

Forensic Entomology


Forensic Entomology
An Introduction, Second Edition
Dorothy Gennard
University of Lincoln, UK
With guest chapter by Krzysztof Szpila
University of Turun´, Poland

This edition ﬁrst published 2012  2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global Scientiﬁc,
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered ofﬁce: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex,
PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial ofﬁces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial ofﬁces, for customer services and for information about how to
apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identiﬁed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission
of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not
engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance
is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gennard, Dorothy
Forensic entomology : an introduction / Dorothy Gennard; with guest
chapter by Krzysztof Szpila. – 2nd ed.
p.; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-68902-8 (cloth) – ISBN 978-0-470-68903-5 (pbk.)
I. Title.
[DNLM:
1. Entomology–methods.
2. Forensic Sciences–methods.
3. Insects–classiﬁcation.
4. Postmortem Changes. W 820]
6140.1–dc23
2011043531
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic books.
Set in 10.5/12.5pt Times by Thomson Digital, Noida, India
First Impression
2012

Contents
List of plates
ix
List of ﬁgures
xiii
List of tables
xvii
Preface
xix
Acknowledgements
xxi
1
The scope of forensic entomology
1
1.1
Forensic entomology in urban contexts
1
1.2
Stored product infestation and forensic entomology
2
1.3
Forensic entomology in the medico-legal context
3
1.4
The history of forensic entomology
6
1.5
Professional associations for forensic entomologists
9
1.6
The UK regulator for forensic science
10
1.7
Web addresses of relevant organisations
11
2
Forensic entomology, DNA and entomotoxicology
12
2.1
Preparation of specimens for molecular analysis
15
2.2
Methods of analysis and sources of information
16
2.3
Alternative methods
20
2.4
Validity of methodologies
21
2.5
The use of other molecular means of insect species determination
23
2.6
Insects and entomotoxicology
24
2.7
Forensic applications of arthropod behaviour for chemical analysis
27
3
Insects and decomposition
29
3.1
Indicators of ‘time of death’
29
3.2
Stages of decomposition of a body
30
3.3
Volatiles released from the body during decomposition
36
3.4
Decomposition in speciﬁc circumstances
38

4
Identifying ﬂies that are important in forensic entomology
42
4.1
What is a ﬂy and how do I spot one?
48
4.2
The ﬂy lifecycle
53
4.3
Forensically important families of ﬂies
60
4.4
Members of other orders that have forensic relevance in aquatic cases
73
4.5
Review technique: larval spiracles or mouthparts – preparation of
whole slide mounts
75
5
Key for the identiﬁcation of European and Mediterranean
blowﬂies (Diptera, Calliphoridae) of medical and veterinary
importance – adult ﬂies
77
5.1
Introduction
77
5.2
Key
80
6
Identifying beetles that are important in forensic entomology
82
6.1
What do beetles look like?
82
6.2
The life stages of the beetles
87
6.3
Selected forensically relevant families of beetles
88
6.4
Features used in identifying forensically important beetle families
89
6.5
Identiﬁcation of beetle families using DNA
97
6.6
Key to selected forensically relevant families in the order Coleoptera
98
7
Sampling at the crime scene
101
7.1
Entomological equipment to sample from a corpse
101
7.2
Catching adult ﬂying insects at the crime scene
104
7.3
The sampling strategy for the body
106
7.4
Sampling at aquatic crime scenes
108
7.5
Obtaining meteorological data at the crime scene
109
8
Rearing insects and other laboratory investigations
111
8.1
Transporting entomological evidence to the laboratory
111
8.2
Laboratory conditions for ﬂy rearing
112
8.3
Methods of maintaining and rearing insects – terrestrial species
113
8.4
Dietary requirements of insects reared in the laboratory
116
8.5
Beetle rearing in the laboratory
117
8.6
Methods of maintaining aquatic species
119
9
Calculating the post mortem interval
121
9.1
Working out the base temperature
123
9.2
Accumulated degree data
124
9.3
Calculation of accumulated degree hours (or days) from crime-scene data
127
9.4
Sources of error
128
9.5
Use of larval growth in length to determine post mortem interval
(isomegalen diagrams and isomorphen diagrams)
130
9.6
Calculating the post mortem interval using succession
132
vi
CONTENTS

9.7
The effects of hymenopteran parasitoids on post mortem interval determination
137
9.8
Review technique: interpretation of data from a crime scene case study
137
9.9
Further reading
138
10
Ecology of forensically important ﬂies
139
10.1
Ecological relationships of some forensically relevant families
140
10.2
Speciﬁc family features
144
10.3
Fly infestation of the living
151
10.4
Flies inﬂuencing the crime scene
154
11
The ecology of some forensically relevant beetles
156
11.1
Ecology of carrion beetles (Silphidae)
157
11.2
Ecology of skin, hide, and larder beetles (Dermestidae)
159
11.3
Ecology of clown beetles (Histeridae)
163
11.4
Ecology of chequered or bone beetles (Cleridae)
164
11.5
Ecology of rove beetles (Staphylinidae)
165
11.6
The ecology of dung beetles and related families
166
11.7
Ecology of ground beetles (Carabidae)
168
12
Investigations in an aquatic environment
169
12.1
Decomposition and submergence in water
170
12.2
The nature of the water bodies in which submergence may take place
176
12.3
Methods of establishing time since corpse submergence –
indicator species
179
12.4
Attractants to the corpse
182
12.5
Methods of culturing aquatic insects
182
12.6
Algae an alternative source of determining time since submergence
182
13
The forensic entomologist in court
184
13.1
The expert’s report
185
13.2
The content of the expert’s report
187
13.3
The forensic expert in the courtroom
194
13.4
Communicating entomological facts in court
195
13.5
Physical evidence: its continuity and integrity
195
13.6
The code of practice for experts
196
13.7
Use of single joint experts
198
13.8
Practical assignment – writing an expert report using the post
mortem calculations generated from Chapter 9
198
13.9
Further reading on presentation in court
198
13.10 Web
site addresses
199
Appendices
201
Glossary
205
References
216
Index
241
CONTENTS
vii


List of plates
2.1
Electropherogram
3.1
Decomposition of a human body
3.2
Fresh stage of decomposition
3.3
Bloat
3.4
Active stage of decay
3.5
Advanced stage of decay
3.6
Skeletal remains
3.7
A cadaveric island surrounding the body where vegetation has
died away
4.1
A Tabanid larva
4.2
Emerging calliphorid with inﬂated ptilinum
4.3
Transition from larval stage L2 to larval stage L3
4.4
Puparial colour changes in Calliphora vomitoria Linnaeus
within the ﬁrst 25 hours of pupariation
4.5
A pair of Piophilids taken ‘in cop’
4.6
Head of Piophila casei Linnaeus
4.7
The Chironomidae
5.1A–F
General morphology of blowﬂies. A – habitus, Chrysomya
albiceps, male; B – head proﬁle, Calliphora uralensis; C – thorax,
dorsal view, Lucilia sericata; D – wing, Protophormia terraenovae;
E – male terminalia, Lucilia bufonivora; F – ovipositior,
Lucilia illustris.
5.2A–N
Details of morphology of blowﬂies. A – calypters, Cynomya
mortuorum; B – calypters, Lucilia caesar; C – greater ampulla,
Chrysomya albiceps; D – greater ampulla, Cochliomyia
hominivorax; E – habitus, dorsal view, Chrysomya marginalis;
F – head proﬁle, Chrysomya albiceps; G – head proﬁle,
Chrysomya megacephala; H – head proﬁle, Phormia regina;
I – anterior part of thorax, Chrysomya albiceps; J – abdomen,
Chrysomya albiceps; K – anterior part of thorax, Chrysomya
putoria; L – abdomen, Chrysomya putoria; M – calypters,
Chrysomya bezziana; N – calypters, Chrysomya megacephala.
5.3A–K
Details of morphology of blowﬂies. A – head proﬁle,
Cochliomyia hominivorax; B – calypters, Phormia regina;

C – calypters, Protophormia terraenovae; D – calypters,
Calliphora vicina; E – wing, Lucilia sericata; F – head proﬁle,
Cynomya mortuorum; G – head proﬁle, Calliphora vicina;
H – head proﬁle, Calliphora vomitoria; I – head proﬁle,
Calliphora loewi; J – basicosta, Lucilia sericata; K – basicosta,
Lucilia caesar.
5.4A–G
A – occipital area, Lucilia sericata; B – occipital area
Lucilia cuprina; C – head proﬁle, Lucilia sericata; D – head
proﬁle, Lucilia silvarum; E – head proﬁle, Lucilia caesar;
F – head proﬁle, Lucilia illustris; G – coxopleural streak,
Lucilia caesar.
5.5A–T
Male genitalia of Calliphorinae. Calliphora loewi: A – cerci
and surstyli, lateral view; B – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view;
C – phallus, lateral view; D – pregonite and postgonite, lateral
view. Calliphora subalpina: E – cerci and surstyli, lateral view;
F – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; G – phallus, lateral view;
H – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Calliphora vicina:
I – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; J – cerci and surstyli, dorsal
view; K – phallus, lateral view; L – pregonite and postgonite,
lateral view. Calliphora vomitoria: M – cerci and surstyli, lateral
view; N – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; O – phallus, lateral
view; P – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Cynomya
mortuorum: Q – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; R – cerci
and surstyli, dorsal view; S – phallus, lateral view; T – pregonite
and postgonite, lateral view.
5.6A–P
Male genitalia of Chrysomyinae. Chrysomya albiceps: A – cerci
and surstyli, lateral view; B – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view;
C – phallus, lateral view; D – pregonite and postgonite,
lateral view. Chrysomya bezziana: E – cerci and surstyli,
lateral view; F – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; G – phallus,
lateral view; H – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view.
Chrysomya marginalis: I – cerci and surstyli, lateral view;
J – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; K – phallus, lateral view;
L – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Chrysomya megacephala:
M – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; N – cerci and surstyli,
dorsal view; O – phallus, lateral view; P – pregonite and
postgonite, lateral view.
5.7A–T
Male genitalia of Chrysomyinae and Luciliinae. Chrysomya
putoria: A – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; B – cerci and surstyli,
dorsal view; C – phallus, lateral view; D – pregonite and
postgonite, lateral view. Cochliomyia hominivorax: E –
cerci and surstyli, lateral view; F – cerci and surstyli, dorsal
view; G – phallus, lateral view; H – pregonite and postgonite,
x
LIST OF PLATES

lateral view. Phormia regina: I – cerci and surstyli, lateral view;
J – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; K – phallus, lateral view;
L – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Protophormia
terraenovae: M – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; N – cerci
and surstyli, dorsal view; O – phallus, lateral view; P – pregonite
and postgonite, lateral view. Lucilia cuprina: Q – cerci and
surstyli, lateral view; R – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view;
S – phallus, lateral view; T – pregonite and postgonite,
lateral view.
5.8A–V
Terminalia of Luciliinae. Lucilia ampullacea: A – cerci
and surstyli, lateral view; B – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view;
C – phallus, lateral view; D – pregonite and postgonite,
lateral view. Lucilia caesar: E – cerci and surstyli, lateral view;
F – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; G – phallus, lateral
view; H – ovipositor, lateral view; I – pregonite and postgonite,
lateral view. Lucilia illustris: J – cerci and surstyli, lateral view;
K – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; L – phallus, lateral view;
M – ovipositor, lateral view; N – pregonite and postgonite,
lateral view. Lucilia sericata: O – cerci and surstyli, lateral
view; P – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; Q – phallus, lateral
view; R – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Lucilia silvarum:
S – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; T – cerci and surstyli, dorsal
view; U – phallus, lateral view; V – pregonite and postgonite,
lateral view.
5.9A–O
European and Mediterranean blowﬂies of forensic importance,
general appearance (A-C, E, F, I-N phot. by T. Klejdysz).
A – Calliphora loewi, B – Calliphora vicina, C – Calliphora
vomitoria, D – Calliphora subalpina, E – Cynomya mortuorum,
F – Chrysomya albiceps, G – Chrysomya marginalis, H –
Chrysomya megacephala, I – Phormia regina, J – Protophormia
terraenovae, K – Lucilia ampullacea, L – Lucilia caesar,
M – Lucilia illustris, N – Lucilia sericata, O – Lucilia
silvarum.
6.1
Dermestes lardarius Linnaeus
6.2
Dermestes maculatus DeGeer
6.3
A clerid beetle
6.4
Nicrophorus humator Gleditsch
12.1
Chironomidae – blood worms
12.2
Caddisﬂy – cased
12.3
River with bankside vegetation
12.4
Hydrophilid larva
12.5
Hydrophilid beetle
12.6
Dytiscid beetle larva
LIST OF PLATES
xi

12.7
Gammarus sp., - an example of a shredder
12.8
Culicid pupa
12.9
Rat-tailed larva (Syrphidae)
12.10
Turtle – a scavenger
12.11
Gyrinidae larva (whirligig beetles)
xii
LIST OF PLATES

List of ﬁgures
1.1
Stored product pests
2
1.2
Insect structural damage to wood
3
1.3
Body in wrappings
4
1.4
Necrophagous insects colonising a body
5
1.5
Predatory beetles will consume eggs and larvae of those ﬂies
colonising the body
5
1.6
Omnivores such as wasps will consume both the body and
any insects present
6
1.7
Opportunist insects – a spider
6
1.8
An opportunist butterﬂy attracted to faecal material
7
2.1
Insect mitochondrial genome
13
2.2
Electrophoresis gel for RAPD Analysis of Fly DNA
18
3.1
Fresh stage of decomposition
30
3.2
Bloat
31
3.3
Active decay stage
31
3.4
Advanced decay
32
3.5
Skeletal remains
32
4.1
General morphology of the insect
44
4.2
Structure of the insect leg
44
4.3
Insect wing venation exempliﬁed using the Needham
Comstock venation naming system
46
4.4
The insect wing structure illustrating the position of the calypters
47
4.5
Examples of some of the forms of insect antenna
47
4.6
Classiﬁcation hierarchy
49
4.7
A Nematoceran ﬂy
50
4.8
An example of a member of the Brachycera – a Tabanid
50
4.9
The wing of a member of the infraorder Muscomorpha Aschiza
illustrating the long anal cell
51
4.10
The remains of a ptilinum as a ptilinal suture
52
4.11
Occipital dilation present on Calliphora uralensis Villeneuve
53
4.12
(a) Copulating blue bottle ﬂies (b) Clump of eggs
54
4.13
The plastron runs the length of the egg
55
4.14
The lifecycle of the blowﬂy
56
4.15
(a) Electronmicrograph of the tubercles (b) Posterior spiracles
57

4.16
An example of the anterior spiracle on a larva
58
4.17
Electronmicrograph of the puparium with detached operculum
59
4.18
Generalised insect growth curve
59
4.19
The thorax showing the position of the acrostichal bristles
60
4.20
The ‘tessselation’ (chequer board) effect on the abdomen of
ﬂies such as Calliphora vicina Robineau-Desvoidy
61
4.21
An example of a larval ‘head skeleton’ with oral sclerites
62
4.22
Lucilia richardsi Collin
63
4.23
A ﬂy showing the characteristic features of the Sarcophagidae
65
4.24
An electronmicrograph of a Piophilid
66
4.25
Hydrotaea larva
69
4.26
A pre-imaginal stage of Hermetia illucens Linnaeus
70
4.27
An aquatic larva: a member of the Stratiomyidae
70
4.28
The curved second anal vein characteristic of the Trichoceridae
71
4.29
An example of the features of a Tipulid including the drooping
mouthparts
72
6.1
Generalised morphology of a beetle – dorsal view
83
6.2
The structure of the coleopteran thorax
83
6.3
The front legs of a beetle that have been modiﬁed for digging
(Geotrupes sp.)
85
6.4
Examples of the shapes of beetle larvae
86
6.5
The types of pupa and puparia to illustrate the relationship
of appendages to the body
86
6.6
Ventral view of the beetle thorax to illustrate the distinction
between the Polyphaga (Figure 6.6a) and the Adephaga
(Figure 6.6b)
89
6.7
Nicrophorus humator Gleditsch
90
6.8
An example of a member of the Staphylinidae
91
6.9
A hister beetle
92
6.10
A trogid beetle
92
6.11
The front coxa of the dermestid projects from the coxal cavity
93
6.12
The lifecycle of Dermestes maculatus DeGeer
94
6.13
A clerid beetle
95
6.14
An example of a nitulid beetle
95
6.15
The striations on the elytra of a carabid
96
6.16
Electropherogram proﬁle to allow comparison of the RAPD
of a Silphid beetle to that of a calliphorid ﬂy
98
7.1
Entomological crime scene equipment in a carrying case
102
7.2
Sealed, labelled bag containing entomological specimens
collected at the crime scene
103
7.3
Retrieving a ﬂy from a net
105
7.4
Label for the inside and outside of the collecting tube
107
8.1
Larvae from a crime scene are ideally reared in a controlled
environment cabinet
112
xiv
LIST OF FIGURES

8.2
Aquarium with pump
119
9.1
Insect growth in relation to upper and lower threshold temperatures 122
9.2
Base temperature determination using the linear approximation
method
123
9.3
Graph to show the justiﬁcation for using the accumulation
averaged temperatures over time
125
9.4
Regression of crime scene temperature data against the
meteorological station temperature to determine a correction
factor for the period after the body was found
127
9.5
An insect transporting mites
135
10.1
Electronmicrograph of the head of an adult Piophilid
149
10.2
Piophilid infestation of meat
153
10.3
Fly faeces and vomit contaminate surfaces
154
11.1
Dermestid beetles
159
11.2
Faecal remains (frass) from dermestid beetles
160
11.3
Electronmicrograph of the ventral side of Dermestes maculatus
DeGeer female and Dermestes lardarius Linnaeus male
162
11.4
Geotrupid beetle
167
12.1
Stoneﬂies
173
12.2
Ephemeroptera
173
12.3
Molluscs feed as scrapers
174
12.4
Nonbiting midges: an example of the Chironomidae
174
12.5
A Caddisﬂy larva
175
12.6a
Corixid bug
175
12.6b
Notonecta nymph
175
12.7
The rifﬂes and pools of a river
176
12.8
Dytiscid beetle – a predator
177
12.9
Ascellus sp. a shredder
178
LIST OF FIGURES
xv


List of tables
2.1
Examples of primers for cytochrome oxidase
14
3.1
Speed of decomposition of encofﬁned bodies in graves
36
3.2
Odour proﬁle interpretation of decomposition volatiles during
human decomposition recognised using the advanced sensor for
detecting clandestine graves (LABRADOR)
40
8.1
Average minimum lifecycle durations of a selection of dipteran
species at ﬁxed temperatures
114
9.1
Lower developmental thresholds (base temperatures)
123
9.2
An example of the headings and completed spread sheet to
calculate the ADD for Calliphora vicina Robineau-Desvoidy
128
9.3
The nature of the Excel spreadsheet
129
9.4
Daily temperature readings from a meteorological station
for the period between 7 and 20 April
133
11.1
Beetle succession on decomposing corpses
157
13.1
Contemporaneous notes checklist
185
13.2
Suggested headings for a forensic entomology expert’s report
189


Preface
This book is intended as an introduction to forensic entomology, including those
aspects that relate to aquatic forensic entomology, in which insects and macro-
invertebrates can be used to interpret crime scenes and provide an indication of time
since submergence. The book is intended to provide a basic entomological intro-
duction to forensic entomology, using examples from a range of countries. It includes
practical activities to enhance understanding of the subject.
The second edition has beneﬁtted greatly from the comments of a number of
reviewers to whom I am most grateful. I have tried to respond to their suggestions.
Any omissions were due to pressures of space. Forensic entomology has matured
greatly as a science and a profession in recent years and owes much to the enthusiasm
and energy of those running the professional societies. The work of the taxonomists
has also strengthened the identiﬁcation skills of practitioners and academics alike
and their generously shared enthusiasm is of great value.
Alongside this, television series increasingly emphasise the role of insects in
solving crime. Hopefully this textbook will therefore also be of interest to a broader
audience and trigger an enthusiasm for insects that will encourage ‘students’ in the
broadestsense to explore further boththeforensicandentomologicalliterature inthis
subject area.
Dorothy Gennard


Acknowledgements
I am grateful to the following for permission to reproduce illustrations or quote from
publications:
Dr Arpad Vass and co-workers for permission to quote information from their
unpublished report Award Number 2007-DN-R.104 (presented in this book
as Table 3.2).
Dr Mark Benecke for permission to use and provision of a copy of his RAPD
proﬁle of Oiceophoma thoracicum Linnaeus and Calliphora vicina
(Robineau-Desvoidy).
Professor Lin Field, The Royal Entomological Society of London, for permis-
sion to reproduce the mitochondrial genome from an antenna (presented in
this book as Figure 2.1).
Dr Sharon Erzinc¸lioglu for permission to quote the case of Mike Evans and Zoe
from Erzinc¸lioglu Y. Z., 2000 Maggots, Murder and Men. Harley Books:
Colchester.
Dr Jonathan Cooter, Honorary Associate Curator at Oxford University
Museum of Natural History, for permission to quote his comments on the
distribution of Nebria ruﬁcollis in the UK.
Elsevier, for permission to quote details of lower temperature limits for a
number of ﬂies, published in Marchenko M. L. K. 2001. Medico-legal
relevance of cadaver entomofauna for the determination of the time of death.
Forensic Science International 120(1–2): 89–109 and a section of Forensic
Science International (presented in this book as Table 9.1).
Elsevier for permission to reproduce a section of Figure 4 from Benecke M.
1998. Random Ampliﬁed Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) Typing of Necropha-
gous Insects, p.164, presented in this book as Figure 6.16.
Mr Michael Cohen Chairman Emeritus, The Academy of Experts and ‘The
Academy of Experts’ for kind permission to reproduce the ‘Code of Practice
for Experts 2005’ presented in chapter 13 of this book as section 13.6.
Dr A. Brigham and Rentokil Initial Plc, for permission to reproduce diagrams
of insect larvae and pupa (presented in this book as Figures 6.4 and 6.5) from
Munro J. W. 1965. Pests of Stored Products. The Rentokil Library, Benham
and Co.: Colchester.
The Regents of the University of California for permission to reproduce a
modiﬁcation of Figure 4A from Wilson L. T., and Barnett W. W. 1983.
Degree days: an aid in crop and pest management. California Agriculture
(January–February) 4–7, presented in this book as Figure 9.3.

Dr Chris Pamplin, Editor, UK Register of Expert Witnesses, for permission to
quote from the article ‘Expert witness immunity abolished’ from Expert
Witness e-Wire, Wednesday 30 March 2011.
Warrant Ofﬁcer 1st Thierry Pasquerault and Colonel F. Daoust of the Criminal
Research Institute of the French National Gendarmerie for permission to use
a photograph of packaging of entomological specimens recovered from a
crime scene, presented as Figure 7.2 in this book.
Mr Ian Ward for permission to reproduce his photographs of ﬂies, a dragonﬂy,
and a butterﬂy along with a river bank scene: Figures 1.7, 1.8, 4.12a, 4.23,
9.5 and Plate 12.3 in this book).
I would like to thank the following people for their discussions, comments, and
advice: anonymous referees on the proposal to prepare a second edition of Forensic
Entomology: An Introduction; Mr Bill Barnett; Mr Keith Butterﬁeld; University of
Lincoln; Dr Trevor Crosby, Curator New Zealand Arthropod Collection, Landcare
Research, University of Auckland; Dr John Esser; Mr Alex Pickwell; Dr Brett
Ratcliffe, Curator and Professor, Systematics Research Collections, University of
Nebraska, Lincoln, USA; Mrs Kate Stafford; Janet L. White, Executive Editor
California Agriculture; Dr Lloyd T. Wilson Texas A&M University; Dr Laura
Woodcock and Dr Frank Zalom, University of California.
I am most grateful to Fiona Seymour and Jasmine Chang of John Wiley & Sons
Ltd. and Prakash Naorem of Thomson Digital, for their help, encouragement, and
support during the preparation of the second edition of Forensic Entomology: An
Introduction.
Dr Darren Mann and Mr James Hogan of the Hope Entomological Collections,
Oxford University Museum of Natural History, kindly provided dipteran specimens
for photography on extended loan, for which I am extremely grateful.
Dr M.I. Salonˇa for permission to reproduce her photographs of a larva of
Hydrotaea sp. (Figure 4.25) and a pre-imaginal stage of Hermetia illucens (Figure
4.26) in this publication.
I am grateful to Mr Alex Pickwell for allowing the use of his macroinvertebrate
specimens for photography and Mr Richard Chadd for conﬁrming identiﬁcations.
To Mr James Coulter and Mr Alex Pickwell for the opportunity to return to the ﬁeld
of aquatic ecology, including carrying out ﬁeldwork. I am especially grateful to
Mr David Padley, formerly photographer with the Lincolnshire Police and lecturer at
the University of Lincoln, for his excellent photography of the dipteran specimens,
and to Mr Ian Ward for his willingness to allow his photographs to be used as
illustrations in this book.
xxii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

1
The scope of forensic
entomology
Forensic entomology is a branch of forensic science. Forensic entomologists use
information about insect lifecycles and behaviour to help interpret evidence in a legal
context relating to both humans and wildlife. On occasion, the term ‘forensic
entomology’ is expanded to include other arthropods, mites, spiders, or macro-
invertebrates such as freshwater shrimps. The legal contexts in which forensic
entomology is of use relate to matters considered in either civil courts or criminal
courts. The cases that are heard in civil courts most frequently relate to insect
infestation in urban contexts or in relation to stored product pests. Where there is
insect infestation of a body, either living or dead, and foul play is thought to have
occurred, or a law has been broken, then the case is generally termed a medico-legal
case. Such cases can relate to both humans and wildlife.
1.1
Forensic entomology in urban contexts
Cases of infestation of homes or other buildings, such as hospitals, are instances in
which forensic entomologists may have a role to play. For example, where structural
timber is found to harbour insects such as longhorn beetles (Cerambycidae) an
entomologist might be called to assist in determining the cause and source of
infestation. Such insects are generally pests of sapwood, but can complete their
lifecycle in dry wood that has been harvested. An example of such a beetle is Eburia
quadrigeminata (Say), the ivory marked beetle, a longhorn beetle, which usually
attacks living American oak trees but has been known to survive felling, wood
treatment and transformation of the wood into furniture, only to emerge some 10 to
15 years later. In 2007, Cocquempot recorded an instance of this species having been
caught when emerging from a bamboo stand in France.
Other examples of the urban application of forensic entomology relate to
infestation of food premises and food production sites. For example, the owners
of a butcher’s shop in London, was closed in January 2010. The Magistrates’ Court
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

awarded costs of £560 to the council after meat on sale at the butchers had been found
to be infested with maggots and ﬂy eggs.
Poultry production units may similarly be convicted of causing ﬂy infestations
that affects residents living nearby. Such was the case in a small Lincolnshire
village where, in 2009, the farm owners were ﬁned £20 000 by Skegness
Magistrates court, having pleaded guilty to breaching an abatement order, intended
to reduce the numbers of ﬂies, which had been put in place in 2008 for a similar
misdemeanour.
1.2
Stored product infestation and forensic entomology
In general, only a small number of stored product pest species may be encountered by
the forensic entomologist. They include ﬂies, cockroaches, ants, and beetles. The
insects that inhabit animal products and their waste include members offamilies such
as larder beetles (Dermestidae), Moth ﬂies (Psychodidae), Scuttle ﬂies (Phoridae),
Muscid ﬂies (Muscidae) Blowﬂies (Calliphoridae) and Flesh ﬂies (Sarcophagidae)
such as Sarcophaga carnaria Linnaeus, ants (Formicidae) such as the Pharaoh ant
(Monomorium pharaonis Linnaeus), or the Copra beetle (Necrobia ruﬁpes DeGeer).
These may also be cited in medico-legal cases (Figures 1.1 and 1.2).
The following are examples of phytophagous insects, which may infest food,
resulting in forensic entomologists contributing to court cases.
Biscuit beetles (Stegobium paniceum Linnaeus) will infest not only food items
such as ﬂour bread and biscuits but also wool, hair and leather material. The saw-
toothed grain beetle (Oryzaephilus surinamensis Linnaeus) and the Indian meal
Figure 1.1
Stored product pests
2
CH01 THE SCOPE OF FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

moth (Plodia interpunctella Hubner) both infest dried fruit, breakfast cereals and
pasta.The Indian meal moth is also known to consume dried dog food and ﬁsh
food products. The rust-red ﬂour beetle (Tribolium castaneum Herbst) and the
confused ﬂour beetle (Tribolium confusum Jacquelin du Val), infest grain and ﬂour.
The fruit ﬂy (Drosophila melanogaster Meigen) will infest any fermenting fruit or
vegetable, including tomatoes, onions, and bananas. It can also inhabit compost
heaps and piles of rotting garden waste and so could be the subject of urban forensic
entomology cases.
Because food-processing plants have difﬁculty in reducing insect infestation
levels to zero, a legal tolerance level is speciﬁed in many countries, contravention of
which can lead to prosecution. For example, the American Food and Drug Admin-
istration considers that, in canned citrus juice, a maximum of ﬁve or more eggs of
Drosophila or other insects per 250 ml is allowable. The presence of one maggot per
250 ml of canned citrus juice is also considered acceptable (AOAC 970.72).
In the majority of instances in stored product and urban forensic entomology, the
main focus of the contribution is conﬁrmation of the identity of the insect species and
interpreting its biology in the particular context in question. In such instances this
aspect of forensic entomology is conﬁrmatory and relates to the work of the
Environmental Health Department or the Ofﬁce of Trading Standards.
1.3
Forensic entomology in the medico-legal context
Insects have a role in crime scene investigations on both land and in water (Anderson,
1995; Erzinc¸liogˆlu, 2000; Keiper and Casamatta, 2001; Hobischak and Anderson,
Figure 1.2
Insect structural damage to wood
1.3 FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY IN THE MEDICO-LEGAL CONTEXT
3

2002; Oliveira-Costa and de Mello-Patiu, 2004: Moretti, Bonato and Godoy, 2011).
The majority of medico-legal cases where entomological evidence is used are
the result of illegal activities that take place on land and are discovered within
a short time of being committed. In France for example, 70% of cadavers are
found outdoors and, of these, 60% are discovered within less than one month
(Gaudry et al., 2004).
All insects could be of potential relevance to a medico-legal question, however a
numberof species from several families are foundmore oftenthan others.The insects
of particular relevance to forensic entomological investigations include blow ﬂies,
ﬂesh ﬂies, cheese skippers, hide and skin beetles, rove beetles and clown beetles. In
some of these families only the juvenile stages are carrion feeders and consume dead
bodies. In others both the juvenile stages and the adults will feed on the body (are
necrophages). Yet other families of insects are attracted to the body solely because
Figure 1.3
Body in wrappings
4
CH01 THE SCOPE OF FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

they feed on the necrophagous insects that are present. Forensically relevant insects
can be grouped into four categories based on feeding relationship. These are:
. Necrophages, which feed only on the decomposing tissue of the body or body
parts – for example blowﬂies, hide beetles and clown beetles (Figures 1.4 and 1.5).
. Predators (and parasites) of the necrophages – for example rove beetles and ground
beetles.
Figure 1.4
Necrophagous insects colonising a body
Figure 1.5
Predatory beetles will consume eggs and larvae of those ﬂies colonising the body
1.3 FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY IN THE MEDICO-LEGAL CONTEXT
5

. Omnivores that consume both the live insects inhabiting the corpse and the dead
ﬂesh – for example ants (Formicidae), and wasps (Figure1.6).
. Opportunist (adventive) species, which arrive because the corpse is a part of their
local environment – for example mites, hoverﬂies, butterﬂies and, on occasion,
spiders (Figures 1.7 and 1.8).
On occasion waste material or faecal material may be the attraction (Figure 1.8).
The roles of speciﬁc species which have these feeding strategies will be considered in
later chapters.
1.4
The history of forensic entomology
Insects are known to have been used in the detection of crimes over a long period of
time and a number of researchers have written about the history of forensic
entomology (Benecke, 2001; Greenberg and Kunich, 2002). The Chinese used the
presence of ﬂies and other insects as part of their crime-scene investigative armoury
and instances of their use are recorded as early as the mid-tenth century (Cheng,
1890, cited in Greenberg and Kunich, 2002).
Such was the importance of insects in crime-scene investigation that in 1235, a
training manual on investigating death, Washing Away of Wrongs, was written by
Sung Tz’u. In this early medico-legal book it is recorded that attention paid by a
number of blowﬂies to a particular sickle caused a murderer to confess to murdering a
fellow Chinese farm worker with that sickle.
Figure 1.6
Omnivores such as wasps will consume both the body and any insects present
6
CH01 THE SCOPE OF FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

Between the thirteenth and nineteenth centuries a number of developments in
biology laid the foundation for forensic entomology to become a branch of scientiﬁc
study. The two most notable were, perhaps, experiments by Redi (1668), an Italian
who, using the ﬂesh of a number of different animal species, demonstrated that larvae
developed from eggs laid by ﬂies, and the work by Linnaeus (1735) developing a
system of classiﬁcation. In so doing, Linnaeus provided a means of insect identiﬁ-
cation (including identifying such forensically important ﬂies as Calliphora vomi-
toria Linnaeus). These developments formed foundations from which determination
of the length of the stages in the insect’s lifecycle could be worked out and the
indicators of time since death could be developed.
A particularly signiﬁcant legal case, which helped establish forensic entomology as
arecognisedtoolforinvestigatingcrimescenes,wasthatofamurderednewbornbaby.
In 1850 a baby’s mummiﬁed body, encased in a chimney, was revealed behind a
mantelpiece in a boarding house when, during renovation work, Dr Marcel Bergeret
carried out an autopsy on the body and discovered larvae of a ﬂesh ﬂy, Sarcophaga
carnaria and some moths. He concluded that the baby’s body had been sealed into the
Figure 1.7
Opportunist insects – a spider. Source: Reproduced by permission of Mr. Ian Ward
1.4 THE HISTORY OF FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY
7

chimney in 1848 and that the moths had gained access in 1849. As a result of this
estimation of the time since death, occupiers of the house previous to 1848 were
accused and the current occupiers exonerated (Bergeret, 1855).
The next signiﬁcant point in the history of forensic entomology resulted from
observations and conclusions made by Megnin (1894). He related eight stages of
human decomposition to the succession of insects colonising the body after death.
He published his ﬁndings in La faune des cadavres: Application de l’entomologie a
la medicine legale. These stages of decomposition were subsequently shown to vary
in speed and to depend upon environmental conditions, including temperature and,
for example, size of the corpse and whether or not the corpse was clothed.
The similarity in overall decomposition sequence and the role of insect assemblages
in decomposition has been demonstrated for a number of animal species.
Knowledge about insect succession and the periods of insect activity on a corpse
has become the basis for forensic entomologists’ estimations of time since death,
although this is acknowledged as being based on assumptions of time of colonisation
relative to the point of death. Research continues to be required in order to establish
the accuracy levels of estimates of time since death and to interpret variation in
different biotopes (Tomberlin et al., 2011).
In the twentieth century, insects were shown to be of value in court cases involving
insect colonisation of body parts recovered from water and not just for entire corpses
found on land. On 29 September 1935 several body parts, later identiﬁed as
Figure 1.8
An opportunist butterﬂy attracted to faecal material. Source: Reproduced by
permission of Mr. Ian Ward
8
CH01 THE SCOPE OF FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

originating from two females, were recovered from a river near Moffatt in Scotland.
The identities of the deceased were Isabella Kerr, the wife of a Dr Ruxton, and Mary
Rogerson, the family’s ‘nanny’. The presence of third instar larvae of the blowﬂy
Calliphora vicina Robineau-Desvoidy indicated that the eggs had been laid prior to
the bodies being dumped in the river. This information, combined with other
evidence, resulted in the conviction of Dr Buck Ruxton, for the murder of his wife
and Mary Rogerson.
The level of acceptance of forensic entomology by the courts has depended upon
the results of scientiﬁc study. This has been carried out since the early twentieth
century, both by academics and practitioners working alongside the police and legal
authorities. As a result the subject base has been reﬁned and protocols and rigorous
forensic procedures have been developed to raise its level of esteem. However, there
remain several areas for which accurate information and levels of error remain
undetermined. These aspects of uncertainty with respect to forensic entomology will
be addressed with focused research. The requirement for this to happen quickly is
dictated both by the professional aspirations of the forensic entomology community
and also as a result of reviews and legislation.
In the USA the report concerning the whole of forensic science produced by the
National Research Council, was signiﬁcant. The council recommended that an
independent federal organisation – the National Institute for Forensic Science, be set
up in order to establish mandatory standards for laboratories, the promotion of
scholarly, peer-reviewed research and the establishment and reinforcement of
methods of best practice and the use of standardised protocols. A similar approach
was taken in the United Kingdom and in 2007 the Ofﬁce of the Forensic Science
Regulator was set up to help establish and maintain standards in forensic science in
general. These national organisations inﬂuence the work and aspirations of the
professional associations who respond to guidance that they provide.
Forensic entomologists in a number of countries have set up professional
organisations to provide a forum for the exchange of ideas and experience and to
develop and maintain professional standards in forensic entomology. These orga-
nisations include the North American Forensic Entomology Association and the
European Association for Forensic Entomology (EAFE).
1.5
Professional associations for forensic entomologists
The nature and aspirations of two major professional associations for forensic
entomologists are described below.
1.5.1
North American Forensic Entomology Association (NAFEA)
This organisation is a charitable, non-proﬁt-making educational organisation
for the promotion of good practice and research in forensic entomology. It
1.5 PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS FOR FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGISTS
9

had its ﬁrst annual meeting in 2003 and seeks to collaborate with other
international societies to enhance the moral, ethical and scientiﬁc base of
forensic entomology. It currently has over 60 members. The strength of the
organisation is its inclusivity. To quote its web site (www.nafea.net/, accessed 26
October 2011):
NAFEA is an organization for anyone interested in the application of forensic
entomology to civil or criminal matters of law, research on arthropods of forensic
importance, or carrion ecology.
From a student perspective it is also a valuable source of support, and conference
funding may be available to student members. The organisation seeks to promote
good practice and the presentation of scientiﬁc research, casework, and cooperative
ideas on forensic entomology. As such, it is a forum through which research in
forensic entomology can receive peer-review and new developments in approach can
be discussed.
1.5.2
European Association for Forensic Entomology (EAFE)
The European Association for Forensic Entomology (EAFE) was founded in 2002.
The Association was launched in France and has a number of aims:
. To seek a common protocol for forensic entomology case investigation.
. To foster high standards of competency in specimen collection and analysis.
. To create a solid scientiﬁc basis so that forensic entomology can be a valid
analytical tool.
In 2006, EAFE produced a protocol of good practice in order to ensure that the
methods used in forensic entomology investigations at a crime scene could be
standardised and good forensic entomological practice could be developed by
following standard operating procedures. Its annual meetings also provide an
opportunity for dialogue, discussion and collaboration.
1.6
The UK regulator for forensic science
The regulation and maintenance of standards for forensic expert witnesses is
currently voluntary and based on the membership of such organisations as the
Academy of Experts or the Institute of Expert Witnesses. In the UK in 2007, the
Ofﬁce of the Forensic Science Regulator was set up by the Home Secretary to operate
on behalf of the criminal justice system.
10
CH01 THE SCOPE OF FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

The purpose of the Ofﬁce of the Regulator is primarily to i) determine new and
improved quality standards for organisations and if necessary to take the lead in their
development; ii) advise and guide organisations undertaking forensic analysis to
ensure that they can show compliancewith the generally accepted standards that may
be required by the courts; iii) ensure sure that that there are appropriate arrangements
for quality assurance and standards monitoring; iv) ensure that there are procedures
in place for the determination competence of the individual forensic scientist.
The Regulator is supported in this role by a Forensic Science Advisory Council
(FSAC). Amongst other things this committee is responsible for offering advice on
accreditation and procedures for validating and approving new technologies. They
also have the responsibility ‘for tasking and overseeing the work of Expert Working
Groups established to advise on or develop quality standards . . .’
Currently, forensic organisations are required to be accredited through the United
Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS) in order to conduct their work and to
observe ISO9000 guidelines.These organisations arerequired to quality controltheir
work and a number of options including participation in blind trials have been
proposed.
The accreditation ofindividuals is under discussion because it is the individual and
not the organisation that appears as a witness and is responsible to the court. At
present forensic entomologists are not included on the list of expertise that is being
considered. Those forensic disciplines that are on the list include more laboratory-
based experts such as toxicologists, ﬁngerprint ofﬁcers, and document examiners.
Membership of professional organisations, for the forensic entomologist, therefore
remains an important means of standardising operating procedures and ensuring and
also demonstrating that good practice is maintained.
1.7
Web addresses of relevant organisations
European Association for Forensic Entomology (EAFE): www.eafe.org (accessed
26 October 2011).
North American Forensic Entomology Association (NAFEA): www.nafea.net
(accessed 26 October 2011).
The Forensic Science Regulator
http://www.homeofﬁce.gov.uk/agencies-public-bodies/fsr/ (accessed 26 October
2011).
1.7 WEB ADDRESSES OF RELEVANT ORGANISATIONS
11

2
Forensic entomology,
DNA and entomotoxicology
Molecular identiﬁcation of insects feeding on corpses can be an important technique
in forensic entomology, particularly if indeterminate larval species are recovered at a
crime scene. Analysis is frequently carried out by molecular biologists, although the
answers are interpreted by entomologists. In casework, the life stages collected from
a corpse are reared to the adult stage in order to identify the species using
morphology. This is a slow process so using molecular methods, alongside mor-
phological identiﬁcation may, on occasion, be a more rapid and accurate way of
providing the basis for determining the PMI.
Many forensically relevant molecular techniques were originally developed to
investigate insect phylogeny and particulargenetic proﬁles havebeen constructed for
individual species. An example of the combined use of molecular and morphological
techniques is provided by Pai et al. (2007) who used them to identify larvae and
determine the PMI for a murdered Taiwanese girl whose burned body was recovered
from a sugarcane ﬁeld. In combination the techniques conﬁrmed that the colonising
ﬂy was Chrysomya megacephala Fabricius.
Potential molecular biology identiﬁcation methods range from using chromosome
C-banding (Angus, Kemeny and Wood, 2004), for example, on the one hand, to using
genomic material on the other. Genetic material can be harvested from both the
nucleus and from mitochondria. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is the more frequent
source of genetic information, not least because more DNA is available.
Mitochondria are haploid structures with genetic material solely from maternal
origins. No recombination occurs in its manufacture. The mitochondrial genome
contains around 16 000 base pairs of double-strand DNA (Lessingeret al., 2000) and
is a stable source of genetic information. Cells contain a large number of mitochon-
dria and much is known about insect systematics as a result of their use in
phylogenetic studies. Hence mtDNA is a ready source of information for use in
forensic contexts (Figure 2.1).
In mitochondria a stage of respiration called oxidative phosphorylation takes
place, generating adenosine triphosphate (ATP) using enzyme complexes called
cytochromes. These enzyme complexes include cytochrome c oxidase (Complex IV),
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

which is found in the mitochondrial inner membrane. Cytochrome c oxidase is the
third and ﬁnal electron transfer chain enzyme complex involved in oxidative
phosphorylation. It is made up of three subunits; the genes of two of which are
useful for molecular investigation. The mitochondrial genome comprises approxi-
mately 37 genes (22 for transfer RNA, two for ribosomal RNA, and 13 for peptides).
Amongst the37genesare thoseforthetwo subunitsofcytochromecoxidase, subunits
I and II (COI and COII). Molecular biologists originally chose COI to investigate
genetic proﬁles, because it is the biggest of the three mitochondrially encoded
cytochrome oxidase subunits and the protein sequence combines both variable and
highly conserved regions (Saraste, 1990; Gennis, 1992; Beard, Hamm and Collins,
1993; Morlais and Severson, 2002, quoting Clary and Wolstenholme, 1985). This
allows reﬁnement of information so that the degree of geographic variation may also
be interpreted.
Species identiﬁcation is based on sequences of nucleotides. These sequences are
termed loci and are made up of strings of nucleotide base pairs-adenine (A), thymine
(T), cytosine (C) and guanine (G). The non-coding region of insect mtDNA is called
the control region or the A-T region. This region is made up of a large number of
adenine and thymine nucleotides and controls mitochondrial DNA replication and
RNA transcription (Avise et al., 1987). To describe the sequence of base pairs so that
an individual ‘signature’ or haplotype can be speciﬁed for a particular species, a
Figure 2.1
Insect mitochondrial genome. Source: Professor Lin Field, The Royal Entomological
Society of London for permission to reproduce the Mitochondrial genome from Antenna
(presented in this book as Figure 2.1)
FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY, DNA AND ENTOMOTOXICOLOGY
13

nucleotide position numbering system is used. This follows that described for the
fruit ﬂy Drosophila yakuba (Burla) (GenBank accession Number NC-001322).
The base pairs sections can be very short. Where the sections are made up of
fewer than 1000 base pairs, it is necessary to artiﬁcially increase or ‘amplify’ the
length of DNA before it can be interpreted. The process used to do this is called
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). To replicate the required sections of the
DNA sample, previously generated regions are joined at known sites on the DNA, to
enable it to be copied. These artiﬁcially generated sections are called primers.
Speciﬁc primers are generated for particular insect families, for example the
Calliphoridae (Table 2.1). This means that the ampliﬁed DNA product is from a
known site, so the nucleotides and their position on the DNA molecule can be
interpreted.
Fortunately some species ‘signatures’ are based on quite short sections (loci),
often of fewer than 350 signiﬁcant base pairs. This means that, although the DNA
chain degrades over time, specimens that have been stored for a long time or which
have dried out, can still be reliably identiﬁed. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is
extremely useful; for the most part, it is resistant to degradation. Its use can provide
ﬂy species identiﬁcation within a day.
Details of primer sequences speciﬁcally complementary to calliphorid mtDNA
have the reference numbers L14945–7. They can be accessed from GenBank
(Malgorn and Coquoz, 1999). This information can then be used to request prepared
primers from biotechnology companies. These enzymes (primers) are robust at a
range of temperatures, can be used with various buffers and are moderately inexpen-
sive.Theyaredesignedwithdifferentdegreesofspeciﬁcityallowingampliﬁcationof,
for example, only insect DNA or more selective species-speciﬁc products.
Once extracted, the mtDNA sequences for the protein-coding regions are com-
pared with known species ‘signatures’ in a database using computer software.
Table 2.1
Examples of primers for cytochrome oxidase
Primer Title
Composition
Reference Source
CO – I2f
50-CAG CTA CTT TAT GAG CTT TAG G-30
Vincent, Vian and
Carlotti 2000
CO – I 3r
50-CAT TTC AAG C/TTG TGT AAG CATC-30
Vincent, Vian and
Carlotti 2000
TY – J – 1460
TAC AAT TTA TCG CCT AAA CTT CAG CC
Wells and Sperling 2001
C1 – N – 1687
CAA TTT CAA ATC CTC CAA TTA T
Wells and Sperling 2001
C1 – J – 2319
TAG CTA TTG GAC/TTA TTA GG
Wells and Sperling 2001
C1 - N - 2514
AAC TCC AGT TAA TCC TCC TAC
Wells and Sperling 2001
C1 – J – 2495
CAG CTA CTT TAT GAG CTT TAGG
Also used by Harvey,
Dadour and
Gaudierie 2003
C1 – N – 2800
CAT TTC AAGT/CTG TGT AAG CATC
Also used by Harvey,
Dadour and
Gaudierie 2003
14
CH02 FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY, DNA AND ENTOMOTOXICOLOGY

GenBank is an example of a database of genetic proﬁles which is ratiﬁed and publicly
available. Software such as Blast Search (www.ncbi.nlm.gov) is used to search
GenBank. Some degree of concern has been expressed about the validity of the
information held in GenBank but over time the quality is improving (this aspect is
discussed later under Validity of Methodologies).
2.1
Preparation of specimens for molecular analysis
In all instances, specimens for molecular analysis should be killed and stored
appropriately and any possibility of contamination minimised. The chemicals
and/or the extraction method chosen can inﬂuence the outcome of the analysis,
although there is some disagreement on good practice (Fukatsu, 1999; Dean and
Ballard, 2001). For example, Dillon, Austin and Bartowsky (1996) considered that
using ethyl acetate as a killing agent could reduce the amount of DNA extracted.
Logan (1999) found that genomic DNA was adequately recovered from insect
specimens that had been preserved in acetone. Espeland et al. (2010) expressed
concern about the effects of the insecticide, Dichlorvos, on recoveryof nuclear DNA,
noting that COI ampliﬁcation was prevented after 229 days.
The initial means of evidence storage is also important. Ideally, storage of samples
in 95% alcohol at the crime scene, or by freezing, ensures reliable recovery of the
genetic information. Storing specimens in 99% alcohol provided fragments of up to
1400 base pairs according to Sperling, Anderson and Hickey (1994). In contrast, ﬂies
stored dry, or preserved in 75% ethanol, provided DNA fragments reduced to up to
350 base pairs. If neither freezing nor alcohol use is possible then the specimens
should be kept on ice in a cool box, or refrigerator, until they are received at the
laboratory. Contamination by organisms residing on the external surface of the
maggot must be removed prior to starting to extract. A 20% solution of bleach is
effect for this purpose and does not interfere with the results of molecular analysis
(Wells, 2002).
A further precaution against contamination is to analyse the genetic material from
the head or thorax of an adult ﬂy, or the mid-section of a larva. This allows, as is
necessary in all forensic work, the retention of voucher specimens in the form of the
remainingbody parts. Where possiblein forensicwork, thepost-feeding stage should
be used, or the larvae should be starved so that their gut is empty offood. This ensures
that only the DNA from that particular individual is investigated and that contami-
nation by gut contents does not occur.
Where possible, insect specimens chosen for DNA extraction should be taken
from live cultures and killed by freezing. Freezing adult ﬂies immediately at 70 C
ensures that the DNA does not degrade as rapidly as it might if other preservation
methods are used. However work by Lonsdale, Dixon and Gennard (2004) indicates
that the length of time in frozen storage will affect the degree of degradation of DNA
molecule if storage time is longer than one year.
2.1 PREPARATION OF SPECIMENS FOR MOLECULAR ANALYSIS
15

If the crop content is required for analysis, the larval outer coat should be treated
with 20% bleach solution (Linville and Wells, 2002) and the crop excised from the
larval body. This makes interpretation of the analytical results easier. The rest of the
larval specimen is also available for more traditional analysis or for preservation. At
this point a preservative such as Kahle’s solution can be used for specimen storage.
2.1.1
DNA extraction
There are several methods for extracting DNA and the preferred choice of extraction
chemicals varies between laboratories. DNA extraction using Qiagen tissue kits such
as DNeasy Tissue Kit or Chelex can be helpful because the pre-prepared
extraction chemicals ensure standardisation of the technique. More frequently in
insect molecular science phenol-chloroform extraction is used. However, Junqueira,
Lessinger and Azendo-Espin (2002) concluded that DNAzol was the most effective
chemical for extracting DNA, compared to extraction using either Chelex or the
phenol/chloroform method, particularly if there was a fear that the DNA could be
damaged. More recently, genomic DNA has been extracted using automated
processes such as the BioRobot EZ1 workstation and EZ1 DNA Forensic Cards
(Qiagen) (Caine et al., 2006).
2.1.2
DNA concentration
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) splits the double-stranded DNA by heating,
and replicates it to increase the amount of genetic material available. Artiﬁcially
generated single DNA strands kick start or ‘prime’ the DNA synthesis. The primers
are designed to position either side of a chosen section of genetic coding. They bind
to complimentary sequences and using them the DNA polymerase enzyme manu-
factures a new strand. This new strand forms the basis for repetition of the process;
more DNA is generated over a number of cycles until there is sufﬁcient material
for extraction and realisation of the DNA. At this point, depending on the original
source of the DNA, several further methods of analysis can be used to determine the
genetic signature.
2.2
Methods of analysis and sources of information
Examples of these methods include restriction fragment length polymorphism
(RFLP), random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA (RAPD), analysing genes for
particular enzymes such as NADH, RNA analysis including sites related to ITS,
ribosomal, (for example 28S RNA), as well as pyrosequencing amongst others.
These will each be discussed under separate headings.
16
CH02 FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY, DNA AND ENTOMOTOXICOLOGY

The use of PCR itself as a means of analysis has also been explored, particularly
for determining the age of ﬂy pupae from inside the puparia since this is a life stage
the duration of which is not easily determined. Zehner, Mosch and Amendt (2010)
used differential display PCR to examine changes in gene expression as the pupa
developed inside the puparium. They found that only in later stages of development
was there a signiﬁcant difference and considered the procedure had some potential,
but required further work.
2.2.1
Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
This type of analysis has been used to analyse the degree of variation in populations
of a particular species. It provides information relevant to the interpretation of
forensic samples from data provided from a wide context. For example nuclear DNA
PCR-RFLP has been used to examine variation in populations of the secondary
screwworm Cochliomyia macellaria (Fabricius) in Uruguay, as a means of deter-
mining the identity of a particular specimen.
In forensic cases, PCR- RFLP methods have been successfully used to assist in
species identiﬁcation to make a post mortem interval determination. Schroeder et al.
(2003) carried out RFLP analysis, using a modiﬁcation of the method described by
Sperling, Anderson and Hickey (1994) for analysing mitochondrial DNA. They
separated species of Calliphora vicina, Calliphora vomitoria, and Lucilia sericata
Meigen using a 349 bp section of the mtDNA using subunit I (COI), the cytochrome
oxidase subunit II gene (COII) and the tRNA-leucine gene. From these speciﬁc
regions they clearly distinguished between the three most common corpse-infesting
ﬂy species in the vicinity of Hamburg, Germany.
PCR-RFLPhasalsobeenusedtoidentifysomeAustralianchironomidﬂylarvaethat
areoftendifﬁculttoidentify(Carew,PettigroveandHoffmann,2003).Anidentiﬁcation
key has been built using the RFLP proﬁles of the species of non-biting midge
(Chironomidae)present inthewaterbody. Thismethod was validated using specimens
from both wetlands and streams and has application in aquatic forensic entomology.
2.2.2
Random Ampliﬁed Polymorphic DNA (RAPD)
This method uses non-speciﬁc primers and the PCR products come from many areas
of the DNA of the specimens. Primer 5 and REP 1R are often used for forensic case
work (Benecke, 1998). Based on a 50-30 sequence the RAPD primers are:
REP 1R
XIIIACGTCGICATCAGGC
Primer 5
XAACGCGCAAC
(From a primer description provided by Pharmacia Biotech, estimating the post-
mortem interval of pupae and referenced in Benecke, 1998.)
2.2 METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SOURCES OF INFORMATION
17

The separation of the PCR-products is carried out using gel electrophoresis.
The results are read as peaks to give a peak proﬁle, or ‘signature’ (see colour section).
Only peaks of a maximum intensity of at least 50% are used to generate the proﬁles
of individual ﬂy species. If the numbers of strong peaks are small, further primers
are needed to generate a trustworthy proﬁle. If the peak tops split on the display,
the sequencer view using the silver stain-like banding pattern should be used.
False positives may be generated if a strict methodology is not adhered to. For
example samples from the same DNA source should never be loaded next to each
other on the electrophoresis gel to avoid this happening (Figure 2.2).
Stevens and Wall (1995) used RAPD analysis to compare the degree of
geographic variation between Lucilia sericata populations at farms near Weybridge
in Surrey and those in the Bristol area. Control specimens were provided by a
laboratory culture of Lucilia sericata from the University of Bristol. Their results
conﬁrmed the value of RAPD in separating closely related Lucilia sericata
specimens.
Small intra-speciﬁc differences in the sequences of individual larvae from the
same species do occur, although the overall ‘signature’ is constant. For example
Wells et al. (2001) recorded a substitution of adenine at position 2058 (with reference
to the Drosophila yakuba numbering system). Because the resulting amino acid
sequence is unchanged, this is called a ‘silent substitution’ and considered typical of
a cytochrome oxidase subunit b (COI) haplotypevariation. (Where there is more than
one haplotype, because of mutation in individual members of a particular species,
the condition is called heteroplasmy.)
Using RAPD analysis for species identiﬁcation can be disadvantageous as there
is no standardisation in different species signatures; there are no recognised data-
bases against which to compare RAPD proﬁles of insect species; no statistical data is
available in order to exclude chance when interpreting the results. For these reasons,
RAPD analysis is not a technique of choice in forensic analysis.
Figure 2.2
Electrophoresis gel for RAPD Analysis of Fly DNA
18
CH02 FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY, DNA AND ENTOMOTOXICOLOGY

2.2.3
RNA
RNA is found in three forms, transfer RNA (tRNA), messenger RNA (mRNA),
and ribosomal RNA (rRNA). Of these investigating the sequences coding for mRNA
and rRNA have been found to be of value in molecular forensic entomology.
Ribosomal RNA is used in insect systematics more frequently than in forensic
entomology.
Analysing RNA reveals the genes that are ‘switched on’ in the insect tissue at the
point at which the analysis is undertaken. Both nuclear DNA and mitochondrial DNA
have associated RNA genes. Nuclear RNA, in particular, is present in sufﬁcient
quantity to provide an easy means of replication and analysis from which to
determine the species identity of a specimen.
Messenger RNA gene concentrations change as a function of time. Tarone,
Jennings and Foran (2007), using Lucilia sericata, showed that the concentration
of two mRNA genes changed between pre, and post-feeding stages. Therefore
this distinction can be used in order to conﬁrm the developmental state of a
specimen which is not morphologically distinct in the third instar. In turn, this
aids determination of the time since death and enhances the value of using the
mRNA genes.
Transfer RNA (tRNA)
On occasion COI and COII are used in association withtRNA-leucinegenesto obtain
a proﬁle from which to conﬁrm insect identity. Mazzanti et al. (2010) used the
approach to identify species using empty puparial cases, although they also warn of
the problems that degradation of DNA may cause – the amount of DNA available can
be seriously reduced in degraded puparial cases.
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
Three of the four forms of cytoplasmic rRNA come from the genes located on the
nuclear organiser sites of the chromosomes. The ascription of the number to the
cytoplasmic rRNA is based on their coefﬁcient of sedimentation i.e. 5S, 5.8S, 16S,
18S, and 28S. Ribosomal RNA described as 16S can accumulate mutations faster
than the nucleus. It has been used to explore the distinction between Ophyra species
and Fannia species with some success.
Stevens and Wall (2001) showed that, based on the variation in 28S rRNA
gene sequences of 13 specimens, the Calliphorinae and Luciliinae were, without
doubt, two distinct clades. Both can be reliably separated from Protophormia
terraenovae and the Chrysomyinae using this gene sequence. In the process of
the investigation they concluded from analysis of sub regions np: 511–710 and np:
1521–1830 that 39 characters provide phylogenetically informative sites from the
28S subunit.
2.2 METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SOURCES OF INFORMATION
19

2.2.4
Internal transcribed spacer region (ITS)
The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region is a non-coding region of the genome.
The second ribosomal internal transcribed spacer has been successfully used to
distinguish Chrysomya species by Nelson, Wallman and Dowton (2008), so ITS has
a potential value in forensic entomology. It is used in association with techniques
such as RFLP for exploration purposes. It is also used in association with analysis of
other gene subunits to distinguish between closely allied species.
Chen and Shih (2003) conﬁrmed that the partial gene of subunit cytochrome
oxidase and the ﬁrst internal transcribed spacer ITSI region of ribosomal RNA
(rRNA) could successfully distinguish between Chrysomya megacephala, Chryso-
mya pinguis Walker, and Chrysomya ruﬁfacies. The internal transcriber space
regions, ITS1 and ITS2, are valuable for distinguishing a number of species but
not for Cochliomyia macellaria.
GenBank contains a number of ITS sequences for calliphorid species but there are
only a small number of case studies in the literature.
2.2.5
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide dehydrogenase (ND4)
Genes for the NADH Dehydrogenase subunit 4 of ribosomal RNA, along with the
internal transcribed spacer, has been found to be a useful means of distinguishing
intraspecies variation. For example, in the blackﬂy (Simulium ochraceum
Walker), four NADH alleles were identiﬁed from populations in Mexico
(Rodriguez-Perez et al., 2006), which revealed both intrapopulation and inter-
population differences.
Tan et al. (2010) emphasised the value of incorporating a large number of species
into an analysis when preparing a database of species. He considered that using COI
and COII, as well as tRNA-leucine alleles facilitated the distinction between
members of a difﬁcult species. This they did for the classiﬁcation and characterisa-
tion of members of the Malaysian Sarcophagidae; a family that is under-represented
in terms of the genetic signatures available in the database for use in forensic
circumstances.
2.3
Alternative methods
2.3.1
Pyrosequencing
This method is a real-time method of exploring a short nucleotide string of base pairs;
for example a 100 nucleotide base section of DNA. It is based on the release of
pyrophosphate during DNA sequencing. The visible light generated is proportional
to the number of incorporated nucleotides. Each nucleotide is copied into a
20
CH02 FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY, DNA AND ENTOMOTOXICOLOGY

synthesised string, identiﬁed, and recorded in real time. Because the identities of the
nucleotides that are added are known, the sequence of unknown nucleotides can be
determined. The technique is potentially valuable for identifying heteroplasy in
species as well as for conﬁrming species identity.
Salk, Sanchez, Pierce et al. (2006) enabled the direct ampliﬁcation of single-
stranded DNA for pyrosequencing by developing an automated Linear-after-the
Exponential PCR (LATE-PCR) method. He and his co-workers were able to
sequence a region containing only 191 base pairs using the method. Pyrosequencing
advantages are its accuracy, ﬂexibility and that it is a process which can be readily
automated, eliminating the need for primers and gel electrophoresis. However
pyrosequencing is not currently standard practice in forensic entomology although
some attempts have been made to increase the genetic information available on
Sarcophagids through its use. For example, a genomic analysis of Sarcophaga
crassipalpis Macquart using parallel pyrosequencing provided a library containing
9000 transcripts, which were then classiﬁed into 14 major subcategories relating to
biological processes (Hahn, Ragland, Shoemaker and Delinger, 2009).
2.4
Validity of methodologies
The validity of assessment using mtDNA has been explored by Wells and Williams
(2007). They conﬁrmed their conﬁdence in the method using ﬂies from the
Chrysomyinae and tested a number of sequences using mtDNA. Wells and Williams
conﬁrmed the identity of all of the specimens they investigated. However, from a
forensic perspective, the validity of each method requires that there is a reasonable
chance that the larval specimens collected are from insects that are likely to be found
in the area concerned and that the proﬁles are already present on the database. The
effects of global warming and the resultant species migration may be the cause of
identiﬁcation which gives unexpected results where species are not normally found
in a speciﬁc location. More work is needed to build up the database, ensure that the
information available is accurate and to conﬁrm the repeatability of the molecular
methods used.
Current databases such as GenBank are considered to contain a number of
misidentiﬁcations and a biased sample range (Mitchell, 2008), so caution has to
be exercised in interpreting the results using the available databases. Meir et al.
(2006), for example, revealed that the COI sequences in GenBank could not be
used to distinguish 30% of the dipteran species they examined. However, Nelson,
Wallman and Dowton (2007) and Meiklejohn et al. (2011) have shown that the
approach works satisfactorily for the Australian Chrysomya species and Australian
Sarcophagidae respectively. A further example of the need for the sequences used for
comparison to be valid is provided by Lessard, Wallman and Dowton (2010) who
conﬁrmed the single taxon status of Chrysomya ruﬁfacies Macquart when reassess-
ment of the original COII sequences revealed that they originated from specimens of
2.4 VALIDITY OF METHODOLOGIES
21

Lucilia porphyrina (Walker) and not Chrysomya ruﬁfaces. Quality assurance
procedures are in place to assist in reducing these problems.
Another area of concern about the validity of the conclusions that can be drawn is
that of the effects of the variation revealed both phenotypically and as a result of
genetic investigation within a particular species. The implications of this need to be
taken into consideration when evaluating data to decide the species identity of
members of a particular population of insects collected from a body or crime scene.
Analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have shown them to be
found at a frequency of at least 7.2 SNPs per 10 kb in one species (Hahn et al., 2009)
and microsatellite (repeated regions of noncoding base pair sequences) analysis may
be able to provide details of such variation. These latter sets of repeat base pairs arise
because of mutation, independent variation in chromosomes and as a result of
recombination. They are therefore distinct to the individual rather than the species.
The implication of this variation and its effect, if any, on the development of
forensically relevant species of insects is as yet unclear – a further aspect needing
study. Such examples indicate the value of the close working partnership that is
required between the entomologist and those involved in molecular biology.
2.4.1
DNA barcoding
The current concern regarding biodiversity and genomics has resulted in the
establishment of a Consortium of the Barcode of Life (CBol) in 2004 (Ratnasingham
and Herbert, 2007). The objective of this consortium is to develop a genetic barcode
for every eukaryotic organism. The proposal is that a database and work platform
utilising a speciﬁc 658-bp section of the cytochrome oxidase I gene (COI) be
generated for use in identiﬁcation. The COI region is used as the standard for ex-
ploring the identity of a species and has, for example, been provided for Sarcophaga
(subgenus Robineauella)caerulescens Zetterstedt, whichwill beoffuturebeneﬁt for
conﬁrming the identity of a species newly found on indoor corpses in Finland
(Pohjoism€aki et al., 2010). The consortium also propose a large-scale approach to the
molecular identiﬁcation of a large number of species using standardised protocols,
voucher specimens so that there is the possibility of reconﬁrming the identity of a
species, morphological methods, and the development of a large database that is
actively maintained. Such proposals are very attractive for the forensic world,
including the area of biosecurity.
From such an approach, determining the genetic makeup of the ﬂy would be
readily achieved and forensic entomologists would be able to interrogate the
database to conﬁrm a specimen’s identity. Barcoding for Life (BOLD-IDS) is an
online tool that accepts a sequence of DNA from the barcode region and provides a
taxonomic ascription, down to species if it is possible. The database allows this to be
undertaken using overview sequences. The use of high through-ﬂow protocols and
the examination of a large number of samples could also result in a reduction of the
cost of such analysis which would be favoured by the forensic science end users.
22
CH02 FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY, DNA AND ENTOMOTOXICOLOGY

The measure of the percentage divergence of the specimen proﬁles has been
considered a numerical means of bar code evaluation of the security of the species
identiﬁcation of the specimen (Meiklejohn, Wallman and Dowton, 2011); a further
aspect increasingly considered by the courts as necessary in presenting evidence.
Some degree of caution, however, needs to be expressed regarding the approach
and the system needs to be policed in order to maintain quality. The presence of
endoparasites and micro-organisms in specimens could cause some degree of
difﬁculty in identiﬁcation.
2.5
The use of other molecular means of insect species
determination
DNA is not the only molecular method which has been used to characterise ﬂies.
Chemicals, including hydrocarbons and allozymes, have also been used for this
purpose. For example, by extracting 22 cuticular hydrocarbons using GCMS, Byrne
et al. (1995) discriminated between both the sexes of Phormia regina Meigen and the
three different geographic locations they sampled.
2.5.1
Allozymes
Allozymes are enzymes which, because of genetic mutation, vary within individual
species. Heterogeneity in enzymes can be investigated by using electrophoretic
techniques such as iso-electric focussing; isolating the proteins as bands on
polyacrylamide gels and visualising them by staining. Examples of the enzymes
that have been explored for enzyme heterogeneity include hexokinase and glycerol
dehydrogenase. Szalanski (1995) provided the descriptions of components for a
range of stains for these and other enzymes arising out of his research on the genetic
characterisation and population genetics of Stomoxys calcitrans the stable ﬂy.
Allozymes have been used in southern Australia to distinguish between four
calliphorid species of forensic signiﬁcance (Wallman and Adams, 2000); Calliphora
dubia Macquart, Calliphora stygia Fabricius, Calliphora hilli hilli Paton, and
Calliphora vicina. Using 42 allozymes, Wallman and Adams were able to show
a clear distinction between species, both for third larval instars and adults.
The main advantage of this method is its speed; results can be generated in three
hours, which is more rapid than is possible for DNA analysis. The method is also
considered cost effective and to have a high level of reliability. It also has the
potential to be a ﬁeld technique, unlike the standard DNA methodologies. On
occasion the banding patterns produced do not develop strongly but Loxdale and
Lushai (1998) suggest that this can be overcome by applying the sample accurately to
the gel plate, investigating the buffers so that the most effective is used, and keeping
the reaction cool whilst electrophoresis is being carried out.
2.5 THE USE OF OTHER MOLECULAR MEANS OF INSECT SPECIES DETERMINATION
23

Alternative chemicals have been investigated to identify the age of individual
species. A number of researchers have used pteridines (Thomas and Chen, 1989) and
lipofuscins for this purpose. Thomas and Chen found that pteridines were useful for
aging adult screwworms, Cochliomyia hominivorax Coquerel. Robson and Crozier
were less successful in using this chemical for aging a species of the Formicidae (ants).
They did, however, demonstrate a relationship between lipofuscin concentration and
the age of the spiny weaver ant (Polyrhachis sexpinosa Latrielle) (Robson and Crozier,
2009). A similar relationship between age and concentration of lipofuscin has been
found in the honey bee Apis mellifera Linnaeus, suggesting that these chemicals may,
for individual species, assist in determining the duration of PMI.
Further studies need to be undertaken in order to develop reliable diagnostic
markers for forensically important ﬂy species. The limits of variability also need to
be conﬁrmed before this technique is routinely encountered in the court room.
Overall, though, using standardised methods that are validated is the preferred
approach in forensic science. For this reason, the use of mtDNA is likely to become
the recognised standard approach for species conﬁrmation in the near future.
2.6
Insects and entomotoxicology
At a crime scene, insects, particularly larvae, can be valuable as a source of
information about the poisoning and/or drug consumption of a victim. This is
especially true where the body is so badly decomposed that it is not possible to take
samples of blood, urine, or the stomach contents. Immature insect stages, as well as
adults, may retain or accumulate foreign chemicals present in their food – the corpse.
However, the time period over which speciﬁc chemicals last in a cadaver will vary,
dependent on both the conditions under which the body is kept and the toxicant itself.
For example, Grellner and Glenewinkel (1997), in their actual and desk-based study
of exhumations, found indications of diazepam for a period ofﬁve years; mercury for
one month (based on the literature), morphine up to 1.1 years (based on the
literature), whilst amitriptyline was still present in the cadaver after 5.5 years. If
these chemicals remain in a body for such a long time it is important to determine
what their effect is likely to be on insect development so that this can be taken into
account when estimating time since death. Equally the ability of the insects to retain
indications of such drugs means that they, themselves, can be a valuable source of
information about the past behaviour of the deceased.
It has been known that heavy metals could be extracted from cadavers by using the
larval stages of insects that feed on corpses for a number of years. Arsenic has been
recovered from the larvae of the Piophilidae (cheese skippers), Psychodidae (moth
ﬂies) and Fanniidae (Leclercq and Brahy, 1985). Other heavy metals have also been
recovered using insects. For example mercury has been extracted from calliphorid
larvae, puparia, and adults feeding on ﬁsh which contained methylated-mercury
(Nuorteva and Nuorteva, 1982).
24
CH02 FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY, DNA AND ENTOMOTOXICOLOGY

Poisons besides heavy metals have been recovered from corpse tissue at both
medicinal and recreational concentrations. In many instances, larvae are the most
useful source of information about the drug consumption of the deceased. A
comparison of the relationship between the recovery of drugs such as oxazepam
and triazolam (benzodiazepines), alimemazine and clomipramine (tricyclic anti-
depressants) and phenobarbital (barbiturate) from calliphorid larvae and the organs
of a two month-old corpsewas undertaken using liquid chromatography (Kintz et al.,
1990). The larvae provided a more sensitive means of determining the nature of the
drug than using tissue from the corpse.
Wood et al. (2003) developed a rapid, sensitive method for the quantitation of
benzodiazepines from insects. They conﬁrmed that Calliphora vicina larvae and
puparia are a suitable source of toxicological information. Sadler et al. (1995) pointed
out that Calliphora vicina post-feeding stages analysis provided estimates of concen-
tration of drugs like temazepam and amitriptyline, which were lower than the original
experimental dose. Gola and Lukose (2007) also recovered diazepine, prednisolone,
and phenobarbitone from larvae, puparia, and adult blowﬂies. So, depending upon the
drug, all stages of metamorphosis may potentially be used for entomotoxicology.
However the quantities of drugs recovered may not be strictly related to the levels
present in the body. In laboratory experiments Introna et al. (1990) showed a
signiﬁcant correlation (r ¼ 0.790) using regression analysis, between morphine
concentrations recovered from larvae and that present in the intoxicated liver upon
which the larvae had been fed. However, Hedouin et al. (1999, 2001) could not
demonstrate a similar relationship in experiments using rabbits intoxicated with the
drug when alive. They recovered amounts of morphine 30 to 100 times lower than the
concentrations recovered from rabbit tissue.
The majority of experimental work related to the inﬂuence of drug intoxication of
tissue on larval growth has been carried out using visceral organs such as liver as a
food source, rather than muscle, a more likely diet of corpse-dwelling insects. Nolte,
Pinder and Lord (1992) investigated larvae feeding on the corpse of a 29-year-old
drug addict who was considered to have died ﬁve months prior to the recovery of the
body. Using gas chromatography and gas chromatography–mass spectroscopy,
cocaine and its dominant metabolite benzoylecognine were detected in both the
larvae and the decomposing skeletal muscle. However, it was not possible to
determine the concentration of the drug. A similar situation was experienced by
Deﬁnis-Gojanovic et al. (2007) who recovered amphetamine from the body of a
suicidevictim in the early stages of decomposition. The person was estimated to have
been dead for approximately one month. In this instance the presence of amphet-
amine was unequivocally conﬁrmed but the levels could not be related to the
concentrations found in either the blood or liver tissue.
The effects of drugs on larval life-cycle duration must be taken into account when
estimating time since death. Sarcophagid species larvae of Boettcherisca peregrina
Robineau–Desvoidy fed on drug-intoxicated tissue containing cocaine and its
metabolite at both the median lethal dose and twice the median lethal dose, had
an accelerated development time due to a reduced time in the larval stages, early
2.6 INSECTS AND ENTOMOTOXICOLOGY
25

pupation and adult eclosion (Goff, Omori and Goodbrod, 1989). On heroin the speed
of growth of their larvae increased by up to 29 hours (Goff et al., 1991). In contrast,
Arnaldoset al. (2005), investigating theeffects ofheroinonthe durationofindividual
life stages of a different ﬂesh ﬂy, Sarcophaga (Curranea) tibialis Macquart, showed
that the life stages were extended considerably compared to those of larvae fed on
tissue that were not drug intoxicated.
The effect of the antidepressant amitriptyline has similarly been shown to increase
development time in other species of ﬂesh ﬂy (Sacrophagidae). Hydrocortisone
similarly increased the time in the larval stages of Sarcophaga tibialis – their dose-
dependent effects were nonlinear (Musvasva et al., 2001). (This chemical is often
prescribed for the treatment of allergy and inﬂammatory conditions such as
rheumatism. It can be applied topically and as such would be in direct contact with
any eggs laid on the skin of a treated corpse or available to larvae consuming the
ﬂesh.) Overall, however, the length of time from egg eclosion to adult emergence for
Sarcophaga tibialis was not dissimilar to that of the controls, suggesting that it has no
lasting effect on the determinationof the post mortem interval if the insects have been
present on the body over a long period.
Bourel et al. (1999) demonstrated that morphine reduced the speed of develop-
ment in Lucilia sericata and that if this was not taken into consideration then the time
since death could be underestimated by 24 hours. Oliveira et al. (2009) similarly
revealed that if Chrysomya megacephala larvae were exposed to the drug active
ingredient butylscopolamine bromide, then with increasing concentrations so the
development time increased. Therefore the effect of a particular drug or its
metabolites (or both) on speed of insect development appears to be species speciﬁc,
due to variation the in tolerance levels for particular drugs. This depends on whether
the chemical is sequestered in or excreted by the insect.
Bourel et al. (2001), using radioimmunoassay, identiﬁed a concentration rela-
tionship between recovery of morphine and the original amount in the host tissue.
They conﬁrmed that Lucilia sericata larvae were capable of excreting morphine
during the post-feeding stage and that tissue with concentrations of 100 to 1000 mg
Kg1 were the most reliably determined because false positives were also recorded at
some concentrations. Equally other drugs have little or no effect on development
insect time. Work by Kaneshrajah and Turner (2004) and Estrada et al. (2009) have
shown that consumption of medicinal drugs such as aspirin do not alter the speed of
larval development.
Flies are not the only source of toxicological information: many of the beetles that
feed directly upon a corpse can also be a valuable source of forensic evidence about
the drug consumption ofthe decedent. For example, Milleret al. (1994) examined the
mummiﬁed female and conﬁrmed that the shed dermestid larval skins (exuviae) and
dermestid faecal material on and around the body contained the drug amitriptyline.
The researchers were able to recover more amitriptyline from skull fragments and
stomach contents of the mummiﬁed remains of the person who was thought to have
died two years previously. This conﬁrmed the value of dermestid remains as a
suitable source of entomotoxicological evidence.
26
CH02 FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY, DNA AND ENTOMOTOXICOLOGY

Predators feeding on insects consuming a corpse can be a useful source of
information about drug presence. Beetles that are predators of blowﬂy larvae can
bio-accumulate drugs and heavy metals. Therefore these predators, recovered from
the later stages of succession, particularly from badly decomposed bodies, can be an
effective means of drug detection (Introna, Campobasso and Goff, 2001). They may
also provide an explanation for variation in the time of death established by other
forensic analytical techniques. A staphylinid, Creophilus maxillosus Linnaeus, a
predator of dipteran larvae feeding on mercury contaminated ﬁsh, was also found to
be a source of mercury, which it had bioaccumulated having consumed the maggots
feeding on the mercury source.
In some instances the poisons concerned are designed for application to other
animals and are not intended for human consumption. Agricultural chemicals such as
insecticides are a potential cause of both intentional and unintentional poisoning.
The organophosphate Malathion, present in corpses, has, for example, been identi-
ﬁed and successfully recovered using Chrysomya larvae. Gunatilake and Goff (1989)
isolated this from both Chrysomya megacephala and Chrysomya ruﬁfacies larvae.
Using pooling they detected the insecticide in a suicide victim at a concentration of
2050 mg g1 of larvae. Recognition of the presence of chemicals such as Malathion
is important as Yan-wei et al. (2010) conﬁrmed. These co-workers showed that
Malathion increased Chrysomya megacephala larval development time but not the
puparial duration and that the larval length and puparial weight were increased.
Similarly Gola and Lukose (2007) revealed that the insecticide dichlorodiphenyltri-
chloroethane (DDT) could be recovered from the larval stages of blowﬂies but could
not identify it in the adult stages. This is also true of humans where DDT has been
recovered from human tissue as it was stored in body fat and also in breast milk (Jaga
and Dharmani, 2003). Many Africans and Asians have higher concentrations present
in their bodies than do the Europeans.
Insects collected from drug hauls can be useful as an indicator of plant origin. For
example, beetles on cannabis leaves, impounded from a ship in a New Zealand
harbour, were examined by entomologists. The beetles identiﬁed were Carabidae,
Bruchidae and Tenebrionidae from species which were not native to either the ship’s
original port or those it had visited. The beetles came from a region between the
Andaman Sea and Thailand. Based upon the geographic distribution of the insects, it
was concluded that the drugs originated from the Tenasserim region. When this
entomological evidence was revealed one of the two suspects confessed to illegal
drug smuggling (Crosby et al., 1986).
2.7
Forensic applications of arthropod behaviour
for chemical analysis
Arthropods, including spiders, can be of value as a source of detection and some
species can be trained to indicate the presence of drugs and explosives by expressing
2.7 FORENSIC APPLICATIONS OF ARTHROPOD BEHAVIOUR FOR CHEMICAL ANALYSIS
27

particular behaviour patterns. Insects will demonstrate particular behaviour patterns
in response to chemical stimuli such as carbon dioxide, lactic acid, or the odour from
nectar or other substances to which they have been trained to respond. For example,
honey bees have been trained to indicate the presence of explosives at places like
airports, or train and bus stations and moths are being trained to indicate the location
of landmines (King et al., 2004). Bees are able to detect explosive substances despite
their being masked by materials such as oil, dead bodies, and other odours (Ornes,
2006). The period over which an individual honey bee can be used to detect TNT,
according to research by the Stealthy Insect Sensor project, tends to be around two
days; training though, is achieved in an extremely short period.
Similarly, parasitic wasps (Microplitis croceipes Cresson) have been trained,
using associative learning, to indicate the presence of explosives, food toxins or dead
bodies (Tomberlin, Rains and Sanford, 2008). Cruz (2006) explored the effects on
blowﬂy larval development of their consuming trinitrotoluene (TNT) contaminated
ﬂesh and the possibility of transfer of explosives as a result ofingestion by insects. He
showed that the TNT could be recovered from second and third instar larvae which
had been fed upon liver laced with explosives. This researcher conﬁrmed the
presence of the explosive using scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive
spectroscopy (SEM/EDAX).
The forensic value of insects and other arthropods as a source of evidence or
evidence interpretation for a court is therefore wide. They can be integrated with a
variety of technologies and used for a variety of forensic purposes in contexts
which range from security to toxicology and time since death determination.
Currently new areas of chemistry incorporating nanotechnology such as nanopar-
ticles (Bhattacharyya et al., 2010) are being developed, which may have a role to play
in forensic entomology.
28
CH02 FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY, DNA AND ENTOMOTOXICOLOGY

3
Insects and decomposition
The rate of decomposition of the body, and the interpretation of the post mortem
interval, are inﬂuenced by the arthropods, including insects, which visit and colonise
the body.
3.1
Indicators of ‘time of death’
The determination of time since death has, historically, been based upon the
condition of the corpse itself and such physical features as fall in body temperature.
Once the body has been dead for over 72 hours there is less medical information
available with which to correlate post mortem interval. Forensic entomology can
provide a measure of the minimum post mortem interval, based upon the lifecycle
stages of particular ﬂy species recovered from the corpse, or from the succession of
insects present on the body. This estimate can be given over a period of hours, weeks,
or years once the normal pathological features are no longer usable to determine time
since death.
The point at which the ﬂy ﬁrst laid its eggs on the body is considered to coincide
with the point of death and its end is considered to be the discovery of the body. The
life stage and name of the oldest colonising species infesting the body is used as a
marker of this initial colonisation. The summation of the time in the individual life
stages taken to reach the insect life stage recovered from the body, in relation to its
particular stage of decay, gives a good estimation of the probable length of time the
person has been dead. Indeed this may be the best estimate of the time since death that
is available.
Decomposition can be inﬂuenced by theage of theperson, their physical build,and
also their previous activities. Bodies that are obese will decompose more rapidly
because bacteria have access to tissuewith a good supply of water. Peoplewho have a
low level of muscle tissue or who are starving will have a rapid onset of active decay
and a faster rate of decomposition. Active decay is much slower in elderly people and
in babies; so overall decomposition will be correspondingly slow.
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

3.2
Stages of decomposition of a body
There are three recognisable decomposition processes through which a body passes
as it decays. These are autolysis, putrefaction, and skeletal bone decomposition
(diagenesis). During autolysis, a process of natural breakdown, the cells of the body
are digested by enzymes including lipases, proteases and carbohydrases. This
process can be most rapid in organs such as the brain and liver (Vass, 2001). A
‘soup’ of nutrients is released, which forms a food source for bacteria.
Putrefaction is the breakdown of fat and muscle tissues by members of such
anaerobic bacterial genera as Clostridium and Bacteroides. Anaerobic fermentation
generates propionic and butyric acids. The production of fermentation gases results
in an increase in the size of the body due to bloating. Eventually the skin can contain
the gases no longer and liquid leaks from any gaps in the skin, including the oral and
nasal and anal oriﬁces. As a result there is an increase in the amount of body tissue
available for insect consumption. A greater exposure to the air encourages an
increase in the populations of aerobic species of micro-organisms associated with
the body, which also speeds up decomposition.
When the soft tissue is removed, skeletal material – organic and inorganic
remains – are further broken down by environmental conditions and are ﬁnally
reduced to components of the soil (Figures 3.1–3.5) (see also coloured section).
Carter, Yellowlees and Tibbett (2007) consider that each square kilometre of the
landmass receives 5000 kg of cadaveric material annually. The decomposition of the
body provides a nutrient-rich island around the body in which there is an increase in
Figure 3.1
Fresh stage of decomposition
30
CH03 INSECTS AND DECOMPOSITION

soil carbon, nutrients, and pH (see colour section). According to Vass et al. (1992) a
68 kg human in advanced decomposition, will enrich each gram of the top three to
ﬁve centimetres of soil by 300 mg potassium, 50 mg calcium and 10 mg magnesium.
The island is visually distinct because of a change of vegetation in the area.
The rate of decomposition is temperature dependent. A formula has been proposed
by forensic pathologists to estimate the time of body decomposition to skeletisation,
Figure 3.2
Bloat
Figure 3.3
Active decay stage
3.2 STAGES OF DECOMPOSITION OF A BODY
31

in relation to temperature (Vass, 2001). The formula is:
Y ¼ 1285=X
where Y is the number of days to mummiﬁcation or skeletonisation and X is the
average temperature on the day that the body was found (Vass et al., 1992).
Figure 3.5
Skeletal remains
Figure 3.4
Advanced decay
32
CH03 INSECTS AND DECOMPOSITION

Box 3.1
Diagenesis, mummiﬁcation and adipocere
Besides skeletonisation, with the resultant change in the bone structure (Diagene-
sis), two other outcomes of the decomposition process may occur. These are
mummiﬁcation and the generation of ‘grave wax’ or adipocere.
Diagenesis
Whenthebodyreachestheskeletalstage,changestothebonecalleddiagenesisoccur.
Diagenesis is deﬁned, in chemical terms, according to the Collins Dictionary of the
English Language (Hanks, 1984), as recrystallisation of a solid to form large crystal
grains from smaller ones. The changes in the bone structure depend upon the
breakdownofthesofttissue.Thisisaffectedbythenatureofthedeathandsubsequent
treatment ofthe body, including the type ofenvironment inwhich the bodyisburied.
Investigating bone can tell us about the latter stages of post mortem change
because a number of features can be quantiﬁed. The length of the post mortem
intervalcanbeestimatedifthebonehistologyisinvestigatedunderthemicroscope–
the degree of bone porosity is determined; the carbonate and protein content of the
bone are calculated; the crystalline nature and content of the bone mineral made of
calcium ﬂuorophosphate or calcium chlorophosphate (apatite), is examined and the
components that have leached out of or into the bone are determined.
Insect attack, both before the body is buried and after, has a role to play in
causing change to the environment and hence bone diagenesis.
Adipocere
If the body is in an environment that combines high humidity with high
temperatures the subcutaneous body fat of the face, buttocks (breasts in the
female) and the extremities become hydrolysed. Fatty acids are released. These
form food for bacteria, which can speed up the rate at which adipocere is made.
For example Clostridium bacteria will convert oleic acid (a fatty acid) into
hydroxystearic acid and oxostearic acid.
Two types of adipocere are found, depending on whether the fatty acids combine
withsodiumorwithpotassium.Ifsodiumfromthebreakdownofintercellularﬂuidis
bound to the fatty acids the adipocere is hard and curly. Where the cell membranes
breakdownandpotassiumisreleasedasofteradipocereresults,whichisoftentermed
‘pasty’.Anindicationofsubmergenceincoldwateristheuniformcoverofadipocere
over the body (Spitz, Spitz and Fisher, 2006).
Mummiﬁcation
If water is removed from skin and tissue, the tissue becomes desiccated and
mummiﬁcation will occur. This happens particularly where a body is kept in an
environment with a dry heat and little humidity and where the airﬂow is good.
Chimneys are examples of good locations with these features. In mummiﬁed
corpses in temperate conditions the extremities become shrivelled and the skin
tends to be ﬁrm but wrinkled and to have a brown colouration. The internal organs
such as the brain will decompose during mummiﬁcation.
3.2 STAGES OF DECOMPOSITION OF A BODY
33

3.2.1
Body decomposition and the sequence of insect colonisation on
land
The body can be allocated to one of ﬁve recognisable post mortem conditions, which
can be linked to the eight waves of arthropod colonisation proposed by Megnin
(1894). The transition from one stage to the next is not distinct and Gaudry (2002), on
the basis of 400 cases, considers Megnin’s ﬁrst two waves to be one.
Although no stage has a ﬁxed duration, each stage can be associated with a
particular assemblage of insects. The proﬁles of insects would appear to be universal,
although the majority of research on this aspect has, until recently, been undertaken
primarily in North America (Hough 1897; Easton and Smith, 1970; Rodriguez and
Bass, 1983; Catts and Haskell, 1990; Mann, Bass and Meadows, 1990; Goff, 1993;
Dillon and Anderson, 1996; VanLaerhoven and Anderson, 1999; Okiwelu, Ikpamii
and Umeozor, 2008; Byrd and Castner, 2010; T€uz€un, Dabri and Yuksel, 2010;
Valdes-Perezgasga et al., 2010).
These post mortem transitions on land are discussed in this chapter; the sequence
of decomposition in aquatic environments is discussed in Chapter 12.The stages of
decomposition of corpses left on the soil surface are:
. Stage 1. Fresh stage. This stage starts from the moment of death to the ﬁrst signs of
bloating of the body. The ﬁrst organisms to arrive are the blowﬂies (the Calliphor-
idae). In Britain these are usually Calliphora vicina or Calliphora vomitoria, or in
early spring they may be Protophormia (¼Phormia) terraenovae Robineau-
Desvoidy (Nuorteva, 1987; Erzinc¸liogˆlu, 1996).
. Stage 2. Bloated Stage. Breakdown of the body continues because of bacterial
activity, orputrefaction. This is perhapsthe easiest stageto distinguish. Gasescausing
the corpse to bloat are generated by anaerobic bacteria metabolising nutrients. The
whole body swells, starting with the abdomen, and becomes stretched like an inﬂated
air-balloon (Figure 3.2). At this stage more and more blowﬂies are attracted to the
body, responding to the odour, including that of the breakdown gases. Vass et al.,
(1992, 2004) studied the odours emanating from buried bodies and those dead bodies
resting on the surface. Their work provides clariﬁcation of the identity of some of
these gases and allows interpretation of the observations of Megnin (1887, 1894);
Hough (1897); Smith (1986); Matuszewski et al. (2008, 2010) and others. At bloat,
rove beetles (Staphylinidae) may be attracted to the body. These and other predators
can affect the interpretation of the range of insects and insect-life stages present as
they feed on larvae, or remove puparia (Smith, 1986).
. Stage 3. Active decay stage. At this stage the skin of the corpse is split in places and
starts to slough off the body. Sloughing allows decomposition gases to escape. The
body gradually deﬂates as putrefaction continues (Figure 3.3). In the later stages of
putrefaction, fermentation occurs and butenoic and caseic acids are generated,
amongst others. This is followed by a period of advanced putrefaction, which
includes ammoniacal fermentationofthebody, towhichadifferentcohort ofinsects
34
CH03 INSECTS AND DECOMPOSITION

is attracted. These include the silphid beetle Nicrophorus humator, (Gleditsch), the
histerids Hister cadaverinus Hoffmann and Saprinus rotundatus Kugelann, and
the muscid ﬂy Hydrotaea capensis Wiedeman (¼Ophyra cadaverina Curtis).
. Stage 4. Post-decay stage. In the later stages of decay all that remains of the body is
skin, cartilage, and bones with some remnants of ﬂesh, including the intestines
(Figure 3.4). Any remaining body tissue can be dried. The biggest indicator of this
stage is an increase in the presence of beetles and a reduction in the dominance of
the ﬂies (Diptera) on the body.
. Stage 5. Skeletonisation. At this stage the body is only hair and bones (Figure 3.5).
No obvious groups of insects are associated with this stage, although beetles of the
family Nitidulidae can, in some instances, be found. The body has clearly reached
its ﬁnal stage of decomposition. Any further breakdown is best described in terms
of the decay of individual components of the body, such as the bones of the feet and
legs, the skull and the ribs.
3.2.2
Decomposition of buried bodies
Buried corpses may require investigation from one of two situations: the result of
either criminal activity, where the body is covered over or placed in a hole dug in the
soil to conceal it from view, or legitimate burial of the deceased in a cofﬁn in a grave
where exhumation is requested. Research has been undertaken on both types of
burial. Breitmeier et al. (2005) explored the stages of decomposition of legitimately
buried corpses and found that evidence of decomposition was divided into four
stages. These were from early decomposition to skeletisation of most or all of the
body. Environmental conditions such as how deep the body was buried, the condition
of the ground in which the body was buried, and the season of burial all played a large
role in dictating the speed of body decomposition (Table 3.1).
Gunn and Bird (2011) consider that in general, in the UK, a body that is buried to
conceal a crime (a clandestine burial) tends, on average, to be covered by an average
of 0.4 m of soil. In the USA the depth of soil was considered to be slightly greater at
an average depth of 0.56 m.
Wilson et al. (2007) investigated the decomposition of buried corpses using
pigs (Sus scrofa Linnaeus), which were buried directly into the ground – an
Table 3.1
Speed of decomposition of encofﬁned bodies in graves
Decomposition stage
Average time
Range
1. Early decomposition
22 days
5–58 days
2. Moderate decomposition
93 days
8–8.7 months
3. Advanced decomposition including
minor skeletalisation
2.8 years
5.7 months–10 years
4. Skeletalisation (complete or predominant)
12.7 years
8.4–16.8 years
Source: After Breitmeier et al. (2005)
3.2 STAGES OF DECOMPOSITION OF A BODY
35

approach reminiscent of the type of burial characteristic in criminal activity and also
the approach taken for mass graves. In their research, water-table movements, changes
in soil temperature and moisture levels strongly inﬂuenced the rate of decomposition.
Interestingly, decomposition rates between one corpse and the next at a particular site
also varied. The rate of decomposition in general, however, was determined by the
season the body (pig) was buried and soil temperature, irrespective of location; be it
pastures deciduous woodland or moorland. This was also the experience of Turner and
Wiltshire (1999) who showed that burial of pigs in winter in cold, oxygen-limited
conditions in heavy, base-poor clay soil resulted in good corpse preservation.
Gaudry et al. (2006) revealed that depth of burial affected the colonisation of
buried bodies by insects. In this instance, the carcasses chosen were sheep (Ovis aries
Linnaeus). The main colonising insects were ﬂies from the families of the House ﬂies
(Muscidae), lesser house ﬂies (Fannidae) and hump-backed ﬂies (Phoridae).
Muscidae were found on corpses buried at 10, 30, or 90 cm below the soil surface.
However the attractiveness of the corpse to this family diminished with depth.
Colonisation lasted between 60–120 days post-burial at 30 cm; in contrast colonisa-
tion continued over six months where the bodies were covered by only 10 cm of soil.
In contrast to the situation where bodies were retained on the soil surface, no species
of the Calliphoridae were found on any of the buried sheep.
Gunn and Bird (2011) found a similar relationship with depth and colonisation but
noted that the eggs of both Lucilia sericata and Calliphora vomitoria could hatch
beneath the soil surface. Their results linked efﬁciency of colonisation of remains by
Calliphora vicina and Calliphora vomitoriawith loose soil whichcovered remains to
a depth of 5 cm. Calliphora vomitoria was unable to colonise remains at any greater
depth. Therefore Gunn and Bird conclude that if there is a large number of larvae of
either Calliphora vicina or Calliphora vomitoria present on a body buried at a depth
of 5 cm or greater, then there is some possibility that the body was exposed to the
elements above ground prior to its subsequently being covered over with soil. This is
in contrast to Lucilia sericata, which could colonise decomposing remains at a depth
of at least 10 cm. Muscid ﬂies such as Muscina stabulans are far more successful and
can colonise a body to a depth of 40 cm at least. Soil conditions therefore have a role
to play in colonisation of buried bodies and may dictate the species successfully
colonising the body. Spilza, Voss and Pape (2010), for example, showed that
Sarcophagidae were more common colonisers of buried bodies in habitats that were
dry; the soil loose and dry. In such circumstances they were able to colonise bodies
buried to a depth of around half a metre.
3.3
Volatiles released from the body during
decomposition
Statheropoulos et al. (2007) investigated the volatiles released from a human body in
early decay four days after death. Thirty volatiles were identiﬁed comprising
36
CH03 INSECTS AND DECOMPOSITION

hydrocarbons, alcohol, aldehydes, ketones, sulphide compounds, and benzene
derivatives. Only 12 substances were recovered immediately after the four day-old
body was examined directly after being in a refrigerator for 24 hours. These
substances were octane, trimethyl decane, ethanol, 2-propanone, 2-butanone,
dimethyl disulphide, dimethyl trisulphide, methyl ethyl disulphide, methyl benzene,
o-xylene, m-xylene, and r-xylene.
At active decay, simple volatiles such as hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide,
carbon dioxide, methane, ammonia, hydrogen, and carbon dioxide are released.
Protein and fat decomposition produce glycerols and phenols and proteins are also
broken down by bacteria into fatty acids (Vass, 2001).
A large number of odours are released from the decomposing human corpse over
the whole sequence of decomposition. Vass et al. (2008) recorded 478 volatiles of
which 30 were considered to be key indicators of human decomposition. From the
surface of the soil above bodies buried for 12 months, Vass et al. (2004) recorded
cyclic and non-cyclic hydrocarbons, sulphur compounds, acids, esters, oxygen
compounds, and halogens. Volatile chemicals recorded from decomposing humans
irrespective of whether or not they were buried were: toluene, 1,1,2-trichloro-1,2,2-
triﬂuoro ethane, hexane, undecane, alpha, alpha, dimethyl benzenemethanol,
dimethyl disulphide, dimethyl trisulphide, decanal, carbon disulphide, nonanal,
1,4-dimethyl benzene, benzene, ethyl benzene, 1-ethyl, 2-methyl benzene, dichloro-
diﬂuoromethane, 1,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid, diethyl ester, methenamine, carbon
tetrachloride (Vass et al., 2008). LeBlanc and Logan (2010) found that two of these
volatiles, which were derived from the unburied corpse of a pig, dimethyl disulphide
and dimethyl trisulphide, stimulated an electrophysiological response from Calli-
phora vomitoria, but she failed to gain a response from the ﬂy to benzene and hexane.
Upon death, the body can emit body ﬂuids soon after the muscles of sphincters
cease to remain constricted, which attracts insects and in particular the Muscidae.
The decomposition compounds originating from urine contain attractants such as
1-octen-3-ol, 6-methyl-5-hepten-2-one and (z)-3-hexen-1-ol which draw muscids
Hydrotaea irritans Linnaeus, Musca autumnalis DeGeer and Stomyx calcitrans
Linnaeus (Birkett et al., 2004). These chemicals draw the species to the body and its
waste material, adding to the assemblage of early colonising insects that arrive at the
recently dead body.
Decomposition odour differences have also been found to distinguish between
the decomposing corpses of different species. For example the emission of
1,1-dimethylcyclohexane distinguishes dead rat from the corpses of dog, human,
cat, bird or rabbit. The volatile phenanthrene distinguished humans from the other
species (Verplaetse et al., 2007).
The decomposing body will respond to different environmental conditions.
Under buried conditions where moisture is present and the pH is quite high, fatty
regionsof abody such asthe cheeks, thighsand buttocks, can undergo saponiﬁcation
with the formation of ‘gravewax’ or adipocere. The nature of adipocere, whether it is
hard and crumbly or more like a paste, can indicate source of material and the speed
of decomposition.
3.3 VOLATILES RELEASED FROM THE BODY DURING DECOMPOSITION
37

According to Vass (2001), if the fatty acids are bound with sodium from the ﬂuid
from between the cells (interstitial ﬂuid), a hard, crumbly adipocere will be
produced. The pasty form of adipocere is the result of binding of fatty acids with
potassium, available where cell membranes have decomposed. The nature of these
fatty acids varies with body and location. Conditions in the moorland and deciduous
woodlands of the Pennine uplands of the UK resulted in a wide range of different
fatty acids being recovered from pigs buried for 12 months.
The average relative percentages of fatty acids recovered from pigs buried in
moorland and deciduous woodland soils respectively were: myristic acid (6.5% and
13%); palmitic acid (38.5% and 40%); palmitoleic acid (5.5% and 7.5%);stearic acid
(15.5% and 4.5%); oleic acid (27.5% and 27%); triacyl-glycerol (17.5% and 32%)
(Wilson et al., 2007). In general the presence of adipocere protects the body from
decomposition through insect attack and acts as a preservative.
3.4
Decomposition in speciﬁc circumstances
Frequently bodies are recovered from inside vehicles or other conﬁned spaces such
conditions may inﬂuence the speed of development of the insects.
3.4.1
Decomposition inside vehicles
Decomposition of bodies recovered from inside vehicles is inﬂuenced by the
conditions within the vehicle, where the vehicles are located and how accessible
the interior is. Many people intending suicide – one of the main reasons why
bodies are found in cars – choose to drive to secluded spots in order to avoid
rapid detection. Despite the site being in shadow or exposed, the sequence of
body decomposition is not altered although, because of the increased heat inside
a vehicle, the decomposition rate may be faster because of the speed of
development of both bloat and the dry stage of decomposition (Voss, Forbes
and Dadour, 2008).
It might be expected that the effect of being contained in a vehicle would inﬂuence
the sequence of insect succession on a body. This is because the speed at which
insects both ﬁnd the body and oviposit is likely to be delayed through restriction of
access. Voss, Forbes and Dadour (2008) found that insects did not detect the presence
of a body in a car for a period of between 16–18 hours longer than they detected an
exposed body in the same location. This applied to the speed of colonisation of both
Calliphoridae and beetles. The beetles were delayed in colonising the body until a
later stage of decomposition (active decay rather than bloat) when the body was
within a vehicle. The location and conditions within the vehicle are also important.
Campobasso, Di Vella and Introna (2001), citing unpublished work by Meek,
recorded a delay of three days for ﬂies laying eggs on bodies conﬁned in a car
boot and of around seven days where the body was conﬁned in a burned-out car.
38
CH03 INSECTS AND DECOMPOSITION

3.4.2
Decomposition of burned bodies
Bodies are burned for a number of reasons. They may be burned through accident in
cases of ﬁre setting or the body may be burned in the context of a suspicious death, as
a means of disposal. Avila and Goff (1998) compared the colonisation of insects on
burned bodies in a dry habitat compared to that in a rain forest. In both instances there
was no difference in the colonisers in either condition but oviposition by most
Calliphoridae occurred one day earlier on the burnt carcass than the control carcass in
dry conditions in Hawaii and four days earlier in the rain forest for all of the
colonising species.
Hart, Hall and Whitaker (2011) outlined the value of insects in determining post
mortem interval in burned bodies. They cite the case of a suicide for which
determination of time since death was difﬁcult using pathology. Fly larvae of which
had colonised the body after it had been burned were used to conﬁrm time since
death. They indicated that the body had been in the disused ammunition bunker for at
least six days prior to its discovery. Colonisation of a body may therefore occur after
it has been burned.
Work by Chin et al. (2008a) indicated that the degree of burning is signiﬁcant.
Partial burning of the pig carcass did not prevent it from bloating. Campobasso,
Di Vella and Introna (2001) point out that burnt tissue provides a poor source
of protein for developing larvae as well as a physically difﬁcult medium
upon which to lay eggs. They concluded that it is the internal organs that
provide the attractive odour for diptera and that these are exposed by burning
if the skin splits.
Anderson (2005) carried out a series of very elegant experiments to explore the
effect of a subsequent ﬁre on larval survival. She showed that on occasion, if the body
is burned after ﬂies have colonised it, the maggots may survive by moving into the
centre of the corpse. She also points out that it is possible to use dead maggots if
the body has been colonised initially and then burned. The maggots which fail to
survive can be used to determine the post mortem interval provided that the rapidity
with which the ﬁre was extinguished, and the date and time that the ﬁre was
extinguished are known. This can then be added to the estimated PMI in order to
determine a minimum time since death.
3.4.3
Decomposition of hanging bodies
The speed of decomposition of a hanging body is inﬂuenced by its being suspended
above the ground. The body is no longer easily accessible by soil-inhabiting insects,
nor does it beneﬁt from the increased moisture available from the soil as it
decomposes. However bacteria may be encouraged to increase because the asphyxia
caused by hanging may result in the blood carrying bacteria to a number of regions
of the body in the process of dying. This increase can speed up the initial stages of
decomposition.
3.4 DECOMPOSITION IN SPECIFIC CIRCUMSTANCES
39

There is less predation by maggots in these circumstances, so decomposition is
slowed down and the time to reach the dry stage is extended. However, as Chin et al.
(2010) point out, the lifecycle of the colonising insects is not affected. Gennard and
Robson (2007)] showed that the location in which the body was hanged also
inﬂuenced the speed of colonisation by ﬂies and hence the post mortem interval.
3.4.4
The effect of wrapping bodies
Whether or not the body is easily located and eggs are readily laid on the corpse by
ﬂies, is dictated by how easy it is for the odours to percolate from the body and the ﬂies
to be attracted to the corpse. The presence of clothes and also wrappings such as
blankets, polythene bags, and carpets will all deter the ﬂies from gaining access to
the body to lay eggs because it restricts the emission of decomposition odours. This
will limit the interpretation of the minimum time since death because the period of
time between death and oviposition cannot be established accurately. However
the degree of tightness of wrapping will dictate whether or not this is true, as Kelly,
vanderLindeandAnderson(2009)showedthatwheretheclotheswerelooselyattached
there was no reduction in speed of colonisation compared to bodies without clothes.
The presence of clothes on the body will also slow down the speed at which the
body cools. However this will also mean that tissue breakdown is likely to start more
rapidly and hence the succession ofinsects attracted to the body mayalso speed up.In
addition once the insects gain access to the body clothing and other body wrappings,
these provide shelter and maintain the environmental conditions generated by the
insects. Ac¸ikg€oz, Y€uksel and Ac¸ikg€oz (2005) showed that larvae on unwrapped
corpses required more time to reach a similar size to those larvae on wrapped corpses.
They urged caution in such circumstances where the post mortem interval is
determined using larval length.
The inﬂuence of body ﬂuids on maggot survival may be large where thewrappings
(and body ﬂuids) combine to limit gas exchange. Kelly, van der Linde and Anderson
(2009) concluded that a buildup of toxic waste gases or a reduction in the availability
of oxygen could cause high larval mortality. This, however, did not affect
development in those larvae that were not surrounded by tight bindings. Leakage
of body ﬂuids, even where the access is limiting to insects, may also result in
attraction of insects to the wrapped copse and the stimulation of egg laying. Muscid
ﬂies, for example, may be attracted by blood and stimulated to oviposit on blood-
soaked soil. Sufﬁcient nutrients may be provided by this ﬂuid to support larval
development (Gunn and Bird, 2011).
3.4.5
The effects of cold environments
The effects of conditions of prolonged darkness and cold temperatures on insect
development should also be considered when interpreting the post mortem interval.
40
CH03 INSECTS AND DECOMPOSITION

Bodies have been recovered from beneath snow and yet have been infested by insects
(Wyss et al., 2003a). They have also been recovered from conditions of apparent total
darkness in caves in Switzerland where the temperatures have been around 5 C and
yet the bodies have been infested with insects (Faucherre, Cherix and Wyss, 1999).
The environmental conditions and the stage and nature of decomposition have an
effect on determining time since death. Facets of both the condition of the corpse and
also the habitats and environmental conditions in which the body is located should all
be taken into consideration when determining time since death and the sequence of
decomposition of the corpse or using the corpse for other purposes such as the
recovery of genetic or toxicological information. The signiﬁcance of unseen
environmental conditions in inﬂuencing post mortem analysis and interpretation
is exempliﬁed by thework of Zhong et al. (2002) who showed that very low magnetic
ﬁelds have an effect upon messenger RNA and its transcription of cytochrome
oxidase. They suggest that there is a biological effect from low-level magnetic ﬁelds,
even where exposure is for a period as short as 20 minutes, which may be an
important consideration in interpreting molecular analysis of corpse tissue.
Consideration of the overall decomposition process in the context of the environ-
ment will allow rapid interpretation of time since death. To this end Vass, Thompson
and Wise (2010) have designed an advanced sensor for determining the location of
buried bodies using a partial human decomposition odour proﬁle (LABRADOR).
This will allow linkage to the decomposition stages of a body – based on the different
odours present. For example they concluded that at 113 accumulated degree days
(ADD) there was 5–8% decomposition of a buried body based upon the presence of
seven odours (Table 3.2). At an ADD of 362 there was a 45% level of decomposition
and the body could be identiﬁed by an odour proﬁle based on eight odours. Such
research is also of relevance to the forensic entomologist in reﬁning the cues to
which the insects respond when they colonise bodies left on the soil surface of a
crime scene.
Table 3.2
Odour proﬁle interpretation of decomposition volatiles during human decomposition
recognised using the advanced sensor for detecting clandestine graves (LABRADOR)
Percentage decomposition
ADD
Number of odour
of the buried body
sensors triggered
5–8%
113
7
15–20%
216
9
45%
362
8
65%
412
11
85–90%
1020
5
Source: Dr Arpad Vass and co-workers for permission to quote information from their unpublished report
Award Number 2007-DN-R.104 (presented in this book as Table 3.2).
3.4 DECOMPOSITION IN SPECIFIC CIRCUMSTANCES
41

4
Identifying ﬂies that
are important in forensic
entomology
In order to interpret a crime scene it is important to know which insect species have
colonised the body and something about their habits and environmental require-
ments. To identify the species you will need to know what the parts of an insect
are called, so that you can use the scientiﬁc keys written by taxonomists to identify
the insects.
Insects are invertebrates. They are classiﬁed within the Arthopoda but differ from
other arthropods because they have a number of differing features. Insects have a
hardened body case (an exoskeleton) which is split into three distinct regions.
These sections are called:
. the head;
. the thorax;
. and the abdomen.
The sections havethree dimensions, a top (dorsum), an underneath (sternum) and
sides, each of which is a called a pleuron. The thorax is split into three segments,
which may or may not be clearly deﬁned, depending upon the species. Starting from
the head and working backwards along the thorax, these segments are called the
prothorax, the mesothorax and the metathorax (Figure 4.1).
All insects have six legs (three pairs of jointed legs). These too are made up of
sections – starting at the point nearest to the body (the proximal region) we have
sections called the coxa (plural coxae), followed by the trochanter (a small section),
the femur, tibia and the tarsus (plural tarsi) (Figure 4.2). The numbers of tarsal
segments (tarsomeres) may vary, but usually there are ﬁve per leg. The legs are
located on the thorax. One pair of legs is found on each of the thoracic segments – i.e.
one pair is on the prothorax, the second pair is on the mesothorax and the third pair of
legs is attached at the metathorax.
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Box 4.1
Arthropoda
Members of the phylum Arthropoda are signiﬁcant in forensic entomology
because a large proportion of the identiﬁed living Arthropoda are insects.
Arthropods have an open circulatory system referred to as a coelom, and an
exoskeleton made up of amongst other things a polysaccharide called chitin and
protein. The arthropod body supports jointed appendages.
The Arthropoda classiﬁcation for organisms which are currently living is
divided into a number of lineages. The division into a particular lineage is based
on both morphology and on molecular features – a combination of phenotypic and
genotypic similarities.
For those invertebrate organisms which are not currently extinct there are
currently considered to be four lineages, deﬁnedby anumber of speciﬁc features or
lifestyle aspects:
. Chelicerata – based on the presence of feeding appendages modiﬁed into a
claw or claws; the presence of a combined head and thorax the cephalothorax,
andaposteriorabdomen.Membersofthissubphylumdonothaveantennaebut
do have simple eyes. This subphylum includes members that are of obvious
forensicrelevance:theticks,mites,spidersandscorpions.Mitesaresigniﬁcant
in forensic entomology as indicators of the stage of decomposition.
. Myriapoda – these are long segmented organisms. Of major interest within
the subphylum are the millipedes and the centipedes. Millipedes have two
pairs of legs per apparent segment (each segment is the product of the fusion
of two segments each with a pair of legs). Millipedes are plant feeders and,
although they may be found in association with a body, they are merely using
it as shelter rather than having a direct forensic inﬂuence. Centipedes have
only one pair of legs per segment and are able to catch prey and immobilise it
by using front claws that deliver a poison.
. Hexapoda – all six-footed organisms but primarily the insects. There are
many insects of great forensic signiﬁcance.
. Crustacea – crabs, lobsters, shrimps (freshwater and marine) and barnacles,
which may have some forensic relevance in connection with submerged
bodies. This subphylum also includes small plankton – copepods and the
woodlice, which are of less forensic relevance. Crustacea have walking legs
and abdominal appendages. They also have a number of pairs of appendages
(three or more) modiﬁed into mouthparts including a pair of mandibles.
Crustacea have two pairs of antenna, unlike insects, which have only one.
(Barnacles are included in the subphylum because barnacle larvae are
similar to those of the other aquatic crustacean organisms.)
Havingdeterminedthe subphylum,class and order towhichthe organisms of
interest belong, the original binomial naming system becomes of relevance.
The names are foundin insect keys asan endproduct ofidentiﬁcation. The keys
are used in order to specify which species are present upon a body. Time since
death can be determined from this.
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY
43

Insects have two pairs of membranous wings (one pair of which may be modiﬁed).
The ﬁrst pair of membranous wings is attached to the mesothorax. The second pair of
wings (or a modiﬁcation of the second pair) is attached at the metathorax – the ﬁnal
segment of the thorax. The membranous wings are supported by veins. These veins
have been named in order to assist in identifying the species of insect. They are
counted from the ﬁrst vein i.e. the ﬁrst vein running along thewing edge. (The system
of naming described here is based on work by two scientists called Needham and
Comstock and is called the Needham Comstock System (Figure 4.3).
Figure 4.2
Structure of the insect leg
Figure 4.1
General morphology of the insect
44
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

Box 4.2
How to name Leg Bristles
Bristles can be distributed down the femur at set points. A bristle near the joint
of the femur with the trochanter is called a basal bristle. The bristle near the
joint with the tibia is called an apical bristle. The bristle just before the joint
with the tibia is the pre apical bristle. The one just before the joint with the coxa
is a sub-basal bristle.
Dorsal
Front
Rear
Ventral
Antero -
ventral
Postero -
dorsal
Antero -
dorsal
Postero -
ventral
Leg held
horizontally
Orientations of bristles on the insect leg
In the early twentieth century, a system was proposed that helps us to decide
the names of the other bristles (Grimshaw, 1917, 1934). The method requires
that you think of the bristle position in terms of a cross-section through the leg
as if it is stretched out horizontally from the body. (The next ﬁgure indicates
the positions of bristles when the leg is held horizontally.) The positions of the
bristles are thought of as positions on a clock face. At 12 o’clock the bristle
would be a dorsal bristle; at 6 o’clock it would be a ventral bristle. At
10 o’clock it would be called an antero-dorsal bristle whilst at 2 o’clock it
would be called a postero-dorsal bristle.
Femur
Trochanter
Coxa
o
o
o
o
o
Basal
bristle
Sub-basal
bristle
Mid 
bristle
Pre-apical 
bristle
Apical 
bristle
Examples of names of bristles on the femur
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY
45

The ﬁrst of thewing veins, vein 1, is called the costa. This is a thick, hardened vein
and gives thewing some rigidity for ﬂying. The second vein, vein 2, is called the stem
vein or sub costa. The third vein at the proximal (body) point of attachment, vein 3, is
called the radius. The fourth long vein, vein 4, is the media (or medial) vein. This
can be split into four veins as it passes to thewing edge.The ﬁfthvein, vein5, is called
the cubitus vein and in some insect species also splits.
There are in addition, several cross veins. These wing cross veins are named on the
basisoftheveinsbetweenwhichtheypass.Thecandscveinrunsbetweenthecostaand
subcosta. The ‘r’ veins run between the splits in the radial vein. The r – m vein runs
betweentheradialandthemedianveinsandthem–cuveinsrunbetweenthemediaand
the cubitus veins. An example of the structure of the Calliphorid wing is found in
Figure4.4.Theveinnumbersarehardtoworkoutfromﬁrstprinciplesanddiagramsfor
thegroupshouldalwaysbeconsulted.Onebookmaynotbeconsistentwithanothersoit
is necessary to use an insect key with diagrams with which you are comfortable.
Insects also have a pair of segmented structures on their heads, which are sense
organs (anterio-dorsally positioned). These are the antennae, although they are
(Continued)
Moving round the clock face, at the 3 o’clock position, as the leg is held
horizontally from the body, the bristle is a posterior bristle. At the 9 o’clock
position the bristle is the anterior bristle and at the 7 o’clock position the
bristle is called the antero-ventral bristle and at the 5 o’clock position it would
be called the postero-ventral bristle. In identiﬁcation keys, having a bristle
present on any of the three pairs of legs constitutes presence of a bristle. It does
not necessarily need to be present on all three pairs of legs.
Figure 4.3
Insect wing venation exempliﬁed using the Needham Comstock venation
naming system
46
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

commonly called ‘feelers’. There are many different forms of antennae and their
shapes can assist in identiﬁcation (Figure 4.5). Antennae provide the insect with a
means of gaining both chemical (contact chemoreceptors) and mechanical informa-
tion (mechanoreceptors over a distance) from its surroundings.
Figure 4.4
The insect wing structure illustrating the position of the calypters
Figure 4.5
Examples of some of the forms of insect antenna
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY
47

Within the phylum Arthropoda (or jointed limbs phylum), insects are incorporated
within the Hexapoda and are divided into a large number of groups called orders.
Each order is divided into a number of families. Each family is made up of a number
of genera (singular genus) and each genus has one or more species (Figure 4.6). The
named groups, at each level of this hierarchy, are called taxa (singular taxon).
One of the orders of insects which are forensically relevant is the order Diptera –
the true or two-winged ﬂies. These are discussed in the following sections. Three
other insect orders are discussed at the end of the chapter as these can have forensic
relevance in aquatic crime scenes.
4.1
What is a ﬂy and how do I spot one?
True ﬂies are easily distinguished from other insects by having two fully developed,
usually obvious, front wings but with each of its two back wings (the second pair of
Box 4.3
Insect antenna
The insect antenna is made up of three discernible sections:
. Section 1 – the scape. This is the part nearest to the head. It can be moved
using what could be termed a ‘ball-and-socket’ joint.
. Section 2 – the pedicel.Thisis asmall segment. The pedicel carries aspeciala
region called Johnston’s organ which informs the insect about changes in its
position. Johnston’s organ is stimulated when the ﬂagellum moves and also
provides information about aspects such as air currents or the presence of
solid objects as well as about information on position changes for the insect.
. Section 3 – the ﬂagellum. This consists of a variable number of segments
depending upon the insect species. They also are of variable shapes and this
feature is used as a means of identiﬁcation in identiﬁcation keys. For
example, some may be elbowed; some may end in a club and others may
be simple repeated segments of similar dimension.
If the antenna has expanded terminal segments that look swollen and make a
club on top of much more slender segments nearer to the pedicel, the ﬂagellum
appears to be in two parts. The name of the slender region, which can resemble
a stem, is the funicle. The name of the swollen terminal region is the head.
Antennae are primarily sense organs providing information in terms of
odour and touch for the insect. Peglike or conelike structures, which are
chemoreceptors, are found projecting from pits on the antennae of several
diptera including members ofthe Muscidae. In the Coleopteraa different shape
of chemoreceptor sensilla have been noted, which are contained in pits on the
antennal surface and do not project above the cuticle surface.
48
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

wings) modiﬁed into balancers, called halteres. These structures resemble tiny drum
sticks attached to the metathorax.
There has been a considerable change in ﬂy taxonomy recently and the agreed
groupings ofﬂies arise from modern developments in taxonomy including molecular
studies. (In older forensic textbooks the taxonomy by Kloet and Hincks (1976) has
been used. In this classiﬁcation the dipterawere divided into three suborders, with the
third, the Cyclorrhapha subdivided into the Aschiza, Schizophora-Acalyptratae and
the Schizophora-Calyptratae.)
Currently, thephylogeneticclassiﬁcations betweenthesuborders and thefamilies
are mainly a response to practical considerations, so that now, rather than three
suborders within the diptera, there are two suborders.
The ﬁrst of these suborders, the Nematocera or Thread horns, contains the crane
ﬂies (Figure 4.7). These insects have a long slender body, long antennae with more
than six segments, and a complex wing venation. The Nematocera have mouthparts
that are ‘droopy’ (pendulous).
Phylum
Arthropoda
Class
Insecta
Order Diptera
Family e.g.
Calliphoridae
Genus e.g.
Lucilia
Suborder
Nematocera 
Suborder
Brachycera
Infraorder Muscomorpha
Schizophora Calyptratae
Infraorder
Muscamorpha 
Aschiza
Species e.g.
Lucilia sericata
Figure 4.6
Classiﬁcation hierarchy
4.1 WHAT IS A FLY AND HOW DO I SPOT ONE?
49

The larvae of this suborder have a structurally distinct head (exserted head) with
horizontal biting mouthparts. The pupa is not encased and so morphological
structures such as wing buds are visible.
The winter gnats (Trichoceridae) are an example of a nematoceran family that has
forensically relevant members. They have been used to determine the post mortem
interval in the winter having colonised a body found on the soil surface when many
other insects are no longer available.
The second suborder is called the Brachycera or Short horns. These are much
more robust ﬂies and are often called the higher ﬂies (Figure 4.8 and see also the
Figure 4.7
A Nematoceran ﬂy
Figure 4.8
An example of a member of the Brachycera – a Tabanid
50
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

colour section). They have shorter antennae than the Nematocera, with eight or
fewer segments. Their wing venation is less complex and their mandibles are
divided. The male genitalia are separated into two parts. The larva has an elongated
head, which is combined within the ﬁrst segment of the thorax (prothorax), and
their pupaegrow inside a case, which is the hardened remains of the last larval (third
instar) coat.
The Brachycera are split into groups (infraorders). The groups which are called
the Tabanomorpha and Asilomorpha also made up the Brachycera under the old
classiﬁcation system.
A third group (infraorder), the Muscomorpha, is most important forensically.
These are predominantly the Cyclorrhapha of the old classiﬁcation system. This
group has antennae with a bristle and have three larval stages in which the
morphological distinction into head and body of the larva is absent.
This group is subdivided into:
1. The Muscomorpha Aschiza. In this division the depression and suture over the
antenna is either absent or very indistinct. Some wing veins close off a wing
compartment (‘cell’) called the anal cell (Figure 4.9). This is very long and
closes or almost closes, at a point at least more than half to two thirds the way to
the edge of the wing. The Phoridae are of forensic note in the Muscomorpha
Aschiza division. Usually though, the anal wing cell in insects of forensic
importance, is short or even not there at all. This is a feature of the Muscomorpha
Schizophora, which includes the blowﬂies, cheese skippers and the ﬂesh ﬂies.
This group is divided into two, depending upon whether or not there are ﬂaps or
calypters (Figure 4.4) at the base of thewing with the lower one joining thewing
to the thorax.
Figure 4.9
The wing of a member of the infraorder Muscomorpha Aschiza illustrating the long
anal cell
4.1 WHAT IS A FLY AND HOW DO I SPOT ONE?
51

2. The Muscomorpha Schizophora Acalyptratae. These ﬂies emerge from the
puparial case by using an ‘air bag’ or ptilinum. This deﬂates and draws back
below the eyes and above the antennae. Its presence is indicated by a depression
like a crease or furrow just below the eyes called a ptilinal suture (Figure 4.10;
see also the colour section). Flies in this group do not have a thorax with sutures
that completely divide the prothorax. The halteres are exposed and the antennae
do not have a slit in segment three. Such ﬂies are termed acalypterate. Offorensic
note are the Piophilidae, Sphaeroceridae, and Sepsidae.
3. The Muscophora Schizophora Calyptratae. A division is made depending upon
whether the halteres are exposed or covered. The opaque ﬂaps concealing the
halteres are termed the squamae or calypters. (Working from the body outwards
the proximal (near) ﬂap is termed the lower thoracic calypter (squama) and the
distal (far) ﬂap is called the upper thoracic calypter (squama).
Flies that have covered halteres also have a complete line, or suture, across the
prothorax and thoracic protrusions sticking out from the middle of the thorax. These
prominent protrusions are called posterior callus. Such ﬂy species may also have a
slit or cleft in the second antennal segment (working outwards from the head).
According to Watson and Dallwitz (2003) however, this is considered an unreliable
feature for identiﬁcation purposes. These ﬂies also have a ptilinum.
On the top or dorsal side of the antenna there is a feathery protuberance that stands
out from the antennal segment. This protuberance is called arista. Those ﬂies with
ﬂaps covering the halteres and the features described above are termed calyptrate.
Of particular forensic importance in this grouping are the families Calliphoridae,
Sarcophagidae, Fannidae, and Muscidae.
Figure 4.10
The remains of a ptilinum as a ptilinal suture
52
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

4.1.1
How to sex ﬂies
The adult head has two large compoundeyes. Those of the female are more widely
spaced than those of the male blowﬂy, as you look at them head on from the front.
Anotherfeaturewhichisimportantisoccipitaldilationoftheeyes.Toseeifthisfeature
is present, look at the ﬂy head from the side view. It is possible to see if the eye is
expanded. This occipital dilation is used to distinguish some species (Figure 4.11).
The region below the eye, as you look at the ﬂy face side on (lateral view), is called
the jowl. In Calliphora vomitoria, a species which is of forensic importance, the
lower part of the jowls and around the sides of the mouth have a mass of golden
coloured hairs on it. The jowl itself is coloured black. In contrast, in Calliphora
vicina the top two-thirds of each jowl is a reddish orange colour.
The families and the identiﬁcation characteristics of some of the important species
are described in the next section. However, to ensure that you have correctly identiﬁed
a specimen you should use keys, and conﬁrm your identiﬁcation using a collection of
named species and the diagnostic and differential description in the identiﬁcation
handbook. Or you should ask a taxonomist to check your identiﬁcation so that you are
absolutely certain of the name of the species. On this identiﬁcation hangs the
determination of the post mortem interval and your evidence for the court.
4.2
The ﬂy lifecycle
Flies complete a number of stages in their lifecycle; the egg stage, larval stage,
pupal stage and the adult stage. The lifecycle shows complete metamorphosis
(Figure 4.14). This means that the different lifecycle stages look dissimilar.
Figure 4.11
Occipital dilation present on Calliphora uralensis Villeneuve
4.2 THE FLY LIFECYCLE
53

We term this a holometabolous lifecycle. The cycle starts when the adult female
lays eggs.
4.2.1
The egg stage
Most ﬂies mate lay eggs (oviposit) in batches. The clumps of eggs are laid on the
corpse in places that provide protection), moisture and food (Figure 4.12). In general
the number of eggs laid is around 150–200 although the numbers canvary depending
on the nutrient source available to the ﬂy.
The blowﬂy egg is usually very shiny and white, ranging in size from around
0.9 mm to over 1.50 mm long and 0.3–0.4 mm wide (Rognes, 1991). The outer,
textured coating of the egg is termed the chorion. This sculpturing, which may, for
example, be reticulate or spotty, can be used to identify different species of ﬂy. The
end of the egg has a pore called a micropyle. This is the route by which the sperm
gain entry to fertilise the egg.
Figure 4.12
(a) Copulating blue bottle ﬂies (b) Clump of eggs
54
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

A furrow called the plastron runs the length of the egg along one side
(Figure 4.13). This acts as a means of trapping air should the egg become covered
by water droplets or be drowned in water, and so aids continued respiration.
The emergence of the ﬁrst instar larva from the egg is called eclosion, although
the term is used to describe any form of hatching.
Not all ﬂies lay eggs some deposit the larvae on to the corpse. Examples of such
behaviour is seen in Sarcophagidae – the ﬂesh ﬂies and in species of Calliphorid such
as Calliphora dubia, Calliphora stygia, and Calliphora hilli will lay either eggs or
larvae (are ovoviviparous) whilst Calliphora augur larviposits (is viviparous).
Erzinc¸lioglu (1996) commented that Calliphora vicina may lay live larvae where
fertilisation had taken place without a suitable oviposition site being immediately
available.
If an electron microscope is available investigating the surface of the egg may be a
means of making identiﬁcation to at least genus, of the ﬂy species which has
colonised the body (Greenberg and Singh, 1995).
4.2.2
The larval stage
The larva has 12 segments and a pointed anterior end, all that remains of the head
capsule found in other insect larvae, with a black structure comprising mandibles and
related sclerites and ending in mouth hooks (the cephalopharyngeal skeleton)
(Figure 4.21). The posterior end is blunt and has two brown circular areas on the
ﬁnal segment. These are the posterior spiracles.
In the ﬂy there are three larval stages or instars. A particular larval stage out of the
three is described by referring to it as LI, LII, or LIII. The speciﬁc life stage of
the larva can be identiﬁed by the number of slits present in each posterior spiracle. In
Figure 4.13
The plastron runs the length of the egg
4.2 THE FLY LIFECYCLE
55

the ﬁrst instar, one slit is present; in the second instar, two slits are present; in the third
instar, three slits are present. In blowﬂies there is normally a difference in size of
larvae in the three larval stages. The ﬁrst instar tends to be less than 2 mm in length,
whereas the second instar is between 2 mm and 9 mm long. The third instar can be
between 9 and 22 mm long. However, size is a relatively unreliable measure of age
because it depends upon the amount and quality of food available – although a body
may be considered to be an abundant source of food.
Projections called tubercles surround the edge of the posterior segment of the
larva. The spiracles are located on the horizontal face of this ﬁnal posterior segment.
The distance between tubercles plays a role in the identiﬁcation of larval species. For
example, Smith (1986) points out that in larvae of Lucilia sericata, the inner
tubercles (those at 12 o’clock), are separated from each other by a distance roughly
equal to the distance between the inner and the median tubercles (those at 10 o’clock
and 2 o’clock respectively) (Figure 4.15a and Figure 4.15b).
Sticking out from the third anterior segment (second thoracic segment) of the larva
is an anterior spiracle, which looks like a hand with ﬁngers projecting from it
(Figure 4.16). The morphology of this spiracle can also be used as a means of
identiﬁcation in some species.
Larvae in the third instar are the largest. Half way through this stage they stop
feeding and become migratory, seeking a place for pupariation (the ﬁnal develop-
mental stage of metamorphosis into the adult stage). This is called the larval
postfeeding stage. Larvae move away from the body, towards dark and somewhat
cooler areas. In the postfeeding stage the contents of the crop begin to reduce, until
ﬁnally there is no obvious dark line of crop material visible through the white larval
cuticle. Cragg (1955) suggests that the postfeeding larvae may move up to 6.4 metres
from the carcass. On concrete ﬂoors, such as might be found in buildings,
post feeding larvae have been known to migrate for up to 30 m from the body
Figure 4.14
The lifecycle of the blowﬂy
56
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

(Green, 1951). Usually the postfeeding larva attempts to bury itself in soil, or some
other dark location. They may be found by searching in the ﬁrst two or three
centimetres depth of soil at outdoor crime scenes. This tendency to migrate is not true
for all species, some, for example Protophormia terraenovae, have been found to
pupate on the corpse (Erzinc¸lioglu, 1996).
Figure 4.15
(a) Electronmicrograph of the tubercles (a) Posterior spiracles
4.2 THE FLY LIFECYCLE
57

4.2.3
The puparial stage
The puparial case changes colour over time, becoming an oval object resembling an
uncut cigar, coloured somewhere between reddish brown, and a dark mahogany
brown or black (see colour section).
This case maintains all of the features of the third instar. So there is some
possibility of identifying this stage to species, using keys for the identiﬁcation of
third instar dipteran larvae. Some attempts have been made to try and relate state of
colouration development of the puparium to post mortem interval, but to date the
methods have not shown great accuracy beyond the ﬁrst 24 hours (Greenberg, 1991).
Emergence of the adult, at the end of the lifecycle, is achieved by its pushing the
cap (operculum) (Figure 4.17), off the puparium, using a blood-inﬂated region on
its head, called a ptilinum. This is like an ‘airbag’ that projects from the anterior
dorsal region of the head as the ﬂy emerges (see colour section). It later sinks back
into the facial structure generating the crease, or ptilinal suture, just above the
antennae. The mouth hooks (cephalopharyngeal skeleton) remain inside the broken
puparial case and can be used to conﬁrm identiﬁcation if you can ﬁnd them.
The adult pushes out of the puparial case and up through the soil responding,
according to Fraenkel (1935), to light. The ﬂy ‘dries out’ and eventually its wings
expand and the greyish coloured ﬂy becomes recognisably pigmented as, for
example, a bluebottle or greenbottle.
Figure 4.16
An example of the anterior spiracle on a larva
58
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

The speed of insect development is determined by temperature (Figure 4.18). A
number of researchers in a number of countries have determined the duration of the
life stages of locally relevant species of ﬂy, at particular temperatures. These include
Kamal (1958); Greenberg (1991); Reiter (1984); Anderson (2000); Grassberger and
Reiter (2002) and other researchers. This information forms the experimental
measure for post mortem interval because from it the energy budget for development
(the accumulated degree hours) can be determined. It is important to use the sum of
thedurationof each oftheindividuallife stages andtoworkwithboththeaverage and
the maximum and minimum durations, at the speciﬁc experimental temperatures
used. Further discussion of the method for calculating the post mortem interval is
found in Chapter 9.
Figure 4.17
Electronmicrograph of the puparium with detached operculum
Temperature
Development 
rate 
1/time to 
develop
Region where a linear
relationship with temperature
is assumed
Figure 4.18
Generalised insect growth curve
4.2 THE FLY LIFECYCLE
59

4.3
Forensically important families of ﬂies
4.3.1
Calliphoridae
The particular species of ﬂy that are forensically important will differ from location
to location. In Europe including Britain, the ﬁrst three species listed below are
common initial colonisers of corpses that are not buried or in some way ‘modiﬁed’.
Schroeder et al. (2003) consider, for example, that Calliphora vicina, Calliphora
vomitoria and Lucilia sericata are the most common species recovered from corpses
in Germany.
Calliphora vicina (Robineau-Desvoidy)
This is a large blowﬂy, which is between 9 and 11 mm in length. (It is also recorded in
the older literature as Calliphora erythrocephala Meigen.) The front thoracic
spiracle is orange in colour (Smith, 1986). The head is black on top and the front
half of the cheek (bucca) is reddish orange. The lower region of the face is black.
There are black hairs on the jowls irrespective of the jowl colour. The thorax is black
and the top of the thorax (the dorsum) is covered with a dense greyish shine
(pubescence). There are four pairs of strong bristles in a row in the centre of
the thorax. These are called the acrostichal bristles (Figure 4.19). Like other
blowﬂy species, this species also has a fan of bristles, the hypopleural bristles, on a
plate above the coxa of each hind (third) leg, near the posterior spiracle. Look for
this spiracle and you will spot them.
The abdomen is blue with a silvery chequerboard effect (tessellation)
(Figure 4.20). The basicosta on the wing is yellowish in colour although this can
fade to a yellowish brown colour.
Figure 4.19
The thorax showing the position of the acrostichal bristles
60
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

Calliphora vomitoria (Linnaeus)
These are also large bluish-coloured blowﬂies. The species has a longer lifecycle
than the previous species and is found more often frequenting rural environments.
The hairs on the jowls and the colour of the basicosta help distinguish Calliphora
vomitoria. The basicosta is black in colour (see colour section) as opposed to the
orange in Calliphora vicina and the hairs on the base region of the jowls and around
the side of the mouth are gingery orange. The spiracle at the front (anterior) of the
thorax is brownish in colour in Calliphora vomitoria.
Where both Calliphora vicina and Calliphora vomitoria are found together as third
instar larvae they can be separated, according to Smith (1986), by the width of their
posterior spiracles. He indicates that in Calliphora vicina the spiracles are between
0.23 and 0.28 mm wide. The spiracles in this species are smaller than in Calliphora
vomitoriaandareseparatedbythesame,orabigger,distancethanthewidthofasingle
spiracle. In Calliphora vomitoria the spiracles are larger, being in the region of 0.33 to
0.38 mm. Its spiracles are separated by less than the diameter of an individual spiracle.
Lucilia sericata Meigen
This is commonly called a greenbottle because all the ﬂies in this genus are a metallic
green colour. In North America, Lucilia sericata is called Phaenicia sericata. Lucilia
species are distinguished from other blowﬂies by having a ridge just above the
squama, the rear wing ﬂap (hence the suprasquamal ridge), which has tufts of hair on
it. Lucilia sericata has a yellow-coloured basicosta.
OneofthedifferencesbetweenthelarvaeofCalliphoraandLuciliasericataisthatthe
oral sclerite in the head skeleton (cephalopharyngeal skeleton) is transparent and so
Figure 4.20
The ‘tessselation’ (chequer board) effect on the abdomen of ﬂies such as Calliphora
vicina Robineau Desvoidy
4.3 FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FAMILIES OF FLIES
61

seems to be absent in larvae of Lucilia sericata. The identity of Lucilia sericata larvae
can also be conﬁrmed by looking at the rim of the ﬁnal posterior segment of the larva.
The tubercles are named from the top (12 noon position), the inner, median and
outer (lower) tubercles. If the distance between the two inner tubercles is the same as
the distance between the inner and the median tubercle, then this species can be
identiﬁed as Lucilia sericata. This feature is characteristic of the third instar larvae.
Erzinc¸liogˆlu (1987)found thataround the posterior spiracles in ﬁrst and second instar
larvae of Calliphora and Lucilia there was a circle of hairs. In Calliphora sp. these
hairs would be visible under low power, being very well developed in Calliphora
vomitoria, but would not be visible under low power in Lucilia species.
Lucilia illustris Meigen
The basicosta (plate on the base of the costa) is blackish or brown in colour in this
species and the arista on the antenna has up to 10 hairs on its underside. There are no
bristles on the sides of the abdominal segments in the males of this greenbottle
species, according to Erzinc¸lioglu (1996). The males can be distinguished from
Lucilia caesar Linnaeus males, by the presence of curved surstyli (exterior structures
of the genitalia) (see colour section). This ﬂy has been found to be of value as a post
mortem indicator in a murder in Washington State (Lord et al., 1986).
Lucilia caesar Linnaeus
These ﬂies are similar to Lucilia illustris in that they share a dark coloured basicosta.
In males the sides of the second abdominal segment lacks bristles, when you look at
Figure 4.21
An example of a larval ‘head skeleton’ with oral sclerites
62
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

the ﬂy from the dorsal view (i.e. from the top). They can also be distinguished
by having surstyli with a straight projection – i.e. fork (see colour section)
(Erzinc¸lioglu, 1996).
Lucilia richardsi Collin
In this ﬂy the basicosta is white, or yellowish. The spacing of the eyes in the male
assists in distinguishing this species from adult Lucilia sericata (Figure 4.22). The
distance between the eyes in males is not more than the width of the third antennal
segment (Erzinc¸lioglu, 1996). The abdominal sternites are hairy in both males and
females (Greenberg and Kunich, 2002). Smith (1986) indicates that the tibia of the
middle leg has two anterior bristles, which also distinguish this species from Lucilia
sericata, which has only one bristle (the leg articulates in the posteroventral
plane – i.e. backwards and downwards).
Protophormia terraenovae Robineau-Desvoidy
This species is between 8 to 12 mm long. The ﬂy has a greenish blue abdomen,
black-coloured legs, and a dark calypter with hairs that are dark (see colour
section). According to Smith (1986) this species is widely distributed and
found in waste land and marshy areas in Britain. The ﬂy overwinters as an adult
and so may be amongst the ﬁrst ﬂies to colonise a body in spring. Its puparia may be
recovered from the body rather than at some distance from it according to Busvine
(1980) in Smith (1986). Tantawi and Greenberg (1993) provide information about
the lengths of the life stages of Protophormia terraenovae at 12.5 C, 23 C, 29 C
and 35 C.
Figure 4.22
Lucilia richardsi Collin
4.3 FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FAMILIES OF FLIES
63

Phormia regina Meigen
This is a smaller ﬂy than those previously described and is a Nearctic and
Palaearctic species. It is between 7 and 9 mm long and has a green or greeny
olive-coloured body. Its head is large proportional to the body and is black in colour.
Adistinguishing feature in this species is theanterior spiracle onthe thorax whichhas
obvious orange hair. In contrast to that in Protophormia terraenovae, the calypter is
white, with white hairs on its surface. Phormia regina is commonly known as the
black blowﬂy.
Cynomya mortuorum Linnaeus
This is a metallic blue-green blowﬂy, which is about the same size as Calliphora
species. Its face and jowls are yellow to bright orange (see colour section). It is
infrequently found in the south of England and MacLeod and Donnelly (1956) note
that it favours cool uplands.
Chrysomya species – Chrysomya ruﬁfacies Macquart
These are large, blue- or green-coloured ﬂies. Chrysomya ruﬁfacies are most
commonly found in the Orient, Australasia and the neotropics. Chrysomya ruﬁfacies
is metallic bluish, or green in colour. The adults are between 6 and 12 mm long, with
at least the front part of the cheeks on the head being yellow or orange in colour
(Smith, 1986). Chrysomya ruﬁfacies is one of the initial colonisers of corpses in
Hawaii (Goff, 2000). Its larvae have spines on the sides of their tubercles.
Chrysomya ruﬁfacies is often accompanied by Chrysomya megacephala Fabri-
cius, which is of a similar size. In contrast to Chrysomya ruﬁfacies, its anterior
spiracle is orange to black-brown in colour, rather than being white to pale yellow.
The front part of the cheeks (bucca) in this species is yellowish or orange. Chrysomya
megacephala has also been identiﬁed from corpses along with Cochliomyia
macellaria Weidemann, a native American species in Brazil (Oliveira-Costa and
de Mello-Patiu, 2004).
Chrysomya albiceps Wiedemann is a third species that is found at crime scenes. It
has a yellowish or white thoracic spiracle, its abdomen has dark bands across it and its
legs are dark. Larvae of Chrysomya ruﬁfacies and Chrysomya albiceps are hard to
distinguish visually. However, Wells and Sperling (1999) demonstrated that the two
species could be distinguished by using mitochondrial DNA.
4.3.2
Sarcophagidae
The common name for this family of ﬂies is the ﬂesh ﬂy. There are three subfamilies
and recently (Spilza, Voss and Pape, 2010) a potential forensic indicator was
recorded from a subfamily (Miltogramminae) other than the Sarcophaginae. Spilza,
Voss and Pape describe the members of the Miltogramminae as of comparable size
64
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

to house ﬂies, with a grey abdomen with either black spots or dark abdominal
banding. A Nearctic and a Palaearctic species have been recorded as able to develop
on buried corpses.
The ﬂesh ﬂies most recognisably considered as corpse colonisers are large and
greyish in colour and have a thorax with three stripes down it and a chequerboard
(tessellated) abdomen, which is silvery grey (Figure 4.23). In volume 12 of the
Checklist of Insects of the British Isles (new series) part 1: Diptera (Chandler, 1998),
it is noted that there has been a division of the old genus Sarcophaga into a number of
subgenera, resulting in a number of name changes from the early. It may be helpful to
consider this in your reading of the earlier scientiﬁc papers.
Colyer and Hammond (1951) considered Sarcophagidae a difﬁcult group from
which to distinguish species with any degree of certainty, unless adult specimens are
captured whilst mating (‘in cop’). (Using the identity of the male, it is easier to
conﬁrm the identity of the female species.) Help should be sought from taxonomists
if these are the only family recovered from the body.
Sarcophagid larvae are characterised by having a barrel-like shape with their
posterior spiracles sunk into a hollow. The edge of the posterior segment has a large
number of tubercles. This makes this family easy to distinguish at the larval stage.
Some success has also been made in identiﬁcation to species of larvae of the
Sarcophagidae, using molecular methods (Zehner et al., 2004).
Figure 4.23
A ﬂy showing the characteristic features of the Sarcophagidae
4.3 FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FAMILIES OF FLIES
65

4.3.3
Sepsidae
Sepsid ﬂies are small and a shiny black colour. They have a head which looks spherical
with bulging (convex) eyes and an abdominal constriction (an apparent waist!). The
legs of male sepsids have spines and are elongated, which makes the legs look
deformed. The costa on the wing is unbroken. This family is characterised by its habit
of wing waving. There may be swarms of these ﬂies at the crime scene, depending on
its location. Pont and Meier (2002) have revised the European Sepsidae and provide
further detailsof their distribution as well asdetails of characteristicsfor identiﬁcation.
4.3.4
Piophilidae
The Piophilidae are small, shiny, black ﬂies (Figure 4.24; see also colour section).
They are between2.5 and 4.5 mm inlength. The costal vein of thewing appears broken
at one point in this family. One of the most researched members of the Piophilidae is
Piophila casei Linnaeus, which is a pest on food products such as cheese.
Piophila casei Linnaeus
This ﬂy is usually found on the corpse at the end of active decay and the start of the
dry stages (Byrd and Castner, 2010). It is a small black ﬂy, 2.5–4 mm in length and is
Figure 4.24
An electronmicrograph of a Piophilid. Source: Reproduced by permission of Dr
Marta Salona
66
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

commonly called the cheese skipper. It has prominent cheeks, which are more
than half the eye height (see colour section). These species of ﬂies have a
yellow colour on their legs, antennae and on the jowls of their faces. Their ocellar
bristles are found opposite the simple eye (front ocellus), which are small and
widely spaced.
Piophilid larvae are similar to sepsid larvae, although the posterior larval region is
narrower in the Piophilidae. The behaviour of Piophila casei larvae makes them easy
to identify, as it is particularly characteristic. If disturbed, larvae bend round to grasp
two small papillae on the posterior segment, with their mouth hooks. They suddenly
release the papillae and the larvae unexpectedly ‘jump’ up to 15 cm into the air.
Other species of Piophilidae may also be present on corpses. For example
Stearibia (¼Piophila) nigriceps Meigen was recorded by Oldroyd (1964) as feeding
on a human corpse. Therefore do not make an assumption about the name of the
species of piophilid that you have recovered from the body.
4.3.5
Phoridae
These ﬂies are small, often minute ﬂies. They have a humped back and can be greyish
brown, or bluish in colour. The forehead (frons) is usually wide, and has bristles
which are very robust and upward curving. On the antenna the third segment is large,
although in this family the arista can be found either dorsally or apically (frontward).
Phorid wings are characteristic; with veins one to three appearing very pronounced
and crushed together. The wing costa also has a spine at its proximal end, nearest the
body of the ﬂy.
On a corpse, Phoridae can be identiﬁed by the fact that they are active ﬂies, capable
of running and jumping, and this gives them their common name of scuttle ﬂies.
Dewaele and LeClerq (2002) deﬁne their ﬂight period as April to November.
4.3.6
Muscidae
Muscid ﬂies are frequently greyish in colour and are characterised by having lines
running down the length of their thorax and no hypopleural bristles. Wing veins 6 and
7 are short and do not move towards each other (as they do in Fannia spp.). Their
calypters are of roughly the same size, or the lower calypters may be bigger (Unwin,
1981). The eggs can be differentiated into two groups based on their morphology and
the strength of projections, hatching pleats down the sides of the furrow or plastron –
the Musca and Phaonia types.
Larvae undergo three larval stages and the puparium is typically barrel-shaped.
The larvae and indeed the puparia of the Muscidae by the shape of their posterior
spiracle slits which range from straight through sinuate (‘s-shaped’) to bowed. For
example Musca domestica are recognisable by the wiggly ‘S-shaped’ slits on the
posterior spiracles.
4.3 FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FAMILIES OF FLIES
67

Muscid ﬂies, such as Musca domestica, a common member of the Muscidae, will
visit a body soon after death, attracted by any exudates rather than the corpse itself.
Musca domestica is a greyish ﬂy, about 6 to 7 mm in length. It is characterised by four
narrow black stripes along its thorax and a greyish or yellowish abdomen. A sharp-
angled wing vein is found at vein 4 (Smith, 1986).
Musca autumnalis De Geer is also recorded as visiting corpses (Smith, 1986) but
can also have forensic importance as a nuisance ﬂy. It is commonly called the ‘face
ﬂy’ and the male is easily identiﬁed by its bright yellow abdomen with a black
stripe up the middle. According to Smith (1986), female Musca autumnalis are
very similar to female Musca domestica, but can be distinguished by a smaller
frontal stripe. In female Musca autumnalis this stripe is less than twice the width of
the eye orbit, whilst in Musca domestica it is three to four times as wide. Musca
autumnalis is rare in the north of England up to the borders of Scotland and is not
found in Ireland.
Other Muscid ﬂies of signiﬁcance include Hydrotaea species. These are dark
brown coloured ﬂies that are able to hatch from the egg as a second instar although
those of the Hydrotaea dentipes group hatch as ﬁrst instars (Ferrar, 1987). The larvae
(Figure 4.25) are often distinguished on the basis of the cephalopharyngeal skeleton
and the puparia on the basis of the length of the pupal horn.
4.3.7
Fannidae
These ﬂies are commonly called latrine ﬂies. They are distinguished from the muscid
ﬂies by the much greater curve on the axillary vein – vein 7. This is the vein which is
Figure 4.25
Hydrotaea larva. Source: Reproduced by permission of Dr Marta Salona
68
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

nearest to the upper calypter and the species also lacks the sharp angle on vein 4,
which reaches to the wing margin. Fannia canicularis Linnaeus, the lesser house ﬂy,
is common in houses as it is attracted to light. Smith (1986) comments that this is the
more common house ﬂy until July. Benecke and Lessig (2001) recorded Fannia
canicularis in a case of child neglect in central Germany. They suggested that urine
and faeces attracted the adult ﬂies, resulting in larval infestation of the child’s
genitalia.
4.3.8
Sphaeroceridae
Sphaeroceridae are known as small dung ﬂies. They are a dull-coloured ﬂy of
between 1.5 to 5 mm. Their antennae are three segmented with an arista. Vibrissae
(bristles) are present on the sides of the mouth. The wing costa has two breaks and
vein 6 is present, but does not extend to meet the wing margin.
Sphaeroceridae ﬁlter feed on bacteria. Only a few species in this family are
recorded from dead bodies. They have been noted from the fresh, bloat and advanced
stages of decay (the ﬁfth wave of insects) at between 4–8 months after death.
Grassberger and Frank (2004a) recorded them on dressed pig corpses placed in an
urban garden in Vienna between May and November, 2001. Ammonia is an attractant
forthedung-breedingﬂies. Hencevoidingofurineearlyindecompositioncan attract
members of this family, as much as ammonia release during later decomposition.
4.3.9
Stratiomyidae
Members of this family are termed soldier ﬂies and some species are distributed
across all geographic zones. They range in size from 3 to 20 mm. The ﬂies are
recognisable by appearing slightly ﬂattened and having wings that fold one over the
other so that the costal margins of the wings are in parallel. The costal vein does not
run round the entire wing margin but stops at the wing tip. There is a discal cell in the
middle of the wing veins. The antenna has a ﬁnal segment which seems to have
several parts fused together to make up the third antennal segment.
The majority of larvae are found in decaying vegetation or scavenge on animal
remains (Oldroyd, 1964). Hermetia species have been found in some forensic
contexts (Figure 4.26). The Hermetia illucens Linnaeus adult, for example, is black
and ranges from 15–20 mm in length. The species is identiﬁed by the two small
abdominal translucent spots that give it its name.
Some stratiomyid species have aquatic larvae. Such larvae are spindle shaped, as
withall stratiomyids theyhave a covering of calcium carbonate over thecuticle. They
have thoracic spiracles and their posterior spiracles are enclosed in a slit in the
posterior segment, which is sometimes called a siphon (Figure 4.27). This is
surrounded by a halo of ﬁne hairs which repel the water. The larvae pupate in a
puparium as do the Calliphoridae.
4.3 FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FAMILIES OF FLIES
69

4.3.10
Trichoceridae
These ﬂies are members of the Nematocera and therefore have physical features that
are similarto the‘Daddy longlegs’ (Tipulids).Characteristicallyadultsof thisfamily
have long antennae with at least eight segments. On the head there are two or three
ocelli or simple eyes. The wings are held up over the back of the body at rest and the
legs are long and slender. This is a moderately delicate ﬂy, an average of 8 mm long,
blackish brown in colour and its wing venation is distinctivewith nine veins reaching
the wing margin including two anal veins. The second anal vein is strongly curved
Figure 4.26
A pre-imaginal stage of Hermetia illucens. Source: Reproduced with kind permis-
sion of Dr M. I. Salonˇa
Figure 4.27
An aquatic larva: a member of the Stratiomyidae
70
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

(Figure 4.28). The costa runs round the margin of the wing, although it is less
distinctive on the distal margin. Some members of the family have a slight opacity of
the membranes of the wing around the cross vein. A key feature in distinguishing the
family is the length of sections of the ﬁrst part of the second radial wing vein (R2)
relative to the second plus third sections (R2 þ 3) (Laurence, 1956).
The larvae have four larval instars and the instars can be distinguished by the
colour of the head capsule. The larvae have posterior spiracles, which are held upon
projections covered with a fringe of hairs. These projections are termed the anal lobes
of the ﬁnal segment. The ﬁnal instar has a paler yellow-brown head capsule, which is
ﬂattened, whereas the earlier instars have a black head capsule. All have strong
mandibles. Pupae are not held inside a protective covering and the sex of the pupa is
distinguishable. The family have been found of value, as is any insect species, but is
not of routine signiﬁcance as a forensic indicator.
A number of ﬂy species are associated with submerged bodies in their larval
stages, but have no relationship with those which are terrestrial. The non-biting
midges (Chironomidae), Tipulidae and the black-ﬂies (Simulidae) are examples of
species which can be found in aquatic habitats and in association with a corpse.
4.3.11
Tipulidae
Tipulidae are members of the Nematocera and have similar features to those
described earlier. In the adults the antenna are long and have at least six uniform
segments. They have a head that supports feeding palps, which are drooping
(Figure 4.29). The forensically signiﬁcant species of tipulid are those with aquatic
larval stages. These larvae tend to be fat, often greyish in colour and have a well
developed head. They can reach around 50 mm in length. The larval head can be
retracted into the prothorax. The posterior segment carries the two posterior spiracles
on a transverse lobed segmental plate. The plate is fringed with hairs to facilitate gas
Figure 4.28
The curved second anal vein characteristic of the Trichoceridae
4.3 FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FAMILIES OF FLIES
71

exchange. Some species have paired prolegs on the ventral surface of the abdomen.
Three genera are particularly common in Britain but cannot be used as habitat
indicators because they are cosmopolitan and exist both in pools and/or in fast
ﬂowing rivers. These are Tipula spp., Dicranota spp., and Pedicia spp.
4.3.12
Simulidae
Britainhas approximately 35species of Black-ﬂies. Adult members ofthis family are
compact ﬂies 2 to 6 mm long. As the name suggests, these ﬂies are black. They have
very broad wings, which have distinctly thickened section of their costal veins at the
proximal end of the wing.
The larvae are club-shaped and can be up to 10 mm long. The head of the larva has
two collapsible stalks each with fans of bristles that serve to trap small organic
fragments of food. On the prothorax of the larva there is a single proleg, which assists
in movement. The larvae anchor themselves onto the substrate using a caudal disc,
which is covered with extremely tiny hooks to give the larvae purchase.
The pupae have obvious white respiratory ﬁlaments that stick out. The pupa is
protected in a silk cocoon pocket anchored to the substratum of the water body. This
family inhabits ﬂowing water in its aquatic stage.
4.3.13
Chironomidae
These are small ﬂies, which have a humped thorax that frequently overshadows the
head. They can be up to 14 mm long. The front pair of legs is the longest of the three
Figure 4.29
An example of the features of a Tipulid including the drooping mouthparts
72
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

pairs. The wings do not extend beyond the end of the abdomen and are very narrow.
The veins have a distinctive characteristic fourth or medial vein (1 þ 2) which does
not fork. At rest the chironomid holds its wings alongside its body. Male chironomids
are distinguished by their feathery antennae.
The larval stage is aquatic and the most frequently cited in forensic contexts –
particularly in stagnant water – are the blood worms (Chironomus spp) (see colour
section). Identiﬁcation of this family to species level is difﬁcult. However, beha-
viourally, blood worms (Chironomus spp.) can be distinguished by their character-
istic ‘ﬁgure of eight’ wiggling movement. Chironomid pupae are often
indistinguishable from those of other midges and gnats. Although some species
can be distinguished by the tufts of ﬁne white hair present on the pupal head, whilst
others are undistinguishable from the pupae of mosquitos as they too have a
respiratory horn.
4.4
Members of other orders that have forensic relevance
in aquatic cases
There are several other orders of insects which are relevant forensically, particularly
as their juvenile stages are aquatic. The orders are the Ephemeroptera, Trichoptera
and Plecoptera. One of the indications that these are members of different orders
despite the fact that they have the word ‘ﬂy’ in their common name is that the whole
word is run together where as in the true ﬂies the common name is made up of two
words, the latter being the word ﬂy e.g. dragonﬂies and ﬂesh ﬂies.
4.4.1
Mayﬂies – Ephemeroptera
The members of this order have an incomplete lifecycle incorporating an immature
adult stage, which is distinct and termed a subimago. The life stages are egg, nymph,
pupa, subimago, and imago. The nymph is distinguished from members of the
Plecoptera by having three appendages (‘tails’) on the abdomen (Figure 12.2 in
Chapter 12). The nymphal body is segmented; the thorax has three pairs of legs
attached to it, and also wing buds. Nymphs consume algae, plant debris, and small
food particles. Their developmental period can be several months to several years.
The duration of the nymphal stage is between three to six months. The subimago
stage lasts between a few hours to one to two days.
Ephemeroptera nymphs can be found in a range of habitats and their feeding
strategy is inﬂuenced by the habitat. Some species burrow into sediment, some crawl
around on silt or moss; others cling to stones. The swimming ability of nymphs
ranges from very effective to incompetent. Although adult mayﬂies have no forensic
value, they may be obvious in a crime scene and can be distinguished by the fact that
they hold their wings straight up in relation to the body.
4.4 MEMBERS OF OTHER ORDERS THAT HAVE FORENSIC RELEVANCE IN AQUATIC CASES
73

4.4.2
Caddisﬂies – Trichoptera
The insects in this order have a complete metamorphosis. Their lifecycle can take
between six months and two years to complete. Some newly hatched larvae consume
algae and plant debris whilst others are predatory.
Caddis larvae are distinguished by having two ﬂeshy protuberances which project
anally from their abdomen (Figure 12.5). Each protuberance ends in a
hook, sometimes with additional hairs and anchorage points. Larvae can be
found either in a case or be case less, although even the cased caddis may escape
from their refugium on occasion. Caddis larvae have obvious long, jointed legs on
their thorax. This feature distinguishes them from ﬂy larvae, which never have
jointed legs, and chironomid larvae, which do not have either obvious jointed legs on
their thorax (although they do have what appear to be two feet on the ﬁrst segment
behind the head). Chironomid larvae have extensions on their last abdominal
segments, which also have gills.
The lifecycle takes between six months and two years to complete and the
larval stage comprises ﬁve instars, which are completed within six to 10 months
after which the larvae pupate in a cocoon (case-building caddis will seal off the
door of the case and build the cocoon within). The pupal stage can take from a
few weeks to around six months. Adult caddis ﬂies cut their way out of the
cocoon and emerge as a pre-adult, which is mobile but still immature – a
pharate adult, which has fringed legs that it uses to swim to the surface of the
water. Once at the surface it rapidly matures into the adult form. The length of
time which the adults survive is around a couple of weeks but this is dependent
upon the weather.
4.4.3
Stoneﬂies – Plecoptera
Members of this order have an incomplete metamorphosis and the lifecycle can take
up to three years to complete. The main emergence is between late spring and
midsummer. Stoneﬂy egg stage can last between a single day and three months.
Stoneﬂy nymphs can be carnivorous, omnivorous, or herbivorous; the Perlodidae and
the Perlidae are the families that are predators.
Stoneﬂy nymphs have three pairs of well-developed legs with two claws on the
end. The end of the abdomen has two caudal tails (Figure 12.1). The number of
instars is considered to be between 12 and 25; however 33 instars have been recorded
in one species of Perlidae (Harris, 1970).
A stony substratum appears to be a key requirement for the presence of stoneﬂies
along with good water quality. Member of this order can be found in slow-ﬂowing
rivers with a muddy bottom and rooted vegetation. Stony rivers and streams will also
be a suitable habitat for stoneﬂies as well as the shores of lakes which have rocks
along their edges.
74
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

4.5
Review technique: larval spiracles or
mouthparts – preparation of whole slide mounts
Introduction
On some occasions it may be appropriate to make a microscope slide of a specimen to
conﬁrmaspects ofitsidentity. To do this youwill need to ‘clear‘a specimen to remove
the soft tissue, leaving the chitinised tissue so that you can examine the spiracles on
either a larva or puparium more easily in order to conﬁrm its species identity.
Sukontason et al. (2006) describe a method of preparing puparial cases in order to
identify the species. (The same procedure can be used to make a slide of the
cephalopharyngeal skeleton.)
The procedure described below, is for the preparation of a slide of the spiracles
of a larva to conﬁrm its instar.
Safety Instructions (COSHH)
. Use normal laboratory etiquette.
. Wear safety glasses when preparing the slide.
. Ten per cent KOH is caustic – wear latex gloves.
. Glacial acetic acid can cause irritation – keep the watch glass covered.
Materials
two dropper pipettes
mounted needles
three watch glasses
a 10 ml measuring cylinder
slides
a 250 ml beaker
cover slips
mountant – e.g. euparol
labels for slides
ﬁne forceps
wash bottles with distilled or ionised water
specimen of larva(or puparium)
glacial acetic acid
glass rod
compound microscopes with phase contrast facility
ten per cent potassium hydroxide
beaker for waste
clove oil
4.5 REVIEW TECHNIQUE
75

Method
1. Immerse your specimen (which you have carefully punctured with a ﬁne pin) in
10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) overnight to soften the tissue and destroy the
internal tissues. (The alternative is to boil the specimen in 10% KOH, but this is a
potentially dangerous procedure as the potash solution is caustic.)
2. Place the whole specimen in a small watch glass and ﬂood it with distilled water
to wash off the KOH.
3. Pipette off the liquid and dispose of it in the waste beaker.
4. Repeat the washing in distilled water as in instructions 2 and 3.
Your specimen should now be either a very pale yellow colour, or transparent.
(If not, replace it in the potassium hydroxide for a longer period until you are
satisﬁed with the level of transparency of the cuticle.)
5. Remove all water and blot the specimen dry. Take care – the specimen must be
dry for the next stage.
6. Using ﬁne forceps place the specimen intoa second, drywatch glass and add5 ml
glacial acetic acid with afresh dropper pipette. Cover thedish to reduce the rising
odour level (ideally this stage should be carried out in a fume cupboard).
7. Leave the contents for 5 minutes to dehydrate your specimen.
8. Using forceps place the specimen into a third watch glass and add (by eye) 5 ml
of clove oil. Cover the watch glass with two glass slides to reduce the odour
(again this should be carried out in the fume cupboard).
9. Leavethe specimen for 10 minutes. Meanwhile set up the compound microscope
and collect the slides and cover slips.
10. Add a small amount of mountant (for example Euparol) to the centre of a glass
slide using a glass rod.
11. Take the specimen out of the clove oil. Position it carefully on the glass slide
using mounted needles.
12. Carefully overlay the specimen by sliding a cover slip down a mounted needle,
onto the specimen. Label the slide with your name, the date and the contents of
the slide.
13. Allow the slide to dry and harden. This can take twoweeks (or use a slide dryer to
reduce the time).
14. Examine the specimen under phase contrast (total magniﬁcation  400). Make a
labelled diagram of the spiracles and indicate the instar of the specimen in your
laboratory notebook.
15. Justify your conclusion and use Kamal’s data to determine the duration of the
lifecycle of your specimen to this point if grown at 26.7 C.
76
CH04 IDENTIFYING FLIES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

5
Key for the identiﬁcation of
European and Mediterranean
blowﬂies(Diptera,Calliphoridae)
of medical and veterinary
importance – adult ﬂies
Krzysztof Szpila
Nicolaus Copernicus University, Institute of Ecology and Environmental Protection,
Department of Animal Ecology, Torun´, Poland
5.1
Introduction
Blowﬂies are a large Dipteran family with 114 species known from Europe (Rognes,
2010). The family’s position as a paraphyletic taxon (Rognes, 1997) was recently
conﬁrmed by molecular studies (Kutty et al., 2010). Species of forensic importance
belong to one of four subfamilies: Calliphorinae, Chrysomyinae, Luciliinae and
Toxotarsinae; the last subfamily is a New World endemic. This group of four
subfamilies, with addition of the parasitic Melanomyinae, create a monophyletic
clade, which is a good candidate for adoption within the ‘Calliphoridae’ in any future
revision of the whole family (Rognes, 1997).
Adult necrophagous blowﬂies are the earliest visitors to human and animal dead
bodies in terrestrial habitats. They are rarely replaced by other insects unless the
conditions are atypical, such as those occurring in dry environments or with buried
carrion. After arrival, blowﬂies feed on exposed body ﬂuids (saliva, blood, mucus)
and females with mature eggs immediately begin oviposition. This ability to exploit
newly dead bodies makes blowﬂies the most important group for the estimation of
PMI using the developmental method.
Identiﬁcation of the blowﬂies of Europe and the Mediterranean is not especially
difﬁcult. However a single key encompassing all species of forensic and medical
importance has not so far existed. The broadest representation of species was
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

prepared by Zumpt (1956) in a series of papers published in the volumes of Die
Fliegen der Palaearktischen Region. The weak point of this publication is the very
limited illustration of characters used for taxonomic purposes, which makes the
keys difﬁcult for inexperienced researchers to use. More recent monographs
improved this situation but they covered only the local fauna of particular countries
or regions such as Romania (Lehrer, 1972), Scandinavia including Denmark
(Rognes, 1991), Great Britain (Erzinc¸lioglu, 1996), Israel (Rognes, 2002) and Poland
(Draber-Mon´ko, 2004).
In fact only a few species of blowﬂies regularly colonise the dead bodies of large
animals. The list of European blowﬂies of forensic importance proposed recently by
Szpila (2010) includes 12 species. According to recent ﬁndings in Europe and the
USA, this list should be extended by the addition of a few species with conﬁrmed
breeding records from human dead bodies. In the present key, Lucilia cuprina,
recorded from Spain (Rognes, 1994) has been included along with Chrysomya
putoria, which has been reported from the Canary Islands (Baez, Ortega and
Kurahashi., 1981) as ‘Chrysomya chloropyga’ (see discussion in Rognes and
Paterson, 2005).
Chrysomya marginalis, a carrion breeder well established in Israel (Rognes,
2002) and Egypt (Schumann, 1986) is also included in the key presented below as
part of the cohort of ﬂies with relevance to the south-east Mediterranean. The key
also incorporates two obligatory agents of myiasis (see Chapter 10): Cochliomyia
hominivorax and Chrysomya bezziana. Both these species resemble typical
necrophagous blowﬂies and may easily be misidentiﬁed by inexperienced re-
searchers. The New World screwworm, Cochliomyia hominivorax, was acciden-
tally introduced into Libya in the 1980s and only rapid and decisive control action
has eradicated this species from the Mediterranean region (Beesley, 1991;
Lindquist, Abusowa and Hall, 1992). The Old World screwworm Chrysomya
bezziana, known as an oriental species, has extended its distribution to Persian
Gulf countries such as Iran (Navidpour et al., 1996) and Iraq (Al-Izzi, Al-Taweel
and Jassim, 1999). A single record of this species from Algeria (Abed-Benamara
et al., 1997) was probably a misidentiﬁcation (Hall, 2008) but the occurrence of
Chrysomya bezziana in North Africa is possible. The same concerns relate to the
description of a case of human myiasis from Turkey where a larva with a deep
spiracular cavity and spinulation characteristic of Wohlfahrtia magniﬁca Schiner
(Sarcophagidae) was apparently wrongly identiﬁed as Chrysomya bezziana (Satar,
¸Cac¸a. and ¸Sakalar, 2005). The presence of both screwworm species in material
collected in real cases from dead human bodies (as predeath infestations) has a
rather low probability of occurring but if it did happen could seriously affect the
estimation of PMI.
For medico-legal purposes, thanks to the addition of Cochliomyia hominivorax
and Chrysomya bezziana, the key presented below may be successfully used for the
identiﬁcation of European and Mediterranean blowﬂies causing wound myiasis of
human and domestic animals (as both primary and secondary agents) as well as for
the identiﬁcation of ﬂies infesting dead bodies.
78
CH05 KEY FOR EUROPEAN AND MEDITERRANEAN BLOWFLIES

The full list of keyed species is as follows:
Calliphorinae
Calliphora loewi Enderlein, 1903
Calliphora subalpina Ringdahl, 1931
Calliphora vicina Robineau-Desvoidy, 1830
Calliphora vomitoria Linnaeus, 1758
Cynomya mortuorum Linnaeus, 1761
Chrysomyinae
Cochliomyia hominivorax Coquerel, 1858
Chrysomya albiceps Wiedemann, 1819
Chrysomya bezziana Villeneuve, 1914
Chrysomya marginalis Wiedemann, 1830
Chrysomya megacephala Fabricius, 1794
Chrysomya putoria Wiedemann, 1830
Phormia regina Meigen, 1826
Protophormia terraenovae Robineau-Desvoidy, 1830
Luciliinae
Lucilia ampullacea Villeneuve, 1922
Lucilia caesar Linnaeus, 1758
Lucilia cuprina Wiedemann, 1830
Lucilia illustris Meigen, 1826
Lucilia sericata Meigen, 1826
Lucilia silvarum Meigen, 1826
The majority of material used for the purposes of key construction was collected
personally by the author. Excellent stack-images of several specimens were taken by
Tomasz Klejdysz (Poland, IPP-SRI). Specimens of Cochliomyia hominivorax and
Chrysomya bezziana were provided for study thanks to the courtesy of Dr Soccoro
Gomez Dorante (Mexico, COMEXA) and Dr April H. Wardhana (Indonesia,
IRCVC). For each species, pictures of particular elements of male genitalia (cerci,
surstyli, penis, pregonite and postgonite) are included as these characters are of great
taxonomic importance and very useful for conﬁrmation of identiﬁcation based on
general morphology. The method of treatment of freshly collected specimens for
further examination of the details of the genital apparatus is well presented by Pape
et al. (2010). Description of the proper preparation of dried, pinned specimens from
museum collections is provided by Rognes (1991).
Terminology follows Merz and Haenni (2000), except that the author uses the
word setae rather than macrotrichia and that the word bristle is used to denote a
particularly strong seta.
The present key has been tested before publication and seems to work well;
in doubtful cases, however, the author recommends that identiﬁcations should
be checked against the illustrations and descriptions published in the listed
references.
5.1 INTRODUCTION
79

5.2
Key
1. Stem-vein (Plate 5.1D) bare above: 2
Stem-vein haired above (Plate 5.1D): (Chrysomyinae) 3
2. Thorax nonmetallic, dark (Plate 5.9A–E); lower calypter with hairs above
(Plates 5.2A, 5.3D): (Calliphorinae) 10
Thorax bright green metallic (Plate 5.9K–O); lower calypter bare above
(Plate 5.2B): (Luciliinae) 14
3. Greater ampulla with stiff erect hairs (Plate 5.2C); lower calypter with dense
hairs above (Plates 5.2M, N): (Chrysomya spp.) 4
Greater ampulla bare or with short ﬁne hairs (Plate 5.2D); lower calypter bare or
with a few pale hairs (like on Plate 5.2B): 8
4. Anterior wing margin darkened (Plate 5.2E), male genitalia in Plates 5.6I–L:
Chrysomya marginalis
Anterior wing margin transparent (Plate 5.1A): 5
5. Anterior thoracic spiracle yellow (Plate 5.2F): 6
Anterior thoracic spiracle brown (Plate 5.2G): 7
6. Dorsal part of thorax shiny, with little dusting (Plate 5.2I); black transverse
marginal abdominal bands on abdominal segments III and IV very narrow, up to
about a quarter on AIII and usually not more than about sixth in AIV (Plate 5.2J);
male genitalia in Plate 5.6A–D: Chrysomya albiceps
Dorsal part of thorax with conspicuous dusting (Plate 5.2K); black transverse
marginal abdominal bands on abdominal segment III broader, even up to one-half
of tergite length (Plate 5.2L); malegenitaliain Plates5.7A–D: Chrysomya putoria
7. Lower calypter white, with yellowish fringe (Plate 5.2M); male genitalia in Plate
5.6E–H . . . Chrysomya bezziana (obligatory parasite)
Lower calypter brownish infuscated (Plate 5.2N);malegenitaliain Plate5.6M–P:
Chrysomya megacephala
8. Genaldilation(Plate5.1B)yellowororange,withmostlyyellowhairs(Plate5.3A),
male genitalia in Plates 5.7E–H: Cochliomyia hominivorax (obligatory parasite)
Genal dilation (Plate 5.1B) dark (Plate 5.2H): 9
9. Upper and lower calypters bright (Plate 5.3B), basicosta yellow (as in Plates
5.3E, J): Phormia regina
Upper and lower calypters dark brown (Plate 5.3C), basicosta black (as in Plate
5.3K): Protophormia terraenovae
10. Onepair of acrostichalbristles on postsutural area, abdomenshining bluewithout
dusting (Plate 5.9E), male genitalia in Plate 5.5Q–T: Cynomya mortuorum
Three pairs of acrostichal bristles on postsutural area (as in Plate 5.1C), abdomen
shining blue with weak dusting (Plate 5.9A–D): (Calliphora spp.) 11
80
CH05 KEY FOR EUROPEAN AND MEDITERRANEAN BLOWFLIES

11. Upper and lower calypters predominantly white-yellowish (as in Plate 5.2A),
male genitalia in Plate 5.5E–H: Calliphora subalpina
Upper and lower calypters predominantly black (Plate 5.3D): 12
12. Facial ridges, mouth edge, and anterior part of genal dilation orange (Plate
5.3G); basicosta yellow (like in Plates 5.3E, J), male genitalia in Plates 5.5I–L:
Calliphora vicina
Facial ridges, mouth edge, and anterior part of genal dilation dark (Plates 5.3HI);
basicosta black (as in Plate 5.3K): 13
13. Postgena and lower part of genal dilation with black hairs (Plate 5.3I), male
genitalia in Plate 5.5A–D: Calliphora loewi
Postgena and lower part of genal dilation with orange hairs (Plate 5.3H), male
genitalia in Plate 5.5M–P: Calliphora vomitoria
14. Basicosta bright yellow (Plate 5.3E, J): 15
Basicosta brown or black (Plate 5.3K): 16
15. Central occipital area with two to ﬁve bristles below inner vertical bristle (Plate
5.4A), abdomen usually bright green, occasionally shining coppery, male
genitalia in Plate 5.8O–R: Lucilia sericata
Central occipital area with one bristle just below inner vertical bristle (Plate
5.4B), abdomen usually shining coppery, male genitalia in Plate 5.7Q–T: Lucilia
cuprina
16. Three pairs of acrostichal bristles on postsutural area (as in Plate 5.1C), palpus
brown to black (Plate 5.4D), male genitalia in Plates 5.8S–V: Lucilia silvarum
Two pairs of acrostichal bristles on postsutural area, palpus yellow (Plates
5.4EF): 17
17. Coxopleural streak absent, male genitalia in Plate 5.8A–D: Lucilia ampullacea
Coxopleural streak present (Plate 5.4G): 18
18. Male: surstyli slender, gradually tapered to sharp tip (Plates 5.8JK); female:
tergit VI straight in lateral view (Plates 5.1F, 5.8M): Lucilia illustris
Male: surstyli stout, abruptly narrowed at tip (Plate 5.8EF); female: tergit VI
convex in lateral view (Plate 5.8H): Lucilia caesar
5.2 KEY
81

6
Identifying beetles that are
important in forensic entomology
6.1
What do beetles look like?
Beetles belong to the order Coleoptera and all share features in common. Adult
beetles are composed of a head, thorax in three parts all fused together (although the
second and third parts are less visible dorsally) and an abdomen. They have two pairs
of wings; the two forewings are hardened and form a protective covering over the
second, membranous pair of wings. These chitinous, and on occasion ‘leathery’,
protective cases are called the elytra (singular elytron) (Figure 6.1).
Beetle heads can be structured in one of several ways. They can project forwards
horizontally (a prognathous head), or orientate downwards (an hypognathous
head). Adult beetles have biting mouthparts or mandibles. Located on the head are
the antennae that carry tactile, heat-sensitive, olfactory and humidity receptors. Their
antennae have 11 segments in general. Coleopteran antennae vary in form. Some are
threadlike (ﬁliform), or platelike (lamellate) whereas others are elbowed (genicu-
late), or have clublike ends (clavate).
The beetle exoskeleton is formed from hardened plates. The plates on the top
surface are called tergites; the plates on the under (ventral) surface are called
sternites. The segment plates at the side (lateral) of the body are called pleurites.
(The pleuron is the name for this region of the exoskeleton.)
The dorsal surface of the thorax is divided into the pro-, meso-, and metanotum.
(Each plate, or tergite, is called a notum (plural nota).) The pronotum, (the surface of
the ﬁrst thoracic segment in front of the elytra) is the biggest of the thoracic segments.
It is made up of only one plate. (The ventral surface is correspondingly divided into
three; the pro -, meso -, and metasternum) (Figure 6.2).
The prothoraxiswell developedand, togetherwiththehead, can beinterpretedas a
distinct anterior portion of the body. It is usually distinctive in shape and size and can
be used as a means of identifying the beetle. The middle region of the thorax (the
mesothorax) supports the pair of hardened wing cases that meet along the centre of
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

the back of the beetle (dorsal surface). Part of the mesonotum is located between the
base of the elytra behind the pronotum. This small plate is called the scutellum.
The membranous wings are attached to the body on the last section of the thorax
(the metathorax, with which the mesothorax is fused). This pair of wings is folded
beneath the elytra when the beetle is not in ﬂight.
Beetles legs are positioned on the sternum. They are generally designed for
running or walking, but in some beetles, as in the Scarabaeidae, the front legs are also
modiﬁed for digging (Figure 6.3).
Figure 6.1
Generalised morphology of a beetle – dorsal view
Figure 6.2
The structure of the coleopteran thorax
6.1 WHAT DO BEETLES LOOK LIKE?
83

Box 6.1
Structure of the insect cuticle
Insect cuticle, which is made of chitin and proteins, can be rigid or ﬂexible.
Cuticle provides protection from physical damage and water loss, and a rigid
structure for muscle attachment. It limits growth to those times when the
cuticle is newly developing. The mechanical properties of cuticle depend on
the quantity of protein present, the sequence of proteins and the degree of
tanning (sclerotization).
Cuticle has three parts: epicuticle, procuticle and epidermis. The epidermis
and cuticle together are called the insect integument. The epicuticle is the
outermost layer. It is between 0.1 mm and 3 mm thick and is also made of three
layers. The outermost layer is a cement layer, which prevents distortion of the
next layer, a lipid-protein layer. Below this second layer is a glycoprotein
superﬁcial layer. The epicuticle does not contain chitin. It is not capable of
providing support or extending, but does provide waterprooﬁng and protection
against mechanical damage.
Below this is the procuticle. Procuticle is between 10 mm and 0.5 mm in
depth and comprises a thicker endocuticle, which is light in colour, overlaid by
a thinner, darker exocuticle. Procuticle is made up of a protein matrix in which
layers of parallel microﬁbrils of chitin, an amino-sugar polysaccharide, are
embedded to make a sheet. In the exocuticle the sheets of microﬁbrils are in the
same plane, but each sheet may be orientated at a slight angle to the previous
sheet. An alternate stacked, or helicoids arrangement of microﬁbril sheets in
the endocuticle, results in it being a thicker layer than the exocuticle. The
darkening of the thinner exocuticle is due to tanning (sclerotization).
The basal layer beneath the cuticle is the epidermis. This single layer of
cells is supported on a basement membrane which separates the exoskeleton
from the main body cavity. Epidermal cells regenerate by cell duplication, or
mitosis. This layer secretes the cuticle-forming chemical, which is needed for
moulting to take place.
Types of cuticle
There are two types of cuticle: soft cuticle and hard cuticle.
Soft cuticle is ﬂexible and the cuticle is thin and has little or no exocuticle.
Larvae predominantly have soft cuticle and a hydrostatic skeleton. Soft cuticle
is also important where movement is required and, for example, allows gravid
females to extend their abdominal plates to lay eggs.
Hard cuticle is hardened and armour-like because of the level of tanning, the
positions of the microﬁbril sheets and hydrogen bonding between adjacent
chitin molecular chains. Hardened chitin is found surrounding the spiracles of
ﬂy larvae and is present on the head and as the mandibles of beetle larvae. It
provides the strength and rigidity of the body and elytra in adult beetles.
84
CH06 IDENTIFYING BEETLES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

Theupperplatesoftheabdominalsegmentsaresclerotised(madeofcuticlehardened
with a protein called sclerotin). The lower abdominal plates (the sterna) are soft.
Beetles exhibit complete metamorphosis during their lifecycles and pass through
an egg stage, larval stages and a pupal stage and then emerge as an adult, or imago.
Each stage is morphologically different. Beetle eggs are frequently difﬁcult to locate
onoraroundthe bodyas,unlike ﬂyeggs, theydonotoftenappearin batches. Theyare
often laid singly in the vicinity of suitable food sources.
Beetle larvae have more distinctive morphological features than do ﬂy larvae. For
example, they have a sclerotised head capsule, and mouthparts that include mand-
ibles (are mandibulate). Larvae may or may not have legs on the thoracic region of
their body. Prolegs(limbs ontheabdominal region)are rarely present inbeetle larvae
and this distinguishes them from the larvae of other orders.
For example, ground beetle larvae (carabids) have an elongated ﬂattened shape with
well deﬁned legs that end in two claws. These are called campodeiform larvae. Scarab
Figure 6.3
The front legs of a beetle that have been modiﬁed for digging (Geotrupes sp.)
6.1 WHAT DO BEETLES LOOK LIKE?
85

beetlelarvaeresemblea‘cshape’ andthesebeetlestendtohaveabrownsclerotisedhead
and a whitish body. On the other hand, larvae of the dermestid family are particularly
hairy on the sides and the upper body surfaces and are recognised because of this coat of
hairs. Examples of the shapes of forensically signiﬁcant larvae are shown in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4
Examples of the shapes of beetle larvae. Source: Reproduced from Munro (1966)
with kind permission from Rentokil Initial plc.
Figure 6.5
The types of pupa and puparia to illustrate the relationship of appendages to the body.
Source: Dr Andrew Brigham and Rentokil Initial plc, for permission to reproduce diagrams of
beetle larvae and pupa (presented in this book as Figures 6.4 and 6.5 ) from Munro J.W., Pests of
Stored Products. The Rentokil Library Benham and Co. Colchester (1965)
86
CH06 IDENTIFYING BEETLES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

Small, hardened structures projecting from the end of the larval abdomen are
called urogomphi. They are recognisable, for example, in the larvae of Dermestidae,
Nitidulidae and Histeridae.
The third stage of metamorphosis is called the pupal stage 6.16. The pupa has
mouthparts that do not articulate (i.e. are adecticous) and the rest of the pupal
appendages are free and visible through the pupal coat (the pupa is exarate)
(Figure 6.5). This isnotsointhe staphylinids,where thepupaiscoveredbya hardened
coatandthepupalappendagesareheldinplacebysecretedmaterial(anobtectpupae).
Some pupae pupate in a chamber within the soil. Others, like the scarabaeids, form
a cocoon. In this instance the cocoon is made from material in the posterior section of
the caecum (Richards and Davies, 1988).
6.2
The life stages of the beetles
Beetles also have a complete metamorphosis and pass through an egg stage, three to
ﬁve larval stages depending on species, and a pupal stage before becoming an adult,
althoughthe availability and quality offood may dictate the number ofinstars that are
completed before adulthood is reached (Figure 6.12).
Coleopteran eggs tend to be oval, spherical or spheroid in shape and are usually
considered to be morphologically similar, irrespective of family. Larval shape does
differ between families and this is a valuable means of distinguishing the species that
are present on a corpse. Beetle larvae usually bury themselves in the ground, or in a
specially constructed chamber, when they pupate. Less detailed information is
available about beetle lifecycles than is known about the diptera.
The length of the beetle lifecycle varies, depending upon the family and species of
beetle. Development through the complete lifecycle, from egg to adult (imago) can
take from seven to ten days in rove beetles (Staphylindae). In ground beetles
(Carabidae) completion of the lifecycle to the adult stage may take a year and the
adults may live for two to three years. In some species the number of instars in the
larval stage is not ﬁxed but depends onenvironmental conditions. In Dermestidae, for
example, there may be as many as nine instars (Hinton, 1945) prior to the beetles
becoming adults and this can extend the lifecycle quite considerably. Usually though,
there is only one generation of beetles per year. Smith (1986) indicates that the length
of the pupal stage of Dermestes sp. can last between two weeks and two months and
that these beetles can overwinter (enter diapause) in a pupal chamber, if the weather
is not suitable or if it is late in the season.
The problem of lack of a ready morphological distinction between larval instars
in beetles means that other methods to distinguish the instar are needed. Watson
and Carlton (2005) investigated the lifecycles of three species of American silphid
that feed on the insects visiting the carcass and on the carcass itself; Oiceoptoma
inaequale (Fabricius), Necrophilia americana (Linnaeus) and Necrodes surinamensis
(Fabricius). Using multivariate analysis, they identiﬁed three larval stages. For
Necrodes surinamensis they showed a ﬁrst instar average duration of 12 days, a
6.2 THE LIFE STAGES OF THE BEETLES
87

duration of 10days for the second instar and 11days for the third instar, indicating that
the larvae were present from day 9–22 of decomposition (Watson and Carlton, 2005).
Chapter11provides furtherinformation aboutsome ofthebeetle familiesthatplay
a signiﬁcant role in succession on a corpse and so have a role in forensic entomology.
6.3
Selected forensically relevant families of beetles
The order Coleoptera is divided on the basis of molecular studies, into what is treated
as four suborders: Archostemata, Myxophaga, Adephaga and Polyphaga. The
Archostemata is made up of three families, which mostly inhabit decaying wood.
The Myxophaga are made up of four families that are aquatic, or are found in moist
habitats and are algal feeders. Although all insects may be of importance in forensic
entomology the remaining two suborders, Adephaga and Polyphaga, contain fami-
lies of beetles that are most commonly found at crime scenes. The suborder
Adephaga contains ten families and comprises predatory beetles, which inhabit
terrestrial and aquatic habitats, and includes the ground beetles – Carabidae,
Dytiscidae and Gyrinidae. The Polyphaga contains 149 families including the
families Dermestidae, Scarabaeidae, Staphylinidae, Histeridae and Cleridae.
Suborder Adephaga
The term adephagous is derived from the Greek word for being ravenous (extremely
hungry) and describes beetles that are carnivorous and therefore predators. These
beetlesare distinguishedbythe positioningof their legs. The coxae ofthe thirdpair of
legs (the hind legs) are fused to the metasternum. When you look at the underside of
the beetle you see that this region of the leg divides the ﬁrst visible abdominal sternal
plate (Figure 6.6b).
There are lines down the sides of the thorax called sutures. (The indents are
positions where there is internal strengthening of the exoskeleton.) An example of
this is the suture between the notum and the sternum. (Sutures are readily recognised
as the large transverse indentations across the thorax of the ﬂy.) The majority of
beetles in this suborder have thread-like antennae are described as ﬁliform.
Larvae of insects in this suborder have legs with ﬁve segments that end in two
claws (only rarely is it one claw). These larvae are mostly elongated and ﬂattened
(Luff, in Cooter and Barclay, 2006). Because most beetles in the Adephaga are
predaceous they are attracted to a dead body to feed on the insects and their life stages
inhabiting a cadaver. The beetle families of forensic interest, which are in the
Adephaga, are the Carabidae, and the water beetle family the Dytiscidae.
Suborder Polyphaga
This suborder contains the majority of families of beetles with which the forensic
entomologist may be concerned. The following features characterise this suborder.
The hind coxa is rarely fused to the metasternum (it moves, or articulates) and so does
not divide the ﬁrst visible abdominal sternite (Figure 6.6a). The thorax in this
88
CH06 IDENTIFYING BEETLES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

suborder does not have lines (sutures) across its dorsal surface. The types of antennae
in the suborder vary, so they cannot be used as an indicative feature.
Polyphaga larvae are of many different shapes. They have legs with four segments
that end in a claw. Some larvae in the suborder Polyphaga have legs that are reduced;
others have vestigial legs, or they may even be absent altogether.
Polyphaga adults eat a variety of food. Some beetles are predaceous, but in the
suborder as a whole many are phytophagous. Only beetles that are predators or
necrophages are of immediate importance to the forensic entomologist. A number
of beetles, for example the Dermestidae, visit a dead body, either because the
body itself forms food and a habitat or to feed on the insects already present – for
example, the Staphylinidae. The families of insects from this suborder, which are
important in forensic entomology, include the Silphidae, Scarabaeidae, Staphylinidae,
Histeridae, Trogidae, and Dermestidae. Cleridae and Nitidulidae.
6.4
Features used in identifying forensically
important beetle families
6.4.1
Carrion beetles (Silphidae)
Silphidae have a ﬂat body with sharp margins and their heads are small relative to the
size of their thorax. The beetles of this family have antennae in which the sequence of
Figure 6.6
Ventral view of the beetle thorax to illustrate the distinction between the Polyphaga
(Figure 6.6a) and the Adephaga (Figure 6.6b)
6.4 FEATURES USED IN IDENTIFYING FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT BEETLE FAMILIES
89

antennal segments tends to thicken as the segments progress to the end, or the
antennae are distinctly clubbed. The distance between the points of insertion of the
antennae is wide. These are large, robust beetles and some, such as Nicrophorus
vespilloides Herbst, have orange or red markings on their elytra. Others such as
Nicrophorus humator Gleditsch (Figure 6.7 – see also the colour section) are black in
colour. One of the main identiﬁcation features of this family is that no abdominal
segments protrude from the hardened upper wings (the elytra). If the beetle is turned
over, six abdominal sternites are visible.
6.4.2
Rove beetles (Staphylinidae)
Staphylinidae are active beetles that are easily recognised because their short elytra
expose at least half of the abdominal segments so that seven to eight protrude, when
theinsect is viewed from above (Figure6.8). Theyrange in size fromtinyto large. For
example, the largest British staphylinid species Ocypus olens Mu¨ller, (whose English
common name is the devil’s coach horse), has been recorded at 28 mm long
(Richards and Davies, 1988). Beetles of this family, however, are accomplished
ﬂiers and have strong membraneous wings packed away under their shortened elytra.
Some species have the habit of curling up their last few abdominal segments over
their ‘back’. This makes them look very aggressive and the action is reminiscent of a
scorpion. If you see specimens reacting like this as you approach them then you have
most likely found a staphylinid beetle.
Figure 6.7
Nicrophorus humator Gleditsch
90
CH06 IDENTIFYING BEETLES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

Staphylinid beetles are predators andare attractedto the corpseto feedonthe larvae
of diptera. A number of species of rove beetles (Staphylinidae) have been found on a
body. For example Goff and Flynn (1991) recorded the presence of adult Philonthus
longicornis Stephens from a 23-year-old Caucasian male in Hawaii and Creophilus
maxillosus Linnaeus, which Centeno, Maldonado and Oliva (2002) recognise, as
forensically relevant in Argentina and which Chapman and Sankey (1955) also
recorded from rabbit corpses in exposed conditions in Surrey, England.
6.4.3
Clown beetles (Histeridae)
These are small, shiny black beetles (Figure 6.9) with an exoskeleton that has a hard,
often leathery or sculptured texture and a more-or-less oval shape. Their antennae are
elbowed (geniculate) and the ﬁnal segments of the antennae are formed into an
obvious club. Histerid legs have ﬂat tibiae. The signiﬁcant identiﬁcation feature of
this family, when looked at from above, is the square cut to the ends of the elytra,
which reveals the last two abdominal segments.
Both larvae and adults are found on the corpse as they feed on those insects
attracted to decaying organic matter. The larvae also eat ﬂy larvae and prey on other
insects. The adult beetles respond to being handled by withdrawing their heads and
pulling their legs, and any other projections, into the body, which is sculptured to
allow this, and by ‘playing dead’ (exhibiting thanatosis).
6.4.4
Trogid beetles (Trogidae)
These are medium-sized beetles, which are dull brownish in colour (Figure 6.10).
The dorsal surface of their body appears roughened and the elytra can sometimes be
Figure 6.8
An example of a member of the Staphylinidae
6.4 FEATURES USED IN IDENTIFYING FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT BEETLE FAMILIES
91

hairy. The segments at the tip of the antennae are plate like. The legs of trogid adults
are not broad, or modiﬁed for digging.
Trogidae larvae have characteristically long, sharp claws. Chinnery (1973)
indicates that species of the genus Trox are not common in the UK. They are found
Figure 6.9
A hister beetle
Figure 6.10
A trogid beetle
92
CH06 IDENTIFYING BEETLES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

at the dry stage on small carcasses and, in particular, feed on hide, fur, leather,
feathers, and dry matter. These beetles will also exhibit thanatosis if disturbed.
6.4.5
Hide and skin beetles (Dermestidae)
Dermestidae range in size from very small to medium (1.5–10 mm) and have an oval
to elongated shape (Plate 6.1 and 6.2 in the colour section). Their antennae are made
up of between ﬁve and 11 segments, ending in a club made of two to three segments
(Peacock, 1993).
Adult members of the genus Dermestes lack a simple eye (an ocellus) on their
head. The coxa on their front leg is conical and sticks out prominently from the coxal
cavity (Figure 6.11). The femur of the hind leg is covered by the hind coxa, which is
ﬂattened into a plate. These beetles have the capacity to pull all their appendages into
the underside of their body, so nothing protrudes.
Larvae of forensically relevant Dermestidae are brown to black in colour and have
hairs of varying lengths (setae) over their dorsal surface. There are frequently tufts of
hair on the sides or posterior edge of the body. Indeed the larvae of Dermestes
maculatus DeGeer are commonly known as ‘woolly bears’ as a result of this
profusion of hairs. The larvae are 6–13 mm (1/4 to 3/8 inch) long and have two
horns (urogomphi) on their terminal segment.
Dermestes lardarius Linnaeus is known to pupate in a puparium for 40–50 days at
18–20 C. They have one generation per year. Male Dermestes lardarius pass
through four larval instars whilst the female have ﬁve instars.
Figure 6.11
The front coxa of the dermestid projects from the coxal cavity
6.4 FEATURES USED IN IDENTIFYING FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT BEETLE FAMILIES
93

6.4.6
Chequered (or bone) beetles (Cleridae)
These beetles are usually brightly coloured on at least some part of their body
(Figure6.13).They are elongated and cylindrical in shapeand appearto havea ‘neck’
because the ﬁrst part of the thorax (the pronotum) is less broad than their elytra.
The adults can be hairy. An example of a forensically signiﬁcant member of the
Cleridae is Necrobia ruﬁpes DeGeer, the red-legged ham beetle, which can be found
in association with bodies later in the decomposition sequence (see the colour
section). In Hawaii it has been found in the soil under a corpse at a PMI of 34–36 days
(Goff and Flynn, 1991). This species is a predator of ﬂy larvae.
6.4.7
Sap–feeding beetles (Nitidulidae)
These are very small beetles, and are not often longer than 7 or 8 mm (Figure 6.14).
The Nitidulidae have undergone taxonomic revision recently. Therefore the choice
Lifecycle of
Dermestes
maculatus
DeGeer
Figure 6.12
The lifecycle of Dermestes maculatus DeGeer
94
CH06 IDENTIFYING BEETLES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

Figure 6.13
A clerid beetle
Figure 6.14
An example of a nitulid beetle
6.4 FEATURES USED IN IDENTIFYING FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT BEETLE FAMILIES
95

of keys and terminology should be considered carefully. Their antennae are usually
composed of 11 segments, ending in a three-segmented club. Their elytra are often
truncated, but the family rarely has more than three abdominal segments visible
dorsally. The fore and mid coxae are transversely orientated, whereas the hind coxa is
ﬂattened. The tarsal formula for this family is most frequently 5–5–5 (This means
that the tarsus of each of the legs is made up of ﬁve tarsomeres). The ﬁrst segment
(tarsomere) of the tarsus is not shortened and all of the tarsal segments are more or
less dilated.
This family is a coloniser of corpses that are in the later stages of decomposition.
According to Cooter and Barclay (2006) in the British Nitidulidae, the subfamily
Nitidulinae includes two genera, Nitidula and Omosita, which are particularly
associated with bones and dried carrion. Wolff et al. (2001) undertook a preliminary
study in Medellın, Colombia, and found that 0.2% of the total number of families
visiting a dead pig, which they had set up in an experimental ‘crime scene’, were
members of the Nitidulidae. All members of this family were recorded from the
advanced stage of decay that occurred between13 and 51 days after the pig died.
6.4.8
Ground beetles (Carabidae)
Ground beetles have a characteristic beetle shape and are readily recognisable as
such. They can be found in a number of habitats, including grassland and forests.
Carabids are members of the Adephaga because their ﬁrst abdominal sternite
segment is divided by the hind coxa. Their antenna are beadlike (ﬁliform) and
located on their head, between the eyes and jaws. The beetle head is prognathous. In
carabids the elytra are usually sculptured, for examplewith striations, so that one sees
nine regular ridges and furrows along the elytra (Figure 6.15). They are frequently
Figure 6.15
The striations on the elytra of a carabid
96
CH06 IDENTIFYING BEETLES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

ﬁxed in position and, where this is the case, the beetle has only the vestiges of
membranous wings and so cannot ﬂy.
Carabid larvae are long or elongated in shape. The larva has a pair of sharp pincer-
like mandibles and six simple eyes (ocelli) down each side of its head. The larval
abdomen has ten segments and on segment nine there is a pair of cerci. The larvae
have legs that end in two claws. Carabid larvae arevery quick in their movements and
tend to be nocturnal, so they may not be obvious members of the corpse assemblage.
6.5
Identiﬁcation of beetle families using DNA
Techniques for the identiﬁcation of insects through the analysis of mtDNA – RFLP
and RAPD – were described in Chapter 2. As with ﬂies, those molecular techniques
have their original application in phylogenetic investigations of beetle species. For
example they were used to separate members of morphologically similar ground
(carabid) beetles of the Nebria-Gregaria group, on Queen Charlotte Islands in
British Columbia, Canada. Clarke et al. (2001) concluded from RAPD and mtDNA
analysis that only one species of the group could be separated out on molecular
grounds, from the particular group of carabids.
The RAPD analysis of beetle DNA has been a successful tool in crime analysis
(Benecke, 1998). The families investigated included the carrion beetles (Silphidae) –
for example Oiceoptoma thoracicum Linnaeus, (Figure 6.16) for whicha DNA proﬁle
was determined from a badly decayed body in October 1997 (Benecke, 1998).
Mitochondrial DNA has also been used to identify the larvae of beetle species
present on a body and also for additional purposes, such as identiﬁcation of the
human host from the gut content of the larvae upon whom it had been feeding.
DiZinno et al. (2002) successfully analysed specimens from the nitidulid genus
Omosita, in order to match mtDNA to a human host.
Dobler and Mu¨ller (2000) explored the phylogenetic relationship of the Silphidae
using 2094 base pairs (bp) of COI and COII, as well as tRNA. With the longer lengths
of mtDNA they were able to obtain a greater resolution of the genetic make up of the
family, providing an increased identiﬁcation proﬁle for use by the forensic entomol-
ogist. Zehner, Haberle and Armendt (2004) explored intraspecies variation within
the clerid beetles (based upon different mitochondrial genomes for the same species
of organism–Heteroplasmy). They showed that within the cytochrome oxidase I
gene, in both Necrobia ruﬁpes and Necrobia ruﬁcollis Fabricius, there was a high
degree of heteroplasmy that did not express itself as much in Necrobia violacea
(Linnaeus), another species of clerid. This variation has to be considered when
interpreting a proﬁle from a specimen from the crime scene.
Less research has been undertaken on the molecular proﬁles of forensically
important coleoptera than for the diptera. However, since the techniques are in
place, further proﬁling of beetle species should expand this base as more crime-scene
investigations occur and further species of beetles are found to have forensic value.
6.5 IDENTIFICATION OF BEETLE FAMILIES USING DNA
97

Therefore the more usual approach to identiﬁcation is the use of a dichotomous key
based on morphological features.
6.6
Key to selected forensically relevant families
in the order Coleoptera
The following key is intended for use in identifying beetles which may be found in
the water body in which a corpse has been submerged or that are known to be
associated with carrion and have been found in close association with the corpse. In
aquatic sites, other insects with apparently hardened wing cases may be present.
However if they have sucking mouthparts for piercing prey they are distinct from
beetles. Corixidae and Notonectidae are examples of such families (see Figures
12.6a and Figure12.6b). Use the key on the basis of the location of the body. Choose
the description that best ﬁts the insect being examined and move to the next couplet.
This is intended to be an initial key that may help distinguish some common beetle
families. More comprehensive keys should be consulted to conﬁrm the identity of
your specimen.
Species found in water: go to Part A.
Terrestrial species – found on land: go to Part B.
Part A
1. The eyes of the beetle are split into two. Small beetles (3–8 mm). Oval in shape
whenviewed from the top. First antennal segment is large; the rest merge into a
club shape. Long forelegs but mid and hind legs are shorter and ﬂattened for
swimming. Surface swimmers.
Figure 6.16
Electropherogram proﬁle to allow comparison of the RAPD of a Silphid beetle to
that of a calliphorid ﬂy. Source: Elsevier for permission to reproduce a section of Figure 4 from
Benecke M., Random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA (RAPD) typing of necrophagous insects p164
(1998) with permission from Elsevier (presented in this book as Figure 6.16)
98
CH06 IDENTIFYING BEETLES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

Gyrinidae
2. Does not exhibit all of these features: go to 3.
3. Front legs reduced in size; back legs ﬂattened. Legs have long bristles. Thorax
is wider than it is long. Antennae are long with 11–12 segments. Mouthparts
are short.
Dytiscidae (Figure 12.8)
Not so: go to 4.
4. Oval body. Clubbed antennae, not longer than size of head. Mouthparts
(mandibular palps) tend to be long, hind legs ﬂattened.
Hydrophilidae (see colour section). This is an aquatic family but some adults are
attracted to terrestrial rotting material and dung.
Not so – seek a more comprehensive key such as an Aidgap key.
Part B
1. Each leg has ﬁve tarsal segments: go to 3.
2. Legs may vary in number of tarsal segments: go to 11.
3. Insects black or with a metallic sheen and long legs. Antennae long, slender
and made up of uniform segments. Jaws are curved. This family often feeds
on necrophages.
Carabidae (Figure 6.15)
Not so: go to 4.
4. Antenna are club shaped, with or without lamellae plates: go to 5.
Antenna not elbowed: go to 8.
5. Insects with legs modiﬁed for digging. Antenna projects forwards and has a
clubbed end made up of a number of plates.
Scarabaeidae (dung beetles such as Geotrupes sp. may be found) (Figure 6.3).
Legs not modiﬁed for digging: go to 6.
6. Antennae clubbed but with an elbow. Terminal segments are expanded in size
to make the club. Rounded body. No distinct ‘neck’ region and the wing case
does not extend to cover the whole abdomen – last two segments exposed.
Shiny black beetles.
6.6 KEY TO SELECTED FORENSICALLY RELEVANT FAMILIES IN THE ORDER COLEOPTERA
99

Histeridae (Figure 6.9)
Not so: go to 7.
7. Body ﬂattened. Beetle appears to have a ‘neck’. Antennae are clubbed.
Cleridae (Figure 6.13)
Not so: check another key
8. Small beetles, more or less oval in shape and the head is visible from above.
The legs ﬁt into grooves.
Dermestidae (Figure 6.11)
Legs do not ﬁt into grooves on the ventral side: go to 9.
9. The beetles are either black in colour or have black and red/orange elytra or
have a thorax coloured differently from the elytra. Body is rounded. (The
wing case does not extend to cover the abdomen in some species). If
examined from the side view the body has upright hairs.
Silphidae (burying beetles have heads which project forwards whereas carrion
beetles’ heads project downwards) (Figure 6.7)
10. Wing case covers only a small part of the abdomen. At least seven abdominal
segments are exposed. When frightened, the beetle curves its abdomen
forwards like a scorpion.
Staphylinidae (Figure 6.8)
Not so – tarsal segment number is variable: go to 11.
11. Black beetles; ﬁrst and second pars of legs have ﬁve tarsal segments. The third
(hind) legs have four tarsal segments.
Tenebrionidae
Not so, all legs have four tarsal segments: go to 12.
12. Beetles very small and found on dried ﬂesh, remains of sinews and bone. All
legs have four tarsal segments
Nitidulidae (Figure 6.14)
If beetles have features that differ from those listed, or the beetle does not ﬁt the
descriptions, use a more comprehensive key. You may have opportunist species in the
crime scene that are using the body as a place of shelter. These will not key out using
this key.
100
CH06 IDENTIFYING BEETLES THAT ARE IMPORTANT IN FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY

7
Sampling at the crime scene
Forensic entomologists may be called to the crime scene at any time, day, or night.
It therefore helps to have the resources assembled so the response time can be rapid.
Keeping a carrying case complete with equipment that will not deteriorate, such as
vials, bags, pens and entomological forceps along with your butterﬂy net may be the
most efﬁcient way to respond to such an invitation (Figure 7.1). If you areworking for
the prosecutionyou need to collect sufﬁcient samples from the crime scene for fellow
forensic entomologists to make their own assessment for the defence, should this be
requested. This is not only good science but imperative if the body is to be buried or
cremated and the relatives wish to view it prior to disposal without any remnants of
maggots or other insects present. Relatives should be able to view the deceased in a
condition that is the least disturbing. (It may also be that because of the need for
hygiene control activities the environment (crime scene) concerned will change
when it is tidied up. So speed and good sampling techniques are required.)
7.1
Entomological equipment to sample from a corpse
The equipment required to collect insects from a corpse includes plastic or
polycarbonate screw-top sampling jars for preserved specimens and live cultures,
stepping plates to preserve the scene from contamination, a killing jar containing
ethyl acetate, labels, indelible markers with ﬁne points, ﬁne forceps, artists paint
brushes, an entomological net and killing agents for larvae, such as boiling water and
an insect preservative. A number of preservatives could be used, including 70–80%
alcohol, KAAD and Kahle’s solution. Each has its beneﬁts (Adams and Hall, 2003).
Kahle’s solution contains both a fungal control agent and a preservative. It has
been used at the University of Lincoln for samples for eight years and has preserved
the samples used in a teaching collection in the same ﬂexible condition they were in
when the larvae were ﬁrst killed. Alcohol has also been used. However this required
that, because of evaporation, the samples were more frequently curated than when
using Kahle’s solution.
Kahle’s solution can also be used to kill larvae if all else fails, although this is not a
recommended approach. It is a preservative for dead adult insects and so provides a
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

means of combining uses, and limiting the quantity of equipment and chemicals
required at the scene.
Because live specimens must be recovered from the site it is necessary to bring
some food for them. Liver such as pig’s liver or minced (ground) beef has been found
to be the most suitable (although it should be noted that research indicates that larvae
show variable growth on different body parts). The food should ideally be at room
temperature and not frozen, or chilled, when the maggots are placed on it. For the
return journey the cultures should be kept in as low a temperature as possible, at the
base temperature of the specimens. A mobile refrigerator for the car or van, or a cool
box with artiﬁcial ice blocks, would be suitable. A thermometer or temperature
logger should be included in the container to ensure that the temperature during
transport can be conﬁrmed.
A carrying box, or packaging for the specimens, should be included in the
resources brought to the crime scene. The sample jars of preserved and live
Figure 7.1
Entomological crime scene equipment in a carrying case
Box 7.1
Kahle’s solution composition
Chemical
Amount
Ethyl alcohol (95%)
30.0 cc
Formaldehyde
12.0 cc
Glacial acetic acid
4.0 cc
Water
60.0 cc
102
CH07 SAMPLING AT THE CRIME SCENE

specimens, from each site on the body, should be packaged together as a pair. Where
samples are being taken by a crime scene investigator (SOCO) rather than the
forensic entomologist, it is necessary to package the samples and seal them, so that
the integrity of the sampling is not at risk.
These storage packages can be individual cardboard boxes, which are sealed with
both preserved and culture samples from the same site on the body in the same
package. In this instance the package requires holes punched in it and the lids to the
culture jars also need to have holes, or a porous covering, which is ﬁrmly attached to
the top of the container. Larvae are ‘escape artists’ and will push through a top if it is
not secured. If this happens your evidence will have escaped!
The French Gendarmerie use polythene bags, which are appropriately labelled and
sealed, as their means of packaging at a crime scene (Figure 7.2). Pin holes are made
through the bag to prevent a build up of carbon dioxide, whilst preventing the larvae
from escaping.
In order to kill larvae from each colonisation site on the body, they are immersed
for at least 30 s in water at a temperature of at least 80 C, to ﬁx the larvae at their
maximum length (Adams and Hall, 2003). Water can be brought to the crime scene in
a thermos ﬂask, or prepared on site using a small camping stove and kettle. (Matches
or a gas lighter are also required if you are boiling water on site!)
A general description of the crime scene should be recorded. This includes
whether the body has been wrapped, or covered in some way (see Figure 1.3) or,
if indoors, whether the windows are open or closed; the slope of the ground if the
crime scene, or where the body was found, is outside. The nature of any vegetation
and a site description, along with associated photographs, should be recorded.
Figure 7.2
Sealed, labelled bag containing entomological specimens collected at the crime scene.
Source:  Colonel DAOST and Warrant ofﬁcer 1st Thierry Pasquerault
7.1 ENTOMOLOGICAL EQUIPMENT TO SAMPLE FROM A CORPSE
103

The crime-scene temperature must also be recorded, along with the degree of light or
shading at the scene.
Thermometers should be included in your equipment case. These thermometers
should be calibrated so that they read accurately and do not give readings that have to
be corrected. For safety reasons, if a digital probe thermometer is not used, it is better
to use an alcohol thermometer, rather than a mercury thermometer. The thermostat
should be noted on any central heating units that operate indoors and which might
dictate the conditions in the building. If at all possible, a weather recorder should also
be brought on site, if it is an outdoor location, so that the temperature, light intensity,
humidity, wind direction and wind speed can all be recorded over a period of time.
At a minimum, a temperature and humidity recorder should be used on site.
Once permission from the senior investigating ofﬁcer has been obtained, the crime
scene should be examined and a general assessment made prior to capturing
specimens and sampling the body. It is important to start with the organisms
most likely to be disturbed by human presence as these may therefore be lost
as you progress with your investigation. These are usually the adult insects present
at the scene.
7.2
Catching adult ﬂying insects at the crime scene
Flying insects present at the scene should be collected ﬁrst using a net, before hand
collecting any specimens from the body. This is because they are most easily
captured using a net and may disappear if disturbed. The net is ﬂicked from behind
the insect in an upward sweep, catching it within. Then, with a wrist swing, the net
should be folded over at the end to contain the insect. At this point the bag can be
grabbed with the other hand (which hand depends on whether you are left or right
handed) and the insect, in the net base, can be restricted so that a container can be
placed over it (Figure 7.3). A ﬁrm shake usually keeps the insect in the bottom of the
tube for sufﬁcient time to put a lid on top.
These insects can either be kept in individual killing jars, or they can be retained
until dead in a single killing jar, as a collection of ﬂying insects from the crime scene.
Then they can be transferred to individual specimen jars later. Insects are mobile, so
these insects are representative of the crime scene as a whole. In all cases, accurate
labelling and recording is imperative.
If the crime scene is a car, relevant evidence can be obtained by collecting any
insects that have been trapped on the radiator grill, bonnet or on the windscreen
(windshield) of the vehicle. This may provide details of movement of the body.
The temperatures in the car may be important as the interior of the vehicle is likely to
get quite hot and this may affect the speed of the insect development, where ﬂying
insects have been able to gain entry and lay eggs.
Insects such as beetles, which are visible on the surface of the body or on
the ground, can be collected by hand picking and placed in individual, labelled
104
CH07 SAMPLING AT THE CRIME SCENE

containers. This is a sensible precaution because beetles may be carnivores and eat
other specimens, thereby destroying your evidence. In an indoor crime scene it is
useful to check the nooks and crannies of the room for crawling insects, as this
provides further information about predators and the conditions in which the body
has been found.
Leaf litter, or ground cover, in an outdoor scene, can also be collected at regular
points and the contents sieved or handpicked again. Pitfall traps can be used to catch
crawling insects near the body if it is an outdoor crime scene. Tulgren funnels can be
used to recover the soil organisms which are living under the body. Several samples
of soil (around 5 g each) are collected. Each is placed in a Tulgren funnel and a light is
Figure 7.3
Retrieving a ﬂy from a net
7.2 CATCHING ADULT FLYING INSECTS AT THE CRIME SCENE
105

positioned abovethe sample. As the soil dries out, the organisms are drivendown into
the container of 70% alcohol below. These can later be identiﬁed to give a proﬁle of
the specimens below the body and elsewhere at the crime scene. Salonˇa et al., (2010)
have shown the value of this approach. Mites, in particular, may be recovered. The
researchers showed a direct correlation between the proﬁle of insect specimens from
the soil samples beneath where the body had been laid and those collected from the
body at autopsy. In the absence of a body the insects recovered from the soil may give
an indication of post mortem interval of the absent body.
7.3
The sampling strategy for the body
Once the ﬂying and crawling insects have been collected, the body should be
searched in an orderly sequence – searching clothing, examining oriﬁces and wounds
and also beneath the body.
7.3.1
Eggs
The head region is examined ﬁrst and then the trunk is searched, moving along
towards the legs and toes, which are separated and checked. Any wounds are
speciﬁcally noted. Once one side has been checked the body should be turned over
and the underside should be examined. Clothing can be examined cursorily on site. In
particular the pockets, sleeves and clothing folds can be checked at the scenewith the
agreementof theofﬁcer incharge. Amore thoroughsearch ispossible atthemortuary
when the clothes, if present, are stripped from the body.
Fly eggs are normally laid in batches, in or near dark, moist oriﬁces of the body
such as the ears, nose, eye lids, mouth or genitalia. They may also be laid in folds of
skin behind the ears, in joint creases, or on clothing that has absorbed body ﬂuid
exudates. Fly eggs can be mistaken for everything from yellowish white mould to
sawdust, or anencrusting of salt onthebody; beetleeggs are oftenlaidindividually so
may be easily missed at the crime scene. It is therefore important that all sides of the
body are examined and it may be necessary to attend the post mortem to check further
for insects, if the body is fully clothed, or has been wrapped in something.
The individual clumps of eggs should be picked off and carefully placed in a
container without any food. The humidity in the container can be maintained by
using a damp paper towel placed in the tube to stop the eggs drying out.
Each sample shouldbegivenan item number andthe crimescene details. The label
should be written in indelible ink (not ballpoint ink as this will not survive damp
conditions). The label should include the name of the crime scene investigator who
collected them (Figure 7.4), the ofﬁcer in charge of the case, the case number, the
item number, the date and location on the body from which the sample was taken.
This label should be placed on the body of the container, whilst a non-adhesive
version is placed inside the container.
106
CH07 SAMPLING AT THE CRIME SCENE

Placing this information on a label both within the container and outside it, limits
the likelihood of losing the information and ending up with a sample of unknown
origin. The easiest way of getting a paper label into a container is to roll it round a
pencil or paintbrush handle and deposit the roll through the neck of the container
where it unrolls. This data must also be recorded in your scene log.
7.3.2
Larvae
Larvae will be located as the body is searched for eggs. They, too, tend to be in the
body oriﬁces such as the eyes, ears, nose and so on, including any wounds. The larvae
should be collected from each site in batches of 20–30 per jar, so that no additional
heat or ammonia is generated during transit. More than one collection jar per
infestation site may be needed. The ﬁrst instar is the smallest and most vulnerable of
the three larval stages and the larva, if sampled at this stage, can easily die. So it is
necessary, therefore, to protect it from drying out when collecting and culturing these
from a corpse at a crime scene.
Boiling water is poured into a container such as a styrene cup or a collecting jar to a
depth of 3 cm, and larvae that are to be preserved from the speciﬁc site are then added.
They are left immersed in the water for at least 30 s before the contents of the jar are
poured through a small sieve and collected in a large, labelled waste container.
Large bottled water or catering fruit-juice containers make excellent waste contain-
ers. (The contents of the waste container, when full, can be poured down a foul sewer
or toilet, away from the crime scene.)
Larvae are known, when they reach late second and third instar, to mass together.
These maggot masses are capable of raising the temperature above ambient and the
extra heat can inﬂuence the rate of larval development. If a larval mass is noted, it
Crime Scene No.
Senior Investigating Officer
Location and description
Collector
Date
Item No.
Figure 7.4
Label for the inside and outside of the collecting tube
7.3 THE SAMPLING STRATEGY FOR THE BODY
107

should be photographed and the mass temperature should be recorded prior to the
location being sampled. The temperature of every maggot mass should be taken at
each site on the body so that this can be taken into consideration when calculating the
crime scene thermal history.
7.3.3
Pupae and puparia
Fly puparia are usually found some distance from the body. The third instar post-
feeding larval stage migrate from the body and can be found in soil 3–5 cm below the
soil surface; in pockets; under carpets; in leaf litter or in any nooks and crannies that
areavailable inbuildings. Ifthepuparia arestill onthebodytheneithertheremayhave
been some restriction to larval migration, such as blankets or wrappings, or a
particular species of insect is indicated. Puparia change colour from white to dark
brown over time, so all puparia, of whatever colour, should be recovered.
An organised search strategy should be used to determine if the lifecycle reached
the puparial stage. The ideal is to search within each grid of 1 m side over a 36 m2 area
surrounding the body, if it is not in a house. This is a slow, time-consuming activity, in
which the soil should be sampled at the intercepts of thegrid, using a trowel to a depth
of 10 cm. The soil may need to be sieved over a tray, or it can be hand searched. As
previously indicated, the puparia recovered are placed in a container with a moist
paper towel, and suitably labelled. They do not require feeding but should be taken
back to the laboratory for identiﬁcation. The puparia should be cultured through to
emergence if at all possible, so that species identiﬁcation can be conﬁrmed. The
puparial case should also be retained as additional evidence. Those puparia that do
not hatch provide the examples of preserved specimens from the scene.
7.4
Sampling at aquatic crime scenes
Water bodies may be difﬁcult to sample and require trained divers to sample them
if they are submerged and held in position. Alternatively the body may have been
noticed because it has risen to the surface and may be colonised by both aquatic
organisms and terrestrial insects. Macroinvertebrates, including insects, are the most
frequent colonisers of submerged bodies and they are often associated with the body
rather than being speciﬁcally attached to it. This makes their collection difﬁcult and
may require some form of ﬁne netting to be used to scoop up the body and its
inhabitants and associated species.
Once back on the land the body is searched in much the same fashion as the
terrestrial corpse and any terrestrial eggs, larvae or puparia should be collected
alongside any adult ﬂies and beetles. As the specimens are aquatic, they need to be
preserved in a more concentrated solution of preservative. A solution of 95% alcohol
is a good starting point and this should be replaced several times before the preserved
108
CH07 SAMPLING AT THE CRIME SCENE

specimens are placed in their ﬁnal storage tube, suitably labelled. This allows the
dehydration of the specimens to the point where the preservative can function
appropriately. Specimens intended for further culture to conﬁrm identity should be
kept in lidded containers. If the labelled samples are transported as previously
described, surrounded by ice packs or in cool boxes the specimens should survive
satisfactorily. Once back in the laboratory they should be placed in aquaria.
Dechlorinated tap water (water that has been left to stand for 24 hours at room
temperature) may be used, although bringing back some water from the crime scene
may also be an option in order to ensure the specimens survive.The organisms should
be kept so that they do not eat each other, and the locations from which they were
collected on or near the body should be identiﬁed on the tanks and in your notes.
The background fauna at the submergence site should be sampled so that any
distinction in proportions of species resulting from the presence of the body can be
determined. It may be necessary to seek the assistance from the local Environment
Agency or wildlife trust in order to obtain some measure of the baseline of the
populations of macroinvertebrates, if the crime scene has been excessively disturbed.
Such may be the case if a car is driven into the water or dredgers, or inﬂatable rescue
boats have had to be used to lift the body.
7.5
Obtaining meteorological data at the crime scene
It is extremely important to determine the temperature at which the insects were
growing on the body, before it was discovered. The estimates of time since death rely
Box 7.2
Artiﬁcial pond water
Artiﬁcial pond water is often used for toxicological investigations. Water with the
same composition is of value for maintaining cultures of macroinvertebrates,
including aquatic insects, from crime scenes.
Into 10 l of deionised water add 50 cm3 of solutions of each of the following:
calcium chloride (CaCl2.H20)
58.80 g l1
magnesium sulphate (MgSO4.7H2O)
24.65 l1
sodium hydrogen carbonate (NaHCo3)
12.95 l1
potassium chloride (KCl)
1.15 l1
In order to prepare artiﬁcial sea water a 0.05 M saline solution is prepared by
adding 0.25 g sodium chloride to each 100 cm3 of artiﬁcial pond water.
7.5 OBTAINING METEOROLOGICAL DATA AT THE CRIME SCENE
109

on the ﬁgures gleaned at the crime scene and those determined subsequently from
other sources.
The body temperature should be determined by placing a thermometer on the
body surface. The temperature of the air should be taken at a height of 1.1 m (4 feet).
This provides a measure of ambient air temperature at a comparable height to
measurements taken at the meteorological station. Care should be taken to avoid
holding the actual thermometer; use a protector or a rubber band wound round
the end. Do not expose the thermometer to direct sunlight as this will raise the
temperature and give a false reading. Your body may provide some shade. The
temperature directly beneath the body should be taken, followed by the soil
temperature. To take the temperature of the soil it is better to use a soil thermometer,
so that there is little chance of the thermometer breaking as it is forced into the
ground. A copy of a possible protocol for the collection of specimens from the crime
scene is presented in Appendix 3.
7.5.1
Meteorological conditions in water bodies
If the crime-scene environment is aquatic, you may need to place a temperature
logger in the water to conﬁrm the water temperature relative to the ambient
temperature. This should allow you to make a judgement regarding the water
temperature in which the submerged body was retained over time.
110
CH07 SAMPLING AT THE CRIME SCENE

8
Rearing insects and other
laboratory investigations
Insects collected at crime scenes are often reared to their adult stage in order to
identify them accurately, or to conﬁrm an initial identiﬁcation made using the larval
stages. Alternatively it may be appropriate to rear the specimens to adulthood and
then breed up the species from the egg stage up to the stage at which they were found
on the body. Thus, by using the average temperature at the crime scene, it would be
possible to conﬁrm the time since the eggs were ﬁrst laid on the body (and, by
implication, time since death).
In all instances the specimens should be sent to the forensic entomologist, or taken
back to the laboratory under controlled conditions, ideally at a low temperature to
ensure that further development does not occur and to ensure that the insects do
not escape.
8.1
Transporting entomological evidence to
the laboratory
The conditions under which the insects are kept in transit are extremely important.
They must always be transported, and subsequently maintained, in conditions that
ensure that they develop through their life stages, or are stored without damage.
Larvae from each of the separate locations on the body should be transported in
individual containers.
The potential inﬂuence of temperatures on specimens during transit should always
be taken into consideration. If the samples were collected by a crime scene
investigator, they should be taken to the laboratory as rapidly as possible. A
temperature that is the base temperature for those insects found at the scene should
be used to transport them, if the species are obvious. This temperature may need to be
determined for local conditions. Alternatively, a cold box with ice packs or
refrigeration may be necessary. Myskowiak and Doums (2002), point out that
temperatures as low as the normal refrigeration temperature of 4 C may alter the
larval life stages duration and the time taken to reach adulthood. They showed that
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

ten days of refrigeration prior to introduction to culturing at 24 C led to an alteration
of between nine and 56 hours from the normal 15.5 days of Protophormia
terraenovae larval development. In all cases controlled environmental conditions
are necessary, along with a suitable source of food for any larvae and adults being
transported even though they may not consume it.
Whilst all of the insects may feed on carcasses, it is inappropriate, both from the
health-and-safetystandpoint, and in terms of humantissueretention laws, to use ﬂesh
from the corpse to feed specimens in the laboratory. A supply of food, for example
pig’s liver, should be brought to the crime scene to provide food for the samples of
living larvae. Food should be used for the rest of the rearing period. (Dead specimens
are stored in preservative.) Larvae recovered from the crime scene should be placed
in foil packages containing food and around 50 larvae. Such packages are then placed
in containers, for example lidded polystyrene cups with holes in the lids for gas
exchange, for transport and for subsequent rearing.
8.2
Laboratory conditions for ﬂy rearing
The polystyrene cups with foil packages of meat, each containing around 50 larvae
recovered from a speciﬁc site on the body, can be stored in the dark in a controlled
environmentcabinetorroom(Figure8.1),untilthelarvaereachthepost-feedingstage.
In controlled environment cabinets a pierced lid should be placed on the top of
each container to reduce drying out; one per sample from each location, for each
Figure 8.1
Larvae from a crime scene are ideally reared in a controlled environment cabinet
112
CH08 REARING INSECTS AND OTHER LABORATORY INVESTIGATIONS

larval species collected. Pierced lids allow some gas exchange and prevent the
buildup of ammonia as the larvae grow. The pots should be maintained at a relative
humidity of at least 65%, or in baths of water at the appropriate temperature, so that
the microclimate around the containers prevents the eggs, or initial larval instars,
from drying out. Work by Introna et al. (1989) conﬁrmed that being reared in growth
cabinets under conditions reminiscent of the wild does not statistically alter the
duration of the lifecycles of ﬂies. They used Lucilia sericata for the trials.
As aprecaution against loss andintermixingof cultures,each potcan be placed in a
second container such as an aquarium. The aquarium sides should either be treated
with a layer of Fluon (50:50 with water) so that the larvae cannot gain a purchase, or
the top should be covered with ﬁne mesh. Avaluable alternative to a mesh cover is a
pair of tights with the feet cut off. These cover the container topand prevent anyof the
maggots escaping whilst allowing a good air ﬂow. The tights however should be
taped in position to prevent larval escape. (If the species include those of the
Piophilids, using a second container (aquarium tank) may bevaluable since Piophilid
larvae leave the body by springing off and can force their way through the tights.)
Each container should be clearly labelled with date, case number, collector, and item
number. These should also be recorded in the notebook.
Good practice means it is necessary to conﬁrm the developmental stages through
which the insects pass during the rearing process in the laboratory. As each life stage
develops in the laboratory, samples recovered from each location on the body (if
possible at least 20 per sampling) should be despatched in boiling water and
preserved in Kahle’s solution. Data relating to temperature and time to reach this
stage should also be recorded, both in a laboratory note book and also on the sample
pots, so that the pots collected at the crime scene can be related to this information.
This record, along with the specimens, may be either requested by the court, or be
used in court to illustrate your methodology.
8.3
Methods of maintaining and rearing
insects – terrestrial species
Adult ﬂies should be kept in large cages in order to facilitate mating, to gain eggs for
development through to the stage recovered at the crime scene. These cages should
be around 46 cm  36 cm  46 cm and be covered in mesh to allow light to enter and
air to circulate, whilst retaining the ﬂies. If the cage is too small the insect wings will
become battered and ﬂight will be affected, so mating will not be able to take place
successfully. Access to the cage, so that food can be replaced, is through a ‘sleeve’ in
the front of the cage.
The adults should be provided with a constant supply of water. This can either be in
a screw-top jar with a wick emanating through the top, or in a Petri dish with water
and stones, or a damp sponge, so the ﬂies can drink without drowning. A 50:50 mix of
sugar and dried milk powder should be provided for the adults, along with a water
8.3 METHODS OF MAINTAINING AND REARING INSECTS – TERRESTRIAL SPECIES
113

Table 8.1
Average minimum lifecycle durations of a selection of dipteran species at ﬁxed temperatures
Species
Temperature
(C)
Egg stage
(hours)
L1
(hours)
L2
(hours)
L3
(hours)
Pupariation
(hours)
Source
Calliphora vomitoria L.
12.5
64.8
55.2
60.0
434.4
717.6
Greenberg and Kunich (2002)
23.0
21.6
25.2
19.2
210.4
247.2
Greenberg and Kunich (2002)
26.7
26.0
24.0
48.0
420.0
260.0
Kamal (1958)
Calliphora vicina R-D
16.1
41.4
83.0
128.0
522
719.7
Anderson (2000)
20.6
22.5
57.0
84.0
368.5
514.8
26.7
24.0
24.0
20.0
176.0
288.0
Kamal (1958)
Lucilia sericata Meigen
17.0
28.0
39.0
54.0
279.0
442.0
Grassberger and Reiter (2001)
20.0
22.0
24.0
35.0
161.0
209.0
Lucilia illustris Meigen
15.0
70.3
75.0
135.0
573.0
458.0
Byrd and Allen (2001)
25.0
14.0
16.0
19.0
123.0
125.0
Anderson (2000)
Phormia regina Meigen
20.0
21.2
30.0
55.0
274.0
244.0
Byrd and Allen (2001)
25.0
18.9
25.0
44.0
251.0
209.0
Byrd and Allen (2001)
Protophormia terraenovae R-D
12.5
91.2
290.4
240.0
832.8
722.4
Greenber and Kunich (2002)
23.0
16.8
26.4
27.6
118.8
144.0
Greenberg and Kunich (2002)
Sarcophaga haemorrhoidalis Fallen
25.0
N/A
12.0
32.0
112.0
300.0
Byrd and Butler (1998)
Sarcophaga bullata Park
26.7
N/A
26.0
18.0
166.0
288.0
Kamal (1958)
Piophila casei Linnaeus
15
177.6
211.6
156
408.0
417.6
Russo et al. (2006)
25
33.6
91.2
98.4
156.0
165.6
114
CH08 REARING INSECTS AND OTHER LABORATORY INVESTIGATIONS

supply. (If sugar alone is used, female insects may not necessarily develop their egg-
laying capacity.) Meat or liver is also placed in the cage, both as a food source and to
provide nutrients for female ovary development. This is also a place where eggs can
be laid. The meat can be minced (ground) or can be palm-sized pieces of liver.
The food should also be partially covered. This restriction encourages both ﬂies to
lay eggs and the food to retain its moisture for a longer period.Care should be taken to
keep the relative humidity above 50% and ideally 65% in order to ensure that the eggs
and larvae survive.
Porcine liver has been used most successfully as a food and oviposition source. Ox
or sheep liver can also be used but care should be taken to be consistent in the type and
source of diet used. The majority of researchers successfully use ad libitum liver as a
food source for carrion feeders from forensic sites, without any effect on the duration
of lifecycle stages.
Flies should be bred at the most appropriate temperature, either in relation to the
crime scene, or to achieve rapid development. Often this requires a controlled
environment cabinet, althougha room with a temperaturewith a limited and recorded
ﬂuctuation can also be used. Experimental research provides an indication of a
suitable temperature. Information about the expected duration of the life stages
comes from a number of sources (Table 8.1) including work by Kamal in the 1950s,
who investigated the lifecycles of 13 ﬂy species at 26.7 C and 50% relative humidity
(Kamal, 1958) along with papers by Anderson (2000); Higley and Haskell (2001);
Greenberg and Kunich (2002); Donovan et al. (2006); Villet et al. (2006); Byrd and
Castner (2009); and Gallagher, Sandhu and Kimsey (2010).
The day length that has been successfully used to avoid inﬂuencing the lifecycle is
16 hours daylight and eight hours dark (16L: 8D) (Vaz Nunes and Saunders, 1989).
However the most appropriate day length to use is the average day length for the
season in which the specimens were recovered from the crime scene, so that the
conditions in the environment prior to recovery of the body are mirrored. Shorter day
lengths, though, may encourage the larvae to enter diapause and so restrict the speed
at which the post mortem maybe determined.
8.3.1
Conditions for the Postfeeding Stage
Once the larvae have reached the third instar they need to be transferred into
conditions that ensure that the post-feeding larvae can migrate successfully, whilst
preventing loss of the evidence. The ideal is an aquarium with vermiculite, sand, or
sawdust in the bottom, kept in a controlled environment cabinet at the same
temperature as that found at the crime scene. This provides a medium in which
larvae can bury themselvesto pupariate.So itis worthcontainingthird instarlarvae in
an aquarium tank at this stage of their lifecycle, by moving the cup, if the aquarium
has not previously been used as a means of secondary containment. Extra space is
particularly important because lack of a pupariation site can inﬂuence the degree of
success in completing the lifecycle in the normal period of time.
8.3 METHODS OF MAINTAINING AND REARING INSECTS – TERRESTRIAL SPECIES
115

8.4
Dietary requirements of insects reared in
the laboratory
Both ﬂies and beetles have speciﬁc nutrient requirements in order to satisfactorily
complete their lifecycles. Flies require carbohydrate as an energy source, together
with water and protein. Protein is particularly important to females, for the
development of the ovarioles and for egg production. They also require a number
of vitamins and minerals.
For example Estrada et al. (2009) found that the diet on which Chrysomya albiceps
Wiedemann larvae were fed on affected development. They explored the effects of
artiﬁcial diets on larval growth. These diets contained bovine liver, uncooked
stomach muscle, chicken heart and an artiﬁcial diet that included animal ﬂesh. The
control was muscle that had not been made into an artiﬁcial diet. Estrada et al. found
that larval development time and weight gain was satisfactory on artiﬁcial diet for all
of the samples, although fewer adults emerged on bovine liver and raw muscle
treatments. They also showed similarity in development rate and emergence between
the artiﬁcial diet and the control. For this species, liver can therefore be used as a
growth medium for specimens reared from the corpse. Kaneshrajah and Turner
(2004), however, showed a reduced Calliphora vicina larval growth on liver, in
contrast to growth when heart, lungs, kidney, or brain tissues were used.
In contrast, when comparing growth on horse ﬂesh and porcine ﬂesh Boatright and
Tomberlin (2010) showed that the number of degree days required for Cochliomyia
macellaria to reach adulthood did not differ signiﬁcantly. Care must therefore be
exercised in checking the data used with respect to the materials upon which the
insects are reared, if the object is to replicate the time period at average temperatures
in order to reach the developmental stage recovered from the corpse.
A number of other sources of food, beyond cuts of muscle and viscera, have been
exploited for maintaining carrion-feeding ﬂies. They include the use of commercial
cat food, dog food, minced beef, and artiﬁcial diets comprising agar, baker’s yeast,
and sodium chloride. Such food sources have varying beneﬁts and are also often a
source of malodours. Hermes (1928), however, showed an effect on the sex ratio of
Lucilia sericata caused by the amount of food available to the larvae, so ad libitum
feeding in the laboratory is necessary. Where the insects under consideration are also
dung feeders, alternative sources of nutrition are required.
Stratiomyidae, for example, are species which inhabit animal waste products. Of
particular note in forensic entomology are members of the genus Hermetia, for
example Hermetia illucens (Linnaeus). Once eggs are separated out, the larvae will
survive on a diet of wheat bran maize meal and alfalfa plant meal as an alternative to
the use of animal manure (Sheppard et al., 2002). This is of considerable advantage
when rearing and maintaining this species as it reduces the smell and the issue offood
storage is less problematic.
On occasion an artiﬁcial diet is required, either because this is the most suitable
means of adding a known quantity of drug, or for oviposition, or because complaints
116
CH08 REARING INSECTS AND OTHER LABORATORY INVESTIGATIONS

about malodours mean that the regime has to be modiﬁed. Zhang et al. (2009)
designed an artiﬁcial diet that could be heat sterilised. The successful diet comprised
whole milk powder, dried yeast, wheat germ, powered agar, and water and provided
comparable growth success to that on beef liver. The proportions varied depending
upon whether larvae or adults were being kept and whether or not the diet was being
used as an oviposition resource. Cohen (2001) discusses the future requirements for
successful insect rearing technology and lists some references of general interest.
Carrion beetles require a diet that incorporates the relevant nutrients, or to feed on
ﬂesh regularly, in order for them to thrive. They should therefore be fed dead meal
worms every three or four days (Eggert, Reinking and Muller, 1998). This is also a
suitable food for ground beetles (carabids), which can also be fed on ant eggs, such as
those used for feeding ﬁsh, or maggots and pupae. The inclusion of insects in the diet
is particularly appropriate for Silphidae. Cleridae, Histeridae and Nitidulidae can be
fed in the same way.
In contrast, larvae and adults of skin beetles (Dermestidae) – Dermestes maculatus
or Dermestes lardarius, can be fed on dried dog food or ﬁsh food. They prefer
pelleted food rather than ﬂake, but will consume both. Such food should be checked
every two or three days to ensure sufﬁcient is available and it is of appropriate quality.
The food should be available in excess so that the dermestid lifecycle is not impaired.
In order to ensure that, where necessary, beetles such as dermestids can breed
efﬁciently, it may be necessary to provide meat on an intermittent basis, in order to
provide all of the required nutrients for reproduction and to trigger egg laying.
To simulate the conditions at the crime scene using meat such as pork that is not too
moist may be better than using an artiﬁcial diet.
8.5
Beetle rearing in the laboratory
Silphid, clerid, histerid or staphylinid beetles can be kept in transparent plastic
containers, glass jars, vials, pots or buckets. They need to be kept individually to
prevent one beetle eating another. If you are attempting to breed a new generation, an
individual male and female beetle should be placed in a container. These containers
should have a layer of moist peat, peat substitute, soil, or sawdust in the bottom,
depending upon the family of beetles, and places in which insects can hide
(refugiums), such as half plant pots or pieces of ridged cardboard or crumpled paper.
Silphid beetles, such as Microspores sp. adults, need a temperature of 20 C and a
daylight regime of 16:8 (L: D) (Eggert, Reinking and Muller, 1998). Theycan be kept
in a group with a maximum size of six beetles of the same sex. If silphid beetles are
required to breed, pairs can be placed in a container with a small carcass such as a
defrosted mouse or a large piece of beef, pork, or chicken.
If you are keeping Nicrophorus beetles, any meat left in a container placed on the
top of peat, or peat substitute, will be buried and eggs will be laid near the meat ball
(Kramer Wilson, 1999). Such eggs should be recovered and retained on moist ﬁlter
8.5 BEETLE REARING IN THE LABORATORY
117

paper at 20 C until they hatch. Eggs of silphid species such as Nicrophorus
vespilloides take on average 56 hours to hatch at 20 C (Muller and Eggert,
1990, in Eggert, Reinking and Muller, 1998).
Awater source inawicked vialshouldbe providedin the tankfor bothadult beetles
and larvae. The vial is sunk into the peat so that the beetles can readily gain access.
Each larva, in its individual container, can be supplied with a carcass with a hole in it
through which to gain entry. Cultures can be maintained under a regime of total
darkness in an incubator, or controlled environment cabinet. Not all of the beetles
associated with corpses require carrion to complete their lifecycles.
8.5.1
Dermestidae
Dermestids can be bred satisfactorily on dried meat or on an artiﬁcial diet. They
breed optimally at a slightly higher temperature than 20 C and are ideally kept at
25 C and 80% relative humidity (Coombs, 1978). Dermestids, too, can be kept as
cultures in aquaria or glass jars.
Dermestids require wood sawdust or sand, and some solid medium such as
polystyrene or cork, in which to burrow to pupate. This should be covered with
several layers of paper to simulate conditions in the body. A supply of water must be
provided, either as a piece of folded, dampened paper, or as a vial of water with a
wick. Keep the water away from the food to discourage fungal growth. Black paper,
in the form of a ‘concertina’, provides an egg laying site from which it is relatively
simple to see and recover eggs.
8.5.2
Rearing beetle larvae
Beetle larvae can be reared in a variety of containers from beakers and plastic pots to
aquaria and jam jars. In all instances it is helpful to maintain the humidity either by
supplying moisture on damp kitchen towels or paper towels, or by using moistened
plaster of Paris as a base to maintain the humidity.
Carabid and staphylinid larvae (and adults) should be kept individually as they are
predatory and cannibalistic. In addition to a container with a moist base, moss should
be included as a refugium where the larvae can hide. Food should be placed in
containers and checked for mould every few days. Meal worms (Tenebrio molitor
Linnaeus) and dipterous larvae (maggots), obtained from a ﬁshing tackle shop, can
provide food as can earthworms.
Histerid beetle larvae are infrequently found as they inhabit the soil or the region
under the body. They are photophobic so rapidly disappear as the corpse is turned
over. Histerids are not only corpse feeders – they are also carnivorous. These larvae
therefore also need to be kept in individual containers. Such containers can be
anything from small plant pots to the cut ends of soft drinks bottles with some holes
poked in the base. The containers are ﬁlled to 2 cm from their top with garden
118
CH08 REARING INSECTS AND OTHER LABORATORY INVESTIGATIONS

soil (or loam) to which maggots are added as food. The Histerid larva is then placed
in the container and a piece of meat placed on the soil surface. These containers are
then placed in dishes of water to maintain the soil moisture. Ideally the pots are then
covered in netting to contain any ﬂy larvae that pupariate and emerge because they
have escaped being eaten by the histerids. The meat will also provide moisture and
adds nutrients to the soil through decomposition. The meat should be checked every
fewdays and replaced before it becomes mouldy. The beetle specimens can be keptin
the dark in incubators and controlled environment rooms.
8.6
Methods of maintaining aquatic species
Those aquatic insects that inhabitant ponds can be kept in glass tanks, large plastic
containers (Figure 8.2) or aquaria that have an additional aeration source, although it
may be better to use a bubble stone than to use aeration pumps unless this is covered
to prevent the smaller specimens entering the pump. Macroinvertebrates that inhabit
pools and stagnant regions of ﬂowing water may also be kept in tanks. Those that
inhabit ﬂowing water, or rifﬂes, may require the water to be pumped through the
tanks in order to replicate the conditions of high oxygenation within the habitat.
Figure 8.2
Aquarium with pump
8.6 METHODS OF MAINTAINING AQUATIC SPECIES
119

Species of macroinvertebrates from running water may require additional means
to provide well aerated moving water. An example of such a family is the blackﬂy
(Simulidae). Their eggs are often laid on grass in the midst of strong water currents.
This has to be reproduced in the laboratory (Muirhead-Thompson, 1964). By using
an aquarium as a water reservoir and piping the water down into a small container in
which vegetation containing Simulian sp. eggs is suspended, the required high levels
of oxygenation can be achieved. Water passes through the smaller container and back
to the aquarium to ensure a stream is maintained and the excess water can escape.
Aerators (such as bubble stones or pumps with small tubes at the end) have also been
used to achieve this. They are placed with the stream of bubbles directed towards a
removable glass plate positioned in the tank. The effect is to provide a localised area
with increased oxygenation, in the region of the vegetation on which the larvae are
located. This ensures that the larvae are located on vegetation that is less likely to
decompose and also allows maintenance of the culture in good quality water.
On occasion it is valuable to reproduce the conditions of a submerged body in the
same location from which the corpse was recovered – to explore the rate of
colonisation and succession by macroinvertebrates. To do this a sampling device
is required. Vance, VanDyke and Rowley (1995) designed a suspension frame and
cradle that would hold a carcass in position under the water and allow its removal at
intervals to harvest the colonising species.
8.6.1
Aquatic larvae
These can be reared in an aquarium that combines a source of water in a small bowl,
or tank for the insects to swim in (declorinated and preferably the water from which
the location from which corpsewas recovered) surrounded by damp loam soil around
3 cm deep. Luff (in Cooter and Barclay, 2006) considers that the soil should be
banked up at one end of the tank to make a vertical wall made of soil as a pupation
site. A means of escape from the water should be included, which can be pebbles, a
stick, orgreen plants. Daphnia is valuable as food for young larvae; worms, including
meal worms, can also be used. The lifecycles of aquatic species vary but can be of
long duration – approaching several years. This should be borne in mind when
considering this approach in investigating evidence form the crime scene in relation
to the timing of the court case.
120
CH08 REARING INSECTS AND OTHER LABORATORY INVESTIGATIONS

9
Calculating the post mortem
interval
After identifying the specimens from the body, the next stage is to link this informa-
tion to the temperature at the crime scene in order to determine how long it has taken
for the larvae to grow to this stage.
Temperature data, covering the period since the person was last seen alive, are
obtained from the local meteorological station. These data are ‘corrected’, using a
correction factor calculated using the meteorological ofﬁce data and corresponding
half hourly temperature readings, which have been recorded at the crime scene for
three to ﬁve days after the body was discovered. These corrected data provide an
estimate of the temperatures at the crime scene before the corpse was found. From
this information you can determine the length of time the ﬂies took to grow from an
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Box 9.1
Additional comments on PMI
Insects are cold blooded (poikilothermic) and cannot control their body
temperatures, so they use the environment as a source of warmth. Insects use
a proportion of the environmental energy (thermal units) to grow and develop.
Theoverallenergybudgettoachievelifestagescanbecalculated.Itscalculation
is a common feature of integrated pest management predictions, as well as for
cropproduction. The thermalunits are called degree days (D) and can beadded
together to reﬂect periods of development. In this case they are called accumu-
lateddegreedays.Iftheperiodisshorterandthelengthoftimebeingdiscussedis
in hours then the thermal values will be as accumulated degree hours (H).
The minimum temperature for growth (basal temp) will vary with each
species. The maximum temperature before growth ceases and death results is
in the region of 52.7 C (126.9 F), although growth in many species ceases at a
lower temperature. The temperature during each 24 hour period may vary but
the area under a curve between the upper and lower thresholds of growth
represents a predictable block of time – accumulated degree days (or accu-
mulated degree hours).

egg to the developmental stage recovered from the body. By implication, this is the
best estimate of the post mortem interval (PMI) that is available.
Such estimations of time since death are based on the speed of insect growth.
Insects are ‘cold blooded’, so their growth is inﬂuenced by temperature. Below a
temperature threshold, development stops; above a speciﬁc temperature threshold,
the rate of growth also slows down. Between these two points, however, the rate of
growth of the juvenile insect is considered to have a linear relationship with
temperature (Figure 9.1).
The maximum temperature threshold for different species of insect varies.
Wigglesworth (1967), for example, suggested the maximum temperature for growth
and development for Calliphora sp. larvaewas 39 C, whereas for Phormia species it
was 45 C. Upper threshold temperatures are rarely experienced when investigating
most crime scenes, so this factor is only infrequently important. However, if
temperatures do remain at, or near, the maximum for a long period of time, this
will affect the accuracy of the PMI estimate, as the growth of the insect will be slower
than expected. Equally, at particularly low temperatures, development may not be
possible at all.
We call the temperature threshold below which growth and development will not
take place the base temperature. This will vary from species to species and can vary
with geographic location. For example, Davies and Ratcliffe (1994) demonstrate
a threshold of 3.5 C for Calliphora vicina in the north of England, whereas
Marchenko (2001), working in Russia, records a base temperature of 2 C for the
same species. Donovan et al. (2006) explored Calliphora vicina growth in London, at
temperatures between 4 C and 30 C and found the base temperature there to be 1 C
for Calliphora vicina. This reinforces the need to ensure that the most appropriate
base temperature is chosen with respect to the crime scene, or that this limitation
must be acknowledged in the expert’s report when it is submitted.
Oliveira-Costa and de Mello-Patiu (2004) point out that calculations that use an
inappropriate base (lower threshold) temperature will overestimate the accumulated
physiological energy budget (termed accumulated degree hours, or days) and so
the forensic entomologist may give a false post mortem interval. Such species
Upper Threshold
Lower Threshold
Temperature
Time
Figure 9.1
Insect growth in relation to upper and lower threshold temperatures
122
CH09 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL

adaptation has to be taken into consideration at crime scenes and the base tempera-
ture for common dipteran species in that locality may have to be predetermined.
9.1
Working out the base temperature
The speciﬁc base temperature for a particular species is worked out in the laboratory
from the insect’s growth rate at set experimental temperatures. The calculation is
based on the premise that the cooler the temperature, the more slowly the insect
develops. The base temperature is calculated by plotting temperature against 1/total
days to develop, i.e. the time between the larvae initially emerging from the egg and
the emergence of the adult, using a range of temperatures. If the line of the graph is
extended down to the x-axis, the point where it meets thex-axis (abscissa) can be read
off (Figure 9.2).
This is the base temperature for that particular species. This graphical method of
determining the base temperature is called the linear approximation estimation
method.
Rate of
Development
1/days
Temperature
Base
Temperature
Figure 9.2
Base temperature determination using the linear approximation method
Table 9.1
Lower developmental thresholds (base temperatures)
Species
Base temperature C
Calliphora vicina
2.0
Calliphora vomitoria
3.0
Protophormia terraenovae
7.8
Lucilia sericata
9.0
Chrysomya albiceps
10.2
Phormia regina
11.4
Muscina stabulans
7.2
Source: Elsevier, for permission to quote details of lower temperature limits for a number of
ﬂies, published in Marchenko M.L.K., Medico-legal relevance of cadaver entomofauna for the
determination of the time of death. Forensic Science International 120(1-2): 89-109 2001 and a
section of Forensic Science International (presented in this book as Table 9.1)
9.1 WORKING OUT THE BASE TEMPERATURE
123

9.2
Accumulated degree data
As Figure 9.1 shows, there is a relationship between rate of insect growth from the
egg stage to adulthood and temperature. This is because growth and development
through the various life stages has a cost in terms of a ‘physiological development
energy budget’. This budget can be expressed in thermal units called degree days
(D) or degree hours (H).
The methods for working out degree days, or degree hours, range from using
averages through to transformations of the temperature using sine waves, cosine
waves and integration calculations. Work on accumulated degree days at the
University of California (Wilson and Barnett, 1983) suggests that these methods
are interchangeable and, for most calculations, there is little variation in level of
accuracy between those that use transformations and those that are based on average
ﬁgures. Therefore, for the sake of simplicity, the averaging method for a linear
estimation of ADD or ADH will be described here, as this can be applied to both
indoor and outdoor crime scenes.
The hypothesis on which insect growth in degree days is based is that, between the
upper and lower thresholds, the rate of growth of the insect is linear in relation to
temperature increase. This ‘physiological energy budget’ can be represented as the
area under a curve, for temperatures above the base temperature, in each 24-hour
period. As can be seen from the Figure 9.3, for each hour or day, the budget is
Box 9.2
How to get the temperature correction factor
In the EXCEL work book enter the data for the crime scene temperatures and
for the meteorological station temperature data in the ﬁrst two columns. (This
should be up to ten days of data for each site.)
. Highlight the two columns of numbers.
. Click on the scatter graph symbol on the tool bar ribbon.
. Choose the top left scatter diagram and click on it to obtain the graph.
. Place the pointer on one of the data points on the graph and right click.
. From the drop down menu choose ‘Linear Trend Line, Display Equation on
Chart’ and ‘Display R-Squared Value on Chart’. This will give you the trend
line and the equation that you need.
. Relocate the equation so that it is easy to read in relation to the graph. This
equation is the correction factor for the crime scene temperatures before
the body is found and should be applied to the data which you have for the
meteorological station prior to the discovery of the body.
124
CH09 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL

represented asa rectangle of time in relationto temperature; any underestimate atone
point in the accumulation is compensated for by an over estimate at another point on
the graph. Therefore, total accumulated degree hours (or days), reﬂect the time taken
for the insect to develop to the stage recovered from the crime scene.
Based on this relationship, accumulated degree hours (or days) can be determined
from a formula. The formulae are:
TimeðhoursÞ  ðTemperature  base temperatureÞ ¼ ADH
TimeðdaysÞ  ðTemperature  base temperatureÞ ¼ ADD
Information about time to complete individual stages, at set experimental tem-
peratures, comes from the literature. The sources range from Kamal (1958);
Vinogradova and Marchenko (1984); Byrd and Butler (1998); Anderson (2000);
Greenberg and Kunich (2002) to Lefebvre and Pasquerault (2004). Each of these
sources has its value, although Kamal’s calculations have been queried. If the data
for the duration of the individual life stages is used cumulatively, these problems
are overcome. Alternatively, different sources of duration at ﬁxed temperatures for
each life stage may be used, which reﬂect temperatures nearer to the norm for the
crime scene i.e. 12.5 C and 26.7 C. These experimental temperatures are multi-
plied by the time, usually in hours, taken to reach the individual life stages. For
example, the duration of the egg stage cited in the literature, plus ﬁrst instar
duration, plus second instar and so on, are all added up to provide a total
experimental time period to reach a particular stage in the lifecycle. (The number
of life stages which have to be taken into consideration is predetermined by which
A
A
Time (1 day or 1 hour) 
B
B
B
B
A
Average
temp for 
the unit 
of time
Lower 
Threshold
Temperature
ºC 
Figure 9.3
Graph to show the justiﬁcation for using the accumulation averaged temperatures over
time. Source:TheRegentsoftheUniversity ofCalifornia for permission toreproduce a modiﬁcation
of Figure 4A from Wilson L.T., and Barnett W.W. Degree days: an aid in crop and pest management
California Agriculture (January-February) 4-7 1983 (Presented in this book as Figure 9.3)
9.2 ACCUMULATED DEGREE DATA
125

stage was found on the body.) The base temperature (Table 9.1 provides examples)
must be subtracted from the temperature at which the specimens were grown,
before multiplying this ﬁgure by the time taken to pass from the egg stage to the
chosen lifecycle stage.
Once we have identiﬁed the species and worked out the experimental energy
budget to reach the lifecycle stage recovered from the body, we need to turn to the
conditions at the crime scene. The physiological energy budget (accumulated degree
hours or days – i.e. ADH and ADD), which was built up over time at the crime scene,
has to be worked out for the period between death and discovery of the body.
It is based on the individual temperature ﬂuctuations at the crime scene within each
24-hour period, either as an average per hour, or a daily average. Had the tempera-
tures at the crime scene prior to the discovery of the body been known, these thermal
units could merely be added up until the point where the summation approximated to
the experimental ‘physiological energy budget’ (ADH or ADD) for that species.
However, we rarely have this data for the period before the body is discovered. So
crime-scene temperatures haveto be estimated from the information that is available.
Usually these are the data from the nearest meteorological station. Each daily or
hourlyenergybudget is calculated bymultiplyingbyone thetemperature fromwhich
the base temperature has been subtracted.
It is also most important, when calculating the ADH or ADD from the scene, that
the experimental temperatures used are in the same units as those used for recording
the crime scene temperatures. If the Fahrenheit scale was used, then this should also
be used for recording the temperature at the crime scene. If the centigrade scale was
used, then this should be the measure used at the crime scene. The units in which the
temperature is recorded at the local meteorological station usually dictate what is
used, but the ﬁgures may, on rare occasions, need to be converted.
Ideally the temperature measurements for the time since the victim was last seen
should be based on hourly averages and you should calculate an ADH (H) measure
of post mortem interval. However, in practice this may not be possible because the
available meteorological data is given only as daily maximum and minimum
Box 9.3
Converting temperatures
In order to convert a temperature which is in Fahrenheit into Celsius (Tc),
subtract 32 from the temperature in Fahrenheit, multiply the result by 5 and
divide by 9:
Tc ¼ ð5  9Þ  ðTf  32Þ
In order to convert a temperature in Celsius (Centigrade) to Fahrenheit (Tf),
multiply the temperatures in Celsius by 9, divide the answer by 5 and then add
32 to the total:
Tf ¼ ½ð9  5Þ  Tc þ 32
126
CH09 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL

temperatures. Under such circumstances you should calculate accumulated degree
day measurements (ADD or D) because they reﬂect the level of accuracy of the PMI
estimate that can be ascribed. (Remember, you can convert ADH to ADD by dividing
ADH by 24. You cannot accurately convert from ADD to ADH.)
The choice of whether to use ADD or ADH is also dictated by the level of accuracy
that is most appropriate. As a rule of thumb, calculations should be in accumulated
degree hours (ADH) if victims have been missing for less than a month. If they
have been missing for more than a month the data is more appropriately presented
as accumulated degree days (ADD). This is because the accumulated level of
variation in shorter time periods gives a less accurate measure of the ‘physiological
energy budget’.
9.3
Calculation of accumulated degree hours (or days)
from crime-scene data
9.3.1
How to obtain corrected crime scene temperatures
Corrected data for the crime scene before the body was found by comparing
temperatures from the local meteorological station with those from the crime scene,
once the body has been discovered. A scatter diagram is plotted of the meteorological
temperatures (x-axis) against the crime scene temperatures ( y-axis) recorded for
three to ﬁve days after the body was discovered. A regression equation is calculated.
This equation is then used to correct each of the meteorological station readings to
generate predicted crime scene temperatures (Figure 9.4). These corrected average
y = 0.9301x + 2.7866
R2 = 0.9926
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
10
20
30
Meteorological Station (ºC)
Crime Scene (ºC)
Series 1
Linear (Series 1)
Figure 9.4
Regression of crime scene temperature data against the meteorological station
temperature to determine a correction factor for the period after the body was found
9.3 CALCULATION OF ACCUMULATED DEGREE HOURS (OR DAYS) FROM CRIME-SCENE DATA 127

hourly, or daily, temperature readings are used in the calculation of accumulated
degree hours (ADH) or accumulated degree days (ADD).
The temperatures are based upon hourly or daily averages, so the time used is
either one hour or one day. Each of the above ﬁgures (minus the base temperature) is
multiplied by 1 – i.e. one hour or one day. Then each result is added to the former
accumulated ﬁgure, working backwards from the time of discovery of the body, until
the ﬁgure for the experimental accumulated degree hours or days is reached. The
number of days or hours to reach this ﬁgure is then counted up.
An Excel spread sheet can be used to input the initial Meteorological Ofﬁce data,
work out the best estimate of crime scene temperature for the species of insect,
subtract the base temperature and obtain a ﬁgure for the post mortem interval. This
approach means that you calculate the ﬁgures quickly and accurately. Table 9.2,
together with Box 9.4, provides an example of such a table, completewith ﬁgures and
instructions on how to make it. The ADD and or ADH must be calculated for each
species of ﬂy present on the body. When considered together, these data provide
conﬁrmation of the predicted post mortem interval that you have calculated.
9.4
Sources of error
A number of factors need to be taken into account when calculating the post mortem
interval. It is important to consider using the temperature of the maggot mass as the
temperature for larval development in particular instars. If maggot mass temperature
Table 9.2
An example of the headings and completed spread sheet to calculate the ADD for
Calliphora vicina Robineau Desvoidy
Species
Met Data
Corrected
Met data
Base
Temp
ADD
PADD
Calliphora vicina
13.20
14.68
1.00
13.68
14.30
15.67
1.00
14.67
28.35
14.50
15.85
1.00
14.85
43.20
13.50
14.95
1.00
13.95
57.15
13.50
14.95
1.00
13.95
71.10
14.00
15.40
1.00
14.40
85.50
15.00
16.30
1.00
15.30
100.80
15.50
16.75
1.00
15.75
116.55
15.50
16.75
1.00
15.75
132.30
16.20
17.38
1.00
16.38
148.68
16.50
17.65
1.00
16.65
165.33
16.70
17.83
1.00
16.83
182.16
16.50
17.65
1.00
16.65
198.81
17.30
18.37
1.00
17.37
216.18
17.50
18.55
1.00
17.55
233.73
128
CH09 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL

Box 9.4
The post mortem interval (PMI) calculation
Put the following formulae into the initial row of boxes in the Excel workbook
(Table 9.3). In the exampleyou would start in row 3. For this reason the formula
indicates the number 3 in the initial cells. If you start at a different point amend
the formulae accordingly.
. Column B – put the meteorological data for the period before the body was
found; start with the day of the discovery and work backwards.
. Column C – put the formula ¼ (B3 the correction factor accordingly
modiﬁed so that it is suitably modiﬁed for EXCEL. In the example the
formula is ¼ (B30.9) þ 2.8 as the correction factor is 0.9x þ 2.8 (see
Figure 9.4).
. Column D – put the base temperature in the cells of this column.
. Column E – use the formula ¼C3-D3 to provide the D or H for each period
of time used. Copy the formula down the columns by dragging the cross on
the right-hand side of the cells.
. Column F – add (accumulate) the individual degree hours, or days by
writing ¼ Sum(E3,E4) in the cell. In the next cell down you write the
formula ¼ SUM(F4,E5) so that you add (accumulate) the sum of the next
day’s (or hour’s) degree day (or hour) to the sum of the previous total so you
get a value for the accumulated degree days (ADD) or accumulated degree
hours (ADH).
Table 9.3
The nature of the Excel spreadsheet
Column
Information
Source
A
Species being used for the calculation
Fieldwork
B
Meteorological data
Fieldwork or meteorological
station
C
Corrected crime scene data using the
correction factor and data from B
D
Base temperature
From the literature, based on
geography
E
Degree hours (H) or Degree days (D)
C1- base temperature calculation
F
Sum of H or D, i.e. accumulated
degree hours (ADH) or
accumulated degree days (ADD)
In cell F2 the sum of E1 and E2
[¼SUM(E1,E2)] and the indi-
vidual accumulated degree
data subsequently i.e. in cell F3
[¼SUM(F2,E3)]
9.4 SOURCES OF ERROR
129

was recorded as greater than the ambient temperature, the temperature of the mass
should be used in the calculations. This is true where third or potentially late second
instar larvae are recovered from the body, as the maggot mass temperature may be the
highest temperature experienced by the larvae (Higley and Haskell, 2001). If puparia
are recorded, the crime-scene soil temperature at 5, 10, and 20 cm depth should be
used to adjust the estimated crime-scene air temperatures, for the period likely to
reﬂect the time the insect was in pupariation.
Where there is no experimental growth data available for the particular species,
the larva should be reared until the adults are mature and oviposit. The eggs can then
be maintained at a temperature which represents that estimated for the crime scene.
The duration from egg stage to the stage of the lifecycle which was recorded at the
crime scene, will provide a means of estimating the post mortem interval and also of
providing conﬁrmation of any post mortem interval that has been calculated.
Base temperatures must be considered for individual species and the correct base
temperature must be used. It may be necessary to use several base temperatures to
calculate the post mortem interval, in order to reﬂect the other information relating to
the case, particularly when the person was last seen some distance away, or the body
may have been moved. (If the temperature for the period being considered is below
that of the base temperature, then a value of zero is included in the calculation for the
particular hour or day.)
Concern about the accuracy of temperature predictions has been expressed where
the meteorological station temperature recordings for the period before the body was
discovered are at variance with the records for the few days or weeks after the body
was discovered (Archer, 2004). If the weather conditions differ markedly, the
temperatures during the 3–5 days when the temperature is recorded at the crime
scene, may not give an accurate reﬂection of the crime-scene conditions.
‘Correcting’ these data will not produce a sufﬁcient level of accuracy between the
two sites. The best way forward in this instance is to grow the insects through to the
life stage recorded from the body, using the crime scene temperature.
Wall (2004) expressed concern about using average daily temperatures when
calculating accumulated degree data, rather than taking account of the temperature
ﬂuctuations. He pointed out that in his experiments in 2003, using average (mean)
temperatures gave considerably longer estimates for insect development (ADD) than
whentemperatureestimateswerebaseduponmaximaandminimatodetermineADD.
9.5
Use of larval growth in length to determine
post mortem interval (isomegalen diagrams
and isomorphen diagrams)
Where the corpse has been discovered indoors, or in a controlled environment where
the temperature is not ﬂuctuating, the relationship between temperature and growth
can be used in another way. Under such conditions the length of the larva, when killed
130
CH09 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL

Box 9.5
Calculation of the ADD for a corpse found in an urban
location
This data is based on a crime scene where a dead body was found and from
which early third instar larvae were collected and determined from lifecycle
experiments to be Calliphora vicina. Table 9.2 illustrates theapproach using an
Excel spread sheet to calculate accumulated degree days (ADD), when only
the daily average temperatures are available.
ADD ¼ timeðhours=24Þ  ðtemperature  base temperatureÞ
A regression equation must be used to provide a correction factor for the
meteorological data prior to the discovery of the body. This is determined from
the scatter plot of the temperatures at the crime scene and the meteorological
station. In this example the temperatures had been collected by the police and a
regressionanalysisundertakentorelatecrime-scenetemperaturestothoseatthe
meteorological station. The regression equation (and hence correction factor)
was calculated to be 0.93 X þ 2.8. Therefore 2.8 can be added to each
meteorological station daily average temperature (0.93X þ 2.8) when it is
modiﬁed. The equation from the regression analysis will indicate what the
correctionfactoris.(ForthisexampleIhavechosenonesimilartothecorrection
factor ﬁgurewhich was calculated for the case study. It will be different for each
location.)
The Base temperature for Calliphora vicina, chosen as most applicable is
1 C (using Donovan et al., 2006). The forensic entomologist should either
determine their own for the particular geographic location or choose the most
appropriate estimate for the species from the literature.
Using the data from Kamal (1958) because at the time the body was found
the temperatures at the Crime scene were in the mid-20s (C), the following
times apply for each of the stages (in hours):
Egg stage
24.0
LI
24.0
L2
20.0
The total experimental time period to reach the start of the third instar is 68
hours.
The ADH is 68.0  25.7 ¼ 1747.6
The ADD is 1747.6  24 ¼ 72.82
From Table 9.2, and working down to the nearest value for the SADD, within
the sixth day, including the day of the discovery of the body, is the most likely
minimum estimate for the time of death of the victim.
9.5 USE OF LARVAL GROWTH IN LENGTH TO DETERMINE POST MORTEM INTERVAL
131

in the standard way by immersing in boiling water, can be related to the time since the
larva hatched. Graphs are produced under controlled conditions in the laboratory for
thetimesincehatchofthespeciesagainsttheaverageminimumlength.Thetimesince
hatch can thenbe readdirectly off thegraphonthe basisof thelength oftheindividual
larvae collected from the crime scene. Thesegraphs are called isomegalen diagrams
and have been calculated for Lucilia sericata, Protophormia (¼Phormia) terraeno-
vae and Calliphora vicina (Reiter, 1984; Grassberger and Reiter, 2001 and 2002).
A second type of graph can be used, which is derived where lifecycle stages from
hatching of the egg to the time of emergence of the adult (eclosion) have been plotted
against time, at speciﬁc temperatures. Each line indicates a change in the lifecycle to
the next stage. The areas between the lines relate to the identical morphological
stages. These are called isomorphen diagrams and they have been calculated for the
same three species as have the isomegalen graphs. Isomorphen diagrams are useful
when postfeeding larvae and/or puparia are collected from the crime scene. From
these stages the post mortem interval can be read directly off the graph, provided the
temperature has been constant.
9.6
Calculating the post mortem interval using
succession
Investigating post-mortem interval for a period of at least three months may mean
that there is a large assemblage of ﬂies, beetles and other insects present on the body.
These can be used for the calculation of PMI using another method. This method
requires that ﬁrst of all every specimen is identiﬁed to family. After that, an attempt is
made to relate this ‘snap shot’ of decomposition fauna to the succession of insects
which routinely colonise a corpse at that site. Knowing which insects are present and
which are absent locally in what season, helps the entomologist to estimate the post
mortem interval.
As a result the dominance of particular populations of species alters and a
succession of insects can be found on the body as it decomposes. This sequence
is termed insect succession.
Rodriguez and Bass (1983) showed that information about succession in relation
to decomposition could be used to determine the post mortem interval of human
corpses. This method of applying succession to determining the post mortem interval
is based upon knowledge of the local fauna. It may also require experimentation to
conﬁrm the sequence of colonisation in a particular location.
For example, if thespecies present includedX, Yand Zand these particularspecies
had been shown to be present in the locality between 14 and 16 weeks after invading a
fresh corpse, then time since death of that person would be estimated as 14–16weeks.
Suchanassemblageofinsectswoulddeﬁnethe‘probable’timesincedeathandwould
be a guide to post mortem interval. In situations where the body is badly decomposed
and the forensic pathologist cannot provide an estimation of time of death,
132
CH09 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL

information from the succession of insects may provide the best estimate that is
available, despite the large margin of error that is ascribed when interpreting the data.
Work relating to insect succession on rabbit corpses in Egypt revealed rapid
decomposition to the dry stage in 4.5 days, at an average dry season temperature
of 28 C. This changed for temperatures ranging between 13.5 C and 16.6 C, when
decompositiontothesamepointtookanaverageof51.5days(Tantawietal.,1996).In
‘autumn’, Tantawi recorded a slower rate of decomposition, resulting in a longer
periodofdecaythaninthecoolertemperaturesof‘winter’.Thisreductioninthespeed
ofdecompositionwasthoughttobetheeffectofrainfalldelayinglarvaldevelopment.
So it is necessary to take weather conditions into account when using succession as a
measure of post mortem interval, just as it is when using larval growth rates
(accumulated degree hours). In North American studies, the ﬁrst families of beetles
recorded onthe body are carrion beetles(Silphidae), rove beetles (Staphylinidae)and
clown beetles (Histeridae) (Anderson and VanLaerhoven, 1996; VanLaerhoven and
Anderson, 1996). Amongst the later colonisers of the body are the dermestids.
Insect succession on buried remains is more restricted than on bodies left on the
soil surface. The investigation of buried corpses requires a greater investment of
resources and time. According to insect succession on buried remains was ﬁrst
studied in Canada in 1995 (VanLaerhoven and Anderson, 1996, 1999). They
considered that before this date no scientiﬁcally valid work, simulating disposal
of a murder victim, had been undertaken. Their work on insect succession on buried,
clothed pigs showed that the species range, measured as colonisers and, or trapped in
pitfall traps, was less on previously exposed pigs than on those that had been buried
immediately. They noted that buried pigs showed a distinct pattern of succession,
which contrasted with that from pigs retained on the ground surface. However they
Table 9.4
Daily temperature readings from a meteorological station for the period
between 7 and 20 April
Species
Average daily temperature C
for days from body discovery
Calliphora vomitoria
15.0
15.0
14.0
14.0
14.0
15.5
15.0
14.0
13.5
12.0
12.5
13.0
13.0
12.5
9.6 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL USING SUCCESSION
133

also noted variation in terms of the species colonising the body and times of
colonisation between the two sites they chose.
9.6.1
Movement of the corpse
The particular assemblage of insects present on a corpse is also an important
indicator of whether the body has been moved. If an unexpected species is present,
which is more characteristic of a different habitat, or geographic region, then the
body may have been moved. This again depends on knowledge of the local fauna.
Organisations such as local wildlife trusts, nature reserves or amateur naturalist
societies can be a source of important information about the species that are expected
in a particular area. Back copies of their house journals may provide published
accounts that have received peer review and can provide a basis for your conclusions
that will be acceptable to a court.
9.6.2
Predators feeding on insects infesting a corpse
The longer a body remains undiscovered, the greater the chance that insects such as
wasps and ants, will consume those insects that are feeding directly on the body. This
destruction of evidence can cause an interpretation problem relating to time since
death. Ants, for example, may carry away eggs and the population of the next
generation of colonisers may be reduced as a result. They live in colonies as does the
other hymenopteran predator the wasps and so the corpse may be visited by more
than one individual equally they may not be speciﬁc to a particular stage of
decomposition. Gomes et al. (2007) noted that some wasps such as Vespula vulgaris
Linnaeus may also cut sections of ﬂesh from the body. This post mortem damage to
the copse may be interpreted as signiﬁcant damage to the body that predated death.
They also concluded that, in Brazil, Agelaia pallipes (Oliver) was a coloniser at the
fresh stage, chewing the skin in the region of the body oriﬁces, and speeding up
the arrival of other species of insects, which assisted in body decomposition. The
speciﬁc nutritional role occupied by both ants and wasps may varies depending on
circumstances. They may be predators and feed on the colonising insects consuming
the body in some instances, but they may also be necrophages because they feed on
decomposition ﬂuids, or remove pieces of ﬂesh on others. Okiwelu, Ikpamii and
Umeozor (2008), in their studies in Nigeria, were unable to show that the presence of
either ants or wasps on the bodies varied over the stages of decomposition that he
investigated. This reinforces the forensic role of these insects in medico-legal cases,
solely as agents that may be responsible for the removal of some of the insects
present and as potential agents of post morten damage to the corpse.
Equally beetles such as staphylinids and carabids may feed onthe adults and larvae
that are present on the body. Sometimes feeding takes place at night so you will be
less aware of their presence. Somewill feed on theyounger life stages or attack adults
during daylight. In either case there will be an alteration in the sequence of the
134
CH09 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL

succession of insects and some species that would be expected to be present may not
appear. This information about predation can be important when interpreting the data
if the individual has been dead for a period greater than a couple of days.
Mites are considered a signiﬁcant group that are of value at crime scene and in
cases of urban or stored product forensic entomology in the same way as are ants and
wasps. Mites are a subclass of the Arachnida. As is characteristic of the Arachnida,
their body is divided into two – a cephalothorax and an abdomen. Mites are wingless
and have four pairs of legs.
Mites have a role to play both in interpreting the environmental conditions in
which the body is found and also the time since death. Turner (2009) points out that
mites are seasonal creatures and he therefore terms their presence a ‘date stamp’ for
time since death. Many mites are carried on humans, clothing, and insects and can be
relocated to other sites, which also adds to their value as a seasonality indicator.
Indeed some mites are carried speciﬁcally by particular species of insects. This
transport of one organism by another is called phoresy (Figure 9.5).
Figure 9.5
An insect transporting mites. Source: Reproduced by permission of Mr. Ian Ward
9.6 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL USING SUCCESSION
135

The European house dust mite, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus Trouessart, is
well known as a cause of ill health and allergy and hence can be of relevance to urban
forensic entomology. The humidity required by house mites appears to be above 60%
RH. Below this level the mites die out. They are therefore an indicator of the long-
term conditions in which the body was found. They may also be an indicator of
altitude. If dust mites are found on a body it is unlikely that the body will have been
transported down from high altitudes where the relative humidity is low (Spieksma,
Zuidema and Leupen, 1971).
The lifecycle of the house mite includes the following stages: egg, active larva,
resting larva (which can also be known as a pharate tritonymph), active tritonymph, a
pharate adult stage and an active adult. The lifecycle lasts between 19 and 30 days
depending upon temperature and humidity levels. Mites are also indicators of
particular habitats and locations as recorded by Prichard et al. (1986) in linking
a suspect to a crime scene in Ventura County, USA. The mites were a pre-adult stage
of the Trombiculidae; a stage known as Chiggers. These creatures locate a suitable
host by responding to carbon dioxide in exhaled air and once on the body can inﬂict
bites (these skin bites were the link between the suspect and the crime scene because
the police ofﬁcers were also bitten). They are unique amongst mites in that the larval
stage is an ectoparasite onvertebrates. Braig and Perotti (2009) consider that the term
‘micropredator’ suits the relationship of such mites better.
Humans can also carry mites in their hair follicles. The species concerned are
Demodex folliculorum hominis Henle and Demodex brevis Akbulutova, which are
located in the sebaceous glands associated with hair follicles. Desch (2009) notes
that live specimens have been found on corpses dead for as long as 14 days.
O¨ zdemir et al. (2003), in their assessment of over 100 post mortems, found
Demodex only in 10% of the cases and noted that the longest period of time since
death was 55 hours. They considered that populations of hair-follicle mites
increased with age and were more prevalent on those with fair complexions.
However they could not ﬁnd a relationship between length of postmortem interval
and presence on the body.
Mites can be of value in PMI determination as demonstrated by Perotti’s (2009)
reassessment of theviews of Megnin on the death of a newborn baby in Paris in 1878.
She considered that the species of mite that had colonised the body soon after death
was Tyrophagus longior Gervais (as had Megnin but by its earlier name), a soil mite
that required eight months to reach the population size found on the mummiﬁed
remains of the newborn baby.
Braig and Perotti (2009) point out that 75 species from 20 families of mites are
associated with human cadavers at all stages of decomposition on, within and
underneath the body. They realigned the mite species Megnin identiﬁed with his
insect succession relative to stages of decomposition. Signiﬁcantly they note that the
odours related to butyric fermentation and advanced decomposition are strongly
attractive to mites. This is a corpse decomposition stage in which they can become
more visible to the naked eye.
136
CH09 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL

9.7
The effects of hymenopteran parasitoids on
post mortem interval determination
Hymenoptera can inﬂuence the post mortem interval indirectly as some are
parasitoids of carrion-infesting ﬂies. Parasitoids pass through a large period of
their lifecycle using only a single host – in this instance an available ﬂy species.
Voss, Spafford and Dadour (2009) explored the value of such wasp species as
a means of indirect post mortem interval determination and concluded that
Tachinaephagus zealandicus Ashmead and Nasonia vitripennis Walker were the
two most valuable species of general relevance to forensic entomology. Nasonia
vitripennis parasitises pupa within the ﬂy puparia (King and Rafai, 1970). The ﬂy
species it attacks include Calliphora sp., and Hydrotaea rostrata Robineau Des-
voidy. Optimally Nasonia develops in a warm Mediterranean-type climate with
temperatures around 31 C (Voss et al., 2010). The upper threshold temperature was
determined as 37.5  0.9 C and the base temperature to be in the region of
10.4  0.8 C (Voss et al., 2010). Grassberger and Frank (2004b) suggest that
overall Nasonia vitripennis, in research in Austria, required 224.3 1.7 degree-days
to complete its lifecycle. The use of parasitoids to compensate for the loss of
material from the crime scene is helpful but the results should be treated with
caution when presenting the data to a court.
9.8
Review technique: interpretation of data from a
crime scene case study
9.8.1
Introductory background for the assignment on a ﬁctitious
murder
The body of a young girl was foundon the 20April at 11a.m. in the Pleasure Gardens,
in a small seaside resort called Corton-on-Sea. There were signs of a struggle, but no
cuts or knife wounds were noted on the body by the pathologist who attended the
scene. Neighbours had last seen the girl during the previous week. Larvae were
recovered from beneath the eyelids and in the nasal cavities of the corpse. At each
location that had a maggot infestation (e.g. eyes, nasal cavities, etc.), at least 60
larvae were collected, of which 30 were preserved and 30 were reared in the
laboratory to their adult life stage.
Daily meteorological station temperature readings for 20–30 April were obtained
from an inland weather station. Temperatures for the same time period were recorded
at the crime scene by the police, using a portable weather station. A regression
equation for the relationship (Figure 9.4) between crime scene temperature and
meteorological station temperature, was calculated to be 0.9x þ 2.8. This will be
9.8 REVIEW TECHNIQUE: INTERPRETATION OF DATA FROM A CRIME SCENE CASE STUDY 137

used as the correction factor for meteorological station data, working backwards
from date the body was discovered.
The species from beneath the eyelids and in the nose were later identiﬁed as
second-instar larvae of Calliphora vomitoria Linnaeus. The entomologist grew the
second instar larvae to the adult stage in the laboratory in order to conﬁrm this
identiﬁcation. A base temperature for Calliphora vomitoria of 3 C was chosen.
9.8.2
Instructions
Interpret the data in Table 9.4 to provide an estimate of time since death of thevictim.
Use data from Greenberg and Kunich (2002) for the length of the Calliphora
vomitoria lifecycle.
9.9
Further reading
For further reading on the calculation of the post mortem interval please see Richards
and Villet (2008), Tarone and Foran (2008), Michaud and Moreau (2009) and
Gosselin et al. (2010).
138
CH09 CALCULATING THE POST MORTEM INTERVAL

10
Ecology of forensically
important ﬂies
Fliesthatareattractedtoacorpsetolayeggsareinﬂuencedbytheirenvironment.This
information is of vital importancewhen interpreting a crime scene and estimating the
length of time that a body has been dead. In fact it is one of the deciding factors
determiningwhetherforensicentomologistsshouldconsiderthecalculation asoneto
determine time since death (PMI) or whether they are calculating the period of insect
activity (PIA). Where there is some concern that the body has been stored just after
death and insects have been excluded from gaining contact then the best estimate that
can be provided is an estimate of the period of insect activity when the body was
accessible. Other means would be necessary to determine the length of time between
death and the insects gaining access to the body.
To ﬁnd a body, ﬂies must initially be able to interpret volatiles in the air and then
respond to them by following the odour plume to the decomposing corpse. The time
taken for a body to release such volatiles and for the insect to register thevolatiles and
travel to the corpse, combined with the decision about whether or not to oviposit,
determines the point at which the time-since-death calculation (PMI) starts. This
period is currently indeterminate and depends upon both the habitat in which the
body is located and environmental conditions.
Some environmental factors are easier to investigate and quantify, particularly if
they relate to meteorological features such as rain or wind, which can limit the
opportunities for ﬂies to locate a body and to oviposit on it. Therefore elements of
uncertaintyexist in eachindividual casein whichforensicentomologyisused. Hence
a minimum time since death determination is the most appropriate calculation
to make.
On a body, female insects choose to lay eggs in places that provide sufﬁcient food
for the next generation, and also protection, moisture and a consistent microclimate
in which the larva can develop. As it decomposes, the human corpse can support
colonies of a number of different ﬂy species but their distribution on the corpse is
dictated by its condition and the presence of larvae of any other species (Ives, 1991).
Work by Archer and Elgar (2003) showed that, after the corpse had been exposed
outdoors for 24 hours, the preferred colonisation sites on a carcass changed from the
oriﬁces to beneath skin folds. Such locations included between legs or under the ear
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

pinnae. They also found that, over time, larvae of both the Calliphoridae and
Sarcophagidae altered their distribution on the body and concluded that migration
to more favoured sites was in response to food depletion, although competition may
also be involved.
The nature of the carrion insect assemblages will vary depending upon whether the
body is in sun or shade and with the seasons. The number of databases of species in
relation to decomposition state is low. Michaud et al. (2010), in comparing the
carrion fauna of bodies laid on the soil surface in Arcadian forest and agricultural
land, provided only the second database of potential corpse colonisers for North
America. Their work conﬁrms that time since death based upon succession or carrion
insect assemblages is geographically and seasonally sensitive.
10.1
Ecological relationships of some forensically
relevant families
Blowﬂiesareamongtheﬁrsttocoloniseabody.IntheUK,possiblythemostcommon
species initially present on the body, are Calliphora vicina and Calliphora vomitoria.
One of the ﬁrst clues to their colonisation is the presence of eggs on the corpse.
Campan et al. (1994) used a lexical software package to analyse verbal descriptions
of the sexual behaviour of Calliphora vomitoria in order for mating to be successful
and oviposition to be possible. Their work revealed the need for correct orientation of
the body of the ﬂy and the mode of presentation of its wings in order to cue mating –
hence the need for ﬂy cages of suitable dimensions as discussed in Chapter 8.
Mating behaviour most frequently leads to ﬂies laying eggs on a body during
daylight, although some researchers have also found that oviposition in some species
can occur at night. Wyss, Chaubert and Cherix (2003) recorded ﬂies laying eggs up
until10p.m.,unlessitwasraining.Greenberg(1990)alsorecordedegglayingatnight
on bodies at ground level. Singh and Bharti (2001) used bait placed 1.85 m (6 feet)
above the ground, on top of a pole, to investigate night oviposition and to counter the
argument that the ﬂies crawl to the corpse to lay eggs during darkness. They used
suitably sticky tape wound round the pole, to prevent ﬂies crawling rather than ﬂying
tothebait.InbothMarchandSeptember,withtemperaturesbetween16 Cand27 C,
very low light levels (0.6–0.7 lux) and relative humidities of 75–85% RH, the
calliphorids, Calliphora vicina, Chrysomya megacephala and Chrysoma ruﬁfacies
laid eggs at night. These results supported the observations that Calliphora vicina,
PhormiareginaandLucilia(Phaenicia)sericataovipositedatnightatlocationslitby
street lights, which had been previously published by Greenberg. However, he
commented that few eggs are laid at night. When investigating a death, therefore,
the possibility of oviposition on a body during darkness should not be excluded.
Similarly, the effect of weather conditions should also be taken into consider-
ation. Greenberg (1990) stated that calliphorids do not ﬂy in the rain. Digby
(1958) examined the effects of wind speed on the ability of Calliphora vicina
140
CH10 ECOLOGY OF FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FLIES

(then known as Calliphora erythrocephala) to ﬂy. He recorded an optimal wind
speed for ﬂight of 0.7 ms1 and suggested that speeds greater than this inhibited
the ability of Calliphora vicina to ﬂy. Temperatures above 30 C and below 12 C
are also known to inhibit blowﬂy activities. Niederegger, Pastuschek and Mall
(2010) point out that, in Germany, development times of their cultures under
varying developmental conditions, differed from those in other geographical
locations. They achieved satisfactory pupation and development at 13 C in
contrast to the work of others, which consider 16 C as a limiting temperature
(Reiter, 1984). This potential for variation should be taken into consideration
when interpreting the effects of conditions at a crime scene both in terms of time
of oviposition and development times.
Blowﬂy daily activity patterns are inﬂuenced by seasonality and changes with
geographic location. Hedstr€om and Nuorteva (1971) considered most calliphorids
to have a maximum daily ﬂight activity after midday, or to show bimodal ﬂight
activity, although in the subarctic regions of Finland, peak ﬂight activity was around
noon. In central Asia Calliphora vicina shows a single (unimodal) peak of daily
activity in the cooler months, when the ﬂies are most active around midday. In
contrast, in the warmer months in central Asia, this species is active at two periods
in the day, with least activity during the hottest part of the day (Erzinc¸liogˆlu, 1996).
Changes in peaks of seasonal activity will also be related to seasonal peaks in ﬂy
populations. Johnson and Esser (2000) suggest that, in the tropics, blowﬂy
population peaks are synchronised with the early and late stages of the rainy
season, when relative humidities and temperatures are high but rainfall is not at its
maximum. Thus the inﬂuence of the seasons may affect the interpretation of when
the eggs were laid on a corpse.
Work by Tiwari, Mohan and Joshi (1995) examined the role of heat shock
proteins (hsps) in protecting ﬂies from dramatic variations in temperature and other
causes of metabolic stress. They showed that these proteins were present in a number
of calliphorid and sarcophagid species but conﬁned their experimentation to
Lucilia cuprina (Wiedemann). They showed that there was a protective effect of
a ‘pre-conditioning temperature’ which they considered to be 37 C, enhanced both
adult and larval survival at higher temperatures. A temperature increase of 0.1 C
min1 allowed an increased thermotolerance, which could be achieved by the sort of
behaviour changes observed by Johnson and Esser.
Blowﬂies most frequently overwinter in soil, as third instar larvae. Lucilia sp. has a
maternally induced diapause in the third instar. This differs in Calliphora vicina, in
which populations only undergo diapause if they are northern. This is potentially a
response to differences in day length and environmental conditions such as lower
average winter temperatures compared with southern populations. Both Calliphora
vicina and Calliphora vomitoria tolerate a certain degree of supercooling;
Calliphora vicina has a lower freezing threshold; the egg stage is particularly cold
resistant (Block, Erzinc¸liogˆlu and Worland, 1990). Pohjoism€aki et al. (2010) has
shown that Calliphora vicina can be active until November in Finland and it has been
seen to overwinter as an adult. So, survival strategies of particular species and the
10.1 ECOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIPS OF SOME FORENSICALLY RELEVANT FAMILIES
141

location of the corpse should be considered when interpreting the post mortem
interval from species that are present on a body early in the year.
The presence of calliphorid ﬂies and their egg-laying activities in the UK, in
winter, has been the topic of a study undertaken in London during mid-December
(Brandt, 2004). Egg masses were found on pig carcasses in both indoor and outdoor
locations in central London, at ambient indoor temperatures of 10 C to 16 C and an
ambient outdoor temperature range of 1 C to 14 C. The eggs on the indoor pig
hatched into larvae, whilst those on the outdoor pig remained in the egg stage.
Climatic change is altering the distribution of Calliphoridae and is responsible for
changes in the range of some species. This is particularly true of Phormia regina, a
common species at crime scenes in the USA. It is attracted to human faeces and
animal dung (Coffey, 1966) but is also found on human remains. Byrd and Allen
(2001) showed that it is the dominant species in forensic contexts in the summer
months in the northern USA, whilst being the dominant species in winter months
(October to March) in southern USA. Phormia regina activity is inhibited by
temperatures as low as 12.5 C, according to research undertaken by Haskell (cited
in Byrd and Allen, 2001).
Huijbregts (2004) conﬁrmed the presence of Phormia regina in the Netherlands,
Fennoscandia and the UK, noting that in the twentieth century it has only been
recorded on four occasions. Indeed Erzinc¸liogˆlu (1996) considered Phormia regina
to be introduced into the UK from the USA. However, in 2001, Huijbregts (2004)
recorded Phormia regina in the Netherlands on four separate occasions in the same
year. He suggeststhat thisspecies is extendingits range. Catts andHaskell (1990)and
Haskell and Williams (2008) comment that this ﬂy prefers shade rather than brightly
lit, open habitats. This preference for shade may account for the prevalence of
records of Phormia regina in urban environments in the Netherlands, where shade is
readily available in and around buildings.
Development times for Phormia regina increase under a cyclical temperature
regime, compared to development times at a constant temperature (Byrd and Allen,
2001). However, using constant temperatures, they were able to replicate the results
for time to peak egg hatching recorded by Kamal (1958). At 25 C, peak emergence
was found at 19 h whilst at 30 C it was reduced to 15.5 h (Byrd and Allen, 2001).
Variation in the length of the lifecycle occurred at higher temperatures (35 – 45 C)
when adults failed to emerge. They also showed variation in length of lifecycle when
cultures were kept at a constant temperature of 40 C or at 10 C. (Interestingly
Phormia regina activity is thought to be inhibited when monthly temperatures are
below an average of 10 0C – Deonier, 1942). Byrd and Allen felt that developmental
durations at experimental temperatures of 25 C and below were in accord with the
rest of the scientiﬁc literature for this species. But they urged caution in using
published data to determine the ‘experimental value for Accumulated Degree Hours
or Days’ for the species, where environmental temperatures at the crime scene were
above 25 C. However, Nabity, Higley and Heng-Moss (2007) point out that light
intensity and day length inﬂuence Phormia regina growth, so these may have an
effect in addition to temperature.
142
CH10 ECOLOGY OF FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FLIES

A second species that is increasing its numbers in Europe, as indicated by Dutch
crime scene records, is the holarctic blowﬂy, Protophormia terraenovae. Whilst this
species is not often recorded from rural environments, it has become more common
in large cities along the Netherlands coast. In Britain it is recorded from the Pennines
and Erzinc¸liogˆlu (2000) states that it favours upland and northern regions.
Nuorteva (1963) suggests that this species does not compete well with other
species and so only ﬂourishes where competition is low, for example as an Arctic
species. She also suggests that it is usually the ﬁrst blowﬂy to emerge and that if a
larva of such a species is found on a body it indicates that the death occurred in
the spring.
Current research indicates that refrigeration of Protophormia terraenovae larvae
affects their development. When reared at 24 C and then refrigerated at 4 C,
development is dependent upon the period of refrigeration. Refrigeration of the ﬁrst
instar larvae decreases time to adult emergence. With increasing periods of refrig-
eration, the second instar and pupa show an increase in time to adult emergence. The
overall effect of refrigeration gives a potential error of more than six hours in the PMI
calculation (Myskowiak and Doums, 2002).
Changes in geographic distribution are also occurring for Chrysomya species,
which are usually considered to be tropical and subtropical species. They are foundin
Africa, Asia and southern Europe and were introduced onto the American continent.
However, its range seems to be moving northwards. In 2000, Chrysomya species
were recorded from northern France (Erzinc¸liogˆlu, 2000) and in 2002, Chrysomya
albiceps was recorded from Austria in central Europe (Grassberger, Freidrich and
Reiter, 2003). The level of interaction of this species with other species, rather than
the inﬂuence of higher temperatures alone, is considered by Grassberger et al. to be
the important factor in determining its change in distribution.
Competition with Chrysomya albiceps is now thought to be causing a reduction in
the prevalence of the secondary screwworm ﬂy, Cochliomyia macellaria – a species
that is native to the American continent (Faria Del Bianco et al., 1999). Second and
third instar larvae of Chrysomya albiceps are predators on other larvae when the
occasion presents itself (i.e. facultative predation). The ﬁrst instar of Chrysomya
albiceps larvae feed on tissue ﬂuid or decomposition liquor and so are necrophages.
According to De Andrade et al. (2002), postfeeding Chrysomya albiceps larvae
will attack Chrysomya macellaria postfeeding larvae if they both leave the same
corpse at the same time. Chrysomya albiceps cannot complete its development below
15 C (unless it is present in sufﬁcient numbers that it can form a maggot mass, which
in itself raises the local temperature of the microclimate for the larvae). This is
thought to be a means of surviving competition in this less dominant species.
The time between oviposition and the adult stage of Chrysomya albiceps is recorded
as19.2  0.92 days at 20 C and 8.3 days  0.5 at 35 C (Grassberger, Freidrich and
Reiter, 2003).
In afro-tropical regions, oriental regions from India to China, central South
America, and southern Europe, Chrysomya albiceps is commonly the initial
coloniser of a corpse (Baumgartner and Greenberg, 1984; Hall and Smith, 1993).
10.1 ECOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIPS OF SOME FORENSICALLY RELEVANT FAMILIES
143

It is also recorded as one of the two most frequently encountered species in forensic
cases in South Africa (Mostovski and Mansell, 2004), where it is recognised as a
spring and summer species. Smith (1986) considered that this species fulﬁls the
initial colonising role undertaken by Calliphora and Lucilia in the temperate zone.
A species recorded in Britain, as colonising a body in the second wave ofinsects, is
Cynomya mortuorum Linnaeus, a blue-green blowﬂy (see colour section). In Finland
the lifecycle from egg to adult of wild specimens, takes an average of 26.2 days, at a
mean temperature of 15 C (Nuorteva, 1977). Staerkeby (2001) recovered Cynomya
mortuorum from a suicide victim in south-eastern Norway and concluded that its
egg-laying seasonality in Norway was similar to that in Finland. In the UK this
species is more common in the north of England and Scotland than in the south of
England, where it is considered to be scarce (Colyer and Hammond, 1951; Smith,
1986). So the species may be considered to be present in small numbers on a corpse
and also to be a geographic indicator for the north of England and Scotland.
10.2
Speciﬁc family features
10.2.1
Greenbottles – Lucilia spp.
In Britain there are seven species of greenbottle. These are Lucilia (Phaenicia)
sericata, Lucilia caesar, Lucilia illustris Meigen, Lucilia richardsi, Lucilia silvarum
Meigen, Lucilia ampullacea Villeneuve, and Lucilia bufonivora Moniez. Smith
(1986) records only four of them – Lucilia ampullacea, Lucilia illustris, Lucilia
caesar, and Lucilia sericata – from dead bodies in the UK. They vary in their choice
of habitat. Lucilia species are amongst the ﬁrst wave of blowﬂies to colonise a body.
Lucilia sericata is, however, reported in experimental trials by Fisher, Wall and
Ashworth (1998), on the basis of poor responses to fresh liver compared to aged liver,
to be a species that does not act exclusively as a pioneer species on a fresh corpse.
In southern Britain, Lucilia sericata has been estimated to produce three or four
generations a year (Wall et al., 1993). It is very infrequently found indoors, or in
woodlands and hedgerows (Smith and Wall, 1997) and in Britain, is thought to be a
species indicative of bright sunlight (Colyer and Hammond, 1951). In the USA, this
preference for sunlight enables Lucilia (syn. Phaenicia) sericata to colonise bodies
during the hottest part of the summer. Its minimum threshold is considered to be 9 C
and at temperatures of 13 C Lucilia sericata lifecycle did not progress beyond the
larval stage (Niederegger, Pastuschek and Mall, 2010).
Lucilia illustris is also a ﬂy, recognised in the USA as being associated with bodies
found in open, brightly lit habitats (Catts and Haskell, 1990). In contrast, in the UK,
Lucilia illustris is considered to be an open woodland and meadow species. In
Canada the species is most obvious in summer and autumn (Michaud and Morreau,
2009). The work of Niederegger, Pastuschek and Mall (2010) goes some way to
explaining the reason this species is successful during the seasons in that in
144
CH10 ECOLOGY OF FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FLIES

ﬂuctuating temperatures between 5 C to 29 C the larvae can take advantage of the
high temperatures and tolerate the lower, enabling good growth, which was not seen
at a ﬁxed temperature of 13 C.
In contrast, Lucilia caesar is considered to be a species associated with forests and
tolerant of shade. The latter species occurs further to the north of Britain than Lucilia
illustris (Smith, 1986). The effect of environmental factors on ﬂy activity was
considered by von Aesch et al. (2003). They showed that spring radiation and
temperature were signiﬁcant at the 5% level or more for determining the presence
on the wing of Lucilia caesar, Lucilia sericata, Lucilia silvarum and Cynomia
mortuorum. However, solar radiation rather than temperature, determined the ﬂight
activity of Calliphora vicina.
The Finnish community of corpse-inhabiting species in open habitats comprises
ﬁve species of Lucilia. The species are Lucilia sericata, Lucilia caesar, Lucilia
illustris, Lucilia silvarum, and Lucilia richardsi. Of these ﬁve, Prinkkil€a and Hanski
(1995) report Lucilia illustris to be the most abundant, followed by Lucilia silvarum.
Hanski (1987) also noted that Lucilia illustris was the earlier of the two species to
emergeinearlysummer.Prinkkil€aandHanskiconsideredthatLuciliacaesar;Lucilia
sericata and Lucilia richardsi are rare, citing their larval competitive abilities as the
reason. This poor competition results in varying levels of ﬂy densities in the ﬁeld.
In general, ﬁeld populations of greenbottles appear to be small in numbers.
Gilmour, Waterhouse and McIntyre (1946) suggest that Lucilia cuprina Weidemann,
a species found on carrion in Australia and as an agent of myiasis, has a population
density of between 0.17 and 14 ﬂies per hectare. In a northern British population
MacLeod and Donnelly (1960) estimated that the population of Lucilia sericata was
2.5ﬂies per hectare, which was considerably smallerthan the Australian populations.
However, Smith and Wall (1998) showed that the density of Lucilia sericata varied
according to the season, rising from 0 per hectare in England in early June of 1994,
when the study took place, to 6.3 per hectare in the middle of August. Clearly
populations will differ with season and geographic location, which may account for
their absence from a corpse on occasions where they might be expected.
The distance over which greenbottles disperse also varies with species. In
experimental trials in Australia Lucilia cuprina has been recorded between 0.7 and
3.5 km from the point of release (Gilmour, Waterhouse and McIntryre, 1946). Work
on the dispersal of individual Lucilia sericata suggests that it might be expected to
disperse a much smaller average distance of up to 800 m per lifetime (Smith and
Wall, 1998). However, the fecundity of the ﬂies and their physiological state can also
inﬂuence their dispersal. Smith and Wall point out that movement in response to
carrion odour is a migration trigger in both gravid females and those females that lack
a supply of protein in their diet, whereas females that have just laid eggs, or who are
newly merged and are undergoing egg development (vitellogenesis), show less
tendency to respond to the odoursemitted from a corpse. The researchers suggest that
availability of both sugars and protein sources may account for the differences in
migration rates and hypothesise, therefore, thata populationof Lucilia sericata could
spread at a rate of 31–42 km a year.
10.2 SPECIFIC FAMILY FEATURES
145

Once the eggs were laid and the larvae emerged, Rankin and Bates (2004)
demonstrated that, in cohorts of Lucilia sericata above a population size of 400
larvae, heat production was dependent onwhich instar was present and not onthe size
of maggot mass or cohort. They concluded that at ambient temperatures above 15 C,
the duration of the lifecycle (and hence post mortem interval) could be based on the
ambient temperature of the environment for this species. They also showed that at
temperatures between 22 C and 35 C, larval growth rates in the wild did not
signiﬁcantly differ from those in laboratory experiments. This point is important
when attempting to estimate time since death on the basis of larval development in
controlled environments for this species.
10.2.2
Muscid ﬂies – Muscidae
The muscid ﬂies, are attracted to nitrogenous material that leaks from the corpse.
Predominantly they are attracted by urine and faecal waste. Whilst few have been
found to be of forensic value, several species can be of signiﬁcance in speciﬁc
circumstances.Sharanowski,WalkerandAnderson(2008),workinginCanada,found
that species of Musca and Hydrotaea were present during bloat if the corpse was in
sunlight but absent from corpses in shade. In summer, Musca domestica was present
on corpses in bloat and also in early decay whilst Hydrotaea species were absent.
Adult Hydrotaea species were recorded at the dry stage of decomposition. There
would therefore, appear to be a variation in corpse attraction that is both seasonal and
geographic. The consistent feature seems to be that members of this genus will
develop in circumstances where there is high bacterial load causing fermentation.
Lobanov (1970, cited in Skidmore, 1985) considers that this genus has two gen-
erations a year in the northern temperate regions of the world. Skidmore (1985),
citing personal observations in the north of England, considered the species
Hydrotaea dentipes Fabricius to be present from late March to November or
December (depending upon the weather), which made him suggest that at least
four generations a year might be expected.
In south-western Australia Hydrotaea rostrata Robineau-Desvoidy has been
found on a third of the human cadavers, making it a signiﬁcant species where the
body has not been found for several weeks or months (Dadour, Cook and Wirth,
2001). Their lifecycle, in constant light under experimental conditions, has been
found to be 21.6 days in summer. Its duration is tripled in the winter months (Dadour,
Cook and Wirth, 2001).
Other species of Hydrotaea, formerly known as Ophyra species, have been found in
association with corpses. Couri et al. (2009) identiﬁed Hydrotaea (Ophyra) carpensis
Weidemann and Hydrotaea (Ophyra) ignava Harris from the oesophagus of a
mummiﬁed corpse in a nineteenth-century museum collection in Lisbon, Portugal.
They considered that this species invades corpses in the later stages of decomposition
after it has been colonised by Callipora vicina and Muscina species. The adults were
thought to emerge from the soil when the temperature below the soil surface exceeded
146
CH10 ECOLOGY OF FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FLIES

10 C. Hydrotaea (Ophyra) has also been recovered from buried corpses. Skidmore
(1985) considers that Hydrotaea (Ophyra) ignava has several tranches of adult
emergence; in June, August, and October. Although in the north of England and in
Scotland there may be only two, with adult populations peaking in autumn.
10.2.3
Soldier Flies – Stratiomyidae
Stratiomyid species have been recovered from corpses. However, they are more
likelyto be considered nuisance ﬂies and encountered in thecontextofurban forensic
entomology. The black soldier ﬂy, Hermetia illucens Linnaeus, is a detritivore and,
although found in dung heaps, is also of signiﬁcance as a forensic indicator. This
species has also been found to be an agent of myiasis (Calderon-Arguedas, Barrantes
and Solano, 2005) where it is accidentally swallowed. Tomberlin and Sheppard
(2002) concluded that the species was capable of mating two days after emergence
and that oviposition took place four days after that. At 27 C, Hermetia illucens eggs
will hatch after four days. The duration of the larval feeding stage is approximately
14 days before postfeeding migration occurs. The species requires normal daylight in
order to lay fertile eggs (Sheppard et al., 2002). Most signiﬁcantly, members of this
family will consume the larvae of Muscidae and Calliphoridae and therefore can
affect the calculation of time since death.
10.2.4
Lesser Dung Flies – Sphaeroceridae
This family is found on corpses less frequently than the Calliphoridae, with whom
they cannot compete well. The family contains species that feed on bacteria and that
breed in dung and decomposing material. They are habitat speciﬁc. For example, in
Germany, Buck (1997) found that Minilimosina parvula Stenhammar was a common
vertebrate-infesting species in forests whereas Telomerina eburnea Rohacek, was
most common in open habitats. Their development time is considered to be at least
ﬁve weeks. According to Fredeen and Glen (1970), the sphaerocerid Leptocera
caenosa Rondani will survive exposure over a three month period to temperatures of
7 C but not those as low as 1.5 C. This is a species that has been recorded from
buried bodies in northern France (Bourel et al., 2004). It is found, if present, in the
advanced decay stage – although only in small numbers.
10.2.5
Fleshﬂies – Sarcophagidae
In Britain and elsewhere, this family is found to be present on the body after a few
days of decomposition. One of the most signiﬁcant things about it is that the ﬂies are
capable of being viviparous. That is, they generally deposit larvae onto the corpse
and not eggs, although egg laying in Sarcophagidae has been noted under laboratory
conditions, for example in Sarcophaga (Liosarcophaga) tibialis and Sarcophaga
10.2 SPECIFIC FAMILY FEATURES
147

(Lyopygia) argyrostoma Robineau-Desvoidy (Villet, MacKenzie and Muller, 2006
and Niederegger, Pastuschek and Mall, 2010, respectively).
Sarcophagidae are considered to be unimpeded by rain and to ﬂy despite the
weather (Erzinc¸liogˆlu, 2000). Archer and Elgar (2003) consider that females are
selected to deposit the larvae (or eggs) in safe nutritious locations. As a result, ﬂesh
ﬂiesmaybetheinitialcolonisersofthebodyoutdoors,ifthereisalongperiodofrainy
weather. Despite this, many ﬂesh ﬂies prefer sunlight rather than shaded conditions
(Smith, 1986) although Sarcophaga (Subgenus Robineauella) caerulescens Zetter-
stedt is considered a shade lover. Singh and Bahrti (2008) point out that, in Asia,
sarcophagid species may oviposit in low light conditions, which does not preclude
them being able to oviposit during the night if there is sufﬁcient artiﬁcial light.
The time taken for Sarcophaga (Subgenus Robineauella) caerulescens larvae to
emerge as an adult is considered to be between 8–12 days (Pohjoism€aki et al., 2010).
Kamal (1958) provides an indication of the lifecycle durations of the various stages
of the American sarcophagid species Sarcophaga cooleyi Parker, Sarcophaga
shermani Parker and Neobellieria (¼Sarcophaga) bullata Parker. Sarcophagids are
also known to colonise corpses located indoors. One of the most common
Sarcophagids, recovered as larvae from indoor crime scenes in the USA, is
Sarcophaga africa (¼haemorrhoidalis) (Fallen) (Byrd and Butler, 1998). At a
constant temperature (25 C) this species showed variation in its emergence time
– development time to adult emergence varied by as much as 252 hours (Byrd and
Butler, 1998). Therefore this provides a source of variation and limitation in the use
of this species for calculating time since death.
A crucial aspect of some species’ lifecycle is whether or not the species has a
second generation within a season. In the case of Sarcophaga scoparia the duration
of the lifecycle of the second generation, which tends to occur in August in Finland
is longer – 36 days and not around 26 (Hanski, 1987). The potential should be
considered when estimating the minimum post mortem interval that the colonising
ﬂy is second generation.
10.2.6
Cheese skippers – Piophilidae
Some species of Piophilidae, which Megnin considered in his succession, are very
host speciﬁc and conﬁned to the latter stages of decomposition. Such is the case of the
species in the genus Thyreophora (Braig and Perotti, 2009). Braig and Perotti point
out that the attraction is either bone marrow or the protection provided by the large
bones. They note that these species are conﬁned to regions such as the Kashmir
region of India and hence to bones of large animals.
Other members of this family are much more familiar as they are food pests found
on pork products such as ham and bacon, cheese, biltong,ﬁsh, bones and carrion. One
such species, Piophila casei, may also be found on a corpse during the active decay
stage and will colonise a dead body where calliphorid and sarcophagid species are
prevented (Mullen and Durden, 2002) (Figure 10.1).
148
CH10 ECOLOGY OF FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FLIES

Female Piophilids are considered to be monogamous, copulating only once and
laying their eggs in batches of three to 100 (Russo et al., 2006). The average number
of eggs laid in a batch (over 3–4 days) by a female is 140; the maximum batch they
recorded totalled 480. At 13 C the egg stage lasts on average 4–7 days whereas at
18 C the time is reduced to 2.9 days (cited in Russo et al., 2006).
The species can survive at temperatures below freezing. Hegazi et al. (1978)
considered that the larvae could survive temperatures of 4 C for more than
10 days. Whilst Sacchi, Gigolo and Cestari (1971) showed that freezing larvae at
21 C (5 F) midway through the larval stage and then returning them to suitable
conditions did not affect development. The same larval stage was also able to survive
temperatures of 50 C for four hours. Freezing is not, therefore, a means of
despatching them from food, nor does refrigeration whilst transporting larvae back
to the lab once collected from a body, appear to affect this species.
10.2.7
Scuttle ﬂies – Phoridae
If the corpse is located on the surface of the ground, this family is particularly
associated with the later stages of decomposition and advanced decay. A stage in
which diptera and coleoptera are both found on the remains of a corpse.
Figure 10.1
Electronmicrograph of the head of an adult Piophilid
10.2 SPECIFIC FAMILY FEATURES
149

One phorid species is particularly important if buried bodies are being investigat-
ed. This is Conicera tibialis, the cofﬁn ﬂy. Adult females appear to be able to locate a
body using volatiles emanating from the soil. There is evidence that this species can
complete several generations below ground, without emerging from the soil, as
puparia of Conicera sp. have been recorded from exhumed human corpses buried
some considerable time earlier (Colyer and Hammond, 1951).
Phorids ofthegenusMegaseliahavebeen recorded on bodieson theground surface–
they will tend to aggregate their larvae in an attempt to limit competitions with other ﬂy
species because they are poor competitors (Kneidel, 1985). Examples of phorid ﬂies
thathavebeenfoundinforensiccasesareMegaseliaruﬁpesMeigen,Megaseliascalaris
Loew (a parasitic ﬂy) and Triphleba hyalinata Meigen (a cave dweller). Of these,
Megaselia ruﬁpes is the most commonly encountered species of phorid on corpses left
on the soil surface, or from shallow graves in Britain (Disney and Manlove, 2005).
Disney (2005) working on Megaselia giraudii Egger and Megaselia ruﬁpes, has
investigated the lifecycles of these scuttle ﬂies to enable them to be used for post
mortem interval determination. He found a large degree of variation in larval growth
from the same batch of eggs and also recorded successive waves of larvae migrating
from their feeding site.
10.2.8
Scavenger ﬂies – Sepsidae
Sepsid ﬂies are common on bodies at a stage of advanced putrefaction. They are
attracted to decaying material and so justify their common name of scavenger ﬂies.
The larvae are found in decaying organic matter, particularly when it is liquefying
(Oldroyd, 1964), including the decay stages of decomposition of dead bodies. Adult
ﬂies have a characteristic wing-waving movement and, according to Oldroyd (1964),
will run up and down on any surface or piece of vegetation that is available.
Smith (1986) places them between the caseic decomposition stage and before the
ammoniacal fermentation of advanced decay. They are often found on corpses at the
same time as Piophilidae and Drosophilidae. Seven sepsid species are speciﬁcally
associated with carrion or human faeces. Because of this association with dung, its
presence on a corpse requires careful consideration. Does it indicate faecal con-
tamination of the body in the process of death or does presence reﬂect environmental
conditions that are unrelated to the presence of the body? This was a point made quite
strongly by Smith (1986) and, given the concern to ensure that forensic entomology
is a rigorous science, is a major consideration in interpreting the crime scene.
10.2.9
Winter Gnats – Trichoceridae
Winter gnats (Trichoceridae) have been found to be of value for the determination of
time since colonisation of human corpses during the winter months (Broadhead,
Dr Sharon Erzinc¸liogˆlu for permission to quote the case of Mike Evans and Zoe from Maggots, Murder and Men, harley
Books Colchester.
150
CH10 ECOLOGY OF FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FLIES

1980; Erzinc¸liogˆlu, 1980, 2000), although, as yet, not many species have been
recorded from human corpses. Members of this family are usually found in rotting
vegetation, rodent holes (Keilin and Tate, 1940), down mines (Oldroyd, 1964) and in
cattle dung – the location in which larvae develop (Laurence, 1956). Such conditions
also provide a means of larvae escape from low and freezing temperatures. Although
present throughout theyear, winter gnats are most obvious in winter and can be seen
ﬂying in late afternoon in winter, even when snow is on the ground (Colyer and
Hammond, 1951). Laurence (1956) recorded that they can survive freezing for up
to two weeks and that they could tolerate conditions where ambient temperature
was 7.2 C.
Members of this family are more apparent and more abundant in spring and
autumn than in summer. Male winter gnats swarm – moving in such a way for the
swarm to be called ‘a dance’. Edwards (1928), recorded by Keilin and Tate (1940)
suggests that females remain in sheltered roosting sites, and that any that do enter the
swarm of males will immediately undergo copulation.
Nine species of Trichocera are listed in volume 12 of the British ‘Checklist of
Diptera’ (Chandler, 1998), with two more known but not yet identiﬁed. The
species of winter gnat of value for PMI determination will vary with locality.
In the north of England Trichocera annulata Meigen may colonise bodies.
Erzinc¸liogˆlu found this species on ox heart in an experiment run between
8 December 1979 and 1 March 1980. In Maggots, Murder and Men (2000),
Erzinc¸liogˆlu describes how he recovered Trichocera larvae from the corpse of a
nine-year-old girl at a similar time of year to that of his experiment. The girl, Zoe
Evans, was subsequently found to have been murdered by her stepfather. The
murder had taken place in January and six weeks later, in February, the decom-
posing body of the girl was found wedged, head ﬁrst, into a badger’s sett. She had
suffocated to death, from a combination of having had her shirt stuffed into her
mouth and inhaling blood. The blood resulted from her receiving a violent blow –
sufﬁcient to break her nose. The police conﬁrmed their suspicions as to the
identity of the murderer when they found some of the stepfather’s clothes and
underwear, which were covered in blood. The only signiﬁcant evidence of an
entomological nature found on Zoe Evan’s body were larvae of Trichoceridae,
which conﬁrmed, as everyone knew, that the murder had taken place in winter. In
this instance the murder provided more information about the insects than did the
insects about the murder, and conﬁrmed that these are a family that could be used
to determine time since death in the winter.
10.3
Fly infestation of the living
Some species of ﬂy will not only oviposit on corpses and deposit larvae feed on dead
organisms but will also oviposit on the living. Such a circumstance is termed myiasis:
causal agents include members of the Oesteridae, Calliphoridae, Sarcophagidae,
Phoridae, Fanniidae, Stratiomyidae, Piophilidae and Psychodidae (Derraik, Heath
10.3 FLY INFESTATION OF THE LIVING
151

and Rademaker, 2010). Hall (1995) points out that where calliphorid and sarco-
phagid species were concerned, the conditions of the host tend to predispose them to
infestation as a result of the presence of open cuts, skin necrosis, or bacteria
contaminating skin, fur, or wool.
Allowing ﬂies to lay eggs and the larvae to survive on living organisms is not only
illegal under animal welfare laws, since undue distress and often death can be caused
to animals, including pets, but it also causes economic loss to many livestock
farmers. The calliphorid Lucilia sericata is a source of sheep ﬂy strike or myiasis in
the UK, Australia, and South Island of New Zealand. In North Island Lucilia cuprina
is the more frequent causal agent of myiasis (Morris, 2005).
No native New Zealand ﬂies are recorded as myiasis causal agents. Introduced
species of ﬂy, however, are often the cause. For example two species of introduced
Phorid, Megaselia scalaris and Megaselia spiracularis, have been recorded as a
cause of gastrointestinal myiasis (Derraik, Heath and Rademaker, 2010). In Africa
and Asia Chrysomya megacephala and Cochliomya macellaria are frequently
encountered in cases of human myiasis. According to Dasgupta and Roy (1969),
Lucilia illustris will colonise a number of live animal species, including, frogs, toads
and ﬁsh, initially feeding on the brain. They noted that the rate of development was
faster on living tissue than on dead.
In the UK the most common form of human myiasis was, until recently, enteric
myiasis. Smith (1986) indicates that larvae of the following ﬂy genera have been
Box 10.1
Myiasis
The invasion of living tissue by insects is also of concern to the forensic
entomologist. This invasion is called myiasis and becomes relevant where
cases of misuse and abuse are involved.
Myiasis has been deﬁned according to two criteria: the biological require-
ments of the ﬂy, or where the ﬂies attack humans or animals. James (1947)
deﬁned biological myiasis as invasion of tissue or organs of man or animals by
dipterous larvae. He acknowledged Patton’s (1922) earlier views that presence
of eggs, pupae or adults might be included, but considered that the larval stage
was the ‘active stage’ of myiasis.
In medical terms myiasis can be deﬁned according to the location of the ﬂy
infestation. For example it can be deﬁned as: wound myiasis; myiasis of the
nose, mouth and accessory sinuses; aural myiasis; ocular internal and external
myiasis; myiasis of the rectal region and vagina; myiasis of the bladder and
urinary passages; furuncular, dermal and subdermal myiasis; creeping dermal
or subdermal myiasis or enteric myiasis.
Flies, such as Lucilia sericata, Musca domestica Linnaeus and Phormia
regina Meigen, the initial colonisers of the body, have all been implicated in
cases of myiasis.
152
CH10 ECOLOGY OF FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FLIES

identiﬁed as the cause of this disease: Eristalis, Piophila, Drosophila, Calliphora or
Musca. Where urogenital myiasis has been diagnosed, the species Fannia canicu-
laris – the lesser house ﬂy, Musca domestica – the house ﬂy and Sylvicola fenestralis
(Scopoli) have been the culprits. The frequency of colonisation of living ﬂesh by
Lucilia caesar and Protophormia terraenovae is commonly related to latitude. Both
of these species become more common as a causal agent of myiasis the further north
one travels (Stevens, 2003).
Mechanisms for control of myiasis in animals include use of insecticides as this
is a cause of animal welfare cases. However Lucilia cuprina and Lucilia sericata
are becoming resistant to insecticides (Morris, 2005). So there is a drive for
research into the volatiles that attract species to a body, in order either to provide
bait or a deterrent. This area of research is also of great relevance to forensic
entomology.
10.3.1
Piophilidae infestation of the living
Because Piophilids and in particular Piophila casei, inhabit food materials such as
cheese, they have, in the past, been found to have been consumed accidentally.
Derraik, Heath and Rademaker (2010) record Piophilidae as being responsible
for gastrointestinal myiasis, nasal-oral myiasis and cases of urogenital myiasis in
humans. These days this is less likely to happen because hygiene laws and
packaging techniques mean that the consumer predominantly eats cook-chill or
ready meals, which reduce the likelihood of the maggots surviving in the food in
order to cause myiasis (Figure 10.2).
Figure 10.2
Piophilid infestation of meat. Source: Dr Sharon Erzinc¸liog˘lu for permission to
quote the case of Mike Evans and Zoe from Erzinc¸liog˘lu Y.Z., Maggots, Murder and Men. Harley
Books: Colchester (2000)
10.3 FLY INFESTATION OF THE LIVING
153

10.3.2
Myiasis and PMI determination
In some developing countries, human myiasis results in the external infestation of
skin wounds, eyes, noses, sinuses and ears both accidentally and in the context of
wounding. For example, after an assault, a 65-year-old Indian female was diagnosed
as having traumatic wound maxillofacial myiasis and 200 maggots of Musca
domestica were recovered from a wound in the lady’s lower lip and from the oral
cavity (Babu et al., 2010).
If the victim suffered from myiasis prior to death then the oldest maggots on the
body may not necessarily reﬂect the period of time between death and discovery. The
time since death would be shorter. Signs of previous insect infestation (myiasis) are
indicated where the largest maggots are present in urogenital areas or in wounds.
Determination of the existence of larval infestation prior to the death of a victim
should be taken into consideration when interpreting the length of time since the
body was colonised (period of insect colonisation PIA).
10.4
Flies inﬂuencing the crime scene
Because of the nature of their feeding – a process of external digestion – ﬂies will
regurgitate and then reabsorb material. In addition they will add faecal material to the
crime scene (Figure 10.3). Benecke and Barksdale (2003) describe three cases in
which ﬂy artefacts have been added to the crime scene and generated small stains,
which could be confused with high velocity impact scatter. In particular, ﬂies are
attracted to blood and will regurgitate droplets of this in different locations. The
resultant droplets could not be interpreted by reconstructing angles of impact.
Figure 10.3
Fly faeces and vomit contaminate surfaces
154
CH10 ECOLOGY OF FORENSICALLY IMPORTANT FLIES

Calliphora vicina and Lucilia sericata both feed in a manner that will produce
such artefacts. Both the regurgitated blood droplets and faecal material can look like
blood spatter (Striman et al., 2011). Such feeding can take place both during the day
and also in darkness, so the crime scene can be altered if ﬂies are present between
discovery of the body and the subsequent visitation of technicians with particular
skills in blood-spatter analysis. The droplets generated tend to lack tails. Therefore a
room in which there are droplets with tails and small droplets may need to be
investigated carefully. Many presumptive tests for blood will fail to distinguish
between ﬂy-generated artefacts and blood spatter droplets. Fujikawa et al. (2011),
however, were able to show that faecal material from Lucilia sericata would
ﬂuoresce at a wave length of 465 nm. Fluorescent light may therefore be a means
of distinguishing between blood sources if this ﬂy species is present.
10.4 FLIES INFLUENCING THE CRIME SCENE
155

11
The ecology of some forensically
relevant beetles
The relationship between beetles and their environment – beetle ecology – is an
important aspect of forensic entomology. For forensically important species this
environment is the crime scene, which may include a corpse. The nutrient status of
the corpse changes as it decomposes.
Clear relationships between decomposition states, habitat conditions and the
presence and sequence of beetle families have been demonstrated. Oliva (2001), for
example, showed that in Argentina the nitidulid beetle, Carpophilus hemipterus
Linnaeus, was found in the later stages of decomposition, in association with the
Piophilidae and often also with Necrobia ruﬁpes, a clerid beetle. Oliva also linked
silphids of the genus Hyponecrodes, such as Hyponecrodes erythrura Blanchard,
with corpses recovered from rural outdoor environments. However caution has to be
used in interpreting scientiﬁc data from a crime scene in one location, or country, to
another. Ideally, data about insect succession on carrion for the particular region
where the death took place should be used (Table 11.1).
The speed of corpse decomposition is inﬂuenced by environmental conditions.
Seasonality, temperature of the environment, its humidity, the level and duration of
rainfall and insect abundance in the locality are all major inﬂuences on the rate of
decomposition of the body and therefore on the speed of succession of the insects
colonising it. In Canada, VanLaerhoven and Anderson (1996, 1999) recorded
Dermestes species when the body was in early advanced decay. Oliva (2001),
working in Argentina also found early colonisation of bodies by dermestids between
ten and 30 days after death.
Research highlights how important it is to know as much as possible about the
ecology of the species of insects that colonise a body and what inﬂuences their
development on the corpse. The ecology of selected families and species that
colonise the body is presented below.
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

11.1
Ecology of carrion beetles (Silphidae)
The family Silphidae is made up of two subfamilies (Lawrence and Newton, 1982):
carrion beetles (Silphinae) and burying beetles (Nicrophorinae). Both can be found
on a body in the decay stages of decomposition. In some countries, silphids are
forensic indicators of a short post mortem interval and are found on fresh and bloated
corpse. Oxyletrum discicollis Brulle for example, is recognised in this role in south-
eastern Brazil. Barreto, Burbano and Barreto (2002) found they made up 8% of the
insect assemblage infesting human corpses in urban and rural areas near Cali,
Columbia. This conclusion was based on investigations of 16 corpses – two women
and 14 men – brought to the Cali Institute of Legal Medicine from both urban and
rural murders (12 corpses had beetle life stages on them; the other four corpses did
not have beetle life stages on them – only eggs and larvae of ﬂies). In contrast Wolff
et al. (2001) found the same silphid species present on pig carcasses, later in the
decomposition sequence. They recorded it in the active decay stage, at 1450 m above
sea level and a temperature range of 18–24 C. So, height above sea level and
temperature may inﬂuence its presence.
Dekeirsschieter and Haubruge (2011) identiﬁed different habitat relationships for
carrion beetles (Silphidae) and noted that they were not associated with urban
environments in Belgium. They found in experiments undertaken in spring that the
Silphinae were exclusively found in agricultural habitats; Oiceoptoma thoracica
Linnaeus, Thanatophilus sinuata Fabricius, Thanatophilus rugosus Fabricius and
Necrodes littoralis Linnaeus. Nicrophorinae were exclusively found in forested
habitats. The species that they found were Nicrophorus vespillo Linnaeus,
Nicrophorus vespilloides Herbst and Nicrophorus humator Goeze.
Corpse size will also determine the species of carrion beetle (Silphidae) present.
Silphinae tend to colonise larger corpses. For example, Necrophila (¼Silpha)
americana Linnaeus is found at the active decay stage on a large corpse (Payne,
1965), whereas Nicrophorinae (burying beetles) such as Nicrophorus humator, were
Table 11.1
Beetle succession on decomposing corpses
Fresh
Bloat
Active decay
Advanced decay
Skeletal
Staphylinidae





Histeridae



Cleridae



Scarabaeidae


Carabidae

Silphidae



Dermestidae



Nitidulidae


Trogidae


Geotrupidae

Tenebrionidae

11.1 ECOLOGY OF CARRION BEETLES (Silphidae)
157

commonly found on small carcasses of voles and mice. Because more research has
been carried out on the Nicrophorinae they serve, despite their preference for small
corpses, to illustrate the ecology of Silphidae as a whole.
These beetles use semiochemicals to communicate between individuals,
demonstrate social behaviour and many look after their young. Bartlett (1987)
showed that in the laboratory female Nicrophorus vespilloides were signiﬁcantly
more likely to be attracted to containers with males than those containers without,
suggesting an odour was released by males. Other males were also more likely to
be attracted to the same location where a male beetle was already present. Indeed
Nicrophorus sp. males may ‘call’ when they have found carrion. Bartlett recorded
signalling (‘sterzeln’ signalling) achieved by the tip of the male’s abdomen
quivering and by the beetle’s hind legs stroking it. Such communication may
lead to several individuals locating the same carcass. Eventually, however, the
corpse usually becomes the habitat for a single pair of beetles because
the individuals ﬁght each other (Pukowski, 1933, in Bartlett, 1987; Wilson,
Knollenberg and Fudge, 1984). Males and females jointly build a chamber below
ground and alter the carcass to support the development of their offspring.
Interestingly, burying beetles (Nicrophorinae) have been shown to slow down
carcass decomposition using secretions that are inhibitors of bacterial growth
(Hoback et al., 2004). In general such inhibitors have not been shown for members
of the other subfamily (Silphinae).
The location of a suitable carcass triggers female ovary maturation in some
species. Wilson and Knollenberg (in Wilson and Fudge, 1984) discovered female
Nicrophorus orbicollis Sayhad underdeveloped ovaries until thebeetles encountered
an appropriately decomposed carcass. Its presence triggered the female to produce
eggs over a 48-hour period (Wilson and Fudge, 1984). The numbers of eggs produced
varies with species. Nicrophorus defodiens Mannerheim produces an average brood
size of 23.9 eggs, whereas Nicrophorus orbicollis produces only an average number
of 14.9 eggs (Wilson and Fudge, 1984).
The value of having both parents present is that they can defend the corpse against
competition, including preventing ﬂies laying eggs. In some species only the female
stays with the larvae until they pupate, whilst in others, such as Nicrophorus
vespilloides, both males and females may stay (Wilson and Fudge, 1984). The
duration of this parenting role is quite short. Field studies during May to August
showed that the time between adults burying a carcass and offspring reaching the pre-
pupal stage was ten days (Wilson and Fudge, 1984).
The habitats in which burying beetles are found vary with species. Nicrophorus
species, other than Nicrophorus vespillo, are common in forests. (Ruzicka (1994)
showed that Nicrophorus vespillo was more commonly found in ﬁelds.) Pukowski
(1933) considered that the nature of the soil could account for the difference in
distribution of some species. Investigations of Nicrophorus vespilloides and Nicro-
phorus humator around Frankfurt, Germany, revealed the former favoured drier soil.
Therefore habitat and corpse condition as well as environmental conditions may
dictate the presence of Silphidae on a corpse.
158
CH11 THE ECOLOGY OF SOME FORENSICALLY RELEVANT BEETLES

11.2
Ecology of skin, hide, and larder beetles
(Dermestidae)
A number of species of dermestid beetles colonise dead bodies. These include
Dermestes ater DeGeer, Dermestes maculatus, Dermestes lardarius, Dermestes
frischii (Kugelann), (Centeno, Maldonado and Oliva, 2002). Dermestes maculatus
will be used as an example of the response of dermestids to a corpse since this species
is well researched because of its role as a stored product pest.
Dermestes maculatus growth from egg to adult can take between 20 and 45 days,
although the speed of development depends on the temperature of the habitat. The
larvae have characteristic hairs on their body segments and are referred to colloqui-
ally as ‘woolly bears’. These hairs occur in tufts at the end of the body or along the
sides of each segment and according to Hinton (1945) can be moved or vibrated when
the larva is being threatened.
Food quality and composition is important to the success of dermestid larval
growth. McManus (1974) considered that optimum energy consumption for
Dermestes maculatus was between 0.17 and 0.28 kcal/g per day. Food with high
lipid content shortened the length of the larval stage (Obsuji, 1975); Dermestes
species have been shown to require dietary sterols and in particular require
cholesterol. Given a small amount of sterol dermestids can also utilise campesterol
or 7 – dehydrocholesterol to complete their lifecycle (Levinson, 1962).
Pre-pupal larvae migrate to pupate and can bore into a variety of substances in
order to avoid cannibalism as a pupa (Figure 11.1). This, to some degree, accounts for
Figure 11.1
Dermestid beetles
11.2 ECOLOGY OF SKIN, HIDE, AND LARDER BEETLES (Dermestidae)
159

their status as a pest as they can bore into wood, bone and even concrete. Dermestid
larvae can delay the time of their pupationby up to 20 days if there is no suitable place
to pupate (Archer and Elgar, 1998).
Adult dermestids exhibit phototaxis (respond negatively to light) and will, when
touched, readily ‘play dead’ (show thanatosis). The adults and larvae both exist
happily in darkness. However, when food is in short supply, the adult beetles have
been known to walk, or ﬂy away from the current food source towards a light source.
These habits mean that they need a reliable food source and pupation site, to
successfully complete their lifecycles.
Dermestid frass provides evidence of forensic signiﬁcance indicating that this
species was formerly present. Frass has a characteristic twisted shape and is white in
colour (Figure 11.2). It comprises uneaten food, which is encased in peritrophic
membrane. Where frass alone is present, it may reﬂect dermestid activity for a period
of time between 1 month and ten years. Indeed Catts and Haskell (1990) recorded
Dermestid frass from a 10-year-old mummiﬁed body retained in a house by a
solicitous but criminally-culpable relative.
Ecological conditions will determine whether dermestid species will be present.
Coleopteran proﬁles vary in south-eastern Spain in both distribution and abundance
throughout the year (Arnaldos et al., 2005). In spring and summer they recorded few
dermestid species on corpses in the earliest stages of decomposition but numbers of
dermestids increased as the remains began to dry out. Dermestid larvae were
characteristic of the dry stage of decay and lots were found in the muscle mass
and on bones. In south-eastern Brazil Dermestes maculatus is also recognised as a
forensic indicator (Carvalho et al., 2000) during the ﬁnal decay stages since they
were found in both rural and urban locations.
Figure 11.2
Faecal remains (frass) from dermestid beetles
160
CH11 THE ECOLOGY OF SOME FORENSICALLY RELEVANT BEETLES

Dermestids appear to tolerate a range of temperatures and relative humidity.
Kulshrestha and Satpathy (2001) have shown that they are present where the ambient
temperature is 16.5 C and the average humidity is 71%. Dermestids can also tolerate
ambient temperatures of 20 C and a much-reduced average humidity of 46%
(Kulshrestha and Satpathy, 2001). This ﬁts with work by Hinton (1945) who showed
temperatures between 28 and 30 C allowed dermestids to complete their lifecycle in
22 days, whilst at lower temperatures he recorded lifecycles of 40–50 days. Raspi and
Antonelli (1995) considered the optimum temperature for growth for cultures of
dermestids maintained at a constant in a laboratory was between 25 C and 30 C.
Under these conditions the average lifecycle duration was between 35.1 and
43.9 days.
Dermestids compensate behaviourally for high temperatures by changing loca-
tion. Toye (1970) showed that during the morning in Nigeria, when internal
temperatures were between 24 C and 26 C, Dermestes maculatus was seen on
the carcass surface. Later in the day, when the ambient temperature reached
29–47 C, Dermestes moved inside the carcass where the internal temperature was
lower, reaching 29 C to 42 C. The relative humidity within carcasses ranged
between 40% and 70 % RH. Dermestes maculatus appear to have a preferred
relative humidity between 50–60% at 25  1 C (Toye, 1970).
Dermestids appear to communicate, as do other carrion-seeking species, using
odour. Conquest (1999) rinsed the bodies of male and female dermestids in hexane
and was able to show the washes attracted males to both male and females. Female
dermestids were attracted to the concentrated body washes from other females.
Males secrete a pheromone from a canal beneath the fourth abdominal sternite.
Levinson et al. (1978, 1981) demonstrated that the most active of the pheromone
components were isopropyl Z-9-dodecanoate, isopropyl Z-9-tetradecanoate and
isopropyl Z-7-dodecanoate. These chemicals attracted adults and promoted recog-
nition of sexually mature males (Figure 11.3 ab).
Female Dermestes maculatus have multiple mates and copulation is achieved
more readily with a new mate (Archer and Elgar, 1999). Males show mounting
behaviour after copulation and can be found riding on the backs of the female,
particularly where other males are present as a means of preventing further mating.
Jones and Elgar (2004) explored age-related mating success in Dermestes
maculatus. They tested the effect of male age, sperm age, and male mating history
on female fecundity and their ability to achieve fertilisation. When males of
intermediate age were used, females were more successful fertilised and laid more
eggs than when mated with either young or older males. The age of sperm was not
considered an important factor.
The size of a population of Dermestes maculatus affects the length of the larval
period. Both high and low densities increase the length of time of metamorphosis.
Rakowski and Cymborowski (1982) suggest that Dermestes maculatus faeces
emit two compounds that inﬂuence growth and development; the one produced by
the larvae, speeds up growth and encourages aggregation; the odour source
generated by adults, inhibits larval development. The age of larvae present on
11.2 ECOLOGY OF SKIN, HIDE, AND LARDER BEETLES (Dermestidae)
161

Figure11.3
Electronmicrograph of theventral side of Dermestes lardarius Linnaeus male (a) and
Dermestes maculatus DeGeer female (b)
162
CH11 THE ECOLOGY OF SOME FORENSICALLY RELEVANT BEETLES

a body should therefore be interpreted on the basis of dermestid population size,
as well as temperature.
An example of this phenomenon was provided by Lee Goff (2000). He noted the
last larval skins were shed 51 days after the death of an individual and commented
on the fragility of these freshly shed dermestid larval cuticles. This fragility, in
conjunction with the presence of other species that were also found at similar
Hawaiian locations between 48 and 51 days after death, indicated a post mortem
interval of greater than this period. However, the freshness of the shed dermestid
cuticles on the body, with the absence of larvae, suggested that time since death was
not much greater than 51 days. Rapid completion of the larval stage, with the
resultant remnants of larval cuticle, may have been a response to dermestid
population density. Goff commented that in Hawaii there was forensic signiﬁcance
in the absence of Dermestes maculatus larvae where they might be expected to be
present at a crime scene.
An association between dermestids and other species is signiﬁcant. Arnaldos et al.
(2005), examining insect succession on corpses in south-eastern Spain, recorded
Nitidulidae and Dermestidae at the same stage of decomposition, linking their
presence on the body at temperatures common to that location. Post mortem interval
is most accuratewhen based on evidence of presence of several beetle species that are
normally found in association, rather than solely on a single species of beetle.
11.3
Ecology of clown beetles (Histeridae)
Clownbeetlesarriveonthebodyatbloatandremainthroughthedecaystagesandinto
the dry stage. Histerid larvae and adults feed on the larvae ofﬂies colonising the body
in these decomposition stages. Stevenson and Cocke (2000) explored the lifecycle of
Arcinops pumilo (Ericson). In laboratory-bred cultures, adult Arcinops pumilo will
consume between three and 24 muscid eggs per day whilst larva will consume two to
three eggs a day in order to develop satisfactorily. At 20–25 C, histerid beetles take
from 31 to 62 days to pass through their lifecycle from egg to adult (Crowson, 1981).
The eggs and larvae produced at this temperature tend to be large, indicating that this
is an optimum temperature. However clown beetles are also photophobic and
colonise the underside of the body during the day, emerging at night to feed.
Adult histerids secrete small drops of a pungent liquid from the ventral surface of
their thorax and abdomen as a defence. In so doing, they frequently turn over, so their
ventral surface is uppermost. Members of this family also appear, when touched, to
be ‘dead’. This ability to demonstrate thanatosis is a common defence mechanism
found in a number of insect species and care should be taken when handling and
storing them.
The decomposition stage, in which histerid beetles are present on the corpse,
varies depending upon location. Korvarik (1995) found that histerid beetles arrived
on the body soon after ﬂies had colonised it. This supports the ﬁndings of Payne
11.3 ECOLOGY OF CLOWN BEETLES (Histeridae)
163

(1965) who recorded them during bloat, which occurred from day 1, in active and
advanced decay stages, as well as in the initial dry stages of decomposition, which
was recorded from day 5 onwards. Wolff et al. (2001), in contrast, recorded the
arrival of adult histerids on the corpse in active decay between 7–12 days after death.
They recorded the presence of larvae between days 77–118, at the later stages of
decomposition. Richards and Goff (1997), investigating insect succession on pigs
placed in woods at different altitudes in Hawaii, recorded Hister noma Erichson and
Saprinus lugens Erichson in their collections. They, too, stated that histerid beetles
invaded a body at the end of the bloat stage.
Shubeck (1968) considered that habitat played a large role in determining whether
or not histerids were attracted to a corpse. He found that, in still air, histerids
perceived odour from sources a metre away, although capture/recapture experiments
demonstrated little evidence of histerid orientation to bait sources. Because little
information is available that links the duration of the stages of metamorphosis to
histerid colonisation of the body at speciﬁc temperatures, they are not valuable as
post-mortem indicator species.
11.4
Ecology of chequered or bone beetles (Cleridae)
This family has been classiﬁed by someworkers as members of the Cornetidae rather
than Cleridae; although other researchers have retained the family name Cleridae
(Kulshrestha and Satpathy, 2001). The use of the word Cleridae for the family name
has been chosen in this account, as it is a familiar term in forensic entomology.
Cleridae feed on carrion and are often called bone beetles. Cleridae have been
found from bloat through to the dry stage of decomposition, although, the association
with a particular decomposition stage may differ from country to country. For
example in the UK, the clerid beetle Necrobia can be associated with dry carcasses
and bone remains (Cooter, in Cooter and Barclay, 2006). In India, Cleridae and
Dermestidae are the most common beetles infesting the dry stage of decomposition
of human remains (Kulshrestha and Satpathy, 2001). They recorded Necrobia ruﬁpes
on remains where the average temperature was 16.5 C and the relative humidity was
71%; although this species has also been recorded at higher temperatures and a
relative humidity of 46%. Necrobia ruﬁpes is called the red-legged bacon beetle and
is a noted stored product pest. It is 4–5 mm long and dark blue in colour. Its legs, and
the segments at the base of the antennae, are red.
The biology of Necrobia ruﬁpes has been studied experimentally in a light/dark
regime of 8:16 hours, at a temperature of 30  0.5 C and a relative humidity of
80%  5%. The average number of eggs laid per female is 89.7  17.8 (Bhuiyan and
Saifullah, 1997). The average egg stage duration is 4.1  0.4 days. The length of
the larval stage was calculated to be 32.1  5.2 days and that of the pupal stage to
be 9.9  1.7 days. Female Necrobia ruﬁpes have an average lifespan of
60.6  39.5 days, whilst for males it is shorter (49.4  18.2 days).
164
CH11 THE ECOLOGY OF SOME FORENSICALLY RELEVANT BEETLES

Clerids such as Necrobia ruﬁpes begin to be attracted whenvolatile fatty acids and
caseic breakdown products are released from the body (Turchetto, Laﬁsca and
Constantini, 2001). Unpublished work by Bovingdon, recorded by Munro (1966),
indicated that this species was attracted by the stearic and palmitic acids released
during fungal growth. It tends to be found on bodies in association with cheese
skipper ﬂies (Piophilidae). Turchetto et al. conﬁrmed this association when exam-
ining the strangled corpse of a young woman found in a cornﬁeld in northern Italy,
whose badly decomposed body had been damaged post mortem by a tractor.
Necrobia ruﬁpes was found along with the third larval instar of the piophilid
Stearibia nigriceps Meigen, a species that is also a member of the British diptera.
Richards and Goff (1997) cite Necrobia ruﬁpes as an important forensic indicator
species in Hawaii. In Peru, a study of succession of arthropods in July to October on
corpses showed that Necrobia ruﬁpes made up 0.45% of the total insects recovered
(4405 specimens) (Iannacone, 2003).
In the dry stage Necrobia ruﬁpes and Dermestes maculatus can be present on a
body at the same time, although their interspeciﬁc competition has an effect on the
population growth of both species (Odeyemi, 1997). At 20 C, Dermestes maculatus
will outcompete Necrobia ruﬁpes, whereas at 32 C both species are able to coexist
on the same body. This suggests that Necrobia ruﬁpes may be at the extreme of its
environmental tolerance and tends to support the previous records of its success
earlier in the decomposition sequence.
The presence of clerids may inﬂuence interpretation of the cause of death of the
corpse. Members of this family, along with silphids and histerids have been found to
cause damage to the cadaver skin and these marks at ﬁrst sight resemble gunshot
wounds. Such holes served as holes for breeding in, or resulted from feeding
(Benecke, 2004). Therefore care should be taken in interpreting damage on well
decomposed bodies where there is evidence of the presence of members of any of
these three families.
11.5
Ecology of rove beetles (Staphylinidae)
Rove beetles are predators ofﬂy colonisers feeding on the body and they feed on both
the eggs and larvae. They arrive early on the corpse and are expected to be present
when the corpse is in bloat. Chapman and Sankey (1955) recorded the following
species of rove beetle on rabbit carcasses in the UK: Anotylus (¼Oxytelus)
sculpteratus Gravenhorst, Philonthus laminatus (Creutzer); Philonthus fuscipennis
(Mannerheim) Creophilus maxillosus, Tachinus ruﬁpes (Degeer); Aleochara curtula
(Goeze). These carcasses were placed within 30–40 m of each other in shrubbery,
under a plane tree or in thick meadow grass. Goff and Flynn (1991) recovered
specimens of the same genus – Philonthus (adult Philonthus longicornis Stephens)
from samples of sandy soil and leaf litter, from beneath where a body had lain at
11.5 ECOLOGY OF ROVE BEETLES (Staphylinidae)
165

Mokuleia, Oahu, Hawaii. Therefore their association with particular habitat condi-
tions may be geographically variable.
The presence of Staphylinidaevaries with season and location. In spring, Centeno,
Maldonado and Oliva (2002) recorded Staphylinidae on an unsheltered corpse
throughout the stages of decomposition. In summer, however, staphylinids were
absent from the unsheltered corpse and only recorded in a sheltered corpse during the
bloat stage. In contrast, in autumn, Staphylinidaewere recorded in both the advanced
decay and dry stages of decomposition on the unsheltered corpse. Their presence
must be interpreted in the light of environmental conditions such as temperature and
exposure to sunlight.
11.6
The ecology of dung beetles and related families
The superfamily Scarabaeoidea has been the topic of much discussion amongst
taxonomists. Ratcliffe and Jameson (2004) have discussed the current state of
taxonomy and their views on lineages within the classiﬁcation have been taken
into account in the following descriptions.
There are three families contained within the superfamily Scarabaeoidea that have
forensic relevance. These are the Trogidae, Geotrupidae, and the Scarabaeidaewhich
is also part of the Geotrupidae lineage.
11.6.1
Geotrupidae
Geotrupes species are exclusively dung and carrion feeders. Nuorteva (1977)
collected Geotrupes stercorosus Scriba from a partially buried corpse in Finland.
Whilst Gill (2005) concluded that speciﬁc Geotrupidae species had an association
with particular soil types. She noted that Geotrupidae were typically found in areas
with sandier soil types. The presence of Geotrupes sp. may therefore be valuable in
indicating whether or not a body has been moved, if the soil is not of this type but the
presence of Geotrupes is noted. The second family of interest to forensic entomol-
ogists, within the superfamily, is the Trogidae. These are carrion feeders at the later
stages of decomposition (Figure 11.4).
11.6.2
Ecology of trogid beetles (Trogidae)
Trogid beetles are found at the dry stage of decomposition. Trogid larvae are easily
recognisable, if present, as they have a typical ‘C’ shape. The larvae are reputed to
thrive on skin, hair and the remnants of tissue which is dried onto the remaining
skeletal bones. Trogid beetles have been recorded on dry tissue in various seasons.
166
CH11 THE ECOLOGY OF SOME FORENSICALLY RELEVANT BEETLES

Tabor, Brewster and Fell (2004), studying succession on a pig in southwest Virginia,
considered them spring colonisers on the dry stage of decomposition. However in
Manitoba, Canada, Gill (2005) recorded Trox unistratus Beauvaris throughout the
summer, autumn and spring. The family, therefore, seems to be speciﬁc to the later
decomposition stage, but not to a particular season. Archer and Elgar (2003) noted
that members of several Australian families of beetles including Omorgus sp., a
member of the Trogidae, and the histerid Saprinus sp., left exoskeleton fragments by
which evidence of their previous presence could be identiﬁed.
11.6.3
Ecology of dung beetles (Scarabaeidae)
Scarabaeidae or dung beetles have been known from Egyptian times in relation to
dead bodies. Scarabaeidae inhabit tunnels that they construct beneath a corpse.
Two of the most common genera of Scarabaeidae on bodies are Onthophagus and
Aphodius (Payne and King, 1972). As with many other beetle species, because
they are not immediately obvious on a corpse, so their presence can be missed as
they hide.
In astudyin an urbanarea, conductedin south-eastern Brazil dungbeetles were the
second most frequent coloniser of pig carcasses; the calliphorid Chrysoma albicepes
was the major coloniser (Carvalho et al., 2000). Three species of dung beetle were
considered by Carvalho et al., to be important forensic indicators for post mortem
determination because they had been recovered from both human cadavers and pig
carcasses in forested habitats near Campinas City, Brazil. Deltochilum brasiliensis
Castelnau, and Eurysternus parallelus Castelnau, which were found on human
cadavers. Coprophanaeus (Megaphanaeus) ensifer (Germar), were found with
Figure 11.4
Geotrupid beetle
11.6 THE ECOLOGY OF DUNG BEETLES AND RELATED FAMILIES
167

Canthon sp., and Scybalocanthon sp., were found on both pig and human corpses.
Despite this association, a corpse present in a suitable habitat rather than a particular
stage of decomposition appears to be the deciding factor in whether or not
Scarabaeidae colonise a body in any geographic region.
11.7
Ecology of ground beetles (Carabidae)
Carabids are predators of necrophagous ﬂies and are most frequently active at
night. Larvae of Nebria, Notiophilus, Carabus and Pterostichus species are
frequently found on the soil surface (Luff, in Cooter and Barclay, 2006). There
are few examples of the contribution of the ground beetles to succession on the
corpse and Smith (1986) considered that they were of less importance as predators
than other beetle families.
Carabids may be responsible for the degree of variation in the assemblage of
insects responding to both season and stage of decomposition of the corpse. Only in
the context of the local conditions can succession can be used to determine the time
since death of a corpse at a crime scene. At the crime scene, attention should be given
to examining the underside of the body for beetles that are hiding in soil during the
day. The predatory effects of families such as carabids, which consume eggs or
larvae, can cause a gap in the insect proﬁle for a particular stage of succession and this
should be considered when interpreting the evidence.
168
CH11 THE ECOLOGY OF SOME FORENSICALLY RELEVANT BEETLES

12
Investigations in an aquatic
environment
In 2009, in the UK, 427 deaths were associated with water according to the
Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (Royal Society for the Prevention of
Accidents, www.rospa.com/leisuresafety/statistics/accidental-drownings-2005.aspx,
accessed 4 November 2011). In general, of the people who die in water, 31% would
be drowned in rivers, 15% at sea, 6% in lakes and reservoirs, 10% on canals, 4% in
streams, 4% in ports and 4% in harbours. The rest relate to drowning in the context of
dwellings (Department of Trade and Industry, 2001).
Forensic entomologists are frequently required to determine the amount of time
between the discovery of the drowned corpse and the time it became submerged, in
order to assist the investigations being carried out by pathologists. The cause of
submergence is not necessarily an aspect of interest for the forensic entomologist but
how long the body has been in water is of importance. This period between
submergence and discovery is often called the post mortem submergence interval
(PMSI). This terminology (the use of the word ‘submergence’) is particularly
important as there is still discussion about the exact deﬁnition of death by drowning.
The difﬁculty in diagnosing such a death is due to the variation in physical attributes
expressed by the victims (Piette and DeLetter, 2006).
It is not just a matter of deﬁning drowning on the basis that a liquid, most often
water, is preventing gas exchange because the respiratory tract – nose to lungs – have
become blocked by the ﬂuid. The physical features expressed by victims of drowning
vary. But in general it would be expected that the body hangs submerged in water
with its face and limbs hanging downwards so the body forms an ‘n’ shape with the
back uppermost under the water. Drowning is difﬁcult to determine based on body
condition and a number of techniques have been developed to investigate the
condition. For example, a speciﬁc diagnosis using a bacteriological test has been
developed to diagnose drowning (Lucci et al., 2008) based on particular microbio-
logical features. Other researchers have attempted to distinguish the condition (death
as a result of drowning) in salt and freshwater on the basis of alveolar macrophage
levels (Locali, de Almeida and de Oliveira, 2006). However no standard operating
procedures appear, as yet, to exist to conﬁrm that the death has been by drowning.
The forensic entomologist, however, can potentially explore time since submergence
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

based upon the arthropods present on the submerged decomposing corpse and the
rates ofdevelopmentto providean estimate oftheminimumtimesince submergence.
Or they can use the fact that, on many occasions, the decomposing corpse will rise to
the surface of the water and become infested by terrestrial species of insects,
pinpointing the time when the body re-emerged.
12.1
Decomposition and submergence in water
Under water and within in the intertidal zone, the body will still exhibit ﬁve
decomposition stages. However, distinctions in the decomposition process relate
to whether, or not, gas in the gut has caused the body to rise to the surface, or whether
the body is trapped and therefore remains submerged. Little work has been
undertaken to examine and characterise the succession of organisms of importance
for aquatic forensic entomology. However, the work of Payne and King (1972), Chin
et al. (2008b) and Anderson (2010) provide some details of the sequence of
colonisation on bodies which decompose in water. The sequence is outlined below:
Submerged fresh stage
Floating decay stage
Bloated deterioration stage
Sunken remains
Payne and King also included the category of ﬂoating remains, which was not
included in the sequence that Chin et al. recorded. The reason for this observational
difference may be a difference in water temperature and hence speed of decomposi-
tion.Localconditionswilldeterminewhetherthereisaspeciﬁcassemblageofinsects
and macroinvertebrates present when the body is submerged. If the body rises to the
water surface this tends to be the point at which a body is noticed and recovered from
thewater.Theperiodoftimeafterdeathwhenthistakesplacewilldependonthewater
temperature. At around 21 C a body may resurface 24 hours later; at 16 C a body
may resurface between 48 and 72 hours, whilst at 10 C it will take around 72 to
96 hours for re-emergence at the water surface. At 4 C it will be considerably longer
and could take a period greater than six days for the corpse to rise to thewater surface.
Thetimeofresurfacingdependsuponwaterdepthandotherfeaturesofthewaterbody
besides temperature, such as presence of clothing and speed of water movement.
The relationship between time of death and physical breakdown of the body has
been investigated by Giertsen (1977). He cited Casper’s dictum as a means of
determining the length of the post mortem interval. This rule says that:
at a tolerable similar average temperature, the degree of putrefaction present in a
body lying in the open air for oneweek (month) corresponds to that found in a body
170
CH12 INVESTIGATIONS IN AN AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT

after lying in the water for two weeks (months), or lying in the earth in the usual
manner for eight weeks (months).
The reason for this difference in decomposition is that the speed at which the body
loses heat in water is much faster than the speed at which the body will lose heat in air.
A naked corpse, submerged in water will cool twice as fast as the naked body on land.
Howeverthecoolingratewillalsodependonthebodytemperatureatdeath(assuming
death took place in the water), water temperature, and the effects of water currents.
Decomposition is also impeded by the presence of clothing on the deceased.
Initially a number of physical changes can occur to a body submerged in water. For
example regions of the body become wrinkly in a process called skin maceration,
often called ‘Washer woman hands’. In this condition there is thickening, wrinkling,
and whitening of the skin, often starting in the ﬁngers. The changes, occurring ﬁrstly
Box 12.1
Skin structure
The human skin is a tissue made up of cells in a number of layers. Over the
majority of the body there are two distinct sections: the epidermis, and the
dermis. Beneath the skin there is also a layer of connective tissue. This is called
the superﬁcial fascia and sits between the dermis and the covering of the
muscles beneath. The dermis is anchored by ﬁbres onto this superﬁcial fascia.
The ﬁrst layer, the epidermis – counting from the external skin surface – has
four layers; on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet there are ﬁve layers.
The epidermis is made up of a corny layer of rows of ﬂat dead cells ﬁlled with
keratin (the external layer), a clear layer (found only in epidermis of the palms
of the hands and the soles of the feet), a granular layer, a spiny layer and the
lowest layer which is called the basal layer. This layer is a single layer of cells
that are cuboidal or columnar in shape. This layer of cells is capable of mitosis
and therefore the source of skin renewal during life
The dermis is made of connective tissue comprising ﬁbres of collagen and
elastin. The dermis is thicker on the dorsal plane than the ventral plane of the
body. The dermis contains nerves, glands, hair follicles, and blood vessels. The
top ﬁfth of the dermal depth is called the dermal papillary region. In this region
the connective tissue is loose and the elastin ﬁbres are ﬁne. The dermal surface
has ﬁnger like projections pushing into the epidermis. These projections are
called dermal papillae and many have a good supply of blood provided by
capillary loops.
The bottom four-ﬁfths of the dermis is made up of bigger elastin ﬁbres
interlaced with collagenous ﬁbres within a dense and irregularly arranged mass
of connective tissue. Between the ﬁbre spaces there is adipose tissue along with
the glands, blood vessels and hair follicles and sweat gland ducts. This latter
layer is called the reticular layer of the dermis.
12.1 DECOMPOSITION AND SUBMERGENCE IN WATER
171

at the ﬁngertips, on the palms and backs of hands, soles and backs of feet, can
subsequently occur at the elbows and knees. Frequently this can take placewithinone
to two hours after submergence (Heaton et al., 2010). It is the result of the epidermis
detaching, the corny layer splitting and decomposition of the granular layer and the
basal layer of the epidermis of the skin. Fibres can also rupture in the hypodermis, the
layer beneath the skin epidermis.
If the body is in water for a long time the nails loosen and the skin peels from the
hands. The time for this to happen also depends on temperature. For example in
riverine conditions at 3.2 C (winter temperatures) the nails can loosen after seven to
eight weeks whereas at 18.6 C they loosen after three days (Reh, 1969). Some
forensic scientists have recorded contraction of the erector pili muscles associated
with the hair follicles, possibly as a result of rigor, although this has also been
recorded on bodies which have died in terrestrial environments too (Saukko and
Knight, 2004).
The passage of the body into rigor mortis can be slowed down if the water
temperature is low. However, the obverse can also take place – where a victim in the
process of drowning has struggled a great deal this can lead to a more rapid onset of
rigor mortis, which is strongly expressed and lasts a long time.
As with decomposing bodies on land, the corpse passes through hypostasis. This
can occur on any region of the body as the corpse, if dead through drowning, may
have moved because of the water currents, tidal movements or local water turbu-
lence. Hypostasis is most often seen in the face, upper chest region, thighs, calves,
and feet because of the position of the body in the water once it has sunk – the
characteristic ‘n’ shape where the head and feet generally end up facing downwards.
Putrefaction of the body is slow because of a lack of bacterial and insect activity.
This affects the rate at which thegas builds up in thegut and the body can begin to rise
to the surface. Once it does this the rate of decomposition speeds up. Chemical
changes also occur in the body. For example, after 13 days of submergence, ethanol
levels of 104 mg ml1 have been recorded in the tissue of rats drowned and then
retained in water (Iribe, Ueno and Mukai, 1974).
The increase in speed of decomposition is also the result of exposure to the air and
also to the presence of terrestrial insects, which supplement colonising aquatic
macro-invertebrates such as stoneﬂies (Plecoptera) (Figure 12.1), May ﬂies
(Ephemeroptera) (Figure 12.2), midge larvae (Chironomidae) (Figure 12.4),
Caddisﬂies (such as the Limnephilidae) (Figure 12.5 – also see the colour section)
and other arthropods such as water snails (Figure 12.3), which feed on the body.
Factors that are considered to alter the rate of decay are when the body entered the
water, thewater temperature, thewater pH and in particular acidity whether or not the
body was clothed, the biomass including body fat and whether the body is consumed
by scavengers such as mink, rats, ﬁsh such as pike or snapping turtles (see the colour
section) (Hobischak and Anderson, 2002).
Some terrestrial species can be submerged when the body enters the water,
particularly if drowning is the cause of death rather than submergence being a
source of disposal. Where thevictim is host to lice, ﬂeas and ticks the degree towhich
172
CH12 INVESTIGATIONS IN AN AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT

these survive is an indicator of time since death. Fleas, if present on the body, will
survive up to 24 hours post submergence (Simpson, 1985). According to Simpson it
is possible to revive ﬂeas up to this point and time to revival is a measure of the post
mortem interval. Lice, in contrast will be dead if the body is submerged for longer
than 12 hours (Mumcuoglu et al., 2004).
Figure 12.2
Ephemeroptera
Figure 12.1
Stoneﬂies
12.1 DECOMPOSITION AND SUBMERGENCE IN WATER
173

In addition to a knowledge of terrestrial arthropods, especially insects, it is
necessary to have a good knowledge of the species present in the particular water
body, even if this has to be achieved by subsequent experimentation. Such species
include those in the crustacea as well as insect species. The collective name most
suitable for the relevant group is the macroinvertebrates.
Figure 12.4
Nonbiting midges: an example of the Chironomidae
Figure 12.3
Molluscs feed as scrapers. Source: Reproduced by permission of Mr. Ian Ward
174
CH12 INVESTIGATIONS IN AN AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT

Keiper, Chapman, and Foote (1997) have pointed out that there may be dif-
ferences in the macroinvertebrate assemblages for rifﬂes and pools even in the
same river. Hence, they suggest the development of different indices for calculat-
ing the post-mortem submerged interval depending on the particular conditions.
This view is supported by work by MacDonnell and Anderson (1997) amongst
others. Davis and Goff (2000) concluded that, in the intertidal zone, carcass
decomposition resulting in loss of ﬂesh was based mostly upon physical battering
from the tidal cycle and wave action, along with bacterial decomposition. They
found this to be true even though both marine and terrestrial scavengers were
present at the sites.
Figure 12.6
(a) Corixid bug (b) Notonecta nymph
Figure 12.5
A Caddisﬂy larva
12.1 DECOMPOSITION AND SUBMERGENCE IN WATER
175

12.2
The nature of the water bodies in which
submergence may take place
As indicated earlier, submerged bodies can be found in a range of locations from the
sea, lakes and rivers to garden ponds and bath tubs. In the latter the body is likely to
be found relatively quickly as the water is associated with domestic residences. In
lakes, rivers (Figure 12.7) and the sea, the nature of the water and its associated
fauna and ﬂora will differ. The features of lakes and rivers are considered in this
section.
Water bodies such as ponds and lakes (Lentic water) are much more static water
bodies than rivers (Lotic water bodies) and tend to be of greater depth. In winter ice
may cover the surface of part of a lake (or pond) and thewater is dense and a layer of
4 C is located at the bottom, with cooler but less densewater at the top. In spring the
surface water will warm up. Once the lake surface water reaches 4 C, it will
become denser and sink down the water column. Given a windy day the water in the
lake will intermix for a sort time. As the weather warms up so the stratiﬁcation of
the lakewater returns so that the surfacewater may reach a temperature of 18–20 C
whilst the lower layers are cooler and may be around 12–14 C, depending upon the
depth. It is this lower temperature that bodies submerged in the lake bottom will
experience provided they are trapped in position and the water body water
temperature is at some point in the year stratiﬁed. This temperature will affect
the decomposition rate of the body. The nature of the water will also affect what is
living in the water.
Aquatic plants can grow around the lake shore in a small depth of water, be
anchored onto the bottom of the lake or pond, or ﬂoat on the water surface. In the
Figure 12.7
The rifﬂes and pools of a river
176
CH12 INVESTIGATIONS IN AN AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT

water plankton may be growing including algae which are capable of photo-
synthesising. If the water allows light to penetrate to depth, the algae may also be
growing upon solid surfaces within the lake, including on the clothes. These in
combination with other microbial organisms may form a bioﬁlm. In lakes the range
of macroinvertebrate families found includes zooplankton such as Cladocera of
which Daphnia pulex Linnaeus is a member, crustacea, molluscs, insects such as
chironomids, odonata and Gerridae, Dytiscidae (Figure 12.8 see also the colour
section) and Gyrinidae and oligochaete worms.
Within lakes, the food web is based on either the bottom-dwelling species or on
the micro-organisms depending upon how eutrophic the water body is. If the
water body is poor in nutrients then the organisms living on the bottom provide
the main source of energy, these include worms, shrimps and molluscs as well as
large aquatic plants and bottom living algae. In water bodies richer in nutrients
there will be a greater population of zooplankton such as protozoa combined with
a high microbial load – bacteria and fungi which act as decomposers of any
decaying plant material as well as consuming the plankton in the water. In
addition the chironomid larvae including blood worms and oligochaete worms
will feed on detritus. The predators that consume these creatures will include
freshwater shrimps, water beetles and odonata amongst other creatures (see the
colour section).
In rivers, what grows along the bank plays a role in the nature of the food present
in the water body. This is because plant roots can pass down into the water and
vegetation may overhang and drop into the water once it has died. It is therefore a
source of organic material, which is a food source and makes a greater contribution
Figure 12.8
Dytiscid beetle – a predator
12.2 THE NATURE OF THE WATER BODIES IN WHICH SUBMERGENCE MAY TAKE PLACE
177

to the ecology of the river than to a lake. A theory that relates the communities
present based on their functional feeding strategies and the available energy
sources at different points down an ever widening, moving water body such as a
river is called the river continuum concept (Vannote et al.,1980). Such differ-
ences in macroinvertebrate assemblages, based on the nature of the available
organic carbon, can be replicated at a localised site if a submerged decomposing
body is present.
Micro-organisms provide a bioﬁlm covering to the available surfaces and
within these structures bacteria, fungi and algae coexist with the organic material.
Micro-organisms break down the organic material, which is contributed to the
ﬂowing water as well as organic matter such as leaves, which naturally decay. Some
creatures will feed upon the submerged leaves and assist in their breakdown and the
release offragments of organic matter into thewater. In many streams, caddisﬂies are
found alongside ﬂies – which have an aquatic larval stage – beetles, and amphipods
such as Ascellus sp. (Figure 12.9).
Such habitats are very well oxygenated, which facilitates the survival of May ﬂies
and stone ﬂies. Along a river, the proportion of invertebrates will change depending
upon whether there is a lot of organic matter in the form of vegetation and other
organic matter through to locations where ﬁne sediment dominates and the quantity
of plankton is higher. A dead body provides a sudden inﬂux of organic material and,
as such. will alter the proportions of different organisms that can utilise the body and
feed off it or off the organisms which are feeding on it. These may change as the
corpse slowly decomposes.
Figure 12.9
Ascellus sp. a shredder
178
CH12 INVESTIGATIONS IN AN AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT

12.3
Methods of establishing time since corpse
submergence – indicator species
Water uptake in submerged macroinvertebrates means that the loss of body weight
over time cannot be used as a means of determining post mortem interval as might be
available for terrestrial corpses. As Haskell et al. (1989) point out, there are no
obvious indicator species for determining post mortem submergence interval as
might be available for terrestrial species. It is the developmental sequence and the
biology of particular arthropods that are speciﬁc to a particular habitat which are
most useful. However physical conditions such as body size, its position, water
temperature, the exposure of the body to currents and the current speed, which
determine rate of body decomposition, also determine the organisms that choose to
colonise the body.
The macroinvertebrate families that have been most often found on decomposing
bodies in fresh water are the chironomid midges (Chironomidae) and the net-
spinning and cased caddis ﬂies (Trichoptera). Crabs, lobsters and predatory and
carrion-feeding ﬁsh such as sharks are attracted to bodies submerged in marine or
brackish environments. Not only is the family and species required to determine the
minimum time since submergence – it is also necessary to determine the abundance
of the individual species because some may be present for the greater part of the year,
so the presence and absence of particular species alone is insufﬁcient to determine
PMSI (Hobischak and Anderson, 2002).
The majority of work on forensic entomology in freshwater environments has
drawn on either species presence or the responses of different feeding groups.
Cummins and Merritt (1996) related food habitat, diet and the morphology of the
mouthparts; they assigned macroinvertebrates to functional feeding classes.
Five functional feeding groups were identiﬁed which are relevant to submerged
post mortem investigation. These are scrapers or grazers, collectors, ﬁlterers,
shredders, and predators (See SB12.2 on organic carbon for an explanation of these
feeding types). Two subgroups can be assigned to collectors these are ﬁlterers and
gathers (collector-ﬁlterers and collector-gatherers).
. Scrapers. This functional feeding group is made up of organisms that are plant
feeding and thosewhich feed on detritus (herbivores and detritivores). Examples of
these types of feeders include mayﬂies such as the Heptageniidae and caddis ﬂies
(including the Glossomatidae) as well as molluscs such as water snails. If there are
a large population of scrapers it indicates a large amount of organisms attached to
the body which form food (periphyton). Interestingly the percentage of scrapers
has been found to indicate a change in the nature of the habitat following oil
spillage, which also results in an increase in both dead bodies and also abundant
organic matter (Resh, 1994).
. Shredders: this group also comprises a large number of detritivores and herbivores.
However these creatures feed on living and dead matter made up of coarse
12.3 METHODS OF ESTABLISHING TIME SINCE CORPSE SUBMERGENCE
179

particulate organic matter (CPOM). The group, however, is disturbed by water
movements and so is less likely to be found where a body is trapped and the
current is moved – perturbed. This group – shredders, includes many of the
families of stone ﬂy (Plecoptera) such as members of the American genus
Pteronarcy (salmonﬂies) and the freshwater shrimps such as Gammarus spp
(see the colour section). Tipulidae (crane ﬂies or long horns) are members of
the diptera. Their aquatic larvae feed as shredders. Members of the genus
Tipula include species such as Tipula maxima Pod, which is found on the
edges of streams and ponds in the larval stage but pupate on land. Other
genera that can be found in fresh water from ponds, beneath stones or buried
in sediment of ﬂowing streams, include members of the Dicranota sp., and
Pedicia sp.
. Collectors. This group comprises both gatherers and ﬁlterers. Both of these groups
can be considered as generalist feeders. Collector-ﬁlterers include suspension
feeders, which can be herbivores, carnivores, or detritivores. Such members
include blackﬂies (Simulidae) and net-spinning caddis ﬂies (Hydropsychidae).
The food materials used by this group are the ﬁne organic particulate matter (often
termed FPOM). They can use ﬁlamentous algae to attach themselves to a
particular site.
. Gatherers. This feeding subgroup is made up of animals that feed as detritivores
and herbivores and are deposit feeders. Examples of these types of collector-
gatherer feeders include the chironomids, some members of the Trichoptera
(caddis ﬂies) and the may ﬂies (Ephemeroptera). Barbour et al. (1996) have
pointed out that collector-gatherers are a dominant group where there is organic
enrichment. This is a situation that would be found where a submerged body is
breaking down under advanced decay.
. Predators. This feeding group is attracted by the presence of living organisms – the
other feeding strategists, in association with the body (Figure 12 ab). Examples of
such organisms include the dytiscid beetles, damselﬂy and dragonﬂy larvae, later
stage caddis ﬂies and several predatory beetle larvae.
Changes in the proportions of the different functional feeding groups, over
time, has been found to be a valuable means of estimating the time since
submergence (Merritt and Wallace, 2010). However, simply because a species
in one habitat is a member of a particular feeding group may not necessarily hold
true for it being present in another. The presence of a particular species is
dependent on its habitat preferences. Equally food choice may alter over time or
with differing circumstances. It has frequently been noted in the literature that
herbivores and fruit eaters will include animal matter in their diet whilst those we
ascribe to the predatory class may also include ‘vegetable matter’ in their diets
(Buck et al., 2003).
180
CH12 INVESTIGATIONS IN AN AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT

Box 12.2
Organic carbon in the food web
Organic material in a water body comes either from within the water body or
falls into it in the form of material of terrestrial origin such as leaves or wood
and such unusual or intermittent sources as a human corpse. The dead bodies of
aquatic species will also supplement this source of organic carbon – carbohy-
drates, fats and proteins.
In aquatic systems, particularly rivers and streams, organic carbon is
captured from the sun by photosynthetic phytoplankton such as algae
(micro-organisms) and aquatic plants, and is supplemented by the carbon
released from dead organisms and as waste material. This material, in a variety
of forms, is used as nutrients in a food or feeding web.
The initial breakdown of tissue provides coarse organic material (so called
CPOM). Such material is initially colonised by micro-organisms, which use the
material as food and release nutrients and smaller chunks of detritus from the
coarse material. Solid surfaces such as leaves or the body are covered with large
populations of micro-organisms which mass over the surface as a bioﬁlm.
Because of the breakdown of the surfaces they also release dissolved organic
carbon (DOC) directly into the water, particularly where bacteria and fungi
dominate such as will happen on the skin surface of a corpse, and when the gut
microbialcontentisreleasedintothelocalarea.Thesurfacesofallthefragments
of material will also leach dissolved organic carbon, increasing its availability.
Organisms that feed on the surface of the bioﬁlm are called grazers. The
breakdown products arising from this are available as large fragments. Macro-
invertebrates called Shredders consume these large fragments. During feeding
by this group consumed smaller fragments are produced. These are called ﬁne
particulate organic material (FPOM). Not only are the physical remnants a
source of ﬁne particulate matter – so are the waste products and faecal material
from the macroinvertebrates. The organisms that consume FPOM are termed
collectors. The nature of the collection of the ﬁne organic material dictates the
name of thegroup. Those that take up the ﬁne particles from the bed of thewater
body are termed collector-gatherers; those that collect ﬁne particulate material
ﬂoating past in the water are called collector-ﬁlterers.
Each of these categories offeeders provides food for predators. Interestingly,
some organisms will switch their feeding group as they pass through the life
stages. Macroinvertebrates, which, when small, are collectors of the ﬁne
particulate matter can become predators once they are big enough to manipu-
late the other invertebrates and eat them.
The size of the populations of each of the feeding groups will depend upon
the proportion of ﬁne and coarse organic matter in the locality and also the size
of the water body. Where there is a large amount of organic matter so the
abundance of shredders will be large. However the availability of sunlight will
dictate the abundance of the bioﬁlm and hence the availability of grazers.
12.3 METHODS OF ESTABLISHING TIME SINCE CORPSE SUBMERGENCE
181

12.4
Attractants to the corpse
The submerged body produces cues that alert aquatic arthropods that it is there
because of the release of different chemicals in the form of the dissolved organic
carbon. Such materials can include proteins, amino acids, carbohydrates, fats and
fatty acids. According to Zimmer-Faust (1987) a number of marine crustacean, like
the spiny lobster or hermit crabs, for example, depend almost exclusively on
chemoreception to determine the presence and appropriateness of potential food.
The ratio of amino acids that diffuse out of the body and the quantities of ammonia
that are generated by micro-organisms associated with the body provide an indica-
tion ofits nutritional value for such organisms. Examples of the amino acids thathave
stimulatory effects as attractants causing orientation to the food include glycine and
taurine. Concentrations of amino acids can be very low at around 1011 mol l1.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the chemical energy source in respiration in humans,
is an attractant for the spiny lobster, although for Palaemonetes pugio (Holthius)
adenosine 50-monophosphate (AMP) is an attractant (Carr and Thompson, 1983).
The presence of ammonia, a breakdown product produced during active decay and
postdecay because of protein breakdown, reduced the attractiveness of the feeding
stimulants in some species such as the spiny lobster. However for some detritivores
and scavengers it is an attractant.
12.5
Methods of culturing aquatic insects
The methods for culturing and maintaining the species of macroinvertebrates
recovered from a corpse are discussed, along with the methods for culturing
terrestrial species described in Chapter 8. In all instances, water quality and large
sized tanks often with oxygenation are required.
12.6
Algae an alternative source of determining time
since submergence
The body can provide a solid surface, which is rapidly colonised by periphyton such
as algae where sunlight passes down through the water to provide a source of energy
for photosynthesis. Over time the algae provide a food source for the scrapers and
grazers that are found in the water.
Forensic entomologists recognise the advantage of a supplementary source of
information by which to conﬁrm their conclusions. Algae have been found to be a
useful alternative source of information about time since submergence, particularly
in the ﬁrst month after the body has entered the water. Haefner, Wallace and Merritt
182
CH12 INVESTIGATIONS IN AN AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT

(2004) demonstrated the value of such organisms. This is especially true because
some species of algae may colonise the body early in the decomposition, whilst
others macroinvertebrates will arrive later. In all instances, because these are
photosynthetic plants and hence use chlorophyll- a for food production the concen-
tration of algae will also be reﬂected in the increase in concentration of chlorophyll-
a. Haefner, Wallace and Merritt (2004) revealed a strong correlation with time since
submergence. They did not consider that rain would inﬂuence the results by causing
sloughing of the algae so this is a fairly reliable method of determining time
since death.
12.6 ALGAE AN ALTERNATIVE SOURCE OF DETERMINING TIME SINCE SUBMERGENCE
183

13
The forensic entomologist
in court
The ﬁnal stage of the forensic entomological process is to summarise the ﬁndings and
lay out the conclusions and opinions in the form of an expert’s report. This is based
upon the notes that you have produced as you have been carrying out the investiga-
tion. The report might have been requested for a number of purposes – including as a
source of concise information on the topic, as whoever retained you will not be an
expert in forensic entomology. It may also have been requested in order that the
evidence may be assessed by members of the legal profession, either prosecution or
defence, to determine its strength and value. The report may be used to assist in cross-
examination in relation to an entomological problem that you have been asked to
investigate such as the infestation of a building. This report could, at a later date, be
part of proceedings in a civil court.
In each of these instances, the report has to have a logical pattern of explanation
and clarity of information. If the report is sufﬁciently comprehensive and the
conclusions are stated clearly enough, you may not need to attend court. It is
therefore important that communication of the results of an investigation is clear and
concise. All of the casework notes that you make as you go along should be well
written and available if requested by the court. Information from the crime scene
must be accurately collated and summarised and the information must be stored,
together with the written records and preserved crime-scene specimens and any of
those which were later preserved as the insect lifecycle progressed.
Whilst you might have carried out the investigation and written the report in
response to instruction from a particular person, on all counts your responsibility is to
the court if the matter is going to court – if not, thenyour opinion is likely to be treated
conﬁdentially. It is not to the ‘party’ who is instructing or paying you (Criminal
Procedures Rules 33.2; Civil Procedure Rules (CPR) subsections 35 3.1. and 35.2)
(http://www.justice.gov.uk/guidance/courts-and-tribunals/courts/procedure-rules/
civil/pdf/practice_directions/pd_part35.pdf, accessed 3 November 2011). Nor is it
your role to assist in ‘proving someone guilty’. Suggestions that may assist in
preparing the report in an objective manner are described in the following sections.
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

13.1
The expert’s report
The style of report outlined below relates to the legal system which operates in
England and Wales. It may differ in other countries.
13.1.1
Civil reports
In civil cases, the evidence used in court is generally the written report. The Civil
Justice Council Protocol for the Instruction of Experts (CJPIE s13 summarising
CPR 35 and PD35) (http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/ þ /http://www.jus-
tice.gov.uk/civil/procrules_ﬁn/contents/form_section_images/practice_directions/
pd35_pdf_eps/pd35_prot.pdf, accessed 3 November 2011) outlines 13 components
that need to be included in a civil statement of witness. These include the need for
professional objectivity, indication of disputed relevant facts, a summary of con-
clusions and the factual basis of the opinion expressed.
The report must also include a statement of the material instructions and
information given both in writing and verbally upon which the report is based. If
the opposing ‘party ‘ wishes to ask a question relating to the report once it has been
submitted, the question has to be presented in writing, within 28 days of the
submission (‘serving’) of the expert’s report.
At the end of the report a declaration is needed to indicate that the writer has
complied with his or her duty to the court – including having read the ‘Protocol for
Instruction of Experts to give Evidence in Civil Claims’ – and verifying that there are
no conﬂicts of interest in relation to the case that remain undisclosed.
The mandatory wording of the Statement of Compliance for the Civil Court
(Practice Direction for Civil Procedures Rules (PD) 35 2.2(9)) is as follows:
I understand that my overriding duty is to assist the Court in matters within my
expertise, and that this duty overrides any obligation to those instructing me or
their clients. I conﬁrm I have complied with that duty and will continue to do so, I
am aware of the requirements set out in Part 35 of the Civil Procedure Rules and the
accompanying Practice Direction, the Council Protocol for the Instructions of
Experts to give Evidence in Civil Claims, and the Practice Direction for Pre-action
conduct.
The wording of the Statement of Truth (PD 35 2.2(9) and Protocol for Experts 13.5)
is:
I conﬁrm that I have made clear which facts and matters referred to in this report
are within my own knowledge and which are not. Those that are within my own
knowledge I conﬁrm to be true. The opinions I have expressed represent my true
and complete professional opinions on the matters to which they refer.
THE EXPERT’S REPORT
185

In criminal cases you must also make the following statement in the report,
conﬁrming that you know your duty is to the court:
I understand my duty to the Court and I have complied with that duty and will
continue to comply with that duty. (Criminal Procedure Rules 33.3(1) (I) and (j).)
Beneath these statements are the signature and the date the report is sent out.
Expert evidence is usually in the form of a written report. CPR 35.5 allows that, in
response to that report, written questions can be asked of either a single joint expert or
an expert instructed by the other side. In such a case (CPR 35.6) they can only be put
once and must be submitted 28 days after the expert’s report has been presented. In
general, the purpose of such questions is for clariﬁcation. Such responses are
considered as part of the expert’s report for the civil court. If the expert does not
answer the question two things can happen. The evidence from such an expert cannot
be relied on in court and/or recovery of the costs of the expert cannot be recovered
from anyone else.
13.1.2
Criminal reports
Section 33 of the Criminal Procedures (Amendment No. 2) Rules 2006 (‘CPR 06’) –
‘Expert Evidence’, an amendment of the Criminal Justice Act (CJ), considers expert
evidence. The content of the expert report is outlined in Rule 33.3 in which 15
components are speciﬁed as part of the report content.
The criminal expert report structure has to follow a logical thread so that the
nonexpert can understand it. Under the relevant Acts, the statement could potentially
just be read aloud in court, unless it is directed that an oral account be given in person
by the expert. The report must therefore bewrittenvery clearly and simply. Only with
the agreement of the judge can expert witnesses be called to court to explain the
contents of their report.
At the end of the report there is a Statement of Truth. This has a mandatory content,
which is: ‘I understand that my overriding duty is to the court and I have complied
with, and will continue to comply with, that duty. This report is true to the best of my
knowledge and belief, and I know that if it is introduced in evidence then it will be an
offencewilfully to have stated in it anything that I knew to be false and did not believe
to be true. (5 October 2009 (Criminal procedures update 9): Criminal procedures
33.3, Criminal procedures 27.2.)
A statement of compliance is also required. The wording for this is:
I understand my duty as an expert witness to the court to provide independent
assistance by way of objective unbiased opinion in relation to matters within my
expertise. I will inform all parties and where appropriate the court in the event that
my opinion changes on any material issues. (Criminal Procedures Rules 33.3(1)
(i); R V Bowman para117).
186
CH13 THE FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGIST IN COURT

It is also currently necessary, for criminal courts, where you are instructed by the
prosecution, to add a statement that the guidance in the booklet Disclosure: Expert’s
Evidence and Unused Material (14 February 2006) has been read and that a list of
unused material has been included in the report. A copy of the relevant declaration
form is currently available at www.cps.gov.uk.
13.2
The content of the expert’s report
An expert’s report for both courts (civil and criminal) should have a number of
sections and within it must clearly specify:
. report status (i.e. is it for evidence assessment, or to be submitted to the court?);
. to whom the report is addressed (according to the Civil Procedure Rules Practice
Direction (PD) 35 Para 2, reports used for evidence should be addressed to the
court, so indicate its name and location);
. the report’s author (your name should be in full) and the fact that you are a forensic
entomologist, and any assistance received to compile the report. In addition,
indicate if you are employed in any other capacity such as a curator at a museum, or
an academic, and the names and qualiﬁcations of anyone who assisted by carrying
out investigations, measurements or analyses that you did not carry out personally;
. your professional details – i.e. name, professional address and contact details
(telephone, fax and email);
. date – the day you sign and send out the report (sign all of the pages on that date);
. by whom you have been instructed to act as an expert witness, or whether you are
acting as a joint single expert for a civil case – i.e. both the individual and the
solicitors concerned, or the name of the particular police force;
. a court ‘reference number’ if this is relevant to the report style;
. the facts and information about the case that are relevant to you carrying out an
investigation;
. a summary of the factual ﬁndings from the investigation, upon which the opinion
is based;
. the range of opinions that could pertain as a result of the evidence and reasons for
the speciﬁc conclusion reached (PD 35 2.2(6) Protocol para 13.12, 13.13);
. conclusions arising from the facts of the investigation that has been carried out;
. statements of truth, compliance, and disclosure.
There is currently no prescribed way of laying out the expert’s report. However the
comments below will assist you in preparing a clear readable expert’s report, which
13.2 THE CONTENT OF THE EXPERT’S REPORT
187

should address the requirements of the courts in England. Every report should have a
cover sheet. For clarity a forensic entomology expert’s report may be divided into
sections under separate headings, starting by introducing yourself and ending with
the expert’s declarations followed by the annex.
The front cover sheet page (i) of the expert’s report should comprise the ﬁrst four
points in the summary above: to whom the report is addressed; the name of the court;
the instructing party and your name and contact details. This should be followed by
(ii) a contents page and (iii) a glossary of technical words in alphabetical order. This
should be included in the report to provide an explanation of the meaning of
entomological terms.
In the text of the report, it is useful to embolden such technical words as this helps
to speed up reading and assists the nonspecialists for whom you are writing,
providing them with a ready source of information about meanings of the words
in the glossary. The glossary of terms can be placed either after the contents page or
included as part of the annex.
Next indicate your qualiﬁcations and experience (iv) to demonstrate the reason
your opinion should be considered valid. This is a short summary of your academic
qualiﬁcations, expertise, and experience in forensic entomology. A more compre-
hensive CV should form part of the annex.
The next heading (v) should be the Summary of Conclusions and your
Opinion. This should comprise the conclusions about the results of the investi-
gation and the opinion relating to the instructions you were given – for example
that third instar larvae of a particular species were recovered from the dead body;
that the person had last been seen alive 10 days earlier; that the time between
reaching the speciﬁc instar and the eggs being laid was estimated as a minimum
of 90 hours for this particular species and that the minimum time since death is
therefore 90 hours.
Placing this summary of conclusions early in the report allows the barrister to gain
a rapid overview of what your opinion is, having gained some idea of the breadth of
your forensic experience, with respect to that conclusion. This will help support his/
her questioning.
A short description of the background of the case (vi) – the matter upon which you
have been asked to offer an opinion – should follow. This section is an outline of the
relevant known facts of the case, which relate to the question being asked. The police,
or person who is instructing you, will provide these details both verbally and in
writing. All of this information should be included in this section.
Next come the instructions (vii) – what you have been asked to do. In this
section you indicate what you were asked to do in terms of the legal case. The
instructions you cite should include both those you received verbally and those
that were written down. You should not stray outside these boundaries in terms of
what you actually do.
This instruction section is followed by what could be described as a methodology
(viii). You should provide a description of what you sampled to address the
instructions; for example you might indicate that at a mortuary you sampled oriﬁces
188
CH13 THE FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGIST IN COURT

of the partially clothed body of a Caucasian female to recover insect larvae; or that
you received photographs and specimens of 15 insects recovered from a hospital
kitchen in Cholmondley and were being asked to conﬁrm the identity of the
specimens as cockroaches and to provide details of the lifecycle and the food
consumed by such insects.
Descriptions of physical investigations at the locality or crime scene (ix) – what
and where you sampled – follow. In this section you describe where and what you
sampled on the day. In addition you refer the reader to the section where details of
subsequent sampling are described in section (xi). Such samples would include the
temperature recordings and soil-surveying techniques for any buried puparia; any
other investigations that happened at the crime scene at the time you attended or
subsequently should be included here. For example if the samples were collected in
the mortuary (morgue) then this, too, is described in this section. Or for example, if
this is a civil case, any investigations you subsequently undertook at a factory or
urban dwelling or animal house should be cursorily mentioned in this section and
explained in the later section (x).
The section on follow up investigations (x) describes any laboratory or additional
investigations that you carried out, or which you requested to be undertaken. Such
investigations might include additional temperature recordings taken for up to ten
days at the crime scene after discovery of the body, or your request that the larval gut
contents be examined to identify the source of the DNA. The section may also detail
your approach to determining the different dimensions of the larvae from each
sampling site to demonstrate age and so which part of the body was initially
colonised. The conditions used for culturing eggs or larvae to eclosion, or through
to the life stage found on the body, should also be summarised in this section.
Specifying the identity of the specimens provides a logical link to help you to
establish the duration of the post mortem interval using the estimated conditions at
the crime scene, before the body was discovered.
Indicate in the meteorological data sources (xi) section the name of the organisa-
tion from which you sought information about temperatures between when the body
was found and the time the individual was last seen. For example, did you use a local
meteorological station or an amateur weather station? How far away from the crime
scenewere theweather details recorded? In a civil witness statement this section may
not be relevant.
Under the heading Experimental Analysis of relevant Entomological Data (xii)
you should state the method and references you used to investigate the ecology of the
insects infesting the body, food, or the factory or domicile. (The actual reference list
or copies of the papers should be placed in the annex.) For example, you may specify
the titles and authors of the published papers that you used to conﬁrm the duration of
lifecycles of speciﬁc insects, and any taxonomy articles that helped you conﬁrm the
identity of the species of insect.
The next section is your deductions and conclusions about the time of death,
or details about the implication of the presence of the insects you have
been investigating.
13.2 THE CONTENT OF THE EXPERT’S REPORT
189

The Conclusions section (xiii) – sometimes called Opinion – is where you link the
issues you were instructed to address with the results you have recorded in the
experimental and investigative sections of your report and describe your opinion of
the implications of this evidence. It is a more comprehensive section than the
summary you presented earlier in the report. You should indicate the limits of your
investigation along with your estimate of the minimum time since death and an
indication, where possible, of the level of accuracy of your ﬁndings.
The Experts’ Declaration (xiv) is the set of declarations that indicateyou know that
your duty is to the court. You declare that you have disclosed any interest that you
have in the case; that you have not strayed outside your area of competence; that your
fees are independent of the outcome of the case and that you are aware that you
recognise that you will be the subject of adverse public criticism by the judge if the
court considers that you have not taken sufﬁcient care to abide by the expected
standards for being an expert.
It is valuable to indicate in this declaration the numbers of pages in the report
(including the annex) in order to prevent the possibility of additions or removal
of pages.
The Statement of Truth (xv) should be appropriate to the court to which the report
is directed. The different formulae for use were speciﬁed earlier in the chapter.
There should be a signature and date (xvi). The report must be signed and dated by
the author of the report. For the sake of continuity and integrity of evidence, it is good
practice to sign and date each page (for a criminal case your signature should be
witnessed) to prevent any question of pages being added or removed later.
Includein theAnnex(xvii)materialthathelpsexplainadditional aspectsofthe report
– any supporting material such as a generalised lifecycle of the speciﬁc ﬂy species that
you have identiﬁed, photographs, diagrams and maps. These can be of the crime scene
and of the body to indicate where the larvae were infesting the body, or if the
investigation is for a civil prosecution they may be of the location and the substance
in question. You should also include a list of any unused material from the investigation.
You may also choose to highlight pertinent sections from the academic references
you used to draw your conclusions (a photocopy can be helpful) and provide an
explanation, for example, of what physiological or thermal energy is to explain ADD
and ADH.
Your actual calculations can be retained with your laboratory and crime
scene records. They can be requested by the court if the need arises (Criminal
Procedures Rule 33.4). So keeping a clear, readable laboratory and crime-scene
notebook is essential (Table 13.1).
It is also useful to provide a timeline of the entomological activities you have
undertaken to reach your conclusion. This helps you show when the samples were
collected, when they reached the laboratory, your sampling regime for the life stages,
when the adults emerged, or when you started to breed through to the life stage of the
insect collected from the body.
If you have been assisted in undertaking the work, a list of your assistant’s
experience and qualiﬁcations (CV) should also be included in the annex.
190
CH13 THE FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGIST IN COURT

Table 13.1
Contemporaneous notes checklist
Component
Content
Indicated (H)
1. Name of investigation/
examination
Title and page with appropriate sized margin
2. Name of person making
contemporaneous notes
for the examination
Name indicated as being the examiner
3. Date, Time and place
The day, date, time and crime scene location
inc., GPS or map reference where
appropriate
4. Instructing ofﬁcer or
contact
Instructing party – indicate their name, rank
and contact details (including profes-
sional address, telephone and email
address
5. Assistants names
Those working with you or conducting the
assessments for you
6. Background facts
Factual information provided so you cash
interpret the best way to conduct your
investigation of the matter
7. Instructions
The written and verbal instructions which
you were given in order to instruct you
8. Materials provided
Any evidence or information such as mete-
orological data which was provided for
you. Any samples (including item num-
bers) which were not collected by you
9. Methodology
Your standard operating procedures (SOP)
and an outline of any modiﬁcation. You
may just cite the method in a couple of
sentences here and then place an exemplar
of the SOP in the annex.
10. Observations
The results of your sampling including your
personal item numbers
11. Activity time line
The time each activity starts. Or if laboratory
work the time then stage was initiated)
12. List of unused evidence –
for disclosure
List any material which you examined but
which was of insufﬁcient quality to draw
conclusions
13. Check for accuracy
Read through your notes to check they say
what you mean
14. The quality of the
written word and
the notes
Check the English and grammar, including
explaining any terminology used (or refer
the reader to a glossary)
15. Crossings out
Ensure that any amendments are made by
ruling a line through the material to be
excluded. Initial this change and then
write the correct word(s)
16. Rule across blank spaces
Ensure all blank spaces have a z-shaped line
across them
(Continued )
13.2 THE CONTENT OF THE EXPERT’S REPORT
191

13.2.1
Expert report presentation style (CPR 32 19.1)
The report should be double spaced on A4 paper (or foolscap in the USA) of a
reasonable weight. The margins down each side of the page should be set at 3.5 cm
so that comments can be written in them. Your report should be word processed on
only one side of each page, using 14-point font so the text can be quickly and
easily read.
Traditionally, in English courts, the font used is Times New Roman. The
paragraphs should be numbered sequentially. This is traditional in a civil report or
statement. (In a criminal report for forensic entomology, numbering the paragraphs
may assist both you and the court when referring to aspects.) Dates should also be
written in numbers according to the tradition of the country – i.e. in the UK this
should be the day, then the month followed by the year (Table 13.2).
The report should be checked and double checked for accuracy of content and for
spelling mistakes. Any inconsistencies and inaccuracies provide a target for ques-
tioning your work, or for necessitating your attendance at court. They will almost
certainly be picked up, making your court experience all the more fraught!
For the sake of continuity and integrity of evidence it is good practice to sign and
date each page (for a criminal case your signature should be witnessed), to prevent
any question of pages being added or later removed (i.e. page 6 of 18 pages). This
should include those pages in the annex. (Pages are numbered at the bottom centre of
the page, for experts’ reports.)
You shouldﬁnd out howmany copies ofthe reportare needed bythe courtand print
out sufﬁcient copies, ideally using a laser printer. This is better than photocopying
them as it ensures that all the reports are presented professionally.
Each completed report should each be hole punched so it can ﬁt into a lever-arch
ﬁle, or become part of a court bundle. Ideally each report should be submitted bound
between acetate sheets within a slip binder. This makes it easier to disassemble and
for incorporation into the ‘court bundle’, which is often retained in a ring binder.
It also means that you can handle the statement more easily if you need to refer to it in
the ‘witness box’ and you drop pages less easily.
Should you be required to prepare a Statement of Witness for a criminal case rather
than an expert’s report, form MG/11 provides the structure required which conforms
to Section 9 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967.
Table 13.1
(Continued )
Component
Content
Indicated (H)
17. Page numbers
Indicate the page number out of the total
number
18. Sign and date each page
Include the date and your signature at the
bottom of each page of your contempo-
raneous notes
192
CH13 THE FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGIST IN COURT

Table 13.2
Suggested headings for a forensic entomology expert’s report
Page
Report Structure
Page Number
1
Title sheet ref number, your name;
date; institution name and address;
name of the Court receiving the
report; Instigators of the report.
Centre bottom state page out of
total including the annex
2
Contents page – indicate both para-
graph number and page number.
(sign each page)
Paragraph 3
Introduction – who you are; age,
usually ‘over 18’ for an expert
witness; your qualiﬁcations.
4
Summary Background
The nature of the case and the link to
what you have been instructed to do
i.e. entomological investigation.
5
Instructions – what you were asked to
do; by whom. Do not stray from
these instructions.
6
Summary of Conclusions – very short
sentences to direct the reader’s
understanding of your facts and
opinion.
7
Description of what you sampled at the
Crime Scene - forexample if it was a
crime scene with a dead body how
you sampled for puparia; temper-
ature assessments at the time; and
specimens taken for additional
analysis e.g. bullet residues or DNA.
8
Investigations at the Crime Scene –
further meteorological analysis in
the 3–5 days after ﬁnding the body.
9
Follow-up Investigations or Research -
what other work was necessary
i.e. growing up the larvae to identify
species.
10
Meteorological Data sources or re-
search if for a civil case.
11
Conclusions/Opinion. Clear explana-
tion; indicate the limitations and
conﬁrm with a signature. Include a
statement of truth here. For a
criminal case include your state-
ment of disclosure.
12
Annex – Glossary; Life cycles; sam-
pling and larval culturing method-
ology; photographs and sketches;
time line; C.V.s.
13.2 THE CONTENT OF THE EXPERT’S REPORT
193

A criminal statement is written following a similar outline to that of an expert
report but, as it is intended for the criminal courts, there is a speciﬁc sequence of
information at the start of the statement, which indicates who is writing the
statement, their name, age and that they are making a truthful statement. The
sequence of information is provided under set headings, which are:
Statement of. . .
Age if under 18
Occupation
This is followed by the Statement of Truth. The document is then signed
and dated.
The body of the statement then follows. In addition to the information about the
case, the body of the report is similar to the information required in an expert’s
report. A list of all unused case material that is in your possession must be
incorporated in the statement. You are also required to indicate that you will inform
all of the parties involved should you change your mind about any aspect of the
material evidence.
A Statement of Witness for a case in the Civil Court has to conform to the Civil
Procedures Rule 32 and the Practice Direction that relates to it. The ﬁrst page of the
civil statement of witness has the heading of the proceedings (PD 7.4, 20.7),
indicating the names of the parties and whether they are defendants, claimants etc.
The number of the statement in relation to thewitness, the initials, and surname of the
witness, the party on whose behalf the statement is made and the date are written at
the top-right hand corner of the ﬁrst page. In addition, the initials and number of any
exhibits referred are also included. The rest of the statement format for the civil court
is similar to that indicated for an expert’s report. The Statement of Truth at the
statement end is followed by the signature and date.
13.3
The forensic expert in the courtroom
A criminal court may wish to ask the forensic entomologist to attend in person to
expand on the points in the report. This will certainly be the case in a mock courtroom
role play. After you havetaken the oathor afﬁrmedyou will ﬁrst beasked to stateyour
full name and address and to name your qualiﬁcations. Be prepared to explain the
meaning of the acronyms for the qualiﬁcations that you hold.
The court may also be reassured to learn that you have been keeping up to date by
regularly attending entomology and forensic entomology conferences, and contrib-
uting to learned journals. It should also be told about any membership of professional
societies that you hold. You are then generally asked to summarise your ﬁndings and
conclusions, after which you may be required to clarify further any points in your
report either as examination in chief or during cross examination.
194
CH13 THE FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGIST IN COURT

13.4
Communicating entomological facts in court
In a courtroom environment (mock or otherwise), you will be expected to explain
your ﬁndings in a way understandable to people from a wide variety of backgrounds.
Most members of the general public appear frightened by insects, expecting them to
sting or bite, so their general understanding of the lifecycle of insects can be small.
However, in the context of crime, the many crime-related television series have
provided a useful background so that most people now know that maggots may be
used to predict the time since the death of a person and the discovery of the body.
Some are even aware of the concepts of complete and incomplete lifecycles.
Nonetheless, as part of the annex of report it is necessary to routinely provide
details of such things as lifecycles for the particular species in question and
the criteria for distinguishing maggot life stages (larval instars). It is also helpful
to have ready explanations for the meanings of the words used or to use accurate but
more familiar terminology in your explanations. As the expert witness in forensic
entomology you should not use jargon, but sometimes the use of technical terms is
unavoidable. The advice ‘do not stray outside your expertise or be drawn to do this’ is
an important guide as you frameyour responses, both inyour mock court training and
when acting as an expert ‘for real’.
13.5
Physical evidence: its continuity and integrity
One of the crucial aspects of forensic science and especially forensic entomology is
to ensure continuity of the evidence. This is also true where the life stages are
culturedin order toanswer questions about thepostmorteminterval.The crimescene
itself may provide information, along with the insects inhabiting the body, so records,
sketches, photographs and specimens should be taken and your sampling recorded
using item numbers.
Some insect specimens only come to light after the body has been transported to
the mortuary (morgue), either when the body bag is opened by other forensic
scientists, or within the body on initial examination or dissection. This information
must also be recorded if you, the forensic entomologist, are called to the mortuary, or
later receive further specimens relating to the case.
Some forensic entomologists attend the scene in person, take samples, rear the
specimensgatheredfromthebody,andcalculatethepostmortemintervalthemselvesso
the evidence never leaves their possession. In this instance there are fewer problems of
continuity and integrity of evidence provided that your actions and presence are logged
both by you and in the scene investigating ofﬁcer’s log and that the two logs coincide.
However if a crime scene investigator collects the information then it is imperative
that he follows a recognised protocol, records his actions faithfully and carries out
the appropriate packaging procedures, separately sealing the live and preserved
specimens into containers for each location, from each collecting site on the body.
13.5 PHYSICAL EVIDENCE: ITS CONTINUITY AND INTEGRITY
195

These crime scene investigators (or police ofﬁcers) must also ensure the integrity of
the preserved samples and live cultures, keeping the cultures alive but below their
base temperature, until the samples reach the forensic entomologist along with the
relevant crime-scene notes.
If the entomological samples have been collected by the crime scene investigator,
pathologist, or another forensic scientist, it is important that that information recorded
aboutthecontentsofthepackagesofsamplesisveryaccurate.Thesamplesofpreserved
larvae together with the live specimens from that site on the body should be packaged
together and identiﬁed with an individual identity number (or, for example, a bar code),
which is separate from those collected from a different location on the body.
On transporting and receivingthe packages, the same recordsof contents, numbers
and locations must be kept to ensure the integrity of the information. For example, to
describe the contents of apackage as threevials, each containing live larvaewith liver
plus three vials of preserved larval specimens collected from the corpse of J. G.
Cowpit, leaves less room for challenge than solely describing the content of the
package as six containers of maggots.
This integrity between the information relating to the samples and the notes about
their collection is also important (Criminal Procedure and Investigation Act 1996
amendment). In every instance the specimens and sites must be photographed and
these notes and photographs, along with any made subsequently in the laboratory,
must all be catalogued. From this information an expert’s report, or statement of
witness can be generated, which will be considered accurate and comprehensive.
Your laboratory notebook provides support material to demonstrate the continuity
and integrity of the evidence if a question arises.
A further point to consider when presenting a report in court is the nature of the
illustrations contained in your report. Photographs taken from the body, whilst
illustrating where the samples were obtained, may also be quite disturbing if shown
to members of the jury. When you assemble evidence to present to the court (mock or
actual court) it is necessary to choose carefully the particular images that best
illustrate the scientiﬁc point you wish to make. It may be helpful to give verbal
warnings about the content of any photographs prior to showing them to the solicitor
or barrister as well as in court. As Greenberg and Kunich (2002) also point out, in
recounting the views of a Supreme Court Judge in Hawaii, the forensic entomologist
should be aware that for those less familiar with corpse consumption by maggots,
such pictures may inﬂuence their feelings about the individual accused of the crime.
The use of black-and-white photographs may be less prejudicial.
13.6
The code of practice for experts
A code of practice for experts was approved by the Master of the Rolls and Chairman
of the Civil Justice Committee for use in civil claims and in 2006 by the Master of the
Cited by permission of copy holder and identiﬁed as Pamplin 2011.
196
CH13 THE FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGIST IN COURT

Rolls and President of the Queen’s Bench Division for use in criminal proceedings.
The code is that:
‘1. Experts shall not do anything in the course of practicing as an Expert, in any
manner which compromises or impairs or is likely to compromise or impair any
of the following:
(a) the Expert’s independence, impartiality, objectivity, and integrity,
(b) the Expert’s duty to the Court or Tribunal,
(c) the good repute of the Expert or of Experts generally,
(d) the Expert’s proper standard of work,
(e) the Expert’s duty to maintain conﬁdentiality.
2. An Expert who is retained or employed in any contentious proceeding shall not
enter into anyarrangement which could compromise his impartiality nor make his
fee dependent on the outcome of the case nor should he accept beneﬁts other than
his fee and expenses.
3. An Expert should not accept instructions in any matter where there is actual or
potential conﬂict of interests. Notwithstanding this rule, if full disclosure is made
to the judge or those appointing him, the Expert may in appropriate cases accept
instructions when those concerned speciﬁcally acknowledge the disclosure.
Should an actual or potential conﬂict occur after instructions have been accepted,
the Expert shall immediately notify all concerned and in appropriate cases resign
his appointment.
4. An Expert shall for the protection of his client maintain with a reputable insurer
proper insurance for an adequate indemnity.
5. Experts shall not publicise their practices in any manner which may reasonably be
regarded as being in bad taste. Publicity must not be inaccurate or misleading in
any way.
6. An Expert shall comply with all appropriate Codes of Practice and Guidelines.’
(Academy of Experts, 2005. Reproduced by kind permission of the Academy of
Experts, www.academy-experts.org/codeofpractice.htm, accessed 3 November
2011.)
Currently the law has changed as the result of a decision in the Supreme Court
arising from the case of Jones v. Kaney [2011] UKSC 13 and expert witness
immunity in civil cases has been removed (Pamplin, 2011). This means that the
expert is liable and can be sued by those who have instructed them if they are
displeased with the outcome. For this reason it is important to have professional
indemnity insurance and to ensure that not only is the expert’s code adhered to but
that any expert opinions that are offered are based in totality on the evidence that the
expert has been retained to consider.
13.6 THE CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EXPERTS
197

13.7
Use of single joint experts
The use of a single joint expert is encouraged in the civil court (CPR 35.7) and the
aspectsof advice in relationto instruction ofexperts is laidoutin the CivilProcedures
Rules Practice Direction 35 and the Civil Justice Council Protocol for Instruction of
Experts to give Evidence in Civil Claims (June 2005). This does not prevent either of
the parties from engaging their personal expert to advise them, however the cost of
doing this cannot be recovered through the courts.
When you are instructed as a single joint expert it is important, in the ﬁrst instance,
that joint instructions are received. If you ﬁnd that one party does not agree with the
instructions and you receive separate instructions then these instructions should also
have been copied to the opposing instructing party (CPR PD35.8). To ensure that you
have been given all instructions from everyone it is good practice to specify the date
when you expect to receive all of the instructions and towait until that date is reached
before you start work.
In all instances the key to the single joint expert’s report is to outline the
instructions and to seek to provide a report that clearly distinguishes the matters
pertaining to the questions you are addressing and to highlight the factual evidence
on all counts. The overall style of the report can remain the same as that outlined
above (CPR PD35.10). On completion of the work and the report addressing all the
questions it is sent simultaneously to all parties as well as the court.
13.8
Practical assignment – writing an expert report
using the post mortem calculations generated
from Chapter 9
You have been instructed by the police to prepare an expert report on the estimate of
the post mortem interval (Assignment Chapter 9) for the body of a female found in
the Pleasure Gardens, Corton-on-Sea. The trial for murder (R. v. Jennings) will be
heard on 27 November. The suspect is one Arnold Jennings, also of Corton-on-Sea,
who was arrested in May. For the purposes of the assignment, images taken by the
police photographer will be submitted separately and are not be included in your
report. Use the format described in this chapter to prepare your report.
13.9
Further reading on presentation in court
Civil Justice Council. 2005. Protocol for the Instruction of Experts to Give Evidence in
Court. Institute of Expert Witnesses and Academy of Experts: London.
Greenberg B. and Kunich J.C. 2002 Entomology and the Law: Flies as Forensic
Indicators. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, pp. 249–283.
198
CH13 THE FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGIST IN COURT

Hart A. J., Hall M. J. R. and Whitaker A. P. 2010 The use of forensic entomology to assist
the criminal justice system. The Barrister Magazine, http://www.barristermagazine.
com/services/free-monthly-newsletter.html (accessed 31 October 2011).
Wall W. 2009. Forensic Science in Court: The Role of the Expert Witness. Wiley-
Blackwell: Chichester.
13.10
Web site addresses
Academy of Experts: www.academy-experts.org (accessed 31 October 2011).
Civil procedure rules, practice directions, and protocols are located at the web site of the
Ministry of Justice: http://www.justice.gov.uk/guidance/courts-and-tribunals/courts/
procedure-rules/index.htm (accessed 31 October 2011).
Expert Witness Institute: www.ewi.org.uk (accessed 31 October 2011).
13.10 WEB SITE ADDRESSES
199


Appendices
Appendix 1: Post mortem interval – Excel example
for review exercise in Chapter 9
Species
Met data
temperatures
Corrected
crime scene
temperatures
Base
temperature C
Degree
days
PDD
i.e. ADD
A
B
C
D
E
F
Calliphora
vomitoria
Linnaeus
15
16.3
3
13.3
15
16.3
3
13.3
26.6
14
15.4
3
12.4
39
14
15.4
3
12.4
51.4
14
15.4
3
12.4
63.8
15.5
16.75
3
13.75
77.55
15
16.3
3
13.3
90.85
14
15.4
3
12.4
103.25
13.5
14.95
3
11.95
115.2
12
13.6
3
10.6
125.8
12.5
14.05
3
11.05
136.85
13
14.5
3
11.5
148.35
13
14.5
3
11.5
159.85
12.5
14.05
3
11.05
170.9
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Appendix 2: Answer to chapter 9 review technique
exercise
Calculation of the post mortem interval for the body
at the Pleasure Gardens, Corton-on-Sea
The temperatures in the data are low so it is appropriate to use the experimental
lifecycle estimates on experimental growth of Calliphora vomitoria at 12.5 C
(Greenberg and Kunich, 2002). From their ﬁgures the data for Calliphora
vomitoria are:
Egg stage: 64.8 h average minimum duration.
LI stage: 55.2 h average minimum duration.
L2 stage: 60.0 h average minimum duration.
We do not know how long the larvae have been in the second stage so the minimum
duration will be to at least the end of the ﬁrst instar if the second stage had newly
hatched. The egg stage (64.8 h) and the ﬁrst larval instar minimum duration (55.2 h)
estimates were therefore used in the calculation since this would ensure that the
conclusions were based on demonstrable fact, i.e. minimum age of larva:
Total duration in hours (64.8 þ 55.2): 120 h.
Experimental constant temperature used: 12.5 C.
Base temperature chosen: 3 C.
ADH ¼ time hours  (temperature – base temperature)
ADH ¼ 120  (12.5 – 3)
ADH ¼ 120  9.5
ADH ¼ 1140 H (ADD ¼ADH/24)
ADD ¼ 47.5 D
From Table A1 we can count back using the sum of the actual degree days that
accumulated to estimate the minimum time since death. Each cell in column F
represents the sum of the amount of physiological energy generated per day (D)
which has accumulated. So by counting the cells we ﬁnd that the estimated
post mortem interval is four days because the ADD we are looking for is a value
of 47.5 ADD. The table value of relevance in the ﬁnal column will be after 39 ADD
and within the day giving a total of 51.4 ADD – i.e. the values relating to time within
the day four days previous to the 20 April when the body was found. The ﬁgure of
47.5 ADD is more than the values of 39 ADD for the end of day 3 but under the value
of 51.4 ADD to the start of day 5. So the estimated post mortem interval is a minimum
of four days (47.5 ADD would have been achieved at some point within day 4) and
a minimum time of death would be sometime on 17 April.
202
APPENDICES

Appendix 3: Crime scene protocol for forensic entomology
FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY
QUESTIONS TO BE ASKED AT THE CRIME SCENE
Location of the Crime Scene _______________ Date and Time Body Found
_________ Name of Victim if known ____________ Dateand Time last seen
__________________
Who is the collector of the specimens? ___________________
Date of collection ________________
Who is the person instructing you to investigate the scene?
_______________________________________________________
What is the Scene of Death Like? i.e. is it rural or urban; Indoors are the
windows open or closed. Outdoors; in shade or full sunlight; what is the
vegetation like? Is the body buried or on the soil surface? (Photographs
are valuable)
______________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________
________________________________________
________________________________________
What is the position of the Body (Sketch)?
APPENDICES
203

Is the Body Clothed? If so describe the nature and condition of the clothing
or wrappings?
What is the State of Body Decomposition?
What is the Temperature: on the Body surface ___________;0.31m above the
body surface _________________; 1.1 m above the body surface ________;
Beneath the body _______________; Soil temperature 10 cm ________and
20 cm below the surface _____________
204
APPENDICES

Glossary
Abdomen – the third and last division of the body of an insect.
Acalypterate – a classiﬁcation group describing ﬂies with small or vestigial
squamae, Drosophila sp. are an example of such ﬂies.
Accumulated degree hours – cumulative sum of temperatures per hour. The ﬁgures
reﬂect the physiological energy required by an insect to develop over the period of
time stated at the temperatures recorded. The units are expressed in H.
Acrostichal – hairs found between the rows of dorso-central bristles on the top of
the thorax.
Adecticous – insects (or arthropods) that have immoveable (nonarticulated) mouth-
parts. This is frequently true of the pupae and the mandibles may be reduced. Two
types are known: those with appendages that do not attach to the rest of the pupal
body as in most of the Brachycera (called exarate adecticous pupae) and those where
the appendages are ﬁrmly stuck to the pupal body as is found in the Nematocera
(called obtect adecticous pupae).
Adephaga – a suborder of Coleoptera (beetles) where the hind coxa are ﬁxed to the
metasternum and theﬁrstabdominal sternite is completely divided by the hindcoxae.
Adipocere – grave wax, found on bodies in the ﬁrst weeks or months after death
because decomposition is taking place under damp conditions.
Algae – this is a collective name for simple plants that do not belong to the higher
plant groups. Filamentous algae form long chins of cells which are initially ﬁxed onto
the substrate. An example is the Blanket weed Enteromorpha sp.
Allochthonous material – organic food materials that falls into the water and
forms a source of energy for the organisms in the water body e.g., wood, leaves and
even corpses.
Alveolus – an air sac that forms part of the lungs and in which gas exchange takes
place in humans and other mammals (gives rise to the word alveolar).
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Amplify – enhance the number of sections of DNA between primers. Usually related
to PCR.
Anaerobic – needs the absence of (or not dependent upon the presence of) oxygen.
Anal – positioned in the direction of the anus. Can refer to veins 6 and 7.
Antenna – A structure on the head that detects odours. It is made up of a number of
segments. The ﬁrst two have names. The scape – ﬁrst antennal segment; the pedicel –
the second antennal segment.
Appendages – limbs, for example a leg or wing that is attached to the body by a joint.
Arcadian Forest – these are temperate broadleaf and mixed forest habitats. They are
found on hills, mountains and plateaus in New England and the northeast USA and in
the Maritime Provinces of eastern Canada.
Archostemata – a suborder in the classiﬁcation of the Coleoptera in which the larvae
are mainly wood feeders.
Arista – bristle-like projection from the third antennal segment it can be feathery or
with long or short hairs (pubescent).
Bacteria – enucleate (prokaryotic) micro-organisms, which in this instance are
involved in decomposition.
Base temperature – the minimum temperature for development of the particular
insect species.
Basicosta – the second epaulette or plate-like structure on the lead vein of
the membranous wing. In Calliphora species the colour difference may
distinguish species.
Bioﬁlm – surface coating colonies of prokaryotic cells such as bacteria.
Brachycera – the classiﬁcation group (suborder) in which the Calliphoridae are now
placed, alongside such ﬂies as the horse ﬂies (Tabinidae) within the Diptera.
Bucca – the jowls on a dipteran head.
Caecum – a structure, which ends in a blind end or in a sac, for example a region of
the insect mid-gut.
Calypter – ﬂap of tissue (often coloured white and with black hairs). There
are usually two ﬂaps at the base of each wing and these (amongst other
features) give the calyptrates their distinctive name. These ﬂaps can also be
called squamae.
Campodeiform – elongated and ﬂattened with clearly developed legs and antennae.
Cephalopharyngeal skeleton – the internal head skeleton at the anterior end of, for
example, the Calliphorid maggot, which makes up the ﬁrst part of the alimentary
canal and comprises the mouth hooks and an oral sclerite.
206
GLOSSARY

Cerci – (singular cercus) sensory appendages located at the tip of the abdomen.
Chlorophyll-a – the photosynthetic pigment, which is directly involved in the light-
reaction process of photosynthesis.
Chromosome – a single DNA molecule, which is a component of the genetic
makeup of the organism and morphologically apparent during cell division.
Cocaine – white crystalline alkaloid (C17H21NO4); a narcotic.
Coleoptera – the order of insects comprising the beetles, where the front elytra are
hardened or leathery and cover the membranous second pair of wings.
Collectors – this functional feeding group is made up of organisms that feed
by collecting small ﬂoating particles. The material can be collected as ﬁne
fragments from sediment surfaces or can be collected in suspension from the
water body. Collectors can be split into two groups: the collector ﬁlterers and the
collector gatherers.
Compound eye – a collection of individual visual components (ommatidia) that
combine to make a faceted eye structure characteristic of the adult.
Correction factor – in the context of PMI calculation, the formula that allows
the interpretation of the crime scene temperatures from those of the local
meteorological station.
Coxae – (singular coxa) the proximal segments of the insect legs – i.e. at the base of
the legs, where they join to the body.
Cross examination – questioning by opposing lawyers, which takes place in
the court proceedings once you have been questioned by the lawyer who called
you as a witness.
Decomposition – organic matter breakdown into its constituents, in the case of the
corpse by cell lysis and also micro-organisms.
Dermal – to do with the skin, where the insects in the case of myiasis are consuming
the skin tissue.
Diapause – delayed development often induced in the offspring as a result of
environmental conditions experienced by the mother rather than those experienced
by the larva.
Diptera – the order comprising the ﬂies.
Distal – distant from the body.
Dorsal – upper, top surface.
Dorsocentral – usually referring to bristles on the surface of the thorax. They are
found to the sides of the acrostichal bristles.
Dorsum – the upper top surface and a term often used when referring to the thorax.
GLOSSARY
207

Electrophoresis – where an electric current is applied to a gel loaded with molecules
such as nucleic acids, to separate them.
Elytra – (singular elytron) the modiﬁed, hardened front wings of the coleopteran.
The elytra cover the hind, membranous wings that are used for ﬂight where present.
Examination-in-chief – initial questioning by the lawyer who called you as
a witness.
Exarate – having free appendages. This may, for example, relate to the pupal stage of
the lifecycle.
Exoskeleton – the hardened, cuticular, external skeleton to which muscles are
attached.
Eutrophic – a water body with high nutrient status, turbid water and high microbial
loads generating a large amount of organic compounds (high primary production
of chemical energy).
Exuvia – (plural exuviae) outer insect cuticle ‘skin’ shed at the end of each stadium.
Facultative – optional behaviour where an organism is able to adapt its behaviour to
take advantage of a particular situation or food source.
Family – a classiﬁcation division – i.e. genera with similar features are grouped into
families. Lucilia sericata, for example, is in the family Calliphoridae.
Filiform – threadlike; often used to describe the structure of the antennae.
Filterers – a functional feeding group that is made up of animals which ﬁlter small
fragments offood. Blackﬂy larvae are an example ofﬁlter feeders. Filterers comprise
a subgroup of the collectors – i.e. collector-ﬁlterers.
Frass – solid insect, most often larval, waste products from digestion (another name
for insect ‘faeces’).
Frons – the area between the antennae, eyes, and running to the top of the head of
the ﬂy.
Functional feeding groups – groups generated by classifying organisms based upon
their feeding strategies; for example shredders, collectors, predators, scrapers.
Furuncular – relating to boils.
Gena – the cheek of the insect (the region below and behind the insect eye).
Gendarmerie – a police force; often French or from a French-speaking country.
Gene – inherited genetic material that is found in a ﬁxed position or locus, on a
chromosome. It is part of the ‘programming’ for the production of a polypeptide.
Genome – the genetic composition of an organism.
208
GLOSSARY

Grazers – these feed on solid surfaces from the micro-organisms attached. They are
also termed scrapers.
Haltere – reduced hind wings used for balancing. They are sometimes described as
resembling drum sticks as they have a knob at the distal region.
Head – the initial division of the three into which the insect body is split.
Hemimetabolus – insects where immature stages go through moults gradually
becoming increasingly like the adults. Their wings develop externally.
Heteroplasmy – two or more different mitochondrial genomes in the same species.
Holarctic – the zoogeographical region which includes the northern regions of
the earth. It has two sections one called the Nearctic region (North American) and
the other the Palearctic region (Eurasia). The terms are used to describe
insect distributions.
Holometabolus – insects that undergo complete metamorphosis.
Hypopleuron – a plate above the hind coxa and posterior to the sternopleuron (a
plate (pleuron) above the middle coxa). In Calliphora sp. there will be a crescent of
bristles, which are useful aids to identiﬁcation.
Imago – the adult stage of an insect (plural imagines).
Instar – the stage between two successive splittings of the outer layers of the larval
cuticle (exoskeleton) from the inner layers (endoskeleton).
ISO9000 – a suite of standards issued by the International Organisation for
Standardisation to ensure quality in management systems. In this instance the
context is the forensic science laboratory and the effectiveness of the standards
applications are assessed externally.
Isoelectric focusing – a protein separation method using electrophoresis based on
the isoelectric point of the proteins – i.e. the pH at which it has no net charge.
KAAD – a solution for killing larval specimens containing ethanol, formaldehyde
and kerosene in the proportion of 10:2:1.
Kahle’s solution – a solution for preserving dead larvae and for killing and
preserving adult insects.
Larvae – (singular larva) collective term for the immature stages that emerge from
the egg and prior to pupation.
Lateral – on or at the sides.
Lentic – standing water as is present in pools, lakes and ponds.
Lipofuscin – a yellow brown, granular residue, laid down around the nucleus arising
from the digestive action of lysosomes.
GLOSSARY
209

Lotic – running water such as is found in streams and rivers.
Lysis – the breakdown or splitting of cells by enzymes. This takes place spontane-
ously after death.
Maceration – a process of soaking a specimen in a solution to soften it by breaking
down parts of the tissue. The softened material will breakdown further ifforce is then
applied to it by wave action or when using pairs of mounted needles when preparing
insect spiracles for mounting.
Macroinvertebrates – a group of aquatic animals which are visible to the naked eye
but not extensively large. They include aquatic insects as well as crustacea, molluscs,
mites, worms and spiders.
Macrophage – cells that encircle microorganisms (act phagocitically) and remove
them from an environment.
Mandibles – regions of the insect mouthparts; the jawlike structures used for biting
in, for example, the Coleoptera.
Metabolism – the sum of the biochemical processes that take place in a living cell or
organism.
Meron – the posterior lobe of the pleuron where the coxa joins to the side of the
insect body.
Mesothorax – the second segment of the thorax.
Metamorphosis – the speciﬁc change in body form. The term can be applied, for
example, to the transition between pupa and adult.
Metasternum – the under (ventral) side of the mesothorax.
Micropyle – the hole in the egg coating that facilitates fertilisation.
Mitochondria – (singular mitochondrion) a rod-like organelle found in the cell
cytoplasm in which energy is produced. Mitochondria contain circular DNA that can
be duplicated. It originates from the maternal parent.
Monophyletic – descended from a single ancestor.
Myiasis– injuryor secondaryinfectioncaused bylarvae, usually ﬂylarvae (Diptera),
feeding on living human and animal tissue.
Myxophaga – a suborder of the Coleoptera, which includes the Calyptomeridae.
This suborder is of little forensic note.
Nearctic – in the context of insect distribution this indicates a region comprising
North America, areas north of the Tropic of Cancer and Greenland.
Neotropical – a region that includes Central and South America including southern
Mexico together with the West Indies – i.e. south of the Tropic of Cancer.
210
GLOSSARY

Notopleuron – the plate (pleurite) on the side of the ﬂy body just at the end of the
transverse suture.
Notum – a thoracic top surface of a segment (tergite).
Oligochaetes – a group of worms of varying morphology from the Class comprising
earthworms, leeches, etc. The majority of oligochaetes feed by swallowing mud and
removing suitable food particles. They move using a looping movement of body
contraction and expansion. Some oligochaetes are reddish or brown in colour.
Omnivores – organisms that can feed on a wide range of food materials; in this
context they feed on the corpse and the insects present on it.
Opiates – a narcotic drug that contains opium, or an alkaloid of opium.
Order – a component of the classiﬁcation system. There are 29 orders of insects of
which the Diptera and Coleoptera are two.
Orient – countries which are east of the Mediterranean.
Ovoviviparous – where fertilised eggs develop within the female and they hatch
instantly when they are laid although this can take place within the female
reproductive tract.
Palaearctic – in the context of insect distribution, this indicates a distribution
throughout most of Europe, Africa north of the Sahara and the majority of Asia north
of the Himalayas.
PCR – Polymerase chain reaction. The cycles of denaturing the DNA, annealing the
primer and extending with the enzyme DNA polymerase, which increase the amount
of the target sequence of DNA.
Pedicel – the second antennal segment (working from the head outwards).
Periphyton – microfauna (algae and diatoms) attached to sites as parts of rooted
aquatic plants or the body surface and or clothing of submerged bodies.
Pharate adults – where the adult once developed is retained within a pupa for a
period prior to emergence.
Pheromone – a chemical that is released and engenders a particular communication
pattern in other members of the same species. Examples include chemicals that are
sex attractants.
Phototaxis – directional response to light. For example Calliphora sp. and Musca
sp., show negative phototaxis and crawl away from light in the feeding stage.
Phoresy – the transport of one animal by another; for example a mite by another
organism such as a beetle or dragonﬂy.
Pleuron – the side plates of the body, where the legs are joined to the sides of
the body.
GLOSSARY
211

Polyphaga – a suborder of the Coleoptera characterised by moveable hind
coxae, with respect to the metasternum and an incomplete division of the ﬁrst
abdominal sternite.
Posterior callus – region on the posterior region of the top surface (dorsal surface) of
the thorax in ﬂies with calypters. It can also be called the postalar callus.
Predator – an organism that consumes live animals as its source of food – for
example the Staphylinidae and the Dytiscidae are predators.
Primers – a short DNA (or RNA) sequence, which is paired with one of the DNA
strands from the test organism. An available 3’ hydroxyl group provides an anchor
point for DNA replication to start.
Probative value – signiﬁcance in terms of providing evidence or proof.
Prognathous – where the head points forward – i.e. is horizontal and the mouthparts
point to the front.
Prolegs – appendages on the abdominal region of the insect body.
Pronotum – ﬁrst part of the upper plate of the thorax.
Prothorax – the ﬁrst segment of the thorax of the insect body.
Proximal – close to the body.
Pteridines – pigment colours that are often found in the insect cuticle, as eye
pigments, and also in wing scales. They are minor excretory products and also
function as co-factors for growth and development enzymes.
Ptilinum – a balloon-like sac pushed out from the head to force open the puparium
and assist the emergence of the adult ﬂy.
Ptilinal suture – the retracted ptilinum once the ﬂy has emerged and the
body has hardened. The ptilinal suture is characteristic of ﬂies of the
Schizophora.
Pubescence – covered in very short, ﬁne ‘hairs’; extensions of the cuticle.
Pulvilli – (singular pulvillus) the two pads between the claws at the end of the tarsae.
Puparium – the ﬁnal coat of the larval instar, which becomes hardened and ‘tanned’.
Inside this casing, the pupa develops into the adult stage in the Cyclorrapha.
Pyrosequencing – a method in which the makeup of a single strand of DNA is
determined using enzymes, including one that is chemoluminescent, and the
detection of pyrophosphate manufacture, as the complementary strand is built up
nucleotide by nucleotide in the sequence.
RAPD – Random Ampliﬁcation of Polymorphic DNA. Variable bands of DNA
produced on a gel after PCR ampliﬁcation.
212
GLOSSARY

RFLP – Restriction fragment length polymorphisms.Base changesat sites asa result
of restriction digestion, resulting in different-length DNA fragments.
Rifﬂes – areas of rivers and streams in which the water is turbulent and ﬂows rapidly
(although some areas may be less rapid where the water ﬂows around impendences
such as rocks, or even bodies).
River continuum concept – this is a theory that relates to the changes in proportions
of functional feeder groups as one passes from headwaters, where a lot of material
such as vegetation and other matter falls into thewater, through towider water bodies
where there ismore lightand hence a greaterconcentration of periphyton asthe speed
of the water slows on its way to the sea. In the head waters shredders predominate;
downstream collector, gatherers feed off the ﬁne particulate matter generated by,
amongst other things, the shredders; in the river middlewhere the algae are abundant,
scrapers are also abundant. This concept can be translated into the sequence of
functional feeders that can feed on a submerged body.
RNA – ribonucleic acid found in the form of nuclear RNA, transfer RNA, and
messenger RNA
Saponiﬁcation – hydrolysis of fatty acid esters under alkaline conditions. Sub-
stances such as grave wax can be generated by this reaction in the context of body
decomposition.
Scape – ﬁrst antennal segment closest to the head.
Sclerotised – made up of a ‘tanned protein’ (sclerotin), which makes a hard, horny,
outer layer of the cuticle. The structure could also be described as chitinised.
Scrapers – this functional feeding group, also known as grazers, feed on algae and
diatoms that colonise ﬁxed surfaces. These can include the skin surface or clothing of
submerged organisms.
Scutum – the middle division of the top surface of a thoracic segment.
SEM/EDAX – scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectroscopy.
These combined techniques allow the microstructure of solid materials to be
visualised and a quantitative elemental analysis to be made.
Sequester – to set aside in, for example, fat cells; it is a means of storage or
protection.
Shredders – this group feeds on plant material, living or dead includingwood, leaves
and stems. They have mouthparts suitably modiﬁed in order to shred the plant tissue.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) – variation in a single nucleotide of the
shared DNA sequence of a population or individual, relative to other members of
the species.
Species – a group of individual organisms that can interbreed. Their offspring are
fertile and resemble the parents.
GLOSSARY
213

Spiracle – the opening to the outside that is the end of the insect trachael system.
Squamae – (singular squama) ﬂaps of wing tissue (often coloured white and with
black hairs), there are usually two ﬂaps at the base of each wing and these (amongst
other features) give the Calyptrates their distinctive name (also known as calypters).
Stadium – (plural stadia) the stage of morphological development between two
moultings, for example L1 and L2.
Sterna – ventral plates of the segments (plural; the individual plate is termed
a sternite).
Sternum – the ventral segment of the insect body. A division of the sternum is called
a sternite.
Subdermal – below the skin.
Surstyli – sclerotised organs, which are in pairs and together make up the lower parts
of the male genitalia.
Suture – a ‘seam’ visible on the surface of the insect body, which indicates where
two plates join. For example the transverse suture running across the mesonotum in
the Diptera.
Synanthropic – associated with humans and their activities.
Taxon – (plural Taxa). These are overarching terms for groups to which organisms
are assigned, based upon principles of taxonomy – for example, phylum, class,
genus, and species – the top (upper or dorsal) plates of a segment, for instance, of
the abdomen. An individual plate of any upper surface of the insect body is called
a tergite.
Terrestrial – living or growing on the land, rather than in fresh or sea water.
Tessellated – chequered. This is a common description of the abdomen in ﬂesh ﬂies.
Thanatosis – appearing to be lifeless insect carcasses; ‘playing’ dead’.
Tibia – the leg segment between the femur and the tarsus.
Tubercles – small rounded projections. The projections on the posterior segment of
dipteran larvae for example of the families Muscidae and Calliphoridae.
Urogomphi – small hardened structure at the end of the beetle larva abdomen. They
are ﬁxed and unjointed.
Ventral – from below; underneath.
Vertex – the top of the head.
Vestigial – structures that have, over time, become degenerate or reduced.
Vibrissae – large bristles located at the sides of the mouth in some ﬂy species.
214
GLOSSARY

Vitellogenesis – oocyte growth by laying down egg yolk in the vitellarium of the
ovarioles in the ovary.
Viviparous – females that lay live young rather than eggs. The Sarcophagidae are an
example of dipteral, which are viviparous.
Zooplankton – unicellular organisms that feed on primary producers or their
products; some zooplankton are capable of active swimming.
GLOSSARY
215

References
Abed-Benamara M., Achir I., Rodhain F. and Perez-Eid C. 1997. Premier cas algerien
d’otomyiase humaine a Chrysomya bezziana. Bulletin de la Societe de pathologie
exotique et de ses ﬁliales 90: 172–175.
Ac¸ikg€oz H. N., Y€uksel Y. and Ac¸ikg€oz A. 2005. Differences in sizes of diptera larvae on
dressed and undressed pig carcasses. EAFE 2005. The third meeting of the European
Association for Forensic Entomology, 27–29 April 2005, p. 24.
Adams Z. J. O. and Hall M. J. R. 2003. Methods used for the killing and preservation of
blowﬂy larvae and their effect on post mortem length. Forensic Science International
138(1–3): 50–61.
Al-Izzi M. A. J., Al-Taweel A. A. and Jassim F. A. 1999. Epidemiology and rearing of
Old World screwworm Chrysomya bezziana Villeneuve (Diptera: Calliphoridae) in
Iraq. Iraqi Journal of Agriculture 4: 153–160.
Anderson G. S. 1995. The use of insects in death investigations: analysis of cases in
British Columbia over a ﬁve year period. Canadian Society for Forensic Science
Journal 28: 277–292.
Anderson G. S. 2000. Minimum and maximum development rates in some forensically
important Calliphoridae (Diptera). Journal of Forensic Sciences 45(4): 824–832.
Anderson G. S. 2005. Effects of Arson on Forensic Entomology Evidence Canadian
Society of Forensic Science 38(2): 49–67.
Anderson G. S. 2010. Factors that inﬂuence insect succession on carrion. In Byrd J. H.
and Castner J. L. (eds) Forensic Entomology: The Utility of Arthropds in Legal
Investigations, 2nd edn. CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL.
Anderson G. S. and VanLaerhoven S. L. 1996. Initial studies on insect succession on
carrion in southwestern British Columbia. Journal of Forensic Sciences 41(4):
617–625.
Anderson, G. S. 2011. Comparison of Decomposition Rates and Faunal Colonization of
Carrion in Indoor and Outdoor Environments. Journal of Forensic Sciences 56:
136–142.
Angus R. B., Kemeny C. K. and Wood E. L. 2004. The C-banded karyotypes of the four
British species of Notonecta L. (Heteroptera: Notonectidae). Hereditas 140(2):
134–138.
Archer M. S. 2004. The effect of time after body discovery on the accuracy of
retrospectiveweather station ambient temperature corrections in forensic entomology.
Journal of Forensic Sciences 49(3): 1–7.
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Archer M. S. and Elgar M. A. 1998. Cannibalism and delayed pupation in hide beetles,
Dermestes maculatus DeGeer (Coleoptera: Dermestidae). Australian Journal of
Entomology 37(2): 158–161.
Archer M. S. and Elgar M. A. 1999. Female preference for multiple partners: sperm
competition in the hide beetle, Dermestes maculatus (DeGeer). Animal Behaviour
58(3): 669–675.
Archer M. S. and Elgar M. A. 2003. Yearly activity patterns in southern Victoria
(Australia) of seasonally active carrion insects. Forensic Science International 132(3):
173–176.
Arnaldos M. I., Garcia M. D., Romera E., Presa J. J. and Luna A. 2005. Estimation of post
mortem interval in real cases based on experimentally obtained entomological
evidence. Forensic Science International 149(1): 57–65.
Avila F. A. and Goff M. L. 1998. Arthropod succession patterns on burnt carrion in two
contrasting habitats in the Hawaiian islands. Journal of Forensic Sciences 43(3):
581–586.
Avise J. C., Arnold J., Ball R. M., Bermingham E., Lamb T., Neigel J. E., Reeb C. A. and
Saunders N. C. 1987. Intraspeciﬁc Phylogeography: the mitochondrial DNA bridge
between population genetics and systematic. Annual Review of Entomology 18:
489–522.
Babu C. H. S., Rai B. A., Nair M. A., Bulgannawar B. A., Kalola R. and Bhut M. K. 2010.
Traumatic wound myiasis in maxillofacial region – a case study. International Journal
of Clinical Dentistry 2(2): 53–57.
Baez M., Ortega G. and Kurahashi H. 1981. Immigration of the Oriental Latrine Fly,
Chrysomya megacephala (Fabricius) and the Afrotropical Filth Fly, Ch. chloropyga
(Wiedemann), into the Canary Islands (Diptera; Calliphoridae). Kontyu 49: 712–714.
Barbour M.T., Gerritsen J., Grifﬁth G.E., Frydenborg R., McCarron E., White J.S., and
Bastian M.L. 1996 A framework for biological criteria for Florida streams using
benthic macroinvertebrates. Journal of the North American Benthological Society
15(2):185–211.
Barreto M., Burbano M. E. and Barreto P. 2002. Flies (Calliphoridae, Muscidae) and
beetles (Silphidae) from human cadavers in Cali, Colombia (Short Communication).
Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro 97(1): 137–138.
Bartlett J. 1987. Evidence for a sex attractant in burying beetles Ecological Entomology
12: 471-472.
Baumgartner D. L. and Greenberg B. 1984. The genus Chrysomya (Diptera: Calliphor-
idae) in the New World. Journal of Medical Entomology 21: 105–113.
Beard C. B., Hamm D. M. and Collins F. H. 1993. The mitochondrial genome of the
mosquito Anopheles gambiae: DNA sequence, genome organisation and comparisons
with the mitochondrial sequences of other insects. Insect Molecular Biology 103–124.
Beesley W.N. 1991. The new world screw-worm ﬂy in North Africa. Annals of Tropical
Medicine and Parasitology 85(1): 173–179.
Benecke M. 1998. Random Ampliﬁed Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) typing of necropha-
geous insects (Diptera, Coleoptera) in criminal forensic studies: validation and use in
practice. Forensic Science International 98: 157–168.
Benecke M. 2001. A brief history offorensic entomology. Forensic Science International
120(1–2): 2–14.
Benecke M. 2004. Arthropods and corpses. In Tsokos M. (ed.) Forensic Pathology
Reviews, vol. 2. Humana Press: Totowa, NJ, pp. 207–240.
REFERENCES
217

Benecke M. and Barksdale L. 2003. Distinction of bloodstain patterns from ﬂy artefacts.
Forensic Science International 137: 152–159.
Benecke M. and Lessig R. 2001. Child neglect and forensic entomology. Forensic
Science International 120: 155–159.
Bergeret M., 1855. Infanticide. Momiﬁcation naturelle du cadaver. Annuals of Hygiene
and Legal Medicine 4: 443–452.
Bhattacharyya A., BhaumikA., Rani P. A., Mandal S. and Timothy T. 2010. Nano-
particles – A recent approach to insect pest control. African Journal of Biotechnology
9(24): 3489–3493.
Bhuiyan A. I. and Saifullah A. S. 1997. Biological note on Necrobia ruﬁpes (Deg.)
(Coleoptera: Cleridae). Bangladesh Journal of Zoology 25: 121–124.
Birkett M. A., Angelopoulos N., Jensen K.-M. V., Jespersen J. B., Pickett J. A., Prijs
H. J., Thomas G., Trapman J. J., Wadhams L. J. and Woodock C. M. 2004. The
role of volatile semiochemicals in mediating host location and selection by
nuisance and disease-transmitting cattle ﬂies. Medical and Veterinary Entomology
18: 313–322.
Block W., Erzinc¸liogˆlu Y. Z. and Worland M. R. 1990. Cold resistance in all life stages of
two blowﬂy species (Diptera, Calliphoridae). Medical and Veterinary Entomology 4:
213–219.
Boatright and Tomberlin J. K. 2010. Effect of temperature and tissue type on the
develkopment of Cochliomyia macellaria (Diptera:Calliphoridae). Journal of Medi-
cal Entomology 47(5): 917–923.
Bornemissza G. F. 1957. An analysis of arthropod succession in carrion and the effect of
its decomposition on the soil fauna. Australian Journal of Zoology 5: 1–12.
Bourel B., Hedouin V., Martin-Bouyer L., Becart A., Tournel G. and Gosset D 1999.
Effects of morphine in decomposing bodies of Lucilia sericata (Diptera: Calliphor-
idae). Journal of Forensic Sciences 44(2): 354–358.
Bourel B., Tournel G., Hedouin V., Deveaux M., Goff M. L. and Gosset D. 2001.
Morphoine extraction in necrophagous insect remaions fore determining ante-mortem
opiate intoxication. Forensic Science International 120: 127–131.
Bourel B., Tournet G., Hedouin V., Gosset D. 2004. Entomofauna of buried bodies in
Northern France. International Journal of Legal Medicine 118: 215–220.
Braig H. R. and Perotti M. A. 2009. Carcases and mites. Experimental and Applied
Acarology 49: 45–84.
Brandt A. 2004 Insect activity on pig carcasses over winter in London. Proceedings of
the European Association for Forensic Entomology Conference, 29–30 March,
London, p. 42.
Breitmeier D., Graefe-Kirci U., Albrecht K., Weber M., Tr€oger H. D. and Kleemann
W. J. 2005. Evaluation of the correlation between time corpses spent in in-ground
graves and ﬁndings at exhumation. Forensic Science International 154(2–3):
218–223.
Brisard C. 1939. Pediculus vestimenti. Annales de Medicine Legale de Criminologie et le
Police Scientiﬁque 9–10: 614–615.
Broadhead E. C. 1980. Larvae of Trichocerid ﬂies found on human corpse. En-
tomologist’s Monthly Magazine 116: 23–24.
Buck M. 1997. Sphaeroceridae (Diptera) reared from various types of carrion and other
decaying substrates in Southern Germany, including new faunistic data on some rarely
collected species. European Journal of Entomology 94: 137–151.
218
REFERENCES

Buck T. L., Bred G. A., Pennings S. C., Chase M. E., Zimmer M. and Carefoot T. H. 2003.
Diet choice in an omnivorous salt-marsh crab: different food types, body size and
habitat complexity. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology 292: 103–116.
Busvine J. R. 1980. Insects and Hygiene, 3rd edn. Chapman & Hall, London.
Byrd J. and Allen J. C. 2001. The development of the black blowﬂy, Phormia regina
(Meigen). Forensic Science International 120(1–2): 79–88.
Byrd J. and Butler J. F. 1998. Effects of temperature on Sarcophaga haemorrhoidalis
(Diptera: Sarcophagidae) development. Journal of Medical Entomology 35(5):
694–698.
Byrd J. and Castner J. L. (eds) 2010. Forensic Entomology: The Utility of Arthropods in
Legal Investigations, 2nd edn. CRC: Boca Raton.
Byrne A. L., Camann M. A., Cyr T. L., Catts E. P. and Espelie K. E. 1995. Forensic
implications of biochemical differences among geographic populations of the
black blowﬂy, Phormia regina (Meigen). Journal of Forensic Sciences 40(3):
372–377.
Caine L., Corte Real F., Lima G., Pontes Abrantes D. and Pinheiro M. F. 2006. Genetic
identiﬁcation of forensically important Calliphoridae in Portugal. International
Congress Series 1288: 846–848.
Calderon-Arguedas O., BarrantesJ. M., Solano M. E. 2005. Miasisenterica por Hermetia
illucens (Diptera: Stratiomyidae) en una paciente geriatrica de Costa Rica. Para-
sitologica Latinoamericana 60: 162–164.
Campan M., Le Pape G. and Benziane T. 1994. Description du comportement sexuel de
Calliphora vomitoria (Diptera: Calliphoridae) par une technique d’analyse de texts.
Behavioural Processes 31(2–3): 269–284.
Campobasso C. P., Di Vella G. and Introna F. 2001. Factors affecting decomposition and
Dipteran colonization. Forensic Science International 120: 18– 27.
Campobasso C. P., Linville J. G., Wells J. D. and Introna F. M. D. 2005. Forensic genetic
analysis of insect gut contents. American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology
26(2): 161–165.
Carew M. E., Pettigrove V. and Hoffmann A. A. 2003. Identifying chironomids (Diptera:
Chironomidae) for biological monitoring with PCR-RFLP. Bulletin of Entomological
Research 93: 483–490.
Carr W. E. S. and Thompson H. W. 1983. Adenosine 5’-monophosphate, an internal
regulatory agent, is a potent chemoattractant for a marine shrimp. Journal of
Comparative Physiology 153: 47–53.
Carter D. O., Yellowlees D. and Tibbett M. 2007. Cadaver decomposition in terrestrial
ecosystems. Naturwissenschaften 94(1): 12–24.
Carvalho F., Dadour I. R., Groth D. M. and Harvey M. L. 2010. Isolation and detection of
ingested DNA from the immature stages of Calliphora dubia (Diptera: Calliphoridae):
a forensically important blowﬂy. Forensic Science, Medicine and Pathology 1(4):
261–265.
Carvalho L. M. I., Thyssen P. J., Linhares A. X. and Palhares F. A. B. 2000. A checklist of
Arthropods associated with pig carrion and human corpses in southeastern Brazil.
Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz 195(1): 135–138.
Catts E. P. 1992. Problems in estimating the post mortem interval in death investigations.
Journal of Agricultural Entomology 9(4): 245–255.
Catts E. P. and Haskell N. H. (eds) 1990. Entomology and Death: A Procedural Guide.
Joyce’s Print Shop: Clemson, SC.
REFERENCES
219

Centeno N., Maldonado M. and Oliva A. 2002. Seasonal patterns of arthropods occurring
on sheltered and unsheltered pig carcasses in Buenos Aires Province (Argentina).
Forensic Science International 126(1): 63–70.
Chandler P. J. 1998. Check Lists of Insects of the British Isles (New Series) Part 1:
Diptera. In Hollis D. (ed.) Handbooks for the Identiﬁcation of British Insects, vol. 12
Royal Entomological Society: London.
Chapman R. F. and Sankey J. H. P. 1955. The larger invertebrate fauna of three rabbit
carcasses. Journal of Animal Ecology 24: 395–402.
Chen C.-H. and Shih C.-J. 2003. Rapid identiﬁcation of three species of blowﬂies
(Diptera: Calliphoridae) by PCR-RFLP and DNA sequencing analysis. Formosan
Entomology 23: 59–70. (In Chinese with English abstract and ﬁgure titles.)
Cheng Ko 1890. Cases in the history of Chinese trials (English translation of Zhe yu gui
jian bu). Lu Shih, China. In Greenberg B. and Kunich J. C. 2002 Entomology and the
Law. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Chin H. C. Marwi M. A., Sallah A. F. M., Jeffrey J., Kurahashi H. and Omar B. 2008a.
Study of insect succession and rate of decomposition on a partially burned pig carcass
in an oil palm plantation in Malaysia. Tropical Biomedicine 25(3): 202–208.
Chin H. C., Marwi M. A., Jeffrey J. and Omar B. 2008b. Insect succession on a
decomposing piglet carcass placed in a man-made freshwater pond in Malaysia.
Tropical Biomedicine 25(1): 23–29.
Chin H. C., Sulaiman S., Othman H., Jeffrey J., Kurahashi H., and Omar B. 2010. Insect
succession associate with a hanging pig carcass placed in an oil palm plantation in
Malaysia. Sains Malaysiana 39(6): 921–926.
Chinnery M. 1973. A Field Guide to the Insects of Britain and Northern Europe. William
Collins Sons & Co., Ltd.: London.
Clark K., Evans L. and Wall R. 2006. Growth rates of the blowﬂy Lucilia sericata on
different body tissues. Forensic Science International 156: 145–149.
Clarke T. E., Levin D. B., Kavanaugh D. H. and Reimchen T. E. 2001. Rapid Evolution in
the Nebria Gregaria Group (Coleoptera: Carabidae) and the Palaeography of the
Queen Charlotte Islands. Evolution 55(7): 1408–1418.
Clary D. O. and Wolstenholme D. R. 1985. The mitochondrial DNA molecule of
Drosophila yakuba: nucleotide sequence, gene organisation and genetic code. Journal
of Molecular Evolution 22: 252–271.
Cocquempot C. 2007. Alien longhorn beetles (Coleoptera:Cerambycidae) original
inceptions and introductions in Europe, mainly France and notes about recently
imported species. Redia 89: 35–50.
Coffey M. D. 1966. Studies on the association ofﬂies (Diptera) with dung in southeastern
Washington. Annals of the Entomological Society of America 59: 207–218.
Cohen A. C. 2001. Formalising insect rearing and artiﬁcial diet technology. American
Entomologist Winter: 198–206.
Colyer C. N. and Hammond C. O. 1951. Flies of the British Isles. Frederick Warne & Co.,
Ltd: London.
Conquest E. 1999. The pheromone-mediated behaviour of Dermestes maculatus. Poster
presentation at the International Society of Chemical Ecology meeting, 13–17 March
1999, Marseilles.
Coombs C. W. 1978. The effect of temperature and relative humidity upon development
and fecundity of Dermestes lardarius L. (Coleoptera, Dermestidae). Journal of Stored
Product Research 14: 111–119.
220
REFERENCES

Cooter J. 2006. Cleroidea in Cooter, J. and Barclay, M. V. L. A Coleopterists Handbook,
4th edn. Amateur Entomologists’ Society: Orpington.
Cooter J. and Barclay M. V. L. 2006. A Coleopterist’s Handbook Amateur En-
tomologists’ Society (4th edn) Amateur Entomologists’ Society, Orpington.
Couri M. S., Cunha A. M., de Souza S. M. F. M., Laeta M. 2009. Ophyra capensis
(Wiedemann) (Diptera, Muscidae) found inside the oesophagus of a Mummy in
Lisbon, Portugal. Papeis Avulsos de Zoologia 49(6): 87–91.
Cragg J. B. 1955. The natural history of sheep blowﬂies in Britain. Annals of Applied
Biology 42: 197–207.
Crosby T. K., Watt J. C., Kistemaker A. C. and Nelson P. E. 1986. Entomological
identiﬁcation of the origin of imported Cannabis. Journal of the Forensic Science
Society 26: 35–44.
Crowson R. A. 1981. The Biology of the Coleoptera. Academic Press: London.
Cruz A. M. 2006. Crime Intelligence: An experiment in Forensic Entomology. Center for
Strategic Intelligence Research Occasional Paper 12. National Defense Intelligence
College Press: Washington D.C.
Cummins K. W. and Merritt R. W. 1996. Ecology and distribution of aquatic insects. In
Merritt R. W. and Cummins K. W. (eds), An Introduction to the Aquatic Insects of
North America. Kendall Hunt Publishing Company: Dubuque, IN.
Dadour I. R., Cook D. F. and Wirth N. 2001. Rate of development of Hydrotaea rostrata
under summer and winter (cyclic and cibnstant) temperature regimes. Medical and
Veterinary Entomology 15: 177–182.
Dasgupta B. and Roy P. 1969. Studies on the behaviour of Lucilia illustris Meigen as a
parasite of vertebrates under experimental conditions. Parisitology 59: 299–304.
Davies L. and Ratcliffe G. G. 1994. Development rates in some pre-adult stages in
blowﬂies with reference to low temperatures. Medical and Veterinary Entomology 8:
245–254.
Davis J. B. and Goff M L. 2000 Decomposition patterns in terrestrial and intertidal
habitats on Oahu island and Coconut island, Hawaii. Journal of Forensic Sciences 45:
836–842.
De Andrade J. D., Rocha F.A., Rodrigues P., Rosa G. S., Del Banco Faria L.,Vonm Zuben
J., Rossi M. N. and Godoy W. A. C. 2002. Larval dispersal and predation
in experimental populations of Chrysomyia macellaria (Diptera: Calliphoridae).
Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro 97(8): 21137–1140.
Dean M. D. and Ballard J. W. O. 2001. Factors affecting mitochondrial DNA quality from
museum preserved Drosophila simulans. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata
98: 279–283.
Deﬁnis-Gojanovic M., Sutlovic D., Britvic D. and Kokan B. 2007. Drug analysis in
necrophagous ﬂies and human tissues. Arhiv za Higijenu Rada i Toksikologiju 58:
313–316.
Dekeirsschieter D. and Haubruge V. F. 2011. Carrion beetles visiting pig carcases during
early spring in urban, forest and agricultural biotopes in Western Europe. Journal of
Insect Science 11: 1–13.
Deonier C. C. 1942. Seasonal abundance and distribution of certain blowﬂies in
southern Arizona and their economic importance. Journal of Economic Entomology
35: 65–70.
Department of Trade and Industry. Drownings in the Home and Garden. DTI reference:
URN01/903. DTI: London.
REFERENCES
221

Derraik J. G., Heath A. C. G. and Rademaker M. 2010. Human myiasis in New Zealand:
imported and indigenously-acquired cases; the species of concern and clinical aspects.
The New Zealand Medical Journal 123: 1–18.
Desch C. E. 2009. Human hair follicle mites and forensic acarology. Experimental and
Applied Acarology 49: 143–146.
Dewaele Ph. and LeClerq M. 2002. Les Phorides (Dipteres) sur cadavers humains en
Europe occidentale. Proceedings of the First European Forensic Entomology Seminar,
pp. 79–86.
Digby P. S. B. 1958. Flight activity of the blow ﬂy, Calliphora erythrocephala, in relation
to wind speed, with special reference to adaptation. Journal of Experimental Biology
35: 776–795.
Dillon L. and Anderson G. S. 1996. Forensic entomology: the use of insects in death
investigations to determine elapsed time since death in interior and northern British
Columbia regions. Canadian Police Research Centre TR-03-96.
Dillon N., Austin A. D. and Bartowsky E. 1996. Comparison of preservation techniques
for DNA extraction from hymenopterous insects. Insect Molecular Biology 5(1):
21–24.
Disney R. 2005. Duration of development of two species of carrion breeding scuttle ﬂies
and the forensic implications. Medical and Veterinary Entomology 19(2): 229–235.
Disney R. and Manlove J. D. 2005. First occurrences of the Phorid, Megaselia abdita, in
forensic cases in Britain. Medical and Veterinary Entomology 19(4): 489–491.
DiZinno J. A., Lord W. D., Collins-Morton M. B., Wilson M. R. and Goff M. L. 2002.
Mitochondrial DNA sequencing of beetle larvae (Nitidulidae: Omosita) recovered
from human bone. Journal of Forensic Sciences 47(6): 1337–1339.
Dobler S. and Muller J. K. 2000. Resolving phylogeny at the family level by mitochon-
drial cytochrome oxidase sequences: phylogeny of carrion beetles (Coleoptera,
Silphidae). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 15(3): 390–402.
Donovan S. E., Hall M. J. R., Turner B. D. and Moncrieff C. B. 2006. Larval growth rates
of the blowﬂy, Calliphora vicina, over a range of temperatures. Medical and
Veterinary Entomology 20: 106–114.
Draber-Mon´ko A. 2004. Calliphoridae, Plujki (Insecta Diptera). Fauna Poloniae 23,
Natura Optima Dux Fundation & MaZI PAS: Warsaw.
Easton A. M. and Smith K. G. V. 1970. The entomology of the cadaver. Medicine,
Science and the Law 10: 208–215.
Edwards F. W. 1928. Diptera Fam. Protorhyphidae, Anisopodidae, Pachyneuridae,
Trichoceridae (with descriptions of early stages by D Keilin). Genera Insectorum
190: 1–41. In Keilin D. and Tate P. 1940. The early stages of the families Trichoceridae
and Anisopodidae (¼Rhyphidae) (Diptera: Nematocera). Transactions of the Royal
Entomological Society of London 90(3): 39–62.
Eggert A.-K., Reinking M. and Muller J. K. 1998. Parental care improves offspring
survival and growth in burying beetles. Animal Behaviour 55: 97–107.
Erzinc¸lioglu Y. Z. 1980. On the role of Trichoceridae larvae (Diptera, Trichoceridae) in
decomposing carrion in winter. Naturalist 105: 133–134.
Erzinc¸lioglu Y. Z. 1987. Recognition of the early instar larvae of the genera Calliphora
and Lucilia (Dipt., Calliphoridae). Entomologist’s Monthly Magazine 123: 97–98.
Erzinc¸lioglu Y. Z. 1996. Blowﬂies (Naturalists’ Handbooks 23). The Richmond Pub-
lishing Co. Ltd., Slough.
Erzinc¸lioglu Y. Z. 2000. Maggots Murder and Men. Harley Press: Colchester.
222
REFERENCES

Espeland M., Irested M., A
 kerlund K. A., Bergh J.-E. and K€allersj€o M. 2010. Dichlorvos
exposure impeded extraction and ampliﬁcation of DNA from insects in museum
collections. Frontiers in Zoology 7: 2–7.
Estrada D. A., Grella.M. D., Thyssen P. J. and Linhares A. X. 2009. Chrysomya albiceps
(Wiedemann) (Diptera: Calliphoridae) developmental rate on artiﬁcial diet with
animal tissues for forensic purposes. Neotropical Entomology 38(2): 203–207.
Faria Del Bianco L., Orsi L., Trinca L. A. and Godoy W. A. C. 1999. Larval predation by
Chrysoma albiceps on Cochliomyia macellaria, Chrysomya megacephala and Chry-
somya putoria. Entomologia Experimentali et Applicata 90(2): 149–157.
Faucherre J., Cherix D. and Wyss C. 1999. Behaviour of Calliphora vicina (Diptera,
Calliphoridae) under extreme conditions. Journal of Animal Behaviour 12: 687–690.
Ferrar P. 1987. A Guide to the Breeding Habits and Immature Stages of Diptera
Cyclorrhapha. Scandinavian Science Press: Copenhagen.
Fisher P., Wall R. and Ashworth J. R. 1998. Attraction of the sheep blowﬂy, Lucilia
sericata (Diptera: Calliphoridae) to carrion bait. Field Bulletin of Entomological
Research 88: 611–616.
Fraenkel G. 1935. Observations and experiments on the blowﬂy (Calliphora erythro-
cephala) during the ﬁrst day after emergence. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of
London 103: 893–904.
Fredeen F. J. H. and Glen G. S. 1970. The survival and development of Leptocera caenosa
(Diptera: Sphaeroceridae) in laboratory cultures. The Canadian Entomologist 102(2):
164–171.
Fujikawa A., Barksdale L., Higley L. G., Carter D. O. 2011. Changes in the morphology
and presumptive chemistry of impact and pooled bloodstain patterns by Lucilia
sericata (Meigen) (Diptera: Calliphoridae). Journal of Forensic Sciences 56(5):
113–118.
Fukatsu T. 1999. Acetone preservation: a practical technique for molecular analysis
Molecular Ecology 8: 1935–1945.
Gallagher M. B., Sandhu B., Kimsey R. 2010. Variation in developmental times for
geographically distant populations of the common Greenbottle Lucilia sericata
Meigen. Journal of Forensic Sciences 55(2): 438–442.
Gaudry E. 2002. Eight squadrons for one target: the fauna of cadaver described by P.
Megnin. Proceedings of the First European Forensic Entomology Seminar, Rosny
sous Bois, France, p. 23.
Gaudry E., Dourel L., Pasquerault T., Chauvet B and Vincent B. 2006. Burial of lamb
carcasses at three different depths: impact on the colonisation by Necrophagous
insects. Programme and Abstracts of the Fourth Meeting of European Association of
Forensc Entomology, 26–29 April, Bari.
Gaudry E., Dourel L., Zehner R. and Amendt J. 2004. Quality assurance in forensic
entomology: why how and who? Proceedings of European Association for Forensic
Entomology Conference, 29–30 March, London, p. 21.
Gaudry E., Myskowiak J.-B., Chauvet B., Pasquerault T., Lefebre F. and Malgorn Y.
2001. Activity of the forensic entomology department of the French Gendarmerie.
Forensic Science International 120(1–2): 68–71.
Gennard D. and Robson H. 2007. The inﬂuence of height above ground on necrophagous
insect colonisation in three rural habitats. Programme and Abstracts of the
Fifth Meeting of the European Association for Forensic Entomology, 2–5 May,
Brussels, p. 13.
REFERENCES
223

Gennis R. B. 1992. Site-directed mutagenesis studies of subunit I of the aa3-type
cytochrome c oxidase of Rhodobacter sphaeroides: a brief review of progress to date.
Biochemica et Biophysica Acta 11010: 184–187.
Giertsen J. C. 1977. Drowning. In Tedeschi C. G., Eckert W. G. and Tedeschi L. G. (eds)
Forensic Medicine: A Study in Trauma and Environmental Hazards. Saunders:
Philadelphia, PA.
Gill G. J. 2005. Decomposition and arthropod succession on above ground pig carrion
in rural Manitoba. Canadian Police Research Centre, Ottowa, Ontario. TR06-2005.
Gilmour D., Waterhouse D. F. and McIntyre K. L. 1946. An account of experiments
undertaken to determine the natural population of sheep blowﬂy, Lucilia cuprina
Weid. Bulletin of the Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research. Australia 195:
1–39.
Goff M. L. 1993. Estimation of post mortem interval using arthropod development and
successional patterns. Forensic Science Review 5(2): 81–94.
Goff M. L. 2000. A Fly for the Prosecution Harvard University Press Cambridge MA.
Goff M. L. and Flynn M. F. 1991. Determination of post mortem interval by arthropod
succession: A case study from the Hawaiian Islands. Journal of Forensic Sciences 36:
607–614.
Goff M. L., Brown W. A., Hewadikaram K. A. and Omori A. I. 1991. Effect of heroin in
decomposing tissues on the development rate of Boettcherisca peregrina (Diptera,
Sarcophagidae) and implications of this effect on estimation of post mortem intervals
using arthropod development rates. Journal of Forensic Sciences 36(2): 537–542.
Goff M. L., Omori A. I. and Goodbrod J. R. 1989. Effect of cocaine in tissues in the
development rate of Boettcherisca peregrina (Diptera Sarcophagidae). Journal of
Medical Entomology 26: 91–93.
Gola S. and Lukose S. 2007. A study of ante-mortem administered drugs and to analyse
them in the different stages of insect development. International Journal of Medical
Toxicology and Legal Medicine 10(1): 12–15.
Gomes L., Gomes G., Oliveira H. G., Morlin Jnr J. J., Desuo I. C., Queiroz M. M. C.,
Giannotti E., von Zuben C. J. 2007. Occurrence of Hymenoptera on Sus scrofa
carcasses during summer and winter seasons in southeastern Brazil. Revista Brasileira
de Entomologia 51(3): 394–396.
Gosselin M., Charabidtze D., Frippiat C., Bourel B., Gosset D. and Rasmount P. 2010.
Development time variability: adaptation of Regniere’s method of intrinsic variability
of Belgian Lucilia sericata (Diptera, Calliphoridae) population. Journal of Forensic
Research 1(2): 1000109 doi:10.4172/2157-7145.1000109.
Grassberger M. and Frank C. 2004b. Development data for the parasitoid wasp Nasonia
vitripennis (Walker Hymenoptera:Pteromalidae): Veriﬁcation under ﬁeld conditions.
Proceedings of European Association for Forensic Entomology Conference, 29–30
March, London, p. 26.
Grassberger M. and Frank C. 2004a. Initial study of arthropod succession on pig carrion
in a central European urban habitat. Journal of Medical Entomology 41(3): 511–523.
Grassberger M., Freidrich E. and Reiter C. 2003. The blowﬂy Chrysomya albiceps
(Weidmann) (Diptera: Calliphoridae) as a new forensic indicator in Central Europe.
International Journal of Legal Medicine 117: 75–81
Grassberger M. and Reiter C. 2001. Effect of temperature on Lucilia sericata (Diptera:
Calliphoridae) development with special reference to isomegalen-and isomorphen-
diagram. Forensic Science International 120(1–2): 32–36.
224
REFERENCES

Grassberger M. and Reiter C. 2002. Effect of temperature on development of the
forensically important holarctic blow ﬂy Protophormia terraenovae (Robineau-
Desvoidy) (Diptera: Calliphoridae). Forensic Science International 128: 177–182.
Green A. A. 1951. The control of blowﬂies infesting slaughterhouses 1. Field observation
on the habits of blowﬂies. Annals of Applied Biology 38: 475–494.
Greenberg B. 1990. Nocturnal oviposition behaviour of blowﬂies (Diptera: Calliphor-
idae). Journal of Medical Entomology 27(5): 807–810.
Greenberg B. 1991. Flies as forensic indicators. Journal of Medical Entomology 28:
565–577.
Greenberg B. and Kunich J. C. 2002 Entomology and the Law: Flies as Forensic
Indicators. Cambridge University Press.
Greenberg B. and Singh D. 1995. Species Identiﬁcation of Calliphorid (Diptera) eggs.
Journal of Medical Entomology 32(1): 21–26.
Grellner W. and Glenewinkel F. 1997. Exhumations: synopsis of morphological and
toxicological ﬁndings in relation to the post mortem interval. Survey of a 20-year
period and review of the literature. Forensic Science International 90: 139–159.
Grimshaw P. H. 1917. A guide to the literature of British Diptera. Proceedings of the
Royal Physical Society of Edinburgh 20: 78–117.
Grimshaw P. H. 1934. Introdcution to the study of Diptera, with a key to the identiﬁcation
of families. Proceedings of the Royal Physical Society of Edinburgh 22: 187–215.
Gunatilake K. and Goff M. L. 1989. Detection of organophosphate poisoning in a
putrefying body by analysing arthropod larvae. Journal of Forensic Sciences 34:
714–716.
Gunn A. and Bird J. 2011. The ability of the blowﬂies Calliphora vomitoria (Linnaeus),
Calliphora vicina Robineau-Desvoidy) and Lucilia sericata (Meigen) (Diptera:
Calliphoridae) and the muscid ﬂies Muscina stabulans (Fallen) and Muscina prolapsa
(Harris) (Diptera: Muscidae) to colonise buried remains. Forensic Science Interna-
tional 207: 198–204.
Haefner J. M., Wallace J. R. and Merritt R. W. 2004. Pig decompositoin in lotic aquatic
systems: the potential use of algal growth in establishing a post mortem submersion
interval (PMSI). Journal of Forensic Sciences 49(2): 1–7.
Hahn D. A., Ragland G. J., Shoemaker D. D. and Delinger D. L. 2009. Gene discovery
using massively parallel pyrosequencing to develop ESTs for the ﬂesh ﬂy Sarcophaga
crassipalpis BMC Genomics 10: 234, www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/234.
Hall M. J. 1995. Trapping the ﬂies that cause myiasis: their response to host-stimuli.
Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 89(4): 333–357.
Hall M. J. 2008. Chapter 2.1.10 New World screwworm (Cochliomyia hominivorax)
and Old World screwworm (Chrysomya bezziana). Manual of Diagnostic Tests and
Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals (mammals, birds and bees), Sixth Edition, Volume 1.
OiE, World Organisation for Animal Health: Paris, France, pp. 265–275.
Hall M. J. and Smith K. G. V. 1993. Diptera causing myiasis in man. In: Lane R. P.
and Crosskey R. W. (eds) Medical Insects and Arachnids. Chapman & Hall: London,
pp. 429–469.
Hanks P. 1984. The Collins Dictionary of the English Language. Collins: London.
Hanski I. 1987. Carrion ﬂy community dynamics: patchiness, seasonality and coexis-
tence. Ecological Entomology 12: 257–266.
Hart A. J., Hall M. J. R. and Whitaker A. P. 2011. The use offorensic entomology to assist
the criminal justice system The Barrister Magazine http://www.barristermagazine.com/
REFERENCES
225

article-listing/current-issue/the-use-of-forensic-entomology-to-assist-the-criminal-jus-
tice-system.html (accessed 26 June 2011).
Haskell N. H. and Williams R. 2008. Entomology and Death: A Procedural Guide.
Forensic Entomology Partners: Clemson, SC.
Haskell N. H., McShaffrey D. G., Hawley D. A., Williams R. E., Pless J. E. 1989. Use of
insects in determining submersion interval. Journal of Forensic Sciences 34(3):
622–632.
Heaton V., Lagden A., Moffat C., Simmons T. 2010. Predicting the post mortem
submersion interval for human remains recovered from UK waterways. Journal of
Forensic Sciences 55(2): 302–307.
Hedoin V Bourel B., Martin-Bouyer L., Becart A., Tournel G., Deveaux M. and Gosset
D. 1999. Determination of drug levels in larvae of Lucilia sericata (Diptera:
Calliphoridae) reared on rabbit carcasses containing morphine. Journal of Forensic
Sciences 44: 351–353.
Hedouin V., Bourel B., Becart A., Gilles D. D. S., Deveaux M., Goff M. L. and Gosset D.
2001. Determination of drugs levels in larvae of Protophormia terraenovae and
Calliphora vicina (Diptera: Calliphoridae) reared on rabbit carcasses containing
morphine. Journal of Forensic Sciences 46(1): 12–14.
Hedstr€om L. and Nuorteva P. 1971. Zonal distribution of ﬂies on the hill Aiiglas in sub
arctic northern Finland. Annals Entomologici Fennici 37(2): 121–125.
Hegazi, E. M., El Gayar, F. H., Rawah I. A. and Ali, S. A. 1978. Factors affecting the
bionomics of Piophila casei (L.). Zeitschrift fur Angewandte Entomologie 85: 327–335.
Hermes V. B. 1928. The effect of different quantities of food during the larval period on
the sex ratio of Lucilia sericata Meigen and Theobaldia incidens (Thom.). Journal of
Economic Entomology 21: 720–729.
Higley L. G. and Haskell N. H. 2001. Insect development and forensic entomology. In
Byrd J. H.and Castner J. L. (eds) 2001. Forensic Entomology: The Utility of
Arthropods in Legal Investigations. CRC Boca Raton, FL.
Hinton H. E. 1945. A Monograph of the Beetles associated with Stored Products, vol. 1.
Trustees of the Natural History Museum: London.
Hoback W. W., Bishop A. A., Kroemer J., Scalzitti J. M. and Shaffer J. J. 2004.
Differences among the antimicrobial properties of carrion secretions reﬂect phyloge-
ny and ecology. Journal of Chemical Ecology 30(4): 719–729.
Hobischak N. R. and Anderson G. S. 2002. Time of submergence using aquatic
invertebrate succession and decompositional changes. Journal of Forensic Sciences
47(1): 142–151.
Hough G., de N. 1897. The fauna of dead bodies with especial reference to Diptera.
British Medical Journal: 1853–1854.
Huijbregts H. 2004. Distribution of the blowﬂies, Phormia regina and Protophormia
terraenovae in the Netherlands and Western Europe. Proceedings of European
Association for Forensic Entomology Conference, 29–30 March, London, p. 5.
Iannacone J. 2003. Arthropofauna of forensic importance in pig carcass in Callao, Peru.
Revista Brasileira de Zoologia 20: 85–90.
Introna F., Altamura B. M., Dell’Erba A., Dattoli V. 1989. Time since death deﬁnition by
experimental reproduction of Lucilia sericata cycles in a growth cabinet. Journal of
Forensic Sciences 34(2): 478–480.
Introna F., Campobasso C. P. and Goff M. L. 2001. Entomotoxicology Forensic Science
International 120: 42–47.
226
REFERENCES

Introna F., Lo Dico C., Caplan Y. H. and Smialek J. E. 1990. Opiate analysis in cadaveric
blowﬂy larvae as an indicator of narcotic intoxication. Journal of Forensic Sciences
35: 118–122.
Introna F., Suman T. W., Smialek J. E. 1991. Sarcosaprophagous ﬂy activity in Maryland.
Journal of Forensic Sciences 36(1): 238–243.
Iribe K., Ueno M. and Mukai, S. 1974. Relations between production of alcohol from
body ﬂuid and LDH activity in decomposition of corpses. Report of the National
Research. Instute of Police Science. Tokyo 27: 8–11 (in Japanese with an English
summary).
Ives A. B. 1991.Aggregation of Carrion ﬂies. Ecological Monographs 61(1): 75–94.
Jaga K. and Dharmani C. 2003. Global surveillance of DDT and DDE levels in human
tissue. International Journal of Occupational Medicine and Environmental Health
16(1): 7–20.
James M. T. 1947. The ﬂies that cause myiasis in man. Miscellaneous Publication 631.
US Department of Agriculture, Washington DC, pp. 1–175.
Johnson C. and Esser J. 2000. A Review of Insect Infestation of Traditionally Cured Fish
in the Tropics. Department of International Development: London.
Johnson W. and Villeneuve G. 1897. On the medico-legal application of entomology.
Montreal Medical Journal 26: 81–90.
Jones T. M. and Elgar, M. A. 2004. The role of male age, sperm age and mating history on
fertilisation success in the hide beetle Dermestes maculates. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, (Series B) 271: 1311–1318.
Junqueira A. C. M., Lessinger A. C. and Azendo-Espin A. M. L. 2002. Methods for the
recovery of mitochondrial DNA sequences from museum specimens of myiasis-
causing ﬂies. Medical and Veterinary Entomology 16: 39–45.
Kamal A. S. 1958. Comparative Study of thirteen species of sarcosaprophagous
Calliphoridae and Sarcophagidae (Diptera). 1. Bionomics. Annals of the Entomologi-
cal Society of America 51: 261–270.
Kaneshrajah G. and Turner B. 2004. Calliphora vicina larvae grow at different rates
on different body tissues. International Journal of Legal Medicine 118(4):
242–244.
Keilin D. and Tate P. 1940. The early stages of the families Trichoceridae and
Anisopodidae (¼Rhyphidae) (Diptera: Nematocera). Transactions of the Royal
Entomological Society of London 90(3): 39–62.
Keiper J. B. and Casamatta D. A. 2001. Benthic organisms as forensic indicators. Journal
of the North American Benthological Society 20(2): 311–324.
Keiper J. B., Chapman E. G. and Foote B. A. 1997. Midge larvae (Diptera: Chirono-
midae) as indicators of post-mortem submersion interval of carcasses in a woodland
stream: preliminary report. Journal of Forensic Sciences 42(6): 1074–1079.
Kelly J. A., van der Linde T. C. Anderson G. S. 2009. The inﬂuence of clothing and
wrapping on carcass decomposition and arthropod succession during the warmer
seasons in central South Africa. Journal of Forensic Sciences 54(5): 1105–1111.
King P. E. and Rafai J. 1970. Host discriminatikon in a gregarious parasitoid Nasonia
vitripennis (Walker) (Hymenoptera: Pteromalidae). Journal of Experimental Biology
53: 245–254.
King T. L., Horine F. M., Daly K. C. and Smith B. H. 2004. Explosives detection with
hard-wired moths Instrumentation and Measurement IEEE Transactions 53(4):
1113–1118.
REFERENCES
227

Kintz P., Godelar B., Tracqui A., Mangin P., Lugnier A. A. and Chaumont A. J. S. 1990.
Fly larvae: a new toxicological method of investigation in forensic science. Journal of
Forensic Sciences 35: 204–207.
Kloet G. S. and Hincks W. D. 1976. A Check List of British Insects. Second edition
(completely revised). Part 5: Diptera and Siphonoptera Handbooks for the Identiﬁca-
tion of British Insects 11(5): 1–139.
Kneidel K. A. 1985. Patchiness, aggregation, and the coexistence of competitors for
ephemeral resources. Ecological Entomology 10(4): 441–448.
Korvarik P. W. 1995. Development of Epierus divisus Marseul (Coleoptera: Histeridae).
The Coleopterists’ Bulletin 49(3): 253–260.
Kramer Wilson K. A. 1999. Parenting behaviour and long-term implications for
reproduction success of burying beetles (Coleoptera: Silphidae: Nicrophorus), www.
colostate.edu/depts/Entomology/courses/en507/papers-1999/kramer.htm.
Kulshrestha P. and Satpathy D. K. 2001. Use of beetles in forensic entomology. Forensic
Science International 120: 15–17.
Kutty S. N., Pape T., Wiegmann B. M. and Meier R. 2010. Molecular phylogeny of the
Calyptratae (Diptera: Cyclorrhapha) with an emphasis on the superfamily Oestroidea
and the position of Mystacinobiidae and McAlpine’s Fly. Systematic Entomology 35:
614–635.
Laurence B. R. 1956. On the life history of Trichocera saltator (Harris) (Diptera,
Trichoceridae). Journal of Zoology 126(2): 235–243.
Lawrence J. F. and Newton A. F., jr. 1982. Evolution and classiﬁcation of beetles. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics 13: 261–290.
LeBlanc H. and Logan J. 2010. Exploiting insect olfaction in forensic entomology. In
Amendt, J., Goff M. L., Campobasso C. P. and Grassberger M. Current Concepts in
Forensic Entomology. Springer Dordrecht Chapter 11.
Leclerq M. and Brahy G. 1985. Entomologie et medicine legale: datation de la mort.
Journal Medecinee Legale 28: 202–223.
Lefebvre F. and Pasquerault T. 2004. Temperature-dependent development of Ophyra
aenescens (Weidemann, 1830) and Ophyra capensis (Weidemann 1818). Forensic
Science International 139: 75–79.
Lehrer A. 1972. Diptera Familia Calliphoridae. Fauna Republici Socialiste Romania
11(12): 1–245.
Lessard B. D., Wallman J. F. and Dowton M. 2010. Incorrect report of cryptic species
within Chrysomya ruﬁfaces (Diptera: Calliphoridae). Invertebrate Systematics 23(6):
507–514.
Lessinger A. C, Martins Junqueira A. C., Lernos T. A., Kemper E. L., Da Silva F. R.,
Vettore A. L., Arruda P., Azeredo-Espin A. M. 2000. The mitochondrial genome of the
primary screw worm Cochliomyia nominivorax (Diptera. Calliphoridae). Insect
Molecular Biology 9(5): 521–529.
Levinson A. R., Levinson H. Z. and Franke D. 1981. Intraspeciﬁc attractants of the hide
beetle, Dermestes maculatus Deg. Mitteilungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft fur
Allemeine 2: 235–237.
Levinson H. Z., Levinson A. R., Jen T.-L., Williams J. L. D., Kahn G. and Francke W.
1978. Production site, partial composition and olfactory perception of a pheromone in
the male hide beetle. Naturwissernschaften 10: 543–545.
Levinson Z. H. 1962. The function of dietary sterols in phytophagous insects. Journal of
Insect Physiology 8(2): 191–198.
228
REFERENCES

Lindquist D. A., Abusowa M., and Hall M. J. R. 1992. The New World screwworm ﬂy in
Libya: a review of its introduction and eradication. Medical Veterinary and Entomol-
ogy 6: 2–8.
Linnaeus C. 1735. Systema naturae, sive regna tria naturae sysematice proposita per
classes, ordines, genera & species. Lugduni Batavorum: Haak.
Linville J. G. and Wells J. D. 2002. Surfaces sterilisation of a maggot using bleach does
not interfere with Mitochondrial DNA analysis of crop contents. Journal of Forensic
Sciences 47(5): 1055 –1059.
Lobanov A. M. 1970. The fauna and ecology of the ﬂies of the genus Hydrotaea R.-D.
(Diptera, Muscidae in the Ivanovo District). In Skidmore P. 1985. The Biology of the
Muscidae of the World. Dr W. Junk Publishers: Dordrecht.
Locali R. F., de Almeida M. and de Oliveira I. S., Jnr. 2006. Use of histopathology in the
differential diagnosis of drowning in fresh and salty water: establishment of an
experimental model in rats. Acta Circurgica Brasileira 21(4): http://www.scielo.br/
acb.
Logan J. A. 1999. Extraction, polymerase chain reaction and sequencing of a 440 base
pair region of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I gene from two species of
acetone-preserved damselﬂies (Odonata: Coenagrionidae, Agrionidae). Environmen-
tal Entomology 28(2): 143–147.
Lonsdale H. L., Dixon R. A. and Gennard D. E. 2004. Comparison of the efﬁciency of
mitochondrial DNA extraction and assessment in aged and modern dipteran samples.
Forensic Analysis 2004, Royal Society of Chemistry Conference University of Lincoln
20–22 June 2004.
Lord W., Catts E. P., Scarboro D. A. and Hadﬁeld D. B. 1986. The green blowﬂy
Lucilia illustris (Meigen), as an indicator of human post mortem interval: a case of
homicide from Fort Lewis, Washington. Bulletin of the Society of Vector Ecology
11: 271–275.
Loxdale H. D. and Lushai G. 1998. Molecular markers in entomology. Bulletin of
Entomological Research 88: 577– 600.
Lucci A., Campobasso C. P., Cirnelli A. and Lorenzini G. 2008. A promising microbio-
logical test for the diagnosis of drowning. Forensic Science International 182: 20–26.
Luff M. 2006. Rearing larvae. In Cooter J. and Barclay M. V. L. 2006. A Coleopterist’s
Handbook, 4th edn. Amateur Entomologists’ Society: London.
MacDonnell N. and Anderson G. A. 1997. Aquatic Forensics: Determination of
Time since Submergence. Canadian Police Research Centre, Ottawa, Ontario.
TR-09-07.
MacLeod J. and Donnelly J. 1956. Methods for the study of blowﬂy populations: The use
of laboratory-bred material. Annals of Applied Biology 44(4): 643–648.
MacLeod J. and Donnelly J. 1960. Natural features and blowﬂy movement. Journal of
Animal Ecology 29(1): 85–93.
Malgorn Y. and Coquoz R. 1999. DNA typing for identiﬁcation of some species of
Calliphoridae: an interest in forensic entomology. Forensic Science International 102:
111–119.
Mann R. W., Bass W. M. and Meadows L. 1990. Time since death and decomposition of
the human body: variables and observations in case and experimental ﬁeld studies.
Journal of Forensic Sciences 35: 103–111.
Marchenko M. L. 2001. Medico-legal relevance of cadaver entomofauna for the
determination of the time of death. Forensic Science International 120(1–2): 89–109.
REFERENCES
229

Matuszewski S., Bajerleiin D., Konwerski D. and Spilza K. 2008. An initial study of
insect succession and carrion decomposition in various forest habitats of central
Europe. Forensic Science International 180: 61–69.
Matuszewski S., Bajerleiin D., Konwerski D. and Spilza K. 2010. Insect succession and
carrion decomposition in selected forests of central Europe. Part 2: Composition and
residency patterns of carrion fauna. Forensic Science International 195: 42–51.
Mazzanti M., Tagliabracci A. F., Wells J. D. and Campobasso C. P. 2010. DNA
degradation and genetic analysis of empty puparia: Genetic identiﬁcation limits in
forensic entomology. Forensic Science International 195: 99–102.
McManus J. J. 1974. Oxygen consumption in the beetle Dermestes maculates. Com-
parative Biochemistry and Physiology (Pt A) 49(1): 169–173.
Meek L. 1990. Unpublished work cited in Catts E. P. and Goff M. L. 1992 Forensic
Entomology in Criminal Investigations. Annual Review of Entomology 37: 253–272.
Megnin P. 1887. La faune des tombeaux. Comptes Rendu Hebdomadaire des Seances de
l’Academie des Sciences 105: 948–951.
Megnin P., 1894. La faune des cadavres Encyclopedie Scientiﬁques des Aide Memoire,
Masson, Gauthier-Villars et Fils, Paris.
Meiklejohn K. A., Wallman J. F. and Dowton M. 2011. DNA-based identiﬁcation of
forensically important Australian Sarcophagidae (Diptera). International Journal of
Legal Medicine 125: 27–32.
Meir R.,Shiyang K., Vaidya G. and Ng P. K. L. 2006. DNA barcoding and taxonomy in
diptera: a tale of intra-speciﬁc variability and low identiﬁcation success. Systematic
Biology 55: 715–718.
Merritt R. W. and Wallace J. R. 2010. The role of aquatic insects in forensic investiga-
tions. In Byrd J. H. and Castner J. L. (eds) Forensic Entomology: The Utility of
Arthropods in Legal Investigations. CRC: Boca Raton, FL.
Merz B. and Haenni J.-P. 2000. Morphology and terminology of adult Diptera (other
than terminalia). Contributions to a manual of Palaearctic Diptera (with special
reference to ﬂies of economic importance), Science Herald Press, Budapest, pp. 21–51.
Michaud J.-P. and Moreau G. 2009. Predicting the visitation of carcasses by carrion-
related insects under different rates of degree-day accumulation. Forensic Science
International 185(1–3): 78–83.
Michaud J.-P., Majka C. G., Prive J.-P. and Moreau G. 2010. Natural and anthropogenic
changes in the insect fauna associated with carcasses in the North American Maritime
lowlands. Forensic Science International doi:10.1016/j.forsciint.2010.04.028.
Miller M. L., Lord W. D., Goff M. L., Donnelly B., McDonough E. T. and Alexis J. C.
1994. Isolation of Amitriptyline and Nortriptyline from ﬂy puparia (Phoridae) and
beetle exuvae (Dermestidae) associated with mummiﬁed human remains. Journal of
Forensic Sciences 39(5): 1305–1313.
Missa O., Basset Y., Alonso A., Miller S. E., Curletti G., de Meyer M., Eardley C.,
Mansell M. W. and Wagner T. 2008. Monitoring arthropods in a tropical landscape:
relative effects of sampling methods and habitat types on trap catches. Journal of
Insect Conservation 13(1): 103–118.
Mitchell A. 2008. DNA barcoding demystiﬁed. Australian Journal of Entomology 47:
169–173.
Moretti T. C., Bonato V. and Godoy W.A,C. 2011.Determining the season of death from
the family composition of insects infesting carrion. European Journal of Entomology
108: 211–218.
230
REFERENCES

Morlais I. and Severson D. W. 2002. Complete mitochondrial DNA sequence and amino
acid analysis of the cytochrome C oxidase subunit I (COI) from Aedes aegypti. DNA
Sequence 13(2): 123–127.
Morris M. 2005. Tests on a new baiot for ﬂies (Diptera:Calliphoridae) causing cutaneous
myiasis (ﬂy strike) in sheep. New Zealand Journal of Agricultural Research 48:
151–156.
Mostovski M. and Mansell M. W. 2004. Life after death: true ﬂies recover the truth.
National Cemeteries and Crematoria Conference, 15–16 July Durban.
Muirhead-Thompson R. C. 1964. Culture methods for diptera in running water as a larval
habitat. Bulletin of the World Health Organisation 31: 479–482.
Mullen G. and Durden L. 2002. Medical and Veterinary Entomology. Academic Press:
Amsterdam.
Muller J. K. and Eggert A.-K. 1990. Time-dependent shifts between infanticidal and
parental behaviour in female burying beetles: a mechanism of indirect mother-
offspring recognition. Behaviour, Ecology and Sociobiology 27: 11–16.
Mumcuoglu K. Y., Gallili N., Reshef A., Brauner P. and Grant H. 2004. Use of human lice
in forensic entomology. Journal of Medical Entomology 41: 803–806.
Munro J. W. 1966. Pests of Stored Products. The Rentokil Library: Benham & Co.,
Colchester.
Musvasva E, Williams K. A., Muller W. J. and Villet M. H. 2001. Preliminary observa-
tions on the effects of hydrocortisone and sodium methohexital on development of
Sarcophaga (Curranea) tibealis Macquart (Diptera: Sarcophagidae), and implications
for estimating post mortem interval. Forensic Science International 120: 37–41.
Myskowiak J.-B. and Doums C. 2002. Effects of refrigeration on the biometry and
development of Protophormiaterraenovae(Robineau-Desvoidy) (Diptera: Calliphor-
idae) and its consequences in estimating post-mortem interval in forensic investiga-
tions. Forensic Science International 125: 254–261.
Nabity P. D., Higley L. G. and Heng-Moss T. M. 2007. Light-induced variability in
development offorensically relevant blowﬂy Phormia regina (Diptera: Calliphoridae).
Journal of Medical Entomology 44(2): 351–358.
Navidpour S. H., Hoghooghi-Rad N., Goodarzi H. and Pooladgar A.R. 1996. Outbreak of
Chrysomya bezziana in Khoozestan province, Iran. Veterinary Records 139: 217.
Nelson L. A., Wallman J. F. and Dowton M. 2008. Identiﬁcation offorensically important
Chrysomya (Diptera: Calliphoridae) species using the second ribosomal internal
transcribed spacer (ITS2). Forensic Science International 117: 238–247.
Nelson L. A., Wallman J. F. and Dowton M. 2007. Using COI barcodes to identify
forensically and medically important blowﬂies. Medical and Veterinary Entomology
21: 44–52.
Niederegger S., Pastuschek J., Mall G. 2010. Preliminary studies of the inﬂuence of
ﬂuctuating temperatures on the development of various forensically relevant ﬂies.
Forensic Science International 199: 72–78.
Nolte K. B., Pinder R. D. and Lord W. D. 1992. Insect larvae used to detect cocaine
poisoning in a decomposed body. Journal of Forensic Sciences 37: 1179–1185.
Nuorteva P. 1963. Synanthropy of blowﬂies (Dipt., Calliphoridae) in Finland. Annals
Entomologici Fennici 29: 1–49.
Nuorteva P. 1977. Sarcosaprophagous insects as forensic indicators. In Tedeschi C. G.,
Eckert W. G. and Tedeschi L. G., (eds) Forensic Medicine: A Study in Trauma and
Environmental Hazards, vol. II, Saunders Philadelphia, pp. 1072–1095.
REFERENCES
231

Nuorteva P. 1987. Empty puparia of Phormia terraenovae R-D (Diptera, Calliphoridae)
as forensic indicators. Annales Entomologici Fennici 53: 53–56.
Nuorteva P. and Nuorteva S. L. 1982. The fate of mercury in sarcosaprophagous ﬂies and
in insects eating them. Ambio 11: 34–37.
Obsuji F. N. C. 1975. Some aspects of the biology of Dermestes maculatus De Geer
(Coleoptera, Dermestidae) in dried ﬁsh. Tropical Stored Product Information 29:
21–32.
Odeyemi O. O. 1997. Interspeciﬁc competition between the beetles Dermestes macu-
latus De Geer and Necrobia ruﬁpes De Geer on dried ﬁsh. Insect Science and its
Application 17: 213–220.
Okiwelu S. N., Ikpamii T. and Umeozor O. C. 2008. Arthropods associated with
mammalian carcasses in Rivers State, Nigeria. African Journal of Biomedical
Research 11: 339–342.
Oldroyd H. 1964. The Natural History of Flies. The World Naturalist. Weidenﬁeld &
Nicolson: London.
Oliva A. 2001. Insects of forensic signiﬁcance in Argentina. Forensic Science Interna-
tional 120(1–2): 145–154.
Oliveira H. G., Gomes G., Morlin J. J.,Von Zuben C. J., Linhares A. X. 2009. The effect of
Buscopan on the development of the blowﬂy Chrysomya megacephala (F.) (Diptera:
Calliphoridae). Journal of Forensic Sciences 54(1): 202–206.
Oliveira-Costa J. and de Mello-Patiu C. A. 2004. Application of forensic entomology to
estimate of the post-mortem interval (PMI) in homicide investigations by the Rio de
Janeiro Police Dept in Brazil. Aggrawal’s Internet Journal of Forensic Medicine and
Toxicology 5(1): 40–44.
Ornes S. 2006. Using bees to detect bombs. Technology News, December 7.
O¨ zdemir M. H., Aksoy U., Akisu L., S€onez E. and Lakmak M. A. 2003. Investigating
demodex in forensic autopsy cases. Forensic Science International 135: 226–231.
Pai C.-Y., Jien M.-C., Li L.-H., Cheng Y.-Y. and Yang C-H. 2007. Application of forensic
entomology to post mortem interval determination of a burned human corpse: a
homicide case report from southern Taiwan. Journal of the Formosan Medical
Association 106(9): 792–798.
Pamplin C. 2011. Expert Witness Immunity abolished. Expert Witness e-Wire Wednes-
day 30 March 2011 http://www. jspubs. com/experts/ewire/itemtext. cfm?ewid¼
211andewdid¼3837.
Pape T., Dahlem G., Mello Patiu C. A. de and Giroux M. 2010. The World of Flesh Flies
(Diptera: Sarcophagidae), www.zmuc.dk/entoweb/sarcoweb/sarcweb/sarc_web.htm.
Patton W. S. 1922. Notes on myiasis-producing diptera of man and animals. Bulletin of
Entomological Research 12(3): 239–261.
Payne J. A. 1965. A summer carrion study of the baby pig Sus scofa Linnaeus. Ecology
46(5): 592–602.
Payne J. A. and King E. W. 1972. Insect succession and decomposition of pig carcasses in
water. Journal of Georgia Entomological Society 7: 153–162.
Payne J. A., King E. W. and Beinhart G. 1968. Arthropod succession and decomposition
of buried pigs. Nature 219(14 September): 1180–1181.
Peacock E. 1993. Adults and Larvae of Hide, Larder and Carpet Beetles and their
Relatives (Coleoptera: Dermestidae) and of Derodontid beetles (Coleoptera: Dero-
dontidae). Handbooks for the Identiﬁcation of British Insects. Royal Entomological
Society: London.
232
REFERENCES

Perotti M. A. 2009. Megnin reanalysed: the case of the newborn baby girl, Paris, 1878.
Experimental and Applied Acarology 49(1–2): 37–44.
Perotti M. A., Braig H. R. and Goff M. L. 2010. Phoretic mites and carcasses: Acari
transported by organisms associated with anumal and human decomposition. In
Amendt J., Campobasso C. P., Goff M. L. and Grassberger M. (eds) Current Concepts
in Forensic Entomology Springer: Dordrecht.
Piette M. H. A. and De Letter E. A. 2006. Drowning: Still a difﬁcult autopsy diagnosis.
Forensic Science International 163: 1–9.
Pohjoism€aki J. L. O., Karhunen P. J., Goebeler S., Saukko P. and S€a€aksjarvi I. E. 2010.
Indoors forensic entomology: Colonisation of human remains in closed environments
by speciﬁc species of sarcosaprophagous ﬂies. Forensic Science International 199:
38–42.
Pont A. C. and Meier R. 2002. The Sepsidae (Diptera) of Europe. Brill: Leiden.
Prichard J. G., Kossortis P. D., Leibovitch R. A., Robertson l. D. and Lovell F. W. 1986.
Implications of Trombiculid mite bites: report of a case and submisison of evidence in
a murder trial. Journal of Forensic Sciences 31: 301–306.
Prinkkil€a M.-L. and Hanski I. 1995. Complex competitive interactions in four species of
Lucilia blowﬂies. Ecological Entomology 20: 261–272.
Pukowski E. 1933. Okologische untersuchungen an Necrophorus F. Zeitschrift f€ur
Morphologie und O¨ kologie der Tiere 27: 518–586.
Rabinovich J. E. 1970. Vital Statistics of Synthesiomyia nudiseta (Diptera: Muscidae).
Annals of the Entomological Society of America 59: 749–752.
Rakowski G. and Cymborowski B. 1982. Aggregation pheromone in Dermestes
maculatus: effects onlarval growth and developmental rhythms. International Journal
of Invertebrate Reproduction 4: 249–254.
Rankin M. R. and Bates P. G. 2004. Ageing blowﬂy strike lesions by larval morphology.
Proceedings of the European Association of Forensic Entomology Conference,
London, 2004, p. 34.
RaspiA.andAntonelliR.1995.InﬂuenceoftemperatureonthedevelopmentofDermestes
maculatus Deg. (Coleoptera, Dermestidae). Frustula Entomologica 18: 169–176.
Ratcliffe B. C. and Jameson M. L. 2004. The revised classiﬁcation for Scarabaeoidea:
what the hell is going on? Scarab 15: 3–10.
Ratnasingham S. and Herbert, P. N. D. BOLD: The Barcode of Life Data System (www.
barcodinglife. org). Molecular Ecology Notes 7: 355–364.
Redi F. 1668. Esperienze intorno alla generazionedegl’insetti e da lui scritte in una
lettera all’illustrissimo Signor Carlo Datti. All’insegna della Stella: Firenze.
Reh H. 1969. Diagnostik des Ertrinkungstodes und Bestimmung der Wasserzeit. Michael
Trisch Verlag: D€usseldorf.
Reiter C. 1984. Zum Wachstumsverhalten der Maden der blauen Schmeissﬂiege
Calliphora vicina. Zeitschrift f€ur Rechtsmedizen 91: 295–308.
ReshV.H.1994.Variability,accuracyandtaxonomiccostsofrapidassessmentapproaches
in benthic macroinvertebrate biomonitoring. Bollettino di Zoologia 61: 375–383..
Richards C. S. and Villet M. H. 2008 Factors affecting accuracy and precisioon of
thermal summation models of insect development used to estimate post mortem
intervals. International Journal of Legal Medicine 122(5): 401–408.
Richards E. N. and Goff M. L. 1997. Arthropod succession on exposed carrion in three
contrasting tropical habitats on Hawaii Island, Hawaii. Journal of Medical Entomolo-
gy 34(3): 328–339.
REFERENCES
233

Richards O. W. and Davies R. G. 1977. Imms’ General Textbook of Entomology, 2 vols.
Chapman & Hall: London.
Robson S. K. A. and Crozier R. H. 2009. An evaluation of two methods of age
determination in insects (pteridines and lipofuscins) using the ant Polyrhachis
sexpinosa Latrielle (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Australian Journal of Entomology
48: 102–106.
Rodriguez W.C. andBassW.M.1983.Insect activityand its relationship todecay rates in
human cadavers in Eastern Tennessee. Journal of Forensic Sciences 28(2): 423–432.
Rodriguez-Perez M. A., Nu´nˇez-Gonzalez C. A., Lizarazo-Ortega C., Sanchez-Varela A.,
Wooten M. C., Unnasch T. E. 2006. Analysis of the genetic variation in ribosomal
DNA Internal Transcribed Spacer and the NADH Dehydrogenase Subunit 4 Mito-
chondrial genes of Onchocerciasis vector Simulium ochraceum. Journal of Medical
Entomology 43(4): 701–706.
Rognes K. 1991. Blowﬂies (Diptera: Calliphoridae) of Fennoscandia and Denmark.
Fauna Entomologica Scandinavica 24: 7–272.
Rognes K.1994. First record of the sheep greenbottle ﬂy Lucilia cuprina (Wiedemann,
1830) from Europe (Diptera: Calliphoridae) with additional Spanish records of
Calliphoridae, Muscidae and Sarcophagidae. Eos 69: 41–44.
Rognes K. 1997. The Calliphoridae (blowﬂies) (Diptera: Oestroidea) are not a mono-
phyletic group. Cladistics 13: 27–66.
Rognes K. 1998. 3.51. Family Calliphoridae. Contributions to Manual of Palaearctic
Diptera. Budapest, Science Herald, pp. 617–648.
Rognes K. 2002. Blowﬂies (Diptera: Calliphoridae) of Israel and adjacent areas,
including a new species from Tunisia. Insect Systematics and Evolution suppl. No. 59.
Rognes K. 2010. Fauna Europaea: Calliphoridae. Fauna Europaea version 2.4, http://
www.faunaeur.org.
Rognes K. and Paterson H. E. H. 2005. Chrysomya chloropyga (Wiedemann, 1818) and
Chrysomya putoria (Wiedemann, 1830) are two different species. African Entomolo-
gy 13: 49–70.
Russo A., Cocuzza G. E.,Vasta M. C., Simola M. and Virone G. 2006. Life fertility yables
of Piophila casei L. (Diptera: Piophilidae) reared at ﬁve different temperatures.
Environmental Entomolology 35(2): 194–200.
Ruzicka J. 1994. Seasonal activity and habitat associations of Silphidae and Leiodidae:
Cholevinae (Coleoptera) in central Bohemia. Acta Societatis Zoologicae Bohemo-
slovicae 58: 67–78.
Sacchi, L., Gigolo A. and Cestari G.. 1971. Un metodo di allevamento di Piophila casei
L. Rivista Parasitologica 32: 289–301.
Sadler D. W., Fuke C., Court F. and Pounder D. J. 1995. Drug accumulation in Calliphora
vicina larvae. Forensic Science International 71(3): 191–197.
Salk J. J., Sanchez J. A., Pierce K. E., Rice J. E., Sores K. C., Wangh L. J. 2006. Direct
ampliﬁcation of single-stranded DNA for pyrosequencing using Linear-After-The-
Exponential (Late)-PCR. Annals of Biochemistry 353(1): 124–132.
Saraste M. 1990. Structural features of cytochrome oxidase. Quarterly Review of
Biophysics 23: 331–366.
Satar A., ¸Cac¸a I. and ¸S akalar Y. B. 2005. Oldworld screw-worm ﬂy, Chrysomya bezziana
Villeneuve, 1914, new record for Turkey. Annals of Upper Silesian Museum (Ento-
mology) 13: 5–7.
Sauukko P. and Knight B. 2004. Knight’s Forensic Pathology. Arnold: London.
234
REFERENCES

Schroeder H., Klotzbach H., Elias S., Augustin C. and Pueschel K. 2003. Use of PCR-
RFLP for differentiation of calliphorid larvae (Diptera, Calliphoridae) on human
corpses. Forensic Science International 132: 76–81.
Schumann H. 1986. Family Calliphoridae. Catalogue of Palaearctic Diptera, 12,
Calliphoridae Sarcophagidae. Budapest, pp. 11–58.
Sharanowski B. J., Walker E. G. and Anderson G. S. 2008. Insect succession and
decomposition patterns on shaded and sunlit carrion in Saskatchewan in three different
seasons. Forensic Science International 179: 219–240.
Sheppard D. C., Tomberlin J. K., Joyce J. A., Kiser B. C., Sumner S. M. 2002. Rearing
methods for the Black Soldier Fly (Diptera: Stratiomyidae). Journal of Medical
Entomology 39(4): 695–698.
Shubeck P. P. 1968. Orientation of carrion beetles to carrion: random or non-random.
Journal of the New York Entomological Society 76: 253–265.
Simpson K. 1985. Forensic Medicine. Arnold: London.
Singh D. and Bharti M. 2001. Further observations on the nocturnal oviposition
behaviour of blowﬂies (Diptera:Calliphoridae). Forensic Science International
120: 124–126.
Singh D. and Bharti M. 2008. Some notes on nocturnal larviposition by two species of
Sarcophaga (Diptera: Sarcophagidae). Forensic Science International 117(1):
e19–e20.
Skidmore P. 1985. The Biology of the Muscidae of the World. Dr W. Junk Publishers:
Dordrecht.
Smith K. E. and Wall R. 1997. Asymmetric competition between larvae of the blowﬂies
Calliphora vicina and Lucilia sericata in carrion. Ecological Entomology 22:
468–474.
Smith K. E. and Wall R. 1998. Estimates of population density and dispersal in the
blowﬂy Lucilia sericata (Diptera: Calliphoridae). Bulletin of Entomological Research
88: 65–73.
Smith K. G. V. 1975. The faunal succession of insects and other invertebrates on a dead
fox. Entomologist’s Gazette 26: 277–287.
Smith K. G. V. 1986. A Manual of Forensic Entomology. The Trustees of the British
Museum (Natural History): London.
Sperling F. A. H., Anderson G. S. and Hickey D. A. 1994. A DNA-based approach to the
identiﬁcation of insect species used for post-mortem interval estimation. Journal of
Forensic Sciences 39: 418–427.
Spieksma F. Th. M., Zuidema P. and Leupen M. J. 1971. High altitude and house-dust
mites. British Medical Journal 1: 82–84.
Spilza K., Voss J. G., Pape T. 2010. A new dipteran forensic indicatopr in buried bodies.
Medical and Veterinary Entomology 24: 278–283.
Spitz W. U., Spitz, D. J. and Fisher R. S. (eds). 2006. Spitz and Fisher’s Medico-Legal
Investigation of Death: Guidelines for the Application of Pathology to Crime
Investigation, 4th edn. Charles C. Thomas: Springﬁeld, IL.
Staerkeby M. 2001. Dead larvae of Cynomya mortuorum (L.) (Diptera, Calliphoridae) as
indicators of the post-mortem interval – a case history from Norway. Forensic Science
International 120(1–2): 77–78.
Statheropoulos, M., Agapiou, A., Spiliopoulou, C., Pallis, G. C. and Sianos. E. 2007.
Environmental aspects of VOCs evolved in the early stages of human decomposition.
Science of the Total Environment 385: 221–227.
REFERENCES
235

Stevens J. 2003. The evolution of myiasis in blowﬂies (Calliphoridae). International
Journal of Parasitology 33(19): 1105–1113.
Stevens J. and Wall R. 1995. The use of random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA (RAPD)
analysis for studies of genetic variation in populations of the blowﬂy Lucilia sericata
(Diptera: Calliphoridae) in southern England. Bulletin of Entomological Research 85:
549–555.
Stevens J. and Wall R. 2001. Genetic relationships between blowﬂies (Calliphoridae) of
forensic value. Forensic Science International 120: 116–123.
Stevenson D. and Cocke J. 2000. Integrated Pest Management of Flies in Texas Dairies.
Texas Agricultural Extension Service, The Texas A and M University System, College
Station, TX, pp 1–30.
Striman B., Fujikawa A., Barksdale L., Carter D. O. 2011. Alteration of expirated
bloodstain by Calliphora vicina and Lucilia sericata (Dipetra: Calliphoridae) through
ingestion and deposition of artifacts. Journal of Forensic Sciences 56: doi 10.111/
j.1556-4029.2010.01575.x.
Sukontason K. L., Ngern-klun R., Sripakdee D and Sukason K. 2006. Identifying ﬂy
puparia by clearing technique: application to forensic entomology. Zeitsachrift fur
Parasitenkunde 164(2): 230–234.
Szalanski A. L. 1995. Genetic Characterisation and Population genetics of Stable Fly
(Diptera: Muscidae) PhD thesis, University of Nebraska, USA.
Szpila, K. 2010. Key for the identiﬁcation of third instars of European blowﬂies (Diptera:
Calliphoridae) of forensic importance. Current Concepts in Forensic Entomology.
Springer: Dordrecht, pp. 43–56.
Tabor K. L., Brewster C. C. and Fell R. D. 2004. Analysis of the successional patterns of
insects on carrion in southwest Virginia. Journal of Medical Entomology 41(4):
785–795.
Tan S. H., Rizman-Idid M., Mohd-Aris E., Kurahashi H. and Zulqarnain M. 2010. DNA-
based characterisation and classiﬁcation of forensically important ﬂesh ﬂies (Diptera:
Sarcophagidae) in Malaysia. Forensic Science International 199: 43–49.
Tantawi T. I. and Greenberg B. 1993. The effects of killing and preserving solutions on
estimates of larval age in forensic cases. Journal of Forensic Sciences 38: 303–309.
Tantawi T. I., El-Kady E. M. Greenberg B. and El-Ghaffar H. A. 1996. Arthropod
succession on exposed rabbit carrion in Alexandria, Egypt. Journal of Medical
Entomology 33(4): 566–580.
Tarone A. M., and Foran D. R. 2008 Generalized additive models and Lucilia sericata
growth: assessing conﬁdence intervals and error rates in forensic entomology. Journal
of Forensic Sciences 53(4): 942–948.
Tarone A. M., Jennings K. C., Foran D. R. 2007. Aging blow ﬂy eggs using gene
expression: a feasibility study. Journal of Forensic Sciences 52(6): 1350–1354.
Thomas D. B. and Chen A. C. 1989. Age determination of the adult screwworm
(Diptera: Calliphoridae) by pteridine levels. Journal of Economic Entomology 82:
1140–1144.
Tiwari P. K., Mohan D. R. K., aand Joshi A. 1995. Developmental study of thermo
tolerance and the heat shock response in Lucilia cuprina (Weidemann). Journal of
Biosciences 20(3): 341–354.
Tomberlin J. K., Mohr R., Benbow M. E., Tarone A. M. and VanLaerhoven S. 2011. A
roadmap for bridging basic and applied research in forensic entomology. Annual
Review of Entomology 56: 401–421.
236
REFERENCES

Tomberlin J. K., Rains G. C. and Sanford M. R. 2008. Development of Microplitis
croceipes as a biological sensor. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata 128:
249–257.
Tomberlin J. K. and Sheppard D. C. 2002. Factors inﬂuencing mating and oviposition of
Black Soldier Flies (Diptera: Startiomyidae) in a colony. Journal of Entomological
Science 37(4): 345–352.
Toye S. A. 1970. Studies on the humidity and temperature reactions of Dermestes
maculatus DeGeer (Coleoptera: Dermestidae) with reference to infestation in dried
ﬁsh in Nigeria. Bulletin Entomological Research 60: 23–31.
Turchetto M., Laﬁsca S. and Constantini G. 2001. Post mortem interval (PMI) deter-
mined by study of sarcophagous biocenoses: three cases from the province of Venice
(Italy). Forensic Science International 120: 28–31.
Turner B. 2009. Forensic entomology: a template for foprensic acarology. Experimental
and Applied Acarology 49: 15–20.
Turner B. and Wiltshire P. 1999. Experimental validation of forensic evidence: a study of
the decomposition of buried pigs in a heavy clay soil. Forensic Science International
101: 113–122.
T€uz€un A., Dabri F. and Yuksel S. 2010. Preliminary study and identiﬁcation of insects’
species of forensic importance in Urmia, Iran. African Journal of Biotechnology
9(24): 3649–3658.
Unwin D. M. 1981. A Key to the Families of British Diptera. Aidgap Field Studies
Council: Shrewsbury.
Valdes-Perezgasga T., Sanchez-Ramos F. J., Garcia-Martinez O., Anderson G. S. 2010.
Arthropods of forensic importance on pig carrion in the Coahuilan Semidesert,
Mexico. Journal of Forensic Sciences 55(4): 1098–1101.
Valentincic T., Krai J., Stenovec M., Koce A., and Caprio J. 2000. The behavioral
detection of binary mixtures of amino acids and their individual components by
catﬁsh. The Journal of Experimental Biology 203: 3307–3317.
Vance G. M., VanDyk J. K., Rowley W. A. 1995. A device for sampling aquatic insects
associated with carrion in water. Journal of Forensic Sciences 40(3): 479–482.
VanLaerhoven S. L. and Anderson G. S. 1996. Forensic entomology determining time of
death in buried homicide victims using insect succession. Canadian Police Research
Centre, Ottawa, Ontario, technical report TR-02-06.
VanLaerhoven S. L. and Anderson G. S. 1999. Insect succession on buried carrion in two
biogeoclimatic zones of British Columbia. Journal of Forensic Sciences 44(1): 32–43.
VannoteR.L.,MinishallG.W.,CumminsK.W.,SedellJ.R.andCushingC.E.1980.Theriver
continuum concept. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 37: 130–137.
Vass A, 2001. Beyond the grave – understanding human decomposition. Microbiology
Today 28(November edition): 190–192.
Vass A, Smith R. R., Thompson C. V., Burnett M. N., Nishan Dulgerian N., Eckenrode B.
A. 2008. Odor analysis of decomposing buried human remains. Journal of Forensic
Sciences 53(2): 384–391.
Vass A., Bass W. B., Wolt J. D., Foss J. E., Ammons J. T. 1992. Time since death
determinations of human cadavers using soil solution. Journal of Forensic Sciences
37(5): 1236–1253.
Vass A., Smith R. R., Thompson C. V., Burnett M. N., Wolf D. A., Synstelien J. A.,
Dulgerian N. and Eckenrode B. A. 2004. Decompositional odour analysis database.
Journal of Forensic Sciences 49(4): 1–10.
REFERENCES
237

Vass A., Thompson, C. V., M. S. and Wise M. 2010. A New Forensics Tool: Development
of an Advanced Sensor for Detecting Clandestine Graves. 2007-DN-R-104 US
Document Number 231197 Department of Justice.
Vaz Nunes M. and Saunders D. S. 1989. The effect of larval temperature and photoperiod
on the incidence of larval diapause in the blowﬂy, Calliphora vicina. Physiological
Entomology 14: 471–474.
Verplaetse R., Waumans D., Bruneel N., Cuypers E., de Winne J., Smedts B., van der
Voorde W. and Tygat J. 2007. Comparative analysis of post-mortem remains from
human and animal origin: perspectives of a future study. Colloquium DVI, Brussels,
Belgium, November 2007.
Villet M. H., MacKenzie B. and Muller W. J. 2006. Larval development of the carrion-
breeding ﬂeshﬂy Sarcophaga (Liosarcophaga) tibialis Macquart (Diptera: Sarcopha-
gidae), at constant temperatures. African Ecology 14(2): 357–366.
Vinogradova E. B. and Marchenko M. I. 1984. The use of temperature parameters of ﬂy
growth in medico-legal practice. Sudebno Meditsinkskaya E´kspertiza 27: 16–19.
von Aesch L., Pellet J., Cherix D. and Wyss C. 2003. Activity and behaviour of blowﬂies
on pig liver baits in spring. Bulletin de la Societe Entomologisque Suisse 76: 201–203.
Voss S. C., Cook D. F., Dadour I. R. 2011. Decomposition and insect succession of
clothed and unclothed carcasses in Western Australia. Forensic Science International
doi: 10.1016/j.forsciint.2011.04.018.
Voss S. C., Forbes S. and Dadour I. R. 2008. Decomposition and insect succession on
cadavers inside a vehicle environment. Forensic Science Medicine and Pathology 4:
22–32.
Voss S. C., Spafford H. and Dadour I. R. 2010. Temperature-dependent development of
Nasonia vitripennis on ﬁve forensically important carrion ﬂy species. Entomologia
Experimentalis et Applicata 135(1): 37–47.
Voss S. C., Spafford H. and Dadour I. R. 2009. Hymenopteran parasitoids of forensic
importance: host associations, seasonality and prevelence of parasitoids of carrion
ﬂies of Western Australia. Journal of Medical Entomology 46(56): 1210–1219.
Wall R. 2004. Daily temperature ﬂuctuation and the accumulation of day-degrees.
Proceedings of the European Association for Forensic Entomology, 29 and 30 March
2004. London UK.
Wall R., French N. P. and Morgan K. L. 1993. Predicting the abundance of the sheep
blowﬂy Lucilia sericata (Diptera: Calliphoridae). Bulletin of Entomological Research
83: 431–436.
Wallman J. F. and Adams M. 2000. The forensic application of allozyme electrophoresis
to the identiﬁcation of blowﬂy larvae (Diptera: Calliphoridae) in southern Australia.
Journal of Forensic Sciences 46(3): 681–684.
Watson E. J. and Carlton C. E. 2005. Succession of forensically signiﬁcant carrion beetle
larvaeonlargecarcasses(Coleoptera:Silphidae).SoutheasternNaturalist4(2):335–346.
Watson L. and Dallwitz M. J. 2003 onwards. British Insects: the Families of Diptera.
Version: 17 May 2005, http://delta-intkey.com.
Wells J. 2002. Development of DNA-based identiﬁcation techniques for Forensic
Entomology; Phase 2, Final Report. US Department of Justice Document No.
194121. Award 1999-IJ-CX-0034.
Wells J. and Williams D. W. 2007. Validation of a DNA-based method for identifying
Chrysomyinae (Diptera:Calliphoridae) used in a death investigation. International
Journal of Legal Medicine 121: 1–8.
238
REFERENCES

Wells J. D. and Sperling F. A. H. 1999. Molecular phylogeny of Chrysomya albiceps and
C. ruﬁfacies (Diptera: Calliphoridae). Journal of Medical Entomology 36(3):
222–226.
Wells J. D., Introna F., Di Vella G., Campobasso C. P., Hayes J. and Sperling F. A. H.
2001. Human and insect mitochondrial DNA analysis from maggots. Journal of
Forensic Sciences 46(3): 685–687.
Wigglesworth V. B. 1967. The Principles of Insect Physiology. Methuen: London.
Wilson A. S., Janawaya R. C., Holland A. D., Dodson H. I., Barana E., Pollard A. M. and
Tobin D. J. 2007. Modelling the buried human body environment in upland climes
using three contrasting ﬁeld sites. Forensic Science International 169(1): 6–18.
Wilson D. S. and Fudge J. 1984. Burying beetles: intraspeciﬁc interactions and
reproductive success in the ﬁeld. Ecological Entomology 9: 195–203.
Wilson D. S., Knollenberg W. G. and Fudge J. 1984. Species packing and temperature
dependent competition among burying beetle (Silphidae, Nicrophorus). Ecological
Entomology 9: 205–216.
Wilson L. T. and Barnett W. W. 1983. Degree-Days: an aid in crop and pest management.
California Agriculture (January–February): 4–7.
Wolff M., Uribe A., Ortiz A. and Duque P. 2001. A preliminary study of forensic
entomology in Medellın, Colombia. Forensic Science International 120(1–2): 53–59.
Wood M., Laloup M., Pien K., Samyn N., Morris M., Maes R. AS. A., de Bruijn E. A.,
Maes V. and De Broeck G. 2003. Development of a rapid and sensitive method for
quantitation benzodiazepines in Calliphora vicina larvae and puparia by LC-MS-MS.
Journal of Analytical Toxicology 27: 505–511.
Wyss C. and Cherix D. 2002. Beyond the limits, the case of Calliphora species (Diptera,
Calliphoridae) Proceedings of the First European Forensic Entomology Seminar.
Rosny sous Bois, France, p. 77.
Wyss C., Chaubert S. and Cherix D. 2003b.Case Study – Determining post-mortem
interval with four blowﬂy species (Diptera: Callliphoridae): the importance of cross
assessment. Proceedings of European Association for Forensic Entomology Confer-
ence, 29–30 March, London, p. 28.
Wyss C., Cherix, D., Michaud, K. and Romain, N. 2003a. Pontes de Calliphora vicina
Robineau-Desvoidy et de Calliphora vomitoria (Linne) (Dipteres Calliphoridae) sur
un cadavre humain enseveli dans la neige. Revue internationale de criminologie et de
police technique et scientiﬁque 1: 112–116.
Yan-Wei S., Xiao-Shan L., Wang M. D. and Run-Jie Z. 2010. Effects of Malathion on
insect succession and the development of Chrysomya megacephala (Diptera: Calli-
phoridae) in the ﬁeld and implications for estimating post mortem interval. American
Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology 31(1): 46–51.
Zehner R., Armendt J., Schutt S., Sauer J., Krettek R. and Povolnoy D. 2004. Genetic
identiﬁcation of forensically important ﬂesh ﬂies (Diptera: Sarcophagidae). Interna-
tional Journal of Legal Medicine 118(4): 245–247.
Zehner R., H€aberle M. and Amendt J. 2004. Heteroplasmy in the Necrobia genome
(Coleoptera: Cleridae): Impact of DNA based species determination. Proceedings of
European Association for Forensic Entomology Conference, 29–30 March, London,
p. 28.
Zehner R., Mosch S. and Amendt J. 2010. Estimating the post-mortem interval by
determining the age of ﬂy pupae: are there any tools? Progress in Forensic Genetics 11
International Congress Series 1288: 619–21.
REFERENCES
239

Zehner R., Mosch S. and Amendt J. 2010. Estimating the post-mortem interval by
determining the age of ﬂy pupae: are there any molecular tools? Proceedings and
Abstracts of the European Association for Forensic Entomology, 8–11 September,
Murcia.
Zhang B., Numata H., Mitysui H. and Goto S. G. 2009. A simple, heat sterilisable
artiﬁcial diet excluding animal-derived ingredients for adult blowﬂy, Lucilia sericata.
Medical and Veterinary Entomology 23: 443–447.
Zhong T., Chen Q., Wu R., Yao G., Lu G. and Chiang H. 2002. The effect of extremely
low frequency magnetic ﬁelds on cytochrome oxidase subunit I mRNA transcription.
Journal of Industrial Hygiene and Occupational Diseases 20(4): 249–251 (in
Chinese).
Zimmer-Faust 1987. Crustacean chemical perception: towards a theory on optimal
chemoreception. Biological Bulletin 172: 10–29.
Zumpt F. 1956. Calliphorinae. Die Fliegen der Palaearktischen Region 11: 1–140.
240
REFERENCES

Index
Accumulated degree days (ADD), 41, 121,
124, 127–129, 131
Accumulated degree hours (ADH), 59, 121,
122, 125–129, 133, 142
Adipocere, 33, 37, 38
Adventive species
feeding relationships, 5
Algae, post mortem interval determinant
Chlorophyll-a, 183
Allozymes, 23–24
American Food and Drug
Administration, 3
Ants
Pharaoh’s Ants (Monomorium
pharaonis), 2
Arson see Insects and burning
Arthropoda
Chelicerata, 43
Crustacea, 43, 174, 177, 182
Hexapoda, 43, 48
Myriapoda, 43
Basal (base) temperature
calculation, 129
linear approximation method, 123
Beetles, see Coleoptera
Head shape see Coleoptera
Bergeret, M, 8
Blood spatter
ﬂy species, 14, 17, 18, 24, 29, 52,
55, 60, 71, 115, 137, 139,
150, 155, 190
Blowﬂies (see also Calliphoridae and
Diptera)
activity and temperature, 141, 145
black blowﬂy see Phormia regina
cold resistance, 141
competition between species, 140
daily activity pattern, 141
distribution and climate change, 142
greenbottles see also Lucilia sp.
Body
sampling strategy, 106–108
boiling water for ﬁxing larvae, 107
eggs, 106–107
larvae, 107–108
meteorological equipment, 109–110
puparia, 108
Bone beetles see Cleridae
Burning see also Decomposition of the body
degree of burning, 39
speed of colonisation, 38, 40
Burying Beetles see Silphidae
Caddis ﬂies see Trichoptera
Calliphoridae
Calliphora erythrocephala, 60, 141
Calliphora vicina, 9, 17, 23, 25, 34, 36, 53,
55, 60, 61, 79, 81, 114, 116, 122,
123, 128, 131, 132, 140, 141,
145, 155
Calliphora vomitoria, 7, 17, 34, 36, 37, 53,
60–62, 79, 114, 123, 133, 138, 140,
141, 202
Forensic Entomology: An Introduction, Second Edition. Dorothy Gennard.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Calliphoridae (Continued )
characteristics, 61
Chrysomya albiceps, 64, 79, 116, 123, 143
Chrysomya megacephala, 12, 20, 26, 27,
64, 79, 140, 152
Chrysomya pinguis, 20
Chrysomya ruﬁfacies, 20, 21, 27, 64
Cochliomyia macellaria, 17, 20, 64,
116, 143
Cynomya mortuorum, 64, 80, 144
habitat preference, 77
forests, 145
open habitats, 142
Lucilia ampullacea, 144
Lucilia caesar, 62, 79, 144, 145, 153
Lucilia cuprina, 78, 79, 141, 145, 152, 153
Lucilia illustris, 62, 79, 144, 144, 145, 152
Lucilia richardsi, 63, 144, 145
Lucilia sericata, 17–19, 26, 36, 49, 56,
60–63, 113, 114, 116, 123, 132,
144–146, 152, 153, 155
Protophormia (¼Phormia) regina, 23, 64,
79, 114, 123, 140, 142, 152
Protophormia terraenovae, 19, 57, 63, 64,
79, 112, 114, 123, 143, 153
Carabidae
characteristics, 96
predators, 88, 168
Carrion beetles see Silphidae
Casper’s dictum, 170
Cerambycidae, 1
Cheese skippers see also Piophilidae
Chequered beetles see Cleridae
Chironomidae
bloodworms, 73, 177
larvae, 71, 172
life cycle, 73
Pharate adults, 74, 136
Civil Justice Council Protocol for the
Instruction of Experts, 185
Civil Procedures Rules, 185, 194, 198
Cleridae, see also Bone beetles
Characteristics, 88
life cycle, 164
Necrobia ruﬁcollis, 97
Necrobia ruﬁpes, 2, 94, 97, 156, 164–165
Necrobia violacea, 97
post mortem feeding damage resembles
gunshot wounding, 165
Clothes moths, 40, 106, 151, 177
Clown beetles see Histeridae
Coleoptera
Adephaga, 88, 89, 96
Carabidae, 27, 87, 88, 96, 99, 157, 168
Dermestidae, 2, 87–89, 93, 100, 117, 118,
157, 159, 161, 163, 164
Dytiscidae, 88, 99, 177
Elytra, 82–84, 91, 94, 96, 100
Gyrinidae, 88, 99, 177
hypognathous head, 82
mandibles, 82
Polyphaga, 88, 89
prognathous head, 82
Contamination, 15, 101, 150
bleach, 15
crop excision, 16
freezing, 15
samples, 15, 101
Copra Beetle see Nebria ruﬁpes
Criminal Procedures Rules
Disclosure, 184, 187
Expert’s declaration
Statement of compliance, 185, 186
Statement of truth – civil court, 186,
190, 193, 194
Culturing insects,
Diet, 113, 115
laboratory, 111, 112
storage in transit, 107, 111
Cuticular hydrocarbons (see also Molecular
Identiﬁcation of insects)
Phormia regina, 23, 64, 79, 114, 123, 140,
142, 152
Cytochrome C see also Mitochondria,
COI, 13, 15, 17–22, 97
COII, 13, 17, 19–21, 97
geographic variation, 13, 18
Sub-units I and II, 13
Decomposition of the body
buried bodies, 34–36, 41, 147, 150
colonisers, 36
depth, 36
exhumation, 35
242
INDEX

burned bodies, 39
hanging bodies, 39
on land, 34–35
anaerobic fermentation, 34
decomposition in conﬁned spaces, 38
vehicles, 38
effects of wrappings, 40
fatty acids, 37, 38
Grave wax (adipocere), 33, 37
mummiﬁcation, 32, 33
nutrient-rich islands, 30
post mortem submerged
interval, 175
stages of decomposition, 30–36
time of decomposition in relation to
temperature formula, 29
in water, 29
algae, 73
Decomposition Volatiles
ammonia, 37
2-butanone, 37
decomposition odour differences between
species, 37
dimethyl disulphide, 37
dimethyl trisulphide, 37
ethanol, 37
nonanal, 37
octane, 37
2-propanone, 37
Volatile detection of buried bodies, 41
LABRADOR, 41
Dermestidae, see also Coleoptera
characteristics, 88, 159
Dermestes frischii, 159
Dermestes lardarius, 93, 117,
159, 162
Dermestes maculatus, 93, 94, 117,
159–163, 165
Frass as a PMI indicator, 160
pheromones, 161
reproduction, 161
Diapause, 115, 141
maternal induction, 141
Diptera (true ﬂies),
Calliphoridae, 2, 14, 34, 36, 38, 39, 49, 52,
60, 69, 77, 140, 142, 147, 151
Fannidae, 36, 52, 68
Muscidae, 2, 36, 37, 48, 52, 67,
68, 146, 147
Phoridae, 2, 36, 51, 67, 149, 151
Piophilidae, 24, 52, 66, 67, 148, 150, 151,
153, 156, 165
Sarcophagidae, 2, 20, 21, 36, 52, 55, 64,
65, 78, 140, 147, 148, 151
Stratiomyidae, 69, 70, 116, 147, 151
Tipulidae, 71, 180
Trichoceridae, 50, 70, 71, 150, 151.
see also winter gnats
DNA
barcoding, 22–23
barcoding for Life (BOLD-IDS), 22
DNA concentration, 16
magnetic ﬁelds, 41
extraction, 15, 16
Chelex, 16
DNAzol, 16
DNeasy tissue kits, 16
human identity, gut contents, 15
insect identiﬁcation, 7
Drosophilidae
Drosophila melanogaster, 3
Drosophila yakuba, 14, 18
Dung ﬂies see Spheroceridae
Drugs
amitriptyline, 24–26
aspirin, 26
Arthropod use for extraction, 10,
27–28
barbiturates, 25
phenobarbital, 25
benzodiazepines, 25
diazepam, 24
oxazepam, 25
triazolam, 25
cannabis 27
cocaine, 25, 27
opiates
morphine, 24–26
predatory insects value for recovering
drugs, 27
steroids
hydrocortisone, 26
variation in insect tolerance, 26
victim’s previous drugs, 26
INDEX
243

Eburia quadrigeminata see Longhorn
Beetles
Eclosion – egg, 26, 55, 189
Egg laying
Ephemeroptera, 73, 172, 173, 180
Mayﬂies, 73, 179
life cycles, 117, 144
night, 148
and temperature, 40, 118, 142, 144
Entomological equipment
ethyl acetate, 15, 101
forceps, 75, 76, 101
labels, 75, 76, 101, 106–107
sampling jars, 101
Ethyl acetate see also preservation of insects
European Association for Forensic
Entomology (EAFE), 9–11
Exhumations and drugs, 24, 35 (see also
diazepam, amitriptyline,
morphine)
Expert’s Report
Code of practice for experts – Civil Justice
Council, 185, 198
presenting in court
cross examination, 194
examination in chief, 194
purpose, 186, 198
structure, 186
Expert witness testimony, 10, 186, 187,
195, 197–198
Explosives, see also landmine detection
Arthropods, 27, 28
Stealth Insect sensor project, 28
TNT (trinitrotoluene), 28
Fannidae, 36, 52, 68
Fannia canicularis, 69, 153
Feeding relationships
collectors, 113, 179–181
grazers, 179, 181, 182
necrophages, 4, 5, 89, 99,
134, 143
omnivores, 6
opportunists, 6, 7, 100
predators, 5, 27, 34, 36, 74, 88, 89, 91, 94,
105, 134, 143, 165, 168, 177,
179–181
scrapers, 174, 179, 182
shredders, 178–18
Fleas, 172, 173
Fleshﬂies see Sarcophagidae
Flight
distance, 145
weather, 146
rain, 141
wind, 141
Food infestations see Urban forensic
entomology
Frass, 160
Functional feeding groups
aquatic forensic entomology indicators,
17, 170
collectors, 113, 179–181
ﬁlterers, 179–181
predators, 5, 27, 34, 36, 74, 88, 89, 91,
94, 105, 134, 143, 165, 168, 177,
179–181
scrapers, 174, 179, 182
GenBank, database, 14, 15, 20, 21
Ground beetles see Carabidae
Habitat, blowﬂy distribution, 144
Hanging, 39, 169
Health and safety, 112
Hide (skin) beetles see Dermestidae
Histeridae
Arcinops pumilo, 163
characteristics, 88
night feeder, 163
indicator species, 164, 165, 179
History of forensic entomology
Chinese, 6
La faune des cadavres: Application de
l’entomologie a la medicine
legale, 8
Linnaeus, 7
Megnin, 8
Redi, 7
Ruxton, Buck, 9
Identifying life stages, 26, 29
Insect classiﬁcation
beetles (Coleoptera), 88
244
INDEX

ﬂies (Diptera), 35
acalypterate, 52
Brachycera, 49– 51
calyptrate, 52
Nematocera, 49, 51, 70, 71
Insect damage
gunshot, 165
Insect growth
effects of refrigeration, 143
linear relationship, 59, 122
Insect morphology
abdomen, 34, 42, 43, 60, 61, 63–65, 68,
72–74, 80, 87, 97, 99, 100, 135,
158, 163
sternites, 63, 82, 88, 90, 96, 161
tergites, 82
antenna, 13, 43, 47, 48, 51, 52, 62, 67, 69,
71, 96, 99
of beetles, 83
of ﬂies, 12, 56
legs, 35, 42, 43, 46, 63, 64, 66, 67, 70,
72–74, 83, 85, 88, 89, 91, 92,
96–100, 106, 135, 139, 158, 164
leg bristles, 45
ptilinum, 52, 58
tarsal formulae, 96
thorax, 15, 42–44, 51, 52, 60, 61, 64, 65,
67, 68, 72–74, 80, 82, 83, 88, 89,
94, 99, 100, 163
scutellum, 83
wing structure, 47
vein names, 46
Insects and burning, 39
oviposition, 39, 40, 55, 77, 115–117, 140,
141, 143, 147
Isomegalen – diagrams, 130, 132
Isomorphen – diagrams, 130, 132
ITS (Internal Transcribed Spacer region), 16,
20, 195
Kahles solution, 16, 101, 102, 113
Landmine detection, 28
bees, 28
Latrine ﬂies see Fannidae
Lice
survival in water, 172, 173
Longhorn beetles, 1
Macroinvertebrates, 1, 108, 109, 119, 120,
170, 174, 179, 181–183
Chironomidae, 17, 71, 72, 171, 174, 179
Crustacea, 43, 174, 177, 182
Maggot mass, 107, 108, 128, 130, 143, 146
effect on post mortem interval calculation,
128, 130
heat shock proteins, 141
Marchenko, 122, 125
Mayﬂies. see Ephemeroptera
Midges–non biting see also Chironomidae
Mites, 1, 6, 43, 106, 135, 136
Mitochondria, 12
Cytochrome C, 12, 13
Mitochondrial DNA, 12–14, 17,
64, 97
Cytochrome Oxidase (COI), 13, 14, 17,
18, 20, 22, 41, 97
haplotype, 13, 18
Molecular identiﬁcation of insects,
allozymes, 23
base pairs, 12–15, 20–22, 97
Blast searching, 15
C-banding, 12
cuticular hydrocarbons, 23
GenBank, 14, 15, 20, 21
Lipofuscins, 24
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), 12–14, 17,
64, 97
ND4 (Nicotinamide Adenine
Dinucleotide
Dehydrogenase), 20
nuclear material, 17, 19
SNP (Single nucleotide
polymorphisms), 22
validity of methodologies, 21–23
voucher specimens, 15, 22
Mummiﬁcation, 32, 33
Muscidae, 2, 36, 37, 48, 52, 67, 68,
146, 147
characteristics, 36, 67, 68
Hydrotaea, 35,. 37, 68, 137, 146, 147
Hydrotaea carpensis, 146
Hydrotaea dentipes, 38, 146
Hydrotaea ignava, 146, 147
Musca autumnalis, 37, 68
Musca domestica, 67, 68, 146, 152–154
Ophyra, 19, 35, 146, 147
INDEX
245

Myiasis, 78, 145, 147, 151–154 see also
physical abuse
biological, 152
Piophilidae, 24, 52, 66, 67, 148, 150, 151,
153, 156, 165
Piophila casei, 66, 67, 114, 148, 153
Wound, 78, 152
Nanotechnology, 28
National Research Council of America, 9
Mandatory Standards, 9
Standardised Protocols, 9, 22
Necrobia ruﬁpes, 2, 94, 97, 156,
164, 165
Necrophages, 4, 5, 89, 99, 134, 143
Nitidulidae, 35, 87, 89, 94, 96, 100,
117, 157, 163
characteristics, 96
dry stage indicators, 163
North American Forensic Entomology
Association (NAFEA), 9, 11
North American Board of Forensic
Entomology, 9
Nucleotide Bases, 13, 20
adenine, 13, 18, 20
cytosine, 13
guanine, 13
thymine, 13
Odours and corpse location
butyric acid, 30
caseic acid, 34
colonisation, 8, 29, 34, 36, 38, 39, 40, 103,
120, 132, 134, 139, 140, 150, 153,
154, 156, 164, 170
insect signalling, 158, 161
Ofﬁce of the Forensic Science Regulator
(UK), 9, 10
advice and guidance, 9
criminal justice system, 10
ISO9000, 11
quality assurance, 11
standards monitoring, 11
United Kingdom Accreditation Service
(UKAS), 11
Omnivores, 6, 74
Opportunists, 6, 7, 100 see also Adventive
Oviposition see egg laying
and decomposition, 39, 40
locations on corpse, 8, 37
Phaenicia sericata see Lucilia sericata
Pharaoh’s Ants (Monomorium pharaonis), 2
Phoresy, 135
Phoridae
characteristics, 67
Conicera tibialis, 150
Megaselia giraudii, 150
Megaselia ruﬁpes, 150
Megaselia scalaris, 150, 152
Triphleba hyalinata, 150
Physical abuse, indications, 152
Physiological energy budget see also basal
temperature
Piophilidae
characteristics, 67, 150
Piophila casei, 66, 67, 114, 148, 153
Stearibia nigriceps, 165
‘Playing dead’ see Thanatosis
Plecoptera, 73, 74, 180
Perlidae, 74
Perlodidae, 74
predators, 74
Poisons (see also drugs)
agricultural chemicals, 27
organophosphates, 27
heavy metals, 24, 25, 27
arsenic, 24
mercury, 24, 27
suicide, 25, 27, 38, 39, 144
PCR (Polymerase chain reaction), 14, 16
(see also mitochondrial DNA)
Calliphoridae, 2, 14, 34, 36, 38, 39, 49, 52,
60, 69, 77, 140, 142, 147, 151
late-PCR, 21
PCR-RFLP, 17
non-biting midges, 17, 71
primers, 14, 16, 17, 18, 21
Post mortem interval (PMI), 17, 26, 29, 33,
39, 40, 50, 53, 58, 59, 106, 121,
122, 126, 128–130, 132, 133, 137,
138, 142, 146, 148, 150, 157, 163,
170, 173, 179, 189, 195, 198, 201,
202 see also time since death
246
INDEX

estimating, 33, 122, 130, 132, 148,
198, 202
factors affecting, 40, 50
insect succession for PMI determination,
38, 132, 133, 136, 163
isomegalen diagrams, 130, 132
isomorphen diagrams, 130, 132
larval length for PMI determination, 40
linear approximation method, 123
movement of the corpse, 134
sources of error, 128–130
Post mortem submergence interval (PMSI)
see Time since submergence
Practice Direction, 184, 185, 187, 194, 198
Civil Court, 186, 194,198
Predators, 5, 27, 34, 74, 88, 89, 91, 94, 105,
134, 136, 143, 165, 168, 177, 179,
180, 181
Preservation of insects
ethyl acetate, 15, 101
Kahle’s solution, 16, 101,
102, 113
packaging and labelling, 102, 103,
153, 195
Professional Entomological Associations
European Association for Forensic
Entomology, 9, 10
North American Forensic Entomology
Association, 9
Psychodidae, 2, 24, 151
causal agent of myiasis, 152, 153
Pupa
adecticous, 87
exarate, 87
obtect, 87
Pyrosequencing, 16, 20, 21
automation, 16, 21
Sarcophagidae, 20, 21,
RAPD (Random ampliﬁed polymorphic
DNA), 16–18, 97, 98
disadvantages, 18
false positives, 18
geographic variation, 18
RFLP(Restriction fragment length
polymorphism), 16, 17,
20, 97
Rivers see Water Bodies
RNA analysis, 16
cytoplasmic RNA, 19
16S, 19
sedimentation, 19
messenger RNA (mRNA), 19, 41
ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 13, 19, 20
transfer RNA (tRNA), 13, 19
tRNA-leucine genes, 17, 19
Rove beetles see Staphylinidae
Ruxton, Buck, 9
Sampling the crime scene, 101–110
adults, 104–106
cars, 102, 104
eggs, 106–107
larvae, 107–108
night, 101
pupae and puparia, 108
soil, 105, 106, 108, 110
temperature, 102–104, 107–110
Sap-feeding Beetles see Nitidulidae
Sarcophagidae, 2, 20, 21, 36, 52, 55, 64–65,
78, 140, 147, 148, 151 see
ﬂeshﬂies
characteristics, 20, 65, 78
Neobellieria (¼Sarcophaga) bullata, 148
Sarcophaga (Robineauella) caerulescens,
148
Sarcophaga africa (¼haemorrhoidalis),
148
Sarcophaga carnaria, 2, 7
Sarcophaga cooleyi, 148
Sarcophaga scoparia, 148
viviparous, 55, 147
Scarabaeoidae, 166
classiﬁcation, 166
Geotrupidae, 166
Scarabaeidae, 167
Trogidae, 166–167
forensic indicators, 166
can move bodies by burrowing
beneath, 165
Scuttle ﬂies see Phoridae
Searching the crime scene, 106
Sepsidae, 52, 66, 150
characteristics, 66
INDEX
247

Sheep strike see myiasis
Silphidae,89–90,97, 100,117,133,157–158
characteristics, 157
classiﬁcation, 157
Hyponecrodes erythrura, 156
Microspores sp., 117
Necrophila(¼Silpha) americana, 87, 157
Nicrophorinae, 157, 158
Nicrophorus defodiens, 158
Nicrophorus humator, 35, 90, 157, 158
Nicrophorus orbicollis, 158
Nicrophorus vespillo, 157, 158
Nicrophorus vespilloides, 90, 118,
157, 158
Oiceoptoma thoracicum, 97
Oxyletrum discicollis, 157
preference for corpse size, 157
preference for soil type, 158
semiochemicals, 158
Thanatophilus sinuata, 157
Simulidae, 71, 72, 120, 180
blackﬂies, 180
Skin beetles see hide beetles
Sphaeroceridae, 52, 69, 147
associated with advanced decay, 147
characteristics
Leptocera caenosa, 147
Minilimosina parvula, 147
Telomerina eburnea, 147
Staphylinidae, 34, 88, 89–91, 100, 157,
165, 166
characteristics, 90
Creophilus maxillosus, 27, 91, 165
Oxyletrum discicollis, 157
Philonthus longicornis, 91, 165
predators of insects feeding on the corpse,
91, 165
Statement of compliance, 185, 186
Statement of truth, 186, 190, 193, 194
purpose, 186
structure, 186, 192
Stoneﬂies, 74, 172, 173, see also Plecoptera
carnivorous larvae, 74
lifecycle, 74
Stored Product pests, 1, 2, 159, 164
Dermestes maculatus see Dermestidae
Dermestes lardarius see Dermestidae
Plodia interpunctella, 3
Tribolium castaneum, 3
Tribolium confusum, 3
Stratiomyidae, 69–70, 116, 147, 151
aquatic larvae, 69
Hermetia illucens, 69, 70, 116, 147
soldier ﬂies, 69, 147
Suicide, 25, 27, 38, 39, 144 see also poisons
hanging, 39
Sung Tz’u, 6
Succession of insects, 8, 29, 40,
132, 133, 135
buried corpses, 133
Conicera tibialis, 150
exposed corpses, 8, 40, 132, 133
PMI determination, 136
rural habitats, 156, 157, 160
urban habitats, 131, 135
Tarsal formulae see insect morphology
Temperature
recording at the crime scene, 7, 102–104,
107–110
recording in the laboratory, 12, 15
meteorological stations, 110
Thanatosis (playing dead), 91, 93,
160, 163
Thermal units see physiological energy
budgets
Time since death, 7, 19, 24–26, 28, 29,
39–41, 43, 109, 111, 122, 132, 134,
135, 136, 138–140, 146–148, 151,
154, 163, 168, 173, 183, 188, 190,
202 see also post mortem interval
calculations, 147, 148
correction factors, 121, 131, 138
sources of error, 128–130
maggot mass, 128, 130
soil temperature, 130
Time since submergence, 169, 170, 179, 180,
182, 183
Tipulidae, 71–72, 180, see also Nematocera
Dicranota spp., 72
Pedicia spp., 72
Tipula, 72, 180
Trichoptera, 73, 74, 179, 180
Caddis ﬂies, 74, 179, 180
248
INDEX



Plate 2.1
Electropherogram
Plate 3.1
Decomposition of a human body
Plate 3.3
Bloat
Plate 3.5
Advanced stage of decay
Plate 3.2
Fresh stage of decomposition
Plate 3.4
Active stage of decay
Plate 3.6
Skeletal remains

Plate 3.7
A cadaveric island surrounding the body where vegetation has died away
Plate 4.1
A Tabanid larva
Plate 4.2
Emerging calliphorid with inﬂated ptilinum
Plate 4.3
Transition from larval stage L2 to larval stage L3

Plate 4.4
Puparial colour changes in Calliphora vomitoria Linnaeus within the ﬁrst 25 hours of
pupariation

Plate 4.5
A pair of Piophilids taken ‘in cop’
Plate 4.6
Head of Piophila casei Linnaeus
Plate 4.7
The Chironomidae

Plate 5.1A–F
General morphology of blowﬂies. A – habitus, Chrysomya albiceps, male; B –
head proﬁle, Calliphora uralensis; C – thorax, dorsal view, Lucilia sericata; D – wing, Proto-
phormia terraenovae; E – male terminalia, Lucilia bufonivora; F – ovipositior, Lucilia illustris.
Source: Reproduced by permission of Dr. Krzysztof Szpila

Plate 5.2A–N
Details of morphology of blowﬂies. A – calypters, Cynomya mortuorum; B –
calypters, Lucilia caesar; C – greater ampulla, Chrysomya albiceps; D – greater ampulla,
Cochliomyia hominivorax; E – habitus, dorsal view, Chrysomya marginalis; F – head proﬁle,
Chrysomya albiceps; G – head proﬁle, Chrysomya megacephala; H – head proﬁle, Phormia regina;
I – anterior part of thorax, Chrysomya albiceps; J – abdomen, Chrysomya albiceps; K – anterior
part of thorax, Chrysomya putoria; L – abdomen, Chrysomya putoria; M – calypters,
Chrysomya bezziana; N – calypters, Chrysomya megacephala. Source: Reproduced by
permission of Dr. Krzysztof Szpila

Plate 5.3A–K
Details of morphology of blowﬂies. A – head proﬁle, Cochliomyia hominivorax;
B – calypters, Phormia regina; C – calypters, Protophormia terraenovae; D – calypters, Calliphora
vicina; E – wing, Lucilia sericata; F – head proﬁle, Cynomya mortuorum; G – head proﬁle,
Calliphora vicina; H – head proﬁle, Calliphora vomitoria; I – head proﬁle, Calliphora loewi;
J – basicosta, Lucilia sericata; K – basicosta, Lucilia caesar. Source: Reproduced by permission
of Dr. Krzysztof Szpila

Plate 5.4A–G
A – occipital area, Lucilia sericata; B – occipital area Lucilia cuprina; C – head
proﬁle, Lucilia sericata; D – head proﬁle, Lucilia silvarum; E – head proﬁle, Lucilia caesar;
F – head proﬁle, Lucilia illustris; G – coxopleural streak, Lucilia caesar. Source: Reproduced by
permission of Dr. Krzysztof Szpila

Plate 5.5A–T
Male genitalia of Calliphorinae. Calliphora loewi: A – cerci and surstyli, lateral
view; B – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; C – phallus, lateral view; D – pregonite and postgonite,
lateral view. Calliphora subalpina: E – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; F – cerci and surstyli, dorsal
view; G – phallus, lateral view; H – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Calliphora vicina:
I – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; J – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; K – phallus, lateral view;
L – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Calliphora vomitoria: M – cerci and surstyli, lateral
view; N – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; O – phallus, lateral view; P – pregonite and postgonite,
lateral view. Cynomya mortuorum: Q – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; R – cerci and surstyli, dorsal
view; S – phallus, lateral view; T– pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Source: Reproduced by
permission of Dr. Krzysztof Szpila

Plate 5.6A–P
Male genitalia of Chrysomyinae. Chrysomya albiceps: A – cerci and surstyli,
lateral view; B – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; C – phallus, lateral view; D – pregonite and
postgonite, lateral view. Chrysomya bezziana: E – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; F – cerci and
surstyli, dorsal view; G – phallus, lateral view; H – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view.
Chrysomya marginalis: I – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; J – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view;
K – phallus, lateral view; L – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Chrysomya megacephala:
M – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; N – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; O – phallus,
lateral view; P – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Source: Reproduced by
permission of Dr. Krzysztof Szpila

Plate 5.7A–T
Male genitalia of Chrysomyinae and Luciliinae. Chrysomya putoria: A – cerci and
surstyli, lateral view; B – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; C – phallus, lateral view; D – pregonite
and postgonite,lateral view.Cochliomyia hominivorax: E – cerciand surstyli,lateral view; F– cerci
and surstyli, dorsal view; G – phallus, lateral view; H – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view.
Phormia regina: I – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; J – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; K – phallus,
lateral view; L – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Protophormia terraenovae: M – cerci and
surstyli, lateral view; N – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; O – phallus, lateral view; P – pregoniteand
postgonite, lateral view. Lucilia cuprina: Q – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; R – cerci and surstyli,
dorsal view; S – phallus, lateral view; T – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Source:
Reproduced by permission of Dr. Krzysztof Szpila

Plate 5.8A–V
Terminalia of Luciliinae. Lucilia ampullacea: A – cerci and surstyli, lateral view;
B – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; C – phallus, lateral view; D – pregonite and postgonite, lateral
view. Lucilia caesar: E – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; F – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view;
G – phallus, lateral view; H – ovipositor, lateral view; I – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view.
Lucilia illustris: J – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; K – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; L – phallus,
lateral view; M – ovipositor, lateral view; N – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Lucilia
sericata: O – cerci and surstyli, lateral view; P – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; Q – phallus, lateral
view; R – pregonite and postgonite, lateral view. Lucilia silvarum: S – cerci and surstyli, lateral
view; T – cerci and surstyli, dorsal view; U – phallus, lateral view; V – pregonite and postgonite,
lateral view. Source: Reproduced by permission of Dr. Krzysztof Szpila

Plate 5.9A–O
European and Mediterranean blowﬂies of forensic importance, general appear-
ance (A-C, E, F, I-N phot. by T. Klejdysz). A – Calliphora loewi, B – Calliphora vicina,
C – Calliphora vomitoria, D – Calliphora subalpina, E – Cynomya mortuorum, F – Chrysomya
albiceps, G – Chrysomya marginalis, H – Chrysomya megacephala, I – Phormia regina,
J – Protophormia terraenovae, K – Lucilia ampullacea, L – Lucilia caesar, M – Lucilia
illustris, N – Lucilia sericata, O – Lucilia silvarum. Source: Reproduced by permission
of Dr. Krzysztof Szpila

Plate 6.1
Dermestes lardarius Linnaeus
Plate 6.3
A clerid beetle
Plate 12.1
Chironomidae – blood worms
Plate 12.3
River with bankside vegetation
Plate 6.2
Dermestes maculatus DeGeer
Plate 6.4
Nicrophorus humator Gleditsch
Plate 12.2
Caddisﬂy – cased
Plate 12.4
Hydrophilid larva

Plate 12.5
Hydrophilid beetle
Plate 12.7
Gammarus sp., - an example of a
shredder
Plate 12.9
Rat-tailed larva (Syrphidae)
Plate 12.6
Dytiscid beetle larva
Plate 12.8
Culicid pupa
Plate 12.10
Turtle – a scavenger

Plate 12.11
Gyrinidae larva (whirligig beetles)

