
FOREST
CONSERVATION
POLICY
A Reference Handbook
V. Alaric Sample and Antony S. Cheng
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California • Denver, Colorado • Oxford, England


FOREST
CONSERVATION
POLICY
A Reference Handbook

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as terrorism, sexual harassment,
homelessness, AIDS, gambling, animal rights, and air pollution.
Written by professional writers, scholars, and nonacademic
experts, these books are authoritative, clearly written, up-to-
date, and objective. They provide a good starting point for
research by high school and college students, scholars, and
general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject; a detailed chronology; biographical
sketches; facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material; a directory of organizations and agencies;
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources; a glossary; and
an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to better understand the
social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing the
world today.

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Homelessness, Third Edition, Mary Ellen Hombs
Capital Punishment, Second Edition, Michael Kronenwetter
Environmental Activism, Jacqueline Vaughn Switzer
Families in America, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Forest Fires, Phillip N. Omi
Freshwater Issues, Zachary A. Smith and Grenetta Thomassey
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Ocean Politics and Policy, Peter Jacques and Zachary A. Smith
Police Misconduct in America, Dean J. Champion
Rainforests of the World, Second Edition, Kathlyn Gay
Religion and Politics, Glenn H. Utter and John W. Storey
Tax Reform, James John Jurinski
Tobacco, Harold V. Cordry
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
War Crimes and Justice, Howard Ball
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert


FOREST
CONSERVATION
POLICY
A Reference Handbook
V. Alaric Sample and Antony S. Cheng
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California • Denver, Colorado • Oxford, England

Copyright © 2004 by V. Alaric Sample and Antony S. Cheng
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Sample, V. Alaric.
Forest conservation policy : a reference handbook / V. Alaric Sample
and Antony S. Cheng.
p. cm. -- (Contemporary world issues)
ISBN 1-57607-991-0 (hardcover : alk. paper)
ISBN 1-57607-992-9 (eBook)
1. Forest conservation--United States--Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2.
Forest policy--United States--Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Cheng,
Antony S. II. Title. III. Series.
SD412.S26 2003
333.75'16'0973--dc22
2003019575
07 06 05 04   10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. Visit abc-
clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper      .
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

vii
Contents
Preface, xiii
1
The Conservation Movement and the Roots of U.S.
Forest Policy, 1
Forest Policy in an Era of Environmental Awareness, 1
Historical Roots, 4
Early Forest Laws, 5
Forest Exploitation and Disposal of the Public
Domain, 6
Forest Reserves and the Awakening of a Conservation
Ethic, 8
Forest Management Policies in the National Forests, 11
From Custodial Management to Intensive Use, 11
Multiple-Use Forestry, 12
Wilderness, 14
The Clearcutting Controversy, 15
Establishing Sustainable Forest Management on Private
Lands, 16
Evolution of the Forest Products Industry, 17
Improving Management of Private Forests, 18
Conclusion, 20
References, 22
2
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy, 23
Sustainable Forest Management, 24
Background, 25
Recent Policy Developments, 27
Conclusion, 32

Conserving Biological Diversity, 33
Background, 33
Recent Policy Developments, 35
Conclusion, 40
Wilderness and Roadless Areas, 41
Background, 41
Recent Policy Developments, 44 
Conclusion, 45
Forest Health, 47
Background, 47
Recent Policy Developments, 50
Conclusion, 52
Community Forestry, 53
Background, 54
Basic Elements of Community Forestry, 56
Recent Policy Developments, 58
Conclusion, 61
Forestry Regulation on Private Lands, 62
Background, 62
First Generation: 1920–1950, 62
Second Generation: 1970–1983, 65
Third Generation: 1984–1995, 70
Conclusion, 73
Forest Land Conservation, 74
Conservation of Public Forest Lands, 75
Conservation of Corporate Forest Lands, 77
Conservation of Family Forest Lands, 79
Forest Management Certification, 82
Background, 83
Recent Policy Developments, 86
Forests and Water, 89
Background, 89
Recent Policy Developments, 91
Conclusion, 93
Forests and Atmospheric Carbon, 94
Background, 94
Recent Policy Developments, 97
Conclusion, 100
Forest Biotechnology, 101
Background, 101
Recent Policy Developments, 103
Conclusion, 104
viii
Contents

Emerging Issues and Future Policy Directions, 106
Wood Supply in the Global Context, 106
Forest Management as a Plus in Biodiversity 
Conservation, 108
Putting U.S. Forest Policy in the Global Context, 
109
References, 110
3
Chronology, 117
4
Personalities, 131
Bolle, Arnold (1912–1993), 131
Church, Frank (1924–1984), 131
Dana, Samuel Trask (1883–1978), 132
Dwyer, William (1929–2002), 132
Fernow, Bernhard (1851–1923), 132
Franklin, Jerry (1936– ), 133
Gordon, John (1939– ), 133
Graves, Henry (1871–1951), 133
Hough, Franklin (1822–1885), 134
Humphrey, Hubert (1911–1978), 134
Ickes, Harold (1874–1952), 134
Johnson, K. Norman (1942– ), 135
Leopold, Aldo (1886–1948), 135
Marsh, George Perkins (1801–1882), 135
Marshall, Robert (1901–1939), 136
Mather, Stephen (1867–1930), 136
McGuire, John (1916–2002), 136
Muir, John (1838–1914), 136
Murie, Olaus (1889–1963), 137
Olmsted, Frederick Law (1822–1903), 137
Pack, Charles Lathrop (1857–1937), 137
Peterson, Max (1927– ), 137
Pinchot, Gifford (1865–1946), 138
Powell, John Wesley (1834–1902), 138
Roosevelt, Theodore (1858–1919), 139
Sargent, Charles Sprague (1841–1927), 139
Schenck, Carl (1868–1955), 139
Thomas, Jack Ward (1934– ), 139
Udall, Morris (1922–1988), 140
Weyerhaeuser, Frederick (1834–1912), 140
Weyerhaeuser, Frederick E. (1872–1945), 140
Contents
ix

Zahniser, Howard (1906–1964), 141
Zon, Raphael (1887–1957), 141
5
Forest Facts and Data, 143
Forest Ecoregions in the United States, 144
Forest Area, Production, and Trade Information, 145
Ownership of U.S. Forests, 146
Federal Public Forest System, 147
The National Forest System, 148
Bureau of Land Management, 151
National Park System, 153
The National Wilderness Preservation System, 153
State and County Forest Lands, 153
Private Forest Lands, 154
Forest Industry, 154
Timber Investment Management Organizations, 155
Nonindustrial Private Forests, 155
Tribal Forests, 157
Conditions and Trends in U.S. Forests, 158
The Montreal Process, 161
Criterion 1 through 6, 162
Criterion 7, 168
Forest Certification Principles and Standards, 171
SmartWood, 171
Scientific Certification Systems, 173
The Sustainable Forestry Initiative, 175
American Tree Farm System Standards, 176
References, 179
6
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations, 183
Federal and International Government Organizations, 
183
State Organizations, 190
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations, 197
Society of American Foresters Accredited Forestry
Schools, 220
Forest Products Companies, 227
Forestry Trade Associations, 229
Forestry Professional Associations, 232
Other Forestry-Related Associations, 234
x
Contents

7
Print Resources, 239
General Forestry and Forest Conservation Books and
Reports, 240
U.S. Forest Policy Books and Reports, 243
U.S. Forest History, 248
International Forestry and Forest Conservation, 250
Scientific Journals, 252
8
Nonprint Resources, 265
Information Clearinghouses on the Web, 265
Online Reports, Maps, and Information, 267
Videos, 270
Nonprint Resources from Various States, 273
Glossary, 277
Index, 293
About the Authors, 321
Contents
xi


xiii
Preface
T
hrough history, forests have played a central role in develop-
ing nations, the United States included. The exploitation of
these primeval natural resources has built and fueled human
habitation since ancient times. Forests have brought wealth and
power to nations through trade and conquest. They have even
served as collateral in the building of empires, as when Marc
Antony made the forests of what is now southern Turkey a birth-
day gift to Cleopatra, who used them to build a powerful navy.
From Odysseus to Horatio Lord Nelson, forests have been key to
exploration and trade between nations, and the power of empires
has often risen or fallen in step with the health and well-being of
their forests.
From a broad perspective, it was not long ago that the United
States itself was a young and developing nation, with citizens
who were exploiting a continent new to Europeans and clothed
with a seemingly inexhaustible supply of trees. Barely a century
ago, the primeval forest resources of the United States were being
removed at a far higher rate than they could possibly be replaced,
and little if any thought was given to their regeneration. Fortu-
nately for this particular developing nation, however, the United
States did not continue on this path until its forests were ex-
hausted and ruined. Inspired in part by the history of denuded
and barren lands once ruled by the classical empires—as de-
scribed in 1864 by George Perkins Marsh in his landmark book
Man and Nature—farsighted and public-spirited individuals in-
cluding Gifford Pinchot, Bernhard Fernow, and Franklin Hough
acted to conserve America’s forests to ensure their protection and
sustainable use in perpetuity. Now, a century after these and
other conservationists established the policies and institutions

xiv
Preface
that halted rampant forest exploitation and developed a new sci-
ence of sustainable forest management, America’s forests are
nearly as extensive as they were before European colonization.*
Today these policies and institutions are a model for many devel-
oping nations that seek to sustain their forests for the wealth of
ecological, economic, and social values they provide.
The policies that guide the management of U.S. forests con-
tinue to be a source of passionate debate, precisely because of the
many different resources and uses that forests provide. Public
policy is a manifestation of public values. Forest policy—perhaps
more than any other area of public policy in the United States—is
based on an amalgam of public values as diverse as the 286 mil-
lion citizens who make up our constitutional democracy. Citizens
are directly involved in setting goals and objectives for forest
management on public forest lands and in protecting important
environmental values on private forests. The accomplishment of
these goals within boundaries established through policy is care-
fully monitored by citizens’ groups, public agencies, and corpo-
rations that own and manage forest lands. An added complica-
tion is that the objectives for which U.S. forests are managed are
not static; they evolve over time as social values themselves
evolve. Thus, forest policy is dynamic and ever-changing. The
fact that forest management in the United States continues to be a
focus of debate is a reflection of the value and importance of
forests and a tribute to the citizens who actively participate in the
governance of natural resources. These resources, after all, are as
central to the continued ecological and economic health of the
United States as they were to the less-democratic ancient empires
that failed to conserve these essential components of national
health and well-being.
The issues that define today’s U.S. forest policy debates are
* More than three-quarters of the conversion of U.S. forests to agriculture
and other uses occurred in the nineteenth century, and today only about
5 percent of the area of native forest (“old growth”) remains. Since 1907,
however, the total area of forest land in the United States has steadily in-
creased, and forests now cover about 71 percent of the area that was
forested in 1630. Today, approximately 52 million acres, or 7 percent of
U.S. forest land, is reserved or protected in National Parks and Wilder-
ness areas (Smith et al. 1997).

Preface
xv
the core of this book. As one in the ABC-CLIO Contemporary World
Issues series, this book is intended to be a reference handbook
rather than a comprehensive text on forest policy. It will be useful
to all students interested in forest policy including upper-level
undergraduate and graduate students in forestry, conservation,
and environmental policy. It will also be useful to journalists and
other readers seeking to better understand current policy issues
by seeing them both in their historical context and as they relate
to one another. We hope readers will come away with a clearer
understanding not only of what the policy issues are, but also of
why they are issues and for whom they are issues. For those who
wish to delve further into these issues, the book serves as a guide
to the broader literature on forest policy and to an array of addi-
tional informational resources in both print and electronic form.
We wish to thank Michele Burns, currently a graduate stu-
dent in the Department of Forest Sciences at Colorado State Uni-
versity, for her assistance in compiling the wealth of information
on the array of public, private, and nongovernmental organiza-
tions involved in U.S. forestry, forest conservation, and forest pol-
icy. The United States is unique in the world in the extent and
complexity of such organizations—another reflection of the level
of citizen involvement in determining the policies that guide the
management of our forests. We are also grateful for Michele’s as-
sistance in assembling the list of additional print resources and
the vast array of information now available electronically via the
Internet.
The editorial staff at ABC-CLIO has been wonderful to work
with. Special thanks go to Alicia Merritt, who patiently guided
this effort from conception to completion; Deborah Lynes, who
managed production; and Linda Bevard, whose careful editing
will be appreciated by both the writers and readers of this book.
As urbanized and technology-oriented as the United States
has become, our forests continue to be key to the ecological, eco-
nomic, and social well-being of the nation. With barely a century
separating our nation’s adolescence and its position today as a
leading industrialized nation, it is important that we not lose
sight of the importance of our forests as sources of abundant
clean water, habitat for a wide diversity of animal and plant
species, wood for material and renewable energy needs, and a
place of refuge and renewal from the pressures of everyday life.

xvi
Preface
For the United States perhaps more than for any other nation,
forests are a part of our history and culture and help to define
who we are as a people. We hope this book will be one more small
contribution to the citizens of all kinds who continue to play an
active role in determining the policies that guide the conservation
and sustainable management of our forests.
V. Alaric Sample
Washington, D.C.
Antony S. Cheng
Fort Collins, Colorado

1
The Conservation
Movement and the Roots
of U.S. Forest Policy
Forest Policy in an Era of
Environmental Awareness
At no time in history has there been greater interest and concern
over the future of the world’s forests. Images from satellites
orbiting the Earth convey to us how finite our resources are, and
how small a proportion of our sky-blue planet is forest-green.
From this satellite imagery we can also see continental-scale
smoke plumes from fires that annually deforest areas of the
tropics as large as entire U.S. states.
Down here on the ground, some of the most respected scien-
tists of our time tell us that plant and animal species, many of
them dependent on forest ecosystems, are quietly going extinct—
at a rate faster than at any time since a comet smashed into the
Earth 60 million years ago and wiped out the dinosaurs. As
20,000-year-old glaciers melt in Greenland and Antarctica, scien-
tists tell us that the long-term survival of our own species may be
in jeopardy from global climate changes leading to rising sea
levels, prolonged droughts in key agricultural regions, and more
intensely destructive storms. Although global warming is dis-
cussed primarily in terms of carbon dioxide and other “green-
house gases” produced by the combustion of oil, gas, and other
1

fossil fuels, it is estimated that one-quarter of all greenhouse gas
emissions stemming from human activity during the past two
decades has come from deforestation in the tropics.
Is the situation hopeless? No. But we will need to follow a dif-
ferent course than the one we have been on if this trend of species
extinction and global warming is to be changed. Approaches to
forest conservation and sustainable use that worked well a half-
century ago are unlikely to work a half-century in the future.
World population will have more than doubled in that time, and
with it the needs for all the goods and services that forests provide.
Just as importantly, there is likely to be a similar increase in the
needs for agricultural production, living space, and other human
activities that displace forests and lead to continued net decreases
in forest area.
Forest policy provides a framework for effective action. Pol-
icy change comes about when enough people come to regard the
current situation or direction as unacceptable and begin to search
for alternatives. Policy change is a process by which diverse inter-
ests within society arrive at a common set of goals and then or-
ganize institutions and legal frameworks that will lead to the
achievement of those goals. Forest policy does not stay the same
for long. The past few decades have seen a revolution in our sci-
entific understanding of forests—how they function, what they
provide, the ways in which they become degraded, and what is
needed to sustain them. It is natural that forest policy should
continue to evolve to reflect new knowledge and changing social
values.
The evolution in U.S. forest policy has in many ways been a
prelude to the policy debates now taking place at the global level.
A new environmental awareness arose in the United States be-
ginning in the 1960s. Emblematic of this period was the 1962 pub-
lication of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring, which documented the
lethal effects of pesticides and other chemical toxins on songbirds
and other species. Carson’s book also helped usher in a new era
of social activism on behalf of the natural environment, with in-
dividual citizens taking to the street and to the halls of govern-
ment, forcing industries of all kinds to reduce pollution and envi-
ronmental degradation.
This activism produced several landmark U.S. laws and
government policies during the 1970s (among them the Na-
tional Environmental Policy Act of 1970, Clean Water Act
Amendments of 1972 and 1977, and Clean Air Act Amendments
2
Conservation Movement and U.S. Forest Policy

of 1970) that provided an entirely new framework for reducing
the negative effects of human activities on the air, water, and
land on which we all depend. At times, government itself be-
came the target of this new environmental activism. Federal and
state agencies created to implement environmental laws were
challenged in court when they were seen to be lax in their en-
forcement of these laws. Other government agencies, particu-
larly those responsible for managing public lands and natural
resources, were challenged as never before to demonstrate that
they themselves were not contributing to the degradation of im-
portant environmental values.
Forests and the policies governing them became an espe-
cially high-profile focus of this environmental activism. Concerns
over clearcutting and other aspects of commercial timber produc-
tion prompted a series of Federal and state laws aimed at limiting
or prohibiting controversial forest practices, protecting wilder-
ness areas, and conserving habitat for wildlife—especially threat-
ened or endangered species.
Although many of us tend to think of these issues as they re-
late to our own locale and experiences, they are but a reflection
of the broader concern over these very same issues worldwide.
For example, the creation of protected forest areas to conserve bi-
ological diversity is an issue in every country that has significant
areas of forest, whether tropical, temperate, or boreal. The Con-
vention on Biological Diversity, an agreement developed at the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
(UNCED) in 1992, was one of the first major efforts by nations
around the world to reach a common understanding and de-
velop a common strategy to conserve biological diversity in the
world’s forests.
Likewise, our struggle to develop solutions to these issues is
a reflection of similar efforts worldwide. Issues in the United
States in the 1970s over clearcutting and the protection of envi-
ronmental values in forests were but a precursor to the current
global debate over sustainable forest management. As in the
United States, the global debate has been like a pendulum, swing-
ing the focus from commercial uses to environmental values and
finally to a position recognizing that, in the long run, forests can
only be conserved through a strategy that protects forest produc-
tivity and environmental values, maintains economic values, and
deals squarely with perennial concerns over the fair and equitable
use of these important resources.
Forest Policy in an Era of Environmental Awareness
3

Historical Roots
Forest policy is the framework of laws, regulations, and deci-
sions governing the management and use of a variety of forest
resources so as to meet current needs while maintaining the
value and productivity of forests for future generations. De-
clared forest policies in the United States date back to the earliest
days of European colonization. Native Americans had their own
style of forest policies prior to European colonization. Evidence
of fairly widespread intentional burning suggests that many Na-
tive Americans manipulated the forest environment to increase
forage for game and protect themselves from enemies (Pyne
1982; Williams 1989). Alteration of forests became far more wide-
spread and enduring in the years following settlement by Euro-
pean colonists in the early 1600s. Even in those early years, com-
petition over forest resources prompted the sense of resource
scarcity and need for regulated use that underlies much of U.S.
forest policy today.
Today’s forest policies and much of U.S. law in general have
their roots in English common law (Adams 1993). Oppressive for-
est laws in Anglo-Saxon and Norman England, which often man-
dated punishment by mutilation or death for poaching the king’s
game or cutting down trees in the royal forests (Young 1979),
helped create the impetus for the Magna Carta, the greatest value
of which to succeeding generations has been in defining and pro-
tecting individual rights. Forest policy today continues to be as
much about promoting economic opportunity and ensuring so-
cial equity as it is about ecological science.
The balancing of individual and community rights is at the
heart of the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights, and nowhere in
U.S. law is this principle more evident than in the policies gov-
erning the conservation and use of forest resources on public and
private forest lands. At the start of the twentieth century, forester,
conservationist, and social activist Gifford Pinchot wrote that the
nation’s forests should be managed “for the greatest good, for
the greatest number, in the long run” (Pinchot 1911). In a reflec-
tion of the defining goals of the Progressive Era, Pinchot worked
to create forest policies to eliminate waste of public resources,
combat government corruption and corporate fraud, and ensure
social equity. A century later, national and international proto-
cols are being developed to achieve “sustainable forestry,” which
4
Conservation Movement and U.S. Forest Policy

is defined as forest practices that are “ecologically sound, eco-
nomically viable and socially responsible” (Aplet et al. 1993). It
is clear that U.S. forest policy is continuously evolving to reflect
not only the changing conditions in forests and their ecological
environment but also the changing values and perceptions in
the social and economic environment. At their heart, U.S. forest
policies are expressions of social values blended with ecological
realities.
Following is a brief historical overview of the development of
forest policies in the United States. References are provided at the
end of this chapter to facilitate a more in-depth examination of the
roots of today’s forest policy efforts. Chapter 2 more closely ex-
amines a few of the key issues that are being addressed in current
debates and that will shape the evolution of U.S. forest policy.
Early Forest Laws
Forest policies arose on the North American continent shortly
after the arrival of the first Europeans. Less than five years after
the Mayflower first anchored in Massachusetts Bay in 1620, the
Plymouth Colony was already concerned about timber supplies
and had enacted a law forbidding “the sale or transport of any
timber whatsoever out of the colony without the approval of the
governor and the council” (Dana 1956). In 1691, “all pine trees fit
for masts” were reserved to the King of England and marked
with the “Broad Arrow” symbol of the British Navy. Colonists
cutting such trees could be fined or imprisoned. So unpopular
was this forest policy that resistance was widespread, and the
Broad Arrow policy was one of the irritants that led to the Decla-
ration of Independence and the American Revolution.
Following the Declaration of Independence, the 13 original
states took claim to all the lands formerly held by the British
Crown. Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, New
York, and Connecticut all claimed extensive “western reserve”
lands—Connecticut’s western reserve claim, for example, in-
cluded what is now Chicago. After the Revolutionary War, these
states were persuaded to give up their claims, and in 1780 the
Continental Congress determined that all western reserve lands
ceded to the central government of the United States would be
used for the common benefit of all the states. After all, the infant
U.S. Treasury was severely depleted from fighting the British, and
Early Forest Laws
5

land was one of the few assets on which the Federal government
could draw. The states’ shared stake in the economic benefits to
be derived from these commonly held lands helped cement the
early Union. These state cessions, estimated at about 233 million
acres, formed the nucleus of what would become known as the
“public domain” of Federal public lands. In the ensuing years,
this public domain grew significantly through land purchases
and treaties such as the Louisiana Purchase (1803), the Florida
Purchase (1819), the Oregon Compromise (1846), the Mexican
Cession (1848), the Texas Purchase (1850), the Gadsden Purchase
(1853), and the Alaska Purchase (1867), until the public domain
totaled more than 1.8 billion acres.
Forest Exploitation and Disposal of the
Public Domain
Originally, it was not intended that the public domain lands
would remain in federal ownership. Rather, title to these lands
was to be conveyed to farmers, settlers, and other private owners
as quickly as possible. So began the era of disposal of public do-
main lands to private citizens. This process began as soon as the
Revolutionary War ended, with regular soldiers being granted
title to tracts of public domain lands as a bounty for their service.
The General Land Ordinance of 1785 provided for the purchase of
public domain lands for as little as $1 per acre, and as much as 20
million acres per year were being sold by 1836. Together with the
Northwest Ordinance of 1787, the General Land Ordinance was
the means by which the public domain was surveyed, divided
into townships and sections, and distributed into private hands.
The legacy of townships and sections is evident even today on
every U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle map that delineates
township and section lines. The disposal of the public domain
lands was greatly accelerated by the passage of the Homestead
Act in 1862, which allowed individuals to obtain up to 160 acres
free of charge in return for proof that they had resided on and cul-
tivated the land for five years. About 287 million acres of the pub-
lic domain were put into private hands under the Homestead Act.
In an attempt to address the chronic shortage of timber for devel-
oping farms and towns in the Midwest and Plains states, Con-
gress in 1873 passed the Timber Culture Act, authorizing grants
6
Conservation Movement and U.S. Forest Policy

of up to 160 acres to anyone willing to plant 40 of these acres with
trees and keep the trees healthy and growing for ten years.
In addition, enormous areas of public-domain lands were
given to large companies, most notably to the railroads, as a way
of expediting the settlement of the western states. Transcontinen-
tal grants were made in 1862 to the Union Pacific and Central
Pacific Railroads, giving title to alternating 640-acre tracts of Fed-
eral land for 20 miles on each side of the railroad over its entire
length. Eventually totaling more than 94 million acres, these
grants remain the largest conveyances of public land to private
corporations in the history of the nation.
Timber trespass—that is, the illegal removal of commercial
timber from public lands—was rampant during this period.
Rarely was the law effectively enforced and only then with great
difficulty and danger. In one instance in 1853, a violent riot had to
be put down by armed Marines from the USS Michigan after Fed-
eral agents tried to seize a large volume of timber illegally cut on
public lands near Manistee, Michigan, and to arrest the perpetra-
tors. To help prevent such confrontations, Congress enacted pro-
visions by which timber could legally be obtained from public
lands. The Free Timber Act of 1878 allowed citizens in the Rocky
Mountain states to obtain free of charge whatever timber they
needed for building, agricultural, mining, or other domestic pur-
poses. The Timber and Stone Act of 1878 allowed citizens in Ore-
gon, Washington, California, and Nevada to purchase the land it-
self for as little as $2.50 per acre to satisfy their needs for building
materials (USDA, U.S. Forest Service 1993).
These early forest policies, though well-intentioned, became
the basis for monumental fraud, collusion, graft, and outright
theft of vast amounts of public land and timber. Schemes breath-
taking in their magnitude, boldness, and ingenuity eventually re-
sulted in many millions of acres of some of the most productive
forest lands in the West being fraudulently obtained by the largest
timber operators of the time—at little or no cost to the companies
but at great expense to the public domain and the national inter-
est. Between 1800 and 1910, some 300 million acres, or 469,000
square miles, of forests were cut and converted to nonforest land
uses—about 13 percent of the total land area of the United States
and nearly one-quarter of the original total forest land area in the
United States. The period between 1850 and 1880 was especially
devastating; in this 30-year period, nearly 100 million acres were
deforested—an area nearly twice the size of Kansas.
Forest Exploitation and Disposal of the Public Domain
7

Forest Reserves and the Awakening of a
Conservation Ethic
In the history of forest policy in the United States, the Forest Re-
serve Act of 1891 marks a major turning point. The overexploita-
tion of forests on private lands and the resulting local timber
shortages, destructive wildfires, costly floods, and sharp decrease
in game populations had persuaded early conservationists that it
made sense to reserve a significant area of the remaining public
domain lands in federal ownership, to be protected and managed
for the benefit of the entire nation rather than a privileged few.
One of the earliest cautionary tales about the danger of forest
destruction was Man and Nature, written in 1864 by George
Perkins Marsh (Lowenthal 1965). Marsh recounts the fall of great
civilizations, from Babylonia to the Roman Empire, in part be-
cause they overexploited their forests. By the 1870s, it was be-
coming clear that forests in the United States were not as inex-
haustible as previously thought and that the nation’s timber
supply was being drawn down far more quickly than it was being
replenished. America was still a nation that ran on wood. Almost
all buildings were constructed of wood; all major forms of trans-
portation relied on wood (for example, sailing ships, railroads,
bridges, carriages); and wood was the predominant fuel for heat-
ing, cooking, and many industrial processes. The prospect of a
“timber famine” was grim indeed, and guaranteeing a timber
supply adequate for the needs of a growing nation became the
primary driver of U.S. forest policy for most of the century to fol-
low. Groups such as the American Forestry Association and the
American Association for the Advancement of Science pushed
hard for Congress to take action.
The resulting Forest Reserve Act of 1891 authorized the Pres-
ident of the United States to reserve forested lands from the pub-
lic domain and discontinued virtually all disposal of public forest
lands into private ownership. By 1897, almost 40 million acres
had been proclaimed in more than a dozen Forest Reserves cre-
ated throughout the western United States. But because the law
provided no guidance on how the reserves were to be used and
managed, western states and territories clamored that the re-
sources had simply been “locked up.” To alleviate this situation,
Congress that year passed the Organic Administration Act, spec-
ifying the purposes for which Forest Reserves could be desig-
nated and how they were to be managed. Forest Reserves were to
8
Conservation Movement and U.S. Forest Policy

be established “to improve and protect the forest within the reser-
vation for the purpose of securing favorable conditions of water
flows, and to furnish a continuous supply of timber for the use
and necessities of citizens of the United States.” It instructed the
Secretary of the Interior to protect the Forest Reserves from fire
and theft and authorized the Secretary to “make such rules and
regulations and establish such service as will insure the objects of
such reservations, namely, to regulate their occupancy and use
and to preserve the forests thereon from destruction.”
By 1905, management of the Forest Reserves—they were re-
named National Forests in 1907—was transferred to the U.S. For-
est Service, an agency within the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Under the charismatic leadership of Gifford Pinchot, its first
Chief Forester, the Forest Service quickly distinguished itself as a
highly decentralized agency of professionally trained foresters
who were capable of making technically proficient decisions at
the local level. Pinchot was a strong advocate of developing  a
cadre of professionals insulated from political pressures. The cre-
ation of the U.S. Forest Service as an independent civil service
agency was consistent with the ideas of the Progressive Move-
ment, of which Pinchot was a strong proponent. The Progressives’
approach to forest and rangeland management focused not on
strict protection but on regulating extractive uses such as timber
cutting or livestock grazing to levels that could be sustained over
the long term and that would protect public values such as water,
wildlife, and soil productivity. Later these values would include
recreation and wilderness. Between 1906 and 1909, President
Theodore Roosevelt, a close friend and confidant of Gifford Pin-
chot, set aside an additional 80 million acres of National Forests.
In 1911, Congress authorized the Forest Service to purchase
private lands for the creation of new National Forests. Up until
this time, the National Forests had all been created out of public
domain lands by Presidential authorization, generally west of the
Mississippi River. In the early 1900s, there were large areas of
land in the eastern forests that had been privately owned, but
they had been stripped of their timber and abandoned. Many of
these lands had become tax-delinquent and reverted to state or
county ownership. Under the Weeks Act of 1911, the Forest Ser-
vice acquired many thousands of acres of such land, protected it
from fire, and gradually restored the extensive, mature forests
that now exist in National Forests from the Appalachians west to
the Great Plains. (Figure 1.1 shows the National Forest System
today.)
Forest Reserves and the Conservation Ethic
9

Figure 1.1
National Forest System of the United States
Source: Department of Forest Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado.

Forest Management Policies in the
National Forests
Much of the forest policy that developed in the United States dur-
ing the twentieth century concerned the management and use of
the National Forests. The U.S. Forest Service led the development
of forestry research, education, financial assistance to state
forestry organizations, and the expansion of responsible forestry
practices on private lands.
From Custodial Management to
Intensive Use
Before World War II, management of the National Forests was
largely custodial. As noted previously, many of the eastern Na-
tional Forests had already been heavily cut over and abused be-
fore the Forest Service acquired them. As National Forests they
were protected from fire and further depredation during the
decades it took for them to be restored through both natural
processes and extensive replanting efforts. In the West, extensive
wildfires had raged unchecked across thousands of square miles
of National Forest in the summer of 1910, destroying millions of
acres of valuable timber along with homes, ranches, and a sig-
nificant number of lives. The 1910 fires shook the confidence of
the young forestry agency and resulted in a committed effort to
build an effective firefighting capability. This capability included
not only training and equipping an army of wildland firefighters
but developing new and innovative technologies for predicting,
detecting, and suppressing wildfires. The image of Smokey Bear
was first enlisted in 1944 for a massive public education
campaign—one of the most successful in the nation’s history—to
carry the message of every citizen’s personal responsibility for
fire prevention. By 1952, Smokey Bear was on the cover of
Newsweek, solidifying fire prevention as part of the core mission
of the Forest Service. The policy of fire suppression throughout
U.S. forests was so simple and direct, so successful, so well
known, and so widely supported for so long that decades later,
when ecologists had come to a clearer understanding of the im-
portant role of fire in many forest ecosystems, it was difficult for
the Forest Service to persuade the public that forest fire could
sometimes be a positive force.
Forest Management Policies in the National Forests
11

In the 1940s, policies governing the National Forests shifted to
a wartime stance and were aimed at helping supply the immense
volume of wood needed to support the war effort. This new focus
on wood production was accentuated during the postwar boom,
when millions of wood-frame houses were being constructed in
new suburban neighborhoods across the country. In earlier
decades, the timber industry had sought to limit timber sales from
the National Forests to keep from oversupplying the market and
depressing timber prices. In the postwar years, however, with tim-
ber companies scrambling to keep up with the insatiable demand
for lumber and plywood for housing, the industry clamored for
the sale of an ever-larger volume of timber from the National
Forests. Much of the forest industry land had been cut over and it
would be decades before forests sufficient for harvesting would
grow back. In short, the same industry that lobbied Congress to
limit timber harvesting on National Forests prior to the war was
now lobbying Congress to increase harvesting.
Congress readily complied with additional funding to sup-
port increased timber sales from the National Forests. Legislators
saw more timber sales as a way not only to fulfill the need of an
expanding nation for materials but also to create employment
and income opportunities in forest industry–based communities
in their home districts. Figure 1.2 shows the steady increase in
timber harvesting in National Forests beginning shortly after
World War II through 1988, a period of roughly 40 years. Con-
gress was less receptive, however, to the other half of the Forest
Service’s message—that higher levels of timber harvesting had to
be accompanied by greater investments in reforestation and other
management activities aimed at maintaining healthy, growing
forests. Congress regularly funded these activities at levels lower
than the Forest Service requested, whereas timber sales were
often funded at levels well beyond what was requested (Sample
1990). In many National Forests, this resulted in an increasing
backlog of reforestation needs and led to conditions that in some
instances appeared as bad as those the National Forests had been
created to prevent (Hirt 1996).
Multiple-Use Forestry
A countervailing social trend in America during this period was
the explosive growth in outdoor recreation, and in particular the
recreational use of the National Forests. Americans with in-
creased leisure time and the mobility provided by cars and im-
12
Conservation Movement and U.S. Forest Policy

proved highways flocked to the National Forests in numbers that
were regularly twice the numbers of National Parks visitors. Fig-
ure 1.3 shows how recreation visits for National Forests exceed
those of National Parks over a 70-year time period, with the no-
table exception of the 1980s. Aesthetic and amenity resources of
the National Forests took on far greater importance than ever be-
fore. The inevitable conflicts between recreationists seeking to ex-
perience wild Nature and loggers seeking the best and most ac-
cessible timber became more frequent and increasingly strident.
The Forest Service was eager to prove that it could manage
such competing uses, however. The perception that the Forest
Service focused only on timber production had been responsible
for vast areas of the National Forest System being carved out to
create National Parks—the Olympic and the North Cascades Na-
tional Parks among them. Since 1916, when the National Park
Service was established, the Forest Service had lost land to its
counterpart agency and, as a result, had had to compete with it
for budgets and prestige as an effective public land management
agency. The Forest Service itself petitioned Congress to expand its
mandate to include recreation, wildlife, and other nontimber re-
sources. In 1960 the Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act became
one of the most important forest policies governing the National
Forest Management Policies in the National Forests
13
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
1905
1915
1925
1935
1945
1955
1965
1975
1985
1995
Year
Thousand Board Feet
Figure 1.2
National Forest Timber Harvest Volume, 1905–1999
Sources: Timber harvest data from 1905 to 1960: M. Clawson. The Federal Lands since 1956: Recent Trends in Use
and Management. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press for Resources for the Future, 1967, appendix
table 3, p. 59. Timber harvest data from 1960 to 1980: M. Clawson. The Federal Lands Revisited. Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press for Resources for the Future, 1983, table A-3, p. 283. Timber harvest data
from 1980 to 1999: R. W. Gorte. Timber Harvesting and Forest Fires. Congressional Research Service Report
to Congress. August 22, 2000. Available: http://www.cnie.org/nle/crsreports/forests/for-30.cfm, accessed
April 6, 2003.

Forests since they were created in 1905. The Multiple-Use Sus-
tained-Yield Act clarified that the National Forests were to be
managed for wood production, livestock forage, water, fish and
wildlife habitat, and recreation. Congress left it largely up to the
discretion of the Forest Service to determine the appropriate bal-
ance among these various uses at any given time and location.
Wilderness
While reassuring to some, the discretion given to the Forest Ser-
vice under the Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act further stimu-
lated the growing public interest in the designation of wilderness
areas to protect places of outstanding scenic value from the mech-
anistic incursions of modern life. Since 1924, the Forest Service
had designated portions of the National Forests, often those that
were remote and at high elevations, as wilderness areas. In these
areas, it was the policy of the Forest Service to permit only prim-
itive, nonmotorized kinds of recreation, and the focus of manage-
ment was maintaining the wild character of the landscape by
minimizing the evidence of human use.
14
Conservation Movement and U.S. Forest Policy
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
1924
1934
1944
1954
1964
1974
1984
1994
Year
Millions of Visits
National
Forest Visits
National
Park Visits
Figure 1.3
Recreation Visits for National Forests and National Parks,
1924–1996
Sources: Recreation visits for National Parks from 1924 to 1964: M. Clawson. The Federal Lands since 1956: Recent
Trends in Use and Management. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press for Resources for the Future, 1967,
appendix table 4, p. 60, and appendix table 36, p. 95. Recreation visits for National Forests from 1924 to 1996:
Forest History Society. Available: http://www/lib.duke.edu/forest/usfscoll/policy/recreationvisitors.html, accessed
April 6, 2003. Recreation visits for National Parks from 1965 to 1996: United States Department of the Interior
National Park Service. Available: http://www2.nature.nps.gov/npstats/systemrpt.cfm, accessed April 6, 2003.

These designations were made administratively by the For-
est Service itself. With the ever-growing pressure on the Forest
Service in the 1950s and 1960s to open new areas of the National
Forests to logging, recreationists and wilderness enthusiasts be-
came increasingly concerned that the Forest Service would re-
verse its earlier designations of wilderness areas and they would
be lost. Aldo Leopold and Robert Marshall—both dedicated For-
est Service employees—were among the leaders of a movement
to have wilderness areas on National Forests and other Federal
lands designated by Congress itself, taking the decision out of the
hands of the agencies and making them more difficult to reverse.
Leopold and Marshall were instrumental in creating The Wilder-
ness Society, which today remains a strong voice for Wilderness
designation on Federal public lands.
In 1964 Congress passed the Wilderness Act, designating
more than nine million acres of Federal land as the National
Wilderness Preservation System. Subsequent additions to the
Wilderness system, particularly those contained in the Alaska
National Interest Lands Act of 1980, have greatly increased its
total area. Today, the National Wilderness Preservation System
comprises more than 104.5 million acres. About 83 million acres
in National Forests remain unroaded, and the question of which
areas should be designated as Wilderness and which should be
developed continues to be one of the most contentious issues in
the management of these public lands.
The Clearcutting Controversy
By the 1970s, 30 years of intensive timber cutting, primarily
through clearcutting (felling or removing every tree over an area
of many acres), had taken a toll on the National Forests them-
selves and on the public’s confidence in the Forest Service to con-
serve and protect these public resources. Public outcry over
clearcutting was nothing new: Clearcutting in the Adirondacks
by the Cornell School of Forestry in the late 1890s and early 1900s
under the direction of Bernhard Fernow led to the dissolution of
the school and to Fernow’s emigration to Canada because of the
public outcry against him. A series of citizen lawsuits against the
Forest Service, notably the Izaak Walton League’s 1974 suit
against Monongahela National Forest in West Virginia, focused
on the Forest Service’s widespread use of clearcutting as
the means of timber harvesting over large areas of land. The
main thrust of these lawsuits was that by using clearcutting so
Forest Management Policies in the National Forests
15

extensively, the Forest Service had violated the Organic Admin-
istration Act of 1897. These citizen actions questioned the quality
of the Forest Service’s management of the National Forests and
challenged the judgment of its forestry professionals. This pro-
duced a defensive reaction by the forestry profession in general,
which drove an enduring wedge between foresters and the Con-
servation Movement that they had not only once been part of but
for many years had led.
Congress responded in 1976 by passing the National Forest
Management Act (NFMA). This legislation curtailed some of the
discretion granted to the Forest Service by the Multiple-Use
Sustained-Yield Act and prescribed specific forest management
practices—particularly those relating to clearcutting—that would
or would not be permitted on the National Forests. This new for-
est policy also established a complex process for developing ten-
year management plans for each National Forest, requiring the
Forest Service to involve the public in its decision-making and to
adhere to all the public disclosure and environmental analysis re-
quirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1970
(NEPA). NFMA proved once again that U.S. forest policy is an ex-
pression of social values as well as ecological considerations.
This planning process for each National Forest has become
the venue in which competing interests press their often conflict-
ing views about the appropriate balance of uses on these public
lands. The regulatory requirements of other policies, although
they are not strictly forest policies, must also be considered—
NEPA, the Clean Water Act, the Clean Air Act, and the Endan-
gered Species Act, to name a few. So complex are the analytical
and legal requirements of this combination of process and regu-
latory policies that virtually any management decision can be
held up for review by the courts and often blocked. This political
gridlock in the management of the National Forests has given rise
to many of the current issues in U.S. forest policy that will be dis-
cussed in chapter 2.
Establishing Sustainable Forest
Management on Private Lands
Although much of the attention in forest policy continues to focus
on the National Forests, these forests constitute only 19 percent of
the nation’s timberland area (Smith et al. 1997). Approximately
16
Conservation Movement and U.S. Forest Policy

7 percent is in state, county, and tribal forests. The remaining
71 percent of the country’s forests remain in private ownership—
approximately 13 percent is owned by forest products companies
and another 58 percent is in the hands of farmers and other pri-
vate landowners. How to best accomplish sustainable forest man-
agement on the nearly three-quarters of the nation’s forests that
are privately owned has been one of the most persistent and ur-
gent challenges in U.S. forest policy.
Evolution of the Forest Products Industry
The attitude of the early timber industry in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries toward sustainable forest manage-
ment was driven by the harsh economics faced by any develop-
ing nation—being natural resource–rich but cash-poor, the nation
exploited its resources to build wealth. Even while the Federal
government was reserving millions of acres of public land be-
cause of concerns about a potential future timber famine, the tim-
ber industry still considered timber supply to be less a problem
than other major factors of production—labor and capital. As
long as labor and capital were scarce and expensive and trees
were plentiful and cheap, it made little economic sense to the tim-
ber industry to invest labor and capital in reforestation or other
aspects of forest culture. “Cut-and-run”—the practice of stripping
the timber, abandoning the land, and moving on to other places
where timber was still plentiful and land cheap—remained the
unofficial forest policy of the lumber industry.
From the perspective of the forester and of communities left
behind to cope with cut-over hillsides that could do little to hold
back the spring floods, cut-and-run timber exploitation was no
longer acceptable. With the timber industry unwilling to take the
initiative to prohibit destructive methods of logging, a number of
proposals were developed for making basic sustainable forest
management practices mandatory on private lands, with either
the Federal or state government in charge of enforcing these rules.
Like many other industries, the forest products industry in
general has sought to minimize government regulation of any
kind. However, some timber companies welcomed regulation as
a way of stabilizing what had become a chaotic and unpredictable
business environment. By the 1920s, some timber companies
were already foreseeing timber supply problems and were shift-
ing to a new approach—acquiring and holding land for the long
term and investing in reforestation and other practices aimed at
Sustainable Forest Management on Private Lands
17

producing “second-growth” forests. There would be less waste in
these forests because the companies would have greater control
over species composition and could plant faster-growing trees of
more uniform size. Companies among this group considered gov-
ernment requirements for basic, sound forestry practices—such
as replanting after harvesting—to be largely consistent with their
existing practices, which aimed to maintain land productivity to
support successive crops of timber and to reduce the competitive
advantage of less responsible timber operators. The key question
was who should conduct such government regulation of forestry
practices on private lands—the Forest Service or state forestry
agencies. Lingering questions over the constitutionality of Fed-
eral regulation on private lands added to a general preponder-
ance of public opinion in favor of state regulation. By the middle
of the twentieth century, the question had for the most part been
resolved in favor of regulation by the states (see chapter 2 for the
history and development of state-level regulation of private for-
est practices).
The forest products industry has sought assistance through
government policies aimed at improving the competitive advan-
tage of U.S. companies internationally. The industry argues that
such policies improve the economics of U.S. timber production,
basing companies’ adoption of better forest practices not on gov-
ernment regulation but on sound business decisions. In the view
of the U.S. forest products industry, low prices for lumber and
plywood (which limit profits and thus the industry’s ability to in-
vest in higher-cost forest management practices) are at least
partly attributable to imports of cheap foreign lumber, chiefly
from Canada. Historically, the influence of imports has been ad-
dressed through imposition by the U.S. government of import
tariffs on wood products, especially softwood lumber. The first of
these import tariffs was imposed in 1794. In March 2002, a 29 per-
cent tariff was reimposed after negotiations to address the trade
imbalance between the two nations broke down. Cross-border al-
legations of government subsidization and unfair trade practices
continue to be a source of tension between Canada and the
United States (see chapter 2).
Improving Management of Private Forests
State government regulation is only one of several policy mecha-
nisms aimed at improving forest practices on private lands
18
Conservation Movement and U.S. Forest Policy

owned by individuals and organizations other than forest prod-
ucts companies. Other mechanisms include cost-sharing for ac-
tivities such as fire protection and control of insects and disease,
financial incentives for reforestation and silvicultural improve-
ments (growing trees for wood production), and government
purchase of conservation easements to reduce property taxes and
protect private forests from development.
Forest taxation policy has long been at the heart of debates
over how best to improve forest practices on private lands. Local
property taxes and Federal and state “death taxes” have been
blamed for making forestry uneconomical on small family hold-
ings. Property taxes that increase each year with the appreciating
value of both land and timber have been faulted with forcing pre-
mature or excessive timber harvesting, because landowners do
not have the cash flow they need to pay the taxes until the timber
is harvested. This problem has largely been addressed by local tax
authorities shifting from ad valorem property taxation—taxing
land according to its “highest and best use” fair market value—to
“severance taxes” collected at the time mature timber is harvested.
Federal estate taxes, which are due within one year of an in-
dividual’s death and can range as high as 50 percent, are blamed
for forcing surviving family members to undertake excessive, un-
planned timber harvests in order to pay the tax on forest assets.
Others are forced to sell all or part of the land itself, contributing
to fragmentation, development, or conversion to other nonforest
land uses—all of which tend to degrade the public value of the
forest land for wood production, wildlife habitat, watershed pro-
tection, recreation, and other uses. Federal estate tax reform has
raised the amount of asset value that may be excluded from tax-
ation to more than $1 million, but this exclusion is of little help to
forest landowners with more than just a few acres. There are sim-
ilar issues with state and local inheritance taxes, which are taxes
paid by heirs on assets willed to them, rather than taxes paid by
the estate of the deceased. Even under existing tax policy, indi-
viduals can significantly reduce these tax liabilities through com-
prehensive estate planning well before death. Assistance with es-
tate planning is now one of the services offered to private forest
landowners by private consulting foresters and state foresters.
Above and beyond the challenge of improving forest man-
agement on private lands is the challenge of conserving private
forest land in the first place. Every year, hundreds of thousands of
acres of private forest land are converted to nonforest uses such as
Sustainable Forest Management on Private Lands
19

development, effectively removing these lands from providing the
multitude of goods, services, benefits, and values that intact
forests supply. The effect has been twofold. First, private forests
converted to nonforest land uses either lose their forest cover com-
pletely (such as when they are developed for residential housing)
or have their tree cover diminished significantly. Forests that once
protected water quality and prevented flooding by intercepting
and storing rainfall often can no longer effectively serve this
watershed-protecting function. Second, development in forested
areas fragments the forest, both in terms of forest cover and of
ownership. Increasingly, privately owned parcels of forested land
are becoming smaller, raising challenges for integrated forest
ecosystem management across a large area. It is far more efficient
to manage one 1,000-acre parcel of private forest land for wildlife
than it is to coordinate the management of 100 ten-acre parcels that
are each owned by a different individual or organization. Private
forest land fragmentation is a national trend from New England to
the Rocky Mountain states, as urban dwellers flock to rural areas.
Increased private forest land fragmentation and conversion to
nonforest land uses pose some of the most daunting policy and
management challenges, from wildlife and watershed conserva-
tion to managing wildland forest fires.
Conclusion
Forest policies in the United States have always been and con-
tinue to be expressions of social values. For much of the history of
the United States, forest policies have been driven by fears of tim-
ber shortages, first at the local level and later at the national scale.
Less than a century ago in the United States, wood was still the
primary source of fuel for heating and cooking and was the raw
material for many industrial processes; a sudden shortage would
have significantly affected the national economy and indeed vir-
tually every household. At the end of the nineteenth century, the
United States made the transition from developing nation (with
an economy based on resource extraction) to modern industrial-
ized nation (with an economy based on agriculture, manufactur-
ing, and international mercantilism), and forest policies were in-
troduced as a way to ensure a reliable and perpetually sustainable
supply of this important resource.
20
Conservation Movement and U.S. Forest Policy

With the gradual shift to coal-based and then to petroleum-
based energy sources by the mid-twentieth century, U.S. forests
became less important as a source of fuel and industrial raw ma-
terial. Forest policy then became focused almost entirely on en-
suring timber supply for building products, paper, and wood
fiber–based products. Enormous public investments were made
to tame wildfires that burned millions of acres of forest each
year, first on National Forests managed by the U.S. Forest Ser-
vice, then by the forest products industry on its own timber-
lands, and finally on private forest lands through a variety of co-
operative fire control programs operated by Federal and state
forestry agencies.
The idea of sustained-yield forest management gradually re-
placed the practice of land clearing followed by abandonment.
This shift was a matter of policy for National Forests and many
state forests and was the objective of government efforts to regu-
late forest management practices on private lands. Achieving sus-
tained-yield forestry created a demand for improved science and
for technically trained foresters, resulting in substantial public
support for forestry research and for forestry education at more
than 50 colleges and universities throughout the United States.
During the final three decades of the twentieth century, pub-
lic attention turned increasingly to the environmental values of
forests, and forest policy development has reflected the strain that
many see between the economic uses of forests and the protection
of nonextractive forest ecosystem goods, services, and values. As
debate around these issues has become increasingly adversarial
and public consensus more difficult for policymakers to craft, the
courts have played a greatly expanded role in determining how
forests can or cannot be managed.
With this historical summary as background, the following
chapters will describe some of the key aspects of forest policy in
the United States today and provide a context for better under-
standing current issues and events in forest policy. This treatment
is not intended to be either detailed or exhaustive. Instead, it is in-
tended as a reference and a gateway to the much larger volume of
information about forests and forest policy available in the
printed scientific and professional literature; in electronic form on
the Internet; and through the wide variety of public, private, and
nonprofit organizations that are involved in forest conservation
and the continuing evolution of forest policy.
Conclusion
21

References
Adams, D. 1993. Renewable Resource Policy. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Aplet, G., N. Johnson, J. Olson, and V. A. Sample. 1993. Defining Sustain-
able Forestry. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Dana, S. 1956. Forest and Range Policy: Its Development in the United States.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hirt, P. 1996. A Conspiracy of Optimism: Management of the National Forests
Since World War Two. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Lowenthal, D., ed. 1965. Man and Nature: Or, Physical Geography as Modi-
fied by Human Action by George Perkins Marsh (originally published in
1864). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pinchot, G. 1911. The Fight for Conservation. New York: Doubleday, Page
and Company.
Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America: A Cultural History of Wildland and Rural
Fire. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Sample, V. A. 1990. The Impact of the Federal Budget Process on National For-
est Planning. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Smith, W. B., J. S. Vissage, D. R. Darr, and R. M. Sheffield. 1997. Forest Re-
sources of the United States, 1997. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-219. St. Paul, MN:
USDA, U.S. Forest Service, North Central Research Station.
USDA, U.S. Forest Service. 1993. The Principal Laws Relating to Forest Ser-
vice Activities. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Williams, M. 1989. Americans and Their Forests: A Historical Geography.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Young, C. 1979. The Royal Forests of Medieval England. Philadelphia: Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Press.
22
Conservation Movement and U.S. Forest Policy

2
Current Issues in
U.S. Forest Policy
C
hanges in forest policy in the United States today are issue-
driven. The previous chapter described the historical develop-
ment of U.S. forest policy over several centuries from European
colonization of North America through the present day. Through
U.S. history, there have been four distinct eras of forest policy—(1)
nation-building and forest exploitation; (2) the rise of the Conser-
vation Movement in response to growing fears of an impending
timber famine; (3) development of scientific forestry and sus-
tained-yield wood production; and (4) the environmental era and
increased emphasis on ecological and amenity values of forests.
During each of these periods, the basic framework of U.S. forest
policy has reflected the prevailing social values and economic con-
ditions in the nation as a whole.
Social values and economic conditions are not static. They
continually evolve and change. With these changes in the societal
context for forestry, and with improvements in our scientific un-
derstanding of forests, new issues arise and must be addressed
through incremental adjustments in forest policy. If these incre-
mental adjustments in forest policy are not made or are made too
slowly, social pressure continues to build; some invisible political
threshold is reached and seemingly overnight fundamental
changes are made to the basic legal and institutional framework
relating to forest conservation and management, ushering in the
next era of forest policy.
This chapter provides a brief overview of some of the most
23

significant issues influencing current developments in U.S. forest
policy:
•
Sustainable forest management
•
Conserving biological diversity
•
Wilderness and roadless areas
•
Forest health
•
Community forestry
•
Forestry regulation on private lands
•
Forest land conservation
•
Forest management certification
•
Forests and water (watershed protection and water
quality)
•
Forests and atmospheric carbon
•
Forest biotechnology
•
Emerging issues and future policy directions
For each issue, this chapter provides essential facts, back-
ground, and a description of recent policy developments. This list
of issues is by no means exhaustive or comprehensive, nor is it in-
tended to address specific current legislative proposals or cases
currently before the courts. Nevertheless, the issues discussed
here reflect the range of social pressures currently building up in
U.S. forest policy; they provide a context with which to better un-
derstand the daily ebb and flow of policy-related activities influ-
encing the basic legal, institutional, and policy framework for the
conservation and sustainable management of U.S. forests.
Sustainable Forest Management
Any study of forest policy must begin with the concept of sustain-
ability in forest management. Operating under a variety of terms
over more than two centuries—from “sustained yield” to “sus-
tainable forestry” to “forest ecosystem sustainability”—the central
concern of forestry has always been essentially the same: how to
meet current needs for wood, wildlife, forage, and other products
of the forest without diminishing the forest’s basic productivity
and its ability to continue meeting those needs in the future.
Sustainability in forest management is both a biological and
socioeconomic concept. Originating in eighteenth-century Europe
with the aim of avoiding social and economic disruptions associ-
ated with local timber shortages, sustained-yield forest manage-
24
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

ment evolved to a highly technical process of modeling growth,
mortality, and risk in order to set timber removals at a level that
theoretically could be maintained in perpetuity (annual forest re-
movals should equal annual forest growth minus annual mortal-
ity). Changing scientific understanding of the ecological function-
ing of forest ecosystems has challenged the notion that a sustained
yield of timber is equivalent to sustaining all the components and
natural processes necessary to maintain the long-term health and
productivity of these ecosystems.
There is widespread public debate currently, both in the
United States and elsewhere, as to what constitutes sustainable
forestry. The continuously evolving science of forest ecology, as
well as the continuously evolving social values and perceptions
relating to forests, mean that what constitutes sustainable forest
management cannot be defined once and for all time. The concept
of sustainability itself will continue to evolve, and so must the
laws and policies designed to promote sustainable forest man-
agement. Ensuring that forest policy is flexible and dynamic
enough to accommodate evolving science and changing societal
expectations is critically important for guiding the development
of future forest policies that will be both durable and effective.
Background
Sustainability has always been a primary focus of forestry. Indeed,
it was concern that forest resources would be inadvertently de-
pleted, leading to unacceptable social and economic effects, that
first gave rise to the systematic study of forests and a scientific ap-
proach to the long-term management of the forests’ resources.
Sustainability in forest management began as both a biologi-
cal and socioeconomic concept. Foresters developed an under-
standing of natural forestry productivity—and how it might be
enhanced through silviculture—to maintain a continuous supply
of wood, game, and other products for human use and consump-
tion. The concept was fundamentally driven by the desire to
avoid the social and economic disruption associated with short-
ages of timber, whether for local use or as the basis for a commu-
nity export economy. Forest products clearly held the potential of
being a perpetually renewable resource, and foresters undertook
the responsibility of making this so.
As mentioned previously, the origins of sustained-yield forest
management can be found in eighteenth-century Europe (Heske
1938). The lack of well-developed systems for transportation and
Sustainable Forest Management
25

communication were barriers to the development of regional
trade (Waggener 1977). Local consumption was almost entirely
dependent on local production, and communities had to be
largely self-sufficient. There was a distinct possibility of exhaust-
ing local timber resources unless collective use was strictly con-
trolled, and so the production and consumption of forest products
became communally regulated. Perhaps because of the opportu-
nities it afforded for employment and income in rural communi-
ties, this approach to sustained-yield forestry persisted long after
improved transportation and communication systems had re-
duced the need for local self-sufficiency and turned timber into an
ordinary economic commodity.
It was in this context that the concept of the regulated forest
came into being. Under this concept, forests were to be managed
to yield periodic, regular, and sustainable timber harvest vol-
umes. In theory, the objective of maximizing the volume of tim-
ber that can be sustainably harvested from the forest is achieved
by harvesting when the annual increment of growth in the stand
reaches a maximum (“culmination of mean annual increment”).
This approach recognizes that trees begin their growth slowly,
with only modest increases in annual volume; then increase their
growth at a faster rate; and finally, beyond some age, begin to ex-
perience a decline in annual additions to tree volume. The “cul-
mination of mean annual increment” rule gives the rotation age
at which the sustainable harvest volume would be maximized.
The harvest level is determined using “Hanzlik’s Formula,”
which divides the net growth over the entire area of the eco-
nomic enterprise by the rotation length and indicates the average
annual volume of timber that can be removed on a sustainable
basis.
In the mid-nineteenth century, it was shown that forestry en-
terprises seeking to maximize financial returns would, in most
cases, harvest younger trees on shorter rotations (Faustmann
1849). Although harvesting at the culmination of mean annual in-
crement maximized the physical volume of the harvest, it could
result in lower financial returns from the forest, because it did not
account for the cost of capital tied up in land and forest manage-
ment expenses. This concept was controversial at the time and re-
mains so today. In Europe, where centuries-old forest enterprises
have endured through wars, currency devaluations, and other
events that have put other forms of capital investment at great
risk, forests have served as a stable, reliable, tangible asset. In-
creasing long-term financial security can be as much a concern as
26
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

near-term financial returns. Building value in relatively low-
yielding forest assets (compared with investments in stocks or
bonds) reduces risk in a diversified portfolio of investments and
thus increases overall return (Binkley 1996).
Recent Policy Developments
Sustained-Yield Forestry in the United States
These concepts of sustained-yield forest management were trans-
planted to the United States at a time of growing concern over the
possibility of a timber famine—nationally as well as locally.
Forests in the United States had been regarded as both an inex-
haustible resource and an obstacle to the westward expansion of
agriculture. By the late nineteenth century, wood was still the
major building material and the predominant source of fuel. Vast
areas of forest had been cleared but not reforested, and there was
a very real concern that a timber shortage would begin to seri-
ously limit the prospects for future economic growth.
As introduced in the United States by early foresters Bern-
hard Fernow, Gifford Pinchot, and others, forestry was largely a
technical undertaking. It was broadly assumed that by maintain-
ing a continuous supply of timber and protecting the basic pro-
ductivity of soils and watersheds, a broader set of forest uses and
values would automatically be protected for the American
people as a whole. Federal forest reserves were established by
the Forest Reserve Act in 1891. The purpose of the Federal Forest
Reserves, later called the National Forest System, was to provide
“the greatest good, for the greatest number, in the long run” (Pin-
chot 1947).
Custodial Management
Management of the National Forests was largely custodial until
the mid-1940s. Preventing theft and wildfire was the major activ-
ity in the National Forests of the western United States. In the East,
large areas of cut-over forest and abandoned farmland were ac-
quired by the U.S. Forest Service and gradually restored through
replanting, erosion control, and land stabilization efforts. Con-
version of forest to other land uses was generally prohibited. Lit-
tle timber was cut on the National Forests during this period,
partly because political pressure from timber companies sought
to minimize competition in the private wood products industry
and maintain favorable prices for private timber. Management of
Sustainable Forest Management
27

public forests emphasized maintaining the land in its native for-
est cover and relying on natural regeneration following distur-
bances. The underlying biological and ecological systems were
not well understood, however, as evidenced by the way wildfire
was viewed at the time. Rather than recognizing that wildfire was
part of a natural disturbance regime integral to the functioning of
the forest ecosystem, policymakers of the day sought to suppress
wildfires whenever and wherever they occurred. Thus, even cus-
todial management requires a thorough understanding of natural
disturbance regimes and other complexities of forest ecosystem
functions.
By the 1940s, many private timber companies had also come
to accept the idea of sustained-yield forest management. Previ-
ously, the standard practice had been to acquire forest land, liqui-
date the timber assets, and abandon the land—an approach
known as “cut out and get out” or, more succinctly, “cut and run.”
Under the leadership of corporate pioneers such as Frederick
Weyerhaeuser, private timber companies began to recognize the
benefit of holding land, reforesting it, and harvesting timber on a
renewable basis. Today, the management of many private forest
lands in the U.S. reflects the sustained-yield forestry of
nineteenth-century Europe, although using modern technology
and adhering to certain environmental constraints. With private
timber supplies drawn down by the war effort, the National
Forests in the late 1940s and 1950s became a major supplier of
timber for economic expansion and the suburban housing boom.
Increased leisure time and improved transportation systems
brought more Americans in contact with the National Forests, in-
creasing demand for recreation, wildlife, and other noncommod-
ity resource values. With growing frequency, large-scale timber
harvesting activities came into conflict with these other uses,
challenging the operational utility of the traditional concept of
sustained yield as the maximization of timber yield constrained
only by the biophysical limits of the land itself.
Multiple-Use Forestry
The Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act (1960) was an important
turning point in foresters’ interpretation of their responsibility for
sustainable forest management. It defined sustained yield as “the
achievement and maintenance in perpetuity of a high level an-
nual or regular periodic output of the various renewable resources of
the National Forests without impairment of the productivity of
the land” (16 USC 528 1960, emphasis added). It has long been
28
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

recognized that forests generate a host of goods and services si-
multaneously. Medieval forests were commonly valued for their
game and forest foods, as well as for wood used as fuel and con-
struction materials (Westoby 1989). Even when forests are man-
aged for timber, other values are commonly produced as by-
products. Fish and wildlife, recreation, water and water quality,
range, and other outputs are commonly generated incidentally to
the production of timber. It was this notion of producing multiple
benefits for multiple uses that inspired the Multiple-Use
Sustained-Yield Act.
The Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act provided the statutory
basis for the application of this approach to U.S. public forests.
Public controversies over the Forest Service’s implementation of
multiple-use forestry have led to additional statutory direction
for sustainable management of the National Forests. The Forest
and Rangelands Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974
(RPA) required periodic national assessments of the supply and
demand for a large array of resource uses and values—and a
strategic plan detailing how the Forest Service intended to ad-
dress all demands simultaneously (16 USC 1600). The agency’s
answer, in a word, was money; with significant increases in fund-
ing, investments in intensive resource management would allow
all the renewable resources of the National Forests—several of
which, like timber production and providing certain kinds of
wildlife habitat, or timber production and certain forms of recre-
ation, competed and conflicted with one another—to be sustained
indefinitely (Sample 1990).
In the decades following the passage of the Multiple-Use
Sustained-Yield Act, the public grew increasingly dissatisfied
with the balance the Forest Service had struck in addressing these
competing sustainability goals. The predominant focus on timber
production that had developed in the agency during the 1950s
persisted, largely because budget allocations from Congress fa-
vored sustaining high harvest levels over other forest manage-
ment goals. Public criticism suggested that such high levels of
timber removal not only imposed unacceptable effects on the
nontimber resources but threatened the long-term sustainability
of timber production as well. The Forest Service’s optimism and
estimates of the increasing level of sustainable timber harvesting
were based on technical assumptions that overlooked an impor-
tant fact—that needed investments in intensive forest manage-
ment were simply not being funded by Congress and thus were
not being made (Hirt 1994).
Sustainable Forest Management
29

Nondeclining Even Flow
In 1976, the National Forest Management Act (NFMA), an
amendment to RPA, placed numerous additional statutory limits
on timber production on the National Forests, and it required the
development of detailed management plans with ample opportu-
nity for public involvement in decision-making (16 USC 1600
[note]). Many of these limitations were aimed at reducing the ef-
fects of timber harvesting on nontimber resources such as wildlife
or recreation. But concern over the sustainability of timber pro-
duction itself led Congress to add a new wrinkle to its definition
of sustained yield: it specified that the sale of timber from each
National Forest be limited to “a quantity equal to or less than a
quantity which can be removed from such forest annually in per-
petuity” (16 USC 1600, 13). This so-called “nondeclining even
flow” constraint was criticized by some economists as inherently
inefficient in managing the extensive areas of native forest old
growth that existed on many western National Forests at the time
(Clawson 1983). Old-growth forests, especially in the Pacific
Northwest, can reach the age of 800 to 1,000 years and, therefore,
far surpass the point of culmination of mean annual increment
(the age at which harvest is typically set for maximizing timber
production). Because of the high rate of tree mortality, old-growth
forests can actually lose timber volume faster than they put it on.
Purely from the perspective of sustained-yield forest manage-
ment, old-growth forests are very inefficient and need to be con-
verted to young vigorous and fast growing forests. The debate
over nondeclining even flow was effectively ended in the early
1990s when there was a virtual moratorium on harvesting old
growth to protect habitat for the northern spotted owl and other
species dependent on old-growth forests.
Taken together, the Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act and the
National Forest Management Act represent an important shift in
the concept of sustainability in forest management—from the max-
imization of a single objective subject to ecological and environ-
mental constraints, to the simultaneous pursuit of multiple objec-
tives. Whereas sustained-yield forestry has as its sole objective the
maximization of timber volume production (or the maximum fi-
nancial returns), the intent of multiple-use forestry is to satisfy nu-
merous resource output objectives simultaneously. In developing
plans to implement these laws for National Forests, the Forest Ser-
vice took a highly technical approach, using complex mathematical
models to determine which mix of products and “nonmarket val-
30
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

ues” could be expected to maximize “net public benefits.” In prac-
tice, this mechanistic approach simply did not work, as evidenced
by the political and legal gridlock that came to characterize Na-
tional Forest policy and management. Additional concerns over
endangered species led to sudden and immediate court-imposed
reductions in timber supply in some areas, resulting in a political
impasse and a fundamental reexamination of what forest man-
agers are to sustain, for whom, and to what purpose.
Definition of Sustainable Forest Management
This reexamination is leading to a further evolution in the defini-
tion of sustainability in forest management, one that explicitly
rather than implicitly includes social and economic, as well as bi-
ological, objectives. A key tenet of sustainable forest management
is that it must be not only ecologically sound but also economi-
cally viable and socially responsible (Aplet et al. 1993). If it is lack-
ing in any one of these three areas, the forest management ap-
proach will not be tenable in the long run.
Most conservation interests now acknowledge that it is im-
possible to accomplish long-term protection of forest ecosystems
without incorporating into conservation strategies the economic
and social needs of the local communities. Economic develop-
ment and commercial interests are recognizing that ensuring the
ecological soundness of their activities helps not only to ensure
raw material supplies for the future but to maintain essential so-
cial and political support (Schmidheiny 1992). Communities are
no longer willing to accept the social disruptions and family dis-
locations that have always accompanied a boom-and-bust ap-
proach. They are recognizing that government policymakers
alone cannot lead the way toward stable, resilient, and economi-
cally diverse communities—that there is an important role for
partnerships among Federal and state governments, business in-
terests, and the communities themselves in finding a new basis
for sustainable resource use and sustainable communities.
The debate over sustainable forest management in U.S. forest
policy is not taking place in isolation; it is part of a larger interna-
tional effort to define, articulate, and encourage the practice of
sustainable forestry. At the 1992 United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, con-
sensus was reached on a set of nonbinding “forest principles”
defining sustainable forest management. Since that time, the
United States has made significant progress toward a nationwide
Sustainable Forest Management
31

assessment of forest conditions and trends relative to an interna-
tionally agreed-on set of criteria and indicators of sustainable for-
est management developed at a 1993 conference in Montreal (the
Montreal Process). Both public and private forest interests in the
United States are currently striving to implement a series of pro-
posals for action aimed at improving forestry, as measured
against the criteria and indicators of sustainable forest manage-
ment. For example, the American Forest and Paper Association
has a Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) based on a derivation of
the Montreal criteria and indicators of sustainable forest manage-
ment. Similarly, the Forest Service and several state forestry agen-
cies are working on their own set of criteria and indicators for
sustainable forest management in their respective jurisdictions.
Conclusion
Sustainability in forest management is a dynamic, evolving con-
cept, reflecting changing social values and the evolution in our
scientific understanding of the effects of human activities on the
functioning of forest ecosystems. As an increasingly broad cross
section of forestry interests comes to accept that truly sustainable
forestry must reflect ecological, economic, and social objectives,
the most challenging trade-off for policymakers may be between
short-term needs and long-term assurances.
The central idea behind “sustainable development”—that is,
meeting the needs of current human society without unduly com-
promising the capacity of future human societies to meet their
needs (World Commission on Environment and Development
1987)—is not materially different from the basic motivating con-
cept behind sustained-yield forestry in eighteenth-century Eu-
rope or sustainable forestry in twenty-first-century America.
From a policymaking and operational management perspec-
tive, it seems the sustainability challenge will always be to protect
the long-term productivity of forest ecosystems—to the best of
our biological, social, and economic understanding—without un-
duly limiting the use of forests to meet current needs. Or from an
analytical perspective, the challenge will be to operate as closely
as is socially and politically acceptable to the limits of what can be
sustainably produced, neither exceeding ecological capacities nor
leaving significant ecological capacity unused. How conservative
a margin for error is incorporated is as much a political decision
as a scientific one.
32
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

Conserving Biological Diversity
The conservation of biological diversity, and especially the pro-
tection of habitat for threatened or endangered species, has
emerged as one of the foremost issues in forest management both
in the United States and around the world. Although forest man-
agers have been able to adapt to the need to provide an ever-
broader array of forest values and uses, the increasing need to
conserve biological diversity may be the most challenging yet.
The downward trend in biodiversity and the potential of forest
protection to slow that decline are seen by many as sufficient rea-
son to cease any and all forest management activities that poten-
tially interfere with that objective.
Background
Many of the world’s most recognized and respected biologists be-
lieve that we are now in the midst of a biodiversity crisis, with ex-
tinctions of animal and plant species taking place at a rate not
seen since the dinosaurs were wiped out 65 million years ago.
Harvard biologist Edward O. Wilson has estimated the current
rate of species extinctions at approximately 27,000 per year—or
an average of 74 each day—out of a worldwide total of perhaps
10 million species (Wilson 1992). The normal “background” ex-
tinction rate is about one species per one million species a year
(Raup and Sepkoski 1984). More than 20,000 species are globally
rare or threatened, and as many as 60,000 face extinction by the
middle of this century (IUCN 1988). According to Wilson,
“Human activity has increased extinction between 1,000 and
10,000 times over this level . . . clearly we are in the midst of one
of the great extinction spasms in geological history” (Wilson 1992,
280).
The world’s greatest concentration of biological diversity in
forest ecosystems—and the greatest threats to conserving that
diversity—are in the tropics (Raven 1987). Because of the means
by which tropical rainforests cycle their nutrients, these seem-
ingly lush and irrepressible forests are much more vulnerable to
ecological damage than most temperate-zone forests and much
slower to recover from deforestation (Wilson 1992, 274). The
growing loss of forest area in the tropics is the single greatest
threat to global biodiversity, a trend that is exacerbated by popu-
lation growth rates in many tropical nations that far exceed those
Conserving Biological Diversity
33

in most temperate-zone nations. “An awful symmetry binds the
rise of humanity to the fall of biodiversity: the richest nations pre-
side over the smallest and least interesting biotas, while the poor-
est nations, burdened by exploding populations and little scien-
tific knowledge, are stewards of the largest” (Wilson 1992, 272).
The importance of conserving biological diversity in forest
ecosystems has generated policy proposals aimed at minimizing
the conversion and fragmentation of the remaining large areas of
native forests and preventing the diminishment of remaining bi-
ological diversity by development for commodity production.
Wilson estimates that the 4.3 percent of world’s land surface cur-
rently under legal protection should be expanded to 10 percent
(Wilson 1992, 337). Many eminent biologists and other scientists
support a proposal to set aside 50 percent of the North American
continent as “wild land” for the preservation of biological diver-
sity (Ehrlich 1997). Environmental organizations in the United
States, such as the Sierra Club, are actively working to ban all
commercial timber harvesting on Federal public lands.
Many conservation biologists today point to the need to
think beyond the “reserve mentality” in designing strategies for
conserving biological diversity (Brussard, Murphy, and Noss
1992). But it is also clear that forest reserves will continue to be a
major component of any successful biodiversity conservation
strategy (Hunter and Calhoun 1996), particularly with regard to
species endemic to late-successional forest ecosystems—that is,
old-growth forests (Spies and Franklin 1996).
The global nature of the biodiversity crisis points up the need
for a strategy that integrates the management of temperate, trop-
ical, and boreal (northern) forests with world demand for wood.
Current global industrial roundwood demand is estimated at
1.6 billion cubic meters per year and is expected to rise to 2.5 bil-
lion cubic meters per year by 2050 (FAO 2000). Industrialized na-
tions account for a disproportionate share of this global demand,
and among the developed nations, the United States stands out as
one of the world’s largest consumers of wood. U.S. per capita
consumption of major wood products (lumber, plywood, and
paper) is about double that of Germany, 7 times that of Brazil, and
15 times that of China (FAO 2000). The United States has one of
the lowest average population densities among the developed na-
tions (for example, Oregon has a population of fewer than 3 mil-
lion people; Germany, with a geographic area slightly larger than
that of Oregon, has a population of more than 82 million) and
some of the most productive forests. In spite of this, the United
34
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

States continues to import more than one-quarter of its wood—
114 million cubic meters in 1997—from harvesting in both tropi-
cal and boreal forests outside of the United States (Howard 1999).
Although temperate forests are comparatively less biologi-
cally diverse, they have “hot spots” with extraordinary concen-
trations of species diversity, particularly where there are large,
contiguous areas of mostly undisturbed native forest (Ricketts et
al. 2000). For a wealthy, temperate-forest nation like the United
States to support a credible and ethical program for biodiversity
conservation in the poorer tropical nations, its own policies for
sustainable forest management are gradually moving toward a
two-pronged strategy of (1) protecting their own biodiversity hot
spots where they exist, even when it means sacrificing economic
values that could have been derived through resource develop-
ment, and (2) sustainably using productive forest areas of rela-
tively low biodiversity value to help alleviate the pressure on
tropical and boreal forests to meet global needs for wood fiber
and other renewable resources.
Recent Policy Developments
The single most important policy with regard to conserving bio-
logical diversity is the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA).
Under the terms of ESA, the United States is acting to protect
habitat for threatened and endangered species on both public and
private forest lands and to prohibit the trade of threatened and
endangered species internationally. Controversy abounds on
both public and private lands, however, and it will be increas-
ingly difficult to guarantee the survival of every species without
limiting economic activities in forests in ways that many would
find difficult to accept.
Public Lands
The Endangered Species Act requires the managers of Federal
forest lands to protect habitat for species that have been listed by
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) as threatened or en-
dangered. When a species has been listed as threatened or en-
dangered, critical habitat is often designated. Critical habitat is
defined as geographic areas with features that are essential to the
survival of a species and that require special management con-
siderations. Regardless of critical habitat designation, the agen-
cies develop a recovery plan that serves as a coordinated strategy
for increasing the species’ population to the point where it is no
Conserving Biological Diversity
35

longer considered threatened or endangered. Federal land man-
agement agencies such as the Forest Service or Bureau of Land
Management are required to consult with biologists from the
wildlife agencies before they undertake any management activi-
ties that could have potentially negative effects on the habitat of
listed species.
Although it is quite logical in principle, the required consul-
tation process can become a substantial source of delay and addi-
tional project planning costs for the land management agencies.
In recent years, the wildlife agencies have been so overwhelmed
by the number of projects on which consultation is needed that it
sometimes takes years for a proposed project to be reviewed and
approved. Often interest groups then take legal action to appeal
the decision, whichever way it is rendered, which means it may
be many more months or even years before a final decision is
made on whether or not the project may proceed. Several policy
proposals to streamline the consultation process have been con-
sidered, but they are often opposed by citizens’ groups because
they are regarded as limiting public review of agency decisions or
increasing the likelihood that potentially damaging aspects of a
proposed project will be overlooked in haste.
In the case of the National Forests, the habitat conservation
requirements of the National Forest Management Act have been
interpreted as far more stringent than those of the Endangered
Species Act. The administrative regulations implementing NFMA
have required that the Forest Service ensure viable populations of
species throughout their range (36 CFR 219). This requirement is
more rigorous than those of ESA in two ways. First, NFMA regu-
lations require that the Forest Service ensure the viability of the
species themselves, whereas ESA requires only that suitable habi-
tat be maintained. Second, the NFMA regulations require that
these populations be maintained throughout their range, whereas
it would be permissible under ESA for a regional subpopulation
to decline as long as adequate habitat is maintained overall under
a recovery plan.
The fact that the Forest Service can directly influence the man-
agement of only the National Forest lands—and not adjacent
lands that also include habitat for listed species—has been used to
support the view that ensuring the viability of the species itself is
an impossible standard to which the Forest Service should not be
held. This argument has been made, not least of all, by a former
Forest Service Chief who is among the nation’s most respected
conservation biologists. In recent years, there have been several
36
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

proposals to revise the NFMA regulations to, among other things,
bring them into uniformity with the requirements of the Endan-
gered Species Act in regard to maintaining suitable habitat for
threatened or endangered species. But it has been argued, and
quite correctly, that this would constitute a significant reduction in
the protection currently given to listed species in National Forests.
How this will be resolved is much less a scientific or technical
issue than it is a political issue: Whose interests will be helped,
whose will be hurt, and who can prevail in the policy arena?
Private Lands
Biodiversity conservation on private forest lands is handled quite
differently under ESA. The act prohibits the taking of any listed
species—defined not only in terms of directly harming the ani-
mal, but of indirectly harming it through destruction of critical
habitat. Essentially, if critical habitat for a listed species occurs on
private forest land, that habitat cannot be significantly modified
through any means, including timber harvesting. To many pri-
vate forest landowners, this represents a “taking” of private prop-
erty without due compensation, which is prohibited under the
Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In some instances, the
Federal courts have agreed. In most cases, however, courts have
found that protecting the habitat in question does not deny a sig-
nificant enough portion of the owner’s economic use of the land
to constitute a taking (Stedfast 1999).
Nevertheless, several options are available to private forest
landowners that, in many cases, will allow them to continue ac-
tively managing their forest land for their own objectives.
Landowners can work with USFWS biologists to develop habitat
conservation plans designed to allow timber management and
other activities to proceed while still conserving habitat for the
resident population of the listed species present. Adhering to the
terms of the plan assures the landowner that, should any subse-
quent activities result in an “incidental take” (the accidental death
of an individual of this species), the landowner is not liable. Ex-
perience has shown the development of a habitat conservation
plan to be a costly and time-consuming process that, although a
useful option for a forest products company or large private
landowner, is not financially feasible for the majority of small pri-
vate forest landowners.
Another option developed specifically with small landown-
ers in mind is the safe harbor agreement. With the increasing at-
tention being given to threatened or endangered species with a
Conserving Biological Diversity
37

preference for late-successional or old-growth forest habitat, pri-
vate landowners have been known to harvest their timber pre-
maturely rather than take the risk that a listed species will be
found to have taken up residence in their forest, thereby limiting
their management options. Under a safe harbor agreement, the
population of the listed species is determined at the time the
agreement is reached, and this becomes the population level the
landowner is subsequently responsible for maintaining—no mat-
ter how much the population might increase thereafter. This ef-
fectively removes the risk to the landowner of allowing the forest
to continue to maturity, providing a higher financial return to the
landowner when the harvesting takes place and providing criti-
cal habitat to late-successional forest dependent species in the
meantime.
Forest Plantations and Protected Areas
Conserving biodiversity in managed forests limits the level of
timber management activity and the degree of ecological inter-
vention it represents in forest areas containing critical habitat. For
numerous species, particularly those found in interior regions of
large late-successional forests, even minimal levels of ecological
disturbance result in significant diminishment of habitat quality
and perhaps loss of the species. On the other hand, there are areas
of forest land that are of relatively low value for biodiversity con-
servation but are highly productive and well-suited in other ways
to sustainable wood production. There is a distinct possibility
that taking a more specialized approach to managing areas espe-
cially well-suited to either biodiversity conservation or sustain-
able wood production will result in a net gain in both wood pro-
duction and the protection of threatened and endangered species.
It is now widely recognized that for many uses, wood is en-
vironmentally preferable to other building materials such as alu-
minum, steel, or concrete. All of these other materials require far
more energy to convert the raw material into usable product, and
far more waste is generated, with important implications for the
consumption of fossil fuels and for emissions of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases. These nonrenewable resources
leave degraded landscapes, mine wastes, and other chemical
pollution related to processing and manufacturing. By compari-
son, wood from well-managed forests is perpetually renewable,
easily recyclable, and ultimately biodegradable. Energy require-
ments for processing wood are relatively low and often are re-
38
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

duced further by cogeneration using non–fossil fuels (such as
sawdust and chips) from the wood and paper manufacturing
processes themselves.
A recent report by the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) suggests
that a significant expansion of the area of intensively managed
forest plantations could allow the world’s major forest products
companies to meet a substantial share of the global demand for
industrial roundwood from a relatively small proportion of the
world’s forest area. The report also suggests that such an expan-
sion of intensively managed forest plantations could open up
new opportunities to provide outright protection to forests with
high conservation values, particularly those with globally signif-
icant biodiversity (Howard and Stead 2001). WWF is so con-
vinced of the value of this approach that it has called on the
world’s ten largest forest products companies to collectively in-
crease the area of intensively managed forest plantations by 5
million hectares per year for the next 50 years (World Wildlife
Fund 2001). With this level of investment, WWF estimates that as
much as 80 percent of the world demand for industrial round-
wood in 2050 can be met from less than 20 percent of the world’s
forests. Furthermore, WWF asserts this can all be done in a man-
ner that is consistent with the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
criteria for green certification—meaning that much of that 20
percent will be new forests planted on retired marginal crop and
pasture land rather than plantations created by converting natu-
ral forests.
What would such an approach mean for the United States?
In some ways, we are already tending in this direction: Wood pro-
duction is shifting increasingly to private industrial timberlands
and other private forests, and biodiversity conservation is be-
coming a primary management goal in many public forests. Nev-
ertheless, significant policy and political barriers remain to
achieving either of these objectives efficiently or effectively. We
are perhaps within reach of a new political consensus—one in
which both the forestry community and the environmental com-
munity actively support the idea that intensively managed forest
plantations and protected areas in high-conservation-value forests
have an essential place in a comprehensive strategy for sustain-
able forest management. New Zealand has already gone this
route, and other countries are seriously considering this approach
in the face of competing demands on their forests.
Policymakers have an opportunity to further develop this
Conserving Biological Diversity
39

potential for broad public consensus on forests and forestry and
to shape a policy framework that will support and facilitate this
kind of practical approach to accomplishing sustainable forestry.
It has been suggested (Binkley 2001) that a consensus agreement
might include considerations such as these:
•
Devoting 20 to 30 percent of the land area of plantation
projects to ecological services.
•
Maintaining strict control of offsite impacts of
plantation-based timber production, especially the
movement of silt, fertilizer, or herbicides into
waterways or groundwater.
•
Establishing agreed-on limits regarding the use of
yield-enhancing chemicals such as fertilizers and
herbicides, focused on minimizing their use and
maximizing their effect.
•
Establishing agreed-on limits regarding the use of
genetically modified organisms to instances in which it
can be demonstrated that gene flow out of the
plantation is impossible.
•
Making a commitment not to log old-growth forests.
Numerous additional limited opportunities exist to create a
policy framework that enables and encourages public and private
forest land managers to make rational choices that will tend to be
consistent with and supportive of this general approach. For ex-
ample, a more expansive approach to the Conservation Reserve
Program (a Federal assistance program for private landowners)
could provide landowners with the incentive to turn marginal
crop and pasture land into productive forest plantations. Raising
or eliminating the $10,000-per-year cap on the Reforestation Tax
Credit would give new income tax incentive for undertaking the
significant up-front costs of establishing forest plantations. Ex-
panded use of safe harbor agreements under the Endangered
Species Act could insulate landowners who establish forest plan-
tations through afforestation, providing greater assurance that
they will be able to recoup their investment.
Conclusion
The world is losing species at a faster rate now than at any time
in human history. The conservation and sustainable management
40
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

of forests, both in the United States and in other regions of the
world, holds one of the most important keys to slowing this loss
of biological diversity. As one of the world’s most heavily
forested nations—and as one of the world’s largest consumers of
wood products—the United States has a dual conservation re-
sponsibility to fulfill: The United States could protect its remain-
ing hot spots of biological diversity—and bear its share of the
local, short-term economic effects of doing so—and at the same
time meet its share of the demand for renewable wood and fiber
that the United States itself generates without shifting an undue
burden on biologically rich forests in other regions of the world.
Joining together the interests of the environmental community,
the forest industry, and government could become the basis for
the broadest and most effective consensus on U.S. forest policy in
half a century. Policymakers are just beginning to consider the
mechanisms that will facilitate this process, but it is one that is
certain to receive significant attention in coming years.
Wilderness and Roadless Areas
The idea of preserving large areas of wilderness for their own
sake sprang from the uniquely American experience. European
colonizers arrived on what they believed was an untamed conti-
nent and struggled over a period of more than two centuries to
bend the landscape to their will and make it look like the ones
their ancestors had left behind. It was not until the late nineteenth
century, when most of the continent had fallen under the ax or the
plow, that Americans began to recognize the important role that
wilderness had played in shaping American culture, values, and
perspectives. Wild, untamed landscapes became valuable in their
own right—not because they looked like European landscapes,
but precisely because they did not. North America was one of the
few places in the known world at the time that could boast such
spectacular places as Yosemite or Yellowstone. Americans took a
new pride in their wild landscapes and felt a new fascination with
protecting these pieces of their national heritage.
Background
Yosemite Valley was transferred to the ownership of the state of
California in 1864 and was designated a state park in 1869. It later
Wilderness and Roadless Areas
41

became Yosemite National Park in 1890, but the core valley was
not transferred to the Federal government until 1906, when it was
officially added to the National Park System. Yellowstone was
withdrawn from development in 1872 and was protected by a
contingent of the U.S. Army. Both became “crown jewels” in the
National Park System when it was formed by Stephen Mather in
1916, becoming a model for national parks throughout the world.
Many of these parks, managed as “pleasuring grounds for the
public,” came to feature their own kind of development, com-
plete with roads, parking lots, hotels, and restaurants. In the
1930s, conservationists began looking to other areas of undevel-
oped Federal lands, primarily the western National Forests, to
protect landscapes “untrammeled by Man . . . where Man himself
is a visitor who does not remain” (16 USC 1131 [note]).
Some of these areas were protected by the Forest Service it-
self. With the help of Forest Service leaders like Aldo Leopold and
Robert Marshall, the agency designated Wilderness areas as early
as 1924 for their backcountry recreation opportunities and spec-
tacular scenery and as a baseline for research on the ecological ef-
fects of human activities on other more-developed landscapes.
The first roadless area review by the Forest Service was in 1929
(under the “L-20” regulations); a second review (under the 
“U-Regulations”) took place in 1939. With each review, the size of
the areas under review became smaller. With the new emphasis on
timber production in the National Forests in the years following
World War II, conservationists became increasingly concerned that
these administratively designated Wilderness areas could just as
easily be “de-designated” by the Forest Service and made avail-
able for logging. Logging, in addition to its immediate effects on
the landscape, requires the construction of an extensive road net-
work that, long after the logging is completed, still allows other
human activities to permeate the area—motorized recreation ve-
hicles, increased hunting pressure, and human-caused wildfires.
Conservationists felt that an act of Congress would be required to
truly protect the remaining areas of wilderness on Federal lands.
The Wilderness Act of 1964 immediately protected more than
9 million acres of wild areas on lands managed by the Forest Ser-
vice, National Park Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and
the Bureau of Land Management, primarily in the western conti-
nental United States. Subsequent congressional acts designated
additional Wilderness in the eastern United States (1978) and
Alaska (1980). In 1971 the Forest Service undertook a Roadless
42
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

Area Review and Evaluation (RARE) to evaluate the wilderness
potential of every unroaded area in the National Forest system
larger than 5,000 acres—a total area of almost 56 million acres.
Concerned that the Forest Service would quickly develop some of
these areas to disqualify them for future Wilderness designation,
the Sierra Club filed a lawsuit (Sierra Club v. Butz) that resulted in
a requirement that the Forest Service prepare an environmental
impact statement detailing the values that would be lost through
development. A second roadless area review (RARE II) was initi-
ated, but in the meantime the passage of the Eastern Wilderness
Act essentially broadened the operational definition of Wilderness
by designating areas as small as the 2,570-acre Gee Creek Wilder-
ness in Tennessee.
The RARE II inventory was thus expanded to include 62 mil-
lion acres of National Forest. In the end, the Forest Service rec-
ommended only 25 percent of these lands (15.4 million acres) for
future Wilderness designation; 17 percent (10.6 million acres)
were recommended for further planning, and the remaining 58
percent (36 million acres) were to be reopened for timber produc-
tion, grazing, mineral development, and other uses. A lawsuit
challenging the adequacy of the environmental impact statement
prepared by the Forest Service temporarily halted new develop-
ment on any of the inventoried roadless areas, however. Even
today, the fate of large roadless areas in places such as Montana
and Idaho is the topic of contentious debate.
Since the RARE II inventory, Congress has designated new
Wilderness areas on a state-by-state basis, and with each bill de-
velopment interests sought the permanent release to multiple-
use management of all roadless areas not being designated in the
bill as Wilderness. Many of these Wilderness areas received their
designation only after traditional resource uses such as grazing
and mining were grandfathered in as acceptable. Hence, even
today, grazing and mining can occur in designated Wilderness—
the price of political compromise. In all, an additional 4.4 million
acres were designated as Wilderness in the continental United
States, and none of the remaining roadless areas were legisla-
tively released. The Alaska National Interest Lands Act in 1980
added another 5.3 million acres of the Tongass and Chugach Na-
tional Forests to the Wilderness system. Currently, there are 33.2
million acres of National Forest System lands (17 percent of the
total of 192 million acres) in the Wilderness system.
Wilderness and Roadless Areas
43

Recent Policy Developments
The Clinton Administration’s Roadless Rule
In October 1999, the Forest Service initiated a Federal rulemaking
process to put the remaining 58 million acres of unroaded Na-
tional Forest lands more than 500 acres in size off limits to future
roadbuilding except for specifically defined purposes. President
Bill Clinton asked the Forest Service to begin an open public
process to address how roadless areas within the National Forest
system would be managed in the future. Roadless areas have typ-
ically remained roadless because of inaccessibility, rugged ter-
rain, low timber values, or environmental concerns. The Forest
Service Notice of Intent to the public cited budgetary concerns
and public questioning of the logic of building new roads into
roadless areas when the Forest Service receives insufficient fund-
ing to maintain its existing road system. The Forest Service has a
growing $8.4 billion maintenance and reconstruction backlog and
receives only 20 percent of the annual funding it needs to main-
tain its existing 380,000-mile road system to environmental and
safety standards (USDA, U.S. Forest Service 1999).
After 23 public hearings held at locations around the coun-
try and a record 1,156,308 comments on the proposed rulemak-
ing, a final Roadless Rule was issued in 2001 (USDA, U.S. Forest
Service 2001). The rule had not yet been implemented by the suc-
ceeding George W. Bush Administration when it was set aside by
a Federal district court in Idaho, which halted the rule’s imple-
mentation on grounds that the process under which the rule was
developed lacked adequate public participation. This decision
was appealed to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, where the
case was decided in 2003 in favor of the Clinton Roadless Rule.
At this writing, it is undecided if the state of Idaho will bring the
matter before the U.S. Supreme Court.
Revision of National Forest Plans
Recommending undeveloped roadless areas on National Forests
for permanent protection can also occur in the forest planning
process under the National Forest Management Act of 1976. All
155 National Forests are in the process of or will embark on up-
dating their forest plans, all of which were first developed in the
1980s. Although there is no guarantee that Congress will grant
permanent protection to roadless areas on National Forests, the
44
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

public involvement process in the forest plan revisions will likely
keep the debate alive at local and regional levels. Forest plan re-
visions for all National Forests are scheduled to be completed by
2012.
Conclusion
This is quite likely the final chapter in the half-century struggle
over wilderness protection on the National Forests. It is really
part of a larger societal debate about the extent to which forests
will be developed for commodity production and the extent to
which forests will be protected to serve purposes such as biodi-
versity conservation that development would harm. There is
broad support in American society for protection of remaining
wild areas but a wide divergence of views over the questions of
how much should be protected and where protection should take
place.
Since the battle over wilderness was joined in the 1950s,
some important changes have taken place that may have bearing
on the outcome of this final chapter. Biodiversity conservation,
and especially the protection of habitat for federally listed threat-
ened and endangered (T&E) species, has become a leading issue
in forest management in the United States on both public and pri-
vate lands. Since 1989, sales of timber from the National Forests
have declined from a high of 12 billion board feet annually to one-
tenth of that. Small forest products companies—and the rural
communities that depend on them as the linchpin of their local
economies—have been hard hit. In many cases, communities
have lost not only the forest products companies that have now
gone out of business, but much of the economic infrastructure
that had developed around these primary industries. For better or
worse, it will be difficult to re-establish this infrastructure, even if
National Forest timber sales once again begin to increase. This has
now become a serious issue as the Forest Service attempts to thin
forests and reduce hazardous fuels and can no longer find local
firms capable of performing this kind of woods work.
Wilderness advocates point out that many of the remaining
unroaded areas have been identified independently as areas of re-
gionally or globally significant biodiversity values (WWF 2001)
and that Wilderness protection would have little influence on
most of the values for which these National Forest lands are cur-
rently being managed. Logging in designated Wilderness areas is
Wilderness and Roadless Areas
45

prohibited, but depending on the individual legislation that cre-
ated them, some Wilderness areas still permit grazing and min-
eral development. Wilderness areas provide outdoor recreation
opportunities, preserve wildlife and fish habitat, and protect wa-
tersheds. From the standpoint of timber production, one of the
key reasons many of these areas are still unroaded is that it is un-
economic to develop the timber resource because of its remote-
ness or relative low productivity, or because of other factors like
steep terrain, unstable soils, or watersheds highly susceptible to
damage from soil erosion or landslides.
Whether or not most of this 58 million acres of remaining un-
roaded forest receives Wilderness designation may well be deter-
mined by the extent to which some level of forest management is
needed to prevent these areas from becoming sources of wild-
fires. Recognizing the essential role that fire plays in many forest
ecosystems, the Forest Service is more likely now than it was in
the past to allow lightning-caused fires in wild areas to burn. But
the Forest Service must take measures to minimize the likelihood
that fires will start in wild areas and then “blow up” to threaten
life and property outside the boundaries of Wilderness areas. This
is a tricky business that depends on many variables, such as fu-
ture drought conditions and weather patterns, that are difficult to
predict with a high degree of confidence.
As in nearly every other aspect of natural resource manage-
ment, decisions made on the basis of evaluations of site-specific
characteristics of individual roadless areas are likely to be supe-
rior than a single blanket decision made on the entire 58 million
acres. As a matter of politics, blanket land protections at such a
large scale are simply too contentious, and they invariably split
sides into polar-opposite positions. The legal challenge on which
the Federal district court in Idaho blocked implementation of the
roadless area conservation rule was not based on ecological or
even economic concerns, but the degree to which state and local
government and affected communities had been consulted in the
process. Wilderness designations following the Forest Service’s
RARE II recommendations were handled by Congress on a state-
by-state basis, with a certain amount of deference given to the
consensus reached within each state by local government and the
state’s Congressional delegation. It is likely that the future of the
58 million acres of unroaded areas on the National Forests will be
decided through a similar process.
46
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

Forest Health
In testimony to Congress in August 2002, Forest Service Chief
Dale Bosworth reported that 73 million acres of the National
Forests were at significant risk for outbreaks of catastrophic wild-
fires. This is an area more than 20 times the size of the state of
Connecticut. Already that year, both Colorado and Arizona had
experienced the largest wildfires in each state’s history; these
were followed by a wildfire in Oregon that now ranks as the
largest in U.S. history. Federal fire suppression costs for the year
exceeded $1.5 billion.
How does such a situation develop? In part, it can be attrib-
uted to the unusually hot, dry conditions throughout the western
United States in that year, part of a drought that had affected the
region for several previous years. But there is a larger issue—one
that is a function of past and present forest management practices,
the evolving scientific understanding of forest ecology, and incre-
mental policymaking through the Federal appropriations process.
In the nearly 100 years since the Forest Service began actively sup-
pressing fires—effectively excluding fires from fire-adapted
ecosystems—forests in many U.S. regions have transformed into
dense stands with uncharacteristic mixes of tree species. Past log-
ging and grazing practices have also contributed to what many re-
gard as unhealthy forest conditions across large areas—conditions
that are not resilient to disturbances like fire and are, in many
cases, susceptible to uncharacteristically severe fires.
Background
To understand today’s forest health situation, one must follow the
clues back to 1910. It too was a year of unusually hot, dry condi-
tions in forests in the West. In late summer, more than 1,700 wild-
fires exploded across Montana and Idaho, burning out of control
and devouring everything in their path. The fires left more than 3
million acres of forest—about the size of the entire state of Con-
necticut—in charred ruin. Eighty-six lives were lost, and count-
less acres of private property and entire towns were destroyed.
The 1910 fires also consumed an estimated 8 billion board feet of
valuable timber, enough to build 450,000 single-family homes. Be-
cause wood was still a crucial raw material for virtually every as-
pect of American life, the fire was also economically devastating.
Forest Health
47

For years afterward, these fires had a profound effect on water-
sheds, wildlife habitat, and wood production in the region (see
Pyne 2001 for a more detailed account of the 1910 fires).
The fledgling U.S. Forest Service, having been established
and given charge of the National Forests only five years earlier,
was itself devastated by this catastrophe. Subsequently, the
agency undertook a dedicated effort to become an effective fire-
fighting organization, developing many innovative tools and tech-
niques based on extensive new research into forest fire behavior.
The stated objective was to spot every fire and extinguish it
within 24 hours; later the objective was changed to extinguishing
every fire before 10 A.M. the next day—the so-called “Ten A.M.
Rule.” In effect, the Forest Service declared war on wildland for-
est fires, using heroic “smoke jumpers” and a fleet of bombers to
dramatically attack fires from the air with chemical fire retar-
dants. With its attention to organization and its responsive hier-
archical command system, the U.S. Forest Service became one of
the most admired and respected agencies in the Federal govern-
ment. The agency mounted a public campaign to enlist every cit-
izen in the fire-prevention effort; its mascot Smokey Bear, who ad-
monished “Only You Can Prevent Forest Fires,” remains today
one of the most widely recognized symbols in advertising.
Ironically, the enormous success of this effort over many
decades helped set up the dangerous situation we see in the na-
tion’s forests today. Only recently have scientists and forest man-
agers come to understand the essential role that fire plays in
many forest ecosystems. Some species, such as lodgepole pine,
actually need fire to open their wax-sealed cones and release their
seeds in order to regenerate. Western U.S. forests experience fires
that periodically burn the underbrush, usually without killing the
mature trees in the burned area. Many of these fires—far more
than many realize—were ignited by Native Americans. Early Eu-
ropean explorers and settlers encountered open, parklike forests
with a relatively small number of large, mature trees and little
woody vegetation in the understory. They most likely did not re-
alize that Native Americans had maintained these areas using fire
for thousands of years.
After the Forest Service had spent decades suppressing all
fires, no matter the cause, understory vegetation in many of these
forests became thick and dense, filled with tree species that his-
torically had been absent. Forests in many parts of the western
United States, instead of containing mostly pure ponderosa pine,
now had mixed-conifer stands of trees, with Douglas fir, true firs,
48
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

and juniper encroaching into these areas. This heavy vegetation
fuels hotter and more persistent fires, often providing a lethal
“ladder” to the towering crowns of the mature trees in the forest.
The result is a forest that is killed entirely, often over a large area.
With little to regenerate vegetation to provide ground cover, sub-
sequent erosion by wind and water rob the soil of its nutrients.
Unnaturally hot fires can cook forest soils until they become hard-
ened and hydrophobic, meaning that precipitation tends to run
off rather than being absorbed into the soil. The result is floods
and negative effects on water quality and fish habitat.
Adding to the effects of overly successful fire suppression is
the minimal level of reinvestment in many forest areas harvested
in past decades. Following timber harvesting, reforestation oc-
curs either through natural regeneration or through tree plant-
ing. If forest regeneration is to be successful—that is, if the tree
seedlings are to effectively outcompete brush and other
vegetation—there must be many more seedlings per acre than
will later be found in a healthy mature forest. Some seedlings are
eliminated by insects or disease, and others by competition with
one another. But forests in which human actions such as large-
scale timber harvesting have interfered with natural processes—
particularly in fire-adapted ecosystems in which fire is artifi-
cially eliminated—some sort of management action is needed to
take the place of these natural processes. Usually this involves
thinning the stand, removing some trees and allowing others to
continue growing with reduced competition for light, water, and
nutrients. This action is often termed a precommercial thinning, be-
cause the trees removed are usually too small or poorly formed
to be of any commercial value. Although this step is a key ele-
ment in responsible forest management following timber har-
vesting, it is a significant cost that is borne years after the income
from the prior timber harvest and years before the income from
the next timber harvest.
In the case of the National Forests, the rate of timber har-
vesting was sharply increased during the postwar housing boom
of the 1950s, but funding for reforestation and thinning did not
keep pace with funding for timber sales. The cumulative result of
a half-century of heavy cutting on the National Forests without
the necessary reinvestment subsequent to timber harvesting con-
tributed significantly to the current unhealthy conditions in many
of these forests. Extensive areas that were clearcut in the 1940s
and 1950s are now choked with densely packed trees. In the case
of ponderosa pine, historically there were between 5 and 20 trees
Forest Health
49

per acre because of frequent, low-intensity ground fires that
killed young trees and shrubs. Today, these same areas carry up
to 500 trees per acre or more. This has not only increased the risk
of fire and pest outbreaks, but it has diminished the value of these
forests for wildlife, watershed protection, recreation, and even
wood production.
Recent Policy Developments
The increasing frequency and extent of destructive wildfires have
made the forest health situation front-page news across the coun-
try. Wildfires have prompted a variety of responses from resource
management agencies, legislators, the forest products industry,
and environmentalists.
During the 1990s, resource management agencies stepped up
their use of prescribed burning, or controlled fires, to reduce fuel
loads and reestablish the natural role of fire in the ecosystem. For-
est managers’ use of controlled burning has been severely limited
by concerns over the effect on air quality and by fears that man-
agers would be unable to prevent the spread of fires into sur-
rounding areas. Even with careful consideration of expected
weather conditions at the time of a proposed controlled burn, for-
est managers often have not been able to obtain the necessary ap-
proval from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or
state environmental agencies concerned about particulate pollu-
tion and impacts on visibility. Public confidence in forest man-
agers’ ability to contain controlled burns has been damaged by
several high-profile accidents, such as the National Park
Service–prescribed fire in Bandelier National Monument in New
Mexico, which got out of control and burned much of the town of
Los Alamos in May 2000. Even “let-burn” policies (to allow
lightning-caused fires in Wilderness areas to burn out naturally)
have been undermined by cases such as the Canyon Creek fire
that began in the Bob Marshall Wilderness but escaped to
threaten the town of Lincoln, Montana.
The wildland forest fire problem has been exacerbated by an
influx of people and homes into what is known as the wildland-
urban interface. This is an area where human development of any
kind has encroached into undeveloped lands. In the western
United States, the fastest-growing areas in terms of population
change are at the wildland-urban interface, specifically at the bor-
ders of Federal public lands. The 1985 Ojai fire in California was
the first of many uncharacteristically severe wildfires occurring at
50
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

the wildland-urban interface that destroyed property and threat-
ened lives. The fact that the wildland-urban interface is quickly
expanding further into wildlands and bordering on Federal pub-
lic lands makes addressing wildfires and forest conditions even
more challenging.
In September 2000, following a bad fire year in which a sig-
nificant number of homes and other private property had fallen
victim to forest fires originating on Federal public lands, land
management agencies developed a strategy to systematically re-
duce fire hazards on both public lands and adjacent private lands.
The result was the National Fire Plan, which gave priority to re-
ducing hazardous fuel in forest areas within the wildland-urban
interface and to making homes and other domestic structures less
susceptible to fire damage through public education efforts con-
ducted by the state forestry agencies. The National Fire Plan also
emphasized community-based approaches through multiyear
land stewardship contracts with local firms to do thinning on an
ongoing basis.
Closely related to the emphasis on community-based ap-
proaches is the focus on developing and enhancing markets for
so-called small-diameter wood that is usually removed from
these thinnings. Traditionally, construction and similar sectors
use larger timber, which retains its structural characteristics
better than small-diameter timber. However, there are bound-
less opportunities—ranging from biofuels energy to particle
board to window trim and sills—to transition from traditional
wood products toward using materials made from small-
diameter timber from thinning treatments. However, without
adequate assurance that the timber supply will be available in
the foreseeable future, few community entrepreneurs will be
willing to risk investing in small-diameter wood. The National
Fire Plan provided an Economic Action Program to jump-start
these entrepreneurs.
A broad political consensus for the objectives of the National
Fire Plan, including the forest products industry, the environ-
mental community, and state governments, was developed by the
Western Governors Association in 2002. Called the 10-Year Im-
plementation Plan, the consensus signaled a commitment among
Federal, state, local, and nongovernmental organizations to work
together to address the twin issues of wildland forest fires and
forest health.
However, before the National Fire Plan could have a major
influence, forest fires in 2002 scorched more acres than in any year
Forest Health
51

since the disastrous fires of 1910. President George W. Bush
toured the burned-over forests and prompted the Healthy Forests
Initiative to deal with what was regarded as a National Forest
health crisis. Citing legal actions under national environmental
laws like the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), the En-
dangered Species Act, and the National Forest Management Act
as barriers to timely action to address forest health concerns, the
White House initiative sought to streamline environmental re-
view for projects to reduce hazardous fuels, to minimize oppor-
tunities for legal challenge, and to help finance the cost of forest
health projects through the sale of commercial-quality timber in
other areas of Federal forests.
One of the most controversial features of the Healthy Forests
Initiative was to allow local Forest Service managers to designate
virtually any fuels treatment project as a “Categorical Exclusion”
(CE) under NEPA. A Categorical Exclusion exempts a Federal
project from environmental impact analysis and documentation.
Additionally, it precludes NEPA-based administrative appeals.
Environmental groups fear that projects to remove large trees or
even clearcut an area can be defined by the Forest Service as a
fuels treatment and that such projects would automatically be
excluded from any critical analysis and oversight. Environmen-
tal activists perceive this as a lack of accountability and are con-
cerned that citizens will have no recourse concerning the fate of
their public lands. From the perspective of others, the initiative
will allow the Forest Service to take action on projects that have
been held up by seemingly unending procedural delays, analy-
sis, and appeals. At this writing several bills have been proposed
in Congress to authorize some or all parts of the Healthy Forests
Initiative.
Conclusion
From a forest policy perspective, the dangerous fire and forest
health conditions prevailing in many areas of the nation’s
forests are in no one’s best interest, and there is a broad consen-
sus that something must be done to address these conditions.
Despite our improved understanding of the natural role of fire
in many forest ecosystems, restoring the natural fire regime is
no longer an option because of the proximity of homes and
other human development.
What is likely to emerge from all of this is a two-part strat-
52
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

egy. The first part must address the near-term need to thin dense,
overstocked forests, with priority given to inhabited areas in the
wildland-urban interface. Dealing with this large backlog of de-
ferred maintenance will be extremely costly and thus can be ex-
pected to take place over a period of several years. It has been
suggested that this will require a systematic program of projects
in rural areas throughout the nation’s forests, not unlike the Civil-
ian Conservation Corps that was successfully used to accomplish
public works projects in the 1930s.
A second and longer-term strategy is needed for cost-
effectively removing trees of various size and quality in areas
where nearby communities make it impossible to let fire play its
natural role. These communities have a disproportionate stake in
maintaining the health of nearby forests for a variety of values
and in preventing it from becoming a dangerous liability. Appli-
cation of innovative, appropriately scaled technologies to im-
prove the value that can be derived from processing small-diam-
eter trees into manufactured products, biofuels, and cogenerated
electricity can become the basis for stable, sustainable employ-
ment in rural communities and at the same time provide for con-
tinuous forest stewardship that will make today’s dangerous for-
est health conditions a thing of the past.
Community Forestry
Forest policies affect communities in vastly different ways. Resi-
dents of a suburban neighborhood in Atlanta may support a pol-
icy that sets aside large amounts of National Forest lands in
northwestern Montana for recreation and wildlife habitat; but for
the residents of Libby in northwestern Montana, the same policy
could eliminate jobs and tax revenues and, therefore, schools,
local road maintenance and repair services, and other public serv-
ices that are essential to the local community. The same forest that
once sustained the community of Libby may now be the cause of
its demise.
Community forestry focuses on the interdependence be-
tween healthy forest ecosystems and healthy social systems.
Community forestry is a growing movement, both in the United
States and abroad, yet at its roots it is a concept that is as old as
the practice of forestry itself. Community forestry links efforts to
develop new models of sustainable forestry with initiatives
Community Forestry
53

aimed at alleviating poverty in rural economies. It emphasizes
decentralized natural resource management decision-making
and promotes social and economic self-reliance on a relatively
small scale. Community forestry in the United States today is
largely a reaction to the political dysfunction of centralized
decision-making in Federal forest management. But organiza-
tions favoring community-based approaches to forest steward-
ship also express growing concern over the consolidation of the
global forest products industry into just a few national or
transnational corporations controlling large expanses of forest
land, the management of which is centrally determined by indi-
viduals who often have little or no knowledge of the local com-
munities that are affected.
Background
Community forestry in the United States today is in many ways a
rediscovery of the earliest concepts of forestry. The first glimmer-
ings of what would later become known as sustained-yield forest
management arose in communities throughout Europe in the late
Middle Ages. Growing populations relied on forests for fuel,
structural timber, wild game, forage, fodder, and bedding for
livestock. Yet without a road system suitable for moving heavy
goods such as wood for long distances, communities had to rely
primarily on forests within easy reach for all of these goods and
services—exporting and importing wood products was out of the
question. To prevent these forests from being devastated through
overuse and to avoid conflicts among users, these communities
devised various approaches to governing the use of forests by in-
dividuals so as to ensure the well-being of the community as a
whole and to keep forest utilization within the bounds of what
could be sustained over the long term.
Early forest laws in colonial America reflected this same ap-
proach, but it was during the Conservation Movement of the
late nineteenth century that community forestry found a place
in national policy. Widespread “cut-and-run” forest exploitation
had left many communities bereft of forests sufficient to meet
basic needs for structural timber, wild game, or watershed cover
to prevent catastrophic flooding. Forest Reserves were estab-
lished beginning in 1891 to retain forests in common public
ownership, provide an inexpensive local source of wood for de-
veloping communities, and prevent overuse by individuals for
54
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

purposes such as timber harvesting and livestock grazing. At a
time when the wealth of the United States was becoming in-
creasingly concentrated in the hands of a few powerful individ-
uals and corporations, the Forest Reserves were established to
ensure that these essential resources remained available to the
American people as a whole—and especially to the citizens of
nearby communities.
Today there is a resurgence of interest in community forestry
in the United States, particularly in connection with the Federal
public lands. Following World War II, timber harvesting on the
Federal forests more than quadrupled what it had been for much
of the previous half-century as they became a primary source of
timber supply for producers of commodity wood products. The
increased timber supply provided a competitive advantage for
larger corporate wood products companies. Increasingly, many
rural communities found their economies turning on the fortunes
of a handful of operations or even a single company. While the
timber harvest remained high, everyone prospered. This prosper-
ity largely ended in the early 1990s when concerns about declin-
ing environmental quality—and especially about habitat for
threatened and endangered species—resulted in a sharp decline
in timber sales from Federal lands. The dislocation of lumber and
plywood manufacturing facilities in numerous rural communi-
ties resulted in economic hardship for many individuals who
were unable or unwilling to relocate.
Since the early 1990s, a growing number of community-
based forestry efforts have emerged to reconnect sustainable,
healthy community development to sustainable, healthy forest
ecosystems. Some early examples include the Applegate Partner-
ship in southwest Oregon and the Quincy Library Group in
northern California. Today, there are numerous community
forestry efforts in every corner of the United States that include
both Federal public land and private forest lands. National or-
ganizations such as American Forests, Forest Trust, the National
Network of Forest Practitioners, and the Pinchot Institute for
Conservation are good sources of more detailed information
about the number, scope, and scale of community forestry efforts
in the United States.
The sudden change in forest management practices also af-
fected the forests themselves. Timber sales had long served as the
mechanism by which the Federal agencies addressed other man-
agement needs, such as thinning dense forest stands, removing
Community Forestry
55

brush and other hazards, improving recreation areas, enhancing
habitat for fish and wildlife, and maintaining many miles of un-
surfaced roads. Before long, inattention to these basic land stew-
ardship responsibilities was beginning to have negative effects,
such as impacts on water quality and fish habitat caused by soil
erosion from deteriorating roads perched on steep hillsides,
often on unstable or highly erodible soils. Thickets of brush and
unthinned stands of young trees created conditions ripe for in-
sects and disease—and for wildfires—on many thousands of
acres of Federal forest land. The declining condition of forests
surrounding many communities, paired with the lack of Federal
agency attention to these declines, have provided important
niches that communities have identified and filled with varying
success. For example, the National Fire Plan of 2000 and its sub-
sequent 10-Year Implementation Plan emphasize community-
based approaches to reducing wildfire risk and improving forest
conditions.
Basic Elements of Community Forestry
Because of their dispersed, unique nature, community forestry ef-
forts lack a unified framework. Indeed, community forestry ef-
forts have emerged largely because unified policies and adminis-
trative frameworks have caused undesirable ecological,
economic, and social situations locally. Nevertheless, four basic
elements of community forestry have been synthesized by lead-
ers in the field (Gray, Enzer, and Kusel 1998).
First, community forestry is about forest stewardship—
maintaining and restoring the health of the land for current and
future generations. Community forestry does not necessarily seek
to maximize economic gains from timber only for the benefit of
community residents. Maintaining and restoring forest ecosys-
tems can provide a broad array of benefits and values to local
communities above and beyond the financial returns from timber
harvesting. These include but are not limited to watershed func-
tioning, reduced fire risk, healthy populations of wildlife, unique
biological diversity, and diverse recreation opportunities. In
many ways, community forestry embodies multiple-use forestry
at smaller geographic scales. The challenge to making community
forest stewardship durable is the lack of financial investment op-
portunities for ecosystem maintenance and restoration. Aside
from timber sales, hunting fees, recreation use fees, and water al-
56
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

locations, many goods, services, and values of forest ecosystems
have no financial value, yet they contribute enormously to local
communities. Linking ecosystem maintenance and restoration to
the economic vitality of communities is often the biggest barrier
to sustaining community forestry efforts.
Second, community forestry signals a shift toward more
open, participatory decision-making processes. Currently, forest
management decision-making, especially on Federal public
lands, is dominated by organized interest groups that staked out
certain policy and rhetorical positions regardless of the specific
ecological and economic conditions affecting communities. The
decision process is predictable: the Forest Service proposes an ac-
tion; one set of organized groups supports the action; and another
set of organized groups opposes the action. Communities are
often left without a voice in the process. Community forestry ef-
forts seek to overcome this positional approach to forest steward-
ship by developing processes “that recognize and respect the le-
gitimacy of diverse perspectives, cultures, and knowledge
systems” (Gray, Enzer, and Kusel 1998, 9).
Third, community forestry focuses on an indefinite time
period—communities rarely have the choice of whether to stay or
go. For a forest-dependent community to endure, it must ensure
that the surrounding forest ecosystem is sustained into the future.
This requires a firm commitment of monitoring and learning.
Monitoring ecological, economic, and social conditions can pro-
vide information for ongoing planning and decision-making.
Monitoring also ensures that local communities are accountable
not only to themselves and their neighbors, but to nonlocal stake-
holders, especially with respect to Federal public lands. From
monitoring, communities learn about the interrelationships be-
tween their surrounding forests and their own communities.
Learning is empowering, and communities can set off on the road
to self-governance rather than waiting for someone else to make
decisions that affect their fate and futures.
Lastly, community forestry in the United States is strength-
ening connections to a large global movement toward community
forestry. With financial support from organizations such as the
Ford Foundation, community forestry efforts in the United States
have learned from and contributed to community forestry activi-
ties around the world. Community forestry was a central topic at
the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg,
South Africa, in 2002, and U.S. community forestry practitioners
Community Forestry
57

were actively represented. A central theme in these discussions
was the rapid globalization of forest products, fueled by large
transnational corporations. Decisions about forest use, produc-
tion, ownership, and conservation may not necessarily have
forest-community interdependence in mind. The durability of
community forestry in the United States and around the world
depends on working through the tensions between global eco-
nomic forces and local community priorities.
In sum, community forestry in the United States has filled a
niche for forest ecosystem maintenance and restoration by em-
phasizing the link between sustainable, healthy forests and sus-
tainable, healthy communities. Unique opportunities exist, pri-
marily in the areas of wildland forest fire mitigation and
watershed restoration. Each of these areas of ecosystem restora-
tion falls outside the traditional timber focus that dominated
forest-dependent community economic development. Instead of
communities relying solely on traditional timber sales and rev-
enues, they can generate economic benefits from a host of stew-
ardship activities. The main challenge is how to make this link
operational.
Recent Policy Developments
To address this situation, the Federal agencies have begun exper-
imenting with new approaches to land management in closer
partnership with local communities. The Forest Service, for ex-
ample, has undertaken a nationwide pilot project in which the
agency enters into contracts with local governments or private
firms in local communities to provide a variety of land manage-
ment services over a period of several years. These land steward-
ship contracts once again make local communities active partners
in balancing the many uses of nearby forests and in ensuring the
long-term sustainability of the wide variety of goods and services
a well-managed forest is capable of providing. Through addi-
tional research and technical assistance, the Forest Service is help-
ing communities to develop and market new products manufac-
tured from the small-diameter trees being thinned from
overstocked stands and to capitalize on high-value nontimber
forest products (such as medicinal herbs, fir boughs, mushrooms,
and floral ferns) that can be sustainably gathered from nearby
forests. An example of this is the Economic Action Program under
the National Fire Plan. Additional financial and technical re-
sources are delivered through the Rural Community Assistance
58
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

Program of the Forest Service. The latter program is part of a
broader effort under the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The
ideal is local communities that contribute to the active steward-
ship of their surrounding forests and, in so doing, strengthen and
diversify their economies on the basis of employment and income
that can be sustained over the long term.
The need for community-based forest stewardship, particu-
larly on Federal lands in the western United States, has gained
added impetus because of several large wildfires in recent
years—increasing the urgency to reduce buildup of fuels, sal-
vage forest areas killed by insects or disease, and thin over-
stocked stands before they, too, become fire hazards. In the 106th
session of Congress (1999–2000), a bill proposed by Senator Jeff
Bingaman (D–New Mexico) entitled Community Forest Restora-
tion Act was passed, granting funding and legislative authority
to National Forests in New Mexico to work more closely with
forest-dependent rural communities on forest restoration proj-
ects. In 2002, Senator Bingaman cosponsored a bill with Senator
Larry Craig (R-Idaho) entitled Community-Based Forest and
Public Lands Restoration Act, which sought to expand the New
Mexico approach nationwide. Although the bills did not pass in
the 107th Congress, no fewer than five bills relating to commu-
nity forestry and forest restoration have been introduced in the
108th Congress (2003–2004), in addition to three appropriations
bills granting funding to specific community-based forest
restoration projects and programs. Given large wildfires’ poten-
tial danger to life and property, many local communities adjacent
to Federal forest lands have a direct stake in addressing forest
conditions that increase the likelihood of a catastrophic wildfire.
Mechanisms such as land stewardship contracts are likely to be-
come essential tools to address the ongoing challenges of Federal
forest land management—and to address them within the con-
text of community forestry.
Because these are Federal lands managed for the benefit of
the nation as a whole, there are national-level organizations that
are wary of what they see as a shift to more local-level decision-
making that might serve local interests in ways possibly detri-
mental to the larger national interest. There has always been
some level of tension between national and local interests, par-
ticularly when the national interest was articulated primarily in
a conservation context and local interests were seen as focused
only on maintaining jobs in the near term. Decentralized
decision-making has always been regarded as a hallmark (and
Community Forestry
59

one of the great strengths) of Federal agencies like the Forest Ser-
vice. During the 1970s and 1980s when the high level of timber
harvesting on Federal lands was being continuously challenged
by conservation groups, decision-making in the agencies became
increasingly centralized through legislation, through the annual
appropriations process, and through planning decisions. But
local communities have become so frustrated with being caught
up in national issues and having only limited access to the Fed-
eral lands that surround them that they are actively exploring al-
ternatives to federal management. The Forest Service is now
striving to bring the pendulum back to the center and to restore
effective decentralized decision-making within the bounds of na-
tional policy and law.
Multiparty monitoring could become an essential tool to pro-
vide independent assurance to the public that community-based
stewardship and decentralized decision-making are indeed keep-
ing within the spirit and letter of national-level law and policy.
Multiparty monitoring, involving a diversity of interests, has
been used successfully in many circumstances to evaluate agen-
cies’ performance and ensure accountability, especially in new
stewardship contracting demonstration projects. Although it has
been slow to be applied on Federal forest lands, independent
third-party certification could be another useful tool for ensuring
that local resource management decision-making is consistent
with agreed-on standards and policies.
On the private-lands side of community forestry, a host of
Federal and state policies and programs have been developed.
Several programs under the 1996 and 2002 Farm Bills emphasize
coordination among landowners before they receive financial
and technical assistance to address issues like protecting
wildlife habitat on private lands and improving water quality.
The Environmental Quality Improvement Program is one such
example. At the state level, numerous mechanisms facilitate co-
ordination among private landowners, effectively creating a
community-based approach to stewardship. In Colorado, for ex-
ample, the Habitat Partnership Program administered by the
Colorado Division of Wildlife provides financial and technical
assistance to private ranchers to protect and enhance habitat on
their lands for migrating wildlife. Although the focus is on
rangelands, the connection to forest ecosystem stewardship is
direct, because many wildlife species inhabit forested areas dur-
ing certain parts of the season and migrate through or to private
60
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

lands during other seasons. In many eastern states, the Coverts
program explicitly focuses on cooperation and coordination
among private forest landowners to protect and improve habi-
tat for wildlife. The Coverts program is modeled after the Co-
operative Extension Service’s volunteer training program, in
which active adopters of conservation techniques train their
neighbors and peers.
Conclusion
Community-based forest management is an approach that in-
volves local communities as an integral part of policy develop-
ment and natural resource management decision-making. Partic-
ipation by local communities in resource planning and
management can both improve the effectiveness of forest man-
agement and help ensure that local communities benefit from the
stewardship of these natural resources.
Public forestry agencies in countries worldwide are experi-
menting with various approaches to community-based forest
management. In India, degraded areas of public forests are actu-
ally given to local communities, which provide the labor and pro-
tection to allow the forests to regenerate in return for access for
fuel, food gathering, and eventually a share of the returns from
timber production. In parts of Africa, local communities are given
a custodial interest in forest land to ensure that it does not become
degraded. Local communities become stakeholders of the forest,
not just users of its products.
In the United States, forestry agencies and conservation in-
terests are recognizing that local communities have a strong in-
terest in forest stewardship that maintains environmental quality,
aesthetic values, and recreational resources—as well as sustain-
able levels of wood production—as the basis for a resilient, di-
versified local economy and a desirable quality of life. As Federal
and state forestry agencies continue to restructure and downsize,
they will increasingly turn to local communities to assist them in
protecting and managing public forests. It is likely that national-
level organizations representing both conservation and resource
development interests will continue to seek refinements in the
overall policy framework guiding the management of Federal
lands to ensure that management decisions based on community-
level consensus continue to reflect the broader public interests in
these lands.
Community Forestry
61

Forestry Regulation on Private Lands
Few topics are as controversial in U.S. forest policy as govern-
ment regulation of private forest land use and management prac-
tices. The controversy dates back to the early 1900s, when Gifford
Pinchot, the first Chief of the Forest Service, emerged as a strong
advocate of federal regulation of private forestry. Although Pin-
chot’s vision of federal regulation had little political support, reg-
ulatory policies and programs at the state level grew in number
throughout the twentieth century. Today, 38 states have a law or
regulatory program concerning private forestry practices. Some
state laws concerning forest practices are comprehensive and
rival Federal policies in their scope and breadth. Other states
have restricted their role in regulating private forestry practices to
the protection of water quality. The diverse regulatory landscape
in U.S. forest policy is a product of evolution and change over the
past 60 years. During this time, there have been three “genera-
tions” of forest-practices regulation.
Background
State regulation of forest practices on private lands has developed
by stages. Starting in the early part of the twentieth century, the
first generation of state laws governing forestry focused largely
on the reforestation of cut-over lands, halting the cut-and-run ap-
proach that had previously characterized so much of timber har-
vesting in the United States. The second generation of state laws,
starting a half-century later, focused on minimizing the effects of
forest management practices on environmental quality, with a
particular emphasis on protecting water quality. The third gener-
ation of such laws, starting in the last decade of the twentieth cen-
tury, focused on protecting a broader set of public values, such as
habitat for endangered species and public watersheds.
First Generation: 1920–1950
The primary concern in Pinchot’s day was an impending “timber
famine”—a shortage of timber supplies caused by cut-and-run
logging practices. More often than not, lumber companies would
not replant trees on lands they had cut over. Instead, these lands
would become thick with brush or “trash trees”—tree species that
had no merchantable value. Meanwhile, wood was a primary ma-
62
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

terial for industrial, manufacturing, and residential development
for a growing nation. The increasing demand for wood paired
with what was perceived as a dwindling supply of available do-
mestic timber spurred the call for greater government control
over private forestry.
By 1920, it was clear that the Federal government would not
have a role in regulating private forestry practices. Instead, the
burden of ensuring socially beneficial forestry practices fell on the
states. A handful of states with significant pine forests enacted
what were called seed tree laws—statutes that mandated the reten-
tion of mature pine trees after harvest to ensure a seed source for
the next generation of forest. An example is Louisiana’s Turpen-
tine Seed Tree Law of 1922. The fear of a timber famine reached
its height during World War II, when timber was used in all as-
pects of the war effort. During the 1940s, many states passed laws
that required private forest landowners to immediately replant
their cut-over lands and use logging methods that would not ad-
versely impact soil productivity (see Table 2.1).
Central to the controversy over government regulation of
private forest land use and management practices is the “takings”
doctrine—when government regulation limits uses or actions on
private lands for public benefit without compensating the
landowner for the lost opportunities. Takings is a clause in the
Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution that states: “No person
Forestry Regulation on Private Lands
63
Table 2.1
States with Early Private Forestry Regulations
State
Year
California
1945
Florida
1943
Idaho
1937
Maryland
1943
Massachusetts
1943
Mississippi 
1944
Missouri
1945
Nevada
1955
New Hampshire
1949
New Mexico
1939
New York
1946
Oregon
1941
Vermont
1945
Virginia
1950
Washington
1945
Source: P .V. Ellefson and F. W. Cubbage. “State Forest Practices Laws and Regulations: A Review and Case Study for
Minnesota.” Station Bulletin 536-1980. St. Paul: Minnesota Agricultural Experiment Station, University of Minnesota,
pp. 9–10.

shall . . . be deprived of life, liberty, and property without due
process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use
without just compensation.” In 1887, the U.S. Supreme Court up-
held government restrictions on private land uses in Mugler v.
State of Kansas (123 U.S. 623, 1887), setting precedence in favor of
government’s police power to regulate if it is done to protect pub-
lic health, safety, and morals (or, in the language of the Court, to
avoid a “nuisance”). The landmark ruling in Village of Euclid v.
Ambler Realty Company (272 U.S. 365, 1926) solidified govern-
ment’s police power over private land use and management prac-
tices that are deemed contrary to the public’s welfare.
The takings issue on private forest lands reached a head in
the late 1940s. The spate of state reforestation laws and regula-
tions in the 1940s imposed increased costs to private forest land-
owners. Many owners were of the opinion that these state laws
amounted to a taking of private forest land property without just
compensation. The first major forestry-related takings court case
was filed in Washington state by a landowner named Avery Dex-
ter who, between 1945 and 1947, harvested 150,000 board feet of
timber from his 320-acre parcel in northeastern Washington. In
1947, the Washington state forester directed Dexter to cease oper-
ations until the necessary permits were secured in compliance
with the state’s Forest Conservation Act. When Dexter failed to
apply, the state halted further operations. In the lawsuit, Dexter
made four claims:
•
Washington’s Forest Conservation Act permits what
amounts to a taking of private property without just
compensation.
•
The act establishes an unreasonable exercise of police
power.
•
The act violates private property rights and impairs the
obligation of contracts, which are guaranteed by the
U.S. Constitution.
•
The requirements stipulated in the act are
unreasonable, unnecessary, arbitrary, and oppressive.
The case was first handled by a state district court, which
ruled in favor of Dexter and found the Forest Conservation Act
unconstitutional. The ruling was held as a victory for private for-
est landowners around the United States. But the state appeals
court overturned the district court’s ruling, leading to a show-
down in the state supreme court, which ruled in favor of the state,
64
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

asserting that “the state is not required by the United States Con-
stitution to stand idly by while its natural resources are depleted,
as affecting validity of conservation measures . . . [and that the]
protection and conservation of natural resources constitutes a rea-
sonable exercise of police power” (State of Washington v. Avery Dex-
ter 1949). Perhaps the most compelling point in the Dexter case
was made by Justice Matthew W. Hill of the state supreme court:
Rights of property, like all other social and conven-
tional rights, are subject to such reasonable limitations
in their enjoyment, as shall prevent them from being
injurious, and to such reasonable restraints and regu-
lations established by law, as the legislature, under the
governing and controlling power vested in them by
the constitution, may think necessary and expedient.
The Washington supreme court’s ruling was upheld on ap-
peal by the U.S. Supreme Court without comment (338 U.S. 863
1949). As such, the Dexter case set judicial precedent regarding
the constitutionality of a state’s police power to protect the state’s
forest resources via regulation.
In general, strict reforestation regulations were broadly sup-
ported, especially in states like Washington and Oregon that are
economically dependent on forest products. Many in the forest
products industry were already active in reforestation, with the
understanding that the future of the industry was directly tied to
successful replanting of cut-over areas. The laws were also popu-
lar with the public, which sought to put an end to cut-and-run
logging practices. However, this first generation of state-level for-
est practices laws opened the door for continued expansion of
state police power over private forest land use and management.
Second Generation: 1970–1983
The 1970s brought significant changes in environmental policy at
the national level. The National Environmental Policy Act of 1970
made the Federal government directly accountable for its effect
on the environment. The Endangered Species Act of 1973 signaled
growing public value of all living things, not just those that pro-
vide economic benefit to humans. The clearcutting controversy
on National Forests was in full swing, capped by the seminal
court case Izaak Walton League of West Virginia v. Butz, in which the
Federal appeals court ruled against the Forest Service for violat-
ing the Organic Administration Act of 1897. Congress enacted the
Forestry Regulation on Private Lands
65

National Forest Management Act of 1976 in response to the
clearcutting controversy.
Public concern over the environmental impact of logging
spilled over into private forestry. Starting with the Oregon Forest
Practices Act of 1971 and ending with the revised Massachusetts
Forest Cutting Practices Act of 1983, eight states enacted com-
prehensive regulatory laws and programs (see Table 2.2). With-
out a doubt, the major force behind the development of compre-
hensive state-level forest practice acts was the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act of 1972. Public pressure and political ac-
tion led to the passage of the act, which targeted both point and
nonpoint sources of water pollution. Water pollution was a high-
profile public concern at this time, especially after the Cuyahoga
River caught fire in June 1969 because of high concentrations of
pollutants. 
Point sources are identifiable discharges of pollution, like
outflow pipes from factories. The Federal Water Pollution Control
Act of 1972 achieved a high degree of success in bringing point
pollution sources under regulatory compliance. Nonpoint
sources of water pollution are dispersed and harder to identify
accurately in terms of their contribution to water pollution. Ex-
amples of nonpoint sources are agricultural operations, parking
lots, construction sites, residential lawns, roadways, and golf
courses. Forest practices such as road building, logging, skidding,
and site preparation (for example, burning and fertilization) are
also considered nonpoint sources of water pollution.
Nonpoint sources are more difficult for a centralized author-
ity like the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to regulate. In-
stead of letting the Federal government take the lead, the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 delegated responsibility to
66
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy
Table 2.2
States with Comprehensive Private Forestry Regulations,
1971–1983
State
Year
Alaska
1978
California
1973
Idaho
1974
Massachusetts
1983
Nevada
1971
New Mexico
1978
Oregon
1971
Washington
1974
Source: P. V. Ellefson, A. S. Cheng, and R. J. Moulton. “Regulation of Private Forestry Practices by State Governments.”
Station Bulletin 605-1995. St. Paul: Minnesota Agricultural Experiment Station, University of Minnesota, p. 25.

the states. Specifically, section 208 of the act directed states to as-
sess nonpoint sources of pollution and develop best management
practices for major categories of land use to manage those non-
point sources. States with active private forestry operations were
increasingly pressured by the EPA and state-level environmental
organizations to develop mandatory forest practices standards.
Fearing federal regulation of private forest practices, timber in-
dustry trade associations in these states took the initiative and
secured passage of forest practice acts. The timber trade associa-
tions in Oregon were the most proactive, working with that
state’s legislature even before the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act was enacted to win passage of the Oregon Forest Practices
Act of 1971. The Oregon FPA strengthened the reforestation stan-
dards of the Oregon Forest Conservation Act of 1945 and went
further, imposing a more comprehensive regulatory process.
In general, state-level forest practices acts (FPAs) follow a
common model, although details differ from state to state. The
FPA model contains the following basic components:
•
Rulemaking authority: delegation of authority to a
board or the state forestry or natural resource agency to
develop and implement administrative rules to carry
out the FPA.
•
Administrative procedures: notification and application
process, requirements for written plans, administrative
review protocols, provisions for variances or
exemptions, and on-site inspections.
•
Timber harvesting standards: limits on clearcut size and
timing; recommended harvesting methods for steep
slopes; guidelines for slash and debris disposal; and
minimum standards for felling trees, cutting timber to
more manageable lengths, and transporting logs from
the logging site.
•
Streamside restrictions: buffer areas or setbacks within
which harvest activities are limited, restrictions on
timber harvesting methods, and guidelines for machine
operations in streamside buffer areas.
•
Reforestation standards: minimum stocking standards
(number of trees per acre planted) according to site
quality and regional conditions, recommended
regeneration methods by commercial tree species, site
preparation standards, restrictions on chemical use,
inspections, and minimum free-to-grow standards
Forestry Regulation on Private Lands
67

(minimum height and vigor of trees five years after
harvesting).
•
Sensitive resource standards: special rules pertaining to
protection of streamside areas, endangered fish and
wildlife habitats, areas with steep slopes or unstable
soils, and wetlands.
•
Enforcement and penalties: enforcement procedures,
notification of violation, stop-work orders, injunctions,
damage repair orders, liens on property, fines,
penalties, and appeals.
Because Oregon’s FPA is regarded as a prototype law and
program, it is worth exploring its features in greater detail. The
Oregon FPA established the Oregon Board of Forestry, a quasi-
legislative body composed of citizens nominated by the governor
and approved by the state senate. The Board of Forestry had the
power to draft and amend the administrative regulations that im-
plemented the Oregon FPA. The Board of Forestry also became a
focal point for public involvement. Board meetings were open to
the public, something that was previously unheard of. That the
public had a voice in determining private land use and manage-
ment practices was more than unsettling to many, especially to
professional foresters. However, the Oregon FPA reflected grow-
ing environmental concern among the public and reflected na-
tional trends.
Oregon’s FPA also delegated authority for monitoring and
enforcement to the Oregon Department of Forestry. To implement
and enforce the Oregon FPA standards and associated regula-
tions, the department created a force of forest practices officers
whose sole duties were to review proposals of private forest
landowners, monitor compliance, and punish violations. The reg-
ulatory responsibilities of Oregon Department of Forestry staff
were a marked change from what they had done previously,
which was to work with private forest landowners and timber
operators in an educational or technical-assistance capacity. The
Oregon FPA became—and remains—the model state-level forest
practices act for states to follow.
For the private forest landowner, the Oregon FPA lays out
specific mandatory guidelines. The first is a notification and ap-
proval process that varies according to potential environmental
impact. A landowner or operator who contemplates any forest
practice on private land is required to submit a notice of intent to
the Oregon Department of Forestry. Depending on the proposed
68
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

forest practices, operators are required to submit a written plan
that identifies environmental impacts and describes how those
impacts will be minimized. Forest practice operations are classi-
fied by the following criteria: proximity to sensitive watercourses
and water bodies, size and location of clearcuts, proximity to vi-
sually sensitive corridors, location of sensitive wildlife habitat,
and risk potential related to steep slopes and fragile soils.
After receiving approval from the Oregon Department of
Forestry, the private forest landowner or operator must carry
out the operations in compliance with the following regulatory
standards:
•
Clearcuts must not exceed 120 acres within a single
ownership and must be at least 300 feet away from
other clearcuts unless prior approval is given.
•
Harvested areas are considered under compliance if
reforestation meets or exceeds 200 seedlings per acre
that have survived beyond 48 months.
•
Forest practice operations are prohibited or restricted in
streamside buffer zones and vary in specific standards
according to whether or not the stream is fish-bearing.
•
In clearcuts exceeding 10 acres in size, operators must
leave at least two standing dead trees (“snags”) and
two standing live trees per acre that exceed 30 feet in
height and are 11 inches in diameter. At least 50 percent
of the standing live trees left in the harvested area must
be conifers. In addition, two downed logs must be left
per acre that must be at least 16 feet long and 12 inches
in diameter. At least 50 percent of the downed logs left
in the harvested area must be conifers.
•
For specified scenic state and interstate highways,
visual buffers must be retained 150 feet from the
outermost boundary of the right-of-way. Within each
visual buffer area, at least 50 healthy trees of at least 11
inches in diameter must be temporarily left per acre.
Harvest debris must be removed within 30 days of
completing the operation. Reforestation of at least 400
trees per acre must be done.
The notification and approval process and specific forest
practice standards are not limited to the Oregon FPA. Other state
FPAs have similar guidelines; California has the most comprehen-
sive set of rules among all the states. In California, private forest
Forestry Regulation on Private Lands
69

landowners are required to develop a timber harvest plan ap-
proved by a state-licensed forester. The written plan must also un-
dergo review and approval by the California Department of
Forestry officials. In Washington, large private forest landowners
are required to complete a cumulative effects analysis—a compre-
hensive study of the effects of forest practices on a range of eco-
logical values over time. This is similar to the cumulative effects
analysis required under the National Environmental Policy Act.
The administrative structure of forest practices programs
also varies among states. Alaska, California, and Washington, like
Oregon, have quasi-legislative boards that develop and modify
forest practices standards and rules. In Idaho, Massachusetts,
Nevada, and New Mexico, the state forestry agency has sole au-
thority to develop, implement, and enforce standards and rules.
Active enforcement and monitoring of private forest practices
varies widely among states, depending on available staffing and
budgets as well as the attitudes of agency directors and staff.
Since initial passage, the state-level FPAs and administrative pro-
grams found in the aforementioned seven states have undergone
varying degrees of revision and amendment. The most active
states are California, Oregon, and Washington.
Third Generation: 1984–1995
State-level regulatory laws and programs expanded significantly
in the 1980s due to three major factors: persistent water quality
concerns and passage of the Clean Water Act Amendments of
1987, the proliferation of local ordinances, and persistent con-
cerns over the environmental impacts of timber harvesting.
Concerns over Water Quality
Nonpoint-source water pollution remained a high-profile envi-
ronmental policy issue at both the federal and state levels
throughout the 1980s. States varied widely in their compliance
with section 208 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of
1972. A national assessment of CWA implementation showed a
lack of significant improvement nationwide. In 1987, Congress
amended the Federal Water Pollution Control Act through the
Water Quality Act, which required states to perform comprehen-
sive assessments of waters that were significantly degraded from
nonpoint-source pollution. Section 319 of the 1987 act required
states to specify both voluntary and regulatory programs to deal
with nonpoint sources.
70
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

The persistent concern over water quality at the federal level
prompted action at the state level. Several states, including
Florida, Maryland, Montana, New Hampshire, North Carolina,
Vermont, and Virginia, included forestry under the umbrella of
nonpoint sources to be regulated. Although the details of each
state’s regulatory program vary, in general all programs use a
graduated sanctioning system. If forest practices on private lands
conform to best management practices (BMPs) as defined by the
state forestry or natural resource agency, then private forest
landowners are not subject to any further requirements. How-
ever, if, on inspection, forest practices violate BMPs, the state
forestry agency is empowered to take a series of steps to ensure
compliance, starting with a notice of violation and ending with
stop-work order, fines, and damage repair orders to be paid in
full by the private forest landowner or operator. In Florida and
Maryland, forest practices that affect wetlands are required to file
for permits and may even require a written management plan.
The graduated sanctioning system is referred to as “contin-
gent regulation”; regulatory enforcement comes into play only
when voluntary BMPs are not followed and notices of violation
are ignored. In these states, it is more politically palatable to leave
regulation as the last resort. Regulation is invoked only to punish
the “bad apples” in an otherwise professional forestry commu-
nity. Contingent regulation programs are also favored by state
forestry and natural resource agencies, because they retain their
role as service foresters rather than police officers. Besides the
aforementioned states, many others have developed the statutory
authority to go after landowners or timber operators who egre-
giously impact water quality as a result of forestry practices.
Proliferation of Local Ordinances
State-level forest practices laws and programs also expanded in
the 1980s and early 1990s in response to an increasing number of
local ordinances. Such ordinance would change from municipal-
ity to municipality and from county to county. For example, 11
counties in Georgia have logging ordinances; 100 municipalities
in Illinois have forestry-related ordinances; 20 of the 23 counties
in Maryland limit forestry practices; 300 municipalities in New
Jersey regulate forest practices; and municipalities in New York,
Pennsylvania, Vermont, and Wisconsin have ordinances pertain-
ing to logging or other forest management activities. State-level
regulations offer a degree of consistency, especially for forestry
operators.
Forestry Regulation on Private Lands
71

A prime example of a state that expanded its private forestry
practices programs is Maryland. The Chesapeake Bay Critical
Areas Protection Act of 1984 provided broad authority to regulate
land use activities to minimize nonpoint-source pollution to
Chesapeake Bay. The state developed a regulatory program that
requires private forest landowners to prepare timber harvest
plans and sediment control plans and to maintain buffer areas for
water quality and wildlife habitat protection. The regulatory pro-
gram also establishes minimum standards for maintaining and
enhancing forested vegetation in critical areas. The Chesapeake
Bay protection act supplements a suite of state-level laws that reg-
ulate timber harvesting on private forest lands.
Public Concerns over Environmental Impacts
The association between environmentally harmful forest prac-
tices and the forestry profession has made it necessary for the
forestry profession to become more proactive. Throughout the
mid-1980s and early 1990s, state legislatures—prompted by envi-
ronmental organizations, state forestry and natural resource agen-
cies, forest products companies, and private forest landowners—
addressed public concerns about the environmental impacts of
forestry practices through a variety of mechanisms.
One approach is the forest practices act, which is similar to
those found in the western states but not as comprehensive.
Maine enacted the Maine Forest Practices Act in 1989 in response
to public concerns over clearcutting and rapid development of
mill facilities. The Maine FPA requires private forest landowners
and operators to submit a notification of intent to harvest to the
Maine State Forest Service for review and approval. The Com-
missioner of Conservation develops rules and standards, with
primary focus on clearcutting restrictions and reforestation re-
quirements. Clearcuts over 50 acres must have an approved man-
agement plan and are subject to inspection. Forestry practices on
private lands in Maine are also subject to guidelines to protect
water quality, soil, and wildlife habitat.
A second approach is to require registration and licensing of
forestry professionals, operators, and forest product companies.
The Connecticut Forest Practices Act of 1991, in addition to set-
ting minimum standards for timber harvesting, establishes an
examination and certification process for forestry professionals
and operators. The underlying premise of the Connecticut FPA is
that accountability for private forestry practices starts and ends
with professional field foresters and operators. Through a certi-
72
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

fication process, the state and the public are able to track the per-
formance of forestry professionals and operators. Violation of
certification requirements or minimum forest practices standards
could result in the revocation of one’s license by the state’s Com-
missioner of Environmental Protection. The state of West Vir-
ginia has similar requirements under its program titled Sediment
Control during Commercial Timber Harvesting Operations. Per-
sons engaged in timber operations, buying, and selling must be
licensed by the West Virginia Division of Forestry. The division
must also be notified in advance of intent to harvest timber,
which includes how harvest operations will comply with best
management practices.
Conclusion
Regulation is a useful policy tool to enforce minimum standards
for private forestry practices. However, it has limited value as an
incentive for private landowners and timber operators to go
above and beyond those minimum standards. State forestry agen-
cies generally regard regulation as a necessary backstop, one that
serves as one tool in the toolbox. States with comprehensive FPAs
continue expanding the scope of the laws and programs. One
trend is to convert forest practices rules and standards into statu-
tory provisions. What this does is to remove the flexibility with
which rules and standards are applied in the field. The
landowner or operator must comply no matter the uniqueness of
the circumstance. This trend toward more “prescriptive” stan-
dards opposed to “discretionary” standards ensures consistency
across all forest practices.
States without comprehensive FPAs but with some form of
regulation of private forestry practices continue to experiment
with the appropriate mix of nonregulatory and regulatory ap-
proaches. The development of contingent regulations seems to be
a growth area. In general, state forestry agency staff would rather
work with private forest landowners and operators through edu-
cation and technical assistance programs than as enforcers of reg-
ulatory standards. Senior administrators in state forestry agencies
contend that nonregulatory approaches preserve working rela-
tionships with landowners, an important consideration in man-
aging a long-term resource like forests.
Minnesota provides a unique model for other states to ex-
plore in the future. In 1990, under pressure from public interest
groups concerned with the proposed expansion of chip mills and,
Forestry Regulation on Private Lands
73

thus, increased harvesting of aspen-dominated forests, Min-
nesota’s state legislature authorized a statewide environmental
impact statement (EIS) to explore potential affects of alternative
harvesting scenarios. It was the first statewide forest EIS of its
kind in the United States. The EIS examined the effects of differ-
ent harvesting levels on a broad range of forest-related resources,
from wildlife and water quality to recreation and tourism. The
policy outcome of the EIS was the creation of the Minnesota For-
est Resource Council (FRC), a diverse group of citizens and
agency leaders appointed by the governor to set broad statewide
forest policy priorities. Site-specific best management practices
and monitoring programs were developed at a regional level but
were consistent with broad statewide priorities. The FRC con-
venes on a regular basis to continually review and revise
statewide priorities and site-specific programs. This ongoing
adaptive management approach stops short of outright regula-
tion but is far more proactive than traditional education and tech-
nical assistance programs.
Finally, many of the changes in state-level regulation of pri-
vate forestry practices are spurred by forces beyond government.
Many states including California, Maine, and Oregon have rela-
tively easy requirements for creating ballot initiatives, which are
proposals put forth by nongovernmental actors (individual citi-
zens or interest groups) that are voted on in general elections. All
it takes to get an initiative on the electoral ballot is a certain num-
ber of petition signatures—88,000 signatures in Oregon. Since
1980, California, Maine, and Oregon voters have considered bal-
lot initiatives to halt the use of clearcutting as a timber harvesting
method. The campaigns to support or oppose ballot initiatives are
fierce and highly charged. Thus far, voters in all three states have
voted down these initiatives. However, citizens and groups
strongly opposed to clearcutting continue their efforts, and it is a
sure bet that initiatives to ban clearcutting will continue to appear
in the future.
Forest Land Conservation
The single greatest threat to sustainable forest management in the
United States is the loss of the forests themselves to development
or conversion to other nonforest land uses. Most of the forest pol-
icy issues addressed in this book deal with the debates over how
forests should be managed and under what standards or prac-
74
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

tices. While these debates are taking place, however, millions of
acres of U.S. forest land are lost each year to other uses through
development that—at least in terms of human time scales—is es-
sentially permanent. Although some of this forest land develop-
ment is appropriate and can reasonably be expected with in-
creases in population, in many other instances forest land
conversion is an unintended consequence of policies established
for other unrelated purposes, such as taxation of property or in-
heritance. Unless these unintended consequences are recognized
and addressed, and policies developed that support rather than
discourage forest ownership and responsible stewardship, we
can expect to see a continued loss of forest land, along with the
important public values and ecological services these lands pro-
vide.
Conservation of Public Forest Lands
As noted previously, the idea of holding forest land as such and
investing in its long-term productivity and sustainable manage-
ment is a relatively new idea in the United States. Hardly more
than a century ago, it was a widely accepted practice to acquire a
tract of forest land, strip it of all valuable timber, and then sell it
for agriculture or simply abandon it and move on to the next
tract. The consequences of this practice, in terms of future timber
supply—but also disastrous floods and catastrophic forest fires
that caused widespread destruction of lives and property—first
inspired the idea of reserving large areas of forest land in public
ownership for public purposes. One of the first such reservations
was the Adirondack Park, a 4-million-acre area in upstate New
York that was protected by the state legislature in 1892.
The Forest Reserve Act of 1891 authorized the President to
reserve Federal forest lands from the public domain by executive
order, but the act said nothing about how these lands would be
managed or by whom. The Transfer Act of 1905 placed these For-
est Reserves, which were subsequently renamed National
Forests, under the stewardship of the U.S. Forest Service in the
Department of Agriculture. The agency’s first Chief Forester, Gif-
ford Pinchot, and President Theodore Roosevelt greatly ex-
panded the National Forest System, which now encompasses 192
million acres in the continental United States, Alaska, and Puerto
Rico. History may show that Gifford Pinchot’s greatest contribu-
tion as the nation’s first native-born forester was not his intro-
duction of scientific forestry in the United States. Rather, it was
Forest Land Conservation
75

his role in establishing the National Forests and conserving them
in public ownership to serve a variety of evolving public needs
that could not even have been guessed at in Pinchot’s time and
that we cannot predict for the future.
Additional reservations of Federal public lands continue to
be made, primarily through the Land and Water Conservation
Fund (LWCF). A portion of the Federal revenues from oil and gas
production on the Outer Continental Shelf are designated each
year for acquiring lands of significant conservation value. Of
these designated revenues, however, only those specifically au-
thorized by Congress during the annual appropriations process
can actually be used for land acquisition (the remainder accumu-
lates as a “balance” that increases over time but, like Social Secu-
rity trust funds, this balance is only on paper and does not repre-
sent a large cash reserve that can be tapped at any time). In recent
years, the authorization of LWCF expenditures has become an
ideological battleground in Congress over the wisdom of adding
to the portion of land under federal ownership.
This ideological battle has extended to include various pro-
posals to divest large areas of Federal lands through privatiza-
tion. Especially in states west of the Mississippi River, large areas
of land were reserved to the public domain as a condition for
statehood, and many of these lands remain under federal owner-
ship and management. Although most of these lands remain
open to grazing, mining, timber harvesting, and other uses, these
uses are regulated by one or more Federal agencies, which has
created resentment among individuals who feel these lands could
be better managed under private ownership. The “Sagebrush Re-
bellion” of the 1980s and the States’ Rights, County Supremacy,
and Wise Use movements in the 1990s were examples of efforts
over the years to privatize Federal lands, but they failed to gain
the necessary support at the national level. The political resist-
ance to efforts to transfer authority over Federal lands to individ-
ual states is often attributed to the disproportionate political
power in urban areas, especially in the East, where there is a
strong interest in continued federal management of these lands to
protect water supply, prevent overuse of resources, and conserve
environmental values.
However, careful economic analysis often shows that federal
transfer payments to states with a high percentage of Federal land
significantly exceed the income the state could expect if the lands
were in private ownership. Moreover, if the Federal lands were
offered for sale, the highest bidder would in many cases not be
76
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

local ranchers and other local interests who currently are the
major users of these lands—and local users could find themselves
either shut out or paying far more to the new private landlord
than they have become accustomed to paying for Federal use per-
mits. To address these concerns, there have been related propos-
als to divest Federal lands into ownership and management by
state governments. Although this option might offer a greater
sense of local control, the economics are even worse from a state
government perspective: not only would the state lose the value
of the federal transfer payments, but it would also have to assume
the responsibilities and costs of management. Nevertheless, the
notion of increased local control over lands whose management
can significantly influence the course of local economic develop-
ment remains powerful at the visceral level, and successfully ad-
dressing both the local and national interests will continue to be
one of the most important challenges facing Federal land man-
agement agencies—and thus the continued conservation and
stewardship of these forests as Federal public lands.
Conservation of Corporate Forest Lands
In spite of the attention focused on forest management issues on
public lands, it is important to remember that three-quarters of
U.S. forest land remains in private ownership. Furthermore, the
ownership and management of private forest lands in the United
States is currently undergoing greater change than at any time in
recent history. This will have important implications for the con-
tinued conservation of these lands as forests and for the impor-
tant public values these lands provide simply stemming from the
fact that they are forests rather than suburban subdivisions or
strip malls.
About one-fifth of private forest land in the United States is
owned by integrated forest products companies, which produce
lumber, panels, paper, and paperboard. Historically, the other
four-fifths of private forest land has been owned by “nonindus-
trial private forest” owners, a wide variety that includes every-
thing from farmers to Native American tribes. However, power-
ful economic and political forces are substantially redrawing the
picture of who owns America’s private forest lands and how they
are managing them.
The forest products industry is one of many industries that
have been significantly reconfigured in recent years, first by the
trend toward consolidation at the national level and then by
Forest Land Conservation
77

economic globalization. The spasm of mergers and acquisitions
beginning in the 1980s and continuing early in the twenty-first
century has resulted in an unprecedented consolidation of hun-
dreds of small and medium-sized forest products companies into
an industry now dominated by fewer than a dozen large compa-
nies worldwide. The top five—International Paper, Georgia Pa-
cific, Weyerhaeuser, Stora Enso, and Smurfit Stone Container—
produce 20 percent of the world’s industrial wood. In some cases,
companies were acquired by speculative investors who deter-
mined that the market value of a company’s assets was greater
than the combined value of its outstanding stock. The investors
made “tender offers” to stockholders to purchase all their shares
at a price higher than the value at which the shares were currently
being traded. Having acquired a controlling interest, the in-
vestors then proceeded to break the company up into its compo-
nent parts, which were then sold off separately for a tidy profit.
Because a company’s forest lands are shown on its books at their
purchase price rather than at a current appraisal of the value of
the land and timber, these forest lands represented “undervalued
assets,” and those companies with large timberland ownerships
were especially vulnerable to such hostile takeovers.
A few high-profile instances of large tracts of forest industry
land being sold to real estate developers has prompted some in-
teresting responses. Concern over several such sales in northern
New England and New York resulted in Congress creating the
Forest Legacy program, which provides funds to state agencies to
acquire ownership or conservation easements on forest lands that
are under imminent threat of development. Such concerns also
prompted a significant increase in the activity of private conser-
vation organizations such as the Nature Conservancy, the Con-
servation Fund, and the Trust for Public Lands, which could act
quickly to acquire forest lands as they came on the market and
then transfer the lands into public ownership as soon as public
funds became available.
But the continuing consolidation of the forest products in-
dustry and a series of divestitures of hundreds of thousands of
acres of forest land that are no longer strategically valuable to the
new combined companies has overwhelmed land conservation
approaches that have worked well in the past and stimulated the
development of new approaches and institutions. Land trusts
and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) that previously
functioned primarily to purchase and resell forest land into pub-
lic ownership have now become major owners and managers of
78
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

forest land in their own right. The Nature Conservancy, for ex-
ample, now owns 15 million acres in the United States that it
manages as a system of private preserves.
Timber investment management organizations (TIMOs)
have emerged as a new category of private forest landowner, rais-
ing capital primarily from pension funds and other institutional
investors to respond to major acquisition opportunities as they
arise. TIMOs are able to offer substantial return on investment
through both current income from forest management and ap-
preciation of land and timber values over the period of the in-
vestment. TIMOs are not land conservation organizations, and at
the end of the investment period they usually sell to the highest
bidder to maximize return to investors. However, with the access
to capital that enables them to act quickly to acquire large tracts
of forest land being divested by forest products companies,
TIMOs can buy time for conservation organizations and public
agencies to carefully assess and set priorities concerning the lands
they will eventually endeavor to acquire from the TIMOs.
The large-scale forest land divestitures have also forced in-
novation in the traditional use of conservation easements to con-
serve forest land and stave off development. The opportunities
and needs for conservation easements have almost overwhelmed
all possible sources of funding for acquiring them. “Working for-
est” conservation easements have emerged as means of explicitly
encouraging active forest management, in accordance with spec-
ified standards of responsible forestry, to help offset the cost of ac-
quiring an easement aimed at preventing land conversion and de-
velopment. Congress is currently considering proposals to make
it easier for NGOs to raise capital for private land conservation
and working forest easements by altering Federal income tax pol-
icy to authorize “conservation bonds,” which would be exempt
from Federal income tax, much like tax-exempt municipal bonds.
Conservation of Family Forest Lands
Few issues in U.S. forest policy have been debated longer—and
less productively—than how to best ensure conservation and re-
sponsible forest management on the nonindustrial private forests
that collectively constitute three-fifths of the nation’s forest land.
The right of private individuals to own land with secure
tenure and a high degree of self-determination in the use of that
land is one of the most basic tenets of the U.S. Constitution. Cer-
tainty that these rights will be protected through our legislative
Forest Land Conservation
79

and judicial systems, whether one is rich or poor, has been an es-
sential part of the foundation for building the United States as na-
tion. This has become a model to many other nations in which se-
cure land tenure and property rights are still a distant goal,
especially for the economically underprivileged citizens of those
nations. Secure private property rights are especially important to
responsible stewardship of forest lands, where the benefits of in-
vestments in sound management are long in coming and the im-
pacts of poor management are long-lasting. In developing coun-
tries, the establishment and the fair, reliable enforcement of private
property rights may be the single most important stepping-stone to-
ward sustainable forest management.
But 200 years after the signing of the Constitution, there is
still a lively debate over how best to protect the property rights of
private forest owners while still protecting the important public
values that these forests also provide. Perhaps more than any
other category of land use, forests play an essential role in pro-
tecting values that benefit not only the owners, but also the pub-
lic at large—water supply, wildlife habitat, and flood control, to
name just a few. Even the resources that are of direct commercial
value to the owner represent important public values, especially
given the large proportion of U.S. forests in private ownership.
For example, the vast majority of the wood supply in the U.S.
South, one of the most productive timber-growing regions in the
world, comes from private forest lands. Timber supply from pri-
vate lands helps to maintain moderate prices for wood products
domestically, contributing to such broad social goals as affordable
housing. But forest products are also the third most valuable U.S.
export, with broad public benefits in terms of lowering the inter-
national balance of payments and contributing to a stronger U.S.
economy.
In spite of all this, private forest land in many areas of the
country is being lost to development at a record rate. In many
other areas, it is continually “on the edge” and vulnerable to con-
version to nonforest land uses. Ironically, these changes are often
not the first choice of the landowner, who can be forced into the
decision by unforeseen circumstances or the overwhelming eco-
nomics of development versus land conservation. Forest man-
agement issues notwithstanding, the fundamental policy ques-
tion is how to “keep forests as forests.” What are the factors
responsible for forcing private forest landowners into decisions
that result in the loss of forests, and what can be done about
them?
80
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

For many private forest owners, the issue is simple
economics—the direct financial return from their forest is less
than the cost of owning the land and responsibly managing the
forest. Property taxes must be paid annually, and even well-
managed forests do not always produce income annually or do
not produce enough to pay the taxes. Timber values increase over
time, but it may be decades before the timber reaches maturity,
and property taxes that include timber values have been known
to force premature harvesting or overharvesting. Most localities
now separate timber value from land value for the purpose of an-
nual property taxes, and they instead tax the timber only at the
time of harvest. This “severance tax” or “yield tax” approach has
significantly reduced financial pressures on private forest owners.
Government regulation is another part of the financial issue,
in that it can limit the income that can be generated to offset taxes
and management costs. States are required to protect water qual-
ity, and such protection often requires stream buffers where tim-
ber harvesting must be reduced or avoided. Under Federal law,
habitat for threatened or endangered species must be protected,
and this too can lead to reductions or prohibitions of timber har-
vesting on some of the land, with a resulting reduction in income.
Steps have been taken to minimize these kinds of effects on pri-
vate forest owners, but the financial impacts of protecting these
important public values on private forest lands can still be signif-
icant for some owners.
Also of major importance in the conversion of private forest
lands are “death taxes”—Federal estate taxes and state inheri-
tance taxes. These taxes affect everyone, but their implications for
forest landowners often run counter to the public goal of land
conservation on private forests. To pay these taxes within one
year of the owner’s death, heirs are often forced to sell all or part
of the tract or immediately liquidate a significant portion of the
timber. Recent tax reforms aimed at reducing the Federal estate
tax burden by increasing the threshold of estate value that is ex-
empt from taxes has been of only limited value to forest landown-
ers because the value of the land and timber together often sig-
nificantly exceeds the threshold. Further efforts to address this
issue have been caught up in the broader issues surrounding Fed-
eral estate tax reform. The issue is unlikely to be dealt with effec-
tively without reform that is targeted specifically to the needs of
family forests, in light of the broad public benefits of better en-
abling landowners to continue conserving these lands as forests.
Conservation easements have become perhaps the single
Forest Land Conservation
81

most widely used mechanism for addressing the effect of
taxation—both property taxes and death taxes—on private forest
land conservation. If the owner donates or sells all development
rights on the property, the appraised value of the property usu-
ally is substantially reduced, meaning the taxes on the property
will also be greatly reduced. Unless prohibited by the terms of the
easement, forest management can usually continue to produce
periodic income for the landowner. Conservation easements on
forest lands should be considered as part of a comprehensive es-
tate plan aimed at keeping the ownership intact for future gener-
ations, and harvesting timber in a way that is consistent with a
long-term forest management plan.
Although there are many ways to improve the economics of
private forest land ownership, a large, one-time cash offer from a
real estate developer can seem very appealing to forest landown-
ers and especially to heirs who may no longer live nearby or who
simply have no interest in owning and managing forest land. For-
est owners who are committed to the conservation of their lands
as forest for the long term, again, may want to consider a conser-
vation easement. In many instances, development rights can be
sold for a substantial sum, which can then be set aside to provide
for heirs. Changes in Federal tax policy to authorize conservation
bonds on which the proceeds would be exempt from Federal in-
come tax, mentioned previously, would give land trusts and other
appropriate land conservation organizations a new way to raise
the private capital needed to purchase development rights and
conservation easements to “keep forests as forests.”
Forest Management Certification
Forest certification is a voluntary, nongovernmental process by
which forest products are physically identified as having come
from forests that are responsibly managed. This determination is
made by an independent third party (that is, neither the forest
management firm itself nor its direct customer or client) based on
a field evaluation of forest management practices relative to a
specific set of standards.
Forest certification differs from government regulation of
forest practices (for example, state forest practices laws) in that it
is market-based. It allows consumers of paper and other wood
products to play a part in encouraging responsible forest man-
agement by providing them a way to distinguish certified wood
82
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

products from other brands in their purchase decisions. If there is
strong enough consumer preference for certified wood products,
the companies that manage their forests responsibly will outcom-
pete those that do not, leaving the latter companies either to de-
cline or to improve the quality of their forest management so that
their products, too, can be marketed as “certified.”
In the United States, Federal and state policies to date en-
courage nongovernmental organizations in the development of
certification programs, but they generally keep government agen-
cies out of the processes of setting forest practices standards or
evaluating forest management in the field. Several other countries,
particularly those in Europe, have established policies to prefer
the import of certified wood and wood products over those not
certified. Concerned that this could be interpreted as a nontariff
trade barrier under the rules of the World Trade Organization
(WTO), the United States has avoided establishing a policy that
could be seen as limiting the importation of noncertified wood
products. The de facto policy is thus to leave this to individual de-
cisions by the companies that import wood or wood products,
based on the purchasing preferences of their own customers. Nev-
ertheless, several public forest management agencies in the United
States have sought certification of their forest practices to ensure
access to markets for certified wood, to provide independent as-
surance to citizens that public forest lands are being responsibly
managed, and to educate and encourage private forest owners to
voluntarily improve forest management practices on the basis of
market incentives rather than government regulation.
Background
EPA defines certification as an environmental label or “ecolabel”
used to communicate information to consumers (Environmental
Protection Agency 1993). Certification is an assurance that an en-
vironmental claim about a product or management system meets
specified criteria. This usually involves an objective assessment of
a forest management operation by an independent certifier. Some
form of mark, label, or stamp attached directly to the product is
then used to inform consumers of a passing grade or endorse-
ment. The objective of certification is to link the informed con-
sumer with products produced in an environmentally and so-
cially responsible manner (Cabarle et al. 1995).
Independent, third-party certification did not begin with
forests. In recent years, environmental considerations have been
Forest Management Certification
83

incorporated into the production of many kinds of consumer
goods, and producers’ claims that their products are “environ-
mentally safe,” “ozone-friendly,” “dolphin-safe,” “recyclable,” or
“made from recycled materials” have been used to market these
products to the growing number of consumers who, given the
choice, select products considered less damaging to the natural
environment. The Federal Trade Commission regulates advertis-
ing practices regarding such “green” claims (Rathe 1992). Since
neither the consumer nor the retailer is in a position to know
which claims are valid and which are not, retailers often turn to
independent laboratories or other organizations, such as Scien-
tific Certification Systems, that investigate claims on everything
from aerosols to pesticides to canned tuna.
Forest management certification is just one aspect of this ef-
fort to accomplish the following objectives:
•
Offer consumers the opportunity to purchase from
producers that have made a concerted effort to
minimize impacts on the natural environment.
•
Provide independent assurance that producers’ claims
are based on more than just empty promises.
The initial impetus for “green certification” in forestry arose from
the boycott of imported tropical timbers by European consumers
in the 1980s. The boycott was intended to decrease demand for
this timber and reduce tropical deforestation. However, this
“blunt-instrument” approach made no distinction between tropi-
cal timber obtained through exploitive means and timber har-
vested through responsible forest management. It equally pun-
ished companies attempting to practice renewable resource
management and companies that had never given the issue a sec-
ond thought, with unnecessary and unwarranted economic im-
pacts on struggling enterprises in some of the world’s poorest de-
veloping countries. Recognizing this, representatives of European
environmental organizations met with forest industry representa-
tives and tropical timber exporters to examine conditions under
which tropical timbers could be produced and deemed accept-
able for importation into Europe.
In the 1990s, two other international events contributed di-
rectly to the development of forest management certification as
we know it today: the 1992 United Nations Conference on Envi-
ronment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro and the
Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs
84
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

(GATT). At UNCED (also called the Earth Summit), the world’s
governments came to consensus on the goal of sustainable devel-
opment, acknowledging that sound environments and economies
are inextricably linked. This included international acceptance of
the “Forest Principles” section of the agreement as well as a chap-
ter of the UNCED document, which is called Agenda 21, entitled
“Combating Deforestation.” Both embraced the concept of sus-
tainable management of the world’s forests to meet current needs
without compromising the ability of current and future genera-
tions to meet their own needs (Society of American Foresters
1995). For a time, Germany, the Netherlands, and the United
Kingdom considered trade restrictions in the form of requiring
certification of timber originating from tropical countries. This
was opposed by tropical timber-exporting nations, which as-
serted that any such rules should apply to all internationally
traded timber regardless of source. In addition, GATT prohibits
the use of trade restrictions based on methods of production to
discriminate among “like products,” thus preventing the use of
any government-imposed tariffs, bans, or quotas in favor of sus-
tainably produced wood.
In the absence of governmental action, the World Wide Fund
for Nature brought together representatives of forest industry
and environmental organizations in 1993 to form the Forest Stew-
ardship Council (FSC), whose purpose is to “support environ-
mentally appropriate, socially beneficial, and economically viable
management of the world’s forests.” The FSC adopted a set of
Principles and Criteria to apply to the management of tropical,
temperate, and boreal forests worldwide, and it established a
process for on-the-ground “performance-based” third-party veri-
fication of a forestry operation’s adherence to these principles and
criteria. Following successful third-party assessment, the pro-
ducer is entitled to affix the FSC label directly to the product to in-
form consumers that the product came from a forest managed in
accordance with FSC principles and criteria.
Also in 1993, the International Standards Organization (ISO)
created a technical committee to develop standards and guide-
lines for sustainable forest management, which was carried out
by the Canadian Standards Association (Hoberg 1999). ISO stan-
dards specify what processes and procedures a company needs to
have in place to produce a quality product, but they do not certify
actual performance under these procedures or the quality of the
product itself. “Rather, the ISO certification demonstrates that the
company has adopted quality management processes that are
Forest Management Certification
85

consistent and repeatable systems certification” (Berg and Ol-
szewski 1995). The ISO 14001 standards are intended to docu-
ment that a process or system ensuring continuous improvement
in forest management exists and that management is committed
to environmental performance and the achievement of sustain-
able forestry over time.
Meanwhile, the leading forest industry trade association in
the United States, the American Forest and Paper Association
(AF&PA) received the results of a nationwide survey of public
perceptions of the forest products industry, which concluded that
Americans were looking for tangible evidence of substantive im-
provement in the way the industry managed its forests. AF&PA
responded with the Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI), a set of
basic principles of responsible forest management that, by 1996,
all member companies had committed to adopt as a condition for
continued membership in and representation by AF&PA. Verifi-
cation of actual performance was first-party, meaning it was
based on the assurances by a company itself that it was in fact
managing in accordance with SFI principles.
A diverse Expert Review Panel was established to advise the
AF&PA board of directors on further improvements to SFI, and
by 1999 the panel had persuaded the association to make several
important changes. First, the SFI principles were converted to a
formal standard consistent with ISO 14001. Second, AF&PA de-
veloped a licensing program whereby nonmember companies
can participate in the SFI standard. Third, SFI program partici-
pants could verify their compliance with the SFI standard ac-
cording to generally accepted auditing and verification proce-
dures similar to the ISO 14001 auditing standards (Berg and
Cantrell 1999). In 2001, a Sustainable Forestry Board was estab-
lished to take the place of the Expert Review Panel, providing a
greater degree of independence in improving the features of the
SFI program. Other changes continue to be made as this and other
certification programs continue to evolve and adapt to changing
markets and changing perceptions of what constitutes responsi-
ble forest management.
Recent Policy Developments
Forest management certification in the United States is in a period
of sorting out among several different systems, each with some-
what different objectives, costs, and benefits. U.S. forest
landowners—corporations, private forest landowners, Federal
86
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

and state agencies, and tribes—are evaluating the various sys-
tems to determine which systems are most consistent with their
own needs and objectives.
Comparisons of the two major independent, third-party certi-
fication systems in the United States (FSC and SFI) indicate that
there continue to be important differences between them, some of
which are intentional. For example, FSC focuses on rewarding ex-
emplary forest management, places greater emphasis on ecologi-
cal and social components, and generally has more credibility
with environmental organizations and the general public. On the
other hand, SFI seeks to bring along virtually every forest prod-
ucts enterprise in the United States, steadily improving forest
management practices by all AF&PA member companies and their
suppliers (Mater, Price, and Sample 2002; Meridian Institute 2001).
Competitive as they are, the two systems are also gradually
converging on certain key features. SFI has quickly evolved from
being simply a code of conduct that AF&PA members pledge to
abide by; much like FSC, it now requires independent, third-
party verification of a company’s adherence to specific standards
for use of the SFI label on its products. FSC is gradually moving
toward the continuous-improvement approach to the standards
by which it evaluates forest enterprises, long a characteristic of
SFI, and is striving to establish a more stable, inclusive approach
to modifying its standards over time.
Both systems still face similar and substantial challenges to
achieving their long-term objectives. Both were aimed initially at
relatively large forest enterprises, and neither has been able to
successfully adapt itself to the needs of private forest landowners,
who generally have a limited ability to pay the costs of certifica-
tion but who collectively own 60 percent of the forest land in the
United States. Primary and secondary wood products manufac-
turers will continue to have a difficult time becoming certified if
a significant fraction of their raw material comes from noncerti-
fied forest enterprises. Neither system has created the kind of
awareness among American consumers that FSC has gained
among many European consumers. Although several major
wood products retailers have endorsed certification, particularly
retailers that market their products internationally, it is ultimately
the preference of consumers for certified wood products that will
determine the success of this market-based mechanism.
The incentives for public sector forestry organizations are
somewhat different. Several Native American tribal governments
in the United States have sought to have their forest management
Forest Management Certification
87

activities certified as a way of gaining greater independence from
Federal authorities. Many tribes in the United States own sub-
stantial areas of forest land, but the areas are often managed on
the tribes’ behalf by the Bureau of Indian Affairs, an agency in the
U.S. Department of the Interior. In 1990, Congress passed the Na-
tional Indian Forest Resource Management Act (NIFRMA) to pro-
vide the tribes greater autonomy in the management of their
forests, but the act also required an independent evaluation every
ten years to assess forest conditions (25 USC 3101–3120). The sec-
ond Indian Forest Management Assessment, conducted in 2002,
used a comprehensive set of field data gathered by teams of
forestry experts whose primary purpose was to evaluate the
tribes for possible certification. For some tribes, the process led to
successful certification. For others, the process provided valuable
guidance on how best to improve their forest practices and con-
tinue along the path toward greater autonomy and self-reliance.
State forestry agencies that have sought certification have
often realized unexpected benefits in addition to broadening their
markets to include those for certified wood. State agencies, like all
public forestry agencies in recent years, have come under in-
creased scrutiny and criticism for their forest practices and skep-
ticism regarding their claims of sound, responsible forest man-
agement. Through independent third-party review and
evaluation of their forestry activities, the agencies have been
helped to better address the concerns of even the most skeptical
critics and to provide an extra measure of assurance to the other
citizens to which the agency is responsible. State forest lands,
when certified, also become extensive demonstration forests used
to educate private forest owners about responsible forest prac-
tices. In states with forest practices laws administered by these
agencies, certification of private lands often can relieve the state
forestry agencies of a significant burden for monitoring forestry
operations on these lands. Certification requirements often meet
or exceed those of the state forest practices law, meaning that cer-
tification provides prima facie proof that the private forest owner
is also complying with the law.
Federal lands remain without question the most controver-
sial when it comes to forest certification. Federal land manage-
ment agencies like the Forest Service and Bureau of Land Man-
agement have generally not sought independent, third-party
certification, having been discouraged from doing so by both the
forest products industry and major environmental organizations.
Forest management standards and guidelines are established in
88
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

the process of developing a land management plan for each na-
tional forest every 10 to 15 years under the terms of the National
Forest Management Act. It is possible in the future that national
forests may seek independent verification of their adherence to
these standards and guidelines, thereby attaining many of the
same benefits that state forestry agencies have found without be-
coming entangled in the competitive and maturing FSC and SFI
programs, which are still oriented primarily toward private
forestry enterprises.
Forests and Water
The protection of forested watersheds was one of the first moti-
vators for improving forest management in the United States. The
Organic Administration Act of 1897, which defined the purposes
for which National Forest lands were to be established and man-
aged, mentions first and foremost “to improve and protect the
forest within and boundaries” and second “for the purpose of se-
curing favorable conditions of water flows” (16 USC 475). A key
concern at the time was the protection of watersheds of navigable
waterways to maintain commerce. A second major concern was
the control of flooding from cut-over watersheds, which had been
responsible for several damaging floods.
Watershed protection and the restoration of damaged water-
sheds are poised to become perhaps the most important issues in
forest management in the twenty-first century. Forests help man-
age the timing and flow of water supplies for agricultural, indus-
trial, and municipal purposes, and they protect water quality for
human consumption. It is becoming particularly challenging to
manage forest watersheds to maintain fish habitat, especially for
threatened and endangered species. With continuing population
growth and the influence of development and pollution, forests
will become increasingly valuable for their ability to protect
watersheds—not only in arid regions of the western United States
where water is in extremely short supply relative to human
needs, but also in the areas surrounding cities and towns in the
eastern United States.
Background
Forests have remarkable capabilities to retain, release, and purify
water. Forest soils absorb and retain water from rain and snow
Forests and Water
89

and slowly release that water into streams and lakes over time.
Forested watersheds are also massive filters that produce high-
quality water in terms of clarity and chemical content. In more
mountainous regions, forests can have a tremendous influence on
the timing and quantity of spring snowmelt for agricultural and
municipal uses. Given the close relationship between forests and
water, it is no wonder that many of the key U.S. forest policies re-
late directly to water.
The relationship between forests and water takes two forms:
water quantity and water quality. Water quantity refers to the
amount of water produced by forests and by manipulating forest
cover. Water quality refers to the amount of particulates, nutri-
ents, and pollutants in water bodies (for example, streams, rivers,
lakes, and wetlands) caused by production activities like building
forest roads and harvesting timber. Both water quantity and qual-
ity continue to be dominant concerns in U.S. forestry.
Forest watershed protection was one of the first motivators
for improving forest management in the United States. Because
forests regulate the timing and release of water into streams and
rivers, forest conservation was deemed necessary for maintaining
navigable waterways as a primary source of commercial trans-
port through the early 1900s. Not only do exploited forests con-
tribute to flooding, they produce large amounts of sediment that
can render waterways unnavigable, silt up agricultural irrigation
canals, and clog intake pipes for municipal water supplies. For
these reasons, forest watershed protection was the highest prior-
ity defined by the Organic Administration Act of 1897, which es-
tablished the direction for managing the National Forest System.
Virtually all rivers in the western United States and many in the
eastern United States have their source on National Forests. Wa-
tershed protection and management remains a high priority for
the Forest Service today.
Population and industrial growth throughout the twentieth
century created greater demands for water. Forest managers and
watershed scientists experimented with different forest-cutting
techniques to manage the timing and flow of water. The first tests
of the effect of forest-cutting patterns on water flow were con-
ducted in experimental forests managed by the Forest Service,
such as Hubbard Brook in New Hampshire and Fraser in Col-
orado. In general, water yield can be increased over the short term
by as much as 10 percent by creating small, scattered openings in
the forest. However, many factors can change this increase, and se-
90
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

rious questions remain whether this increase is sustainable over
the long term and over a large area. It should be noted that the cut-
ting experiments took place in fairly small areas.
The emergence of forest water quality as a policy issue was
tied to general concerns over water pollution throughout the
1960s and early 1970s. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of
1948 primarily addressed point sources of pollution such as in-
dustrial drainpipes. Scientists and policymakers soon recognized
that nonpoint sources contribute more significantly to water pol-
lution. Nonpoint sources generate pollutants attributable to many
dispersed activities that cannot be precisely identified. Streets,
parking lots, lawns, and agricultural lands are considered non-
point sources. Forestry activities such as road building, road use,
and timber harvesting are also considered nonpoint sources. The
Clean Water Act (CWA) of 1972 and the CWA Amendments of
1987 directly addressed nonpoint sources of water pollution and
prompted states to look at forestry practices more closely. Pri-
mary pollutants from forestry activities are sediment, nutrients
(for example, nitrogen and phosphorus), petroleum from ma-
chinery, and chemical pesticides and herbicides. In response, sev-
eral states enacted forest practices acts to regulate private forestry
activities. Many other states work cooperatively with forest in-
dustry and private landowner associations to develop and imple-
ment voluntary best management practices, or BMPs, to mini-
mize forestry-related sources of water pollution.
Recent Policy Developments
In connection with water quantity, one of the most controversial
policy developments is the assertion of Federal reserve “instream
flow” rights. This controversy has emerged in the western United
States, where water law is governed by a Prior-Appropriations
Doctrine that reflects a “first in time, first in right” allocation of
who gets water. The Federal government is a relative latecomer to
the water rights system, with the prime water rights having been
appropriated by early miners, farmers, and other homesteaders
and industries. Hence, the Federal government is considered
under the prior-appropriations doctrine to hold junior water
rights. One of the conditions of holding water rights is that the
water has to be used—“use it or lose it.” Water use typically
means diverting water out of the river to be applied to some use
before it is returned to the river. However, the Forest Service has
Forests and Water
91

recently asserted a claim to watercourses running through Na-
tional Forest lands, requiring that a certain amount of water be
left in streams and rivers to support fish and recreation, among
other values. This claim, in allowing a junior water rights holder
to usurp senior rights holders and in leaving water in streams and
rivers rather than diverting it for use, runs counter in both re-
spects to the Prior-Appropriations Doctrine. Although several
specific disputes have been resolved out of court, serious legal
questions remain that need to be resolved across the West.
In terms of water quality, both states and Federal land man-
agement agencies have paid special attention to forestry activities
in areas adjacent to streams and rivers. Forest stands along these
riparian areas serve multiple watershed functions: they stabilize
the bank, provide shade, and filter runoff after storms. They also
support a broad range of habitat and wildlife corridors that con-
tribute to biological diversity. The Northwest Forest Plan (1994),
which sets strategic priorities for the management of Federal lands
west of the Cascade Mountains in the Pacific Northwest and in
northwest California, has some of the most restrictive riparian for-
est protections in the world, protecting 300 feet on each side of
many streams and rivers from any kind of forestry activities. Al-
though such restrictions have not been placed on privately owned
riparian areas, the issue remains at the front of both policymakers’
and landowners’ agendas. Even in traditionally laissez-faire states
like Virginia, concern about forestry activities in riparian areas has
prompted more restrictive policies on private lands.
One ongoing political battle has been over the designation of
forestry as a point source of water pollution. The Environmental
Protection Agency has on several occasions sought to put forestry
under its purview. Doing so would subject forestry on both pub-
lic and private lands to permits and regulations to reduce the
“total maximum daily load” (TMDL) of pollutants in any given
water body. In 2002, the EPA once again proposed to place
forestry under the TMDL requirements. Compared with agricul-
ture and urban development—both classified as nonpoint
sources of water pollution—forestry contributes very little in
terms of chemical, nutrient, and sediment pollution to streams,
rivers, and lakes. Herbicides and pesticides are typically applied
on young forests over the first five years or so, but they are not
used after the young trees have reached a certain age and height.
In contrast, agricultural crops often require multiple applications
of pesticides and herbicides in a single year, year after year. For-
92
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

est road building, harvesting, and processing are episodic, typi-
cally lasting several weeks before operations end. Federal and
state forest practice regulations restrict these activities and often
go so far as to require site rehabilitation after the operations
end—that is, road obliteration and replanting. Most of these reg-
ulations are in place to directly address water quality issues stem-
ming from forestry. In audit after audit of forest practices on pub-
lic and private land, compliance with best management practices
is typically in the 90 percent range. In the case of urban develop-
ment, land disturbance activities are typically permanent and
contribute to water quality problems on an ongoing basis.
Both water quantity and water quality have become issues
after the catastrophic wildfire seasons in 2000 and 2002, especially
in the western United States but also in Florida and other parts of
the Southeast. In Colorado, which is the headwaters for the Col-
orado, Platte, Arkansas, and Rio Grande Rivers, large wildfires
pose extreme threats to water quantity and water quality, because
scorched forest lands lose their capacity to retain and release
water during and after storms. In 1996 in Colorado, massive sed-
imentation and debris flow resulted when heavy rain fell in the
area of the Buffalo Creek fire, clogging the intake valves in the
Strontia Springs Reservoir, which serves as a municipal water
source for the Denver metropolitan area. Repairs reached into the
millions of dollars. The ability of severely burned watersheds to
retain and release snowmelt into streams and rivers is hampered,
compounding the effect of drought and increasing human de-
mand on diminishing water supply.
Conclusion
Water quantity and quality will continue to be high-priority is-
sues in U.S. forest policy, especially as population growth and de-
velopment increase pressure to protect and augment existing
water sources. In fact, water is poised to become perhaps the most
important issue in forest management in the twenty-first century.
The relationship between forests and water is compounded by
the societal demand to protect biological diversity, manage cata-
strophic wildland forest fire risk, and increase the human pres-
ence in previously undeveloped forest land. An ultimate future
challenge will be to optimize forest management to capture, store,
and release water that is in extremely short supply relative to
human needs.
Forests and Water
93

Forests and Atmospheric Carbon
Forests provide the world with more than wood; they abound
with a broad array of environmental services, many of which are
essential to the survival of all life on Earth. Yet, many of these
services have no price and so are not accounted for in the market
or even in public policy. One of these essential services is the stor-
ing and processing of atmospheric carbon, which is produced by
the cumbustion of fossil fuels and is one of the leading contribu-
tors to global climate change. Because the value of forests to
process and store carbon is rarely factored into the financial side
of forest management decision-making, the value of a forest’s
services to society is not fully accounted for.
Recent initiatives such as the Kyoto Protocol seek to change
this (UNFCCC 1997). One area of focus is on developing an accu-
rate, reliable, transferable accounting system to calculate the full
value of forest environmental services so that the financial side of
forest management decision-making is more fully informed and
forest conservation efforts are appropriately rewarded. When a fi-
nancial price is assigned to a forested area’s services, those serv-
ices can be bought, sold, and traded like any other service. A sec-
ond focal point is on developing the institutional mechanisms to
bring forest environmental services into the market exchange,
such as trading carbon credits among emitters of atmospheric
carbon, such as coal-fired electricity generating plants. By pur-
chasing a certain number of carbon credits based on its annual
carbon emissions, the emitter effectively pays for forest lands that
process and store the corresponding quantity of annual carbon
emissions. As unconventional as this may seem, the calculation,
designation, and exchange of forest environmental services on
the open market is being seriously considered around the world.
Background
Forests are one of Earth’s great respirators, converting carbon in
the atmosphere into life-giving oxygen. Second only to oceans,
the world’s forests process more carbon than any other ecological
system. Forests not only convert atmospheric carbon to oxygen,
they also store an enormous amount of carbon that would other-
wise be released into the atmosphere—more than half of the
world’s terrestrial carbon is stored in forests. Forests store carbon
not only in the leaves, branches, and stems of trees, but in the soil
94
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

as well. There are three categories of activities through which for-
est conservation can help reduce atmospheric carbon (Bass et al.
2000):
1.
Carbon sequestration
•
Afforestation, reforestation, and restoration of
degraded lands.
•
Improved silvicultural techniques to increase
growth rates.
•
Implementation of forestry practices on
agricultural lands to boost those lands’ ability to
sequester carbon.
2.
Carbon conservation
•
Conservation of biomass and soil carbon in
existing forests (that is, by forestalling forest
cutting).
•
Improved harvesting practices to reduce effects on
remaining biomass and soils.
•
Improved efficiency of wood processing to reduce
waste.
•
Fire protection and more effective use of burning
in both forest and agricultural systems.
3.
Carbon substitution
•
Increased conversion of forest biomass into
durable wood products for use in place of energy-
intensive materials such as concrete or aluminum
in housing construction.
•
Increased use of biofuels to generate power.
•
Enhanced use of harvesting waste as feedstock.
Each category varies in how effective it is and over what pe-
riod of time. Carbon sequestration through the conservation of
biomass and soil carbon in existing forests has the largest and
most immediate positive effect on reducing atmospheric carbon.
Carbon sequestration through reforestation or afforestation takes
place over a much longer period of time. Substituting biofuels for
fossil fuels slows, but does not reverse, carbon emissions. Con-
servation of existing forests allows mature forests to continue se-
questering carbon at a high rate and also helps avoid major car-
bon emissions associated with deforestation. Since the early
1980s, as much as one-quarter of all carbon emissions from
human activities has come from deforestation and the burning of
forests, primarily in the tropics.
Forests and Atmospheric Carbon
95

In the United States, economic pressures continue to result in
the conversion of significant areas of forest land to housing de-
velopments and other nonforest land uses. Even considering all
the National Forests and forest industry lands managed with a
long-term perspective, half of all U.S. forests are in small private
ownerships (Smith et al. 2001). Factors such as property taxes
often make it difficult for these owners to achieve a positive fi-
nancial return on their lands, and estate and inheritance taxes can
make it nearly impossible for heirs to maintain these forest lands
unless they fragment them or convert them to nonforest uses.
With the loss of these forest lands, there is also the loss of the nu-
merous ecosystem services these forests provide, such as water-
shed protection, wildlife habitat, and carbon sequestration. These
are important public values that private forests routinely provide.
When private forests disappear, the public values disappear too.
To help ensure that private forest ecosystems continue to
provide these public values, new mechanisms are being devel-
oped to better recognize the values and to translate them into fi-
nancial values (Daily 1997). Some of these are mechanisms for di-
rect compensation of private forest landowners. For example, in
1989, the EPA informed New York City that its drinking water
quality was declining to the point of requiring construction of so-
phisticated water treatment plants at an estimated cost of $6 bil-
lion to $8 billion (Daily and Ellison 2002). Faced with so costly a
project, the city government began exploring alternatives and de-
cided to embark on an aggressive land conservation program to
protect 2,000 square miles of upstate forest land in the Hudson
River watershed through acquisition of land and conservation
easements, as well as stricter controls on new development. The
land conservation program was essentially a transfer of about
$1.5 billion from water users in New York City to upstate com-
munities and landowners. New York City will clearly want to rely
on the water filtration services of its forested watershed for as
long as possible before it switches to the technological solution.
Ecosystem services in the New York City watershed are being bet-
ter protected today, not only because we have a better estimate of
their value, but because some of that value is actually being cap-
tured by the private forest owners whose lands provide water-
shed protection services.
With deepening concern over global climate change and
recognition of the important role of forests in mitigating atmos-
pheric carbon dioxide, there is a potential that this value, too, will
be recognized in the marketplace in ways that will promote im-
96
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

proved forest conservation. The potential role of forest conserva-
tion and management to decrease greenhouse gases in the atmos-
phere suggests that forests will eventually have to be part of any
effective strategy to mitigate climate change. Government poli-
cies and land use regulation may play a part, but it is possible that
the greatest influence may be private, voluntary participation in
innovative capital markets for ecosystem services that are just
now being developed.
Recent Policy Developments
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(FCCC) of 1992 sets broad goals for reducing greenhouse gas
emissions and enhancing carbon “sinks”—ecosystems that can
process and store large quantities of atmospheric carbon, like
forests (UNFCCC 1992). The FCCC of 1992 was signed by virtu-
ally every country around the world, including the United States.
In December 1997, delegates from 160 nations met in Kyoto to
continue work on the FCCC, resulting in the objective of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions to 5 percent or more below 1990 levels
by 2012. Although there was no formal agreement on how to ac-
count for forests as carbon sinks, it is clear that they will play a
key role in any global strategy to mitigate greenhouse gases.
Aside from storing about half of the world’s terrestrial carbon,
they account for about 80 percent of carbon exchange between
terrestrial ecosystems and the atmosphere, absorbing some 3 bil-
lion tons of carbon a year. Aside from oceans, few carbon sinks
can match the carbon processing and storage capacity of forests.
Nongovernmental organizations have generally taken the
lead on linking forest conservation to carbon reduction. Organiza-
tions involved are typically industries seeking to offset their carbon
emissions, intermediary nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),
and specific forest managers. Some example projects include:
Rio Bravo Conservation and Management Area, Belize
Objective: Protection of 14,000 hectares of endangered
forest and development of a sustainable
management program for another 46,000 hectares;
all of this land was slated to be cleared for
agriculture.
Forest area: 60,000 hectares (148,000 acres).
Estimated carbon credit and price: 2.5 million tons @
US$3/ton (US$7.5 million).
Forests and Atmospheric Carbon
97

Baseline assumed: Clearing of entire area within five
years.
Partners: Programme for Belize (Belizean NGO) and
group of U.S. utilities.
Scolel Te Community Forestry Project, Mexico
Objective: Develop systems by which small farmers can
gain access to carbon markets (activities include
reforestation, forest restoration, and agroforestry).
Forest area: 300 hectares (741 acres).
Estimated carbon credit and price: 312 tons @ US$12/ton
(US$3,744).
Baseline assumed: Mean carbon storage under
continuation of existing land use.
Partners: Ambio (Mexican NGO), El Colegio de la
Frontera, University of Edinburgh, and UK
Department for International Development.
Carbon Sink Project in Matto Grosso, Brazil
Objective: Sequester carbon in a plantation of native
species established on degraded land.
Forest area: 5,000 hectares (12,300 acres).
Estimated carbon credit and price: “Maximize
sequestration”; US$10 million.
Baseline assumed: Continuation of previous land use.
Partners: Peugot, Instituto pro Natura (Brazilian NGO),
Office National des Forêts of France.
Sustainable Management of Reserva Forestal Malleco,
Chile
Objective: Promote sustainable management of this
state-owned forest and prove the feasibility of the
new management regime both in economic and
carbon sequestration terms.
Forest area: 16,625 hectares (41,000 acres).
Estimated carbon credit and price: To be determined.
Baseline assumed: Continuation of previous land use.
Partners: French Fund for the Environment,
Corporación Nacional Forestal of Chile, and Office
National des Forêts of France.
In each of these examples, a utility or industry seeking to
mitigate its carbon emissions has sought out and then directly im-
98
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

plemented a major project to sequester the corresponding amount
of carbon it expects to emit. One drawback of a project-by-project
approach is that the twin problems of carbon emissions and
degradation or loss of forest ecosystems are occurring at a global
scale. Intermediary nongovernmental organizations are just not
well positioned to facilitate each and every possible industry-
forest exchange.
In response to the Kyoto standards set in 1997, many coun-
tries are exploring creating a carbon exchange system that would
operate much like any other commodities futures market. The in-
ternational carbon credit trading system now being developed by
Australia, Canada, Mexico, and the European Union is based on
a highly successful sulfur dioxide (SO2) “cap-and-trade” system
developed by the United States and aimed at reducing the causes
of acid rain. The SO2 system was established by the Clean Air Act
Amendments of 1990 under President George H. W. Bush and is
administered by the EPA. Under these amendments, EPA issued
permits to utilities for a certain level of SO2 emissions and issued
the right to trade these permits with other utilities. It was more
expensive for older-technology power plants to achieve the re-
quired reductions than it was for newer, more efficient power
plants. This stimulated an active trading of SO2 credits from new
plants to old, but it also prompted the new plants to become even
more efficient so as to have more unused permits to sell. Ten years
later, the market in SO2 permits had grown to $3 billion, overall
SO2 emissions by the utility industry as a whole were signifi-
cantly lower than EPA targets, and the reduction had been accom-
plished at about one-tenth of the predicted cost.
The 2001 decision by President George W. Bush to withdraw
the United States from participation in the Kyoto Protocol has sig-
nificantly slowed progress toward developing a corresponding
cap-and-trade system for carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions in the
United States and internationally. The United States is the source
of about one-quarter of the world’s carbon emissions; without
U.S. participation, no such system is likely to be effective in re-
ducing global atmospheric carbon.
This has not stopped individual states within the United
States from acting, however. More than half the states have
adopted voluntary or mandatory programs for reducing carbon
emissions. In February, seven state attorneys general announced
that they would sue the EPA for failing to enforce the Clean Air
Act, and they called for new Federal regulations on emissions of
CO2 and other greenhouse gases (Lee 2003). In 2003, Senators
Forests and Atmospheric Carbon
99

John McCain (R-Arizona) and Joseph Lieberman (D-Connecticut)
announced proposed legislation (S.139) that would establish a na-
tional cap-and-trade system for carbon, modeled closely on the
successful system developed for reducing SO2 emissions (Pianin
2003).
Also in 2003, the Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX) opened
for business and became the first financial market in the United
States to begin trading carbon credits like any other commodity
(Behr and Pianin 2003). The goal of the CCX is to implement a
voluntary, private cap-and-trade pilot program for reducing and
trading greenhouse gas emissions. CCX will administer this pro-
gram for carbon-emitting industries and for farm and forest car-
bon sinks primarily in North America. To foster international
emissions trading, forestry operations in Brazil can also partici-
pate. CCX’s founding member companies have made a voluntary
binding commitment to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by
4 percent by 2006 (MeadWestvaco 2002).
Among CCX’s 14 founding member organizations are 4
major forest products corporations (International Paper, Mead-
Westvaco, Temple-Inland, and Stora Enso), 3 of them based in the
United States (Chicago Climate Exchange 2003). There is more
work to do at the national policy level in order to create the kind
of framework that will be required to make this program work in
the long run. But clearly, according to CCX, there are market play-
ers positioned to “make investments that will spur innovation,
raise productivity, and lead to new profit centers.” And the
founding members of CCX have a unique opportunity, through
this bold and innovative pilot program, to help shape the future
policy framework within which their organizations will operate.
Conclusion
Forests provide essential environmental services that society
often takes for granted. Keeping forests growing in natural con-
ditions ensures the sustainability of these services. But based on
current market values of timber alone, many areas of forest land
in the United States and around the world are still not overly
valuable. Many private landowners continue to have great diffi-
culty just breaking even on their forestry investments. Such losses
often lead to the conversion of forest land to nonforest uses such
as agriculture or development. Public forest managers are having
to do more on steadily declining budgets. Development of finan-
100
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

cial markets for the environmental services provided by forests in
processing and storing carbon has the potential for increasing the
values derived from forests and thus improving forest conserva-
tion in the United States and around the world.
Maintaining and enhancing forests that are not under strict
production objectives remains one of the most important chal-
lenges for the future. Wood fiber production is likely to increase
on intensively managed industrial plantations. Because of the
economies of scale involved in industrial wood production, most
nonindustrial and public forest landowners probably will not be
able to compete in either the wood products market or the finan-
cial investment market solely based on wood production values.
Forest Biotechnology
Biotechnology is a relatively new issue area in forestry—one in
which the policy framework is still being formed. What little pol-
icy is currently in place is largely an offshoot of policies originally
developed to guide the use of agricultural biotechnology. Forest
biotechnology has significant potential benefits in terms of in-
creased growth to meet expanding needs for wood and fiber. It
also has the potential to improve environmental performance
through lower energy requirements for production processes and
to reduce use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. There are also
potential risks, however, that scientists are unable to fully define
or predict. Public concern about these risks is likely to result in
policies that will require rigorous review of every new applica-
tion of genetically modified tree species in the United States.
Background
Genetic improvement of commercial tree species has long been
an important aspect of forest management for wood production.
In traditional genetic improvement, individual trees exhibiting
certain favorable characteristics—such as straightness, frost-
hardiness, or resistance to diseases common to the species—are
crossed with other individuals of the species through controlled
combinations of pollen from one and seed from the other. Over
time, this has produced generations of offspring that grow faster,
produce higher-quality wood, and are less susceptible to damage
or early mortality from insect pests and disease. These offspring
Forest Biotechnology
101

are propagated in forest nurseries, often by the thousands, to
produce the seedlings that are planted to regenerate forest areas
following timber harvests. Special varieties of natural tree
species are also bred for particular purposes such as afforestation
of desertified areas, reclamation of mining spoils, or planting
among agricultural crops in agroforestry operations.
It is important to note that in this type of genetic improve-
ment, the collection of genes inherent to the species of tree (its
genome) remains unchanged from that of wild individuals of the
same species. Even after many generations of genetic tree im-
provement, in which individuals exhibiting desired traits have
been favored repeatedly over individuals not exhibiting those
traits, the composition of genes—and the DNA that serves as the
building blocks of these genes—is still the same.
The current policy issues relating to forest biotechnology re-
volve around a different approach to genetic modification—that
of actually altering the DNA and, in effect, creating a new
species. Scientists working first with agricultural crops discov-
ered that, by clipping out certain sections of a species’ DNA and
replacing them with DNA of another species, they could engi-
neer species of grains, vegetables, and other agricultural crops
that grew faster and larger; survived over a wider range of soil
types, climates, and moisture regimes; were of greater nutritional
value; and could even protect themselves from common insects
and diseases. Scientists saw the potential for a second “green
revolution” in which food production could be markedly in-
creased to meet the needs of a growing world population.
Among other benefits were lower requirements for chemical fer-
tilization and pesticide application, reducing energy require-
ments and agricultural effects on environmental values such as
water quality and aquatic habitat.
However, concerns were raised about the unintended, unpre-
dictable, and potentially harmful effects of such genetic engineer-
ing. Would corn designed to produce natural toxins that killed
corn borers also wipe out certain species of butterflies whose lar-
vae also feed on corn (Prasad 1999)? Could the corn itself have
unanticipated negative health effects on people who ate it?
Genetic engineering is a complex and evolving science. The
genome of a given plant or animal species is composed of thou-
sands of individual genes, each of which has a particular purpose
or role. Some genes express themselves in not one, but multiple
ways. Other important expressions arise from clusters of certain
102
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

genes, rather than from just one. The characterization or “map-
ping” of genomes—for species from rice to humans—is one of the
great scientific challenges of the twenty-first century. For now,
however, the inability of scientists to say definitively what all the
effects of a given genetic modification will be—whether for the
environment or for the consumer—has led to public concern,
countries banning the importation of food derived from geneti-
cally modified crops, and even calls for a prohibition on any fur-
ther research or field trials of genetically modified species (Bruce
and Palfreyman 1998).
Potential human health effects are of minimal concern in for-
est biotechnology when compared with agricultural uses, but
concern over its potential environmental effects may be even
greater. Unlike most agricultural crops, genetically modified
(GM) tree species often would be grown in close proximity to
wild populations of the same tree species. This leads to the possi-
bility of interbreeding and the escape of genetic modifications
into the outside environment, with unknown consequences for
the long-term survival of the original species or of other plant and
animal species that live in association in natural ecosystems.
Scientists have attempted to address this issue by program-
ming delayed seed or pollen production in GM trees (so that
there is little chance for genetic interaction with wild popula-
tions) or by making the GM trees sterile altogether (Bajaj 2000).
Nevertheless, the continuing scientific uncertainty over the ef-
fects of GM trees is seen by many as constituting an unacceptable
risk, and public concern will continue to pressure political lead-
ers to develop new policies to guide the development of forest
biotechnology.
Recent Policy Developments
U.S. policies governing research and commercial use of geneti-
cally modified trees are largely indirect, having been developed
primarily for application to agricultural biotechnology (Friedman
2002). At least three Federal agencies are currently involved in
some way in regulating the use of GM crops and forest trees.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture, through its Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), has regulatory author-
ity over the importation or propagation of organisms that are re-
garded as “plant pests”—that is, that pose a danger to U.S. agri-
cultural and tree species (Raychaudhuri and Maramorosch 1999).
Forest Biotechnology
103

To date, there has been no formal determination by APHIS that
GM trees are plant pests as defined by the Plant Protection Act (7
USC 1501 [note]). There is significant public pressure on APHIS to
do so.
To the extent that tree species are genetically modified to pro-
duce food, animal feeds, pharmaceuticals, or cosmetics, the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration has regulatory authority to ap-
prove or disapprove of the use of these products in the United
States.
The EPA, through its authority to regulate the development
and application of pesticides (7 USC 136 et seq. 1996), also asserts
authority over tree species that have been genetically modified to
produce their own toxins to guard against insect or disease or-
ganisms. There has also been experimentation with genetically
engineering certain tree species to absorb serious soil contami-
nants such as lead, arsenic, and mercury, thereby providing a new
tool for the cleanup of toxic wastes. This sort of “bioremediation”
also falls under the regulatory jurisdiction of EPA. Most impor-
tantly, EPA has specific jurisdiction for regulating the “microbial
products of biotechnology” through the Toxic Substances Control
Act (15 USC 2601 et seq.). The EPA has authority to review new
chemicals before they are introduced to commerce, and “interge-
netic microorganisms” (microorganisms created to contain ge-
netic material from organisms in more than one taxonomic gen-
era) are considered new chemicals. Federal regulations now
establish the manner in which EPA will review and regulate the
use of intergenetic microorganisms in commerce or commercial
research (62 FR 17910).
Conclusion
Thus far, there are few if any examples of large-scale commercial
production of GM tree species. However, hundreds of field trials
involving at least 24 species of trees are under way in more than
a dozen countries around the world (Owusu 1999). International
research consortia have been formed with the objective of ex-
panding the use of GM trees to commercial scale, and at least one
consortium has indicated its intent to seek approval from the U.S.
Department of Agriculture and other regulatory agencies for
mass plantings in the United States by 2005 (Brown 2001). Genetic
modification of commercial tree species may hold valuable op-
portunities for supplying wood needs from a smaller area of in-
104
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

tensively managed plantation forests, with reduced effects on
water quality and other environmental values through less use of
chemical fertilizers and pesticides (Arborgen 2002). Other bene-
fits may include genetically modified forms of important tree
species that are immune to diseases that have nearly eliminated
the natural species, including American elm (nearly destroyed by
Dutch Elm Disease), American chestnut (virtually eliminated
from American forests by chestnut blight), and flowering dog-
wood (in sharp decline as a result of Dogwood Anthracnose).
There are potentially significant risks that are as yet ill-
defined and poorly understood even by the scientists most
closely involved in the ongoing research on genetic modification
of trees. The long life of forest trees, as compared with annual
agricultural crops, poses a special challenge for scientists because
negative traits of certain genetic modifications may not become
apparent for several years into the trial of a particular GM tree.
Such trials may turn out to be the most time-consuming and ex-
pensive part of future research on GM trees, but they could also
be essential to demonstrating to the public that all reasonable
measures have been taken to minimize the biological and ecolog-
ical risks associated with artificially engineering new tree species.
As with many other public policy issues involving the intro-
duction of new technologies, future policymaking will require a
careful weighing of potential benefits and potential risks, and in-
volving diverse segments of the public who may regard these
benefits and risks somewhat differently.
Previous experience with new technologies also suggests the
wisdom of moving forward carefully and taking a case-by-case
approach to using new technology to accomplish near-term
objectives. More
traditional approaches to genetic tree
improvement—that is, approaches that do not involve the intro-
duction of genetic material from other species—still have signifi-
cant unrealized potential for increasing growth rates and enhanc-
ing disease resistance. The per capita consumption rate for
industrial roundwood is decreasing, and wood production from
plantations worldwide is continually increasing, and so little or
no increase in wood prices is projected during the next few
decades (Adams 2002). All of this suggests that there is little ur-
gency to rush this new genetic modification technology into
widespread use, and that scientists have time to more fully ex-
plore the potential risks of what could ultimately be a very bene-
ficial technological achievement.
Forest Biotechnology
105

Emerging Issues and Future Policy
Directions
What are some of the major trends influencing the future direc-
tion of forests, forestry, and U.S. forest policy? There will be con-
tinued concerns over sustainable wood production, protecting
habitat for endangered species, protecting remaining areas of
wilderness and primeval forest, and restoring and protecting
forested watersheds.
New issues will arise, some of which will require new bodies
of science and new institutional frameworks for policy imple-
mentation. For example, we are only now beginning to under-
stand the role forests and forest soils play in sequestering carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere and thus helping regulate global
climate. Understanding how best to optimize the contribution of
forests to moderating global climate change is a first step; estab-
lishing the institutional, legal, and policy framework to facilitate
the monitoring of carbon storage in forests—and establishing the
market mechanisms to permit the trading of “carbon credits”
from carbon-storing countries to carbon-producing countries—is
yet another step.
The basic questions that have been the focus of U.S. forest
policy for decades will remain. In the future, as in the past, eco-
nomics will be the primary driver, with policy and law as sec-
ondary influences. 
Wood Supply in the Global Context
The economic globalization that has so transformed the U.S. for-
est products industry during the past decade can be expected to
continue at an even faster pace, particularly in terms of where the
United States gets its wood and wood fiber. In decreasing order
of importance, future U.S. wood supplies will come from:
•
Southern Hemisphere forests, particularly forest
plantations in South America
•
Forest plantations on industry timberlands in the U.S.
South and Pacific Northwest
•
Other industry timberlands and TIMOs
•
Nonindustrial private forest lands in the U.S. South
•
State forest lands
•
Federal forest lands
106
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

Southern Hemisphere
High growth rates (even relative to the U.S. South) and lower
costs for land, labor, and capital will continue to draw timberland
investments to South America and other parts of the Southern
Hemisphere. Lower costs for converting wood to pulp for paper
and paperboard (that is, costs related to energy, labor, and envi-
ronmental restrictions) will increase the proportion of imported
Southern Hemisphere pulp going to U.S. paper mills. Gradually,
an increasing proportion of finishing plants for commodity fiber
products (for example, white business papers and kraft paper for
packaging) will also be located in the Southern Hemisphere. With
the continued transnational consolidation of the paper and wood
fiber industry, the term U.S. forest products company will lose its
meaning: companies’ headquarters may remain here, but their fa-
cilities and markets will be global.
Industry Timberlands in the United States
The relatively high cost of land, labor, and capital in the United
States will make it increasingly difficult for forest products com-
panies to continue owning and managing large areas of forest
land here. This will lead companies to retain only those lands that
can be intensively managed for uniform, high-quality fiber for
high-value specialty products (for example, coated stock for con-
sumer packaging and coated papers for magazine publishing and
commercial printing). The forest products industry has sold mil-
lions of acres of forest land in the United States during the past
decade, and it is expected that the industry will divest millions
more acres in the years to come. Many of these lands will be ac-
quired by the timber investment management organizations
(TIMOs) that invest in land on behalf of pension funds, insurance
companies, and other institutional investors more interested in
appreciation of financial value and reduction of investment risk
than in timber supply per se. Many other areas of industry forest
land, particularly those in the “growth path” of burgeoning cities
in the U.S. South and Pacific Northwest, will be developed.
Other Private Forest Lands
The nonindustrial private forests that constitute the majority of
the forest land in the United States will continue to be a timber
supply reserve for industry in times of increased market demand.
This is especially true in the U.S. South, where forest industry
lands were cut heavily in the early 1990s in the wake of the sharp
reduction in timber supply from Federal lands. Replanted forests
Emerging Issues and Future Policy Directions
107

in industry lands in the South are expected to once again become
the major source of timber supply in that region after 2015, but
until then most of their supplies will come from nonindustrial
private forest (NIPF) lands. Given that there is little if any regula-
tion of forest practices on private lands in most states in the U.S.
South, the current level of public concern over the management
of these forests is certain to increase. In other regions of the
United States, most of the NIPF lands will continue to be man-
aged at low to moderate intensity for multiple values and uses.
These family forests will continue to produce timber sporadically,
more in response to changes in owners’ circumstances (retire-
ment, college tuition, death) than to fluctuations in timber prices.
Public Forest Lands
Considering the political uncertainty and the legal and regulatory
process requirements, public lands will increasingly be the most
expensive place to get timber. The large transnational forest prod-
ucts companies that have resulted from the past decade’s mergers
and industry consolidation have many other ways to obtain
wood closer to their manufacturing facilities and markets. Fed-
eral forests will continue to be an important source of timber sup-
ply primarily to small and medium-sized regional firms, particu-
larly in the Intermountain West. Much of the timber supply from
Federal land will be determined primarily by forest health con-
cerns, that is, it will come from thinning to control hazardous
fuels in areas prone to wildfires.
Forest Management as a Plus in
Biodiversity Conservation
With continued population growth and a finite land base, de-
pendence on wild stocks of trees will steadily decrease, and de-
pendence on intensive culture will increase. This has already hap-
pened with agriculture and animal husbandry. Marine fisheries
and forestry are among the last major human enterprises to shift
from “hunting and gathering” from natural populations wherever
they might occur to intensive production in smaller areas under
more controlled conditions. For forests, this means more intensive
management of forest plantations on the most productive forest
lands and on marginal crop and pasture lands that can be prof-
itably afforested. Not only can this reduce timber harvesting pres-
sures on other forest areas, but it can also help create new oppor-
108
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

tunities to establish protected areas where forests harbor signifi-
cant biodiversity resources or other environmental values.
Several conservation organizations regard such approaches
as the best hope for protecting forest biodiversity around the
world while also meeting the world’s needs for paper and build-
ing products through sustainable wood production. The World
Wide Fund for Nature has called on the world’s ten largest forest
products companies to expand the area of forest plantations by 5
million hectares annually for the next 50 years, as part of a global
strategy for biodiversity conservation. Even with the doubling of
current industrial roundwood demand by 2050 predicted by the
UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), it is estimated that
80 percent of the world’s wood needs could be met from less than
20 percent of the world’s forests. With wood production thus con-
centrated, an estimated 20 percent of the world’s forests could be
devoted to preserving habitat for rare, localized, threatened, and
endangered species. The remaining 60 percent would be managed
at low or moderate intensity for wood products and other uses.
This approach is also appealing from a broader environmen-
tal perspective, in that meeting building material needs as much
as possible from a renewable, recyclable resource like wood can re-
duce the use of concrete, steel, and aluminum. In addition to being
nonrenewable, these require far more energy to turn the raw ma-
terial into usable products, exacerbating the impacts of fossil fuel
burning on greenhouse gas emissions and global climate change.
Greater understanding and acceptance of intensively managed
forest plantations by conservationists and greater understanding
and acceptance of protected forest areas by forest industry can
lead to a new consensus that these are all components in a com-
prehensive strategy for the conservation and sustainable use of
forests—and an end to the gridlock that has characterized so much
of U.S. forest policy for much of the past half-century.
Putting U.S. Forest Policy in the
Global Context
The world is becoming a smaller place. U.S. forest policy will be-
come increasingly intertwined with international policymaking
that takes a global perspective when assessing trends and condi-
tions across the world’s forests and facilitates local actions that
meet local needs in ways consistent with moving ever closer to-
ward the goal of sustainable use and management. In 1992, the
Emerging Issues and Future Policy Directions
109

Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro set the stage for national-level as-
sessments of forest conditions and trends, with reference to Crite-
ria and Indicators of sustainability developed in the earlier Mon-
treal Process. Ten years later, the World Summit on Sustainable
Development in Johannesburg focused on moving beyond paper
resolutions to increase the demonstrable, measurable improve-
ments in forest management at the local level. Although there is
still significant room for improvement in the way U.S. forests are
managed, the United States nevertheless has the potential to
serve as a model of sustainable forestry that is ecologically sound,
economically viable, and socially responsible. Leadership will
come not only through the transfer of useful technologies and
proven forest management methodologies, but through the adap-
tation of institutional, legal, and policy mechanisms to provide a
framework for creativity and innovation. After all, it was not so
long ago that the United States was still a developing country, es-
pecially in the context of forestry.
References
7 USC 1501 (note). Agricultural Risk Protection Act of 2000. 114 Stat. 358.
7 USC 136. Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act of June 25,
1947. 61 Stat. 63, as amended.
15 USC 2601 et seq. Toxic Substances Control Act of October 11, 1976. 90
Stat. 2003, as amended.
16 USC 1131 (note). Wilderness Act of September 3, 1964. 78 Stat. 890, as
amended.
16 USC 1600 (note). National Forest Management Act of October 22,
1976. 90 Stat. 2949, as amended.
16 USC 1600. Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Management
Act of August 17, 1974. 88 Stat. 476, as amended.
16 USC 528. Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of June 12, 1960. 74 Stat.
215.
36 CFR 219 Planning. Subpart A. National Forest System Land and Re-
source Management Planning.
62 FR 17910. “Microbial Products of Biotechnology: Final Regulation
under the Toxic Substances Control Act.” Federal Register, April 11, 1997.
Adams, D. M. 2002. “Harvest, Inventory, and Stumpage Prices: Con-
sumption Outpaces Harvest, Prices Rise Slowly.” Journal of Forestry
100(2):26–31.
110
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

Aplet, G., N. Johnson, J. Olson, and V. A. Sample. 1993. Defining Sustain-
able Forestry. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Arborgen. 2002. “Improving Forestry through Genetics and Technology.”
Available at: www.arborgen.com/science.html. Accessed on April 30,
2003.
Bajaj, Y., ed. 2000. Transgenic Trees. Biotechnology in Agriculture and
Forestry, No. 44. New York: Springer Verlag.
Banzhaf, W. 1995. “The Forest Congress: A New Way of Doing Busi-
ness?” Journal of Forestry 93 (3): 3.
Bass, S., O. Dubois, P. Mouracosta, M. Pinard, R. Tipper, and C. Wilson.
2000. Rural Livelihood and Carbon Management. IIED Natural Resources
Paper No. 1. London: International Institute for Economic Development.
Behr, P., and E. Pianin. 2003. “Firms Start Trading Program for Green-
house Gas Emissions.” Washington Post, January 17, 2003, p. A14.
Berg, S., and R. Olszewski. 1995. “Certification and Labeling: A Forest In-
dustry Perspective.” Journal of Forestry 93(4):30–32.
Berg, S., and T. Cantrell. 1999. “Sustainable Forestry Initiative: Toward a
Higher Standard.” Journal of Forestry 97(11):33–36 (November 1999).
Binkley, C. S. 2001. “Forestry in the Long Sweep of History.” In Sustain-
able Forestry and Biodiversity Conservation: Toward A New Consensus. Wash-
ington, DC: Pinchot Institute for Conservation.
Binkley, C. S., C. F. Raper, and C. L. Washburn. 1996. “Institutional Own-
ership of US Timberland.” Journal of Forestry 94(9):21–28.
Bowes, M., and J. Krutilla. 1989. Multiple-Use Management: The Economics
of Public Forestlands. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Brown, K. 2001. “Industry Hugs Biotech Trees.” Technology Review. Avail-
able at: www.technologyreview.com/magazine/mar01/innovation6.
asp. Accessed on April 30, 2003.
Bruce, A., and J. Palfreyman, eds. 1998. Forest Products Biotechnology. Lon-
don: Taylor & Francis.
Brussard, P. F., D. D. Murphy, and R. F. Noss. 1992. “Strategy and Tactics
for Conserving Biological Diversity in the United States.” Conservation
Biology 6: 157–159.
Cabarle, B., R. Hrubes, C. Elliot, and T. Synnott. 1995. “Certification Ac-
creditation: The Need for Credible Claims.” Journal of Forestry 93 (4):
12–16.
Callicot, B. 1991. “Conservation of Biologic Resources: Responsibility to
Nature and Future Generations.” In D. J. Decker, M. E. Krasny, G. R.
Groff, C. R. Smith, and D. W. Gross, eds., Challenges in the Conservation of
Biological Resources: A Practitioner’s Guide. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
References
111

Chicago Climate Exchange. 2003. Available at: http://www.chicagocli-
matex.com. The founding members of the Chicago Climate Exchange are
American Electric Power (AEP); Baxter International Inc.; City of
Chicago; Equity Office Properties Trust; Ford Motor Company; Interna-
tional Paper; Manitoba Hydro; MeadWestvaco Corporation; Motorola
Inc.; STMicroelectronics; Stora Enso North America; Temple-Inland Inc.;
and Waste Management Inc.
Clawson, M. 1967. The Federal Lands since 1956: Recent Trends in Use and
Management. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press for Re-
sources for the Future.
———. 1975. Forests for Whom and for What? Baltimore, MD: Johns Hop-
kins University Press for Resources for the Future.
———. 1983. The Federal Lands Revisited. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press for Resources for the Future.
Coulombe, M. 1995. “Sustaining the World’s Forests: The Santiago
Agreement.” Journal of Forestry 93 (4): 18–21.
Daily, G. 1997. Nature’s Services: Societal Dependence on Natural Ecosystems.
Washington, DC: Island Press.
Daily, G., and K. Ellison. 2002. The New Economy of Nature: The Quest to
Make Conservation Profitable. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Dana, S. T. 1918. “Forestry and Community Development.” USDA Bull.
638. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Ehrlich, P. R. 1997. “No Middle Way on the Environment.” The Atlantic
Monthly 280 (6): 98–104.
FAO. 2000. Global Outlook for the Future Wood Supply from Forest Planta-
tions. Rome: United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.
———. 2001. State of the World’s Forests 2001. Rome: United Nations Food
and Agriculture Organization.
Faustmann, M. 1849. “The Determination of Value Which Forest Land
and Immature Stands Possess for Forestry.” Originally published in Ger-
man in Allegemeine Forest und Jagd Zeitung 25. English translation pub-
lished in 1995 in Umea, Sweden, in Journal of Forest Economics 1 (1).
Friedman, S. 2002. “Overview of Current Laws and Regulatory Struc-
ture.” In Biotech Branches Out: A Look at the Opportunities and Impacts of
Forest Biotechnology. Washington, DC: Pew Initiative on Food and
Biotechnology.
Gordon, J. 1994. The New Face of Forestry: Exploring a Discontinuity and the
Need for a New Vision. Pinchot Distinguished Lecture. Milford, PA: Grey
Towers Press.
Gray, G. J., M. J. Enzer, and J. Kusel. 1998. Understanding Community-
Based Forest Ecosystem Management: An Editorial Synthesis of an American
112
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

Forests Workshop, Bend, OR, June 1998. Washington, DC: American
Forests.
Grumbine, M. 1994. “What Is Ecosystem Management?” Conservation Bi-
ology 8 (1): 27–38.
Heske, F. 1938. German Forestry. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Hirt, P. 1994. A Conspiracy of Optimism: Management of the National Forests
since World War Two. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Hoberg, George. 1999. “The Coming Revolution in Regulating Our
Forests.” Policy Options. Institute for Research in Public Policy. 53–56.
Howard, J. L. 1999. U.S. Timber Production, Trade, Consumption and Price
Statistics 1965–1997. Gen. Tech. Rep. FPL-GRT-116. Madison, WI: U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service, Forest Products Laboratory.
Howard, S., and J. Stead. 2001. The Forest Industry in the 21st Century. Lon-
don: World Wide Fund for Nature.
Hunter, M. L., and A. Calhoun. 1996. “A Triad Approach to Land-Use Al-
location.” In R. A. Szaro and D.W. Johnston, eds., Biodiversity in Managed
Landscapes. London: Oxford University Press.
International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). 1988. Plant
Conservation Programme. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.
Krutilla, J., and J. Haigh. 1978. “An Integrated Approach to National For-
est Management.” Environmental Law 8 (2).
Langbein, W., ed. 1996. Seventh American Forest Congress: Final Report,
New Haven, CT: Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies.
Lee, J. 2003. “Seven States to Sue EPA over Standards on Air Pollution.”
New York Times, February 21.
Leopold, A. 1949. A Sand County Almanac, and Sketches Here and There.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Mater, C. M., W. C. Price, and V. A. Sample. 2002. Certification Assessments
on Public and University Lands: A Field-Based Comparative Evaluation of the
Forest Stewardship Council and Sustainable Forestry Initiative Programs.
Washington, DC: Pinchot Institute for Conservation.
MeadWestvaco. 2002. “Chicago Climate Exchange Founding Members
Make Unprecedented Voluntary Binding Commitment to Reduce Green-
house Gas Emissions by Four Percent by 2006.” Available at: www.mead-
westvaco.com/news/news011603.html. Accessed on April 30, 2003. 
Meridian Institute. 2001. Comparative Analysis of the Forest Stewardship
Council and Sustainable Forestry Initiative Certification Programs. Washing-
ton, DC: Meridian Institute.
Owusu, R. “GM Technology in the Forest Sector: A Scoping Study for
WWF.” Available at: http://www.wwf-uk.org/news/gm.pdf. Accessed
on April 14, 2003.
References
113

Pagiola, S., J. Bishop, and N. Landell-Mills. 2002. Selling Forest Environ-
mental Services: Market-Based Mechanisms for Conservation and Develop-
ment. London: Earthscan Publications Ltd.
Pianin, E. 2003. “Reductions Sought in Greenhouse Gases.” Washington
Post, January 9, p. A4.
Pinchot, G. 1947. Breaking New Ground. New York: Harcourt, Brace and
Company.
Prasad, B., ed. 1999. Biotechnology and Biodiversity in Agriculture/Forestry.
Plymouth, England: Science Publishers Inc.
Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America: A Cultural History of Wildland and Rural
Fire. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
———. 2001. Year of the Fires: The Story of the Great Fires of 1910. New York:
Viking.
Rathe, T. 1992. “The Green Area of the Green Market: Is It Really Envi-
ronmentally Friendly? Solutions to Confusion Caused by Environmental
Advertising.” Journal of Corporate Law 18 (2): 419–458.
Raup, D. M., and J. J. Sepkoski. 1984. “Periodicity of Extinctions in the
Geologic Past.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 81: 801–805.
Raven, P. H. 1987. “We’re Killing Our World: Preservation of Biological
Diversity.” Vital Speeches of the Day, May 15, 472–478.
Raychaudhuri, S., and K. Maramorosch, eds. 1999. Biotechnology and Plant
Protection in Forestry Science. Plymouth, England: Science Publishers Inc.
Ricketts, T. H., E. Dinerstein, D. M. Olson, and C. J. Loucks. 1999. Terres-
trial Ecoregions of North America: A Conservation Assessment. Covelo, CA:
Island Press.
Sample, V. A. 1990. The Impact of the Federal Budget Process on National For-
est Planning. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
———. 1998. Principles of Sustainable Forest Management: Examples from
Recent US and International Efforts. Discussion Paper 98–01. Washington,
DC: Pinchot Institute for Conservation.
Schallau, C. 1974. “Forest Regulation II: Can Regulation Contribute to
Economic Stability?” Journal of Forestry 72 (6): 214–216.
Schmidheiny, S. 1992. Changing Course: A Global Business Perspective on
Development and the Environment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sedjo, R., and D. Botkin. 1997. “Using Forest Plantations to Spare Natural
Forests.” Environment 39 (10): 15–20.
Sedjo, R., and B. Sohngren. 2000. Forestry Sequestration of CO2 and Markets
for Timber. Discussion Paper 00–35. Washington, DC: Resources for the
Future.
114
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

Shands, W. E., V. A. Sample, and D. Le Master. 1990. National Forest Plan-
ning: Searching for a Common Vision. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service.
Smith, W., J. Vissage, R. Sheffield, and D. Darr. 2001. Forest Resources of the
United States, 1997. General Technical Report NC-219. St. Paul, MN: U.S.
Department of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service, North Central Forest Ex-
periment Station.
Society of American Foresters. 1995. “Forest Certification. Summary of
Report of SAF Study Group on Forest Certification.” Journal of Forestry 93
(4): 6–10.
Spies, T. A., and J. F. Franklin. 1996. “The Diversity and Maintenance of
Old-Growth Forests.” In R. A. Szaro and D. W. Johnston, eds., Biodiversity
in Managed Landscapes. London: Oxford University Press.
State of Washington v. Avery Dexter. 1949. 32 Wn. 2d 551, 202 P. 2d 906.
Stedfast, S. 1999. “Regulatory Takings: A Historical Overview and
Legal Analysis for Natural Resource Management.” Environmental Law
(Winter).
Szaro, R. A., and B. Shapiro. 1990. Conserving Our Heritage: America’s Bio-
diversity. Arlington, VA: The Nature Conservancy.
Thomas, J. W. 1994. Ecosystem Management: A National Framework. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service.
UNFCCC. 1992. “United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change.” Convention text available at http://unfccc.int/resource/
docs/convkp/conveng.pdf. Accessed on April 30, 2003.
———. 1997. Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change. Protocol text available at http://unfccc.int/resource/
docs/convkp/kpeng.pdf. Accessed on April 30, 2003.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1993. Status Report on the Use of
Environmental Labels Worldwide. EPA 742-R-9–93–001. Washington, DC:
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
USDA, U.S. Forest Service. 1999. “National Forest System Roadless
Areas: Notice of Intent to Prepare an Environmental Impact Statement.”
Federal Register 64 (201): 56306–56307 (October 19, 1999). 
USDA, U.S. Forest Service. 2001. “36 CFR Part 294. Special Areas: Road-
less Area Conservation; Final Role.” Federal Register 66 (9): 3244–3273
(January 12, 2001).
Waggener, T. R. 1977. “Community Stability as a Forest Management Ob-
jective.” Journal of Forestry 75 (11): 710–714.
Westoby, J. 1989. Introduction to World Forestry: People and Their Trees. Ox-
ford, England: Blackwell.
References
115

Williams, M. 1989. Americans and Their Forests: A Historical Geography.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, E. O. 1992. The Diversity of Life. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.
World Commission on Environment and Development. 1987. Our Com-
mon Future. New York: Oxford University Press.
World Wildlife Fund. 2001. “Top Ten Companies Can Help Save the
World’s Forests.” Press release, March 14. Washington, DC: World
Wildlife Fund.
116
Current Issues in U.S. Forest Policy

3
Chronology
1626
In the first documented forest legislation in what later
would become the United States, the Massachusetts
Bay Colony addresses local concerns over dwindling
timber supplies by prohibiting the sale or transport of
any timber whatsoever out of the colony without the
approval of the governor and council.
1691
England reserves to the Crown “all pine trees fit for
masts” throughout the American colonies; this Broad
Arrow policy (named for the distinctive mark of the
British Navy stamped into the best-suited white
pines) establishes the right of the sovereign to exercise
absolute control over the use of public lands. Widely
unpopular with colonists, the policy is among the
grievances contributing decades later to the American
Revolution.
1781
Creation of the “original public domain” of Federal
lands begins with the cession of “western reserve
lands” by the 13 original states; further additions to
the public domain are made through the Louisiana
Purchase (1803), Florida Purchase (1819), Oregon
Compromise (1846), Mexican Cession (1848), Texas
Purchase (1850), Gadsden Purchase (1853), and
Alaska Purchase (1867).
117

1799
Congress authorizes the creation of naval timber re-
serves to protect stands of live oak and red cedar
needed for ship construction, reflecting the right of
government to exercise control over public lands in
the national interest.
1837
Senator John Calhoun of South Carolina introduces a
bill providing for the cession to the states of all the
public lands within their borders; although the pro-
posal fails, it helps lead to the Preemption Act of 1841,
in which 500,000 acres of Federal land is ceded to each
of the existing states and to such new states as might
be admitted to the Union.
1850
First of several railroad land grants are made to pro-
vide rights-of-way, assist railroads in the financing of
railway construction, and promote settlement of the
western United States; transcontinental grants are
made in 1862 to the Union Pacific and Central Pacific
Railroads, giving title to alternating 640-acre blocks of
Federal land for 20 miles on each side of the railroad
over its entire length. Eventually totaling more than
91 million acres, these grants remain the largest con-
veyances of public land to private corporations in the
history of the nation.
1853
The warship USS Michigan is called on to control vio-
lent mobs in Manistee, Michigan, and assist a local
agent of the new U.S. Department of the Interior in ar-
resting several individuals caught stealing large quan-
tities of timber from the public lands. Timber theft
from public lands elsewhere in the country is wide-
spread and largely uncontrolled.
1862
The Homestead Act allows an individual citizen to
claim up to 160 acres of land from the public domain
and to secure a free patent on that land upon proof of
having resided on and cultivated the land for five
years.
1864
Publication of George Perkins Marsh’s Man and Nature
(republished in 1872 as Earth as Modified by Human Ac-
118
Chronology

tion), describing the gradual destruction of the
Mediterranean forests through overexploitation and
raising the prospect of similar destruction of Amer-
ica’s abundant forests; this seminal work eventually
helps prompt a reexamination of forest policy in the
United States.
1872
The Mining Law of 1872 opens all public-domain
lands to mineral exploration and purchase by private
citizens when valuable mineral deposits are located
and claimed. It is largely on the basis of this law that
private citizens and corporations continue to own in-
holdings in Federal forests, which can be developed
and to which transportation access over adjacent pub-
lic land must be allowed.
1873
Timber Culture Act authorizes grants of 160 acres of
Federal land per person to anyone who agrees to plant
40 acres of the land to trees not more than 12 feet apart
and to keep them in a growing and healthy condition
by cultivation for a period of ten years. This is in-
tended to address the lack of wood for settlements in
the western plains and prairies.
1877
Interior Secretary Carl Schurz introduces a timber-
agent program to vigorously enforce laws against the
theft of timber from the public lands; Congress
sharply reduces Interior appropriations available for
prosecution of such theft.
1878
Congress passes the Free Timber Act, which together
with subsequent amendments permits the free cutting
of timber anywhere on the public domain not only for
mining, agricultural, and domestic purposes but also
for manufacturing. In the same year, the Timber and
Stone Act allows for the purchase of Federal timber-
lands in Oregon, Washington, California, and Nevada
for $2.50 an acre, setting off a wave of fraudulent land
purchases resulting in more than 15 million acres of
the most productive timberlands in the Pacific North-
west being transferred from the public domain to pri-
vate timber companies for a fraction of their value.
Chronology
119

1879
Public dissatisfaction with fraud and abuse associated
with public land acquisition leads to creation of the
Public Land Commission, which recommends that all
public lands be withdrawn from sale or other dis-
posal; the commission recommends the sale of timber
from these lands at fair market value and that settlers
be allowed free use of timber for building, agricul-
tural, mining, and other purposes, but not for sale,
commerce, or export; Congress takes no action on the
recommendations.
1885
New York becomes the first state to create state Forest
Reserves, followed by Pennsylvania in 1897.
1891
Forest Reserve Act authorizes the President to reserve
forest lands from the public domain for retention in
federal ownership. It also repeals the Timber Culture
Act and halts the sale of Federal lands except isolated
small tracts. By the end of 1893, more than 17 million
acres of Forest Reserve have been set aside by execu-
tive order, but no further action is taken because of the
lack of any provision for the protection and adminis-
tration of the reserves.
1897
Organic Administration Act directs that the Forest Re-
serves will be managed by the Department of the In-
terior to protect the headwaters of navigable water-
ways and to secure a continuous supply of wood for
the American people; act specifies forest management
standards that will later be interpreted as a prohibi-
tion of clearcutting on Federal forest lands.
1905
Second American Forest Congress held at the White
House, organized by Gifford Pinchot and hosted by
President Theodore Roosevelt; lays political ground-
work for the transfer of the Forest Reserves from the
Department of the Interior to the Department of Agri-
culture’s Division of Forestry in the Transfer Act of
1905; Forest Reserves renamed National Forests; U.S.
Forest Service established as an agency of U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture, with Gifford Pinchot serving
as first Chief Forester.
120
Chronology

1906
Annual lumber production in the United States
reaches a record 46 billion board feet; with the Lake
States and the East largely cut over, most timber cut-
ting has moved to the virgin forests of the Pacific
Northwest and the South.
1910
President William H. Taft fires Gifford Pinchot as
Chief Forester after Pinchot challenges Interior Secre-
tary Richard A. Ballinger’s approval of allegedly
fraudulent claims on coal lands in the Chugach Na-
tional Forest in Alaska. After a lengthy public dispute
in which Congress is finally obliged to intervene, Pin-
chot is dismissed for providing information directly to
Congress without approval by the Secretary of Agri-
culture as required by a standing executive order. Na-
tional press characterizes Pinchot as a martyr for con-
servation in the fight against big business.
1911
Weeks Law provides long-sought authority for federal
acquisition of forest lands, ostensibly to facilitate in-
terstate commerce through the regulation of stream
flow and protection of the headwaters of navigable
rivers. This becomes the basis for the acquisition, with
required state government approval, of most of what
are now National Forests in the eastern United States.
1913
Underwood Tariff Act eliminates virtually all import
tariffs and duties on wood products, settling the first
of many trade disputes with Canada over timber
trade. This dispute began in 1872 with the imposition
of a lumber import duty by the United States. Canada
responds with its own duty on the export of logs, se-
verely restricting timber supply to American sawmills
in the Lake States. Compromises in 1890 (McKinley
Tariff Act) and 1894 (Wilson Act) are overturned by
the U.S. forest products industry in the Dingley Tariff
Act of 1897, which starts a new round in the trade dis-
pute and prompts Canadians to ban all exports of logs
from Crown lands to the United States. The Under-
wood Tariff Act compromise holds until 1930, when
the cycle of U.S.-Canadian lumber trade disputes be-
gins again.
Chronology
121

1915
Forest Service is authorized to issue special-use per-
mits for the construction of summer cabins on Federal
lands, recognizing recreation as a legitimate use of the
National Forests.
Branch of Research is established in the Forest Service
as an organizational coequal of the branch adminis-
tering the National Forests; regional experiment sta-
tions are established around the country, largely as a
result of pressure from private timberland owners on
Congress.
1916
National Park Service is established under Stephen T.
Mather “to conserve the scenery and the natural and
historic objects and the wildlife therein and to provide
for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by
such means as will leave them unimpaired for the en-
joyment of future generations.”
1920
The Capper Report (prepared by the Forest Service at
the request of Republican Senator Arthur Capper
from Kansas) describes destructive cutting methods
and fires following logging as having left 81 million
acres of U.S. forest land effectively devoid of forest
growth, increasing timber prices and raising concerns
over future timber shortages. The transfer of much of
the more productive public forest land to private own-
ership, followed by exploitive and unstable forest
ownership (referred to as “cut-out-and-get-out”) stim-
ulates policies encouraging reforestation and a gen-
eral shift from logging virgin forests to practicing sus-
tained-yield management in second-growth forests.
National Forestry Program Committee is formed to
secure the adoption and enactment of a comprehen-
sive Federal forestry policy “to coordinate the various
plans and measures proposed to provide an adequate
and permanent timber supply for the people of the
United States, and to promote national legislation to
this end.” Subsequent legislation focuses on the issue
of Federal regulation of forestry practices on private
lands. Prevailing view is that Forest Service should
122
Chronology

provide national leadership and financial assistance,
but that regulation should be left to state governments
under the police powers granted to states under the
Constitution.
1924
Clarke-McNary Act establishes Federal-state coopera-
tive forest fire control and cooperation in reforestation
and management of state and private forests. Respon-
sibility for forest fire control and forest pest manage-
ment on all but the Federal forest lands eventually re-
sides almost entirely with state government.
National Conference on Outdoor Recreation is con-
vened under President Calvin Coolidge to determine
how to address the growing public demand for forest-
based recreation. A permanent committee established
by Coolidge to implement the conference’s resolu-
tions focuses primarily on transfers from National
Forests and other public lands to create new National
Parks.
1930
Knutson-Vandenberg Act authorizes the Secretary of
Agriculture to require a special deposit by purchasers
of National Forest timber to help cover the expenses of
reforestation and other mitigation measures on cut-
over areas. The objective is to speed up reforestation
and improve silvicultural practices in the National
Forests.
Shipstead-Nolan Act withdraws from entry all public
lands in two counties in northern Minnesota, taking
the first steps toward the later designation of roadless
areas and wilderness preserves. This act requires the
Forest Service to preserve the natural beauty of the
lakes in the Superior National Forest primarily for
recreational use and prohibits the cutting of all trees
along the lakes’ shorelines. This large protected area
forms the basis for the later designation of the Bound-
ary Waters Canoe Area and the establishment in co-
operation with Canada of the Quetico-Superior Inter-
national Peace Park.
Chronology
123

1944
Sustained Yield Forest Management Act authorizes
the secretaries of the Departments of Agriculture and
the Interior to enter into cooperative agreements with
private landowners to create “cooperative sustained-
yield units” consisting of both Federal and private for-
est lands. The purpose of these units is to promote the
stability of forest industries, employment, communi-
ties, and the taxable forest wealth through a continu-
ous and stable supply of timber from the combination
of Federal and private lands in the vicinity.
1948
Federal Water Pollution Control Act and subsequent
major amendments require states to develop pro-
grams for reducing and controlling water pollution,
including nonpoint-source pollution from forestry ac-
tivities such as sedimentation from road-building ac-
tivities, fertilizer runoff, and spraying of pesticides;
despite certain silvicultural exemptions, limitations
on the draining and filling of inland wetlands be-
comes an important consideration in forestry activi-
ties.
1955
Clean Air Act and subsequent major amendments re-
quire states to develop programs for reducing and
controlling air pollution; visibility protection require-
ments for Federal “Class I” areas become an impor-
tant consideration in forest fire control and the use of
prescribed burning for brush control and ecological
restoration.
1960
Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act establishes that the
National Forests are to be managed for a combination
of uses, including outdoor recreation, range, timber,
watershed, and wildlife and fish. Multiple use is de-
fined as “the management of all the various renew-
able surface resources of the National Forests so that
they are utilized in the combination that will best meet
the needs of the American people . . . with considera-
tion being given to the relative values of the various
resources, and not necessarily the combination of uses
that will give the greatest dollar return or the greatest
unit output.” Sustained yield is defined as the “achieve-
ment and maintenance in perpetuity of a high level
124
Chronology

annual or regular periodic output of the various re-
newable resources of the National Forests without im-
pairment of the productivity of the land.” This law be-
comes 
the 
foremost 
guiding 
principle 
for
management, planning, and future policy develop-
ment for the National Forests.
1964
The Wilderness Act provides for areas of Federal
lands to be designated by law (rather than simply by
the administrative authority of Federal land manage-
ment agencies) and administered “for the use and en-
joyment of the American people in such manner as
will leave them unimpaired for future use and enjoy-
ment as wilderness.” The National Wilderness Preser-
vation System (NWPS) is created from lands already
under the management of at least four Federal agen-
cies (Forest Service, National Park Service, Bureau of
Land Management, and Fish and Wildlife Service),
and management of individual segments of the
NWPS continues to reflect the policies of those indi-
vidual agencies.
1965
Land and Water Conservation Fund Act provides for
federal acquisition of land, particularly for outdoor
recreation, using a fund built up primarily from a por-
tion of federal receipts from oil and gas leases on the
outer continental shelf.
1970
National Environmental Policy Act requires an assess-
ment of the potential environmental effects of any
major federal action, a consideration of a full range of
alternatives to the proposed action, and an opportunity
for public involvement prior to final decision-making.
Subsequently, environmental analysis becomes a major
consideration in federal forest management and is the
basis for many proposed activities being halted by the
courts or significantly modified.
1973
Endangered Species Act provides for the protection of
habitat for federally listed threatened or endangered
species and prohibits development or forest manage-
ment activities that would amount to a “taking” of
these species through destruction of their habitat.
Chronology
125

1974
Eastern Wilderness Act designates areas of several
eastern National Forests as Wilderness and creates ad-
ditional Wilderness Study Areas for future considera-
tion. This is the start of a process for the review of rel-
atively undeveloped areas of Federal forests for
potential Wilderness designation that pits develop-
ment interests against Wilderness protection interests
and places forestry agencies in the middle of a contin-
uing, politically charged debate.
Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
Act requires the periodic assessment of trends and
conditions on all forests and rangelands in the United
States and the development of a strategic plan for the
management of renewable resources on National For-
est lands.
1976
National Forest Management Act requires the peri-
odic development of a management plan for each in-
dividual National Forest subject to several new limi-
tations on controversial forest practices such as
clearcutting and requiring public involvement.
1980
The Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act
establishes several new National Monuments to pro-
tect portions of the 17-million-acre Tongass National
Forest in southeast Alaska but legislatively establishes
the timber harvest level; this sets up conflicts with the
Endangered Species Act and other laws that keep the
planning and management for this—the largest of the
National Forests—tied up in the Federal courts for
decades.
1988
Major forest fires in Yellowstone National Park and
elsewhere in the western United States prompt a
major reconsideration of long-standing fire control
policies, which are seen as allowing an unnatural and
dangerous accumulation of fuels and circumstances in
which large-scale wildfires erupt with unacceptable
loss of life and property; new policies are developed
to allow natural fires to burn uncontrolled in remote
forest areas and to expand the use of prescribed fire to
126
Chronology

reduce brush and other fuels in managed forests adja-
cent to developed areas.
1989
Northern spotted owl listed as a threatened species
(under terms of the Endangered Species Act and Na-
tional Forest Management Act); this results in the
withdrawal of large areas of Federal forest in the west-
ern United States from timber harvesting; subsequent
sharp reductions in timber harvest volume and forest
industry employment, especially in the Pacific North-
west and California, result in one of the twentieth cen-
tury’s biggest controversies in forest management.
Legal challenges substantially increase the role of the
Federal courts in U.S. forest policy.
Several European countries ban the import of tropical
timbers as way to slow the rate of tropical deforesta-
tion; as a result, the Forest Stewardship Council is
formed by representatives of forest industry and con-
servation nongovernmental organizations to set stan-
dards by which a forest management enterprise can
become independently certified and its products la-
beled as having come from well-managed forests; this
is the start of several voluntary, market-based initia-
tives aimed at giving consumers the information
needed to orient their purchases toward products
from sustainably managed forests; it also represents
an important step beyond sole reliance on govern-
ment policy and regulation as a means of influencing
the management of forests.
1990
Sharply accelerated international consolidation of the
forest products industry results in the sale of large
areas of private forest land for development; public
concern over the loss of these forest areas, particularly
in the northeastern United States, prompts new Fed-
eral laws to facilitate state government acquisition of
private forest lands of significant conservation value
and encourages the transfer of development rights on
private forest lands to local government or qualified
nongovernmental organizations.
Chronology
127

1992
Global attention is focused on the rapid rate of defor-
estation in the Amazon and tropical forests elsewhere
in the world, with widespread implications of defor-
estation for rural poverty, the loss of biodiversity, and
acceleration of global climate change; a United Na-
tions Conference on Environment and Development
is held in Rio de Janeiro, resulting in an international
convention on biological diversity, a framework con-
vention on climate change, and, a nonbinding agenda
for actions by both developed and developing coun-
tries to improve the sustainable management of
forests.
1993
United States takes part in a nonbinding international
agreement to periodically assess domestic forest con-
ditions and trends with reference to a set of seven cri-
teria and 67 indicators of sustainable forest manage-
ment (Montreal Process Criteria and Indicators, or
C&I); in subsequent international meetings, United
States participates in additional nonbinding agree-
ments to take actions to gradually improve the man-
agement of domestic forests with reference to the C&I.
1994
The two remaining long-term timber sale contracts for
harvesting timber on the Tongass National Forest in
southeast Alaska are canceled early as no longer being
in the public interest; the long-term contracts, guaran-
teeing access to Federal timber for 50 years, are the
last of several such contracts begun in the 1950s to
stimulate economic development in the region.
1995
Through a rider on the Forest Service appropriations
bill for 1996, all timber salvage sales in the National
Forests are made temporarily exempt from legal chal-
lenge or judicial review under any law. Environmen-
tal opposition is galvanized, and efforts to build con-
sensus and cooperation among U.S. forest interests,
such as the Seventh American Forest Congress, suffer
a major setback.
1999
The United States and 46 other nations agree to the
Kyoto Protocol, which commits countries to gradually
reduce their emission of carbon dioxide and other
128
Chronology

greenhouse gases through reduced fossil fuel con-
sumption and the increased sequestration of atmos-
pheric carbon through the use of “carbon sinks” such
as forests; the United States officially withdraws from
the agreement in 2001, but private entrepreneurs
move ahead with the development of financial ex-
changes that allow carbon-emitting industries to pur-
chase “carbon credits” to support afforestation and
other carbon-storing activities to offset their emis-
sions.
2000
The United Nations Forum on Forests is formed to
oversee the implementation of more than 200 non-
binding “proposals for action” by individual coun-
tries that have agreed to conduct comprehensive na-
tionwide assessments of the condition of their forests
and steps they are taking to improve their manage-
ment.
2002
Large-scale wildfires during the summers of 2000 and
2001 over many regions of the United States, espe-
cially in western states, raise the issue to the level of a
White House initiative to reduce fuel buildups and
fire hazards in Federal forests. Broad political support
for addressing the forest health issue is tempered by
public concerns that this will be used to sharply in-
crease the level of commercial timber harvesting on
Federal forests.
2003
Congress grants the Forest Service and the Bureau of
Land Management authority to enter into long-term
stewardship contracts for land management services
to restore degraded forest ecosystems and address for-
est conditions conducive to destructive wildfires.
Chronology
129


4
Personalities
T
he list of people who have made significant contributions to
the development of U.S. forest policy is long, and those whose
names are included in this chapter are but a few from among
this group. The emphasis here is on individuals associated with
major changes in U.S. forest policy and those mentioned else-
where in the text of this book. These sketches provide a brief
background and help the reader who seeks more detailed biogra-
phical information in other listed sources.
Bolle, Arnold (1912–1993) 
As dean of the University of Montana School of Forestry in 1970,
Arnold Bolle was asked by Democratic Senator Lee Metcalf of
Montana to appoint a team of faculty members to conduct an in-
dependent investigation of alleged abusive forest management
practices in the Bitterroot National Forest. The resulting “Bolle
Report” became a focus for the debate over clearcutting in the na-
tional forests, culminating six years later with the National Forest
Management Act.
Church, Frank (1924–1984) 
During the 24 years that Democrat Frank Church served as U.S.
senator from Idaho (1957–1981), he made several landmark con-
tributions to U.S. forest policy. In the wake of numerous lawsuits
over Forest Service clearcutting in the national forests, Senator
Church held hearings in the Senate Interior Subcommittee on
131

Public Lands that produced the nonbinding “Church Subcom-
mittee Guidelines” to limit the use of this practice. The guidelines
were adopted as policy by the Forest Service and Bureau of Land
Management and later served as a basis for the National Forest
Management Act. Senator Church was also a strong advocate for
Wilderness protection in Idaho, particularly the 2.2-million-acre
River of No Return Wilderness, to which his name was added
after his death.
Dana, Samuel Trask (1883–1978) 
As an educator and first dean of the University of Michigan School
of Natural Resources, Samuel Trask Dana was both a leader in and
chronicler of the development of U.S. forest policy. He chaired the
U.S. Timber Conservation Board and served on the National Out-
door Recreation Review Commission. He was also a member of
the Hoover Commission on reorganization of the executive branch
of government, which among other things recommended remov-
ing the Forest Service and the National Forests from the Depart-
ment of Agriculture and consolidating them with all other natural
resource functions in the Department of the Interior. This has since
been attempted several times, but never successfully.
Dwyer, William (1929–2002)
As a Federal judge in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, William
Dwyer presided over more than a decade of legal challenges to
the management of Federal forests in the Pacific Northwest. His
decisions over such issues as the adequacy of Forest Service pro-
tection of old-growth forest habitat for the northern spotted owl
had a profound effect on the forests and economy of the Pacific
Northwest.
Fernow, Bernhard (1851–1923) 
Born in Germany, Bernhard Fernow emigrated to the United
States in 1876 and became a leader in the movement to protect
forests against fire and exploitation. Fernow was one of the first
professional foresters to introduce European concepts of refor-
estation and sustained-yield forest management to the United
States. In 1886 he was appointed Chief of the Division of Forestry
in the U.S. Department of Agriculture. After a trip through the
132
Personalities

western United States in 1887, Fernow concluded that “the future
of the country cannot be left wholly to the operation of enlight-
ened self-interest” and advocated for government leadership in
the conservation of natural resources. Working with Senator Hale
of Maine, he drafted a bill providing for the establishment and
management of Forest Reserves, which later became the basis for
the Forest Reserve Act of 1891. He organized several of the
schools of forestry in the United States and Canada, and served as
the first dean of the forestry school at Cornell University.
Franklin, Jerry (1936– )
As a forest ecologist at the University of Washington, Jerry
Franklin served as a leading authority on the ecological function-
ing of old-growth forests of the Pacific Northwest during a
decade of debate over policies to protect these ecosystems and the
threatened or endangered species that inhabit them, such as the
northern spotted owl. Franklin served as one of the “Gang of
Four”—a group of scientists whose analysis and recommenda-
tions provided the basis for old-growth habitat conservation
plans and management policies in the Pacific Northwest.
Gordon, John (1939– )
A forest ecologist and dean of the Yale School of Forestry and En-
vironmental Studies, John Gordon has made numerous contribu-
tions to forest policy through the application of ecosystem princi-
ples to resource management. Gordon served as one of the “Gang
of Four,” a group of scientists whose analysis and recommenda-
tions provided the basis for old-growth habitat conservation
plans and management policies in the Pacific Northwest.
Graves, Henry (1871–1951) 
Graves served as the first dean of the Yale School of Forestry until
1910, when he was asked to succeed the recently fired Gifford
Pinchot as chief of the U.S. Forest Service. During his tenure as
chief, Graves warded off efforts to devolve the national forests to
state and local control, expanded National Forests to the East
under the Weeks Law of 1911, and organized the research branch
of the Forest Service. One of Henry Graves’ most important ac-
complishments was development of the first comprehensive
Personalities
133

Policy of Forestry for the Nation in 1919, which later served as the
basis for the Clark-McNary Act of 1924. This act was broadly sup-
ported, and represented a broad consensus on forestry among
government, industry, and public interests that has been difficult
to achieve in more recent decades.
Hough, Franklin (1822–1885)
Franklin Hough was perhaps the single most influential individ-
ual in the establishment of the precursors to both the Forest Ser-
vice and the National Forests. As a chairman of a committee of the
American Association for the Advancement for Science, Hough
was instrumental in the founding of the Division of Forestry in
the U.S. Department of Agriculture and served as its first director.
Hough compiled a series of comprehensive studies of the extent
and conditions of forests in the United States in 1877, 1878, and
1882 and called for the establishment of forest reserves to halt the
disposal of public lands and conserve forest resources under the
protection of the Federal government. Hough’s efforts helped lay
the foundation for the Forest Reserve Act of 1891 and the estab-
lishment of reserves that later became the basis for the National
Forest System.
Humphrey, Hubert (1911–1978) 
Hubert Humphrey served as vice president of the United States
(1965–1969), but it was as Democratic U.S. senator from Min-
nesota that he made his most important contributions to U.S. for-
est policy. He was the lead sponsor of the Forest and Rangeland
Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974, which required the
Forest Service to do a periodic assessment of the conditions and
trends in U.S. forests and a strategic plan for their conservation
and management. After the 1974 lawsuit over clearcutting on the
Monongahela National Forest (Izaak Walton League v. Butz),
Humphrey strove to “get forestry out of the courts and back into
the woods” as lead sponsor of the National Forest Management
Act of 1976.
Ickes, Harold (1874–1952) 
Serving as Secretary of Interior from 1933 to 1946, Harold Ickes
brought about important changes in policies governing the Na-
tional Parks and the public-domain lands. The Taylor Grazing Act
134
Personalities

helped to establish the Grazing Service, which was the precursor
to today’s Bureau of Land Management. The O&C Act estab-
lished sustained-yield management in forests in southern Ore-
gon, revested to the Federal government after the failure of the
Oregon and California Railroad. Ickes is perhaps best known for
his concerted but unsuccessful attempt over several years to have
the Forest Service and the national forests transferred from the
Department of Agriculture to a revamped Department of the In-
terior, to be called the Department of Conservation.
Johnson, K. Norman (1942– )
A professor of forest engineering and operations research, K. Nor-
man Johnson was a leading proponent of the use of optimization
models in forest planning (FORPLAN) to balance the competing
resource demands on the national forests. Johnson was one of the
“Gang of Four,” a group of scientists whose analysis and recom-
mendations provided the basis for old-growth habitat conserva-
tion plans and management policies in the Pacific Northwest.
Leopold, Aldo (1886–1948) 
Aldo Leopold is best known for his articulation of the individ-
ual’s personal responsibility for land stewardship that maintains
the land’s productivity and ecological integrity—what he termed
a “land ethic.” Leopold was a forester with the U.S. Forest Service
and later a professor of game management at the University of
Wisconsin. His 1949 book A Sand County Almanac is regarded as a
major inspiration for later policies aimed at managing land as an
integrated ecosystem, rather than as a collection of parts, and rec-
ognizing the interdependence of the many plant and animal
species that define ecosystems.
Marsh, George Perkins (1801–1882) 
As author of the 1864 book Man and Nature, George Perkins
Marsh helped Americans recognize that continued unfettered ex-
ploitation of forests and other natural resources could lead to eco-
logical disaster. As American ambassador to Italy and an amateur
naturalist, Marsh was shocked to realize that much of the barren,
unproductive land around the Mediterranean had once been
forests and fertile cropland, but had been damaged by centuries
of overuse. His scientific approach and his advocacy for more
Personalities
135

sustainable resource use helped launch the Conservation Move-
ment in the United States.
Marshall, Robert (1901–1939) 
Bob Marshall was one of the leading proponents of a policy of
protecting certain undeveloped areas of the Federal lands as
Wilderness. He served as the first director of forestry for the U.S.
Bureau of Indian Affairs, and later as the head of the Forest Ser-
vice’s Division of Recreation and Lands, where he was instru-
mental in protecting more than 5 million acres of wilderness. One
of the founders of the Wilderness Society, he was commemorated
with the naming of the Bob Marshall Wilderness Area in Mon-
tana, one of the nation’s largest Wilderness areas.
Mather, Stephen (1867–1930) 
The founder of the National Park Service, Stephen Mather sought
permanent protection of forest areas of outstanding scenic, his-
toric, and recreational value on Federal lands. Now comprising
more than 80 million acres nationwide, the national parks have
become worldwide models for protected-area management and
scientific study, and they educate millions of visitors annually
about the value of protecting wild landscapes.
McGuire, John (1916–2002) 
While serving as chief of the Forest Service during the turbulent
1970s, John McGuire faced increasing opposition to forestry prac-
tices being carried out on the National Forests. Congress held
hearings on clearcutting on the National Forests, brought about
by lawsuits on the Bitterroot National Forest in Montana and the
Monongahela National Forest in West Virginia. As a result, Con-
gress mandated planning at the National Forest, regional, and na-
tional levels through the Resources Planning Act of 1974 and the
National Forest Management Act of 1976. McGuire ushered in im-
portant changes in forest management practices and methods of
land management.
Muir, John (1838–1914) 
Founder of the Sierra Club, John Muir is credited with introduc-
ing many Americans to the beauty and grandeur of America’s
136
Personalities

forests and mountains and the need for national policies to ensure
their protection from development. Along with President
Theodore Roosevelt and Forest Service Chief Gifford Pinchot,
Muir was a powerful advocate for conservation and the creation
of National Parks, but he differed with Roosevelt and Pinchot
over permitting the regulated use of Federal lands for activities
such as grazing and water development.
Murie, Olaus (1889–1963) 
A lifelong advocate of protecting certain wild forest areas as
Wilderness, Olaus Murie led the decades-long campaign for the
creation of a National Wilderness Preservation System, which
was accomplished with the Wilderness Act of 1964.
Olmsted, Frederick Law (1822–1903) 
As one of the premier landscape architects of his time, Frederick
Law Olmsted established forests as an essential part of even the
urban landscape and helped create an appreciation for natural
beauty that later translated to broad support for natural resource
conservation. Known primarily for his creation of New York
City’s Central Park, Olmsted was also a leading advocate for the
protection of wild areas such as Yosemite Valley.
Pack, Charles Lathrop (1857–1937) 
One of the most colorful and controversial figures in American
forest policy, Charles Lathrop Pack accumulated a substantial for-
tune logging the virgin forests of the Pacific Northwest. As presi-
dent of the American Forestry Association during the early twen-
tieth century, Pack became an advocate for forest conservation,
research, and education, ultimately endowing experimental
forests at several U.S. universities and establishing a foundation
that continues to support forestry education.
Peterson, Max (1927– )
Max Peterson led the U.S. Forest Service as Chief during a diffi-
cult time of turmoil and criticism of the agency. Major forest pol-
icy issues included the development of National Forest plans im-
plementing the National Forest Management Act of 1976, the
identification of remaining National Forest roadless areas for
Personalities
137

possible Wilderness designation, the effect of the recession and
the housing slump of the early 1980s on timber-dependent com-
munities, increasing public concern over the use of herbicides
and pesticides on the National Forests, growing concern about
old-growth logging, below-cost timber sales, and threatened and
endangered species. During this period, the Forest Service’s fund-
ing was sharply reduced, and public trust of the Forest Service to
effectively manage the National Forests fell to its lowest point in
the agency’s history.
Pinchot, Gifford (1865–1946) 
Regarded by many as the “Father of Forestry in the United
States,” Gifford Pinchot served as the first Chief Forester and
head of the U.S. Forest Service. As a leader of the Progressive Era
Conservation Movement, Pinchot’s fight for conservation fo-
cused on the introduction of scientific forestry to the United
States and the establishment of national policies to promote the
conservation and sustainable use of forests on both public and
private lands. With the 1905 transfer of the Forest Reserves from
the Department of the Interior to the Forest Service in the De-
partment of Agriculture, Pinchot established the overarching
policy that these National Forests were always to be managed
“for the greatest good, for the greatest number, in the long run.”
Pinchot also founded several other nongovernmental institu-
tions to promote forest science and sound forest management,
including the Yale Forest School and the Society of American
Foresters.
Powell, John Wesley (1834–1902) 
John Wesley Powell was a leading advocate for reform of Fed-
eral land policies aimed at promoting settlement of the western
United States. His geological exploration of the interior West,
and particularly the Colorado River watershed, helped per-
suade policymakers that a different approach was needed in the
development of these arid lands. As director of the U.S. Geolog-
ical Survey, he initiated the first major biological and geological
surveys of the West and helped establish the role of the Federal
government in advancing science as a basis for natural resource
policy.
138
Personalities

Roosevelt, Theodore (1858–1919) 
As twenty-sixth president of the United States, Theodore Roo-
sevelt helped to firmly establish the Progressive Era Conservation
Movement, basing it on the notion that the nation’s natural re-
sources were a public trust rather than an asset to be exploited for
the benefit of a few private individuals or corporations. In 1905,
President Roosevelt signed the Transfer Act, which established
the National Forests and the U.S. Forest Service as we know it
today. In cooperation with Gifford Pinchot, his Chief Forester,
President Roosevelt increased the area of these Federal Forest Re-
serves from 56 million acres to 148 million acres. According to
Roosevelt, “The nation behaves well if it treats the natural re-
sources as assets which it must turn over to the next generation
increased and not impaired in value.”
Sargent, Charles Sprague (1841–1927) 
A botanist, Charles Sargent was appointed by President Grover
Cleveland to head the Forestry Commission, which the National
Academy of Sciences had formed to advise on the protection of
forest land in the United States. The commission’s recommenda-
tions, urged forward by its vice chairman Gifford Pinchot, re-
sulted in President Cleveland’s establishment of the first 13 For-
est Reserves.
Schenck, Carl (1868–1955) 
Founder of the first forestry school in the United States, a private
school on George Vanderbilt’s Biltmore Estate in North Carolina,
Carl Alwin Schenck compiled the first state-by-state analysis of
forest area and ownership, distribution of forest types, and forest
conservation laws in effect, and he later published them as Lec-
tures in Forest Policy (1904).
Thomas, Jack Ward (1934– )
Just prior to being named Chief of the Forest Service in 1992, Jack
Ward Thomas was the senior scientist on several major studies
concerning the protection of the threatened northern spotted owl
and old-growth habitat in the Pacific Northwest. Thomas was a
Personalities
139

member of the “Gang of Four,” a group of scientists whose analy-
sis and recommendations provided the basis for old-growth habi-
tat conservation plans and management policies in the Pacific
Northwest. In 1993, Thomas was named to head the Forest
Ecosystem Management Assessment Team (FEMAT), which had
as its objective to resolve the spotted owl crises in the Pacific
Northwest and northern California based on the best scientific
evidence.
Udall, Morris (1922–1988) 
As a congressman and chair of the House Interior Committee, Mo
Udall was one of the strongest modern-day advocates for conser-
vation in the U.S. government. He strove to find balanced solu-
tions to controversial issues over the management of Federal
forests, water, and Wilderness. He played a major role in the
Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act, the Tongass
Timber Reform Act, the Strip Mining Reclamation Act, and the
Southern Arizona Water Rights Settlement Act.
Weyerhaeuser, Frederick (1834–1912) 
Beginning with 900,000 acres of Washington forests purchased
from James J. Hill and the Northern Pacific Railway, Frederick
Weyerhaeuser founded the Weyerhaeuser Timber Company.
The company eventually owned more than 6 million acres of
forest land in the United States, and for many years it was the
largest and most politically influential private forestry firm in
the country.
Weyerhaeuser, Frederick E. (1872–1945) 
President of the Weyerhaeuser Company from 1928 until his
death, F. E. Weyerhaeuser was an industry leader in adopting
the policy of sustained-yield management of commercial
timberlands—a policy that had previously been applied prima-
rily to public forests. He was a proponent of prompt planting and
reforestation following timber harvesting.
140
Personalities

Zahniser, Howard (1906–1964) 
President of the Wilderness Society from 1945 to 1964, Howard
Zahniser is regarded as the father of the Wilderness Act, which
was passed in 1964 after 66 drafts spanning almost 20 years.
Zon, Raphael (1887–1957)
As an early pioneer in the development of Forest Service research,
Raphael Zon was the author of what became a landmark study on
the importance of forests in watershed protection, Forests and
Water in the Light of Scientific Investigation (1927).
Personalities
141


5
Forest Facts and Data
T
he forests of the United States are diverse in their character,
ownership, and management. U.S. forests range from tropical
in Hawaii, southern Florida, and Puerto Rico to the boreal
spruce-fir forests of Alaska and northern Maine. The forests are a
mix of conifer (or evergreen) and deciduous (or broadleaf)
species. The forests grow right down to the ocean’s edge and up
to the timberlines of the Colorado Rocky Mountains. The United
States is the largest consumer of forest products in the world but
harvests far less per year than what its forests are capable of
growing per year.
Who owns the forest? The Federal government owns a large
amount of forest land, but private citizens own more. Compara-
tively, the forest industry owns a fairly small amount of forest
land. Tribal governments, states, counties, and municipalities
own the rest.
This chapter presents facts, statistics, and other information
intended to provide the reader with a basic understanding of U.S.
forests—what they are, how they are managed, who owns and
manages them, and their relative condition. The chapter also de-
scribes two international initiatives that affect U.S. forest man-
agement: (1) the Montreal Process Criteria and Indicators and (2)
Forest Management Certification. For more in-depth information
on any of these subjects, readers should consult the information
resources enumerated in chapter 7.
143

Forest Ecoregions in the United States
An ecoregion is a geographic area that has a relatively distinct
combination of biotic and abiotic factors, such as soils, vegetation,
climate, geology, physical geography, elevation, and latitude. A
forest ecoregion is a geographic area that has a relatively distinct
combination of tree species as well as other biotic and abiotic fac-
tors. The most cited source for delineation of U.S. ecoregions is a
map produced in 1995 by Robert G. Bailey and his colleagues
(http://www.fs.fed.us/land/ecosysmgmt/ecoreg1_home.html).
The United States has four major domains: Dry, Humid Trop-
ical (Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Florida Everglades), Humid
Temperate, and Polar (Alaska) (Bailey 1995). The vast majority of
the forest land in the United States is in the Humid Temperate do-
main. Within each domain are divisions, and within each division
are provinces corresponding to geographic location, climate, and
dominant vegetation types.
In general, conifer forests such as pine, true fir, Douglas fir,
hemlock, larch, false cedar, redwood, sequoia, and spruce are
found in Alaska, the western United States, the northern Lake
States, the northern tier of New England, and the piedmont and
coastal plains of the Southeast and in Texas.
Deciduous forests—those with oak, maple, beech, cherry,
walnut, poplar, ash, birch, and aspen—are found primarily in the
Lake States, the mid-South, the mid-Atlantic, the southern tier of
New England, and Appalachia. In many regions, conifer and de-
ciduous forests mix, making it difficult to draw clean boundaries
between forest ecoregions.
Forest types have evolved and persisted in response to soil
and climate conditions as well as because of latitudinal and lon-
gitudinal location. In many parts of the United States, large dis-
turbances have changed the entire forest composition. For exam-
ple, the chestnut blight has eliminated the American chestnut
from the forest ecosystem in the eastern United States. Early land
clearing for farming eliminated much of the native deciduous for-
est in New England and the Ohio River valley. Today New Eng-
land is heavily forested with many of same forest tree species that
were present before European settlement, but the forested areas
are interspersed with roads and development. By contrast, the
Ohio River valley is still heavily fragmented with farms, urban
centers, and forest. Aggressive logging in Michigan and Min-
nesota during westward migration greatly reduced the red and
144
Forest Facts and Data

eastern white pine forests. In their place are extensive stands of
aspen, birch, Jack pine, and scattered—but growing—pockets of
red and eastern white pine. Human settlement and natural forces
such as disease, wind, and fires have shaped the forests’ ecore-
gions over time.
An excellent printed publication of ecoregions of the United
States is Ricketts et al. (1999), Terrestrial Ecoregions of North Amer-
ica: A Conservation Assessment.
Forest Area, Production,
and Trade Information
Information for this section came from the following sources:
Cubbage, O’Laughlin, and Bullock, Forest Resource Policy (1993);
U.S. Forest Service, RPA Assessment of Forest and Range Lands
(2000); and U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Forest Facts and Historical
Trends (2001).
In the United States, 747 million acres (33 percent of the total
land area) is forest land. Timberland accounts for 504 million
acres, or 67 percent of the total forest land area. Of the remaining
forest land area, 51.9 million acres is designated as reserved forests
(for example, designated Wilderness areas), and 190.2 million
acres is designated other forests—forests not capable of producing
commercial timber on an annual basis for whatever reason.
Timberland is the production part of the forested land. The
southern United States has the most available timberland with
200 million acres, followed by the northern United States with
160.5 million acres and the western United States with 143.3 mil-
lion acres. Conversely, the western United States contains 76 per-
cent of reserved forest (39.5 million acres); and the northern and
southern United States have 7.4 million acres and 4.9 million
acres, respectively, of reserved forest.
U.S. timber production and timber trade can be summarized
by the following statistics:
•
The United States produces almost 30 percent of the
world’s pulp, 33 percent of the world’s paper and
cardboard, and 20 percent of the world’s softwood
lumber.
•
Since 1980, the United States has harvested about
Forest Area, Production, and Trade Information
145

450 million cubic meters of timber annually. Of this
total, softwood harvest (used primarily for construction
lumber and paper and cardboard pulp) comprises 64
percent or 285 million cubic meters, and hardwood
harvest (used primarily for furniture) comprises 36
percent or 165 million cubic meters.
•
Forest growth exceeds forest harvest by a ratio of 3:2 in
public forests. On privately owned forest industry land,
removal significantly exceeds growth, with a ratio of 5:1.
•
Timber harvested from public forests makes up about
17 percent of average annual total harvest (80 million
cubic meters out of 450 million cubic meters).
•
On average, the United States consumes 33 percent
more lumber than it produces domestically. Canadian
imports make up the majority of this deficit.
•
The United States exports about 13 percent of the
world’s pulp, 7 percent of the world’s paper and
cardboard, and less than 5 percent of the world’s
softwood lumber. Canada is the largest exporter of
these three products.
•
The southern United States is by far the region with the
highest harvest levels, at about 290 million cubic meters
annually or 64 percent of average annual total harvest,
followed by the western and northern United States,
respectively.
Ownership of U.S. Forests
There are numerous owners of U.S. forests, most of them falling
under the “private nonindustrial” ownership class (Table 5.1). The
term nonindustrial means that no wood processing mill is associ-
ated with the forest properties. Private nonindustrial owners—
typically individuals, families, trusts, and some corporations—
own 49 percent of the nation’s forests. Despite the political and
economic importance of the forest industry, this ownership class
only controls 9 percent of the total forest land in the United States.
The Federal government owns and manages about 33 percent of
U.S. forest lands under different mandates, ranging from multiple-
use to strictly Wilderness. Of the Federal public lands, the U.S.
Forest Service owns and manages 60 percent, followed by the Bu-
reau of Land Management and other Federal agencies such as Na-
tional Park Service, Department of Defense, and Bureau of Indian
146
Forest Facts and Data

Affairs. States, counties, and municipalities own about as much as
the forest industry owns—about 9 percent of all U.S. forests.
However, not all U.S. forest lands are suitable for producing
timber. The U.S. Forest Service has separated timberlands from
forest lands. The distribution of timberland ownership is identi-
cal to the distribution of forest land ownership.
Federal Public Forest System
There are four general categories of Federal public forest lands:
the National Forest System (NFS), Bureau of Land Management
(BLM) lands, the National Park System (NPS), and the National
Wilderness Preservation System (NWPS). The first and last cate-
gories are managed by the U.S. Forest Service; the middle two cat-
egories are managed by agencies within the U.S. Department of
the Interior. National Forests and BLM lands not designated as
Wilderness are, for the most part, managed as multiple-use. That
is, these forests are intended to produce a variety of commercial
and noncommerical goods, benefits, services, and values, such as
game and nongame wildlife, recreation, timber, grazing, mineral
exploration, oil and gas, water development, biodiversity, and
subsistence uses (food, shelter, and medicine).
Federal Public Forest System
147
Table 5.1
Area of Forest Land and Timberland in the United States by
Ownership Category, 1997
Acres in millions
Ownership category
Forest land*
Timberland†
Federal
246.7
109.2
National Forest System
146.8
96.4
Bureau of Land Management
48.3
6.1
Other
51.6
6.6
State
60.5
28.9
County and Municipal
9.2
7.9
Private 
430.5
357.7
Forest Industry
67.7
66.9
Nonindustrial Private Forests
362.8
290.8
TOTAL
746.9
503.7
Source: W. B. Smith, J. S. Vissage, D. R. Darr, and R. M. Sheffield. 1997. Forest Resources of the United States,
1997. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-219. St. Paul, MN: USDA Forest Service, North Central Research Station.
* Forest land is land at least 10 percent stocked by forest trees of any size, including land that formerly had tree
cover and can be naturally or artificially regenerated.
† Timberland is land that is producing or is capable of producing crops of industrial wood and has not been
withdrawn from timber production by statute or administrative regulation.

National Parks and the Wilderness Preservation System
lands are managed for preservation, thereby eliminating virtually
all commercial uses, especially timber harvesting. These lands are
also intended to allow natural ecological processes including
wildfire to occur unimpeded. The Yellowstone National Park fires
of 1988 were intentionally allowed to burn. By contrast, many
fires on the National Forests and BLM forest lands are actively
suppressed. All Federal public forest lands receive their funding
from annual congressional appropriations, and recreation-use
fees also contribute to operating budgets.
The National Forest System (www.fs.fed.us)
The National Forest System (NFS) includes National Forests and
National Grasslands located in 44 states, Puerto Rico, and the Vir-
gin Islands. Established by the Creative Act of 1891, today’s Na-
tional Forest System has 155 National Forests and 20 National
Grasslands totaling 191 million acres—8.5 percent of the total
land in the United States. Managing these 191 million acres is the
U.S. Forest Service, which is part of the U.S. Department of Agri-
culture. The Forest Service comprises the Washington, D.C., of-
fice, 9 regional offices, 124 supervisors’ offices, and more than 600
administrative units called ranger districts. Each level of the
agency has different legal mandates, operational procedures, and
resource management responsibilities.
The primary policies governing NFS land and resource man-
agement are the Organic Administration Act of 1897, the Multiple-
Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960, the Wilderness Act of 1964, the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, the Endangered Spe-
cies Act of 1973, and the National Forest Management Act of 1976.
The nine regional offices (numbered 1–6, 8, 9, and 10) are:
•
Region 1: Twelve National Forests in northern Idaho,
northeastern Washington, and Montana; four National
Grasslands in North Dakota and northwestern South
Dakota. Contact information:
USDA Forest Service
Northern Region
200 E. Broadway
P.O. Box 7669
Missoula, MT 59807
Phone: (406) 329-3511
148
Forest Facts and Data

•
Region 2: Eleven National Forests in Colorado,
Nebraska, South Dakota, and Wyoming; four National
Grasslands in Colorado, Nebraska, and Wyoming.
Contact information:
USDA Forest Service
Rocky Mountain Regional Office
740 Simms Street
P.O. Box 25127
Lakewood, CO 80225-0127
Phone: (303) 275-5350
•
Region 3: Eleven National Forests in Arizona and New
Mexico; two National Grasslands in Oklahoma and the
Texas Panhandle. Contact information:
USDA Forest Service
Southwestern Region
333 Broadway SE
Albuquerque, NM 87102
Phone: (505) 842-3292
•
Region 4: Thirteen National Forests in Utah, western
Wyoming, southern Idaho, Nevada, and small portions
of California and Colorado. Contact information:
USDA Forest Service
Intermountain Region
324 25th Street
Ogden, UT 84401
Phone: (801) 625-5306
•
Region 5: Seventeen National Forests in California and
the Lake Tahoe Basin Management Area. Contact
information:
USDA Forest Service
Pacific Southwest Region
1323 Club Drive
Vallejo, CA 94592
Phone: (707) 562-8737
•
Region 6: Nineteen National Forests in Oregon and
Washington; one National Grassland in Oregon.
Contact information:
Federal Public Forest System
149

USDA Forest Service
Pacific Northwest Region
P.O. Box 3623
333 S.W. First Avenue
Portland, OR 97208-3623
Phone: (503) 808-2971
•
Region 8: Thirty-five National Forests in Alabama,
Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Puerto Rico,
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia; two
National Grasslands in Texas; Land Between the Lakes
National Recreation Area in Kentucky; Savannah River
Site in South Carolina. Contact information:
USDA Forest Service
Southern Region
1720 Peachtree Road NW
Atlanta, GA 30309
Phone: (404) 347-4177
•
Region 9: Fourteen National Forests in Illinois, Indiana,
Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New
York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Vermont, West Virginia, and
Wisconsin; Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie in
Illinois. Contact information:
USDA Forest Service
Eastern Region
319 W. Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 500
Milwaukee, WI 53203
Phone: (414) 297-3600
•
Region 10: Two National Forests in Alaska. Contact
information:
USDA Forest Service
Federal Office Building
709 W. 9th Street
P.O. Box 21628
Juneau, AK 99802-1628
Phone: (907) 586-8806
150
Forest Facts and Data

Bureau of Land Management
(www.blm.gov)
The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) is responsible for man-
aging 262 million acres of land, or about one-eighth of the land in
the United States. Additionally, about 300 million acres of sub-
surface mineral resources are managed by the BLM. The bureau
is also responsible for wildfire management and suppression on
388 million acres.
The land managed by the BLM is located in 12 western
United States including Alaska. Much of this land is dominated
by extensive grasslands, forests, high mountains, arctic tundra,
and deserts. Management activities of BLM land include energy
and minerals; timber; forage; wild horse and burro populations;
fish and wildlife habitat; Wilderness areas; archaeological, pale-
ontological, and historical sites; and other natural heritage values.
The 12 state offices are:
Bureau of Land Management
Alaska State Office
222 W. 7th Avenue #13
Anchorage, AK 99513
Phone: (907) 271-5960
Bureau of Land Management
Arizona State Office
222 N. Central Avenue
Phoenix, AZ 85004
Phone: (602) 417-9200
Bureau of Land Management
California State Office
2800 Cottage Way
Suite W1834
Sacramento, CA 95825-1886
Phone: (916) 978-4400
Bureau of Land Management
Colorado State Office
2850 Youngfield Street
Lakewood, CO 80215
Phone: (303) 239-3600
Federal Public Forest System
151

Bureau of Land Management
Eastern States Office
7450 Boston Boulevard
Springfield, VA 22153-3121
Phone: (703) 440-1600
Bureau of Land Management
Idaho State Office
1387 S. Vinnell Way
Boise, ID 83709
Phone: (208) 373-4000
Bureau of Land Management
Montana/Dakotas State Office
5001 Southgate Drive
P.O. Box 36800
Billings, MT 59107
Phone: (406) 896-5000
Bureau of Land Management
Nevada State Office
1340 Financial Boulevard
P.O. Box 12000
Reno, NV 89520
Phone: (775) 861-6400
Bureau of Land Management
New Mexico State Office
1474 Rodeo Road
Santa Fe, NM 87505
Phone: (505) 438-7400
Bureau of Land Management
Oregon State Office
333 S.W. 1st Avenue
Portland, OR 97204
Phone: (503) 808-6002
Bureau of Land Management
Utah State Office
P.O. Box 45155
324 S. State Street
Salt Lake City, UT 84145-0155
Phone: (801) 539-4001
152
Forest Facts and Data

Bureau of Land Management
Wyoming State Office
5353 Yellowstone Road
P.O. Box 1828
Cheyenne, WY 82003-1828
Phone: (307) 775-6256
National Park System (www.nps.gov)
The National Park System (NPS) encompasses approximately
83.6 million acres nationwide. The largest area is Wrangell–
St. Elias National Park and Preserve, Alaska. At 13.2 million acres,
it comprises 16.3 percent of the entire system. The smallest unit in
the system is Thaddeus Kosciuszko National Memorial, Pennsyl-
vania, at 0.02 of an acre. The NPS includes National Parks, mon-
uments, preserves, historic sites, historical parks, memorials, bat-
tlefields, cemeteries, recreation areas, seashores, lakeshores, rivers,
parkways, and trails.
The National Wilderness Preservation
System (www.nwps.gov)
There are more than 620 areas officially designated Wilderness in
the National Wilderness Preservation System (NWPS). These
areas total 104,571,344 acres, or 4.52 percent of the entire land area
of the United States. Four agencies manage Wilderness lands: Bu-
reau of Land Management (5 percent of NWPS); USDA Forest
Service (33.2  percent of NWPS); U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(19.8 percent of NWPS); and National Park Service (42.1 percent
of NWPS). The western states (excluding Utah) and Alaska hold
the largest number of acres of Wilderness. Each state has an aver-
age of 1.5 million acres. Only Connecticut, Delaware, Iowa,
Kansas, Maryland, and Rhode Island have no Wilderness areas.
State and County Forest Lands
States own about 60.5 million acres of forest land, and counties
and municipalities combined own 9.2 million acres of forest land
in the United States (USDA, U.S. Forest Service 2000). State forest
State and County Forest Lands
153

lands were either granted as trust lands on entry into the United
States or were specifically designated to protect them from devel-
opment—the 2.5-million-acre Adirondack State Park, for exam-
ple. State-owned forest lands are managed for a variety of objec-
tives. For example, Adirondack is managed for preservation goals
and objectives, with no timber harvesting. State forests in Col-
orado, Washington, and Oregon, by contrast, are managed to pro-
duce revenue primarily for schools. For a more in-depth history
and analysis of the management of state forest and other trust
lands, see Souder and Fairfax, State Trust Lands: History, Manage-
ment, and Sustainable Use (2002).
County and municipal forest lands are most often found in
the Northeast and the Lake States. Many of these lands were ac-
quired during the early part of the 1900s when homesteaders had
to forfeit their lands because they could not pay taxes on them—
so-called “tax-delinquent lands.” Very little is known about
county and municipal forest management.
Private Forest Lands
Private forest land accounts for 430 million acres or 58 percent of
the total U.S. forest land. Private forest land is classified as forest
industry land or nonindustrial private land (USDA, U.S. Forest
Service 2000). Nonindustrial forest land ownership comprises 9.9
million units—primarily individuals, but also organizations,
partnerships, and so on (Birch 1994). Forest industry lands are ob-
viously managed for wood production; nonindustrial forest lands
are managed for reasons ranging from investment or second
homes to wildlife recruitment and family heirloom.
Forest Industry
The forest industry owns about 67 million acres of U.S. forest
land, all of which is timberland. The southern United States ac-
counts for the largest holdings of forest industry forest land at
54.7 percent, followed by the North at 22.1 percent, the Pacific
Coast at 18.8 percent, and the Rocky Mountains at 4.3 percent. Ten
percent of the hardwood growing stock and 14 percent of the soft-
wood growing stock is held by the forest industry.
154
Forest Facts and Data

Timber Investment Management
Organizations
The timber investment management organization (TIMO) is a rel-
atively novel approach to timberland management in the United
States—an emerging form of forest land ownership that fits be-
tween traditional industrial and nonindustrial categories. TIMOs
(see the web site http://www.endgame.org/timo.html  for addi-
tional information) are primarily made up of financial institutions
that invest in private timberland. In general, TIMOs own and
manage forest lands as a low-risk investment on behalf of large
institutional investors such as teachers’ pension funds. TIMOs
emphasize steady rates of return over long time periods. Forests
managed by TIMOs are not as intensively managed as industry
lands, but they are more intensively managed than the average
nonindustrial forest land. In 1998, investments totaled about $6.5
billion in more than 6 million acres of forest land.
The major TIMOs include the John Hancock Timber Re-
source Group (which owns the largest number of holdings), the
Campbell Group, Forest Investment Associates, Forestland
Group, Prudential Timber Investments, Strategic Timber Trust,
Timberland Investment Services, UBS Resource Investments, U.S.
Timberlands, Wachovia Timberland Investment Management,
Wagner Forest Management Ltd., and Woodlands Resource Man-
agement Group.
Nonindustrial Private Forests
Nonindustrial private forests (NIPFs) account for nearly half of
U.S. forest lands, or 363 million acres. East of the Mississippi,
more than two-thirds of the forest land is NIPF. In the western
United States the majority of forests are federally owned. NIPFs
supply about 49 percent of the timber harvested in the United
States. NIPFs are also ecologically important because of where
they are located on the landscape. Private forest lands were set-
tled first and were the most productive in terms of sustaining the
early homesteaders. Private lands tend to be closer to water, have
more productive soils, and are generally more ecologically rich
than public lands, which tend to be at higher elevations and have
thinner soils and less water. Federal and state public forest lands
were the marginal leftover lands that no one could settle.
Private Forest Lands
155

Nonindustrial private forests are diverse in their biophysical
characteristics, ownership, uses, and management. An indispen-
sable resource on nonindustrial and industrial private forest
landowners in the United States is by Thomas W. Birch, entitled
Private Forest-Land Owners of the United States (1994, USDA, U.S.
Forest Service, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station). This re-
port analyzes data about private forest landowners from 1978 and
1994. The general trend is for private forest lands to be either di-
vided into smaller tracts owned by an increasing number of indi-
viduals or consolidated into large tracts owned by a decreasing
number of corporations. Table 5.2 details the number of private
forest landowners and acres in each type of land ownership.
The trend toward smaller tracts owned by many individual
nonindustrial private forest landowners is called “parcelization.”
Table 5.3 gives the data connected to parcelization, which has two
general effects. The first is that within any region, the objectives,
uses, and management activities of nonindustrial forest landown-
ers is likely to be diverse and widely variable. Achieving ecolog-
ical goals such as wildlife habitat conservation, water quality, and
forest biodiversity is an enormous social and political challenge,
as these goals typically require coordinated management across
very large areas and across large numbers of owners. Coordinat-
ing these landowners and encouraging their cooperation is no
easy task.
The second effect of parcelization is the potential for frag-
mentation of the forest. Nonindustrial forest landowners may de-
cide to convert some or all of their parcels into nonforest cover—
residential development or agriculture. A large number of small
openings across a forested landscape not only fragments forest
cover but also disrupts wildlife habitat and can damage water-
156
Forest Facts and Data
Table 5.2
Estimated Number of Private Forest Landowners and Acres
Owned by Type of Ownership, 1978 and 1994
Ownership
Number of owners
Percentage of
Acres owned
Percentage of
type
(thousands)
owners
(millions)
acreage
1978
1994
1978
1994
1978
1994
1978
1994
Individual
6,793
9,319
87.6
94.1
183.5
232.3
55.1
59.0
Partnership
484
289
6.2
2.9
35.8
29.7
10.7
7.5
Corporation
237
157
3.0
1.6
101.1
107.1
30.4
27.2
Other
246
136
3.2
1.4
12.7
24.3
3.8
6.2
TOTAL
7,757
9,902
100.0
100.0
333.1
393.4
100.0
100.0
Source: T. W. Birch. 1994. Private Forest-Land Owners of the United States, 1994. Radnor, PA: USDA, U.S. Forest
Service, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station.

shed functioning. Property tax incentives or forest land conserva-
tion easements have some effect in minimizing parcelization, but
the economics of private forest land ownership can, in many parts
of the country, force nonindustrial forest landowners either to cut
down their trees to generate immediate financial gain or to con-
vert their forest land into nonforest cover and land uses. Either
way, the full spectrum of environmental services provided by
forests can be permanently negatively affected.
As far as the primary reason for owning forest land is con-
cerned, private owners vary greatly. Of course, industrial forest
landowners are primarily interested in generating revenue for
themselves or shareholders, although many industrial forest
landowners also have a real estate division. The reasons for own-
ing forest land among nonindustrial private owners range from
“part of residence” to “land investment.” Table 5.4 identifies the
reasons for owning forest land.
Tribal Forests
Tribal forest land comprises 16 million acres on 214 reservations
in 23 states. Approximately one-half of the forests are timberland
and the remainder are woodland (forest with less than 5 percent
crown cover by commercial timber species).
Forest management is essential to the economies of the sur-
rounding communities. The Federal government “has a trust re-
sponsibility for managing Indian forests” that is accomplished
through the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and tribal governments.
Tribal Forests
157
Table 5.3
Estimated Number of Private Forest Landowners and Acres
Owned by Ownership Size Class, 1978 and 1994
Ownership size
Number of private
Percentage of private
class (acres)
owners (millions)
owners 
1978
1994
1978
1994
1–9
5,528
5,795
71.3
58.6
10–49
1,164
2,762
15.0
27.9
50–99
464
717
5.9
7.2
100–499
538
559
7.0
5.6
500–999
40
41
0.5
0.4
1000+
23
27
0.3
0.3
TOTAL
7,757
9,902
100.0
100.0
Source: T. W. Birch. 1994. Private Forest-Land Owners of the United States, 1994. Radnor, PA: USDA, U.S. Forest
Service, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station.

Detailed information about tribal forest lands can be found in An
Assessment of Indian Forests and Forest Management in the United
States, a publication of the Intertribal Timber Council.
Conditions and Trends in U.S. Forests
The condition of forests in the United States is a topic of lively de-
bate. Statistics show that the quantity of forest land in the United
States has been relatively unchanged for 80 years, with the great-
est threat to the loss of forests being development. However, there
are wide-ranging opinions about the quality of U.S. forests and
prognoses for the future. Listed here are brief descriptions of U.S.
forest conditions and trends from three sources: the Forest Ser-
vice’s 2000 RPA Assessment of Forest and Range Lands, the World
Resources Institute’s Low-Access Forests and Their Level of Protec-
tion in North America (2002), and Douglas W. MacCleery’s Ameri-
can Forests: A History of Resiliency and Recovery (1996).
•
Total forest land area in the United States has been
relatively stable since the 1920s (USDA, U.S. Forest
Service 2000). Recent changes in forest land coverage
include a 25.1-million-acre loss of forest land to other
uses between 1982 and 1997. The losses can be
attributed to land use changes as land is removed from
agriculture or private forests are cleared for
158
Forest Facts and Data
Table 5.4
Estimated Number of Private Forest Landowners and Acres
Owned by Primary Reason for Owning Forest Land, 1994
Reason for owning
Number of owners
Acres of forest land
Thousands
Percent
Millions
Percent
(rank)
(rank)
Land investment 
920.0
9.3 (5)
39.3
10.0 (3)
Recreation
874.5
8.8 (6)
37.9
9.5 (5)
Timber production 
272.2
2.7 (9)
113.2
28.9 (1)
Farm and domestic use 
816.4
8.3 (7)
35.8
9.1 (6)
Enjoyment of owning 
1,392.4
14.1 (3)
28.7
7.3 (8)
Part of farm
1,189.8
12.0 (4)
38.6
9.8 (4)
Part of residence 
2,641.5
26.7 (1)
32.6
8.2 (7)
Other
1,440.9
14.5 (2)
61.0
15.3 (2)
No answer 
354.1
3.6 (8)
6.3
1.5 (9)
TOTAL
9,901.7
100.0
393.4
100.0
Source: T. W. Birch. 1994. Private Forest-Land Owners of the United States, 1994. Radnor, PA: USDA, U.S. Forest
Service, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station.

development. On forest land some forest types have
changed since 1800. In the northeastern and mid-
Atlantic states, the American chestnut was once in great
abundance, but the chestnut blight has made the species
all but extinct. In the southern Appalachians, mid-South,
and piedmont zones of the Southeast, mixed hardwood
(deciduous) forests have been converted to agriculture
or intensively managed pine plantations. Large areas of
red and eastern white pine forests in northern Michigan,
Wisconsin, and Minnesota have been fragmented and
replaced with aspen and other deciduous forest types.
In the western United States, fire suppression has
altered large areas of Ponderosa pine forests by allowing
diverse tree species to grow in underneath Ponderosa
pine canopies. What were once pure Ponderosa pine
forests are now mixed-conifer forests with a high risk of
uncharacteristically intense fires.
•
Only 6 percent of forest cover in the lower 48 states
remains within large tracts of low-access, low-elevation
forests (WRI, 2002). These large tracts are at least 320
square miles and are mostly undivided by roads and
other access routes. These large tracts are essential for
maintaining viable populations of threatened or
endangered wildlife and biodiversity in general.
Continued logging and road building in these areas
threaten biodiversity.
•
About 39 million acres of forest land in the National
Forest System—and many more millions of acres on
private lands—are at high risk from catastrophic
wildfires. Many of these forests are overcrowded from
years of poor logging practices and fire suppression,
resulting in high mortality rates from bark beetle and
other insect and disease outbreaks. High mortality
rates—standing and fallen dead trees—result in
excessive fuel buildups that can rapidly feed wildfires.
•
About 40 percent of the large tracts of low-access forest
land is considered strictly or moderately protected from
development activities such as logging, road building,
or other human activities. Much of this forest is under
federal ownership and management, 30 percent of it
within the National Forest System. These remaining
large tracts of forests are the focus of controversy
regarding logging and road construction. The latest
Conditions and Trends in U.S. Forests
159

policy initiative dealing with these forests was the
Roadless Area Rule, proposed during the Clinton
Administration.
•
The amount of timberland in the United States has
remained stable since the 1950s at two-thirds of the
forest land. Hardwood volumes increased between 1952
and 1997. Softwood volumes increased between 1952
and 1977, declined for the next 10 years, but increased
again until 1997. The development of fast-growing
hybridized or genetically modified plantation tree
species will likely contribute to total wood production
in the United States. On average in the United States,
growth exceeds removal for hardwoods and softwoods
with a combined growth:removal ratio of 3:2 in 1996.
Trends in harvesting of nontimber forest products are
difficult to establish because of the dependency on
habitat, information availability, and so on. The acreage
of plantations planted has increased. Private forest lands
are expected to decline by 2 percent over the next 50
years. Hardwood and softwood growing stocks are
expected to increase in the future, and timber harvest on
public land should remain stable.
•
In the lower 48 states, more than 60 percent of the
remaining large tracts of low-access forest are found
within six states. In order of relevant forest area, they
are Idaho, Montana, Washington, California, Wyoming,
and Minnesota.
•
Tree mortality rates range between 0.5 and 0.8 percent
of the growing timber stock. In some areas the
mortality rates are expected to increase. About 58
million acres are at risk of greater mortality rates
because of insect and disease infestations. Drought and
altered forest conditions in the western United States
attributable to 100 years of fire suppression are most at
risk for insect and disease epidemics. Examples include
spruce budworm, mountain pine beetle, bark beetle,
and dwarf mistletoe.
•
Fire frequency is on the rise across the United States
after 20 stable years between the 1950s and 1970s. Only
the South is considered to be within historic fire
frequencies. Drought conditions in the West and
Northeast are likely to exacerbate the frequency of large
160
Forest Facts and Data

fires. About 73 million acres of forest land in the
western United States is regarded as at risk for large,
intense wildfires in the next decade. Aggressive forest
thinning and prescribed fire programs can offset the
frequency and intensity of fires in small areas, but it is
unlikely that any program can receive the funding and
legal authority necessary to address the fire issue on a
sufficiently large scale.
•
Exotic species are increasing in the United States; the
highest concentrations are in the North and along the
Pacific Coast. There are more than 4,500 exotic species
in the nation, prompting many plant ecologists to
regard the invasion of exotic plant species in the United
States as one of the greatest threats to biological
diversity. Exotic pests are also a major threat. The Asian
long-horned beetle, for example, was introduced to the
United States as larvae inside untreated wood shipping
pallets from China. This pest was first found infesting
trees in New York and, more recently, Chicago. The
gypsy moth has been and continues to be a major threat
to hardwoods in the eastern United States since its
introduction from Europe into Massachusetts in 1869.
The Montreal Process
The Montreal Process is the product resulting from the Working
Group on Criteria and Indicators for the Conservation and Sus-
tainable Management of Temperate and Boreal Forests. The
working group was formed in 1990 during the UN Convention
on Sustainable Development in Montreal, Canada. Membership
in the Working Group is voluntary and currently includes coun-
tries from both hemispheres: Argentina, Australia, Canada, Chile,
China, Japan, Republic of Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, Russian
Federation, United States, and Uruguay. These countries repre-
sent about 90 percent of the world’s temperate and boreal forests
in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres.
The Montreal Process Working Group agreed on a frame-
work of criteria and indicators that provide member countries
with a common definition of what characterizes sustainable
management of temperate and boreal forests. The framework
identifies seven criteria that are further defined by 67 associated
The Montreal Process
161

indicators that are aspects of the criteria that can be identified or
described.
Criterion 1 through 6
The following six criteria and associated indicators (quoted from
http://www.mpci.org/criteria_e.html) characterize the conser-
vation and sustainable management of temperate and boreal
forests. They relate specifically to forest conditions, attributes or
functions, and to the values or benefits associated with the envi-
ronmental and socioeconomic goods and services that forests pro-
vide. The intent or meaning of each criterion is made clear by its
respective indicators. No priority or order is implied in the al-
phanumeric listing of the criteria and indicators. Indicators for
which most data are available are so identified. All others may re-
quire the gathering of new or additional data and/or a new pro-
gram of systematic sampling or basic research.
Criterion 1: Conservation of
Biological Diversity
Biological diversity includes the elements of the diver-
sity of ecosystems, the diversity between species, and
genetic diversity in species.
Indicators of Biological Diversity:
• Ecosystem diversity
a. Extent of area by forest type relative to total
forest area [most data available] 
b. Extent of area by forest type and by age class
or successional stage
c. Extent of area by forest type in protected area
categories as defined by IUCN [International
Union for Conservation of Nature] or other
classification systems [most data available]
[IUCN categories include strict protection,
ecosystem conservation and tourism,
conservation of natural features, conservation
162
Forest Facts and Data

through active management, landscape/
seascape conservation and recreation, and
sustainable use of natural ecosystems.]
d. Extent of areas by forest type in protected
areas defined by age class or successional stage
e. Fragmentation of forest types
• Species diversity
a. The number of forest dependent species
b. The status (threatened, rare, vulnerable,
endangered, or extinct) of forest dependent
species at risk of not maintaining viable
breeding populations, as determined by
legislation or scientific assessment [most data
available]
• Genetic diversity
a. Number of forest dependent species that
occupy a small portion of their former range
b. Population levels of representative species from
diverse habitats monitored across their range
Criterion 2: Maintenance of Productive
Capacity of Forest Ecosystems
[The productive capacity of a forest ecosystem entails
the components and processes necessary for a forest
ecosystem to renew itself in perpetuity. Ecosystem
components and process include nutrients, nutrient
cycling, water retention, leaf respiration, decomposi-
tion, regeneration, seed production, plant growth, and
plant mortality.]
Indicators of Productive Capacity:
a. Area of forest land and net area of forest land
available for timber production [most data
available]
b. Total growing stock of both merchantable and
non-merchantable tree species on forest land
The Montreal Process
163

available for timber production [most data
available]
c. The area and growing stock of plantations of
native and exotic species [most data available]
d. Annual removal of wood products compared to
the volume determined to be sustainable [most
data available]
e. Annual removal of non-timber forest products
(e.g., fur bearers, berries, mushrooms, game),
compared to the level determined to be
sustainable
Criterion 3: Maintenance of Forest
Ecosystem Health and Vitality
[Forests maintain their health and vitality by recover-
ing from and adapting to a variety of disturbance
forces, such as insect and disease infestations, fire,
wind, landslides, floods, and so on. The same compo-
nents and processes that contribute to the productive
capacity of forest ecosystems also contribute to forest
ecosystem health and vitality.]
Indicators of Health and Vitality:
a. Area and percent of forest affected by processes
or agents beyond the range of historic variation,
e.g., by insects, disease, competition from exotic
species, fire, storm, land clearance, permanent
flooding, salinisation, and domestic animals
b. Area and percent of forest land subjected to
levels of specific air pollutants (e.g., sulfates,
nitrate, ozone) or ultraviolet B that may cause
negative impacts on the forest ecosystem
c. Area and percent of forest land with
diminished biological components indicative of
changes in fundamental ecological processes
(e.g., soil nutrient cycling, seed dispersion,
pollination) and/or ecological continuity
(monitoring of functionally important species
164
Forest Facts and Data

such as fungi, arboreal epiphytes, nematodes,
beetles, wasps, etc.)
Criterion 4: Conservation and Maintenance
of Soil and Water Resources
This criterion encompasses the conservation of soil
and water resources and the protective and productive
functions of forests.
Indicators of Conservation:
a. Area and percent of forest land with significant
soil erosion
b. Area and percent of forest land managed
primarily for protective functions, e.g.,
watersheds, flood protection, avalanche
protection, riparian zones [most data available]
c. Percent of stream kilometers in forested
catchments in which stream flow and timing has
significantly deviated from the historic range of
variation
d. Area and percent of forest land with
significantly diminished soil organic matter
and/or changes in other soil chemical properties
e. Area and percent of forest land with significant
compaction or change in soil physical properties
resulting from human activities
f. Percent of water bodies in forest areas (e.g.,
stream kilometers, lake hectares) with significant
variance of biological diversity from the historic
range of variability
g. Percent of water bodies in forest areas (e.g.,
stream kilometers, lake hectares) with significant
variation from the historic range of variability in
pH, dissolved oxygen, levels of chemicals
(electrical conductivity), sedimentation or
temperature change
h. Area and percent of forest land experiencing an
accumulation of persistent toxic substances
The Montreal Process
165

Criterion 5: Maintenance of Forest
Contribution to Global Carbon Cycles
[Forests convert atmospheric carbon into oxygen
through photosynthesis and respiration. Forests also
store an enormous amount of carbon in the soil, root
systems, tree trunks, branches, and leaves. Young
forests grow very rapidly, converting atmospheric car-
bon to oxygen, but young forests do not store as much
carbon as old-growth forests.] 
Indicators of Contribution:
a. Total forest ecosystem biomass and carbon pool,
and if appropriate, by forest type, age class, and
successional stages
b. Contribution of forest ecosystems to the total
global carbon budget, including absorption and
release of carbon (standing biomass, coarse
woody debris, peat and soil carbon)
c. Contribution of forest products to the global
carbon budget
Criterion 6: Maintenance and Enhancement
of Long-Term Multiple Socio-economic
Benefits to Meet the Needs of Societies
[Forests provide society with a wide range of goods
and services, from basic food and shelter to jobs and
recreational experiences. There is a mutual relation-
ship between forests and people: Forests contribute to
the wealth and well-being of people; in turn, people
will ensure that the forests are not exploited and will
contribute to the sustainability of the forests.] 
Indicators of Long-Term Benefits:
• Production and consumption
a. Value and volume of wood and wood
products production, including value added
through downstream processing [most data
available]
166
Forest Facts and Data

b. Value and quantities of production of
nonwood forest products
c. Supply and consumption of wood and wood
products, including consumption per capita
[most data available]
d. Value of wood and non-wood products
production as percentage of GDP
e. Degree of recycling of forest products
f. Supply and consumption/use of non-wood
products
• Recreation and tourism
a. Area and percent of forest land managed for
general recreation and tourism in relation to
the total area of forest land
b. Number and type of facilities available for
general recreation and tourism in relation to
population and forest area
c. Number of visitor days attributed to
recreation and tourism in relation to
population and forest area
• Investment in the forest sector
a. Value of investment, including investment in
forest growing, forest health and
management, planted forests, wood
processing,  recreation and tourism [most data
available]
b. Level of expenditure on research and
development, and education
c. Extension and use of new and improved
technologies
d. Rates of return on investment
• Cultural, social, and spiritual needs and values
a. Area and percent of forest land managed in
relation to the total area of forest land to
protect the range of cultural, social and
spiritual needs and values
b. Non-consumptive use forest values
• Employment and community needs
a. Direct and indirect employment in the forest
sector and forest sector employment as a
proportion of total employment
The Montreal Process
167

b. Average wage rates and injury rates in major
employment categories within the forest
sector [most data available]
c. Viability and adaptability to changing
economic conditions, of forest dependent
communities, including indigenous
communities
d. Area and percent of forest land used for
subsistence purposes
Criterion 7
Criterion 7 and associated indicators (quoted from http://www.
mcpi.org/criteria_e.html) relate to the overall policy framework
of a country that can facilitate the conservation and sustainable
management of forests. Included are the broader societal condi-
tions and processes often external to the forest itself but which
may support efforts to conserve, maintain, or enhance one or
more of the conditions, attributes, functions, and benefits cap-
tured in criteria 1 through 6. No priority or order is implied in the
listing of the indicators.
Criterion 7: Legal, Institutional, and
Economic Framework for Forest
Conservation and Sustainable Management
Indicators of Framework:
• Extent to which the legal framework (laws,
regulations, guidelines) supports the conservation and
sustainable management of forests, including the
extent to which it:
a. Clarifies property rights, provides for
appropriate land tenure arrangements,
recognizes customary and traditional rights of
indigenous people, and provides means of
resolving property disputes by due process;
b. Provides for periodic forest-related planning,
assessment, and policy review that recognizes
168
Forest Facts and Data

the range of forest values, including
coordination with relevant sectors;
c. Provides opportunities for public participation
in public policy and decision-making related
to forests and public access to information;
d. Encourages best practice codes for forest
management;
e. Provides for the management of forests to
conserve special environmental, cultural,
social, and/or scientific values.
• Extent to which the institutional framework
supports the conservation and sustainable
management of forests, including the capacity to:
a. Provide for public involvement activities and
public education, awareness and extension
programs, and make available forest-related
information;
b. Undertake and implement periodic forest-
related planning, assessment, and policy
review including cross-sectoral planning and
coordination;
c. Develop and maintain human resource skills
across relevant disciplines;
d. Develop and maintain efficient physical
infrastructure to facilitate the supply of forest
products and services and support forest
management;
e. Enforce laws, regulations and guidelines.
• Extent to which the economic framework
(economic policies and measures) supports the
conservation and sustainable management of forests
through:
a. Investment and taxation policies and a
regulatory environment which recognize
the long-term nature of investments and
permit the flow of capital in and out of
the forest sector in response to market
signals, non-market economic valuations,
and public policy decisions in order to
meet long-term demands for forest products
and services;
The Montreal Process
169

b. Non-discriminatory trade policies for forest
products.
• Capacity to measure and monitor changes in the
conservation and sustainable management of forests,
including:
a. Availability and extent of up-to-date data,
statistics, and other information important to
measuring or describing indicators associated
with criteria 1–7;
b. Scope, frequency and statistical reliability of
forest inventories, assessments, monitoring
and other relevant information;
c. Compatibility with other countries in
measuring, monitoring and reporting on
indicators.
• Capacity to conduct and apply research and
development aimed at improving forest
management and delivery of forest goods and services,
including:
a. Development of scientific understanding of
forest ecosystem characteristics and functions;
b. Development of methodologies to measure
and integrate environmental and social costs
and benefits into markets and public policies
and to reflect forest-related resource depletion
or replenishment in national accounting
systems;
c. New technologies and the capacity to assess
the socio-economic consequences associated
with the introduction of new technologies;
d. Enhancement of ability to predict impacts of
human intervention on forests;
e. Ability to predict impacts on forests of
possible climate change.
The Forest Service and several states are in the process of
drafting programmatic reports documenting how Montreal
Process C&Is are to apply to forest lands and resources they over-
see. The Montreal Process Criteria and Indicators web site is
http://www.mpci.org/criteria_e.html.
170
Forest Facts and Data

Forest Certification Principles
and Standards
This section outlines the various principles and standards under
different forest certification systems. Forest certification is a small
but growing concept in the United States. Forest certification
emerged in the early 1990s with the development of the Montreal
Process Criteria and Indicators. The idea behind forest certifica-
tion is to provide financial incentives for timber producers to em-
ploy forest practices that sustain and enhance ecological and
social forest values, such as biodiversity and community sustain-
ability. Forests are certified by meeting certain standards and
practices that vary by certification system, bioregion, and coun-
try. The certification is carried through to the end-use forest prod-
ucts such as lumber and paper, guaranteeing purchasers that the
products are derived from forests that are managed sustainably.
Several large private forest companies have received certification
through protocols sanctioned by the Forest Stewardship Council
(FSC). The state of Pennsylvania and the Navajo Indian Nation
are also certified. However, widespread adoption of forest certifi-
cation among U.S. forest companies has been slow.
The FSC is an international nongovernmental, nonprofit or-
ganization that has taken the lead on timber certification. In coun-
tries across the world, FSC educates third-party organizations on
how to certify wood and establishes criteria for sustainable man-
agement. In the United States, only two organizations are ap-
proved by the FSC to certify wood—SmartWood and Scientific
Certification Systems.
SmartWood
SmartWood certification of forest “sources” is based on field
review using SmartWood’s generic guidelines, or, when available,
country or bioregional guidelines that have been drafted in con-
sultation with local experts and organizations, often in collabora-
tion with the FSC. SmartWood has been involved in the develop-
ment of draft regional certification standards throughout the
world. In all cases, these guidelines have been developed with
help from stakeholders in each region, including the general pub-
lic, local communities, professional foresters, ecologists, and so-
cial scientists. The guidelines are widely and publicly circulated
Forest Certification Principles and Standards
171

for comment and are periodically revised based on comments
received.
Forest management certification evaluates the practices of
forest managers according to environmental, silvicultural, and
social standards. If these standards are met, an operation is certi-
fied, and timber (or other nontimber forest products) harvested
from that forest may be sold as SmartWood and FSC-certified. In
general, candidate operations must meet the following broad
principles:
1.
Long-term security for the forest.
2.
Maintenance of environmental functions, including
watershed stability and biological conservation.
3.
Sustained-yield forestry production.
4.
Positive effect on local communities.
5.
The existence of a system for long-term forest
management planning, management, and monitoring
(including a written forest management plan). In the
case of plantations, SmartWood does not endorse the
conversion of standing forests to tree plantations, but it
will certify those that have been developed on
previously deforested lands and/or that are a first step
toward forest restoration.
Certification for Chain of Custody for SmartWood
Certification of companies marketing SmartWood products (for
example, wholesalers, processors, retailers, and brokers) is
granted after chain-of-custody audits confirm that certified wood
is being used in certified product lines.
Categories of Source Certification for SmartWood
SmartWood sources are certified according to how closely they
adhere to SmartWood principles and guidelines. Sources operat-
ing in very strict adherence to these principles, and having long-
term data to support this, are classified as sustainable. Sources that
can demonstrate a strong operational commitment to the princi-
ples and guidelines are classified as well managed.
Categories of Chain-of-Custody Certification
Chain-of-custody certification assures consumers that the certi-
fied items they buy were produced with certified wood or other
certified nontimber forest products. SmartWood companies re-
172
Forest Facts and Data

ceive chain-of-custody certification according to whether all or
some of their wood products come from certified SmartWood
sources. An “exclusive” SmartWood company sells forestry prod-
ucts made only from wood from SmartWood or other FSC-
endorsed sources. A “nonexclusive” SmartWood company sells
products from both SmartWood and other FSC-endorsed certified
sources and other noncertified origins.
Scientific Certification Systems
The forest certification process of Scientific Certification Systems
(SCS) is built on the premise that an evaluation of forest products
for purposes of establishing a basis for marketplace claims must
necessarily focus on the management of the land from which
those products originate. The evaluation process includes the fol-
lowing components:
1.
Information supplied by the landowner that can be
verified through observation and field sampling.
2.
Collection of additional field data through sample-
based field reviews conducted by an interdisciplinary
evaluation team under contract to SCS.
3.
A structured evaluation process based on sound
decision science principles that focuses on timber
resource sustainability, forest ecosystem maintenance,
and financial and socioeconomic considerations.
4.
Ongoing, periodic monitoring to assure continued
adherence to long-term management plans and
management practices in place at the time of the initial
evaluation and to assure adequate tracking of the
chain of custody of products from certified operations.
5.
Chain-of-custody certification for all participants
involved in the manufacture and distribution of
certified products destined for markets in which the
product bears the “certified” claim.
Operational steps include the following:
1.
Determine the scope of the potential project
2.
Conduct a preliminary evaluation
3.
Execute the contract
4.
Assemble the evaluation team
Forest Certification Principles and Standards
173

•
Determine evaluation scope; collect and analyze
data
•
Consult with regional stakeholders
•
Weight criteria and modify scoring guide (and
documentation), as necessary
5.
Assign numerical performance scores
6.
Specify conditions and recommendations
7.
Solicit and respond to client review comments
8.
Solicit and respond to peer review comments
Chain-of-Custody Process
Valid chain-of-custody procedures are a key aspect of any credible
product-labeling program. The purpose of these procedures is to
ensure that the product bearing a label is, in fact, produced from
certified sources or materials. The process for chain-of-custody
certification normally involves the following operational steps:
1.
The participant is asked to submit a summary of
processing/sales operations outlining how operational
procedures will incorporate chain-of-custody
consideration.
2.
SCS reviews the summary to ensure that all elements of
the respective chain-of-custody standards are covered.
3.
If the approach appears to be viable for the purposes of
maintaining chain of custody, SCS recommends that
the participant proceed with an on-site compliance
audit.
4.
The participant reviews and signs the chain-of-custody
contract.
5.
An audit is scheduled.
6.
On-site compliance audits are conducted by an SCS
inspector to accomplish the following:
•
To ensure that the client’s documentation is
complied with by staff
•
To review activities and documentation to
determine that the documentation of activities is
sufficient
•
To review the effectiveness of the system in
meeting chain-of-custody requirements
7.
An audit report is submitted to the client for review.
8.
A certificate is issued if the client’s operations
successfully meet chain-of-custody standards.
174
Forest Facts and Data

The Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI)
(www.aboutsfi.org)
To meet the needs of both society’s demand for wood products
and ecological health, the SFI program was developed by
foresters, conservationists, scientists, landowners, and other
stakeholders. The SFI program allows foresters, landowners, log-
gers, and wood and paper producers to satisfy the growing de-
mand for environmentally sound forestry while still producing
forest products economically. An independent group of stake-
holders called the Sustainable Forestry Board (SFB) manages the
SFI program standard and verification procedures and SFI pro-
gram compliance. Currently, the SFB has 15 members, two-thirds
of whom represent nonindustry interest groups such as environ-
mental and conservation groups.
The SFI program has 11 objectives or principles that provide
guidance to forest managers who practice or want to practice sus-
tainable forestry.
•
Broadening the implementation of sustainable forestry
by employing an array of economically,
environmentally, and socially sound practices in the
conservation of forests—including appropriate
protection, growth, harvest, and use of those forests—
using the best scientific information available.
•
Ensuring long-term forest productivity and
conservation of forest resources through prompt
reforestation, soil conservation, afforestation, and other
measures.
•
Protecting the water quality in streams, lakes, and other
bodies of water.
•
Managing the quality and distribution of wildlife
habitats and contributing to the conservation of
biological diversity by developing and implementing
stand- and landscape-level measures that promote
habitat diversity and the conservation of forest plants
and animals including aquatic fauna.
•
Managing the visual impact of harvesting and other
forest operations.
•
Managing program participants’ lands of ecologic,
geologic, cultural, or historic significance in a manner
that recognizes their special qualities.
•
Promoting the efficient use of forest resources.
Forest Certification Principles and Standards
175

•
Broadening the practice of sustainable forestry by
cooperating with forest landowners, wood producers,
consulting foresters, and program participants’
employees who have responsibility in wood
procurement and landowner assistance programs.
•
Publicly reporting program participants’ progress in
fulfilling their commitment to sustainable forestry.
•
Providing opportunities for the public and the forestry
community to participate in the commitment to
sustainable forestry.
•
Promoting continual improvement in the practice of
sustainable forestry and monitoring, measuring, and
reporting performance in achieving the commitment to
sustainable forestry.
American Tree Farm System Standards
(http://www.treefarmsystem.org)
Since 1941, the American Tree Farm System (ATFS), under the
oversight of the American Forest Foundation (AFF), has been cer-
tifying trees managed using sustainable forestry. It is the oldest
and largest voluntary third-party verification process in the
United States.
Certification in ATFS is a voluntary process and follows a set
of standards and guidelines. Landowners who want to become
certified Tree Farmers must have their property inspected by an
ATFS forest professional. If the property meets AFF’s standards
and guidelines for forest sustainability, the landowner receives a
certificate and the recognizable diamond-shaped Tree Farm sign.
The property is reinspected every five years to maintain Tree
Farm certification status. The inspections are available free of
charge to the landowner.
Table 5.5 contains a list of the ATFS Standards, Guidelines,
and Performance Measures for certification.
Through December 1997, close to 3.5 million acres of U.S. for-
est land has been certified by SmartWood, Scientific Certification
Systems, or both (Hayward and Vetinsky 1999). SmartWood has
certified 1,051,000 acres and SCS has certified 2,616,000 acres. The
two organizations jointly certified more than 218,000 acres of the
Menominee Tribal Enterprises. According to information on the
Forest Stewardship Council web site, more than 30.4 million acres
of forest land have been certified worldwide.
176
Forest Facts and Data

Forest Certification Principles and Standards
177
Ensuring Sustainable Forests
Standard: Members of the ATFS
promote the growing of renewable
forest resources on their forest land
while protecting environmental
benefits. They are encouraged to strive
to increase public understanding of all
benefits of productive forestry.
Reforestation Standard: Members
must provide for prompt restocking of
desired species of trees on harvested
areas and idle areas where tree
growing is the land use objective.
Restocking may be accomplished by
natural seeding, sprouting, direct
seeding, or reforestation with tree
seedlings.
Water Quality Standard: Forestry
practices must include the application
of the state’s environmental protection
organization–approved forestry best
management practices (BMPs) or
forest practices act as well as any
other practices required by local, state,
or federal regulations.
Wildlife Habitat Standard: Members’
forest management plans must
address the effects of forest practices
on fish and wildlife.
Ensuring Sustainable Forests
Performance Measures: To achieve
and maintain certification, all
members must have a written and
active forest management plan. This
plan must take into consideration
maintenance and/or enhancement of
wood and fiber production, wildlife
habitat, water quality, and recreational
opportunities.
Reforestation Performance Measures:
To achieve and maintain certification,
members must achieve satisfactory
restocking levels within five years
following harvest, or less than five
years as specified by state or local
ordinance. Acreage not reforested
because of change of use shall be
deducted from overall Tree Farm
acreage.
Water Quality Performance
Measures: To achieve and maintain
certification, members must be in
compliance with state forestry best
management practices (BMPs) or their
forest practices act to ensure that
water quality standards are met.
Wildlife Habitat Performance
Measures: To achieve and maintain
certification, members shall follow
forest practices that, to the extent
practicable, protect and enhance fish
and wildlife habitat while
considering floral and faunal
diversity.
(Table continues)
Table 5.5
American Tree Farm System (ATFS) Standards, Guidelines,
and Performance Measures
Standards and guidelines
Performance measures
for forest landowners
for Tree Farm certification

178
Forest Facts and Data
Forest Aesthetics Standard: Members
shall follow forest practices that
consider the aesthetic effects of forest
activities.
Protect Special Sites Standard:
Implemented forest management
practices shall, to the extent
practicable, recognize and protect
recreational, historical, biological,
archaeological, and geological sites of
special interest.
Biodiversity Standard: Acceptable
forest management includes the range
of even and/or uneven age
management practices.
Slash Disposal and Utilization
Standard: Members shall consider
harvest contract wording that
addresses utilization and slash hazard
reduction.
Prudent Use of Chemicals Standard:
Forest management practices using
herbicides, pesticides, and/or
fertilizers and implemented by the
landowner shall be of the type that
maintain or enhance the health and
productivity of the woodland while
protecting soil, water, fish, and
wildlife resources.
Forest Aesthetics Performance
Measures: To achieve and maintain
certification, members shall, to the
extent practicable, follow forest
management practices that
demonstrate concern for visual
impacts.
Protect Special Sites Performance
Measures: To achieve and maintain
certification, forest management
practices, to the extent practicable,
shall demonstrate concern for special
sites.
Biodiversity Performance Measures:
To achieve and maintain certification,
members shall implement forest
management practices that enhance
the health and productivity of the
woodland while considering
biodiversity on a landscape or
watershed scale.
Slash Disposal and Utilization
Performance Measures: To achieve
and maintain certification, members
shall make a good-faith effort to
utilize, in an environmentally and/or
economically sound manner, all
severed and/or damaged materials on
a harvest site.
Prudent Use of Chemicals
Performance Measures: To achieve
and maintain certification, the use of
herbicides, pesticides, and/or
fertilizers must meet or exceed all
applicable label requirements as well
as all local, state, and federal laws.
(Table continues)
Table 5.5
American Tree Farm System (ATFS) Standards, Guidelines,
and Performance Measures (continued)
Standards and guidelines
Performance measures
for forest landowners
for Tree Farm certification

Source: American Tree Farm System. “About Tree Farming: Standards of Sustainability for Forest Certification
Including Performance Measures and Field Indicators.” Available: http://www.treefarmsystem.org/aboutfarming/
standards.cfm; accessed April 18, 2003.
References
American Tree Farm System. “Standards of Sustainability for Forest Cer-
tification.” http://www.treefarmsystem.org/aboutfarming/standards.
cfm. Accessed on April 18, 2003.
Bailey, Robert G. 1995. “Description of the Ecoregions of the United
States.” USDA, U.S. Forest Service. http://www.nearctica.com/
ecology/ecoreg/ecoprov.htm. Accessed on March 25, 2003.
———.   2003. http://www.fs.fed.us/land/ecosysmgmt/ecoreg1_home.
html. Accessed on March 25, 2003.
Birch, Thomas W. 1994. Private Forest-Land Owners of the United States,
1994. Radnor, PA: USDA, U.S. Forest Service, Northeastern Forest Exper-
iment Station.
Cubbage, F., J. O’Laughlin, and C. S. Bullock. 1993. Forest Resource Policy.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Endgame Research Services: A Public Information Network. 2003. Tim-
berland Investment Management Organizations (TIMOs). http://www.
endgame.org/timo.html. Accessed on April 18, 2003.
References
179
Forestry Contractor Use Standard:
ATFS provides information,
education, and assistance to forest
landowners regarding forest
management practices that will
sustain or enhance forest productivity,
wildlife habitat, water quality, and
outdoor recreation.
Forestry Contractor Use Performance
Measures: To achieve and maintain
certification, members shall make a
good-faith effort to ensure that loggers
and contractors working on members’
property are made aware of special
requirements. In addition, members
are encouraged to contract with
loggers and other forest management
contractors who have completed
recommended training and education
programs offered for their profession
in their respective states and to ensure
that such contractors are insured and
comply with all state and federal
regulations.
Table 5.5
American Tree Farm System (ATFS) Standards, Guidelines,
and Performance Measures (continued)
Standards and guidelines
Performance measures
for forest landowners
for Tree Farm certification

Forest Stewardship Council. 2003. “Who We Are.” http://www.fscoax.
org/principal.htm. Accessed on April 18, 2003.
Hayward, J., and I. Vertinsky. 1999. “High Expectations, Unexpected
Benefits: What Managers and Owners Think of Certification.” Journal of
Forestry 97 (2): 13–17.
Intertribal Timber Council. 1993. An Assessment of Indian Forests and For-
est Management in the United States. November. The Indian Forest Man-
agement Assessment Team, 52pp. plus appendices.
MacCleery, D. W. 1996. American Forests: A History of Resiliency and Re-
covery, 4th revision. Durham, NC: Forest History Society.
The Montreal Process. 1998. “What Is the Montreal Process?” http://
www.mpci.org/whatis_e.html. Accessed on July 21, 2003.
Nogueron, R. 2002. Low-Access Forests and Their Level of Protection in North
America. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute.
Pinchot Institute. 2003. “Facts about Non-Federal Forest Lands.” http://
www.pinchot.org/pic/farmbill/Facts.html. Accessed on March 25, 2003.
Ricketts, T. H., E. Dinerstein, D. M. Olson, and C. J. Loucks. 1999. Terres-
trial Ecoregions of North America: A Conservation Assessment. Covelo, CA:
Island Press.
SmartWood. 2003. “Practical Conservation through Certified Forestry:
Certification Guidelines and Applications.” http://www.smartwood.
org/guidelines/index.html. Accessed on April 18, 2003.
Souder, Jon, and Sally Fairfax. 1995. State Trust Lands: History, Manage-
ment, and Sustainable Use. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press. 
Sustainable Forestry Initiative. 2003. “About SFI.” http://www.aboutsfi.
org/about.asp. Accessed on April 18, 2003.
———. 2003. “Our Principles and Objectives.” http://www.aboutsfi.
org/about_principles.asp. Accessed on April 18, 2003.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), U.S. Forest Service. 2000. 2000
RPA Assessment of Forest and Range Lands. http://www.fs.fed.us/
pl/rpa/rpaassess.pdf. Accessed on July 21, 2003.
———. 2001. U.S. Forest Facts and Historical Trends. http://fia.fs.fed.us/
library/ForestFactsMetric.pdf. Accessed on July 21, 2003.
———. 2003. http:// www.fs.fed.us. Accessed on July 21, 2003.
U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Bureau of Land Management. 2003.
http://www.blm.gov. Accessed on February 21, 2003.
U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. National Park Service. 2003.
http://www.nps.gov. Accessed on February 21, 2003.
180
Forest Facts and Data

U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. National Wilderness Preservation
System. 2003. http://www.nwps.gov. Accessed on February 21, 2003.
World Resources Institute (WRI). 2002. Low-Access Forests and Their Level
of Protection in North America. http://www.wri.org/wri/gfw/gfw_
namerica.html. Accessed on March 25, 2003.
References
181


6
Directory of
U.S. Forestry Organizations
N
umerous government and nongovernment organizations are
involved in forest conservation, management, and utilization.
In this chapter, the reader will find a whole host of organiza-
tions at state, national, and international levels chosen for their
importance and contributions to U.S. forest conservation. The
types of organizations listed include international and national
government organizations, state government organizations, non-
governmental conservation organizations, forestry schools ac-
credited by the Society of American Foresters, private forest prod-
ucts companies, forestry trade associations, forestry professional
associations, and other forestry organizations that defy easy cate-
gorization. More information about any these organizations can
be obtained by logging on to the web site address provided.
Federal and International
Government Organizations
Bureau of Indian Affairs
See U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs
Bureau of Land Management
See U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land
Management
183

Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service
See U.S. Department of Agriculture, Cooperative State
Research, Education, and Extension Service
Council on Environmental Quality
722 Jackson Place NW
Washington, DC 20503
Phone: (202) 456-6224
Web site: www.whitehouse.gov/ceq/
The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) provides environ-
mental expertise and policy analysis for the executive office of the
President. The council also implements statutory or regulatory re-
quirements and programs related to the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969, which applies to management of all Federal
public forest lands.
Environmental Protection Agency
See U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Fish and Wildlife Service
See U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service
Forest Service
See U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service
Geological Survey
See U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey
Ministry of Water, Lands, and Air Protection
P.O. Box 9339
Victoria, BC V8W 9M1
Canada
Phone: (604) 387-9422
Web site: http://www.gov.bc.ca/wlap/
The mission of the Ministry of Water, Land, and Air Protection is
to provide leadership in building environmental principles into
day-to-day decisions of governments, corporations, and private
individuals. Also, it monitors and reports on the state of the envi-
ronment and ensures that defensible environmental standards are
set and complied with. The ministry manages natural habitats,
184
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

wildlife, and water resources for ecological diversity and eco-
nomic and recreational opportunities.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
See U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
National Park Service
See U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service
National Science Foundation
4201 Wilson Boulevard
Arlington, VA 22230
Phone: (703) 306-1234
Web site: http://www.nsf.gov
The National Science Foundation supports science and engineer-
ing research and develops science education programs; it funds
long-term research on forest ecosystems. Policy for the founda-
tion is established through the National Science Board.
Natural Resource Conservation Service
See U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resource
Conservation Service 
Natural Resources Canada
Canadian Forest Service
580 Booth Street
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0E4
Canada
Web site: http://www.NRCan.gc.ca/cfs
Natural Resources Canada/Canadian Forest Service promotes
sustainable development of forests and competitiveness of the
forest sector. It also establishes links with nongovernmental or-
ganizations to address issues of international trade, market ac-
cess, and worldwide sustainable forestry.
North American Wetlands Conservation Council
4401 North Fairfax Drive
Suite 110
Arlington, VA 22203
Phone: (703) 358-1784
Federal and International Government Organizations
185

E-mail: r9arw_nawwo@mail.fws.gov
Web site: http://www.fws.gov/r9nawwo/nawcahp.html
The North American Wetlands Conservation Council encourages
public-private partnerships to conserve wetland ecosystems, in-
cluding forested wetlands, for birds, fish, and wildlife.
St. Croix International Waterway Commission
Box 610
Calais, ME 04619
Phone: (506) 466-7550
The St. Croix International Waterway Commission is a joint com-
mission of the state of Maine and the province of New Brunswick
to implement international management plans for the St. Croix
River system, which includes large amounts of forest land.
Tennessee Valley Authority
400 W. Summit Hill Drive
Knoxville, TN 37902-1499
Phone: (865) 632-2101
Web site: http://www.tva.gov/index.htm
The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) provides public service to
the people of the Tennessee River valley by supporting sustain-
able economic development, supplying affordable and reliable
power, and managing the Tennessee River system, which in-
cludes large amounts of forest land.
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service
1400 Independence Avenue SW
Stop 2201
Washington, DC 20250-2201
Phone: (202) 720-7441
Web site: http://www.reeusda.gov/
The goal of the Cooperative Extension Service is to advance
knowledge for agriculture, the environment, human health and
well-being, and communities. This agency provides leadership to
support university-based and other institutional research, educa-
tion, and extension programs including forestry extension to pri-
vate forest landowners.
186
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Natural Resource Conservation Service
USDA, NRCS, Office of the Chief
Fourteenth and Independence Avenue SW
Room 5105-A
Washington, DC 20250
Phone: (202) 720-7246
Web site: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov
The Natural Resources Conservation Service provides leadership
in a partnership effort to help people conserve, maintain, and im-
prove natural resources and environment.
U.S. Department of Agriculture
U.S. Forest Service
P.O. Box 96090
Washington, DC 20090-6090
Phone: (202) 205-8333
The Forest Service is a Federal agency that manages National
Forests and National Grasslands. As the largest forestry research
organization in the world, it provides technical and financial as-
sistance to state and private forestry agencies. The mission of the
Forest Service is to sustain the health, diversity, and productivity
of the nation’s forests and grasslands to meet the needs of current
and future generations.
U.S. Department of Commerce
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Office of Global Program
1100 Wayne Avenue
Suite 1210
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Phone: (301) 427-2089
Web site: http://www.noaa.gov
The historical role of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad-
ministration (NOAA) has been to predict environmental changes,
protect life and property, provide decision-makers with reliable
scientific information, and foster global environmental steward-
ship. It provides coordination with national and international sci-
entific communities for global warming, the Tropical Oceans and
Global Atmosphere project, and climate research on issues in-
cluding the interaction between forests and climate change.
Federal and International Government Organizations
187

U.S. Department of the Interior
Bureau of Indian Affairs
1849 C Street NW
Washington, DC 20240
Phone: (202) 208-5116
Web site: http://www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html
The Bureau of Indian Affairs carries out the trust responsibility of
the United States to Native American tribes. This includes the pro-
tection and enhancement of Native American lands and the con-
servation and development of forests/other natural resources.
U.S. Department of the Interior
Bureau of Land Management
Office of Public Affairs
1849 C Street
Room 406-LS
Washington, DC 20240
Phone: (202) 452-5125
Web site: http://www.blm.gov/
It is the mission of the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to sus-
tain the health, diversity, and productivity of the public lands for
the use and enjoyment of present and future generations. The
BLM administers 262 million acres of America’s public land,
much of it forested, primarily in 12 western states.
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
1849 C Street NW
Washington, DC 20240
Phone: (202) 208-6843
Web site: http://www.nps.gov
The National Park Service preserves unimpaired the natural and
cultural resources and values of the National Park System for the
enjoyment, education, and inspiration of this and future genera-
tions. It cooperates with partners to extend the benefits of natural
and cultural resource conservation and outdoor recreation
throughout the United States and the world.
U.S. Department of the Interior
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
1849 C Street NW
188
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Room 3012
Washington, DC 20240
Phone: (202) 208-4717
Web site: http://www.fws.gov
The mission of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is to administer
a national network of lands and waters for the conservation, man-
agement, and, where appropriate, restoration of the fish, wildlife,
and plant resources and their habitats within the United States for
the benefit of current and future generations of Americans.
U.S. Department of the Interior
U.S. Geological Survey
USGS National Center
12201 Sunrise Valley Drive
Reston, VA 20192
Phone: (703) 648-4000
Web site: http://www.usgs.gov
The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) serves the nation by provid-
ing reliable scientific information to describe and understand the
Earth; minimize loss of life and property from natural disasters;
manage forest, water, biological, energy, and mineral resources;
and enhance and protect our quality of life.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
401 M Street SW
Washington, DC 20460
Phone: (202) 260-2090
Web site: http://epa.gov
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), housed in the
executive branch of the U.S. government, strives to achieve sys-
tematic control and abatement of pollution through research,
monitoring, standard setting, and enforcement. EPA works with
the Forest Service and other Federal land management agencies
to control and abate pollution in forested landscapes.
U.S. Forest Service
See U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service
Federal and International Government Organizations
189

State Organizations
National Association of State Foresters
Hall of the States
444 North Capitol Street
Suite 540
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: (202) 624-5415
E-mail: nasf@sso.org
Web site: http://www.stateforesters.org/
The National Association of State Foresters provides manage-
ment assistance and protection services for more than two-thirds
of the nation’s forests. It ensures that individual resource man-
agers have the best technical, educational, and financial assis-
tance available to help them achieve their objectives in an envi-
ronmentally beneficial way. State forestry agencies also leverage
state and local resources to develop urban and community
forestry programs and to help protect all forests from wildfire, de-
structive pests, and diseases. The following is a list of individual
associations by state: 
190
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations
Alabama
Timothy C. Boyce
Alabama Forestry Commission
513 Madison Avenue
Montgomery, AL 36130
Phone: (334) 240-9304
Fax: (334) 240-9390
E-mail: BoyceT@
forestry.state.al.us
Alaska
Jeff Jahnke
Alaska Division of Forestry
State Forester’s Office
550 West Seventh Avenue
Suite 1450
Anchorage, AK 99501
Phone: (907) 269-8474
Fax: (907) 269-8902
E-mail: Jeff_Jahnke@
dnr.state.ak.us
American Samoa
Sheri S. Mann
Forestry Program Manager
P.O. Box 5319
ASCC/AHNR
Pago Pago, AS 96799
Phone: 011 (684) 699-1394
Fax: 011 (684) 699-5011
E-mail: ssuemann@yahoo.com
Arizona
Kirk Rowdabaugh
Arizona State Land
Department
2901 W. Pinnacle Peak Road
Phoenix, AZ 85027-1002
Phone: (602) 255-4059
Fax: (602) 255-1781
E-mail: krowdabaughaz@
cybertrails.com

Arkansas
John T. Shannon
Arkansas Forestry
Commission
3821 West Roosevelt Road
Little Rock, AR 72204-6396
Phone: (501) 296-1941
Fax: (501) 296-1949
E-mail: john.shannon@mail.
state.ar.us
California
Andrea E. Tuttle
Department of Forestry and
Fire Protection
P.O. Box 944246
1416 Ninth Street
Room 1505
Sacramento, CA 94244-2460
Phone: (916) 653-7772
Fax: (916) 653-4171
E-mail: andrea_tuttle@
fire.ca.gov
Colorado
James E. Hubbard
Colorado State Forest Service
Colorado State University
203 Forestry Building
Fort Collins, CO 80523
Phone: (970) 491-6303
Fax: (970) 491-7736
E-mail: jhubbard@lamar.
colostate.edu
Connecticut
Donald H. Smith
Division of Forestry
79 Elm Street
Hartford, CT 06106
Phone: (860) 424-3630
Fax: (860) 424-4070
E-mail: don.smith@
po.state.ct.us
Delaware
E. Austin Short III
Delaware Forest Service
2320 S. DuPont Highway
Dover, DE 19901
Phone: (302) 698-4548
Fax: (302) 697-6245
E-mail: AUSTIN@
dda.state.de.us
District of Columbia
Mark Buscaino
Trees and Lands – District
Government
1105 O Street SE
Washington, DC 20003
Phone: (202) 698-8361
Fax: (202) 724-1406
E-mail: mark.buscaino@dc.gov
Florida
L. Earl Peterson
Division of Forestry
3125 Conner Boulevard
Tallahassee, FL 32399-1650
Phone: (850) 488-4274
Fax: (850) 488-0863
E-mail: peterse@
doacs.state.fl.us
Georgia
J. Fred Allen
Georgia Forestry Commission
P.O. Box 819
Macon, GA 31202-0819
Phone: (478) 751-3480
Fax: (478) 751-3465
E-mail: fallen@gfc.state.ga.us
State Organizations
191

Guam
David T. Limtiaco
Territorial Forester
Forestry and Soil Resources
Division
192 Dairy Road
Mangilao, Guam 96923
Phone: (671) 735-3949
Fax: (671) 734-0111
E-mail: dlimti@mail.gov.gu
Hawaii
Michael G. Buck
Division of Forestry and
Wildlife
1151 Punchbowl Street
Honolulu, HI 96813
Phone: (808) 587-0166
Fax: (808) 587-0160
E-mail: Michael_G_Buck@
exec.state.hi.us
Idaho
Winston A. Wiggins
Idaho Department of Lands
954 W. Jefferson Street
P.O. Box 83720
Boise, ID 83720-0050
Phone: (208) 334-0200
Fax: (208) 334-2339
E-mail: wwiggins@
idl.state.id.us
Illinois
Stewart Pequignot
Division of Forest Resources
2005 Round Barn Road
Champaign, IL 61821
Phone: (217) 278-5773
Fax: (217) 278-5763
E-mail: spequignot@dnrmail.
state.il.us
Indiana
Burnell C. Fischer
Department of Natural
Resources
402 W. Washington Street
Room W296
Indianapolis, IN 46204
Phone: (317) 232-4105
Fax: (317) 233-3863
E-mail: bfischer@
dnr.state.in.us
Iowa
Mike Brandrup
Department of Natural
Resources
Wallace Office Building
East Ninth and Grand Avenue
Des Moines, IA 50319
Phone: (515) 281-8657
Fax: (515) 281-6794
E-mail: Mike.Brandrup@
dnr.state.ia.us
Kansas
Raymond G. Aslin
Kansas Forest Service
2610 Claflin Road
Manhattan, KS 66502-2798
Phone: (785) 532-3300
Fax: (785) 532-3305
E-mail: raslin@oznet.ksu.edu
Kentucky
Leah W. MacSwords
Kentucky Division of Forestry
627 Comanche Trail
Frankfort, KY 40601
Phone: (502) 564-4496
Fax: (502) 564-6553
E-mail: leah.macswords@
mail.state.ky.us
192
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Louisiana
Paul D. Frey
Office of Forestry
P.O. Box 1628
Baton Rouge, LA 70821
Phone: (225) 952-8002
Fax: (225) 922-1356
E-mail: Paul_F@ldaf.state.la.us
Maine
Thomas C. Doak
Maine Forest Service
22 State House Station
Harlow Building
Augusta, ME 04333
Phone: (207) 287-2791
Fax: (207) 287-8422
E-mail: tom.doak@state.me.us
Maryland
Steven W. Koehn
DNR – Forest Service
580 Taylor Avenue, E-1
Annapolis, MD 21401
Phone: (410) 260-8501
Fax: (410) 260-8595
E-mail: skoehn@
dnr.state.md.us
Massachusetts
Warren E. Archey
Department of Environmental
Management
P.O. Box 1433
Pittsfield, MA 01202
Phone: (413) 442-4963
Fax: (413) 442-5860
E-mail: Warren.Archey@
state.ma.us
Michigan
Gerald J. Thiede
Michigan Department of
Natural Resources
Forest Management Division
Mason Building, Eighth Floor
P.O. Box 30452
Lansing, MI 48909-7952
Phone: (517) 335-4225
Fax: (517) 373-2443
E-mail: thiedeg@state.mi.us
Minnesota
Michael Carroll
Division of Forestry
500 Lafayette Road
St. Paul, MN 55155-4044
Phone: (651) 296-4485
Fax: (651) 296-5954
E-mail: mike.carroll@
dnr.state.mn.us
Mississippi
James L. Sledge Jr.
Mississippi Forestry
Commission
301 N. Lamar Street
Suite 300
Jackson, MS 39201
Phone: (601) 359-1386
Fax: (601) 359-1349
E-mail: jsledge@
mfc.state.ms.us
Missouri
Robert L. Krepps
Missouri Department of
Conservation
P.O. Box 180
Jefferson City, MO 65102
Phone: (573) 751-4115 ext. 3300
Fax: (573) 526-6670
E-mail: kreppr@mail.
conservation.state.mo.us
State Organizations
193

Montana
Donald K. Artley
DNRC – Forestry Division
2705 Spurgin Road
Missoula, MT 59804
Phone: (406) 542-4300
Fax: (406) 542-4217
E-mail: dartley@state.mt.us
Nebraska
Gary L. Hergenrader
Nebraska Forest Service
Plant Industry Building
Room 103
Lincoln, NE 68583-0815
Phone: (402) 472-2944
Fax: (402) 472-2964
E-mail: ghergenrader1@
unl.edu
Nevada
Steve Robinson
Division of Forestry
1201 Johnson Street
Suite D
Carson City, NV 89706-3048
Phone: (775) 684-2512
Fax: (775) 687-4244
E-mail: forester@govmail.
state.nv.us
New Hampshire
Philip Bryce
Division of Forests and Lands
P.O. Box 1856
172 Pembroke Road
Concord, NH 03302-1856
Phone: (603) 271-2214
Fax: (603) 271-6488
E-mail: p_bryce@dred.
state.nh.us
New Jersey
James S. Barresi
State Forestry Service
P.O. Box 404
Trenton, NJ 08625-0404
Phone: (609) 292-2520
Fax: (609) 984-0378
E-mail: jbarresi@dep.state.nj.us
New Mexico
Toby A. Martinez
Forestry Division
P.O. Box 1948
Santa Fe, NM 87504-1948
Phone: (505) 476-3328
Fax: (505) 476-3330
E-mail: TAMartinez@
State.nm.us
New York
Robert K. Davies
New York State Department of
Environmental
Conservation
625 Broadway
Albany, NY 12233-4250
Phone: (518) 402-9405
Fax: (518) 402-9028
E-mail: rkdavies@
gw.dec.state.ny.us
North Carolina
Stanford M. Adams
North Carolina Division of
Forest Resources
1616 Mail Service Center
Raleigh, NC 27699
Phone: (919) 733-2162 ext. 202
Fax: (919) 715-4350
E-mail: Stan.Adams@
ncmail.net
194
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

North Dakota
Larry A. Kotchman
North Dakota Forest Service
307 First Street
Bottineau, ND 58318-1100
Phone: (701) 228-5422
Fax: (701) 228-5448
E-mail: Larry_Kotchman@
ndsu.nodak.edu
Ohio
Ronald G. Abraham
Division of Forestry
1855 Fountain Square Court,
H-1
Columbus, OH 43224
Phone: (614) 265-6690
Fax: (614) 447-9231
E-mail: Ron.Abraham@
dnr.state.oh.us
Oklahoma
Roger L. Davis
Oklahoma Department of
Agriculture
Forestry Services
P.O. Box 528804
Oklahoma City, OK 73152-3864
Phone: (405) 521-3864
Fax: (405) 522-4583
E-mail: rogerd@oda.state.ok.us
Oregon
Marvin Brown
Oregon Department of
Forestry
2600 State Street
Salem, OR 97310
Phone: (503) 945-7211
Fax: (503) 945-7212
E-mail: mbrown@odf.state.or.us
Pennsylvania
James R. Grace
Bureau of Forestry
P.O. Box 8552
Harrisburg, PA 17105-8552
Phone: (717) 787-2703
Fax: (717) 783-5109
E-mail: jagrace@state.pa.us
Puerto Rico
Diego Jimenez Carrion
Forest Service Bureau – DNER
P.O. Box 9066600
Puerta de Tierra
San Juan, PR 00906-6600
Phone: (787) 724-3647
Fax: (787) 721-5984
E-mail: prforests@hotmail.com 
Rhode Island
Thomas A. Dupree
Division of Forest
Environment
1037 Hartford Pike
North Scituate, RI 02857
Phone: (401) 647-3367
Fax: (401) 647-3590
E-mail: riforestry@edgenet.net
South Carolina
Bob Schowalter
South Carolina Forestry
Commission
P.O. Box 21707
Columbia, SC 29221
Phone: (803) 896-8800
Fax: (803) 798-8097
E-mail: bschowalter@
forestry.state.sc.us
State Organizations
195

South Dakota
Ray Sowers
Resource Conservation and
Forestry
Foss Building
523 East Capitol Avenue
Pierre, SD 57501
Phone: (605) 773-3623
Fax: (605) 773-4003
E-mail: Ray.Sowers@
state.sd.us
Tennessee
Director
Tennessee Department of
Agriculture
Division of Forestry
P.O. Box 40627, Melrose
Station
Nashville, TN 37204
Phone: (615) 837-5411
Fax: (615) 837-5003
E-mail: lburrow@
mail.state.tn.us
Texas
James B. Hull
Texas Forest Service
301 Tarrow Drive
Suite 364
College Station, TX 77840-7896
Phone: (979) 458-6600
Fax: (979) 458-6610
E-mail: jim-hull@tamu.edu
Utah
A. Joel Frandsen, Director
Department of Natural
Resources
1594 West North Temple
Suite 3520
Salt Lake City, UT 84114-5703
Phone: (801) 538-5540
Fax: (801) 533-4111
E-mail: joelfrandsen@utah.gov
Vermont
Conrad M. Motyka
Department of Forests, Parks
and Recreation
103 S. Main Street
Waterbury, VT 05671-0601
Phone: (802) 241-3670
Fax: (802) 244-1481
E-mail: cmotyka@
fpr.anr.state.vt.us
Virginia
James W. Garner
Virginia Department of
Forestry
900 Natural Resources Drive
Suite 800
Charlottesville, VA 22903
Phone: (434) 977-6555
Fax: (434) 977-7749
E-mail: garnerj@dof.state.va.us
Washington
Pat McElroy
Department of Natural
Resources
Box 47037
1111 Washington Street
Olympia, WA 98504-7037
Phone: (360) 902-1603
Fax: (360) 902-1775
E-mail: pat.mcelroy@
wadnr.gov
West Virginia
C. Randall Dye
West Virginia Forestry
Division
1900 Kanawha Boulevard East
Charleston, WV 25305-0180
196
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Nongovernment Conservation
Organizations
Adopt-A-Stream Foundation
600 128th Street SE
Everett, WA 98208
Phone: (425) 316-8592
E-mail: aasf@streamkeeper.org
Web site: http://www.streamkeeper.org
The mission of the Adopt-A-Stream Foundation is to empower
people to become stewards of watersheds, wetlands, and streams,
many of which run through forests. The foundation’s long-term
goal is to ensure that all streams are adopted by local residents.
Aldo Leopold Foundation Inc. 
E12919 Levee Road
P.O. Box 77
Baraboo, WI 53919
Phone: (608) 355-0279
E-mail: mail@aldoleopold.org
Web site: http://www.aldoleopold.org
The Aldo Leopold Foundation promotes harmony between
people and land including forest land through restoration, re-
search, and educational activities.
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
197
Phone: (304) 558-3446
Fax: (304) 558-0143
E-mail: RDye@
gwmail.state.wv.us
Wisconsin
Paul DeLong
DNR – Division of Forestry
P.O. Box 7921
Madison, WI 53707
Phone: (608) 266-2694
Fax: (608) 266-6983
E-mail: delong@dnr.state.wi.us
Wyoming
Tom Ostermann
Wyoming State Forestry
Division
1100 West Twenty-Second
Street
Cheyenne, WY 82002
Phone: (307) 777-7586
Fax: (307) 777-5986
E-mail: toster@state.wy.us

American Conservation Association Inc. 
1200 New York Avenue NW
Suite 400
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 289-2431
The American Conservation Association is an educational and
scientific organization formed to advance knowledge and under-
standing of conservation and to preserve and develop natural re-
sources for public use.
American Forests
P.O. Box 2000
Washington, DC 20013
Phone: (202) 955-4500
E-mail: info@amfor.org
Web site: http://www.americanforests.org
American Forests plants trees for environmental restoration, is a
pioneer in the science and practice of urban forestry, and com-
municates the benefits of trees and forests. Its focus is on assisting
communities in planning and implementing tree and forest ac-
tions to restore and maintain healthy ecosystems and communi-
ties. It also works with community-based forestry partners in
both urban and rural areas to help them participate in National
Forest policy discussions.
American Hiking Society
1422 Fenwick Lane
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Phone: (301) 565-6704
E-mail: info@americanhiking.org
Web site: http://www.americanhiking.org
The American Hiking Society is a recreation-based conservation
group dedicated to establishing, protecting, and maintaining foot
trails, many of which run through forest land. The AHS lobbies to
encourage funding for trails and promotes volunteerism in trail
building and maintenance.
American Lands
726 Seventh Street SE
Washington, DC 20003
Phone: (202) 547-9400
198
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

E-mail: wafcdc@americanlands.org
Web site: http://www.americanlands.org
The mission of American Lands is to protect and recover North
American native forests, grassland, and aquatic ecosystems and
preserve biological diversity. American Lands strengthens grass-
roots conservation networks, provides advocacy services, and im-
proves coordination and communication among groups.
Ancient Forest International
P.O. Box 1850
Redway, CA 95560
Phone: (707) 923-3015
E-mail: afi@ancientforest.org
Web site: http://www.ancientforest.org
Ancient Forest International is an alliance of conservationists
dedicated to helping preserve, study, and increase awareness of
the Earth’s intact forest ecosystems while providing habitat con-
tinuity through corridors. Currently work is being done in Chile,
Mexico, Ecuador, and the north Pacific Coast.
Biomass Users Network
383 Franklin Street
Bloomfield, NJ 07003
Phone: (201) 680-9100
The Biomass Users Network works to advance rural economic
development in Third World countries in an environmentally
sound manner through the innovative production and efficient
use of biomass resources including forest resources.
Canada–United States Environmental Council
1101 Fourteenth Street NW
Suite 1400
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 682-9400
Web site: http://www.defenders.org
The Canada–United States Environmental Council is sponsored
by Canadian and American conservation and environmental
groups to facilitate interchange of information and cooperative
action on environmental issues of concern including forest con-
servation issues.
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
199

Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society
880 Wellington Street, Suite 506
Ottawa, Ontario K1R 6K7
Canada
Phone: (613) 569-7226
E-mail: info@cpaws.org
Web site: http://www.cpaws.org
The Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society is an advocacy or-
ganization dedicated to the protection of Wilderness areas and
the preservation and stewardship of Canada’s public lands.
Canadian Wildlife Federation
2740 Queensview Drive
Ottawa, Ontario K2B 1A2
Canada
Phone: (613) 721-2286
The Canadian Wildlife Federation fosters understanding of natu-
ral processes so that people may live in harmony with the land
and its resources, including forests, for the long-term benefit of
society. It also maintains educational programs and sponsors re-
search.
Center for Watershed Protection
8391 Main Street
Ellicott, MD 21043
Phone: (410) 461-8323
E-mail: center@cwp.org
Web site: http://www.cwp.org
The Center for Watershed Protection is dedicated to new, cooper-
ative ways of protecting and restoring watersheds such as forest
conservation.
Coastal Alliance
600 Pennsylvania Avenue SE
Suite 340
Washington, DC 20003
Phone: (202) 546-9554
E-mail: coast@coastalliance.org
Web site: http://www.coastalliance.org
The Coastal Alliance is a public interest group dedicated to rais-
ing public awareness about coastal resources such as coastal
200
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

forests. It provides information about activities affecting the na-
tion’s four coasts.
Coastal Society
P.O. Box 25408
Alexandria, VA 22313
Phone: (703) 768-1599
E-mail: coastal@aol.com
Web site: http://www.coastalsociety.org
The Coastal Society is an organization of private, academic, and
governmental professionals and students dedicated to address-
ing coastal issues such as coastal forest conservation, fostering di-
alog, forging partnerships, and promoting communication and
education.
Conservation International
1919 M Street NW
Suite 600
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 429-5660
Web site: http://www.conservation.org
Conservation International (CI) is dedicated to the preservation
of tropical and temperate ecosystems. CI works in partnerships
with indigenous peoples and with organizations to sustain bio-
logical diversity and the ecological processes that support life on
Earth.
Conservation Law Foundation
62 Summer Street
Boston, MA 02110
Phone: (617) 350-0990
Web site: http://www.clf.org
The Conservation Law Foundation is an environmental law or-
ganization dedicated to improving resource management, envi-
ronmental protection, and public health in New England.
Defenders of Wildlife
National Headquarters
1101 Fourteenth Street NW
Suite 1400
Washington, DC 20005
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
201

Phone: (202) 682-9400
E-mail: info@defenders.org
Web site: http://www.defenders.org
Defenders of Wildlife is dedicated to the protection of all native
wild animals and plants in their natural communities. It focuses
its programs on the accelerating rate of extinction of species and
the associated loss of biological diversity and on habitat alteration
and destruction. Its programs encourage protection of entire
ecosystems and interconnected habitats while protecting preda-
tors that serve as indicator species for ecosystem health.
Earthstewards Network
P.O. Box 10697
Bainbridge Island, WA 98110
Phone: (206) 842-7986
E-mail: office@earthstewards.org
Web site: http://www.earthstewards.org
Earthstewards Network is the international network for global
conflict resolution. Rainforest reforestation and urban forestry
projects are used to bring together peoples of cultures in conflict
to improve environmental conditions.
Earthwatch Institute
3 Clocktower Place, Suite 100
P.O. Box 75
Maynard, MA 01754
Phone: (978) 461-0081
E-mail: info@earthwatch.org
Web site: http://www.earthwatch.org
Earthwatch Institute sponsors scientific field research worldwide.
It recruits volunteers to help field scientists including forest sci-
entists with their research in 50 countries.
Eastern Shore Land Conservancy
P.O. Box 169
Queenstown, MD 21658
Phone: (410) 827-9756
E-mail: eslcmain@usa.net
Web site: http://www.eslc.org
The Eastern Shore Land Conservancy preserves farms, forests,
202
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

and natural areas for future generations using voluntary land-
protection tools.
Environmental Defense
257 Park Avenue South
New York, NY 10010
Phone: (212) 505-2100
E-mail: members@environmentaldefense.org
Web site: http://www.environmentaldefense.org
Environmental Defense is dedicated to protecting the environ-
mental rights of all people, including future generations. Among
these rights are clean air and water, healthy and nourishing food,
and a flourishing ecosystem. It evaluates environmental prob-
lems and works to create and advocate solutions that win lasting
political, economic, and social support because they are nonpar-
tisan, cost-efficient, and fair.
Environmental Law and Policy Center of the Midwest
25 East Wacker Drive
Suite 1300
Chicago, IL 60601
Phone: (312) 673-6500
E-mail: elpc@elpc.org
Web site: http://www.elpc.org
The Environmental Law and Policy Center of the Midwest is a
public interest environmental advocacy organization working to
implement sustainable energy strategies, promote innovative
transportation approaches, expand and develop green markets,
and develop sound environment and forest management prac-
tices in the Midwest.
Europarc Federation
Kroellstrasse 5
D-94481 Grafenau
Grafenau 94481
Germany
Phone: 4985-529-6100
E-mail: office@europarc.org
Web site: http://www.europarc.org
The Europarc Federation promotes and supports protected
areas in Europe. It aims to facilitate the exchange of technical
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
203

and scientific expertise, information, and personnel between
parks and reserves. It organizes training and exchange pro-
grams and provides professional advice on the establishment
and development of protected areas.
Forest Service Employees for Environmental Ethics
P.O. Box 11615
Eugene, OR 97440
Phone: (541) 484-2692
E-mail: fseee@fseee.org
Web site: http://www.fseee.org
Forest Service Employees for Environmental Ethics is a national
organization of Forest Service employees and retirees, other re-
source professionals, and concerned citizens working to change
from within the Forest Service’s basic management philosophy to
a land ethic that ensures ecologically and economically sustain-
able management.
Forest Trust
P.O. Box 519
Santa Fe, NM 87504
Phone: (505) 983-8992
E-mail: forest@theforesttrust.org
Web site: http://www.theforesttrust.org
The Forest Trust is dedicated to protecting the integrity of the for-
est ecosystem and improving the lives of people in rural commu-
nities. It provides protection strategies to grassroots environmen-
tal organizations, rural communities, and public agencies. It also
provides land management services to private landowners.
Friends of the Earth
1025 Vermont Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20005-6303
Phone: (877) 843-8687
E-mail: foe@foe.org
Web site: http://www.foe.org
A national, nonprofit advocacy organization, Friends of the Earth
is dedicated to protecting the planet from environmental degra-
dation; preserving biological, cultural, and ethnic diversity; and
empowering citizens to have an influential voice in discussions
affecting the quality of their environment and their lives.
204
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Grand Canyon Trust
HC 64, Box 1801
Moab, UT 84532
Phone: (435) 259-5284
Web site: http://www.grandcanyontrust.org
The Grand Canyon Trust is a regional organization dedicated to
protecting the Colorado Plateau, which contains abundant forest
land.
Grassland Heritage Foundation
P.O. Box 394
Shawnee Mission, KS 66201
Phone: (913) 262-3506
E-mail: grasslandheritage@grapevine.net
Web site: http://www.grasslandheritage.org
The Grassland Heritage Foundation is dedicated to prairie
preservation and education. It encourages the preservation of all
remaining prairies and works to increase public awareness of our
prairie heritage. Many National Grasslands are managed by the
U.S. Forest Service. In many prairie ecosystems, prairie and
forests are interspersed.
Greater Yellowstone Coalition
P.O. Box 1874
13 S. Wilson, Suite 2
Bozeman, MT 59771
Phone: (406) 586-1593
E-mail: gyc@greateryellowstone.org
Web site: http://www.greateryellowstone.org
The Greater Yellowstone Coalition is dedicated to preserving and
protecting the greater Yellowstone ecosystem by enhancing the
ecosystem concept, raising the national public consciousness
about the area, and combining the political effectiveness of the
coalition’s members.
Heartwood
P.O. Box 1424
Bloomington, IN 47402
Phone: (812) 337-8898
E-mail: info@heartwood.org
Web site: http://www.heartwood.org
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
205

Heartwood works to protect the forest by addressing responsible
and sustainable stewardship of privately held forestland; the in-
flux of high-volume, indiscriminate forest-consuming industries;
and the need to dramatically reduce the wasteful use of wood
and paper that drives the destruction of the forest.
International Ecology Society
1471 Barclay Street
St. Paul, MN 55106
Phone: (612) 579-7008
The International Ecology Society is a volunteer-staffed organiza-
tion dedicated to the protection of the environment and the en-
couragement of better understanding of all life forms.
International Society for the Preservation of the Tropical
Rainforests
3931 Camino de la Cumbre
Sherman Oaks, CA 91423
Phone: (818) 788-2202
E-mail: forest@nwc.net
The International Society for the Preservation of the Tropical
Rainforests is dedicated to the global conservation of tropical for-
est resources through the promotion of park implementation, sus-
tainable agriculture, and timber harvesting.
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources
Rue Mauverney 28, CH-1196
Gland, Switzerland
Phone: 022-999-0001
Web site: http://www.lucn.org
The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources is an independent body the goal of which is to promote
scientifically based action for the conservation of nature and to
ensure that development is environmentally and socially sustain-
able. It consists of 880 members and maintains a global network
of more than 6,000 scientists.
Island Resources Foundation
1718 P Street NW
Suite T-4
206
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 265-9712
E-mail: irf@irf.org
Web site: http://www.irf.org
Island Resources Foundation, an independent center for the
study of island systems, is dedicated to improved resources man-
agement; comprehensive development planning; and the conser-
vation of cultural, physical, and natural resources of islands.
Izaak Walton League of America Inc.
707 Conservation Lane
Gaithersburg, MD 20878
Phone: (301) 548-0150
Web site: http://www.iwla.org
The Izaak Walton League of America promotes means and op-
portunities for educating the public to conserve, maintain, pro-
tect, and restore the soil, forest, water, air, and other natural re-
sources. It also promotes the enjoyment and wholesome use of
those resources.
Mid-Atlantic Council of Watershed Associations
12 Morris Road
Ambler, PA 19002
The Mid-Atlantic Council of Watershed Associations promotes
the exchange of ideas about citizen watershed association activi-
ties and advises any group wishing to start a new watershed as-
sociation. Most watersheds in the Mid-Atlantic contain abundant
forest land.
National Arbor Day Foundation
100 Arbor Avenue
Nebraska City, NE 68410
Phone: (402) 474-5655
Web site: http://www.arborday.org
The National Arbor Day Foundation sponsors Trees for America,
Arbor Day, Tree City USA, Conservation Trees, and Rainforest
Rescue educational programs.
National Association of Recreation Resource Planners
P.O. Box 2430
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
207

Pensacola, FL 32513
The National Association of Recreation Resource Planners ex-
changes recreation resource planning information among Federal,
state, and regional agencies. It participates in national recreation
concerns, promotes improvements in the state of the art of recre-
ation planning, and advocates for conservation and recreation op-
portunities. Its headquarters, now in Pensacola, rotate yearly.
National Audubon Society
700 Broadway
New York, NY 10003
Phone: (212) 979-3000
Web site: http://www.audubon.org
The National Audubon Society has dedicated itself to bringing
about a national and worldwide culture of conservation by fo-
cusing on the conservation of birds and other wildlife and their
habitats, expanding educational programs to nurture apprecia-
tion of nature and understanding of the essential link between
ecological health and the well-being of human civilization, and
investing heavily in Audubon’s distinctive grassroots network as
the primary instrument of its environmental advocacy.
National Conservation Foundation
509 Capitol Court NE
Washington, DC 20002-4946
Phone: (202) 547-6223
Web site: http://www.nacdnet.org
Directed by the Conservation Districts Foundation Inc., the Na-
tional Conservation Foundation collects conservation and envi-
ronmental education materials about all natural resources, in-
cluding forests.
National Forest Foundation
1050 Seventeenth Street NW
Suite 600
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 496-4963
The National Forest Foundation seeks to build relationships that
result in measurable improvements in the health, productivity,
and diversity of national forests and grasslands.
208
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

National Forestry Association
374 Maple Avenue E
Suite 310
Vienna, VA 22180
Phone: (703) 255-2300
Web site: http://www.forestry.tv
The National Forestry Association is a nationwide advocate of
sustainable forestry on private and public lands. Programs in-
clude the National Forestry Network, Green Tag Forestry, the
American Hardwood Management Advisory Board, and the Na-
tional Historic Lookout Register.
National Network of Forest Practitioners
P.O. Box 487
Santa Fe, NM 87504
Phone: (505) 995-0000
E-mail: info@nnfp.org
Web site: http://www.nnfp.org
The National Network of Forest Practitioners is a grassroots al-
liance of rural people, organizations, and businesses finding prac-
tical ways to integrate economic development, environmental
protection, and social justice.
National Park and Conservation Association
1300 Nineteenth Street NW
Suite 300
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 223-6722
E-mail: natparks@aol.com
Web site: http://www.npca.org
The National Park and Conservation Association, a citizen organ-
ization, is dedicated to preserving, protecting, and enhancing the
national park system. It has been an advocate and critic of the Na-
tional Park Service.
National Park Trust
415 Second Street NE
Suite 210
Washington, DC 20002
Phone: (202) 548-0500
E-mail: nptrust@aol.com
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
209

Web site: http://www.parktrust.org
The National Park Trust is dedicated to protecting resources
within and around parklands and other natural and historic
properties. It is the only private citizen group recognized by Con-
gress to own and manage, in cooperation with the National Park
Service, a unit of public land.
National Wildlife Federation
11100 Wildlife Center Drive
Reston, VA 20190
Phone: (703) 438-6000
Web site: http://www.nwf.org
The mission of the National Wildlife Federation is to educate, in-
spire, and assist individuals and organizations of diverse cultures
to conserve wildlife and other natural resources and to protect the
Earth’s environment to achieve a peaceful, equitable, and sus-
tainable future.
Native Ecosystems Council
P.O. Box 125
Willow Creek, MT 59760
Native Ecosystems Council is a nonprofit technical assistance
group doing work on all the forests in the Rocky Mountain re-
gion. With special expertise in forest planning policy, it is cur-
rently submitting management alternatives based on principles
of conservation biology and landscape ecology.
Native Forest Network
P.O. Box 8251
Missoula, MT 59807
Phone: (406) 251-2385
E-mail: nfn@wildrockies.org
Web site: http://nativeforest.org
The Native Forest Network is a global autonomous collective of
forest activists, indigenous peoples, conservation biologists, and
nongovernmental organizations. It functions on a consensus basis
and is nonviolent, nonhierarchical, and nonpatriarchal. Its mis-
sion is to protect the world’s remaining native forests, be they
temperate or otherwise, to ensure they can survive, flourish, and
maintain their evolutionary potential.
210
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Natural Resources Council of America
1025 Thomas Jefferson Street NW
Suite 109
Washington, DC 20007
Phone: (202) 333-0411
E-mail: nrca@nrcanet.org
The Natural Resources Council of America is an association of
nonprofit environmental and conservation organizations dedi-
cated to the protection, conservation, and responsible manage-
ment of the nation’s natural resources.
Natural Resources Defense Council
40 West Twentieth Street
New York, NY 10011
Phone: (212) 727-2700
E-mail: nrdcinfo@nrdc.org
Web site: http://www.nrdc.org
The Natural Resources Defense Council combines legal action,
scientific research, and citizen education in programs to protect
natural resources and improve the quality of the human environ-
ment. It publishes a quarterly magazine, On Earth: Environment,
Politics, and People, and regularly reports on a variety of environ-
mental issues.
Nature Conservancy
4245 North Fairfax Drive
Suite 100
Arlington, VA 22203-1606
Phone: (800) 628-6860
E-mail: comment@tnc.org
Web site: http://www.nature.org
The goal of the Nature Conservancy is to preserve the plants, an-
imals, and natural communities that represent the diversity of life
on Earth by protecting the lands and waters they need to survive.
It works closely with communities, businesses, and people, tak-
ing a nonconfrontational approach and using sound science.
Nature Conservancy of Canada
110 Eglinton Avenue W
Suite 400
Toronto, Ontario M4R 1A3
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
211

Canada
Phone: (416) 932-3202
E-mail: nature@natureconservancy.ca
Web site: http://www.natureconservancy.ca
The Nature Conservancy of Canada is the only national charity
dedicated to preserving ecologically significant areas and places
of special beauty and educational interest through outright pur-
chase, donations, and conservation agreements.
Nature Conservation Society of Japan
Nihon-Shizen-Hogo-Kyokai
Yamaji Saubauncho Building 3F
5-24 Sanbancho
Chiyoda Ku, Tokyo 102
Japan
Phone: 8133-265-0521
The Nature Conservation Society of Japan is a conservation or-
ganization devoted to promoting conservation, research, and ed-
ucation concerning the natural areas and wildlife in Japan.
North Cascades Conservation Council
P.O. Box 95980
Seattle, WA 98145
Phone: (206) 282-1644
The North Cascades Conservation Council seeks to protect and
preserve the North Cascades’ scenic, scientific, recreational, edu-
cational, wildlife, and wilderness values from the Columbia River
to the U.S.-Canadian border.
Northcoast Environmental Center
879 Ninth Street
Arcata, CA 95521
Phone: (707) 822-6918
E-mail: nec@igc.org
Web site: http://www.necandeconews.to
The Northcoast Environmental Center, an educational organiza-
tion, is dedicated to illuminating the relationships between hu-
mankind and the biosphere. 
Northwest Ecosystem Alliance
1421 Cornwall Avenue
212
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Suite 201
Bellingham, WA 98225
Phone: (360) 671-9950
E-mail: nwea@ecosystem.org
Web site: http://www.ecosystem.org
The Northwest Ecosystem Alliance protects and restores wild-
lands in the Pacific Northwest and supports such efforts in British
Columbia. The alliance bridges sciences and works with activists,
policymakers, and the public to conserve our natural heritage.
Ozarks Resource Center
P.O. Box 1198
Ava, MO 65608
Phone: (417) 683-6245
E-mail: jlorrain@goin.missouri.org
The center provides research, education, technical assistance, and
dissemination of information on renewable resources–based tech-
nology; sustainable agriculture; environmentally responsible
practices; sustainable community economic development; and
self-reliance for the family, farm, community, and Ozarks and
other bioregions.
Pacific Rivers Council
P.O. Box 10798
Eugene, OR 97440
Phone: (541) 345-0119
E-mail: pacificriver@igc.apc.org
The council protects and restores rivers, their watersheds, and na-
tive aquatic species.
Partners in Parks
4916 Butterworth Place NW
Washington, DC 20016
Phone: (202) 364-7244
E-mail: partpark@cqi.com
This organization encourages, promotes, and establishes
professional-level partnerships between National Park and other
public land managers and those who would contribute their time
and skills to studying, protecting, and interpreting natural and
cultural features.
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
213

Pinchot Institute for Conservation
1616 P Street NW
Suite 100
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 797-6580
E-mail: pinchot@pinchot.org
Web site: http://www.pinchot.org
The Pinchot Institute for Conservation is a nonprofit natural re-
source policy, research, and education organization dedicated to
leadership in conservation thought, policy, and action. The insti-
tute was designed to facilitate communication and closer cooper-
ation among resource managers, scientists, policymakers, and the
American public.
Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility
2001 S Street NW
Suite 570
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: (202) 265-7337
E-mail: info@peer.org
Web site: http://www.info@peer.org
Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility (PEER) is an
alliance of land managers, scientists, biologists, law enforcement
officials, and other government professionals including many
Forest Service employees dedicated to the protection of the na-
tion’s environment. PEER advocates the responsible management
of natural resources and promotes environmental ethics, profes-
sional integrity, and accountability.
Public Lands Foundation
P.O. Box 7226
Arlington, VA 22207
Phone: (703) 790-1988
E-mail: leaplf@erols.com
Web site: http://www.publicland.org
Administered by the Bureau of Land Management, the founda-
tion is an independent advocate to keep the public lands public
and to properly use and protect the public land.
Rainforest Action Network
221 Pine Street
214
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Suite 500
San Francisco, CA 94104
Phone: (415) 398-4404
E-mail: rainforest@ran.org
Web site: http://www.ran.org
Rainforest Action Network (RAN) works nationally and interna-
tionally on major campaigns using nonviolent direct action to
protect rainforests and defend the rights of indigenous people.
RAN also produces educational materials, teachers’ packets, and
fact sheets.
Rainforest Relief
P.O. Box 150566
Brooklyn, NY 11215
Phone: (718) 398-3760
E-mail: relief@igc.org
Web site: http://www.enviroweb.org/rainrelief
Rainforest Relief works through education and nonviolent direct
action to end the loss of tropical and temperate rainforests by re-
ducing the demand for products and materials for which rain-
forests are destroyed.
Renewable Natural Resources Foundation
5430 Grosvenor Lane
Bethesda, MD 20814
Phone: (301) 493-9101
E-mail: infor@rnrf.org
Web site: http://www.rnrf.org
The foundation conducts conferences and symposia about re-
newable natural resource subjects and public policy alternatives.
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street NW
Washington, DC 20036-1400
Phone: (202) 328-5000
Web site: http://www.rff.org
RFF is a nonprofit and nonpartisan think tank that conducts in-
dependent research, rooted primarily in economics and other so-
cial sciences, on environmental and natural resource issues. RFF
researchers work on a variety of issues ranging from climate
change to electric utility restructuring to sustainable forestry.
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
215

Save America’s Forests
4 Library Court SE
Washington, DC 20003
Phone: (202) 544-9219
Web site: http://www.saveamericasforests.org
This nationwide coalition of grassroots regional and national en-
vironmental groups, public interest groups, and responsible busi-
nesses and individuals works to pass strong forest protection leg-
islation in Congress.
Sierra Club
85 Second Street, Second Floor
San Francisco, CA 94105
Phone: (415) 977-5500
E-mail: information@sierraclub.org
Web site: http://www.sierraclub.org
The mission of the Sierra Club is to explore, enjoy, and protect the
wild places of the Earth; practice and promote the responsible use
of the Earth’s ecosystems and resources; educate and enlist hu-
manity to protect and restore the quality of the natural and
human environment; and use all lawful means to carry out these
objectives.
Society for Ecological Restoration
1207 Seminole Highway
Suite B
Madison, WI 53711
Phone: (608) 262-9547
The society was created to promote the development of ecologi-
cal restoration, both as a discipline and as a model for a healthy
relationship with nature, and to raise awareness of the value and
limitations of restoration as a conservation strategy.
Southwest Center for Biological Diversity
P.O. Box 710
Tucson, AZ 85702-0710
Phone: (520) 623-5252
E-mail: center@biologicaldiversity.org
Web site: http://www.sw-center.org
Combining conservation biology with litigation, policy advocacy,
216
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

and an innovative strategic vision, the Center for Biological Di-
versity is working to secure a future for animals and plants hov-
ering on the brink of extinction, for the wilderness they need to
survive, and by extension for the spiritual welfare of generations
to come.
Theodore Roosevelt Conservation Alliance
2409 Dearborn
Suite K
Missoula, MT 59801
Phone: (406) 541-9975
E-mail: info@trca.org
Web site: http://www.trca.org
The alliance’s mission is to inform and engage Americans to fos-
ter the nation’s conservation legacy while working to nurture, en-
hance, and protect fish, wildlife, and habitat resources on public
lands.
Trust for Public Land
116 New Montgomery Street
Fourth Floor
San Francisco, CA 94105
Phone: (415) 495-4014
E-mail: info@tpl.org
Web site: http://www.tpl.org
The Trust for Public Land helps local communities, public agen-
cies, and other nonprofits acquire natural, scenic, and recreational
land for permanent protection.
UN Environment Programme
P.O. Box 30552
Nairobi, Kenya
Phone: 254-262-3089
E-mail: ipainfo@unep.org
Web site: http://www.unep.org
The UNEP was established by the UN General Assembly to be the
environmental conscience of the United Nations system. It as-
sesses the state of the world’s environment; acts in an environ-
mental management capacity for developing countries; and raises
environmental considerations for the social and economic poli-
cies and programs of UN agencies.
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
217

Union of Concerned Scientists
2 Brattle Square
Cambridge, MA 02238
Phone: (617) 547-5552
E-mail: ucs@ucsusa.org
Web site: http://www.ucsusa.org
UCS is an independent nonprofit alliance of 50,000 concerned cit-
izens and scientists across the country. It augments rigorous sci-
entific analysis with innovative thinking and committed citizen
advocacy to build a cleaner, healthier environment and a safer
world.
U.S. Public Interest Research Group
218 D Street SE
Washington, DC 20003
Phone: (202) 546-9707
E-mail: uspirg@pirg.org
Web site: http://www.pirg.org
U.S. Public Interest Research Group (PIRG) is the national lobby-
ing office for state PIRGs around the country, representing more
than a million members. Its mission is to conduct independent re-
search and to lobby for national environmental and consumer
protections.
Wilderness Society
900 Seventeenth Street NW
Washington, DC 20006
Phone: (202) 833-2300
E-mail: member@tws.org
Web site: http://www.wilderness.org
The Wilderness Society works to protect America’s wilderness
and to develop a nationwide network of wildlands through pub-
lic education, scientific analysis, and advocacy. Its goal is to en-
sure that future generations will enjoy the clean air and water,
wildlife, beauty, and opportunities for recreation and renewal
that pristine forests, rivers, deserts, and mountains provide.
Wildlife Action Inc.
P.O. Box 866
Mullins, SC 29574
218
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Phone: (843) 464-8473
Web site: http://www.wildlifeaction.com
Wildlife Action is dedicated to the appreciation and enjoyment of
our wildlife heritage and to educating the public in the value of
protection, restoration, enhancement, and wise use of our natural
resources.
Women’s Environment and Development Organization
355 Lexington Avenue, Third Floor
New York, NY 10017
Phone: (212) 973-0325
E-mail: wedo@igc.apc.org
Web site: http://www.wedo.org
This is an international advocacy network actively working to
transform society to achieve social, political, economic, and envi-
ronmental justice for all through the empowerment of women.
Many projects focus on increasing women’s access and role in
sustainable forest management.
World Forestry Center
4033 S.W. Canyon Road
Portland, OR 97221
Phone: (503) 228-1367
Web site: http://www.worldforestry.org
The center promotes a greater appreciation and understanding of
the world’s forests and related natural resources. It operates a
forestry museum, an arboretum, and an 80-acre demonstration
forest.
World Parks Endowment Inc.
1616 P Street NW
Suite 200
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 797-6540
E-mail: worldparks@juno.com
Web site: http://www.worlparks.org
This international organization acquires land in the rainforest and
other critical sites for biological diversity. It provides funds for
park management of tropical rainforests and other ecosystems of
great conservation importance.
Nongovernment Conservation Organizations
219

World Resources Institute
10 G Street NE
Suite 800
Washington, DC 20002
Phone: (202) 729-7600
Web site: http://www.wri.org
WRI is an environmental think tank that goes beyond research to
find practical ways to protect the Earth and improve people’s
lives. It provides information, ideas, and solutions to global envi-
ronmental problems.
World Wildlife Fund, U.S.
1250 Twenty-Fourth Street NW
Washington, DC 20037-1175
Phone: (202) 293-4800
Web site: http://www.panda.org
WWF uses a factual, science-based approach to conservation
that focuses on several global priorities and recognizes the need
to strike a balance with other economic and social considera-
tions to achieve concrete results. WWF’s work focuses on
species conservation; the protection of forest, freshwater, ocean,
and coastal ecosystems; and the fight against climate change
and toxic pollution.
Worldwatch Institute
1776 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 452-1999
E-mail: worldwatch@worldwatch.org
Web site: http://www.worldwatch.org
This research institute informs policymakers and the public about
emerging global problems and trends and the complex links be-
tween the world economy and its environmental support systems.
Society of American Foresters Accredited
Forestry Schools
Professional accreditation of an academic program defines the
knowledge base and training necessary for prospective members
220
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

of the profession. Accreditation is a guarantee to prospective stu-
dents and employers that the academic program offers courses
and experiences that graduates will need to succeed in the
profession. All major professions have some form of accreditation
of academic programs preparing young people to enter into the
profession—medicine, law, engineering, and so on. Forestry also
has an accreditation system. The Society of American Foresters
(SAF), as the only professional society for the forestry community
in the United States, has conducted periodic accreditation re-
views of two- and four-year undergraduate forestry programs in
the United States since 1935. Accreditation lasts for ten years.
An accreditation team visits the campus as part of the review
to interview faculty, staff, and students. The team also examines
course syllabi and facilities. Faculty members of the academic
program are required to conduct a self-assessment as part of this
review. The accreditation team reviews eight standard areas:
•
Forestry program mission, goals, and objectives
•
Curriculum
•
Organization and administration of the forestry
program
•
Faculty
•
Students
•
Parent institution support
•
Physical resources and facilities
•
Research, extension, continuing education, and public
service
The schools listed here have been accredited by SAF for the past
ten years. The list includes schools that offer both two-year and
four-year academic programs.
Accredited Forestry Schools
221
Auburn University
108 M. White Smith Hall
Auburn University
Auburn, AL 36849-5418
Phone: (334) 844-1007
E-mail: brinker@
forestry.auburn.edu
Web site: http://www.forestry.
auburn.edu
California Polytechnic State
University
1 Grand Avenue
San Luis Obispo, CA 93407
Phone: (805) 756-2702
E-mail: dpiirto@calpoly.edu
Web site:
http://nrm.calpoly.edu

Clemson University
132 Lehotsky Hall
P.O. Box 340306
Clemson, SC 29634-0306
Phone: (864) 656-3215
E-mail: adunn@clemson.edu
Web site: http://www.
clemson.edu/natres
Colorado State University
101 Natural Resource Building
Fort Collins, CO 80523
Phone: (970) 491-6911
E-mail: redente@
cnr.colostate.edu
Web site: http://www.cnr.
colostate.edu
Duke University
P.O. Box 90329
Durham, NC 27708-0329
Phone: (919) 613-8004
E-mail: drichter@duke.edu
Web site: http://www.env.
duke.edu/communicator.
html
Humboldt State University
101 Forestry Building
Arcata, CA 95521
Phone: (707) 826-3256
E-mail: cnrsdean@laurel.
humboldt.edu
Web site: http://www.
humboldt.edu/~cnrs
Iowa State University
251 Bessey Hall
Ames, IA 50011
Phone: (515) 294-1166
E-mail: jmkelly@iastate.edu
Web site: http://www.ag.
iastate.edu/departments/
forestry/Forestry.html
Louisiana State University
227 Forestry-Wildlife-Fisheries
Building
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6200
Phone: (225) 578-4167
E-mail: jchamb@lsu.edu
Web site: http://www.
fwf.lsu.edu
Michigan State University
126 Natural Resource Building
East Lansing, MI 48824-1222
Phone: (517) 355-0093
E-mail: keathley@
pilot.msu.edu
Web site: http://www.
for.msu.edu
Michigan Tech University
1400 Townsend Drive
Houghton, MI 49931
Phone: (906) 487-2454
E-mail: gdmroz@mtu.edu
Web site: http://forestry.
mtu.edu
Mississippi State University
109 Thompson Hall
P.O. Box 9680
Mississippi State, MS 39762-
9690
Phone: (662) 325-8726
E-mail: bkarr@cfr.msstate.edu
Web site: http://www.
cfr.msstate.edu
222
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

North Carolina State
University
P.O. Box 8008
3019 Jordan Hall
Raleigh, NC 27695-8008
Phone: (919) 515-7789
E-mail: fred_cubbage@
ncsu.edu
Web site: http://www.cfr.
ncsu.edu/for/
Northern Arizona University
Box 15018
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5018
Phone: (928) 523-6636
E-mail: bruce.fox@nau.edu
Web site: http://www.for.
nau.edu/forestry
Ohio State University
2021 Coffey Road
Columbus, OH 43210
Phone: (614) 292-2265
E-mail: mullins.2@osu.edu
Web site: http://www.ag.
ohio-state.edu/~natres
Oklahoma State University
008C Agriculture Hall
Stillwater, OK 74078-6013
Phone: (405) 744-5438
E-mail: mckincr@okstate.edu
Web site: http://www.okstate.
edu/OSU_Ag/asnr/fore
Oregon State University
Peavy Hall 150
Corvallis, OR 97331-5704
Phone: (541) 737-1585
E-mail: hal.salwasser@orst.edu
Web site: http://www.cof.
orst.edu
Pennsylvania State
University
113 Ferguson Building
University Park, PA 16802-
4300
Phone: (814) 863-7093
E-mail:chs3@psu.edu
Web site: http://www.cas.
psu.edu/docs/CASDEPT/
FOREST/homepage.htm
Purdue University
1159 Forestry Building
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1159
Phone: (765) 494-3590
E-mail: dclmstr@
fnr.purdue.edu
Web site: http://www.fnr.
purdue.edu
Southern Illinois University
Mailcode 4411
Carbondale, IL 62901-4411
Phone: (618) 453-3341 or (618)
453-7464
E-mail: jphelps@siu.edu
Web site: http://www.
siu.edu/~forestry/
forest.html
Stephen F. Austin State
University
Box 6109, SFA Station
Nacogdoches, TX 75962-6109
Phone: (409) 468-3304
E-mail: sbeasley@sfasu.edu
Accredited Forestry Schools
223

Web site: http://www.
environment.sfasu.edu
SUNY College of
Environmental Science and
Forestry
320 Bray Hall
1 Forestry Drive
Syracuse, NY 13210
Phone: (315) 470-6534
E-mail: wbentley@esf.edu
Web site: http://www.esf.
edu/faculty/for/
Texas A&M University
Horticulture/Forest Science
Building
College Station, TX 77843-2135
Phone: (409) 845-5000
E-mail: tat-smith@tamu.edu
Web site: http://agrinet.
tamu.edu/FOREST/
department
University of Alaska–
Fairbanks
P.O. Box 757140
Fairbanks, AK 99775-7140
Phone: (907) 474-7083
E-mail: ffcel@uaf.edu
Web site: http://www.uaf.
edu/catalog/current/
schools/agriculture.html
University of Arkansas–
Monticello
P.O. Box 3468
Monticello, AR 71655
Phone: (870) 460-1052
E-mail: kluender@uamont.edu
Web site: http://www.afrc.
uamont.edu/sfr/index.htm
University of California–
Berkeley
145 Mulford Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3114
Phone: (510) 643-5428
E-mail: standifo@nature.berke-
ley.edu
Web site: http://www.cnr.
berkeley.edu/
departments/espm/
University of Florida
118 Newins-Ziegler Hall
P.O. Box 110410
Gainseville, FL 32611-0410
Phone: (352) 846-0850
E-mail: whs@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu
Web site: http://www.sfrc.
ufl.edu
University of Georgia
Forest Resources Building,
Room 2-229
Athens, GA 30602-2152
Phone: (706) 542-7247
E-mail: bongarte@
smokey.forestry.uga.edu
Web site: http://www.uga.
edu/~wsfr
University of Idaho
College of Natural Resources
Moscow, ID 83844-1133
Phone: (208) 885-7311
E-mail: joellen@uidaho.edu
Web site: http://www.uidaho.
edu/cfwr/fr/fr.html
University of Illinois
West 503 Turner Hall
Urbana, IL 61801
Phone: (217) 333-2770
224
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

E-mail: g-rolfe@uiuc.edu
Web site: http://www.aces.
uiuc.edu/~nres
University of Kentucky
205 Thomas Poe Cooper
Building
Lexington, KY 40546-0073
Phone: (606) 247-7496
E-mail: dgraves@ca.uky.edu
Web site: http://www.uky.
edu/Agriculture/Forestry/
forestry.html
University of Maine
5755 Nutting Hall
Orono, ME 04469-5755
Phone: (207) 581-2856
E-mail:
field@umenfa.maine.edu
Web site: http://www.ume.
maine.edu/~nfa/for_mgt/
welcome.htm
University of Massachusetts
Holdsworth Natural
Resources Center
Box 34210
Amherst, MA 01003-4210
Phone: (413) 545-1764
E-mail: bmccomb@
forwild.umass.edu
Web site: http://www.umass.
edu/forwild
University of Minnesota
115 Green Hall
1530 Cleveland Avenue N.
St. Paul, MN 55108
Phone: (612) 624-3400
E-mail: aek@forestry.umn.edu
Web site: http://www.cnr.
umn.edu/FR
University of Missouri
203 Anheuser-Busch Natural
Resources Building
Columbia, MO 65211
Phone: (573) 882-2627
E-mail: settergrenc@
missouri.edu
Web site: http://www.snr.
missouri.edu
University of Montana
109 Forestry Building
Missoula, MT 59812
Phone: (406) 243-5522
E-mail: pbrown@
forestry.umt.edu
Web site: http://www.forestry.
umt.edu
University of New
Hampshire
215 James Hall
Durham, NH 03824-3589
Phone: (603) 862-1020
E-mail: bill.mcdowell@
unh.edu
Web site: http://www.unh.
edu/natural-resources/
index.html
University of Tennessee
274 Ellington Plant Science
Building
Knoxville, TN 37996-4563
Phone: (865) 974-7126
E-mail: ghopper@utk.edu
Web site: http://fwf.ag.
utk.edu/
Accredited Forestry Schools
225

University of Vermont
Aiken Center
Burlington, VT 05405
Phone: (802) 656-4280
E-mail: ddehayes@
nature.snr.uvm.edu
Web site: http://nature.
snr.uvm.edu
University of Washington
Box 352100
Seattle, WA 98195
Phone: (206) 685-1928
E-mail: bare@
u.washington.edu
Web site: http://www.
cfr.washington.edu/
University of Wisconsin
1630 Linden Drive
Madison, WI 53706-3976
Phone: (608) 262-3976
E-mail: jcstier@
facstaff.wisc.edu
Web site: http://forest.
wisc.edu
University of Wisconsin–
Madison
146 Agricultural Hall
1450 Linden Drive
Madison, WI 53706
Phone: (608) 262-6968
E-mail: kmcsween@
facstaff.wisc.edu
Web site: http://www.
cals.wisc.edu/snr/
University of Wisconsin–
Stevens Point
1900 Franklin Street
Stevens Point, WI 54481
Phone: (715) 346-4617
E-mail: vphillip@uwsp.edu
Web site: http://www.
uwsp.edu/cnr
Utah State University
5200 Old Main Hill
Logan, UT 84322-5215
Phone: (435) 797-3219
E-mail: tlsharik@cc.usu.edu
Web site: http://www.
cnr.usu.edu/
Virginia Tech
307 Cheatham Hall
Blacksburg, VA 24061-0324
Phone: (540) 231-5483
E-mail: burkhart@vt.edu
Web site: http://www.
fw.vt.edu/forestry
West Virginia University
P.O. Box 6125
Morgantown, WV 26506
Phone: (304) 293-2941
Web site: http://www.caf.
wvu.edu/for/index.html
Yale University
205 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
Phone: (203) 432-5109
E-mail: gus.speth@yale.edu
Web site: http://www.
yale.edu/forestry/
226
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Forest Products Companies
Boise Cascade
1111 West Jefferson Street
P.O. Box 50
Boise, ID 83728-0001
Phone: (208) 384-6161
E-mail: bcweb@bc.com
Web site: http://www.bc.com
Boise is an international distributor of office supplies and paper
and an integrated manufacturer and distributor of paper, packag-
ing, and building materials. Its operations extend throughout
North America, Australia, New Zealand, and Brazil. It owns or
manages 2.3 million acres of timberlands in the United States to
support its operations.
Bowater Inc.
55 East Camperdown Way
Greenville, SC 29602
Phone: (864) 271-7733
Web site: www.bowater.com/
Bowater Inc., headquartered in Greenville, South Carolina, makes
newsprint, coated and uncoated groundwood papers, bleached
kraft pulp, and lumber products, and it converts a groundwood
base sheet to coated products.
Collins Companies
1618 S.W. First Avenue
Suite 500
Portland, OR 97201
(800) 329-1219
(503) 227-1219
Web site: http://www.collinswood.com
The family-owned Collins Companies traces its roots back to 1855
in Pennsylvania and has expanded west to manage 94,000 acres
of softwood in northeastern California. Today its holdings also in-
clude the Collins Lakeview Forest in southern Oregon and north-
ern California. Collins Products LLC manufactures standard and
certified exterior siding and particle board and standard hard-
board siding and trim.
Forest Products Companies
227

Duluth Timber Company
P.O. Box 16717
Duluth, MN 55816
Web site: http://www.duluthtimber.com
Duluth Timber Company, using reclaimed or salvaged wood, is
dedicated to satisfying the needs of new projects with old wood.
Georgia Pacific
133 Peachtree Street NE
Atlanta, GA 30303
Phone: (404) 652-4000
Web site: http://www.gp.com
Georgia Pacific manufactures and distributes tissue, packaging,
paper, building products, and pulp and related chemicals. Head-
quartered in Atlanta, Georgia-Pacific employs more than 75,000
people at 600 locations worldwide.
Home Depot
Consumer Affairs
2455 Paces Ferry Road
Atlanta, GA 30339
Phone: (770) 433-8211
Web site: http://www.homedepot.com
Home Depot is the largest seller of lumber in the United States.
Mead Westvaco Corporation
1 High Ridge Park
Stamford, CT 06905
Phone: (203) 461-7400
Web site: http://www.mead.com
MeadWestvaco Corporation has annual sales of $8 billion and
produces packaging, coated and specialty papers, consumer and
office products, and specialty chemicals. MeadWestvaco oper-
ates in 33 countries, serves customers in approximately 100 na-
tions, employs more than 30,000 people worldwide, and owns
3.4 million acres of forests managed using sustainable forestry
practices. 
228
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Universal Forest Products Inc.
2801 East Beltline NE
Grand Rapids, MI 49525
Phone: (616) 364-6161
Web site: http://www.ufpi.com
Universal Forest Products Inc. is the nation’s leading manufac-
turer and distributor of wood products for retail home centers,
residential and commercial site-built construction, the industrial
market, and structural lumber products for the manufactured
housing industry.
WNC Pallet and Forest Products Co.
P.O. Box 38
1414 Smoky Park Highway
Candler, NC 28715
Phone: (828) 667-5426
E-mail: wncpallet@bellsouth.net
Web site: http://www.wncpallet.com
WNC Pallet and Forest Products is a forest products supplier in
western North Carolina. It buys land and timber and operates a
modern sawmill complete with planing, resawing, and dry-kiln
capabilities. In addition, it produces pallets, skids, and boxes.
Forestry Trade Associations
American Forest and Paper Association
1111 Nineteenth Street NW
Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 463-2700
E-mail: info@afandpa.org
Web site: http://www.afandpa.org
AF&PA is the national trade association of the forest, paper, and
wood products industry. It represents member companies en-
gaged in growing, harvesting, and processing wood and wood
fiber; manufacturing pulp, paper, and paperboard products from
Forestry Trade Associations
229

both virgin and recycled fiber; and producing engineered and tra-
ditional wood products. It is a nonprofit education and conserva-
tion organization working for healthy forests and quality envi-
ronmental education.
Composite Panel Association
18928 Premier Court
Gaithersburg, MD 20879-1569
Phone: (301) 670-0604
The Composite Panel Association is the national trade associa-
tion for the particle board and medium density fiberboard in-
dustries. It is dedicated to increasing the acceptance and use of
industry products and to providing for the general welfare of the
industry.
Forest Products Society
2801 Marshall Court
Madison, WI 53705-2295
Phone: (608) 231-1361
E-mail: info@forestprod.org
Web site: http://www.forestprod.org
The Forest Products Society is an international not-for-profit tech-
nical association that provides an information network for all seg-
ments of the forest products industry. Its mission is to foster in-
novation and research in the environmentally sound processing
and use of wood and fiber resources by disseminating informa-
tion and providing forums for networking and the exchange of
knowledge.
Forest Resources Association Inc.
600 Jefferson Plaza
Suite 350
Rockville, MD 20852
Phone: (301) 838-9385
Web site: http://www.apulpa.org
The mission of the Forest Resources Association is to promote the
best interests of wood fiber suppliers and consumers in the eco-
nomical, efficient, and sustainable use and stewardship of forest
resources to meet wood fiber needs through private enterprise.
230
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Hardwood Plywood and Veneer Association
P.O. Box 2789
Reston, VA 20195-0789
Phone: (703) 435-2900
E-mail: hpva@hpva.org
Web site: http://www.hpva.org
The HPVA represents the interests of the hardwood plywood,
hardwood veneer, and engineered hardwood flooring industries.
HPVA member companies produce nearly all of the hardwood
plywood stock panels and sliced hardwood veneer manufactured
in North America. It offers information and resources on hard-
wood, plywood veneer, and engineered flooring.
International Wood Products Association
4214 King Street
West Alexandria, VA 22302
Phone: (703) 820-6696
E-mail: info@iwpawood.org
Web site: http://www.iwpawood.org
IWPA’s mission is to advance international trade in wood prod-
ucts through leadership in business, environmental, and govern-
ment affairs. The association serves as the North American im-
ported wood products industry’s “spokesgroup” at all levels of
government.
National Hardwood Lumber Association
6830 Raleigh-LaGrange Road
Memphis, TN 38184-0518
Phone: (901) 377-1818
E-mail: info@ntlhardwood.org
Web site: http://www.ntlhardwood.org
The mission of NHLA is to maintain order, structure, and ethics
in the hardwood marketplace; provide specialized member serv-
ices unique to the hardwood industry; assure timber availability
to meet society’s needs; and build positive relationships within
the hardwood community.
Technology Association for the Pulp and Paper Industries
P.O. Box 105113
Atlanta, GA 30348
Forestry Trade Associations
231

Phone: (770) 446-1400
Web site: http://www.tappi.org
The Technology Association for the Pulp and Paper Industries
(TAPPI) is the leading technical association for the worldwide
pulp and paper industry. TAPPI provides its members quick ac-
cess to the largest international group of technically experienced
people in the industry, the most comprehensive collection of reli-
able technical information and knowledge in the industry, and
the highest-quality products and services created to meet the
needs of people who solve industry technical problems.
Forestry Professional Associations
American Fisheries Society
5410 Grosvenor Lane
Bethesda, MD 20814
Phone: (301) 897-8616
E-mail: main@fisheries.org
Web site: http://www.fisheries.org
The mission of the American Fisheries Society is to improve the
conservation and sustainability of fishery resources and aquatic
ecosystems by advancing fisheries and aquatic science and pro-
moting the development of fisheries professionals. Much fish
habitat relies on stream shading provided by trees.
Association of Consulting Foresters of America Inc.
732 N. Washington Street
Suite 4-A
Alexandria, VA 22314-1921
Phone: (703) 548-0990
E-mail: director@acf-foresters.com
Web site: http://www.acf-foresters.com
The ACF was founded to advance the professionalism, ethics, and
interests of professional foresters who primarily consult to the
public. ACF is active in setting the standards for the consulting
forestry profession; educating and assisting landowners in good
forest stewardship; tracking legislation that directly affects pri-
vate forestry; educating the public, legislators, and others about
issues sensitive to private landowners; and cooperating with Fed-
eral and state agencies to protect private property rights.
232
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Forest History Society
701 William Vickers Avenue
Durham, NC 27701-3162
Phone: (919) 682-9319
Web site: http://www.lib.duke.edu/forest/
The Forest History Society links the past to the future by identi-
fying, collecting, preserving, interpreting, and disseminating in-
formation on the history of interactions between people, forests,
and their related resources—timber, water, soil, forage, fish and
wildlife, recreation, and scenic or spiritual values.
Society of American Foresters
5400 Grosvenor Lane
Bethesda, MD 20814
Phone: (301) 897-8720
E-mail: safweb@safnet.org
Web site: http://www.safnet.org
The Society of American Foresters (SAF) is the national scientific
and educational organization representing the forestry profession
in the United States. The mission of the SAF is to advance the sci-
ence, education, technology, and practice of forestry; to enhance
the competency of its members; to establish professional excel-
lence; and to use the knowledge, skills, and conservation ethic of
the profession to ensure the continued health and use of forest
ecosystems and the present and future availability of forest re-
sources to benefit society.
Wildlife Society
5410 Grosvenor Lane
Suite 200
Bethesda, MD 20814-2144
Phone: (301) 897-9770
Web site: http://www.wildlife.org
The Wildlife Society is an international nonprofit scientific and
educational association dedicated to excellence in wildlife stew-
ardship through science and education. Its mission is to enhance
the ability of wildlife professionals to conserve diversity, sustain
productivity, and ensure responsible use of wildlife resources for
the benefit of society.
Forestry Professional Associations
233

Other Forestry-Related Associations
American Forest Foundation
1111 Nineteenth Street NW
Suite 780
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 463-2462
E-mail: info@forestfoundation.org
Web site: http://www.affoundation.org
The American Forest Foundation strives to promote the growing
of renewable forest resources on private lands while protecting
environmental benefits and increasing public understanding of
all benefits of productive forestry.
American Forest Resource Council
1500 S.W. First Avenue
Suite 330
Portland, OR 97201
Phone: (503) 222-9505
Web site: http://www.afrc.ws
AFRC strives to create a favorable operating environment for the
forest products industry; ensure a reliable timber supply from
public and private lands; and promote sustainable management
of forests by improving Federal laws, regulations, policies, and
decisions that determine or influence the management of all
lands.
American Tree Farm System
c/o American Forest Foundation
1111 Nineteenth Street NW
Suite 780
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 463-2462
E-mail: info@treefarmsystem.org
Web site: http://www.treefarmsystem.org
The American Tree Farm System® (ATFS), a program of the
American Forest Foundation, is committed to sustaining forests,
watersheds, and healthy habitats through the power of private
stewardship. ATFS educates and recognizes the commitment of
private forest owners in the United States.
234
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

Certified Forest Products Council
721 NW Ninth Avenue
Suite 300
Portland, OR 97209
Phone: (503) 224-2205
E-mail: info@certifiedwood.org
Web site: http://www.certifiedwood.org
The Certified Forest Products Council is an independent, not-for-
profit, voluntary initiative committed to promoting responsible
forest products–buying practices throughout North America in
an effort to improve forest management practices worldwide.
The council actively promotes and facilitates the increased pur-
chase, use, and sale of certified forest products and promotes the
transition away from forest products originating in forests that
have been identified as endangered through an assessment
process.
Forest Stewards Guild
P.O. Box 8309
Santa Fe, NM 87504-8309
Phone: (505) 983-3887
E-mail: info@foreststewardsguild.com
Web site: http://foreststewardsguild.com
The mission of the guild is to promote ecologically responsible re-
source management that sustains the entire forest across the land-
scape. The guild provides a forum and support system for prac-
ticing foresters and other resource management professionals
working to advance this vision.
Forest Stewardship Council,  U.S.
1155 Thirtieth Street NW
Suite 300
Washington, DC 20007
Phone: (202) 342-6589
Web site: http://fscus.org/html/index.html
The FSC promotes responsible forest management globally by
certifying forest products that meet the most rigorous standards
in the world. The organization brings industry, environmental-
ists, and community groups together to promote practical solu-
tions that meet its diverse stakeholders’ needs.
Other Forestry-Related Associations
235

Global Association of Online Foresters
Web site: http://www.foresters.org/
The aim of the Global Association of Online Foresters (GAOF) is
to increase the understanding of forestry by improving commu-
nication worldwide. Services include information links, a help
line, assistance with careers including job searching, and a reg-
istry of consultants. The GAOF also helps members promote
forestry in their respective countries by providing directories of e-
mail addresses and web sites.
National Association of Professional Forestry Schools and
Colleges
701 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20004
Phone: (202) 624-1280
Web site: http://www.napfsc.org
The association was formed to advance the science, practice, and
art of forest resource management through the encouragement
and support of forest resource education, research, extension, and
international programs at the university level. NAPFSC repre-
sents member schools and institutions in their collective dealings
with governmental entities, forestry and other natural resource
organizations, forestry industry groups, educational and scien-
tific organizations, and the public.
National Network of Forest Practitioners
305 Main Street
Providence, RI 02903
Phone: (401) 273-6507
E-mail: Thomas@nnfp.org
Web site: http://www.nnfp.org
The National Network of Forest Practitioners is a grassroots al-
liance of rural people who are striving to build a forest economy
that is ecologically sound and socially just. As one of the leading
community forestry organizations in the United States, the NNFP
provides information and technical assistance, a forum for net-
working and organizing, and a meaningful role in national dis-
cussions about forests and rural communities.
236
Directory of U.S. Forestry Organizations

National Tree Trust
1120 G Street NW
Suite 770
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 628-8733
Web site: http://www.nationaltreetrust
The mission of the National Tree Trust is to act as a catalyst for
local volunteer groups in the growing, planting, and maintenance
of trees in rural communities, urban areas, and along the nation’s
highways.
National Woodland Owners Association
374 Maple E
Suite 310
Vienna, VA 22180
Phone: (703) 255-2700
E-mail: info@woodlandowners.org
Web site: http://www.woodlandowners.org
The National Woodland Owners Association (NWOA) is a na-
tionwide organization made up of nonindustrial private wood-
land owners. NWOA is independent of the forest products in-
dustry and government forestry agencies. NWOA works with all
organizations to promote nonindustrial forestry and the best in-
terests of woodland owners. Its purpose is to develop policy, leg-
islation, and representation at the national level as one unified
voice as well as to provide educational and networking opportu-
nities to landowners throughout the country.
Other Forestry-Related Associations
237


7
Print Resources
T
here is an enormous amount of printed information about
forestry and forest conservation policy in the United States.
Writings about forest conservation policy date back to the late
1800s, with key figures such as Carl Schenck, Bernhard Fernow,
and Gifford Pinchot calling for a more coherent policy approach
to forest conservation to counter the “cut-and-run” practices of
the time. Forest conservation policy again became a focal point in
the 1950s with the emergence of multiple-use forestry. But it
wasn’t until the mid-1970s, with the passage of the National For-
est Management Act of 1976 and a spate of state-level forest prac-
tices laws, when forest conservation policy became a field unto its
own in the forestry world. Several important books were written
about the challenges inherent in balancing the multiple demands
on forests, from timber products to water quality and recreation.
Public involvement also became a pervasive theme.
The conflicts over the northern spotted owl in the Pacific
Northwest during the late 1980s and early 1990s brought forest
conservation policy within the broader fold of biodiversity. The
biodiversity issue was brought into sharper focus with news re-
ports about tropical deforestation in Brazil and other parts of the
world. By 2000, forest conservation policy had become synony-
mous with biodiversity conservation in the literature.
Much of the focus in forest policy books and forestry jour-
nals has been on public forest land, especially targeting the U.S.
Forest Service. As the steward of 192 million acres of public for-
est land, the Forest Service is under constant pressure to provide
for human uses as well as conserving biodiversity and other
ecosystem goods and services. Far less attention has been given
239

to private forest conservation, even though private forests com-
prise 58 percent of the total forest land in the United States.
Forest science and research journals are also abundant, a tes-
tament to the importance of forests to society at large. Scientific
journals are generally inclusive, with topics ranging from forest
genetics and soil microbiology to economic models and policy
analysis.
General Forestry and Forest
Conservation Books and Reports
Aplet, G. H., N. Johnson, J. T. Olsen, and V. A. Sample, eds. 1993.
Defining Sustainable Forestry. Covelo, CA: Island Press. 328p.
A broad collection of essays on the meaning of sustainable
forestry by authors from varying perspectives. Contributors
range from conservation biologists, academic researchers, and
Forest Service decision-makers to forest industry representatives,
environmentalists, and nonindustrial private landowners. The es-
says reflect the rich and diverse perspectives on what constitutes
sustainable forestry.
Best, C., and L. A. Wayburn. 2001. America’s Private Forests: Sta-
tus and Stewardship. Covelo, CA: Island Press.
A comprehensive overview of status and trends in U.S. private
forest land ownership and uses. The authors concentrate on con-
structive recommendations to enhance the conservation, restora-
tion, and sustainable management of these lands.
Birch, T. W. 1994. Private Forest-Land Owners of the United
States, 1994. Resource Bulletin NE-134. Radnor, PA: U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service, Northeastern Forest Ex-
periment Station. 183p.
An indispensable source of data on changes in private forest land
ownership between 1978 and 1994, including information about
private land owner objectives for ownership. Data on ownership
acreage are organized by ownership category, as well as by region
and state.
240
Print Resources

Davis, L. S., and K. N. Johnson. 1986. Forest Management, 3rd
Edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
The fundamental textbook on forest management used by ac-
credited forestry schools in the United States for many years. The
focus of the text is on maximizing the production of forest values,
focusing primarily on timber but also including other examples.
Forest Ecosystem Management Assessment Team (FEMAT). 1993.
Forest Ecosystem Management: An Ecological, Economic, and
Social Assessment. Report of FEMAT, 1993-793-071. Washington,
DC: General Printing Office.
A comprehensive report by a team of forest ecologists, econo-
mists, and social scientists assembled in 1993 by the Clinton Ad-
ministration to provide analysis and recommendations to man-
age a part of the Federal forest lands in the Pacific Northwest and
northwest California. The report was the first of its kind to ana-
lyze the effects of timber harvesting on Federal forest lands on a
broad array of ecological and social values supported by old-
growth forests in the region. The resulting analysis provided the
foundation for the Northwest Forest Plan, which governs forest
conservation and management in a large part of National Forests
in the Pacific Northwest and northwest California.
Hunter, M. L., Jr., ed. 1999. Maintaining Biodiversity in Forest
Ecosystems. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
This text is aimed at a broad audience concerned about the effects
of forest management on biological diversity and how to adapt
forestry to meet broader goals of biodiversity. The book includes
basic concepts of biodiversity and forest ecology and provides
constructive recommendations for a restoration-based forestry.
Kimmins, H. 1992. Balancing Act: Environmental Issues in
Forestry. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.
Basic principles of forestry and ecology are outlined in the begin-
ning of the book, followed by major issues facing forestry in British
Columbia and worldwide. The issues include clearcutting, slash-
burning, chemicals, old-growth forests, biological diversity, “new
forestry” initiatives, climate change, acid rain, decision-making,
tropical forestry, and sustainability of diverse forest values.
General Forestry and Forest Conservation
241

Knight, R. L., and S. F. Bates, eds. 1995. A New Century for Nat-
ural Resources Management. Covelo, CA: Island Press. 398p.
A collection of writings by leaders in U.S. natural resource con-
servation and management that reflect on the dysfunctions, chal-
lenges, and opportunities for the twenty-first century. A primary
thrust of the writings is the philosophies and principles underly-
ing sustainable natural resource management.
Kohm, K. A., and J. F. Franklin, eds. 1997. Creating a Forestry for
the 21st Century: The Science of Ecosystem Management. Covelo,
CA: Island Press. 475p.
A series of highly technical chapters concerning the integration of
ecological principles into forest management and conservation.
The chapters are organized into three general themes: principles
of ecosystem management across spatial and temporal scales; ap-
plications of forest ecosystem management; and social, institu-
tional, and economic issues surrounding the implementation of—
and impediments to—forest ecosystem management.
Ricketts, T. H., E. Dinerstein, D. M. Olson, and C. J. Loucks. 2000.
Terrestrial Ecoregions of North America: A Conservation Assess-
ment. Washington, DC: Island Press.
An impressive collection of color maps and narratives of the sta-
tus and trends of the ecoregions of North America.
Szaro, R. C., and B. Shapiro. 1990. Conserving Our Heritage:
America’s Biodiversity. Arlington, VA: The Nature Conservancy.
An assessment of biodiversity in the United States and recom-
mendations for protecting, maintaining, and enhancing biodiver-
sity into the future.
Yaffee, S. L., A. F. Phillips, I. C. Frentz, P. W. Hardy, S. M. Maleki,
and B. E. Thorpe. 1996. Ecosystem Management in the United
States. Covelo, CA: Island Press.
A comprehensive reference guide to ecosystem management ef-
forts in the United States targeted at practitioners and decision-
makers. The guide provides findings from 105 ecosystem man-
agement projects nationwide.
242
Print Resources

U.S. Forest Policy Books and Reports
Adams, D. 1993. Renewable Resource Policy. Washington, DC: Is-
land Press.
A thorough survey of policies, programs, and key organizations
affecting the use, management, and conservation of renewable
natural resources including forests, rangeland, water, and
wildlife.
Anderson, T. L. 1994. Multiple Conflicts over Multiple Uses.
Bozeman, MT: Political Economy Research Center. 103p.
A critical analysis of how the government addresses conflicts over
public lands and natural resources. Recommendations based on
free-market principles are provided, with calls for reforms of the
political and institutional environment surrounding public land
and resource management.
Behan, R. W. 2001. Plundered Promise: Capitalism, Politics, and
the Fate of Federal Lands. Covelo, CA, and Washington, DC: Is-
land Press. 240p.
A critical analysis of the relationship between corporations and
the U.S. Forest Service and the resulting timber program in Na-
tional Forests. The central thesis is that current institutions have
overshot their original mandates and missions, and that these
mandates and missions need to be readdressed through an alter-
native model of forest sustainability, one that emphasizes
community-based forest conservation and management.
Bowes, M., and J. Krutilla. 1989. Multiple-Use Management: The
Economics of Public Forestlands. Washington, DC: Resources for
the Future.
Basic concepts and principles of public economics applied to the
allocation and management of public forest lands.
Clarke, J. N., and D. C. McCool. 1996. Staking the Terrain: Power
and Performance among Natural Resource Agencies, 2nd Edition.
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 279p.
U.S. Forest Policy
243

An analysis of Federal natural resource agencies and their relative
power and effectiveness. The Forest Service is regarded as a bu-
reaucratic superstar. The National Park Service, Bureau of Land
Management, Fish and Wildlife Service, and Army Corps of En-
gineers are also examined.
Clary, D. A. 1986. Timber and the Forest Service. Lawrence: Uni-
versity of Kansas Press. 252p.
An interpretive history of the relationship between timber man-
agement and Forest Service organization, planning, and decision-
making. Historical documents, official memos, reports, and inter-
nal analyses are placed under a critical light to show how the
Forest Service evolved from being a custodial steward of Federal
forest land into a timber production organization in a very short
period of time. How the Forest Service extracts itself from pre-
dominantly timber production to multiple use and values re-
mains a persistent challenge.
Clawson, M. 1975. Forests for Whom and for What? Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press for Resources for the Future.
Data and trends of National Forest use and management are ex-
amined against political demands on National Forests. Clawson
raises critical questions about what the future might hold and
what possible directions the Forest Service might take to manage
the National Forests into the future.
Clawson, M. 1983. The Federal Lands Revisited. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press for Resources For the Future.
Data and trends for all Federal lands, National Forests, Bureau of
Land Management lands, national parks, and national wildlife
refuges.
Committee of Scientists. 1999. Sustaining the People’s Lands:
Recommendations for Stewardship of the National Forests and
Grasslands into the Next Century. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service.
The Committee of Scientists was appointed by Congress in 1998
to provide analysis and recommendations to the Forest Service in
revising the administrative regulations for planning and manage-
ment of the National Forests and grasslands. This report empha-
244
Print Resources

sizes ecological sustainability over social and economic sustain-
ability by taking an ecosystem management approach to National
Forest planning and management. The report also calls for more
collaborative approaches and sustained public involvement
throughout decision-making processes.
Cortner, H. J., and M. A. Moote. 1999. The Politics of Ecosystem
Management. Covelo, CA: Island Press. 179p.
This book examines ecosystem management in the context of po-
litical theory and principles, from the “politics of expertise” and
policy paradoxes of ecosystem management to new forms of pub-
lic participation in land and natural resource decision-making.
The authors critically analyze the new role of scientists, man-
agers, and the public in putting ecosystem management princi-
ples into practice.
Cubbage, F. W., J. O’Laughlin, and C. S Bullock. 1993. Forest Re-
source Policy. New York: Wiley.
Intended as a textbook for introductory courses in forest policy,
Forest Resource Policy covers a broad range of policies and partici-
pants affecting forest conservation and management in the
United States. Early chapters focus on the various values pro-
vided by and assigned to forests and the role of policy in ensur-
ing that those values are sustained. Middle chapters focus on key
participants in forest policy and management, such as the legisla-
tive, executive, and judicial branches; interest groups; the public;
and the media. Major laws and policies affecting both public and
private forest lands follow. The text ends with discussions of in-
ternational forestry and forest policy.
Dana, S., and S. K. Fairfax. 1980. Forest and Range Policy: Its De-
velopment in the United States, 2nd Edition. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
The original textbook intended for introductory courses in forest
and range policy. The text takes a historical narrative approach,
tracking the development and implementation of policies
through major historical periods and events up to 1980. The text
doubles as a good historical primer on forest conservation policy.
Gray, G. J., M. J. Enzer, and J. Kusel. 1998. Understanding
Community-Based Forest Ecosystem Management. An editorial
U.S. Forest Policy
245

synthesis of an American Forests workshop, Bend, Oregon, June
1998. Washington, DC: American Forests.
A synthesis of papers given at a national conference on community-
based forest ecosystem management. Basic principles and essen-
tial practices are described and applied in the context of sustain-
able forestry and sustainable communities.
Hirt, P. 1996. A Conspiracy of Optimism: Management of the Na-
tional Forests Since World War Two. Lincoln: University of Ne-
braska Press.
This book tracks the emergence of timber production as an em-
bodiment of technical efficiency and optimistic attitudes that
pervaded the Forest Service after World War II. The author criti-
cizes the agency as a “can-do” organization that refused to rec-
ognize the long-term negative effects of the timber program, de-
spite growing scientific evidence and public opposition to the
program.
O’Toole, R. 1988. Reforming the Forest Service. Covelo, CA: Is-
land Press. 247p.
An analysis of Forest Service planning and decision-making
processes and priorities in the context of public economic theory.
The Forest Service acts as any “rent-seeking” actor by constantly
looking for opportunities to maximize its budgets regardless of
the negative environmental, economic, and social effects. O’Toole
suggests restructuring the Forest Service to operate under free
market principles and practices, which emphasize efficiency and
equity to a greater extent than the current model.
Sample, V. A. 1990. The Impact of the Federal Budget Process on
National Forest Planning. Westport: Greenwood Press.
This is a compilation of data and trends that couple Forest Service
planning, decision-making, and management with annual con-
gressional appropriations. Regardless of land allocations, conser-
vation strategies, and management priorities outlined in forest
plans, the agency implements actions in correspondence to its
budget structure. Line items and expanded budget line items
track closely with on-the-ground management much more
closely than forest plans. Reform of the Forest Service begins and
ends with the federal budget process.
246
Print Resources

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), U.S. Forest Service. 1993.
The Principal Laws Relating to Forest Service Activities. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
A collection of all congressional statutes relating to Forest Service
activities.
Wilkinson, C. F., and H. M. Anderson. 1987. Land and Resource
Planning on the National Forests. Covelo, CA: Island Press.
History, detailed description, and execution of the Renewable Re-
sources Planning Act of 1974 and the National Forest Manage-
ment Act of 1976.
Wondolleck, J. M. 1988. Public Lands Conflict and Resolution:
Managing National Forest Disputes. New York: Plenum Press.
In-depth examination of public involvement and dispute-
resolution approaches in National Forest planning and manage-
ment decision-making. The examination applies principles of ef-
fective public involvement and dispute resolution against
empirical information from National Forest disputes. In conclu-
sion, the Forest Service can be more effective if it engages public
stakeholders earlier in the decision process and more often
throughout the process.
Wondolleck, J. M., and S. J. Yaffee. 2000. Making Collaboration
Work: Lessons from Innovation in Natural Resource Manage-
ment. Covelo, CA: Island Press.
This book presents a series of case studies and lessons learned
from collaborative approaches to natural resource management
in the United States. Lessons include maintaining a place-based
focus, developing open and fair procedures, emphasizing social
learning and conflict management, and instituting monitoring
and evaluation to ensure adaptive management.
Yaffee, S. J. 1994. The Wisdom of the Spotted Owl: Policy Lessons
for a New Century. Covelo, CA: Island Press.
Interpretive history and analysis of the policy conflicts over the
protection of the northern spotted owl and old-growth forests on
Federal lands in the Pacific Northwest. The first half of the book
provides historical development of the issue; the second half
places the issue in a broader political context.
U.S. Forest Policy
247

U.S. Forest History
Clawson, M. 1967. The Federal Lands since 1956: Recent Trends in
Use and Management. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press for Resources for the Future.
A comprehensive collection of data on the uses of all Federal
lands through the mid-1960s. Data are for all management activ-
ities in national forests, Bureau of Land Management public
lands, and national parks—for example, timber harvest volume,
oil and gas leases, and recreation visitors.
Frederick, K. D., and R. A. Sedjo, eds. 1991. America’s Renewable
Resources: Historical Trends and Current Challenges. Washing-
ton, DC: Resources for the Future.
This book traces the history of the uses of water, forests, range-
land, cropland and soils, and wildlife since early colonial times
through major periods and events marking the expansion and de-
velopment of the United States. The authors analyze their current
condition at the end of the twentieth century and the role of so-
cial and political institutions in perpetuating degradation or con-
servation.
MacCleery, D. W. 1996. American Forests: A History of Resiliency
and Recovery, 4th revision. Durham, NC: Forest History Society.
This short handbook presents data and trends regarding U.S.
forests, including information on total forest land acreage, forest
growth and harvesting, and forest health conditions from colonial
settlement through the late twentieth century.
Miller, C., and R. Staebler. 1999. The Greatest Good: 100 Years of
Forestry in America. Bethesda, MD: Society of American
Foresters.
A coffee table–type volume of interpretive photo essays on the
history of U.S. forestry since 1900. Rare black-and-white photos
from forestry’s early beginnings and pictures representing
today’s forestry are collected with narratives and quotations from
forestry leaders throughout the twentieth century.
Pinchot, G. 1907. The Use of the National Forests. Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture.
248
Print Resources

This handbook was distributed to the first generation of National
Forest managers to guide their decisions regarding the uses of the
newly created National Forests. The handbook contains the most
famous of quotes attributed to Gifford Pinchot, first Chief of the
Forest Service, to “provide for the greatest good, for the greatest
number, over the long term.”
Pinchot, G. 1911. The Fight for Conservation. New York: Double-
day, Page and Company.
Written by Gifford Pinchot, the first Chief of the Forest Service,
this book contains the essence of the early Conservation Move-
ment blended with essential principles of the Progressive Era re-
forms. Pinchot laid out a three-pronged approach to natural re-
source conservation: conservative use of resources for current
generations, protection of resources from wasteful practices for
future generations, and distribution and management of re-
sources in a way that is just and equitable.
Pinchot, G. 1947. Breaking New Ground. New York: Harcourt,
Brace and Company.
A collection of personal essays, journal excerpts, and philosophi-
cal reflections by the first chief of the Forest Service, Gifford Pin-
chot. The book is a highly personal account by a personality at the
forefront of the Conservation Movement at the turn of the twen-
tieth century and the social and political changes wrought by con-
servation policy and politics.
Pyne, S. J. 1982. Fire in America: A Cultural History of Wildland
and Rural Fire. Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press.
An essential work on the history of wildland fire in the United
States and social and political responses to fire. Detailed accounts
of the famous forest fires of 1910 and the emergence of Smokey
Bear enrich this narrative history of wildland fire.
Steen, H. K., ed. 1992. The Origins of the National Forests.
Durham, NC: Forest History Society.
A comprehensive collection of essays on the emergence, manage-
ment, and significance of the National Forests. Themes include
the importance of National Forests; management of specific re-
sources such as timber, mining, grazing, wildlife, and water; rela-
tionships between National Forests and Native Americans, states,
U.S. Forest History
249

and private lands; relationships between the Forest Service and
other Federal agencies such as the National Park Service; and key
personalities associated with the National Forests, such as Bern-
hard Fernow, John Waldo, and William Steel.
Williams, M. 1989. Americans and Their Forests: A Historical Ge-
ography. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
A dense analysis of the meaning and significance of forests in
American history and culture, from the clearing and uses of
forests in pre-European society to the late twentieth century. The
analysis is compelling given the author’s British perspective.
International Forestry and Forest
Conservation
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2000. Global Outlook
for the Future Wood Supply from Forest Plantations. Rome:
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.
An analysis of trends in consumption of wood products and pro-
duction of wood from forest plantations. As demand for wood
products continuously grows, there is increasing interest in the
development of intensively managed forest plantations to re-
place forest product harvesting and development from native
forests around the world. Plantations are examined in light of the
need to protect native forests for biodiversity and other ecologi-
cal values.
Howard, S., and J. Stead. 2001. The Forest Industry in the 21st
Century. London: World Wide Fund for Nature.
Information about past, current, and future trends of the forest
products industry around the globe. Included in the assessment
are analyses of trade, corporate structuring, and effects on con-
serving nontimber forest values such as biodiversity.
Lele, U., ed. 2002. Managing a Global Resource: Challenges of
Forest Conservation and Development. New Brunswick, NJ:
Transaction Publishers.
A general overview and selected case studies of challenges and
opportunities in forest conservation around the world. Case ex-
250
Print Resources

amples come from Costa Rica, China, India, Cameroon, Indone-
sia, and Brazil.
Pagiola, S., J. Bishop, and N. Landell-Mills. 2002. Selling Forest
Environmental Services: Market-Based Mechanisms for Conser-
vation and Development. London: Earthscan Publications Ltd.
299p.
An unconventional analysis of using market mechanisms to con-
serve forests, such as selling watershed protection services, trad-
ing carbon credits to reduce greenhouse gases, and creating mar-
kets for biodiversity protection. Case examples from around the
world are included.
Prasad, B., ed. 1999. Biotechnology and Biodiversity in Agricul-
ture/Forestry. Plymouth, England: Science Publishers Inc.
A technical text about the technologies for genome and DNA
analysis and cloning and their applications in agriculture,
forestry, and protection of global biodiversity.
Ramakrishna, K., and G. M. Woodwell, eds. 1993. World Forests
for the Future: Their Use and Conservation. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
A general overview of issues and challenges in sustaining forests
and forest values around the world.
Sharma, N. P., ed. 1992. Managing the World’s Forests: Looking
for Balance Between Conservation and Development. Dubuque,
IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing.
A global perspective on approaches to balance forest conserva-
tion with development needs, interests, and concerns of both de-
veloped and developing countries, with an emphasis on poverty
alleviation.
Westoby, J. 1989. Introduction to World Forestry: People and
Their Trees. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
An introductory guide to the coevolution of trees, forests, and
people around the world, emphasizing the significance of trees
and forests to human development and well-being. The guide
also provides overviews of forest conflicts around the world and
assesses policies and programs aimed at conserving forests.
International Forestry and Forest Conservation
251

World Commission on Environment and Development. 1987. Our
Common Future. New York: Oxford University Press.
Known informally as the “Brundtland Report” after Prime Minis-
ter Gro Harlem Brundtland of Norway, who chaired the commis-
sion, this book provides definitions and guidelines for sustain-
able development, balancing economic development with
environmental sustainability. The book is regarded as the defini-
tive source literature for sustainable development.
Scientific Journals
Advances in Horticulture and Forestry. Scientific Publishers.
An international journal focusing on the science and technology
applied to horticulture and forestry.
American Forests. American Forests Association.
American Forests is the magazine about trees and forests for
people who know and appreciate the many benefits of trees. Sto-
ries are written to entice a general audience to care about tree
planting; content includes profiles of forest advocates, in-depth
looks at current controversies, and stories about current research.
Arboricultural Journal: The International Journal of Urban
Forestry. A B Academic Publishers.
This journal is a source for all aspects of urban forest science,
management, and administration.
Australian Forestry. Institute of Foresters of Australia.
This journal is a comprehensive source for all aspects of forest sci-
ence and forest management.
Biological Conservation. Elsevier Science.
Biological Conservation has as its main purpose the widest dissem-
ination of original papers dealing with the preservation of
wildlife and the conservation or wise use of biological and allied
natural resources. It is concerned with plants and animals and
their habitats in a changing and increasingly human-dominated
biosphere—in fresh and salt waters as well as on land and in the
252
Print Resources

atmosphere. Biological Conservation publishes field studies, ana-
lytical and modeling studies, and review articles.
Biotechnology in Agriculture and Forestry. Springer-Verlag,
Journals.
The purpose of this international journal is to disseminate re-
search and insights about the use, application, and effect of
biotechnology on agricultural and forest production.
Boston College Environmental Affairs Law Review. Boston Col-
lege Environmental Affairs Inc.
The Boston College Environmental Affairs Law Review is the nation’s
second-oldest law review dedicated solely to environmental law.
Since its inception in 1971, Environmental Affairs has developed
and maintained a national reputation as one of the country’s lead-
ing environmental journals. Its staff consists of approximately 15
second- and 15 third-year students who publish four issues dur-
ing the academic year. Each issue contains articles contributed by
prominent outside authors as well as several student-written
legal comments.
Canadian Forest Industries Journal. NRC Research Press.
Canadian Forest Industries Journal, published six times per year, is
the journal of record for the Canadian Woodlands Forum and fo-
cuses exclusively on all aspects of logging from the stump to the
mill gate.
Canadian Journal of Forest Research. National Research Council
of Canada.
The journal features articles about silviculture, forest mensura-
tion, harvesting, vegetation management, tree physiology, eco-
physiology, dendrochronology, forest ecology, forest fire ecology,
forest soil biology, biotechnology, forest genetics, tree improve-
ment, forest entomology and pathology, effects of pollution and
global change, effects of forest practices on biodiversity and sus-
tainability, and forest economics.
Columbia Journal of Environmental Law. Columbia University
Press.
Scientific Journals
253

The Columbia Journal of Environmental Law is the second-oldest en-
vironmental law journal in the nation and is widely regarded as
one of the preeminent environmental journals in the country. The
journal has more than 600 subscribers including law libraries; law
firms; and Federal, local, and state courts. It also has a significant
international readership.
Conservation Biology. Blackwell Scientific Publications.
This is an international, interdisciplinary journal focusing on the
science and development of conservation biology and its applica-
tion to modern ecological problems.
Conservation Ecology. The Resilience Alliance.
Conservation Ecology is an electronic, peer-reviewed, multidiscipli-
nary journal devoted to the rapid dissemination of current re-
search. Manuscript submission, peer review, and publication are
all handled on the Internet. Content ranges from the applied to
the theoretical on topics relating to the ecological, political, and
social foundations for sustainable social-ecological systems.
Conservation in Practice. Society for Conservation Biology.
This journal provides information to conservation practitioners
and policymakers. Articles and topics include conservation biol-
ogy and ecosystem management.
Ecology Law Quarterly. University of California, School of Law.
One of the most respected and widely read journals on environ-
mental law and policy, Ecology Law Quarterly (ELQ) provides
fresh insights and analysis from leading authors on critical envi-
ronmental affairs. Synthesizing legal and technical matters, ELQ’s
articles are cited frequently in court opinions, by legal institu-
tions, and by attorneys.
Ecology USA. Business Publishers Inc.
This journal provides comprehensive coverage of the ecosystem
as a whole with its complex interrelationships.
Environmental Law. Northwestern School of Law of Lewis and
Clark College.
254
Print Resources

Environmental Law, the nation’s oldest law review dedicated
solely to environmental issues, is a premier legal forum for envi-
ronmental and natural resources scholarship. It is published
quarterly by the students of Lewis and Clark Law School.
Environmental Law Reporter. Environmental Law Institute.
This is a periodical publication on environmental case law, court
rulings, and legal analysis of environmental issues.
Environmental Management. Springer-Verlag.
Environmental Management publishes research and opinions con-
cerning the use and conservation of natural resources, the protec-
tion of habitats, and the control of hazards. Its field is applied
ecology in the widest sense, without regard to the disciplinary
boundaries created by modern academic study. Contributions are
drawn from biology, botany, climatology, ecology, fisheries man-
agement, forest sciences, geography, geology, information sci-
ence, law politics, public affairs, zoology, and a wide variety of
other disciplines, often in combinations determined by interdisci-
plinary study.
Forest Ecology and Management. Elsevier Science.
Forest Ecology and Management publishes scientific articles con-
cerned with forest management and conservation, and in particu-
lar the application of biological, ecological, and social knowledge
to the management of planted and natural forests. The journal
aims to encourage communication between scientists in disparate
fields who share a common interest in ecology and natural re-
source management and to bridge the gap between research work-
ers and forest managers in the field to the benefit of both.
Forest Policy and Economics. Elsevier Science.
Forest Policy and Economics is an international journal dealing with
policy issues, including economics and planning, relating to the
forest and forest industries sector. Its aims are to publish original
papers of a high scientific standard and to enhance communica-
tions among researchers, legislators, decision-makers, and other
professionals concerned with formulating and implementing
policies.
Scientific Journals
255

Forest Products Journal. Forest Products Research Society.
Forest Products Journal is the source of information for industry
leaders, researchers, teachers, students, and anyone interested in
today’s forest products industry.
Forest Science. Society of American Foresters.
Forest Science is internationally renowned as a leading forestry re-
search journal. For more than 30 years, it has been publishing sig-
nificant articles in forestry research: silviculture, soils, biometry,
disease, recreation, photosynthesis, and tree physiology as well as
all aspects of management, harvesting, and policy analysis. Forest
Science also features reviews of recent publications.
Forestry. Oxford Press.
Forestry publishes refereed papers covering the results of original
research and practice in forestry. Topics covered are the basic sci-
ences (for example, forest physiology, ecology, classical and mo-
lecular genetics, soils, mycology, zoology, economics, and wood
structure) and the application of these sciences to the sustainable
management of forests.
Forestry Chronicle. Canadian Institute of Forestry.
The Forestry Chronicle provides information about scientific man-
agement of forests and their resources to forest professionals and
practitioners in Canada and around the world, giving them a
means to communicate with their peers in the professional
community.
Forestry Source. Society of American Foresters.
The Forestry Source, the newspaper of the Society of American
Foresters, offers timely news for forest resource professionals. It is
published 12 times a year and covers the latest forestry policy is-
sues, developments in forestry research and technology, Society
of American Foresters programs and activities, and much more.
Harvard Environmental Law Review. Harvard University Press.
The Harvard Environmental Law Review (HELR) publishes articles
about a broad range of environmental affairs such as land use; air,
water, and noise regulation; toxic substances control; radiation
256
Print Resources

control; energy use; workspace pollution; science and technology
control; and resource use and regulation. HELR draws on the ex-
pertise of environmental experts from government, academia,
private practice, industry, and public interest groups to cover
legal developments from the local to international levels.
In Practice. Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management.
This journal contains news and articles of interest to professional
ecologists. It offers vocational advice and covers professional
standards.
Institute for Social Ecology Newsletter. Institute for Social
Ecology.
This newsletter covers anarchism, community development, po-
litical and social change, ecological design, ecological technology,
and biological agriculture.
International Forestry Review. Commonwealth Forestry Asso-
ciation.
The International Forestry Review is a peer-reviewed scientific jour-
nal that publishes papers, research notes, and book reviews on all
aspects of forestry and forest research. It is published four times
per year. Theme editions are a regular feature and attract a wide
audience.
International Journal of Forest Engineering. University of New
Brunswick.
The International Journal of Forest Engineering is dedicated to the
dissemination of scholarly writings on all aspects of forest opera-
tions. The scope normally covered includes tree harvesting, pro-
cessing, and transportation; stand establishment, protection, and
tending; operations planning and control; machine design, man-
agement, and evaluation; forest access planning and construction;
human factors engineering; and education and training.
International Journal of Wildland Fire. Commonwealth Scien-
tific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Publishing.
International Journal of Wildland Fire publishes new and significant
papers that advance basic and applied research concerning
Scientific Journals
257

wildland fire. The journal has an international perspective, be-
cause wildland fire plays a major social, economic and ecological
role around the world.
Journal of Ecology. Blackwell Publishers.
Journal of Ecology is published six times a year and includes orig-
inal research papers on all aspects of the ecology of plants (in-
cluding algae) in both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. Editors
are happy to consider studies of plant communities; populations
or individual species; and studies of the interactions between
plants and organisms such as animals, fungi, or bacteria, provid-
ing that the focus is toward the ecology of the plants.
Journal of Environmental Management. Elsevier Science.
The Journal of Environmental Management publishes papers on all
aspects of management and use of the environment, both natural
and artificial. It is aimed not only at the environmental manager
but at everyone concerned with the wise use of environmental re-
sources. The journal tries particularly to publish examples of the
use of modern mathematical and computer techniques and en-
courages contributions from the developing countries.
Journal of Forestry. Society of American Foresters.
The Journal of Forestry is the premier scholarly journal in forestry.
It has received several national awards for excellence. The mis-
sion of the journal is to advance the profession of forestry by
keeping professionals informed about significant developments
and ideas in forest science, natural resources management, and
forest policy.
Journal of Land, Resources, and Environmental Law. University
of Utah, College of Law.
This journal publishes traditional legal articles as well as those of
an interdisciplinary nature. It also includes expository articles
that provide the nonspecialist with an overview of specialized
areas of law, and it publishes articles oriented toward a practi-
tioner’s perspective.
Journal of Natural Resources and Environmental Law. Univer-
sity of Kentucky, College of Law.
258
Print Resources

This law journal focuses on the legal, policy, and ethical issues re-
lating to environmental and natural resources law.
Journal of Nature Conservation. European Center for Nature
Conservation.
This is an international journal devoted to nature, natural re-
source conservation, and environment.
Journal of Pulp and Paper Science. Pulp and Paper Technical As-
sociation of Canada and Technical Association for Pulp and Paper
Industry (TAPPI).
The JPPS is devoted to the science of pulp and paper, and its aim
is to publish articles that illuminate the underlying principles of
the technology of pulp and paper rather than those that are of a
purely technological or engineering nature.
Journal of Sustainable Forestry. Haworth Press.
This journal provides a linkage of silviculture and the underlying
biology: tree physiology, morphology, and genetics. As such, it
elucidates the scientific principles and techniques of controlling,
protecting, and restoring the regeneration, composition, and
growth of natural forest vegetation as well as plantations, agro-
forestry, and silvo-pastoral systems. It encompasses topics from
biotechnology, physiology, silviculture, wood science, economics,
and forest management.
Journal of Tropical Forestry. Scientific Publishers.
An international, interdisciplinary journal focusing on the sci-
ence, management, and conservation of tropical forests and forest
lands around the globe.
Land Letter: The Newsletter for Natural Resource Professionals.
Environmental and Energy Publishing LLC.
This newsletter reports on natural resources issues and environ-
mental studies.
Landscape Ecology. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Landscape Ecology seeks new and innovative papers that improve
understanding of the relationship between patterns and processes,
Scientific Journals
259

explaining the spatial variation in landscapes at multiple scales as
affected by natural causes and human society. Because landscape
ecology is a broad, interdisciplinary topic, the journal is open to
contributions that consider the landscape as the basis of integra-
tion of knowledge.
National Parks. National Parks and Conservation Association.
This is the only national publication focusing solely on National
Parks. The most important communication vehicle of the Na-
tional Parks and Conservation Association, the magazine creates
an awareness of the need to protect and properly manage the re-
sources found within and adjacent to the National Parks.
Natural Resource Perspectives. Overseas Development Institute.
This journal presents accessible information on international de-
velopment issues.
Natural Resources and Environment, in The Section of Natural Re-
sources Law. American Bar Association.
Natural Resources and Environment is a quarterly magazine con-
taining practical, informative articles for legal practitioners. The
section provides a wide range of publications to enhance the
practices of environmental, energy, and resources lawyers.
Natural Resources and Environmental Issues. Utah State Univer-
sity, College of Natural Resources.
This journal publishes monographs devoted primarily to research
in natural resources and related fields.
Natural Resources Forum. Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
This journal focuses on sustainable development and manage-
ment of natural resources, mainly in developing countries. In re-
cent years, following the growing importance of social policy and
programs at the United Nations, the journal’s editorial policy has
also shifted to socioeconomic aspects of sustainable development
of water, energy, and mineral resources.
Natural Resources Management. Australian Association of Nat-
ural Resource Management.
260
Print Resources

This journal features technical and research articles that cover all
aspects of natural resource management in Australia.
Nature and Resources. United Nations Educational, Scientific,
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
This publication is a production of UNESCO and focuses on the
status of the world’s environment and natural resources and their
relationship with global society and economy.
Naturopa. European Information Center for Nature Conservation.
The magazine Naturopa, which covers specific topics in each
issue, is published three times a year in five languages (English,
French, Italian, German, and Russian). From 1968 to 2000 Natur-
opa concentrated on promoting nature conservation, sustainable
management of natural resources, and the development of a mul-
tidisciplinary approach to environmental issues. In 2001, Natur-
opa began the progressive introduction of new themes such as
cultural heritage and landscape preservation in a perspective of
sustainable development and enhancement of the quality of life.
OnEarth, formerly The Amicus Journal. Natural Resources De-
fense Council.
OnEarth is an independent quarterly magazine of environmental
thought and opinion. It publishes items from hard-hitting reports
on the environmental issues that define our time—global warm-
ing, “big oil” in the Arctic, the disappearance of wild places—to
short takes on the new, the provocative, and the just plain weird.
Quarterly Journal of Forestry. Hall-McCartney Ltd.
This journal is a periodical of the Royal Forestry Society of Eng-
land, Wales, and Northern Ireland, providing applied forestry
techniques, technical features, and book reviews.
Regional Journals of Applied Forestry. Society of American
Foresters.
These journals focus on research, practice, and techniques tar-
geted to foresters and allied professionals in specific regions of
the United States and Canada. The regional journals are the
Northern Journal of Applied Forestry, the Southern Journal of Applied
Forestry, and the Western Journal of Applied Forestry.
Scientific Journals
261

Renewable Resources Journal. Renewable Natural Resources
Foundation.
This journal is a forum for discourse on public policy issues. Co-
operation and understanding among professionals in the various
natural resources disciplines can be enhanced by sharing per-
spectives on resource issues, objectives, and technical and politi-
cal constraints. To this end, the journal carries original articles,
previously unpublished speeches, and selected articles from the
publications of member organizations. Communications among
natural resource professionals also is promoted by publication of
news, announcements, and meeting notices of member organiza-
tions and other groups.
Sierra. The Sierra Club.
Sierra is the official magazine of the Sierra Club.
Society and Natural Resources. Taylor and Francis.
Bringing together social science research on current and emerging
environmental and natural resource issues, Society and Natural Re-
sources provides a forum for scientific, refereed research that un-
derlies management decisions about natural resource develop-
ment from multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary social science
perspectives.
Timber Harvesting. Hatton-Brown Publishers.
Timber Harvesting appeals to business owners and operating man-
agement of the U.S. logging and forestry industry. Timber Har-
vesting focuses on operational/technological developments in
logging, timber transportation, and silvicultural operations. It is
the only logging magazine that routinely surveys its subscribers
about equipment purchasing and harvesting practices and is the
leader in reporting up-to-date environmental developments af-
fecting the industry.
Tulane Environmental Law Journal. Tulane Law School, Tulane
Environmental Law Society.
The Tulane Environmental Law Journal is a student-run and student-
262
Print Resources

edited law review devoted to environmental issues. It is published
twice each year and has a national circulation. The journal pub-
lishes articles by scholars and practitioners as well as student work.
Unasylva. United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO).
Unasylva, an international journal of forestry and forest indus-
tries, is produced quarterly in separate English, French, and
Spanish editions. Unasylva covers all aspects of forestry: policy
and planning; conservation and management of forest-based
plants and animals; rural socioeconomic development; species
improvement; industrial development; international trade; and
environmental considerations, including the role of forests and
trees in maintaining a sustainable base for agricultural produc-
tion at the micro and macro levels as well as the effects of envi-
ronmental change on forestry.
Urban Ecology. Urban Ecology Inc.
This journal discusses issues of urban planning and design in the
context of social justice. It covers such ecological issues as mass
transportation, urban forests, and aesthetic improvement.
Urban Forestry and Urban Greening. Urban & Fischer Verlag.
This publication concentrates on all tree-dominated as well as
other green resources in and around urban areas, such as wood-
lands, public and private urban parks and gardens, urban nature
areas, street tree and square plantations, botanical gardens, and
cemeteries.
Virginia Environmental Law Journal. University of Virginia,
School of Law.
The Virginia Environmental Law Journal, a leader in environmental
legal scholarship, is published by students at the University of
Virginia School of Law. The journal focuses on state, regional, na-
tional, and international issues of environmental, preservation,
land use, energy, and natural resources law.
Wilderness. The Wilderness Society.
This is the official monthly publication of the Wilderness Society.
Scientific Journals
263

Women in Natural Resources. University of Idaho, Bowers Labo-
ratory.
Women in Natural Resources is a journal of professional women in
forestry, wildlife, fisheries, range, soils, and the social sciences as
they pertain to natural resources.
Wood and Fiber Science. Allen Publishing Inc.
Wood and Fiber Science, the official publication of the Society of
Wood Science and Technology, publishes papers with both pro-
fessional and technical content. It considers original papers of
professional concern or those based on research dealing with the
science, processing, and manufacture of wood and composite
products of wood or wood fiber origin.
Woodland Report: Late-Breaking News on Private Forestry Is-
sues from Washington D.C. and State Capitals. National Wood-
land Owners Association.
The report contains practical forestry information for private
woodland owners.
World Conservation. International Union for Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN).
IUCN’s World Conservation journal is published three times a year
in English, French, and Spanish. Each issue contains articles fo-
cusing on various conservation themes, including mountains,
threatened species, world heritage, and forests. The articles so-
licited from guest contributors, scientists, and experts provide a
wide range of viewpoints on what is involved in preserving nat-
ural resources and supporting sustainable development. The
journal also includes a section dedicated to news and current ac-
tivities in IUCN and its commissions.
World Forestry Directions. Sterling Publications Ltd.
This journal provides a comprehensive review of the emerging
technologies that will drive the forestry industry in the future.
264
Print Resources

8
Nonprint Resources
N
umerous sources of information on forests, forestry, and for-
est conservation can be found on the World Wide Web and on
videotape. Besides providing information about government
and nongovernment organizations (see chapter 6, U.S. Forestry
Organizations), many web sites serve as online information clear-
inghouses, providing links to a vast array of more specific online
resources.
With the relatively low cost of publishing online, large
amounts of data, information, maps, and reports are now accessi-
ble. The availability of information is staggering, and one can
learn a lot about forests, forestry, and forest conservation policy
from surveying a broad array of web sites. However, data, infor-
mation, maps, and analyses posted on the World Wide Web often
do not undergo rigorous review and critique; users should al-
ways cross-check information and analyses with sources that
have undergone more critical review, especially consulting peer-
reviewed research when possible.
Videos are also available through various specialty media or-
ganizations. Videos are especially useful for educational pur-
poses and broad audiences.
Information Clearinghouses on the Web
Environmental News Service
http://ens-news.com/
Daily news stories and analysis on a broad range of environmen-
tal issues globally.
265

Environmental Organization Web Directory
http://webdirectory.com/
A clearinghouse of numerous government, nongovernment, com-
munity, and educational organizations under 30 topic headings.
FireWise
http://www.firewise.org/
Information and resources aimed at homeowners and property
owners in the wildland-urban interface for mitigating risks from
wildland forest fires.
Forest Conservation Portal
http://forests.org/
Forests.org Inc., which operates this web site, works to end de-
forestation, preserve old-growth forests, conserve and sustain-
ably manage other forests, maintain climatic systems, and com-
mence the age of ecological restoration. This web site is for
educational and noncommercial use only.
ForestInformation.com
http://www.forestinformation.com/index.asp
Web-based clearinghouse of forest and forestry information per-
taining to the United States.
Inventory and Monitoring Institute
http://www.fs.fed.us/institute/
Administered by the Forest Service of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, the Inventory and Monitoring Institute provides
technical consultation to Forest Service units with responsibilities
for on-the-ground inventory, monitoring, and planning activities.
The Inventory and Monitoring Institute’s work focuses on the ap-
plication of knowledge and technology to these areas of the in-
formation environment:
•
Data collection with sound inventory design and
quality assurance;
•
Land classification using Bailey’s world-class ecoregion
principles;
266
Nonprint Resources

•
Information management using leading-edge Forest
Service information technology;
•
Information analysis to answer questions and address
issues;
•
Knowledge sharing through technical assistance to
other countries.
National Interagency Fire Center
http://www.nifc.gov/
Provides up-to-date data and information about wildland fires
throughout the United States as well as links to wildland fire or-
ganizations, training opportunities, statistics of previous fire sea-
sons, and the latest fire science and technology.
Timbergreen Forestry
http://my.execpc.com/~tmbrgrn/index.html
Timbergreen Forestry works with other forest owners to grow
large, high-quality crop trees that give many benefits from careful
management. The web site is directed at SmartWood–certified re-
source managers to sustain profitability of small private forest
lands.
Vegetation Management Tools
http://www.fs.fed.us/vegtools/index.shtml
Web-based information-sharing source for projects used in the
field to restore and maintain forest health.
Online Reports, Maps, and Information
Biodiversity and Sustainable Forestry: State of the Science Re-
view. National Commission on Science for Sustainable
Forestry.
http://cnie.org/NCSSF/Documents/Biodiversity%20Paper.
logo1.pdf
This paper focuses on summarizing the research relevant to the
current status of science and research efforts related to sustain-
able forestry practices and biodiversity.
Online Reports, Maps, and Information
267

Descriptions of the Ecoregions of the United States. U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service.
http://www.fs.fed.us/land/ecosysmgmt/ecoreg1_home.html
http://www.neartica.com/ecology/ecoreg/ecoprov. 
htm#anchor170336
Digitized maps from Robert G. Bailey’s “Ecoregions of the United
States.”
Digital Representations of Tree Species Range Maps of the
United States. U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological
Survey (USGS).
http://climchange.cr.usgs.gov/data/atlas/little/
Maps of the ranges of tree species in North America—compiled
by Elbert Little of the Forest Service and others—were digitized
for use in USGS’s vegetation-climate modeling studies. These
digital map files are available here for download.
Ecoregions of the United States. U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
http://www.epa.gov/bioindicators/html/usecoregions.html
Digitized maps of ecoregions of the United States as interpreted
by the EPA.
Forest Land Distribution Data for the United States. U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service.
http://www.srsfia.usfs.msstate.edu/rpa/rpa93.htm
Downloadable maps and metadata files on forest land data for
the United States.
Global Forest Resources Assessment 2000: Main Report. Food
and Agriculture Organization.
http://www.fao.org/forestry/fo/fra/main/index.jsp
The “Global Forest Resources Assessment 2000” is an appraisal of
the status of the world’s forests, with analyses of changes since
1980. The assessment is a key reference source for forest informa-
tion for governments, nongovernmental organizations, and inter-
national conventions such as the Convention on Biological Diver-
sity and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change.
268
Nonprint Resources

Hayman Fire Case Study Analysis. U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture (USDA), U.S. Forest Service.
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/hayman_fire/
A report compiled by the Hayman fire case study analysis team
comprising researchers from the USDA Forest Service Rocky
Mountain Research Station in cooperation with USDA Forest Ser-
vice Rocky Mountain Region and the Colorado Forest Service.
This team of federal, state, and local experts from throughout the
United States developed an analysis framework to address issues
raised by Congressman Mark Udall (D-Colorado) in connection
with the Hayman fire, which burned 138,000 acres in Colorado in
2002. Teams addressed fire behavior, home destruction, social and
economic impacts, fire rehabilitation, and ecological effects.
Using Representative Udall’s issues, each team developed a set of
analysis questions and its own approach to answering the ques-
tions in a timely manner. Techniques used by the teams included
interviews, analysis of existing data, expert opinion, Hayman fire
reports, and other available information. The report highlights
each team’s interim findings addressing the analysis questions.
Temperate and Boreal Forest Resources Assessment 2000. Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
http://www.unece.org/trade/timber/fra/welcome.htm
The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
(UNECE)/FAO published and distributed a CD-ROM containing
the “Temperate and Boreal Forest Resources Assessment 2000”
(TBFRA-2000) electronic database and the main TBFRA-2000 re-
port. Since the launch of the CD-ROM, positive responses from
users have confirmed that this product is another important
source of information about temperate/boreal forests and a use-
ful tool for scientists, researchers, and  all others who are inter-
ested in the TBFRA data.
Understanding the FAO Forest Resources Assessment 2000.
World Resources Institute.
http://www.wri.org/press/fao_fra5.html
Critique of the methods and findings of the “Global Forest Re-
sources Assessment 2000: Main Report” by the Food and Agri-
culture Organization.
Online Reports, Maps, and Information
269

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
United Nations.
http://unfccc.int/cop4/conv/conv.html
Online summary and full report of the Kyoto Protocol.
Videos
Can Tropical Forests Be Saved?
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 120 minutes
Date: 1991
Cost: Academic institutions $240.00; community groups and li-
braries $150.00
Source: Richter Productions
http://www.richtervideos.com
Fifty years ago, tropical rainforests covered 14 percent of the
planet’s surface in a belt of 33 countries, most of them grouped
along the equator. More than half of this forest has now been lost;
much of it is now barren wasteland. Explore alternative ap-
proaches to conservation, including debt-for-nature swap and
sustainable harvesting.
Earth Report
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 250 minutes on two tapes; 130 minutes on five tapes
Date: 1996
Source: Television Trust for the Environment (TVE)
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
http://www.tve.org/network.html
A regular update on the state of the planet, these tapes are a re-
port card on how well the world is achieving the targets of the
1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It breaks the mold of
doom-and-gloom coverage of the environmental crisis and docu-
ments how people around the globe are rising to their environ-
mental challenges.
Fate of the Forest
Type: VHS videocassette
270
Nonprint Resources

Length: 30 minutes
Date: 1996
Source: Television Trust for the Environment (TVE)
Prince Albert Road
London NW1 4RZ
United Kingdom
http://www.tve.org/network.html
For more than 20 years, the shrinkage of the world’s tropical
forests has been at the forefront of environmental concerns. Find
out how local people ingeniously imitate natural productivity,
agroforestry techniques, and other initiatives.
The Salmon Forest
Type: VHS videocassette
Video Number: 1-56029-909-6
Length: 52 minutes
Date: 2001
Cost: Purchase $250.00; rental $75.00
Source: Bullfrog Films
372 Dautrich Road
Reading, PA 19606
http://www.bullfrogfilms.com
Reveals the fragile connections among salmon, bears, trees, and
people in the Pacific Northwest rainforest.
The Temperate Rainforest
Type: VHS videocassette
Video Number: 0-7722-0394-6
Length: 16 minutes
Date: 1985
Cost: Purchase $49.00; rental $20.00
Source: Bullfrog Films
372 Dautrich Road
Reading, PA 19606
http://www.bullfrogfilms.com
This beautifully photographed film examines the characteristics
and ecology of the coastal rainforest of the Pacific Northwest.
Trees Are the Answer
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 30 minutes
Videos
271

Date: 2000
Cost: $19.95
Source: Greenspirit Ltd.
4068 West 32nd Avenue
Vancouver, BC V6S 1Z6
Canada
http://www. greenspirit.com/index.cfm
Trees Are the Answer is an enlightening video documentary hosted
by Greenpeace cofounder Dr. Patrick Moore. It explores the
beauty, biodiversity, and resiliency of forests while delivering a
powerful message about how forests work and the role they play
in solving many current environmental problems.
Tree-Sit: The Art of Resistance
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 120 minutes
Date: 1998
Cost: Institutions $200.00; individuals $25.00
Source: Earth Films/ESP
P.O. Box 2198
Redway, CA 95560
http://www.earthfilms.org/
Feature-length grassroots documentary. Covers the struggle to
save Headwaters Forest, the attempted assassination of Judi Bari,
the pepper-spray torture of young activists, and the establishment
of permanent “tree villages” hundreds of feet up; culminates in
the World Trade Organization protests in the streets of Seattle.
This film is historical, exhilarating, informative, and intense!
Up in Flames: A History of Fire Fighting in the Forest
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 29 minutes
Cost: $25.00
Source: Forest History Society
701 William Vickers Avenue
Durham, NC 27701
(919) 682-9319
http://www.lib.duke.edu/forest/Publications/films.html
Up in Flames documents the development of North American fire
detection, communication, and fire suppression technology from
the inception of the lookout tower to the weather satellite.
272
Nonprint Resources

Nonprint Resources from Various States
Listed are a few states that have fairly extensive online and video
resources.
The Forestry Media Center in the College of Forestry at Oregon
State University
http://www.cof.orst.edu/cof/fmc/
Oregon State University has a large collection of educational, in-
formational, and technical videos on various forestry topics. To
download an order form from the Internet, go to http://www.
cof.orst.edu/cof/fmc/orderpage.php.
Conversations on Sustainable Forestry
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 90 minutes
Date: 1991
Number: 992
Cost: $95.00; rental $25.00
Forest Fragmentation: Issues and Implications
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 18 minutes
Date: 1990
Number: 968
Cost: $95.00; rental $25.00
Help for Your Woodlands
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 20 minutes
Date: 1991
Number: 971
Cost: $130.00; rental $25.00 
The Huckleberry Story: Building a Bridge between Culture and Science
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 20 minutes
Date: 1997
Number: 1097
Cost: $95.00; rental $25.00
Management Planning for Your Small Woodland: An Introduction
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 19 minutes
Nonprint Resources from Various States
273

Date: 1996
Number: 1017
Cost: $95.00; rental $25.00
Managing for Biodiversity in Young Forests
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 28 minutes
Date: 2000
Number: 1155
Cost: $95.00; rental $25.00
Perspectives on Ecosystem Management
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 145 minutes
Date: 1988
Number: 941
Cost: $95.00; rental $25.00
Thinning Young Stands
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 31 minutes
Date: 1998
Number: 1089
Cost: $95.00; rental $25.00
Maryland Cooperative Extension
The Maryland Cooperative Extension Service offers a video about
riparian forest buffers. To order, contact Robert Tjaden, Wye Re-
search and Education Center, P.O. Box 169, Queenstown, MD
21658, (410) 827-8056.
Riparian Forest Buffers: The Link between Land and Water
Type: VHS videocassette
Oklahoma Cooperative Extension
To order, write to Oklahoma State University Agricultural Com-
munications, 111 PIO Building, Oklahoma State University, Still-
water, OK 74078-6041.
Logging, Best Management Practices and Water Quality
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 21 minutes
Number: VT 264
Cost: $24.95
274
Nonprint Resources

Managing Forest Ecosystems: Assessing New Opportunities
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 105 minutes
Number: TC 146
Cost: $24.95 
Pennsylvania State University Cooperative Extension Service,
College of Agricultural Sciences
To order publications and videos, please print and fill out an
order form available at the following web site:  http://pubs.cas.
psu.edu/PubCat.OrderForm.pdf. Mail it to the Publications Dis-
tribution Center, The Pennsylvania State University, 112 Agricul-
tural Administration Building, University Park, PA 16802-2602,
(814) 865-6713, Fax: (814) 863-5560.
Forest Stewardship at the Urban/Rural Interface
Type: VHS videocassette
Length: 27 minutes
Date: 1992
Number: L36540VH
Cost: $35.00
Nonprint Resources from Various States
275


Glossary
Acre
An area of land measuring about 43,560 square feet. A square 
1-acre plot measures about 209 feet by 209 feet.
Adaptive management
A management philosophy that rigorously
combines management, research, monitoring, and means of changing
practices so that credible information is gained and management activi-
ties are modified by experience.
Afforestation
Establishment of forest by artificial methods, such as
planting or sowing on land where trees have never grown.
Age class
One of the intervals, commonly 10 or 20 years, into which the
age range of tree crops is divided for classification or use. Also pertains
to the trees included in such an interval.
All-aged or uneven-aged management
The practice of managing a for-
est by periodically selecting and harvesting individual trees or groups of
trees from the stand while preserving its natural appearance. Most com-
mon in hardwood forests.
All-aged or uneven-aged stand
A forest stand composed of trees of dif-
ferent ages and sizes.
Allowable cut
Volume of timber that may be harvested during a given
period to maintain sustained production.
Allowable cut effect
Allocation of anticipated future forest timber
yields to the present allowable cut; this is employed to increase current
harvest levels by spreading anticipated future growth over all the years
in the rotation.
Anadromous fish
Fish that breed in fresh water but live their adult life
in the sea. On the Pacific coast, anadramous fish include all the Pacific
salmon, steelhead trout, some cutthroat trout, and Dolly Varden char,
lampreys, and eulachons.
Animal unit month (AUM)
The amount of forage required for one
month by an average cow; unit used to calculate grazing management.
277

Annual allowable harvest
Quantity of timber scheduled to be re-
moved from a particular management unit in one year.
Annual growth
Average annual increase in the biomass of growing-
stock trees of a specified area.
Aquatic habitat
Habitat where a variety of marine or freshwater flora
and fauna occur for long periods throughout the year.
Area regulation
Method of controlling the annual or periodic acreage
harvested from a forest, despite fluctuations in fiber-yield volumes.
Leads to a managed forest.
Artificial regeneration
Renewal of the forest by planting or direct
seeding; establishing a new stand of trees by planting seeds or seedlings
by hand or machine.
Backfire
Blaze set in front of an advancing forest fire in an effort to
check the wildfire by cutting off its fuel supply.
Basal area
The cross-section area of a tree stem in square feet com-
monly measured at diameter breast height (4.5 feet above ground) and
inclusive of bark.
Benefit/cost analysis
Technique for comparing alternate courses of action
by an assessment of their direct and indirect outputs (benefits) and inputs
(costs). Benefits and costs are usually defined in economic and social terms.
Best management practices (BMP)
Standards and guidelines set by
professionals that define the most appropriate means and mechanisms
for forest practices.
Biological diversity
The variety of life forms in a given area. Diversity
can be categorized in terms of the number of species, the variety in the
area’s plant and animal communities, the genetic variability of the ani-
mals, or a combination of these elements.
Biomass
Total woody material in a forest. Refers to both merchantable
material and material left following a conventional logging operation. In
the broad sense, all of the organic material on a given area; in the narrow
sense, burnable vegetation to be used for fuel in a combustion system.
Board foot
A unit of wood measuring 144 cubic inches. A 1-inch by 
12-inch shelving board that is 1 foot long is equal to 1 board foot. Board
foot volume is determined by: length (feet) × width (inches) × thickness
(inches)/divided by 12.
Broadcast burning
Controlled burn, in which the fire is intentionally
ignited and allowed to proceed over a designated area within well-
defined boundaries, for the reduction of fuel hazard after logging or for
site preparation before planting. Also called slash burning.
Broadleaf
A tree with leaves that are broad, flat, and thin and generally
shed annually.
278
Glossary

Buffer strip
A narrow zone or strip of land, trees, or vegetation border-
ing an area. Common examples include visual buffers, which screen the
view along roads, and streamside buffers, which are used to protect water
quality. Buffers may also be used to prevent the spread of forest pests.
Carrying capacity
The average number of individuals that can be sus-
tained on a unit of land, compatible with management objectives for the
unit. It is a function of site characteristics, management goals, and man-
agement intensity.
Chip
Small piece of wood used to make pulp. Chips are made either
from wood waste in a sawmill or pulpwood operation, or from pulp-
wood specifically cut for this purpose. Chips are larger and coarser than
sawdust.
Clearcut harvest
A harvesting and regeneration method that removes
all trees within a given area. Clearcutting is most commonly used in pine
and hardwood forests, which require full sunlight to regenerate and
grow efficiently.
Commercial thinning
Partial harvesting of a stand of trees for eco-
nomic gains from the harvested trees and to accelerate the growth of the
trees left standing.
Community forestry
Forest planning, management, and monitoring
by and for local communities.
Conifer
Tree that is usually evergreen with cones and needle-shaped or
scalelike leaves, producing wood known commercially as softwood.
Conservation
Management of the human use of the biosphere so that
it may yield the greatest sustainable benefit to present generations while
maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of future gen-
erations. It includes the preservation, maintenance, sustainable utiliza-
tion, restoration, and enhancement of the environment.
Conservation biology
The discipline that treats the content of biodi-
versity, the natural processes that produce it, and the techniques used to
sustain it in the face of human-caused environmental disturbance.
Conservation easements
A land protection tool to remove private land
from future development, often in the form of purchasing development
rights on private property.
Controlled burning
Use of fire to destroy logging debris, reduce
buildups of dead and fallen timber that pose wildfire hazards, control
tree diseases, and clear land. Other functions of a controlled burn include
clearing a buffer strip in the path of a wildfire; see Backfire.
Cord
A stack of round or split wood consisting of 128 cubic feet of
wood, bark, and air space. A standard cord measures 4 feet by 4 feet by
8 feet. A face cord or short cord is 4 feet by 8 feet by any length of wood
under 4 feet.
Glossary
279

Cost-share assistance
An assistance program offered by various state
and Federal agencies that pays a fixed rate or percentage of the total cost
necessary to implement some forestry or agricultural practice.
Critical habitat
Those areas officially designated by the Secretary of In-
terior or Secretary of Commerce as needed for survival and recovery of
listed species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973.
Cruise
A survey of forest land to locate timber and estimate its quan-
tity by species, products, size, quality, or other characteristics.
Cumulative effects
Effects on biota of stress imposed by more than one
mechanism (e.g., stress in fish imposed by both elevated suspended sed-
iments concentrations in the water and by high water temperature).
Cutting cycle
The planned time interval between major harvesting op-
erations within the same stand—usually within uneven-aged stands. For
example, on a 10-year cutting cycle in a hardwood stand, trees are har-
vested every 10 years.
DBH
See Diameter at breast height.
Deciduous
Perennial plants that are normally leafless for some time
during the year.
Defoliators
Insects that destroy foliage.
Dendrology
Study and identification of trees.
Diameter at breast height (DBH)
Tree DBH is outside bark diameter at
breast height. Breast height is defined as 4.5 feet (1.37 m) above the for-
est floor on the uphill side of the tree. For the purposes of determining
breast height, the forest floor includes the duff layer that may be present
but does not include unincorporated woody debris that may rise above
the ground line.
Diameter classes
Classification of trees based on diameter outside bark
measured at DBH. In forest surveys, each diameter class encompasses
approximately 2 inches: the 6-inch class would include trees 5.0 through
6.9 inches in DBH.
Diameter limit
Maximum diameter of trees to be cut, as in a timber
sales contract.
Ecological health
Both the occurrence of certain attributes that are
deemed to be present in a healthy, sustainable resource, and the absence
of conditions that result from known stresses or problems affecting the
resource.
Ecological integrity
The quality of a natural unmanaged or managed
ecosystem in which the natural ecological processes are sustained, with
genetic, species, and ecosystem diversity assured for the future.
Ecological type (also see Habitat)
A category of land having a unique
combination of potential natural community in terms of soil, landscape
features, and climate, and differing from other ecological types in its abil-
280
Glossary

ity to produce vegetation and respond to management. Classes of eco-
logical types include all sites that have this unique combination of com-
ponents with the defined range of properties.
Ecology
The science or study of the relationships between organisms
and their environment.
Ecosystem
A functional unit consisting of all the living organisms
(plants, animals, and microbes) in a given area and all the nonliving
physical and chemical factors of their environment, linked together
through nutrient cycling and energy flow. An ecosystem can be of any
size—a log, pond, field, forest, or the Earth’s biosphere—but it always
functions as a whole unit. Ecosystems are commonly described accord-
ing to the major type of vegetation—for example, forest ecosystem, old-
growth ecosystem, or range ecosystem.
Edge
The transition between two different types or ages of vegetation.
Endangered or threatened species
A species is endangered when the
total number of remaining members may not be sufficient to reproduce
enough offspring to ensure survival of the species. A threatened species
exhibits declining or dangerously low populations but still has enough
members to maintain or increase numbers. 
Environment
The interaction of climate, soil, topography, and other
plants and animals in any given area. An organism’s environment influ-
ences its form, behavior, and survival.
Erosion
The wearing away of land or soil by the action of wind, water,
or ice.
Even-aged forest
Theoretically, stands in which all the trees are one
age. In actual practice, these stands are marked by an even canopy of
uniform height characterized by intimate competition between trees of
approximately the same size.
Even-aged management
A forest management method in which all
trees in an area are harvested at one time or in several cuttings over a
short time to produce stands that are all the same age or nearly so. This
management method is commonly applied to shade-intolerant conifers
and hardwoods.
Fire danger
Measure of the likelihood of a forest fire, based on temper-
ature, relative humidity, wind force and direction, and the dryness of the
woods.
Fire hazard
Condition of fuel on the ground, particularly slash.
Fire suppression
All activities concerned with controlling and extin-
guishing a fire following its detection. Synonymous with fire control.
Firebreak
Any nonflammable barrier used to slow or stop fires. Several
types of firebreaks are mineral soil barriers; barriers of green, slow-
burning vegetation; and mechanically cleared areas.
Glossary
281

Forage
Grasses, herbs, and small shrubs that can be used as feed for
livestock or wildlife.
Forest
Area managed for the production of timber and other forest
products or maintained as wood vegetation for such indirect benefits as
protection of watersheds or recreation.
Forest certification
A labeling process by which forests are deter-
mined, through third-party auditing, to be managed under sustainable
forest management principles and practices. Forest certification is a
means by which end-product consumers can identify if their purchases
are derived from sustainably-managed forest land.
Forest cover type
A descriptive term used to group stands of similar
characteristics and species composition (due to given ecological factors)
by which they may be differentiated from other groups of stands.
Forest health
Forest condition that is naturally resilient to damage;
characterized by biodiversity, it contains sustained habitat for timber,
fish, wildlife, and humans, and meets present and future resource man-
agement objectives.
Forest land
Land at least 10 percent stocked by trees of any size or for-
merly having had such tree cover and not currently built up or devel-
oped for agricultural use. Forest land may include grassland, shrub land,
tree land, wetland, and/or barren land. Examples of forest land uses are
grazing, recreation, and timber production.
Forest management
The practical application of scientific, economic,
and social principles to the administration and working of a forest for
specified objectives. Particularly, that branch of forestry concerned with
the overall administrative, economic, legal, and social aspects and with
essentially scientific and technical aspects—especially silviculture, pro-
tection, and forest regulation.
Forest management plan
Written guidelines for current and future
management practices recommended to meet an owner’s objectives.
Forest practice
Any activity that enhances and/or recovers forest
growth or harvest yield, such as site preparation, planting, thinning, fer-
tilization, and harvesting.
Forest resources
Resources and values associated with forests and
range including timber, water, wildlife, fisheries, recreation, botanical
forest products, forage, and biological diversity.
Forest stewardship plan
A written document listing activities that en-
hance or improve forest resources (wildlife, timber, soil, water, recre-
ation, and aesthetics) on private land over a five-year period.
Forest type
Classification of forest land in terms of potential cubic-
foot volume growth per acre at the culmination of mean annual incre-
282
Glossary

ment in fully stocked natural stands. Also, classification of forest land
based on the species forming a plurality of live-tree stocking. Type is
determined on the basis of species plurality of all live trees that con-
tribute to stocking.
Forestry
The science, art, and practice of managing and using trees,
forests, and their associated resources for human benefit.
Fragmentation
The process of transforming large continuous forest
patches into one or more smaller patches surrounded by disturbed areas.
This occurs naturally through such agents as fire, landslides, windthrow,
and insect attack. In managed forests, timber harvesting and related ac-
tivities have been the dominant disturbance agents.
Fuel loading
A buildup of fuels—especially easily ignited, fast-burning
fuels.
Fuel management
The planned manipulation and/or reduction of liv-
ing or dead forest fuels for forest management and other land use objec-
tives (such as hazard reduction, silvicultural purposes, and wildlife habi-
tat improvement) by prescribed fire, mechanical, chemical, or biological
means and/or changing stand structure and species composition.
Fuelbreak
An existing barrier or change in fuel type (to one that is less
flammable than that surrounding it), or a wide strip of land on which the
native vegetation has been modified or cleared, that acts as a buffer to
fire spread so that fires burning into it can be more readily controlled.
Often selected or constructed to protect a high-value area from fire.
Genetic diversity
Variation among and within species that is attribut-
able to differences in hereditary material.
Geographic information system
A computer system designed to allow
users to collect, manage, and analyze large volumes of spatially refer-
enced information and associated attribute data.
Grade
Established quality or use classification of timber.
Grassland
Areas on which vegetation is dominated by grasses,
grasslike plants, forbs, and/or cryptogams (mosses, lichens, and ferns),
provided these areas do not qualify as built-up land or cultivated crop-
land. Examples are tallgrass and shortgrass prairies, meadows, cord-
grass marshes, sphagnum moss areas, pasturelands, and areas cut for
hay.
Green strip
Uncut strip of timber left along streams and roads. Also
known as buffer strip, leave strip, streamside management zone.
Group selection
The selective removal of small groups of trees to re-
generate shade-intolerant trees in the opening (usually at least 1/4 acre).
Growing stock
The sum of all trees in a forest or specified part of it.
Glossary
283

Habitat
(a) An area in which a specific plant or animal can naturally
live, grow, and reproduce. (b) For wildlife, habitat is the combination of
food, water, cover, and space.
Hardwoods (deciduous trees)
Trees with broad, flat leaves as opposed
to coniferous or needled trees. Wood hardness varies among the hard-
wood species, and some are actually softer than some softwoods.
Harvest schedule
A document listing the stands to be harvested dur-
ing a year or period, usually showing types and intensities of harvests
for each stand, as well as a timetable for regenerating currently nonpro-
ductive areas.
High-grading
A harvesting technique that removes only the biggest
and most valuable trees from a stand and provides high returns at the ex-
pense of future growth potential. Poor-quality, shade-loving trees tend to
dominate in these continually high-graded sites.
Historical range of variability
The range of the spatial, structural,
compositional, and temporal characteristics of ecosystem elements dur-
ing a period specified to represent “natural” conditions. Also called the
range of natural variation.
Human dimension
An integral component of ecosystem management
that recognizes people are part of ecosystems; that people’s pursuits of
past, present, and future desires, needs, and values (including percep-
tions, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors) have influenced and will continue
to influence ecosystems; and that ecosystem management must include
consideration of the physical, emotional, mental, spiritual, social, cul-
tural, and economic well-being of people and communities.
Hydrology
The science that describes and analyzes the occurrence of
water in nature and its circulation near the surface of the Earth.
Improvement cut
An intermediate cut made to improve the form,
quality, health, or wildlife potential of the remaining stand.
Incentive
A reward for improving forest management. Incentives in-
clude reimbursement of some expenses but can also take the form of an
abatement of property or income tax.
Indicator species
Species of plants or animals used to predict site qual-
ity and characteristics.
Industrial private forest
Private forest land owned by an individual or
organization that directly supplies a production mill.
Intensive forest management
Use of a wide variety of silvicultural
practices, such as planting, thinning, fertilization, harvesting, and genetic
improvement, to increase the capability of the forest to produce fiber.
Keystone species
A species that plays an important ecological role in
determining the overall structure and dynamic relationships within a bi-
284
Glossary

otic community. Presence of a keystone species is essential to the in-
tegrity and stability of a particular ecosystem.
Ladder fuels
Fuels that provide vertical continuity between the surface
fuels and crown fuels in a forest stand, thus contributing to the ease of
torching and crowning.
Land and resource management plan
A strategic integrated resource
plan at the National Forest level. It is based on the principles of enhanced
public involvement, consideration of all resource values, consensus-
based decision-making, and resource sustainability.
Landscape
The fundamental traits of a specific geographic area, in-
cluding its biological composition, physical environment, and anthro-
pogenic or social patterns.
Landscape ecology
The study of the distribution patterns of communi-
ties and ecosystems, the ecological processes that affect those patterns,
and changes in pattern and process over time.
Leave strip
Strip of uncut timber left between cutting units or adjacent
to another resource such as a stream. Also known as a buffer strip, green
strip, or streamside management zone.
Log rule or log scale
A table based on a diagram or mathematical for-
mula used to estimate volume or product yield from logs and trees.
Scribner is the common scale for pine; Doyle is the common hardwood
scale; and the International 1/4 Inch Rule best measures mill output, al-
though it is used less frequently than the other log scales.
Management plan
A written document describing the goals, objec-
tives, and proposed actions over a specified time period for a specific
unit of land. Contains inventory and other resource data.
Marginal land
Land that does not consistently produce a profitable
crop because of infertility, drought, or other physical limitations such as
shallow soils.
Mature tree
A tree that has reached a desired size or age for its in-
tended use. Size, age, or economic maturity varies depending on the
species and intended use.
MBF
Abbreviation denoting 1,000 board feet. MBF is a typical unit of
trade for dimension lumber and sawtimber stumpage. (It takes 11 MBF
of wood to build an average 1,900-square-foot house.)
Mensuration or biometrics
(a) The measurement and calculation of
volume, growth, and development of individual trees or stands and their
timber products. (b) A measurement of forest lands.
Merchantable
Logs exceeding a minimum size and a minimum usable
volume that are suitable for sale.
Glossary
285

Mixed stand
A timber stand in which less than 80 percent of the trees
in the main canopy are of a single species.
Multiple use
The management of land or forest for more than one pur-
pose, such as wood production, water quality, wildlife, recreation, aes-
thetics, or clean air.
Multiple-use forestry
Concept of forest management that combines
two or more objectives, such as production of wood or wood-derivative
products, forage and browse for domestic livestock, proper environmental
conditions for wildlife, landscape effects, protection against floods and
erosion, recreation, and protection of water supplies.
Multiple-use management
Management of land resources with the
objective of achieving optimum yields of products and services from a
given area without impairing the productive capacity of the site.
Natural regeneration
A stand of trees grown from natural seed fall or
sprouting.
Natural resources
Land, water, and atmosphere, including their min-
eral, vegetable, and other components and flora and fauna on or in them.
Net annual growth
Increase in volume of trees during a specified year.
Net present value
The value of current investment discounted into the
future, after all costs have been subtracted.
Noncommercial species
Tree species in which small size, poor form, or
inferior quality is typical. These species do not normally develop into
trees suitable for conventional forest products.
Nonindustrial private forest
Private forest land owned by an individ-
ual or organization that does not directly supply a production mill.
Nonpoint sources
Dispersed human activities such as agriculture,
urban development, and forestry that cause water pollution (as opposed
to point sources such as industrial effluent pipes).
Nontimber forest values
Values within the forest other than timber
that include but are not limited to biological diversity, fisheries, wildlife,
minerals, water quality and quantity, recreation and tourism, cultural
and heritage values, and wilderness and aesthetic values.
Old-growth forest
Ecosystems distinguished by old trees and related
structural attributes. Old growth encompasses the later stages of stand
development, which typically differ from earlier stages in ways that may
include tree size, accumulations of large dead woody material, number
of canopy layers, species composition, and ecosystem function. The age
at which old growth develops and the specific structural attributes that
characterize old growth varies widely according to forest type, climate,
site conditions, and disturbance regime.
Ownership
The identification of the legal owner/administrator (Fed-
eral, state, local, private) on both the surface and subsurface estates.
286
Glossary

Partial cutting
Refers generically to harvest operations, under any of
the several silvicultural systems, to cut selected trees and leave desirable
trees for various stand objectives. Partial cutting includes harvest meth-
ods used for seed tree, shelterwood, selection, and clearcutting with
patches of forest remaining.
Periodic annual increment
Mean annual growth or increase in volume
during a specific period of time.
Planning
Determination of the goals and objectives of an enterprise
and selection—through a systematic consideration of alternatives—of
the policies, programs, and procedures for achieving them. An activity
devoted to clearly identifying, defining, and determining courses of ac-
tion before their initiation, necessary to achieve predetermined goals and
objectives.
Plant or habitat diversity
A variety of food or cover for wildlife. Vari-
ation may occur at one point in time or over a period of time, such as
during the course of a season. Seasonal diversity of food and cover is
often critical to the survival of a species.
Precommercial thinning
Cutting trees from a young stand so that the
remaining trees will have more room to grow to marketable size. Trees
cut in a precommercial thinning have no commercial value, and nor-
mally none of the felled trees are removed for use. The primary intent is
to improve growth potential for the trees left after thinning.
Prescribed or controlled burn
The use of fire under specific environ-
mental conditions to achieve forest management objectives. Used to re-
duce hazardous fuel levels, control unwanted vegetation, favor desired
vegetation, and improve visibility and wildlife habitat.
Preservation
The action of reserving, protecting, or safeguarding a por-
tion of the natural environment from unnatural disturbance. It does not
imply preserving an area in its current state, for natural events and nat-
ural ecological processes are expected to continue. Preservation is part of,
and not opposed to, conservation.
Public involvement
The procedures for obtaining and considering the
views of the general public in planning and decision-making processes.
Rangeland (range)
Land on which vegetation is predominantly grasses,
forbs, or shrubs suitable for grazing or browsing. Rangeland is generally
shrub land but may include some tree land and barren land. Agricultural
land is excluded. Also included are areas seeded to native species or
adapted introduced species that are managed like native vegetation.
Recreation opportunity class
A mix of outdoor settings based on re-
moteness, area size, and evidence of humans, which allows for a variety
of recreation activities and experiences. The descriptions used to classify
the settings are on a continuum and are described as rural, roaded re-
source, semiprimitive motorized, semiprimitive nonmotorized, and
primitive.
Glossary
287

Reforestation
Reestablishing a forest by planting or seeding an area
from which forest vegetation has been removed.
Regeneration
The renewal of a tree crop through either natural means
(seeded on site from adjacent stands or deposited by wind, birds, or an-
imals) or artificial means (by planting seedlings or by direct seeding).
Regeneration cut
A cutting strategy in which old trees are removed
while favorable environmental conditions are maintained for the estab-
lishment of a new stand of seedlings.
Reserve
An area of forest land that, by law or policy, is not available for
harvesting. Areas of land and water set aside for ecosystem protection,
outdoor and tourism values, preservation of rare species, gene pool,
wildlife protection, and so on.
Residual stand
Trees left in a stand to grow until the next harvest. This
term can refer to crop trees or cull trees.
Restoration
The return of an ecosystem or habitat to its original com-
munity structure, natural complement of species, and natural functions.
Riparian
An area of land adjacent to a stream, river, lake, or wetland
that contains vegetation that, because of the presence of water, is dis-
tinctly different from the vegetation of adjacent upland areas.
Rotation
The number of years required to establish and grow trees to a
specified size, product, or condition of maturity. For example, a pine ro-
tation in the South may range from as short as 20 years for pulpwood to
more than 60 years for sawtimber.
Roundwood
A length of cut tree generally having a round cross sec-
tion, such as a log or bolt.
Sale unit
A timber sales arrangement in which the buyer pays for for-
est products removed in units (measured in cords, MBF, or units of
weight).
Salvage cut
The harvesting of dead or damaged trees or of trees in dan-
ger of being killed by insects, disease, flooding, or other factors in order
to save their economic value.
Sawlog or sawtimber
A log or tree that is large enough (usually 10 to
12 inches in diameter) to be sawed into lumber. Minimum log length is
typically 8 feet.
Second growth
A forest or stand that has grown up naturally after re-
moval of a previous stand by fire, harvesting, insect attack, or other
cause.
Sedimentation
The deposition or settling of soil particles suspended in
water.
Seed tree cut
A harvesting method in which a few scattered trees are
left in the area to provide seed for a new forest stand. Selection of seed
trees should be based on growth rate, form, seeding ability, wind firm-
288
Glossary

ness, and future marketability. This harvesting method produces an
even-aged forest.
Selection system
Uneven-aged silvicultural system in which single or
small groups of trees are periodically selected to be removed from a large
area so that age and size classes of the reproduction are mixed.
Selective cutting
The periodic removal of individual trees or groups of
trees to improve or regenerate a stand.
Shelterwood system
Even-aged silvicultural system in which a new
stand is established under the protection of a partial canopy of trees. The
mature stand is generally removed in a series of two or more cuts, the
last of which is when the new even-aged stand is well developed.
Silviculture
The art and science of controlling the establishment,
growth, composition, health, and quality of forests and woodlands. Sil-
viculture entails the manipulation of forest and woodland vegetation in
stands and on landscapes to meet the diverse needs and values of
landowners and society on a sustainable basis.
Site class
The measure of the relative productive capacity of a site for a
particular crop or stand, generally based on tree height at a given age
and expressed as either good, medium, poor, or low.
Site preparation
Preparing an area of land for planting, direct seeding,
or natural reproduction by burning or chemical vegetation control or by
mechanical operations such as disking, bedding, scarifying, windrow-
ing, or raking.
Slash
(a) Tree tops, branches, bark, or other residue left on the ground
after logging or other forestry operations. (b) Tree debris left after a nat-
ural catastrophe.
Softwood (conifer)
A tree belonging to the order Coniferales. Softwood
trees are usually evergreen, bear cones, and have needles or scalelike
leaves. They include pine, spruces, firs, and cedars.
Soil compaction
A physical change in soil properties that results in a
decrease in porosity and an increase in soil bulk density and soil
strength.
Soil type
Soils that are alike in all characteristics, including texture of
the topsoil. Soil maps and information on site index, erodibility, and
other limiting properties are available from county Natural Resource
Conservation Service offices.
Species
A group of related organisms having common characteristics
capable of interbreeding.
Stand
An easily defined area of the forest that is relatively uniform in
species composition or age and can be managed as a single unit.
Stewardship
Caring for land and associated resources and passing
healthy ecosystems to future generations.
Glossary
289

Stocking
A description of the number of trees, basal area, or volume
per acre in a forest stand compared with a desired level for balanced
health and growth. Most often used in comparative expressions—such as
well-stocked, poorly stocked, or overstocked.
Stream flow
Measure of the volume of water passing a given point in
a stream channel at a given point in time. Stream flow is a function of
depth, width, and velocity of water in a channel. Changes in stream flow
affect the available habitat for fish spawning or rearing.
Streamside management zone (SMZ)
An area adjacent to a stream in
which vegetation is maintained or managed to protect water quality. The
width depends on slope, but 50 feet is the normal minimum. Trees may
be removed from SMZs as long as the streambed is not disrupted and
sufficient vegetation is left to protect water quality.
Stumpage
The value or volume of a tree or group of trees as they stand
uncut in the woods (on the stump).
Succession
The natural sequence of plant community replacement be-
ginning with bare ground and resulting in a final, stable community in
which a climax forest is reached. Foresters, wildlife biologists, and farm-
ers constantly battle ecological succession to try to maintain a particular
vegetative cover.
Sustainable forest management
Management regimes applied to for-
est land that maintain the productive and renewal capacities as well as
the genetic, species, and ecological diversity of forest ecosystems.
Sustained yield
Management of forest land to produce a relatively
constant amount of wood products, revenue, or wildlife.
Thinning
A tree removal practice that reduces tree density and com-
petition between trees in a stand. Thinning concentrates growth on fewer
higher-quality trees, provides periodic income, and generally enhances
tree vigor. Heavy thinning can reduce fire risk by reducing the amount
and location of hazardous fuels. Thinning can also benefit certain types
of wildlife by increasing the growth of ground vegetation.
Threatened or endangered species
A threatened species exhibits de-
clining or dangerously low populations but still has enough members to
maintain or increase numbers. A species is endangered when the total
number of remaining members may not be sufficient to reproduce
enough offspring to ensure survival of the species.
Timber General term applied to forests and their products.
Tree farm
A privately owned forest or woodland in which timber crop
production is a major management goal. Many tree farms are officially
recognized by the American Tree Farm System, an organization spon-
sored by the American Forestry Council.
Understory
(a) The layer formed by the crowns of smaller trees in a for-
est. (b) The trees or foliage layer beneath the forest canopy.
290
Glossary

Uneven-aged forest
Theoretically, these stands contain trees of every
age on a continuum from seedlings to mature canopy trees. In practice,
uneven-aged stands are characterized by a broken or uneven canopy
layer. Usually the most trees are in the smaller-diameter classes. As trees
increase in diameter, their numbers diminish throughout the stand. See
also Even-aged forest.
Uneven-aged management
Silvicultural system in which individual
trees originate at different times, resulting in a forest with trees of all ages
and sizes. Trees are harvested on an individual basis.
Urban-wildland interface
Areas where urban development en-
croaches on undeveloped lands; specifically, an area of heightened con-
cern over wildland forest fire management and impacts.
Water quality
The physical, chemical, and biological properties of
water.
Watershed
An area of land that collects and discharges water into a sin-
gle main stream through a series of smaller tributaries.
Wetland
Areas inundated by surface water or groundwater frequently
enough to support—and under normal circumstances they do or would
support—a prevalance of vegetation or aquatic life that requires satu-
rated soil conditions for growth and reproduction. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas such as sloughs, pot-
holes, wet meadows, river overflows, mudflats, and natural ponds.
Wilderness
An area of land intentionally set aside and designated the
highest protections from human activity and development.
Wildfire
Unplanned fire requiring suppression. Can be contrasted
with a prescribed fire that burns within prepared lines, enclosing a des-
ignated area, under predetermined conditions.
Wildlife
A broad term that includes nondomesticated vertebrates, es-
pecially mammals, birds, and fish.
Withdrawals
Lands that have been removed or segregated from the
operation of some or all of the public land laws through executive or
Congressional action.
Glossary
291


Accredited forestry schools,
220–226
Acre (defined), 277
Adaptive management
(defined), 277
Adirondack State Park, 75, 154
Administrative procedures, 67
Adopt-A-Stream Foundation,
197
Afforestation (defined), 277
Age class (defined), 277
Agenda 21 (UNCED), 85
Alabama Forestry Commission,
190
Alaska
comprehensive private
forestry regulation, 66(table)
forest ecoregion, 144
forest practices programs, 70
Wilderness areas, 153
Alaska Division of Forestry, 190
Alaska National Interest Lands
Conservation Act (1980), 15,
42, 43, 126, 140
Alaska Purchase (1867), 6, 117
Aldo Leopold Foundation Inc.,
197
All-aged or uneven-aged
management (defined), 277
All-aged or uneven-aged stand
(defined), 277
Allowable cut (defined), 277
Amazon, 128
Ambio, 98
Ambler Realty Company, Village of
Euclid v., 64
American Association for the
Advancement of Science, 8,
134
American chestnut, 105
American Conservation
Association Inc., 198
American elm, 105
American Fisheries Society, 232
American Forest and Paper
Association (AF&PA),
229–230
Expert Review Panel, 86
Sustainable Forestry Board, 86
Sustainable Forestry Initiative
(SFI), 32, 86, 87, 175–176
American Forest Congress
(1905), 120
American Forest Congress
(1995), 128
American Forest Foundation
(AFF), 176, 234
American Forest Resource
Council (AFRC), 234
American Forestry Association, 8
American Forests, 55, 198
American Hiking Society, 198
American Lands, 198–199
American Revolution, 5
American Samoa Forestry
Program, 190
293
Index

American Tree Farm System
(ATFS), 234
Standards, Guidelines, and
Performance Measures for
certification, 176,
177–179(table)
web site, 176
Anadromous fish (defined), 277
Ancient Forest International, 199
Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service (APHIS),
103–104
Animal unit month (AUM)
(defined), 277
Annual allowable harvest
(defined), 278
Annual growth (defined), 278
Applegate Partnership, 55
Applied forestry, 261
Aquatic habitat (defined), 278
Area regulation (defined), 278
Arizona, 47
Arizona State Land Department,
190
Arkansas Forestry Commission,
191
Artificial regeneration, 278
Asian long-horned beetle, 161
Association of Consulting
Foresters of America Inc.,
232
Auburn University, 221
Australia, 99
Backfire (defined), 278
Bailey, Robert G., 144
Ballinger, Richard A., 121
Ballot initiatives, 74
Bandelier National Monument,
fire in, 50
Bari, Judi, 272
Basal area (defined), 278
Belize: Rio Bravo Conservation
and Management Area,
97–98
Benefit/cost analysis (defined),
278
Best management practices
(BMP), 71
defined, 278
nonprint resources, 274
Bill of Rights, 4
Bingaman, Jeff, 59
Biodiversity
books and reports, 241, 242, 251
defined, 278
indicators of, 162–163
nonprint resources, 274
online reports, maps, and
information, 267
performance measures,
178(table)
standards for, 178(table)
Biodiversity conservation, 33–41,
107–108, 162–163
in forest plantations/protected
areas, 38–40
global strategy for, 109
Montreal Process criterion,
162–163
in private lands, 37–38
in public lands, 35–37
recent policy developments,
35–40
scientific journals, 252–253
Biological diversity. See
Biodiversity
Biology
conservation, 279
scientific journals, 254
Biomass (defined), 278
Biomass Users Network, 199
Biometrics (defined), 285
Bioremediation, 104
Biotechnology
books and reports, 251
forest, 101–105
microbial products of, 104
recent policy developments,
103–104
scientific journals, 253
Birch, Thomas W., 156
Bitterroot National Forest, 131,
136
294
Index

Board foot (defined), 278
Bob Marshall Wilderness Area,
136
fire in, 50
Boise Cascade, 227
Bolle, Arnold, 131
“Bolle Report,” 131
Books and reports
general forestry and forest
conservation, 240–242
international forestry and
forest conservation, 250–252
U.S. forest history, 248–250
U.S. forest policy, 243–247
Bosworth, Dale, 47
Boundary Waters Canoe Area,
123
Bowater Inc., 227
Brazil: Carbon Sink Project
(Matto Grosso), 98
Broad Arrow policy, 5, 117
Broadcast burning (defined), 278
Broadleaf (defined), 278
“Brundtland Report,” 252
Buffalo Creek fire (Colorado), 93
Buffer strip (defined), 279
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA),
88, 146–147, 157, 188
Bureau of Land Management
(BLM), 151–153, 188
area of forest land and timber
land owned, 147(table)
Church Subcommittee
Guidelines, 132
conserving biological
diversity, 36
forest lands, 147
management of Wilderness
areas, 153
ownership of forests, 146
precursor, 135
state offices, 151–153
stewardship contracts, 52
web site, 151
Burning
broadcast, 278
intentional, 4
let-burn policies, 50
prescribed or controlled, 50,
279, 287
See also under Fire danger; Fire
frequency; Fire suppression
Bush, George H. W., 99
Bush, George W., 52
and Clinton Administration’s
Roadless Rule, 44
Healthy Forests Initiative, 52
withdrawal from Kyoto
Protocol, 99
Butz, Izaak Walton League of West
Virginia v., 15–16, 65, 134
Butz, Sierra Club v., 43
Calhoun, John, 118
California
early forest policy, 7
forest practices act, 69–70
forest practices programs, 70
large tracts of low-access
forest, 160
private forestry regulation,
63(table), 66(table), 74
purchase of Federal
timberlands, 119
California Department of
Forestry and Fire Protection,
191
California Polytechnic State
University, 221
Campbell Group, 155
Can Tropical Forests Be Saved?
(video), 270
Canada
carbon credit trading system,
99
trade disputes, 121
Canada–United States
Environmental Council, 199
Canadian Parks and Wilderness
Society, 200
Canadian Standards Association,
85
Canadian Wildlife Federation,
200
Index
295

Canadian Woodlands Forum,
253
Canyon Creek fire (Montana), 50
Cap-and-trade system, 99
Capper, Arthur, 122
Capper Report, 122
Carbon
atmospheric, 94–101
cap-and-trade system, 99
conservation, 95
credit trading system, 99, 106,
129
forest conservation activities
that help reduce, 95
global cycles, 166
reduction projects, 97–98
recent policy developments,
97–100
Carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions,
99, 128–129
Carbon sequestration, 95
Carbon Sink Project (Matto
Grosso, Brazil), 98
Carbon sinks, 98, 129
Carbon substitution, 95
Carrying capacity (defined), 279
Carson, Rachel: Silent Spring, 2
Categorical Exclusion (CE)
projects, 52
Center for Watershed Protection,
200
Central Pacific Railroad, 7, 118
Central Park (New York City),
137
Certification
for chain of custody, 172–173,
174
defined, 83
forest, 171–179, 282
forest management, 82–89, 143
green, 39, 84
Tree Farm, 177–179(table)
wood, 171–173, 174
Certified Forest Products
Council, 235
Chain of custody, certification
for, 172–173, 174
Chemicals, prudent use of
performance measures,
178(table)
standards for, 178(table)
Chesapeake Bay Critical Areas
Protection Act (1984), 72
Chicago Climate Exchange
(CCX), 99
Chile: Reserva Forestal Malleco,
98
Chip (defined), 279
Chugach National Forest, 43,
121
Church, Frank, 131–132
Church Subcommittee
Guidelines, 131–132
Clarke-McNary Act (1924), 123,
134
Class I areas, 124
Clean Air Act (1955), 16, 124
Clean Air Act Amendments of
1970, 2–3
Clean Air Act Amendments of
1990, 99
Clean Water Act (1972), 2, 16, 70,
91
Clean Water Act Amendments of
1977, 2
Clean Water Act Amendments of
1987, 91
Clearcut harvest (defined), 279
Clearcutting
ballot initiatives to ban, 74
controversy, 15–16, 65, 131
Oregon regulatory standards,
69
Clemson University, 222
Cleveland, Grover, 139
Clinton, Bill, 44
Clinton Administration
Roadless Area Rule, 44, 160
Colorado Division of Wildlife
Habitat Partnership
Program, 60
Coastal Alliance, 200–201
Coastal Society, 201
Collins Companies, 227
296
Index

Colorado
forest health, 47
forestry and water, 93
recent policy developments, 93
state forest lands, 154
See also Hayman fire case
study analysis
Colorado River watershed, 138
Colorado State Forest Service,
191
Colorado State University, 222
“Combating Deforestation”
(UNCED), 85
Commercial thinning (defined),
279
Common law, English, 4
Community-Based Forest and
Public Lands Restoration
Act (did not pass), 59
Community forestry, 53–61
basic elements of, 56–58
books and reports, 245–246
current policy developments,
58–61
defined, 279
global movement toward,
57–58
Scolel Te Community Forestry
Project, Mexico, 98
Composite Panel Association,
230
Conifer forests, 144, 279(defined)
Connecticut, 5
Connecticut Division of Forestry,
191
Connecticut Forest Practices Act
(1991), 72–73
Conservation
biodiversity, 33–41, 107–108,
162–163
books and reports, 240–242,
249
carbon, 95
of corporate forest lands,
77–79
defined, 279
of family forest lands, 79–82
forest, 95, 168–170, 240–242,
250–252, 266
forest land, 74–82
indicators of, 165
Pinchot as martyr for, 121
of public forest lands, 75–77
Rio Bravo Conservation and
Management Area, Belize,
97–98
scientific journals, 252–253,
254, 259, 264
of soil and water resources,
165
Conservation biology
defined, 279
scientific journals, 254
Conservation bonds, 79
Conservation easements, 81–82
defined, 279
“working forest,” 79
Conservation ethic, 8–9
Conservation Fund, 78
Conservation International, 201
Conservation Law Foundation,
201
Conservation Movement, 1–22
leaders, 135–136, 138, 139
Conservation organizations,
nongovernment, 197–220
Conservation Reserve Program,
40
Constitution. See U.S.
Constitution
Continental Congress, 5–6
Contingent regulation, 71
Controlled burning, 50,
279(defined), 287
Convention on Biological
Diversity (1992), 3
Conversations on Sustainable
Forestry (video), 273
Coolidge, Calvin, 123
Cooperative Extension Service,
61
Cooperative State Research,
Education, and Extension
Service, 186
Index
297

Cooperative sustained-yield
units, 124
Cord (defined), 279
Cornell School of Forestry,
15–16, 133
Corporación Nacional Forestal
(Chile), 98
Corporate forest lands, 77–79
Cost analysis, 278
Cost-share assistance (defined),
280
Council on Environmental
Quality, 184
County forest lands, 154
County Supremacy Movement,
76
Coverts program, 61
Craig, Larry, 59
Creative Act (1891), 148
Criteria and Indicators (C&I)
Montreal Process, 128, 143,
162–168, 168–170
Working Group, 161
Critical habitat (defined), 280
Cruise (defined), 280
“Culmination of mean annual
increment” rule, 26
Cultural, social, and spiritual
needs and values, 167
Cumulative effects (defined), 280
Custodial management, 11–12,
27–28
Cut, allowable, 277
Cut-and-run practice, 17, 28, 54
Cut-out-and-get-out practices,
122
Cutting cycle (defined), 280
Cutting patterns, 90
Cuyahoga River, 66
Dana, Samuel Trask, 132
Death taxes, 19, 81
Deciduous forests, 144
Deciduous trees, 284
Decision-making
decentralized, 59–60
participatory processes, 57
Declaration of Independence, 5
Defenders of Wildlife, 201–202
Deforestation
“Combating Deforestation”
(UNCED), 85
early, 7
tropical, 127, 128
Delaware Forest Service, 191
Dendrology, 280
Development. See Research and
development
Dexter, Avery, State of Washington
v., 64–65
Diameter at breast height (DBH)
(defined), 280
Diameter classes (defined), 280
Diameter limit (defined), 280
Dingley Tariff Act (1897), 121
District of Columbia Trees and
Lands, 191
Diversity
biological. See Biodiversity
genetic, 163, 283
plant or habitat, 287
species, 163
Dogwood Anthracnose, 105
Douglas fir, 48
Drinking water quality, 96
Dry domain, 144
Duke University, 222
Duluth Timber Company, 228
Dutch Elm Disease, 105
Dwyer, William, 132
Earth as Modified by Human
Action (Marsh), 118–119
Earth Report (video), 270
Earth Summit. See United
Nations Conference on
Environment and
Development
Earthstewards Network, 202
Earthwatch Institute, 202
Eastern Shore Land
Conservancy, 202–203
Eastern Wilderness Act (1974),
43, 126
298
Index

Ecolabels, 83
Ecological health (defined), 280
Ecological integrity (defined),
280
Ecological type (defined),
280–281
Ecology
defined, 281
landscape, 285
scientific journals, 258, 263
Economic Action Program, 51, 58
Economic framework, 168–170
books and reports, 241, 246
indicators of, 169–170
Ecoregions
books and reports, 242
forest, 144–145
online reports, maps, and
information, 268
Ecosystem(s)
defined, 281
indicators of diversity, 162–163
indicators of health and
vitality, 164–165
indicators of productive
capacity, 163–164
maintenance of health and
vitality of, 164–165
maintenance of productive
capacity of, 163–164
scientific journals, 254
sustainability of, 24
Ecosystem management
books and reports, 242,
245–246
nonprint resources, 274, 275
Edge (defined), 281
El Colegio de la Frontera, 98
Employment needs, 167–168
Endangered or threatened
species, 127, 281(defined),
290
Endangered Species Act (1973)
(ESA), 16, 35, 65, 125, 148
as barrier to timely action, 52
requirements for private lands,
37
requirements for public lands,
35–37
Enforcement, 68
England
Broad Arrow policy, 117
common law, 4
See also United Kingdom
Environment (defined), 281
Environmental awareness, era
of, 1–3
Environmental Defense, 203
Environmental impact analysis
books and reports, 241
Categorical Exclusion (CE)
projects, 52
public concerns over, 72–73
Environmental impact statement
(EIS), statewide, 73–74
Environmental Law and Policy
Center of the Midwest, 203
Environmental law journals,
253–254, 254–255, 256–257,
258–259, 260, 262–263
Environmental management
journals, 255, 258
Environmental News Service,
265
Environmental organizations, 266
Environmental Protection
Agency. See U.S.
Environmental Protection
Agency
Environmental Quality
Improvement Program, 60
Erosion (defined), 281
Estate taxes, 19, 81
Euclid, Village of, v. Ambler Realty
Company, 64
Europarc Federation, 203–204
Europe, 25–26
European Union, 99
Even-aged forest (defined), 281
Even-aged management
(defined), 281
Exotic pests, 161
Exotic species, 161
Extinction rates, 33
Index
299

Family forest lands, 79–82
Farm Bill (1996), 60
Farm Bill (2002), 60
Farm use, 158(table)
Fate of the Forest (video),
270–271
Federal Forest Reserves, 54–55,
120
first 13, 139
increase of, 139
purpose of, 27
renamed National Forests, 120
See also National Forest System
Federal public forest lands,
147–153
books and reports, 244, 248
See also National Forest System
Federal Trade Commission
(FTC), 84
Federal Water Pollution Control
Act (1948), 91, 124
Federal Water Pollution Control
Act (1972), 66–67
Fernow, Bernhard, 15–16, 27,
132–133
Fire(s). See under location of
specific fire
Fire danger
defined, 281
information clearinghouses,
266, 267
See also Wildfire(s)
Fire frequency, 160–161
Fire hazard (defined), 281
Fire suppression, 48, 148
defined, 281
federal costs, 47
National Fire Plan, 51, 56, 58
by Native Americans, 48
policy of, 11
Ten A.M. Rule, 48
videos, 272
Firebreak (defined), 281
Firefighting, 11, 48
“First in time, first in right”
allocations, 91
Fish, anadromous (defined), 277
Florida
concerns over water quality, 71
early private forestry
regulation, 63(table)
forestry and water, 93
recent policy developments, 93
Florida Division of Forestry, 191
Florida Everglades, 144
Florida Purchase (1819), 6, 117
Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), 268, 269
Forage (defined), 282
Ford Foundation, 57
Forest(s)
and atmospheric carbon,
94–101
as carbon sinks, 129
conditions and trends, 158–161
defined, 282
exploitation of, 6–7
facts and data, 143–181
indicators of consumption,
166–167
long-term socioieconomic
benefits of, 166–167
performance measures,
178(table)
standards for aesthetics of,
178(table)
U.S. ownership, 146–147
and water, 89–93
See also National Forest System
Forest and Rangelands
Renewable Resources
Planning Act (1974) (RPA),
29, 126, 134
Forest area, 145–146
Forest biotechnology, 101–105
Forest certification
defined, 282
principles and standards,
171–179
Forest conservation
activities that help reduce
atmospheric carbon, 95
300
Index

books and reports, 240–242,
250–252
information clearinghouses,
266
international, 250–252
legal, institutional, and
economic framework for,
168–170
Forest Conservation Act
(Washington), 64
Forest Conservation Portal, 266
Forest cover type (defined), 282
Forest-cutting patterns, 90
Forest ecoregions, 144–145
Forest Ecosystem Management
Assessment Team (FEMAT),
140
Forest ecosystems
indicators of health and
vitality, 164–165
indicators of productive
capacity, 163–164
maintenance of health and
vitality of, 164–165
maintenance of productive
capacity of, 163–164
sustainability of, 24
Forest Fragmentation (video), 273
Forest health, 47–53
defined, 282
recent policy developments,
50–52
Forest History Society, 233
Forest industry, 154
area of forest land and timber
land owned, 147(table)
books and reports, 250
investment in, 167
scientific journals, 263
Forest Investment Associates,
155
Forest land
county, 154
defined, 282
federal acquisition of, 121
large tracts of, 159–160
online reports, maps, and
information, 268
standards and guidelines for
owners, 177–179(table)
state, 153–154
U.S. ownership, 146–147,
147(table)
Forest land area, 145
Forest land conservation, 74–82
Forest Legacy program, 78
Forest management
in biodiversity conservation,
107–108
books and reports, 241
custodial, 27–28
defined, 282
early laws, 5–6
information clearinghouses,
267
intensive, 284
international initiatives, 143
policies in National Forests,
11–16
on private lands, 18–20
proposals for action, 129
scientific journals, 255
sustainable, 16–20, 24–32,
168–170, 290
sustained-yield, 122
Forest management certification,
82–89, 143
objectives, 84
recent policy developments,
86–89
Forest management plan
(defined), 282
Forest planning, 135
Forest plantations and protected
areas
books and reports, 250
consensus agreement on, 40
conserving biological diversity
in, 38–40
early, 119
expansion, 109
trends in, 160
Index
301

Forest policy
books and reports, 243–247
current issues in, 23–116
introduction to, 4–5
in National Forests, 11–16
roots of, 1–22
scientific journals, 255
U.S., 23–116
Forest practice (defined), 282
Forest practices acts (FPAs), 73
basic components, 67–68
state-level, 67–68
“Forest Principles” (UNCED),
31–32, 85
Forest production, indicators of,
166–167
Forest products, 145–146
globalization of, 58
scientific journals, 256
Forest products companies,
227–229
Forest products industry, 77–78
evolution of, 17–18
international consolidation of,
127
Forest Products Society, 230
Forest Reserve Act (1891), 8–9,
27, 75, 120, 133, 134
Forest resource councils (FRCs),
74
Forest resources
defined, 282
online reports, maps, and
information, 269
Forest Resources Association
Inc., 230
Forest Service Employees for
Environmental Ethics, 204
Forest Stewards Guild, 235
Forest stewardship, 56–57
Forest Stewardship at the Urban/
Rural Interface (video), 275
Forest Stewardship Council, U.S.
(FSC), 39, 87, 171, 235
formed, 127
Principles and Criteria, 85
purpose, 85
Forest stewardship plan
(defined), 282
Forest Trust, 55, 204
Forest types, 144–145, 282–283
Forest water quality, 91
ForestInformation.com, 266
Forestland Group, 155
Forestry
accredited schools, 220–226
books and reports, 240–242,
248–250, 250–252
community, 279
defined, 283
international, 250–252
multiple-use, 12–14, 28–29, 286
as point source of water
pollution, 92
private regulation, 62–74
professional associations,
232–233
scientific journals, 252–264
sustainable, 4–5, 24
sustained-yield, 27
trade associations, 229–232
U.S., 248–250
videos, 270–272
world, 251
Forestry Commission, 139
Forestry contractors
performance measures,
179(table)
standards for use, 179(table)
Forestry Media Center (Oregon
State University College of
Forestry), 273–274
Forestry-related associations,
234–237
Forests and Water in the Light of
Scientific Investigation (Zon),
141
Forests.org, Inc., 266
Fragmentation
defined, 283
nonprint resources, 273
Franklin, Jerry, 133
Fraud and abuse, 119, 120
Free Timber Act (1878), 7, 119
302
Index

French Fund for the
Environment, 98
Friends of the Earth, 204
Fuel loading (defined), 283
Fuel management (defined), 283
Fuelbreak (defined), 283
Fuels treatment projects, 52
Gadsden Purchase (1853), 6, 117
“Gang of Four,” 133, 135, 140
Gene mapping, 103
General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT), 85
General Land Ordinance (1785), 6
Genetic diversity
defined, 283
indicators of, 163
Genetic engineering, 102–103
Genetically modified (GM) trees,
103, 104
Geographic information system
(defined), 283
Georgia
local ordinances, 71
western reserve claim, 5
Georgia Forestry Commission,
191
Georgia Pacific, 78, 228
Germany: trade restrictions, 85
Global Association of Online
Foresters (GAOF), 236
Global carbon cycles
indicators of forest
contribution to, 166
maintenance of forest
contribution to, 166
Global resource management
books and reports, 250
online reports, maps, and
information, 268
Globalization of forest products,
58
Gordon, John, 133
Grade (defined), 283
Grand Canyon Trust, 205
Grassland(s)
books and reports, 244–245
defined, 283
National Grasslands, 148
Grassland Heritage Foundation,
205
Graves, Henry, 133–134
Grazing, 134–135, 137
Grazing Service, 135
Greater Yellowstone Coalition,
205
Green certification, 39, 84
Green strip (defined), 283
Greenhouse gases, 1–2
Greenpeace, 272
Group selection (defined), 283
Growing stock (defined), 283
Guam Forestry and Soil
Resources Division, 192
Gypsy moth, 161
Habitat
aquatic, 278
critical, 280
defined, 284
performance measures,
177(table)
standards for, 177(table)
Habitat diversity (defined), 287
Habitat Partnership Program, 60
Hanzlik’s Formula, 26
Hardwood Plywood and Veneer
Association, 231
Hardwoods
defined, 284
trends in, 160
Harvest schedule (defined), 284
Hawaii, 144
Hawaii Division of Forestry and
Wildlife, 192
Hayman (Colorado) fire case
study analysis, 269
Headwaters Forest, 272
Healthy Forests Initiative, 52,
129
Heartwood, 205–206
Help for Your Woodlands (video),
274
High-grading (defined), 284
Index
303

Hill, James J., 140
Hill, Matthew W., 65
Historical range of variability
(defined), 284
History, U.S. forest, books and
reports, 248–250
Home Depot, 228
Homestead Act (1862), 6, 118
Hoover Commission, 132
Hot spots, 35
Hough, Franklin, 134
Hubbard Brook, 90
Huckleberry Story, The: Building a
Bridge between Culture and
Science (video), 273
Human dimension (defined),
284
Humboldt State University, 222
Humid Temperate domain, 144
Humid Tropical domain, 144
Humphrey, Hubert, 134
Hydrology (defined), 284
Ickes, Harold, 134–135
Idaho
forest health, 47
forest practices programs, 70
large tracts of low-access
forest, 160
private forestry regulation,
63(table), 66 (table)
roadless areas in, 43, 44, 46
Wilderness protection, 132
Idaho Department of Lands, 192
Illinois: local ordinances, 71
Illinois Division of Forest
Resources, 192
Import bans on tropical timbers,
127
Import tariffs and duties, 18, 121
Improvement cut (defined), 284
Incentive (defined), 284
Incidental taking, 37
Indian Forest Management
Assessment (2002), 88
Indiana Department of Natural
Resources, 192
Indicator species (defined), 284
Industrial private forest
(defined), 284
Information clearinghouses,
265–267
Information online, 267–270
Institutional framework,
168–170
Instituto pro Natura (Brazil), 98
Instream flow rights, 91
Intensive forest management
(defined), 284
International Ecology Society,
206
International forestry and forest
conservation, 250–252
International Paper, 78, 99
International Society for the
Preservation of the Tropical
Rainforests, 206
International Standards
Organization (ISO), 85–86
International Union for
Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources, 206
International Wood Products
Association, 231
Internet
information clearinghouses,
265–267
online reports, maps, and
information, 267–270
Inventory and Monitoring
Institute, 266–267
Investment
in forest sector, 167
land, 157, 158(table)
Iowa Department of Natural
Resources, 192
Iowa State University, 222
Island Resources Foundation,
206–207
Izaak Walton League of America
Inc., 207
Izaak Walton League of West
Virginia v. Butz, 15–16, 65,
134
304
Index

John Hancock Timber Resource
Group, 155
Johnson, K. Norman, 135
Journals, scientific, 252–264
Kansas, Mugler v. State of, 64
Kansas Forest Service, 192
Kentucky Division of Forestry,
192
Keystone species (defined),
284–285
Knutson-Vandenberg Act (1930),
123
Kyoto Protocol, 94, 97, 128–129
online report, 270
U.S. withdrawal from, 99, 129
L-20 regulations, 42
Ladder fuels, 49, 285(defined)
Land and resource management
plan (defined), 285
Land and resource planning, 247
Land and Water Conservation
Fund (LWCF), 76
Land and Water Conservation
Fund Act (1965), 125
Land conservation, 96
Land ethics, 135
Land grants, 118, 119
Land investment, 157, 158(table)
Land stewardship contracts,
58–59
Land trusts, 78–79
Landscape (defined), 285
Landscape ecology
defined, 285
scientific journals, 259–260
Large tracts, of forests, 159–160
Law journals, 254
Leave strip (defined), 285
Lectures in Forest Policy
(Schenck), 139
Legal framework, 168–170
Leopold, Aldo, 15, 42, 135
Let-burn policies, 50
Lieberman, Joseph, 100
Local ordinances, 71–72
Log rule (defined), 285
Log scale (defined), 285
Logging, Best Management
Practices and Water Quality
(video), 274
Logging journals, 253
Long-term benefits, indicators
of, 166–167
Louisiana, 63
Louisiana Office of Forestry, 193
Louisiana Purchase (1803), 6, 117
Louisiana State University, 222
Low-access forest land, 159–160
Lumber trade disputes, 121
Magna Carta, 4
Maine: private forestry
regulation, 74
Maine Forest Practices (1989), 72
Maine Forest Service, 193
Man and Nature (Marsh), 8,
118–119, 135
Management
adaptive, 277
all-aged or uneven-aged, 277
best management practices
(BMP), 71, 274, 278
custodial, 11–12, 27–28
ecosystem, 242, 245–246, 274, 275
even-aged, 281
forest, 107–108, 129, 241, 255,
267, 282, 284
fuel, 283
global resources, 250, 268
intensive, 284
international initiatives, 143
multiple-use, 243, 286
of National Forests, 11–16,
27–28, 138, 248–249
on private lands, 18–20
resources, 273–274
sustainable, 24–32, 35, 85–86,
98, 168–170, 177(table),
244–245, 290
sustained-yield, 122
uneven-aged, 277, 291
woodland, 273–274
Index
305

Management plan/planning
defined, 285
nonprint resources, 273–274
Management Planning for Your
Small Woodland: An
Introduction (video), 273–274
Managing for Biodiversity in
Young Forests (video), 274
Managing Forest Ecosystems:
Assessing New Opportunities
(video), 275
Maps, online, 267–270
Marginal land (defined), 285
Marsh, George Perkins
biographical sketch, 135–136
Man and Nature (Earth as
Modified by Human Action), 8,
118–119, 135
Marshall, Robert, 15, 42, 136
Maryland
Chesapeake Bay Critical Areas
Protection Act (1984), 72
concerns over water quality,
71
early private forestry
regulation, 63(table)
local ordinances, 71
private forestry practices, 72
Maryland Cooperative Extension
Service, video by, 274
Maryland Department of
Natural Resources–Forest
Service, 193
Massachusetts
forest legislation, 117
forest practices programs, 70
private forestry regulation,
63(table), 66(table)
Massachusetts Department of
Environmental
Management, 193
Massachusetts Forest Cutting
Practices Act (1983), 66
Mather, Stephen T., 42, 122, 136
Mature tree (defined), 285
MBF (defined), 285
McCain, John, 100
McGuire, John, 136
McKinley Tariff Act (1890), 121
Mead Westvaco Corporation, 99,
228
Measurement, capacity for, 170
Menominee Tribal Enterprises,
176
Mensuration (defined), 285
Merchantable (defined), 285
Metcalf, Lee, 131
Mexican Cession (1848), 6, 117
Mexico: carbon credit trading
system, 99
Michigan
forest ecoregion, 144–145
timber trespass, 7
total forest land area, 159
Michigan Department of
Natural Resources Forest
Management Division, 193
Michigan State University, 222
Michigan Tech University, 222
Mid-Atlantic Council of
Watershed Associations, 207
Mineral exploration, 119
Mining Law (1872), 119
Ministry of Water, Lands, and
Air Protection (Canada),
184–185
Minnesota
environmental impact
statement (EIS), 73–74
forest ecoregion, 144–145
large tracts of low-access
forest, 160
total forest land area, 159
Minnesota Division of Forestry,
193
Minnesota Forest Resource
Council (FRC), 74
Mississippi: early private
forestry regulation, 63(table)
Mississippi Forestry
Commission, 193
Mississippi State University, 222
306
Index

Missouri: early private forestry
regulation, 63(table)
Missouri Department of
Conservation, 193
Mixed stand (defined), 286
Monitoring, 57
capacity for, 170
information clearinghouses,
266–267
multiparty, 60
Monongahela National Forest,
15–16, 134, 136
Montana
concerns over water quality, 71
forest health in, 47
large tracts of low-access
forest, 160
roadless areas in, 43
Montana DNRC–Forestry
Division, 194
Montreal Process, 32, 110,
161–170
Criteria and Indicators (C&I),
128, 143, 162–168, 168–170
Moore, Patrick, 272
Mugler v. State of Kansas, 64
Muir, John, 136–137
Multiparty monitoring, 60
Multiple use (defined), 124, 286
Multiple-use forestry, 12–14,
28–29, 286(defined)
Multiple-use management
books and reports, 243
defined, 286
Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield
Act (1960), 13–14, 28–29, 124,
148
Municipal forest lands, 154
Murie, Olaus, 137
National Academy of Sciences
Forestry Commission, 139
National Arbor Day Foundation,
207
National Association of
Professional Forestry
Schools and Colleges
(NAPFSC), 236
National Association of
Recreation Resource
Planners, 207–208
National Association of State
Foresters, 190
National Audubon Society, 208
National Commission on Science
for Sustainable Forestry, 267
National Conference on Outdoor
Recreation, 123
National Conservation
Foundation, 208
National Environmental Policy
Act (1970), 65, 125, 148
National Environmental Policy
Act (1970) (NEPA), 2, 16, 52
National Fire Plan, 51, 56
Economic Action Program, 51,
58
10-Year Implementation Plan,
51, 56
National Forest Foundation, 208
National Forest Management
Act (1976) (NFMA), 16, 30,
65–66, 126, 131, 148
as barrier to timely action, 52
basis for, 132
habitat conservation
requirements, 36–37
implementing, 137
lead sponsor, 134
National Forest System (NFS), 9,
10(figure), 28, 75, 120, 147,
148–150
area of forest land and timber
land owned, 147(table)
books and reports, 244–245,
246, 247, 248–249, 249–250
clearcutting controversy, 15–16
conserving biological diversity
in, 36–37
created, 9
custodial management of,
11–12, 27–28
Index
307

National Forest System (continued)
expansion of, 75
forest health, 47
forest management policies,
11–16
intensive use of, 11–12
low-access forest land, 159–160
management of, 138, 248–249
multiple use of, 12–14,
124–125, 147
plan revisions, 44–45
purpose, 27
recreation use of, 12–13,
14(figure), 122
reforestation of, 123
regional offices, 148–150
risk from catastrophic
wildfires, 159
silvicultural practices, 123
timber harvest, 12
timber harvest from, 13(figure)
timber salvage sales, 128
water rights, 91–92
web site, 148
Wilderness areas, 14–15, 43
National Forestry Association,
209
National Forestry Program
Committee, 122–123
National Grasslands, 148
National Hardwood Lumber
Association, 231
National Indian Forest Resource
Management Act (NIFRMA)
(1990), 88
National Interagency Fire
Center, 267
National Monuments, 126
National Network of Forest
Practitioners (NNFP), 55,
209, 236
National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), 187
National Outdoor Recreation
Review Commission, 132
National Park and Conservation
Association, 209
National Park Service, 13, 188
controlled burns, 50
established, 122
founder, 136
management of Wilderness
areas, 153
ownership of forests, 146
National Park System (NPS), 13,
123, 147, 153
forest lands, 148
recreation visits, 12–13,
14(figure)
scientific journals, 260
web site, 153
See also specific parks
National Park Trust, 209–210
National Science Foundation,
185
National Tree Trust, 237
National Wilderness
Preservation System
(NWPS), 15, 147, 148, 153
created, 125, 137
web site, 153
National Wildlife Federation,
210
National Woodland Owners
Association (NWOA), 237
Native Americans
forest management
certification, 87–88
forest policy, 4, 48
Native Ecosystems Council, 210
Native Forest Network, 210
Natural regeneration (defined),
286
Natural Resource Conservation
Service, 187
Natural resources
books and reports, 242,
243–244, 247
defined, 286
scientific journals, 258–259,
260–261, 262
308
Index

Natural Resources Canada, 185
Natural Resources Council of
America, 211
Natural Resources Defense
Council, 211
Nature Conservancy, 78, 79, 211
Nature Conservancy of Canada,
211–212
Nature Conservation Society of
Japan, 212
Navajo Indian Nation, 171
Nebraska Forest Service, 194
Net annual growth (defined),
286
Net present value (defined), 286
Netherlands: trade restrictions, 85
Nevada
early forest policy, 7
forest practices programs, 70
private forestry regulation,
63(table), 66(table)
purchase of Federal
timberlands, 119
Nevada Division of Forestry, 194
New Hampshire
concerns over water quality, 71
early private forestry
regulation, 63(table)
New Hampshire Division of
Forests and Lands, 194
New Jersey: local ordinances, 71
New Jersey State Forestry
Service, 194
New Mexico
community forestry in, 59
forest practices programs, 70
private forestry regulation,
63(table), 66(table)
New Mexico Forestry Division,
194
New York
early private forestry
regulation, 63(table)
local ordinances, 71
state Forest Reserves, 120
western reserve claim, 5
New York City
drinking water quality, 96
land conservation, 96
New York State Department of
Environmental
Conservation, 194
New Zealand:
plantations/protected areas
in, 39
Newsweek, 11
Noncommercial species
(defined), 286
Nondeclining even flow, 30–31
Nongovernment conservation
organizations, 197–220
Nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), 78–79, 97–98
Nonindustrial private forests
(NIPFs), 77, 155–157
area of forest land and timber
land owned, 147(table)
defined, 286
U.S. wood supply, 107
Nonpoint sources, 66–67,
286(defined)
Nontimber forest products, 58
Nontimber forest values
(defined), 286
North American Wetlands
Conservation Council,
185–186
North Carolina
concerns over water quality, 71
western reserve claim, 5
North Carolina Division of
Forest Resources, 194
North Carolina State University,
223
North Cascades Conservation
Council, 212
North Cascades National Park,
13
North Dakota Forest Service, 195
Northcoast Environmental
Center, 212
Northern Arizona University, 223
Index
309

Northern Pacific Railway, 140
Northern spotted owl, 127, 132,
139, 140, 247
Northwest Ecosystem Alliance,
212–213
Northwest Forest Plan (1994), 92
Northwest Ordinance (1787), 6
O&C Act, 135
Office National des Forêts
(France), 98
Ohio Division of Forestry, 195
Ohio River valley, 144
Ohio State University, 223
Ojai fire (California, 1985), 50
Oklahoma Cooperative
Extension, videos by,
274–275
Oklahoma Department of
Agriculture, 195
Oklahoma State University, 223
Old-growth forest, 30, 133, 135,
139, 286(defined)
Olmsted, Frederick Law, 137
Olympic National Park, 13
Online information
clearinghouses, 265–267
Online reports, maps, and
information, 267–270
Optimization models, 135
Oregon
early forest policy, 7
forest health, 47
private forestry regulation,
63(table), 66(table), 74
purchase of Federal
timberlands, 119
state forest lands, 154
Oregon and California Railroad,
135
Oregon Board of Forestry, 68
Oregon Compromise (1846), 6,
117
Oregon Department of Forestry,
195
Oregon Forest Practices Act
(1971), 66, 67, 68
mandatory guidelines, 68–69
regulatory standards, 69
Oregon State University, 223
video collection of, 273–274
Organic Administration Act
(1891), 8–9
Organic Administration Act
(1897), 16, 89, 90, 120, 148
Organizations, 183–237
conservation, 197–220
state, 190–197
Ownership (defined), 286
Ozarks Resource Center, 213
Pacific Northwest, 30, 271
Pacific Rivers Council, 213
Pack, Charles Lathrop, 137
Parcelization, 156
Partial cutting (defined), 287
Participatory decision-making
processes, 57
Partners in Parks, 213
Penalties, 68
Pennsylvania
forest certification, 171
Forest Reserves, 120
local ordinances, 71
Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry,
195
Pennsylvania State University, 223
publications and videos by, 275
Periodic annual increment
(defined), 287
Perspectives on Ecosystem
Management (video), 273
Peterson, Max, 137–138
Peugot, 98
Pinchot, Gifford, 4, 9, 27, 75–76,
137, 139
biographical sketch, 138
books and reports, 249
as Chief Forester, 120
as “Father of Forestry in the
United States,” 138
as martyr for conservation, 121
Second American Forest
Congress (1905), 120
310
Index

Pinchot Institute for
Conservation, 55, 214, 321
Planning
books and reports, 247
defined, 287
forest, 135
forest management plan, 282
forest stewardship plan, 282
land and resource
management plan, 285
management plan, 285
nonprint resources, 273–274
Plant or habitat diversity
(defined), 287
Plant pests, 103–104
Plant Protection Act, 104
Plymouth Colony, 5
Polar domain, 144
Policy of Forestry for the Nation
(Graves), 134
Ponderosa pine, 48, 49, 159
Powell, John Wesley, 138
Precommercial thinning
(defined), 49, 287
Preemption Act (1841), 118
Prescribed or controlled burn,
126–127, 287(defined)
Preservation (defined), 287
Prior-Appropriations Doctrine,
91
Private Forest-Land Owners of the
United States (Birch), 156
Private forest lands, 154–157
books and reports, 240
conserving biological diversity
in, 37–38
cooperative sustained-yield
units, 124
forestry regulation on, 62–74
incidental taking of, 37, 63–64
industrial, 284
management of, 18–20
nonindustrial, 146, 155–157,
286
owners and acres owned,
156–157, 156(table),
157(table), 158(table)
scientific journals, 264
state acquisition of, 127
sustainable management of,
16–20
U.S. wood supply, 106–107
Private forestry regulation,
62–74
comprehensive, 66, 66(table)
early, 63, 63(table)
first generation (1920–1950),
62–65
second generation
(1970–1983), 65–70
third generation (1984–1995),
70–73
Private timber companies, 119
Professional associations,
232–233
Programme for Belize, 98
Progressive Era, 4
Progressive Movement, 9
Prudential Timber Investments,
155
Public Employees for
Environmental
Responsibility, 214
Public forest lands
books and reports, 243, 244,
247
cession to states, 118
conservation of, 75–77
conserving biological diversity
in, 35–37
conveyances to private
corporations, 118
cooperative sustained-yield
units, 124
disposal of, 6–7
early domain, 6
Federal, 147–153
mineral exploration in, 119
original domain, 117
ownership of, 146
timber theft from, 118, 119
total acres, 6
U.S. wood supply, 107
See also National Forest System
Index
311

Public involvement
concerns over environmental
impacts, 72–73
defined, 287
Public Land Commission, 120
Public Lands Foundation, 214
Puerto Rico, 144
Puerto Rico Forest Service
Bureau–DNER, 195
Purdue University, 223
Quetico-Superior International
Peace Park, 123
Quincy Library Group, 55
Railroad land grants, 118
Rainforest Action Network,
214–215
Rainforest Relief, 215
Rangeland (range) (defined), 287
Recreation opportunity class
(defined), 287
Recreation use
indicators of, 167
of National Forests, 122, 123
private forest land ownership,
158(table)
Reforestation, 123
defined, 288
performance measures,
177(table)
policy encouraging, 122
standards for, 67–68, 177(table)
Reforestation Tax Credit, 40
Regeneration (defined), 288
Regeneration cut (defined), 288
Regulation(s)
area regulation, 278
concept of, 26
contingent regulation, 71
L-20 regulations, 42
on private lands, 62–74
U-Regulations, 42
Renewable Natural Resources
Foundation, 215
Renewable resources journals,
262
Research and development
books and reports, 250
capacity to conduct and apply,
170
sale of private forest lands for,
127
scientific journals, 253
sustainable development, 32
water development, 137
Reserva Forestal Malleco, Chile,
98
Reserve (defined), 288
Reserve mentality, 34
Reserved forests, area, 145
Residual stand (defined), 288
Resources for the Future, 215
Resources Planning Act (1976), 136
Restoration (defined), 288
Revolutionary War, 5
Rhode Island Division of Forest
Environment, 195
Rio Bravo Conservation and
Management Area, Belize,
97–98
Riparian areas, 92
defined, 288
nonprint resources, 274
Riparian Forest Buffers: The Link
between Land and Water
(video), 274
River of No Return Wilderness,
132
Roadless Area Review and
Evaluation (RARE), 42–43
Roadless Area Review and
Evaluation (RARE II), 43, 46
Roadless Area Rule, 44, 160
Roadless areas, 41–46, 123
Roosevelt, Theodore, 9, 75, 137
biographical sketch, 139
Second American Forest
Congress (1905), 120
Rotation (defined), 288
Roundwood (defined), 288
Rulemaking authority, 67
Rural Community Assistance
Program, 58–59
312
Index

Sagebrush Rebellion, 76
Sale unit (defined), 288
Salmon, 271
Salmon Forest, The (video), 271
Salvage cut (defined), 288
Sand County Almanac, A
(Leopold), 135
Sargent, Charles Sprague, 139
Save America’s Forests, 216
Sawlog (defined), 288
Sawtimber (defined), 288
Schenck, Carl, 139
Schurz, Carl, 119
Scientific Certification Systems,
84, 171
forest certification, 173–174,
176
Scientific journals, 252–264
Scolel Te Community Forestry
Project, Mexico, 98
Second American Forest
Congress (1905), 120
Second-growth forests, 18
defined, 288
sustained-yield management
in, 122
Sediment Control during
Commercial Timber
Harvesting Operations
(West Virginia), 73
Sedimentation (defined), 288
Seed tree cut (defined), 288–289
Seed tree laws, 63
Selection system (defined), 289
Selective cutting (defined), 289
Senate Interior Subcommittee on
Public Lands, 131–132
Sensitive resource standards, 68
Seventh American Forest
Congress (1995), 128
Severance taxes, 19, 81
Shelterwood system (defined),
289
Shipstead-Nolan Act (1930), 123
Sierra Club, 34, 136–137, 216
Sierra Club v. Butz, 43
Silent Spring (Carson), 2
Silvicultural practices, 123
Silviculture (defined), 289
Site class (defined), 289
Site preparation (defined), 289
Slash (defined), 289
Slash disposal and utilization
performance measures,
178(table)
standards for, 178(table)
SmartWood
categories of chain-of-custody
certification, 172–173
categories of source
certification, 172
certification for chain of
custody, 172
exclusive companies, 173
forest certification, 171–173,
176
nonexclusive companies, 173
principles of certification, 172
Smokey Bear, 11, 48
Smurfit Stone Container, 78
Social and spiritual needs and
values, 167
Social ecology journals, 257
Society for Ecological
Restoration, 216
Society of American Foresters
(SAF), 138, 233
accredited forestry schools,
220–226
Socioeconomic assessment
books and reports, 241
long-term benefits, 166–167
Softwood (conifer)
defined, 289
trends in, 160
Soil compaction (defined), 289
Soil resources
conservation and maintenance
of, 165
indicators of conservation, 165
Soil type (defined), 289
South Carolina, 5
South Carolina Forestry
Commission, 195
Index
313

South Dakota Resource
Conservation and Forestry,
196
Southern Arizona Water Rights
Settlement Act, 140
Southern Hemisphere forests,
106
Southern Illinois University, 223
Southwest Center for Biological
Diversity, 216–217
Special sites, protection of
performance measures,
178(table)
standards for, 178(table)
Special-use permits, 122
Species
defined, 289
endangered or threatened, 127,
281, 290
exotic, 161
indicator, 284
indicators of diversity, 163
keystone, 284–285
noncommercial, 286
online tree species range
maps, 268
rate of extinctions, 33
Spiritual needs and values, 167
St. Croix International Waterway
Commission, 186
Stand (defined), 289
Standards, ISO, for sustainable
forest management, 85
State forest lands, 153–154
State Forest Reserves, 120
State forestry agencies, 88
State of Washington v. Avery
Dexter, 64–65
State organizations, 190–197
States’ Rights Movement, 76
Statewide forest environmental
impact statement (EIS), 73–74
Stephen F. Austin State
University, 223–224
Stewardship, 56–57
books and reports, 240,
244–245
defined, 289
long-term contracts, 52
nonprint resources, 275
pilot project, 58–59
Stocking (defined), 290
Stora Enso, 78, 99
Strategic Timber Trust, 155
Stream flow (defined), 290
Streamside management zone
(SMZ) (defined), 290
Streamside restrictions, 67
Strip Mining Reclamation Act,
140
Strontia Springs Reservoir, 93
Stumpage (defined), 290
Succession (defined), 290
Sulfur dioxide (SO2) cap-and-
trade system, 99
Summer cabins, on Federal
lands, 122
SUNY College of Environmental
Science and Forestry, 224
Superior National Forest, 123
Sustainability
forest ecosystem, 24
of wood sources, 172
Sustainable development, 32
Sustainable forest management,
24–32
books and reports, 244–245
current, 31–32
defined, 290
forest principles defining,
31–32
guidelines for, 85–86
legal, institutional, and
economic framework for,
168–170
performance measures,
177(table)
on private lands, 16–20
recent policy developments,
27–32
of Reserva Forestal Malleco,
Chile, 98
standards for, 85–86, 177(table)
two-pronged strategy, 35
314
Index

Sustainable forestry, 4–5, 24
books and reports, 240
defined, 4–5
nonprint resources, 273
online reports, maps, and
information, 267
scientific journals, 259
Sustainable Forestry Board
(SFB), 175
Sustainable Forestry Initiative
(SFI) (AF&PA), 32, 86, 87,
175–176
objectives or principles,
175–176
web site, 175–176
Sustained yield, 24, 124–125,
290(defined)
Sustained Yield Forest
Management Act (1944), 124
Sustained-yield management,
27, 122
Taft, William H., 121
Taking of private land,
incidental, 37
“Takings” doctrine, 63–64
Tax-delinquent lands, 154
Taxes. See under name of specific
tax
Taylor Grazing Act (1934),
134–135
Technology
books and reports, 251
forest biotechnology, 101–105
Technology Association for the
Pulp and Paper Industries,
231–232
Temperate Rainforest, The (video),
271
Temple-Inland, 99
Tennessee Department of
Agriculture Division of
Forestry, 196
Tennessee Valley Authority, 186
Texas A&M University, 224
Texas Forest Service, 196
Texas Purchase (1850), 6, 117
Thaddeus Kosciuszko National
Memorial, 153
Theodore Roosevelt
Conservation Alliance, 217
Thinning
commercial, 279
defined, 290
nonprint resources, 274
precommercial, 287
Thinning Young Stands (video),
274
Thomas, Jack Ward, 139–140
Threatened or endangered
species, 127, 281,
290(defined)
Timber (defined), 290
Timber and Stone Act (1878), 7,
119
Timber companies, private, 119
Timber Culture Act (1873), 6–7,
119, 120
Timber famine, 8, 62
Timber harvesting
annual lumber production, 121
books and reports, 244
clearcutting controversy, 15–16
cut-and-run practice, 17
Healthy Forests Initiative and,
52, 129
import bans on tropical
timbers, 127
information clearinghouses,
267
long-term sale contracts, 128
from National Forests, 12,
13(figure)
naval reserves, 118
nondeclining even flow
constraint, 30–31
precommercial thinning, 49
salvage sales, 128
scientific journals, 262
standards for, 67
sustainable volume, 26
Timber investment management
organizations (TIMOS), 79,
155
Index
315

Timber production and trade,
145–146
disputes with Canada, 121
private forest land ownership,
158(table)
Timber theft, 118, 119
Timber trespass, 7
Timbergreen Forestry, 267
Timberland Investment Services,
155
Timberlands
area, 145
transfer to private timber
companies, 119
U.S., 146–147, 147(table), 160
Tongass National Forest, 43, 126,
128
Tongass Timber Reform Act, 140
Total forest land area, U.S.,
158–159
Total maximum daily load
(TMDL) requirements, 92
Tourism, indicators of, 167
Toxic Substances Control Act, 104
Trade
cap-and-trade system, 99
carbon credit trading system,
99, 106, 129
information, 145–146
restrictions on, 85
U.S. disputes with Canada, 121
Trade associations, 229–232
Transfer Act (1905), 75, 120, 139
Trash trees, 62
Tree farm (defined), 290
Tree Farm certification,
177–179(table)
Tree Farm signs, 176
Tree mortality rates, 160
Tree-Sit: The Art of Resistance
(video), 272
Tree-sitting, 272
Tree species range maps, online,
268
Trees Are the Answer (video),
271–272
Trends, 158–161
Tribal forests, 157–158
Tropical deforestation, 127, 128
Tropical forestry
import bans on tropical
timbers, 127
scientific journals, 259
videos, 270
Trust for Public Land, 78, 217
Turpentine Seed Tree Law (1922)
(Louisiana), 63
U-Regulations, 42
UBS Resource Investments, 155
Udall, Morris, 140
UN Environment Programme
(UNEP), 217
Understory (defined), 290
Underwood Tariff Act (1913), 121
Uneven-aged forest (defined),
291
Uneven-aged management
(defined), 277, 291
Uneven-aged stand (defined), 277
Union of Concerned Scientists,
218
Union Pacific Railroad, 7, 118
United Kingdom
Department for International
Development, 98
trade restrictions, 85
See also England
United Nations Conference on
Environment and
Development (UNCED)
(1992) (Rio de Janeiro), 3,
84–85, 110, 128
Agenda 21, 85
“Forest Principles,” 31–32, 85
United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe
(UNECE), 269
United Nations Forum on
Forests, 129
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate
Change (FCCC) (1992), 97,
270
316
Index

United States
annual lumber production, 121
comprehensive forest policy,
122–123
consumption of major wood
products, 34
current forest policy issues,
23–116
current policy developments,
44–45, 58–61
directory of forestry
organizations, 183–237
emerging forest policy issues,
106–110
forest area, 145
forest conditions and trends,
158–161
forest ecoregions, 144–145
forest ownership, 146–147,
147(table)
forest policy, 118–119
forest policy books and
reports, 243–247, 248–250
industry timberlands, 106
online reports, maps, and
information, 268
recent policy developments,
27–32, 35–40, 50–52, 86–89,
91–93, 97–100, 103–104
sulfur dioxide (SO2) cap-and-
trade system, 99
sustained-yield forestry in, 27
timber production and trade,
145–146
total forest land area, 158–159
total wood production, 160
wood supply, 106
Universal Forest Products Inc., 229
University of Alaska–Fairbanks,
224
University of Arkansas–
Monticello, 224
University of California–
Berkeley, 224
University of Edinburgh, 98
University of Florida, 224
University of Georgia, 224
University of Idaho, 224
University of Illinois, 224–225
University of Kentucky, 225
University of Maine, 225
University of Massachusetts, 225
University of Minnesota, 225
University of Missouri, 225
University of New Hampshire,
225
University of Tennessee, 225
University of Vermont, 226
University of Washington, 226
University of Wisconsin, 226
University of Wisconsin–
Madison, 226
University of Wisconsin–Stevens
Point, 226
Up in Flames: A History of Fire
Fighting in the Forest (video),
272
Urban ecology journals, 263
Urban forestry journals, 263
Urban-wildland interface
(defined) 291
Uruguay Round, 84–85
U.S. Constitution, 4, 63–64
U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA)
Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service (APHIS),
103–104
Cooperative State Research,
Education, and Extension
Service, 186
Division of Forestry, 120, 134
Natural Resource
Conservation Service, 187
online reports, maps, and
information, 269
Rural Community Assistance
Program, 58–59
U.S. Forest Service. See U.S.
Forest Service
U.S. Department of Commerce,
187
U.S. Department of
Conservation, 135
Index
317

U.S. Department of Defense, 146
U.S. Department of the Interior,
120, 188–189
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), 50, 92, 189
authority over genetically
modified tree species, 104
definition of certification, 83
online reports, maps, and
information, 268
sulfur dioxide (SO2) cap-and-
trade system, 99
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(USFWS), 35, 153, 188–189
U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, 104
U.S. Forest Service, 11–16, 148,
187, 239
books and reports, 246, 247
Branch of Research, 122, 133
Capper Report, 122
Church Subcommittee
Guidelines, 132
clearcutting controversy, 15–16
conserving biological
diversity, 36–37
created, 9
decentralized decision-
making, 59–60
established as agency of
USDA, 120
forest management by, 147,
148
funding, 138
information clearinghouses,
266–267
Inventory and Monitoring
Institute, 266–267
land stewardship contracts
pilot project, 58–59
long-term stewardship
contracts, 52
online reports, maps, and
information, 268, 269
ownership of forests, 146, 147
policy of fire suppression, 11,
48
roadless area reviews, 42
Rural Community Assistance
Program, 58–59
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS),
189
maps, 6
online reports, maps, and
information, 268
surveys, 138
U.S. Navy timber reserves, 118
U.S. Public Interest Research
Group, 218
U.S. Timber Conservation Board,
132
U.S. Timberlands, 155
USS Michigan, 7, 118
Utah Department of Natural
Resources, 196
Utah State University, 226
Vanderbilt, George, 139
Variability, 284
Vermont
concerns over water quality,
71
Department of Forests, Parks,
and Recreation, 196
early private forestry
regulation, 63(table)
local ordinances, 71
Videos, 270–272
Village of Euclid v. Ambler Realty
Company, 64
Virginia
concerns over water quality, 71
Department of Forestry, 196
early private forestry
regulation, 63(table)
western reserve claim, 5
Virginia Tech, 226
Volunteer training, 61
Wachovia Timberland
Investment Management,
155
Wagner Forest Management
Ltd., 155
318
Index

Washington (state)
Department of Natural
Resources, 196
early forest policy, 7
Forest Conservation Act, 64
forest practices programs, 70
large tracts of low-access
forest, 160
private forestry regulation,
63(table), 66(table)
purchase of Federal
timberlands, 119
state forest lands, 154
State of Washington v. Avery
Dexter, 64–65
Water, 89–93
“first in time, first in right”
allocations, 91
Forests and Water in the Light of
Scientific Investigation (Zon),
141
recent policy developments,
91–93
Water development, 137
Water pollution, 66, 92
Water quality
concerns over, 70–71
defined, 291
forest, 91
nonprint resources, 274
performance measures,
177(table)
standards for, 177(table)
total maximum daily load
(TMDL) requirements, 92
Water Quality Act (1987), 70
Water resources
conservation and maintenance
of, 165
indicators of conservation, 165
Water rights, 91
Watershed (defined), 291
Web sites
information clearinghouses,
265–267
online reports, maps, and
information, 267–270
Weeks Act (1911), 9, 121, 133
Well-managed wood sources,
172
West Virginia
Forestry Division, 196–197
Sediment Control During
Commercial Timber
Harvesting Operations, 73
West Virginia University, 226
Western Governors Association,
51
Western reserve lands, 117
Wetland (defined), 291
Weyerhaeuser, Frederick, 140
Weyerhaeuser, Frederick E., 140
Weyerhaeuser Timber Company,
78, 140
White pine forests, 145, 159
Wilderness, 14–15, 291(defined)
Wilderness Act (1964), 15, 42,
125, 137, 148
father of, 141
Wilderness Act (1978), 42
Wilderness and roadless areas,
41–46, 136, 153
current policy developments,
44–45
designation of, 123, 137–138
eastern, 126
let-burn policies, 50
management of, 153
Roadless Area Review and
Evaluation (RARE), 42–43
Roadless Area Review and
Evaluation (RARE II), 43, 46
Roadless Area Rule, 44, 160
scientific journals, 263
Wilderness Society, 15, 136, 218
Wilderness Study Areas, 126
Wildfire(s), 47
backfire, 278
catastrophic, 159
defined, 291
large-scale, 129
scientific journals, 257
See also Burning
Wildlife (defined), 291
Index
319

Wildlife Action Inc., 218–219
Wildlife habitat
performance measures,
177(table)
standards for, 177(table)
Wildlife Society, 233
Wilson, Edward O., 33
Wilson Act (1894), 121
Wisconsin
local ordinances, 71
total forest land area, 159
Wisconsin DNR–Division of
Forestry, 197
Wise Use Movement, 76
Withdrawals (defined), 291
WNC Pallet and Forest Products
Co., 229
Women’s Environment and
Development Organization,
219
Wood certification, 171
chain-of-custody process, 174
principles of, 172
SmartWood, 171–173
Wood production
books and reports, 250
total U.S., 160
See also Timber production and
trade
Wood products
import tariffs and duties on,
121
U.S. consumption of, 34
Wood source categories, 172
Wood supply
global, 106–108
Southern Hemisphere, 106
Woodland management
resources, 273–274
Woodlands Resource
Management Group, 155
Working forest conservation
easements, 79
Working Group on Criteria and
Indicators for the
Conservation and
Sustainable Management of
Temperate and Boreal
Forests, 161
World Forestry Center, 219
World Parks Endowment Inc.,
219
World Resources Institute, 220,
269
World Summit on Sustainable
Development (2002), 57, 110
World Trade Organization
(WTO), 83
World Wide Fund for Nature,
85, 109
World Wide Web
information clearinghouses
on, 265–267
reports, maps, and
information on, 267–270
World Wildlife Fund, U.S
(WWF), 39, 220
Worldwatch Institute, 220
Wrangell-St. Elias National Park
and Preserve, 153
Wyoming, 160
Wyoming State Forestry
Division, 197
Yale School of Forestry, 133, 138
Yale University, 226
Yellowstone National Park, 41,
126–127, 148
Yield, sustainable, 290
Yield, sustained, 24, 124–125
Yield taxes, 81
Yosemite National Park, 41–42,
137
Zahniser, Howard, 141
Zon, Raphael, 141
320
Index

About the Authors 
V. Alaric Sample has served as president of the Pinchot Institute
for Conservation in Washington, D.C., since 1995. He is a Fellow
of the Society of American Foresters and a Research Affiliate on
the faculty at the Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Stud-
ies. Sample earned his Ph.D. in resource policy and economics
from Yale University in 1989. He also holds an MBA and a Master
of Forestry degree from Yale and a BS in forest resource manage-
ment from the University of Montana. His professional experi-
ence spans public, private, and nonprofit organizations, includ-
ing the U.S. Forest Service, Champion International, The
Wilderness Society, and the Prince of Thurn und Taxis in Bavaria,
Germany. He specialized in resource economics and National
Forest policy as a Senior Fellow at the Conservation Foundation
in Washington, D.C., and later as Vice President for Research at
the American Forestry Association. Sample has served on numer-
ous national task forces and commissions including the Presi-
dent’s Commission on Environmental Quality task force on bio-
diversity on private lands and as cochair of the National
Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry. His other pro-
fessional activities include serving as chair of the National Capi-
tal Society of American Foresters and chair of the board of direc-
tors for the Forest Stewards Guild.
Antony S. Cheng is on the faculty in the Department of Forest,
Rangeland, and Watershed Stewardship at Colorado State Uni-
versity in Fort Collins, Colorado, where he teaches courses in nat-
ural resource history, policy, and sustainability. Dr. Cheng’s re-
search and practice focus on improving the quality and durability
321

of natural resource decisions through more meaningful public
participation, collaborative approaches, and institutional innova-
tions. His work is published in the Journal of Forestry, Society, and
Natural Resources and Forest Science. He received his Ph.D. at Ore-
gon State University in Corvallis and MS at the University of Min-
nesota in St. Paul, both in forest resource policy. He holds a BA in
politics from Whitman College in Walla Walla, Washington.
322
About the Authors

