It’s hard to get into the Night Masks.It’s impossible to get out.  
Another Name for Dawn By Paul S. Kemp  
The garbage-strewn alley behind the Black Eye stank of puke and rotting
fish. Vasen wrinkled his nose, endured the odor, and stared holes into the
Eye’s backdoor. It was nearly four hours past midnight. Jeldis would be coming
through in moments. The target, Nomen Thorsar, soon thereafter.
At ease in the darkness, Vasen settled deeper into the shadows beside
the inn’s back exit. Selûne rode full and bright in the night sky above but the
tall wooden buildings that lined the alley blotted out her light. Here, only a soft
silver glow reached down to caress the street. Vasen waited, tense. Long
seconds passed. With the waters of the Inner Harbor only a dagger toss behind
him, he could hear the waves of the Sea of Fallen Stars lapping against
Westgate’s piers. The sound lulled him to lethargy.
To keep himself occupied, he ran through his Dwarven language lesson
from the day before. Vasen enjoyed both the linguistics lessons and the
after-session talks with Theevis, his teacher. Everything else that involved the
Night Masks was drudgery to him. Though the Faceless, the Mask’s
guildmaster, had culled him from an orphanage and trained him up as an
assassin and translator, Vasen knew that the guild would discard him whenever
it became convenient. He owed them no gratitude, and now he wanted out. To
get out he needed coin, and he knew how to earn money only through
extortion, bribery, and assassination. The logic was inexorable and ironic. To
get out, he needed to get deeper in.From behind the inn’s door, the loud crash
of a broken dish gave him a start. He rebuked himself for his inattention and
refocused on the job. He could not afford to be sloppy.
The murmur of voices carried through the inn’s oak walls. An occasional
shout or laugh rose above the general din. The place sounded crowded.
Good, he thought. He and his crew had chosen The Eye for two reasons;
Nomen Thorsar regularly slummed here, and none of the crew had ever set foot
in the place. Their faces would not be remembered, and they would never be
back.The door flew open. Candlelight, voices, and the smell of beef stew spilled
into the alley. Out of professional habit, Vasen closed one eye to avoid entirely
losing his night-adjusted vision. A tall figure stood momentarily silhouetted in
the doorway before pushing it closed. Jeldis.
The big man walked past without slowing. Above the stink of the alley,
Vasen caught a whiff of his smell: oiled leather and stale ale. His ringmail
armor clinked as he moved. He wore a longsword at his belt.
“Nomen, drunk with one bodyguard,” Jeldis said. “Less than a twenty
count behind me.”
“Got it,” Vasen acknowledged. He and his team had trailed Nomen
Thorsar for the previous two tendays. They had learned that when slumming,
the nobleman always entered and exited via back doors. Things were going
according to plan.
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

“Don’t foul this up,” Jeldis hissed over his shoulder.
“Piss off.”
Jeldis offered no retort, merely stalked down the alley and out of sight.
Vasen watched him go, imagining how satisfying it would be to bury a dagger in
his spine, then turned back to business.
He drew a dagger, his tool for close work. The metal of the hilt felt cool in
his hand. His heart rate accelerated slightly – but only slightly. He brushed the
red hair from his face and waited.
Within a few moments voices sounded from behind the door. Vasen could
not make out the words, but he knew it had to be Nomen and the bodyguard.
The door opened.
Nomen staggered through first, stumbled, and slipped to the ground.
“Blast,” he cursed, his voice slurred with drink.
Behind him, the bodyguard filled the doorway. A hulking brute, the
dark-haired bastard fairly glittered with steel: a chainmail shirt, two daggers,
and a broadsword. Vasen figured him to be new to the job. An experienced man
would never have let his charge walk through the door first. If Vasen had
wanted to kill Nomen, he could have done it before the bodyguard ever got out
of the doorway.
“Don’t just stand there, lout,” said Nomen. “Help me up.”
The big man murmured something unintelligible, looked once up and
down the alley – his eyes looked over and past Vasen – closed the inn door, and
stalked forward to help Nomen regain his feet.
The moment the bodyguard exposed his back, Vasen erupted from the
shadows. The big man never saw it coming. Vasen drove his dagger into the
man’s neck just under the base of the skull. Death came instantly. Vasen
jerked the dagger free, shouldered the corpse to the ground, and stood over
Nomen.
The brown haired young nobleman stared at him with eyes as wide as
coins. His mouth hung open. He seemed to want to say something, but nothing
came forth save a frightened croak.
Without a word, Vasen slammed the hilt of his dagger into the
noblemen’s temple. He went out with a soft groan.
Moving quickly, he dragged the bodyguard’s corpse into the darkness
further down the alley. Afterward, he bound and gagged Nomen. He’d have to
carry the pudgy nobleman across town to the drop by himself. Vasen had told
his team that the client wanted to deal with him alone – a lie. He’d told them
too that the job paid two hundred and fifty platinum – another lie. It paid three
hundred. He planned to skim fifty off the top, just as he did with every job.
Soon he would have enough coin stashed away to buy him passage and a
comfortable life somewhere else. He would only miss Theevis when he left.
He gripped Thorsar by the cloak and heaved the unconscious nobleman
over his shoulder. He would take the back alleys to avoid prying eyes. This job
would go off like every other – without a problem.
Though it took longer then he had anticipated, the drop went fine.
Deposit one nobleman; collect one bag of coins. Vasen didn’t know the names
of the people who had paid, and he didn’t want to know. Now heavier by three
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

hundred platinum pieces, he stalked through Westgate’s alleys. He would make
a fifty platinum piece detour to his private apartment in the River Quarter, then
go to the rendezvous at the flat. He’d be even more late, but there was nothing
for it.
After clearing the alleys, he walked south down Trayben Street. Light
spells cast on glass globes lined the flagged avenue and lit his way. Though
Westgate’s shops were all closed, the noise from the city’s many taverns and
eateries still gave the streets in this part of town a lively buzz. Westgate never
slept, not even in the small hours before dawn.
With the bag of coins surreptitiously tucked under his cloak, he made for
the River Bridge. He walked across without a pause.
Immediately to his left stood The Black Boot Inn, torchlit and still loud.
Vasen kept a small room around back, a room no one but himself and Hesper
the Innkeep knew about. He ducked down the side street beside The Boot, hid
in the shadows, and scanned the street behind. He wanted to ensure that no
one had followed him. At his back, the wooden wall of the inn vibrated with the
sounds of voices and clanking dishes. He focused his attention back out on
Trayben street.
Several moments passed and he saw no one. The streets were empty.
Reassured, he climbed a wooden fence, circled the Boot’s stables – they stank
of manure and old hay – and came to the small outbuilding that served as his
room. A former storehouse, it had been built right off the inn’s kitchens.
When he opened the door he immediately sensed the intruder, heard the
soft intake of breath, felt the alien presence in the room. He froze for an instant
too long. Before he could pull his longsword free a shoulder slammed into his
chest and knocked him into the wall. A punch to the side of the head set off a
spark shower behind his eyes. The attacker maneuvered behind him, gripped
him in a chokehold, and began to squeeze.
“Sorry,” the man leaned his head forward to say. A young man’s voice,
and a young man’s mistake.
Vasen threw his own head back and slammed the crown of his skull into
the bridge of the man’s nose. It broke with a wet crunch. Warm blood sprayed
the back of Vasen’s neck. The man grunted in pain, reflexively released his
hold on Vasen’s throat. Vasen whirled around, swinging a wild elbow as he did.
It landed flush against the man’s temple. The man – the boy, Vasen corrected,
for he saw that the would-be assassin was younger than he by at least three
years – hit the floor flat on his stomach. Vasen grabbed a handful of hair,
jerked the boy’s head back, and held a dagger at his throat.
“Don’t,” the boy said through clenched teeth. “Please.”
Vasen didn’t. He wanted to know what in the Hells was going on, though
he had already begun to suspect.
He released the boy’s head but kept the dagger at his throat. Blood ran
unabated from the assassin’s nose, pooled on the floor.
“I’m listening,” Vasen said. “Tell me what I want to hear.”
The boy took a deep breath before he finally spat the information. “Jeldis
told me to watch you, to find where you hid your stash. I saw you come in here
yesterday. Thought I’d search for the coin. Didn’t expect you back before dawn.”
Vasen’s breath caught; his limbs went numb. Jeldis knew. Who else
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

then? Askaxen? Belifor? The Faceless? That last sent a chill up Vasen’s spine.
The boy went on. “They were going to hit you tonight. At the rendezvous.
After taking a cut for Jeldis, I was supposed to bring the coin you skimmed. You
know, so they could confront you with it.”
Vasen’s mind raced. What now? If Jeldis knew, then soon the whole guild
would know. Vasen knew the Faceless didn’t forgive betrayals. He would have to
get out of the city – fast.
“That’s everything,” said the boy. “I swear it.” Vasen nodded but made no
reply. He stared absently at the back of the boy’s head. He had killed so many
men already, one more hardly seemed significant.
The boy must have sensed the danger. “Don’t,” he pleaded. “I’ve got a
woman. A child.”
Vasen pressed the boy’s face into the pool of blood on the floorboards and
raised his dagger – 
He hesitated.
A woman. A child.
“What’s your name?”
The boy spat blood, tried to turn his head and look up. “Cale. Losk Cale.
Listen. I won’t say anything – ”
“Shut up.” Vasen felt the boy shaking, smelled the ammonia stink of fear.
What was one more murder? He wondered again, but this time answered
his own question. One more was one more. He figured it was time to start
making changes.
“Tonight’s your lucky night, Cale.” He slammed his dagger hilt into the
back of Cale’s head. The boy grunted and went limp.
Vasen left the boy where he lay and rose. He felt a peculiar lightness. It
felt good to have spared the boy. Losk Cale was the first unfinished business
Vasen had ever left behind him. He hoped that he did not come to regret it.
He hurried across the room and slid aside the cheap night table that sat
beside his dirty bed. Beneath it was a loose floorboard, the stash Cale had
sought but not been able to find. Vasen used his dagger to pry up the plank.
The hole looked like a mouth cut into the floor, a mouth that fed on skimmed
coin. Its appetite was going to get Vasen killed.
He reached in and pulled everything out: another leather bag filled with
platinum coins; four healing potions in steel vials; a magical necklace with
explosive globes for charms. He prized this last above everything. A grateful
mage had given him the necklace as a bonus for a job the crew had done a
couple months back. Vasen had never worn it for fear that he would have to
explain its existence to his crew. He wore it now. There would be no more
explaining.
He shoved the potions and a handful of spending money into his
beltpouch. Afterward, he consolidated the two bags of coins – those he had
skimmed previously plus the entire take from tonight – and put them in a
backpack, which he shouldered on. He did not have as much coin as he had
wanted, but it would have to be enough.
If he could get out of Westgate.
He took a deep breath and headed for the door. On his way out, he bent
over Cale’s body, took a few platinum pieces from his beltpouch, and stuffed
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

them into the boy’s hand.
For the woman and the child, he thought.
With that, Vasen walked out the door. With one hand on the hilt of his
sword, he backtracked past the stables and walked out onto Trayben street.
Immediately, he felt vulnerable, exposed. The light globes seemed too bright.
The backpack on his shoulders weighed heavy. Struggling to stay calm, he kept
an alert gaze on the street ahead, on every shadowy corner.
Already he was late for the rendezvous with Jeldis and his crew. He had
no doubt they’d be looking for him. The whole guild would be looking for him.
Nervous, he pulled up the hood of his cloak and walked on. He wished
now that he did not have such a conspicuous head of red hair.
It occurred to him then that he did not know where he was going. He had
no clear plan.. He knew he had to get out of Westgate, but he wasn’t sure how
to do it. The city had only six gates. If Jeldis had alerted the rest of the guild,
then the Faceless probably had men stationed at each gate already – no good.
He could try to scale the city wall, but rumor had it that the walls were
magically trapped. That left only one other way out – by ship. The Faceless
would have men at the harbor too, but Westgate’s maze of piers and ships was
so big that Vasen thought he could avoid Night Mask agents and still get
through. The problem would be in finding a ship that would allow him passage
without questions. To find that kind of ship, he would have to make for the
Outer Harbor.
A spike of land shaped like an angler’s hook, Westgate’s Harbor Quarter
was really comprised of two separate entities. The interior of the hook, that part
shielded from the sea, was the Inner Harbor. There, legitimate trade went on,
and the city’s Harbormaster ruled. The exterior side of the hook, that part that
face open sea, was the Outer Harbor. There, rickety piers and decrepit
warehouses provided the milieu for the city’s black market. The Harbormaster’s
authority extended there only in name. Vasen would find a ship there if
anywhere.
His mind made up, he picked up his pace and headed north. He tried to
stay out of the light and kept a ready hand on his sword hilt.
Ahead, five men walking with a purpose rounded the corner. Vasen
assessed them at a glance: four wore leather armor and carried lots of steel.
Jeldis was among those. The last wore dark robes and bore no visible weapons.
Likely he was a spellcaster.
Before they could spot him, Vasen darted into a side alley – and
immediately realized his mistake. The alley was a dead end, and he did not
have time to scale the wall. He looked about frantically. There was no cover save
for a few barrels. He ducked behind the nearest and waited. Heart racing, he
filled both fists with steel. He vowed that if this went bad, he’d take out at least
Jeldis before he died.
Within moments, the Night Mask hit team came into view. They stopped
near the mouth of the alley, no more than a dagger toss from Vasen’s barrel.
Vasen tried to focus his hearing above the sound of his thumping heart.
“Is he close or not?” Jeldis asked the mage tersely.
The mage shrugged. “The spell is limited in duration. He was close when I
had him last.”
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

At those words, Vasen’s breath caught. The mage was a hound, a
spellcaster who used divinations to locate men and treasure. Vasen did not
know how the magic worked – maybe they tracked him by name, maybe by
description, or maybe by some item he carried – but he did know that he was in
serious trouble.
Jeldis put a threatening hand on the mage’s shoulder. “Then you get him
again. Cast another spell or whatever the Hells you do. We have to be the ones
who find him. You understand?”
Behind his barrel, Vasen exhaled nervously. He knew now that multiple
teams were tracking him. His crewmates must have told Faceless, and now the
guildmaster had turned the Masks loose, hands and all. It was a good thin
Vasen had not gone to the rendezvous. He’d have been taken, and he’d have
died ugly.
“I’ll tell you what I understand,” the mage replied. “I understand that you
shouldn’t have kept Vasen Coriver’s treachery to yourself for as long as you did.
I also understand that if he gets away, you’re likely to end up floating in the
harbor. That about right?”
Jeldis snarled, gripped the mage by the robes and jerked him close.
“That’s about right. So I got nothing to lose in bleeding you out, now do I?”
The mage’s arrogance vanished. “Fair point.”
Jeldis grunted and let him go.
The mage straightened his robes, tried to recapture some dignity. “You
want me to cast it now?”
Behind his barrel, Vasen readied himself. If the hound cast it now – 
“How long’s it last?” Jeldis asked.
“A quarter hour, right about.”
“How many more can you cast tonight?”
“Three.”
Jeldis rubbed the back of his neck and considered. “Let’s get closer to the
River Bridge first,” he said at last. “My informant says he keeps quarters south
of the river.”
With that, they started to walk off. Vasen closed his eyes and tried to
breathe. This was going to be tougher than he thought.
When he finally got himself back under control, he ran his hands over
the alley wall. It was rough, an easy climb. From now on, he would move at
street level only as necessary. If the guild wanted him, they’d have to come up
to the city’s roofs.
Leaping alleys and dashing across the tops of buildings, Vasen started to
head for the Outer Harbor. Before he had traveled two blocks, however, he
remembered Theevis. He could not leave without saying goodbye. He knew it
increased his risk, but Theevis had been good to him, fatherly.
With his mind made up, Vasen turned east.Theevis lived alone in a
modest brick home in the Foreign Quarter of the city. Vasen had never learned
how his tutor had become beholden to the Faceless. He knew only that Theevis
was a former adventurer with shadows in his past. Vasen had never wanted to
know anything more. To him, Theevis was simply a teacher and a friend.
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

Vasen stood on the street a block away from his tutor’s house. He
surveyed the buildings all around, the rooftops, the alleys. He saw no one.
Here, torches rather than light globes lit the street, and dancing brands cast a
flickering patchwork of shadows. To the east, the sky was already beginning to
lighten. He did not want to be on the streets when the sun rose. It was now or
never.
Theevis’s house stood dark. The old man must still be sleeping.
Vasen hurriedly crossed the street and approached the house. When he
reached the door, he debated for an instant whether to pick the lock or knock.
Knock, he decided, and rapped once against the wood. The sound
reverberated up and down the street. A dog barked from somewhere nearby.
Nervous, Vasen raised his fist to rap again but a sleepy voice stopped him.
“Who’s there?” asked Theevis.
“Vasen Coriver.”
Theevis muttered something and opened the door. The old man’s gray
hair stuck out every which way, and he wore wrinkled white nightclothes.
Bleary eyes looked out from a weathered visage. “Vasen, come in. What is it
boy?”
Vasen cast one look back onto the street, entered, and closed the door
behind him. The room beyond was small and sparsely furnished. Theevis went
to a small hutch from which he produced two glasses of wine. Vasen declined.
“You look troubled, young man. Losing sleep over a translation?” He
smiles around his goblet.
“No, aerister.” Out of habit, Vasen had referred to Theevis with the elven
word for teacher. “I’m in trouble, and I’m leaving the city. But I wanted to say
goodbye. I want you to know that I … appreciate what I’ve learned from you.
Everything I’ve learned.”
Theevis’s bleary eyes grew immediately clear. He set down the wineglass.
“What kind of trouble? Surely not with the guild?”
Vasen could not meet his eyes.
“Look at me, boy. Did you cross The Faceless?”
Vasen looked up, nodded.
“Gods,” Theevis oathed. He sank into an armchair beside the cold
fireplace. “Gods, boy. If you were foolish enough to cross the guild, then you
didn’t learn anything important from me.”
Vasen tried to keep the hurt from his face. Theevis’s reprimand hit him
hard. He must have failed to hide the pain, for Theevis’s tone softened.
“I’m sorry, Vasen. I didn’t mean that. Look at me boy. You see where
crossing the Faceless gets you? My comrades are dead and I’m alive only
because I’m of service to the guild. This is no life, Vasen. Only the occasional
student like you makes it bearable.”
Vasen could think of nothing to say.
Theevis looked up and smiled softly, tiredly. “Ah well. Korvikoum, as the
dwarves say. We all pay for the choices we make.”
To that, Vasen nodded. He knew all about paying the price for his
choices. “I just wanted to say goodbye, aerister. I … I learned much here, and
I’ll miss you. But I have to go now. They’re after me already.”
Theevis looked up sharply, half rose from his chair.
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

“They know?”
“They know.”
“Gods, boy.” Theevis jumped out of his chair and took Vasen by the arm.
“They’ll have hounds after you!”
“I know - ”
“Wait. I’ve got something that might help. Something I’ve kept for myself,
just in case.” The old man hurried into a back room. He returned after a few
moments with a thin stick of wood in his hand.
“A wand from my adventuring days,” he explained, holding up the stick.
“Its magic will make it harder for the hounds to track you.” Without waiting for
Vasen’s reply, Theevis uttered a word of magic and touched him with the wand.
A charge went through Vasen’s body.
“It’s not foolproof, but it’ll help.” Theevis took him by the shoulders,
looked him up and down. “Damned red hair of yours makes you stand out.
Hmm. You fond of it?”
“Fond of it?” Vasen’s hand went to his red hair. He had never thought
about it before; that meant, he supposed, that he wasn’t particularly fond of it.
“I guess not.”
“Good. A cantrip then.” Theevis smiled, reached up to put his hands
around Vasen’s head, and uttered a quick incantation. Vasen felt a flash of pain
in his scalp. Before he could think why, his hair fell to the floor in a red
shower.
“Blast,” he cursed. He ran a hand over his now smooth pate, a strange
sensation. “Blast.”
“I’d shrink you too, if I could,” Theevis said. “Your height is conspicuous.
Get used to the baldness though. It’s a good disguise. Makes you look a new
man.”
Vasen looked at the hair around his feet and smiled – a new man, indeed.
Inexplicably, his thoughts turned to Losk Cale, the boy he had spared earlier. A
new man …
Theevis grew serious. “You better go. I don’t want to know where you’re
going, but when you get there, get yourself smart. Get out of this kind of life,
you hear?”
Vasen nodded. “Goodbye.” He squeezed Theevis’s shoulder. Without
warning, the old man caught him up in an embrace.
“You’ve been like a son to me, Vasen. I’ll miss you.” Theevis’s voice shook.
Before Vasen’s own eyes began to well, he nodded, turned, and walked
out the door.
When he hit the street, he headed for the harbor. The night breeze
danced over his bald scalp. He found the sensation enjoyable and decided to
leave the hood of his cloak down.
Because he had little time, he opted against using the rooftops. Instead,
he headed in a straight line for the harbor. With Theevis’s magic thwarting the
Night Masks hounds, he could buy passage and hide aboard a ship until it
weighed anchor.
The brick and timber shops around him were beginning to awaken.
Candlelight leaked out from around closed shutters as shopkeepers prepared
their wares for the upcoming day. A few were already out sweeping their front
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

stoops. Farmers made their way toward the market in creaky horse-drawn
wagons. Vasen passed them by and said nothing. He was only minutes from the
harbor.
He started to cross Borinkel’s Avenue when from his right he heard a
shout of, “There! That’s him!” He spun to see three men racing toward him, iron
bare. Behind them stood a robed figure, already in the midst of spellcasting.
Theevis had warned him that the wand’s magical protection was not infallible.
At least one of the hounds had managed to track him.
He jerked free a dagger and hurled it at one of the charging men. It
buzzed through the air and took the man straight in the gut. He grunted,
doubled over, and fell to the street. Vasen turned and ran.
He hadn’t taken two strides before the hound’s magic affected him. His
muscles grew thick and sluggish. He suddenly felt as though he were running
through mud. Behind him, he could hear the stomps of his pursuers on the
flagged street. They were drawing closer.
He tried to fight off the spell, willed himself to move, but his legs felt
leaden. His arms would not answer his commands – 
Without warning, the spell effect ended. He had resisted it!
Smiling fiercely, he exploded back into a run and sprinted down the
nearest alley. The men pursued hard after. Vasen toppled every barrel he
passed, sent them rolling behind him. First one, then another, then another.
The men cursed, tried to leap them, failed, and fell. Breathing hard, Vasen
rounded a corner, got a grip on the rough wall, and climbed for his life.
It would be only moments before his pursuers regained their feet.
He hadn’t made it twenty feet before he heard them approach. He froze,
tried to make himself one with the wall. Cursing and breathing hard, the men
were right below him. Vasen’s heart hammered in his chest. He held onto the
wall with only one hand. With the other he gripped an explosive globe on his
necklace, readied it for a throw.
They ran past and continued down the alley.
He sighed in relief and climbed the rest of the way to the roof. When he
reached the top, he ran across the rooftop and looked back onto Borinkel’s
Avenue. There, in the middle of the street, the hound was kneeling over the
fallen body of the man Vasen had hit with the dagger. The man was apparently
dead, for the mage left him on the ground and started to move toward the alley.
Since this hound had shown himself able to see through Theevis’s
protective charm, Vasen decided that he could not allow him to live. Crouched
low, he crept to the edge of the rood and watched the mage approach below. He
knew that the other two Mask agents would not return for at least a few
moments. Plenty of time.
He silently drew his longsword. The Dwarven and Elven words for killing
danced through his brain – novlik and eisliesen. Both sounded cleaner than
murder.
The mage drew closer. Vasen saw that this was the same one who had
been part of Jeldis’s team. Strange that Jeldis hadn’t appeared.
The mage was just below Vasen now. He started to walk off but froze, as
though he sensed something …
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

It registered with Vasen then – the mage still had his detection spell in
effect!
The mage looked up to the roof in alarm. His mouth moved with the
beginnings of a spell. Vasen cursed and leaped from the roof with his longsword
raised high to strike. Before the mage could finish his incantation, Vasen
chopped downward and split the hound’s skull. Blood and brains showered the
street. Vasen’s momentum carried him hard to the ground. He crashed to the
street in a bloody tangle with the dead mage. The awkward landing snapped his
ankle.
He groaned but bit his lip to prevent a scream. Eyes watering, he pulled
forth a healing potion and gulped it down. Instantly, the bones of his ankle knit
back together. He disengaged from the body of the mage and stood to test the
ankle – still tender. He gulped a second healing potion. The pain vanished
altogether. But for the corpse at his feet, it was as though the leap had never
happened.
Without a backward glance, Vasen scaled back up to the rooftops and
sped for the Outer Harbor.
He made it to the harbor without seeing any more Night Mask hit teams.
The smell of sea salt and fish filled his nostrils. For as far as he could see to the
north and south, ships sat at piers. There were Inner Sea galleys, biremes from
the south, Cormyrian schooners, even a few high-prowed longboats. A forest of
masts stood against the pre-dawn sky, black spires ascending skyward. Even at
this hour he could hear the occasional shout carry from a ship’s rigging.
Scattered groups of men walked the waterfront, some obviously sailors
returning from shore leave drunk, others unidentifiable pedestrians. From atop
a warehouse roof, Vasen observed for a time, tried to determine whether any
were Mask agents. He couldn’t tell.
With nothing else for it, he climbed over the lip of the roof and descended
the warehouse wall. Once at street level, he melted into the darkness and
peered up and down the wharf. He saw no pursuers, only darkness.
Across from him, a three-sailed schooner sat in its berth – as good a ship
as any. Lanterns illuminated the deck. Sailors climbed among the rigging like
spiders in a web, shouting, working, laughing. He looked to the masthead, but
the ship flew no colors. An independent merchant then, or maybe a pirate.
Either way, fine by Vasen.
He looked once more up and down the wharf, saw no one, and broke from
cover. Walking quickly – he hoped unobtrusively – he made straight for the
ship. A plaque affixed to the side of the prow declared the vessel’s name: Wave
Runner.
A few of the crewmen on deck watched him approach. Two left what they
were doing and walked down the gangplank to meet him. Vasen kept his hands
empty and visible.
The sailors wore light scrubs and soft leather shoes typical of seamen.
Each sported several days’ growth of beard. Their hard eyes asked Vasen his
business before they ever opened their mouths.
“Help you, mate?” asked the taller. Vasen saw that he held some kind of
spike or pin nestled in his palm – a weapon. The other sailor stepped out wide,
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

took a flanking position.
Vasen made no hostile move. He figured the men to be pirates with a
sensitive cargo aboard. He did not want to appear a snooper or agent of the
Harbormaster.
“I need passage. When do you sail?”
The taller sailor ignored the question, flashed a hard smile of stained
teeth. “We sail at dawn, but we ain’t taking passengers.” With that, they turned
and began to walk away.
“I can pay.” Vasen said, and pulled out a few platinum. That turned them
round. Vasen knew it was risky to show wealth to these pirates, but he was
desperate.
Both sailors’ eyes grew sly at sight of coin. “So it’s like that, is it?” The
taller nudged the shorter. “He looks nervous, don’t he, Tik?”
The other smiled and nodded, his eyes glued to the coins.
“You in trouble boy?”
Vasen bit back the angry words that rose in his throat. Instead he tossed
the platinum at them. Their hands flashed and not one coin hit the pier.
“There’s more for each of you, and for the captain. If I get passage.”
The coins vanished into the sailors’ scrubs. The taller one grinned. “We’ve
all been in trouble sometime, though, haven’t we, Tik?”
The shorter man gave a noncommittal grunt.
“Tell you what, the captain doesn’t come aboard until the sun’s up.” He
gave the short man another nudge. “That’s tradition ain’t it, Tik?”
Another grunt.
The taller looked at Vasen and again flashed those stained teeth. “You
can wait here on the pier until he shows. It’s the captain’s say whether you
come or not. But for the right price he’s been known to take in folks, even one’s
what have trouble. Hasn’t he, Tik?”
Tik said nothing.
Vasen kept the anger from his face. There was nothing for it but to accept
the offer.
“I’ll wait.”
The sailors nodded. “Suit yerself,” said the taller. Without another word,
both Tall and Tik turned and walked up the gangplank.
Vasen walked a short distance away, burned that he had to endure
smugness from a couple of deckhands. Any other night, and he’d have shoved
that spike down both their throats. But tonight was not any other night. Wave
Runner was his best hope.
Out of long habit, he translated the vessel’s name into Elven, Dwarven,
Lurienal, then Thorass. The linguistic exercise reminded him fondly of Theevis.
He smiled to himself, thought of his mentor, and waited for the captain to
arrive. Dawn was less than a half-hour away. The lap of waves against the pier
made him drowsy. He closed his eyes, felt his fatigue for the first time.
A harsh voice pulled him out of his reverie. Jeldis’s voice.
“You think shaving your head would hide you from me? I can recognize
your walk at a spear’s cast, Coriver. And I didn’t need a hound to tell me you’d
come to the harbor.”
Vasen snapped open his eyes and whipped free his blade. Jeldis stood at
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

the end of the pier, ten paces away, his own longsword already in hand. Vasen
scanned the area but there was no one else in sight. Jeldis was alone.
The big man must have read his gaze. “Just you and me, Coriver. I sent
away the rest of my team.” His cold eyes promised blood. “It was my mistake to
wait so long to move on you, my mistake to remedy.”
Vasen considered jumping into the harbor but thought better of it. The
gray water offered no escape. What would he do, swim out of Westgate? No, 
Wave Runner was his only hope. He needed to put Jeldis down now or die
trying.
Resolved, he lowered into a fighting crouch. The pier did not offer as
much maneuvering room as he would have liked, but it would have to do. He
was just as big as Jeldis, just as strong, and a heartbeat faster. At least he
hoped.
As Jeldis approached, Vasen remembered his healing potions. He pulled
one of the steel vials from his beltpouch and gripped it in his offhand. Might as
well have it on hand, he figured. Just in case.
Out of the corner of his eye, he saw that the crew of Wave Runner had
congregated near the railing, smiling, murmuring. They were going to watch
the show. Vasen resolved to make it a good one.
“There’s only one way out of the Masks, Coriver,” Jeldis said as he slowly
closed.
Vasen knew it to be true. The Faceless never let anyone escape, never
stopped hunting traitors.
The sailors at Wave Runner’s railing hollered encouragement. “Get ‘em,
baldy,” a few said. “Yeah, kill the puke.” That set off a general round of
laughter.
Jeldis shot them a hateful glare and charged down the pier. He swung
overhand for Vasen’s head. Vasen parried, lashed out with a kick for the knee.
It missed, and Jeldis danced backward.
Vasen quickly followed up with a flurry of blows. He stabbed, ducked, and
slashed. The sailors murmured in appreciation but none of the blows struck
home. Jeldis was too strong – and equally fast. The big man parried again and
again. His longsword seemed everywhere.
Vasen knew he could not let this continue much longer. Another Mask
hit team could come along. Desperate, he lunged forward, blade aimed low for
Jeldis’s groin. The big man swatted the sword aside, spun, and punched Vasen
in the face with his free hand. Vasen’s vision went blurry for a heartbeat.
Reflexively, he struck out with his blade while he backed off, felt it nick flesh. 
Wave Runner’s crew let out a cheer. Jeldis exclaimed in pain. Vasen tried to
recover his wits.
Enraged by the wound in his forearm, Jeldis rushed forward and loosed a
barrage of blows. Vasen backed off, desperately parrying. The ring of steel on
steel was so fast as to sound continuous. After an eternity, Jeldis backed off.
Both men stood facing each other, breathing hard.
“You’ll never get away,” Jeldis gasped. “If not me then someone else.”
Vasen was too tired to reply, just sucked in air. His arms felt leaden. His
soul too felt leaden, weighed down with hopelessness. Jeldis was right: There
would always be someone else, as long as he lived.
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

Angrily he squeezed the vial in his hands. The vial …
An idea took shape in his mind.He charged Jeldis with a roar. As he did,
he popped the cork from the vial. Jeldis backed off, still gasping, blade held
defensively. Vasen closed, swung for Jeldis’s neck, missed, and left himself
horribly – and deliberately – exposed.
The big man dropped to one knee and stabbed Vasen through the gut.
Pain exploded in Vasen’s body. Warm blood gushed from the wound and began
to soak his cloak. He struggled to keep his feet, damning himself for a fool for
trying such a desperate gambit.
Jeldis gave a grunt of satisfaction and jerked the blade free. The
movement of the steel tore flesh and sent another wave of pain through Vasen’s
body. He reeled, staggered backward, felt his lifeblood pouring from his
abdomen. Jeldis raised his blade high, intent on finishing the combat.
Vasen, still desperately clutching the vial, feigned a stumble, teetered on
the edge of the pier, and let himself fall before Jeldis could close. As he did, he
slammed the vial into his mouth – cracking a tooth in the process – and gulped.
The cold water of the Harbor swallowed him.
The potion did its work instantly. The hole in his abdomen closed; the
horrific pain stopped. He felt a flash of satisfaction but it vanished quickly: He
had not been able to take a deep breath before submerging, and he had to stay
down long enough to convince Jeldis that he was dead.
The dark water was impenetrable. Though he dropped his sword and
shed his daggers, his clothes still weighed him down. Already his lungs had
begun to burn.. He tried to keep a count of how long he had been under but
quickly lost it.
Leave, Jeldis, you bastard, he willed to the surface. Leave!
Instinct demanded that he surface. To fight it, he instead swam
downward. He found Wave Runner’s side and swam along her barnacled keel
until he reached the other side of the ship. There, he swam toward the nearest
pier, still submerged. His lungs were on fire! He blew out some air, fought the
urge to gulp in more, and swam. When he reached the pier, he again forced
himself to stay down. Blowing out air a little at a time, he bought himself a few
more seconds. Finally, he could take no more. He broke the surface and
inhaled, unarmed and exposed.
A pair of legs stood on the pier over him. Vasen waited for the killing
blow, but it never came.
Instead, a hairy, calloused hand appeared before his face. Vasen wiped
the water from his eyes and tried to focus.
“I though I’d be pulling a corpse from the water.” The voice belonged to a
grizzled middle-aged man with a black beard and bald head. His barrel-chested
body had long ago gone to fat, but he still looked strong as a bull. He had only
one arm, and that was extended to help Vasen from the water.
Vase took the proffered hand, and the man heaved him up easily. “Here
he is, boys,” the man called up to the railing of Wave Runner. At that, a soft
cheer went up from the crew. Vasen winced at the sound, scanned the docks
for Jeldis. The man read Vasen’s expression and thumped him on the back.
“No need to worry, boy. That other fella sprinted off the moment you hit
the water.” He smiled and jerked a thumb at the ship. “I think he was worried
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

the boys might take matters into their own hands.”
Still gasping, Vasen only nodded and clasped the man’s shoulder
gratefully.
“My mate tells me you want passage aboard Wave Runner. That so?”
This man was the captain then. Vasen did his best to recover his breath,
“That’s so. I can pay.”
“So I hear. But you’re a hunted man, no?”
Vasen automatically translated the term: hunted in common; vikrik in
Dwarven; aes in Elven; erevis in ancient Thorass. The drill reminded him of
Theevis; sadness filled his breast. He fought down the feeling and looked the
captain in the eye. After all that had happened on the pier, he could hardly
deny it.
“I am.”
The Captain eyed him shrewdly, finally broke out in a grin. “That’s fine
by me.”
Vasen exhaled, at last returned the captain’s smile.“Let’s get you aboard,
then. We weigh anchor within the half hour.”
When the ship left, Vasen’s soul too would weigh anchor. At last, he
would be free of the Masks.
“I’m Fallimor, boy. Captain Gros Fallimor. What should we call you?”
Vasen thought about it. The captain had named him a hunted man;
hunted would be his name then. “Erevis,” he said. “Erevis Cale.”
The sun broke the horizon. Dawn. Already, the city was coming back to
life. It was a new day.
ABC Amber Text Converter Trial version, http://www.processtext.com/abctxt.html

