
lummeting from the tower, Cale perceived the 
moment stretching. Air roared past his ears. 
Shadows poured from his ﬂesh, no doubt trailing 
after his fall like the tail of a comet.
Above him sounded the despondent, furious 
wail of the Skulls and the crack of breaking 
stone. The cavern was falling to pieces, smash­
ing the ruined Netherese city on the cavern ﬂoor. 
Lightning and a baleful green beam split the air 
beside him—ill-aimed spells from the Skulls.
Beside him, Magadon and Jak shouted as they 
fell. He clutched each of their cloaks in one of 
his hands. They clutched at him, whatever they 
could grab. The shadows leaking from his ﬂesh 
coalesced, enshrouded them.
The ﬂoor of the collapsing cavern rushed up to 
P
CHAPTER 1
THE BEST LAID PLANS

6 • Paul S. Kemp
meet them. The moment was stretched to its limit; it was 
ending. Cale had to act or die alongside his friends.
Cale felt the darkness around him the same way he felt 
the air—a tangible sensation on his skin. Its touch was as 
light and seductive as that of a lover. He always felt the 
darkness now.
Opening his mind, he attuned himself to the cor­
respondence between the Prime Plane and the Plane of 
Shadow, the link that lived in every shadow. He reached 
for it, took it in his mental grasp and willed them all to 
move from one plane to the other. At the same time, he 
consciously dispelled the inertia of their fall.
Sound fell away. Darkness swallowed them. In the 
span of a heartbeat they moved between worlds.
They found themselves lying face down on the cold, 
damp stone of the Plane of Shadow. The Skulls were 
gone; the ruins were gone. They were alone in the dark, 
but alive.
The breath of his friends came in ragged gasps. The 
slow drip of water sounded from somewhere. The air 
smelled dank, pungent with some vague foulness.
Cale remained still for a moment as stabs of pain shot 
through his body—the regenerative properties of his 
shade ﬂesh closing the wounds Riven had inﬂicted on 
him.
Riven.
Cale sat up, and as he did he remembered it all, or 
thought he did. Riven’s betrayal had been planned, or at 
least Cale thought it had. Unless he had dreamed it. . . .
Beside him, Magadon rolled over with a groan, still 
breathing hard.
“Demon’s teeth,” the guide swore, and his voice echoed 
loudly, jarring in the silence.
Beside Magadon, Jak sat up with a groan of his own. 
He looked around blindly, eyes wide. “I can’t see a thing. 
Cale?”
Cale had become so accustomed to his ability to see 

Midnight’s Mask • 7
perfectly in darkness that he forgot that others could not. 
The chamber was as dark as a devil’s heart, thick with the 
black air of the Plane of Shadow.
“Here, little man,” he answered, and reached out a hand 
to touch Jak’s shoulder. The halﬂing clutched his hand and 
gave it a brief squeeze.
“I will get a light,” Magadon said. He unstrapped 
his pack and searched for a sunrod. Cale remembered 
that Magadon’s ﬁendish heritage allowed him to see in 
the darkness, probably not as well as a shade, but well 
enough.
Cale stood, wincing as the last of his wounds closed.
“Can the Skulls track us?” Magadon asked as he 
searched his pack.
Cale had not considered that. “I don’t see how,” he said 
after a moment’s thought. As far as he knew, his ability to 
walk the shadows between worlds left no footprints.
The guide nodded, found the sunrod he sought within 
his pack. He struck it on the chamber ﬂoor and the 
alchemical substance on its tip ﬂared to life. He held 
it aloft and lit the cavern—dimly. The darkness gave 
ground only grudgingly.
Jak and Magadon blinked in the sudden illumination, 
but Cale felt a part of him boil away in the sunrod’s light. 
He refused to cover his eyes despite the sting. His shadow 
hand, he was pleased to see, had not disappeared. Per­
haps only real sunlight could cause that.
“The Plane of Shadow,” Jak observed, eyeing their 
surroundings. “But where this time? This is not where 
we were before.”
A large natural cavern opened around them. Loose 
stone and stalagmites covered the uneven ﬂoor. Irregu­
larly shaped holes in the walls opened onto tunnels 
that led into darkness. An oily black substance clung in 
patches to the stone. It shimmered in the sunrod’s light 
like polished basalt. Water dripped from the stalactite-
dotted ceiling to fall into a dark pool in the center of the 

8 • Paul S. Kemp
chamber. The pool was as black as jet. The air felt heavy 
and still, threatening.
“Something akin to the Underdark but on the Plane 
of Shadow, I would guess,” Magadon offered as he stood. 
“Do not use the water to ﬁll your skins and do not touch 
the walls. That’s some kind of lichen, but I’ve never seen 
its like before.”
Jak nodded, his eyes thoughtful. He looked up at Cale.
“Are you are all right? The wounds, they’re healed?”
When Cale regarded him to answer, Jak recoiled 
slightly but masked it quickly.
“Dark, but I cannot get used to the way your eyes look 
here,” the little man said.
Cale felt himself ﬂush.
“I’m all right,” he said. He extended a hand and pulled 
Jak to his feet. Cale put his ﬁngers through the hole Riven 
had made in the front of his cloak and armor. He had simi­
lar holes in the back. The holes in his ﬂesh were closed. 
“What about you two?”
Both Jak and Magadon were pale, exhausted, and 
obviously wounded. Claw rakes had opened cloaks, rent 
armor, and torn ﬂesh.
“I’m well enough,” Magadon said, and moved to the 
edge of the pool. The guide knelt and stared at the water. 
He dipped his ﬁngers, smelled them, and wiped them 
clean on his breeches.
Jak said, “I am all right, too. We killed one of the 
slaadi, Cale. The small one. The other one. . . .”
Magadon stood and ﬁnished for Jak. “In our hurry to 
get to you, we left the other alive but enspelled. He may 
have died in the cavern’s collapse.”
Cale doubted it, but kept his thought to himself.
“We should have killed him,” Jak said, and reached 
into his belt pouch for his pipe. “Just to be sure.” He came 
out with a wooden pipe, the one he had given to Riven, 
the one Riven had thrown back at him atop the tower. He 
must have picked it up before they ﬂed. He eyed it for a 

Midnight’s Mask • 9
moment, then threw it past Magadon and into the pool, 
where it vanished. He withdrew his other pipe—the ivory 
bowled affair—and popped it into his mouth. He chewed 
its end in agitation, but did not light up. Around the pipe 
stem he said, “I’m personally going to drive an armspan 
of steel into Drasek Riven’s gut for what he did.” For 
Magadon’s beneﬁt, Jak added, “I’ve done it before, you 
know. Treacherous Zhent bastard.”
Cale thought the little man’s anger might be mis­
placed. To Magadon, Cale asked tentatively, “Do you . . . 
remember what happened between you, me, and Riven, 
last time we were on the Plane of Shadow?”
Jak looked up, a furrow in his brow.
Magadon started to speak, stopped, ﬁnally nodded. 
“Erevis, I thought I had dreamed it all, or conceived it in 
a meditation. Sometimes my mind manifests wishes as 
reali—” He stopped and smiled. “Never mind all that. I 
do remember. It started to come back to me shortly after 
I saw him atop the tower with the slaad.”
“What came back to you?” Jak asked.
Cale nodded, pleased to have his own hazy memory 
conﬁrmed. Magadon had set Riven’s betrayal—itself the 
product of a latent psionic compulsion—as the trigger that 
would allow the guide and Cale to remember the strata­
gem they had developed.
“So what next, then?” Magadon asked.
Jak took his pipe from his mouth and regarded them 
with narrowed eyes.
“What are you two talking about?”
Magadon’s question sent Cale’s mind racing. He thought 
ﬁrst of Riven and of Varra. He made up his mind.
“A return to Skullport,” he announced. “Just me. For 
only a moment or two.”
He wanted to determine if the city still stood. He 
needed to see if Varra was all right.
“Skullport?” Jak asked. “Why would we return there? 
Again, what in the Seven Heavens are you two—”

10 • Paul S. Kemp
Magadon stared into Cale’s face and shook his head. 
“We cannot go back to Skullport, Erevis. Not right now. 
Riven is relying on us.”
“Riven!” Jak exclaimed.
“Because of what we did, the cavern could be collaps­
ing,” Cale said. “We’ve only been gone moments. I am 
going back, Mags. I can get her out.”
Magadon did not ask who Cale meant by her. Instead, 
he shook his head and said, “I understand what you 
want to do, Erevis. But if it was going to collapse, then it 
already has. She’s either alive or . . . not, and you won’t be 
able to affect which it is. But wherever Riven is right now, 
he will soon remember what happened, too. That makes 
him vulnerable. The slaadi have displayed telepathy, and 
we think they can read minds.”
Cale hesitated. Magadon must have seen it. The guide 
added, “He trusted you when he agreed to do this. We’ve 
got to back him up. We can return to Skullport afterward. 
I’ll go with you. Jak will go with you.”
“I will?” Jak asked, confused. “Wait a—”
“But not right now,” Magadon said. “Right now, we do 
what we intended to do.”
“And what in the Hells is that?” Jak exclaimed.
Cale stared at Magadon, not in anger, but in frustra­
tion. He knew Magadon was speaking sense but he felt as 
though he were abandoning Varra. He made one last play. 
“You’re sure you have Riven?”
If Magadon did not have a sensory link on Riven, they 
would have no way to locate him. Cale did not know how 
he wanted Magadon to answer.
Magadon nodded and replied, “Since the moment I 
stepped into the cupola atop the tower. Erevis, if he makes 
a play for the Sojourner because he expects our help. . . .”
Cale sighed and nodded. The guide spoke the truth. 
Riven had trusted him. Cale silently prayed to Mask to 
protect Varra until he could return to Skullport.
If there still was a Skullport.

Midnight’s Mask • 11
Fed up, Jak stepped between Magadon and Cale. He 
pointed his pipe at Cale, glared, and said, “I’ll ask again. 
What in the Hells are you two talking about?”
Cale smiled and said, “Sorry, little man.” He quickly 
explained to Jak the plan they had developed on the 
Plane of Shadow: Magadon had implanted a latent 
mental urging in Riven’s mind to betray them at an 
opportune moment and ally himself with the slaadi. 
They had hoped that Riven would thereby get close to the 
Sojourner, where he would serve as a beacon for the rest 
of them. To avoid discovery by the slaadi, who likely could 
read minds, Magadon had wiped the scheme from their 
memories until the triggering event occurred—Riven’s 
putative betrayal. Riven’s trigger was different. He would 
not remember the plan until he saw the Sojourner.
Jak absorbed the story in wide-eyed silence. Finally, he 
said, “He’s a plant? Burn me! Every time I think I have 
that blackheart ﬁgured. . . .”
“You are not alone in that,” Magadon said.
Jak popped his pipe in his mouth and looked up at 
Cale, his expression mildly hurt. “You could have trusted 
me with it.”
“I know that, little man,” Cale answered. “It wasn’t 
trust. I ﬁgured the fewer who knew, the better. And I 
wanted at least one of us to be outside of it, in case some­
thing went wrong. If we all started to go mad, I wanted 
someone who could ﬁgure things out and ﬁx it.”
Jak seemed to accept that. He chewed his pipe, thought­
ful, and said, “You three were talking a long while to come 
up with this little scheme. And you said something in a 
foreign language, Cale. What about that?”
“We did?” Cale asked.
“You did,” Jak answered.
Cale had no idea what Jak was talking about. He looked 
to Magadon, whose face showed similar confusion.
“Something else?” Cale asked Magadon. “Another 
contingency?”

12 • Paul S. Kemp
Magadon shook his head. “Perhaps. We won’t know 
until we know.”
“Trickster’s hairy toes,” Jak softly said.
Cale agreed. The idea that something else might have 
been placed in his mind but he was ignorant of it. . . .
From far down one of the tunnels, whispers sounded, 
hisses. They trailed back to silence. Still, whatever lived 
in the Underdark of the Plane of Shadow must have heard 
their voices or perhaps seen their light.
All three had blades in hand before they drew their 
next breath. Jak pocketed his pipe and licked his lips.
“We should not stay here overlong,” the little man said.
Weaveshear leaked shadows; so too did Cale’s ﬂesh.
“We aren’t,” Cale said. “Mags, show me what Riven 
sees. We go on my word. We wait for the Sojourner to 
show, ﬁnd out what we can, then hit him with everything 
we have.”
Magadon nodded, closed his eyes, and concentrated. A 
violet halo surrounded his head and he held up his free 
hand. Cale took it.
And saw.
            
For the hundredth time, Riven rebuked himself for 
leaving Cale bleeding but alive. He still did not under­
stand why he had done it. He never left opponents alive. A 
simple ﬂick of his blade would have opened Cale’s throat 
and put an end to the First of the Shadowlord. Cale’s 
shade ﬂesh could not have regenerated the damage that 
Riven could have done.
He could not explain his behavior. When he looked 
back, it was as though someone else had been control­
ling him. The events atop the tower were a blur in his 
memory.
He pushed the recriminations out of his mind as unpro­
ductive nonsense. He needed to focus on the present. He 

Midnight’s Mask • 13
stood on a sword’s edge and he knew it. He had taken a 
gamble allying with the slaadi. The creatures were unre­
liable; they might turn on him at any time.
He did not know where the slaadi had brought him. 
From the crumbling cavern near Skullport, they had tele­
ported to the surface, mentally communicated with their 
master, the Sojourner, and from there teleported to. . . .
Here, Riven thought.
The foppish slaad Azriim, in his preferred half-drow 
form, stood to one side of him, and the dull slaad, Dolgan, 
stood to the other. Both seemed to have already recovered 
from the wounds inﬂicted on them at the Skulls’ tower.
“Where are we?” Riven asked.
“Home,” Azriim answered.
They were in the center of a smooth-walled, hemispher­
ical chamber. There were no windows and the stone, while 
smooth, was not masonry, so Riven assumed they were 
underground. The dry air smelled faintly of medicines 
or perhaps alchemical preparations. The smell made his 
nose tingle.
A thick carpet covered the ﬂoor, and a single, dim 
green glowglobe on the far side of the chamber provided 
the only light. The globe cast only enough illumination 
to raise shadows in the room. Riven could see little. 
Irregularly-shaped mounds dotted the ﬂoor and it took 
Riven a moment’s study to recognize them as cushions 
and furniture. In better light, the place must have looked 
like a Calishite Caliph’s harem room.
Riven saw no means of egress, no doors or archways of 
any kind. That made him uncomfortable, and he let his 
hands fall to the hilts of his sabers. It would have been 
ridiculous for the slaadi to have brought him all the way 
here only to ambush him, but. . . .
They are unpredictable, he thought. And it’s better to 
be cautious than dead.
He decided to take steps to ensure a means of escape, 
should he need it.

14 • Paul S. Kemp
“Home is dark,” he said. “How about a light? I can’t see 
past my hands.”
He deliberately stepped on a cushion at his feet and 
feigned a stumble into Dolgan. Cursing, he intentionally 
entangled himself in the slaad’s cloak and limbs—the 
slaad’s form looked fat but his body was as solid as a tree—
and used the short-lived tussle to lift the teleportation rod 
from the slaad’s cloak pocket.
“Watch where you step, human,” the big slaad said, 
dislodging Riven and shoving him away.
“I can’t watch anything, oaf,” Riven answered. “I said I 
cannot see.” He feigned a second stumble on another cush­
ion and used the movement to secrete the rod in his cloak. 
“There are cushions all over the ﬂoor and walking on this 
ridiculous carpet is like moving through mud.”
“I selected these carpets myself,” Azriim said, his tone 
mildly hurt.
“I’m not surprised,” Riven answered, putting a sneer 
in his voice.
Dolgan said to Azriim, “Why can’t I just kill him?”
“I am tempted,” Azriim said lightly, “given his view of 
my carpets.”
Riven stared into Dolgan’s face, the features indistin­
guishable in the darkness. “His permission to try won’t 
make it so, slaad. I’d put you down in less than a tencount, 
darkness or no.”
Riven kicked away the cushions near him, to clear 
any trip hazards. Both hands went to saber hilts and 
he balanced on the balls of his feet. Dolgan took a step 
forward but Azriim stopped him with an arm across 
his chest.
“Enough,” Azriim commanded, smiling indulgently. 
“You’re adding to his tension.”
Riven kept his gaze on Dolgan but said to Azriim, “You 
haven’t yet seen me tense, slaad.”
“I can smell your sweat at ten paces,” Azriim said.
Dolgan glared at Riven and said, “I do not understand 

Midnight’s Mask • 15
why we have not killed him. His brood killed Serrin, 
wounded you, wounded me.”
“Brood?” Riven asked derisively. “I’m a man, oaf. I 
don’t have a brood. And you’re fortunate that it wasn’t me 
who gave you the wound. If it had, you wouldn’t be stand­
ing here to annoy me.”
Azriim ignored Riven and said to Dolgan, “You enjoy 
being wounded, Dolgan, so no harm done. And besides, I 
like him.” He looked at Riven and smiled broadly. “Even 
though he has poor taste in clothes, friends . . . and 
carpets.”
Dolgan started to speak but Azriim cut him off, 
saying,“Silence, now. The Sojourner comes.”
Riven felt something . . . a presence . . . join them, ﬁll 
the space. He could ﬁnd no other way to characterize it.
The slaadi looked past him, their eyes wide.
Riven could not help himself, though it meant turning 
his back to the slaadi. He turned around to see a circular 
hole in the wall where none had been before. Floating 
a hand’s-breadth off the ﬂoor before it was a humanoid 
creature that could only be the Sojourner. The instant 
Riven laid eyes on the creature, memories from the Plane 
of Shadow ﬂooded him.
“Father,” said Dolgan, awe in his tone, and Riven heard 
the big slaad abase himself.
Azriim stepped forward and put a hand on Riven’s 
shoulder. The sudden contact gave Riven a start but he 
managed not to gut the slaad.
Azriim said, “Sojourner, I’ve brought you a present.”
            
“What in all the Hells is that?” Cale breathed. Wisps 
of shadow snaked from his ﬂesh.
“The Sojourner,” Magadon answered softly. “It must be.”
“Dark,” Cale swore. He knew that at that moment 
Riven’s memory was ﬁlling in.

16 • Paul S. Kemp
Beside them, Jak asked, “What does he look like? What 
is he?”
Cale only shook his head. “I don’t know, Jak.” He had 
never seen a creature like the Sojourner.
The Sojourner was neither slaad nor human, though he 
was humanoid in shape. With his pale ﬂesh and skeletal 
frame, Cale might have thought him undead had it not 
been for the thready black veins pulsing beneath his skin. 
He bore a staff, and several magical gemstones orbited 
his head.
Magadon said, “Gods. I can detect his mental energies 
even through the link with Riven. He has a presence, 
Erevis. Do you feel it? I think he’s not only a wizard but 
also a mindmage.”
“A mindmage? Like you?” Cale asked.
“Not like me,” Magadon corrected. “More powerful, 
Erevis. Much more. Riven is in very real danger.”
Cale nodded. To Jak, he said, “Little man, cast every 
defensive spell on us that you can. Hurry. Do whatever 
you can to shield us from spells and mental attacks.”
“Done,” Jak said. He pulled out his holy symbol, a 
jeweled pendant, and recited the words to a spell, then 
another.
Still watching through Riven’s eyes, Cale said, “Speed 
and surprise are all we have. When we get there, we 
concentrate everything on the Sojourner. He’s the target. 
The slaadi are incidental. Mags, can you tell Riven that 
we’re coming?”
“Not without risk of detection by the Sojourner,” Maga­
don answered. “He will be sensitive to mental emanations. 
I’m surprised he hasn’t yet detected the visual leech.”
“Then we’ll surprise Riven, too,” Cale said. “Get ready. 
We go when I say.”
Cale held off because he wanted to give Riven a 
moment to gather himself. The rush of memories was 
intense. Besides, he also wanted to learn as much as he 
could before attacking. He could not hear through the 

Midnight’s Mask • 17
mind leech but he could see enough to read the Sojourner’s 
thin lips.
Meanwhile, Jak continued to cast.
            
In a rush, Riven remembered why he had betrayed 
Cale, why he had left the First of the Shadowlord bleeding 
but not dead. The torrent of memories made his temples 
burn.
He was a plant.
Only long practice allowed him to keep his face expres­
sionless. He suddenly became painfully conscious that a 
mind-reading slaad stood beside him and another behind 
him, and that the Sojourner—a creature of obvious but 
unknown power—hovered across the chamber.
Riven, Magadon, and Cale had devised a plot back on 
the Plane of Shadow to get Riven close to the Sojourner. 
Riven’s betrayal of Cale was designed to gain the slaadi’s 
trust, which it had. Magadon and Cale would then use 
Riven as a beacon to bring them to the Sojourner.
Snippets of the exchange played in his mind.
Why me? Riven had asked, when Cale had related his 
idea.
You already know why, Cale had answered, and Riven 
had known why: because a betrayal by a former Zhent 
and assassin was believable; because the Second of the 
Shadowlord would surely covet the position of the First; 
because Riven was a better killer than Cale.
It was believable enough that it was almost true. Hells, 
perhaps it was true.
Riven’s mind raced; he pored through his memories. 
What had he really intended? He could not remember 
many of the details. But he did remember that he’d wanted 
to keep other options available. And at that moment other 
options were looking more and more appealing.
When Riven had told Azriim in Skullport that he 

18 • Paul S. Kemp
always sided with the winner, he had meant it. And while 
he deplored being second to Cale in Mask’s eyes, he also 
had thought back then that they would succeed. Mask was 
blessing him with more powers every tenday. He’d had no 
intention of remaining the Shadowlord’s Second forever.
But he could see now that his calculus had been off. 
He had stood face to face with high-ranking members of 
the Zhentarim, powerful priests, skilled warriors, all of 
them powerful men and women, but he had never before 
stood in the presence of anything like the Sojourner. The 
creature’s thin body fairly sparked with pent-up power; 
his presence implied might. There would be no defeating 
him.
If Riven wanted to side with the winner, he had to side 
with the Sojourner and the slaadi.
He reconsidered the plan, reconsidered everything. He 
may or may not have planned a betrayal of the betrayal 
back on the Plane of Shadow, but now. . . .
Don’t come, he thought to Cale and Magadon, in case 
Magadon was somehow connected to him. Don’t bother.
The Sojourner looked past Riven and Azriim to Dolgan 
and said, “Stand, Dolgan.” His soft voice leaked so much 
power that it seemed to squeeze everything else out of 
the room.
Over his shoulder, Riven watched the big slaad lurch 
to his feet, as obedient as a well-trained dog. Dolgan was 
gnawing excitedly at his lower lip, so hard it was bleed­
ing. Riven wanted to sneer at the oaf’s obsequiousness 
but could not quite manage it. Obsequiousness seemed 
appropriate, somehow.
Dolgan caught his gaze, made a bloody grin, and said, 
“Maybe you’re tense now, eh?”
Riven resisted the urge to slit the bastard’s throat and 
turned back to face the Sojourner.
The creature held a smooth duskwood staff in his pale, 
long-ﬁngered hands. A tracery of gold or electrum spiraled 
around the shaft from base to top. He inclined the staff 

Midnight’s Mask • 19
slightly and the hole in the wall behind him vanished, 
replaced again by smooth stone.
No wonder Riven had seen no exits. The Sojourner 
created them as needed. Riven was doubly pleased that 
he had lifted Dolgan’s teleportation rod. He would need 
to ﬁgure out its operation quickly, should an emergency 
arise.
Riven considered the Sojourner. He looked vaguely 
human, but unlike any race of humans with which the 
assassin was familiar. Standing a head taller than even 
Cale, the Sojourner’s thin body looked as though it had 
been stretched overlong by pulling him at the ankles and 
head. Sunken black eyes in cavernous sockets stared out 
of a similarly elongated face. His nose was little more than 
a bump with two vertical slits, his lips as thin as blades. 
The points of his backswept ears reached nearly to the top 
of his bald, spotted pate. A handful of magical gemstones 
whirred around his head in different orbits. Seeing them, 
Riven was reminded somehow of Cale’s celestial sphere, 
the magical artifact that had started everything.
“A present, Azriim?” the Sojourner asked, letting his 
gaze fall on Riven as he ﬂoated forward across the room. 
Outside the light of the glow globe, the Sojourner was 
reduced to a shadow in Riven’s sight.
With great effort, Riven kept his face a mask—no fear, 
no wonder, no dread—even while his mind moved through 
possibilities.
Azriim said, “Yes, Sojourner. This human was . . . help­
ful in our successful use of the Weave Tap. His clothes 
are unfortunate, I acknowledge. And his taste is poor in 
general. But neither of those are fatal ﬂaws.”
Riven did not bother to correct Azriim, though he had 
been more than merely helpful with planting the Weave 
Tap seed—he had been instrumental. Without Riven’s 
intervention, Cale would have killed Azriim.
But instead of speaking, Riven made a stiff bow. The 
gesture did not come easily to him.

20 • Paul S. Kemp
“Sojourner,” Riven said.
The creature did not acknowledge him, and Riven 
dared take no offense. The Sojourner stopped in the air 
two paces from Riven. Up close, his power was even more 
palpable. Fear threatened, but Riven managed to hold 
his ground and his expressionless mask. Riven’s eyesight 
adjusted somewhat to the darkness and he could again 
mark the Sojourner’s features.
Though he was not a slaad, the nose slits, spotted skin, 
and the shape of his eyes reminded Riven of something 
slaadlike, or at least reptilian. He wore a short-sleeved 
robe of red silk, trimmed in gold, over which hung an 
ermine-trimmed black cape clasped at his throat with a 
silver pin. His thin body swam in the clothing, and both 
robe and cape hung off his frame as though he were made 
of sticks.
The Sojourner ﬁxed Riven with a stare, started to say 
something, but stopped, blinked, and inhaled sharply.
At ﬁrst Riven did not know what had happened, then it 
hit him. The Sojourner had felt a stab of pain.
“Father?” Dolgan asked.
Beside him, Azriim wore a sneer nearly the match of 
Riven’s.
The Sojourner had to be sick or injured, Riven rea­
soned, which explained why the creature had moved his 
body hardly at all since entering the room. Perhaps even 
small movements pained him.
Riven tried to ﬁgure how that ﬁt into his calculations, 
if at all.
The Sojourner’s spasm passed as quickly as it had 
appeared.
“I am well, Dolgan,” he said, and eyed Riven. “You were 
a companion of the priest of Mask?”
Riven nodded tightly. The mention of Cale as a priest 
irritated him.
“You betrayed your friend to join my sons?”
“I don’t have friends,” Riven answered, and kept his 

Midnight’s Mask • 21
voice steady. “I have allies and enemies. Allies I use. 
Enemies I kill.”
The Sojourner smiled, a barely perceptible rise in the 
corners of his mouth. “Which are we, then?”
Behind Riven, Dolgan chortled. The big slaad shifted 
on his feet.
“Allies,” Riven said, but could not prevent himself from 
adding over his shoulder, “For now.”
Dolgan growled, moved a step closer.
Riven tensed, readied himself. Azriim dispelled the 
tension. “You see?” the foppish slaad said, grinning and 
thumping Riven on the shoulder. “I like him. So does 
Dolgan.”
Dolgan scoffed and spat on the carpet.
Azriim frowned at that and said, “Mind the carpet, 
fool.”
The Sojourner remained expressionless, motionless, 
and considered. Riven knew his life sat on a blade’s edge. 
The moments seemed hours. Finally, the Sojourner said to 
Azriim, “The timing is poor, Azriim. Things are nearing 
completion and you have introduced a . . . random element 
into my plans.”
“I enjoy random elements,” Azriim answered, a chal­
lenge in his tone.
Anger ﬂashed in the Sojourner’s eyes. He raised his 
staff slightly and Dolgan fell to the ﬂoor. Azriim bowed 
his head and took his hand from Riven.
Riven considered using the teleportation rod to get the 
Nine Hells clear of there, but his pride refused to let him 
run. He would make his play and see it through.
“Time is short,” the Sojourner said to the room, and 
Riven wondered at his meaning. “I am disinclined to 
indulge you. You will take another seed by sea to the 
Eldritch Temple of Mystryl. Your human is an unneces­
sary risk. Accordingly—”
“I can be an asset,” Riven interrupted, even as he put 
one hand to the teleportation rod. “I know Cale well.”

22 • Paul S. Kemp
Azriim nodded and said, “He was his companion.”
“He was, Azriim, and that is why I wonder why he 
aided you.” The Sojourner turned his gaze to Riven. “That 
is the question.”
“Why do we aid you?” Azriim asked. “That, too, is a 
question.”
Behind Riven, Dolgan whined in dismay.
Riven turned one of the dials on the rod with his thumb. 
He was not certain he could operate it. He certainly could 
not dictate a location. But if things went poorly, anywhere 
would be better than where he stood.
The Sojourner’s eyes bored into Azriim. “You aid me 
because I give you no choice. But also because I offer 
something you crave. And because you fear me.” He said 
the last in a soft, tight tone that caused Azriim to take a 
half-step backward, leaving Riven alone and exposed.
“And appropriately so,” the Sojourner added. He nodded 
at Riven. “This one does not fear you. That is evident. So 
what do you offer him?”
Azriim made no answer.
Riven gave his own: “Cale—the priest of Mask—I want 
him dead.”
The Sojourner stared at him, baring his soul. “Why?”
Riven gritted his teeth and looked away. He would 
not admit, even to the Sojourner, that being the Second 
of Mask galled him. Instead, he said simply, “I have my 
reasons. It’s enough that I’m here of my own choice, and 
for my own beneﬁt.”
“I will decide if it is enough,” the Sojourner said 
softly.
To that, Riven said nothing. His thumb hovered over 
the rod’s dials, gave another half turn.
The only sound in the room was the Sojourner’s 
wheeze.
Riven decided to make one last play.
“Make the decision,” he said softly. “I’m either with you 
or I’m not. And if not, then we are no longer allies.”

Midnight’s Mask • 23
Dolgan lurched to his feet with a growl. Riven put a 
hand to a saber hilt.
A look from the Sojourner froze the big slaad. The 
mysterious creature eyed Riven with something akin to 
appreciation.
“You remind me of Azriim,” he said.
Riven did not consider that a compliment but kept his 
feelings to himself.
Perhaps sensing a change in the Sojourner’s senti­
ments, Azriim again took station beside Riven. “He can 
accompany Dolgan and me, Sojourner, to the Eldritch 
Temple. He has already proven his usefulness. I believe 
his words—he wants the priest dead.”
“No,” Dolgan said. “Kill him.”
Riven wanted nothing so much as to turn around and 
slit Dolgan’s throat.
The Sojourner smiled distantly. To Riven, he said, “You 
are here of your own choice? For your own beneﬁt?”
“Those are my words,” Riven answered.
“They are,” the Sojourner acknowledged. “Now let us 
see if they are true.”
The Sojourner never moved, gave no warning, but 
agony wracked Riven’s head.
He screamed, clutched his skull in his palms, and fell 
to his knees. He felt as if ﬁve long ﬁngers had burrowed 
knuckle-deep into his brain. There, they began to sift 
through what they found. Riven had never before felt 
more violated. He resisted the intrusion and fought—
futile. The Sojourner’s will was inexorable, the pain 
unbearable. Riven’s eye felt as though it would pop out 
of his skull. He forced his blurry gaze upward and stared 
into the Sojourner’s eyes, fell into them. His body shook, 
convulsed, but he held the Sojourner’s gaze. He bit open 
his tongue. Screams, spit, and blood poured from his 
mouth. He felt his consciousness being cracked open like 
a nut. He could not move; his body would not answer his 
commands. He could do nothing but suffer and scream. 

24 • Paul S. Kemp
He forced himself to stay conscious.
Mental ﬁngers peeled away the layers of his brain, 
baring memories, hopes, fears, ambitions. He screamed 
again, again.
The Sojourner’s expression did not change.
Distantly, he heard Dolgan laughing and Azriim 
shouting.
He, too, is a servant of Mask the Shadowlord, the 
Sojourner mentally projected, sorting Riven’s life and 
laying it out for the slaadi. A mistreated boy who became 
an assassin. He hates his life up to now. Religion has given 
him purpose. . . .
“Get out,” Riven tried to mutter, but the syllables 
emerged only as an indecipherable mumble.
Ah, the Sojourner projected, and nodded. He is much 
like you two in that he also desires a transformation, not 
to gray, but from Second to First. He hates the priest for 
being First.
Riven tried again to speak, failed. His heart ham­
mered in his chest. He tried to dismiss from his mind the 
events that had occurred in the Plane of Shadow, tried to 
tuck them into some distant corner of his consciousness, 
but the Sojourner burrowed like a gnome through the dirt 
of his life.
The Sojourner reached the memory. Riven screamed 
again. Blood leaked from his nose. Surely his skull must 
explode. Surely.
And here is this, the Sojourner said, his mental voice 
hard. He came to kill me, to draw others here to kill me. 
The betrayal of the priest of Mask was a fraud, a ploy. 
You have brought a would-be murderer into my presence, 
Azriim.
The full force of the Sojourner’s mind and will assaulted 
Riven’s mind, pinioning him, burying him under its 
weight. He fell ﬂat on the ﬂoor. His vision went dark; 
something warm dripped from his ears. He was falling, 
falling.

Midnight’s Mask • 25
Riven tried to mouth the words, “No. It is real. I want 
him dead.” His lips would not form the words so he thought 
them instead: I want him dead! I want him dead!
A booted foot slammed into Riven’s ribs—Dolgan. 
Riven’s leather armor kept the bones intact but his breath 
went out in a whoosh.
“Kill him,” Dolgan said.
He was going to die prone on the ﬂoor, helpless as a 
babe. Distantly, he wondered if Cale and Magadon were 
watching, laughing.
They must have a practitioner of the Invisible Art 
among their number, the Sojourner observed, surprise in 
his mental voice. He has moderate skill.
The pain in Riven’s mind intensiﬁed. He was too far 
gone to scream anymore. He dug his ﬁngers into the carpet 
so hard that he tore three ﬁngernails from their beds. He 
felt a peculiar sensation through the pain. A tickle in his 
consciousness. Something scurried around the edges of his 
sentience, trying to avoid the Sojourner’s mental percep­
tion. To no avail. Nothing could avoid the Sojourner.
The Sojourner said, We have a mindmage in our midst. 
To someone Riven could not see, the Sojourner projected, 
I see you.
It must have been Magadon. They had been watching 
the whole time.
With the Sojourner’s attention temporarily diverted, 
Riven managed to claw his way back to coherence.
“Get . . . out . . . of my head!” he shouted, and pulled 
himself up to all fours.
            
Magadon lurched back, clutching his temples and 
groaning with pain. Jak stopped whatever spell he had 
been casting and leaped to the guide’s aid.
“He sensed me,” Magadon managed, leaning on Jak. 
“Such a mind. . . .”

26 • Paul S. Kemp
Cale knew. He had felt the Sojourner make contact 
through Magadon, had felt the residuum of power that 
had accompanied the contact. Cale had let the mental 
scrying go on far too long. Riven had suffered unneces­
sarily. He had hoped to learn the Sojourner’s full plans for 
the Weave Tap, but he had learned only snippets.
He started to draw the darkness around them. The light 
from Magadon’s sunrod dimmed. Shadows intensiﬁed.
“Mags?” Cale asked while he summoned shadows.
“I’m all right,” the guide said. He took his hand off 
Jak’s shoulder and massaged his brow. He unslung his 
bow and nocked an arrow, though he did not draw. “I’m 
ready.”
The air around Cale’s body crackled with magical 
energy; the hairs on his arms stood up—the result of Jak’s 
various protective spells. Cale hoped the magic would be 
enough.
“I did what I could,” Jak said by way of explanation, 
and gripped his holy symbol, shortsword, and dagger.
Magadon concentrated, and a handful of coin-sized 
spheres of light formed around his head and quickly 
faded.
“I cannot mindlink us,” he said. “Jak’s spell is blocking 
my abilities, at least. Let us hope it does the same to the 
Sojourner.”
Cale nodded and quickly donned his mask. To Jak, 
he said, “It’s a dark cavern, little man. Cluttered with 
cushions and furniture. The two slaadi—one in human 
form, one as a half-drow—and the Sojourner. Riven is on 
the ﬂoor. ”
He hefted Weaveshear, looked each of his comrades in 
the eye.
Both nodded.
“We go,” he said.
Cale let himself sink into the darkness around them, 
let it seep into him. He understood that the shadows 
anywhere were the shadows everywhere. He pictured the 

Midnight’s Mask • 27
Sojourner’s cavern in his mind, the shadows that ﬁlled 
its corners.
Pulling his comrades into his personal night, he moved 
them through the black, from a cavern on the Plane of 
Shadow to a distant cavern elsewhere.

