Editor: Aritra Acharyya
Foundations and Frontiers
in Computer, Communication 
and Electrical Engineering

FOUNDATIONS AND FRONTIERS IN COMPUTER, COMMUNICATION 
AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

PROCEEDINGS OF THE 3RD INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON FOUNDATIONS AND 
FRONTIERS IN COMPUTER, COMMUNICATION AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (C2E2 – 2016), 
MANKUNDU, WEST BENGAL, INDIA, 15–16 JANUARY 2016
Foundations and Frontiers in 
Computer, Communication and 
Electrical Engineering
Editor
Aritra Acharyya 
Department of Electronics and Communication, 
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions (SKFGI),
Mankundu, West Bengal, India

CRC Press/Balkema is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, UK
Typeset by V Publishing Solutions Pvt Ltd., Chennai, India
All rights reserved. No part of this publication or the information contained herein may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
by photocopying, recording or otherwise, without written prior permission from the publisher.
Although all care is taken to ensure integrity and the quality of this publication and the information 
herein, no responsibility is assumed by the publishers nor the author for any damage to the property or 
persons as a result of operation or use of this publication and/or the information contained herein.
Published by: CRC Press/Balkema
 
P.O. Box 11320, 2301 EH Leiden, The Netherlands
 
e-mail: Pub.NL@taylorandfrancis.com
 
www.crcpress.com – www.taylorandfrancis.com
ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7 (Hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-65791-2 (eBook PDF)

v
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Table of contents
Preface 
xi
Advisory committees 
xiii
Organizing committees 
xv
A microscopic view on the effect of anisotropy in the breakdown phenomenon 
of the 4H-SiC power diodes 
1
S. Chatterjee, A. Das, A. Singh, T.G. Biswas & A. Acharyya
Wireless power transmission—part I: A brief history 
5
N. Patra, D. Banerjee, S. Chatterjee, T.K. Sengupta, S. Chakraborty & A. Acharyya
Wireless power transmission—part II: Theoretical modeling of transmitting 
and receiving electrically-small loop antennas 
9
N. Patra, D. Banerjee, S. Chatterjee, T.K. Sengupta, S. Chakraborty & A. Acharyya
Wireless power transmission—part III: Experimental study 
13
N. Patra, D. Banerjee, S. Chatterjee, T.K. Sengupta, S. Chakraborty & A. Acharyya
Evaluation of ionization rates of charge carriers in a semiconductor via a generalized 
analytical model based on multistage scattering phenomena—part I: Wurtzite-GaN 
17
A. Banerjee, S. Chatterjee, A. Das, S. Chakraborty & A. Acharyya
Evaluation of ionization rates of charge carriers in a semiconductor via a generalized 
analytical model based on multistage scattering phenomena—part II: Type-IIb 
diamond and 6H-SiC 
21
A. Banerjee, A. Das, S. Chatterjee, S. Chakraborty & A. Acharyya
Design and development of smart traffic lighting 
25
S. Roy, P. Rakshit, S. Nandy, P. Chakraborty, S. Mukhopadhyay & V. Gupta
Influence of band-to-band tunneling induced shift of ATT phase delay on millimeter-wave 
properties of DDR IMPATTs—part I: Theoretical modeling 
29
P. Banerjee, P.K. Bandyopadhyay, S. Chakraborty & A. Acharyya
Influence of band-to-band tunneling induced shift of ATT phase delay on millimeter-wave 
properties of DDR IMPATTs—part II: Simulation results 
35
P. Banerjee, P.K. Bandyopadhyay, S. Chakraborty & A. Acharyya
Influence of band-to-band tunneling induced shift of ATT phase delay on millimeter-wave 
properties of DDR IMPATTs—part III: Calculation of shift of ATT phase delay 
due to tunneling 
39
P. Banerjee, P.K. Bandyopadhyay, S. Chakraborty & A. Acharyya
Effect of gate voltage and structural parameters on the Subthreshold Swing and the DIBL 
of Si-SiO2 GAA quantum wire transistor 
43
A. Deyasi & N.R. Das
50 Hz cascaded twin-tee notch filter for removal of power line interference from human 
electrocardiogram—part I: Circuit design 
49
S. Chakraborty, S. Roy, S. Chatterjee, A. Das, M. Ghosh & A. Acharyya

vi
Research on the 50 Hz cascaded twin-tee notch filter for the removal of power line 
interference from human electrocardiogram—part II: Simulation study 
53
S. Chakraborty, S. Roy, S. Chatterjee, A. Das, M. Ghosh & A. Acharyya
Digital Phase Lock Loop based on Discrete Energy Separation Algorithm 
57
S. Sarkar, B.N. Biswas & U. Maulik
Vibrational signal analysis for bearing fault detection in mechanical systems 
63
N. Boro, H. Das, A. Ghosh & G. Roy
Differential Biogeography Based Optimization applied to Load Frequency Control problem 
69
D. Guha, P.K. Roy & S. Banerjee
Wide beam microstrip patches with grounded E-shaped edges to improve the polarization purity 
75
S. Chakraborty, R. Poddar, S. Chattopadhyay & R. Guha
Smooth sliding mode control of a nonlinear CSTR using an inverse hyperbolic 
function-based law 
79
A. Sinha & R.K. Mishra
A unified FDTD approach in electromagnetics metamaterials 
83
B. Mandal, S.K. Singh, A. Biswas, A. Acharyya, A. Ghosal, 
A.K. Bhattacherjee & D.P. Chakraborty
Development of a low-cost field detector unit for safety of operating personnel 
in low tension line 
87
T.S. Biswas, A. Baug, R. Ghosh, B. Chatterjee & S. Dalai
Congestion control in Cognitive Radio networks using fractional order rate reaching 
law based sliding modes 
91
T. Majumder, R.K. Mishra, S.S. Singh, A. Sinha & P.K. Sahu
The dynamic compensation of the reactive power for the integration of wind power 
in a weak distribution network 
95
R. Misra
The Oppositional Chemical Reaction Optimization algorithm for the optimal tuning 
of the Power System Stabilizer 
101
S. Paul, A. Maji & P.K. Roy
Neural network based multi objective optimization—a new algorithm 
107
D. Roy
Available Transfer Capacity evaluation through BBO and GWO algorithms 
111
K. Majumdar, P.K. Roy & S. Banerjee
Optimal location of capacitor in radial distribution network using Chemical Reaction 
Optimization algorithm 
119
S. Sultana, S. Roy & P.K. Roy
Application of Improved Particle Swarm Optimization technique for thinning 
of Elliptical Array antenna 
125
R. Bera, D. Mandal, S.P. Ghoshal & R. Kar
Linear phase FIR bandstop filter design using Colliding Bodies Optimization technique 
131
S.K. Saha
An intelligent controller for the enhancement of voltage stability and power oscillation 
damping of an isolated micro grid 
139
A. Mohanty, M. Viswavandya & S. Pragyan
Identification of lyapunov function for testing stability of nonlinear systems using BFO 
143
C.M. Banerjee & A. Baral
Development of a cross correlation based induction motor stator winding 
inter-turn fault severity indicator 
149
P. Mishra & S. Das

vii
Webpage prediction using latest substring association rule mining 
157
R.P. Chatterjee, M. Ghosh, M.K. Das & R. Bag
Development of a compact, portable setup for demonstration of corona phenomenon 
161
S. Mukherjee, R. Ghosh, B. Chatterjee & S. Dalai
Design of the bipolar, floating HVDC source for the insulation diagnostics 
165
A. Kumar, N. Haque, R. Ghosh, B. Chatterjee & S. Dalai
Minimization of return loss using minimum steps coaxial coupler for ka-band helix TWT 
169
R. Guha, N. Purushothaman & S.K. Ghosh
Human identification by gait using wavelet transform and the analysis of variance 
173
M. Ghosh, S. Chatterjee & D. Bhattacharjee
A fiber optic sensor for the detection of Partial Discharge within the High Voltage power transformer 
177
B. Sarkar, C. Koley, N.K. Roy & P. Kumbhakar
2D-thermal model for estimation of heat-dissipation in SiC based p-i-n switches used 
for RF-communication 
183
J. Kundu, A. Kundu, M.R. Kanjilal & M. Mukherjee
Load balancing in cloud computing using a local search technique—Tabu Search 
187
B. Mondal, M. Das, C. Mukherjee & O. Das
High density salt and pepper noise removal by selective mean filter 
191
A. Bandyopadhyay, K. Chakraborty, R. Bag & A. Das
Comparison of electric and thermal stress distribution in underground cable 
for different insulating materials 
195
S. Pal, V. Gupta & A. Lahiri
An improved approach of cloud service brokerage model in multi-cloud environment 
201
B. Bhabani
A study to find the most suitable set of prominent genes from microarray data 
for disease prediction 
207
S. Dasgupta, G. Saha, R. Mondal, A. Chanda & R.K. Pal
Magnetic Field Tunable Avalanche Transit Time (MAGTATT) device 
213
P. Banerjee, A. Acharyya, A. Biswas & A.K. Bhattacharjee
A deviation based identification of random valued impulse noise towards image filtering 
using neighborhood approximation 
217
S. Banerjee, A. Bandyopadhyay, R. Bag & A. Das
A variable gain CMOS phase shifter for phased array beamformer applications 
221
D. Mitra, A. Sanyal, P. Roy & D. Dawn
Calculating absorption coefficient of Gaussian double quantum well structured with band 
nonparabolicity for photodetector in microwave spectra 
225
D. Sarkar & A. Deyasi
Application of STATCOM in power quality improvement under different fault conditions 
in a power system network 
231
N. Roy
Effects of close proximity and hybrid operation of HVAC & HVDC transmission lines 
under steady-state and fault conditions: A literature survey 
237
B. Datta, K. Gogoi & S. Chatterjee
Studies on frequency domain spectroscopy of transformer insulation considering 
distributed relaxation process 
245
S.K. Ojha, P. Purkait, A. Kumar, A. Sultan, I. Kumar, J.K. Singh & S. Satyam
Generation of air gap rotating magnetic field using switched dc supply for sensor-less 
Brushless DC motor drive 
253
U. Dey, A. Ganguly & S. Tola

viii
Dependence of photonic bandgap on material composition for two-dimensional photonic 
crystal with triangular geometry 
259
S. Mukherjee, A. Roy, A. Deyasi & S. Ghosal
Design and simulation of a power factor corrected boost converter 
265
S. Tola, A. Ganguly, U. Dey, Megha, S. Mukherjee, A.K. Das, T. Dey, I. Mondal & S. Mondal
Smart shoes with cueing system and remote monitoring of Parkinson’s patients: SCARP 
269
P. Das, R.N. Mitra & N. Suppakitjarak
A survey on cloud computing and networking in the next generation 
275
P. Das & R.N. Mitra
Tilaiya reservoir catchment segmentation using hybrid soft cellular approach 
281
K. Mahata, R. Das & A. Sarkar
MIMO channel capacity in non-uniform phase distributed Nakagami channel with ZF Receiver 
289
S.N. Sur, S. Bera, R. Bera & B. Maji
Decision feedback equalization for large scale MIMO system 
295
S.N. Sur, R. Bera & B. Maji
Comparative study of DR image De-noising method based on quality parameters 
299
M. Chakraborty & M. Mondal
Energy efficient adaptive power control in indoor wireless sensor networks 
305
D. Basu, G.S. Gupta, G. Moretti & X. Gui
The present energy scenario and need of microgrid in India 
313
A. Singh & P. Basak
Influence of temperature on field emission from finite barrier quantum structures 
in presence of image force 
319
S.B. Sett & C. Bose
Tuning of fractional-order PID controller—a review 
323
D. Shah, S. Chatterjee, K. Bharati & S. Chatterjee
Effect of void geometry on noise rejection in 1D photonic crystal with 
metamaterial/air interface 
331
B. Das & A. Deyasi
A second-order bandpass response with a wideband frequency selective surface 
337
A. Chatterjee & S.K. Parui
An acrylic sheet based frequency selective surface for GSM 1800 MHz band shielding 
341
P. Sasmal, A. Chatterjee & S.K. Parui
Design of efficient second harmonics injection based solar inverter for standalone application 
345
S. Mondal & S. Chowdhuri
Proxima-Talk: A proposed framework for network assisted device-to-device communication 
353
R.N. Mitra & D.P. Agrawal
Effect of slow decaying trapped charges on PDC data and associated diagnosis 
of power transformer insulation 
359
N. Verma & A. Baral
Priority based service scheduling in Enterprise Cloud Bus architecture 
363
G. Khan, S. Sengupta & A. Sarkar
Real-time vehicle safety monitoring and recording system using microcontroller Atmega16 
and ultrasonic sensor 
369
S.S. Thakur & J.K. Sing
Innovative structures for stepped impedance resonator filters for wireless applications 
375
A.K. Varshney, S.K. Varshney, R.K. Saw, S.K. Shaw & T. Biswas

ix
Effect of variation of load demand on bus voltage magnitude in radial distribution 
system 
379
V. Gupta & M. Mukherjee
A hybrid distribution state estimation algorithm with regard to distributed generations 
383
U. Sur & G. Sarkar
Electric stress control on post-type porcelain insulators using a coating of RTV Silicone 
Rubber with BaTiO3 nanofillers 
387
A.K. Pal, A. Baral & A. Lahiri
Mapping forest cover of Gautala Autramghat ecosystems using geospatial technology 
391
Y. Rajendra, S. Thorat, A. Nagne, R. Dhumal, A. Vibhute, A. Varpe, 
S.C. Mehrotra & K.V. Kale
Synthesis of linear array antenna of a large number of elements using Restricted Search 
Particle Swarm Optimization 
397
A. Ghosh, T. Das, S. Chatterjee & S. Chatterjee
Effect of a high-k dielectric material on the surface potential and the induced lateral 
field in short-channel MOSFET 
403
A. Ganguly, C. Ghosh & A. Deyasi
Effect of carrier-carrier collisions on RF performance of millimeter-wave 
IMPATT sources 
409
P.K. Bandyopadhyay, S. Chakraborty, A. Biswas, 
A. Acharyya & A.K. Bhattacharjee
Removal of the baseline wander and the power line interference from ECG signals 
using the Median–Kalman filter 
415
K. Nandi & A. Lahiri
A practical approach for power system state estimation based on the hybrid Particle 
Swarm Optimization algorithm 
421
U. Sur & G. Sarkar
Design of the Leaky-Wave Antenna using the Composite Right/Left-Handed Transmission 
Line metamaterial at the center frequency of 2.33GHz 
427
S.K. Varshney, A.K. Varshney, A.M. Chowdhury, A. Ganguly & A. Samanta
An artificial neural network-based temperature measurement system using a thermistor 
in astable multivibrator circuit 
431
S.K. Sahu & K. Nandi
Valence Band Anticrossing model for InAs1-xBix by k·p method 
437
D.P. Samajdar, T.D. Das & S. Dhar
Assessment of different transient conditions in a radial feeder by THD- and DWT-based 
Skewness analysis 
441
A. Maji, A. Chattopadhyaya, B. Das & S. Chattopadhyay
Study of dynamic responses of an interconnected power system using a zero-order 
hold circuit 
447
S. Mukherjee, S.K. Bandyopadhyay, A. Chattopadhyaya & B. Das
Nanorobot—the expected ever reliable future asset in diagnosis, treatment, and therapy 
451
O. Biswas & A. Sen
Fabrication and resilience measurement of thin aluminium cantilevers using scanning 
probe microscopy 
457
A.K. Basu, H. Sarkar & S. Bhattacharya
Comparative analysis of AODV routing protocols based on network performance 
parameters in Mobile Adhoc Networks 
461
M. Rath, B.K. Pattanayak & B. Pati

x
Pseudo mesh schema based data warehouse architecture employing encryption request 
algorithm and intelligent sensor algorithm for secured transmission 
and performance enhancement 
467
R. Chowdhury, P. Chatterjee, S. Datta & M. De
Simulation study on variation of attenuation and power handling capacity of micro-coaxial 
line for different characteristic impedances 
471
M.K. Sharma, A. Bhattacharya & R.R. Day
Design and development of a web-based teaching performance assessment tool 
with student feedback and fuzzy logic 
475
S. Banerjee, R. Bag & A. Das
A comparison of the performance analysis between the PWM- and SVPWM-Fed 
induction motor drive 
481
S.K. Bandyopadhyay, S. Mukherjee, A. Chattopadhyaya, S. Naha & R. Bhadra
A study on the switching life test of low-power-factor Compact Fluorescent Lamps 
487
S. Naha, S.K. Bandyopadhyay, S. Mukherjee & S. Datta
Demonstration of edge detection technology using the coupling of the IR sensor and robotics 
493
S. Mukherjee & S. Ghosh
Measurement and analysis of harmonics contribution by HID lamp systems 
497
S. Datta, S.K. Bandyopadhyay & S. Mukherjee
Optimization of electrode-spacer geometry of a gas insulated system for minimization 
of electric stress using SVM 
501
S. Dasgupta, A. Lahiri & A. Baral
Study of electrical and thermal stress distribution using boron nitride with Silicon Rubber 
in HV cable termination 
507
M. Basu, V. Gupta, A. Lahiri & A. Baral
A hybrid compartmental epidemic model for predicting the Ebola outbreak 
511
S. Roy & S.B. Chaudhury
Lighting design technique of the sports arena 
517
A. Khanra, T. Halder & B. Das
Numerical experiment on a modified PLL with the Euler method. Part-1: 
Locking boundary and stability 
521
S. Roy, S. Ghosh, S. De, S. Guha Mallick & B.N. Biswas
Numerical experiment on a modified PLL with the Euler method. Part-2: 
Demodulation criteria 
525
S. De, S. Roy, S. Ghosh & B.N. Biswas
Design of band pass filter at 13.325 GHz 
529
S. Guha Mallick, S. Das, S. Bhanja & T.K. Dey
Bose Einstein Condensation in lithium tantalate ferroelectrics 
533
A. Biswas
Gain and bandwidth enhancement of a microstrip antenna by incorporating air gap 
537
A. Biswas
A brief study of the ESPRIT Direction-Of-Arrival estimation algorithm in an uncorrelated 
environment for application in the Smart Antenna System 
541
D.K. Mondal, B. Dian, C. Dutta, A. Chatterjee & A. Ray
Photonic Integrated Circuit technology for ultra high speed wireless communications 
547
G. Carpintero
Author index 
551

xi
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Preface
The 3rd International Conference on “Foundations and Frontiers in Computer, Communication and 
Electrical Engineering–2016” (C2E2–2016), hosted by Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of 
Institutions (SKFGI), India, in association with CSIR-CEERI, Pilani, Rajasthan, India, followed the 
success of previous two International Conferences hosted by SKFGI in 2012 and 2015.
C2E2–2016 was a notable event which brings academia, researchers, engineers and students of 
Electronics and Communication, Computer and Electrical Engineering together. The conference was 
a perfect platform to share experience, foster collaborations across industry and academia, and evalu-
ate emerging technologies across the globe. The conference was technically sponsored by IEEE Kolkata 
Section, IET Kolkata Network along with several IEEE chapters under Kolkata Section such as Electron 
Devices Society, Power and Energy Society, Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation Society and Computer 
Society. The conference was sponsored by CSIR-CEERI, Pilani, Rajasthan, Defence Research and 
Development Organization (DRDO) and Indian National Science Academy (INSA).
C2E2–2016 celebrated the historical moment of the four-way call between Alexander Graham Bell in 
New York, his assistant Thomas Watson in San Francisco, President Woodrow Wilson in Washington 
and Theodore Vail, President of American Telephone and Telegraph company (AT&T) in Jekyll 
Island, i.e. the first transcontinental phone call made on January 25, 1915. The theme of C2E2–2016 
rejoiced a walk down telephone memory lane; a remarkable footstep of human being in the field of 
electrical communication. Many scopes from the earlier International Conferences hosted by SKFGI 
are still relevant today and therefore remain unchanged for the 3rd C2E2–2016; these include electron 
devices, ion integrated circuits, interconnects, semiconductors, quantum-effect structures, microwave 
and millimeter-wave vacuum devices, emerging materials with applications in bioelectronics, biomedical 
electronics, computation, communications, displays, microelectromechanics, imaging, micro-actuators, 
nano-electronics, optoelectronics, photovoltaics, power ICs, micro-sensors, digital and analog VLSI, 
photonics, plasma devices, microwave/millimeter-wave components, devices, circuits and systems, anten-
nas, millimeter-wave and sub-millimeter-wave techniques, antenna signal processing and control, tubes, 
missile tracking and guided systems, radio astronomy, propagation and radiation aspects of terrestrial 
and space based communication, satellite and mobile communication systems, radar, high power micro-
wave systems (HPMS), optical communications, information processing science and technology, machine 
learning and artificial intelligence, networking, image processing, soft computing, cloud computing, data 
mining & data warehousing, generation, transmission, distribution, storage and usage of electric energy, 
dielectric phenomena and measurements, high voltage engineering, electrical machines, power systems, 
control systems, non-conventional energies, power electronics and drives, etc.
The 3rd C2E2–2016 retained the same format as the previous International Conferences at SKFGI, 
specifically a two-day programme with plenary session format for the forenoon sessions followed by paral-
lel technical session format for the afternoon sessions of each day. Only the oral format had been kept for 
the authors to present their research works during the parallel technical sessions. Professor (Dr.) Akhtar 
Kalam of Victoria University, Melbourne, Australia being the Chief Guest, inaugurated the Conference. 
Professor Kalam also delivered the opening keynote address of the conference at the forenoon session 
on the first day. He explored the state-of-the-art of the smart power grids in the 21st century during 
his talk. Dr. Guillermo Carpintero of Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain, delivered the next key-
note address on photonic integrated circuit technology for ultra-high speed wireless communications. 
Dr. Sekhar Bhattacharya of SSN Research Centre, Chennai, India, Er. Tulika Mehta, Director, Fortune 
consultancy services, India, and Mr. Rajdeep Chowdhury, Department of Computer Applications, JIS 
College of Engineering, India, delivered notable lectures during the forenoon plenary session of the sec-
ond day of the conference. Dr. Bhattacharyya discussed regarding the atomic layer deposition technique 
in nanoelectronics and plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition for photovoltaics during his lecture. 
Er. Mehta talked about the advanced applied cognition neuroscience education technology to eradicate 

xii
drug addiction. The last invited speaker Mr. Chowdhury delivered his lecture on data warehouse per-
formance enhancement employing minimized query processing proposal and implementation of security 
modus operandi. All broad scopes of the conference were covered by the keynote addresses as well as 
invited lectures. We are sincerely grateful to the keynote and invited speakers who generously have con-
tributed their time, expertise and experience to these comprehensive lectures.
More than 140 research articles were submitted by the authors from all over the world. Each paper has 
been peer-reviewed by at least two reviewers, drawn from academic institutions and industry from around 
the world. And finally, 106 papers were accepted for oral presentation during the conference. All those 
accepted papers were presented by the respective authors during the parallel technical sessions during the 
afternoon sessions of each day of the conference. At each technical session, five parallel sessions were 
simultaneously held; out of which two sessions were designated for electronics and communication engi-
neering related papers, two for electrical engineering related papers and one session was designated for the 
papers fall under the scope of computer science and engineering. The presented papers collected in these 
proceedings which provide a comprehensive reference of the current state-of-the-art in computer, com-
munication and electrical engineering. We are indebted to the efforts of all the reviewers, who undoubt-
edly have raised the quality of the proceedings. We are also earnestly thankful to all the authors who have 
contributed their valuable research works to the conference.
We convey our heartiest thank to the managerial bodies of SKFGI for their immense help and supports 
for organizing the event. We also thank Professor (Dr.) Abhijit Lahiri, Campus Director, SKFGI for his 
enormous contribution in overall coordination with the contributing authors, invited speakers, publisher 
and intense supervision during the programme. We are thankful to Mr. Biswadeepam Pal for his assist-
ance with graphic design and webpage development. We are also grateful for the cooperative advice from 
Professor (Dr.) B. N. Basu with respect to planning of the conference. Finally, SKFGI is grateful to the 
industrial and academic sponsors for providing financial support, the members of our Local Organizing 
Committee, National and International Advisory Committees, and all the technical sponsors under whose 
crucial auspices the C2E2–2016 experienced the utmost success.
Aritra Acharyya
March 2016

xiii
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Advisory committees
INTERNATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Dr. Tadao Nagatsuma, Professor, Department of Systems Information, Graduate School of Engineering 
Science, Osaka University, Japan.
Dr. Tzyh-Ghuang Ma, Distinguished Professor, Group, Communication and Electromagnetic Engineering, 
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology. Taiwan. 
Dr. Dipak Ranjan Poddar, Emeritus Professor, Department of Electronics and Telecommunication 
 Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. 
Dr. V. Rodolfo García Colón H., Registrar, IIE Centro de Posgrado, IEEE DEIS Adcom Member and  
DEIS Chapters Chair 
Dr. Sivaji Chakravorti, Professor, Electrical Engineering Department, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India.
Dr. Nikhil Ranjan Pal, INAE Chair Professor, ECSU, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India.
Dr. Dharma P. Agrawal, Ohio Board of Regents Distinguished Professor, Department of EECS 
University of Cincinnati, Ohio.
NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Dr. Chandan Sarkar, Professor, Department of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering, 
Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India.
Dr. Monojit Mitra, Professor, Department of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering Indian 
Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur, Howrah, India.
Dr. Nandini Gupta, Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kanpur, India.
Dr. Saibal Chatterjee, Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, North Eastern Regional Institute 
of Science & Technology, Arunachal Pradesh, India.
Dr. Mita Nasipuri, Professor, Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Jadavpur University, 
Kolkata, India.
Dr. Soumya Pandit, Assistant Professor, Institute of Radio Physics and Electronics, 
University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India.
Dr. Ujjwal Maulik, Professor, Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Jadavpur University, 
Kolkata, India.
Dr. Suranjan Ghose, Professor, Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Jadavpur University, 
Kolkata, India.


xv
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Organizing committees
CONFERENCE PATRONS
Prof. D. K. Basu, Chairman, B.O.G., SKFGI
Mr. B. G. Mallick, Chairman Trustee 
Mr. D. K. Mondal, Secretary, Trustee
Mr. C. K. Bhattacharya, CEO, Trustee
Mr. K. C. Mondal, Treasurer, Trustee
CONFERENCE CHAIR
Professor B. N. Biswas, Chairman, Education Division, SKFGI
CONFERENCE CONVENER
Professor T. K. Sengupta, Chief Technical Director, SKFGI
CONFERENCE CO-CONVENER
Professor Abhijit Lahiri, Campus Director, SKFGI
CONFERENCE SECRETARY
Professor T. K. Dey, Additional Chief Technical Director, SKFGI
CONFERENCE COORDINATOR
Mr. Aritra Acharyya, Department of ECE, SKFGI
CONFERENCE LIAISON
Dr. S. N. Joshi, CSIR-CEERI, Pilani, Rajasthan
Professor B. N. Basu, Research Coordinator, SKFGI
Mr. Subhradeep Pal (On lien), SKFGI
Mr. Subhadip Chowdhury (On lien), SKFGI

xvi
CONFERENCE HOST
Ms. Srima Nandi, SKFGI
PUBLICATION CHAIR
Dr. Rajib Bag, Dean of Student Affairs, SKFGI
TREASURER
Mr. Sourav Koley, Department of CSE, SKFGI
EDITOR IN CHIEF
Mr. Aritra Acharyya, Department of ECE, SKFGI 

1
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A microscopic view on the effect of anisotropy in the breakdown 
phenomenon of the 4H-SiC power diodes
Subhashri Chatterjee, Adrija Das, Alka Singh, Tripti Guin Biswas & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper, the authors have studied the effect of anisotropy on the static characteristics, 
such as breakdown voltage, avalanche region voltage drop, avalanche width, etc., of 4H-SiC power diodes. 
A sample of n+-n-p-p+ structured 4H-SiC power diodes having different structural and doping parameters 
have been taken into consideration and a simulation study based on the drift-diffusion model has been 
carried out by taking into account the material parameters of both <0001> and <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC 
to investigate the influence of anisotropy exhibited by 4H-SiC due to those material parameters depend-
ing on the orientation of the wafer growth on the aforementioned static characteristics. Results show that 
the <0001> oriented 4H-SiC power diodes have a larger breakdown voltage as compared to their <
>
1120  
counterparts. The reasons behind the better breakdown characteristics of <0001> oriented 4H-SiC power 
diodes have also been discussed from a microscopic insight of the breakdown phenomena.
Schottky diodes, p-n junction diodes, p-i-n diodes, 
thyristors, UMOSFETs, SITs, RF MOSFETs, and 
RF JFETs, based on 4H-SiC have already been 
fabricated and their performances are found to 
be superior to those based on Si, GaAs, InP, etc. 
(Weitzel et al. 1995).
Experimental studies show that some impor-
tant material parameters, such as impact ioni-
zation rates, mobilities, and drift velocities of 
charge carriers, in <0001> and <
>
1120  oriented 
4H-SiC epitaxial wafers exhibit large anisotropy 
(Hatakeyama et al. 2004). Since the abovemen-
tioned material parameters have a major role in 
the breakdown mechanism of p-n junctions based 
on both <0001> and <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC, the 
orientation becomes crucial in the design of power 
devices. Both experimental and simulation results 
of breakdown phenomena in 4H-SiC diodes have 
shown a large anisotropy. In the present paper, the 
authors have studied the effect of anisotropy on 
the static characteristics of 4H-SiC power diodes. 
Simulation is carried out to obtain the spatial vari-
ations of electric field, particle current densities, 
carrier densities as well as breakdown voltage, ava-
lanche region voltage drop, and avalanche width 
in n+-n-p-p+ structured 4H-SiC power diodes hav-
ing different structural and doping parameters as a 
function of bias current density. Simulation study 
has been carried out by taking into account the 
material parameters of both <0001> and <
>
1120  
oriented 4H-SiC to investigate the influence of 
anisotropy exhibited by 4H-SiC due to those mate-
rial parameters depending on the orientation of 
the wafer growth on the aforementioned static 
1 INTRODUCTION
Since the last two and half decades, one of the 
most promising wide bandgap semiconductor 
material, silicon carbide (SiC), has attracted the 
attention of researchers for high-power and high-
frequency device applications (Weitzel et al. 1995, 
Acharyya et al. 2013). Due to the excellent elec-
trical, thermal, and other physical properties of 
SiC, such as high breakdown field, high saturation 
drift velocity and mobility of charge carriers, high 
thermal conductivity, etc., it turns out to be supe-
rior to conventional semiconductor materials, like 
Si, GaAs, InP, etc., for high-power, high-temper-
ature, and high-frequency operational conditions. 
The 4H-SiC excels other polytypes of SiC (e.g., 
6H-SiC, 3C-SiC, etc.) as the potential candidate 
to be the base material of high-power and high-
frequency devices due to its large bandgap (Eg ≈ 
3.26 eV at 300 K), most favorable carrier transpor-
tation properties, and the availability of the most 
advanced epitaxial growth.
Some of the properties, which are indispensi-
ble for high-power solid-state devices are (a) high 
breakdown voltage, (b) negligible leakage current, 
(c) very small on resistance, (d) high switching 
speed, (e) high reliability throughout the opera-
tional lifetime, capacity of withstanding very 
high temperature, and (f) cost effectiveness. In 
this regard, the most favorable electrical, thermal, 
and other physical properties of 4H-SiC enables 
it to excel other polytypes of SiC as well as other 
conventional semiconductor materials mentioned 
earlier. Several solid-state power devices, such as 

2
characteristics of the power diodes under consid-
eration. Results show that the <0001> oriented 
4H-SiC power diodes have a larger breakdown 
voltage as compared to their <
>
1120  counterparts. 
The reason behind the better breakdown charac-
teristics of <0001> oriented 4H-SiC power diodes 
has also been discussed from microscopic insights 
of the breakdown phenomena.
2 MATERIAL PARAMETERS
The material parameters of the base semiconduc-
tor play a major role in the breakdown mechanism 
of reverse biased power diodes. Important material 
parameters of 4H-SiC, such as energy bandgap (Eg 
in eV), effective density of the states in the conduc-
tion band (Nc in m−3), effective density of states in 
the valance band (Nv in m−3), density of the state 
effective mass of charge carriers (md
* in Kg), satu-
rated drift velocities of electrons and holes (vn(sat) and 
vp(sat) in m s−1), diffusivity of electrons and holes (Dn 
and Dp m2 s−1), dielectric constant (εr), thermal con-
ductivity (k in W m−1 K−1), etc., at room tempera-
ture (i.e., at 300 K) have been taken for simulation 
from the published literature (Electronic Archive 
2015, Lee 2008). In the year 2004, Hatakeyama et al. 
experimentally measured the electron and hole ioni-
zation rates (αn and αp in m−1) in the 4H-SiC diodes 
in two different directions, i.e., <0001> and <
>
1120  
directions (Hatakeyama et al. 2004). They fit their 
experimental data with the well-known empirical 
relation of the field dependence of the ionization 
rates of the charge carriers in a semiconductor, i.e., 
α
ξ
ξ
n p
α
n p
n p
A
B
n p
n
n
ξ
p
n
)
ξ
e p((
/ )
ξ
= A
; where ξ is the electric 
field in V m−1 and An,p (m−1) and Bn,p (V m−1) are the 
ionization coefficients. According to their report, the 
fitting parameters’, An, Ap, Bn, Bp, values are found 
to be different for <0001> and <
>
1120  oriented 
4H-SiC. These values of An,p and Bn,p and the expres-
sion of αn,p(ξ) have been incorporated in the simula-
tion program to introduce anisotropy in 4H-SiC in 
terms of the ionization rates of the charge carriers.
The low-field mobility model used in the present 
simulation is taken to be
μ
μ
n p
μ
n p
an p
,
m
p
in (
)
T
+
(
)
an p ,
{
}
μn p
,
m
p
ax
+
μ
(
)
n p refe
N
(
)
A
D
N
N
A
D
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎤
(
)
1
bn p
b
(
)
T
where NA and ND are the acceptor and donor con-
centrations, respectively. Other parameters, such as 
μn,p(min), μn,p(max), an,p, bn,p, have been taken from the 
published literature for 4H-SiC oriented in <0001> 
and <
>
1120  directions (Schaffer et al. 1994). It can 
be observed from the experimental results reported 
in (Schaffer et al. 1994) that the electron mobility 
of <0001> oriented 4H-SiC is around 1.20 times of 
that of the <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC above 200 K. 
The widely used parallel field mobility model for 
4H-SiC has been taken into account in the simula-
tion as a high-field mobility, which can be expressed 
as
μ
μ
n p
μ
n p
μ
c
c
n p
n p
μ
p
n
μ
( )
ξ = μ
(
)
μ
ξ
n p
n p sat
v
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
0
+
μ
(μ
⎡
1
,
where cn,p = 2 and vn,p(sat) = 2 × 105 m s−1 have been 
chosen for a high field mobility.
3 SIMULATION TECHNIQUE
A one-dimensional (1-D) model of reverse biased 
n+-n-p-p+ structured Power Diode (PD) shown in 
Figure 1 has been considered for the simulation. In 
the present paper, simulation has been carried out 
based on a drift-diffusion model to study the break-
down characteristics of PDs under consideration. 
The spatial variations of the electric field (ξ(x) 
vs. x), electron and hole current densities (Jn(x), 
Jp(x) vs. x), and electron and hole concentrations 
(n(x), p(x) vs. x) within the depletion layer of the 
reverse biased PD can be obtained from the simul-
taneous numerical solution of fundamental device 
equations, such as (a) Poisson’s equation, (b) com-
bined carrier continuity equations at steady-state, 
(c) current density equations, and (d) mobile space 
charge equation subject to appropriate boundary 
conditions at the depletion layer edges.
Now the appropriate boundary conditions asso-
ciated with ξ(x), Jn(x), and Jp(x) to be imposed at 
depletion layer edges, i.e., at x = 0 and x = W to 
solve the aforementioned equations can be for-
mulated as follows. Due to the high conductivity 
of n+- and p+-layers, the electric field within those 
regions must be zero. Thus, the boundary condi-
tions for the electric field at x = 0 and x = W are 
given by:
ξ
ξ
(
)
ξ
(
)
ξ
W
0
ξ(
)
ξ x
W
=
x
= .  
(1)
The normalized current density parameter (P(x)) 
may be defined as P(x) = (Jp(x) – Jn(x))/J0, where 
J0 = Jn(x) + Jp(x) is the total bias current density. 
Figure 1. 1-D model of the n+-n-p-p+ structured power 
diode.

3
The boundary conditions for Jn(x) and Jp(x) at x = 0 
and x = W can be defined in terms of P(x) as:
P
J
J
P
J
J
p
J
n
J
(
)
x =
=
(
) −
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(
)
x
W
=
=
−
(
)
x
W
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎫
⎬
⎪
⎫
⎪⎬
⎪
⎭
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
⎪
2J (x =
1
1
2
0
J
0
J
,  
(2)
where Jp(x = 0) = Jps and Jn(x = W) = Jns; Jps and Jns 
are the electron and hole component of the ther-
mally generated reverse saturation current, respec-
tively, where Jns,ps = (qDn,pni
2/Ln,pND,A), Ln and Lp are 
the diffusion lengths of the electrons and holes, 
and ni is the intrinsic carrier concentration of the 
base semiconductor at room temperature. For both 
the cases, J0 >> Jns,ps after the breakdown of the p-n 
junction; therefore, the ratios (2Jp(x = 0)/J0) and 
(2Jn(x = 0)/J0) tend to become zero after the break-
down. Thus, the boundary conditions in equation 
(6) reduce to P(x = 0) = –1 and P(x = W) = +1.
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Two power diodes having different structural 
and doping parameters have been chosen for the 
simulation study. The n- and p-side epitaxial layer 
lengths (Wn and Wp) have been taken to be 2.50 μm 
in the first diode (i.e., PD1) and those are taken 
to be 2.00 μm each in the second one (i.e., PD2). 
The doping concentrations of the epitaxial layers 
have been chosen (ND = NA = 3.00 × 1022 m−3 in PD1 
and ND = NA = 5.00 × 1022 m−3 in PD2) keeping in 
mind that both of the diodes do not behave as high 
punch-through diodes even at high bias current 
densities. The thickness and doping concentra-
tions of the highly doped n+- and p+-contact layers 
(Wn+, Wp+ and Nn+, Np+) are taken to be 0.50 μm 
and 5.00 × 1025 m−3 each in both PD1 and PD2, 
respectively. The structural and doping parameters 
of both PD1 and PD2 are given in Table 1.
The numerical integration of ξ(x)-profile by 
using Simpson’s –1/3 rule within x = 0 and x = W 
and x = xA1 and x = xA2 provide the breakdown 
voltage (VB) and avalanche zone voltage drop (VA) 
for a particular J0. The VB and VA values in both 
PD1 and PD2 based on both <0001> and <
>
1120  
oriented 4H-SiC have been obtained for differ-
ent bias current densities ranging from 0.7 × 108 
to 1.4 × 108 A m−2 and plotted in Figures 2 and 3, 
respectively. It is observed that both the break-
down voltage and avalanche region voltage drop 
are greater in PD1s based <0001> oriented 4H-SiC 
PDs as compared to their <
>
1120  counterparts. 
The reason behind it can be easily explained in 
the following way. Figure 4 shows the variations 
of electron and hole ionization rates in <0001> 
and <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC in an electric field. 
It is very much clear from Figure 4 that within the 
operating field range of both PDs as indicated by 
the grey box, both the αn and αp values of <0001> 
oriented 4H-SiC are smaller than its <
>
1120  coun-
terparts. Lower ionization rates signified that a 
higher electric field is required to cause impact 
ionization within the multiplication region of PDs 
based in <0001> oriented 4H-SiC as compared to 
those based in <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC. That is 
why the electric field at each space point is found 
to be greater in <0001> oriented 4H-SiC PDs than 
those in <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC PDs. A higher 
electric field at each space point obviously leads to 
higher VB as well as VA in <0001> oriented 4H-SiC 
PDs than in <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC PDs. Moreo-
ver, the inset of the Figure 4 shows the variations 
of (αn/αp) in <0001> and <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC 
Table 1. Structural and doping parameters.
Parameters
PD1
PD2
Wn (μm)
2.50
2.00
Wp (μm)
2.50
2.00
Wn+ (μm)
0.50
0.50
Wp+ (μm)
0.50
0.50
ND ( × 1022 m−3)
3.00
5.00
NA ( × 1022 m−3)
3.00
5.00
Nn+ ( × 1025 m−3)
5.00
5.00
Np+ ( × 1025 m−3)
5.00
5.00
Figure 2. Variation of breakdown voltage in <0001> 
and <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC power diodes with bias cur-
rent densities.

4
with the electric field. It is observed that the values 
of the ratios (αn/αp) are around 70 and 1.5 within 
the operating field range (indicated by the grey 
box) of PD1 and PD2. Higher ionization rates of 
holes as compared to electrons cause a narrower 
p-side avalanche width xAp  = (xA2 – xj) than that in 
the n-side, i.e., xAn  = (xj – xA1). Moreover, narrower 
p-side avalanche width leads to smaller avalanche 
region voltage drop in the p-side, i.e., VAp < VAn 
(where VA = VAp + VAn). Since (αn /αp) ratio is much 
larger in <0001> oriented 4H-SiC within the oper-
ating field range of the PDs, the values of (xAp /xAn) 
and (VAp /VAn) are found to be much smaller in 
<0001> oriented 4H-SiC PDs as compared to their 
<
>
1120  counterparts for any bias current density. 
It is observed that the values of (xAp /xAn) and (VAp /
VAn) vary between 1.30 and 1.52 and 1.46 and 1.55, 
respectively, in PDs based on <
>
1120  oriented 
4H-SiC, while they vary between 3.40 and 3.60 
and 4.00 and 4.20, respectively, in PDs based on 
<0001> oriented 4H-SiC for the variation of J0 
from 0.7 × 108 to 1.4 × 108 A m−2.
5 CONCLUSION
The authors have studied the influence of anisot-
ropy on the static characteristics of 4H-SiC power 
diodes. Numerical simulation study based on drift-
diffusion model on the n+-n-p-p+ structured 4H-SiC 
power diodes having different structural and dop-
ing parameters has been carried out by taking into 
account the material parameters of both <0001> 
and <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC to investigate the 
influence of anisotropy exhibited by 4H-SiC due 
to those material parameters depending on the 
orientation of the wafer growth on the afore-
mentioned static characteristics. Results show 
that the <0001> oriented 4H-SiC power diodes 
have a larger breakdown voltage as compared to 
their 
g
<
>
1120  counterparts. The results presented 
in this paper will be extremely helpful for future 
experimentalists for choosing the appropriate ori-
entation of the crystal growth of 4H-SiC for the 
fabrication of power diodes having high voltage 
ratings.
REFERENCES
Acharyya, A., & Banerjee, J.P. (2013). Potentiality of 
IMPATT devices as terahertz source: An avalanche 
response time based approach to determine the upper 
cut-off frequency limits. IETE Journal of Research, 
59(2), 118–127.
Electronic Archive: New Semiconductor Materials, 
Characteristics and Properties (2015). Retrieved from 
http://www.ioffe.ru/SVA/NSM/Semicond/SiC/index.
html.
Hatakeyama, T., Watanabe, T., Shinohe, T. (2004). 
Impact ionization coefficients of 4H silicon carbide. 
Applied Physics Letters, 85(8), 1380–1382.
Lee, H.S. (2008). Fabrication and Characterization of 
Silicon Carbide Power Bipolar Junction Transistors. 
PhD Dissertation, KTH.
Schaffer, W.J., Kong, H.S., Negley, G.H., and Palmour, 
J.W. (1994). Hall Effect and C-V Measurement on 
Epitaxial 6H—and 4H-SiC,” In Proc. of Inst. Phys. 
Conf. Ser., 137 (pp. 155–159).
Weitzel, C.E., Palmour, J.W., Carter, C.H., Moore, K., 
Nordquist, K.J., Allen, S., Thero, C., and Bhatnagar, 
M. (1995) Silicon Carbide High-Power Devices. IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices, 43(10), 1732–1741.
Figure 3. The variation of avalanche zone voltage drop 
in <0001> and <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC power diodes 
with bias current densities.
Figure 4. Variations of electron and hole ionization 
rates in <0001> and <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC with elec-
tric field. Inset of the figure shows the variations of the 
ratio of the hole to the electron ionization rates in <0001> 
and <
>
1120  oriented 4H-SiC with electric field.

5
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Wireless power transmission—part I: A brief history
Nirvik Patra, Debodyuti Banerjee, Subhashri Chatterjee, T.K. Sengupta, 
Subhendu Chakraborty & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this part of the paper, authors have discussed the historical background of the wireless 
power transmission since the inception of it to the current state-of-the-art. This initial part of the paper 
may be regarded as the introductory part of authors’ experimental studies on wireless power transfer 
via near-field coupling of electrically-small transmitting and receiving loop antennas which have been 
recently carried out at the Antenna and Propagation Laboratory, SKFGI, Mankundu. The theoretical 
modeling of the transmitting and receiving loop antennas as the wireless power transfer module and the 
corresponding experimental studies have been discussed in the successive parts later on as the continua-
tion of the same paper.
19th century was the inception of wireless power 
transmission.
2 INITIATION BY NIKOLA TESLA
Nikola Tesla was the pioneer of wireless electri-
cal power transmission (Tesla 1904, Tesla 1914). 
He initiated his efforts on wireless transmission 
of electrical power on 1989, just after the Hertz’s 
successful experiment. During 1889–1900, Tesla 
carried out experiments in Colorado Springs, CO, 
USA, related to wireless power transmission via 
the electric field and capacitive coupling, as well as 
transmission line or waveguide-like effects (Tesla 
1891). In the year 1901, Tesla began the construc-
tion of Wardenclyffe Tower near Long Island 
Sound, New York, UA (Figure 1) for broadcast-
ing, wireless communication and transmission of 
wireless power. However, earlier than Tesla, Sir 
J.C. Bose already demonstrated experimentally the 
first millimeter-wave radio communication link 
in the year 1894 at Presidency College, Kolkata, 
India (Bondyopadhyay 1998). Later, Tesla believed 
that the capability of his own invention for wireless 
power transmission was even more significant than 
its abilities as a way of wireless communication, it 
has been said that Tesla’s experiments achieved to 
light lumps several kilometers away from the source 
without any wire connection. Nonetheless, due to 
very low power transfer efficiency, depletion of 
financial resources and most importantly the dan-
gerous nature of his experiments, Tesla finally dis-
carded his experimentations. He left this bequest 
in the form of a patent that was never commer-
cially exploited (Tesla 1914). Thus, undoubtedly, 
1 INTRODUCTION
After the invention of electrical energy, the efficient 
energy transportation became an imperative con-
cern for mankind. The biggest and sophisticated 
energy transportation network is the electrical grid. 
Distribution grids transport the electrical energy 
from the point of its generation to the far ends in 
a very efficient way. However, during the trans-
mission, a loss of around 30% of energy remains 
unavoidable due to several reasons. Some poten-
tial modern-day applications significantly promote 
the concept of electrical energy transportation and 
distribution without the copper cables, i.e. wireless 
energy transfer. Some of those prospective appli-
cations of wireless energy/power transfer are (a) 
charging mobile devices, electrical cars, unmanned 
aircrafts, etc., (b) driving home appliances like 
irons, vacuum cleaners, television, etc., (c) sup-
plying power to the biomedical implants such as 
pacemakers, cochlear implants, subcutaneous drug 
supplier, etc. mankind has desired to transfer elec-
trical energy without use of wires from as far back 
as the mid 1800s. In the year 1864, James C. Max-
well predicted the existence of electromagnetic 
waves by means of his famous set of equations, 
known as Maxwell’s equations (Maxwell 1964). 
Later in 1884, John H. Poynting realized that the 
Poynting vector would play an important role in 
quantifying the energy/power of electromagnetic 
wave (Poynting 1884). Reinforced by the Maxwell’s 
equations, Heinrich Hertz first showed the experi-
mental evidence of radio waves by his spark-gap 
radio transmitter in the year 1988 (Hertz 1888); 
and this evidence of radio wave (i.e. the experimen-
tal validation of Maxwell’s equations) in the end of 

6
if Sir J. C. Bose was the pioneer of wireless trans-
mission of information (i.e. wireless communica-
tion), the Nikola Tesla was the same of wireless 
transmission of electrical power.
3 DIFFERENT METHODS OF WIRELESS 
POWER TRANSMISION
Electromagnetic radiation which has been com-
prehensively used for wireless transmission of 
information (voice and data) can also be used for 
transportation of electrical energy/power to distant 
end. Highly efficient transfer of electrical power is 
possible in a directional way by means of micro-
waves (Glaser 1973). Though the said method is 
extremely efficient, it has some significant disad-
vantages such as it requires line of sight path, it 
is a dangerous mechanism for living beings, etc. 
more viable option for efficient and harmless short 
and medium range wireless energy transfer is the 
use of electromagnetic resonance (Karalis et al. 
2008, Kurs 2007). However a number of methods 
are available for wireless energy transportation at 
present days. Some of those are: (a) by means of 
high power laser beam targeted to distant solar 
cell of relevant detector (NASA 2003), (b) by 
means of vibratory waves emitted and collected 
by piezoelectric transducers (Hu et al. 2008), by 
means of highly directive, high power microwaves 
(Glaser 1973), and use of rectenna for conversion 
of microwave energy to DC electrical energy with 
a conversion energy exceeding 95% (Akkermans 
et al. 2005, Ali et al. 2005, Shams et al. 2007, 
Basset et al. 2007), (d) by means of resonant cou-
pling effect between the inductive coils of two LC 
circuits, (Karalis et al. 2008, Kurs 2007, Gao 2007, 
Low et al. 2009), etc.
The method of wireless electrical energy transfer 
by means of resonant coupling of two coils capa-
ble of transferring energy within a very short dis-
tance in order of few centimeters. But this method 
involves some important advantages such as (a) it 
can work in low frequencies which are harmless to 
the living beings, (b) it is the lowest cost method, 
(c) at resonant frequency, maximum absorption 
rate is guaranteed at the receiver coil. When two 
objects have the same resonant frequency, they can 
be easily coupled in a resonant way which causes 
transfer of energy from one object to another in 
an efficient way. This simple principle has to be 
exploited to transfer electrical energy from one 
point to another point by means of electromag-
netic field. The resonant coupling can be broadly 
classified into two broad categories such as (a) 
inductive coupling (Mansor et al. 2008), (b) self-
resonance coupling. Inductive coupling is a form 
of resonant coupling between two LC circuits hav-
ing the same resonance frequency. The electrical 
energy is transferred from source to sink coil in a 
very efficient manner provided that both of them 
are separated by a very short distance. This phe-
nomenon can easily be explained by the Faraday’s 
law of electromagnetic induction (transformer emf 
equation: 
g
∇×
∂
∂
E = −∂
t; where 
(
E  and B are the 
time varying electric and magnetic field vectors 
respectively). However the self-resonance coupling 
takes place between two coils due to the presence of 
very small parasitic capacitance distributed within 
those. Two coils having the same inductive values 
(L), having same structural parameters (l = length, 
A = cross-sectional area, N = number of turns) 
and same core material (having same constitutive 
parameters: σ = conductivity, ε = permittivity and 
μ = permeability) constitute the same parasitic 
capacitance value (Cp) theoretically. Thus the self-
resonance frequency associated with the coils is 
f
LC
rsf
p
C ; where frs is much higher than the 
resonance frequency of LC circuit for inductive 
coupling ( f
LC
r
l
f
L
f
C ), since the value of the 
parasitic capacitance (Cp) of the coil is too low as 
compared to the lumped capacitance (Cl) used in 
the inductive coupling (Cp << Cl). In the year 2008, 
Karalis et al. (Karalis et al. 2008) reported around 
40% efficiency of Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) 
between two self-resonance coils provided that r << 
d << λr; where r, d and λr are the radius of the coils, 
separation between them and wavelength corre-
sponding to the resonance frequency respectively.
4 A BRIEF SUMMERY OF THE 
PRESENT WORK
In the present work, a comprehensive experimental 
investigation on Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) 
have been carried out to study the near-field elec-
tromagnetic coupling between transmitting and 
Figure 1. Tesla’s Wardenclyffe Tower Facility. It was 
dismantled during World War I for scrap metal.

7
receiving electrically-small loop antennas as well 
as the self-resonance coupling between them. For 
self-resonance coupling mechanism, the frequency 
of the transmitted signal is kept same as the self-
resonance frequency (frs) of the transmitting and 
receiving antenna system; however, for the near-
field electromagnetic coupling mechanism, the 
frequency of the transmitted signal is kept well 
above the frs subject to obtain high radiation effi-
ciency of the transmitting antenna. Experiments 
have been carried out to study the Power Transfer 
Efficiency (PTE) of the antenna system coupled in 
axial and radial orientations as shown in Figures 
2 (a) and (b) respectively, for both the abovemen-
tioned coupling mechanisms. Results show that 
the better PTE is achieved in axial coupling mode 
as compared to the radial coupling mode when the 
self-resonance coupling mechanism is used; but 
the usable frequency range (i.e. the bandwidth) is 
found to be very small less than 1 MHz for this 
coupling mechanism. The observation is reversed 
(i.e. PTE associated with radial coupling orienta-
tion is found to be far better than that in axial cou-
pling orientation) when near-field electromagnetic 
coupling mechanism is used and the bandwidth 
for WPT for this mechanism is also found to much 
broader ∼50 MHz.
5 CONCLUSION
Authors have briefly described the historical back-
ground of the wireless power transmission in this 
part of the entire work. This initial part of the 
paper may be regarded as the introductory part 
of authors’ experimental studies on wireless power 
transfer via near-field coupling of electrically-small 
transmitting and receiving loop antennas which 
have been recently carried out at the Antenna and 
Propagation Laboratory, SKFGI, Mankundu. 
Further, the theoretical modeling of the trans-
mitting and receiving loop antennas as the wire-
less power transfer module and the corresponding 
experimental studies have been discussed in the 
successive parts later on.
REFERENCES
Akkermans, J. A. G., van Beurden, M. C., Doodeman, 
G. J. N., and Visser, H. J. (2005). Analytical models 
for low-power rectenna design,” IEEE Antennas and 
Wireless Propagation Letters, 4, 187–190.
Ali, M., Yang, G., and Dougal, R. (2005). A new circu-
larly polarized rectenna for wireless power transmis-
sion and data communication,” IEEE Antennas and 
Wireless Propagation Letters, 4.
Basset, P., Andreas Kaiser, B. L., Collard, D., and Bucha-
illot, L. (2007). Complete system for wireless power-
ing and remote control of electrostatic actuators by 
inductive coupling. IEEE/ASME Transactions on 
Mechatronics, 12(1), 23–31.
Bondyopadhyay, P. K. (1998). Sir J. C. Bose’s Diode 
Detector Received Marconi’s First Transatlantic 
Wireless Signal of December 1901 (The “Italian Navy 
Coherer” Scandal Revisited). Proc. IEEE, 86(1).
Gao, J. (2007). Traveling magnetic field for homogene-
ous wireless power transmission. IEEE Transactions 
on Power Delivery, 22(1), 507–514.
Glaser, P. E. (1973). Method and apparatus for convert-
ing solar radiation to electrical power. U.S. Patent 3 
781 647.
Hertz, H. (1888). Ueber die Ausbreitungsgeschwindig-
keit der electrodynamischen Wirkungen. Annalen der 
Physik, 270(7), 551–569.
Hu, H., Hu, Y., Chen, C., and Wang, J. (2008). A system 
of two piezoelectric transducers and a storage circuit 
for wireless energy transmission through a thin metal 
wall. IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, 
and Frequency Control, 55(10), 2312–2319.
Karalis, A., Joannopoulos, J., Soljacic, M. (2008). Effi-
cient wireless non-radiative mid-range energy transfer. 
Elsevier Annals of Physics, 323, 34–48.
Kurs, A. (2007). Power transfer through strongly coupled 
resonances. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Master of Science in Physics Thesis.
Low, Z. N., Chinga, R. A., Tseng, R., and Lin, J. (2009). 
Design and test of a high-power high-efficiency 
loosely coupled planar wireless power transfer system. 
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 56(5), 
1801–1812.
Mansor, H., Halim, M., Mashor, M., and Rahim, M. 
(2008). Application on wireless power transmission 
for biomedical implantable organ. Springer-Verlag 
Biomed. Proceedings, 21, 40–43.
Maxwell, J. C. (1864). A dynamical theory of the electro-
magnetic field. Proceedings of Royal Society London, 
XIII, 531.
Figure 2. Pictorial view of (a) radial and (b) axial cou-
pling between transmitter (Tx) and receiver (Rx) coils.

8
NASA (2003). Beamed laser power for UAVs. Dryden 
Flight Research Center.
Poynting, J. H. (1884). On the Transfer of Energy in the 
Electromagnetic Field. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London, 175, 343–361.
Shams, K. M. Z., and Ali, M. (2007). Wireless power 
transmission to a buried sensor in concrete. IEEE Sen-
sors Journal, 7(12), 1573–1577.
Tesla, N. (1891). Experiments With Alternate Currents 
of Very High Frequency and Their Application to 
Methods of Artificial Illumination. New York, NY, 
USA: AIEE.
Tesla, N. (1904). The Transmission of Electrical Energy 
without Wires. Electrical World and Engineer.
Tesla, N. (1914). Apparatus for transmitting electrical 
energy. U.S. Patent 1119732.

9
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Wireless power transmission—part II: Theoretical modeling 
of transmitting and receiving electrically-small loop antennas
Nirvik Patra, Debodyuti Banerjee, Subhashri Chatterjee, T.K. Sengupta, 
Subhendu Chakraborty & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this part of the paper, the theoretical modeling of electrically-small loop antennas 
as transmitting and receiving modules for wireless power transmission have been discussed in detail. 
The proposed experimental setup for the measurements has also been described in brief at the end.
E
E
r
E
=
Eθ
0,  
(1)
E
r
j r e
j r
φ
β
j r
j r
η
θ
I
β
j r
=
(
)
βa
+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
−
0
η
2
0I
4
1
1
.  
(2)
And the near-field magnetic field components are 
given by (Balanis 2010)
H
j
r
j r e
r
H
j r
+
j
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
−
β
θ
a I
a
β
j r
β
j r
j r
I
2
2
1
1
,  
(3)
H
r
j r
e
j r
θ
β
j r
j r
θ
I
β
j r
= −(
)
βa
+
−
(
)r
βr
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
−
2
0I
2
4
1
1
1
,  
(4)
Hφ = 0.  
(5)
In equations (1)–(5), Er, Eθ, E  and Hr, Hθ, H  
are the r, θ,  components of electric and mag-
netic fields in spherical coordinate system respec-
tively (where 
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
, ,
r
r
E r
E a
E a
E a
θ
θ
φ
φ
θ φ =
+
+
 and 
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
, ,
r
r
H r
H a
H a
H a
θ
θ
φ
φ
θ φ =
+
+
), η0 = 
μ
ε
0
0
μ
ε
μ /
= 
120π is the intrinsic impedance of free-space, 
β
π λ
/
π
 is the phase constant, a is the radius 
of the loop and r is the distance of the near-field 
observation point (P) from the origin (outside the 
loop) as shown in Figure 1.
If the electrically-small loop antenna has N number 
of turns, then the near-field electric and magnetic 
field components can be obtained by simply multi-
plying N with those for single turn loop. Therefore 
the near-field electric and magnetic field components 
of a multiple turn loop can be obtained as
E
E
r
E
=
Eθ
0,  
(6)
E
r
j r e
j r
φ
β
j r
j r
η
θ
NI
N
β
j r
=
(
)
βa
+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
−
0
η
2
0I
4
1
1
,  
(7)
1 THEORY OF ELECTRICALLY-SMALL 
LOOP ANTENNAS
Loop antennas may be classified into two catego-
ries such as (a) electrically-small and (b) electrical-
ly-large. If the overall length, i.e. the circumference 
(C) of a loop antenna is less than one-tenth of the 
wavelength of the transmitting/receiving signal 
(i.e. C < λ/10), then it is called electrically-small. 
However, if the circumference of a loop antenna 
is comparable to the free-space wavelength (i.e. 
C ∼ λ) then it is considered as electrically-large. 
In the present paper, the frequency range under 
study is 100 KHz–60 MHz and the corresponding 
wavelength range is 5–3000 m. But the diameter 
of the transmitter (Tx) and receiver (Rx) coils are 
2a = 8 cm. therefore the overall length of both the 
coils are C = 2πa ≈ 0.50 m << λ; therefore these can 
be considered as electrically-small.
In this section, at first the theory of electrically-
small loop antenna is presented in brief. And 
finally the expression for power transfer efficiency 
has been established for WPT between two near-
field coupled Tx and Rx electrically-small loop 
antennas. The near-field properties of the electri-
cally-small loop antennas are taken into considera-
tion since those are used for the WPT within a very 
short distance (i.e. d ∼ 2a << λ). A single thin wire 
loop is assumed to be positioned symmetrically on 
the xy plane, at z = 0, as shown in Figure 2. Since 
the overall length of the loop is very small as com-
pared to the free-space wavelength (C << λ), thus 
constant current distribution I  = I0 (where I0 is a 
constant) throughout the loop is a valid approxi-
mation. Now, by following the standard proce-
dure adopted by C. A. Balanis (Balanis 2010), the 
near-field electric and magnetic field components 
can easily be obtained. The near-field electric field 
components are given by (Balanis 2010).

10
H
j
r
j r e
r
H
j r
+
j
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
−
β
θ
a N
a
I
N
β
j r
β
j r
j r
I
2
2
1
1
,  
(8)
H
r
j r
e
j r
θ
β
j r
j r
θ
NI
N
β
j r
= −(
)
βa
+
−
(
)r
βr
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
−
2
0I
2
4
1
1
1
,  
(9)
Hφ = 0.  
(10)
Now the complex power density at any point 
outside the multiple turn electrically-small loop 
can be calculated as
(
)
(
)
*
*
*
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
.
2
2
r
r
W
E
H
E H a
E H a
φ
θ
φ
θ
=
×
=
−
+
 (11)
The r- and θ-components of W  is given by
W
N
I
r
j
r
W =
(
)
a
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+
(
)r
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
η ( a
θ⎞
( r
0
η
4
2
0I
2
2
3
32
1
sin
,  
(12)
W
j
a
r N
I
θ
W
η
j
β
θ
θ
+
(
)r
βr
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
0
η
3
4
a
3
2
0I
2
2
16
1
1
sinθ
, (13)
respectively. Therefore the radiated power can be 
calculated a (using equations (12) and (13))
(
)
(
)
2
4
2
0
0
Re
.
ˆ
ˆ
Re
.
.
12
rad
S
r
r
S
P
W dS
W a
W a
dS
a
N
I
θ
θ
π
η
β
⎡
⎤
=
⎢
⎥
⎣
⎦
⎡
⎤
=
+
⎢
⎥
⎣
⎦
⎛
⎞
=
⎜
⎟
⎝
⎠
∫∫
∫∫


 
(14)
Moreover, the radiated power may be also writ-
ten as Prad = (1/2)|I0|2Rrad (where Rrad is the radiation 
resistance), which can be equated to equation (14) 
and from that equality, the value of Rrad can be cal-
culated as
R
N
S
N
C
ra
R
d
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠(
)
a
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
η
π ( a
η
π
βS
⎞⎛
λ
π
λ
0
4
2
0
η
2
2
2
π
6
2
3
20
⎟
⎞
⎠
⎫
⎬
⎪
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪⎬
⎪
⎭
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
⎪
2
2
N
,  
(15)
where S = πa2 and C = 2πa are the cross-sectional 
area and circumference of the coil having circular 
cross-section. Since Rrad is the function of λ, there-
fore it is a function of frequency (Rrad(f)).
2 EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS OF 
TRANSMITTING AND RECEIVING 
LOOP ANTENNAS
The equivalent circuit of the Tx loop antenna 
(electrically-small) is shown in Figure 2(a). The 
input impedance Zin across A1A1′ terminals is 
given by
Z
R
jX
j
in
Z
in
in
X
j
+
Rin
R
= (
)
R
R
rad
a
R c
R
+ j(
)
X
X
e
X xt +
Xe
X xt
X
,  
(16)
where Rrad is the radiation resistance given by equa-
tion (15), Rac is the AC loss resistance of the loop 
conductor, Xext = 2πfLext is the external inductive reac-
tance, Xint = 2πfLint is the internal inductive reactance 
Figure 2. Equivalent circuits of the electrically-small loop 
antenna in both (a) transmitting and (b) receiving modes.
Figure 1. Geometrical arrangement for analyzing a sin-
gle turn electrically small loop antenna.

11
of the loop antenna, Cp is the distributed stray or 
parasitic capacitance responsible for self-resonance 
of the loop antenna, Vs is the source voltage phasor 
and Zs is the internal impedance of the source.
The AC loss resistance of the loop conduct-
ance can be calculated from the Dowell’s equation 
(Dowell 1966) given by
R
l
t
mN
n
ac
R
e
p
( )
f = ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠(
)
m
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
δσ t
Ξ
n
+
m −
1
⎞(
2 ⎛⎞(m
2
2
3
,
)
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
Ξ
)
2
 (17)
where l is the length of the coil, δ
π σμ
f
π σ
 is the 
skin depth of the conductor at frequency f, σ is the 
conductivity of the conductor, m is the number of 
layers, Ξ1 is the skin effect factor given by
Ξ1 =
(
)
2Δ′
(
)
Δ
2 ′
(
)
2Δ′
(
)
Δ
2 ′
sinh
si
cosh
cos
,  
(18)
and Ξ2 is the proximity effect factor given by
Ξ2 =
(
)
2Δ′
(
)
Δ
2 ′
(
)
2Δ′
(
)
Δ
2 ′
sinh
si
cosh
cos
,  
(19)
where 
′
Δ  represents the modified penetration 
depth 
′
Δ
Δ
′ =
np , Δ represents the penetration 
ration given by Δ = te δ , te is the equivalent diam-
eter of the wire having circular cross-section given 
by t
t
e
π 4 , t is the actual diameter of the wire, 
n
t N
a
p
et
2  is the porosity factor. Thus equation 
(17) takes into account both the skin and proxim-
ity effects.
In the present work, both the Tx and Rx coils have 
a single layer, i.e. m = 1 and other dimensions are given 
by (i) t = 4.877 mm (6 SWG wire), (ii) 2a = 8 cm, (iii) 
l = 8 cm, (iv) N = 30. The conductor of the wire is 
copper; therefore the values of σ = 5.96 × 107 S m−1, 
μ = 1.256629 × 10−6 H m−1 which are taken from the 
reference (Technical Data for Copper 2015). Thus 
the value of Rac can easily be calculated from equa-
tion (17) as a function of frequency using the above 
mentioned parameter values.
Moreover, the external and internal inductances 
of the coils can be calculated from (Kraus 1992)
L
aN
a
t
ex
L
t
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠−
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
μ0
16
2
ln
,  
(20)
L
aN
ft
f
in
L t
,
( )
f = ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
π f
π μ
f
σ
0
μ
 
(21)
where μ0 = 4π × 10−7 H m−1 is the permeability of 
free-space.
If the self-resonance frequency ( frs) of the coils 
can be measured experimentally, then from the 
knowledge of frs, Lext and Lint, the value of the 
parasitic capacitance associated with the coils can 
easily be determined. The input admittance of the 
coil can be written as
Y
G
jB
Z
R
jX
in
Y
in
G
in
B
in
Z
in
R
in
X
+
Gin
G
=
=
+
1
1
,  
(22)
where Gin = Rin/(Rin
2 + Xin
2) and Bin = –Xin/(Rin
2 + Xin
2) 
are the conductance and susceptance. Now, at the 
self-resonance frequency (frs), the magnitude of 
the susceptance of Cp (|Bp| = 1/2πfrsCp) must be 
equal to the magnitude of the susceptance of Yin 
(i.e. |
|
|
|
|
|
p f|
f
i
|
n f|
i
f
rs
f
rs
f
=
=
f
|
f|
). Thus at the self-resonance 
frequency
C
f
p
C
rf s
rsf
=
(
)
R
R
ra
R
d
a
R c
(
)
frf s +
(
)
frf s
f
+
(
)
L
L
ext +
Le
L xt
(
)
frsf
2
2
2
f
2
2
2
f
4
4π 2
L
(
)
Le
L xt
x
L
+
(
)
rsfr
L
.
 
(23)
The equivalent circuit of the Rx coil in receiving 
mode is shown in Figure 2(b); where Voc is the open 
circuit voltage induced across it, Zin is the input imped-
ance of it given by the equation (16), VL is the voltage 
across the RL. Thus the VL can be obtained as
V
V
R
R
Z
L
o
V
V
V
V c
L
R
L
i
R
Z ni
.  
(24)
3 CALCULATION OF POWER 
TRANSFER EFFICIENCY
Now the input power to the Tx coil is given by
P
V
Z
in
P
in
V
p
p
in
Z
in
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
′
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(
)
2 2
1
2
co
,
in
sϕi
 
(25)
where 
′
Z
Z
′ =
j fC
f
in
Z
in
Z
p
C
|| ( /
)
2/
f
 is the input imped-
ance of the Tx coil across AA′ terminals, 
ϕin
ϕ
in
in
Zi
=
′
′
Z
tan (
−Im(
)
in
Zin′ /
e(
))
1
 and Vin(p–p) is the peak-
to-peak signal amplitude measured across AA′ ter-
minals. Similarly, the power absorbed by the pure 
resistive load RL at the receiving side is given by
P
f d
V
f d
R
out
P
L p
V
p
L
R
,f
)
,f
)
,
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(
)
2 2
1
2
 
(26)
where VL(p–p)(f,d) is the peak-to-peak signal ampli-
tude measured across BB′ terminals which is 
obviously the functions of both frequency (f) of 
the transmitted signal and separation (d) between 
the Tx and Rx coils. Therefore the Power Transfer 
Efficiency (PTE) can be calculated as

12
PTE f d
P
f d
P
out
P
in
P
( f
)
,f
) .
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(27)
4 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The block diagram of the experimental setup is 
shown in Figure 3. The AC signal is amplified 
through a Class-B power amplifier and then fed 
into the transmitting coil. A DC regulated ±15 V 
bipolar power supply is used to provide the appro-
priate bias to the Class-B power amplifier. A Digital 
Storage Oscilloscope (DSO-1) is connected across 
the transmitting coil to obtain the direct readout of 
the peak-to-peak amplitude (Vin(p–p)) and frequency 
( f ) of the transmitted signal. In the receiver side, 
a pure resistive load RL = 1 Ω is connected across 
the receiver coil. Another Digital Storage Oscillo-
scope (DSO-2) is connected across the load (RL) to 
obtain the read out of the peak-to-peak amplitude 
(VL(p–p)( f, d)) and frequency ( f ) of the RF voltage 
appeared across RL. Figures 4(a)–(d) show the 
snaps of the Tx and Rx coils coupled in axial and 
radial orientations along with the arrangement for 
power pattern measurement of the WPT system in 
both the said orientations.
REFERENCES
Balanis, C.A. (2010). Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design. 
3rd Edition, Wiley-India Edition, India, 231–246.
Dowell, P. (1966). Effect of eddy currents in transformers 
windings. Proceedings of the Institution of Electrical 
Engineers, 113(8), 1387–1394.
Technical Data for Copper. (2015). Retrieved from http://
periodictable.com/Elements/029/data.html.
Kraus, J.D. (1992). Electromagnetics. 4th Edition, 
McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, USA.
Figure 3. Experimental setup to study the WPT system 
for both (a) radial and (b) axial coupling of Tx and Rx 
coils.
Figure 4. Transmitter (Tx) and receiver (Rx) coils cou-
pled in (a) axial and (b) radial orientations. Snap-shots 
of the arrangement for power pattern measurement 
of the WPT system coupled in (c) axial and (d) radial 
orientations.

13
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Wireless power transmission—part III: Experimental study
Nirvik Patra, Debodyuti Banerjee, Subhashri Chatterjee, T.K. Sengupta, 
Subhendu Chakraborty & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: The authors have carried out a comprehensive experimental study on Wireless Power 
Transfer (WPT) by using both the self-resonance coupling and near-field electromagnetic coupling 
between transmitting and receiving electrically-small loop antennas. For the first coupling mechanism, 
the frequency of the transmitted signal is kept same as the self-resonance frequency of the transmitting 
and receiving antenna system; however, for the second coupling mechanism, the frequency of the trans-
mitted signal is kept well above the self-resonance frequency subject to obtain high radiation efficiency 
of the transmitting antenna. Experiments have been carried out to study the Power Transfer Efficiency 
(PTE) of the antenna system coupled in axial and radial orientations for both the abovementioned cou-
pling mechanisms. Results show that the better PTE is achieved in axial coupling mode as compared to 
the radial coupling mode when the self-resonance coupling mechanism is used; but the usable frequency 
range (i.e. the bandwidth) is found to be very small less than 1 MHz for this coupling mechanism. The 
observation is reversed when near-field electromagnetic coupling mechanism is used and the bandwidth 
for WPT for this mechanism is also found to much broader ∼50 MHz.
and (21) of Part II, the value of LT at resonance 
frequency (1.4 MHz) is found to be LT = 5.86 μH. 
Thus the parasitic capacitance (Cp) of the coil may 
be obtained from equation (23) of Part II and its 
value is Cp = 2.20 nF at 1.4 MHz. It is interesting to 
observe from Figure 1 that the PTEa is much greater 
1 MEASUREMENT OF FREQUENCY 
RESPONSE
The aim of the present work as well as the proposed 
setup for the experimental measurements have 
been already described in the earlier parts of the 
paper respectively (Patra et al. 2016a,b). Initially 
the frequency response of the WPT system have 
been studied for both radial and axial coupling 
(R-coupling and A-coupling) of Tx and Rx coils 
by keeping the separation between them d = 0 cm 
and varying the frequency of the transmitted signal 
(generated from function generator) from 100 KHz 
– 100 MHz. The power transfer efficiency in both 
the above mentioned coupling modes (PTEr and 
PTEa) have been calculated by using the formula 
given in equation (27) of Part II (Patra et al. 2016b) 
and from the peak-to-peak amplitudes of the 
transmitted and received signals (Vin(p–p)) and VL(p–p)
(f,d = 0)) readout from DSO-1 and DSO-2 respec-
tively for each frequency. The plots of PTEr and 
PTEa as functions of frequency (within the range 
of f = 100 KHz – 100 MHz) are shown in Figure 1. 
Now the total inductance (LT(f) = Lext + Lint(f)) of 
Tx and Rx coils can be calculated as functions of 
frequency from equations (20) and (21) of Part II. 
It is observed from Figure 1 that the self-resonance 
frequency (frs) of both the coils (where both PTEr 
and PTEa sharply attain their respective peaks) is 
found to be frs = 1.4 MHz. From equations (20) 
Figure 1. Frequency response of WPT system in both 
radial and axial coupling of Tx and Rx coils for zero cen-
timeter separation between them.

14
than PTEr at the resonance frequency frs = 1.4 MHz 
(
.
%
a (
)
f
frf
67
 and PTEr
E (
)
f
frf = 53 91
.
%
91
).  
Stronger magnetic field coupling in A-coupling ori-
entation at resonance frequency as compare to the 
near-field electromagnetic in R-coupling orienta-
tion is the cause of higher value of PTEa than PTEr 
at frs. Very small value of radiation resistance Rrad 
= 82.07 μΩ and comparatively larger value of loss 
resistance Rac = 211.27 nΩ cause a very small radia-
tion efficiency €rad = (Rrad/(Rrad + Rac)) × 100 = 3.88 
× 10–4% in R-coupling orientation at 1.4 MHz. Con-
sequently, the near-field electromagnetic coupling 
in R-coupling orientation is very weak at 1.4 MHz. 
 However, at the resonance frequency frs = 1.4 MHz, 
the impedance of both the coils become minimum 
and purely resistive; which causes maximum flow 
of AC current through then and leads to maximum 
magnetic field coupling in axial orientation (i.e. in 
A-coupling orientation).
Further, it is very interesting to observe from 
Figure 1 that at the higher frequencies especially 
f > 50 MHz, the values of PTEr significantly pre-
dominate over the values of PTEa. This fact can 
be explained from Figure 2. The loss resistance 
(Rac) and radiation resistance (Rrad) of the Tx coil 
have been calculated as functions of frequency and 
plots of Rac, Rrad versus frequency are shown in Fig-
ure 2. It is observed from Figure 2 that the values 
of Rrad are much smaller and almost negligible as 
compared to the values of Rac at the lower frequen-
cies. But the rate of increase of Rrad with respect 
to frequency (i.e. dRac/df) is much larger than that 
of Rac (i.e. dRac/df). It is interesting to note that 
the values of Rrad become almost comparable to 
the values of Rac, when the frequency increases 
beyond 10 MHz. At f = 54.1 MHz, both of them 
become equal, Rrad = Rac = 1.83 ohm and corre-
sponding radiation efficiency becomes €rad = 50%. 
The values of Rrad over take those of Rac while the 
frequency increases above 54.1 MHz; which leads 
to sharp increase of radiation efficiency of the Tx 
coil. Thus the near-field electromagnetic coupling 
in R-coupling orientation improves sharply for the 
higher frequencies f > 10 MHz and due to the sig-
nificant increase of €rad beyond 54.1 MHz, PTEr 
increase significantly. But at the same time, it may 
be noted that these frequencies (f > 10 MHz) are 
much larger than the self-resonance frequency of 
the coils. Thus at higher frequencies (10 MHz ≤ 
f ≤ 60 MHz), the magnitude the input impedance 
of the coils are much greater than that of its value 
at resonance. Thus the AC current flowing in both 
the coils is very small, causing very small magnetic 
coupling. As a result of small amount of magnetic 
coupling, the PTEa values are very small at the said 
frequency range (10 MHz ≤ f ≤ 60 MHz).
2 MEASUREMENT OF POWER 
TRANSFER EFFICIENCY VERSUS 
DISTANCE CHARACTERISTICS
Power transfer efficiency versus distance charac-
teristics of the WPT system have been also investi-
gated by varying the separation between Tx and Rx 
coils coupled in axial (i.e. magnetic field coupling) 
and radial (i.e. near-field electromagnetic coupling) 
directions. The above mentioned characteristics are 
shown in Figures 3 and 4 for 1.4 MHz and 60 MHz 
frequencies respectively.
Figure 2. Variations of radiation resistance and loss 
resistance of the coils with frequency. Inset of the figure 
shows the variation of radiation efficiency of the trans-
mitting loop antenna with frequency. In all the graphs 
the frequency ranges suitable for A-coupling (1–2 MHz) 
and R-coupling (10–60 MHz) are highlighted by the light 
gray and deep gray boxes respectively.
Figure 3. Power transfer efficiency versus distance plots 
of WPT system in radial and axial coupling orientations 
at self-resonance frequency (frs = 1.4 MHz).

15
It is observed from Figure 3 that the value of 
PTEa is larger than the values of PTEr when the 
separation of the coils are small (d ≤ 8 cm) at the 
self-resonance frequency (frs = 1.4 MHz). However, 
both the PTEa and PTEr become comparable for 
higher separation between the coils (d > 8 cm) at 
1.4 MHz. It suggests that the axial coupling must 
be preferred over the radial coupling to obtain 
better power transfer efficiency, especially for 
smaller separation or very small distance WPT at 
self-resonance frequency. Further, from Figure 4 
it can be concluded that at 60 MHz (i.e. f >> frs), 
radial coupling orientation is highly suitable for 
WPT and its performance is even better than the 
axial coupling orientation at self-resonance fre-
quency for larger separation between the Tx and 
Rx coils.
3 MEASUREMENT OF 
RADIATION PATTERNS
Normalized power patterns of the Rx coil in yz 
plane for both R- and A-coupling orientations 
at self-resonance frequency frs = 1.4 MHz for 
d = 5 cm are shown in Figure 5. The same pat-
terns for 60 MHz transmitted frequency for the 
same separation (d = 5 cm) have been shown in 
Figure 6. At self-resonance frequency, half power 
beam width for A-coupling orientation is found 
to be larger (HPBWa = 108.11°) than that for 
R-coupling (HPBWr = 84.13°). The same nature 
is also observed in the normalized power patterns 
Figure 4. Power transfer efficiency versus distance plots 
of WPT systems in radial and axial coupling orientations 
at f = 60 MHz.
Figure 5. Normalized power patterns of the receiving 
coil in yz plane for both radial and axial coupling orienta-
tions at self-resonance frequency (frs = 1.4 MHz) for 5 cm 
separation between transmitter and receiver coils.
Figure 6. Normalized power patterns of the receiving 
coil in yz plane for both radial and axial coupling orienta-
tions at 60 MHz for 5 cm separation between transmitter 
and receiver coils.
at 60 MHz (i.e. HPBWa = 103.33° > HPBWr 
= 88.39°). The smaller beam widths of R-coupling 
 orientation for both the cases suggest better 
directivity of that orientation as compared to 
the A-coupling orientation. Better directivity 
naturally improves the received power density at 
larger distance from the transmitter. Therefore, 
R-coupling is always the preferable orientation for 
longer distance WPT.

16
4 CONCLUSION
A comprehensive experimental study have been car-
ried out on wireless power transfer by using both the 
self-resonance coupling and near-field electromag-
netic coupling between transmitting and receiving 
electrically-small loop antennas. Experiments have 
been carried out to study the frequency response, 
Power Transfer Efficiency (PTE) versus distance 
characteristics and power pattern characteristics 
of the antenna system coupled in axial and radial 
orientations for both the abovementioned coupling 
mechanisms. It may be concluded from the experi-
mental results that the near-field electromagnetic 
coupling mechanism is the better choice for WPT 
between transmitting and receiving loop antennas 
aligned in radial direction as compared to the self-
resonance coupling mechanism between transmit-
ting and receiving loop antennas aligned in axial 
direction especially when the separation between 
the antennas is larger. The results are highly encour-
aging to make larger prototypes of the WPT system 
for transmission of high power to confirm the better 
suitability of radial coupling orientation for usable 
amount of far-field power transmission.
REFERENCES
Patra, N., Banerjee, D., Chatterjee, S., Sengupta, T. K., 
and Acharyya, A. (2016a). Wireless Power Transmis-
sion—Part I: A Brief History. In Proceedings of C2E2 
2016, SKFGI, Mankundu, WB, India, (pp. 5–7).
Patra, N., Banerjee, D., Chatterjee, S., Sengupta, T. K., 
and Acharyya, A. (2016b). Wireless Power Transmis-
sion—Part II: Theoretical Modeling of Transmitting 
and Receiving Electrically-Small Loop Antennas. In 
Proceedings of C2E2 2016, SKFGI, Mankundu, WB, 
India, (pp. 8–11).

17
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Evaluation of ionization rates of charge carriers in a semiconductor 
via a generalized analytical model based on multistage scattering 
phenomena—part I: Wurtzite-GaN
Apala Banerjee, Subhashri Chatterjee, Adrija Das, Subhendu Chakraborty & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: A comprehensive analytical model based on multistage scattering phenomena has been 
used to evaluate the impact ionization rates of electrons and holes in Wz-GaN within the field range of 
4.0 × 107–2.0 × 108 V m−1. The numerical results obtained from the proposed analytical model within the 
field range under consideration have been compared with the ionization rate values calculated by using the 
empirical relations fitted from the experimentally measured data. The calculated values of impact ioniza-
tion rates of electrons and holes in Wz-GaN are found to be in close agreement with the experimental 
results especially for the electron and hole concentrations of 1023 m−3 which are same as those taken into 
account in the experiment.
in addition to the usual scattering events like opti-
cal phonon scattering ionization collisions in their 
analysis. Ten years later in 1985, Singh and Pal 
(Singh et al. 1985) adopted the similar approach 
and evaluated the ionization rates of electrons and 
holes in <100> oriented in GaAs. The calculated 
results were in close agreement with the experi-
mental results of Ito et al. (Ito et al. 1978) and 
Pearsall et al. (Pearsall et al. 1978). In addition to 
that the theory proposed by Singh and Pal (Singh 
et al. 1985) was successful to explain the behav-
ior of holes in GaAs as spin-orbit splitoff holes 
and heavy holes at lower and higher field ranges 
respectively.
Generation of Electron Hole Pairs (EHP) by 
impact ionization process basically a multistage 
phenomena. Several combinations of optical pho-
non scattering as well as carrier-carrier collision 
events may take place prior to the generation of an 
EHP via impact ionization. This microscopic view 
of an EHP generation by means of impact ioniza-
tion has been first taken into account by Acharyya 
et al. (Acharyya et al. 2014) in the year 2014. They 
considered the all possible combinations of opti-
cal phonon scattering and carrier-carrier collision 
events prior to the impact ionization and thereby 
generation of an EHP. Finally the probability of 
impact ionization has been obtained from a tri-
nomial distribution function which describes the 
above mentioned multistage scattering phenom-
ena. Using the probability of impact ionization, 
finally the analytical expression of ionization rate 
of charge carriers in a semiconductor material has 
been developed and using that the ionization rates 
1 INTRODUCTION
Avalanche multiplication by means of impact ioni-
zation of charge carriers within the active regions 
reversed biased p-n junctions plays a significant 
role in various microwave, millimeter-wave and 
optoelectronic semiconductor devices. Several 
theoretical models to describe and formulate the 
impact ionization rates of charge carriers in a sem-
iconductor material had been proposed by differ-
ent researchers since last sixty years. Out of those, 
most acceptable analytical models were proposed 
by Wolff (Wolff 1954) in the year 1954 and Shock-
ley (Shockley 1961) in the year 1961. In the year 
1961, Mole and Meyer (Mole et al. 1961) modified 
the Shockley’s theory by considering different pos-
sible ways through which electron can cause ioni-
zation by acquiring energy equal and greater than 
the ionization threshold energy. Two years later in 
1963, Mole and Overstraeten (Mole et al. 1963) 
proved that the theories of Wolff (Wolff 1954) and 
Shockley (Shockley 1961) are applicable for low 
and high field conditions respectively. One year 
earlier of that, i.e. in the year 1962, Baraff (Bar-
aff 1962) had plotted the impact ionization rates 
of charge carriers as function of electric field from 
the numerical simulation technique without any 
low or high field approximations. In the year 1975, 
Ghosh and Roy (Ghosh et al. 1975) shown that the 
higher carrier density in semiconductors enhance 
the energy loss due to electron-electron collisions 
which causes significant deterioration in ionization 
rate of charge carriers. They considered the energy 
loss occurred due to electron-electron interactions 

18
of electrons and holes in 4H-SiC have been calcu-
lated as functions of electric field. The calculated 
results show better agreement with the experimen-
tal data (Konstantinov et al. 1997) as compared to 
those calculated from the analytical expressions of 
Ghosh et al. (Ghosh et al. 1975) and Singh et al. 
(Singh et al. 1985).
In the present paper, similar approach (as in ref. 
Acharyya et al. 2014) has been taken into account 
to calculate impact ionization rates of both elec-
trons and holes in Wurtzite-GaN (Wz-GaN). 
The calculated results have been compared with 
the  values of electrons and holes ionization rates 
of Wz-GaN obtained from the empirical relation 
with the experimentally measured data of Kuni-
hiro et al. (Kunihiro et al. 1999) within the electri-
cal field range under consideration. The calculated 
results are found to be in good agreement with the 
experimental results.
2 THEORETICAL MODEL
Acharyya et al. (Acharyya et al. 2014) considered 
the multistage scattering phenomena by taking 
into account a w-stage process; where w = 1, 2, 3, 
4, ………, N, N + 1. During the first N stages, all 
possible combinations of optical phonon scatter-
ing as well as carrier-carrier scattering events are 
assumed to be occurred. At the final (N + 1)th stage, 
the impact ionization is assumed to be occurred. 
They have formulated the above mentioned w-stage 
process by means of a trinomial distribution func-
tion. And finally by considering all possible values 
of the number of stages, i.e. values of w varying 
from 1 to ∞, the total probability of multistage 
impact ionization initiated by electrons or holes 
can be expressed as (PTc ≡ PTe for electrons and 
PTc ≡ PTh for holes)
P
p
E
q l
p
E
q l
Tc
P
i e h c
i e
E
h c
rcl
rc
r
E
icl
ξ
q l
ξ
q l
( )
ξ =
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
−
−
p
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
(
)
(
)
,
,
exp
exp
1
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+
−
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎧
⎨
⎧
⎨
⎧
⎩
⎨
⎩
⎨
⎫
⎬
⎫
⎬
⎫
⎭
⎬
⎭
⎬
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
p
E
q l
cc
cc
E
irl c
exp
,
ξ
q l
 
(1)
where pi(e,h)c, prc, pcc are the probabilities of occur-
rence of impact ionization, optical phonon 
generation, carrier-carrier interaction after reach-
ing the respective energies (pi(e,h)c ≡ pi(e,h)e, prc ≡ pre 
and pcc ≡ pee for electrons, pi(e,h)c ≡ pi(e,h)h, prc ≡ prh 
and pcc ≡ phh for holes), Er is the energy of optical 
phonons, Ecc is the average energy loss due to carrier-
carrier interation (Ecc ≡ Eee for electron-electron and 
Ecc ≡ Ehh for hole-hole interaction), Ei(e,h)c is the ioni-
zation threshold energy (Ei(e,h)c ≡ Ei(e,h)e for electrons 
and Ei(e,h)c ≡ Ei(e,h)h for holes), lrcl
(
)
l
l
r
c
l
l c
+
lrl
−
l
+ l
+
1 , 
licl
(
)
l
l
i e
l
h c
ccl
+
lil
h
−
l
+ l
+
1
, lirl c
(
)
l
l
i e
l
h c
rl
+
lil
h
−
l
+ l
+
1
; where lr, lcc 
and li(e,h)c are the mean free paths associated with 
optical phonon scattering, carrier-carrier collisions 
and impact ionization respectively (lcc ≡ lee, li(e,h)c ≡ 
li(e,h)e for electrons and lcc ≡ lhh, li(e,h)c ≡ li(e,h)h for holes), 
q is the electronics charge (q = 1.6 × 10−19 C) and ξ 
is the applied electric field.
Now considering the energy balance equation, 
i.e. applied energy per unit length equals to energy 
loss due to optical phonon collision, carrier-car-
rier interaction and impact ionization, along with 
the relative probabilities of impact ionization of 
charge carriers, impact ionization rates of charges 
carriers may be obtained as
α
ξ
ξ
e
α
Te
ee
ee
r
Te
T
PT
l
le
ξ
dEe
dx
( )
ξ =
( )
ξ ⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
−
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(
)
Te
PTe
−
( )
ξ
( )
ξ
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(
)
1
l
l
E
rl
eel
i e(
E
h e)
,
,  (2)
α
ξ
ξ
h
α
Th
hh
hh
r
Th
T
PT
l
lh
ξ
dEh
dx
( )
ξ =
( )
ξ ⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
−
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(
)
Th
PTh
−
( )
ξ
( )
ξ
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(
)
1
l
l
E
rl
hh
l
i e(
E
h h)
,
,  (3)
where ‹dEee/dx› and ‹dEhh/dx› are the average energy 
loss per unit length due to electron-electron and 
hole-hole collisions respectively (Acharyya et al. 
2014). The effect of carrier density on αe.h(ξ) has 
been incorporated by the dependence of lee and lhh 
on the electron and hole concentrations (i.e. n and p) 
respectively. Those are taken to be l
A
n
eel
e
c
−
(
)
Ae
1 3 
and l
A
p
hh
l
h
d
−
(
)
A h
1 3 (Singh et al. 1985), where Ae, 
Ah, c and d are dimensionless fitting parameters 
which may be adjusted in numerical calculations 
for obtaining the best fit of the experimental data.
3 NUMERICAL RESULTS 
AND DISCUSSION
Numerical calculations have been carried out to 
obtain the ionization rate of electrons and holes 
in Wz-GaN as functions of applied electric field 
within the field range 4.0 × 107 – 2.0 × 108 V m−1 
using the analytical expressions given in equations 
(2) and (3) in which the multistage scattering phe-
nomena have been taken into account for obtain-
ing the total probability of impact ionization of 
the charge carriers. The calculated values of αe,h are 
compared with the empirical relations fitted from 
the experimental data measured by Kunihiro et al. 
(Kunihiro et al. 1999) given by

19
α
ξ
e
α
e h
e h
m
Ae
A
Be
,
,
h
e
,
exp
,
ξ
,
( )
ξ
h
= A
exp
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
 
(4)
where the ionization coefficients Ae, Be, Ae, Bh are 
138.00 × 108 m−1, 14.28 × 108 V m−1, 6.867 × 108 m−1, 
8.72 × 108 V m−1 respectively for ξ ≤ 108 V m−1 and 
122.70 × 108 m−1, 13.63 × 108 V m−1, 3.84 × 108 m−1, 
7.95 × 108 V m−1 respectively for ξ > 108 V m−1, while 
m = 1 for the entire field range under considera-
tion (Kunihiro et al. 1999). Other material param-
eters of Wz-GaN such as bandgap (Eg = 3.39 eV), 
ionization 
threshold 
energy 
of 
electrons 
(Ei(e,h) e = 3.6612 eV) and holes (Ei(e,h)h = 3.5934 eV) 
and corresponding mean free paths (li(e,h)e = 840 Å 
and li(e,h)h = 1360 Å respectively), optical phonon 
energy (Er = 91.2 meV) and corresponding mean 
free path (lr = 42 Å), permittivity (εr  = 8.9), etc. 
at 300 K are taken from the experimental reports 
(Electronic Archive 2015).
Variations of ionization rate of electrons and 
holes in Wz-GaN obtained from the analytical 
model presented in this paper with inverse of the 
electric field for different electron and hole con-
centrations respectively are shown in Figures 1 
and 2. The same variations obtained from the 
empirical relations given in equations (4) (Kunihiro 
et al. 1999) are also shown in Figures 1 and 2. The 
parameters Ae, c, Ah and d associated with the 
mean free path of electron-electron and hole-hole 
collisions (lee and lhh) are adjusted in numerical cal-
culations for the best fit of the experimental data. 
In the present analytical model the best fittings 
for electron and hole ionization rates described 
by equations (2) and (3) with the empirical rela-
tions describing the field variations of the same 
parameters, i.e. equations (4) are obtained from 
lee = (0.75)3.12 n−1/3 and lhh = (0.77)3.18 p−1/3 m respec-
tively. It can be observed from Figures 1 and 2 
that the analytical expressions of ionization rates 
considering the multistage scattering phenomena 
presented in this paper are in close agreement with 
respect to the experimental data (Kunihiro et al. 
1999) at any electric field especially for the elec-
tron and hole concentrations of 1023 m−3 which 
are same those taken for the experiment (Kunihiro 
et al. 1999). It is also noteworthy from Figures 1 
and 2 that the impact ionization rate of charge 
carriers decreased significantly when the carrier 
concentrations are increased. This decrement of 
impact ionization rates are more pronounced for 
the carrier concentrations of 1021 m−3 and above 
of it. Degradation of impact ionization probabili-
ties for both electrons and holes as a consequent 
of increase of energy loss per unit length due to 
increased amount of electro-electron and hole-
hole collisions is responsible for decrement of 
impact ionization rate of charge carriers at higher 
carrier concentrations. Moreover the degradations 
impact ionization rate of both electrons and holes 
are found to be more severe at lower electric field 
Figure 1. Ionization rate of electrons in Wz-GaN versus 
inverse of applied electric field. Points ( ) represent the 
plot of empirical relation given by equation (4) fitted 
from experimental data of Kunihiro et al. (Kunihiro et al. 
1999) (electron concentration in (Kunihiro et al. 1999) is 
n = 1023 m−3).
Figure 2. Ionization rate of holes in Wz-GaN versus 
inverse of applied electric field. Points (•) represent the 
plot of empirical relation given by equation (4) fitted 
from experimental data of Kunihiro et al. (Kunihiro 
et al. 1999) (hole concentration in (Kunihiro et al. 1999) 
is p  = 1023 m−3).

20
values especially below 1.0 × 108 V m−1 for all car-
rier densities. At lower electric fields the supplied 
energy per unit length (qξ) is smaller and compa-
rable to the energy loss per unit length due to the 
carrier-carrier interactions which leads to more 
degradation in impact ionization probabilities 
at those electric fields as compared to at higher 
fields. Thus the values of ionization rates are more 
affected by energy loss due to carrier-carrier colli-
sions at lower electric fields.
4 CONCLUSION
In this paper, a comprehensive analytical model 
based on multistage scattering phenomena has 
been used to evaluate the impact ionization rates 
of electrons and holes in Wz-GaN within the field 
range of 4.0 × 107–2.0 × 108 V m−1. The numeri-
cal results obtained from the proposed analytical 
model within the field range under consideration 
have been compared with the ionization rate val-
ues calculated by using the empirical relations fit-
ted from the experimentally measured data. The 
calculated values of impact ionization rates of 
electrons and holes in Wz-GaN are found to be 
in close agreement with the experimental results 
especially for the electron and hole concentra-
tions of 1023 m−3 which are same as those taken 
into account in the experiment. The effect of vary-
ing charge density and corresponding variations 
of energy loss due to carrier-carrier collisions on 
the impact ionization rate of charge carriers in the 
base semiconductor can be taken into account for 
the analysis or simulation of several microwave, 
millimeter-wave and optoelectronic devices by 
using the analytical expressions developed in this 
paper.
REFERENCES
Acharyya, A., Banerjee, J. P. (2014). A generalized ana-
lytical model based on multistage scattering phenom-
ena for estimating the impact ionization rate of charge 
carriers in semiconductors. Journal of Computational 
Electronics, 13, 917–924.
Baraff, G. A. (1962). Distribution functions and ioniza-
tion rates for hot electrons in semiconductors. Phys. 
Rev. 128, 2507.
Electronic Archive: New Semiconductor Materials, Char-
acteristics and Properties (2015). Retrieved from http://
www.ioffe.ru/SVA/NSM/Semicond/GaN/ index.html.
Ghosh, R., and Roy, S. K. (1975). Effect of electron-electron 
interactions on the ionization rate of charge carriers in 
semiconductors. Solid-State Electronics, 18, 945–948.
Ito, M., Kagawa, S., Kaneda, T., and Yamaoka, T. (1978). 
Ionization rates for electrons and holes in GaAs. Jour-
nal of Applied Physics, 49, 4607.
Konstantinov, A. O., Wahab, Q., Nordell, N., and Lin-
defelt, U. (1997). Ionization rates and critical fields in 
4H-Silicon Carbide. Applied Physics Letters, 71, 90–92.
Kunihiro, K., Kasahara, K., Takahashi, Y., Ohno, Y. (1999). 
Experimental evaluation of impact ionization coefficients 
in GaN. IEEE Electron Device Letter, 20, 608–610.
Moll, J. L., and Meyer, N. I. (1961). Secondary multipli-
cation in silicon. Solid-State Electronics, 3, 155–158.
Moll, J. L., and Overstraeten, R. V. (1963). Charge multi-
plication in silicon p-n junctions. Solid-State Electron-
ics 6, 147–157.
Pearsall, T. P., Capasso, F., Nahory, R. E., Pollack, M. 
A., and Chelikowsky, J. R. (1978). The band structure 
dependence of impact ionization by hot carriers in semi-
conductors: GaAs. Solid-State Electronics, 21, 297–302.
Shotckey, W. (1961). Problems related to p-n junctions in 
silicon. Solid-State Electronics, 2, 35–67.
Singh, S. R., and Pal, B. B. (1985). Ionization rates of 
electrons and holes in GaAs considering electron-
electron and hole-hole interactions. IEEE Trans. on 
Electron Devices, 32(3), 599–604.
Wolff, P. A. (1954). Theory of electron multiplication sili-
con and germanium. Phys. Rev. 95, 1415.

21
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Evaluation of ionization rates of charge carriers in a semiconductor 
via a generalized analytical model based on multistage scattering 
phenomena—part II: Type-IIb diamond and 6H-SiC
Apala Banerjee, Adrija Das, Subhashri Chatterjee, Subhendu Chakraborty & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: The analytical model based on multistage scattering phenomena as discussed in the ear-
lier part of the paper has been used to evaluate the impact ionization rates of charge carriers in type-IIb 
diamond and 6H-SiC within the field ranges of 4.0 × 107–1.0 × 108 V m−1 and 5.0 × 107–5.0 × 108 V m−1 
respectively. The calculated results have been compared with the ionization rate values calculated by using 
the empirical relations fitted from the experimentally measured data. The calculated values of impact 
ionization rates of charge carriers in both type-IIb diamond and 6H-SiC are found to be in close agree-
ment with the experimental results especially for the electron and hole concentrations of 1022 m−3 which 
are same as those taken into account in the experiments.
field within the field range 4.0 × 107–1.0 × 108 V m−1 
using the analytical expressions given in equations 
(2) and (3) of the Part I of this paper (Chatterjee 
et al. 2016) in which the multistage scattering phe-
nomena have been taken into account for obtain-
ing the total probability of impact ionization of 
the charge carriers. The calculated values of αe,h are 
compared with the empirical relations fitted from 
the experimental data measured by Konorova et al. 
(Konorova et al. 1983) given by
α
ξ
e
α
e h
e h
m
Ae
A
Be
,
,
h
e
,
exp
,
ξ
,
( )
ξ
h
= A
exp
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
 
(1)
where the ionization coefficients Ae, Be, Ae, Bh are 
193.50 × 108 m−1, 7.749 × 108 V m−1, 193.50 × 108 
m−1, 7.749 × 108 V m−1 respectively, while m = 1 for 
the entire field range under consideration (Kono-
rova et al. 1983). It is observed from the experi-
mental measurement of Konorova et al. (Konorova 
et al. 1983), the ionization rates of both electrons 
and holes are same (i.e. αe = αh) in type-IIb dia-
mond for the entire field range under consideration. 
Other material parameters of type-IIb diamond 
such as bandgap (Eg = 5.48 eV), ionization thresh-
old energy of electrons (Ei(e,h)e = 6.1376 eV) and 
holes (Ei(e,h)h = 6.1376 eV) and corresponding mean 
free paths (li(e,h)e = 3400 Å and li(e,h)h = 3400 Å respec-
tively), optical phonon energy (Er = 160.0 meV) 
and corresponding mean free path (lr = 170 Å), 
permittivity (εr  = 5.7), etc. at room temperature 
(i.e. T = 300 K) are taken from the experimental 
reports (Electronic Archive 2015).
1 INTRODUCTION
The generalized analytical model based on multi-
stage scattering phenomena proposed by Ach-
aryya et al. (Acharyya et al. 2014) has been used 
to evaluate the impact ionization rates of charge 
carriers in type-IIb diamond and 6H-SiC within 
the field ranges of 4.0 × 107–1.0 × 108 V m−1 and 
5.0 × 107–5.0 × 108 V m−1 respectively. The detail of 
the theoretical model has already been discussed 
in the earlier part of the paper (Chatterjee et al. 
2016). The numerical results obtained from the 
proposed analytical model within the field ranges 
under consideration have been compared with 
the ionization rate values calculated by using the 
empirical relations fitted from the experimentally 
measured data (Konorova et al. 1983, Dmitriev 
et al. 1983). The calculated values of impact ioni-
zation rates of charge carriers in both type-IIb 
diamond and 6H-SiC are found to be in close 
agreement with the experimental results especially 
for the electron and hole concentrations of 1022 
m−3 which are same as those taken into account in 
the experiments (Konorova et al. 1983, Dmitriev 
et al. 1983).
2 CALCULATION OF IMPACT 
IONIZATION RATES OF CHARGE 
CARRIERS IN TYPE-IIB DIAMOND
Numerical calculations have been carried out to 
obtain the ionization rate of electrons and holes in 
type-IIb diamond as functions of applied electric 

22
Variations of ionization rate of electrons and 
holes in type-IIb diamond obtained from the ana-
lytical model presented in the Part I of this paper 
with inverse of the electric field for different elec-
tron and hole concentrations are shown in Figure 1. 
The same variation obtained from the empirical 
relation given in equation (1) (Konorova et al. 
1983) is also shown in Figure 1. The parameters 
Ae, c, Ah and d associated with the mean free path 
of electron-electron and hole-hole collisions (lee 
and lhh) are adjusted in numerical calculations for 
the best fit of the experimental data. In the present 
analytical model the best fittings for electron and 
hole ionization rates described by equations (2) and 
(3) of the Part I of this paper with the empirical 
relations describing the field variations of the same 
parameters, i.e. equation (1) are obtained from 
lee = (0.03)0.54 n–1/3 and lhh = (0.03)0.54 p–1/3 m respec-
tively. It can be observed from Figure 1 that the 
analytical expressions of ionization rates consider-
ing the multistage scattering phenomena presented 
in this paper are in close agreement with respect to 
the experimental data (Konorova et al. 1983) at any 
electric field especially for the electron and hole con-
centrations of 1022 m−3 which are same those taken 
for the experiment (Konorova et al. 1983). It is also 
noteworthy from Figure 1 that the impact ioniza-
tion rate of charge carriers decreased significantly 
when the carrier concentrations are increased. This 
decrement of impact ionization rates are more pro-
nounced for the carrier concentrations of 1021 m−3 
and above of it. Degradation of impact ionization 
probabilities for both electrons and holes as a con-
sequent of increase of energy loss per unit length 
due to increased amount of electro-electron and 
hole-hole collisions is responsible for decrement of 
impact ionization rate of charge carriers at higher 
carrier concentrations. Moreover the degradations 
impact ionization rate of both electrons and holes 
are found to be more severe at lower electric field 
values especially below 7.0 × 107 V m−1 for all car-
rier densities. At lower electric fields the supplied 
energy per unit length (qξ) is smaller and compa-
rable to the energy loss per unit length due to the 
carrier-carrier interactions which leads to more 
degradation in impact ionization probabilities 
at those electric fields as compared to at higher 
fields. Thus the values of ionization rates are more 
affected by energy loss due to carrier-carrier colli-
sions at lower electric fields.
3 CALCULATION OF IMPACT 
IONIZATION RATES OF CHARGE 
CARRIERS IN 6H-SILICON CARBIDE
Numerical calculations have also been carried out to 
obtain the ionization rates of both types of charge 
carriers in 6H-SiC as functions of applied electric 
field within the field range 5.0 × 107–5.0 × 108 V m−1 
using the analytical expressions given in equations 
(2) and (3) of the Part I of this paper (Chatterjee 
et al. 2016) in which the multistage scattering phe-
nomena have been taken into account for obtain-
ing the total probability of impact ionization of 
the charge carriers. The calculated values of αe,h 
are compared with the empirical relations fitted 
from the experimental data measured by Dmitriev 
et al. (Dmitriev et al. 1983) given by the equations 
(1). The ionization coefficients Ae, Be, Ae, Bh are 
4.65 × 106 m−1, 12.00 × 108 V m−1, 4.65 × 108 m−1, 
12.00 × 108 V m−1 respectively, while m = 1 for the 
entire field range under consideration (Dmitriev 
et al. 1983). It is observed from the experimental 
measurement of Dmitriev et al. (Dmitriev et al. 
1983), the ionization rate of holes is 100 times 
greater than that of electrons (i.e. αe = αh/100) in 
6H-SiC for the entire field range under considera-
tion. Other material parameters of 6H-SiC such 
as bandgap (Eg = 2.86 eV), ionization threshold 
energy of electrons (Ei(e,h)e = 5.2052 eV) and holes 
(Ei(e,h)h = 4.4330 eV) and corresponding mean free 
paths (li(e,h)e = 1600 Å and li(e,h)h = 600 Å respectively), 
optical phonon energy (Er = 104.2 meV) and cor-
responding mean free path (lr = 40 Å), permittivity 
(εr  = 9.66), etc. at 300 K are taken from the experi-
mental reports (Electronic Archive 2015).
Variations of ionization rate of electrons and 
holes in 6H-SiC obtained from the analytical model 
Figure 1. Ionization rates of electrons and holes in type-
IIb diamond versus inverse of applied electric field. Points 
( ) represent the plot of empirical relation given by equa-
tion (1) fitted from experimental data of Konorova et al. 
(Konorova et al. 1983) (electron and hole concentrations in 
(Konorova et al. 1983) is n, p = 1022 m−3).

23
presented in earlier part of this paper with inverse of 
the electric field for different electron and hole con-
centrations respectively are shown in Figures 2 and 
3. The same variations obtained from the empirical 
relations given in equations (1) (Dmitriev et al. 1983) 
are also shown in Figures 2 and 3. The parameters 
Ae, c, Ah and d associated with the mean free path of 
electron-electron and hole-hole collisions (lee and lhh) 
are adjusted in numerical calculations for the best fit 
of the experimental data. In the present analytical 
model the best fittings for electron and hole ioniza-
tion rates described by equations (2) and (3) of Part 
I of this paper with the empirical relations describ-
ing the field variations of the same parameters, 
i.e. equations (1) are obtained from lee = (3.75)3.86 
n–1/3 and lhh = (2.65)2.05 p–1/3 m respectively. It can 
be observed from Figures 2 and 3 that the analyti-
cal expressions of ionization rates considering the 
multistage scattering phenomena presented in this 
paper are in close agreement with respect to the 
experimental data (Dmitriev et al. 1983) at any elec-
tric field especially for the electron and hole concen-
trations of 1022 m−3 which are same those taken for 
the experiment (Dmitriev et al. 1983).
It is also noteworthy from Figures 2 and 3 
that the impact ionization rate of charge carriers 
decreased significantly when the carrier concentra-
tions are increased. This decrement of impact ioni-
zation rates are more pronounced for the carrier 
concentrations of 1021 m−3 and above of it. Degra-
dation of impact ionization probabilities for both 
electrons and holes as a consequent of increase of 
energy loss per unit length due to increased amount 
of electro-electron and hole-hole collisions is 
responsible for decrement of impact ionization rate 
of charge carriers at higher carrier concentrations. 
Moreover the degradations impact ionization rate 
of both electrons and holes are found to be more 
severe at lower electric field values especially below 
1.0 × 108 V m−1 for all carrier densities. At lower 
electric fields the supplied energy per unit length 
(qξ) is smaller and comparable to the energy loss 
per unit length due to the carrier-carrier interac-
tions which leads to more degradation in impact 
ionization probabilities at those electric fields as 
compared to at higher fields. Thus the values of 
ionization rates are more affected by energy loss 
due to carrier-carrier collisions at lower electric 
fields.
4 CONCLUSION
In this part of the paper, the analytical model based 
on multistage scattering phenomena as discussed 
in the earlier part has been used to evaluate the 
impact ionization rates of charge carriers in type-
IIb diamond and 6H-SiC within the field ranges of 
4.0 × 107–1.0 × 108 V m−1 and 5.0 × 107–5.0 × 108 V 
m−1 respectively. The calculated results have been 
compared with the ionization rate values  calculated 
by using the empirical relations fitted from the 
Figure 2. Ionization rate of electrons in 6H-SiC ver-
sus inverse of applied electric field. Points ( ) represent 
the plot of empirical relation given by equation (1) fit-
ted from experimental data of Dmitriev et al. (Dmitriev 
et al. 1983) (electron concentration in (Dmitriev et al. 
1983) is n = 1022 m-3).
Figure 3. Ionization rate of holes in 6H-SiC versus 
inverse of applied electric field. Points ( ) represent 
the plot of empirical relation given by equation (1) fit-
ted from experimental data of Dmitriev et al. (Dmitriev 
et al. 1983) (hole concentration in (Dmitriev et al. 1983) 
is p = 1022 m−3).

24
experimentally measured data. The calculated 
values of impact ionization rates of charge carriers 
in both type-IIb diamond and 6H-SiC are found 
to be in close agreement with the experimental 
results especially for the electron and hole concen-
trations of 1022 m−3 which are same as those taken 
into account in the experiments. The effect of vary-
ing charge density and corresponding variations of 
energy loss due to carrier-carrier collisions on the 
impact ionization rate of charge carriers in the base 
semiconductor can be taken into account for the 
analysis or simulation of several microwave, mil-
limeter-wave and optoelectronic devices by using 
the analytical expressions developed in this paper.
REFERENCES
Acharyya, A., Banerjee, J.P. (2014). A generalized analyt-
ical model based on multistage scattering phenomena 
for estimating the impact ionization rate of charge 
carriers in semiconductors. Journal of Computational 
Electronics, 13, 917–924.
Chatterjee, S., Das, A., and Acharyya, A. (2016). Evalua-
tion of Ionization Rates of Charge Carriers in a Semi-
conductor via a Generalized Analytical Model Based 
on Multistage Scattering Phenomena—Part I: Wurtz-
ite-GaN. in Proceedings of 3rd International Confer-
ence C2E2 2016, SKFGI, Mankundu, WB, India.
Dmitriev, A.P., Kanstantinov, A.O., Litvin, D.P., and 
Sankin, V.I. (1983). Impact ionization and supperlat-
tice in 6H-SiC. Sov. Phys.–Semicond, 17, 686–689.
Electronic Archive: New Semiconductor Materials, 
Characteristics and Properties (2015). Retrieved from 
http://www.ioffe.ru/SVA/NSM/Semicond/GaN/ index.
html.
Konorova, E.A., Kuznetsov, Y.A., Sergienko, V.F., 
Tkachenko, S.D., Tsikunov, A.K., Spitsyn, A.V., 
and Danyushevski, Y.Z. (1983). Impact ionization in 
semiconductor structures made of ion-implanted dia-
mond. Sov. Phys.–Semicond, 17, 146–149.

25
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Design and development of smart traffic lighting
Suman Roy, Prasenjit Rakshit, Soumyadeep Nandy, Pranabesh Chakraborty, 
Sourav Mukhopadhyay & Vishwanath Gupta
Department of Electrical Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, India
ABSTRACT: In the proposed work, a fuzzy logic based inference system based waiting time predic-
tor system for traffic control has been designed and the hardware model for the traffic lighting system 
has been developed using ARDUINO micro-controller kit. The fuzzy logic inference system has been 
designed using raw traffic data collected manually at a particular road intersection and the predicted wait-
ing time has been found nearly equal to the observed waiting time. The hardware model has been designed 
with a special feature incorporated into it to prevent excess fuel wastage and also prevent accidents. The 
results that have been found are satisfactory.
chosen based on the heuristic knowledge. The rules 
are formed based on the heuristic knowledge of 
the required waiting time by manually collecting 
data at different times of the day at Dunlop More, 
South of 24 parganas. The manually collected data 
is shown in Table 1. The output has a range of 0 to 
1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been significant develop-
ment in the use of automation while designing traf-
fic lighting systems. Automation of the traffic lights 
has been instrumental in reducing the fuel wastage 
and smooth running of the traffic. Various soft com-
puting techniques have come to the fore where the 
automation of the traffic lights have been concerned 
(Tahilyani, Darbari & Shukla 2013). In this proposed 
work, fuzzy logic along with Arduino micro-control-
ler has been used to design and develop a smart traf-
fic lighting system for a particular road intersection.
2 SMART TRAFFIC LIGHTING
Smart traffic lighting system differs from the tradi-
tional traffic lighting system, which is a combination 
of advanced signaling devices positioned at pedes-
trian crossings, road intersections and other places, 
to ascertain smooth movement of traffic. Our pro-
posed system has combined the existing technology 
with fuzzy logic inference system to create a traffic 
light system that ascertains smooth moving of traf-
fic and saving of fuel.
3 PREDICTION OF WAITING 
TIME USING FUZZY LOGIC 
INFERENCE SYSTEM
The designed fuzzy logic inference system is a 
2-input (Road Condition and number of vehicles), 
1-Output (Waiting time) and 9 Rule-Based sys-
tem. The value of “Road condition” is kept in the 
range of 0 to 1, the value of the number of vehi-
cles is kept between 0 and 100. These values are 
Table 1. Manually collected raw traffic data.
Time of the day
Average number 
of vehicles per 2 
minutes
Waiting time 
in seconds
12 Midnight–6 AM
8
25
6 AM–8 AM
20
40
8 AM–11 AM
42
70
11 AM–4PM
34
50
4PM–8PM
50
75
8PM–12 Midnight
25
50
Figure 1. Overview of the fuzzification process.

26
Figure 2. FIS editor window.
Figure 3. Rule editor window.
100 seconds. The developed Rule-Base is based on 
the Mamdani type interface which is a collection 
of the IF-THEN rules. The defuzzyfication tech-
nique is used in the centroid method. The overview 
of the fuzzification process is shown in Figure 1. 
The designed FIS editor window and the designed 
Rule-Base are shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3, 
respectively.
4 DEVELOPMENT OF AUTOMATIC 
TRAFFIC LIGHT USING ARDUINO 
MICRO-CONTROLLER KIT
After the fuzzy logic inference system has predicted 
the waiting time, the hardware for the proposed 
automatic traffic lighting system was developed 
using Arduino Micro-Controller Kit. The devel-

27
Figure 4. Position of placement of traffic lights.
Figure 5. Predicted waiting time when road condition is 0.7 and number of vehicles is 50.
oped hardware model has taken into consideration 
four traffic light units viz. Unit 1, Unit 2, Unit 3, and 
Unit 4. Unit 1 and Unit 2 have the same light pat-
tern at any particular time as they have been placed 
on the opposite crosswise intersections while Unit 
3 and Unit 4 have the same light patterns between 
themselves but opposite light pattern with respect 
to Unit 1 and Unit 2 and have been placed on the 
remaining two crosswise intersections as shown in 
Figure 4. In the proposed work, a slight modifica-
tion has been done in the conventional traffic light-
ing system, which is that the amber light starts to 
blink along with the red and green light 5 seconds 
before the end of waiting period and free move-
ment period so as to indicate the driver to get ready 
to either start the engine or to slow down, respec-
tively. This modification prevents unnecessary fuel 
usage during the waiting period and the accident 
prevention during the free movement period.
5 RESULTS OBTAINED
The fuzzy logic inference system predicts the wait-
ing time for the vehicles satisfactorily as is shown 
in Table 2. One of the results of the predicted wait-
ing time by the designed Fuzzy Logic Inference 
System is shown in Figure 5. The Road condition 
for a particular location is constant for a consid-
erable time period so it has been taken as a con-
stant during the waiting time prediction and the 
designed Fuzzy Logic Inference System that pre-
dicts the waiting time based on the number of vehi-
cles for a particular road.
The developed hardware model works satisfac-
torily for a single LED as a single traffic light. The 
developed hardware model in the working condi-
tion is shown in Figure 6. Due to unavailability 
of the amber colored LED, White LED has been 
used in place of Amber. The signal phase and cycle 
length for each light of the smart traffic lighting 
system is given in Table 3.

28
6 CONCLUSION
Both the designed fuzzy logic waiting time predic-
tor and the developed hardware traffic light model 
work satisfactorily for a particular considered case. 
However, more than one traffic lighting system has 
been positioned at different intersections, and can 
also be controlled simultaneously. The modifica-
tion made in the lighting pattern helps to save fuel 
and prevent accidents.
7 FUTURE SCOPE OF THE WORK
The interfacing between the designed Fuzzy Logic 
Waiting time predictor system and the developed 
hardware model can be done to make a coherent 
system. The Fuzzy Rule base and membership 
functions can be further modified. The hardware 
Figure 6. Smart traffic light in operation.
Table 3. Signal phase and cycle length of each light at any one unit.
Time
Average
number of
vehicles per
2 minutes
Cycle length
Total
cycle
length
Unit 1 and Unit 2
Unit 3 and Unit 4
Red
Green
Amber 
(blinks)
Red
Green
Amber
(blinks)
12 Midnight–6 am 08
OFF OFF
Blinks
OFF
OFF
Blinks
Not
Applicable
6 am–8 am
20
OFF 0 to 40 secs
35 to 40 secs
0 to 40 secs
OFF
35 to 40 secs
40 secs
8 am–11 am
42
OFF 0 to 64 secs
59 to 64 secs
0 to 64 secs
OFF
59 to 64 secs
64 secs
11am–4 pm
34
OFF 0 to 45 secs
40 to 45 secs
0 to 45 secs
OFF
40 to 45 secs
45 s
4 pm–8 pm
50
OFF 0 to 70 secs
65 to 70 secs
0 to 70 secs
OFF
65 to 70 secs
70 s
8 pm–12 midnight 25
OFF 0 to 48 secs
43 to 48 secs
0 to 48 secs
OFF
43 to 48 secs
48 s
Table 2. Predicted waiting time vs. observed waiting 
time.
Average number
of vehicles per
2 minutes
Waiting time
predicted by fuzzy
logic inference
system (seconds)
Waiting time 
observed
manually
(seconds)
8
24
25
20
40
40
34
45
50
42
64
70
50
70
75
25
48
50
model can be further developed to a drive having 
more number of LEDs.
REFERENCES
Ross T.J. (2008), “Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Applica-
tions” 2nd Edition, John Wiley
Wen W. (2008), “A dynamic and automatic traffic light 
control expert system for solving the road congestion 
problem”, Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 
34, Issue 4, pp 2370–2381.
Tahilyani S., Darbari M. & Shukla P.K. (2013), “Soft 
Computing Approaches in Traffic Control Systems: 
A Review”, AASRI Conference on Intelligent Systems 
and Control, Volume 4, pp 206–211.
Mehan S., Sharma V. (2011), “Development of traffic 
light control system based on fuzzy logic”, ACAI’11 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Advances in Computing and Artificial Intelligence, 
pp 162–165.

29
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Influence of band-to-band tunneling induced shift of ATT 
phase delay on millimeter-wave properties of DDR IMPATTs—
part I: Theoretical modeling
Partha Banerjee
Department of Electronics and Communication, Techno India, Salt Lake, Kolkata, India
Prasit Kumar Bandyopadhyay
Department of Electronics and Communication, Dumkal Institute of Engineering and Technology, 
Murshidabad, West Bengal, India
Subhendu Chakraborty & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: The effect of tunneling on the high frequency properties of Double-Drift Region (DDR) 
Impact Avalanche Transit Time (IMPATT) diodes based on different semiconductors such as Si, InP, GaAs 
and 4H-SiC designed to operate at 94 GHz window frequency has been investigated by using a generalized 
double—iterative computer simulation method. Drift-diffusion model is used for DC and high frequency 
analysis of DDR IMPATTs operating in Mixed Tunneling Avalanche Transit Time (MITATT) mode. 
The theoretical modeling and simulation methodology have been discussed in this part of the paper.
zone and simultaneous increase of the breakdown 
field to very high values in the range of 6 × 107 to 
10 × 107 V m−1 (Dash et al. 1992). Higher RF power 
output can be obtained from IMPATTs based on 
wider bandgap materials such as SiC, GaN and InP 
(Mukherjee et al. 2010). Some theoretical studies on 
the RF performance of heterojunction IMPATTs 
based on III-V and IV-IV semiconductors have 
been reported in the literature (Bailey 1992) which 
show that these devices are suitable for generation 
of high millimeter wave power along with high 
conversion efficiency. The thinner depletion layer 
(W < 0.80 μm) of mm-wave IMPATT diode and the 
higher peak electric field (Em > 6 × 107 V m−1) near 
the junction are the favourable conditions for tunnel 
generation of Electron Hole Pair (EHP) provided 
vacant states are available in the conduction band 
opposite to the filled states of the valance band. 
Both the tunnel generated and the impact ionization 
generated carriers move in the drift region to pro-
duce the necessary transit time delay for IMPATT 
action. This mode of operation of IMPATT diode 
is known as mixed tunneling avalanche transit time 
mode or MITATT mode.
W.T. Read (Read 1958) followed by other 
researchers (Kwok et al. 1972, Chive et al. 1975) car-
ried out the analysis of IMPATT diode based on the 
simplifying assumption of equal ionization rates of 
electrons and holes in the respective semiconductor. 
1 INTRODUCTION
The rapid developments in the process technology 
of IMPATT device have made possible the fabri-
cation of this device having narrow depletion layer 
width. IMPATT devices are finding useful applica-
tion as powerful and efficient sources in various 
communication systems operating in millimetre-
wave and sub-millimeter-wave bands of frequency. 
The advantages of millimeter-wave and sub-mil-
limeter-wave frequencies are many fold such as 
increased resolution, higher penetrating power of 
these signals through cloud, dust, fog etc, low power 
supply voltage and reduced system size (Midford 
et al. 1979). Several atmospheric window frequencies 
are available in the millimetre-wave frequency range 
(30–300 GHz) such as 35, 94, 140, 220 GHz. This 
has attracted the attention of researchers working 
in this area to design and develop IMPATT diodes 
which can deliver appreciable amount of millimeter 
wave power of the order of watts at the chosen win-
dow frequency. Further the decrease of DC to RF 
conversion efficiency of the device at higher mm-
wave frequencies of operation can be compensated 
by using impurity bumps in the depletion layer of 
flat profile structures leading to quasi Read hi-lo 
and lo-hi-lo devices (Mukherjee et al. 2009). The 
incorporation of impurity bump in the depletion 
layer of IMPATTs leads to constriction of avalanche 

30
Elta and Haddad (Elta et al. 1978) used an effec-
tive ionization rate of charge carriers in their analy-
sis by introducing the concept of dead space. Luy 
et al. (Luy et al. 1989) considered a time depend-
ent tunnel current and observed that the DC to RF 
conversion efficiency of the device decreases due 
to tunneling induced phase distortion. A detailed 
numerical simulation of the DC and high frequency 
properties of DDR MITATT device based on Si, 
InP, GaAs and 4H-SiC operating at W-Band is car-
ried out and the results are presented and compared 
in the next part of this paper. A pure field depend-
ent tunnel generation rate for electrons is taken 
from which the tunnel generation rate for holes 
is calculated from the energy band diagram. The 
present method provides not only the integrated 
terminal properties of MITATTs such as negative 
resistance, negative conductance of the device but 
also the microscopic negative resistance distribu-
tion profile in the depletion layer of the device. The 
effect of tunnel current on RF performance of the 
device has been determined separately in avalanche 
and drift zone to identify the region of the deple-
tion layer where the effect is more predominant. In 
this part of the paper the method of analysis incor-
porating the effect of tunneling in reverse biased 
DDR p+pnn+ IMPATT device is described. Also the 
simulation technique of MITATT mode of opera-
tion has been discussed in brief.
2 BAND-TO-BAND TUNNELING
One-dimensional model of a reverse biased p+pnn+ 
DDR IMPATT device is shown in Figure 1. The 
DC and RF performance of MITATT device are 
obtained at 94 GHz under mixed tunneling and 
avalanche breakdown condition. In this analysis 
the tunneling generation rate for electrons [gTn(x)] 
is obtained from quantum mechanical considera-
tions as reported in (Dash et al. 1992, Kane 1961). 
Thus
g
A E
B
E
Tn
T
A
T
B
( )
x =
( )
x
( )
x
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
2
ex
,
E
T
−
( )
p
⎝⎜⎝
⎠⎟⎠
 
(1)
where the coefficients AT and BT are given by
A
q
m
E
T
A
g
E
=
⎛
⎝⎜⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
2
3 2
1
2
8
2
π3ℏ
*
,  
(2)
B
q
m E
T
B
g
E
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
1
2
2
q ⎝
3
1
2
ℏ
*
. 
(3)
The symbols used in Equations (1)–(3) carry their 
usual significance. The tunneling generation rate 
for holes can be obtained from Figure 1. The phe-
nomenon of tunneling is instantaneous and the 
tunnel generation rate for holes is related with 
that for electrons i.e. gTp(x) = gTn(x′). The tunnel 
generation of an electron at x′ is simultaneously 
associated with the generation of a hole at x, where 
(x–x′) is the spatial separation between the edge of 
conduction band and valence band at the same 
energy. Taking F as the measure of energy from the 
bottom of the conduction band on the n-side and 
making use of the idea that the vertical difference 
between x and x′ is Eg, x′ can be easily obtained by 
referring to Figure 1 as,
′
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
≤
≤
x
x
′ =
E
F
g
E
1
0
−
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
g
1
2
0
for
,
≤
≤
x
x
≤
0
0  
(4)
′
−(
)
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
≤
≤
x
W
′ =
−
E
F
F
−
W
g
E
B
F
1
1
2
0
for
,
≤
≤
x
x
≤
W
0
 (5)
In Figure 1 xa/xb is the position where the elec-
tron energy in the valence/conduction band equals 
the energy corresponding to the bottom/top of 
the conduction/valance band at the n-side/p-side 
edge of the depletion layer. W is the total deple-
tion width of the device and x0 is the position of 
the junction.
The hole generation rate due to tunneling is zero 
between x = 0 and x = xa (Figure 1) as within this 
region electrons in the valance band have no avail-
able states in the conduction band for tunneling. 
Similarly, non-availability of states in the con-
duction band for tunneling to take place between 
Figure 1. Structure and energy band diagram of a 
reverse biased DDR IMPATT Diode showing the loca-
tions of tunnel generated electrons and holes.

31
x = xb and x = W (Figure 1) makes no contribution 
of tunnel generated electrons in this region (Dash 
et al. 1992).
3 DESIGN METHODOLOGY AND 
MATERIAL PARAMETERS
The frequency of operation of an IMPATT diode 
essentially depends on the transit time of charge 
carriers to cross the depletion layer of the diode. 
IMPATT diodes having symmetrical Double drift 
p+pnn+ structure are first designed for operation 
at 94 GHz window by using computer simulation 
technique and the transit time formula of Sze and 
Ryder (Sze et al. 1971) given by Wn,p = 0.37vsn,sp/
fd; where Wn,p, vsn,sp and fd are the total depletion 
layer width (n- or p-side), saturation velocity of 
electrons/holes and design frequency respectively. 
Here n+- and p+-layers are highly doped substrates 
whose doping concentrations are taken to be 
1026 m−3. The background doping concentrations 
of n and p – depletion regions are initially chosen 
according to the design frequency. The electric field 
profile using the above doping profile is obtained 
from the simulation. The input doping profile 
is adjusted so that the electric field just punches 
through the depletion layers (Wn,p) for a particular 
value of fd and a particular biasing current den-
sity J0. Small-signal computer simulation based 
on Gummel-Blue approach (Gummel et al. 1967) 
is then carried out to obtain the admittance char-
acteristics of the device. The optimum frequency 
(fopt) for peak negative conductance is determined 
from the admittance characteristics. If the magni-
tude of fopt differs very much from fd, the value of 
J0 is varied and the computer simulation program 
is run till the value of fopt is nearly equal to the value 
of fd. The bias current density is thus fixed for the 
particular design frequency. The material param-
eters like ionization coefficients, saturation drift 
velocities, mobilities of charge carriers, dielectric 
constants, bandgaps, effective masses of the base 
materials (Si, InP, GaAs and 4H-SiC) used for the 
analysis are taken from (Electronic Archive 2015).
4 SIMULATION TECHNIQUE
The computer simulation technique is used to 
study the DC and small-signal properties of DDR 
IMPATT diode, one dimensional model of the p-n 
junction is considered in the present simulation 
method.
The DC analysis of DDR IMPATT described in 
details elsewhere (Acharyya et al. 2014) is first car-
ried out by using a double iterative field maximum 
computer method. In this method the computation 
starts from the location of field maximum near the 
metallurgical junction. The spatial distributions 
of both DC electric field and carrier current den-
sities in the depletion layer are obtained by using 
the above method, which involves iteration over 
the magnitude of field maximum (Em) and its loca-
tion in the depletion layer. A software package has 
been developed for simultaneous numerical solu-
tion of Poisson’s equation, combined continuity 
equations and the space charge equation subject 
to appropriate boundary conditions by taking into 
account the effects of mobile space charge, car-
rier diffusion and tunneling. Thus the electric field 
and carrier current density profiles are obtained 
for DDR device operating in both IMPATT and 
MITATT modes. The boundary conditions for the 
electric field at the depletion layer edges are given 
by (Figure 2)
E
0
( )
0
(
)
a d
,
E
0
(
)
W =
 
(6)
where, x = 0 and W define the p+- and n+-edges 
of the depletion layer. The boundary conditions 
for normalized current density P(x) = (Jp – Jn)/
J0 (where, Jp = hole current density, Jn = electron 
current density) at the edges are given by
P
M
M
p
n
M
M
2
1
2
( )
0 =
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎠
(
)
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
a d
,
M
1
P
2
(
)
W
−
1
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(7)
where, Mp = J0/Jps = hole current multiplication 
factor and Mn = J0/Jns = electron current multipli-
cation factor. The necessary device equations are 
simultaneously solved satisfying the appropriate 
boundary conditions given in (6) and (7). The field 
dependence of electron and hole ionization rates 
(αn and αp) and saturated drift velocities of electron 
Figure 2. The different active regions of DDR IMPATT 
diode.

32
(vsn) and holes (vsp) at 500 K are incorporated in the 
simulation of DC electric field and carrier currents 
density profiles. The conversion efficiency is calcu-
lated from the semi quantitative formula
η
π
,
( )
%
2m
V
V
D
V
B
V
 
(8)
where, VD = Voltage drop across the drift region, 
VB = Breakdown voltage and m is the RF voltage 
modulation index. Avalanche breakdown takes 
place when the electric field at the junction is large 
enough such that the charge multiplication fac-
tors (Mn, Mp) become infinitely large (≈106). The 
breakdown voltage is obtained by integrating the 
electric field profile over the total depletion layer 
width, i.e.
V
E x dx
d
B
V
W
∫
( )
x
.
0
 
(9)
The high-frequency analysis of DDR IMPATT 
diode is carried out to obtain distribution of 
negative resistivity in the depletion layer which 
provides considerable insight into high frequency 
performance and the possible measure to improve 
the same. The range of frequency for which the 
device exhibits negative conductance is obtained 
from the admittance plot. The DC parameters are 
fed as input data for the small signal analysis. The 
depletion layer edges of the device, are fixed from 
the DC analysis and taken as the starting and end 
points for the small signal analysis. Two second 
order differential equations are framed by resolv-
ing the diode impedance Z(x, ω) into its real part 
R(x, ω) and imaginary part X(x, ω) given by
∂
∂
+
−
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤∂
∂
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∂
∂
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠−
2
2
2
2
2
R
x
R
x
r
v
X
x
v
H
n
p
nr
α
α
−
p
n
ω
ω 2
( )
x
( )
x
( )
x
−
(
)
′ ( ) + ′ ( )′
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
−
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
qr
v
′ (
′ (
R
v
v
pr
( ) +
(
ε
α ω
α
⎞
⎛
ε
,
2
2 ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
−
X
α ω⎞X
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠= 0
 (10)
∂
∂
+
−
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤∂
∂
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∂
∂
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠−
2
2
2
2
2
X
x
X
x
r
v
R
x
v
H
n
p
nr
α
α
−
p
n
ω
ω 2
( )
x
( )
x
( )
x
−
(
)
′ ( ) + ′ ( )′
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
+
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
qr
v
′ (
′ (
X
v
v
pr
( ) +
(
ε
α ω
ω
⎞
⎛
ε
.
2
2 ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+
R
α ω⎞R
2
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠= 0
 (11)
The boundary conditions for R and X are given 
by (n side and p side respectively)
∂
∂
+
= −⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∂
∂
R
x
X
v
v
⎝
X
x
R
v
ns
ns
ns
ωX
ε
ωR
1
and
a
∂
−
=
X
R
ωR
0 t
0
=
x
,
 
(12)
∂
∂
−
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∂
∂
R
x
X
v
v
⎝
X
x
R
v
x
W
=
ps
ps
ps
ωX
ε
ωR
1
and ∂
+
=
X
R
at
ωR
0
,
 
(13)
where Z(x, ω) = R(x, ω) + i X(x, ω). A double-
iterative simulation scheme is used to solve those 
equations simultaneously by satisfying the bound-
ary conditions. The device negative resistance 
(ZR) and reactance (Zx) are computed through 
the numerical integration of the R(x) and X(x) 
profiles over the space-charge layer width, W. 
Thus
Z
X dx
R
Z
W
W
∫
∫
Rdx
ZX
Z
Rdx
0
0
 
(14)
The negative conductance (−G), Susceptance 
(B) and the quality factor (QP) of the device are 
evaluated by using the following relations
=
−
(
)
G
Z
+
R
Z
+
( )
,
)
+
 
(15)
B
ZX
Z
( )
,
) =
−
(
)
Z
Z
R
X
Z
ZZ
 
(16)
Qp
Q
f
fopt
f
(
)
B
.
f
f
)
G
 
(17)
It may be noted that both −G and B are nor-
malized to the area of the diode. The avalanche 
frequency (fa) is the frequency at which the sus-
ceptance (B) changes its nature from inductive 
to capacitive. Again it is the lowest frequency at 
which the real part (G) of admittance becomes 
negative and oscillation starts to build up in the 
circuit. At the resonant frequency of oscilla-
tion, the maximum RF power output (PRF) from 
the device is calculated by using the following 
expression
P
V
G
A
RF
P
RF
V
p
G
⋅G
1
2
2
,  
(18)
where VRF is the amplitude of the RF swing (VRF = 
VB/2, assuming 50% modulation of the breakdown 
voltage VB), Gp is the diode negative conductance 
at the operating frequency and A is the junction 
area of the diode.

33
REFERENCES
Acharyya, A., Mukherjee, M., Banerjee, J. P. (2014). 
Effects of Tunnelling Current on mm-wave IMPATT 
Devices. International Journal of Electronics, pub-
lished online, DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/002072
17.2014.982211.
Bailey, M. J. (1992). Heterojunction IMPATT diodes. IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices, 39(8), 1829–1834.
Chive, M., Constant, E., Lefebvre, M., and Pribetich, J. 
(1975). Effect of tunneling on high efficiency IMPATT 
avalanche diode. Proc. IEEE (Lett.), 63, 824–826.
Dash, G. N., and Pati, S. P. (1992). A generalized simula-
tion method for MITATT-mode operation and stud-
ies on the influence of tunnel current on IMPATT 
properties. Semicond. Sci. Technology, 7, 222–230.
Electronic Archive: New Semiconductor Materials, 
Characteristics and Properties (2015). Retrieved from 
http://www.ioffe.ru/SVA/NSM/Semicond/index.html.
Elta, M. E., and Haddad, G. I. (1978). Mixed tunneling 
and avalanche mechanism in p-n junctions and their 
effects on microwave transit time devices. IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices, 25, 694–702.
Gummel, H. K., and Blue, J. L. (1967). A small-signal 
theory of avalanche noise in IMPATT diodes. IEEE 
Trans. on Electron Devices, 14(9), 569–580.
Kane, E. O. (1961). Theory of tunneling. J. Appl. Phys., 
32, 83–91.
Kwok, S. P., and Haddad, G. I. (1972). Effect of tunneling 
on an Impatt oscillator. J. Appl. Phys., 43, 3824–3830.
Luy, J. F., and Kuehnf, R. (1989). Tunneling assisted 
Impatt operation. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 36, 
589–595.
Midford, T. A., and Bernick, R. L. (1979). Millimeter 
Wave CW IMPATT diodes and Oscillators. IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 27, 483–492.
Mukherjee, M., Banerjee, S., and Banerjee, J. P. (2010). 
Dynamic characteristics of iii-v and iv-iv semiconduc-
tor based transit time devices in the terahertz regime: 
a comparative analysis. Terahertz Sci. and Tech., 3, 
97–109.
Mukherjee, M., and Mazumder, N. (2009). Effect of 
charge-bump 
on 
high-frequency 
characteristics 
of α-SiC based double drift ATT diodes at MM-
wave window frequencies. IETE J. of Research, 55, 
118–127.
Read, W. T. (1958). A proposed high-frequency negative-
resistance diode. Bell Syst. Tech. J., 37, 401–466.
Sze, S. M., and Ryder, R. M. (1971). Microwave Ava-
lanche Diodes. Proc. of IEEE, Special Issue on Micro-
wave Semiconductor Devices, 59, 1140–1154.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

35
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Influence of band-to-band tunneling induced shift of ATT 
phase delay on millimeter-wave properties of DDR 
IMPATTs—part II: Simulation results
Partha Banerjee
Department of Electronics and Communication, Techno India, Salt Lake, Kolkata, India
Prasit Kumar Bandyopadhyay
Department of Electronics and Communication, Dumkal Institute of Engineering and Technology, 
Murshidabad, West Bengal, India
Subhendu Chakraborty & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: The simulations have been carried out based on the technique described in the earlier 
part of the paper to study the millimeter-wave performance of DDR IMPATTs based on different semi-
conductors such as Si, InP, GaAs and 4H-SiC. The simulation results show that the millimeter-wave 
performance of the device based on Si, InP, GaAs and 4H-SiC as regards RF power delivery and conver-
sion efficiency degrades when tunneling is incorporated in the analysis. But the deterioration of device 
performance of MITATTs based on relatively wider bandgap 4H-SiC material is less pronounced than 
those based on other materials.
2 BAND-TO-BAND TUNNELING
Figure 1 shows that the tunneling and avalanche 
generation rates increase sharply with electric field 
in all the devices except in case of 4H-SiC based 
DDR device where the increase of avalanche gener-
ation rate is much sharper than the increase of tun-
neling generation rate with electric field. This can 
be understood from equations (1) – (3) of Part I of 
this paper. The values of both Eg and m* are higher 
for 4H-SiC compared to those for other materials. 
Thus the value of the coefficient BT in equation (1) 
is higher for 4H-SiC which causes a slower rate of 
increase of tunneling generation rate in compari-
son of that of avalanche generation rate.
1 STRUCTURAL AND DOPING 
PARAMETERS
Double-Drift Region (DDR) IMPATT diodes 
based on different materials such as Si, InP, 
GaAs and 4H-SiC are designed and optimized 
for CW operation at W-Band (near 94 GHz). The 
method of analysis presented in the earlier part 
of the paper is used to simulate the DC and RF 
properties of DDR IMPATT diodes designed for 
optimum performance. The design parameters 
of the devices are given in Table 1. The junction 
diameter of the device is taken to be D = 35 μm 
(for CW mode of operation at W-Band) (Luy 
et al. 1987).
Table 1. Structural and doping parameters of 94 GHz DDR IMPATT diodes.
Base Material
Wn (μm)
Wp (μm)
ND (×1023 m−3)
NA (×1023 m−3)
Nn+, Np+ (×1026 m−3)
J0 (×108 A m−2)
Si
0.390
0.380
1.20
1.25
1.00
3.4
InP
0.350
0.352
1.60
1.60
1.00
1.4
GaAs
0.320
0.320
1.60
1.60
1.00
6.0
4H-SiC
0.550
0.550
3.50
3.50
1.00
5.0

36
Figure 2 shows the spatial variations of both 
avalanche generation rate and tunneling genera-
tion rate in the depletion layer of DDR devices 
based on different materials. These generation rates 
exhibit peaks near the junction plane followed by 
sharp falls on either side of the junction. The gTpeak 
/gApeak – ratio is found to be maximum in InP DDR 
(1.59) followed by GaAs DDR (0.76), Si DDR 
(0.31) respectively and minimum in 4H-SiC DDR 
(0.21). Figure 2 shows that the avalanche genera-
tion rate predominates over tunneling generation 
rate in the space charge layer for DDR IMPATTs 
based on Si, GaAs and 4H-SiC while the converse 
is true for DDR IMPATTs based on InP.
3 INFLUENCE OF TUNNELING 
ON STATIC AND DYNAMIC 
CHARACTERISTICS
The simulated has been carried out to study the 
DC and small-signal parameters of DDR devices 
based on all four semiconductor materials in both 
IMPATT (without considering tunneling) and 
MITATT (considering tunneling) modes. It is 
observed that the DC and RF performances of 
MITATT devices degrade with respect to those 
of IMPATT devices due to the effect of tunneling. 
It is interesting to note that this degradation is 
strongly related to the ratio of the peak electron 
tunneling generation rate to the peak avalanche 
generation rate (gTpeak/gApeak) of the corresponding 
device. Higher value of gTeak/gApeak – ratio leads to 
more degradation of the RF performance of the 
device. The results show that the decrease of peak 
DC electric fields are 8.5%, 2.4%, 1.53%,1.2%, 
breakdown voltages are 7.31%, 3.7%, 2.5%, 0.97% 
and DC to RF conversion efficiencies are 9.8%, 
6.5%, 4.5%, 0.82% for InP, GaAs, Si and 4H-SiC 
based DDR IMPATTs respectively due to the 
effect of tunneling. Thus the degradation of the 
performance of the devices is pronounced in InP 
DDR device.
The admittance characteristics i.e. Conductance-
Susceptance Plots of the devices in both IMPATT 
and MITTAT modes are shown in Figure 5. It is 
observed from Figure 3 that the decrease of the 
magnitude of negative conductance is most pro-
nounced (6.4%) in InP DDR. The optimum fre-
quency shifts to higher values for all DDRs and 
this shift is found to be maximum in InP DDR 
(38 GHz) as compared to all DDR devices based 
on GaAs (27 GHz), Si (22 GHz) and 4H-SiC (9 
GHz). Q-factor of the device is an indicator of 
the growth rate and stability of oscillation. Lower 
Q-factor close to unity leads to better RF perform-
ance of the device. It is observed that the Q-factors 
degrade for all the DDRs in MITATT mode.
The negative resistivity profiles of DDR 
devices in both IMPATT and MITATT shown in 
Figures 4–6, which exhibit two peaks in the two 
drift regions separated by a minimum near the 
junction in the avalanche region for both IMPATT 
and MITATT mode operation. The magnitude of 
negative resistivity peak of the device is higher in 
n-side than p-side for Si DDR (Figure 4) while the 
reverse is observed to be true in InP, GaAs and 
4H-SiC DDRs (Figures 5, 6). Ratio of the negative 
resistivity peaks on n-side and p-side is indirectly 
Figure 1. Avalanche and electron tunneling generation 
rates (qgA and qgT) versus electric field.
Figure 2. Spatial variation of avalanche and electron 
tunneling generation rates (qgA and qgT) in the active lay-
ers of the DDR IMPATT/MITATT diodes operating at 
W-Band.

37
connected to the ratio of electron to hole ionization 
rates of respective materials (Banerjee et al. 1989). 
It is well known that in Si, αn is greater than αp, 
while the αp is greater than αn in InP, GaAs and 
4H-SiC. That is why the magnitude of negative 
resistivity peak is found to be higher in p-side of 
the device compared to n-side of it for InP, GaAs 
and 4H-SiC DDRs. It is interesting to observe that 
the magnitude of negative resistance falls appreci-
ably due to the effect of tunneling in all the devices 
based on Si, GaAs, InP and 4H-SiC DDRs.
It may further be noted that the decrease in 
the magnitude of the negative resistance peak 
due to tunneling is more appreciable on p-side of 
the device than on the n-side. This can be under-
stood by considering that the tunnel generation 
rate due to electrons at any point x is a function 
of the electric field at the same point x while that 
due to holes at x depends on the electric field at 
some other point x′, given in equations (4) and 
Figure 3. Small-signal conductance versus susceptance 
plots of the diodes in both IMPATT and MITATT 
modes.
Figure 4. Negative resistivity profiles of the Si flat-
DDR diode in both IMPATT and MITATT modes.
Figure 5. Negative resistivity profiles of the InP and 
GaAs flat-DDR diodes in both IMPATT and MITATT 
modes.
Figure 6. Negative resistivity profile of the 4H-SiC flat-
DDR diode in both IMPATT and MITATT modes.

38
(5) of the Part I of this paper. Thus the tunneling 
generation rate of electrons attains its peak value 
close to the junction while that of holes attains 
the peak value slightly away from the junction on 
the p-side (Figure 7) due to the effect of tunneling. 
The effective tunneling generation rate defined 
as, q(gT(x)+gT(x′)) is found to be predominant on 
p-side of the avalanche zone.
Figure 7. Spatial variation of tunneling generation rates 
of electrons and holes (qgTn and qgTp) in the active layers 
of the Si flat-DDR.
4 CONCLUSION
A generalized method based on double-iterative 
numerical analysis for Mixed Tunneling And Ava-
lanche Transit Time (MITATT) mode of operation 
of a reverse biased p-n junction is presented in this 
paper. Application of this method for flat-DDR 
diode structures based on different semiconduc-
tor base materials such as Si, GaAs, InP, 4H-SiC 
operating at W-Band indicate that the effect of 
tunneling degrades the device performance in 
MITATT mode due to phase distortion caused 
by tunneling. The results indicate that the effect 
of tunneling is found to be more pronounced in 
InP DDR device and least pronounced in 4H-SiC 
DDR device. Therefore it is expected that the 
DDR IMPATTs based on 4H-SiC should provide 
superior RF performance in MITATT mode at 
higher frequency bands. Further the design data, 
presented in this paper, are expected to be helpful 
for realization of IMPATT oscillators for commu-
nication systems in millimeter-wave and sub-mil-
limeter-wave frequencies.
REFERENCES
Banerjee, J.P., Pati, S.P. and Roy, S.K. (1989). High fre-
quency characterisation of double drift region InP 
and GaAs diodes. Appl. Phys. A, 48(5), 437–443.
Luy, J.F., Casel, A., Behr, W. and Kasper, E. (1987). A 
90-GHz double-drift IMPATT diode made with Si 
MBE. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 34, 1084–1089.

39
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Influence of band-to-band tunneling induced shift of ATT 
phase delay on millimeter-wave properties of DDR IMPATTs—
part III: Calculation of shift of ATT phase delay due to tunneling
Partha Banerjee
Department of Electronics and Communication, Techno India, Salt Lake, Kolkata, India
Prasit Kumar Bandyopadhyay
Department of Electronics and Communication, Dumkal Institute of Engineering and Technology, 
Murshidabad, West Bengal, India
Subhendu Chakraborty & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: A novel method is proposed by the author to calculate the tunneling induced shift of 
Avalanche Transit Time Phase (ATT) delay in MITATT mode of the device from the spatial shift of the 
simulated negative resistivity profiles due to tunneling. The method is used to calculate the shift of ATT 
phase delays due to tunneling in DDR IMPATTs based on Si, InP, GaAs and 4H-SiC, designed to oper-
ate at 94 GHz.
ϕ
π
ϕ
π
pa
pa
a
ps
pm
pm
m
ps
x
f
pa
af
v
x
f
π
pm
m
v
=
=
ϕ
p
2
a
2πx
f
π
pa
a ,
.
ϕ pm
 
(1)
Similarly the phase delays on the n-side of 
the device can be obtained from the following 
relations
ϕ
π
ϕ
π
na
na
a
ns
nm
nm
m
ns
x f
na
af
v
x
f
π
nm
m
v
=
=
ϕ
na
a
2
a
2πx f
π
na
a ,
,
ϕnm
 
(2)
where xna and xnm are the distances of the R(x)-
peaks from the junction on the n-side of the ATT 
device in the pure avalanche and mixed mode 
respectively. The condition for obtaining maxi-
mum power is that the total phase lag should sat-
isfy the following relations at xpa and xna given by, 
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
π
pa
ϕ
pt
na
ϕ
nt
+
=
ϕ pt
ϕ
+
=
ϕnt
; where ϕ pa  and ϕna  are 
the avalanche phase delays and ϕ pt
ϕ  and ϕnt  are the 
transit time phase delays.
The shifts of ATT phase delays (in MITATT 
device) due to the effect of tunneling are deter-
mined from the following relations:
δ
ϕ
ϕ
p
p
δ
ϕ
δ
m
p
ϕ a
p
−
ϕ
at -
p side,  
(3)
δ
ϕ
ϕ
n
n
δ
ϕ
δ
m
n
ϕ a
n
−
ϕ
at -
n side.  
(4)
1 PROCEDURE OF CALCULATING 
THE TUNNELING INDUCED SHIFT 
OF ATT PHASE DELAY
The Avalanche Transit Time (ATT) phase delays 
of the 94 GHz diodes can be calculated from the 
corresponding R(x)-profiles for the following two 
cases from which the shift of ATT phase delay due 
to tunneling current can be computed: (i) without 
considering the tunneling current; which gives 
ATT phase delay in pure avalanche mode and 
(ii) considering the tunneling current; which gives 
ATT phase delay in mixed mode.
The R(x)-profiles of the diodes for the above 
two cases exhibit negative specific resistance peaks 
in the drift layers, but the magnitudes and loca-
tions of these maxima change when tunneling 
effect is taken into account in MITATT devices. 
The spatial shift of the negative specific resistance 
maxima for a particular base material determines 
the shift of ATT phase delay of MITATT due to 
tunneling current. If the distances of the peaks 
from the junction on the p-side of ATT device in 
the avalanche and mixed mode are xpa and xpm and 
the corresponding optimum frequencies fa and fm 
respectively, then the phase delays on the p-side of 
the device at xpa and xpm for cases (i) and (ii), are 
obtained from the following relations

40
The results presented in the next section show 
that the effect of tunneling causes an effective shift 
of the R(x)-profile towards the p-side of the device. 
That is why on the p-side of the device, ϕ
ϕ
pm
ϕ
pa
>
; which means δ p
δ  is positive. But on the n-side of 
the device ϕ
ϕ
nm
ϕ
na
<
; which means δ n
δ  may be nega-
tive or positive. Generally p-side of the device is 
predominantly affected by the tunneling than the 
n-side of that, which is explained in the following 
section. Thus the value of δ p
δ  is greater than the 
value of δ n
δ  (i.e. δ
δ
p
n
δ
δ
δ
>1). The overall ATT phase 
delay shift in MITATT device is obtained by aver-
aging over δ p
δ  and δ n
δ  and given by,
δ
δ
δ
=
p
n
δ
δ
δ
2
.  
(5)
The simulated values of DC and small-signal 
parameters of DDR devices based on all four sem-
iconductor materials in both IMPATT (without 
considering tunneling) and MITATT (considering 
tunneling) modes are given in Table 1.
It can be observed from Table 1 that the RF 
power output of the devices based on different 
semiconductors decreases in MITATT mode as 
compared to IMPATT mode. Maximum power 
output can be obtained from an IMPATT device 
when the phase difference between total current 
and AC voltage is 180°. In IMPATT mode of 
operation, total current gets 180° phase difference 
with RF voltage due to both avalanche build-up 
and transit time of charge carriers, while in 
MITATT mode tunnel current develops the phase 
delay with RF voltage due to only the transit time. 
This fact causes phase distortion between the total 
current and AC voltage leading to lower RF power 
output of the device (Acharyya et al. 2014).
2 CALCULATION OF THE TUNNELING 
INDUCED SHIFT OF ATT 
PHASE DELAY
The authors have involved a novel method of cal-
culating the tunneling induced shift of ATT phase 
delay from a study of the shift of negative resistiv-
ity peaks due to tunneling in the depletion layers of 
the device. The principle of the calculation of this is 
outlined in Section 1 and the results are given below. 
The ATT phase delay shifts in MITATT mode of 
the devices are obtained from the R(x)-profiles (Fig-
ures 4 – 6 of Part II of this paper) of the diodes. The 
magnitude of shift of ATT phase delay for 94 GHz 
Si, InP, GaAs and 4H-SiC DDR devices are given 
in Table 2. This is found to be highest in InP DDR 
and lowest in 4H-SiC DDR. Thus higher gTpeak/
Table 1. Simulated DC and small-signal parameters.
Device
Si Flat-DDR
InP Flat-DDR
GaAs Flat-DDR
4H-SiC Flat-DDR
IMPATT MITATT IMPATT MITATT IMPATT MITATT IMPATT IMPATT
Bias current 
density, 
J0 ( × 108 A m−2)
3.4
3.4
1.4
1.4
6.0
6.0
5.0
5.0
Peak electric 
field, 
Em ( × 107 V m−1)
6.0125
5.9404
6.7499
6.1762
6.0192
5.8747
36.1247
35.5720
Breakdown 
voltage, VB (V)
24.25
23.64
28.82
26.71
22.88
22.03
212.41
210.35
Efficiency,
η (%)
10.62
10.14
15.90
14.34
9.89
9.24
16.40
16.27
Peak operating 
frequency,
fp (GHz)
95
117
94
132
96
123
94
103
Peak conductance,
GP ( × 107 S m−2)
−4.3419
−4.1676
−8.2456
−7.7174
−6.0287
−5.6971
−6.2250
−6.0687
Peak susceptance,
BP ( × 107 S m−2)
6.6244
7.7904
6.8436
7.8599
8.1159
10.1450
12.7510
13.7700
Quality factor,
QP =  (-BP/GP)
1.53
1.86
0.83
1.19
1.35
1.78
2.05
2.27
Negative resistance,
ZR ( × 10−8 Ohm.m2)
−0.6921
−0.5340
−0.7181
−0.6360
−0.5898
−0.4208
−0.3091
−0.2680
RF power output,
PRF (W)
0.3192
0.2911
0.8563
0.6882
0.3946
0.3456
35.1070
33.5653

41
gApeak – ratio corresponds to higher ATT phase delay 
shift; which in turn leads to greater deterioration of 
device performance due to tunneling.
3 CONCLUSION
A novel method of calculating the tunneling 
induced shift of ATT phase delay is proposed 
Table 2. ATT phase delay shifts in MITATT mode.
Base Material 
and Device Structure
ATT Phase Delay Shift
δ ( × 10−3 π radian)
Si Flat-DDR
130.2
InP Flat-DDR
257.6
GaAs Flat-DDR
169.4
4H-SiC Flat-DDR
 41.7
by the authors. Using this method the tunneling 
induced shift of ATT phase delay is calculated 
for DDR IMPATTs based on Si, InP, GaAs and 
4H-SiC, designed to operate at 94 GHz.
REFERENCE
Acharyya, A., Mukherjee, M. & Banerjee, J.P. (2014). 
Effects of Tunnelling Current on mm-wave IMPATT 
Devices. International Journal of Electronics, pub-
lished online, DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/002072
17.2014.982211.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

43
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Effect of gate voltage and structural parameters on the Subthreshold 
Swing and the DIBL of Si-SiO2 GAA quantum wire transistor
Arpan Deyasi
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, RCC Institute of Information Technology, 
Kolkata, India
N.R. Das
Institute of Radio Physics and Electronics, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: Subthreshold Swing (SS) and Drain-Induced Barrier Lowering (DIBL) of gate-all-around 
quantum wire transistor is computed using a coupled-mode space approach. Schrödinger and Poisson 
equations are self-consistently solved involving a Non-Equilibrium Green’s Function (NEGF) technique 
under ballistic limit. Gate voltage, channel width and an insulating layer thickness are varied to observe 
the effect on SS and DIBL considering the occupancy of carriers at a few lower sub-bands only. The result 
plays an important role in designing the quantum wire transistor based on an integrated circuit involving 
quasi-ballistic electron transport, and also for switching applications.
electrical properties which are beneficial for real-
izing quantum integrated circuit.
Among the various numerical methods used 
so far by researchers, Non-Equilibrium Green’s 
function formalism is one of the best techniques 
as it provides the near accurate calculation for dif-
ferent devices with various geometries (Ren et al., 
2000, Datta 2000). Real space approach under 
NEGF method is popular due to less complex-
ity (Venugopal et al., 2002), but the mode space 
approach may be used for those devices where 
the expansion of the characteristic modes of the 
Hamiltonian is required. In this technique, the 
Schrödinger equation and the Poisson equation are 
self-consistently solved to compute electric poten-
tial, based on which channel current is computed.
In this paper, subthreshold swing and DIBL of 
gate-all-around quantum wire transistors are com-
puted using NEGF formalism for Si-SiO2 material 
composition excluding the effect of scattering. Chan-
nel width and thickness of the insulating layer are 
varied along with the vertical electric field to study 
the change in the electrical parameters. Dissipative 
effects are considered at both the source and drain 
ends in terms of self-energy. Results are important 
in designing the QWT-based integrated circuit.
2 THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
The Schrödinger equation in 3D domain can be 
written as:
1 INTRODUCTION
For modeling of transistor with a low power con-
sumption and minimum leakage, a subthreshold 
swing and drain-induced barrier lowering are the 
two crucial parameters, which play a pivotal role in 
improving the performance of a QWT-based inte-
grated circuit. With the increase of a short-channel 
effect owing to the downsizing of a transistor, the 
performance of conventional transistors degraded 
due to higher leakage current and high power 
requirement (Lu et al., 2008). The quantum wire 
transistor is the best possible alternative (Gilbert 
et al., 2005, Clement et al., 2013) in this condition, 
which remarkably improves the performance of 
the transistor with an effective gate control (Zhang 
et al., 2010). Electronic and transport proper-
ties of the nanowire transistors are significantly 
different than the conventional bulk transistors 
(Lundstorm et al., 2002), which can be realized 
through atomistic simulations. Extensive works 
have already been carried out for computing cur-
rent flow and significant electrical properties in a 
nanowire transistor (Chowdhury et al., 2014, Jin 
et al., 2008, Lundstorm 2000) and are reported 
for different geometries (Sajjad et al., 2008, Fiori 
et al., 2007) involving various numerical methods 
(Fitriwan et al., 2008, Vashaee et al., 2006). Theo-
retical analysis of resonant tunneling diode (Do 
et al., 2006), DG MOSFET (Sabry et al., 2011), 
and CNTFET (Xinghui et al., 2011) is already 
reported in various literatures due to their unique 

44
V
y z
m
y
x
y
m
y z
y
z
x
y
( ,
x
, )
z
* ( , )
z
* ( , )
z
−
∂
∂
−
∂
∂
∂
∂
−
∂
∂
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
ℏ
ℏ
ℏ
2
2
∂
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
m
y
m
z
E
x y
z * ( , )
z
(
)
( ,
x
, )
z
∂
∂
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎥
ψ
ψ
x y
E
( ,
(x
, )
z
(
 
 
(1)
where V(x, y, z) is the conduction band edge 
potential in the active device, and we assume the 
parabolic energy band with diagonal effective mass 
tensor due to the variation along y and z directions 
because of the transition between the channel and 
the insulating layer.
Considering ‘N’ number of nodes in the cou-
pled mode space and ‘M’ number of sub-bands are 
occupied, the Hamiltonian of the device may be 
written as:
H
E
M
M
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
1
2
1
2
( )
x
( )
x
...
...
( )
x
( )
x
( )
x
...
...
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
=
( )
(
...
...
...
...
...
...
.
h
h
h
h
h
h
M
M
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
=
11
h
12
h
1h
21
h
22
h
2h
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
(
h
h
h
M
h
MM
h
1
2
hM
h
1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
φ x
M
)
( )
x
...
...
( )
x
φ
φ
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
 
(2)
where
h
a
x
E
c
b
x
mn
h
m n
mn
sub
mn
mn
b
∂
∂
+
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
−
−
c
∂
δm,
( )
x
( )
x
( )
x
( )
x
( )
x
ℏ
ℏ
ℏ
2
2
∂
2
2
2
2
2
∂x
 
(3)
All the symbols have the usual meanings.
Introducing dissipative effects in the retarded 
green’s function:
G
E
E
D
S
(
)
E
(
[ES
H
(
)
(
)]
= [ES
E)
−
∑
∑
1  
(4)
After computing drain current, subthreshold 
swing may be put into the form:
S
k T
d
dV
B
e
k T
s
G
= ⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
−
1
10
0
1
log (
e
)
(
)
0
μ
μ
s −
0
 
(5)
Considering is channel-gate capacitance and CP 
is channel-substrate capacitance, Eq. (5) may be 
modified as:
S
k T
C q
C
C
B
e
k T
G
C
G
P
C
C
= ⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
−
1
10
1
log (
e
)
 
(6)
DIBL is measured by:
D
V
V
V
V
th
V DD
th
V low
DD
D
V low
= −
 
(7)
where Vth
DD is the threshold voltage measured for 
higher drain voltage, and Vth
low is the threshold 
voltage measured for lower drain voltage, VD
low is 
the lower drain voltage at the linear region of the 
static characteristics.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Using Eq. (6) and Eq. (7) derived in the section 
II of this paper; subthreshold swing and drain-
induced barrier lowering are computed for the 
device as a function of channel width, insulating 
layer thickness and gate voltage. Figure 1 shows 
the variation of subthreshold swing with channel 
width for 1V VGS for different insulating layer thick-
nesses. From the plot, it is seen that with increas-
ing channel dimensions, the subthreshold swing 
reduces. This is due to the fact that larger channel 
width increases ON current due to enhanced gate-
channel capacitive coupling; simultaneously, OFF 
current is reduced due to charge sharing.
The overall effect is represented by a monotonic 
reduction of subthreshold swing. But, with the 
Figure 1. Subthreshold swing with channel width for 
different insulating layer thickness at VGS = 1V.

45
increase of the insulator thickness for a given channel 
width, the swing increases. This is because the higher 
thickness of the insulator restricts the charge sharing, 
which enhances the off current, and results in increase 
of the subthreshold swing. This effect is shown in 
Fig. 2, where subthreshold swing is plotted as a func-
tion of insulating the layer thickness for a different 
channel width. One interesting feature may be noted 
down in this context that is rate of the decrease of the 
swing is higher when channel dimensions have been 
enhanced from 5 nm to 10 nm, but the rate reduces 
when the width is increased from 10 nm to 15 nm. 
Hence, the effect of channel width on the subthresh-
old swing width is predominant for lower magnitude, 
and also for a higher insulator thickness.
Fig. 3 shows the variation of DIBL with chan-
nel width, for different insulating layer thick-
nesses with 1V VGS. From the plot, it is observed 
that DIBL monotonically decreases with channel 
width, and it increases for higher insulator thick-
ness. Higher channel width allows higher rate 
of carrier transport inside the channel, which 
increases ON current. This lowers the potential 
barrier more, which requires less effective voltage 
to overcome the channel resistance. Hence DIBL 
reduces. With the increase of insulating layer 
thickness, effective potential barrier in the channel 
increases, which requires a greater horizontal field 
to make carrier transport. This, in turn, increases 
DIBL, as depicted in Fig. 4.
Effect of gate voltage on subthreshold swing 
and DIBL is represented from Fig. 5 to Fig. 8. In 
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, subthreshold swing is calculated 
for the three different values of VGS. From both the 
Figure 2. Subthreshold swing with insulating layer 
thickness for different channel width at VGS = 1V.
Figure 3. Drain-induced barrier lowering with chan-
nel width for different insulating layer thicknesses at 
VGS = 1V.
Figure 4. Drain-induced barrier lowering with insu-
lating layer thicknesses for different channel widths at 
VGS = 1V.
Figure 5. Subthreshold swing with channel width for 
different VGS for two insulating layer thicknesses.

46
figures, it may be concluded that with the increase 
of VGS, subthreshold swing increases when other 
structural parameters remain constant. The rea-
son behind the variation may be stated as: higher 
VGS increases ON current, simultaneously the 
charge sharing between channel and substrate also 
increases towards the drain end. This enhances 
OFF current. The overall effect is the increase of 
subthreshold swing.
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 show the effect of VGS on 
DIBL. Since the increase of VGS, the channel cur-
rent increases; hence, channel resistance decreases. 
Thus, the effective potential barrier against carrier 
transport is reduced, which makes a lower mag-
nitude of DIBL. However, it may be noted that 
the rate of change of DIBL for lower to moder-
ate value of gate voltage (0.4 v to 0.7 V) is signifi-
cantly compared to the rate when VGS is changed 
from moderate to higher magnitude (0.7 V to 1 V). 
Thus, the precise estimation of DIBL is important 
for low to moderate bias application.
4 CONCLUSION
Subthreshold swing and DIBL of GAA quan-
tum wire transistors are computed using the self-
consistent solutions of Schrödinger equation and 
Poisson equation. Solution is obtained through 
NEGF technique under ballistic limit. Dissipative 
effect is considered at both the ends of the chan-
nel. Si is used as material for channel with SiO2 as 
a dielectric. Structural parameters and gate voltage 
are varied to study the behavior of the computed 
properties. Result will play a crucial role in design-
ing quantum wire transistor based integrated cir-
cuit for nanoelectronic applications.
REFERENCES
Chowdhury. B.N. & Chattopadhyay. S., 2014. Investigat-
ing The Impact of Source/Drain Doping Dependent 
Effective Masses on The Transport Characteristics of 
Ballistic Si-Nanowire Field-Effect-Transistors, Jour-
nal of Applied Physics, 115, 124502.
Clément. N., Han. X.L. & Larrieu. G., 2013. Electronic 
transport mechanisms in scaled gate-all-around sili-
con nanowire transistor arrays, Applied Physics Let-
ters, 103, 263504.
Datta. S., 2000, Nanoscale device modeling: Green’s 
function method. Superlattices and Microstructures, 
28, 253–278.
Do. V.N., Dollfus. P., & Nguyen. V.L., 2006. Transport 
and noise in resonant tunneling diode using self-
Figure 6. Subthreshold swing with insulating layer 
thickness for different VGS for two channel widths.
Figure 7. Drain-induced barrier lowering with chan-
nel width for different VGS for two insulating layer 
thicknesses.
Figure 8. Drain-induced barrier lowering with insu-
lating layer thickness for different VGS for two channel 
widths.

47
consistent Green’s function calculation, Journal of 
Applied Physics, 100, 093705.
Fiori. G., & Iannaccone. G., 2007. Three-Dimensional 
Simulation of One-Dimensional Transport in Silicon 
Nanowire Transistors, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnology, 
6, 524–529.
Fitriwan. H., Ogawa. M., Souma. S., & Miyoshi. T., 2008. 
Fullband Simulation of Nano-Scale MOSFETs based 
on A Non-Equilibrium Green’s Function Method, 
IEICE Trans. Electronics, E91-C, 105–109.
Gilbert. M.J. & Ferry. D.K., 2005. Quantum Interference 
in Fully Depleted Tri-Gate Quantum-Wire Transis-
tors—The Role of Inelastic Scattering, IEEE Transac-
tions on Nanotechnology, 4 (5), 599–604.
Jin. S., Amherst. M.A., Fischetti. M.V., & Tang. T.W., 
2008. Theoretical Study of Carrier Transport in Sili-
con Nanowire Transistors Based on the Multisubband 
Boltzmann Transport Equation, IEEE Transactions 
on Electron Devices, 55, 2886–2897.
Lu. W., Xie. P. & Lieber. C.M., 2008. Nanowire Transistor 
Performance Limits and Applications, IEEE Transac-
tions on Electron Devices, 55(11), 2859–2876.
Lundstorm. M., 2000. Fundamentals of carrier transport, 
2nd Ed, Cambridge, U.K, Cambridge University Press.
Lundstrom. M. & Ren. Z., 2002. Essential Physics of 
Carrier Transport in nanoscale MOSFETs, IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices, 49, 133–141.
Ren. Z., Venugopal. R., Datta. S., Lundstrom. M., 
Jovanovic. D., & Fossum. J.G., 2000. The Ballistic 
Nanotransistor: A Simulation Study, IEDM Tech. 
Digest, 715–718.
Sabry. Y.M., Abdolkader. T.M., & Farouk. W.M., 2011. 
Simulation of quantum transport in double-gate 
MOSFETs using the non-equilibrium Green’s func-
tion formalism in real-space: A comparison of four 
methods, International Journal of Numerical Mod-
eling: Electronic Networks, Devices and Fields, 24, 
322–334.
Sajjad. R.N., Bhowmick. S., & Khosru. Q.D.M., 2008. 
Cross-sectional Shape Effects on the Electronic Prop-
erties of Silicon Nanowires, IEEE International Con-
ference on Electron Devices and Solid-State Circuits, 
1–4.
Vashaee. D., Shakouri. A., Goldberger. J., Kuykendall. 
T., Pauzauskie. P., & Yang. P., 2006. Electrostatics of 
nanowire transistors with triangular cross-sections, 
Journal of Applied Physics, 99, 054310.
Venugopal. R., Ren. Z., Datta. S. & Lundstrom. M., 
2002, Simulating Quantum Transport in Nanoscale 
Transistors: Real versus Mode-Space Approaches. 
Journal of Applied Physics, 92, 3730–3739.
Xinghui. L., Junsong. Z., Zhong. Q., Fanguang. Z., 
Jiwei. W., & Chunhua. G., 2011. Study on transport 
characteristics of CNTFET based on NEGF theory, 
International Conference on Electron Devices and 
Solid-State Circuits, 1–2.
Zhang. X.G., Chen. K.J., Fang. Z.H. & Jun. X., 2010. 
Dual gate controlled single electron effect in silicon 
nanowire transistors, 10th IEEE International Con-
ference on Solid-State and Integrated Circuit Tech-
nology, 923–925.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

49
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
50 Hz cascaded twin-tee notch filter for removal of power line 
interference from human electrocardiogram—part I: Circuit design
Subhendu Chakraborty, Shuvajit Roy, Subhashri Chatterjee, Adrija Das, 
Monisha Ghosh & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: A cascaded twin-tee active notch filter topology has been proposed in this paper to remove 
the 50 Hz power line interference from the human electrocardiogram signal. Two second order twin-tee 
active notch filters having different Q-factors have been cascaded to obtain the proposed topology of the 
fourth order. The rejection bandwidth and the amount of attenuation given to the center frequency of the 
cascaded filter have been optimized by adjusting the Q-factor of the second stage. Detail of the design 
methodology has been discussed in this part of the paper.
from biopotential signals. However, due to simplic-
ity in circuit design and implementation, analog 
notch filtering methods are more convenient as 
compared to their digital counterparts.
In the present paper, the authors have proposed a 
fourth order cascaded improved twin-tee notch fil-
ter topology for obtaining a very high attenuation 
at center frequency without significant broadening 
of rejection bandwidth as compared to its single 
stage second order counterpart. The Q-factor of the 
proposed filter is kept well below 10 (Q < 10). The 
values of resistance and capacitance associated with 
the twin-tee topology are calculated for obtaining 
the center frequency very near to 50 Hz and those 
are kept the same for both the stages in the cas-
caded topology. The performance of the proposed 
filter has been examined in both time and frequency 
domains and has been compared with the single 
stage second order 50 Hz improved notch filter to 
establish the superiority of the proposed topology.
2 CIRCUIT DESIGN
The circuit diagrams of the single stage second order 
improved twin-tee notch filter as well as the pro-
posed fourth order cascaded notch filter are shown 
in Figures 1 (a) and (b), respectively. The center fre-
quency (f0) for both the cases can be obtained from
f
RC
0f
1
2
= πR
,  
(1)
where R and C are the resistance and capacitance 
values of the twin-tee network. If the value of the 
capacitance is assumed to be C = 10 μF, then from 
1 INTRODUCTION
The removal of the power line interference from 
the recorded biopotential signals from the human 
body is one of the major fields of study for the 
biomedical engineers. The strong electric field that 
originated from 50 Hz power lines induces rela-
tively large potentials over the human body, which 
corrupts the recorded biopotential signals such as 
Electrocardiogram (ECG), Electroencephalogram 
(EEG), Electromyogram (EMG), etc. (Huhta 
et al. 1973, Chimeno et al. 2000). Some well known 
techniques such as guard-shield and driven-right-
leg (Spinelli et al. 1999, Van Rijn et al. 1990) are 
used in the biopotential amplifiers in order to 
reduce the coupling of power line interferences 
on the recorded biopotential signals. However, 
enhancement of ‘voltage divider effect’ due to the 
large variability of electrode impedances converts 
the common-mode interference over the body into 
differential-mode interference, which cannot be 
rejected, even by using the best quality biopotential 
amplifiers (Gruetzmann et al. 2007).
Notch filtering is one of the easiest ways of 
rejecting power line interference from recorded 
biopotential signals especially in case of human 
ECG. Both analog and digital notch filters may 
be used for the above mentioned purpose. Second 
order analog 50 Hz notch filters such as improved 
twin-tee (Stout 1976), state-variable topology 
(Kerwin et al. 1967), and active synthetic inductor 
RLC (Franco 1988) filters are very popular for the 
said purpose. Single notch fundamental IIR, single 
notch fundamental FIR, and multiple notch fun-
damental and harmonics FIR digital notch filters 
are also used to reject the power line interference 

50
equation (1), the values of the resistance obtained 
is R = 318.3099 Ω. Now practically the branches 
having resistance values R can be implemented by 
R = 1 KΩ || 470 Ω || 56 KΩ, i.e. the parallel con-
nections of 1 KΩ, 470 Ω, and 56 KΩ resistances. 
The value of the practical R becomes 317.9128 Ω, 
which is very near to the ideal one. The correspond-
ing f0 = 50.0625 Hz is very close to the 50 Hz. The 
branches having resistance values R/2 can be sim-
ply implemented by a parallel combination of two 
practical R (i.e. (1 KΩ || 470 Ω || 56 KΩ) || (1 KΩ || 
470 Ω || 56 KΩ)) and the 2C can be implemented 
by using the parallel combination of the two 10 μF 
capacitances.
The magnitude of the transfer function of the 
first and second stages of the cascaded filter are 
given by (Stout 1976):
H1
H
2
2
2
0
2
16
ω ω
2
0
2
(
)
jω
=
(
)
2
0
2
ω
ω
2
0
2
(
)
2
0
2
ω
ω
2
0
2
+16(
)
K1
K
1−
1
,  
(2)
H2
H
2
2
2
0
2
16
ω ω
2
0
2
(
)
jω
=
(
)
2
0
2
ω
ω
2
0
2
(
)
2
0
2
ω
ω
2
0
2
+16(
)
K2
K
1−
1
,  
(3)
respectively; where K1 = R2/(R1 + R2), K2 = R3/(R3 + 
R4), and ω0 = 2πf0. The Q-factors of the individual 
stages are given by Q1 = 1/4(1 – K1) and Q2 = 1/4(1 
– K2) and corresponding bandwidths are given by 
BW1 = 4(1 – K1)f0 and BW2 = 4(1 – K2)f0.
The overall transfer function (magnitude) of the 
cascaded filter is given by
H
H
H
H
(
)
jω
(
)
jω
j
×
(
)
jω
2
H
1
H (
)
jω
j
×
.  
(4)
Now, the value of R3 keeps varying from 1 to 
40 KΩ. The Q2 varies from 1–10, keeping the 
R1 = R4 = 1 K and R2 = 40 KΩ (i.e. Q1 = 10.25) and 
the corresponding magnitudes of the overall trans-
fer function 20 log10|H(jω)| (in dB) as well as over-
all bandwidth (BW in Hz) of the cascaded filter 
have been calculated. The 3-dB lower and upper 
cutoff frequencies (fl and fu) have been determined 
by equating |H(jω)| = 1/√2 and determining the 
corresponding frequencies numerically. Thus, the 
overall bandwidth is BW = (fu – fl).
The 20 log10|H(jω)|f = 50 Hz vs. Q2 as well as BW 
vs. Q2 plots are shown in Figure 2. It is observed 
from the Figure 2 that the bandwidth decreases 
sharply with the increase of the Q-factor of the 
Figure 1. Circuit diagrams of (a) single stage second order improved twin-tee notch filter and (b) proposed fourth 
order cascaded notch filter.

51
found to be 4.88 Hz, 6.25 Hz, and 8.68 Hz, respec-
tively. The amount of attenuation provided by the 
above mentioned filters at 50 Hz frequency are 
found to be −48.75, −50.90, and −99.65 dB, respec-
tively. The overall Q-factor of the fourth order cas-
caded filter is 5.76 which is lower than that of the 
individual stages.
3 CONCLUSION
A cascaded twin-tee active notch filter topology 
has been proposed in this paper to remove the 
50 Hz power line interference from the human elec-
trocardiogram signal. Two second order twin-tee 
active notch filters having different Q-factors have 
been cascaded to obtain the proposed topology 
of the fourth order. The rejection bandwidth and 
the amount of attenuation given to the center fre-
quency of the cascaded filter have been optimized 
by adjusting the Q-factor of the second stage. The 
performance of the proposed filter has been evalu-
ated by means of both time and frequency domain 
analysis in the next part of the paper.
REFERENCES
Chimeno, M., and Pallas-Areny, R. (2000) A compre-
hensive model for power line interference in biopoten-
tial measurements. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., 49, 
535–540.
Franco, S. (1988) Design with Operational Amplifiers 
and Analog Integrated Circuits. New York: McGraw-
Hill, pp. 162–174.
Gruetzmann, A., Hansen, S., and Muller, J. (2007) Novel 
dry electrodes for ECG monitoring. Physiol. Meas., 
28, 1375–1390.
Huhta, J.C., and Webster, J.G. (1973) 60-Hz interference 
in electrocardiography. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 
BME-20, 91–101.
Kerwin, W.J., Huelsman, L.P., and Newcomb, R.W. 
(1967) State-variable synthesis for insensitive inte-
grated circuit transfer functions. IEEE J. Solid-State 
Circuits, 2, 87–92.
Spinelli, E., Martinez, N., and Mayosky, M. (1999) 
A transconductance driven-right-leg circuit. IEEE 
Trans. Biomed. Eng., 46, 1466–1470.
Stout, D.F. (1976) Handbook of Operational Ampli-
fier Circuit Design. New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 
12.1–12.
Van Rijn, A.C.M., Peper, A., and Grimbergen, C.A. 
(1990) High-quality recording of bioelectric events. 
Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., 28, 389–397.
Figure 3. Frequency responses of the first, second stand 
alone stages as well as the overall cascaded notch filter.
Figure 2. Magnitude of overall transfer function (in 
dB) at 50 Hz frequency as well as bandwidth (in Hz) ver-
sus Q-factor of the second stage.
second stage, whereas the amount of attenua-
tion 50 Hz frequency also decreases rapidly with 
the increase of the same. Therefore, a trade-off 
between the bandwidth and attenuation has to be 
done. Thus, one particular value of Q2 has to be 
chosen for which the overall rejection bandwidth is 
not that high as well as the attenuation at 50 Hz is 
not that low. Keeping this fact in mind, the value 
of Q2 is chosen to be 8.0, for which the value of 
R3 = 31 KΩ.
The frequency response of the designed fourth 
order cascaded filter and the frequency responses 
of the individual stages having Q-factors 10.25 and 
8.0, respectively, are shown in Figure 3.
The bandwidths of the first, second stand alone 
stages and the overall cascaded notch filters are 

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

53
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Research on the 50 Hz cascaded twin-tee notch filter 
for the removal of power line interference from human 
electrocardiogram—part II: Simulation study
Subhendu Chakraborty, Shuvajit Roy, Subhashri Chatterjee, Adrija Das, 
Monisha Ghosh & Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: The simulation study has been carried out to establish the superiority of the proposed 
fourth order cascaded twin-tee active notch filter topology to compare the results withits single stage sec-
ond order counterpart. Noiseless human Electrocardiogram (ECG) signal has been added with different 
levels of interfering 50 Hz power line signal, which are used as inputs of the filters and the corresponding 
outputs have, thus, been analyzed. Both the time domain and frequency domain analyses of the filtered 
(by both second single stage order and fourth order cascaded twin-tee notch filters) and unfiltered noisy 
ECG signals have been presented in this part of the paper for a better inference.
(Chakraborty et al. 2016). Inverse FFT has been 
carried out on V
j
ecg
V f (
)
j )  to obtain the time domain 
of the reconstructed signals. The amplitude of 
the 50 Hz interfering signal (Vinfr) has been varied 
within the range of 1–500 μV to study the effect of 
the power line interference on the performance of 
the filters. In order to access the amount of distor-
tion in both the corrupted and reconstructed sig-
nals, a relative residue energy parameter has been 
defined, which is given by:
χuf
χ
f
Or
χ
der
i
M
i
M
/
,
=
(
)
sig
ecg
usig
vecg
[ ]i −
[ ]i
(
)
ecg
vecg[ ]i
=
=
∑
∑
2
1
2
1
 
(2)
1 INTRODUCTION
In this section of the paper, the performance evalu-
ation of the 50 Hz cascaded fourth order twin-tee 
notch filter has been carried out and compared 
with its single stage second order counterpart. 
Human ECG signals that have been retrieved 
from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database avail-
able at Physionet are of an interference-free record 
(Goldberger et al. 2000). The first six cycles of a 
typical interference-free ECG signal (vecg(t)) has 
been shown in Figure 1.
The 50 Hz sinusoidal signal (vinfr(t)) is added 
with the signal vecg(t) in order to introduce the 
power line interference in it. The corrupted ECG 
signal has been given by:
v
v
ecg
uf
ecg
r
( )t =
( )t +
( )t
infr
n
,  
(1)
where v
V
r
inf
i
V
r
V
n
nfr
i
( )t =
(
)t , Vinfr is the amplitude 
of the interfering signal. Now, the corrupted EGC 
signal has been Fourier transformed by using the 
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm in MAT-
LAB (The MathWorksTM) in order to obtain the 
frequency domain information (
(
))
V
j
(
ecg
f
ω)  of it. 
Sampling frequency and the number of the fre-
quency points of the discrete Fourier transform 
have been taken to be fs = 1000 Hz and N = 5000, 
respectively. Finally, 
ecg
V uffsf
(
)
j )  is multiplied by the 
transfer function of the first stage of the second 
order notch filter (H1(jω)) as well as the transfer 
function of the overall cascaded fourth order notch 
filter (H(jω)) in order to obtain the frequency 
domain of the reconstructed signals (
(
))
V
j
(
ecg
fq
ω)  
Figure 1. First 6 cycles of a typical interference-free 
ECG signal.

54
where χ
χ
uf
χ
f
Or
χ
der
uf
χ
/
0
χ
 is used for the unfiltered cor-
rupted ECG signal, χ
χ
uf
χ
f
Or
χ
der
f
χ
/
2
χ  is used for the 
reconstructed ECG signal filtered by second 
order single stage notch filter and χ
χ
uf
χ
f
Or
y
χ
der
f
χ
/
4
χ  
is used for the reconstructed ECG signal fil-
tered by fourth order cascaded notch filter, 
u
v
sigi
ecg
f
[ ]i ≡
[ ]i  is the unfiltered corrupted ECG 
signal, u
v
sigi
ecg
f
[ ]i ≡
[ ]i
( )
 is the reconstructed ECG 
signal filtered by second order single stage notch 
filter, and u
v
sigi
ecg
f
[ ]i ≡
[ ]i
( )
 is the reconstructed 
ECG signal filtered by fourth order cascaded 
Figure 2. Time domain of the original, corrupted, and reconstructed EGC signals are shown in (a) – (b) for the 
amplitudes of the interfering signal of 1, 10, and 100 μV. Reconstruction has been done via second order single stage 
(first stage) notch filter (Chakraborty et al. 2015). Frequency domain of the corrupted and reconstructed EGC signals 
are shown in figures (d) – (f) for the same values of the amplitudes of the interfering signal.
Figure 3. Time domain of the original, corrupted, and reconstructed EGC signals are shown in figures (a) – (b) for 
the amplitudes of the interfering signal of 1, 10, and 100 μV. Reconstruction has been done via fourth order cascaded 
notch filter (Chakraborty et al. 2015). Frequency domain of the corrupted and reconstructed EGC signals are shown 
in figures (d) – (f) for the same values of the amplitudes of the interfering signal.

55
notch filter, and M is the total number of sam-
ples that are under consideration.
It is obvious that the amount of distortion in 
the unfiltered signal increases linearly with the 
increase of the amplitude of the 50 Hz interfer-
ing signal. But in filtered signals, the amount of 
distortion has reduced significantly as observed in 
Figures 2 and 3. It is observed from Figure 4 that 
the relative residue parameter of the signal filtered 
by the fourth order cascaded notch filter is sig-
nificantly lesser than that of the unfiltered signal 
within the range of 10–500 μV of the amplitude 
of 50 Hz interfering signal. However, the same 
range is found to be of the range of 30–500 μV in 
the signal filtered by the second order single stage 
notch filter, which is smaller than that of its fourth 
order counterpart. But below these specified 
ranges, the relative residue parameters of both the 
types of filtered signals remain at constant values 
(significantly lesser in the signal filtered by fourth 
order notch) due to the inherent low frequency 
oscillations produced by the filters. Removal of 
some harmonics of the clean ECG signals near 50 
Hz by the filters cause those low frequency oscil-
lations to occur, which are irremovable.
2 NOISE PERFORMANCE
Signal to interference ratio at the input side of a 
filter can be expressed as:
SIR
I
v
in
R
ecg
i
M
i
M
=
[ ]i
(
)
(
)
v
r[ ]i
=
=
∑
∑
2
1
2
1
.  
(3)
Similarly, the signal to interference ratio at the 
output of a filter may be defined as:
SIR
I
u
v
u
v
out
ROrder
sig
r
v
i
i
M
sigi
ecg
i
M
=
[ ]i −
[ ]i
(
)
[ ]i −
[ ]i
(
)
=
=
∑
2
1
2
1∑
.  
(4)
Here, the interfering signal may be considered 
as the noise to the original ECG signal. Thus, the 
noise figure of a filter may be written as:
NF
SIR
I
SIR
I
in
R
out
ROrder
=
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
10
10
log
.
SIR
I
in
Order
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
10
 
(5)
Equivalent noise temperature of a filtered sys-
tem may be calculated from:
T
T
e
T
NF
−
T ⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
0
T
10
10
1 ,
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠ 
(6)
where T0 = 300 K (room temperature).
Figure 5 shows the plots of the noise figure of 
the second order single stage notch filters, that is 
the stand-alone first stage (NF1) and second stage 
(NF2) and the overall fourth order cascaded notch 
filter (NF) vs. the amplitude of the interfering 
signal. It is observed from Figure 5 that the over-
all fourth order cascaded notch filter possesses a 
lower noise figure as compared to its second order 
single stage counterpart for the entire range of 
interfering signal amplitude under investigation. 
Moreover, the stand-alone second stage having 
lower Q-factor possesses a slightly better noise 
figure as compared to the stand-alone first stage 
having a higher Q-factor. Magnitudes of the noise 
Figure 4. Relative residue energy parameter of unfil-
tered corrupted signal, reconstructed signal filtered by 
second order single stage and fourth order cascaded 
notch filters vs. amplitude of the interfering signal.
Figure 5. Noise figure of the second order single stage 
notch filters (stand-alone first stage and second stage) 
and fourth order cascaded notch filter vs. amplitude of 
the interfering signal.

56
temperature of the abovementioned filters vs. The 
amplitude of the interfering signal plots has been 
shown in Figure 6. It is obvious that the smaller 
noise figure of the fourth order cascaded notch fil-
ter leads to a smaller equivalent noise temperature 
of the same second order stand-alone filters.
Figure 6. Magnitudes of the noise temperature of the 
second order single stage notch filters (stand-alone first 
stage, and second stage) and fourth order cascaded notch 
filters vs. amplitude of the interfering signal. Right sides 
of the vertical arrows contain negative values of the noise 
temperature.
3 CONCLUSION
A detailed simulation study has been done to investi-
gate the 50 Hz power line interference rejection capa-
bility of the proposed fourth order cascaded twin-tee 
notch filter topology. The noise performance of the 
proposed topology has been compared with the con-
ventional second order modified twin-tee notch filter 
topology. The proposed cascaded topology shows a 
better noise figure throughout a large range of inter-
ference and shows a significantly better 50 Hz power 
line interference rejection capability.
REFERENCES
Chakraborty, S., Roy, S., Chatterjee, S., Das, A., 
Ghosh, M. and Acharyya, A. (2015). 50 Hz Cas-
caded Twin-Tee Notch Filter for Removal of Power 
Line Interference from Human Electrocardiogram—
Part I: Circuit Design. In Proceedings of C2E2 2016, 
SKFGI, Mankundu, WB, India, CRC Press, Taylor & 
Francis Group.
Goldberger, A.L., Amaral, L.A.N., Glass, L., Hausdorff, 
J.M., Ivanov, P.C., Mark, R.G., Mietus, J.E., 
Moody, G.B., Peng, C.K. and Stanley, H.E. (2000). 
PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: compo-
nents of a new research resource for complex physi-
ologic signals. Circulation, 101, e215–220.

57
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Digital Phase Lock Loop based on Discrete Energy Separation Algorithm
S. Sarkar
Department of Information Technology, GCELT, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
B.N. Biswas
Chairman Education Division, SKF Group of Institute, Mankundu, West Bengal, India
U. Maulik
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: This paper introduces a new Digital Phase Lock loop (DPLL) in the presence of the three 
discrete energy separation algorithms, DESA-1a, DESA1, and DESA2 modules, with the incorporation 
of the Teager Energy Operator (TEO). An additional phase modulation input, along with its frequency 
modulation input, is present in the digitally controlled oscillator of the loop. The incorporation of DESA 
module and phase modulation input in the DPLL is an entirely new proposal in the design of the DPLL. 
DPLL with DESAs are simulated in MATLAB SIMULINK environment. The new model is capable of 
demodulating the Frequency Modulated (FM) signal with proper perfection and has achieved a faster 
accusation time for the frequency step signal. Superior output Signal to the Noise Ratio (SNR) is also 
achievable in the modified DPLL.
operator, capable of extracting the signal energy 
based on mechanical and physical considerations. 
It has been successfully used in various speeches 
and biomedical applications (Semmaoui, Drolet, 
Lakhssassi & Sawan 2012).
To derive the TEO expression, let us consider 
the 
unmodulated 
signal 
x
A
c
( )t
cos((
)
= A
ω
θ
t
c
)
+
t
, 
where ωc is the carrier frequency, A is the ampli-
tude, and θ  is the phase of the signal. According 
to Kaiser (Maragos, Quatieri, & Kaiser 1993), the 
following differential equations can be considered 
as a starting point for the operator. The differential 
equation of the system that is capable of generat-
ing such a waveform is the Equation (1).
d x
dt
x
c
2
2
2
0
=
x
c
+
2
ω 2
 
(1)
This is the system equation of an undriven 
linear undamped linear oscillator. It could be a 
mechanical system consisting of a mass attached 
to a spring of constant. The periodic oscillation 
or displacement of the spring can be expressed 
as ωc which is also the same as an unmodulated 
signal.
2.1.1 The continuous teager energy operator
To find out the continuous time TEO considering 
A
t
cosωt and according to (Maragos, Quatieri, & 
Kaiser 1993), it yields:
1 INTRODUCTION
One of the most common modulation techniques in 
many naturally occurring signals is the  Frequency 
Modulation (FM). The Digital Phase Lock Loop 
(DPLL) has been extensively used for demodula-
tion of the FM signal. In recent years, a variety 
of designs have emerged for DPLL (Biswas 1985) 
with the advancement in digital circuit technology. 
In order to obtain faster acquisition and proper 
demodulation of the signal, a Digitally Controlled 
Oscillator (DCO) with an appropriate filtering tech-
nique is used (Sarkar, Chatterjee, Maulik, & Biswas 
2012, Sarkar, Maulik, & Biswas 2013) in the design 
of the digital phase lock loop. Again, the inclu-
sion of the Discrete Energy Separation  Algorithm 
(DESA) (Maragos, Quatieri, & Kaiser 1993) mod-
ule in the DPLL gives better results in terms of 
demodulation, acquisition of frequency step signal, 
and the output signal to the noise ratio (SNR).
2 TEAGER ENERGY OPERATOR (TEO) 
AND DISCRETE ENERGY SEPARATION 
ALGORITHM (DESA)
2.1 Teager Energy Operator (TEO)
The Teager Energy Operator (TEO) (Maragos, 
Quatieri, & Kaiser 1993, Pal, Chatterjee, & Biswas 
2012, Bouchikhi & Boudraa 2012) is a powerful 

58
d x
dt
x
d x
dt
( )
x
( )t
(
)
A
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠−
=
x )t
2
2
2
2)  
(2)
2.1.2 The discrete teager energy operator
Consider a digital signal x
A
n
( )
n
cos((
)
+
n
= A
φ), 
where Ω = 2pif
F
/
i
sF  is the digital frequency, f  is 
the analog frequency, and FS
F  is the sampling fre-
quency. The arbitrary phase is φ .
Using simple mathematics, the discrete Teager 
Energy Operator can be written as:
x
x
x
A
2
2
x
A
2
x
( )
n
(
)
n
1
(
)
n
sin
−x n
=
)1
φ  
(3)
Thus, the following basic definition of the dis-
crete Teager Energy Operator from the Equation 
(3) can be written as the Equation (4)
Ψ[ ( )]
( )
(
) (
)
n
(
x (
x
x(
x(
−
)
= x (
2
) (
) (
x(
 
(4)
So, for a given signal x( )
n , the estimation of the 
instantaneous energy of the signal can be done by 
substituting x( )
n  in the formula above. From the 
context of differential energy operators, the dis-
crete time TEO can be defined (Maragos, Quatieri, 
& Kaiser 1993) using the Lie bracket as Equation 
(5):
[
]
[ ]
[
]
( )
]
[
]
(
=
]
[
]2
Ψ
 
(5)
The TEO block is implemented in Figure 1.
2.2 Discrete Energy Separation Algorithm
The Energy Separation Algorithm (ESA) is the 
method to separate the amplitude and the fre-
quency components using energy operators from a 
signal. The ESA can be broadly classified into two 
major categories as Continuous Energy Separation 
Algorithm (CESA) and Discrete Time, Energy, 
Separation Algorithms (DESA). The DESA are 
again of three major types such as DESA 1a, 
DESA 2, and DESA 1. In this paper we are con-
sidering only discrete energy separation algorithm 
for our proposed design.
2.2.1 DESA-1a
In 1993, Maragos, Kaiser, and Qatari proposed the 
DESA algorithms (Maragos, Quatieri, & Kaiser 
1993) to estimate the amplitude and instantaneous 
frequency of discrete time AM-FM signals. Now if 
we carry on as (Maragos, Quatieri, & Kaiser 1993) to 
derive the three DESAs algorithm, we can get the fre-
quency (Ωc) and the amplitude (A) for the DESA-1a.
Ω
Ψ
Ψ
c
n
n
n
=
−
−
n
arccos(
[ (
x
)
(
x
−x
)]
[ (
x
)]
)
1
1
2
 
(6)
A
n
n
n
n
=
Ψ
Ψ
Ψ
( [
x
])
(
)
n
n
n
−
−
n
Ψ
Ψ
[ (
x
)
(
x
−x
)]
[ (
x
)]
1−(
1
2
2  
(7)
2.2.2 DESA1
The DESA-1 can be easily formulated using the 
result of the DESA-1a as the asymmetric difference 
for approximating the derivative of x in DESA-1a, a 
further improvement, may be done by averaging the 
term ψ[ (
ψ
)
(
)]
n
(
n
(n
( −
n
(
1  with the ψ[ (
ψ
)
( )]
n
(
n
(
+ )1
. 
This is done in the case of DESA-1. Repeating 
the analysis of DESA-1a using forward differ-
ences z
n
n
y n
( )
n
[ (
x
)
(
x
)]
(
)
n
=
+
n
[ (
x
ψ[
y
1
n
)
(
x
)]
(n
=
n
x
)]
, we get the 
Equations (8) and (9),
Ω
Ψ
Ψ
Ψ
c
y n
y n
n
=
−
+
+
Ψ
n
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
arccos
[ (
y
)]
[ (
y
)]
[ (
x
)]
1
1
4
 
(8)
A
n
n
=
+
n
Ψ
Ψ
+
n
Ψ
Ψ
( [
x
])
(
)
y n
y n
n
−
+
n
Ψ
+
n
Ψ
Ψ
[ (
y
)]
[ (
y
)]
[ (
x
)]
1−(
1
4
2  
(9)
Figure 1. Discrete Teager Energy Operator.

59
2.2.3 DESA2
Instead of using two sample derivatives in DESA-1 
if we use three sample derivatives, or three sample 
symmetric differences, then we obtain the DESA-2 
algorithm. The new expressions for amplitude and 
frequency are given as:
Ω
Ψ
Ψ
c
n
n
n
= /
−
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
1 2
/
1
1
n −
1
2
arccos
[ (
x
)
(
x
)
(
x
−
)]
[ (
x
)]
 
(10)
A
n
n
n
=
+
Ψ
Ψ
( [
x
])
[ (
x
)
(
x
)
(
)]
1
n −
1)
(
x
−
 
(11)
The MATLAB SIMULINK implementation of 
three DESAs are depicted in Figure 2.
3 DPLL USING DESA-1A, 
DESA1, AND DESA2
Here, we have proposed a new DPLL of a sec-
ond order where the output signal is fed into the 
frequency modulation and the phase modulation 
input of a digitally controlled oscillator (DCO). 
For the conventional DPLL, the Phase detec-
tor output is fed into the frequency modulation 
Figure 2. MATLAB SIMULINK model of DESA-1a (a), DESA1 (b), and DESA2 (c).

60
input of a DCO through an integrating filter 
and an amplifier of gain GFM
G
. In our publica-
tions (Sarkar, Chatterjee, Maulik, & Biswas 2012, 
Sarkar, Maulik, & Biswas 2013) we have intro-
duced the phase modulation input in the proposed 
DPLL to enhance its performances. On the other 
hand, in our proposed model the phase detector 
output is fed into the input of the DESA modules 
(Figure 3) and the subsequent frequency outputs 
of the DESA blocks are fed into the frequency 
modulation input of DCO through the amplifier 
of gains G
G
DE
G
SA
a
S
−1
1
G
a
D
G ESA
S , and GDE
G
SA2 of the respec-
tive DESA blocks. Once more the phase detector 
output is fed into the phase modulation input 
of the DCO through an amplifier of gain GPM
G
 
(Figure 3).
4 NUMERICAL ANALYSIS 
OF THE DPLL USING DESA
The equivalent open loop transfer function of the 
DPLL with the phase modulation input can be 
written from Figure 3. So the equivalent open loop 
transfer function can be written as:
Figure 3. MATLAB SIMULINK model of proposed DPLL with three different DESA modules.
G
z
G
z
FM
PM
PM
G
( )
z
(
)
G
G
FM
G
PM
G
=
z)
GPM
G
2
2
1
+
z
 
(12)
From (12), the closed loop transfer function can be 
found out. Hence Equation (13) is given as:
H
z
G
z
D
H
PLL
FM
PM
PM
G
FM
PM
PM
PM
L
( )
z
(
)
G
G
FM
G
PM
G
(
)
G
G
FM
G
PM
G
(
)
GPM
G
=
z)
GPM
G
−z(G
2
)
(
+
)
 
(13)
The terms are explained above.
The introduction of the DESA modules gives 
similar results as Equation (13). Here, the fre-
quency modulation gain, GFM
G
, input is absent, but 
the gain GDE
G
SA and the frequency output of DESA 
module Ωc are introduced.
H
z
G
z
G
D
H
PLL_DESA
PM
DESA
c
P
G M
PM
DESA
c
PM
G
(
)
Z
(
)
G
G
PM
G
DE
G
SA
c
(
)
G
G
(GPM
G
DE
G
SA
c
(
=
G
+ z(G
+
)
−
2
1
)
 (14)
Again the one in the side loop bandwidth BL
B  for 
a digital PLL is defined (Lindsey & Chie 1981) by:

61
Figure 4. Output SNR versus GDE
G
SA  with Input SNR as a parameter.
B
B
j
H
H
z dz
d
L
B
iB /
( )
z
(
)
z
2
1
2
1
1
z)
=
∫
)
j ∫
 
(15)
The noise bandwidth can be calculated using Equa-
tion (14) and Equation (15) as:
B
B
G
G
G
G
G
G
L
B
iB
PM
G
DE
G
SA
c
PM
PM
PM
G
PM
G
DE
G
SA
C
PM
G
/
=
GDE
G
SA
c
+
+
2
2
2
2
[(
)
]
GP
G M
+
2
2
G
+
(
)
GP
G M
GP
G M
2
[(
)
(
Ω
Ω
+
−
+ G
G
G
DE
G
SA
C
PM
G
DE
G
SA
C
PM
DESA
C
S
Ω
ΩC
2)]
(
)
G
G
P
G M
D
G ESA
C
S Ω
G
G
−
G
D
G ESA
S
4
2
−
 (16)
Again we know that:
SNR
N
SNR
N
out
R
input
R
B
B
L
B
i
B
=
2
 
(17)
Using Equation (16) and Equation (17), it 
is observed that the improvement of an output 
 Signal to the Noise Ratio (SNR) in the presence of 
the DESA module in the proposed DPLL is over 
the earlier one. Increase in SNR promises further 
improvement in the proposed design as shown in 
Figure 4.
Figure 5. MATLAB Simulation response of FM demodulated signal in conventional DPLL (a), using control of 
phase modulation (b), using control of phase modulation and DESA-1a (c), using phase modulation and DESA1 (d), 
and using phase control and DESA2 (e).

62
Figure 6. Acquisition response of the frequency step signal in conventional DPLL (a), using control of phase modu-
lation (b), using control of phase modulation and DESA-1a (c), using phase modulation DESA1 (d) and using phase 
control and DESA2 (e).
5 MATLAB SIMULATION RESPONSES
The FM demodulated signal tracking behavior and 
the signal acquisition of the frequency step signal 
have been observed from the Figures 5 and 6. It is 
evident from those figures that there is a significant 
improvement in the performance of DPLL in the 
presence of the DESA modules. For acquisition 
of the frequency step signal, the maximum over-
shoot is lower with the use of DESA2 compared 
to DESA-1a and DESA1 modules in our proposed 
DPLL. Again from Table 1 of (Maragos, Quatieri, 
& Kaiser 1993), we get that the mean absolute and 
the RMS error is smallest in DESA2 compared to 
other two DESAs. Maragos, Quatieri, and Kaiser 
(1993) realized that DESA2 is very much easier 
to implement and it is fastest of all three DESAs. 
Therefore, use of the DESA2 module is preferable 
in the proposed model.
6 CONCLUSION
This document suggests an original variety of 
DPLL design methodologies in the presence of 
a discrete energy separation algorithm and phase 
modulation input in the DCO for distortionless 
demodulation of the FM signal. From the simu-
lation, it is observed that the signal tracking time 
and signal to noise ratio improved extremely in the 
presence of DESA. From the above, it is evident 
that the presence of all the three DESA modules 
give a performance of the DPLL.
REFERENCES
Biswas, B.N. (1985). Phase Lock Theories and Applica-
tions. New Delhi: Oxford and IBH.
Bouchikhi, A. & A. Boudraa (2012). Multicomponent 
am-fm signal analysis based on emd-b splines esa. Sig-
nal Processing, Elsevier. 92, 2214–2228.
Lindsey, W. & C. Chie (1981). A survey of digital phase 
locked loops. Proc. IEEE. 69, 410–431.
Maragos, P., T. Quatieri, & J. F. Kaiser (1993). Energy 
separation in signal modulation with application to 
speech analysis. IEEE Trans. Signal Processing. 41, 
3024–3051.
Pal, S., S. Chatterjee, & B.N. Biswas (2012). Energy based 
discriminator: Some issues. International Journal of 
Engineering Research and Applications. 2, 1735–1741.
Sarkar, S., B. Chatterjee, U. Maulik, & B. N. Biswas 
(2012). Elimination of truncation and round off error 
and enhancement of stability using a new split loop 
dpll. Int. J. Communication System. 25, 1059–1067.
Sarkar, S., U. Maulik, & B.N. Biswas (2013). Perform-
ance of the new split loop dpll in additive wide band 
gaussian noise. International Journal of Adaptive Con-
trol and Signal Processing.557, 1–27.
Semmaoui, H., J. Drolet, A. Lakhssassi, & M. Sawan 
(2012). Setting adaptive spike detection threshold 
for smoothed teo based on robust statistics theory. 
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 59, 
1596–1599.

63
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Vibrational signal analysis for bearing fault detection 
in mechanical systems
Naynjyoti Boro, Hrishikesh Das, Abhi Ghosh & Ganesh Roy
Instrumentation Engineering Department, BTAD, Central Institute of Technology, Kokrajhar, Assam, India
ABSTRACT: Rotating machine plays a vital role in the plant. Bearing is one of the critical components 
in the rotating machinery. Various maintenance techniques such as breakdown maintenance, preventive 
maintenance are performed for the protection of a machine. Vibration analysis of bearing is the predic-
tive maintenance technique used for fault diagnosis of the machine bearing. Fault in the bearing causes 
changes in the vibration of the bearing. The main objective of this project is to detect the bearing faults 
(outer race) in the mechanical system using the vibration signal from the bearing. The vibrational signal 
is sensed by a piezoelectric transducer, which is analyzed using LabVIEW software. For avoiding the 
difficulties in the time domain analysis, FFT is employed for a quick comparison between a healthy and 
defective bearing.
method can be effectively applied for eliminating 
the effect of the vibration. The performance of the 
rotating machine can also be determined by the 
measurement and analysis of the vibration signal. 
The vibration fault simulation system is devel-
oped to achieve a better understanding about the 
faults of the machine (Zhao Hua. 2011). In this 
paper a LabVIEW based data acquisition system 
is demonstrated in a very simple way. The obtained 
results are carefully analyzed using the graphical 
tools. This simple and quick technique for detect-
ing bearing faults using software control has not 
been reported previously as far as the knowledge 
of the authors goes.
2 HARDWARE SETUP
The basic block diagram of the system is illustrated 
in Figure 1. Vibration monitoring and Analysis 
1 INTRODUCTION
The electrical machine plays a vital role in the 
plant. Vibration signal analysis has an important 
tool in the area of fault diagnosis (Sukhjeet Singh 
et al. 2014). Vibration based diagnosis has always 
been considered as a reliable and easy factor to use. 
Vibration occurs in the machine in different plants. 
The risk of machine faults can remarkably create 
serious danger in the day to day life and productive 
activities of the people. Vibration can produce the 
noise as well as energy, which are very much harm-
ful to human health. It can also affect the equip-
ment life and operation stability of the machine. 
It causes great losses to the plant. So maintenance 
is a very important factor for a machine, which 
is essential (Heta S. Shah et al. 2013, Ioan Liţă, 
Daniel et al. 2010). The effect of vibration can be 
eliminated or reduced from the machine by using 
vibrational signal monitoring and analysis. Vibra-
tion is considered as a good indicator of machine 
monitoring system. In this paper, the monitoring 
and analysis of the vibration signals are taken care 
of using LabVIEW software. The monitoring and 
analysis of the vibration signal are concerned for 
implementing the predictive maintenance and 
fault detection (Asan Gani et al. 2002). Various 
information about the states change in the vibra-
tion signal and fault features of the machines are 
displayed in the vibration signal. So the measure-
ment and analysis of the vibrational signals are 
necessary for reducing the effect of the vibration. 
Sufficient training is required to familiarize with 
the different parameters. So that the given analysis 
Figure 1. Block diagram of the system.

64
system consists of the components like piezoelec-
tric transducer, data acquisition card, and compu-
ter. The bearing is fitted with the shaft of an ac 
induction motor.
2.1 Motor (split phase ac induction motor)
One of the important equipment to convert elec-
trical energy to mechanical energy in the modern 
production is the motor shown in Figure 2, and 
it plays an important role in the recent industrial 
plants. Typical components of the machine like 
shafts, bearing, gears, rotors, drive belts are moni-
tored. The common problem associated with the 
machine components are Imbalance, misalignment, 
ball bearing, looseness, bent shaft, journal bearing, 
gear problem, impeller blade problem, and motor 
problem. When a machine runs, it creates vibra-
tion; this vibration gives a vibration signal, which 
is sensed by an acceleration transducer. Accelera-
tion transducer is mounted on the machine. Speci-
fications of the analyzed motor are given below.
2.2 Bearing
A bearing (Figure 3) is a machine element that con-
strains relative motion to only the desired motion, 
and reduces the friction between the moving parts. 
The design of the bearing may provide for free 
linear movements of the moving part or for free 
rotation around a fixed axis. Also, it may prevent a 
motion by controlling the vectors of normal forces 
that bear on the moving parts. Many bearings also 
facilitate the desired motion as much as possible, 
such as by minimizing friction. Bearings are clas-
sified broadly according to the type of operation, 
the motions allowed, or to the directions of the 
loads (forces) applied to the parts. The tested bear-
ing specifications are given in the bellow.
a. Number of balls (Nb) = 8
b. Pitch diameter (D) = 25 mm
c. Contact angel of bearing = 0° 
d. Ball Diameter = 7 mm
e. Shaft Speed = 2800 rpm
2.3 Piezoelectric transducer
Mostly the Piezoelectric transducer shown in 
 Figure 4 is a widely used transducer for vibration 
monitoring and analysis system. The piezoelectric 
transducer contains a piezoelectric crystal element. 
It is preloaded by a mass of certain value. The whole 
assembly is enclosed in a strong protective covering. 
An electrical output (low voltage or charge) is gener-
ated by the piezoelectric crystal, when the crystal is 
physically stressed by the vibration of the machine. 
The crystal is stressed due to the variable inertial 
force of the mass and produces an electrical signal 
proportional to the acceleration of that mass. For 
the acceleration measurement, this small accelera-
tion signal can be amplified to a standard unit. This 
acceleration signal is converted (electronically inte-
grated) into a velocity or displacement signal within 
the sensor. This is commonly considered as the ICP 
(Integrated Circuit Piezoelectric) type transducer 
or sensor. It has an extensive frequency range. It 
can be performed well in accurate phase measure-
ments and also in wider temperature range. It resists 
damage due to severe vibrations and shocks. Now 
a day’s internal amplifier is included in most of the 
PE transducer. It has some advantages. These are: 
it has provision for providing a relative immunity to 
the effects of poor cable insulation and high output 
to weight ratio. Specifications of the PE transducer 
are given below.
i. Flat frequency range (HZ): 20–1500HZ or 
20–10000 Hz.
ii. Temperature limitation (°C): −50 to +120°C.
iii. Sensitivity range (mV/g): 100 mV/g.
Figure 2. Split phase ac induction motor.
Figure 3. Bearing.
Figure 4. Piezoelectric transducer.

65
2.4 Data acquisition
A data acquisition system is defined as the proc-
ess in which physical signals are transformed into 
electrical signals, which are then measured and con-
verted to digital signal for processing, collection, and 
storage by a computer. In this work the NI myRIO 
1900 is used, which is shown in  Figure 5. This hard-
ware module has the maximum voltage of +10 v. 
The maximum voltage range is −10 v to + 10 v. The 
ADC resolution of this module is of a 16 bit.
3 SETUP AND PROCEDURE
The experimental setup consists of a split phase asyn-
chronous 15 kW induction motor coupled with mild 
steel shaft of 15 mm diameter mounted on one deep 
groove ball bearing fixed in one Plummer block. The 
experimental setup is shown in  Figure 6. A voltage 
regulator has been attached with the motor in order 
to adjust the motor speed which can be varied 0 to 
2800 rpm. A piezoelectric transducer is coupled to 
the bearing with the help of the adhesive. The motor 
bearings are healthy. The faults in the bearings that 
are measured in the mechanical system are installed 
artificially. The output from the accelerometer given 
to the data acquisition system of (NI myRIO 1900) 
attached with a PC having NI LabVIEW software is 
installed properly. Also, the rotational speed of the 
shaft is measured with a tachometer. Here, two sets 
of experiment are conducted, first with the healthy 
and second with the defective bearing installed in the 
mechanical system. If there is a fault in the inner/
outer raceway, the balls will pass over the defected 
area, which produces a vibration while rotating on 
the machine with a fixed frequency. This frequency 
is known as a characteristic frequency (fbng), which 
is associated with a different type of bearing faults. 
The mathematical calculation for finding out the fbng 
is given in equation (1).
4 VIBRATION SIGNAL ANALYSIS & 
PROGRAMMING
The input signal is coming from the piezoelectric 
sensor with a high frequency is processed with a 
Butterworth band pass filter in LabVIEW program. 
As a result the vibration signal is recovered. These 
data is in 3U (acceleration, velocity, displacement). 
For further analysis, data must be converted in DC 
RMS and at the same time, the system can analyze 
the filtered signals in both the time domain and the 
frequency domain. Here, Fast Fourier Transfor-
mation is applied for identifying the frequency at 
which the fault came. Which means that it informs 
how much amplitude of each frequency compo-
nent in the signal is used. The block diagram of the 
simulated system is illustrated in Figure 7.
5 MATHEMATICAL CALCULATION
5.1 Calculation for acceleration, velocity 
and displacement
All waveform graph indicators of ‘‘Y’’ scale provide 
the amplitude value for each signal or frequency. 
It is the real time signal but overall measurements 
using the Root Mean Square (RMS) are the most 
common vibration measurements used. It is impor-
tant to measure the true RMS not the mean.
peak
peak
peak
peak
RMS
M
=
−
=
2
707
&
.
peak × 0
Figure 5. Data acquisition card NI myRIO 1900.
Figure 6. System setup.
Figure 7. Block diagram of LabVIEW program.

66
The acceleration is obtained in inch/(sec)2 unit 
from mv/g as per following calculation.
1
386
2
2
386
g
f
32
=
2
32
/
f
2 eet
f
/
f
2 eet
f
2 eet
f
(sec)
.
/
1inch (sec)
It can be transferable in any terms like displace-
ment or velocity by following very easy steps.
5.2 Bearing frequency calculation
Two sets of experiments are conducted for this 
work. The first one is with the healthy bearing 
and second is with the defective bearings installed 
in the mechanical system. If there is fault on the 
inner/outer raceway, the rolling element passes 
over the defect point, which produces an impulse 
while rotating on the machine at a given frequency. 
This frequency is known as a characteristics fre-
quency, fbng is associated with different types of 
bearing faults. Due to the periodicity occurrence 
of the abnormal physical phenomenon related to 
the existence of the fault. Characteristics frequen-
cies are functions of the bearing geometry and the 
mechanical rotor frequency, the outer race fault 
frequency for vibration fbng is given as:
f
N
d
D
bng
f
b
i
N
nne
i
r
×
Nb
N
−
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
⎟
ωi
α
1
2
cos
 
(1)
where, Nb = Number of balls, ωinner = Shaft speed, 
d = Ball diameter, D = Pitch diameter, α = Contact 
angle of the bearing.
In the experiment it is found that:
Nb = 8, ωinner = 2800, rpm = 46.6 Hz, d = 6 mm, 
D = 25 mm, α = 0°
Now, f
Hz
H
bng
f
−
1
6
25
0
2
0
cos
Therefore, the fbng of a healthy bearing frequency 
must not be greater than 141.6 Hz.
6 RESULT AND DISCUSSION
Two bearings are tested for the real time experi-
ment. Out of the two bearings the condition of 
one bearing is good and the other one is bad. The 
result shows the clear difference in their vibration 
frequency. Figures 8, 9, and 10 shows the vibration 
signal in the form of acceleration, velocity, and dis-
placement, respectively.
From the acquired FFT spectrum shown in 
Figure 11 of the healthy bearing it is seen that the 
bearing frequency approximately around 60 Hz, 
which is less than the healthy bearing maximum 
Figure 8. Vibration Signal in the form of acceleration.
Figure 9. Vibration Signal in the form of velocity.
Figure 10. Vibration Signal in the form of displacement.
Figure 11. FFT Spectrum for the Healthy Bearing.

67
frequency 141.6 Hz. Hence, it is clear that the bear-
ing is healthy.
From the Figure 12 it is observed that the 
obtained FFT spectrum of the faulty bearing has 
the bearing frequency of approximately 340 Hz. 
Therefore, the frequency is greater than the healthy 
bearing maximum frequency 141.6 Hz. The scale 
is used as along x axis 1 small division = 10 Hz for 
the two FFT plots.
7 CONCLUSION
The project approaches systematically to meas-
ure the vibrational signal in the real time system. 
This measurement is automated with one button 
click. The computer acquires the data from the 
vibration sensor, and mathematical analysis is per-
formed in LabVIEW15 software. The information 
can be obtained about the velocity, acceleration, 
and displacement of vibration signal as well as its 
RMS values, which are very important in the fault 
diagnosis of the mechanical system. Users can 
also get frequency domain analysis (FFT). This 
feature is incorporated with the versatility of the 
LabVIEW vibration measurement tool box. Users 
can also diagnose the faulty bearing in compari-
son with the healthy bearing with the help of FFT 
spectrum generated from the vibrational signal 
of the bearing. Most important thing is that the 
acquired data allows for the simultaneous solution 
of the governing equation that describes the theo-
retical model. This fundamental research helps 
in building a real-time vibrational measurement 
system. Later on such a system may be upgraded 
to measure real time vibrational signals generated 
by industrial machinery, which will be useful in 
making key decisions for the maintenance of the 
machine.
REFERENCES
Asan Gani and M.J.E. Salami (2002). A LabVIEW based 
Data Acquisition System for Vibration Monitoring 
and Analysis. 2002 Student Conference on Research 
and Development Proceedings, Shah Alam, Malaysia.
Heta S. Shah, Pujaben N. Patel, Shashank P. Shah, and 
Manish T. Thakker. (2013). Channel Vibration Moni-
toring and Analyzing SystemUsing LabVIEW. (NUi-
CONE). http://www.ni.com/.
Ioan Liţă, Daniel Alexandru Vişan, and Ion Bogdan 
Cioc (2010). Virtual Instrumentation Application for 
Vibration Analysis in Electrical Equipments Testing. 
978-1-4244-7850-7/2010/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE, 33rd 
Int. Spring Seminar on Electronics Technology.
Sukhjeet Singh, Amit Kumar, and Navin Kumar (2014). 
Motor Current Signature Analysis for Bearing Fault 
Detection in Mechanical Systems. 3rd (ICMPC 2014), 
Procedia Materials Science 6. 171–177.
Zhao Hua. (2011). Application of LabVIEW in the 
Design of Data Acquisition and Signal Processing 
System of Mechanical Vibration. International Con-
ference on Mechatronic Science, Electric Engineering 
and Computer. Jilin, China.
Figure 12. FFT Spectrum for the Faulty Bearing.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

69
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Differential Biogeography Based Optimization applied to Load 
Frequency Control problem
Dipayan Guha
Dr. B.C.Roy Engineering College, Durgapur, West Bengal, India
Provas Kumar Roy
Jalpaiguri Government Engineering College, Jalpaiguri, West Bengal, India
Subrata Banerjee
National Institute of Technology-Durgapur, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: This present paper proposes a new stochastic optimization technique called Differential 
Biogeography Based Optimization (DBBO) for optimal and effective solution of Load Frequency Control 
(LFC) problem. DBBO is a hybridization of relatively new optimization algorithms namely Differential 
Evolution (DE) and Biogeography Based Optimization (BBO). To show the effectiveness, DBBO algo-
rithm is applied to the two-area nonlinear interconnected non-reheat thermal power system and dynamic 
stability of concerned power system is investigated considering 10% step load perturbation in area-1. 
Secondary controller gains are simultaneously optimized using DBBO employing Integral Time Absolute 
Error (ITAE) based fitness function. The performance of proposed controller is compared with original 
BBO, DE and other similar population based techniques. The simulation results show that DBBO can 
significantly improve the dynamic performance of concerned power system compared to BBO, DE and 
other optimization techniques.
pose. The growth in size and complexity of power 
systems have necessitated the use of an intelligent 
system that combines the knowledge, techniques 
and methodologies from various sources for real 
time control of power system. In this context, vari-
ous meta-heuristic stochastic population based 
optimization techniques like hybrid bacteria for-
aging optimization algorithm—particle swarm 
optimization (BFOA-PSO) [3], BBO [4], craziness 
based PSO [9], Differential Evolution (DE) [10], 
BFOA [11], oppositional BBO [12] etc. have been 
proposed in LFC system. These algorithms have 
emerged as efficient computational tools for solv-
ing LFC problem in the power system.
The said optimization techniques pertaining 
to the tuning of LFC parameters suffer from the 
heavy computational burden and premature con-
vergence, which results in degradation of search 
capability and computational ability. Further, in 
the line of ‘no-free-lunch’ theorem, there are no 
meta-heuristic optimization techniques well suited 
for all optimization problems. In other words, the 
existing algorithms may give satisfactory results in 
solving some problems but not all.
Having knowledge of the aforesaid discussion, 
an attempt has been made in this article to design 
1 INTRODUCTION
Modern interconnected power system network is 
made up with several control areas and these areas 
are interconnected by tie-line. For satisfactory oper-
ation of the power system, there should be a balance 
between real power generation and load demand. It 
is well known that power system is always subjected 
to load variations, which may result in deviation 
of area frequency and tie-line interchange power 
from their scheduled values. In this aspect, Load 
 Frequency Control (LFC) plays a vital role to main-
tain frequency and tie-line power flow at their nom-
inal values. The function of LFC can be viewed as 
a regulatory control function which tries to match 
the generation trend within an area to the trend of 
the randomly changing load, so as to keep balance 
between total power generation and load demand 
under normal and disturbed conditions.
Literature survey reveals that LFC has received 
the great attention of the researchers over the last 
few decades in order to improve dynamic stability 
of power system. Different control strategies like 
conventional [1–4], robust [5], fractional order con-
troller [6], fuzzy logic controller [7], artificial neural 
network [8] etc. have been proposed for this pur-

70
an effective and optimal solution of LFC problem 
employing a novel hybrid optimization method, 
called Differential Biogeography Based Optimiza-
tion (DBBO). In this paper, DE method is included 
in original BBO to improve the computational effi-
cacy and convergence performance of original BBO. 
To demonstrate the ability of DBBO algorithm, an 
extensively used two-area non-reheat thermal power 
system with Generation Rate Constraint (GRC) is 
designed and 10% step load perturbation is given in 
area-1 to investigate the dynamic performance.
2 MATERIAL AND METHODS
2.1 System under study
A widely employed two-area non-reheat thermal 
power plant [2, 3] as depicted in Figure 1 is con-
sidered for design and analysis purpose. Each area 
has rating of 2000 MW with nominal loading of 
1000 MW. The relevant system parameters are 
available in [3].
The appropriate value of GRC of the steam tur-
bine is included in the system modeling. In prac-
tical power system situation, power generations 
can only change at a specified maximum limit and 
therefore, GRC is always considered with steam 
turbine, otherwise system will experience large 
momentary disturbances that may cause instabil-
ity in power system network. The limiting value of 
GRC in the thermal power plant is 2–5% [2].
2.2 Controller structure and objective function
To control the frequency and tie-line power flow, 
an optimal Proportional-Integral (PI) controller is 
designed using DBBO and provided in each area. 
The error inputs to the controller are the respective 
Area Control Errors (ACE) given by:
ACE
B
C
f
P
ACE
B
C
f
P
tie
tie
1
1
E
1
1
f
P
f
ti
P e 2
2
2
E
B
E
B
2
1
f
P
f
ti
P e 2
B1
B
B2
B
Δf
Δf
,
,
 
(1)
The controlled inputs (
)
u u
1
2u
 to the plant with 
PI-controller structure is defined as follows:
u
K ACE
K
ACE dt
u
K ACE
K
ACE dt
p
i
C
p
i
ACE
1
K p
1
Ki
K
1
E
2
K p
K
2
Ki
E
K
2
E
+
K ACE
ACE
1
K p
K
1
E
+
K ACE
ACE
2
K p
K
2
E
∫
∫
 
(2)
where Kp and Ki are proportional and integral 
gains of PI-controller, respectively. The proposed 
DBBO algorithm is employed to search optimal 
settings of said controller through minimization of 
 Integral Time Multiplied Absolute Error (ITAE) 
based fitness function, which is defined as follows:
J
t
dt
ITAE
J
t
Tfinal
T
(
)
f
f
Pti
P e
=∫
f
f
+
f
f
+
f
0
* *
t
 
(3)
The design problem can be formulated as an 
optimization problem which is controller param-
eters bounds. Thus, the optimization problem with 
DBBO tuned PI-controller is defined as follows:
Minimize J:
Subjected to: Kp,min ≤ Kp ≤ Kp,max ; Ki,min ≤ Ki ≤ Ki,max
For the present study, PI-controller gains are 
optimally selected between [−1, 1].
3 DIFFERENTIAL BIOGEOGRAPHY 
BASED OPTIMIZATION
BBO, proposed by Simon in 2008 [13], is a relatively 
new optimization technique entered in the domain 
EA’s based on the science of biogeography. Bioge-
ography can easily be defined as the study of dis-
tribution of species in nature. The BBO algorithm 
simulates the emigration and immigration of spe-
cies between islands, where each island represents a 
candidate solution for the optimization problems. 
The main feature of BBO is that the original popu-
lation is maintained from one generation to another 
generation. The original BBO suffers from the lack 
of diversity, slow convergence rate, premature con-
vergence and easily get trapped in local minima. 
One possible way of improving convergence speed 
and computational ability of BBO is the hybridiza-
tion with another algorithm. In this case, DE algo-
rithm can be effectively employed since it is simple, 
fast, easy to use and ease of comprehensibility [14]. 
In this hybrid method, both DE and BBO share a 
Figure 1. Transfer function model of concerned two-
area thermal power system.

71
single population. The process will start by acti-
vating DE algorithm which updates the solution 
at first and then transfer to the control of BBO. 
BBO performs migration and mutation operation 
on the generated population and selects the fittest 
solution based on their fitness value. The newly 
generated solution competes to its parent solution 
in order to enhance the convergence rate of BBO. 
Additionally, the fittest solutions will be copied to 
the next generation to replace the worst ones. The 
candidate solutions provided by BBO are then used 
by DE for the next generation. For more details 
regarding DBBO, readers are referred to [14].
4 DBBO APPLIED TO LFC SYSTEM
In this article, a hybrid optimization technique 
called Differential Biogeography-Based Optimiza-
tion (DBBO) has been proposed for the first time 
to solve LFC problem in the power system. In this 
section, different algorithmic steps of DBBO tech-
nique applied to LFC system are enumerated as 
follows:
Step 1 
 Randomly generate initial population 
within the search space.
Step 2 
 Compute the fitness value of individual 
population using (3) and sort the popula-
tion from best to worst.
Step 3 
 Update current population (Xi) accord-
ing to DE updating strategy as described 
in [14].
Step 4 
 Map fitness value to the number of 
species.
Step 5 
 Calculate emigration and immigration 
rate for individual population using BBO.
Step 6 
 Perform migration and mutation on indi-
vidual population as described in [13]. 
Step 7 
 Calculate fitness value using (3) of the 
newly updated population Mi.
Step 8 
 If, f(Mi) < f(Xi); then select Mi be the cur-
rent population. Otherwise, go to step 3 
until the termination criterion is met. 
5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To show the ability of proposed DBBO algorithm 
to cope with nonlinear interconnected power system 
with different PI-coefficients, an extensively used [2, 
3] two-area non-reheat thermal power plant is con-
sidered for investigation. Initially, the linear model of 
test system, as shown in Figure 1, is studied excluding 
GRC of steam turbine and then the steam turbine 
nonlinearity is included in the system modeling. The 
simulations were performed on an Intel core (TM) 
i3 processor 2.4 GHz and 2 GB memory computer 
in the Matlab 7.8.0 (R2009a) environment. For the 
present analysis, 50 population size and maximum 
50 iterations are considered. The comparative con-
vergence performance of DBBO, BBO, and DE is 
shown in Figure 2. It is clearly viewed from Figure 2 
that proposed DBBO takes 35–40 iterations to reach 
the optimal point, which justifying the choice of 
maximum iterations of 50 for the present study.
To demonstrate the superiority of proposed 
DBBO algorithm, an extensive comparative analy-
sis have been performed with original BBO, DE, 
hBFOA-PSO, BFOA, PSO, and GA for the similar 
test system with identical controller structure. The 
optimum controller gains, minimum fitness value 
and settling time of frequency and tie-line power 
oscillations with and without GRC are presented 
in Tables 1–2. The dynamic performances of con-
Figure 2. Convergence characteristic of different 
algorithms.
Table 1. Controller gains, fitness value and settling time of frequency and tie-line power excluding GRC.
EA’s
Controller gains (–ve)
ITAE value
Settling time
Kp1
Ki1
Kp2
Ki2
Δf1
Δf2
ΔPtie
:PI
0.2790
0.5406
0.7502
0.0008
0.8714
4.60
5.28
5.89
BBO:PI
0.2746
0.5944
0.1497
0.0109
0.8968
5.72
6.57
6.15
DE:PI
0.2884
0.6370
0.7173
0.0015
0.9324
5.47
5.38
6.05
hBFOA-PSO
0.3317
0.4741
0.3317
0.4741
1.1865
7.39
7.65
5.73
BFOA
0.3317
0.4741
0.3317
0.4741
1.8379
5.52
7.09
6.35
PSO
0.3597
0.4756
0.3597
0.4756
1.2142
7.37
7.82
5.0
GA
0.2346
0.2662
0.2346
0.2662
2.7475
10.6
11.4
9.37

72
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, a hybrid optimization technique 
called differential biogeography based optimiza-
tion is designed and implemented in the power sys-
tem to solve LFC problem. The proposed DBBO 
algorithm is used to search optimal settings of PI-
controller employing ITAE based fitness function. 
To establish the superiority of DBBO, the static 
and dynamic responses are compared with other 
similar population based optimization methods. 
The result reveals that proposed DBBO provide 
better transient as well as steady state response 
and increased stability margin when compared 
with other similar population based optimization 
techniques.
Figure 3. Comparative dynamic performances of con-
cerned power system after 10% SLP in area-1.
Figure 4. Comparative dynamic performances of con-
cerned power system after 10% SLP in area-1 in the pres-
ence of GRC.
cerned power system without GRC are presented in 
Figure 3. For better comparison, the system dynam-
ics with original BBO, DE, hBFOA-PSO [3], and 
BFOA [3] are also given in Figure 3. Critical obser-
vation of Figure 3 and Table 1 shows that proposed 
DBBO tuned PI-controller yields greater system 
performance in terms of settling time, fitness value.
In the second phase of study, GRC of steam 
turbine is included in the system and its impact 
on the dynamic stability of power system has been 
studied. The dynamic responses of concerned 
power system with GRC are depicted in Figure 4 
and setting time of frequency and tie-line power 
oscillations are given in Table 2. Critical analysis 
of Table 2 shows that proposed DBBO tuned PI-
controller outperforms original BBO and DE.
Table 2. Controller gains, fitness value and settling time of frequency and tie-line power including GRC.
EA’s
Controller gains (–ve)
ITAE value
Settling time
Kp1
Ki1
Kp2
Ki2
Δf1
Δf2
ΔPtie
DBBO:PI
0.2846
0.6413
0.6739
0.0019
0.8731
5.79
6.57
6.97
BBO:PI
0.2805
0.6580
0.6277
0.0013
0.9526
5.80
6.61
7.13
DE:PI
0.2788
0.7028
0.5253
0.0010
0.9970
8.62
7.72
12.4

73
REFERENCES
 [1] Nanda, J., Mishra, S. & Saikia L.C. 2009. Maiden 
Application of Bacterial Foraging-Based Optimiza-
tion Technique in Multiarea Automatic Generation 
Control. IEEE Trans Power Sys 24(2): 602–609.
 [2] Sahu, R.K., Panda, S. & Padhan, S. 2015. A hybrid 
firefly algorithm and pattern search technique for 
automatic generation control of multi-area power 
systems. Int. J Elect Power Energy Sys 64: 9–23.
 [3] Panda, S., Mohanty, B. & Hota, P.K. 2013. Hybrid 
BFOA–PSO algorithm for automatic generation 
control of linear and nonlinear interconnected 
power systems. Applied Soft Comput13: 4718–30.
 [4] Guha, D., Roy, P.K. & Banerjee, S. 2014. Optimal 
Design of Superconducting Magnetic Energy Stor-
age Based Multi-Area Hydro-Thermal System 
Using Biogeography Based Optimization. In Proc. 
Int.Conf of Emerging Appl of Inform Tech ISI Kolk-
ata, 52–57.
 [5] Hosseini, H., Tousi, B., Razmjooy, N., & Khalilpour, 
M. 2013. Design Robust Controller for Automatic 
Generation Control in Restructured Power System 
by Imperialist Competitive Algorithm. IETE J of 
Res 59(6): 745–52.
 [6] Pan. I. & Das, S. 2015. Fractional-order load-fre-
quency control of interconnected powersystems 
using chaotic multi-objective optimization. Appl 
Soft Comp 29: 328–44.
 [7] Prakash, S. & Sinha, S.K. 2015. Neuro-Fuzzy Com-
putational Technique to Control Load Frequency 
in Hydro-Thermal Interconnected Power System. J. 
Inst. Eng. India Ser. B96(3):273–282
 [8] Saxena S.C., Kumar, V. & Waghmare, L.M. 2002. 
Cascade Control of Interconnected System Using 
Neural Network. IETE J of Res 48(6): 461–69.
 [9] Gozde, H. & Taplamacioglu, M.C. 2011. Automatic 
generation control application with craziness based 
particle swarm optimization in a thermal power sys-
tem. Int. J Elect Power Energy Sys 33: 8–16.
 [10] Padhan, S., Sahu, R.K. & Panda, S. 2014. Auto-
matic generation control with thyristor control-
led series compensator including superconducting 
magnetic energy storage units. Ain Shams Engg J 5: 
759–774.
 [11] Guha, D., Roy, P.K. & Banerjee, S. 2015. Opposi-
tional Biogeography Based Optimization Applied to 
SMES and TCSC Based Load Frequency Control 
with Generation Rate Constraints and Time delay. 
Int. J Power Energy Conversion (in press).
 [12] Ali, E.S. & Abd-Elazim, S.M. 2013. BFOA based 
design of PID controller for two-area Load Fre-
quency Control with nonlinearities. Elect Power 
Energy Sys 51: 224–31.
 [13] Saimon, D. 2008. Biogeography based optimiza-
tion. IEEE Trans Evolutionary Computation 12(6): 
702–713.
 [14] Boussaid, I., Chatterjee, A., Siarry, P. & Ahmed-
Nacer, M. 2011. Two-stage update biogeography-
based optimization using differential evolution 
algorithm (DBBO). Computers Operation Res 38: 
1188–98.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

75
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
suppression of XP radiation compared to the 
maximum CP gain for excitation at different ports. 
However, all of these structures were quite bulky, 
and complex to design.
Recently, Defected Ground Structures (DGS) 
has been used increasingly in the RMAs for the 
suppression of XP radiation as suggested by 
(Kumar et al 2014, Ghosh et al. 2015). Using linear 
and bracketed DGS, around 15–25 dB of CP-XP 
ratio is found. However, the use of DGS influences 
an increase in the back radiation in terms of XP 
radiation from the RMA.
Some works (Lee et al. 2000, Wong et al. 2005) 
show completely new configurations of the micro-
strip patches, where the patch element was short-
ened with the ground plane. But those do not deal 
with the polarization purity of RMP. A recent 
paper (Ghosh et al. 2014) presents a CRMA with 
grounded non-radiating edges intended to achieve 
around 32–34 dB CP-XP ratio in the H plane 
with a nearly equal XP suppression in E-plane. 
Nevertheless, in case of the proposed structure 
by (Ghosh et al. 2014) the resonant frequency 
is shifted to the higher side of the spectrum by 
around 30%. This increases the antenna size and 
seems to be difficult to integrate it with the mod-
ern miniaturized wireless devices. Moreover, the 
proposed antenna (Ghosh et al. 2014) shows poor 
bandwidth of around 5%. Following Ghosh et al. 
2014, another very recent report (Poddar et al.) 
shows the conventional structure with three shorts 
at non radiating edges for low XP with a broad 
Wide beam microstrip patches with grounded E-shaped edges to 
improve the polarization purity
Subhradeep Chakraborty
Department of ECE, Siliguri Institute of Technology, Siliguri, West Bengal, India
Sir J.C. Bose School of Engineering, Department of ECE, Mankundu, West Bengal, India
Rakshapada Poddar & Sudipta Chattopadhyay
Department of ECE, Siliguri Institute of Technology, Siliguri, West Bengal, India
Raktim Guha
Sir J.C. Bose School of Engineering, Department of ECE, Mankundu, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Rectangular microstrip patch with grounded E shaped edges are proposed for wide radia-
tion beam along with an improved polarization performance. Around 64° and 98° of the 3 dB beam 
width is obtained in E and H plane, respectively. Moreover, the proposed structure exhibits excellent cross 
polarization isolation compared to peak co polarization gain. The measured results are theoretically justi-
fied with simulations and excellent agreement between them has been revealed.
1 INTRODUCTION
In the present state of the art research of wireless 
communication technologies, Rectangular Micro-
strip Patch (RMP) is one of the most explored 
type of planar antennas. A Conventional RMP 
(CRMP) exhibits a number of attractive features 
like small size, light weight, compatibility with 
MMICs, conformability to the curved surface 
along with moderate radiation performance (Garg 
et al. 2001). However, a CRMA often suffers from 
its poor polarization purity (less co-polarization 
to cross polarization ratio or CP-XP ratio) of the 
radiated field at the far-field, which limits its use in 
various practical applications where wide coverage 
is required over a wide elevation angle (Guha et al. 
2011). The XP radiation is very much pronounced 
in the H plane than in the E plane, as found in the 
open literature (Garg et al. 2001). It affects the 
polarization purity (CP-XP ratio) significantly. 
Thus, the improvement of CP-XP ratio of RMAs 
is of a very great importance and it is probably one 
of the decisive factors for the use of RMAs.
Some investigations on the modified structure 
of a conventional patch antenna were reported 
by (Loffler et al. 1999, Granholm et al. 2001) for 
the XP radiation reduction. Around 13 to 20 dB 
of CP-XP isolation is obtained from those. A sin-
gle microstrip antenna with an air substrate with 
a complex feeding mechanism was presented by 
(Chiou et al. 2002), where the structure produced 
a dual polarization, along with 25 dB and 23 dB 

76
impedance bandwidth. However, the CP radiation 
beams are not improved in that work. The H plane 
beam width is only 50° with a distorted E plane 
beam, which is obtained from the paper (Poddar 
et al.).
Therefore, in order to circumvent the shortcom-
ings, a RMP with grounded E shaped non radiat-
ing edges is proposed. Around 30–40 dB of CP-XP 
isolation over a wide angular range along with the 
broad H plane beam width is evident from the pro-
posed structure.
2 PROPOSED STRUCTURE
The proposed configuration of the RMP with 
grounded E shaped non radiating edges is shown 
in Figure 1, and the value of the different param-
eters of the proposed RMP is presented in Table 1. 
It is a fact that in a thin CRMP some higher order 
orthogonal modes resonate along the width of the 
patch, which contribute significantly in XP radia-
tions. In order to perturb the field distribution of 
these modes the two slots (dimensions lc × wc) are 
cut on the non-radiating edges of the patch. It rup-
tures the higher order mode distribution beneath 
the patch without affecting the dominant mode field 
pattern. Now, the non radiating edges are shorted 
with very thin strips of metal (copper) (dimensions 
ls × 0.5 mm) to the ground plane. It completely miti-
gates the higher order mode field distribution.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A Pair of prototypes (CRMP and proposed 
grounded E-shaped RMP) with the dimensions 
mentioned in the Table 2. have been utilized for the 
Table 1. Detail parameters of the proposed RMA on 60 
mm × 60 mm ground plane. Substrate thickness h = 1.575 
mm, εr = 2.33. (All dimensions are in mm).
L
W
ls
lc
wc
ρ
8.5
12.75
   0.5
3.2
5
0.8
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the proposed 
microstrip patch (top view).
Figure 2. Measured reflection coefficient profile for 
conventional and proposed RMP.
Figure 3a. Measured and Simulated H plane radiation 
pattern of conventional and proposed RMP.
Table 2. Simulated and Measured half power beam 
width of the conventional and proposed patch.
Structure
3 dB beam width
E plane
H plane
Simulated Measured Simulated Measured
Conventional 61°
66°
63°
64°
Present
64°
68°
91°
94°

77
Table 2, it is evident that the 3dB beam width of the 
proposed RMP is 47% more wider than that of a 
CRMP. The zoomed view of a substrate field dis-
tribution has been explored in Figure 4. The close 
inspection of the figure shows that there is a signifi-
cant asymmetry in the field distribution in the H 
plane, while in the E plane appreciable asymmetry is 
not seen. This may be attributed for the wide beam 
in the H plane.
4 CONCLUSION
A simple and new grounded E shaped patch is pro-
posed for the wide beam and improved cross polari-
zation performance. It finds potential applications 
in the field of wireless communication where wide 
beam and improved polarization purity is required. 
However, more investigations are required with 
such structures for more improved radiations and 
bandwidth performances.
REFERENCES
Chiou, T.W., Wong, K-L. 2002 Broad-Band Dual-Polar-
ized Single Microstrip Patch Antenna With High Iso-
lation and Low Cross Polarization IEEE Transactions 
on Antennas And Propagation 50(3): 399–401.
Garg, R., Bhartia, P., Bhal, I. and Ittipibun, A. 2001 
Microstrip Antenna Design Handbook, Norwood, 
Artech House.
Ghosh, A., Ghosh, D., Chattopadhyay, S., Singh, L. L. 
K. 2015 Rectangular Microstrip Antenna on Slot 
Type Defected Ground for Reduced Cross Polarized 
Radiation IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation 
Letters 14: 321–324.
Ghosh, D., Ghosh, S.K., Chattopadhyay, S., Nandi, S., 
Chakraborty, D., Anand, R., Raj, R. and Ghosh, 
A. 2014 Physical and Quantitative Analysis of Com-
pact Rectangular Microstrip Antenna with Shorted 
Figure 3b. Measured and Simulated H plane radiation 
pattern of conventional and proposed RMP.
present investigation. The simulated and measured 
results are documented in the same plot for com-
parison. From the reflection co-efficient profile, it is 
found that both the conventional and the proposed 
structures resonate near 10 GHz (Figure 2). The 
complete radiation patterns of the CRMP and the 
proposed antenna at the resonating frequency are 
presented in Figure 3. For CRMP, H plane XP level 
is appreciable near the broadside direction with the 
peak XP level of −10 dB near ±50° (Figure 3a). On 
the contrary, when the non-radiating edges of the 
CRMP are shaped like ‘E’, the fields resonating 
along the width of the patch are perturbed signifi-
cantly. Moreover, shorting the E-shaped edges com-
pletely nullifies the corresponding field distribution 
and mitigates the radiation from those edges.
Consequently, the improvement of the XP per-
formance due to the modification of a conven-
tional patch structure is clear from the Figure 3a. 
The H plane XP pattern is suppressed by around 
20 dB compared to the CRMP as is observed from 
Figure 3a. High CP-XP isolation of more than 
30 dB for the present antenna is found for whole 
±180° angular range (Figure 3a) Excellent agree-
ment between simulated and measured results 
are apparent from the figure. In E plane, signifi-
cant suppression in the XP radiation is observed 
with the proposed structure compared to CRMP 
Figure 3b. However, in both the cases, E plane 
XP level is below −30 dB. Nevertheless, Figure 3 
depicts improved polarization purity in both of the 
principle planes for proposed RMP.
It is also evident from Figure 3a that the radiated 
beam becomes broader in the H plane, compared 
to the E plane for the proposed RMP. Wide beam 
in the H plane is obviously beneficial for a wide 
angular coverage in wireless communication. From 
Figure 4. Substrate field distribution for proposed 
patch at the dominant mode.

78
Non-Radiating Edges for Reduced Cross-Polarized 
Radiation Using Modified Cavity Model IEEE Anten-
nas and Propagation Magazine 56(4): 61–72.
Granholm, J., Woelders, K. 2001 Dual Polarization 
Stacked Microstrip Patch Antenna Array With Very 
Low Cross-Polarization IEEE Transactions on Anten-
nas And Propagation 49(10): 1393–1402.
Guha, D., Antar, Y. M. M. (Eds) 2011 Microstrip and 
Printed Antennas—New Trends, Techniques and 
 Applications, U.K, John Wiley.
High Frequency Structure Simulator, v 14.
Kumar, C. and Guha, D. 2014 DGS integrated Rectangu-
lar microstrip patch for improved polarization purity 
with wide impedance bandwidth IET Microwave, 
Antennas & Propagation 8(8): 589–596.
Lee, K.F., Guo, Y.X., Hawkins, J.A., Chair, R. and Luk, 
K.M. 2000 Theory and experiment on microstrip patch 
antennas with shorting walls IEE Proceedings Micro-
waves, Antennas and Propagation 147(6): 521–525.
Loffler, D., Wiesbeck, W. 1999 Low-cost X-polarised 
broadband PCS antenna with low cross-polarisation 
Electronics Letters 35(20): 1689–1691.
Poddar, RP., Chakraborty, S., Chattopadhyay, S. 
Improved Cross Polarization and Broad Impedance 
Bandwidth from Simple Single Element Shorted Rec-
tangular Microstrip Patch: Theory and Experiment, 
Frequenz (In press).
Wong, K. L. 2005 Internal Shorted Patch Antenna for a 
UMTS Folder-Type Mobile Phone, IEEE Transactions 
on Antennas And Propagation 53(10): 3391–3394.

79
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Smooth sliding mode control of a nonlinear CSTR using an inverse 
hyperbolic function-based law
Abhinav Sinha
TATA Consultancy Services Limited, Pune, Maharashtra, India
Rajiv Kumar Mishra
School of Electronics Engineering, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology (KIIT University), 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
ABSTRACT: A Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) is a typical example of an industrial equip-
ment for chemical processes that exhibit dynamics of a second order nonlinear system. Nonlinear and 
coupled nature of CSTR poses a challenge in the design of the robust control with a large operating 
region. Industrial processes require a good state estimation and disturbance rejection. Under parameter 
variations and fast changing dynamics, a sliding mode controller is presented in this work to provide 
robustness to the system in a very short time. Unlike traditional controllers with a fixed gain, this control-
ler is based on an inverse hyperbolic function whose gain is a nonlinear and variable depending on the 
value of the function. The stability of the controller has been proved using the Lyapunov method. Robust-
ness has been confirmed using numerical simulations.
tainties are assumed to be bounded. Alvarez- Rami-
rez (1994) showed that global stability can’t be 
achieved when approximation is made using local 
linearization. Other methods include complete or 
partial feedback linearization of the system dynam-
ics. Input-output feedback linearization was a widely 
used approach earlier, but it requires full measure-
ment of states (Colantonio, Desages, Romagnoli, and 
Palazoglu 1995) by input-output feedback. This is 
practically not possible owing to the difficulties in the 
measurement of the concentration of the reactants 
directly online. A possible control strategy, which is 
nonlinear in nature, was proposed by Kravaris and 
Arkun (1991). The approach involves modifying the 
dynamics of the system to make it a pole assignment 
problem. This method is known as a linearization 
of the dynamics (Colantonio, Desages, Romagnoli, 
and Palazoglu 1995) and incorporates state coordi-
nate transformation for a linear input-state behavior. 
The problem of the unmeasured states was tackled 
using the design of observers (Wu, 2000, Chen and 
Peng, 2004, Pan et al., 2007, Graichen et al., 2009, Di 
Ciccio et al., 2011, Hoang et al., 2012 and Antonelli 
and Astolfi, 2003). Although, guaranteed asymp-
totic stability seems promising but the effect of dis-
turbance remains overlooked. Advanced industrial 
chemical processes like alkylation of benzene with 
ethylene, requires a faster response (Zhao, Zhu, and 
Dubbeldam 2014) and robustness of a high degree. 
Disturbance creeping is strictly undesirable in the 
mentioned scenario. Under continuous perturba-
1 INTRODUCTION
A Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) is 
a benchmark equipment in many industries that 
requires a continuous addition and withdrawal of 
reactants and products. A CSTR may be assumed 
to be somewhat opposite of an idealized well-stirred 
batch and tubular plug-flow reactors. CSTRs are 
incorporated to achieve an optimal productivity of 
a chemical process by maintaining high conversion 
rates and thus maximize economy. This chemical 
process exhibits a nonlinear dynamic behavior dur-
ing a process start-up, shutdown, and during upsets 
in steady state conditions. These dynamics are unfa-
vorable and need to be modified by a control action 
that provides a robustness to it. This process is non-
linear in nature and hence dynamical modelling, 
control, simulation, and controller tuning requires 
substantial effort. Earlier control strategies like PID 
(Ray 1981) and feedback linearization (Yayong 
Zhai 2012) lack the versatility to compensate the 
complexities of the dynamic process. Several linear 
methods of control have been proposed in literature 
to maintain stability and achieve robustness but 
they fail to provide performance of a high degree. 
Operation of these controllers are restricted to a 
linear regime and yield suboptimal results when 
they are operated outside their linear limits.
Kravaris and Palanki (1998) and Morari and 
Zafiriou (1989) developed a linear controller using 
Taylor’s linearization for the system whose uncer-

80
tions, observer design approach to control such a 
nonlinear process ceases to yield optimal results. 
Providing a high gain controller may achieve faster 
response but it can also lead to an unwanted control 
effort saturation (Zhao, Zhu, and Dubbeldam 2014), 
especially, when the initial track error is very large. 
This also lacks safety in such an environment and 
is not permissible. The choice of system outputs is 
considered in practical applications posing limita-
tions on the controller design using these methods. 
In many cases, the actual nonlinear system fails to 
get linearized completely and there remains a part 
of the transformed system, which is nonlinear (Kra-
varis and Arkun, 1991). This part has now some zero 
dynamics as its dynamic properties and it can’t be 
ignored in the design of the controller and can pre-
clude the satisfactory process response (Colantonio, 
Desages, Romagnoli, and Palazoglu 1995). Under 
continuous perturbations, the above strategies fail to 
provide robustness and high performances. Hence, 
the system calls for a nonlinear controller that can 
provide a high degree of robustness. Adaptive and 
fuzzy techniques can also be applied to such a prob-
lem but they have to be combined with other control 
techniques to yield optimal performances. The main 
reason behind this is inspite of being a non-model 
based control and providing a good approximation 
to hard nonlinearities, they are not able to cope up 
very fast with the changing dynamics. Hence, we 
propose a Sliding Mode Control (SMC) to achieve 
a control scheme, which fully accounts for model 
uncertainties and matched parameter variations. 
SMC is a variable structure control composed of 
independent structures and a switching logic (Zak 
2003). The advantage of using this control is that 
we can tailor the system of dynamical behavior by 
a particular choice of the sliding function. However, 
high frequency oscillations are also referred to as 
chattering (K. David Young, Vadim I. Utkin and 
Umit Ozguner 1999), which comes into picture when 
this discontinuous control (K. David Young, Vadim 
I. Utkin and Umit Ozguner 1999) is used. This can 
excite unmodeled parameters and can cause serious 
damage to the actuators and plant dynamics. This 
arises due to the use of signum function in the con-
trol law and its discontinuous nature. Hence, chat-
tering reduction (Levant 1993) is also a problem 
to be considered in the design of the controller. In 
this work, we have used a reaching law based on the 
Inverse Hyperbolic Function (IHF) to formulate our 
control law.
2 REACTOR DESCRIPTION
The mathematical model of the system is nonlin-
ear due to the presence of exponential terms. The 
model (Yayong Zhai 2012), as obtained from the 
theory of thermodynamics and chemical kinetics, 
is presented here.
C
Q
V
t
k C
e
a
a
C
V
a
a
t
k C
E
RT
=
−
(
(
C
C
a
C
a
C
C
( )t
( )
t
0
0
k
 
(1)
T
Q
V
t
kC
e
k Q
t
a
C
c
c
Q
E
RT
k
=
+k Qc
Q
−
(
(
T
T
T
( )t
( )t [
]
e
Qc
Q
−
(
(
T
T
c
T
))
t
0
1
t
kk
(
T
T
T
))
k
1
3
k
0
 
(2)
The above model is based on the complex nonlin-
ear chemical reaction system of CSTR. Under the 
assumption of complete mixing, the reactor is get-
ting cooled continuously and the volume of the out-
put chemical product (B) is equal to the volume of 
the input reactant (A). Also, this reactor is supposed 
to exhibit an irreversible exothermic reaction A→B.
In the above model, the symbols hold the 
 following significance.
Ca
C : Concentration of resultant B
T( )t : Reactor temperature
Ca
C
0: Feed concentration
T0
T : Feed temperature
Q: Feed flow rate
Qc
Q ( )t : Coolant flow rate
Tc
T
0: Coolant temperature
However, for our computational purpose, we 
have adopted the following state space model, as 
found in (Colantonio, Desages, Romagnoli, and 
Palazoglu 1995). This model is based on dimen-
sionless modeling for an exothermic first order 
reaction. Symbols have their usual meanings as 
provided in (W.H Ray 1991).
x
x
Da
exp
x
d
1
1x
1
2
2
2
d
1
+ Da
+
/
x2
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
−
(
)
x1
1−
1
γ
 
(3)
Dimensionless Parameters for CSTR
activation energy
γ =
/
E
R
/
T0
T
adiabatic temperature rise
B
c
Qc T
A f
p
f
T
=
(
)
H
−Δ
0
f
0
Damkohler number
Da
k exp
F
= k exp
0
0
k exp
F
/
(
)
V
−V
heat transfer coefficient
β =
/
hA Qc F
p
o
dimensionless time
t
t
o
′ / (
)
F
V
o /
F
dimensionless composition
x
c
A
A
f
f
A
A
1
0
0
f
f
f
f
/
(
)
c
c
A
A
cA
−
c
dimensionless temperature
x
T
f
f
T
2
0
0
f
(
)
T
Tf
T
−
T
dimensionless control input
u
T
c
f
T
(
)
T
Tc
T
−
T
0
0
f
feed temperature disturbance
d
T
T
f
f
f
T
1d
0
0
f
/
(
)
T
T
f
f
T
T
0
−
T
feed composition disturbance
d
c
c
A
A
f
f
A
f
2
d
0
0
f
f
/
(
)
c
c
A
A
c
f
A
−
c

81
x
x
BDa
exp
x
x
u
d
c
2
2
x
1
2
2
2
2
2
d
1
+ BDa
+
/
x2
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
−
u
(
)
x1
1
γ
β
β
c
2
2
+
u
(
)
(x
x
c
2
2
x
x
 
(4)
The dimensionless parameters for the above 
model are provided in the table below.
d1d  and d2
d  are disturbances in the inlet tempera-
ture and concentrations, respectively.
3 PROBLEM FORMULATION
The control objective is to develop a controller with 
accurate set point tracking and disturbance rejec-
tion in the process, such that the controlled output 
is satisfactory and acceptable. Also, the response is 
required to be quick.
The error candidate is defined as:
e
x
x
refe
−
x2
2
x
 
(5)
Our primary objective in achieving the stated is 
to stabilize the origin to the tracking error (Abhi-
nav Sinhaand Rajiv Kumar Mishra 2015). It is a 
prime requirement in the design process that the 
error approaches some small vicinity of zero after 
a transient of acceptable duration.
4 CONTROLLER DESIGN
The design of controller using sliding modes 
requires the choice of a manifold and a driving 
control to push the states onto the manifold ( Zak 
2003). The manifold under this study is a simple 
linear one, given by:
( )
σ
c
)
c x
=
+
c x
1
1x
2
2
x  
(6)
ci are the weighing parameters affecting system 
trajectory, and the performance of the system; 
whose values we have selected by minimizing the 
quadratic index. Only relative weights are of signif-
icance (Abhinav Sinha, Pikesh Prasoon, Prashant 
K. Bharadwaj and Anuradha C. Ranasinghe 2015), 
and hence any arbitrary choice of weight matrix Q 
can be taken as per design consideration.
The control effort u(t) is given by:
u
x exp
x
sinh
c
( )t
[
(
x
BDa
)
[x
=
−
+
/
x
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+
−
−
β −
γ
β
μ
d
s
c
(
)
(x
x
c
(x
−d
1
2
1x
(
BDa
2
2
2
2
x
2
d
1
1
1(
)]
|
|  (7)
This is a novel reaching law that reduces the 
reaching time as well as reduces the high frequency 
oscillations. This function is odd and monotonous, 
hence, it acts as a good switching candidate. This 
law causes the gain of the system to vary nonlin-
early. The gain is high when the states are away 
from the manifold and low at the time of the slid-
ing motion. It has been chosen in a way to ensure 
sliding motion. It should be noted that parameters 
m ≥ 0, μ > 0, and w > 0.
5 STABILITY ANALYSIS
Stability is the most important factor to be consid-
ered in any design problem. Analysis of the stabil-
ity has been carried out considering a Lyapunov 
candidate of 1
2
2
σ 2( ). Negative definiteness of this 
candidate ensures stability in Lyapunov sense. By 
a simple mathematical calculation, it can be eas-
ily shown that 

V( )
x =
<
σσ
0 for all μ > 0. Also, 
m
h
,
>
w
⇒
|
|
0
|
|
0
i h
i
⇒sinh
i
>
1(
(
(
(
w
+
m
)
Hence, the control law is stable in Lyapunov 
sense.
6 SIMULATION RESULTS
The plant model has been simulated in the ideal 
conditions using Mathworks MATLAB and 
Simulink and the disturbance is randomly gener-
ated. The variable x
c
2  is taken to be as 0. Following 
parametric values have been incorporated (Leonid 
Poslavsky and Jeffrey C. Kantor 1991).
Clearly, the response is quick as desired, as 
well as chattering is completely eliminated. The 
temperature reference has been set to 300 K and 
350 K in two tests. In both runs, the reference 
is tracked equally well. Steady state is reached 
in a very short span and the response does not 
deviate, thereby, guaranteeing robustness. The 
response has been shown in the Figure 1. The 
proposed controller provides advantages over 
the conventional PID and other linear control-
lers by reducing the time to reach steady state. 
For a controller using feedback linearization, 
e.g., (Yayong Zhai 2012), the response is shown 
in Figure 2. It can be seen that the response takes 
more than 0.5 sec to enter steady state. However, 
the system attains the same in 0.1 sec with the 
proposed controller.
Numerical values of parameters used in simulation
heat transfer coefficient
β
1.5
activation energy
γ
20
adiabatic temperature rise
B
11
Damkohler number
Da
0.135

82
7 CONCLUSION
A novel robust and nonlinear controller has been 
designed for a continuous stirred tank reactor. 
The model has been kept intact in its nonlinear 
form and no attempt of linearization was carried 
out. The controller has been designed based on the 
sliding mode control with the reaching law based 
on an inverse hyperbolic function. This reaching 
law has the advantage of reducing chattering as 
well as the reaching phase by varying the gain in a 
nonlinear fashion. The control law has been ana-
lyzed for the stability and results that were pre-
sented to demonstrate high performance of the 
controller. This controller is highly efficient and 
there is no need to increase the order of the sliding 
mode to achieve the same efficiency. Thus, physi-
cal complexity in the design has been simplified.
REFERENCES
Abhinav Sinha and Rajiv Kumar Mishra (2015, 
March). Robust altitude tracking of a miniature 
helicopter uav based on sliding mode. In IEEE 2nd 
International Conference on Innovations in Informa-
tion, Embedded and Communication Systems, Coim-
batore, India.
Abhinav Sinha, Pikesh Prasoon, Prashant K.Bharadwaj 
and Anuradha C. Ranasinghe (2015, Jan). Nonlinear 
autonomous control of a two-wheeled inverted pen-
dulum mobile robot based on sliding mode. In IEEE 
International Conference on Computational Intelli-
gence and Networks, Bhubaneswar, India.
Colantonio, M.C., A.C. Desages, J.K. Romagnoli, and 
A. Palazoglu (1995). Nonlinear control of a cstr: 
Disturbance rejection using sliding mode control. 
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 34(7), 
2383–2392.
David Young, K., Vadim I. Utkin and Umit Ozguner 
(1999, May). A control engineer’s guide to sliding 
mode control. IEEE transactions on Control Systems 
Technology 7(3), 328–342.
Leonid Poslavsky and Jeffrey C. Kantor (1991, June). 
Sliding mode control of an exothermic continuous 
stirred tank reactor. In American Control Conference, 
Boston, MA, USA.
Levant, A. (1993). Sliding order and sliding accuracy in 
sliding mode control. International Journal of Control 
58(6), 1247–1263.
Ray, W.H. (1981). Advanced Process Control. Mc-Graw 
Hill, New York.
Ray, W.H.,  Kravaris C., A.Y. (1991). Geometric Nonlin-
ear Control- An Overview, CPC IV. AIChE Publica-
tions, New York.
Yayong Zhai, S.M. (2012, July). Controller design for 
continuous stirred tank reactor based on feedback 
linearization. In 2012 Third International Conference 
on Intelligent Control and Information Processing, Dal-
ian, China.
Zak, S.H. (2003). Systems and Control. 198 Madison 
Avenue, New York, New York, 10016: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Zhao, D., Q. Zhu, and J. Dubbeldam (2014).Terminal 
sliding mode control for continuous stirred tank reac-
tor. Chemical Engineering Research and Design.
Figure 1. Temperature profile of the plant with pro-
posed controller.
Figure 2. Temperature profile of the plant with the 
controller based on feedback linearization.

83
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A unified FDTD approach in electromagnetics metamaterials
B. Mandal, S.K. Singh & A. Biswas
Faculty of Engineering and Technology, NSHM Knowledge Campus, Durgapur, West Bengal, India
Aritra Acharyya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
A. Ghosal
Institute of Radio Physics and Electronics, Calcutta University, West Bengal, India
A.K. Bhattacherjee
NIT Durgapur, West Bengal, India
D.P. Chakraborty
Techno India University, Saltlake City, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: This Paper presents the implementation of Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) tech-
nique for metamaterial structures with absorbing boundary condition. Finite Difference Time Domain 
(FDTD) technique can be used to model metamaterial by treating them as dispersive material. FDTD 
simulations will use the Convolutional Perfectly Matched Layer (CPML) to model the absorbing bound-
ary condition. CPML is used to absorb the outgoing EM waves in order to model free space calculation 
domain. The contribution of this work is toward the development of a powerful FDTD engine for mod-
ern metamaterial analysis. Our implementation could be used to improve the analysis of a number of 
electromagnetic problems.
which is the first study in this area and key to the 
advancement of recent researches in Electromag-
netic (EM) metamaterials (V.G. Veselago 1968). 
Metamaterial gain its properties from its structure 
rather than directly from its composition. For con-
ventional materials in nature, the basic unit is the 
constitutive molecules, which are of the order of 
the angstrom (0.1 nm) (K.Yee 1966). There are 
many ways to generate different effective permit-
tivity and permeability for a metamaterial. For 
example, changing host materials; varying the size, 
shape, and composition of the inclusions; chang-
ing the density, arrangement, and alignment of 
these inclusions (C. Argyropoulos et al. 2009). 
Materials with negative parameters are innately 
dispersive and their permittivity and permeability 
will alter with respect to frequency (K. Yee 1966). 
At the meanwhile, many new applications also use 
nonlinear and gain materials to tune the properties 
of the metamaterials. These degrees of freedom 
make the metamaterial tunable in its properties 
and thus provide us a variety of applications for 
metamaterial. Plasmonic metamaterials are nega-
tive index metamaterials and can be used to couple 
the incident light with the metal dielectric material 
1 INTRODUCTION
Metamaterial is periodic structures created by 
many identical scattering objects which are sta-
tionary and small compared to the wavelength of 
electromagnetic wave applied to it so that when 
combined with different elements, these materials 
have the potential to be coupled to the applied elec-
tromagnetic wave without modifying the structure. 
They are known by a number of names including 
negative index materials (because the refractive 
index is negative), DNG (double negative index 
materials as opposed to DPS double positive index 
materials), left-handed materials (the E and H 
fields and the wave vector k form a left-hand triad 
and as a consequence k and the Poynting vector S 
point in opposite directions in an isotropic mate-
rial). Due to their unusual properties that are not 
readily available in nature, metamaterial has been 
drawing significant attentions in many research 
areas, including theoretical, experimental as well 
as numerical investigations. Victor Veselago theo-
retically analyzed the propagation of plane wave 
in a material with both negative permittivity and 
negative permeability in his original research, 

84
to create self-sustaining, propagating electromag-
netic waves known as surface plasmon polaritons 
(J.A. Roden et al. 2000). Metamaterials can be inte-
grated with nonlinear media to provide the option 
to change the power of the incident wave, which 
overcomes the limitation of many common optical 
materials that have weak nonlinearity.
2 METHOD
The major computational electromagnetic mod-
eling 
method, 
Finite-difference 
time-domain 
technique tackles problems by providing a full 
wave solution. Since it naturally treats dispersive 
and nonlinear material, and covers a wide range 
frequencies in one single run, FDTD has been a 
primary means to numerically model scientific 
and engineering problems, like antennas, photonic 
crystals, transmission lines, circuit simulations and 
so on J.A. Roden et al. 1998). Thus all the classi-
cal electromagnetic as well as the computational 
electromagnetic methods are based on this set of 
equations. The equation 1 and 2 are the differen-
tial form of Ampere’s Law and Faraday equations, 
respectively. These two equations are used to solve 
numerical calculation in FDTD method.
∇×
=∈∂
∂
+
H
E
t
E
σE  
(1)
∇×
= −
∂
∂
E
H
t
μ
 
(2)
where E and H are the electric filed and magnetic 
field, respectively; ε and μ are the electrical per-
mittivity and magnetic permeability, respectively; 
σ is the electric conductivity loss; t is the time. 
The well-known Yee algorithm comes from Kane 
Yee’s publication in 1966 (P. H. Harms et al. 1997), 
which described the basis of the modern FDTD 
model to solve Maxwell’s curl equations in time 
domain. The special grid cell that Yee originally 
used is called Yee cell and it discreteness the three 
dimensional space into cubes.
As we can be seen from the Figure 1, electric fields 
are along the edges of the cube while the magnetic 
fields are located at the center of the cube’s 6 sur-
faces. Each unit cell has 12 electric fields and 6 mag-
netic fields. Since each electric field is shared by the 
adjacent 4 unit cells, each unit cell possesses 3 electric 
fields, namely Ex, Ey and Ez. Similar rule applies to 
magnetic fields and each unit cell possesses 3 mag-
netic fields, Hx, Hy and Hz. In a 3D point of view, 
each electric field E is surrounded by 4 circulating H 
fields, which interprets the Ampere’s Law. Similarly, 
every magnetic field H is surrounded by 4 circulating 
E fields, representing Faraday equation.
In three-dimensional case, each of these two 
vector equations Equation 1 and Equation 2 can 
be converted into 3 scalar equations, forming 6 sca-
lar equations.
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
−∂
∂
−
⎛
⎝⎜⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
−∂
∂
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
E
t
H
y
H
z
E
E
t
H
z
H
x
E
x
z
=
∂
⎛
⎜
⎛
E
H
y
H
x
E
y
E
x
z
∂
H
H
y
E
1
1
ε
σE
ε
σE
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
−∂
∂
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎫
⎬
⎪
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎬
⎪
⎭
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
⎪
E
t
H
x
H
y
E
z
E
y
H
x
H
z
E
1
ε
σE
 
(3)
∂
∂
= −
∂
∂
−∂
∂
+
⎛
⎝⎜⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∂
∂
= −
∂
∂
−∂
∂
+
⎛
⎝
H
t
E
y
E
z
H
H
t
E
z
E
x
H
x
z
=
∂
⎛
⎜
⎛
H
E
y
E
m
x
H
y
H
x
z
∂
E
E
m
y
H
1
1
μ
σ
μ
σ
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∂
∂
= −
∂
∂
−∂
∂
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎫
⎬
⎪
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎬
⎪
⎭
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎭
⎪
H
t
E
x
E
y
H
z
H
y
E
x
E
m
z
H
1
μ
σ
 
(4)
For a function f of space and time, such as
f(x,y,z,t) = f(iΔx, jΔy, kΔz, nΔt) = fn(i,j,k) 
(5)
where Δt is the time increment, Δx, Δy, Δz are the 
space increments; n is the time mark of current 
calculation, i, j and k denote the space location of 
current calculation, the differential form in time 
and space can be written as
∂
∂
≈
+
−
f x
∂
y z t
t
f
i j k
f
i j k
t
t n
=
t
n+
i
+
j k
,
x
,z )
f
+
, j
) −f
, j
)
Δ
Δ
1
1
 
(6)
∂
∂
≈
−
f x
∂
y z t
x
f
i
j k
j k
f
i
j k
x
x i
=
x
f
j
,
x
,z )
,
+
i +
i
)
k)
k
,
−
i
)
k
Δ
Δ
1
2
1
2
 
(7)
Figure 1. FDTD grid unit.

85
To make the time domain update for the above 
Maxwell’s equations of differential form, similar 
manipulations are applied. Those scalar equations 
from Equation 3 and Equation 4, taking Ex and 
Hx for example, can be written as
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
1 , , )
(
)
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
, )
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
)
1
1
2
2
2
2
1 , )
2
..
1
( , ,
)
..
1
2
n 1
1
x
2
n
1
1
z
2
2
n
1
1
y
2
2
n
y
n
z
E
i
j k
CA m
E
i
j k
CB m
(
, , )
(
)
(
, , )
(
, , )
(
)
(
, , )
(
1
2
(
n 1(
)
(
)
)
(
)
1
x
(
, , )
(
)
, , )
(
2 , , )
(
)
H
i
j
k
H
i
j
k
2 (
,
, )
(
,
,
,
, )
(
,
,
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
(
,,
z
(
,
, )
,
, )
2
2
,
, )
,
y
H
2 (
, ,
)
(
, ,
, ,
)
(
, ,
2
1
2
2
(
, ,
y
(
, ,
)
, ,
)
2
2
, ,
)
, ,
z
E
i j
k
( ,
,
,
,
2
y
1(
1
E n
E
i j k
1( , ,
, ,
n
z
+
+
1
1
1
1
+
1
1
1
1
+
+
, , )
(
)
(
, , )
, )
(
)
(
, ,
, , )
(
)
(
, , )
)
(
)
)
(
)
, , )
(
)
, )
(
)
⎛
,
, )
(
,
, )
(
,
,
, )
(
,
2
,
, )
, )
⎜
⎛
⎜
⎜
−
Δy
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝⎜
⎞
, ,
)
(
, ,
,
)
(
, ,
, ,
)
(
2
, ,
)
,
)
⎟
⎞
⎟
⎟
Δ
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠⎟
=
)
× E
1( ,
,
,
,
n
y
)
…………
 
(8)
H
j
k
CC
H
i j
CD
E
x
H
n
x
H
n
z
E
+
−
=
−
+
⋅
CD
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
( ,i
)
k −
k
1
2
(
)
m
( ,i
,
)
k −
k
1
2
(
)
m
( ,i j
k
j
i j
y
E
j
k
E
i
z
y
E
y
E
)
(
Ez
E
,
)
j
k
( ,i
)
k
(
−
k
i
E
j
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
⎜
−
k
−
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Δy
,
)
(
, ,
)
.
(
,
j
k
,
z
H
(
j k
,
H
(
j
y
H
n
z
H
n
−
k
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
⎟
j
=
−
j
+
+
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
Δ
………
2 , )
.
=………
 
(9)
where CA, CB, CC and CD are coefficients, m is 
the number of material. After discretization of the 
space, as well as time derivatives, scalar form of 
Equation 8 and Equation 9 are used for the electric 
and magnetic fields update at different time steps, 
respectively. Thus, one by another, the electric and 
magnetic fields are calculated as time goes on, as 
shown in Figure 2.
3 BOUNDARY CONDITION
In the numerical calculations, all the data, includ-
ing cell discretization, electric/magnetic fields, 
material parameters, are stored in the computer 
memory. However, any computer has a memory 
limit. As a result, our FDTD model must have a 
boundary. Usually, this outer boundary is Perfect 
Electric Conductor (PEC) which has tangential 
electric fields as zero. PEC will reflect electromag-
netic waves for sure. Therefore, absorbing bound-
ary condition will be needed in FDTD calculation. 
In this dissertation, FDTD simulations will use the 
Convolution Perfectly Matched Layer (CPML) 
to model the absorbing boundary condition. As 
shown in Figure 3, CPML is used to absorb the 
outgoing EM waves in order to model free space 
calculation domain.
4 TOTAL FIELD AND SCATTERED
FIELD MODEL
To model the effect of scattering of objects from 
plane wave incidence, Total Field/ Scattered Field 
(TF/SF) technique is applied in FDTD algorithm. 
As illustrated in Figure 4 (a), the calculation 
domain is divided into 3 regions. The CPML region 
absorbs the outgoing wave to model an infinite free 
space. The scattered field region only simulate the 
scattered electric/magnetic fields that caused by 
the plane wave incidence. Finally, the total field 
region, as shown inside the red box, presents the 
total field for the wave interaction with scattering 
objects. Figure 4 (b) shows a Matlab simulation for 
a PEC object. In this two dimensional simulation, 
the incident wave is a plane wave with Gaussian 
signature going through from lower left to upper 
Figure 3. Illustration of CPML effect on EM wave 
reflection.
Figure 2. General FDTD field update procedure.

86
right. The scattering object is denoted by the white 
square and has no field inside because its bound-
ary is PEC. In the total field region, both incident 
wave and scattered field present. In the scattered 
field region, only the field scattered by the PEC 
square is observed. Beyond the scattered region is 
the CPML region where the EM fields are always 
decaying towards the outer PEC boundary and 
causes no reflection.
5 CONCLUSION
It can be seen that general procedure may be 
derived from those cases  
so that any material 
could be incorporated into FDTD as long as cer-
tain field relation is provided. For the implementa-
tion of sub gridding system, higher order of spatial 
interpolation is expected to improve the calculation 
accuracy and reduce the reflection from the coarse 
grids/sub grids boundary and higher order of sub 
grids could also be considered for even smaller 
structures.
REFERENCES
Argyropoulos, C., Y. Zhao, Y. Hao (2009), “A Radially 
dependent dispersive finite difference time domain 
method for the evaluation of electromagnetic cloaks,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 
vol. 57, pp. 1432–1441.
Harms, P.H., J.A. Roden, J.G. Maloney and M.P. Ke 
(1997), “Numerical analysis of periodic structures 
using the split-field algorithm,” in Proc. 13th Annual 
Review of Progress in Applied Computational 
Electromagnetics.
Kao, Y.-C.A., and R.G. Atkins (1996), “A finite difference-
time domain approach for frequency selective surfaces 
at oblique incidence,” in Antennas and Propagation 
Society International Symposium, 1996. APS. Digest.
Roden, J.A., S.D. Gedney, M.P. Kesle, J.G. Maloney and 
P.H. Harms (1998), “Time-domain analysis of peri-
odic structures at oblique incidence: Orthogonal and 
non orthogonal FDTD implementations,” Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, IEEE Transactions, vol. 46, 
no. 4, pp. 420–427.
Roden, J.A., and S.D. Gedney (2000), “Convolutional 
PML (CPML): An efficient FDTD implementation 
of the CFS-PML for arbitrary media,” Microwave and 
optical technology letters, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 334–338.
Taflove, A., and S.C. Hagness (2005), Computational 
Electrodynamics: The Finite Difference Time Domain 
Method, 3rd ed., Norwood, MA: Artech House.
Veselago, V.G. (1968), “The electrodynamics of sub-
stances with simultaneously negative values of ε and 
μ,” Physics-Uspekhi, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 509–514, 1968.
Yee, K., (1966), “Numerical solution of initial bound-
ary value problems involving Maxwell’s equations in 
isotropic media,” Antennas and Propagation, IEEE 
Transactions on, vol. 14.3, pp. 302–307.
Yee, K., (1966),“Numerical solution of initial boundary 
value problems involving maxwell’s equation siniso-
tropic media,” IEEE Transactionson Antennasand 
Propagation, vol. 14, pp. 302–307.
Figure 4. (a) Total field/scattered field Technique effects 
on EM wave scattering; (b) Matlab Simulation for PEC.

87
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Development of a low-cost field detector unit for safety 
of operating personnel in Low Tension line
T.S. Biswas, A. Baug, R. Ghosh, B. Chatterjee & S. Dalai
Electrical Engineering Department, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: This paper proposes a simple and reliable low-cost field detector unit for the safety of 
maintenance personnel attending to Low Tension (LT) lines. The device is a small and light-weight non-
contact detector that can indicate the presence of electric field by variation in glow of an LED. The need 
for safety devices amongst maintenance personnel attending to LT lines has been highlighted. The local 
field enhancement around a maintenance personnel attending to a line has been simulated using finite 
element method. The knowledge of the enhanced field has been used to design the maximum distance at 
which the detector unit will operate. It is expected that a low cost field detector will encourage utilities to 
promote the use of safety devices amongst maintenance personnel.
sonnel will work (Milutinov et al. 2009). This will 
help in designing the field detector by incorporat-
ing the knowledge of safe expose limit for a human 
body.
In this paper, a study has been done to determine 
how the stress increases if one stands under the 
low voltage distribution line. Based on this study, 
a low-cost non-contact field detector unit has been 
developed that is capable of indicating the pres-
ence of electric fields from a distance. The detector 
device is a small light weight unit that may be con-
veniently put inside the pockets of the personnel 
(McNulty et al. 2011). As and when the personnel 
get too close to the line, an indicator will indicate 
the proximity of the personnel to the power line, 
thereby saving them from accidents.
2 ELECTRIC FIELD NEAR A HUMAN 
BODY UNDER AN OVERHEAD LT LINE
The human body is composed of some biological 
materials with a large amount of water. The rela-
tive permittivity of human body thus becomes very 
high along with high conductivity as compared to 
solid non conducting materials like bones. In addi-
tion, human body contains free electric charges 
due to the presence of highly organized electron 
transport system in the body. These charges move 
in response to forces exerted by electric field in 
nearby power lines and as a consequence, local 
enhancement of field occurs in human body (King 
et al. 2004). Electric field under a LT line increases 
as one travels from the vertically from the ground 
towards the line. In the presence of a human body 
1 INTRODUCTION
The continuous and reliable availability of electri-
cal power has become a critical requirement in our 
daily life. Resources all over the world are heavily 
dependent on the continuity of electric supply. 
With rapid modernization and industrial develop-
ment, the demand for electricity has been stead-
ily going up in recent times. The high demand for 
electricity, coupled with the demand for increased 
reliability has made the task of the utilities chal-
lenging. Though most power utility companies 
around the world have largely been able to meet 
the demands, system outages and failures cannot 
be eradicated. Hence, the need for regular, timely 
and quick maintenance of power distribution sys-
tems has become important.
In the context of developing countries like 
India, where the safety requirements for mainte-
nance personnel are not stringent, fatal accidents 
are common. Hundreds of maintenance personnel 
meet with serious accidents while attending to live 
lines every year. One of the major causes for this is 
the inability of the power utilities to allocate funds 
for state-of-the-art safety devices for the operating 
personnel. With thousands of personnel working 
on power distribution lines every day, providing 
each of them with expensive safety devices is not a 
viable solution to the utilities. To encourage power 
utilities to take proper safety measures, one solu-
tion could be the development of a low cost field 
detector designed to detect appropriate electric 
fields. For such a design to be effective it is neces-
sary to first know the potential distribution around 
the tower and line on which the maintenance per-

88
beneath the line conductors, the electric field at the 
ground level is distorted due to the accumulated 
surface charges on the body. The field strength may 
increase by a factor that may reach five times of the 
magnitude for low voltage line. This local enhance-
ment of electric field, in turn, aids in increase of 
potential, local to the human body.
The system studied in this paper consists of a 
model of a human body standing under an over-
head line of 415 V. Due to the large conductivity 
(about 0.1 S/m) and very high equivalent dielectric 
constant of the human body), the external power 
frequency electric fields near the human body are 
perpendicular to the body surface As a result it is 
possible to treat the human body as conducting. It 
needs to be emphasized that the axial current flow-
ing through the human body depends primarily 
on the height of the body and is independent of 
the cross-section. Hence, the human body may be 
approximated as a cylinder, having the same length 
and mean cross sectional area as that of an aver-
age human body (King et al. 2004). Height of the 
model is taken as 1.8 m and diameter of waist and 
legs are taken as 400 mm and 200 mm respectively. 
Horizontal field exposure is not considered since 
exposure to electric fields of horizontal orienta-
tions results in small induced currents (El-Makka-
way et al. 2007).
In order to investigate the effect of the overhead 
line on a human standing directly beneath the line, 
a model of the human body under a 3-phase 415 
V line has been simulated in COMSOL. Figure 1 
clearly shows that the disturbance in the electric 
field is negligible near the line, but the disturbance is 
significant near to the human body. From Table 1, it 
can be seen that field in presence of a human body 
is near about 5 times higher than field in absence of 
body at 1.8 m height from ground level.
According to electrostatic field theory, in pres-
ence of electric field the human body gets polarized 
and bound charges of opposite nature are induced 
inside the surface of the body depending upon 
the strength of the field. Presence of this bound 
charge in the body attracts more charge from the 
environment which in turn becomes a cyclic proc-
ess that leads to more deformation in the electric 
field around the human body (El-Makkawy et al. 
2007, Yildrim et al. 2007). The body surface with 
lower radius of curvature, which has higher charge 
density, has higher electric field intensity. As the 
human body has high permittivity, it has very low 
electric field intensity inside the body and the field 
is more uniform in nature, whereas, the intensity 
at the body surface becomes high. It may also be 
concluded that the nearer a person is to a line, the 
higher the field he is exposed to. This is particu-
larly true in case of maintenance personnel who 
are responsible for line maintenance.
3 DEVELOPMENT OF A FIELD 
DETECTOR CIRCUIT
Exposure of the human body to a 50 Hz electric 
field due to an overhead high voltage power trans-
mission line or distribution line can lead to two 
types of potential hazards. First of these is the 
steady state current that is induced in the body on 
exposure to the electric field for a prolonged period 
of time. The second is the hazard due to direct elec-
tric shock when current passes through the body 
on contact with live parts associated with a power 
line (Deno et al. 1977). The main aim of the present 
work is to develop a simple low-cost device which 
can detect the presence of electric field and can 
indicate when this field intensity crosses a thresh-
old value. This device will be a non-contact voltage 
detector. The advantage of this type of device is 
Figure 1. Field distribution due to presence of human 
body beneath a 3-phase 415 V distribution line.
Table 1. Comparison of field intensity at different 
heightsdue to presence of a human body (perturbed 
field).
Height from 
ground level 
(in m)
Electric field intensity (in V/m)
Unperturbed
field (E1)
Perturbed
field (E2)
Ratio
(E2/E1)
5.00
13.02
13.21
1.02
4.00
 4.07
 4.18
1.03
3.50
 2.43
 2.52
1.04
3.00
 1.69
 1.91
1.13
2.50
 1.23
 1.60
1.30
2.20
 1.07
 1.65
1.54
1.85
 0.98
 1.99
2.03
1.80
 0.89
 4.06
4.56

89
that it is able to measure weak field from a distance, 
especially in the midst of several objects where one 
or more of them are at a hazardous potential irre-
spective of their relative position.
Electric field detectors can be usefully divided 
into two types: (1) antennas, which typically have 
a size of 1/10 of a wavelength to a full wavelength 
and pick up high frequency electromagnetic radia-
tion far from the source; and (2) sensors, which 
have sizes much smaller than a wavelength and can 
pick up low frequency fields in either the near zone 
or far zone (Williams et al. 2003).
It is already established in the literature that the 
electric field due to any overhead transmission line 
or live object is responsible for induced surface 
charge in nearby metallic electrode or body present 
within that field. From studies it is understood that 
the amount of charge that will be induced in this 
electrode will be very small. An operational ampli-
fier with JFET input stage is used in this scheme. 
The opamp is driven as a half wave active rectifier 
to detect the presence of alternating field. A Light-
Emitting Diode (LED) at the output stage is used 
as a simple indicator, the intensity of which varies 
with the intensity of electric field in which the sen-
sor electrode is placed. A circular metallic disc is 
used to detect the presence of field with diameter 
10.9 cm. Here an op-amp, along with silicon junc-
tion diode 1 N4148 has been used as an active half 
wave rectifier. The presence of the electric field will 
act as the input to the non-inverting terminal of 
the op-amp. Since the system has unity gain, the 
output terminal will show the potential to be same 
as the potential at non-inverting terminal. A LED 
with current limiting resistor is used as indicator.
In the experimental setup, two conducting plates, 
named live plate and capture plate as depicted in 
Figure 3, are taken which have 10.9 cm diameter. 
Live plate is connected to the variable voltage source 
and the capture plate is the antenna of the detector 
circuit. Electric field in the capture plate was varied 
by two methods- (1) the potential of the live plate 
was varied, keeping the distance same between 
them and (2) the distance (d) between the plates was 
varied, keeping the voltage same on the live plate.
The output of the detector circuit is an LED. 
This scheme is done for a layman to visually per-
ceive the presence of hazardous field and at the 
same time, to make the detector unit small, portable 
and rugged with minimal battery consumption for 
long run. But using a LED at output, quantitative 
analysis cannot be carried out. Hence, the output of 
the detector has been replaced with a resistor and 
a true r.m.s. reading Multimeter.  Figure 4 shows 
the output voltages from the detector for different 
input voltages in the live plate, keeping the distance 
between the plates as a constant. Figure 5 shows the 
output voltages from the detector for different dis-
tance d keeping the voltage same on the live plate.
The other important consideration for the per-
formance evaluation of the device is the detec-
tion capability of this device when the output is 
replaced by the LED, corresponding to the scheme 
presented in Figure 2. The advantage of LED is 
that, it can detect the peak value and has a very fast 
turn on time (in the order of μ sec). Table 2 shows 
Figure 2. Electric field detector circuit.
Figure 3. Experimental setup for field detection.
Figure 4. Variation of output voltage with different 
input voltage applied across the detector plates keeping 
the distance fixed.

90
the maximum distances from which the detector 
circuit is able to detect the presence of different 
voltages on the live plate to produce a perceptible 
glow in the output LED.
4 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper the development of a low-cost electric 
field detection device has been reported for main-
tenance personnel working on LT lines. Based on 
the finite element method, change in electric field 
near a grounded human body standing beneath 
a LT line is computed. It has been shown that in 
the presence of a human body under an overhead 
line, the electric field around the line has negligi-
ble changes, but the local electric field around the 
human body is considerably enhanced. The knowl-
edge of this enhancement in electric field has been 
utilized to design the maximum distance at which 
the detector unit will operate. The main contribu-
tion of the paper is the development of a simple 
and low-cost field detector circuit that can be used 
for the safety of the personnel attending to line 
maintenance. The detector device is a small light 
weight unit that may be carried inside the pock-
ets of the maintenance personnel working on LT 
lines. As and when the personnel get too close to 
a live line, an indicator will indicate the proxim-
ity of the personnel to the power line, thereby sav-
ing them from accidents. It is expected that the 
low-cost detection unit reported in this paper will 
help power utilities to encourage the use of safety 
devices among the maintenance personnel.
REFERENCES
Abdel-Salam, M. & Abdallah H. M. (1995). “Transmis-
sion-Line Electric Field Induction in Humans Using 
Charge Simulation Method”, IEEE Transactions on 
Biomedical, Engineering, Vol. 42, No. 11, pp. 1105–
1109, November 1995.
Ahmadi H., Mohseni, S., Akmal, A. A. S. (2010). “Elec-
tro-magnetic Fields Near Transmission Lines—Prob-
lems And Solutions” Iran. J. Environ. Health. Sci. 
Eng., Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 181–188, 25 February 2010.
Deno, D W. (1977). “Currents Induced in the Human 
Body by High Voltage Transmission Line Electric 
Field—Measurement and Calculation of Distribution 
and Dose”, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus 
and Systems, Vol. PAS-96, No.57, pp. 1518–1528. Sep-
tember/October 1977.
El-Makkawy, S. M. (2007). “Numerical Determination 
of electric field induced currents on human body 
Standing under a high voltage transmission line”.
Hossam-Eldin, A. A. (2001). “Effect of Electromagnetic 
Fields from Power Lines on Living Organisms”, IEEE 
7th International Conference on Solid Dielectrics, June 
25–29, 2001, Eindhoven, the Netherlands, pp. 438–441.
King, R. W. P. (2004). “A Review of Analytically Deter-
mined Electric Fields and Currents Induced in the 
Human Body When Exposed to 50–60-Hz Electro-
magnetic Fields”, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004, pp. 1186–1192.
McNulty, W. (2011). “Voltage detection and indication 
by electric field measurement”, Transmission and 
Distribution Construction, Operation and Live-Line 
Maintenance (ESMO), IEEE PES 12th International 
Conference on 16–19 May 2011 Publisher: IEEE.
Milutinov M., Juhas A., Prsa M. (2009) “Electromagnetic 
field underneath overhead high voltage power line”, 
4th International Conference on Engineering Technol-
ogies—ICET 2009, Novi Sad, April 28–29, 2009.
Williams, K. R., De Bruyker, D. P. H., Limb, S. J., 
Amendt, E.J., Overland, D. A. (2003). “Vacuum 
Steered-Electron Electric-Field Sensor” Submitted 
to IEEE/ASME Journal of Microelectromechanical 
Systems–JMEMS-2013–0021.
Yildirim H. & Kalenderli, O. (2003). “Computation of 
electric field induced currents on biological bodies 
near High Voltage transmission lines”, Xth Inter-
national Symposium on High Voltage Engineering, 
Netherlands, Smit(ed), pp. 1–4.
Zipse, D. W. (1993). “Health Effects of Extremely Low-
Frequency (50- and 60-Hz) Electric and Magnetic 
Fields”, IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, 
Vol. 29, No. 2, March/April 1993, pp. 447–458
Figure 5. Variation of output voltage with distance 
between plates keeping the input voltage fixed.
Table 2. Maximum distance at which the LED can 
detect the presence of field corresponding to different 
voltages applied to the live plate.
Input voltage on live 
plate (V)
Distance between 
plates (m)
 60
0.18
 80
0.32
120
0.44
160
0.58
180
0.68
200
0.75
220
0.83

91
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Congestion control in Cognitive Radio networks using fractional order 
rate reaching law based sliding modes
Tirtha Majumder, Rajiv Kumar Mishra & Sudhansu Sekhar Singh
School of Electronics Engineering, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology (KIIT University), 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
Abhinav Sinha
TATA Consultancy Services Limited, Pune, Maharashtra, India
Prasanna Kumar Sahu
National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, Odisha, India
ABSTRACT: Limited bandwidth and exponentially rising user demand calls for an exigent need of 
throughput maximization. In order to maintain Quality of Service (QoS) in any communication network 
requires accurate means to control congestion of the network. The focus of this work is the onerous task 
of designing an effective congestion controller to taper off packet losses to zero in Cognitive Radio (CR) 
networks. Huge number of requests vitiate the performance due to limited buffer capacity and band-
width. A controller has been designed using sliding mode, which is a variable structure control technique 
manifested for its robustness and disturbance rejection capabilities. Exertions are made to reduce design 
complexity by incorporating fractional order rate reaching law based sliding mode. An optimal design 
strategy has been used in the synthesis of the controller. The efficacy of the controller has been confirmed 
by numerical simulations.
and loss sensitive user while latter regulates the 
input flow and delay is not given much concern 
here. The leftover capacity of former is used for the 
latter. Best effort traffic is given the least signifi-
cance where consumed bandwidth is left over from 
both services. Varying needs and data communica-
tion rate of different users may result in congestion 
of the network. Controlling this serious problem is 
a challenging task and is addressed in this work.
Several control strategies have been proposed to 
tackle this problem. Most techniques involved line-
arizing the nonlinear model that simplifies the design 
problem but limits the region of operation. Other 
control techniques such as Adaptive and Fuzzy algo-
rithms (A. Pitsillides and J. Lambert 1997), (Y.C. Liu 
and C. Douligeris 1997), (A. Pitsillides and A. Seker-
cioglu 1999) have also been used but they are unable 
to cope up with fast changing scenario as they are 
non-model based strategies. They provide well adap-
tation and good approximation to hard nonlineari-
ties but have to be combined with other strategies to 
yield high performance. Random Early Detection 
(RED) (C. Chrysostomou, A. Pitsilliides, L. Ros-
sides, M. Polycarpou and A. Sekerciouglu 2003) and 
its variants are also proposed in literature but their 
parameters are very sensitive to network load (Ming 
Yan, Tatjana D. Kolemisevska-Gugolovska, Yuan-
1 INTRODUCTION
Compelling developments in communication and 
networks have ushered heavy increase in user 
demand and traffic. This acute rise in traffic has 
resulted in congestion in communication networks 
which degrades Quality of Service (QoS). Cogni-
tive Radio Network (CRN) is an intelligent system 
that promises effective utlization of wireless spec-
trum by dynamically modifying the transmission 
parameters to improve the bandwidth usage. One 
of the common problems in most wireless spec-
trums is their underutilization in spite of their 
capability to serve increased user demands and 
traffic. Various technologies like Adaptive Radio 
and Software Defined Radio are used by CRN 
to steer the traffic from occupied and congested 
channels to the vacant ones for smooth concur-
rent communicaton. This technique felicitates the 
secondary (low priority) users to use the unused 
licensed band of primary (high priority) users tem-
porarily, thereby significantly improving spectrum 
efficiency by opportunistic spectrum utilization.
There are two types of traffic queues in CRN on 
which the QoS are categorized, viz., high priority 
or premium service and low priority or ordinary 
service. Former provides bandwidth to the delay 

92
wei Jing and Georgi Dimirovski 2007). Other meth-
ods such as Active Queue Management (Ming Yan, 
Tatjana D. Kolemisevska-Gugolovska, Yuanwei 
Jing and Georgi Dimirovski 2007) are also available. 
Sliding mode control is a state dependent feedback 
controller with model based strategy that is known 
to be very effective in controlling uncertain dynami-
cal systems. It provides advantages over other con-
trols by eliminating the need for exact modeling and 
providing very good disturbance rejection. Using 
this control, the dynamic behavior of the system can 
be tailored using a particular choice of sliding func-
tion. The controller is designed to drive and then 
constrain the states of the system to lie in the vicin-
ity of switching function. Under uncertainties such 
as link failures and in both steady state and non-
stationary conditions, this controller delivers a high 
performance. However, the hardware used in realiz-
ing the controller may introduce infinite switching, 
known as chattering and is undesirable. In this work, 
we present Fractional Order Rate reaching law based 
sliding mode control to tackle the congestion control 
problem in CR networks.
2 NETWORKS DYNAMICAL MODEL
The CR network is analytical modelled using queu-
ing model or Fluid Flow Model (J. Filipiak 1988), 
(Bouyoucef and Khorasani 2007). The model used 
here is simpler than probabilistic model and allows 
distributed control and reduces computational time 
in performance evaluations. Let us consider an arbi-
trary channel C  with maximum capacity of Cma
C
x 
(David Tipper and Malur K. Sundareshan 1990), 
N( )t  is the number of packets in the system, i. e., 
queue+server at time t and x( )t  as the state variable 
that represents the average number of packets in the 
system at any given time t. x( )t  is also the ensemble 
average of the number of packets in the system at 
time t, i. e., x
E
t
( )t
{
(
N )}
=
. If d(t) and a( )t  repre-
sent the flow out and into the system respectively, 
then we can define fin and fout
f
 as ensemble average 
of the flow in and out of the queue respectively, 
i. e., f
t
E d t
out
f
)t
{ (
d
)}
=
 and f
t
E
t
inf
)t
{ (
a )}
=
. Thus, by 
flow conservation law, we have
x
f
t
f
t
inf
out
f
( )t
)t)t
)t
=
−
f
)t
 
(1)
It is assumed that the storage capacity of the 
queue is unlimited and the users are arriving at the 
queue according to a nonstationary Poisson proc-
ess with rate λ( )
λ
, the model for M/G/1 queue is
x
C
x
x
( )t
( )t
( )t
( )t
( )t
= −
+
+
1
λ(
 
(2)
Here, x( )t  is the queue length of the buffer, C is 
the assigned to be link capacity and the nonlinear 
term λ( )
λ
 denotes incoming traffic rate.
Premium services require guaranteed delivery 
within given loss bound and delay but rate regula-
tion is not allowed beyond the delay bound (Tirtha 
Majumder, P.K. Sahu, S.S. Singh, Abhinav Sinha 
and Rajiv Kumar Mishra 2015). The buffer state is 
controlled to be close to a reference value such that 
maximum allowable delay and packet loss bound is 
guaranteed in premium service (A. Pitsillides, P. Ioan-
nou, M. Lestas and L. Rossides 2005). Assignment 
of maximum bandwidth Cma
C
x is done dynamically 
to the premium service such that 0 ≤
≤
C
C
p
m
≤
C
C
ax
( )t
.  
Ordinary services can tolerate queuing delay and 
allow the regulation of flow but packet losses are not 
allowed. The bandwidth for ordinary service can be 
given as C
C
C
s
m
C
C
ax
p
C
( )t
( )t
= C
 where Cs(t) > 0.
By suitable change of variable, the model can 
also be rewritten in the observable canonical form, 
which will further aid us in optimization and devel-
opment of controller. Hence, we have


x
x
x
C

x
t
1
2
x
2
2
1
2 +
( )t
( )t
(
(
x1
1+
))
( )t
λ(
 
(3)
We can also write in general
x
f

x
f

x
b
u
1
1f
2
2f2f
+
( )
x
( )
x
( )
x
ϕ  
(4)
with u and ϕ  are control effort and matched uncer-
tainties respectively.
3 PROBLEM FORMULATION
The control target is to maintain desired queue 
length in the buffer, provided the buffer length of 
the router has been defined in priori. The error 
variable is required to be stabilized to the origin 
for accurate tracking, and is defined as
e
x
x
i
ix
iref
−
x
 
(5)
4 CONTROLLER DESIGN
The ontogenesis of sliding mode controller has 
been carried out in two steps scilicet, development 
of a stable hyper surface that is the geometrical 
locus consisting of boundaries, and formation of 
the control law that is composed of equivalent and 
corrective control.
Let us define the surface variable as
σ( )
σ
c
)
x
c x
c
c X
i
n
i
ix
T
c x
+
=
c x
=∑
1
1
1x
2
2
x
 
(6)
with ci that are weighting parameters affecting 
the system trajectory and states (Abhinav Sinha 

93
and Rajiv Kumar Mishra 2013) and in turn, its 
performance.
Choice of ci has been done by minimizing the 
quadratic cost function based on optimal integral 
rule. This requires second order sufficiency, so the 
model from equation (3) has been taken and put 
into regular form.
Z
g Z
b u
= ⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
+ ⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
+ ⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
0
I
0
0
0
ϕ⎦ 
(7)
The surface variable can be rewritten as
σ(
)
σ Z
p
)
p z
p Z
T
+
p z
1 1z
2
2z
 
(8)
From equation (7), we have
Z
f
b u
+
f
+
∗
b
+
∗
φ∗ 
(9)
The design of control law requires σ(
)
σ
= 0. We 
propose a control law of the form
u
p f
p b
p
p b
T
T
T
max
T
= −
−
+
|
|
∗
∗
∗
∗
ϕ max +
∗
σ
α
 
(10)
μ is a design parameter in the above law and 
α ∈(
)
, . The formulated law is based on fractional 
power reaching law which is continuous, bounded 
and robust to perturbations.
5 STABILITY ANALYSIS
Stability is the prime implication to be taken in 
account in any design problem. Analysis of stability 
has been carried out by considering a Lyapunov can-
didiate of 1
2
2
σ 2( ). Negative definiteness of this can-
didate ensures stability in Lyapunov sense. By simple 
mathematical calculations, it can be easily shown that 


V( )
x =
<
σσ
0 for all μ > 0. Hence, the control law is 
stable in Lyapunov sense and also ensures finite time 
reachability. The weighting parameters govern the 
dynamics of the system during sliding. The solution 
for the differential equation of equation (8) in z1( )t  
yields the following solutions
z
p
p
1
1
2
1 0
( )t
exp(
) (
z1
)
=
−
exp(
 
(11)
and z
p
p
p
p
2
1
2
1
2
1 0
( )t
exp(
) (
z1
)
= −
−
 
(12)
As long as p p
1 2
p
0
> , the state Z will show exponen-
tial convergence to zero, whatever initial conditions 
Z( ) may be. Alternatively we may say that expo-
nential convergence to zero will occur in finite time 
when all the roots of the polynomial γ ( )
γ s
p
)
p s
=
+
p1
2
p
+
 
are essentially present in the negative half plane.
6 SIMULATION RESULTS
The simulation has been performed using Mathworks 
MATLABTM and SimulinkTM and the disturbance is 
randomly generated. The network parameters that 
have been considered here are overall server capac-
ity as 1000 packets/sec, disturbance input rate as 80 
packets/sec and desired queue length as 50 packets 
(R. Barzamini and M. Shafiee 2013). Other design 
and surface parameters have been selectively tuned. 
The results of using higher order sliding mode con-
trol, as used in (R. Barzamini and M. Shafiee 2013) 
et al. are shown here. From Figures 1 and 2, it is clear 
that desired queue length has been achieved in around 
0.5 seconds. Since, higher order sliding modes have 
been used here (R. Barzamini and M. Shafiee 2013) 
to counteract chattering (K. David Young, Vadim 
I. Utkin and Umit Ozguner 1999), (Levant 1993), 
the profile is smooth. However, increasing the order 
also increases the complexity of the design. We have 
used first order sliding mode instead. From Figures 3 
Figure 1. Queue for primary user using higher order 
sliding mode.
Figure 2. Queue for secondary user using higher order 
sliding mode.

94
REFERENCES
Abhinav Sinha and Rajiv Kumar Mishra (2013, Decem-
ber). Smooth sliding mode controller design for robotic 
arm. In Proc. IEEE International Conference on Control, 
Automation, Robotics and Embedded Systems(CARE 
‘13), Jabalpur, India.
Barzamini, Y.C. and M. Shafiee (2013). Congestion 
control of differentiated services networks by slid-
ing mode control. ELECTRONIKA IR ELEKTRO-
TECHNIKA 19(1).
Bouyoucef, K. and K. Khorasani (2007, July). A slid-
ing mode-based congestion control for time delayed 
differentiated-services networks. In Proc. 15th Medi-
terranean Conference on Control and Automation, Ath-
ens, Greece.
Chrysostomou, C., A. Pitsilliides, L. Rossides, M. Poly-
carpou and A. Sekerciouglu (2003, Mar). Conges-
tion Control in Differentiated services networks 
using Fuzzy- RED. Control Engineering Practice, 
1153–1170.
David Tipper and Malur K. Sundareshan (1990, Dec). 
Numerical methods for modelling computer networks 
under non stationary conditions. IEEE Journal of 
Selected Areas in Communication 8(9), 1682–1695.
David Young, K., Vadim I. Utkin and Umit Ozguner (1999, 
May). A control engineer’s guide to sliding mode con-
trol. IEEE transactions on Control Systems Technology 
7(3), 328–342.
Filipiak, J. (1988, Jan). Modelling and control of dynamic 
flows in communication networks. IEEE Journal of 
Selected Areas in Communication, 202.
Levant, A. (1993). Sliding order and sliding accuracy in slid-
ing mode control. International Journal of Control 58(6), 
1247–1263.
Liu, Y.C. and C. Douligeris (1997, Feb). Rate Regulation 
with Feedback Controller in ATM Networks- A Neural 
Network Approach. IEEE Journal of Special Areas in 
Communication 15(2), 200–208.
Ming Yan, Tatjana D. Kolemisevska- Gugolovska, Yuan-
wei Jing and Georgi Dimirovski (2007, September). 
Robust discrete-time sliding mode control algorithm 
for tcp networks congestion control. In Proc. 8th 
IEEE International Conference on Telecommunications 
in Modern Satellite, Cable and Broadcasting Services 
(TELSIKS ‘07), Serbia.
Pitsillides, A., P. Ioannou, M. Lestas and L. Rossides (2005, 
Feb). Adaptive nonlinear congestion controller for a 
differentiated-services framework. IEEE/ACM Transac-
tions on Networking 13(1), 94–107.
Pitsillides, A., and A. Sekercioglu (1999, May). Fuzzy 
logic based effective congestion controller. TCD work-
shop on Applications of Computational Intelligence to 
Telecommunications.
Pitsillides, A., and J. Lambert (1997). Adaptive Congestion 
Control in ATM based networks. Journal of Computer 
Communication (20), 1239–1258.
Tirtha Majumder, P.K. Sahu, S.S. Singh, Abhinav Sinha 
and Rajiv Kumar Mishra (2015, March). Robust non-
linear congestion controller for cognitive radio based 
wireless network. In Proc. 2nd IEEE-DRDO Inter-
national Conference on Innovations in Information, 
Embedded and Communication Sytems (ICIIECS ‘15), 
Coimbatore, India.
Figure 3. Queue for primary user using proposed law.
Figure 4. Queue for secondary user using proposed law.
and  4, it is clear that the proposed law can provide 
better results under same conditions without increas-
ing design complexity, given selective tuning of the 
design parameters. The results are self explanatory.
7 CONCLUSION
A sturdy controller has been synthesized to tackle 
the problem of congestion in cognitive radio net-
works. A simple and low order fluid flow model 
of the network has eased the synthesis of the con-
troller based on sliding mode control. The control 
algorithm has been derived analytically considering 
the original nonlinear model of the network. This 
resulted in an increase in the range of operation. 
The contemplated controller is easier to design 
and insensitive to network anomalies. Asymptotic 
stability has been guaranteed in Lyapunov sense. 
Notable improvements have been observed using 
the proposed law and packet loss has been nulli-
fied. The proposed controller also knocked out the 
need of a higher order sliding mode controller, as 
the problem of chattering has been tackled, pro-
vided all the design parameters be carefully tuned.

95
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
The dynamic compensation of the reactive power for the integration of 
wind power in a weak distribution network
Ritam Misra
Midcontinent Independent System Operator, Eagan, Minnesota, USA
ABSTRACT: In the near future, wind energy will be the most cost effective source of electrical power, 
but it will also bring some integration-related power-quality issues like reactive power compensation and 
voltage regulation when it is integrated with a power system network, especially in a weak network. Induc-
tion generators that we use in wind power generators draw a reactive power from the connected system. 
Thus, the power system engineers are very much concerned about the integration of wind power to a 
weak power system network. We are mainly concerned about the voltage regulation and reactive power 
compensation for the integration of wind power in a weak network. A centralized STATCOM (Static 
Synchronous Compensator) is proposed for the dynamic reactive power compensation. The STATCOM 
is connected at a point of interconnection between the wind farm and the network, and, thus, the system 
will absorb the wind power while maintaining its voltage level.
The STATCOM produces more reactive power 
than SVC during the voltage collapse. Also STAT-
COM has a fast response time than the SVC 
because when STATCOM is used with Voltage 
Sourced Converter, there will be no time delay 
associated with the thyristor firing.
2 BACKGROUND
2.1 Literature review
The research presented in (Xu, L., Yao, L. & Sasse, 
C. 2006. Comparison) focuses on the system sta-
bility based on Fixed Speed Induction Generator 
(FSIG) and examines the use of SVC and STAT-
COM for the wind farm integration. The reactive 
power absorbed by the FSIG after the fault makes 
the system unstable. The use of SVC and STAT-
COM improves the system stability. The model 
is developed in PSCAD/EMTDC. A detailed 
examination is conducted on the impact of SVC/
STATCOM on the system recovery after a fault. 
STATCOM provides a better dynamic perform-
ance and a better reactive power support as com-
pared to SVC. The paper (Narimani, M. & Varma, 
R. K. 2010. Application …) shows the dynamic 
reactive power compensation using Static Var 
Compensator. To improve the performance of an 
SVC, a fuzzy controller is used instead of a PI con-
troller. This is shown by conducting a simulation 
using MATLAB/Simulink. This paper (Dongxu, 
Z. & Xiaoming, L. 2010. Research) mainly focusses 
1 INTRODUCTION
Wind power is a great way to generate clean renew-
able energy, and the innovations in the wind tech-
nology being pursued over the last decade or so is a 
reminder that with the right tools, we can turn the 
movement of the air into fuel for our energy-hun-
gry lifestyles. The technology is growing exponen-
tially with the current power crisis. Wind turbine 
consists of a conventional squirrel cage induction 
generator, which has the following characteristics: 
firstly, it consumes the redundant reactive power in 
a large turbine and weak distribution network sys-
tem, secondly, this type of generator slows down 
the voltage restoration after a voltage collapse 
and leads to the voltage and rotor speed instabil-
ity. Generator consumes the reactive power when 
the voltage restores, but when the voltage doesn’t 
restore quickly, the generator consumes an even 
huge amount of reactive power, which results in 
the voltage and rotor speed instability. So to pre-
vent this, the shunt capacitors are connected at the 
generator terminals. We perform the dynamic com-
pensation of the reactive power in order to reduce 
the exchange of the reactive power between wind 
farm and the distribution network. For that pur-
pose, we use the FACTS devices like STATCOM 
(Static Synchronous Compensator) and SVC 
(Static Var Compensator).
The main problem that we are trying to solve 
is the voltage regulation and reactive power com-
pensation that arises because of the integration of 
wind farm to the weak power system network. 

96
on the voltage stability method based on dynamic 
reactive power compensation. Simulation is per-
formed in MATLAB/Simulink and the results 
show that this method can offer dynamic voltage 
support, stabilize the bus voltage of wind turbine 
group in wind farms thereby improving the system’s 
operational characteristics. This method can also be 
applied for the dynamic reactive power compensa-
tion and voltage stability control of the asynchro-
nous generator groups and asynchronous motor 
generator groups. DFIG based wind farm, which 
has the advantage of a variable speed operation 
also faces voltage stability problems during the grid 
side disturbances. The STATCOM at the point of 
common coupling is connected to maintain stable 
voltage. As a dynamic reactive power compensator, 
it protects the DFIG-based wind farm intercon-
nected to weak distribution network (Pokharel, B. 
& Wenzhong, G. 2010. Mitigation ). SVC has also 
been used for the dynamic reactive power compen-
sation instead of a fixed capacitor banks. The volt-
age stability problem has also been studied from the 
aspect of a large-capacity vicarious fan-speed wind 
power generator. Also, the relationship between the 
angular velocity of the wind turbine and terminal 
voltage of asynchronous machine can be found 
(Zhang, J., Zhongdong. Y., Xiao, X. & Di, Y. 2009. 
Enhancement).
3 PROPOSED APPROACH
3.1 Test system
The test system is shown in Figure 1 as a single 
line diagram. The source of the network is a132 
kV, 60 Hz grid supply point, feeding a distribu-
tion system of 33kV. A step down transformer of 
132/33 kV, 62.5 MVA is connected to the source. 
There are two loads in the system of 50 MW, a 
0.9 lagging power factor and 6 MW, and a 0.9 lag-
ging power factor at a distance of 50 km from the 
transformer. The transmission line is modeled as a 
Π line. The total MVA loading is 62.22 MVA con-
sidering the transmission and distribution losses in 
the system it is overloaded, thus, truly represent-
ing a weak distribution network. A 9 MW wind 
farm is connected with the transmission line. The 
wind farm consists of six 1.5 MW wind turbines. 
The STATCOM, which is connected at the wind 
farm connection provides a dynamic compensa-
tion of the reactive power. The variable pitch wind 
turbines are conventionally used in the wind farm 
and consists of squirrel cage induction genera-
tors. The turbines have its own protection scheme 
which monitors voltage, current, and machine 
speed (Shinde, M., Patil, K. D. & Gandhare, W. Z. 
2009. Dynamic).
4 IMPLEMENTATION
4.1 System simulation
As most of the distribution systems are unbal-
anced, three phase models are used here for the 
study. The test system is modeled using MATLAB/ 
SIMULINK. Phasor simulations have been mainly 
used to simulate the model. Variable step ode23tb 
solver is used for the simulation of the system. The 
simulation time is 5 seconds. For the simulation 
purposes there are mainly four cases which would 
be considered, which are:
1. Without wind farm and STATCOM
2. With wind farm and without STATCOM
3. With wind farm and STATCOM (without fault)
4. With wind farm and STATCOM (with fault)
5. Changing the source voltage
The active and reactive power at all the buses 
and in the wind farm has been measured. After 
the connection of STATCOM the reactive power 
provided by the STATCOM will also be presented. 
For the system studying the 50 MVA base power 
and 33 kV base voltages has been taken. 
In each case, the voltage, active and reactive 
power at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2 is taken. The 
active and reactive power of the wind farm is also 
measured. When the STATCOM is connected, the 
reactive power of the STATCOM is also measured 
(Shinde, M., Patil, K. D. & Gandhare, W. Z. 2009. 
Dynamic).
5 RESULTS
5.1 Case 1 – without wind farm and STATCOM
For this mode, the wind farm and STATCOM 
were skipped while running the simulation. Only 
the distribution system and two loads were kept in 
the model. In this mode only the voltages at 33 kV 
Bus-1 and Bus-2 are measured to ascertain that the 
test system is a weak system.
Figure 1. Single line diagram of the system.

97
Figure 2 shows the voltages at 33 kV Bus-1 and 
Bus-2, it is clear from the figure that the voltage 
at 33 kV Bus-1 is 0.92 p.u. is the voltage at 33 kV 
Bus-2 is 0.88p.u. Thus, these voltages are below 
0.95 p.u, the distribution network is really weak.
5.2 Case 2 – with wind farm and without 
STATCOM
For this mode, the wind farm is connected to the 
weak distribution network in the above mode. 
Here, the simulation is performed in order to inte-
grate the 9 MW wind power in a weak distribution 
network, without using the STATCOM. Figure 3 
shows the voltages at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.
Figure 4 shows the active power at 33 kV Bus-1 
and Bus-2, it is clear from the figure that before 
tripping the wind turbines, they have supplied 
active power to the network. It can be seen that 
even after the connection of wind turbine, the net-
work is still a weak network.
The reactive power at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2 are 
shown in Figure 5. From this figure, it can be seen 
that before tripping the turbine generators have 
drawn reactive power from the network. Therefore, 
the voltages at 33 kV Bus-2 and Bus-1 are decreasing, 
which causes the under voltage tripping of the 
wind turbine generators.
5.3 Case 3 – with wind farm and STATCOM 
(without fault)
In this mode, the wind farm with the dynamic 
compensation by STATCOM is connected to the 
weak distribution network in the above mode. The 
purpose of running a simulation in this mode is to 
integrate 9 MW wind power in a weak distribution 
network, with a dynamic compensation of reactive 
power using the STATCOM.
Figure 6 shows the voltages at 33 kV Bus-1 and 
Bus-2, it can be seen from the figure that initially 
the voltage at Bus-2 is less than that at Bus-1, but 
due to the reactive power injection by STATCOM, 
the voltage at Bus-2 goes beyond the voltage at 
Bus-1. Figure 7 shows the active power supplied 
by the wind turbine generators to the distribution 
network. It is seen from the figure that in this case, 
the wind turbine generators are not tripped. But 
they are supplying 9 MW power to the distribution 
network. Figure 8 shows the reactive power drawn 
by the induction generators from the network and 
it can be seen from the figure that initially wind tur-
Figure 2. Voltages at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.
Figure 3. Voltages at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.
Figure 4. Active power at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.
Figure 5. Reactive power at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.

98
Figure 6. Voltages at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.
Figure 7. Active power at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.
Figure 8. Reactive power at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.
bine generators draw more reactive power, but later 
on the reactive power demand has been stabilized.
5.4 Case 4 – with wind farm and STATCOM 
(with fault)
This mode is the same as the above mode of sim-
ulation, but in this case a three phase fault for 
2 to 2.15 seconds is made. The purpose of running 
the simulation in this mode is to verify the dynamic 
reactive power compensation capability of STAT-
COM during the event of a fault, while integrating 
the wind power in a weak distribution network.
Figure 9 shows the voltages at 33 kV Bus-1 and 
Bus-2, and it is seen from the figure that the volt-
age recovery after the fault is accelerated due to 
Figure 9. Voltages at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.
Figure 10. Active power at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.
Figure 11. Reactive power at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2.

99
REFERENCES
Dongxu, Z. & Xiaoming, L. 2010. Research on the Volt-
age Stability Control for Wind Turbine Group Based 
on Dynamic Reactive Power Compensation. Power 
and Energy Engineering Conference(APEEC), Asia 
Pacific. 28–31 March 2010.
Narimani, M. & Varma, R.K. 2010. Application of static 
var compensator (SVC) with fuzzy controller for grid 
integration of wind farm. Canadian Conference on 
Electrical and Computer Engineering.
Pokharel, B. & Wenzhong, G. 2010. Mitigation of distur-
bances in DFIG-based wind farm connected to weak 
distribution system using STATCOM. North Ameri-
can Power Symposium (NAPS).
Shinde, M., Patil, K.D. & Gandhare, W.Z. 2009. Dynamic 
Compensation of Reactive Power for Integration of 
Wind Power in a Weak Distribution Network. Inter-
national Conference On Control, Automation, Commu-
nication and Energy Conservation. 4–6 June 2009.
Xu, L., Yao, L. & Sasse, C. 2006. Comparison of Using 
SVC and STATCOM for Wind Farm Integration. 
International Conference on Power System Technology, 
22–26 Oct 2006.
Zhang, J., Zhongdong. Y., Xiao, X. & Di, Y. 2009. 
Enhancement voltage stability of wind farm access to 
power grid by novel SVC,” Industrial Electronics and 
Applications. 4th IEEE Conference on Industrial Elec-
tronics and Applications. 25–27 May 2009.
STATCOM and the system voltage restores before 
the initiation of the protection systems. Thus, the 
wind turbine generators do not trip in the event of 
a short duration fault. Figure 10 shows the active 
power at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2. Figure 11 shows 
the reactive power at 33 kV Bus-1 and Bus-2 and 
STATCOM, it can be seen that the STATCOM is 
supplying the reactive power to the network even 
in the event of short duration fault at its point of 
interconnection.
6 CONCLUSION
Evaluation is done about the dynamic power com-
pensation capability of the STATCOM for the 
integration of the wind power in a weak distribu-
tion network. The dynamic power compensation 
capability is also done during an external three 
phase fault. The evaluation reveals that the reac-
tive power compensation by STATCOM makes 
it possible to integrate the wind farm in a weak 
distribution network. STATCOM prevents large 
deviations of the bus voltage due to the reactive 
power drawn by the wind turbine generators and 
also after the fault rapid recovery of the voltage 
has been resulted.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

101
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
The Oppositional Chemical Reaction Optimization algorithm 
for the optimal tuning of the Power System Stabilizer
S. Paul & A. Maji
Dr. B.C. Roy Engineering College, Durgapur, West Bengal, India
Provas Kumar Roy
Jalpaiguri Government Engineering College, Jalpaiguri, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper, the co-ordination scheme to improve the stability of a power system by the 
optimal design of the power system stabilizer has been proposed. This paper presents a meta-heuristic 
population-based algorithm named Oppositional Chemical Reaction Optimization (OCRO) algorithm 
of optimally tuning parameters of the Power System Stabilizers (PSSs), which have been added to the 
excitation system to dampen the low frequency oscillation that lies in the large power system. Eigen value 
based objective function incorporating the damping factor and damping ratio of the lightly damped 
electromechanical modes is to be considered in the PSSs design problem. The effectiveness of the pro-
posed OCRO along with the conventional CRO is demonstrated on a single machine infinite bus from 
the Heffron-Phillips model. To show the superiority of the proposed method, the results are presented 
over a wide range of loading conditions. Simulated results of the proposed OCRO method are compared 
with those obtained by CRO, Gravitational Search Algorithm (GSA), and Oppositional GSA (OGSA) to 
demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed algorithm.
variants (classic tuning methods, soft computing 
methods, and robust approaches) and (b) methods 
based on nonlinear dynamic models. Classical con-
trol techniques including self-tuning regulators, 
pole placement, robust control, and pole shifting 
were successfully investigated in the past for the 
design of power system stabilizers.
In the past decade, various population based 
optimization methods such as particle swarm opti-
mization (PSO) (Shayeghi et al. 2010), Genetic 
Algorithm (GA) (Zhang et al. 2000), Honey Bee 
Mating Optimization (HBMO) (Niknam et al. 
2011) have been efficiently implemented to find 
the optimum set of parameters to effectively 
design the PSS. Abd-Elazim et al. (2013) sug-
gests that PSS tuning by hybrid PSO and Bacte-
rial Foraging Algorithm (BFA) was performed on 
the three machine nine bus power system. Detailed 
analysis of the PSS tuning with non-linear model 
based algorithm is provided in reference to (Yee et 
al. 2006). Though, the above stated optimization 
techniques have successfully been applied in PSS 
design, they suffer from many demerits like GA 
requires a very long run time depending on the size 
of the system under study. Also, it suffers from the 
optimal settings of the algorithm parameters and 
gives rise to repeat the revisiting of the same sub-
optimal solutions. In case of PSO, the premature 
convergence nature may trap the algorithm into 
1 INTRODUCTION
The electric power system is operated close to its 
capacity limits, increasing the risk of the stability 
problems. One problem that faces the power sys-
tems is the low frequency oscillations arising due 
to the disturbances. These oscillations may sustain 
and grow to cause a system separation if no ade-
quate damping is provided. Power System  Stabilizer 
(PSS) is the most effective device for dampening 
the low frequency oscillations and increasing the 
stability margin of the power system. PSS is used 
to generate supplementary control signals for the 
excitation system in order to mitigate these types 
of oscillations. The stability of the power system is 
affected due to disturbances like a sudden change 
in load, loss of a generator, and widespread use 
of the high gain fast acting excitation system. The 
research of the PSS for improving the stability of 
the power system has been conducted since the 
late 1960s. In the last two decades, various types 
of PSSs were introduced. Many new intelligent 
methods such as neural networks (Segal et al. 2004) 
and fuzzy logic (Kocaarslan et al. 2005) were used 
in the PSS design. Modern control methods such 
as adaptive control was also used in PSS design 
(Shaoru et al. 2009). Basically, two main group of 
approaches have been investigated in literature: 
(a) methods based on linear models with several 

102
the local optimum, hence, reducing the chances of 
reaching the global optimal solutions.
In view of the above discussion, the main aim of 
the present study is to design and implement a new 
Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) named Oppositional 
Chemical Reaction Optimization (OCRO). In this 
article, the proposed OCRO based PSS design prob-
lem is applied in the single machine power systems 
from the Heffron-Phillips model. The computed 
results are compared with those of OGSA and GSA 
to verify the superiority of the proposed algorithm.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the 
problem of formulation is illustrated in section 2. 
A brief outline of CRO algorithm is discussed in 
section 3. Section 4 gives the outline of the Oppo-
sitional Based Learning (OBL) concept. Section 5 
presents different algorithmic steps of OCRO. Sec-
tion 6 reports the comparative simulation results. 
Finally, section 7 concludes this article.
2 PROBLEM FORMULATION
2.1 System model
The synchronous machine can be represented by 
a set of four first order linear differential equa-
tions (1–4). These equations represent a fourth 
order generator model. Higher machine’s models 
are also proposed based on the varying degrees of 
complexity which provides better results.
d
dT
δ
ω
ω
= ω
0
ω  
(1)
d
dT
H
m
e
ω =
H
1
2
(
)
D
T
T
m
e
T
ω
−
−
Tm
T
 
(2)
'
'
'
'
1 (
(
)
)
q
q
d
d
d
fd
do
dV
V
x
x i
V
dT
T
=
−
+
−
+
 
(3)
'
'
'
'
1 (
(
) )
d
d
q
q
q
qo
dV
V
x
x i
dT
T
−
+
−
=
 
(4)
where, Vfd is the voltage proportional to field 
voltage; V 'd, V 'q are the voltages proportional to 
damper winding and field flux; id,iq are the d-q 
components of armature currents;
'
'
do
qo
,
T
T
do
q
,
 are the 
d-q axis transient time constants. The overall block 
diagram for Heffron-Phillips model that illustrates 
the linearized model of SMIB is shown in Figure 1. 
The constants K1,K2,K3,K4,K5, K6 are modeled in 
(Padiyar et al. 1996)
2.2 PSS controller structure
The model of the Conventional Power System Sta-
bilizer (CPSS) structure is illustrated in Figure 2. 
The CPSS structure under study consists of two 
phase-lead compensation blocks, a gain block, and 
a signal washout block. It can be shown that by 
appropriate selection of the CPSS parameters, a 
satisfactory performance can be obtained during 
the system disturbance.
The transfer function of the ith PSS is given by:
CPSS
K
T s
pss
w
T
w
=
(
)
sT (
)
sT
+
(
)
s
w (
)
sT
+
(
)
sT
+
)
T
+sT (
)
T
+sTw
T (
1
3
)
T (
sTT
+
T
2
4
)
T (
sTT
+
 
(5)
2.3 Objective function
The stability of a power system can be evaluated 
based on its eigenvalues. The unstable poles or 
lightly damped stable poles result in power sys-
tem oscillations and instability. Hence, displaying 
these poles to the left side of the s-plane (shown in 
Figure 3) can guarantee the stability of the power 
system with the corresponding improvement in the 
system performance.
This paper concentrates on the relocation of 
the unstable and lightly damped electromechani-
cal modes of the oscillations. The parameters of 
the PSS may be chosen to minimize the following 
objective functions (Shayeghi et al. 2010).
Figure 1. Block diagram of single machine with CPSS.
Figure 2. Conventional PSS.
Figure 3. D-shaped sector in the negative half of 
s-plane.

103
f
abs
i
n
i
1
0
f
abs
1 2
=
abs
abs
min(
(
));
, ,...,
σ
σi
0 −
0
 
(6)
f
abs
i
n
i
2
1
f
abs
1 2
=
abs
abs
min(
(
));
, ,...,
ζ
ζ i
1 −
1
 
(7)
where, σi and ζi are the real part and the damp-
ing ratios of the ith operating conditions; n is the 
number of states for which the optimization is 
carried out. The relative stability is determined 
by σ0. The value of σ0 is problem dependent. The 
design procedure can be formulated as the follow-
ing constrained optimization problem, where the 
constraints are the PSS parameters that are bound 
(Shayeghi et al. 2010). In this paper, the value of σi 
and ζi are chosen to be −1.5 and 0.2, respectively, 
and the ranges of the PSS parameters are selected 
to be 1 ≤ Kpss ≤ 200, 0.01 ≤ T ≤ 2.
3 CHEMICAL REACTION OPTIMIZATION 
ALGORITHM
Chemical Reaction Optimization (CRO) algorithm 
(Lam et al. 2010) is a population-based metaheu-
ristic optimization technique inspired by the nature 
of chemical reactions, mimicking the process of 
reactions where molecules collide with the walls of 
the container and with each other. In CRO, a can-
didate solution for a specific problem is encoded 
as a molecule. A molecule possesses two kinds of 
energies, i.e., Potential Energy (PE) and Kinetic 
Energy (KE). PE represents the objective function 
of a molecule while the KE of a molecule repre-
sents its ability of escaping from a local minimum.
Moreover, the chemical reaction is assumed 
to take place in a closed container, and there are 
four types of elementary reactions implemented in 
CRO, namely, (a) on-wall Ineffective Collision, (b)
decomposition, (c) inter molecular ineffective col-
lision, and (d)synthesis.
3.1 On-wall ineffective collision:
In this reaction, a single molecule is involved and 
it is allowed to collide on the wall of the container. 
If the energy criteria has been satisfied then the 
present molecular structure (ω) is changed to (ω') 
Needed to be satisfied for the above reaction is:
'
'
PE
KE
PEω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
+
≥
∑
∑
∑
 
(8)
where ω is the existing molecular structure; ω' is 
the converted molecular structure.
Uni-molecular reactions involving a single mol-
ecule which hits on the wall of the container caus-
ing some of its energy to be transferred to a central 
energy buffer (Environment) and (KE) of the mol-
ecule with new structure can be calculated by the 
following equation:
(
)
KE
PE
PE
KE
a
ω
ω
ω
ω
′
′
=
−
+
×
 
(9)
where a is a random number.
3.2 Decomposition:
This is also anuni-molecular reaction. Here, one 
particular molecule converts into two new mol-
ecules with different structures.
i.e. ω→ω1 + ω 2′ 
(10)
This happens when
1
2
PE
KE
buffer
PE
PE
ω
ω
ω
ω
′
′
+
+
≥
+
 
(11)
3.3 Inter-molecular ineffective collision:
This is a reaction involving two molecules interac-
tion. When two molecules with structure ω1 and ω2 
collide with each other, they are changed into two 
new molecules with structure ω ′1 and ω ′2, if the 
following energy criteria is satisfied:
1
2
1
2
2
PE
PE
KE
KE
PE
PE
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
′
′
+
+
+
≥
+
 
(12)
Einter denotes extra energy after the inter molecu-
lar collision.
(
)
(
)
1
2
1
2
1
2
int er
KE
E
PE
PE
KE
PE
PE
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω′
=
+
−
+
 
(13)
Kinetic energy of ω1
ω ′  is given by:
KE
E
er
ω
ε
1
ω
1ε
′ →
×
E
er
in
E
t
 
(14)
Kinetic energy of ω2
ω ′  is given by:
KE
E
er
ω2
ω
1
′ →
×
E
er
in
E
t
(
)
ε
1
1ε
−
 
(15)
3.4 Synthesis
This reaction is also an intermolecular reaction. 
Here, two molecules with a molecular structure 
ω1
ω  and ω2
ω  collide to form a single molecule with 
structure 
′
ω′. If the following energy criteria 
hold:
KE
PE
KE
PE
KE
PE
′ =
+
PE
+
+
PE
−
′
ω′
ω
ω
KE
+
ω
ω
KE
+
ω′
1
1
2
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
2
ω
 
 
(16)

104
4 OPPOSITIONAL BASED LEARNING
Opposition-Based Learning (OBL) (Tizhoosh 
et al. 2005) is a new concept in computational intel-
ligence. Generally speaking, evolutionary optimi-
zation methods start with some initial solutions 
and try to improve their performance toward some 
optimal solutions. We can improve our chance to 
start with a closer solution by checking the oppo-
site solution simultaneously. By doing this, the 
closer one can be chosen as an initial solution. The 
same approach can be applied not only to the initial 
solutions but also continuously to each iteration in 
the current population. In the OBL method, it gen-
erates a second set of solutions, which is opposite 
to the original solution set so that our probability 
of choosing better solutions can increase. Thus, 
by comparing a number to its opposite, a smaller 
search space is needed.
4.1 Definition (opposite number)
while evaluating a solution to a given problem, 
simultaneously computing its opposite solution 
will provide another chance for finding a candidate 
solution, which is closer to the global optimum.
Let z ∈[
]
m n  be a real number, then opposite 
number z* is defined as:
z
m
n
z
* =
+
m
 
(17)
4.2 Definition (opposite point)
Let Z
(
)
z z
zd
z
 be a point in ad-dimensional 
space, where z z
z
R
d
1
2z ,
2z ....,
 and z
n
i
i
in
∈
,
i
m
[mi
m
]
,
i ∈
i
,
1 2
,
..., d. The opposite point Z
z
zd
*
*
*
*
(
,
z*
,.....,
)
1
2z
,
 is 
defined by:
z
n
z
i
i
m
i
iz
* =
+
mi
m
 
(18)
By employing an opposite point definition, 
opposition-based optimization can be defined as 
follows.
4.3 Opposition-Based Optimization
Let Z
(
)
z z
zd
z
 be a point in the d-dimensional 
space. Assume f(Z) as a fitness function, which is used 
to measure the candidate’s fitness. According to the 
definition of the opposite point, Z
z z
zd
*
*
*
*
,....,
(
)
1
2z
,z
is the opposite of Z
(
)(
z z
zd
z
. Now if 
f Z
f Z
)
Z
)
Z
* ≥
then point Z can be replaced with Z*; 
otherwise, keep the current point Z. Hence, the cur-
rent point and its opposite point are evaluated simul-
taneously in order to continue with the faster one. 
The definition can be extended to the d-dimensional 
search space as follows:
z
rand
i
o
i
(
)
zi
*  
(19)
5 OCRO ALGORITHM
Step 1: 
 Randomly initialize the population (P) 
and generate the opposite population 
(OP).
Step 2: 
 Calculate fitness function of P and OP 
and select np number of the fittest solu-
tion from P and OP. Each fitness value 
represents a Potential Energy (PE). An 
initial Kinetic Energy (KE) is assigned to 
all the molecules.
Step 3: 
 Depending on the PE value a few best 
solutions are kept as elite solution.
Step 4: 
 On-wall Ineffective Collision, decomposi-
tion, inter molecular ineffective collision, 
and synthesis are applied to enhance the 
search space using equations. (11–14).
Step 5: 
 Generate opposite population from the 
current solution based on the jumping 
rate.
Step 6: 
 The feasibility of each solution is checked 
by satisfying the operational constraints.
Step 7: 
 Select np number of fittest solution from 
P and OP. Sort the solution from the 
best to the worst and replace the worst 
solution by the best elite solution.
Step 8: 
 If the stop criterion does not satisfy stop, 
then go to step 4.
6 SIMULATION RESULTS AND 
DISCUSSION
Proposed OCRO and CRO algorithms have been 
applied on the two objective functions namely; 
eigen value minimization (Case I) and damping 
ratio minimization (Case II) and their results are 
compared with the results of OGSA and GSA for 
verifying its feasibility. The algorithm is tested over 
a wide range of loading conditions. Three differ-
ent cases as light (
)
P
QQ =
Q
,)  nominal 
(
)
P
QQ =
Q
, and heavy (
)
)
P
QQ =
Q
 
loading are considered as system uncertainties.
Maximum number of iteration of 100 is taken 
for a simulation study. Proposed OCRO are run for 
50 population size. Programs are developed using 
Matlab 7.6 on a personal computer having 2.53 
GHZ core i5 processor with 4GB RAM. Differ-
ent trails are made for solving PSS problem. The 

105
values for the input parameters are deduced from 
the literature (Lam et al. 2010).
The calculated results for different loading 
conditions are demonstrated in Tables 1–3. The 
simulation results of the proposed algorithms 
have been compared with (Paul et al. 2014). It is 
clearly visible from these tables that the OCRO has 
a better dynamic performance in terms of stability 
with the corresponding improvement in the over-
shoot (Os) and undershoot (Us) than the CRO and 
other population based optimization techniques 
like OGSA and GSA for all operating conditions. 
Also, the computed results improve the damping 
of low frequency oscillations. Also, it should be 
pointed out that for light load in case I, the pro-
posed OCRO attains a damping ratio of 0.2371, 
which is better than the previously reported 02379, 
0.2287, obtained by CRO and OGSA. From the 
Table 3 it can also be clearly seen that there is a 
considerable improvement in the fitness function 
value of (0.0347) using OCRO in comparison to 
CRO, OGSA (Paul et al. 2014) and GSA (Paul 
et al. 2014) in case of the nominal load in Case II. 
These results clearly prove the superiority of the 
proposed algorithm.
The dynamic rotor deviation response obtained 
by OCRO under nominal load and heavy load for 
case I and light load for case II are depicted in Fig-
ures 4–6. It can be clearly seen that the overshoot, 
undershoot and settling time using OCRO are bet-
ter than OGSA and GSA. With changing operat-
ing conditions from light to heavy load, while the 
performance of OGSA and GSA become meager, 
the OCRO stabilizer have stable and robust per-
formances. These Figs. clearly demonstrates the 
superiority of the OCRO based PSS.
Table 1. Comparative results of the electromechanical modes for different algorithms for Case I under light load.
Methods
Eigen Value
Os (×10−4)
Us (×10−4)
ωn
ξ
Fitness value
(×10−4)
OCRO
−1.5000 ± 3.1122i
3.3140
9.4729
3.1122
0.4342
0.0043
CRO
−1.5000 ± 3.1854i
3.3138
9.4726
3.1122
0.4329
0.0056
OGSA
−1.5000 ± 3.1602i
3.3131
9.4865
3.1602
0.4288
0.0074
GSA
−1.5000 ± 3.1067i
3.3131
9.4713
3.1067
0.4348
0.0381
Table 2. Comparative results of the electromechanical modes for different algorithms for Case I under heavy load.
Methods
Eigen Value
Os (×10−4)
Us (×10−4)
ωn
ξ
Fitness value
(×10−4)
OCRO
−1.3819 ± 6.7698i
 9.3682
16.0000
6.7698
0.2000
0.0347
CRO
−1.3798 ± 6.7923i
 9.3518
15.9821
6.7912
0.2000
0.0631
OGSA
−1.3892 ± 6.8057i
9.3425
15.6839
6.8057
0.2000
0.0727
GSA
−1.3672 ± 6.6995i
9.4051
16.1162
6.6995
0.1999
0.5264
Table 3. Comparative results of the electromechanical modes for the different algorithms for Case II under nominal 
load.
Methods
Eigen Value
Os (×10−4)
Us (×10−4)
ωn
ξ
Fitness value 
(×10−4)
OCRO
−1.5000 ± 6.1432i
7.0782
13.000
6.1432
0.2372
0.0106
CRO
−1.5000 ± 6.2341i
6.9065
13.000
6.4512
0.2379
0.0298
OGSA
−1.5000 ± 6.3855i
4.6761
13.0352
6.3855
0.2287
0.0319
GSA
−1.5000 ± 6.7786i
4.8443
13.4608
6.7786
0.2161
0.0859

106
7 CONCLUSION
In this article, a novel approach named opposi-
tional based CRO along with conventional CRO 
are developed and successfully applied on a Single 
Machine Infinite Bus (SMIB) system to find the 
optimal design parameters of the PSS controllers. 
The viability of the proposed method is applied 
under various loadings. The computed results 
obtained are compared with other optimization 
techniques like OGSA and GSA. OCRO gives 
better results for both the two objective functions 
taken in this study. It may be concluded that the 
new proposed algorithm shows more potential 
than the other.
REFERENCES
Abd-Elazim, S.M. & Ali, E.S. 2013. A hybrid particle 
swarmoptimization and bacterial foraging for optimal 
power system stabilizer design. Electr Power Energy 
Syst; 46: 334–41.
Kocaarslan, I. & Cam, E. 2005. Fuzzy logic controller 
in interconnected electrical power systems for load-
frequency control. Int J Electr Power Energy Syst;27: 
542–9.
Lam, A.Y.S., & Li, V.O.K. 2010.“Chemical Reac-
tion inspiredmetaheuristic for optimization”, IEEE 
Transactionson on Evolutionary Computation,14(3): 
381–399.
Niknam, T., Mojarrad, H.D., Meymand, H.Z. & 
Firouzi, B.B. 2011. A new honey bee mating optimi-
zation algorithm for non-smooth economic dispatch. 
Electr Power Energy Syst;36: 896–908.
Padiyar, K.R. 1996. “Power system dynamics: stability 
and control”, Bangalore: Interline Publishing Private 
Ltd.
Paul, S. & Roy P.K. 2014.“ Optimal Design of Power 
System Stabilizer Using Oppositional Gravitational 
Search Algorithm”, IEEE Int. Conf. on Non Conven-
tional Energy, 360–65.
Segal, R., Sharma, A. & Kothari, M. 2004. A self-tuning 
power system stabilizer based on artificial neural net-
work. Int J Electr Power Energy Syst;26: 423–30.
Shaoru, Z. & Fang Lin, L. (2009). An improved simple 
adaptive control applied to power system stabilizer. 
IEEE Trans Power Electron;24: 369–75.
Shayeghi, H., Shayanfar, H.A., Safari, A. & Aghmashah, 
R.A. 2010.“Robust PSSs design using PSO in a mul-
timachine environment” Energy Convers Manage, 51: 
696–02.
Tizhoosh, H.R. 2005.Opposition-based learning: a new 
scheme for machine intelligence, Proceedings of Inter-
national Conference on Computational Intelligence for 
Modeling Control and Automation: 695–701.
Yee, S.K, & Milanovi, c.J.V. 2006. Nonlinear time-re-
sponse optimization method for tuning power system 
stabilizers. IEE Proc.—Gen. Transm. Distrib. 153 (3): 
269–275.
Zhang, P., & Coonick, A.H. 2000.Coordinated synthesis 
of PSS parameters in multimachine power systems 
using themethod of inequalities applied to genetic 
algorithms. IEEE Trans Power Syst;15: 811–6.
Figure 6. Generator response for light load for Case II.
Figure 5. Generator response for heavy load for Case I.
Figure 4. Generator response for nominal load for Case I.

107
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Neural network based multi objective optimization—a new algorithm
Debasish Roy
Techno India University, Salt Lake, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: The difference in Single objective and multi-objective optimizations is primarily in the car-
dinality in the optimal set; from a practical standpoint a user needs only one solution, no matter whether 
the associated optimization problem is single-objective or multi-objective. A multi-objective optimization 
problem can be converted into a single-objective optimization problem by the method of scalarizing an 
objective vector into a single composite objective function. This procedure of handling multi-objective 
optimization problems called Predilection Based MOO and is much simpler, yet still being more subjective 
than the any other procedure. In the evolutionary approaches the most popular methods are by evolution-
ary or genetic algorithms. This paper has proposed a new method for deriving Pareto Optimal Front by 
use of Neural Network. The algorithm has been presented here. A numerical experiment has also been 
performed to validate the algorithm.
In this paper ANN is used to estimate Pareto Opti-
mal front in case of MOOP.
2 LITERATURE REVIEW:
Efficient solutions in the decision set were also proved 
too frequently to map onto the same solution of the 
outcome set (Benson 1995), leading to redundant 
solutions in the decision set. There exists number of 
algorithms that solve in the decision space but are 
hard to apply practically as computational demands 
increase substantially as problem size increases 
(Steuer, 1986), (Armand & Malivert, 1991), (Ara-
mand, 1993), (Sayin, 1996).There are other methods 
for solving problems like use of homotopy to find 
efficient solutions for convex multi-objective pro-
gramming (Lin, Zhu, & Sheng, 2003).
Some of the most popular methods are narrated 
in following paragraphs.
The ε-constraint method chooses a single-
 objective to be optimized while every other objec-
tive is treated as a constraint (Haimes, Lasdon, & 
Wismer, 1971).
The two phase method (Ulungu & Teghem, 
1995) involves finding all supported non-dominated 
solutions by solving the weighted sum problem in 
the first phase and finding all other non-dominated 
solutions in the second phase, usually using enumer-
ative techniques which develop search spaces from 
the supported non-dominated solutions found in 
the first phase. The outer approximation algorithm 
(Benson H.P, 1998) which works on the outcome 
1 INTRODUCTION
In principal, the search space in the context of 
multiple objectives can be divided into two non-
overlapping regions, namely one which is non-op-
timal and one which is optimal. It is palpably true 
for two-objective problem and this can be general-
ized to problems with more than two objectives. In 
the case of incongruous objectives, usually the set 
of optimal solutions contains more than one solu-
tion. Thus, it can be conjectured that there are two 
raison d’être in a multi-objective optimization:
1. A set of solutions as close as possible to the 
Pareto-optimal front.
2. A set of solutions as diverse as possible.
Artificial neural network are nonlinear infor-
mation or signal processing devices, which are 
built from interconnected elementary processing 
devices called neurons. An Artificial Neural Net-
work (ANN) is an information-processing para-
digm that is inspired by the way biological nervous 
systems, such as the brain, that process informa-
tion. The key element of this paradigm is the novel 
structure of the information processing system. It 
is composed of a large number of highly intercon-
nected processing elements called neurons, work-
ing in union to solve specific problems. ANNs, like 
people, learn by example. It resembles that brain in 
two respects, firstly the knowledge is acquired by 
the network through a learning process, and, sec-
ondly inter-neuron connection strengths known as 
synaptic weights are used to store the knowledge. 

108
space has the advantage of no need for backtrack-
ing or bookkeeping which is needed when solving 
in the decision space (Benson, 1997). Hybrid vec-
tor maximization approach (Benson, 1998) though 
was introduced in 1951 (Kuhn & Tucker, 1951) was 
implemented in 1997. Simple partitioning technique 
came into being as an extension of outer approxi-
mation algorithm (Ban, 1983), (Horst & Tuy, 1996), 
but (Benson B. L., 1998) the algorithm also gener-
ated weakly efficient points in the outcome space. A 
feasible basis for the linear program can be decom-
posed (Benson & Sun, 2000) into a finite union of 
subsets with a one-to-one correspondence between 
the weights and efficient extreme solutions in the 
outcome space and the result prompted develop-
ment of a weight set decomposition algorithm 
(Benson & Sun, 2002). The network optimization 
problems used an algorithm evolved from scalar-
isation theorem and single-objective duality theory 
(Pureto & Nickel, 2005). Two distinctive approaches 
to duality are one based on the duality relationship 
between minimal and maximal elements of a set and 
its complement, and another using polarity between 
convex polyhedral sets and the epigraph of its sup-
port function (Luc, 2011). Improvements to existing 
duality relations have also been explored. The outer 
approximation algorithm has a dual variant using 
geometric duality theory to derive a dual variant of 
the algorithm (Ehrgott, Lohne, & Shao, 2012).
Sequentially efficient points and rays can be gen-
erated using extreme ray generation method (Ida, 
2011). The inequality constraints can be added to 
the polyhedral feasible region. Adjacency between 
efficient extreme points can be utilized to gener-
ate maximal efficient faces (Krichen, Masri, & 
Guitouni, 2012). The algorithm explores efficient 
extreme points and uses simplex pivots to find 
adjacent vertices of the current extreme point.
Adaptive—constraint method can be used and 
shown that problems of higher dimensions require a 
bound of number of objectives (Laumanns, Thiele, & 
Zitzler, 2006).Tri-criteria problems can be solved by 
finding solutions of sub-problems and thereby an 
algorithm emerged (Klamroth & Dachert, 2015).
3 MULTI OBJECTIVE OPTIMISATION
The concept of domination is used by most multi-
objective optimization algorithms. Let there be M 
objective functions. In order to cover minimization 
and maximization of objective functions, the oper-
ator « between two solutions p and q is used and 
p«q is used to denote that solution p is better than 
solution q on all objective functions. Likewise, p»q 
for a particular objective implies that solution p is 
worse than solution q on the objective space.
Minimize/Maximize: Φm(x), m = 1, 2... M;
Subject to: θj(x) ≤0, j = 1, 2... J;
ψk(x) = 0, k = 1, 2... K;
x(L)
i  ≤ xi ≤ x(U)
i , i = 1, 2,........, n.
A solution x is a vector of n decision variable 
x = (x1, x2, … ,xn)T. The variable bounds consti-
tute the last set of constraints, restricting each 
decision variable xi to take a value within a lower 
xi
(
)
L  and an upper xi
(
)
U  bound and also comprise 
the decision variable space or simply the decision 
space.
In the problem formulation there are J inequal-
ity and K equality constraints. The constraint func-
tions are denoted by the terms θj(x) and ψk(x). The 
inequality constraints are treated as lesser-than-
equal-to types, although a greater-than-equal-to 
type inequality constraint is also taken care of in 
the above formulation. The type of problem this 
paper is trying to solve has following format:
MinimiseZ
c x
d y
e x
f y
i
ix
j
j
d y
i
ix
j
j
f y
= ∑
∑
∑
∑
(
,
d
i
i
∑
∑
,
)
Such that: 
c x
d y
i
ix
j
j
d y
∑
∑
≤1  
e x
f y
i
ix
j
j
f y
∑
∑
≤1
d y
j
j
d y
∑
≠0
f y
j
j
f y
∑
≠0
x y
R
i
iy ∈
+
4 NEURAL NETWORK BASED MULTI 
OBJECTIVE OPTIMISATION
The proposed New Algorithm based on Neural 
Network is presented below:
Step 1: Define n m-dimensional random points.
Step 2:  Define q fractional functions dependent 
on m-dimensional points.
Step 3:  Evaluate n q-dimensional points.
Step 4:  Find n/k non-dominant points from n 
points evaluated in Step 3.
Step 5:  Partition the output in non-dominant 
and dominated sets.
Step 6:  Define a feed forward network m inputs 
and 1 output.
Step 7:  Train the network output for non-
 dominated points be set to 1 and domi-
nated points be set to 0.

109
Figure 1. Pareto optimal front.
Figure 2. The simulated output of NN.
Table 1. Sample of 100 point output. F1 = First Function Value, F2 = Second Function Value. NDM/DM = Non 
Dominated and Dominated Points, NDM = 1, DM = 0 = Non Dominated points are marked 1 and dominated points 
are marked 0.
F1
F2
NDM = 1, DM = 0
EF1
EF2
NDM/DM
0.5439916
0.5446757
1
0.5489116
0.5602151
1
0.5411736
0.5652664
1
0.5362089
0.5664375
0
0.5376216
0.5589858
1
0.5157171
0.5679379
1
0.5376216
0.5589858
1
0.5296044
0.5619226
1
0.5411736
0.5652664
1
0.4991266
0.5702679
1
0.5376216
0.5589858
1
0.5287474
0.5702679
1
0.5437886
0.5693342
1
0.5106052
0.568453
0
0.5411771
0.5652719
1
0.5496189
0.5607274
1
0.5376216
0.5589858
1
0.533112
0.5616756
1
0.5376216
0.5589858
1
0.5220115
0.57649
1
0.5376216
0.5589858
1
0.5281739
0.562853
1
Step 8:  Train a network with set of inputs as 
output of Step 3 where combined parti-
tioned output is input and output is as 
defined in Step 7.
Step 9:  Simulate the output, if the error values are 
not within the range, retrain the network 
or increase number of layers in feedfor-
ward back propagation network.
Step 10:  Repeat 
step7 
till 
the 
results 
are 
satisfactory.
Step 11:  Take another set of m random inputs.
Obtain output from the network. Test 
if the results corroborate, that is error is 
within the margin of definition.
Step 12:  If error is outside the margin, increase 
number of layers and repeat step 5–7.
Step 13:  Run the network with more set of random 
inputs and generate the Pareto front.
5 THE EXPERIMENT
5.1 Setup
Minimise: y
y
1
1
2
x
1
2
x
2
1
2
x
1
2
x
3
4
x
1
5
7
x
5
4
5
x
2
7
9
x
3
=
+
x2
x
4
+
x2
x
7
=
+
x2
x
5
+
x2
x
9
,
Subject to: 5x1 + 7x2 + 5 ≠ 0, 7x1 + 9x2 + 3 ≠ 0 
3
4
1
5
7
5
1 4
5
2
7
9
3
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
4
1
7
1
5
1
9
+
4
2
x
4
+
7
2
x
7
≤
+
5
2
x
5
+
9
2
x
9
≤
,
5.2 Operation
The algorithm has been implemented in MAT-
LAB. A part of the code is presented below:
function [] = NNMOOP2()
[xy_nd xy_d xy_inp] = MOOP4(100);
xy_out = ones(3,100); [m n] = size(xy_nd);
 xy_out(1:2,1:n) = xy_nd; 
xy_out(1:2,n+1:100) = xy_d;
xy_out(3,n+1:100) = 0.0;xyi = xy_out(1:2,:);
xyo = xy_out(3,:);net = newff(xyi,xyo,30);
 xySim = sim(net,xyi);net.trainParam.
epochs = 100;
net = train(net,xyi,xyo);xyTrainO = sim(net,xyi);
[xy_nd1 xy_d1 xy_inp1] = MOOP4(100);
xy_out1 = ones(3,100);[m1 n1] = size(xy_nd1);
xy_out1(1:2,1:n1) = xy_nd1;
xy_out1(1:2,n1+1:100) = xy_d1;
xy_out1(3,n1+1:100) = 0.0;
xyi1 = xy_out1(1:2,:);
xySim1 = sim(net,xyi1);
disp([xy_out1(3,:)' xySim1' ]);
figure;
plot(1:100,xy_out1(3,:),’*B’,1:100,xySim1,’oR’);

110
title(‘Second Network with new data’);
xy_err1 = xySim1-xy_out(3,:);
disp(‘New error’);
disp(std(xy_err1));
5.3 Results
The results have been presented in Table 1 and 
Figures 1–3. Std Deviation of error between Actual 
output and Simulated Output: 0.1290.
5.4 Conclusion
As can be seen from output of errors the Neural Net-
work has reasonably traced the non- dominated front. 
The standard deviation of error is also within accept-
able range. However, in case of further refinement, 
the experiment may be conducted with larger layers 
of Neural Network or with more training epochs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I thank my guides Dr. Anjan Sarkar and Dr. Abhi-
jit Mitra for inspiring me to write the paper and 
guiding me in this direction of research.
REFERENCES
Aramand, P. (1993). Finding all maximal efficient faces 
in multiobjective linear programming. Mathematical 
Programming, 61(1), 357–375.
Armand, P., & Malivert, C. (1991). Determination of the 
efficient set in multiobjective optimisation. Journal of 
Optimisation Theory and Application, 70(3), 467–490.
Ban, V.T. (1983). A finite algorithm for minimising a con-
cave function under linear constraint and its applica-
tion. In Proceedings of IFIP Working Conference on 
recent advances on system modelling and optimisation.
Benson, H.P. (1995). A geometrical analysis of efficient 
outcome set in multiple objective convex programs 
with linear criteria functions. Global Optimisation, 
6(3), 231–251.
Benson, H.P. (1997). Hybrid Approach for Solving Mul-
ti-objective linear programs:the bicriteria case. Acta 
Mathemetica Vietnamica, 22, 29–51.
Benson, B.L. (1998). Evolution of Commercial Laws. 
London: Macmillan Press.
Benson, H.P. (1998). Hybrid Approach for solving mltiob-
jective linear programs in outcome space. Journal of 
Optimisation Theory and Applications, 98, 17–35.
Benson, H.P., & Sun, E. (2000). Pivoting in Outcome 
Polyhedron. Journal of Global Optimisation, 16, 
301–323.
Benson, H.P., & Sun, E. (2002). A weight set decom-
position algorithm for finding all efficient extereme 
points in the outcome set of multiple objective linear 
program. European Journal of Operation Research, 
139(1), 26–41.
Ehrgott, M., Lohne, A., & Shao, L. (2012). A dual vari-
ant of Benson’s outer approximation algorithm for 
multiple objective linear programming. Journal of 
Global Optimisation, 52(4), 757–778.
Haimes, Y.Y., Lasdon, L.S., & Wismer, D.A. (1971). On 
a bricriteria formulation of the problems of the inte-
grated system identification and system optimisation. 
IEEE transaction on Systems and Man and Cybernet-
ics, 1(3), 296–297.
Horst, R., & Tuy, H. (1996). Global Optimsation: Deter-
ministic Approaches. Berlin: Springer.
Ida, M. (2011). Efficient solution generation for multi-
objective linear programming basedon extreme ray 
generation method. European Journal of Operation 
Research, 160(1), 242–251.
Klamroth, K., & Dachert, K. (2015). A linear bound on 
the number of scalarizations needed to solve discrete 
tricriteria optimization problems. Journal of Global 
Optimisation, 61, 643–676.
Krichen, S., Masri, H., & Guitouni, A. (2012). Adja-
cency based method for generating maximal efficient 
faces in multiobjective linear programming. Applied 
Mathematical Modelling, 36(12), 6301–6311.
Kuhn, H.W., & Tucker, A.W. (1951). Nonlinear Program-
ming. Second Barkeley Symposium, 2, 481–492.
Laumanns, M., Thiele, L., & Zitzler, E. (2006). An efficient, 
adaptive parameter variation scheme for metaheuris-
tics based on the epsilon-constraint method. European 
Journal of Operation Research, 169(3), 932–942.
Lin, Z.H., Zhu, D.L., & Sheng, Z.P. (2003). Finding a 
minimum efficient solution of a convex multiobjective 
program. Journal of Optimisation Theory and Applica-
tion, 118(I), 587–600.
Luc, D. (2011). On Duality in Multiple Objective Lin-
ear Progamming. European Journal of Operation 
Research, 118(3), 158–168.
Pureto, J., & Nickel, S. (2005). Location Theory: A Uni-
fied Approach. Springer.
Sayin, S. (1996). An algorithm based on facial decompo-
sition for finding efficient set in multiple objective lin-
ear programming. Operation Research Letters, 19(2), 
87–94.
Steuer, R.E. (1986). Multiple Criteria Optimisation: 
Theory Computation and Application. New York: John 
Wiliey.
Ulungu, E.L., & Teghem, J. (1995). The two phases 
method: An efficient process to solve bi-objective 
combinatorial optimisation problems. Foundaions of 
Computing and Decision Sciences, 20(2), 149–165.
Figure 3. The actual output classification.

111
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Available Transfer Capacity evaluation through 
BBO and GWO algorithms
Kingsuk Majumdar
Dr. B.C. Roy Engineering College, Durgapur, India
Provas Kumar Roy
Jalpaiguri Government Engineering College, Jalpaiguri, India
Subrata Banerjee
National Institute of Technology, Durgapur, India
ABSTRACT: Information of the Available Transfer Capacity (ATC) is very important in the Deregu-
lated Environment (DE). In this paper, ATC calculation is emphasized in view of the Optimal Power 
Flow (OPF) technique through some soft computational methods viz. Biogeography-Based Optimization 
(BBO) and Gray Wolf Optimization (GWO). The ATC is the key factor on the basis of the effect of trans-
action on transmission to allow or disallow bilateral transmission transection. The OPF has many objec-
tives in the DE with open market conditions and these calculations aid to Independent System Operators 
(ISO) to handle the congestion threat on the transmission lines and assure system security and reliability. 
The two methods of soft computing, i.e., BBO and GWO are applied to find out the aforesaid criteria in 
the ATC calculation through the OPF, a corrective tool, which hints a new generation schedule to resist 
congestion and gives clues to the values of controlled parameters (e.g. active power generations, tap set-
ting, reactive power injection) to avoid the violation of power system constrains (bus voltage limit and 
reactive power injection limit). The proposed methods are tested on WSCC 3 machine 9-bus and IEEE 30 
bus test systems to evaluate ATC and their results, which are compared and it is observed that the GWO 
results are better than those obtain by BBO in both cases.
transfer capability or available room in the physi-
cal transmission network, for transfers of power 
for further commercial activity, over and above 
already committed uses without violating the 
power system constrains, which is a key require-
ment for fostering the generation competition 
and customer choices and it should be available 
on a publicly accessible Open Access Same time 
Information System (OASIS). ATC information is 
very vital for independent system operators (ISO), 
planners and operators of the bulk power markets 
[3], and it also gives strategy to handle the conges-
tion. The present computations [4–5] are usually 
oversimplified or time consuming. Without a fast 
computation algorithm, the center computer of 
the ISO would not calculate at a faster speed as 
it is required by the market. As the dc model is 
proposed in [4], it has many assumptions, which 
leads to erroneous results, hence, an ac model 
with a fast algorithm is required to fulfil the need 
regarding ATC, which involves the determination 
of Total Transfer Capability (TTC) and two mar-
gins – Transmission Reliability Margin (TRM) and 
Capacity Benefit Margin (CBM) [6–7]. TTC is the 
1 INTRODUCTION
The Available Transfer Capacity (ATC) is a vital 
area of the power system, which helps the system 
to operate securely and avoid the generation defi-
ciency that may occur during a power transfer. 
The transmission congestion appears when the 
demand for power transmission exceeds the sys-
tem’s capability limit. The condition of conges-
tion can be controlled by the proper planning and 
designing of the power network, i.e., by increasing 
the network’s capacity to fulfill its need. Nowa-
days, the aforesaid criteria requires a serious con-
cern by the transmission grid, system planner and 
needs an optimized engineering study about it, 
which is one of the most challenging aspects in a 
multi-buyer’s competitive wholesale system [1]. It 
can be controlled by a Regional or Zonal conges-
tion transmission charges [2]. As this simple con-
cept is a dynamics and real time manner, hence, 
it is difficult to implement the views of the con-
gestion management, economics of energy market 
and commitment of deregulation of power toward 
the society. Thus, ATC is defined as a measure of 

112
largest flow in the selected interface for which there 
are no thermal overloads, voltage limit violations, 
and voltage collapse and/or any other system secu-
rity problems. ATC can also be defined as the TTC 
minus the base case flow. Hence, the determination 
of the TTC is a key factor for computing ATC. In 
this paper, transient stability or oscillations are not 
addressed, which can be approximated by flow lim-
its. So far ATC is mainly calculated by the classical 
methods like dc linear sensitivity analysis continu-
ation power flow (CPF), decomposition, repetitive 
power flow (RPF), and linear available transfer 
capability (LATC) methods [8–10]. However, these 
approaches possess some drawbacks. In most of 
these methods, the reactive power and voltage 
constraints are neglected and the transmission line 
thermal limits are the only effective restraints and 
they are unable to give an optimum value. Later on, 
OPF is adopted with classical methods to enhance 
the feasibility of this calculation. But the objec-
tive functions of the OPF problem are generally 
non-linear and non-convex in nature, which needs 
the special care to get the global optimal solutions. 
The traditional optimization approaches such as 
non-linear programming (NLP) [11], quadratic 
programming (QP) [12], linear programming (LP) 
[13], and interior point method (IPM) [13] are used 
successfully to solve the OPF problem. The parti-
cle swarm optimization (PSO) was first introduced 
by Kennedy and Eberhart [15], which is a flexible, 
robust, and population-based stochastic search/
optimization algorithm with inherent parallelism 
and in recent years this method has earned the 
popularity over its competitors and is increasingly 
gaining acceptance for solving many power system 
problems like economic dispatch [17], and OPF 
[19]. So far optimization methods like BBO [16] or 
GWO [17] is not reported prominently in this field 
though these are very powerful tools to evaluate 
many power system problems. In this paper, BBO 
introduced by Simon et al. [16] is utilized for the 
solution of ATC problems. Moreover, gray wolf 
optimization (GWO) introduced by Mirjalili et al. 
[17] is also implemented for the same. The effec-
tiveness and application of the proposed BBO and 
GWO algorithms are demonstrated by implement-
ing these in WSCC 3 machine 9 bus and standard 
IEEE 30-bus systems and their performances are 
compared with each other’s.
The rest of the article is composed as follows: At 
the very beginning of this paper, a brief overview of 
the ATC and its solution methods are presented. In 
the next section, mathematical formulation of the 
objective function in view of OPF is evaluated. In 
the third section, a general overview of BBO tech-
nique to evaluate proposed problem is discussed. 
Afterwards, the GWO method is applied to han-
dle the proposed problem. The simulation results 
and a comparative study of the above two methods 
are discussed in Section 5. In the tail end section, 
a conclusion is drawn to summarize the concept 
of this paper and future scope of the works for the 
same.
2 MATHEMATICAL MODELING
In this section, OPF tool is used to deal with TTC 
challenges. The objective function consists of the 
transfer of possible maximum power from a spe-
cific set of generators in a source area to load in a 
sink area through some particular tie-lines without 
the violation of load flow constrains and system 
operation limits. The sum of real power loads in 
the sink area at the maximum power transaction is 
defined as the TTC value. The objective function 
for the OPF-based TTC calculation is expressed 
mathematically as shown in (1) [20].
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
L T
T
L
T
TLA
GP
GP
V
V
F mi
V
si
GQ
GQmi
F
si
+
FGP
F
+
F
F
+
F
L T
F L
T
Φ
Φ
 
(1)
where, Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
TL
GP
V
G
Φ Q
,
,
ΦGP
 are different positive 
scalar values for the objective function.
The equality constrains of load flow can be 
defined as:
P
P
VY V
G
D
P
P
P
P
i i
VY
VY j
j
V
i
Y
j
NB
i
i
G
D −
P
(
)
ij
j
i
−
j
=
=∑
cos
ij
j
+
j
i
1
0  
(2)
Q
Q
VY V
G
D
Q
Q
Q
i i
VY
VY j
j
V
i
Y
j
NB
i
i
G
D
Q
+
QD
Q
(
)
ij
j
i
−
j
=
=∑
sin
ij
j
+
j
i
1
0  
(3)
The generators constraints are as below:
P
P
i
NG
Gi
P
G
G
P i
i
G
min
m
P
P
ax;
,
i
...,
≤
PG
P
1
 
(4)
Q
Q
Q
i
NG
Gi
Q
Gi
Q
Gi
Q
min
m
Q
Q
ax
,
i
...,
≤
QGi
Q
1
 
(5)
V
V
i
NB
i
i
V
V
V
V
i
V
min
m
V
V
ax;
,
i
...,
≤
Vi
V
1
 
(6)
where, P
Q
V
P
Q
Gi
P
Gi
Q
i
G
V
P
V
P i
G
Q i
min
m
Q
in
min
m
P
ax
max
,
QGi
Q
G
P i
 and Vi
V max are 
minimum and maximum active, reactive generated 
power and voltage limits, respectively, and NG, NB 
denotes number of generators and total bus num-
bers, respectively, in the system.
Tap setting transformers are shown as below:
T
T
i
NT
i
i
T
iT
min
m
T
T
ax;
,
i
...,
≤
TiT
1
 
(7)
where, T
T
i
i
T
T
T
T
min
m
T
ax are tap setting limit and NT rep-
resents total number of tap setting transformers.

113
Similarly, shunt reactor compensations can be 
presented as:
Q
Q
i
NSH
SH
Q
i
S
Q
H
Hi
SH
Q
i
H
min
m
Q
Q
ax
,
i
...,
≤
QS
Q Hi
Q
1
 
(8)
where, Q
Q
SH
Q
i
S
Q
H
Hi
min
m
Q
ax are shunt reactors limit and 
NSH represents number of shunt reactors.
The objective function can be divided into sev-
eral parts as:
For a more practical and accurate model of the 
cost function of generators, multiple valve steam 
turbines are incorporated for flexible operational 
facilities. Total cost of generating units with valve 
point loading is given by [21]:
FGP
F
i
NG
(
)
a P
b P
c
e
i G
P i
ib
Gi
P
i
ie
a P
iP
+
ci
(
)
fif (
)
P
P
iP
iP
=∑
1
 
 
(9)
where, a b c e
f
i
ib
i
ie
if
,
ib
and
 are cost co-efficient of the 
ith unit with valve point effect. To evaluate ATC 
or TTC for a system [6], power flow should be 
enhanced through some particular lines and can 
be represents as:
F
S
TLA
F
TLi
S
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
1
 
(10)
where, STLi
S
 is power flow through the ith line.
To restrict the overloading of the transmission 
line cost function which can be formulated as 
below:
FTL
F
i
NTL
T
(
)
S
S
TL
S
TL
S
i
i
TL
−
STL
S
=∑
2
1
 
(11)
where, STL
S
i
max  is the maximum thermal loading, 
i.e., maximum capacity of the ith transmission line.
To restrict the voltage missmatch and gener-
ate the reactive power violations of the proposed 
model in the following equations, which can be 
defined as:
FVmis
F
i
NL
(
)
V
V
i
i
V
V
−
Vi
V
=∑
2
1
 
(12)
FGQmi
F
si
i
NG
(
)
Q
Q
G
Q i
G
Q i
−
QG
Q i
=∑
2
1
 
(13)
The aforesaid objective function of the propose 
problem (1) can be minimized by the proposed 
algorithms, i.e., BBO and GWO without violating 
the power system constrains.
3 BIOGEOGRAPHY-BASED 
OPTIMIZATION
Biogeography deals with how new species arise, how 
species become extinct and how species migrate 
from one island to another. A habitat is any island 
(area), which is geographically isolated from other 
islands. Areas that are well suited as residences 
for biological species are supposed to have a high 
habitat suitability index (HSI). The variables that 
characterize habitability are called as suitability 
index variables (SIYs). SIYs can be treated as the 
independent variables of the habitat, and HSI can 
be calculated using these variables. The basic BBO 
algorithms are applied to any optimization prob-
lem consisting of a migration operator followed by 
a mutation.
3.1 Migration operation
In the migration stage of BBO, the next iteration 
solutions are generated from the present iteration 
by immigrating solution features to other islands 
and receiving solution features emigration from 
other islands. The immigration and emigration 
rate of kth island can be formulated as described 
in (14) and (15)
λi
m
λ
i
Im
Si
S
=
−
I ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
1
ma
S
x
 
(14)
μiμ
m
i
E S
m
i
S
=
ma
S
x
 
(15)
where λ μ
i
i
λ μ
λ
 are immigration and emigration rates, 
respectively, for the kthg
 individual; I
E
m
m
I
E
I
E
ax are the 
maximum possible immigration rate and emigra-
tion rate, respectively; SiS  is the number of species 
of the ith,
 individual and Sma
S
x is the maximum 
number of species.
3.2 Mutation operation
The mutation process of BBO is used to enhance 
the density of the population to achieve good solu-
tions. In the mutation process, SIV of a habitat is 
randomly modified based on the mutation rate as 
follows [22]:
m
m
P
P
i
iP
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
max
ma
P
x
1
 
(16)
where mi is the mutation rate for the ith habitat; 
mmax is the maximum mutation rate; Pma
P
x is the 
maximum species count probability and PiP is the 

114
species count probability for the ith habitat and is 
described as [22]:
P
P
P
S
P
iP
i
i
iP
i
i
=
−
=
P
S
−
(
)
i
)
i
(
(
)
i +
(
)
i
P
λ
μ
i +
i
iλi +
i
P
)
(i
Pi +
i
0
iPiP
i
i
i
P
P
Pi
+
≤
−
λ
P
iλ
λ
(
)
i −
(
)
i
P
(
)
i +
(
)
i
P
max
(
)
i −
(P
)
i
(λ
μ
i +
i
P
)
(i
Pi
P
)
(i
P +
i
1
S
≤
S
1
i
S
S
−
⎧
⎨⎪⎧
⎨
⎩⎪
⎨
⎩
1)
max
 
 
(17)
4 GREY WOLF OPTIMIZATION
Grey Wolf Optimization (GWO) is another new 
meta-heuristic algorithm inspired by grey wolves 
and it mimics the leadership hierarchy and hunt-
ing mechanism of them. Three main steps of hunt-
ing such as searching for prey, encircling prey, 
and attacking prey are applied for optimizing a 
specified problem using GWO. The group size is 
between 5 and12 on an average and there are four 
types of wolves that are considered as alpha, beta, 
delta, and omega. The alpha wolves have the high-
est priority and are mostly responsible for making 
decisions about hunting, sleeping place, time to 
wake, and so on. The next level in the hierarchy 
of grey wolves is beta. The betas are subordinate 
wolves which help the alpha in decision-making. 
After that there is delta wolf category and the low-
est rank is the omega that plays the role of a scape-
goat [17].
4.1 Encircling prey
As mentioned above, grey wolves encircle the prey 
during the hunt and it can be mathematically mod-
elled encircling the behaviour of the following 
equations which are proposed

 

E
D X
X
P
X ( )t −
( )t
.
 
(17)


 
X
t
E
p
(
)
t +
t(
X p
X
) = X
)
.
B
−
 
(18)
where 


X
X
p
X ,
 are the positions of the prey and grey 
wolf, respectively. Here 
 
B D
,
 are as follows

 

B
b r
b

b r1r.
 
(19)


D
r
2 2r  
(20)
where 

b linearly decreases from 2 to 0 over the 
course of iterations and  
r r
1
2
r r
r r  are the random num-
bers between [0 1].
4.2 Hunting
Grey wolves have the inherent ability to recognize 
the location of the prey and encircles them and this 
is usually guided by the alpha. In order to math-
ematically represent the hunting mechanism, the 
following equations can be presented:












E
D X
X
E
D X
X
E
D X
X
α
α
D
β
β
X
δ
α
D X
D X
D X
D X
D X
D X
1
D X
X
E
α
D
β
D
D X
D
X
X
α
X
,
X
β
X
 
 
(21)









X
X
B
E
X
X
B
E
X
X
B
E
1
X
X
X
B
2
X
X
3
X
X
−
X
−
X
−
X
α
α
E
1
B
β
β
B
E
2
B
δ
δ
B
E
3
B
(
),
(
),
(
)  
 
(22)




X
X
X
X
(
)
t
( )t
( )t
( )t
=
)
+
+
X
)t
3
1
2
1
X
X
( )t
( )t
+
+
X
)t
 
(23)
4.3 Attacking prey (exploitation)
The hunt process has been ended by attacking the 
prey when it stops moving. In order to mathemati-
cally model the approaching prey, we decrease the 
value of 

b from 2 to 0 over the course of iterations. 
Consequently, random values of 

B are in [−1,1], 
the next position of a search agent can be in any 
position between its current position and the posi-
tion of the prey. Hence, |B|<1 forces the wolves to 
attack towards the prey.
4.4 Search for prey (exploration)
Grey wolves mostly search according to the posi-
tion of the alpha, beta, and delta. The value of |B|>1 
forces the grey wolves to diverge from the prey to 
hopefully find a fitter prey. The vector 

Dcontains 
random values in [0, 2]. This component provides 
random weights for the prey in order to stochasti-
cally emphasize (D>1) or deemphasize (D<1) the 
effect of prey in defining the distance in (17).
The pseudo code for GWO is shown in 
Figure 1.
5 RESULT AND DISCUSSION
The applicability and validity of the BBO and 
GWO techniques is tested on WSCC 9 bus and 
IEEE 30-bus system to solve the ATC problems. 
For WSCC, 9 bus system data are taken from 
MATPOWER 4.1. The load buses are taken at 5, 
6, and 8 and ATC is calculated for line number is 
7, i.e., in between bus 2 and 8. The IEEE 30-bus 
system contains 6 generating units connected 
at the bus number 1,2,13,22,23, and 27, twenty 
four loads, four regulating transformers are con-
nected between the line numbers 6–9, 6–10, 4–12 
and 27–28; forty one transmission lines and nine 
reactive VAr compensators at the bus numbers 10, 
12, 15, 17, 20, 21, 23, 24, and 29. The full system 

115
data are taken form [23] and it can be divided into 
3 areas say area-1, area-2 and area-3 shown in 
Figure 2. In this proposed test system, TTC is cal-
culated from area-1 (seller) to area-2 (buyer) by the 
tie-line 4-12 i.e. line no 15 and loads of the area-2 
at bus numbers 12,16,17,14,18, and 15, respectively, 
are increased by a minimum of ten percent to a 
maximum fifty percent randomly without chang-
ing its load power factor as that of base load case. 
The program is written in MATLAB-7 software 
(32 bits) and executed on a 1.7 GHz core i3 proc-
essor with 4-GB RAM. In this simulation study, 
Φ
Φ
TL
GP
V
G
Φ Q
,
,
ΦGP
 are taken as 25, 0.00001, 10, 
and 10, respectively. Owing to the unpredictability 
of optimization algorithms, several trials should be 
made for selecting the appropriate values of input 
parameters. After several trials, following param-
eters are found to be the best for successful imple-
mentation of BBO and GWO algorithms:
For BBO: habitat modification probability = 1, 
mutation probability = 0.005, maximum immi-
gration rate, 
ma
I
x = 1, maximum emigration rate, 
Ema
E
x
,
= 1  step size used for numerical integration 
of probabilities = 1, elitism parameter = 15% of 
total habitat e.g. total population.
For GWO: No such initial input parameters 
are required which is a great advantage of this 
algorithm.
The population size and the maximum number 
of the generations are 50 and 100 both cases. It is 
observed from Table 1 that in both cases GWO is 
superior to that of the BBO. In case of IEEE 30 
bus test system there are 6.45% and 10.39% line 
overflow at line numbers 10 and 26, respectively, 
when they are tested by BBO. But GWO there is 
only 6.41% at the line number 10. The optimized 
control parameters are given in Tables 2 and 3. 
Figure 
1. The 
pseudo 
code 
of 
Grey 
Wolf 
Optimization.
Figure 2. IEEE 30 bus test system.
Table 1. Objective function values for BBO and GWO.
Parameters
BBO 
IEEE30
GWO 
IEEE30
BBO 
WSCC9
GWO 
WSCC9
FTL (p.u.)
0.0539
0.0205
0
0
FLTA (p.u.)−1 2.3949
3.1963
0.6244
0.5654
STL(line flow) 
(p.u.)
0.4175
0.3129
1.6014
1.7685
FGP mu/hr
1125.990
841.5889 6814.4993 8060.4653
FVmis (p.u.)
0
0
0
0
FQGmis (p.u.) 0
0
0
0
FT
3.7537
3.7181
0.6926
0.6460
Table 2. Best control variables result for BBO and 
GWO for IEEE 30 bus test system.
Parameters BBO
GWO
Parameters BBO
GWO
PG1 (p.u.)
0.5578 1.1454 QSH1 (p.u.)
0.0449 0.0101
PG2 (p.u.)
1.2609 0.3654 QSH2 (p.u.)
0.0014 0.0231
PG3(p.u.)
0.3147 0.1530 QSH3 (p.u.)
0.0462 0.0385
PG4 (p.u.)
0.3314 0.2366 QSH4 (p.u.)
0.0442 0.0104
PG5 (p.u.)
0.1575 0.1662 QSH5 (p.u.)
0.0096 0.0466
PG6 (p.u.)
0.1367 0.1842 QSH6 (p.u.)
0.0165 0.0108
V1 (p.u.)
1.0204 1.1000 QSH7 (p.u.)
0.0215 0.0167
V2 (p.u.)
1.0195 1.0869 QSH8 (p.u.)
0.0263 0.0023
V3 (p.u.)
1.0371 1.0841 QSH9 (p.u.)
0.0331 0.0325
V4 (p.u.)
0.9956 1.0349 LPD1 (p.u.)
0.3880 0.1482
V5 (p.u.)
1.0167 1.0341 LPD2 (p.u.)
0.1110 0.1168
V6 (p.u.)
1.0210 1.0434 LPD3 (p.u.)
0.3277 0.1437
T1
0.9285 1.0272 LPD4 (p.u.)
0.1535 0.1021
T2
1.0925 0.9128 LPD5 (p.u.)
0.1023 0.0863
T3
0.9231 1.0398 LPD6 (p.u.)
0.1268 0.1256
T4
1.0313 1.0368

116
Figure 3. Convergence curves for WSCC 9 Bus.
Figure 4. Convergence curves for IEEE 30 Bus.
Table 3. Best control variables result for BBO and 
GWO for WSCC 9 bus test system.
Parameters
BBO
GWO
PG1 (p.u.)
1.0364
1.1868
PG2 (p.u.)
1.6013
1.7559
PG3(p.u.)
1.1234
1.2375
V1 (p.u.)
1.0832
1.0446
V2 (p.u.)
1.0986
1.0547
V3 (p.u.)
1.0976
1.0273
LPD1 (p.u.)
1.2395
1.0171
LPD2 (p.u.)
0.1084
0.2524
LPD3 (p.u.)
0.1180
0.6265
The cost function convergence curves are shown in 
 Figures 3 and 4 for WSCC 9 bus and IEEE 30 bus 
test system, respectively.
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, theeffectiveness of the BBO and 
GWO optimizations are studied to achieve maxi-
mum possible ATC for IEEE 30 bus and WSCC 9 
bus test systems. ATC programs along with OPF 
concept is implemented as a tool for solving the 
transmission management problem. By compar-
ing both the results, it can be concluded that in 
case of GWO optimization, the power transfer 
from area-1 to area-2, i.e., from 4 to 12 tie-line 
is enhanced. But active power generation cost in 
later cases are higher than that of the former can 
be ignored. As the OPF is incorporated with these 
techniques, hence, these data can be shown online 
so that the buyers or sellers will be aware that such 
a transaction is possible. In case of IEEE 30 bus 
test system there are some line overflows, which 
can be mitigated by the Flexible AC Transmission 
System (FACTS) and can be extended in the future 
research work.
REFERENCES
 [1] F. P. Sener and E. R. Greene, “Top three technical 
problems -a survey report,” IEEE Transactions on 
Power Systems, vol.12, no.1, pp. 230–244, 1997.
 [2] L. Philipson and H. Lee Willis, “Understanding 
electric utilities and deregulation,” Marcel Dekker 
Inc., New York, 1998.
 [3] Ian et.al, “Electric Power Transfer Capability: Con-
cepts, Applications, Sensitivity and Uncertainty,” 
www.pserc.cornell.edu/tcc/tutorial/TCC\_Tutorial.
pdf
 [4] R. D. Christie, B. F. Wollenberg, I. Wangensteen, 
“Transmission Management in Deregulated Envi-
ronment,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol.88, no.2, 
pp. 449–451, 2000.
 [5] M. Shaaban, Y. Ni, F. F. Wu, “Transfer Capability 
computations in Deregulated Power Systems,” Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd Hawaii International Confer-
ence on System Sciences-2000.
 [6] G.C.Ejebe, J.Tong, J.G.Waight, J.G.Frame, X.Wang, 
W.F.Tinney, “Available Transfer Capability Calcula-
tions,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol.13, 
no.4, pp. 1521–1527, 1998.
 [7] H. Farahmand, M. Rashidinejad, A. Mousavi, and 
A. A. Gharaveisi, et all, “Hybrid Mutation Particle 
Swarm Optimisation method for Available Trans-
fer Capability enhancement,” International Journal 
of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, vol. 42, pp. 
240–249, 2012.
 [8] R.D. Christie, B.F, Wollenberg, and I. Wangensteen, 
“Transmission management in the deregulated 

117
environment’, IEEE Proceedings, vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 
170–195, 2000.
 [9] G.C. Ejebe, J.G. Waight, M. Santos-Nieto and W.F. 
Tinney, “Fast calculation of linear available transfer 
capability”, Proceedings the Power Industry Com-
puter Applications Conference, pp. 255–260, 1999.
 [10] M. H. Gravener, C. Nwankpa, “Available Transfer 
Capability and first order sensitivity,” IEEE Trans-
action on Power Systems, vol.14, no.2, pp. 512–518, 
1999.
 [11] H. Wei, H. Sasaki, J. Kubokawa, and R. 
Yokoyama,,”An interior point nonlinear program-
ming for optimal power flow problems with a novel 
data structure,”EEE Power & Energy Society, vol. 
13, pp. 870–877, 1998.
 [12] R.S. Wibowo, Nursidi, H. Satriyadi, D.F.P. Uman, 
A.Soeprijanto, O.Penangsang, “Dynamic DC opti-
mal power flow using quadratic programming,” 
Information Technology and Electrical Engineering 
(ICITEE), International Conference, pp. 360–364, 
2013.
 [13] S. K. Mukherjee, A.Recio, C. Douligeris, “Optimal 
power flow by linear programming based optimiza-
tion,” Southeastcon ‘92, Proceedings., IEEE, vol. 2, 
pp. 527–529, 1992.
 [14] W. Hua, H. Sasaki, J.Kubokawa,”Interior point 
method for hydro-thermal optimal power flow,” 
Energy Management and Power Delivery, 1995. 
Proceedings of EMPD ‘95., 1995 International 
Conference, vol. 2, pp.607–612, 1995.
 [15] J. Kennedy, R. Eberhart, Particle swarm optimiza-
tion, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on 
Neural Networks (ICNN’95), vol. 6, Perth, Aus-
tralia, (1995), pp. 1942–1948.
 [16] Dan Simon, “Biogeography-Based Optimization,” 
IEEE transactions on Evolutionary computation, 
vol. 12, No. 6, pp. 702–713, 2008.
 [17] S. Mirjalili, S. M. Mirjalili, A. Lewis, “Grey Wolf 
Optimizer”, Advances in Engineering Software, vol. 
69, pp. 46–61,2014
 [18] D. Gong, Y. Zhang, C. Qi, “Environmental/eco-
nomic power dispatch using a hybrid multi- objective 
optimization algorithm,” Electrical Power and 
Energy Systems, vol. 32, pp.607–614, 2010.
 [19] A. Srinivasan, P. Venkatesh, B. Dineshkumar, 
“Optimal generation share based dynamic available 
transfer capability improvement in deregulated elec-
tricity market,” IEEE Transactions on Power Sys-
tems, vol.54, pp. 226–234, Nov2014.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

119
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Optimal location of capacitor in radial distribution network using 
Chemical Reaction Optimization algorithm
S. Sultana & S. Roy
Dr. B.C. Roy Engineering College, Durgapur, India
P.K. Roy
Jalpaiguri Government Engineering College, Jalpaiguri, India
ABSTRACT: Presently, the consolidation of the capacitor banks on the radial distribution network has 
a direct impact on the development of technology and the energy disasters that the world is encountering. 
Distribution system provides the final link between high voltage transmission system and the low voltage 
end users, so it’s very essential to keep the system healthy with minimum losses. Studies have also shown 
that the non-optimal location of the capacitor banks increase the power loss, so that the optimal place-
ment of the capacitor bank is very necessary in the radial distribution system. In this paper, a new and 
efficient Chemical Reaction Optimization (CRO) method is proposed to find the optimal and simultane-
ous placement for the capacitor in the radial distribution systems with an objective of the reduction of 
power losses. To verify the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method, it is tested on the 34-bus 
and 69-bus radial distribution systems. The simulation results of the proposed methods are compared 
with those of other population based optimizations like the Plant Growth Simulation Algorithm (PGSA), 
Teaching Learning Based Optimization (TLBO), Direct Search Algorithm (DSA), Particle Swarm Opti-
mization (PSO), and Genetic Algorithm (GA) in order to demonstrate that the proposed approach is 
more useful than other techniques.
Presently, capacitor placement problem is a 
very attractive and well researched topic. So, many 
researchers focused on the analytical approach to 
determine the optimum location and size of the 
capacitor in the radial distribution system (Salama 
et al. 2000, Baran et al. 1989). An analytical algo-
rithm and fuzzy real coded GA is used to optimize 
the capacitor for enhancing voltage stability in 
the radial distribution system (Wafa et al. 2014). 
Besides the analytical approach, many researchers 
developed a classical based optimizing technique 
for the purpose of the placement of the capacitor 
in the radial distribution system. A Mixed Integer 
Nonlinear Programming approach (MINLP) was 
developed for the purpose of optimal capacitor 
placement (Nojavan et al. 2014). Jabr proposed 
a conic and Mixed Integer Linear Programming 
approach (MILP) to optimize the capacitor for 
minimizing the costs associated with the capacitor 
banks, peak power, and energy losses (Jabr et al. 
2008). A Clustering Based Optimization (CBO) 
was implemented to minimize the sum of costs 
for power/energy losses and capacitor costs in the 
radial distribution system (Todorovski et al. 2014). 
A plant growth simulation algorithm (PGSA) was 
presented to solve the optimal placement of the 
capacitor to minimize the power loss and improve 
1 INTRODUCTION
A capacitor can be defined as a two terminal pas-
sive electrical component, which is used to store 
electric charge. Electricity distribution is a final 
stage in the delivery of electricity to end users. 
A distribution network carries electricity from the 
transmission system and delivers it to the consum-
ers. It is the most visible part of the supply chain. 
Presently, due to their simplicity most of the distri-
bution system is radial in nature, because of high 
R/X ratio, the I2 R loss in the radial distribution 
system is also high compared to the high voltage 
transmission system. The loss minimization in the 
distribution systems is assumed to be of a greater 
significance. Since, the trend towards distribution 
automation is to improve their reliability, effi-
ciency, and service quality, the most efficient oper-
ating scenario for economic viability variations is 
required. Among many of their merits, line loss 
and Total Harmonic Distortion (THD) reduction, 
voltage profile improvement, and reactive power 
compensation can be the salient specifications of 
the capacitors. Therefore, it is necessary to find 
the optimum location and size of the capacitor to 
minimize the power loss in the radial distribution 
system.

120
the voltage profile (Rao et al. 2011). An immune 
multi-objective algorithm was developed for the 
purpose of the optimal placement of the capacitor 
in the radial distribution system (Jiang et al. 2008).
Besides 
the 
classical 
based 
optimization 
approach, several population based optimizations 
are developed by many authors. Particle Swarm 
Optimization (PSO) was proposed for finding the 
optimal location and size of the capacitor (S.P. Sing 
et al. 2012). Genetic Algorithm (GA) based on the 
mechanism of natural selection (Pahwa et al. 1994) 
was used to determine the optimal placement of 
capacitors. Bacterial Foraging Optimization (BFO) 
based fuzzy logic was developed for the optimum 
location of the capacitor in order to minimize the 
cost of the peak power, reducing energy loss, and 
improving voltage profile (Vahidi et al. 2011).
The literature survey shows that the aforesaid 
techniques successfully solved the capacitor place-
ment problem. However, the slow convergence 
toward optimal solution is the main drawback for 
most of these techniques. Furthermore, these tech-
niques often converge to the local optimal solution 
instead of the global optimal solution.
In this article, a recently developed heuristic 
algorithm called Chemical Reaction Optimization 
(CRO) algorithm introduced by Lam and Li (Li et 
al. 2010) was utilized for the solution of the HTS 
problems. The effectiveness of the proposed CRO 
algorithm has been demonstrated by implement-
ing it in two standard radial distribution systems 
and its performance has been compared with other 
algorithms available in the literature.
The rest of this paper has been organized as fol-
lows: Problem formulation is given in Section 2. 
The key points of the proposed CRO technique are 
described in Section 3. In Section 4, the proposed 
techniques applied to the capacitor allocation 
problem in the radial distribution system have been 
illustrated. Two cases based on medium and large 
scale power systems are studied and the simulation 
results are illustrated in Section 5. Section 6 sum-
marizes the conclusion.
2 PROBLEM FORMULATION
2.1 Power loss minimization
Due to large reactance to resistance ratio of the radial 
distribution system, the power loss is significantly 
high. So, to run the radial system in the most eco-
nomical way, the goal is to reduce the system power 
loss. The real power loss in a radial distribution is as:
P
v
P
v
Y
RLOS
P
S
i
n
gz
P i
d
P zi
d
yi zi
yz
Y
i
yi
zi
yzi
N
=
P
∂
−
yi
∂
+
zi
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∗
=∑
2 cos(
)
θ
 
(1)
Here, PRLos
P
s is the real power loss; Pgz
P
i is the 
real power generation at bus zi; Pd z
P
i is active power 
demand at bus zi; vzi  is the voltage magnitude at 
bus zi. Yyz
Y
i is the magnitude of the bus admittance 
matrix between yi  and zi; ∂yi is voltage angle of 
bus yi; ∂zi is voltage angle of bus zi; θyz
θ
i is the 
phase angle between yi  and qi of the bus admit-
tance matrix.
2.2 Constraints
2.2.1 Load balance constraint
For each bus, the following balance constraint 
equation should be fulfilled:
Pgz
P
i
Pdz
P i
vzi
vzjYzj
Y
j
zi
zj
zj
M
−
−
Pd
P
=
∑
+
zj
=
1
0
cos(
)
δ
δ
zi
z
−z
θz
 
 
(2)
Qg
Q
i
Qd
Q
i
vzi
vzj
j
Yzj
Y
z
z
i
Qd
Q
M
−
−
Qd
Q
i
(
)
zi
zj
zj
+
zj
=
=
∑
1
0
cos
zi
z
−z
z
 
 
(3)
where zi = 1, 2.......... nN
2.2.2 Voltage limit
The voltage must be kept within the standard lim-
its of each bus.
v
v
v
zi
zi
zi
min
m
v
ax
<
vzi
v
 
(4)
2.2.3 Capacitor power constraint
A DG power capacity depends on the energy 
resources of any given location; therefore, it is 
essential to keep the DG power capacity within its 
minimum and maximum levels.
P
P
gz
P i
gzi
g
gz
P i
min
m
P
P
ax.
≤
Pg
P zi
g
P
 
(5)
3 CHEMICAL REACTION 
OPTIMIZATION (CRO)
Chemical Reaction Optimization (CRO) is a 
recently developed efficient optimization technique 
proposed by Lam and Li (Li et al. 2010). CRO, a 
population-based meta-heuristic technique, it is 
successfully used for solving various optimization 
problems in the recent past. CRO mimics the inter-
actions of the molecules in the chemical reactions. 
A chemical system undergoes a chemical reaction 
when it is unstable, that is when it possesses exces-
sive energy. It manipulates itself to release the 
excessive energy in order to stabilize itself and this 

121
manipulation is called as chemical reactions. Gen-
erally, in a chemical reaction molecules interact 
with each other aiming to reach the minimum state 
of free energy. Through a sequence of intermediate 
reactions, the resultant molecules (i.e. the products 
in a chemical reaction) tend to stay at the most 
 stable state with the lowest free energy. A molecule 
possesses two kinds of energies such as Potential 
Energy (PE) and Kinetic Energy (KE). There are 
four types of reactions taken into considerations, 
which are elaborated below:
3.1 On-wall ineffective collision
This type of collision is considered as a uni-
 molecular collision where a single molecule is 
allowed to collide with the wall of a container. 
In this case, the molecular structure ω and PE of 
the molecule that hits the wall undergoes subtle 
changes. Therefore, the present molecular struc-
ture ( )
β
( )) is changed and it becomes a new molecule 
( )'
β(
. When a molecule hits a wall, a portion of 
its KE will be lost; the lost energy is then stored 
in the form of a central energy buffer (the initial 
energy buffer size of the container). Thus, the KE 
alters its magnitude and KE for the new molecule 
( )'
β(
 which is as follows:
'
'
(
)
KE
PE
KE
PE
R
β
β
β
β
=
+
−
×
 
(6)
Here, ‘( )
R ’ is the random number that lies in 
between [
]
( )
KElossrate
E
,1 , where KElossrate
E
 is a param-
eter of CRO.
3.2 Decomposition
Similar to that of the on-wall collision, decompo-
sition is also a uni-molecular reaction, when the 
molecule β hits a wall of the container, it breaks 
up into two molecules 
'
1
β1  and β2 with different 
structures.
i.e. 
'
1
2
β
β
β
'
1
2
β1
In decomposition, two steps are considered: (i) 
the molecule has sufficient energy to complete the 
decomposition; (ii) the molecule should get energy 
from the energy center.
Step 1:  The KE of the resultant molecules is shown 
as follows:
'
'
2
1
1
(
)
KE
PE
KE
PE
PE
R
β
β
β
β
β
=
+
−
−
×
 
(7)
'
2
2
1
(
)
(1
)
KE
PE
KE
PE
PE
R
β
β
β
β
β
=
+
−
−
×
−
 
(8)
Here, R is a random number generated from the 
interval [0, 1] considering the constraint as follows:
'
2
1
PE
KE
PE
PE
β
β
β
β
+
≥
+
 
(9)
Step 2:  Here, the KE of the resultant molecules is 
shown as follows:
'
'
2
1
1
(
)
1
2
KE
PE
KE
PE
PE
buffer
m
m
β
β
β
β
β
=
+
−
−
+
×
×
 (10)
2
2
1
(
)
3
4
KE
PE
KE
PE
PE
buffer
m
m
β
β
β
β
β
′
=
+
−
−
+
×
×
 
 
(11)
Here, m1, m2, m3, and m4 are random numbers 
uniformly generated from the interval [0,1], and 
the constraint is as follows:
'
2
1
PE
KE
buffer
PE
PE
β
β
β
β
+
+
≥
+
 
(12)
3.3 Inter-molecular ineffective collision
This reaction occurs when two molecules collide 
with each other and bounce back. After collision, 
the participating molecules change into two new 
molecules if the following energy criterion has 
been satisfied:
'
1
1
2
2
2
1
PE
KE
PE
KE
PE
PE
β
β
β
β
β
β
+
+
+
≥
+
 
(13)
Then KE of the two new molecules are as 
follows:
'
'
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
(
)
KE
PE
KE
PE
KE
PE
PE
s
β
β
β
β
β
β
β
=
+
+
+
−
−
×
 (14)
'
2
1
1
2
2
1
2
(
)
(1
)
KE
PE
KE
PE
KE
PE
PE
s
β
β
β
β
β
β
β
=
+
+
+
−
−
×
−
 (15)
Here, s is an arbitrary number generated from 
the interval [0, 1].
3.4 Synthesis
In this type of reactions, two molecules collide 
with each other and combine to form one new 
single molecule. Unlike the on-wall collision, 
synthesis reactants undergo a vigorous change in 
their molecular structures. Suppose two molecules 
α1
α  and α2
α  collide to form a single molecule with 
structure 
'
α . The condition is as follows:
'
'
1
1
2
2
KE
PE
KE
PE
KE
PE
β
β
β
β
β
β
=
+
+
+
−
 
(16)

122
4 CRO ALGORITHM APPLIED 
CAPACITOR ALLOCATION PROBLEM 
IN RADIAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
The following steps must be taken to apply the 
CRO:
Step 1:  The preliminary structure of each molecule 
should be randomly selected while satisfy-
ing different inequality constraints of the 
control variables. In the proposed area, 
capacitor size and locations are considered 
as the control variables.
Step 2:  Power losses can be found by running the 
load flow problem. In this paper, a direct 
load flow algorithm based on the BIBC 
(Bus-Injection to Branch-Current) matrix 
and the BCBV (Branch-Current to Bus-
Voltage) matrix (Teng et al. 2003) is used.
Step 3:  Calculate the potential energy (fitness value 
0 for each molecule) using (1)
Step 4:  Update the capacitor size and its position 
using on-wall ineffective collision, decom-
position, inter-molecular ineffective colli-
sion and synthesis process.
Step 5:  Check whether the independent variables 
(rating of capacitor) violate the operating 
limits or not. The non-feasible solutions 
are replaced by randomly generated feasi-
ble solutions.
Step 6:  Go to Step 3 until the current iteration 
number reaches the pre-specified maxi-
mum iteration number.
5 TEST SYSTEMS AND RESULTS
In this segment, two different test cases are dis-
cussed to show the effectiveness and efficiency of 
Table 1. Optimal location and settings of the multiple capacitor and corresponding loss using CRO for 34-bus 
system.
Algorithm
CRO
PGSA (Rao et al. 2011)
Optimal capacitor placement
10
18
24
19
20
22
Optimal size of capacitor (MVAR)
0.6914
0.9410
0.8310
1.200
0.200
0.639
Power loss(MW)
0.16023
0.16107
CT time (Sec)
1.67
NA
Chemical reaction optimization (CRO)
Active power loss (MW)
0.16024
Reactive power loss (MVAR)
0.04469475
Voltage profile
0.97419
Voltage deviation (VD)
0.034012
Voltage stability index (VSI)
0.81555
Minimum voltage
0.950304
Figure 1. Single line diagram of the 34-bus radial dis-
tribution system.
the proposed CRO method. For establishment, the 
suggested algorithm is implemented on 12.66 KV 
34-bus and 69-bus radial distribution systems to 
calculate the actual position as well as the rating of 
various capacitors to reduce the total power losses. 
The proposed method for optimal placement of 
the capacitor is implemented on a personal laptop 
having core i-5, 2.5 GHz processor and 4 GB of 
RAM with the help of MATLAB software.
5.1 Test case 1 (For 34 bus radial 
distribution system)
The first test case of this proposed method is a 
34-bus radial distribution system. This system 
has 34 buses and 33 branches, which are shown 
in Figure 1. The rated real and reactive power 
loads of this type of systems are 3.715 MW and 
2.3 MVAR, respectively. The line and load data 
are taken from the literature (Sahoo et al. 2006). 
The simulation results along with the ratings of 
the capacitor obtained by the suggested CRO and 
the other population based optimization meth-
ods like PGSA, which is taken from the literature 
is shown in Table 1. From Table 1, it is observed 

123
that the proposed CRO method incurs a power loss 
of 0.16023 MW, which is significantly smaller as 
compared to the loss incurred by the PGSA that 
is 0.16107 MW. So it may be concluded that the 
power loss incurred by the proposed CRO method 
is much better than that of the PGSA. The conver-
gence characteristic of the loss for multiple capaci-
tors using CRO is shown in Figure 3.
5.2 Test case 2 (For 69 bus radial 
distribution system)
The second test case for implementing the proposed 
method is a 69-bus radial distribution system. This 
system has 69 buses and 68 branches which are 
shown in Figure 2. The rated real power load is 
3.715 MW while the rated reactive power load is 
2.3 MVAR. The line and load data are taken from 
(Sahoo et al. 2006). The result of the proposed CRO 
method is compared with the other population 
based optimization techniques like TLBO, DSA, 
PSO, and GA, which are listed in Table 2. From 
Table 2, it is shown that the power loss incurred 
by the suggested method is 0.14509 MW, which is 
significantly smaller than the power loss incurred 
by TLBO (0.14635 MW), DSA (0.1470 MW), PSO 
(0.15248 MW), and GA (0.15662 MW). So, it is 
clear that the effectiveness of the suggested CRO 
Table 2. Optimal location and settings of the multiple capacitor and corresponding loss using CRO for 69-bus 
system.
Algorithm
Optimal location
of capacitor
Optimal size
of capacitor (MVAR)
Power Loss 
(MW)
CT time 
(sec)
CRO
11
0.3919
0.14509
1.70
18
0.2515
61
1.2334
TLBO (Sultana et al. 2014)
12
0.600
0.14635
15.76
61
1.050
64
0.150
DSA (Raju et al. 2012)
15
0.450
0.1470
NA
60
0.450
61
0.900
PSO (Prakash et al. 2007)
46
0.241
0.15248
NA
47
0.365
50
1.015
GA (Sydulu et al. 2007)
59
0.100
0.15662
NA
61
0.700
64
0.800
Chemical reaction optimization (CRO)
Active power loss (MW)
0.14509
Reactive power loss (MVAR)
0.0676
Voltage profile
1.3784
Voltage deviation (VD)
0.0559
Voltage stability index (VSI)
0.7527
Minimum voltage
0.9314
Figure 2. Single line diagram of the 69-bus radial dis-
tribution system.
Figure 3. Power loss convergence graphs using CRO 
algorithm of the 34-bus system for multiple capacitor.

124
method is much better than TLBO, DSA, PSO, 
and GA. The convergence characteristic of the 
loss for multiple capacitors using CRO is shown 
in Figure 4.
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, a new and efficient CRO technique 
is suggested for the purpose of optimal sizing 
and sitting of the capacitor in a radial distribu-
tion system. The proposed method is tested and 
validated on the 34-bus and 69-bus radial distri-
bution systems. From the simulation results, it is 
observed that the proposed method successfully 
reduces the line losses. The proposed algorithm is 
compared with the other population based opti-
mization techniques like PGSA, TLBO, DSA, 
GA, and PSO. The results show that the effec-
tiveness of the proposed techniques on the mini-
mization of the system power loss is better than 
the other techniques. So, from this study, it can 
be concluded that the proposed technique is very 
effective in finding the optimal sizing and sitting 
of the capacitor.
REFERENCES
Abul’Wafa, A.R. (2014). Optimal capacitor placement 
for enhancing voltage stability in distribution systems 
using analytical algorithm and Fuzzy-Real Coded 
GA. Elect Power Syst Res, 55, 246–252.
Baran, M.E., & Wu, F.F. (1989). Optimal Sizing of 
Capacitors Placed on a Radial Distribution System. 
IEEE Trans. Power Delivery, 1, 1105–1117.
Huang, T.L., Hsiao, Y.T., Chang, C.H., & Jiang, J.A. 
(2008). Optimal placement of capacitors in distribu-
tion systems using an immune multi-objective algo-
rithm, Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst., 30, 184–192.
Jabr, R.A. (2008). Optimal placement of capacitors in a 
radial network using conic and mixed integer linear 
programming, Elect Power Syst Res, 78, 941–948.
Lam, A., & Li, V. (2010). Chemical-reaction-inspired 
metaheuristic for optimization. IEEE Trans. Evol. 
Comp., 14, 381–399.
Nojavan, S., Jalali, M., & Zare, K. (2014). Optimal 
allocation of capacitors in radial/mesh distribution 
systemsusing mixed integer nonlinear programming 
approach, Elect Power Syst Res, 107, 119–124.
Ng, H.N., Salama, M.M.A., & Chikhani, A.Y. (2000) 
Classification of capacitor allocation techniques. 
IEEE Tran. On Power Delivery, 15, 387–392.
Prakash, K., & Sydulu, M. (2007). Particle swarm opti-
mization based capacitor placement on radial distri-
bution systems, In: IEEE power engineering society 
general meeting, 1–5, 24th–28th June.
Raju, M.R., Murthy, K.V.S.R., & Avindra. (2012). Direct 
search algorithm for capacitive compensation in radial 
distribution systems, Int. J. Elect. Power Energy Syst., 
42(1), 24–30.
Rao, R.S., Narasimham, S.V.L., & Ramalingaraju, M. 
(2011) Optimal capacitor placement in radial distribu-
tion system using plant growth simulation algorithm, 
Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst., 33(5), 1133–1139.
Sultana, S, & Roy, P.K. (2014). Optimal capacitor place-
ment in radial distribution systems using teaching 
learning based optimization, 54, 387–398.
Singh, S.P., & Rao, A.R. (2012). Optimal allocation 
of capacitors in distribution systems using parti-
cle swarm optimization, Int. J. Electr. Power Energy 
Syst., 43, 1267–1275.
Sydulu, M, & Reddy, V.V.K. (2007). Index and GA based 
optimal location and sizing of distribution system 
capacitors, In: IEEE power engineering society gen-
eral meeting, 1–4, 24th–28th June.
Sahoo, N.C., & Prasad, (2006). K.. A fuzzy genetic 
approach for network reconfiguration to enhance 
voltage stability in radial distribution systems, Int. 
J. Energy Convers and Manag. Energy Syst., 47, 
3288–3306.
Sundharajan, & Pahwa, A. (1994). Optimal selection 
of capacitors for radial distribution systems using 
genetic algorithm, IEEE Trans. Power Systems, 9(3), 
1499–1507.
Tabatabaei, S.M., & Vahidi, B. (2011). Bacterial foraging 
solution based fuzzy logic decision for optimal capaci-
tor allocation in radial distribution system, Elect 
Power Syst Res, 81, 1045–1050.
Teng, J.H. (2003). A direct approach for distribution sys-
tem load flow solutions, IEEE Trans Power Deliver., 
18(3), 882–887.
Vuletic, J., & Todorovski, M. (2014). Optimal capacitor 
placement in radial distribution systems using clus-
tering based optimization, Elect Power Syst Res, 62, 
229–236.
Figure 4. Power loss convergence graphs using CRO 
algorithm of the 69-bus system for multiple capacitor.

125
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Application of Improved Particle Swarm Optimization technique for 
thinning of Elliptical Array antenna
Rajesh Bera & Durbadal Mandal
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute of Technology Durgapur, 
West Bengal, India
Sakti Prasad Ghoshal
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Institute of Technology Durgapur, West Bengal, India
Rajib Kar
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute of Technology Durgapur, 
West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: This paper describes optimal thinning of an Elliptical Antenna Arrays (EA) of uniformly 
excited isotropic antennas which can generate directive beam with minimum relative Side Lobe Level 
(SLL). The Improved Particle Swarm Optimization (IPSO) method, which represents a new approach 
for optimization problems in electromagnetic, is used in the optimization process. The IPSO is used to 
determine an optimal set of ‘ON-OFF’ elements that provide a radiation pattern with maximum SLL 
reduction. Optimization is done without prefixing the value of First Null Beam Width (FNBW). The 
variation of SLL with eccentricity of thinned array is also reported. Simulation results show that the 
number of array elements can be reduced by more than 40% of the total number of elements in the array 
with a simultaneous reduction in SLL significantly.
2000) applications to reject SNOI the array pattern 
should have several nulls in the azimuth plane. This 
can be implemented by the use of elliptical arrays 
instead of circular arrays (Lotfi et al. 2008).
The circular array antenna is of high side-lobe 
geometry. If the inter-element distance of array 
elements is decreased to reduce the side lobes, the 
mutual coupling influence becomes more signifi-
cant. For mitigating high SLLs, concentric arrays 
are utilized in (Mahmoud et al. 2007). Also concen-
tric circular array antennas have several advantages 
including the flexibility in array pattern synthesis 
and design both in narrowband and broadband 
beam forming applications (Dessouky et al. 2006).
Thinning an array means switching off some 
elements in a uniformly spaced or periodic array to 
generate a pattern with low SLL. In this proposed 
method, the locations of the elements are fixed and 
all the elements have two states either “on” or “off” 
(Similar to Logic “1” and “0” in digital domain), 
depending on whether the element is connected to 
the feed network or not. In the “off” state, either 
the element is passively terminated to a matched 
load or open circuited. If there is no matching 
between the elements, it is equivalent to removing 
“off” element from the array. There are many pub-
1 INTRODUCTION
Usually the radiation pattern of a single antenna 
element is relatively wide and each element pro-
vides low directivity. Antenna arrays increase the 
directivity without enlarging the size of single ele-
ment. Generally, the overall array properties as 
directivity and gain, direction of maximum direc-
tivity, First Null Beam Width (FNBW), SLL, Half 
Power Beam-Width (HPBW) etc. can be control-
led and optimized by adjusting the number of ele-
ments, the inter-element spacing, their excitation 
coefficients, their relative phases, the geometrical 
arrangement of the overall array (linear, circular, 
elliptical etc.) and the relative pattern of the indi-
vidual elements (Ballanis 2005).
A linear array has excellent directivity and it can 
form the narrowest main-lobe in a given direction, 
but it does not work well in all azimuth directions. 
Since a circular array does not have edge elements, 
directional patterns synthesized with a circular 
array can be electronically rotated in the surface 
of the array without a significant change of the 
beam shape (Ioannides & Ballanis 2005). Circu-
lar array pattern has no nulls in azimuth plane 
(Ballanis 2005). In smart antenna (Chryssomallis 

126
lished articles (Razavi & Forooraghi 2008, Haupt 
1994) dealing with the synthesis of thinned array. 
Element behavior in a thinned array is described in 
(Achwartzman 1967).
Classical optimization methods have several 
disadvantages such as: i) highly sensitive to start-
ing points when the number of solution variables 
and hence the size of the solution space increase, 
ii) requirement of continuous and differentiable 
objective functions etc. But there are various evo-
lutionary optimization tools for thinning such as 
Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle Swarm Optimi-
zation (PSO) (Mandal et al. 2010) etc, which do 
not suffer from the above disadvantages. The PSO 
algorithm has proven to be a better alternative to 
other evolutionary algorithms such as Genetic 
Algorithms (GA), Ant Colony Optimization 
(ACO) etc. for optimal design of antenna array. In 
this work, for the optimization of complex, highly 
non-linear, discontinuous and non-differentiable 
array factors of EA design, IPSO is adopted for 
improving the global search ability.
2 DESIGN EQUATION
In this section, the expression for the array factor 
of EA as shown in Figure 1 is derived through the 
analysis of coordinate system.
If the center of an ellipse is located at the origin 
on the x-y plane, then the parametric equation of the 
ellipse in rectangular coordinate system is given by,
x
a
y
b
cos
si
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
π
0
2
≤
<
ϕ
≤
 
(1)
where a, b are semi-major axis and semi-minor 
axis, respectively, and ϕ is the angle between posi-
tive section of x axis and a point (x, y) of the ellipse 
in x-y plane.
Also, the ellipse eccentricity e can be defined 
as:-
e
c
a
b
a
=
=
−
1
2
2  
(2)
where c
a
b
=
+
a2
2
b
+
 is the half of the distance 
between the two foci. Thus, for an elliptical 
N-element array with its center in origin of x-y 
plane, the following expressions are obtained.
I have:-
R
a
b
a
a
a
a
n
n
R
a
R
x
n y
r
x
a
y
z
a
a
=
+
ax
a
+
i
i
sin
i
cos
ϕ
b
n x
n
s
a
b
n x
b
a
n
in
θ
a
θ
ϕa
sin
θa  
(3)
where ϕ
π
n
ϕ
N
π
2π(
)
n
1
π n
π n
/
 is the angle in the x-y plane 
between the × axis and the n-th element.
The general form of array factor of an array can 
be written as [1]
AF
A e
n
A
j
k
a
n
N
n
n
r
( , )
.
kRn
kR
)
θ ϕ
, ) =
=∑
1
 
(4)
Thus, the array factor of an elliptical array can 
be derived by substituting (3) in (4)
AF
A e
n
A
jk
a
b
n
N
n
n
( , )
sin
(
n
i
s
n in )
θ ϕ
, )
θ
ϕ
a
( cos
ϕ
bsin
n
ϕ)
=
=∑
1
 
(5)
Normalized power pattern in dB can be 
expressed as follows:
P( , )
log
|
(
AF
, ) |
|
(
AF
, ) |
log
|
(
AF
, )
max
θ ϕ
, )
θ ϕ
, )
, )
θ ϕ
, )
, )
θ ϕ
, )
, )
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
= 20
10
2
10
|
|
( , ) |max
θ ϕ
, )
, )
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
 
(6)
3 IMPROVED PARTICLE SWARM 
OPTIMIZATION
Improved Particle Swarm Optimization (IPSO), 
modified version of PSO, is applied to compute 
the distributions of the turned on and turned off 
elements in EA. The detail of PSO is not given; 
some references on PSO are given in (Bera & Roy 
2013, Jin & Rahmat-Samii 2007, Everhart & Shi 
2001, Kennedy & Eberhard 1995).
In PSO, mathematically, velocities of the particles 
are modified according to the following equation:
V
w V
C
rand
pbest
S
C
gbest
S
i
V k
i
V k
i
iSk
iSk
+
w V
−
(
)
−
gbest
+ C
rand (
)
1
1
1
C
randd
2
2
C
rand
C
r
C
and
*
*
V
C
k
V
*
*
*
d
rand
 
(7)
Figure1. Elliptical Array (EA) Structure.

127
The searching point in the solution space may 
be modified by the following equation.
S
S
V
iSk
iSk
i
V k
+
+
SiSk
1
1
k
k+
S
V
k
k
Sk
 
(8)
The global search ability of PSO is enhanced 
with the help of the following modifications. This 
modified PSO is termed as IPSO (Mangoud & 
Elragal 2009).
i) The two random parameters rand1
d  and rand2
d  
of (7) are self-governing. If both the parameters 
are large, both the personal and social experi-
ences are over used and the particle is driven too 
far away from the local best promising. If both are 
small, both the personal and social experiences are 
not used fully and the convergence speed of the 
procedure is reduced. So, instead of taking fully 
independent rand1
d  and rand2
d , one single random 
parameter r1r is chosen so that when r1r is large, (
)
1
1
−1  
is small and vice versa. Moreover, to control the 
balance of global and local searches, another ran-
dom parameter r2r  is introduced. For birds flock-
ing for food, there could be some uncommon cases 
that after the position of the particle is changed 
according to (8), a bird may not, due to inertia, 
fly toward a region at which it thinks is the most 
hopeful for food. So, in the step that follows, the 
direction of the bird’s velocity should be inverted 
in order for it to fly back into the promising region. 
sign
i
( )
r3r  is introduced for this purpose. Both cogni-
tive and social parts are modified consequently.
Finally, the modified velocity of jth component 
of ith particle is expressed as follows:
V
r
sign
i
r
V
C
r
r
i
V
i
V k
(
)
k+
∗
r
+
Vi
V k
∗
∗
( )
(
)
r
−r
{
}
pbest
S
i
k
i
k
−
pbesti
k
(
3r
2r
sign
i
∗
r
(
1
C
)
r
1
2r
1
)
(
)
) {
}
∗
)
r
( −1
(
r
(1
 
 
(9)
where r1r, r2r  and r3r  are the random numbers between 
0 and 1 and sign
i
( )
r3r  is a function defined as:
sign(r3) = –1 when r3 ≤ 0.05, = 1 when r3 > 0.05. 
(10)
After defining the far-field radiation pattern, 
the next step in the design process is to create the 
objective function that is to be minimized. The 
objective function is defined using the array factor 
in such a way that the purpose of the optimiza-
tion is satisfied. For the optimization problem of 
the side lobe reduction, the array factor values at 
the side lobe peaks must be less than the reference 
pattern. To satisfy this, the objective function ‘‘cost 
function’’ (CF) to be minimized with the IPSO is 
CF = C1[(SLLc– SLLd) /SLLd]  
   +C2[(FNBWc– FNBWd) /FNBWd] 
(11)
Where, SLLd & SLLc are desired and computed 
value of SLL and FNBWd & FNBWc are desired 
and computed value of FNBW respectively.
The first term in (11) is used to reduce the SLL 
to a desired level. The second term in (11) is intro-
duced to keep FNBW of the optimized pattern to 
a desired level which is at most 125% of reference 
pattern in this particular case.
C1 and C2 are weighting coefficients to con-
trol the relative Importance of each term in (11). 
Because the primary aim is to achieve a minimum 
SLL, the value of C1 is higher than the value 
of C2.
4 COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
The paper describes the application of IPSO algo-
rithm for the reduction of the maximum SLL with-
out prefixing the value of First Null Beam Width 
(FNBW) of thinned Elliptical Array (EA) of iso-
tropic elements.
In the numerical analysis, two cases are consid-
ered where antenna elements in elliptical arrays are 
15 and 20. First the SLLs of fully populated arrays 
are computed then IPSO technique is applied to 
obtain maximum SLL by changing combinations 
of ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ states of elements in each case. 
The eccentricity of the antenna array, in each case, 
is varied. In the both cases, inter-element spacing is 
kept fixed at d = 0.5λ.
Performances of optimized thinned array and 
corresponding fully populated array antennas with 
variation of eccentricity of the EAs are tabulated 
in Table 1. The value of semi-major axis ‘a’ and 
semi-minor axis ‘b’ shows in Table 1 can be calcu-
lated from the equations given below
circumference
a
b
−
a
π 2
2
2
2
(
)
(a
b
+
a2
b
+
. (
)  
(12)
e
b
a
=
−
1
2
2  
(13)
Table 1. Performances of thinned elliptical arrays.
No. of 
elements
Eccentricity 
e = 0
Eccentricity 
e = 0.2
Eccentricity 
e = 0.4
Eccentricity 
e = 0.6
N = 15
a = 1.194
b = 1.194
SLL max = 
–18.48dB
a = 1.2064
b = 1.1823
SLL max = 
–20.94dB
a = 1.2457
b = 1.1417
SLL max = 
–21.3dB
a = 1.323
b = 1.058
SLL max = 
–23.8dB
N = 20
a = 1.59
b = 1.59
SLL max = 
–17.44dB
a = 1.607
b = 1.575
SLL max = 
–15.68dB
a = 1.66
b = 1.52
SLL max = 
–18.44dB
a = 1.763
b = 1.41
SLL max = 
–18.02dB

128
The optimal excitation amplitudes of thinned EA 
using IPSO are shown in Tables 2 and 3 for N = 15 & 
20 respectively. IPSO algorithm is applied to compute 
the distributions of the ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ elements. 
Thinning is the ratio of the number of ‘OFF’ ele-
ments to the total number of elements in the array.
Figures 2–5 represents the optimized pattern of 20 
elements EA for various values of eccentricity. Also 
Figures 6–9 represents the optimized pattern of 20 
elements EA for various values of eccentricity. Pat-
terns for corresponding fully populated arrays are also 
present by dotted line in above mentioned figures.
Table 2 shows that for eccentricity e = 0 (circular 
array), maximum SLL is equal to –18.48 dB and 
for the value of eccentricity e = 0.6, maximum SLL 
is equal to –23.80. So, by the variation of eccen-
tricity of elliptical array may give much better SLL 
Table 2. Excitation amplitude distribution of 15 ele-
ment thinned array for various values of eccentricity.
Eccentricity
Distribution of ON 
and OFF elements
Number 
of ‘ON’ 
elements
SLLmax
(dB)
0
1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1
9
–18.48
0.2
1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1
8
–20.94
0.4
1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1
8
–21.30
0.6
1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1
9
–23.80
Figure 2. Normalized absolute power patterns in dB of the 
15 element optimized thinned array for e = 0 (Circular case).
Figure 3. Normalized absolute power patterns in dB of 
the 15 element optimized thinned array for e = 0.2.
Figure 4. Normalized absolute power patterns in dB of 
the 15 element optimized thinned array for e = 0.4.
Figure 5. Normalized absolute power patterns in dB of 
the 15 element optimized thinned array for e = 0.6.
Table 3. Excitation amplitude distribution of 20 ele-
ment thinned array for various values of eccentricity.
Eccentricity
Distribution of ON 
and OFF elements
Number 
of ‘ON’ 
elements
SLLmax
(dB)
0
1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 12
–17.44
0.2
1 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 12
–15.68
0.4
1 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 12
–18.44
0.6
1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 12
–18.02

129
than the circular array although the number of 
‘ON’ elements is same in both these cases. Also we 
can see the similar thing in Table 3.
Tables 4 and 5 respectively shows the overall per-
formances of 15 and 20 element elliptical array for 
various eccentricities. The filled ratios of the arrays 
are also calculated which are less than or equal to 
60% for the cases. Filled ratio is defined as the ratio of 
the number of ‘ON’ elements to the total number of 
elements in the array. Performance of our proposed 
15 element thinned array with respect to maximum 
SLLs is compared with the referred paper [13] shown 
in Fig. 10, which shows that our proposed method 
with different cost function gives better results for 
various eccentricity of elliptical array.
Figure 6. Normalized absolute power patterns in dB of the 
20 element optimized thinned array for e = 0 (Circular case).
Figure 9. Normalized absolute power patterns in dB of 
the 20 element fully populated array and the correspond-
ing optimized thinned array for e = 0.6.
Figure 7. Normalized absolute power patterns in dB of 
the 20 element optimized thinned array for e = 0.2.
Figure 8. Normalized absolute power patterns in dB of 
the 20 element optimized thinned array for e = 0.4.
Table 4. Performances of 15 element thinned EAs for 
various eccentricity.
Eccentricity
Filled 
Ratio (%)
Maximum
SLL (dB)
First Null Beam 
Width (FNBW) 
in degree
e = 0
60.00
−18.48
47.2
e = 0.2
53.33
−20.94
56.8
e = 0.4
53.33
−21.30
59.6
e = 0.6
60.00
−23.80
58.4
Table 5. Performances of 20 element thinned EAs for 
various eccentricity.
Eccentricity
Filled Ratio 
(%)
Maximum
SLL (dB)
First Null Beam 
Width (FNBW) 
in degree
e = 0
60.00
−17.44
38.4
e = 0.2
60.00
−15.68
34.0
e = 0.4
60.00
−18.44
40.4
e = 0.6
60.00
−18.02
43.6

130
The population size using IPSO, by which the 
antenna array is optimized, is 40 and the maximum 
number of iteration cycles is 60. The minimum CF 
values are recorded against number of iteration 
cycles to get the convergence profile of the algo-
rithm, which is shown in Figure 11.
All computations were done in MATLAB 7.5 
on core (TM) 2 duo processor, 3.00 GHz with 
4 GB RAM.
5 CONCLUSIONS
This paper illustrates Improved Particle Swarm 
Optimization (IPSO) for thinning of 15 & 20 
element Elliptical Array Antennas of isotropic 
elements. The simulation results show that the 
number of antenna array elements can be brought 
down more than 40% of total element in the array 
using IPSO with simultaneous reduction in SLL 
less than –23dB. The first null beam width of the 
synthesized array pattern with fixed inter-element 
spacing is close to that of the fully populated array 
of same shape and size. Simulation results are also 
compared with other published article to show the 
effectiveness of our proposed method. Thus, IPSO 
algorithm can efficiently handle the problem of 
thinning of EA, showing a significant improve-
ment for SLLs with a significant reduction in the 
number of elements, which will reduce the cost of 
designing the antenna array considerably.
REFERENCES
Balanis C.A. 2005. Antenna Theory and Design, 3rd Edi-
tion, John Wiley & Sons.
Bera R. & Roy J.S. 2013. Thinning of elliptical & concentric 
elliptical antanna arrays using particle swarm optimiza-
tion. Microwave Review, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 2–7.
Chryssomallis M. 2000. Smart antennas. IEEE Antennas 
and Propagation Magazine, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 129–136.
Dessouky M., Sharshar H., & Albagory Y. 2006. Efficient 
sidelobe reduction technique for small—sized concentric 
circular arrays. Progress in Electromagnetics Research, 
PIER, vol. 65, pp. 187–200.
Eberhart R.C., & Shi Y. 2001. Particle swarm optimization: 
Developments, applications & resources. Proc. Congr. 
Evolutionary Computation, Vol. 1, pp. 81–86.
Haupt R.L. 1994. Thinned arrays using genetic algo-
rithms. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., Vol. 42, No. 
7, pp. 993–999.
Ioannides P. & Balanis C.A. 2005. Uniform circular arrays 
for smart antennas. IEEE Antennas and Propagation 
Magazine, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 192–206.
Jin N. & Rahmat-Samii Y. 2007. Advances in particle swarm 
optimization for antenna designs: Real-number, binary, 
single—objective & multiobjective implementations. IEEE 
Trans. Antennas Propag., Vol. 55, No. 3, pp. 556–567.
Kennedy J. & Eberhard R.C. 1995. Particle Swarm Opti-
mization. Proc. of IEEE Int’l Conf. on Neural Networks, 
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 1942–1948.
Lotfi A.A., Ghiamy M., Moghaddasi M.N. & Sadeghzadeh 
R A. 2008. An investigation of hybrid elliptical antenna 
arrays. IET Microw. Antennas Propag., vol. 2, no. 1, 
pp. 28–34.
Mahmoud K.R., El-Adway M., Ibrahem S.M.M., 
Basnel R., Mahmoud R., & Zainud-Deen S.H. 2007. 
A comparition between circular and hexagonal array 
geometries for smart antenna systems using particle 
swarm algorithm. Progress in Electromagnetics Research, 
PIER, vol. 72, pp. 75–90.
Mandal D., Ghoshal S.P. & Bhattacharjee A.K. 2010. Design 
of Concentric Circular Antenna Array With Central 
Element Feeding Using Particle Swarm Optimization 
With Constriction Factor & Inertia Weight Approach & 
Evolutionary Programing Technique. Journal of Infrared 
Milli Terahz Waves, vol. 31 (6), pp. 667–680.
Mangoud M.A. & Elragal H.M. 2009. Antenna array pat-
tern synthesis & wide null control using enhanced par-
ticle swarm Optimization. Progress In Electromagnetics 
Research B, vol. 17, pp. 1–14.
Razavi, A. & Forooraghi K. 2008. Thinned arrays using 
pattern search algorithms. Progress In Electromagnetics 
Research, PIER 78, pp. 61–71.
Schwartzman L. 1967. Element behavior in a thinned 
array. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., Vol. 15, No. 7, 
pp. 571–572.
Figure 10. Variation of SLLmax for different values of 
eccentricity with d = 0.5λ.
Figure 11. Convergence curve corresponding to the opti-
mized thinned array pattern shown in Fig. 4 using IPSO.

131
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Linear phase FIR bandstop filter design using Colliding Bodies 
Optimization technique
S.K. Saha
Department of ETC, NIT Raipur, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper, Colliding Bodies Optimization (CBO) technique is applied for finding the 
most promising optimal set of linear phase FIR filter coefficients. CBO is a class of meta-heuristic search 
technique which is free from any kind of internal parameter and governed by the conservation law of 
momentum of colliding bodies. In order to establish the superiority of CBO over other optimization 
techniques, performance of CBO for FIR filter design is compared with the other techniques namely, 
Real Coded Genetic Algorithm (RGA), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Differential Evolution 
(DE). 20th order Bandstop (BS) FIR filter is designed with the proposed CBO and other afore-mentioned 
algorithms individually for the comparison of efficiency in performance of optimization techniques. A 
comparative study of simulation results reveals the optimization efficacy of the CBO over the other opti-
mization techniques for the solution of the multimodal, non-differentiable, non-linear, and constrained 
FIR filter design problem.
Mastorakis et al. 2003, Lu & Tzeng 2000), simu-
lated annealing (Chen 2000), Tabu Search (Kara-
boga et al. 1997), differential evolution (Liu 
et al. 2010) and artificial bee colony optimization 
(Karaboga 2009) etc are developed to solve various 
engineering problems. GA proves itself to be more 
efficient in terms of obtaining local optimum while 
maintaining its moderate computational complex-
ity but they are not very successful in determining 
the global minima in terms of convergence speed 
and solution quality (Ababneh & Bataineh 2008).
Particle Swarm Optimization is an evolutionary 
optimization technique developed by (Kennedy & 
Eberhart 1995). Several works have already 
been done in order to explore the flexibility of 
FIR filter design provided by PSO (Ababneh & 
Bataineh 2008, Najjarazadeh & Ayatollahi 2008). 
LMS and Minimax strategies are also applied in 
(Najjarazadeh & Ayatollahi 2008).
Several modifications of the conventional PSO 
technique have been made to increase its efficiency. 
PSO is used with the differential evolution (Lui-
tel & Venayagamoorthy 2008) to design optimal 
filter. Quantum-behaved Particle Swarm Optimiza-
tion (QPSO) proposed by (Sun et al. 2006 & 2004) 
is a novel algorithm based on the PSO and quan-
tum model. Quantum infused PSO is also utilized 
for the design of digital filters (Luitel & Venayaga-
moorthy 2008). DEPSO and PSO-QI have been 
used for FIR filter design problem in Sarangi et al. 
2011). Recently, particle swarm optimization with 
constriction factor and inertia weight approach 
1 INTRODUCTION
Digital Filter find its application in different fields 
of signal processing. It usually comes in two cate-
gories: Finite Impulse Response (FIR) and Infinite 
Impulse Response (IIR). FIR filter is an attractive 
choice because of the ease in design and assured 
stability. By designing the filter taps to be sym-
metrical about the centre tap position, a FIR filter 
can be guaranteed to have linear phase response 
(Litwin 2000, Parks & Burrus 1987).
Remez Exchange algorithm proposed by Parks 
and McClellan is used for the design of exact lin-
ear phase weighted Chebyshev FIR filter (Parks & 
McClellan 1972). Further a computer program is 
developed for the design of FIR digital filter by 
(McClellan et al. 1973). The program is to be iter-
ated many times in order to meet the filter specifi-
cations in terms of stop band attenuation, cut-off 
frequency and filter length (Rabiner 1973).
The objective function for the design of optimal 
digital filters involves accurate control of various 
parameters of frequency spectrum and is thus 
highly non-uniform, non-linear, non-differentiable 
and multimodal in nature. Classical optimization 
methods cannot optimize such objective functions 
and cannot converge to the global minimum solu-
tion. So, evolutionary optimization methods have 
been implemented for FIR filter design.
Different meta-heuristics and stochastic opti-
mization methods such as Genetic Algorithm 
(GA) (Saha et al. 2013, Ahmad & Antoniou 2006, 

132
with wavelet mutation (PSOCFIWAWM) has been 
applied for FIR filter design problem in (Saha 
et al. 2014).
Most of the above algorithms show the problems 
of fixing algorithm’s control parameters, premature 
convergence, stagnation and revisiting of the same 
solution over and again (Biswal et al. 2009, Ling 
et al. 2008). In order to overcome these problems, 
in this paper, the Colliding Bodies Optimization 
(CBO) technique (Kaveh & Mahdavi 2014) and a 
novel fitness function are employed for the design 
of FIR bandstop (BS) filter.
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. 
In section II, the FIR BS filter design problem is 
formulated. Section III discusses the CBO tech-
nique. Section IV describes the simulation results 
obtained for FIR BS filter using PM algorithm, 
RGA, PSO, DE and the proposed CBO based 
approach. Finally, section V concludes the paper.
2 PROBLEM FORMULATION
A digital FIR filter is expressed as follows:
H
h
z
n
N
n
N
n
( )
z =
( )
n
=
=
−
∑
0
0 1
,
,
n
0 ,
,
 
(1)
where N is the filter’s order with (N + 1) number of 
filter’s coefficients, h(n). In this design approach, 
the FIR filter is positive even symmetric. So, N is 
even number and (N/2 + 1) number of h(n) coef-
ficients are actually optimized, which are finally 
concatenated to find the required (N + 1) number 
of filter coefficients.
Now for (1), the particle, i.e., the coefficient vec-
tor {h0, h1, …,., hN/2}, which is optimized, is repre-
sented in (N/2 + 1) dimension.
The frequency response of the FIR digital filter 
can be calculated as,
H
h
e
n
N
j
n
k
e
j
h
j
h
e
j
h
(
)
e j
k
ωk =
( )
n( )
n
=∑
0
; 
(2)
where ω
π
k
k
π
N
H
=
(
)
ωk
ω
je
2
;
 is the Fourier transform 
complex vector. This is the FIR filter’s frequency 
response. The frequency is sampled in [0, π] with 
S points. An error function given by (3) is the 
approximate error used in PM algorithm for filter 
design [3].
E
G
H
e
H e
d
H
j
i
H
j
G
ω
H e j
ω
( )
ω
( )
ω
(
)−
(
)
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤ 
(3)
where Hd
H
j
(
)
e jω  is the frequency response of 
the designed approximate filter; Hi
H
jp
(
)
e jω  is the 
frequency response of the ideal filter; G(ω) is the 
weighting function used to provide different weights 
for the approximate errors in different frequency 
bands. For ideal BS filter, Hi
H
j
(
)
e jω  is given as,
H e
i
H
j
sl
sh
ω
ω
ω
sl
ωs
(
)
≤
ωsl
=
≤
=
0
1
fo
otherwis
;
e
 
(4)
where  ωsl and ωsh are the lower and upper cut-off 
frequencies in stopband. The major drawback of 
PM algorithm is that the ratio of δp/δs  is fixed. To 
improve the flexibility in the error function to be 
minimized, so that the desired levels of δp and δs 
may be specified, the error function given in (5) is 
considered as fitness function in many literatures 
(Ababneh & Bataineh 2008, Sarangi et al. 2011). 
The error fitness to be minimized using the evolu-
tionary algorithms, is defined as:
J
p
s
1
J
p
( E
(
)
E( )
+
(
)
E
s
E( )
≤
p(
)
p
( )
m
)
p +
E(
ax
ω ω p
≤
p
ωs
≥
p
)
p
) −
s
) −
 
(5)
It is found that the proposed filter deign 
approach as in (6) results in considerable improve-
ment over the PM and other optimization tech-
niques in terms of higher stop band attenuation 
and better transition width.
J
abs abs
abs
p
2
J =
(
)
Hd
H ( )
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
+
(
)
Hd
s
H ( )
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
∑
∑
δ p
)1
) −
−
s
) −
 
(6)
For the first term of (6), ω ∈ passband, includ-
ing a portion of the transition band and for the 
second term of (6),  ω ∈ stopband, including the 
rest portion of the transition band. The portions 
of the transition band chosen depend on passband 
edge and stopband edge frequencies.
Unlike other error fitness functions (Ababneh & 
Bataineh 2008, Sarangi et al. 2011) which consider 
only the maximum errors, J2 involves summation 
of all absolute errors for the whole frequency band, 
and hence, minimization of J2 yields much higher 
stopband attenuation and lesser stopband ripples. 
Transition width is also kept reduced.
3 OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUES 
EMPLOYED
Evolutionary algorithms have the potential to 
adapt to their ever changing dynamic environ-
ment through the previously acquired knowledge. 
Descriptions of fundamental algorithms such as 
RGA, PSO and DE are presented in (Saha et al. 
2014). In this section only CBO is described.

133
3.1 The CBO algorithm
3.1.1 Theory
The main objective of the present study is to for-
mulate a new simple and efficient meta-heuristic 
algorithm which is called Colliding Bodies Optimi-
zation (CBO) (Kaveh & Mahdavi 2014). In CBO, 
each solution candidate Xi containing a number of 
variables (i.e. Xi = {Xi,j}) is considered as a Colliding 
Body (CB). The massed objects are composed of 
two main equal groups; i.e. stationary and moving 
objects, where the moving objects move to follow 
stationary objects and a collision occurs between 
pairs of objects. This is done for two purposes: (i) 
to improve the positions of moving objects and (ii) 
to push stationary objects towards better positions. 
After the collision, new positions of colliding bod-
ies are updated based on new velocity by using the 
collision laws.
The CBO procedure can briefly be outlined as 
follows:
1. The initial positions of CBs are determined 
with random initialization of a population of 
individuals in the search space:
  x
x
rand
i
n
i
0
1 2
=
+
x
i
min
m
rand
+
ax
min
(
)
x
xx
m
x
ax
min ,
,
i
, ... , .n  (7)
 where xi
0 determines the initial value vector of 
the ith CB. xmin and xmax are the minimum and 
the maximum allowable values vectors of vari-
ables; rand is a random number in the interval 
[0, 1]; and n is the number of CBs.
2. The magnitude of the body mass for each CB is 
defined as:
  
m
f t k
f
i
k
n
k
i
n
=
k
=
∑
1
1
1
/
(
fif t
)
/
(
fif t )
, , ... ,
 
(8)
 where fit(i) represents the objective function 
value of the agent i; n is the population size. It 
seems that a CB with good values exerts a larger 
mass than the bad ones.
3. The arrangement of the CBs objective function 
values is performed in ascending order as shown 
in Figure 1(a). The sorted CBs are equally 
divided into two groups:
 The lower half of CBs (stationary CBs): These 
CBs are good agents which are stationary and 
the velocity of these bodies before collision is 
zero. Thus:
  vi
0
1
i =
i
2
2
,
,1
i
, ... ,
/
n
 
(9)
 CBs move toward the lower half. Then, accord-
ing to Figure 1(b) the better and worse CBs, i.e. 
agents with upper fitness value, of each group 
will collide together. The change of the body 
position represents the velocity of these bodies 
before collision as:
  v
x
x
n
i
ix
i n
−
xix
/ ,
/
i
n
= n
, ... ,
2
2
1
+
 
(10)
 where, vi and xi are the velocity and position vec-
tor of the ith CB in this group, respectively; xi-n/2 
is the ith CB pair position of xi in the previous 
group.
4. After the collision, the velocities of the colliding 
bodies in each group are evaluated. The veloc-
ity of each moving CBs after the collision is 
obtained by:
  
/2
/2
(
)
,
/ 2
1,...,
i
i n
i
i
i
i n
m
m
v
v
i
n
n
m
m
ε
′
−
−
−
=
=
+
+
 
(11)
 where vi and iv′  are the velocity of the ith moving 
CB before and after the collision, respectively; 
mi is mass of the ith CB; mi n/2  is mass of the 
ith CB pair. Also, the velocity of each stationary 
CB after the collision is:
  
/2
/2
/2
/2
(
)
,
1,..., / 2
i n
i n
i n
i
i
i n
m
m
v
v
i
n
m
m
ε
′
+
+
+
+
+
=
=
+
 (12)
 where vi + n/2 and 
iv ′  are the velocity of the ith 
moving CB pair before and the ith stationary CB 
after the collision, respectively; mi is mass of the 
ith CB;  mi + n/2 is mass of the ith moving CB pair; 
ε is the value of the COR parameter whose law 
of variation will be discussed in the next section.
5. New positions of CBs are evaluated using the 
generated velocities after the collision in posi-
tion of stationary CBs. The new positions of 
each moving CB is:
  
/2
,
/ 2
1,...,
new
i
i n
i
x
x
rand v
i
n
n
′
−
=
+
=
+

 
(13)
 where xi
new and 
iv′  are the new position and the 
velocity after the collision of the ith moving 
Figure 1. (a) CBs sorted in increasing order and 
(b) colliding object pairs.

134
CB, respectively; xi-n/2 is the old position of ith 
stationary CB pair. Also, the new positions of 
stationary CBs are obtained by:
  
,
1,..., / 2
new
i
i
i
x
x
rand v
i
n
′
=
+
=

 
(14)
 Where x
x
i
new
i
,
 and 
iv′  are the new position, old 
position and the velocity after the collision of 
the ith stationary CB, respectively. rand is a ran-
dom vector uniformly distributed in the range 
(−1, 1) and the sign ‘‘o’’ denotes an element-by-
element multiplication.
6. The optimization is repeated from Step 2 until 
a termination criterion, such as maximum itera-
tion number, is satisfied for the present paper. 
It should be noted that, a body’s status (sta-
tionary or moving body) and its numbering are 
changed in two subsequent iterations.
Apart from the efficiency of the CBO algo-
rithm, parameter independency is an important 
feature that makes CBO superior over other meta-
 heuristic algorithms. Also, the formulation of CBO 
algorithm does not use the memory which saves the 
best-so-far solution (i.e. the best position of agents 
from the previous iterations).
3.1.2 The Coefficient of Restitution (COR)
The meta-heuristic algorithms have two phases: 
exploration of the search space and exploitation of 
the best solutions found. In the meta-heuristic algo-
rithm it is very important to have a suitable balance 
between the exploration and exploitation (Kaveh & 
Talatahari 2010). In the optimization process, the 
exploration should be decreased gradually while 
simultaneously exploitation should be increased.
In this paper, an index is introduced in terms 
of the coefficient of restitution (COR) to con-
trol exploration and exploitation rate. In fact, 
this index is defined as the ratio of the separation 
velocity of two agents after collision to approach 
velocity of two agents before collision. Three vari-
ants of COR values are considered and presented 
below.
1. The perfectly elastic collision: In this case, COR 
is set equal to unity. It can be seen that in the 
final iterations, the CBs investigate the entire 
search space to discover a favorite space (global 
search).
2. The hypothetical collision: In this case, COR is 
set equal to zero. In this case, the movements of 
the CBs are limited to very small space in order 
to provide exploitation (local search). Conse-
quently, the CBs are gathered in a small region 
of the search space.
3. The inelastic collision: In this case, COR 
decreases linearly to zero and ε is defined as:
ε = −
1
iter iter
/
ma
r
x  
(15)
where iter is the actual iteration number and itermax is 
the maximum number of iterations. It can be seen that 
the CBs get closer by increasing iteration. In this way 
a good balance between the global and local search 
is achieved. Therefore, in the optimization process 
COR is considered such as the above equation.
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
4.1 Analysis of magnitude response 
of FIR BS filter
This section presents the simulation study for the 
design of FIR BS filter. The filter order (N) is taken 
as 20, which results in the number of coefficients as 
21. The sampling frequency is taken to be fs = 2 Hz. 
The number of frequency samples (S) is 128. Each 
algorithm is run for fifty times to obtain best results.
The parameters of the filter to be designed using 
RGA, PSO, DE and CBO are as follows: Pass 
band ripple (δp) = 0.1, stop band ripple (δp) = 0.01. 
The lower passband (normalized) edge frequency 
(ωpl) = 0.25; lower stopband (normalized) edge 
frequency (ωsl) = 0.35; upper stopband (normal-
ized) edge frequency (ωsh) = 0.65; upper passband 
(normalized) edge frequency (ωph) = 0.75; transi-
tion width = 0.1. Table 1 shows the optimized filter 
coefficients obtained for FIR BS filter using RGA, 
PSO, DE and CBO algorithm individually.
Table 2 shows the comparative results of per-
formance parameters in terms of maximum and 
average stopband ripple (normalized), transition 
width (normalized) and execution time for 100 
iteration cycles for BS filter using PM, RGA, PSO, 
DE and the CBO, respectively. It is noticed that 
with small transition width CBO attains the lowest 
value of stopband ripple.
Table 3 also summarizes maximum, mean, vari-
ance and standard deviation for passband ripple 
(normalized) and stopband attenuation in dB for 
the designed BS filter using PM, RGA, PSO, DE 
and CBO, respectively. It is observed from Table 3 
that the CBO achieves the best stop band attenua-
tion (35.50 dB), as compared to others.
Figs. 2–5 show the magnitude responses of the 
BS filter using PM, RGA, PSO, DE and CBO. The 
magnitude responses in dB are plotted in Fig. 2 for 
the BS filter. The normalized magnitude response 
is shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 4 shows the normalized 
passband ripple and normalized stopband ripple is 
shown in Fig. 5. From the above figures and tables, 
it is observed that CBO based designed filter 
achieves well results in magnitude response (dB) 
with highest stopband attenuation for BS filter, as 
compared to others.

135
4.2 Convergence profiles of RGA, PSO, 
DE and CBO
Convergence profile presents the algorithms’ effi-
ciency in finding the optimal solution in multidi-
mensional search space in terms of the error fitness 
value with iteration cycle. In Fig. 6 convergence 
profiles for all concerned algorithms are shown. 
From Fig 6, it is that CBO converges to much lower 
error fitness value of 0.8653 as compared to RGA, 
PSO and DE of 3.28, 2.564 and 1.869 which yield 
suboptimal higher error fitness values. The execu-
tion time for CBO is also moderately low and may 
be verified from Table 2. With a view to the above 
fact, it may finally be inferred that the perform-
ance of CBO is the best among all the algorithms 
considered in this paper. All optimization programs 
are run in MATLAB 7.5 version on core (TM) 2 
duo processor, 3.00 GHz with 2 GB RAM.
Table 1. Optimized coefficients of the FIR BS filter of order 20.
h(N)
RGA
PSO
DE
CBO
h(1) = h(21)
 0.04087486099888
 0.03803153039471
 0.04589309650152
 0.03875790077795
h(2) = h(20)
−0.00014306726313
 0.00978872795414
−0.00054101197105
−0.00838892043043
h(3) = h(19)
 0.06892412877542
 0.05961759428540
 0.06770857664214
 0.05299909537482
h(4) = h(18)
 0.00050761523950
 0.00922601970397
 0.00082276653114
−0.01630251507250
h(5) = h(17)
−0.06763806404466
−0.07826643279934
−0.07412324124248
−0.07802955626120
h(6) = h(16)
 0.00022874372402
 0.01158486435957
 0.00389104365616
−0.01171433324790
h(7) = h(15)
−0.07359273266571
−0.08970179312418
−0.07621979186568
−0.08352692295001
h(8) = h(14)
 0.00185475134293
 0.01081379721712
−0.00053119770204
−0.00695868596627
h(9) = h(13)
 0.30409887625951
 0.29495264657382
 0.30164753233390
 0.29602844956797
h(10) = h(12)
−0.00325409665580
 0.00207583340139
−0.00187372146712
−0.00802236950223
h(11)
 0.58550996882805
 0.57949794018090
 0.58319314795976
 0.57530336379387
Table 2. Other comparative results of performance parameters of all algorithms for the FIR BS filter of order 20.
Algorithm
FIR BS filter of order 20
Maximum, average
Stop band ripple (normalized)
Transition width
(normalized)
Execution time
for 100 cycles
PM
0.07627, 0.07616
0.0875
–
RGA
0.03186, 0.02480
0.0933
6.7303
PSO
0.02902, 0.02176
0.0923
4.1629
DE
0.02756, 0.02093
0.0910
4.6253
CBO
0.0167, 0.00719
0.1004
5.2943
Table 3. Statistical parameters of passband ripple and stop band attenuation for different algorithms for the FIR 
BS filter.
Algorithm
FIR BS filter of order 20
Passband ripple (normalized)
Stopband Attenuation (dB)
Maximum
Mean
Variance
Standard 
Deviation
Maximum
Mean
Variance
Standard 
Deviation
PM
0.0763
0.0761
2e-8
1.41e-4
22.35
22.36333
 8.89e-05
0.00943
RGA
0.135
0.12733
7.76e-5
8.807e-3
29.91
32.26333
 2.81416
1.67755
PSO
0.170
0.1205
2.16e-3
4.6477e-2
30.74
33.51333
 4.63776
2.15355
DE
0.161
0.1326
4.62e-4
2.1499e-2
31.19
33.85333
 4.86269
2.20515
CBO
0.157
0.12117
1.174e-3
3.4264e-2
35.50
46.3575
68.88722
8.29983

136
5 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a recently proposed Colliding Bod-
ies Optimization (CBO) technique is applied to the 
solution of FIR bandstop filter design with opti-
mal filter coefficients. Comparison of the results 
of PM, RGA, PSO, DE and CBO algorithms have 
been made. It is revealed that CBO has the abil-
ity to converge to the best quality near optimal 
solution and possesses the best convergence char-
acteristics in much less execution time among the 
algorithms.
The simulation results clearly indicate that the 
CBO demonstrates the best performance in terms 
of magnitude response, minimum stop band rip-
ple and maximum stop band attenuation with the 
small transition width and execution time. Thus, 
the CBO may be used as a good optimization tool 
for obtaining the filter coefficients in any practi-
cal digital filter design problem of digital signal 
processing systems.
REFERENCES
Ababneh J.I. & Bataineh M.H. 2008. Linear phase FIR 
filter design using particle swarm optimization and 
genetic algorithms. Digital Signal Processing, vol. 18, 
pp. 657–668.
Ahmad S.U. & Antoniou A. 2006. A genetic algorithm 
approach for fractional delay FIR filters. IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 
2517–2520.
Biswal B., Dash P.K. & Panigrahi B.K. 2009. Power qual-
ity disturbance classification using fuzzy C-means 
algorithm and adaptive particle swarm optimization. 
IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 56, no.1, pp. 212–220.
Chen S. 2000. IIR Model Identification Using Batch-
Recursive Adaptive Simulated Annealing Algorithm. 
Figure 2. dB plots for the FIR BS filter of order 20.
Figure 3. Normalized plots for the FIR BS filter of 
order 20.
Figure 4. Normalized passband ripple plots for the 
FIR BS filter of order 20.
Figure 5. Normalized stopband ripple plots for the 
FIR BS filter of order 20.
Figure 6. Convergence profiles for RGA, PSO, DE and 
CBO in case of FIR BS Filter of order 20.

137
6th Annual Chinese Automation and Computer Science 
Conference, pp.151–155.
Fang Wei, Sun Jun, Xu Wenbo & Liu Jing 2006. FIR 
Digital Filters Design Based on Quantum-behaved 
Particle Swarm Optimization. First International Con-
ference on Innovative Computing, Information and Con-
trol, vol 1, pp. 615–619.
Karaboga D., Horrocks D.H., Karaboga N. & Kalinli A. 
1997. Designing digital FIR filters using Tabu search 
algorithm. IEEE International Symposium on Circuits 
and Systems, vol.4, pp. 2236–2239.
Karaboga N. 2009. A new design method based on artifi-
cial bee colony algorithm for digital IIR filters. Journal 
of the Franklin Institute, vol. 346, no.4, pp. 328–348.
Kaveh A. & Mahdavi V.R. 2014. Colliding bodies opti-
mization: A novel meta-heuristic method. An Interna-
tional Journal of Computers and Structures, Elsevier, 
vol. 139, pp. 18–27.
Kaveh A. & Talatahari S. 2010. A novel heuristic opti-
mization method: charged system search. Acta 
Mechanica, vol. 213, no. 3–4, pp. 267–289.
Kennedy J. & Eberhart R. 1995. Particle swarm optimi-
zation. Proceedings of the IEEE International Confer-
ence on Neural Networks, vol. 4, pp. 1942–1948.
Ling S.H., Iu H.H.C., Leung F.H.F. & Chan K.Y. 2008. 
Improved hybrid particle swarm optimized wavelet 
neural network for modelling the development of 
fluid dispensing for electronic packaging. IEEE Trans. 
Ind. Electron., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 3447–3460.
Litwin L. 2000. FIR and IIR digital filters. IEEE Poten-
tials, pp. 28–31.
Liu G., Li Y.X., & He G. 2010. Design of Digital FIR 
Filters Using Differential Evolution Algorithm Based 
on Reserved Gene. IEEE Congress on Evolutionary 
Computation, pp. 1–7.
Lu H.-C. & Tzeng S.T. 2000. Design of arbitrary FIR log 
filters by genetic algorithm approach. Signal Process-
ing, 80, pp. 497–505.
Luitel B. & Venayagamoorthy G.K. 2008. Differential 
Evolution Particle Swarm Optimization for Digital 
Filter Design. IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Com-
putation, pp. 3954–3961.
Luitel B. & Venayagamoorthy G.K. 2008. Particle Swarm 
Optimization with Quantum Infusion for the Design of 
Digital Filters. Swarm Intelligence Symposium, pp. 1–8.
Mastorakis N.E., Gonos I.F. & Swamy M.N.S. 2003. 
Design of Two Dimensional Recursive Filters Using 
Genetic Algorithms. IEEE Transaction on Circuits and 
Systems-I. Fundamental Theory and Applications, vol. 
50, pp. 634–639.
McClellan J.H., Parks T.W. & Rabiner L.R. 1973. A 
computer program for designing optimum FIR lin-
ear phase digital filters. IEEE Trans. Audio Electro 
acoust., AU-21, pp. 506–526.
Najjarzadeh M. & Ayatollahi A. 2008. FIR Digital Fil-
ters Design: Particle Swarm Optimization Utilizing 
LMS and Minimax Strategies. International Symp. 
on Signal Processing and Information Technology, pp. 
129–132.
Parks T.W. & Burrus C.S. 1987. Digital Filter Design. 
Wiley, New York.
Parks T.W. & McClellan J.H. 1972. Chebyshev approxima-
tion for non recursive digital filters with linear phase. 
IEEE Trans. Circuits Theory, CT-19, pp. 189–194.
Rabiner L.R. 1973. Approximate design relationships for 
High-pass FIR digital filters. IEEE Trans. Audio Elec-
tro acoust., AU-21, pp. 456–460.
Saha S.K., Ghoshal S.P., Kar R. & Mandal D. 2013. A 
novel firefly algorithm for optimal linear phase FIR 
filter design. International Journal of Swarm Intelli-
gence Research, IGI Global, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 29–48.
Saha S.K., Kar R., Mandal D. & Ghoshal S.P. 2014. Har-
mony search algorithm for infinite impulse response 
system identification. Computers and Electrical Engi-
neering, Elsevier, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1265–1285.
Saha S.K., Kar R., Mandal D. & Ghoshal S.P. 2014. 
Optimal linear phase FIR filter design using parti-
cle swarm optimization with constriction factor and 
inertia weight approach with wavelet mutation. Inter-
national Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, IOS 
Press, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 81–96.
Sarangi A., Mahapatra R.K. & Panigrahi S.P. 2011. 
DEPSO and PSO-QI in digital filter design. Expert 
Systems with Applications, vol. 38, No.9, pp. 
10966–10973.
Sun J., Feng B & Xu W.B. 2004. Particle Swarm Opti-
mization with Particles Having Quantum Behaviour. 
Proc. Congress on Evolutionary Computation, pp. 
325–331.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

139
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
An intelligent controller for the enhancement of voltage stability 
and power oscillation damping of an isolated micro grid
Asit Mohanty, Meera Viswavandya & Sthita Pragyan
CET Bhubaneswar, India
ABSTRACT: This paper focuses on the stability improvement in a standalone hybrid power system 
through a reactive power compensation and also discusses the oscillation damping in the system. A sliding 
mode based on the controller for the DFIG based wind turbine is proposed. For an improved stability and 
reactive power compensation a Linearized small signal model of STATCOM is considered. The Compen-
sation has been carried out with the STATCOM Controller for different loadings and with several wind 
inputs.
and load disturbance. It shows good robustness, 
quick response, and an easy realization. Sliding 
Mode Control (SMC) has been proposed here to 
control DFIG based hybrid power system. For 
the sliding mode controller, the Lyaponov stabil-
ity method has been applied to keep the nonlin-
ear system under control SMC provides a fast and 
accurate dynamic response [7]–[8].
2 MATHEMATICAL MODELING
A detailed small signal model of the hybrid sys-
tem is shown in Figure1and the reactive power 
balance equation of the system is mentioned 
below. The small change in the load ΔQL, the sys-
tem terminal voltage varies affecting the reac-
tive power. The reactive balance equation is 
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
QSG+ Q
Δ SVC
QL
QIG
QIGH=0
−Δ
−
. The 
System Model Equation is through the transfer func-
tion equation, which is given below [14].
1 INTRODUCTION
DFIG based Wind Turbines have been preferred 
and have got much attention as one of the pre-
ferred technologies for the wind energy conver-
sion systems. The DFIG based wind turbine offers 
many advantages in comparison to others such as 
reduction of the inverter cost, better potential to 
control torque and having a better efficiency in 
wind energy extraction. Role of the DFIG based 
wind turbine in Isolated/Standalone hybrid power 
systems is very crucial and effective. Standalone 
systems are small power systems located at remote 
places to cater the local power demands of the 
places situated far away from the main grid. Gener-
ally, two or more renewable sources are combined 
to form a hybrid power system where shortage due 
to one source is compensated by the other. In a 
typical standalone configuration of Wind Diesel 
Micro hydro hybrid systems, diesel generators work 
as a backup with a wind turbine to provide power 
to remote loads. Normally Synchronous genera-
tors are preferred as Diesel Generator and SCIG/
DFIG/PMIG are preferred to Wind Turbine for a 
better performance and for their rugged character-
istics. In a typical Wind-diesel-Micro hydro hybrid 
system, wind is unpredictable and the system faces 
variable input loads. This disturbs the stability of 
the hybrid power system and needs capacitor banks 
and FACTS for enhanced stability and better reac-
tive power compensation [1]–[3]. The challenges of 
the power quality issues like voltage instability and 
reactive power compensation are generally met by 
the use of FACTS (Flexible AC Transmission Sys-
tem) devices [4]–[6].
The advantage of the sliding mode control is that 
it is insensitive to the system parameters change 
Figure 1. Standalone hybrid system.

140
QSG+ QSTAT = QL+ QIG+ QIGH
QSTAT =
QIG+
 
(1)
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
V(S)
[ Q
(S)+ Q
Δ
(S)
Q
Δ
(S)
Q
(S)
Q
(S)]
SG
COM
L
(S)
Q
Δ
IG
IGH
−Δ
R
R
+X
V and Q
X
R
X
X
V
IG
y
Y
e
+X q
IG
eq
Y
e
X q
M
=
=
V and Q
y
IG
+
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
RY
2
2
+X
2
2
2
X
2
1
.
V
Xm
2
 term contributes towards
Electromagnetic energy storage equation for 
the modelling, the reactive power absorbed by the 
Induction generator is:
Q
X
R
X
V
IG
eq
Y
e
X q
=
⎧
⎨⎪⎧
⎨
⎩⎪
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬⎪⎫
⎬
⎭⎪
⎬
⎭
2
2
X
2. The modified synchro-
nous generator equation is Q
X
SG
q
d
=
′
′
(
)
E Vcos
V
q′
δ
2
 
for incremental change:
Δ
Δ
Q
V
E q
V
v
SG
d
q
q
=
′
′
Δ
+
′
−
′
cos
cos
δ
δ
X Δ
d
q
Δ
′Δ
d
2
 
(3)
The state space representation of the system is 
X=AX+Bu+Cw.
The state, control, and disturbance vectors 
are x, u, and w of the wind diesel hybrid system 
and A, B, C are the matrices of the appropriate 
dimensions.
X
[ I
,
V, 
,
,
V ,
,
E ]
u
[ V
] w
Q ]
dr
ref
fd
a
f
V ,
V
V
q
T
re
V f
L
] w
Q
= Δ
[
Δ
Δ
V,
Δ
Δ
E ,
fd
Δ
Δ
V ,
V
′
= Δ
[
δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Q
E
Δ
q
K
V
Δ
SG
Q
a
b
K
E
Δ
q
K
( )s
( )s
( )s
′q
+
 Where
K
V
X d
K
q
V
X d
a
b
K
X d
K
=
d
=
−
′d
cosδ
δ
K
E q′ c
K
E qq os
2
 
(4)
The reactive power injected by the system bus is:
Q+V2B-KVdc
V
VBcos(
)
dc
(
)=0
δ −α
δ
)+KVd
V
VGsin( −α
 
 
(5)
Δ
=
+
Δ
Q
K
S
Δ
K
V
Δ (S)
STATCOM
J
= K
K
( )
S
)
α(
 
(6)
K
KV B
K
KV B
K
d
KV cB
K
V
COS
KV B
K
KV B
K
α
α
KV B
L
K
dc
V
COS  
(7)
3 SLIDING MODE CONTROLLER DESIGN
The sliding mode control method works in three 
stages. (i) Sliding Surfaces (ii) Conditions of conver-
gence, and (iii) Controller Design. The detailed algo-
rithm is mentioned below. In order to have a stable 
operation and to enable independent control through 
smc based DFIG has been used for the smooth oper-
ation. ol active and reactive power of the DFIG The 
PI and SMC controllers have been formulated with 
the dynamic model equations and the results are 
compared. A schematic of sliding mode controller 
based DFI turbine ia shown in Figure 2.   
t
t
d
dt
n
( ,
x )
(
)
(e
n
)
λ)
1
 e(t) is the error in the 
output state:
e
x
x
refe
( )t
( )t( )t
( )t
=
−
x
)t
 λ is a positive coefficient.
The convergence condition is defined by the 
equation of Lyapunov:
s s. ≺0. Consequently, the structure of a control-
ler consists of two parts; a first one concerning the 
exact linearization and the second being that of 
stabilizing.
The equations u
u
u
eq
n
( )t
( )t
=
+
u
)t
, ueq(t) corre-
sponds to the equivalent control, it is calculated on 
the basis of the system behaviour along the sliding 
mode described by: s
t
( ,
x ) = 0
u
K
s
n
sgn( ) Where K〉0
K is the control gain
sgn( )s =
〉
〉
−
〈
⎧
⎨⎪⎧
⎨
⎩⎪
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬⎪⎫
⎬
⎭⎪
⎬
⎭
1
0
s〉
0
0
s〉
0
〈s
4 SIMULATION RESULTS
From the MATLAB based simulation, which has 
been carried out taking a sliding mode based STAT-
COM Controller for the wind diesel micro hydro 
hybrid power system, the settling points and peak 
overshoots of the different parameters of the hybrid 
systems are noted. The reactive power and voltage 
stability of the hybrid power system have been opti-
mized with a step load change of 5%.Variation of all 
the system parameters under system uncertainties as 
shown in Figure 3(a–d) are noticed using traditional 
PI Controller and sliding mode based STATCOM 
Figure 2. Sliding mode controller based DFIG Turbine.

141
controller. In the sliding mode approach the compo-
nents IdI  and IqI  are regulated making IdI  is zero; the 
controller is designed in the total system including 
switching devices. A sliding mode control method 
has been proposed and used for the control of the 
DFIG based hybrid power system. For reactive 
power compensation and stability analysis a STAT-
COM has been used. Simulation results for Fig-
ure 3(a–d) show good performances with proposed 
sliding mode control and shows a good choice of the 
parameters control.
5 CONCLUSION
The reactive power compensation and voltage 
control of the hybrid system show better stabil-
ity results with the sliding mode controller. With 
STATCOM and sliding mode control, the simula-
tion results show a faster response without over-
shoot and the robust performance to parametric 
variation and disturbances in all the system.
REFERENCES
 [1] Hingorani N.G, Gyugyi L. 2000.Understand-
ing FACTS, Concepts and Technology of 
Flexible AC TransmissionSystem, IEEE Power 
Engineering Society: New York.
 [2] Kaldellis J. et al. 1999. Autonomous energy 
system for remote island based on renewable 
energy sources, in proceeding of EWEC: Nice.
 [3] Padiyar K.R, Verma R.K. 1991. Damping 
Torque Analysis of Static VAR System con-
troller, IEEE Transaction of Power System: vol 
6. No 2, PP458–465, May.
 [4] Padiyar  K.R, 2008. FACTS Controllering in 
Power Transmission system and Distribution, 
New Age International Publishers.
 [5] Bansal R.C, Bhatti T.S, Kumar V. 2007. Reac-
tive Power Control of Autonomous Wind Diesel 
hybrid Power System using ANN, Proceeding 
of the IEEE Power Engineering Conference.
 [6] Mohanty Asit, Viswavandya Meera, Ray Pra-
kash K, Patra Sandipan.2014.Stability analy-
sis and reactive power compensation issue in a 
microgrid with a DFIG based WECS, Electri-
cal Power and Energy System.
 [7] Massoum A, Fellah M-K, Meroufe A.2005. 
Sliding mode control for a permanent mag-
net synchronous machine fed by three levels 
inverter using a singular perturbation decou-
pling. Journal Of Electrical & Electronics Engi-
neering: Vol 5. Istanbul University.
 [8] Louze L, Nemmour A, Khezzar A, Hacil M.E, 
Boucherma M.2002. Cascade sliding mode 
controller for self-excited induction generator. 
Revue des Energies Renouvelables: Vol. 12 N°4 
(2009) 617–626 Ohm.
Figure 3. (a–d) Simulation results of the different 
parameters with the change in load and wind power.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

143
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Identification of lyapunov function for testing stability of nonlinear 
systems using BFO
C.M. Banerjee & A. Baral
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India
ABSTRACT: This paper proposes a methodology to access system stability for any nonlinear autono-
mous/non autonomous system. Here, Lyapunov Stability Theorem has been utilized to find that domain 
of attraction. It is known that obtaining suitable Energy Function that satisfies Lyapunov Stability crite-
ria is difficult to formulate for a given nonlinear system. Hence the present paper is aimed at identifying 
the Energy Function for a given nonlinear system using an optimization technique. The proposed meth-
odology, based on Bacteria Foraging Optimization (BFO) Algorithm is capable of identifying the domain 
of attraction along with the Energy Function which satisfies Lyapunov stability criteria. The discussed 
technique is first applied on Synchronous machine dynamics and thereafter, on a non autonomous system 
to show its practical effectiveness.
In the present paper, Bacteria Foraging Optimi-
zation is used to find suitable Lyapunov Function 
and maximize domain of attraction. Related analy-
sis presented in this paper shows that compared to 
other optimization technique like, Adaptive Tabu 
Search (ATS) (Panikhom et al., 2012), application 
of BFO leads to identification of a much larger 
domain of attraction.
2 LYAPUNOV STABILITY: BRIEF THEORY
It is imperative that a description about Lyapunov 
Stability Theorem is provided before the actual 
problem formulation is presented. The following 
section briefly describes Lyapunov Stability theo-
rem and stability criteria.
2.1 Lyapunov Stability Theorem (Nagrath, 2011)
• Stability Property:
For a system whose dynamics can be described by 
the equation x
f

( )
x ; f(0) = 0, there exists a scalar 
Energy Function V(x) which satisfies the follow-
ing properties for all x in the region ||x|| ≤ α where 
α > 0.
a. V(x) > 0; x ≠ 0 and V(0) = 0 i.e. V(x) is positive 
definite scalar function.
b. V(x) has continuous partial derivatives for all 
x.
c. V  ≤ 0 i.e. derivative of the Energy  Function must 
be at least negative semi definite function.
Then it can be concluded that the system is 
 stable at origin.
1 INTRODUCTION
The aim of this paper is to find suitable Energy 
Function and at the same time maximize domain 
of attraction for stability analysis of any nonlinear 
system. Available literature shows that an Energy 
Function, which does not satisfy the properties 
of stability, does not guarantee the instability of 
a given nonlinear system. The Lyapunov Energy 
Function for a given system being non-unique, the 
system under consideration can be said to be sta-
ble if any other Energy Function can be identified 
which satisfies stability conditions. Furthermore, it 
is advantageous to have the area of such region as 
large as possible (Panikhom et al., 2012).
Information regarding stability as obtained 
from the Eigen value (Nagrath, 2011) does not 
give satisfactory result for a nonlinear system. It 
is understood that for a given system, the defini-
tion of the Energy Function V(x) = XTPX can be 
altered by changing symmetric matrix P only. Here, 
X is the state vector of the system considered. The 
dimension of matrix P depends on number of state 
variables of the system. The discussed method not 
only identifies the Energy Function correspond-
ing to a symmetric matrix P but also ensures that 
the Energy Function satisfies the stability condi-
tions on its corresponding domain of attraction. 
It can be observed that identification of such an 
Energy Function is difficult especially for a non-
linear system. Therefore, in the present paper an 
optimization technique is used for addressing the 
above issue.

144
• Asymptotically Stability Property:
If the property (a), (b) of Stability Property remain 
valid and property (c) is substituted by V  < 0, x ≠ 0 
i.e. the function is negative definite function then 
the system is said to be asymptotic stable. The gen-
eralized quadratic form of Energy Function that 
has gained popularity among researchers is given 
by equation (1)
V(x) = XT PX 
(1)
2.2 Domain of Attraction (Vidyasagar, 1993)
Information related to stability region Rst holds 
important information to design any system. In a 
stable domain of attraction, the Energy Function 
should satisfy the following properties
1. V(x) should be positive definite in region Rst.
2. V (x) should be negative definite in region Rst.
3. The domain of attraction should contain equi-
librium points.
If the above conditions are satisfied and the 
initial operating point of the system lies within Rst 
then as →∞ the system operating point will con-
verge to the equilibrium point. If, V(x) denotes the 
Energy Function in a domain then the domain of 
attraction can be defined by equation (2)
ψ =
≤
>
{
|
( )
},
∈
V(
d
d
},
N
0  
(2)
It is understood that the contour of V(x) can be 
varied by changing real symmetric matrix P. The 
aim of this paper is to find suitable Energy Func-
tion V(x) for a particular nonlinear system and 
maximize domain of attraction within which V(x) 
satisfies stability conditions. To satisfy all above 
mentioned condition, Bacteria Foraging optimiza-
tion is used in the present work.
3 BACTERIA FORAGING OPTIMIZATION
Foraging animal always try to maximize energy 
consumption per unit time during foraging period. 
BFO algorithm is modeled by keeping in mind the 
foraging behavior of Escherichia coli (E.Coli) bac-
teria. It is worth mentioning here that the move-
ment of E.Coli bacteria during foraging is also 
known as chemo-tactic behavior (Passino et al., 
2002).
In a search field nutrient may be present in 
patches. In any foraging technique the predator 
present in the search space locates these prey items 
(food) and attacks them. There are distinct advan-
tages of social and intelligent foraging. For which 
communication between agents is required. Due to 
this, locating nutrients become easier and success 
rate is also increased. In BFO, bacteria attract or, 
repel according to their position in nutrient or nox-
ious substance.
E.Coli bacteria use its flagella for locomotion. 
E.coli bacteria swim and tumble using flagella. 
Within the search space E.Coli bacteria always try 
to move in positive nutrient direction. Bacteria’s 
movement is controlled by attraction and repel 
(Das et al., 2009). The dynamics of bacteria move-
ment can be summarized in following three steps 
(Passino et al., 2002).
• In neutral substances it tumbles and run in ran-
dom direction.
• In homogeneous nutrient concentration i.e. zero 
nutrient gradient, bacteria mean run length, 
mean speed increase and mean tumble time 
decrease.
• In nutrient gradient bacteria spent more time in 
swimming less in tumbling. They move towards 
positive nutrient direction up to a certain 
period.
E.coli bacteria senses nutrient gradient from 
the difference between nutrient concentrations on 
the two ends of bacteria. After maximum chemo-
tactic step of all bacteria’s lifetime are over, bac-
teria with lower health die and those with better 
health split for reproduction (Chen et al., 2008). 
It should be kept in mind that during this proc-
ess the total population bacteria are kept constant. 
This is called Reproduction Event. After maximum 
reproduction step, some bacteria are eliminated 
and disperse near nutrient location according to 
probability of elimination. This is called Elimina-
tion and dispersal event.
4 IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURE
It is understood that the Energy Function V(x) can 
be changed by changing real symmetric matrix P. 
To generate suitable V(x), that satisfies Lyapunov 
Stability criteria, a proper real symmetric matrix 
P needs to be generated. If a system has two state 
variable x1 and x2 then Energy Function V(x) can 
be represented by equation (3)
V
P
x
x
x
P
x
( )
x
,
,
x
P
,
=
)
(
(
)+
(
(
)
×
x
)
+
)
(
(
)
11
2
2
P
×
( 1
2 2
1
2
1
2
x
×
2
2
 (3)
˙V(x) can be calculated from the system state 
variable x1 and x2 and their derivative x1 and x2 as 
illustrated in equation (4)
V
P
P
( )
x =
(
)
(
)
(
) × [
]

x
x
×
x
{
(
+[
]
x
x
×
x
}) +
×
2
P
×
(

x
x
)
×
x
)
2(
2
1
1
x
×
x
x
x
P
)
)
(
(
x1
1
x
×
2
2
(
)
2 2
2,
×
×
(
)
x
x
2 ×
2

 
 
(4)

145
The matrix P predicted by BFO at particular 
iteration ‘i’ is used to compute V(x) according to 
equation (3). Once a closed path ‘Rst’ having area 
(A1) for function V(x) is identified, the following 
condition are checked. These conditions must be 
satisfied in order to classify V(x) as a suitable can-
didate of Lyapunov Function.
• V(x) must be positive definite for all points 
within the region
• V( )
x  must be negative definite for all points 
within the region
If both the above conditions are not satisfied 
the cost_function (J) is assigned to a large number 
(denoting a noxious substance or invalid state) else 
it is updated according to equation (5)
Ji = 1/A1 
(5)
It is understood that in order to test the above 
referred conditions, coordinates within the region 
‘Rst’ must be identified. It is observed that the use 
of ‘inpolygon’ function (available in MATLAB) to 
detect the suitable points is too time consuming. 
So a more efficient algorithm having less computa-
tional burden is devised for the discussed method.
The ‘GRADE’ (Grosman et al., 2005) to which 
stability conditions on the detected domain of 
attraction are satisfied, can be checked by taking 
a small region whose radius is 10–3 and center is at 
the equilibrium point using equation (6).
 GRADE G
r
i
i
G
r
i
×
−r (
+
2
*
)
D
V
+
D
−
(
+
−
V
+
D
1  
(6)
Where, ri is the radius of the region and D+ is 
number of points where V ( )
x  is positive(Grosman 
et al., 2005) and V- is number of points where V(x) 
is negative.
5 RESULT AND DISCUSSION
The applicability of Bacteria Foraging Optimiza-
tion in identifying P is illustrated by considering 
two examples.
Example 1: The dynamics of a synchronous 
machine is considered to be the first example. 
The system equation that govern the dynamics 
of synchronous machine (Genesio et al., 1984) is 
given by
• x
x
1
2
x
• x
D
2
2
D
x
×
−
x
( )
1
( ) +
( )
sin
s
( )
x1 + in
)
Where the power angle is indicated by x1 and 
the corresponding speed deviation is indicated by 
x2. In the present work it is assumed that the values 
of D and δ are 0.5 and 0.412 respectively. x2 = 0, 
x1 = 0.412 is the equilibrium point of interest. 
The other critical points for the system described 
by above are x2 = 0, x1 = (0.412+2π) and x2 = 0, 
x1 = ( −0.412+π.).
The expression of V(x), obtained using P 
matrix (corresponding to the minimum value of 
cost_function (J)) is given in equation (7)
V
x
x
x
x
( )
x =
×
(
)+(
×
×
x
)
+
×
(
)+
0 2280
2
0
×
1927
0 7720
7
1
2
1
2
x
×
2
2
.
) (
.
x
×
2280
1
.
 (7)
It can be observed from Figure 1 that BFO 
converges after approx 1200 number of iterations 
for Example 1. It should be mentioned here that 
Figure 1 does not show the value of J for which 
V(x) does not form a closed path as this condition 
denotes an highly noxious substance. The area of 
stability region (shown in Figure 2) is observed to 
much larger than the area found using Adaptive 
Tabu Search (Panikhom et al., 2012). By consider-
ing 10−3 radius circle (Grosman et al., 2005) with 
equilibrium point as its center, the GRADE (Gros-
man et al., 2005) at which the stability condition 
satisfied is 99.72%. This implies V(x) is sufficient 
to shift the operating point of system into the equi-
librium point of interest.
The surface plot of V( )
x  corresponding to the 
Energy Function given in equation (8) is shown 
in Figure 3. It can be observed from Figure 2 and 
Figure 3 that the identified Energy Function sat-
isfies the Lyapunov stability criteria satisfactorily. 
Table 1 summarizes the performance of BFO over 
ATS (Panikhom et al., 2012) for the nonlinear sys-
tem considered as Example 1.
Example 2: A non autonomous system means that 
the system is time varying. The system equation for 
such a non autonomous system (Panikhom et al., 
2012), considered as Example 2, is given as
Figure 1. Variation of cost_function J for Example 1 
with iteration count.

146
tion (8). The range of t selected is an exemplary 
one. The proposed methodology is equally accept-
able for any range of t.
V
x
x
x
x
( )
x =
×
(
)+ (
)
(
×
×
x
)
+
×
(
)+
0 8858
×
0 1142
0 7857
1
2
1
2
x
×
2
2)
((
.
x
×
8858
1
.
.
x
×
)+ 0
2
 
 
(8)
Figure 4 shows the variation of cost_function J 
with number of iteration for the non autonomous 
system considered as Example 2. Like Exam-
ple 1, Figure 4 also does not show the value of 
J for which V(x) does not form a closed path in 
the solution space. The stability region identified 
for Example 2 is shown in Figure 5. Like Exam-
ple 1, the area of the obtained stability region is 
observed to be much larger than the area found 
using Adaptive Tabu Search (Panikhom et al., 
Figure 3. Surface plot of V ( )
x .
Figure 4. Variation of cost_function J for Example 2 
with iteration count.
Figure 5. Domain of attraction identified for Example 
2 with area 201.10.
Figure 2. Domain of attraction identified for Example 
1 with area 109.224.
Table 1. Performance of BFO over ATS.
Method 
name
P(1,1)
P(2,1)
P(2,2)
AREA
GRADE 
(Gi)
ATS
0.2308
0.0632
0.322
11.2693
99.72%
BFO
0.2280
0.1927
0.772
109.224
99.72%
• x
x
1
2
x
• x
f

x
x
2
1
f
x
2
0 8
1 4
( )
( )t
−
×
1 4
f t
.
where the f(t) is a time varying function. For the 
present paper f(t) is considered to be sin(t) (Pan-
ikhom et al., 2012).
The expression of the Energy Function (V(x)) 
for minimum cost_function J using the P matrix 
(identified by BFO) for 2 ≤ t ≤ 5 is given by equa-

147
2012). Figure 6 shows the variation of V ( )
x  at 
a typical coordinate (x1 = 2.8514 and x2 = 4.3271) 
for the range of 1 ≤ t ≤ 10. It is worth mention-
ing here that similar results are observed for other 
points within the search space. It is observed from 
Figure 6 that V ( )
x  remains negative for the entire 
selected range of t selected. Hence, it can be rea-
soned that the P matrix identified using Bacteria 
Foraging Optimization is appropriate.
6 CONCLUSION
This paper discusses a Bacteria Foraging Algo-
rithm based procedure for identifying suitable 
Lyapunov Energy Function for nonlinear system. 
The proposed method is capable of identifying the 
Figure 6. Variation of 
 ˙V(x) with time at (x1,x2) = (2.8514, 
4.3271).
maximum domain of attraction for given system 
whose state equations are known. In the present 
work the capability of the discussed method is 
demonstrated by considering two examples namely, 
a synchronous machine and a non autonomous 
system. Analysis presented in this paper show that 
BFO based method is capable of identifying much 
larger domain of attraction compared to Adaptive 
Tabu Search.
REFERENCES
Chen, H., Zhu, Y.,  and Hu, K., “Self-adaptation in Bacterial 
Foraging Optimization algorithm”, pp1026–1031,2008.
Das, S., Biswas, A., Dasgupta, S., and Abraham A., 
“Foundations of Computational Intelligence”, Vol. 3, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg 2009.
Genesio, R., and Vicino, A., “New techniques for con-
structing asymptotic stability regions for nonlinear 
systems.” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., vol. 31, No. 6, 
pp. 574–581, 1984.
Grosman, B. and Lewin, D. R., ”Automatic generation 
of lyapunov functions using genetic programming”, 
Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 872–872, 2005.
Nagrath, I.J. and Gopal, M., “Control System Engineer-
ing”, 5th Edition, 2011.
Panikhom, S. and Sujitjorn, S., “Numerical Approach to 
Construction of Lyapunov Function for Nonlinear Sta-
bility Analysis”, Vol. 4, No. 17 pp. 2915–2919, 2012.
Passino, K.M., “Biomimicry of Bacterial Foraging for 
Distributed Optimization and Control,” IEEE Con-
trol Systems Magazine, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 52–67, June 
2002.
Vidyasagar, M., “Nonlinear Systems Analysis”, Second Edi-
tion, Prentice Hall, Inc. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 
1993.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

149
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Development of a cross correlation based induction motor stator 
winding inter-turn fault severity indicator
Partha Mishra
EE Department, College of Engineering and Management, Kolaghat, India
Santanu Das
EE Department, Jalpaiguri Government Engineering College, Jalpaiguri, India
ABSTRACT: Stator winding inter-turn faults contribute to a major percentage of induction motor 
failure in the industries. A cross correlation technique based induction motor stator winding fault iden-
tification scheme has a significantly low computational burden that has been proposed in this paper. 
Presented scheme has been found to identify the inter turn fault conditions involving minor number of 
turns in three phase induction motor stator winding. Experimentally obtained, the three phase currents 
of the induction motor under healthy and faulty conditions were analyzed employing a suitably designed 
FIR digital filter and cross correlation technique. Captured motor current signals of the faulty phase were 
fed to the designed fault identification algorithm implemented in the form of a MATLAB program. The 
entire scheme has been found to identify stator winding inter-turn fault conditions quite efficiently and, 
thus, responses of cross-correlation between filtered motor currents under healthy and faulty conditions 
that have been proposed as an effective indicator for identifying such faults of varying severity.
According to IEEE and Electric Power Research 
Institute motor reliability study stator fault are 
responsible for 37% of the IM failures (Kliman 
et al. 1996, Thomson et al. 2001). The stator faults 
are due to turn- to- turn, phase to phase or winding 
to earth short circuit. This paper mainly describes 
the detection of inter-turn short-circuit introduced 
due to the different stresses mainly thermal and 
electrical in stator winding of IM. The stress-
ful condition of the stator winding may lead to a 
breakdown of winding insulation. Insulation fail-
ure may occur in between turn-to-turn or phase- 
to- phase on the stator winding. This phenomenon 
causes a destructive effect on the stator winding.
During the last two decades, significant research 
works have been carried out for detection and diag-
nosis of inter-turn fault in IMs (Thomson et al. 
2001, Gandhi et al. 2011). A number of online and 
offline techniques were proposed to find out the 
inter turn fault. For an online monitoring, Motor 
Current Signature Analysis (MCSA) has been 
proposed as the most prudent approach (Gandhi 
et al. 2011, Das et al. 2011). Other significant tech-
niques are turn-to-turn capacitance calculation, 
online Partial Discharge (PD) analysis, and axi-
ally transmitted leakage flux. Few more popular 
offline techniques are Insulation Resistance (IR) 
measurement, Polarization Index (PI) measure-
ment, dc and ac Hipot test, dc conducting test, 
capacitance impedance test, stator-current and 
1 INTRODUCTION
Induction Motors (IMs) are complex electrome-
chanical devices utilized in most industrial applica-
tions for the conversion of electrical to mechanical 
form of energy. Most of the mechanisms in the 
industry are driven by three-phase induction motors 
which are energized either by constant frequency 
sinusoidal power supply or by ac drive. Induc-
tion motor is a widely accepted component in the 
industry due to its low cost, ruggedness, small size, 
low maintenance, and competent to work in any 
environmental condition such as heat, vibration, 
dust, moisture etc. Though IM is considered as a 
robust machine, it produces several types of electri-
cal faults. Among all types of faults in IM, stator 
winding fault occurs mainly due to the extra volt-
age stress and high frequency current components 
are introduced by ac drives. Regarding the indus-
trial perspective and other electrical appliances, IM 
fault monitoring and diagnosis is important to pre-
vent motor failure to run the plant continuously 
for the extended hours. Any form of unexpected 
shutdown may lead to the wastage of raw mate-
rials, production time and hence economic losses. 
To reduce the effective maintenance cost, a conten-
tious and efficient monitoring system capable of 
providing an indication about the inception of the 
fault is necessary to prevent premature failure of 
such machines.

150
voltage harmonic analysis, recording the negative-
sequence impedance estimation. Other proposed 
methods include temperature analysis, magnetic 
field analysis, vibration analysis, and acoustic 
noise measurement (Kliman et al. 1996, Gandhi 
et al. 2011, Das et al. 2011, Das et al. 2014). Some 
modern knowledge based techniques such as arti-
ficial intelligence, neuro-fuzy technique; genetic 
algorithm, neural network, and Bayesian classifier 
have also been proposed as efficient (Gandhi et al. 
2011, Das et al. 2011). But, most of the techniques 
suffer from either lack of high accuracy in fault 
detection and/or high computational burden.
It is still an open area of research to find out 
and propose a more efficient fault identification 
method with relatively low computational burden. 
This paper presents a simple yet efficient method 
with less computational burden to differentiate 
healthy from faulty conditions, which developed 
due to insulation degradation between turns in 
induction motor’s stator winding. In this work, 
a few basic and popular signal conditioning and 
processing tools such as digital FIR band-pass 
filter and cross-correlation technique have been 
used. Motor phase currents are filtered to dis-
card frequency components around fundamental 
and also very high frequency components. After 
a  suitable digital filtering of faulty phase current, 
the extracted signal containing a specific frequency 
band has been found to be sensitive to fault. Out-
put signal of the digital filter corresponding to a 
healthy motor current has been used as a refer-
ence signal for further analyses. Signature result-
ing from cross correlation between filtered signals 
corresponding to healthy motor phase current 
and faulty phase current has been found to be an 
effective indicator to identifying such faults and 
also their severity. Experimentally obtained com-
prehensive data sets corresponding to healthy and 
faulty conditions of the stator winding were used 
to verify and validate the proposed scheme.
2 EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
In the present work, experimental studies have 
been conducted on a 1/2 HP, 400V, 4 pole, 3-phase 
induction motor with star connected stator wind-
ing, having 8 coils per phase and 70 turns per coil. 
To carry out the desired test, the following appara-
tus and arrangements have been used.
• A 3-phase auto-transformer, which has the capa-
bility to provide the variable voltage ranges from 
0% to 125% of the primary side rated supply 
voltage. It has been used to maintain throughout 
the rated voltage to motor in spite of utility end 
voltage.
• A data acquisition system with YOKOGAWA 
3-phase power meter [Model WT 230] to capture 
stator current signals under different experimen-
tal conditions.
• A customized stator winding where all stator coil 
ends and several tappings from different points 
of windings were brought out of the machine to 
a patch-board. This arrangement allowed sev-
eral faulty conditions to be created by means 
of appropriate short-circuiting links. Exact 
positions of tappings in Y-phase winding have 
been presented in the Table 1 and also shown in 
Figure 1.
Photograph of the experimental setup is shown 
in Figure 2.
In this experimental study, induction motor has 
been tested under a no load condition. At first, a 
rated three phase supply from the auto-transformer 
is fed to the motor under healthy conditions and 
corresponding three line currents of the motor has 
been captured at 20 kHz sampling frequency by 
employing digital power meter interfaced with PC. 
Then, the inter-turn fault conditions were artifi-
cially created one-by-one involving 0.2% (1 turn) to 
2.5% (14 turns) turns in Y-phase winding by short 
circuiting two external taps at a time as listed in 
Table 1. Motor current signals were captured in all 
fault cases for further analysis. Such type of faults 
change the stator symmetrical current to the asym-
metrical. Exemplary plots of captured three phase 
motor current signals under healthy and few faulty 
cases are shown in Figure 3.
Stator inter-turn insulation failures and result-
ing short-circuiting of turns lead to impedance 
unbalance among different phase windings. From 
Figure 1. Positions of the taps in Y phase winding.

151
when the developed fault level is very low, i.e., in 
case of minor faults. But the current Concordia 
pattern and the orientation of the major axis of 
the corresponding pattern has been used to iden-
tify the faulty phase (Das et al. TENCON 2011). 
Therefore, in this analysis, the current in the faulty 
phase, which is of a Y-phase in present study has 
only been analyzed. In the first step of analysis, an 
aim has been set to mask the frequency compo-
nents in the current profiles, which are not much 
sensitive to the variations of the fault levels. To 
achieve a Finite Impulse Response (FIR) type dig-
ital band-pass filter has been designed and found 
to be performing satisfactorily in this application 
as compared to other popular digital filters. This 
band-pass filter keeps a band of frequency compo-
nents in the current signal of the faulty phase while 
discards low frequency and very high frequency 
components from the same. It has been done so 
considering the fact that fundamental components 
in the motor current does not play much role in 
detection of fault or abnormal conditions (Das 
et al. 2011). The magnitude of the fundamental 
components in the current signal varies signifi-
cantly only with load. On the other side, very high 
frequency components can be treated as noise and 
Table 1. Fault conditions in Y-phase winding.
Sl. 
No.
Shorting 
between taps
No. of turns 
involved
% of stator winding 
turns/phase shorted
1
Y25-Y26
1
0.18
2
Y11-Y12
2
0.36
3
Y21-Y22
3
0.53
4
Y12-Y13
4
0.71
5
Y22-Y23
5
0.89
6
Y13-Y14
6
1.07
7
Y23-Y24
7
1.25
8
Y31-Y32
8
1.43
9
Y42-Y41
9
1.61
10
Y2-Y11
10
1.78
11
Y32-Y33
11
1.96
12
Y42-Y43
12
2.14
13
Y33-Y34
13
2.32
14
Y44-Y43
14
2.5
Figure 2. Photograph of the experimental setup.
Figure 3. Captured motor current signals under (a) 
healthy, (b) 3 turns short, (c) 14 turns short in Y-phase 
winding.
the Figure 3, it is clear that such fault cases involv-
ing minor number of turns hardly introduce any 
visually recognizable unbalanced in the current 
signals. Therefore, it is necessary to implement a 
prudent technique to extract visually recognizable 
fault indicator, which would enable an easy inter-
pretation as per an identification and also discrimi-
nation of faulty conditions from healthy motor is 
concerned. Since the objective of the work was 
to find out a suitable fault identification tool, the 
analyses have been carried out taking faulty phase 
motor currents only.
3 DATA ANALYSIS
Any kind of internal faults in the induction 
motor introduces an imbalance in the three phase 
motor currents, which may not be always identi-
fied through a mere visual inspection specially 

152
those normally get introduced in motor currents 
while acquiring current signals at a high sampling 
frequency.
3.1 Brief theory of FIR digital filter
Digital filter is a discrete system, and it does a 
series of mathematic operations to the input sig-
nal, to obtain the desired response. Details of 
Finite Impulse Response (FIR) type digital filter 
design can be found in (Peng 2013). Summary of 
the important steps of the digital filter design is 
presented here for ready reference.
The transfer function for a linear, time-invariant, 
digital filter is usually expressed as (Peng 2013):
H
b j z
a z
j
M
j
b j z
i
N
i
i
( )
z =
+
=
−
Σ
Σ
1
1
 
(1)
where, ai and bj are coefficients of the filter in the 
Z-transform. There are different types of digital 
filters, and also different ways to classify them. 
Similar to the other filters, FIR filters can be classi-
fied into four categories, which are low-pass, high-
pass, band-pass, and band-stop filter. According to 
the impulse response, there are usually two types of 
digital filters, which are Finite Impulse Response 
(FIR) filters and Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) 
filters. According to the formula in equation (1), if 
ai is zero, then it is a FIR filter, otherwise, if there 
is at least one none-zero ai, then it is an IIR filter. 
Usually, three basic arithmetic units are needed 
to design a digital filter; which are the adder, the 
delay, and the multiplier blocks.
Finite Impulse Response (FIR) filter is one of 
the most basic elements in digital signal process-
ing and it can guarantee a strict linear phase fre-
quency characteristic with any kind of amplitude 
frequency characteristic. Unit impulse response of 
FIR filter is finite; so, FIR filters are a stable sys-
tem. FIR filter has a broad application in many 
fields, such as telecommunication, image process-
ing, and so on.
The system function of FIR filter is:
H
h n z n
n
L
( )
z
[ ]
n
=
−
=
−
∑
0
1
 
(2)
where, L is the length of the filter, and h[n] is the 
impulse response.
At the time of designing a filter, it is necessary 
to specify a pass-bands, stop-bands, and transi-
tion bands. In pass-band, frequency components 
are needed to be passed without attenuation and 
in stop-band, frequency components need to be 
passed attenuated. Transition band contains fre-
quencies, which are lying between the pass-band 
and stop-band. Therefore, the entire frequency 
range is split into one or even more pass-bands, 
stop-bands, and transition bands. Practically, the 
magnitude is not necessary to be constant in the 
pass-band of a filter. A small amount of ripple is 
usually allowed in the pass-band. Similarly, the fil-
ter response will not be zero in the stop-band. A 
small, nonzero value is also tolerable in the stop-
band.
FIR filter is designed using least-squares error 
minimization has been employed in the present 
analysis. Cut off frequencies of FIR band-pass filter 
are chosen to be 80 Hz and 800 Hz.  Figure 4 shows 
few samples of filtered output of faulty phase 
(Y-phase) motor current signals. Employing the 
Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) tool the fre-
quency responses of the filtered signals are verified 
as presented in Figure 5.
Frequency responses of the selected frequency 
band have been found to be sensitive to fault level 
and that may be observed in Figure 5 also.
Figure 4. Filtered signals of Y-phase motor current 
under (a) healthy, (b) 2 turns short in Y-phase winding, 
and (c) 6 turns short in Y-phase winding.

153
3.2 Brief theory of cross correlation
In signal and system analysis, the concept and 
implementation of autocorrelation and cross cor-
relation plays an important role (Taghizadeh 2000). 
Correlation is a mathematical tool, which is used to 
analyze functions or series of data or value or time 
series data. Correlation is the mutual similarity or 
any other relationship between two or more sig-
nals. Autocorrelation is the correlation of the signal 
itself whereas cross correlation is the correlation of 
two different signals. In autocorrelation, generally, 
lagged tendency of a signal is observed through a 
long time series of data in the past and future val-
ues. The cross correlation function measures the 
dependency of the values of one signal on another 
signal. It is the simplest tool used to compare simi-
larity or dissimilarity between two signals.
The autocorrelation function of a random sig-
nal describes the general dependence of the values 
of the samples at one time on the values of the 
samples at another time. Consider a random proc-
ess x(t) (i.e. continuous-time), its autocorrelation 
function is written as:
R
T
dt
xx
R
T
T
T
( )
li
( )t
(
)
t
x
x
)
( )t
(
))
t
)t
t
x
x )t
t
lilim
→∞
−∫−
1
2
 
(3)
where, T is the period of observation.
Rxx(τ) is really valued and an even function with 
a maximum value at τ = 0.
For a sampled signal, the autocorrelation is 
defined as either biased or unbiased as follows:
R
N
x
x
xx
R
n
N m
(
)
m
|
|
m
( )
n
(
)
n
m
=
m
=
+
m
∑
1
1
1
 
(4)
[Biased Autocorrelation]
R
N
x
x
xx
R
n
N m
(
)
m
( )
n
( )
(
)
n
m
x
=
x( )
n
(n
=
+
m
∑
1
1
1
 
(5)
[Unbiased Autocorrelation]
For m = 1,2, ..... M + 1, where M is the number 
of lags.
For cross correlation, two WSS (Wide Sense 
Stationary) process x(t) and y(t) it is defined by:
R
T
y t
dt
xy
R
T
T
T
( )
li
( )t
(
)
t
y
x
)
( )t
)
t
)t
t
y
x )t
t
lilim
→∞
−∫−
1
 
(6)
Or,
R
T
y t
dt
yx
R
T
T
T
( )
li
)
( )t
(
)
t
x
y
)
)t
(
))
t
)t
t
x
y )t
t
lilim
→∞
−∫−
1
 
(7)
Where T is the observation time. For sampled 
signal it is defined as:
R
N
y n x
yx
R
n
N m
(
)
m
)
n
( )
(
)
n
m
x
=
y( )
n
(n
=
+
m
∑
1
1
1
 
(8)
Where, m = 1,2,3, ..... N + 1 and N is the record 
length (i.e. number of sample).
Properties of cross correlation function are as 
follows:
• Rxy(m) is always a real valued function which 
may be positive or negative.
• Rxy(m) may not necessarily have a maximum at 
m = 0 nor Rxy(m) an even function.
Figure 5. FFT profiles of filtered Y-phase motor cur-
rent under (a) healthy, (b) 2 turns short in Y-phase wind-
ing, (c) 8 turns short in Y-phase winding, and (d) 12 turns 
short in Y- phase winding.

154
• Rxy(−m) = Ryx(m)
• |Rxy(m)|2 ≤ Rxx(0) Ryy(0)
• |Rxy(m)| ≤ 1
2[Rxx(0) + Ryy(0)]
When Rxy(m) = 0, x(n) and y(n) are said to be 
‘uncorrelated’ or they are said to be statistically 
independent (assuming they have zeros mean.)
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this investigation, filtered stator current signal 
of faulty phase has been found to be most sensi-
tive to the faults in the respective phase winding. 
It has been verified through the FFT responses of 
the filtered signals under healthy and faulty cases 
as presented in Figure 5. Filtered stator current sig-
nals under healthy conditions of winding must have 
some differences from that of the faulty conditions 
of the stator winding. Since the level of stator wind-
ing inter-turn faults being studied is at a very low 
or minor level, the difference between healthy and 
faulty signals may not be significant enough. So to 
get a significant decimating information about the 
fault, a sensitive and highly accurate tool needs to 
Figure 6. Cross correlation between (a) healthy and 2 shorted turns, (b) healthy and 5 shorted turns,(c) healthy and 
6 shorted turns, (d) healthy and 14 shorted turns, (e) healthy and 10 shorted turns, (f) healthy and 12 shorted turns.
be employed. In view of that, cross correlation as a 
statistical signal processing tool has been adopted 
for the analyses. Lag verses coefficient plots 
obtained from cross correlation analyses have been 
found to provide encouraging information, which 
can be used to assess degree of deviation of motor 
fault conditions from its healthy state. As shown 
in Figure 6, the lag vs. coefficient magnitude plots 
of the cross correlation analysis between healthy 
and faulty signals evolves a typical pattern. Envel-
ops of the patterns are found to increase monot-
onically in the vertical directions with increasing 
fault severity. That may be observed in presented 
Figure 6. Figure 6 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) are 
responses of cross correlation between healthy 
and 2 shorted turns, healthy and 5 shorted turns, 
healthy and 6 shorted turns, healthy and 10 shorted 
turns, healthy and 12 shorted turns, and healthy 
and 14 shorted turns, respectively.
5 CONCLUSION
A new type of stator winding inter-turn fault 
indicator has been proposed in this paper. Digital 

155
filtering followed by cross correlation tools have 
been employed to develop this scheme, which is 
found to be accurately and unambiguously identi-
fying short circuit faults in stator winding involv-
ing minor number of turns. Such minor faults 
may not be easily discernible at its early stage and 
may lead to a catastrophic failure of some critical 
industrial process driven by three phase induction 
motor. The entire analysis has been carried out 
on a faulty phase current of the motor. Proposed 
scheme has been validated on the motor develop-
ing inter-turn winding fault under a no-load oper-
ating condition only. Therefore, the effectiveness 
of the scheme still needs to be verified on motors 
running at load and also under supply voltage 
unbalance conditions. But, the outcome of this 
work has established the effectiveness of the dig-
ital filtering and cross correlation tools in detec-
tion of such minor faults.
REFERENCES
Das S., Koley C., Purkait P., & Chakravorti S. (2014) 
“Performance of a Load-Immune Classifier for 
Robust Identification of Minor Faults in Induction 
Motor Stator Winding”, IEEE Transactions on Die-
lectrics and Electrical Insulation,. 21(1). 33–44.
Das S., Purkait P., Dey D., & Chakravorti S (2011). Mon-
itoring of Inter-Turn Insulation Failure in Induction 
Motor using Advanced Signal and Data Processing 
Tools. IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical 
Insulation. 18(5). 1599–1608.
Das S., Purkait P.,& Chakravorti S. (2011). Relating Sta-
tor Current Concordia Patterns to Induction Motor 
Operational Abnormalities. in Proc. IEEE TENCON, 
Bali, Indonesia.
Gandhi A., Corrigan T., & Parsa L. (2011). Recent 
advances in modeling and online detection of stator 
interturn faults in electrical motors. IEEE Trans. Ind. 
Electron., 58(5).1564–1575.
Kliman G.B., Premerlani W.J., Koegl R.A., & Hoeweler 
D.(1996). A new approach to on-line turn fault detec-
tion in ac motors. in Proc. 31st IEEE IAS Annual 
Meeting, 1996.
Peng Su. (2013). Design and analysis of FIR digital filter 
based on Matlab.
Taghizadeh S.R. (2000). Digital Signal Processing Case 
Study.
Thomson W.T. & Fenger M.(2001). Current Signature 
Analysis to Detect Induction Motor Faults. IEEE Ind. 
Appl. Magazine, pp. 26–34.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

157
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
clustering [Dutta R. et al. 2011] techniques and 
the navigational behavior of the users through 
Markov model. The clustering technique is used 
for the accumulation of the similar web pages. 
Similar web pages of the same type reside in the 
same cluster; the cluster containing web pages 
have the similarity with respect to topic of the 
session. The clustering algorithms [Dutta R. 
et al. 2011] considered are K-pages that are 
stored in the form of cellular automata to make 
the system more memory efficient. Sequential 
classifiers [6] from association rules obtained 
through data mining on a large web log data 
have been proposed by [Yang Q. et al.] and by 
significant statistical correlations the next likely 
web page to be predicted. Another web page pre-
diction method is web pre-fetching [Jin X., Xu 
H. 2003], which predicts the next request for web 
pages based on the current request of users that 
are analyzing the server log, and fetching them 
in advance and loading them into the server 
cache. It reduces the perceived access delay to 
some extent and improves the service quality of 
web server.
2 PROPOSED METHOD
Given a web log, the first step is to clean the 
raw data. We filter out documents that are not 
requested directly by users. These are image 
requests in the log that are retrieved automatically 
after accessing requests to a document containing 
links to these files. We consider web log data as a 
sequence of distinct web pages, where user sessions 
can be observed by unusually long gaps between 
consecutive requests.
Webpage prediction using latest substring association rule mining
R.P. Chatterjee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Meghnad Saha Institute of Technology, Kolkata, India
M. Ghosh, M.K. Das & R. Bag
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, 
Mankundu, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Web page prediction plays an important role by predicting and fetching probable web 
pages of the next request in advance, resulting in reducing the user latency. This paper proposes a web 
page prediction model giving significant importance to the user’s interest using the clustering techniques 
and the navigational behavior of the user through latest substring association Rule. This method achieves 
a better precision compared to the recent methods in the web usage mining.
1 INTRODUCTION
The users surf the internet either by entering the 
URL or search for some topic or through the link 
of the same topic. For searching and for link pre-
diction, clustering plays an important role. Web-
site designers want to increase the number of 
visitors and the time that these visitors spend on 
their website. In order to accomplish that, they 
have to supply an attractive content. Also, to make 
their content attractive, website designers and con-
tent providers need to know what their potential 
visitors want, in order to organize their content 
according to their visitors needs, and, if possible, 
according to individual preferences. Researchers 
use different techniques like Markov Model [Jin 
X. et al. 2003], association rule mining, cluster-
ing [Dutta R. et al. 2011] and so on. Web usage 
mining [Barsagade et al. 2003] is the application 
of data mining techniques to extract knowledge 
from web data, where at least one of the structure 
or usage data is used in the mining process. Web 
usage mining has various application areas such 
as web pre-fetching, link prediction, site reorgani-
zation and web personalization. Most important 
phases of web usage mining are the reconstruction 
of user sessions by using heuristic techniques and 
discovering useful patterns from these sessions by 
using pattern discovery techniques like association 
rule mining, Apriori etc. We propose an integrated 
system for applying data mining techniques such 
as association rules on access log files. 
1.1 Related work
A web page prediction model gives us signifi-
cant importance to the user’s interest using the 

158
We have created a unique ID for each web page 
link that exists in the web log. After the binary 
context corresponding to that unique ID to count 
how many times a particular link of a web page 
has been visited by users for a particular session 
are created. Next Apriori algorithm (Agrawal 
et al. 1993) to find out frequent web pages from 
all the previously user visited web pages has been 
used.
2.1 Apriori algorithm
This algorithm is used for mining frequent item 
sets for Boolean rules where frequent subsets 
have extended one item at a time (a step known 
as candidate generation (Agrawal et al. 1993), and 
groups of candidates are tested against the data. 
The algorithm terminates when no further success-
ful extensions are found. It first finds all frequent 
1-itemsets (Agrawal et al. 1993), and then discovers 
2-itemsets and continues by finding increasingly 
larger frequent item sets. 
Key Concepts: 
• Frequent Item sets: The sets of the item, which 
has minimum support (sup).
• Apriori Property: Any subset of the frequent 
item set must be frequent. 
• Joint Operation: To find Lk, a set of candidate 
k-item sets are generated by joining Lk-1with 
itself. 
For each rule of the form LHS→RHS, we define 
the support and confidence as follows:
sup = count(LHS, RHS)/count(Table)  
(1)
conf = count(LHS, RHS)/count(LHS)  
(2)
In the equations above, the function count (Table) 
returns the number of records in the log table, and 
the count (LHS) returns the number of records 
that match the left-hand-side LHS of a rule. In 
the beginning, each page with sufficient support 
forms a (length–1) support pattern. Then, in the 
main step, for each k value greater than 1 and up 
to the maximum reconstructed session length, 
supported patterns (patterns satisfying the sup-
port condition) with length k + 1 are constructed 
by using the supported patterns with length k and 
length 1 as follows. If the last page of the length-k 
Table 1. Latest substring association rule.
W1
W2
Substring rules
A,B,C
D
{C} –>D
B,A,C
D
Figure 1. Flowchart of latest substring association rule 
mining

159
pattern has a link to the page of the (length–1) 
pattern, then by appending that page length-k+1 
candidate pattern is generated. At some k value, 
if no new supported pattern is constructed, the 
iteration halts.
2.2 Latest substring association rule
After finding out the frequent web pages accord-
ing to apriori algorithm we use “Latest Substring 
Association Rule” to generate the rules as shown 
in Table 1.
The “latest-substrings” are in fact the suffixes 
of the strings in W1 window. These rules not only 
take into account the order and adjacency infor-
mation, but also how recent the information about 
the LHS string is. In this representation, only the 
substring ending in the current time (which corre-
sponds to the end of the window W1) qualifies to 
be of the LHS rule.
In our example, we can easily observed that in 
window W1 the first session contains the sequence 
{A,B,C} and the second session contains {B,A,C}.
But the suffixes ‘C’ contains both the sessions at the 
end and ‘D’ is the only predicted page presented in 
the window W2. Hence, only one rule{C->D} can 
be generated. In this way, we use the “Latest Sub-
string Association Rule” in the web page ranking. 
The proposed approach has been depicted by the 
flow chart diagram in Figure 1.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
For a test case that consists of a sequence of web 
page visits, the prediction for the next page visit is 
correct if the RHS of the selected rule occurs in 
window W2. For N different test cases, let C be the 
number of correct predictions. Then the precision 
is defined as: 
precision = C/N 
(3)
First, we measured support of our input file, which 
contains user access path. Results have been pre-
sented in Table 2 and Figure 2. Among them we find 
mostly frequent access path by using Apriori algo-
rithm (Agrawal et al. 1993). From the frequent user 
access path we made the Association rule (Agrawal 
et al. 1994) and there corresponding Confidence in 
the different steps of the user access path. If the rule 
contains minimum confidence threshold then we have 
treated the corresponding test case as correct. We have 
made the experiment on 10 different test cases for 
r = 4, r = 6, r = 8, r = 10, and r = 12 and after all cal-
culate the precision by using the above mentioned 
formula for each value of r and plot them into the 
graph above.
Table 2. User access paths steps and corre-
sponding precision value.
User Access Path steps (r)
Precision
 4
50%
 6
60%
 8
60%
10
60%
12
60%
Figure 2. User access path with respect to precision 
value has been shown.
4 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we surveyed the association rule min-
ing techniques using Apriori Algorithm and the 
latest substring association rules, which has been 
experimented and having a good result. The previ-
ously used algorithms have too many parameters 
for somebody who is a non-expert in data mining 
and the obtained rules are far too many, most of 
them are non-interesting and with low compre-
hensibility .We have overcome this problem in 
our methods but there are some acute problems 
which we had observed during our experiment. 
The larger the set of frequent itemsets, the more 
the number of rules are presented to the user, 
many of which are redundant. We have also faced 
a problem of dynamic itemset counting, i.e, the 
web pages are frequent or not it should be decided 
dynamically.
REFERENCES
Agrawal, R., Imielinski, T. and Swami, A.N. (1993). Min-
ing association rules between sets of items in large 
databases. In Proceedings of the 1993 ACM SIGMOD 
International Conference on Management of Data, 
207–216.

160
Agrawal, R. and Srikant, R. 1994. Fast algorithms for 
mining association rules. In Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Very 
Large Data Bases, 487–499. 
Baralis, E. and Psaila, G., Designing templates for min-
ing association rules. Journal of Intelligent Information 
Systems, 9(1): 7–32, July 1997.
Barsagade, N., Web Usage Mining and Pattern Discovery 
CSE 8331, December 8, 2003.
Dutta, R. and Kundu, A., Mukhopadhyay D. Clustering 
Based Web Page Prediction, 2011.
Jin, X. and Xu, H. 2003. An Approach to Intelligent Web 
Pre-fetching Based on Hidden Markov Model, Dec 
12, 2003.
Yang, Q., Li, T. and Wang, K., School of Computing Sci-
ence, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada 
V5A 1S6, Building Association-Rule Based Sequen-
tial Classifiers for Web-Document Prediction.

161
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Development of a compact, portable setup for demonstration 
of corona phenomenon
S. Mukherjee, R. Ghosh, B. Chatterjee & S. Dalai
Electrical Engineering Department, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: The development of a low-cost, compact and portable corona setup for classroom dem-
onstration has been reported in this paper. Since an in-depth understanding of corona is difficult based 
solely on the theoretical aspects, a portable corona setup for classroom demonstration is expected to be 
more beneficial to students. The developed setup may be used to demonstrate visual corona at both posi-
tive and negative electrodes. It is a basic model that efficiently demonstrates the fundamental stages of 
corona such as inception of visual corona, appearance of streamers and then final breakdown. The stu-
dents were made to note down their observations based on the demonstration, and the observations were 
correlated with the physics behind corona effect during the class. It was found that the use of the corona 
setup helped the students have a better understanding of the theory behind corona formation.
This is where the importance of models in engi-
neering comes in. Models are a simple, cost effec-
tive and safer alternative to demonstrate real-world 
phenomena (Rothenberg et al. 1989). Nowadays, 
models have been widely accepted to provide a 
more authentic understanding of science and engi-
neering among students (Trotskovsky et al. 2015). 
Models can also help in avoiding the complexity 
and hazards involved with certain engineering 
phenomena. However, models have not been fully 
utilized as yet to improve the quality of imparting 
engineering education to students. Consequently, a 
little modification in the way certain complex phe-
nomena are taught in the classes can go a long way 
in improving student satisfaction.
One such area where the use of models can sig-
nificantly improve the student understanding is the 
corona effect in electrical engineering. Corona is a 
partial discharge brought about by the ionization 
of air surrounding a conductor that is electrically 
charged. To have an in-depth knowledge on corona, 
understanding the theory behind its occurrence is 
often insufficient. Instead, a demonstration of the 
corona effect in the classroom through a model, 
and correlating the observations with the theory 
behind corona formation, is expected to be more 
beneficial to the students.
With this in mind, the authors have developed a 
corona setup that is simple, cost-effective and eas-
ily reproducible. The entire setup can be housed 
inside a box of size 30 cm × 15 cm × 15 cm and 
may be carried easily into the classrooms. The 
setup gives a voltage output of 25 kVp dc with the 
1 INTRODUCTION
Engineering education all over the world has pre-
dominantly been a combination of theory sessions 
and hands-on laboratory sessions. Traditionally, 
the students begin by attending theory sessions 
where they gain a theoretical understanding of 
different engineering phenomena. Subsequently, 
they perform laboratory experiments on some of 
the more important phenomena they have studied. 
Since most engineering curriculums give priority 
to theory classes rather than practical demonstra-
tions, only some of the more common phenomena 
are demonstrated to the students through hands-on 
experiments due to time limitations.
The normal practice while teaching engineer-
ing students is to first organize a lecture where the 
basic theory related to a particular phenomenon 
is explained to the students. This is true even in 
various areas of electrical engineering, where it is 
difficult for the students to grasp the fundamen-
tal idea without looking at the phenomenon itself. 
Later, a laboratory demonstration may be con-
ducted wherein the students are expected to look at 
the phenomenon and correlate their observations 
with what they have learnt in the theory sessions. 
The problem with this approach is that the stu-
dents were expected to understand and correlate 
a practical engineering problem based purely on 
theoretical knowledge. This can often lead to the 
development of misconceptions regarding engi-
neering phenomena among students (Goris et al. 
2012, Trotskovsky et al. 2013).

162
distance between the electrodes varying from 
12 mm to 40 mm. Using this setup, the entire phe-
nomenon starting from the inception of visual 
corona to breakdown may be demonstrated. It was 
found that the classroom demonstration helped the 
students have a better understanding of the theory 
behind corona formation and to make various 
observations which have been enumerated later in 
the paper.
2 DESCRIPTION OF THE CORONA SETUP
2.1 Construction
Figure 1 shows a schematic representation of the 
corona setup developed for classroom demonstra-
tion. A low duty cycle oscillator stage at 50 Hz 
is constructed with the help of a widely available 
555 timer IC. The output from the 555 timer is fed 
to a MOSFET driver stage for current amplifica-
tion. The output of the MOSFET is fed to the pri-
mary of a fly-back transformer which is designed 
to generate high voltage saw-tooth signals at a 
relatively high frequency. Commercially available 
EHT fly-back transformers have in-built rectifier 
circuits to produce dc output. Hence, the output 
of the circuit is half wave rectified dc with 25 kVp. 
This 25 kVp output is fed to the corona pointed 
electrode arrangement. The developed corona 
setup has been shown in Figure 2.
2.2 Working
As stated earlier, the corona setup is housed in a 
box which can be conveniently carried into class-
rooms. The setup is plugged into an ordinary 
230 V, 50 Hz power socket and the phenomenon is 
demonstrated to students. The following paragraph 
summarizes the overall working of the setup:
As the power supply is switched on and the 
distance between electrodes is at 40 mm nothing 
is seen. The distance is gradually decreased using 
the slider. As the distance is reduced to 38 mm, a 
faint violet glow appears at the negative electrode; 
but nothing can be seen at the positive electrode. 
As the distance is further decreased, the intensity 
and size of the glow will increase. At a distance of 
34 mm a faint bluish glow appears at the positive 
electrode. With a further decrease in the distance, 
the visual corona at both electrodes increases in 
size and finally at about 24 mm transient arcing 
starts to appear. As the separation is reduced to 
about 12 mm, complete breakdown takes place.
3 OBSERVATIONS
The demonstration of the corona setup in the lab-
oratory was found to be fruitful for the students’ 
understanding of the phenomenon. The students 
expressed their profound interest in the demonstra-
tion session by actively participating in the learn-
ing process. The students were asked to note down 
their observations in detail. The teachers then 
correlated the observations made by the students 
with the physics involved with the observations. 
The observations from the corona setup and the 
corresponding explanations have been enumerated 
below.
Observation 1: Visual corona is observed at the 
negative electrode while nothing can be seen at 
the positive electrode when the distance between 
the two electrodes is about 38 mm. Visual corona 
begins to appear at the positive electrode when 
the distance is about 34 mm. This implies that the 
corona inception voltage in a non-uniform field is 
lower with the negative polarity of voltage than 
that with the positive polarity.
Explanation: On application of voltage, the 
avalanche is first formed and then the transi-
tion takes place and a streamer develops. The 
corona inception is mainly controlled by the space 
charges before the formation of streamer. On the 
Figure 1. Block diagram of corona setup.
Figure 2. Photograph of the developed corona setup.

163
other hand breakdown is the result of growth of 
streamer.
In the case of negative point electrode to posi-
tive plate electrode, the avalanche moves towards 
the plate with the electrons at its head, as shown 
in Figure 3. This will result in the separation of 
charges: the electrons with higher velocity move 
faster and the positive ions, though sluggish, move 
in the direction of higher field which results in 
higher drift velocity. The position of the space 
charges is shown in Figure 4. Presence of posi-
tive ion space charge in the vicinity of the nega-
tive point results in the increased field strength at 
the cathode. This may exceed the corona inception 
voltage of air and corona may start around the 
negative point.
In the case of positive point to negative plate 
electrode configuration, the avalanche formed in a 
region of high field moves towards the anode. The 
electrons with higher velocity and moving towards 
a high field region are swept into the anode leaving 
behind the positive space charge drifting towards 
the low field region. This is elaborated in Figure 5 
and Figure 6. The presence of positive ion space 
charge before the anode substantially reduces the 
field near the anode and to reach the critical ioniza-
tion gradient, applied voltage must be increased.
Observation 2: In case of negative corona, there 
is violet glow whereas positive corona has a bluish 
glow. This may be seen from Figure 7.
Explanation: The emission of light during the 
corona is caused by the recombination of elec-
trons and positive ions leading to the formation of 
neutral atoms. As the electrons fall back to their 
previous energy level, photons of light are emit-
ted. Near the negative electrode, the electrons are 
repelled and the ions are attracted, whereas the 
opposite happens near the positive electrode: the 
electrons are attracted and ions are repelled. As a 
result, electrons have a higher drift velocity near 
the negative electrode. This results in higher energy 
emission due to recombination. This explains why 
negative corona has a violet glow and positive 
corona has a bluish glow.
Figure 3. Electron and positive ion avalanche in a nega-
tive point to positive plate electrode arrangement.
Figure 4. Space charge distribution in a negative point 
to positive plate electrode arrangement.
Figure 5. Electron and positive ion avalanche in a posi-
tive point to negative plate electrode arrangement.
Figure 6. Space charge distribution in a positive point 
to negative plate electrode arrangement.
Figure 7. Bluish glow at the positive electrode (left) and 
violet glow at the negative electrode(right).

164
Observation 3: Positive corona appears to be 
a little smaller than the corresponding negative 
corona.
Explanation: Negative corona has a non-
ionizing plasma region between the inner and 
outer regions which is absent in positive corona. 
A negative corona can be divided into three regions 
around the electrode. In the inner region, inelastic 
collisions occur between high-energy electrons and 
neutral atoms, which lead to avalanches. This inner 
region is known as the ionizing plasma region. In 
the intermediate region, electrons do not have suf-
ficient energy to cause avalanche ionization. They 
collide with neutral atoms to form negative ions. 
This non-ionising region, however, remains a part 
of the plasma region and has the ability of tak-
ing part in characteristic plasma reactions as dif-
ferent polarity species are present. This region is 
called the non-ionizing plasma. The outer elec-
trons (usually of much lower energy than inner 
electrons) combine with neutral atoms to produce 
negative ions. These ions flow toward the positive 
electrode. Additionally, a flow of free electrons also 
takes place toward the positive electrode. The outer 
region is known as the unipolar region.
The positive corona can be divided into two 
regions. The inner region contains ionizing elec-
trons and positive ions which collide with neutral 
atoms to create an avalanche of ion/electron pairs. 
This forms the plasma region. In the outer region, 
positive ions slowly migrate away from the posi-
tive electrode. Very little electrons are present in 
this region. In the boundary of the two regions, 
photons strike neutral atoms liberating second-
ary electrons. These secondary electrons are re-
accelerated into the plasma. Only a small percent-
age of the secondary electrons remain in the outer 
region. The outer region is known as the unipolar 
region.
4 CONCLUSIONS
The corona setup is a basic point-to-point elec-
trode setup to demonstrate visual corona at both 
positive and negative electrodes. It is a very basic 
model that efficiently demonstrates inception of 
visual corona, appearance of streamers and then 
final breakdown. The power consumption of the 
experimental set up is very low, typically around 
2.4 W. The model described here is a low cost, sim-
ple yet effective for corona investigations. Using 
this setup, a demonstration of the corona effect in 
the classroom was given. It was found that the stu-
dents were able to observe some salient features of 
corona formation and were able to correlate them 
with the theory behind corona formation.
REFERENCES
Goris T.V. and Dyrenfurth, M.J. “Concepts and miscon-
ceptions in engineering, technology and science. Over-
view of research literature,” Proc. Amer. Soc. Eng. 
Educ. IL/IN Sectional Conf., Valparaiso, IN, USA, 
Mar. 17, 2012.
Rothenberg, J. “The nature of modelling,” in Artificial 
Intelligence, Simulation, Modeling, L. E. Widman, K. 
A. Lopara, and N. R. Nielsen, Eds. New York, NY, 
USA: Wiley, 1989, pp. 75–92.
Trotskovsky, E., Sabag N. and Waks, S. “Students’ 
Achievements and Misunderstandings When Solving 
Problems Using Electronics Models—A Case Study,” 
IEEE Trans. Educ., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 104–109, 2015.
Trotskovsky, E., Waks, S., Sabag, N. and Hazzan, O. 
“Students’ misunderstandings and misconceptions in 
engineering thinking,” Int. J. Eng. Educ., vol. 29, no. 
1, pp. 1–12, 2013.

165
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Design of the bipolar, floating HVDC source 
for the insulation diagnostics
A. Kumar, N. Haque, R. Ghosh, B. Chatterjee & S. Dalai
Department of Electrical Engineering, Jadavpur University, Jadavpur, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: This paper describes the design and development of a bipolar, floating 5 kV DC source. 
The paper explores a cost effective alternative to the high voltage power supply units and comprises of 
easily available components that are used in low voltage systems. The generated voltage is controllable 
throughout a wide range (from 1 kV to 5 kV) by a closed loop control system. Experimental results dem-
onstrated that the developed source is capable of providing a stable voltage output for low loads, typically 
suitable for the insulation diagnostic purpose where the current required is in the order of microamperes. 
A simple yet effective metering scheme is implemented to get a stable DC output voltage even under 
floating conditions. It is believed that the developed high voltage source can be very useful for insulation 
testing and scientific research purposes.
2 OPERATING PRINCIPLE
The developed scheme, by virtue of its operating 
principle, can be divided into few sub-sections that 
are explained subsequently.
2.1 Flyback Transformer
Flyback Transformer (FBT), also known as Line 
Output Transformer (LOPT) or Extra High Tension 
Transformer (EHT), is a major equipment to gen-
erate low power high voltage DC in Cathode Ray 
Tubes (CRT) for several years. Basically, it generates 
high voltage from horizontal line output pulses at 
a high frequency, which are rectified using a half-
wave rectifier circuit. The primary winding of the 
flyback transformer is connected to a series of 
electronic switching arrangement from a low volt-
age (around 12 volt) DC supply. Usually, the switch 
comprises of a MOSFET or power transistor. In 
these types of transformers, the primary winding 
has a few number of turns while the secondary 
has had a very large number of turns. When the 
switch is closed, the current in the primary builds 
up within milliseconds. Thus, energy is stored in 
the core. When the switch is suddenly switched 
on, a very high voltage is induced in the primary 
circuit due to high inductance and the high rate in 
the change of current. This overvoltage is sufficient 
to destroy the electronic switching element. This 
voltage should be limited by using a fast operating 
diode with a breakdown voltage lower than that of 
the switching elements. According to the turn’s ratio 
of the transformer, the secondary output becomes 
very high; the rectifier diode conducts and delivers 
1 INTRODUCTION
High Voltage DC power supplies are quite fre-
quently used in areas of testing and research in 
the field of dielectric response analysis, applied 
physics research, and other industrial applications 
that require testing of insulation having low leak-
age current. Especially, in the field of electrical 
engineering, high voltage sources have very promi-
nent roles. Due to these reasons, the development 
of low cost, yet compact high voltage DC source 
has attracted researchers and engineers for quite a 
long time. Various methods have been utilized to 
develop high voltage DC sources (Law et al. 2010, 
Jin et al. 1997, Benwell et al. 2008, Wai et al. 2007). 
A good high voltage power source should have a 
wide adjustable range, stable operation over the 
entire selectable range along with a full short cir-
cuit protection and proper safety measures (Kuffel 
et al. 2000). For laboratory purposes, it is intended 
that the source should be lightweight, portable, 
and should have the facility of interchanging the 
polarity and earthing of any of the terminals for 
unground, as well as grounded sample under test. 
Keeping all things in mind, a low cost, portable, 
high voltage DC power supply source is devel-
oped in the laboratory. The developed source 
has an adjustable range of 1–5 kV with floating, 
stable output at 1 mA. Any of the terminals can 
be earthed for diagnostic purpose of different 
types of dielectric samples, both grounded and 
ungrounded. An effective metering scheme that 
can indicate the output voltage under the earth-
ing of any of its output terminals is also integrated 
into the source.

166
the current to the load by releasing energy from the 
core. The same process is repeated in each cycle. 
The output voltage is made stable by using a bank 
of ballast capacitors. The frequency of switching 
the primary is normally kept around 10–15 kHz to 
match the operating characteristics of the ferrite 
core transformer used in this work.
2.2 Basic scheme
The heart of the circuit is based on a commonly avail-
able 555 timer IC with an unstable mode of frequency 
that is 10–15 kHz, and a duty cycle of 20%–40%.
The switching element used in the circuit is an 
n channel MOSFET. A fast acting Zener diode is 
used parallel to the MOSFET to limit the maximum 
primary voltage at an appropriate voltage level.
A low voltage, isolated tertiary winding of 24 V 
in the EHT is used for the feedback loop. This 
tertiary voltage is rectified and filtered to give a 
smooth DC output. The schematic representation 
of the experimental set-up is shown in Figure 1.
The scheme of feedback loop is simple. A series 
of silicon diode is used at the base of an NPN sili-
con transistor. As soon as the voltage at the anode 
of the diode exceeds 1.4 V, the transistor conducts 
and puts the IC in reset mode. Thus, according to 
the setting of variable resistance, the output of 
the tertiary winding must vary to keep a constant 
voltage of 1.4 V at its wiper. Since, the high volt-
age winding, the tertiary winding and the main 
primary winding are all magnetically coupled the 
final high voltage output varies by varying the 
control resistance. This scheme produces a stable 
high voltage output from the developed source 
while keeping both output terminals floating from 
the ground. Either of the terminals can be earthed 
according to the user’s choice. The terminals can 
also be reversed for a reverse polarity.
2.3 Metering scheme
The output voltage of the developed source is too 
high to be measured with an ordinary voltmeter. 
Therefore, a proper metering scheme is needed so 
that the output can be measured with a reasonable 
accuracy. In this work, a resistor bank (shown in Fig-
ure 1) is utilized for an indirect output voltage meas-
urement. The basic principle of the metering scheme 
is to feed the digital voltmeter a very small fraction 
of the actual output current. If the impedance of the 
meter and series resistance is known, then the output 
can be easily calculated from the digital reading.
Since the source current is itself the order of a 
few milliamperes, the series resistance used in the 
metering scheme is in the order of 99 MΩ for a 
meter impedance of 1 MΩ so that a straight multi-
plication factor of 100 can be used with a load cur-
rent of on 50 μA at 5 kV. But in practice, it is very 
difficult to achieve this value of a series resistance 
in a single package with low surface leakage and 
breakdown voltage greater than 5 kV. Hence, in 
this scheme, several carbon film resistors are used. 
Carbon film resistors were used because they show 
fewer variations with little temperature change. 
The surface of these resistors is covered with liquid 
polyurethane. This decreases the surface leakage 
considerably so that a higher accuracy is obtained 
in the reading. This has been verified using an elec-
trostatic voltmeter.
3 RESULTS
The developed DC source was able to produce high 
voltage DC upto 5 kV. The DC output was smooth 
and absolutely stable when the load was less than 
1 milliampere. The control circuitry discussed in 
the previous section enables the device to control 
the output voltage from 1 kV to 5 kV. By connect-
ing any of the output terminals to ground, floating 
polarity output was easily achieved. As discussed 
before, two knobs were utilized for a smoother 
control one for the coarse and an another one for 
Figure 1. Schematic of the experimental set-up.
Table 
1. Output 
voltage 
at 
different 
knob 
configurations.
Coarse knob
Position
Output voltage
Minimum 
voltage (kV)
Maximum 
voltage (kV)
1
1
1.1
2
1.9
2.2
3
2.5
3
4
3.8
5.2

167
ratory. It was observed, that for load current of 
100 μA, the meter output was very much similar to 
that of the ESV reading. However, with an increase 
of load current, some deviations were found. The 
comparison of the obtained metering output and 
ESV reading of the developed high voltage DC 
source is shown in Figure 2. This comparison is 
also tabulated in Table 2.
4 CONLUSION
In the present work, a cost effective high voltage 
DC source is developed using very low cost and 
easily available components. The developed source 
demonstrates stable and controllable output 
throughout a wide range for especially low loads 
(less than 1 mA). The output voltage ranges from 
1 kV to 5 kV and it can be adjusted using two knobs. 
Additionally, the developed source is lightweight, 
portable, and has the facility of reversible polar-
ity. Such a source can be extremely useful for the 
insulation diagnostic purpose as insulation diag-
nostic tests generally require high voltages but very 
low currents. It is believed that the voltage source 
developed can be used in the laboratory research 
on solid insulation materials, i.e., polymers, dry 
type insulation. It can be also used in space charge 
investigations.
REFERENCES
Benwell, A., Kovaleski, S., & Kemp, M. (2008, May). A 
resonantly driven piezoelectric transformer for high 
voltage generation. In IEEE International Power 
Modulators and High Voltage Conference, Proceed-
ings of the 2008 (pp. 113–116). IEEE.
Jin, J.X., Dou, S.X., Liu, H.K., & Grantham, C. (1997). 
High voltage generation with a high T/sub c/supercon-
ducting resonant circuit. Applied Superconductivity, 
IEEE Transactions on, 7(2), 881–884.
Kuffel, J., Kuffel, E., & Zaengl, W.S. (2000). High voltage 
engineering fundamentals. Newnes.
Law, M.K., & Bermak, A. (2010). High-voltage genera-
tion with stacked photodiodes in standard CMOS 
process. Electron Device Letters, IEEE, 31(12), 
1425–1427.
Wai, R.J., Lin, C.Y., Duan, R.Y., & Chang, Y.R. (2007). 
High-efficiency DC-DC converter with high voltage 
gain and reduced switch stress. Industrial Electronics, 
IEEE Transactions on, 54(1), 354–364.
Table 2. Comparison of meter reading with ESV 
reading.
ESV
Meter reading
Load current 
(100 uA)
Load Current 
(500 uA)
Load Current 
(1 mA)
0
0
0
0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
1
1
1
1
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.9
2.2
2.2
2.2
2
2.9
2.9
2.9
2.2
3.8
3.8
3.8
2.6
3.9
3.9
3.84
2.7
4.0
4.0
4.0
2.75
4.2
4.2
4.15
2.9
4.4
4.4
4.24
3.56
4.6
4.6
4.35
3.75
4.8
4.8
4.5
3.84
5.0
5.0
4.6
3.94
Figure 2. Comparison of obtained meter reading and 
ESV reading.
fine tuning. Once the coarse knob is fixed, the out-
put was further tuned using the second knob. The 
output voltage at different knob configurations is 
shown in Table 1. The output obtained through 
the metering scheme was further compared with 
Electrostatic Voltmeter (ESV) present in the labo-

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

169
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Minimization of return loss using minimum steps coaxial 
coupler for ka-band helix TWT
R. Guha
Sir J.C. Bose School of Engineering, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
N. Purushothaman & S.K. Ghosh
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute, 
Pilani, Rajasthan, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper the impedance matching between the characteristic impedance of coaxial 
coupler and helix and the return loss improvement has been done using step by step modeling of the input 
and output coaxial coupler with minimum number of steps in the centre conductor for ka-band helix 
travelling-wave tube. Applying single port excitation and proper boundary conditions in CST Microwave 
Studio, for both input and output section in a helix travelling-wave tube, the return loss has been investi-
gated for single step as well as multiple steps uniform, quarter-wavelength long sections, coaxial coupler 
along with the sever and the attenuator coating in the T-shaped dielectric support rods. Using this tech-
nique more than −15 dB return loss, throughout the frequency band, and −46 dB return loss, at the design 
frequency, has been achieved.
attenuator coating on the dielectric support rods 
are applying to get a considerable reduction of 
the reflected wave from the sever end. To make a 
prediction about the reflection due to impedance 
mismatch and coaxial-to-helix discontinuity at the 
input and output coupler ports one should have 
consider the attenuator coating at the sever end 
(Rao et al. 2009).
In above all cases, for modeling simplicity, 
authors directly connect the coaxial coupler with 
the helix, considering the diameter of the first 
section of the coupler equal to the helix width. 
That consideration limits the diameter of the 
coaxial coupler sections. Practically the coaxial 
coupler is connected with the helix with the help 
of platinum tape, of high conductivity, through 
laser welding.
In this paper, the authors are presenting a tech-
nique that not only reduce the simulation effort but 
also avoid the hit-and-try or iterative method by 
not applying the impedance transformation tech-
nique directly on the load impedance. This tech-
nique is also useful for understanding the nature 
of the reflected wave from different discontinuities. 
The full simulation of the modeled coaxial coupler 
along with this platinum tape, sever and attenuator 
coated dielectric support rods and ceramic window 
has been done using CST Microwave Studio, which 
gives a practical insight.
1 INTRODUCTION
Coaxial coupler is one of the crucial parts of the 
helix travelling-wave tubes (TWTs). It acts as an 
impedance transformer to convert the character-
istic impedance of the helix slow-wave structure 
to the standard 50 Ω TNC connector. It feeds 
the radio-frequency signal into the slow-wave 
structure and extracts the amplified signal from 
the slow-wave structure after suitable beam-wave 
interaction. That is why the design and optimiza-
tion of this coaxial coupler sections is very diffi-
cult. In a helix TWT attenuator coating is applied 
to the three dielectric support rods (each separated 
azimuthally by 120°) to stabilize the device against 
oscillations.
Some research works about the designing and 
optimization of coaxial coupler has been reported 
earlier. Some techniques are proposed by the dif-
ferent authors to make the design of the coaxial 
coupler simple and time efficient for the simula-
tion purpose (Sinha et al. 2000, Ghosh et al. 2007, 
Agrawal et al. 2011, Rao et al. 2012). In order 
to reduce the reflected wave, generated from the 
impedance mismatch, multi-section impedance 
transformer with arbitrary length was used (Sinha 
et al. 2000). But this technique suffers from a huge 
computational time because of its arbitrary length 
sections. In a complete helix travelling wave tube, 

170
2 THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND 
DESIGN OF COAXIAL COUPLER
In any coaxial coupler, for helix TWT, the reflec-
tion at the coupler port is mainly contributed by 
the five discontinuities, namely, i) dielectric discon-
tinuity between window ceramic (alumina, εr = 9.4) 
and the vacuum, inside the metal barrel, ii) coaxial 
step discontinuity, between the conductors of the 
coupler, iii) coupler to platinum tape discontinu-
ity, iv) platinum tape to helix discontinuity and v) 
attenuator discontinuity at the sever end. When the 
RF signal is fed into the coupler port, the RF wave 
reflected back from these discontinuities and setup 
a standing wave pattern in the coupler arm, and 
it is not easy to analyze this reflection characteris-
tic from the each discontinuity separately from the 
superimposed reflected wave at the coupler port. 
But using this proposed method one can charac-
terize the effect of, more or less, each discontinu-
ity separately. Initially, the design of the coupler 
has been carried out by making the characteristic 
impedance of a single section coaxial coupler, of 
one quarter-wavelength (λ/4) long, equal to the 
characteristic impedance of the slow-wave struc-
ture, calculated from the equivalent circuit analysis 
(B.N. Basu, 1996). Slow-wave structure parameters 
used for analysis and simulation, are taken from a 
tube under development at CSIR-CEERI. From 
theoretical point of view, due to the prefect imped-
ance matching, the return loss for the single section 
impedance transformer will be minimum. But the 
reflected wave still exists with a considerable value, 
due to the both platinum tape discontinuities and 
attenuator discontinuity at the sever end.
2.1 Transmission line concept for 
coaxial coupler design
From transmission line concept, one can say that 
the load impedance of the transmission line is the 
helix characteristic impedance (Zh) and the coaxial 
coupler is an impedance transformer with char-
acteristic impedance Z0 that transform the load 
impedance into an input impedance (Zin). So, one 
can write the relation of Zin and Zh for a loss-less 
line as (Peter A. Rizzi, 1986)
Z
Z Z Cos
C
d
Z Sin
d
in
Z
h
Z
h
0
Z
0
0
Z
β
β
d
j
d
Z S
j
in d
0
Z
β
β
d
j
d
Z C
j
os
C
d
h
Z
 
(1)
where β is the phase constant ( = 2π/λ) and d is the 
length of the line. For λ/4 long lines βd will be π/2. 
Using this present method Z0 is equal to the Zh. So, 
in this case, equation (1) is reduced to,
Z
Z
in
Z
h
Z  
(2)
The characteristic impedance of the coaxial 
coupler has been evaluated from,
Z
b
a
r
0
Z
60
=
εr
ln
 
(3)
where εr is the relative permittivity of the medium 
between inner and outer conductor, b is radius of 
the outer conductor and a is the radius of the inner 
conductor.
2.2 Attenuator coating on the dielectric 
support rods
The attenuator coating on the support rods has 
been done using thin conducting carbon coating by 
the process of pyrolytic cracking of hydrocarbons 
such that coating thickness is increased toward 
the sever end. Usually, the carbon-coated rods are 
quality controlled by measuring the loss profile 
through insertion loss (S21) in a reduced-height rec-
tangular waveguide, excited in the dominant TE10 
mode, measurement setup (Naidu et al. 2009). 
Now the measured insertion loss values are used to 
find the equivalent bulk conductivity using the fol-
lowing equations given in (Naidu et al. 2009)
σ
ωμ
ω
=
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
b
Z
rod
V
Z I
V
2
0
μ
2
2
ω
Z
21
2
4
1
1
|
|
S21
S
 
(4)
the characteristic impedance of the waveguide 
(ZVI) is the voltage–current characteristic imped-
ance defined as
Z
b
a Z
VI
Z
TE
Z
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
πb
2
 
(5)
with
Z
k
wg
TE
Z
=
0
k
0
βw η0  
(6)
where σ is the equivalent bulk conductivity of 
the lossy dielectric rod and wrod is the equivalent 
width of the support rod of a square-shaped 
cross-sectional geometry having an area equal to 
its actual cross-sectional area, b is the distance 
between the broad walls of the reduced-height 
waveguide, ZTE is the TE-mode wave impedance 
of the waveguide with k0 as the free-space propa-
gation constant, βwg is the propagation constant 
of the waveguide and η0 as the free-space intrin-
sic impedance (377 Ω), |S21| is the magnitude of 
voltage-scattering parameter corresponding to 
the insertion loss.

171
Fig. 1 shows the tip loss profile and pitch taper-
ing for the output section of the ka-band helix 
TWT. Fig. 2 shows the CST-MWS studio model 
of the single section coaxial coupler, with ceramic 
window, along with the attenuator coated dielectric 
T-shaped support rods.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
From the equivalent circuit analysis (B.N. Basu, 
1996), we got the characteristic impedance of the 
helix at the center frequency is 84.94 Ω. Fig. 3 rep-
resents the comparative study of the return loss of 
single section quarter-wave impedance transformer 
using analytical and optimized characteristic 
impedance value of the helix using CST-Micro-
wave Studio. The design parameters of coaxial line 
coupler has been listed in Table 1.
The coating length of each support rod is taken 
approximately 22 mm, from the sever end, which give 
the total loss around 25–30 dB in the structure at the 
sever end by providing a tapered profile loss on the 
individual rods, the bulk conductivity variation with 
the distance from the sever end is shown in Fig. 4. To 
apply this equivalent bulk conductivity value to the 
modeled rods, the authors divide the dielectric rods 
into small discrete rods and then assign the conduc-
tivity value to each small discrete part as per the dis-
tance from the sever end, as shown in Fig. 2 and 4.
In Fig. 4, the value of the equivalent bulk con-
ductivity goes down near to zero at 10 mm from 
the sever end. So, the same value of conductivity, 
at 10 mm from the sever end, can be imposed on 
remaining part of the coating length.
After finalizing the diameter, 0.48 mm, of the first 
part of the coaxial coupler, we use the binomial 
multi-section impedance transformation technique 
to design the entire coupler along with ceramic win-
dow assembly with improved impedance matching, 
as shown in Fig. 2. Using this three section coaxial 
coupler a very good return loss has been achieved 
for the input coupler, i.e. −15dB loss throughout 
the frequency band and −46dB loss at the design 
frequency, as shown in Fig. 5.
The same coupler has been used for output 
section, where the tapering pitch profile has been 
Figure 1. Tip loss and tapering pitch profile of a two 
section ka-band helix traveling wave tube.
Figure 2. CST-Microwave Studio model of three quar-
ter-wave sections coaxial coupler with sever, attenuator 
and ceramic window.
Figure 3. Return loss comparison of a single section 
quarter-wave impedance transformer with characteris-
tic impedance equal to helix characteristic impedance: 
(a) from analysis it is 84.94Ω, (b) after optimization it 
becomes 85.63Ω.
Figure 4. Equivalent bulk conductivity variation 
depend upon distance from sever end.
Table 1. Coaxial coupler design parameters.
Parameters
Dimensions
1st section radius (mm)
0.240
2nd section radius (mm)
0.290
3rd section radius (mm)
0.385

172
considered for increasing the efficiency of the 
helix traveling wave tube and −10 dB loss has 
been achieved throughout the frequency band and 
−26 dB loss has been get at the design frequency, as 
shown in Fig. 6.
The input and output coaxial coupler consists 
of RF window assembly and an impedance RF 
transformer assembly. Coaxial ceramic window of 
Alumina has been preferred over Beryllia because 
of its low RF loss, high mechanical strength and 
non-toxicity. The thickness of the Alumina win-
dow was chosen as minimum as possible (0.9 mm) 
for low RF loss and its diameter was chosen to 
make the input impedance nearly 50Ω, same as RF 
connector.
4 CONCLUSION
In this paper. the authors have proposed a tech-
nique that is very useful to determine the helix 
characteristic impedance by minimum reflection 
method and also gives a insight about the reflection 
from the different discontinuities. This three quar-
ter-wave sections coaxial axial coupler, with plati-
num tape, attenuator coating, sever and ceramic 
window, gives a insight of the practical coaxial 
coupler with significant reduction of return loss. 
This is a very general technique and this technique 
can be applied to all types of coupler and along 
with the different frequency bands.
REFERENCES
Agrawal, A.K., Raina, Sushil, Kumar, Lalit. (2011). A 
Simple Method for the Design of a Coupler for Helix 
TWTs. IEEE.
Basu, B.N. (1996). Electromagnetic Theory and Appli-
cations in Beam-Wave Electronics. (World Scientific, 
Singapore).
Ghosh, T.K. et al. (2007). Optimization of coaxial cou-
plers. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 54, no.8, pp. 
1753–1759.
Naidu, V.B., Datta, S.K., Rao, P.R.R., Agrawal, A.K., 
Reddy, S.U.M., Kumar, L., and Basu, B.N. (2009). 
Three-dimensional electromagnetic analysis of attenu-
ator coated helix-support rods of a traveling-wave 
tube, IEEE Transaction on Electron Devices.
Rao, K.V., Naidu, V.B., Rao, P.R.R.; Datta, S.K. (2009). 
Simulation of RF coupler of a multi-section TWT 
with matched sever-loss. Proc.IEEE International Vac-
uum Electronics Conference, pp. 455–456.
Rao, P. Raja Ramana., Datta, Subrata Kumar. and 
Kumar, Lalit. (2012). Optimization of couplers of 
TWT using TDR method. IEEE.
Rizzi, Peter A. (1986). Microwave engineering, passive 
circuits.
Sinha, A.K., Singh, V.V.P., Srivastava, V. and Joshi, S.N. 
(2000). On the design of coaxial coupler having multi-
section short transformer for compact sized power 
helix traveling wave tubes. Proc. Int. Vac. Electron. 
Conf., Monterey, CA, pp. p2.25–p2.26.
Figure 5. Return loss versus frequency response for a 
three quarter wave sections input coaxial coupler.
Figure 6. Return loss versus frequency response for a 
three quarter-wave sections output coaxial coupler.

173
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Human identification by gait using wavelet transform 
and the analysis of variance
M. Ghosh & S. Chatterjee
Department of Computer Science Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, 
Mankundu, West Bengal, India
D. Bhattacharjee
Department of Computer Science Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this work a novel feature extraction technique has been discussed, which uses a discrete 
wavelet decomposition and Daubechies4 filters up to four levels of decomposition on gait energy image. 
Statistical parameter variance has been considered for feature extraction. RBF network has been applied 
for the recognition of probe gait sequence with reference to gallery gait sequences. The experimental 
results show a very good recognition rate for different degrees of movement with respect to the surveil-
lance camera.
based on discrete wavelet analysis, was proposed by 
(Shen et al. 1999), with the idea of a Generalized 
Multi-Resolution Analysis (GMRA). Using a time-
varying sequence, it describes the self-similarity of 
gait appearance. Combined features of fractal scale 
and wavelet moments improve the results of gait 
recognition. The method is simple and improves 
the flexibility of the wavelet moments, but the rec-
ognition rate can be improved.
2 PROPOSED METHOD
The classification of the human gait in this paper 
consists of five parts, Silhouette Extraction, 
Creation of GEI of different angles, DWT with 
Daubechies4, Feature Extraction using Analy-
sis of Variance, Matching of the probe image 
sequence with the Gallery of image sequences. 
 Figure 1 shows the complete overview of the pro-
posed human GEI classifications. The sample 
database of a person at different angles of move-
ment with respect to a fixed surveillance camera 
has been shown in Figure 2.
2.1 Silhouette extraction
To recognize the people using gait depends upon 
the silhouette shape of an image sequence, which is 
based on the individual changes during the time.
Considering the silhouette images the informa-
tion related to the silhouette needs to be extracted 
by applying silhouette extraction method (Ghosh 
et al. 2012).
1 INTRODUCTION
Gait recognition is the term used in the human 
identification domain to represent the automatic 
extraction of visual indication that describes the 
activity of a walking person under a surveillance 
camera. Gait recognition is rather promising 
among those biometrics that are used to evaluate 
and compute biometrical data.
It is a soft biometric for the identification of an 
individual by way in which they walk. The classifi-
cation of people at a distance can be accomplished 
via an unobtrusive biometric without any interface 
or cooperation from the subject.
The biometric methodologies like face, iris, and 
fingerprints have their own limitations, i.e., most 
of the face recognition techniques are used to rec-
ognize the frontal or side faces or based with some 
particular turn, but if only the back side of the head 
is seen then it is of no use. Other biometrics such 
as fingerprint and iris cannot be applied when the 
person unexpectedly appears in the surveillance.
1.1 Literature review
(Li et al. 2010) have presented the use of lower leg 
and ankle for the extraction of a gait feature where 
the silhouette was divided into three consecutive 
parts and Discrete Cosine Transform was used to 
transform the amplitude angle sequences.
Moreover, Ghosh et al. (2015) have proposed 
a novel idea of extracting features from the gait 
signature by the Fourier descriptor and anatomi-
cal landmarks. A fractal scale descriptor, which is 

174
2.2 Gait Energy Image (GEI)
Gait Energy Image (GEI) can be defined as:
M
y
N
I
y k
k
k
P
( ,
x
)
/
( ,
x
)
k
=
∑
1
 
(1)
where, I
y k
k( ,
x
)
k  represents the silhouette image 
at time k in a sequence and N is the number of 
frames in the complete gait cycles. GEI saves the 
storage space and computation time, and it is time-
normalized accumulative energy image.
2.3 Wavelet transform
In a Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT), filters of 
different cutoff frequencies are used to evaluate the 
signal at different scales (Saeid et al. 2008). The sig-
nal is passed through a series of high pass filters to 
evaluate the high frequencies and is passed through 
a series of low pass filters to evaluate the low fre-
quencies. Wavelet decomposition includes wave-
forms, i.e., the wavelet function and the scaling 
function. The wavelet function represents high fre-
quencies related to the detailed parts of an image. 
The scaling function represents the low frequencies 
or smooth parts of an image. The scaled and trans-
lated basis functions in 2D DWT (Nandini et al. 
2011) are defined in Eq. (1) and Eq. (2).
φ
φ
i a b
l
i
i
m
a
, ,
a (
)
(
φ
l
,
)
i n
b
m
2
(
φ
l φ(
φ
 
(2)
ψ
ψ
i a b
i
j
i
i
j
m
a
, ,
a
/
(
)
(
ψ
i
(
j
,
)
i n
b
m
2
(
ψ (
i
j
ψ (
ψ j
ψ
2
 
(3)
The discrete Wavelet Transform can decom-
pose a given signal into other signals known as the 
approximation and detail coefficients. The given 
function, f(t), can be represented by the following 
equation:
p
d j n
t
n
b m n
t
n
n
j
m
n
( )t
,j
) (
)
(
,
m
) (
) (
)
−
t
d
n
j
=
−
t
n
b
+
,
m
−
=−
=
=−
∑
∑
∑
φ(
(
α
α
α
α
2
2
1
2
 
(4)
where: φ (t) is the mother wavelet and θ  (t) is the 
scaling function. The variable b(m,n) is called 
as the approximation coefficient at scale m and 
d(j,n) is called as the detail coefficients at scale j. 
The approximation and detail coefficients can be 
expressed as:
b m n
p
n dt
m
m
p
(
,
m
)
/
( )t(t
(
)
t
n
m
p(t
t
∫
2
/
θ
α∫
α
 
(5)
w j n
p
n dt
( ,j
)
/
( )t(t
(
)
t
n
p(t
t
−∫
2
/
1
p( )t
(
1 ∫
ϕ
α
α
 
(6)
Based on the choice of the mother wavelet ϕ(t) 
and scaling function θ(t), different families of 
wavelets can be constructed (Gilbert et al. 1997).
Figure 1. Flowchart describing GEI (Gait Energy Image).
Figure 2. Sample Database of a person at different angles 
of movement with respect to a fixed surveillance camera.

175
2.3.1 Daubechies wavelet
Daubechies wavelets known as orthogonal wavelets 
and can be written as dbN, where N is the order, db 
is the family name of the wavelet. These wavelets 
use overlapping windows, for this high frequency 
coefficient spectrum reflects all high frequency 
changes. (Harbo et al. 2001).
The two functions are used to define Scaling 
and Wavelet functions.
2.3.1.1 Scaling function
The following conditions are necessary for {h (m)} 
to produce a valid scaling function
p
h m
t
m
m
( )t
(
h
/
h
/
m
) (
p
) (
p
)
−
t
m
h
)p
=
∑
1/
1/
 
(7)
2.3.1.2 Wavelet function
The wavelet function can be defined in terms of the 
scaling function
q
v p
k
h
n
( )t
(
)
t
m
t
=
=
−
∑
2
v p
h
n
(
v p(
∑
0
1
 
(8)
The Daubechies D4 transform has four wavelet 
and scaling function coefficients. The scaling func-
tion coefficients are:
p
p
p
p
1
1
3
2
3
3
4 2
4
1
3 4 2
= +
1
+
3
−
1
/
,
4 2
/
/
p
4 2
3
p
3
3
= 3
,
/
The wavelet function coefficient values are:
a
b a
b a
b a
b
b a
b a
3
2b
1
b a
1
0
b
3
b a
b a
b a
b a
2b
2.4 Variance
The variance is one of the several descriptors of 
a probability distribution. The variance of a ran-
dom variable X is its second central moment, the 
expected value of the squared deviation from the 
mean
μ = E( )
Y  
(9)
Var
E Y
( )
Y
[([(
) ]
−
Y
= E
μ)2
 
(10)
This definition includes random variables that 
are discrete, continuous, neither, or mixed. The 
variance can be described as the covariance of a 
random variable itself.
2.5 RBF Network
The basic idea of the Radial Basis Function (RBF) 
Networks is that it is obtained from the theory of 
function approximation. The methods were devel-
oped for the exact interpolation of a set of data 
points in a multidimensional space (Rahul et al. 
2010). The purpose is to project every input vector 
i, onto the corresponding target bi, such that the 
function can be denoted as:
b
f
i
i
b
f
b
(
)
a i
a
 
(11)
where i = 1…, n. n = number of objects.
According to the radial basis function, exact 
mapping can be obtained using a set of n basis 
functions and can be defined as:
f a
p
i
j
p
i
j
j
n
)
a i
(
)
a
a
ai
ja
p
ai
= ∑
φ(
1
 
(12)
where p j denotes weights and a i and a j denotes 
input object and the center of the basis function, 
respectively. The function ⎥⎢
⎥⎢
a
a
i
ja
 denotes the 
distances between a i and a j.
3 RESULTS
This paper focuses on the idea of using variance 
as a statistical parameter where a small variance 
indicates the data points to be very close to the 
expected value while high variance points to the 
data points are to be spread out around the mean. 
The approximated value has been used to calculate 
the variance. Using the CASIA GEI database of a 
sample person as seen for the four different angles 
where the variance of a person varies very little for 
three different sequences for the same angle. How-
ever, for different angles, variance varies. So the 
threshold value (T) is needed for each degree.
Figure 3. ROC for angle 0°, 36°, 90°, and 144°.

176
So vard = vard ± T 
(13)
where var is the variance and d represents the 
degree.
Here for 0° angle T has been chosen experimen-
tally as ± 0.04, for 36° it is 0.1, for 90° it is ± 0.004, 
for 144° it is ± 0.03. Results are presented in Tables 
1 and 2.
Figure 3 shows the receiver Operating Character-
istics Curve (ROC) for different angle of movement. 
For 0°, 36°, 90°, and 144° angle the Equal Error Rate 
(ERR) is 0.15, 0.19, 0.16, and 0.18, respectively.
Table 1. Table contains the approximate data with dif-
ferent sequences.
Degree
Sequence 
number
Variance
0°
1
0.8540
8538.4
0.8525
0.8451
2
0.8450
8448.8
0.8436
0.8365
3
0.8650
0.8648
0.8635
0.8573
36°
1
0.6387
0.6385
0.6375
0.6329
2
0.6423
0.6421
0.6411
0.6371
3
0.7081
0.7080
0.7070
0.7070
90°
1
0.5976
0.5973
0.5957
0.5906
2
0.5975
0.5971
0.5954
0.5903
3
0.5959
0.5955
0.5940
0.5887
144°
1
0.6529
0.6527
0.6510
0.6466
2
0.6473
0.6471
0.6453
0.6405
3
0.6354
0.6352
0.6334
0.6285
Table 2. Different recognition parameters of different 
degree.
Degree
Correct 
Recognitions
Correct 
rejection 
rate
False 
acceptance 
rate
False 
rejection 
rate
  0°
85%
15%
15%
15%
 36°
81%
19%
19%
19%
 90°
84%
16%
16%
16%
144°
82%
18%
18%
18%
4 CONCLUSION
This paper considers four different angles of a walk 
with respect to the surveillance camera. This work 
can be extended to different angles to have a good 
recognition rate since one statistical parameter has 
been considered for the feature extraction consid-
ering more feature extraction parameters can make 
the recognition rate at a high level.
REFERENCES
Ghosh, M., Bhattacharjee D. (2012). Human Identifica-
tion by Gait Using Corner Points. I.J. Image, Graphics 
and Signal Processing, pp 30–36.
Ghosh, M., Bhattacharjee, D. (2015). Gait recognition 
for Human Identification Using Fourier Descriptor 
and Anatomical Landmarks. I.J. Image, Graphics and 
Signal Processing, pp 30–38.
Gilbert, Strang, and Truong, Nguen. (1997). Wave lets 
and Filter Banks. Wellesley-Cambridge Press, MA, 
pp. 174–220, 365–382.
La Cour Harbo, Jensen. (2001). Ripples in mathematics 
Berlin. Springer, pp 157–160.
Li, Yi-Bo., and Yang, Qin. (2010). Gait extraction and 
recognition based on lower leg and ankle, International 
Conference on Intelligent Computation Technology and 
Automation.
Nandini, C., K, Sindhu., and N.C, Ravi Kumar. (2011). 
Gait Recognition by Combining Wavelets and 
Geometrical Features, IEEE Second International 
Conference on Intelligent Agent and Multi-Agent 
Systems, Chennai.
Rahul, K. (2010). Evolutionary Radial Basis Function 
Network For Classificatory Problems International 
Journal of Computer Science and Applicaions. 
Techno mathematics Research Foundation Vol. 7 No. 4, 
pp. 34–49.
Saeid, R., and Moravejian., Reihaneh., & Farhad Moha-
mad, K,. (2008). Gait Recognition Using z Wavelet 
Transform, Fifth International Conference on Informa-
tion Technology: New Generations.
Shen, D, & Ip, H.H.S. (1999). Discriminative Wave let 
Shape Descriptors for Recognition of 2-D Patterns, 
Pattern Recognition 32, pp. 151–165.

177
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A fiber optic sensor for the detection of Partial Discharge 
within the High Voltage power transformer
B. Sarkar, C. Koley, N.K. Roy & P. Kumbhakar
National Institute of Technology, Durgapur, West Bengal, India 
ABSTRACT: High Voltage (HV) power transformers are the most costly and critical equipment in any 
power system. Failures of such an apparatus lead to catastrophic losses and unwanted power interruptions. 
Majority of these failures are due to the weakness in insulation. Therefore, for economic and reliable 
operations, it is essential to monitor the insulation conditions of the HV transformers continuously. 
Partial Discharges (PDs) are reported as the main reason for the degradation of insulation quality and, 
therefore, the measurement of PD can provide an early indication of the failure. There are many existing 
methods for sensing these partial discharges, among them very few methods can be applied for continuous 
monitoring in online system. In the present work, a Fiber Optic sensor has been developed, with the help 
of Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG) as a primary sensing element, by detecting the acoustic wave generated 
from the PDs inside the high voltage transformer tank. Due to the inherent dielectric properties of the 
FBG and optical fiber the proposed system can be easily placed inside the transformer tank, without 
considering any separate insulation system for the proposed PD monitoring system. On the other hand, 
FBG is immune to the Electromagnetic Interference (EMI), and the optical fiber has very low transmis-
sion loss compared to the electrical conductor, therefore, the measured signal can be easily transmitted to 
the monitoring station.
ultrasonic waves, which can propagate through 
multiple paths with different media and differ-
ent propagation velocities [6–7], thus, various 
researchers have proposed PD detection and 
localization system by placing single or multiple 
ultrasonic sensors inside or outside the equipment 
[8–11]. The main problem with such acoustic sen-
sors is that the requirement of the electrical wiring 
around HV terminals, and the EMI noise, which 
limits its online applications for continuous moni-
toring. Moreover, the intensity of the PD gener-
ated acoustic signals is quite low and the output 
of piezoelectric sensors employed for the purpose 
is in the order of few micro-volts, which require a 
high gain and high input impedance amplifier to 
be placed in the proximity of the sensor [12–13].
In this context, an optical fiber based PD sen-
sor can be a promising method, as the optical fiber 
is dielectric material so they can be easily placed 
inside the equipment without any insulation 
arrangements. On the other hand, it has very low 
transmission losses; therefore, the measured signal 
can be transmitted to longer distances to the sub-
station control room without the use of any elec-
trical amplification system and is free from EMI 
[14–15]. These features of optical fibers are the 
main motivation behind the development of opti-
cal fiber based sensor.
1 INTRODUCTION
Partial Discharges (PDs) are the localized electrical 
discharges that only partially bridge the insula-
tion between conductors and which can or cannot 
occur adjacent to the conductor [1]. The previous 
studies concluded that the Partial Discharge (PD) 
is a prime responsible phenomenon for the degra-
dation of insulation of the HV power transformers 
[2–3], among others such as accumulation of 
mechanical, thermal, and electrical stresses occur-
ring during long service period. Each discrete PD 
is the result of an electrical breakdown due to the 
unwanted stress for thermal, electrical, environ-
mental effect within the insulation in the area of 
the homogeneities [4]. Measurable physical effects 
of the PDs are emissions of electromagnetic waves 
(non-visible and visible UV light, radio frequency 
wave), acoustics wave, and sudden abrupt changes 
in the voltage or current [5].
Conventional and standard techniques [1] use a 
coupling capacitor connected across the test sys-
tem to measure the sudden short current pulse, 
which flows through the insulation defect where 
the discharge occurs. This is accurate but requires 
an electrical connection with the test system.
As the sudden electrical discharge due to PD 
generates acoustic waves, mainly high frequency 

178
2 BASIC THEORY OF THE FBG BASED 
PARTIAL DISCHARGE (PD) SENSOR
An FBG is a periodic perturbation of the refractive 
index written into a segment of Ge-doped single 
mode fiber along the fiber length, which is formed 
by the exposure to a spatial pattern of the ultravio-
let light in the region of around 244–248 nm and 
was first demonstrated by Hill et al. (1978). How-
ever, it was not until the transverse holographic 
fabrication method was developed by Meltz et al. 
(1989).
When the FBG is illuminated by a broadband 
light source, a set of beams reflected from the set 
of partially reflecting planes formed by the peri-
odic core index modulation interfere with each 
other. For conservation of momentum, wavevec-
tor of the reflected wave (kr) must be equal to the 
subtraction of the incident wavevector (ki) and the 
grating wavevector (K).
k
k
K
r
i
k
k −
kik
 
(1)
When the Bragg condition is satisfied, k
k
r
i
k
k  
and Equation 1, can be written as:
−
−
2
2
2
π
λ
π
λ
π
B
λ
efff
B
λ
efff
n
n
=
efff
Λ  
(2)
The simplified form of the Equation 2 is related 
to the Bragg wavelength and the effective refractive 
index and grating period is:
λB
e
λ
ff
en
= 2
Λ  
(3)
where, λB
λ  is the Bragg wavelength, Λ is the grating 
period and nefff  is the effective refractive index. In 
the most general case, the index perturbation δn
δ ( )
z  
takes the form of a phase and amplitude-modu-
lated periodic waveform:
δ
δ
π
φ
δ
n
δ
m
z
π
( )
( )
( )
cos
+
δn
δ
( )
z
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
φ⎠
φ⎟
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
0
1
2
Λ
 
(4)
where, δn z
δ
0  is the amplitude of the photo induced 
index change. The local reflectivity is the complex 
ratio of the forward and backward going wave 
amplitudes. It is related to a multiplicative phase 
factor. The grating can then be represented by add-
ing this index change described in Equation 4, to 
the original refractive index of the core as follows:
n
n
n
core
( )
z
( )
z
=
+
n
δn
 
(5)
Variation of the reflectivity of a grating is 
given by:
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
ˆ
sinh (
)
ˆ
ˆ
cosh (
)
l k
R
l k
k
σ
σ
σ
−
=
−
−
 
(6)
where l provides the length of the grating and k and 
ˆσ  are the coupling coefficients. Values of k and ˆσ  
can be calculated with the following equations:
k
nefff
= πδn
λ
 
(7)
ˆσ
δ
σ
=
+
 
(8)
where,
σ
π
λ
= 2 n
π efff  
(9)
δ
π
λ
λ
−
π
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
1
1
n
π efff
B
λ
 
(10)
where, λB
e
λ
ff
en
= 2
Λ for an infinitesimally grating. 
The maximum reflectivity at the Bragg wavelength 
can be written as:
R
N
efff
ma
R
x
ta
(
)
kl)
kl
tanh (
)
sinh [ ( )
]
nefff
cosh [ ( )
=
)
kl
=
−
2
2
k )
kl
tanh
2
2
[
]
n
2
1
Γ
Λ
V
( ) n
V
( ) n
λ
η
δ
V
( ) n
δ
N
N
n
n
efff
efff
]
tanh
( )
1
2
2
N
2
−
−
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
Γ
Λ
Γ
λ
η
δn
( )
V
 
(11)
where, N  is the number of periodic variations and 
Ω is the angular frequency that can be found out 
with the help of following equation
Ω =
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
π
λ
η
n
π
l
n
Δ
⎞⎛
n
efff
B
λ
( )
η V  
(12)
Γ(
)
( )
λ
η
δ
( )
(
λ
λ
B
eff
B
λ
f
n
δ)
−
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
1
1  
(13)
The factor η( )
η
/V
)
/
1 1
2 and V ≥2 4.  is the 
fraction of the integrated fundamental mode 
intensity contained in the core (V is the normal-
ized frequency of the fiber). It is seen that R is 
directly proportional to the grating length l and 
the index perturbation (Δn/n), which is normally 
determined by the equation exposure power and 
time of the UV radiation for a specified fiber. 
The Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM) can be 
calculated as

179
Δ
Δ
λ
λ
B
B
λ
λ
λ
efff
S
n
n
N
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+ ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
2
1
2
2
 
(14)
Due to the axial strain there will be a change of 
radial and axial length in the fiber. As the radial 
change is very small as compared to the axial change, 
neglecting the radial change it can be written as:
Δ
Δ
l
l
E
P
=
= −
ε
(
)
v
−
 
(15)
FBG shown in Figure 1 is a periodic structure 
written in a small section on the core of a single 
mode fiber and its transmission characteristics can 
be used as an in-coupler reflection band-pass filter 
as shown by [8]. The reflected peak Bragg wave-
length is highly sensitive to the change in geom-
etry due to the strain ( )) caused either by the 
mechanical stress or temperature change (
). PD 
generated acoustic signal induces ultrasonic pres-
sure wave having an impulsive nature, which prop-
agates through the lossless homogenous liquid 
dielectric medium at a speed of 1390 m/s as given 
by [9]. Finally, the strain produced by the PD event, 
neglecting the temperature effect, the Bragg wave-
length shift can be expressed as:
Δλ
λ
ρ
B
λ
B
λ
c
A
ρ
ε
ρ
= (
)
ρ
−
(
)
ε
εA
ε
ε
+
 
(16)
where, εA
ε  is the strain produced by the high fre-
quency acoustic wave and ρc
ρ  is the effective strain 
optic coefficient.
3 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
3.1 Sensor assembly
GE-doped FBG has a core diameter of 8.2 μm 
and a cladding diameter of 125 μm manufactured 
by Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute 
(CGCRI), Kolkata. It also has the standard charac-
teristics values: n1 = 1.4494, n2 = 1.444, neff = 1.4485, 
v = 0.16, E = 70 GPa, p11= 0.121, p12 = 0.270, 
Λ = 535 nm, l = 10 mm, strain sensitivity –1.0 pm 
με−1, and temperature sensitivity –10 pm ºC−1 at 
1550 nm. A waveguide is needed to fix the fiber 
to make it convenient for placing it inside the PD 
source. The waveguide must be able to withstand 
the PD environment and will not create any abnor-
malities on the test setup. A 3 mm thick, hard acrylic 
sheet chosen as a waveguide material on which the 
FBG has been fixed is shown in Figure 2.
3.2 Test system
A 60 kV, AC, Power frequency portable transformer 
oil test set having cell size of 100 × 75 × 100 mm is 
made by 10 mm thick acrylic sheet and capacity 
of 600 ml has been taken as a PD source. The cell 
contains a needle and a flat electrode combination 
as an HV electrode and ground electrode. Optical 
Spectrum Analyzer (Yokogawa, Ando AQ6317B) 
of wavelength range: 600–1700 nm, resolution: 10 
pm (min) has been used to analyze the optical sig-
nals. A 50 nm BW, 20 mW SLED (Dense light) 
Source having central peak at: 1550 nm and Santec 
(TSL-510), type ‘C’, wave length-1260–1630 nm, 
SMF, 5 pm resolution, 13 dBm peak output 
power used as Broad ban and tunable laser source. 
A power meter (Newport Model-2936-C, Sl. No.: 
10282) and photo receiver (Newport IR, Model- 
1811) of range DC-125 MHz is used to detect PD. 
Teraxian makes a compact unit containing the 
circulator and connectors, Agilent DSO6054 A, 
500 MHz, 4 channel, 4 Gs/S, and a laptop is taken 
as a part of the experiment for recording and ana-
lyzing s. Schematic diagram and actual photograph 
of the setup is illustrated in Figure 3.
4 RESULT AND DISCUSSION
The recorded PD signals from the detector at two 
different applied voltages have been presented 
in Figure 4(a) and (b), during applied voltage of 
Figure 1. Basic working principle of FBG.
Figure 2. Sensor assembly.

180
30 and 50 kV. From the Figure it can be observed 
the proposed PD sensor is able to capture the 
acoustic wave as generated the occurrence of PD. 
It can be further noticed that the amplitude of the 
captured waveform also increases due to applied 
voltage, which is due to the fact that at higher volt-
ages the magnitude of the PDs also increase.
5 CONCLUSION
The presented system is an FBG based acoustic 
sensor, which is capable of surviving in the harsh 
environment of the transformer interiors without 
compromising the transformer’s normal func-
tionality, which is the prime criteria for the online 
PD detection as well as to find out its location. 
Figure 4. Recorded PD signal with an applied voltage of 30 kV and 50 kV.
Experimental results show that the presented sys-
tem has enough potential to capture acoustic sig-
nals emitted by PD sources in the oil transformer in 
both the domains, i.e., time and frequency domain. 
By keeping one end free and by putting extra load, 
the FBG acts as an oscillation reducer. Finally, it 
can be concluded that the FBG based fiber-optic 
sensor can be used to detect and localize the PDs 
within high voltage transformer.
REFERENCES
[1] 
IEC International Standard 60270, “High-Voltage 
Test Techniques – Partial Discharge Measure-
ments”, International Electrotechnical Commission 
(IEC), Geneva, Switzerland, 3rd Edition 2000.
Figure 3. Experimental setup at the laboratory for the measurement of PD, using optical and electrical methods. a: 
300 kV, AC power frequency source, b: Capacitive voltage divider (CVD), c: Sphere-sphere gap setup, d: Coupling 
capacitor (Ck), e: Quadripole (AVK-D), f: Oil filled prototype test transformer, g: PD sensor, h: Optical fiber coupler, 
i: Laser source, j: FC/ PC connector with mating sleeve, k: Single mode optical fiber, l: Current controller, m: Tempera-
ture controller, n: Fiber Bragg grating analyzer (FBGA), o: Digital storage oscilloscope (DSO), p: Computer.

181
 [2] R. Bartnikas, “Partial Discharges, Their Mechanism, 
Detection and Measurement”, IEEE Transactions 
on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation Vol. 9 No. 5, 
October 2002.
 [3] F.H. Kreuger, Industrial High Voltage, Delft Uni-
versity Press, 1991.
 [4] C.L. Wadhwa, “High Voltage Engineering (second 
edition)” 2007, New Age International (P) Limited, 
publishers.
 [5] E. Kuffel, W.S. Zaengl, J. Kuffel, “High Voltage 
Engineering 
Fundamentals, 
Second 
edition” 
Reprinted 1986, Newnes.
 [6] IEEE Guide for the Measurement of Partial 
Discharges in AC Electric Machinery, IEEE P1434/
D1.1, 4 October 2010.
 [7] Duval, M.: ‘A review of faults detectable by gas-
in-oil analysis in transformers’, IEEE Electr. Insul. 
Mag., 2002, 18, (3), pp. 8–17.
 [8] W. Sikorski, W. Ziomek, “Detection, Recognition 
and Location of Partial Discharge Sources Using 
Acoustic Emission Method” available online at 
www.intechopen.com.
 [9] S.E.U. Lima, O. Frazão, R.G. Farias, F.M. Araújo, 
L.A. Ferreira, V. Mirandac J.L. Santos, “Acoustic 
Source Location of Partial Discharges in Trans-
formers”, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7653 76532N-1.
[10] S. Biswas, C. Koley, B. Chatterjee, S. Chakravorti, 
“A Methodology for Identification and Localization 
of Partial Discharge Sources using Optical 
Sensors”, IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and 
Electrical Insulation Vol. 19, No. 1; February 2012, 
pp. 18–28.
[11] Peter Kung, Lutang Wang, Maria I. Comanici, 
Lawrence R. Chen, “Detection and location of 
PD activities using an array of fiber laser sensors”, 
IEEE International Symposium on Electrical Insu-
lation (ISEI) Conference: 2012, pp. 511–515.
[12] Mm Yaacob, Ma Alsaedi, Jr Rashed, Am Dakhil, 
and Sf Atyah, “Review on Partial Discharge Detec-
tion Techniques Related to High Voltage Power 
Equipment Using Different Sensors”, Photonic 
Sensors / Vol. 4, No. 4, 2014: 325–337.
[13] Kee-Joe Lim, Seong-Hwa Kang, Kang-Won Lee, 
Sung-Hee Park1 & Jong-Sub Lee, “Partial Dis-
charge Signal Detection by Piezoelectric Ceramic 
Sensor and The Signal Processing”, Journal of 
Electroceramics, 13, 487–492, 2004.
[14] S. Karmakar, N.K. Roy, P. Kumbhakar, “Monitoring 
of high voltage power transformer using direct opti-
cal partial discharge detection technique”, J Opt 38 
(4): pp. 207–215.
[15] Xiaodong Wang, Baoqing Li, Harry T. Roman, 
Onofrio L. Russo, Ken Chin, and Kenneth R. 
Farmer, “Acousto-optical PD Detection for Trans-
formers”, Ieee Transactions On Power Delivery, 
Vol. 21, No. 3, July 2006, pp. 1068–1073.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

183
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
2D-thermal model for estimation of heat-dissipation in SiC 
based p-i-n switches used for RF-communication
Jhuma Kundu
NSHM Knowledge Campus, Durgapur, West Bengal, India
Abhijit Kundu
West Bengal University of Technology, Kolkata, India
Maitreyi Ray Kanjilal
Narula Institute of Technology, West Bengal University of Technology, Kolkata, India
Moumita Mukherjee
CMSDS, DRDO-Kolkata, (Ministry of Defence, Government of India), University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: Operation of p-i-n switch under pulse mode condition is presented in this paper. 
The junction temperature is increased by 357°K with thermal heat flux 1.5 × 1010 Watt/m2.The p-i-n switch 
model is done for two poly types of SiC-, α-SiC, and β-SiC. The analysis revels that this β-SiC is better 
than α-SiC as far as thermal model is concerned. It offers high break down voltage for which it can be 
used at high temperature and the device is capable to handle the high power for signal routing between 
instruments and Devices Under Test (DUT). Incorporating a switch into a switch matrix system enables 
one to route signals from multiple instruments to single or multiple DUTs. This allows multiple tests to 
be performed with the same setup, eliminating the need for frequent connects and disconnects. For these 
properties p-i-n diode is suitable as a switch at millimeter wave frequency.
device prior to fabrication in the development of 
the system [5] for calculation of optimum efficiency 
at low cost. The property of the device varies from 
material to material. The switching property of 
1 INTRODUCTION
P-i-n diode is a solid state device that operates as a 
variable resistor at millimeter wave frequency. The 
impedance estimation of p-i-n switch is required 
to determine the power dissipation [1–3] under 
forward bias condition and the impedance of p-i-n 
diode is controlled by stored charge (Q) in the 
intrinsic-region [1, 4]. The power dissipation in a 
device or circuit is an important factor which has 
to be considered when the device will be used to 
generate high current. And heat is generated by the 
dissipation of power in the junction of the diode 
which absorbs the small amount of power and con-
verts it in the heat. So heat sink is required without 
any distortion of the signal (Figure 1). Therefore 
during the fabrication of the semiconductor device 
applicable to high voltage and high frequency, pre-
caution should be taken to control the tempera-
ture increasing within the device especially at the 
junction. It is required to simulate and design the 
Figure 1. Geometry structure of p-i-n switch with heat 
sink.

184
the device is controlled by the carrier mobility 
(μ), diffusion coefficient etc. This high frequency 
switching device is used in wireless and millimeter 
wave systems [5–6].
2 THEORY
The application of the device at high frequency 
requires higher breakdown voltage to handle high 
power. The WBG semiconductor shows high 
breakdown voltage [5, 7]. The breakdown voltage 
of p-i-n diode is given by—
V
E z dz
d
b
V
W
∫
( )
z
0
 
(1)
where electric field E(z) is constant and z represents 
the width of i region. So it can be written as—
V
E W
b
V
⋅
E
 
(2)
Applying Guss law—
∇⋅
=
E
ρ ε
/
ρ
 
(3)
where ρ  is the charge density and ε  is the relative 
permittivity of GaN. If the charge is distributed by 
ionized donors (Ni) in the lightly doped n region or 
i region then—
ρ( )
ρ
( )
N
)
i
N
 
(4)
It is also constant in the depletion region and 
zero in the diffusion region. Using the Gauss’s law 
the electric field is given by—
E
zN q
i
N
( )
z
/
=
ε  
(5)
The p-i-n diode is a 2-terminal device which 
finds application as a variable resistance at for-
ward bias as a function of frequency [2, 8]. 
Intrinsic region resistance (Ri) of p-i-n diode is a 
function of width (W) of the i region (Figure 1), 
effective carrier mobility (μef
μ ff ), carrier life time 
( )) and forward bias current (If) and it can be 
written as—
Ri
R
(
)
W
I f
W
I
efff )
efff
 
(7)
At forward bias condition the stored charge 
(Q = I0τ) depends on carrier life time (τ) and 
forward bias current (I0). The junction resistance 
(Rj) varies with frequency and as a function of 
frequency it can be expressed—
R
qI
j
R ( )
f =
(
)
(
)
(
/
kT
)
0I
−
β
(
)
L
(
tanh(W
cos
)
L
(
cos
 (8)
The carrier diffusion length (L) has an important 
role in controlling the junction impedance of the 
switch. The diffusion length can be expressed as—
L
Def
D ff τ  
(9)
The total series resistance of p-i-n switch can be 
written as—
R
R
Ri
s
j
R
+
Rj
R
2
 
(10)
The resistance has an important role for power 
dissipation [9, 10]. In p-i-n switch the power dissi-
pation is mainly controlled by series resistance Rs, 
characteristic impedance Z0 and available power 
Pav of p-i-n diode. It can be expressed as—
P
R Z
d
P
T
R
T
=
4
0
Z
0
2
(
)
Z
RT
R
2
0
Z
 
(11)
For dissipation of power the heat is produced at 
the junction of the switch [11]. And the heat capac-
ity also depends on geometry structure of p-i-n 
diode and considering the volume of the diode as 
V, it can be written as—
H
C
V
c
p
H
C ρV  
(12)
Heat is also converted into temperature. At 
ambient temperature (Ta) for a given power dissi-
pation (Pd), the junction temperature (Tj) can be 
expressed as—
T
T
P
j
a
T
j
d
P
+
Ta
T
θ j
 
(13)
The thermal impedance (θj) of heat flow can be 
determined by the following equation—
θ j
θ
l
dl AK
= ∫
/A
0
 
(14)
where K is the conductivity of the medium, A is 
the cross-section area and l is the length of heat 
flow path.
3 RESULT AND ANALYSIS
Through the simulation model, and using equa-
tions (1)–(5) the breakdown voltage of the p-i-n 
switch has been estimated first at reverse biased 
condition. The widths of the i region of the 

185
simulated devices are optimized through this 
modelling technique. The break down voltages of 
3C-SiC, 4H-SIC, and 6H-SiC based p-i-n switches 
are then compared for optimization of the switch 
and the results are shown in Figure 2(a) Among 
these three materials 3C-SiC offers highest break-
down voltage than its other counterparts for the 
same width of the i region. The width of the 
intrinsic region is optimized through this model-
ling technique for high power and high frequency 
operation. Figure 2(b) shows that 3C-SiC offers 
less thermal power dissipation than other two 
materials. So 3C-SiC is preferred for p-i-n RF-
switch at millimetre wave communication. Power 
dissipation is occurred by absorbing the small 
amount of power at the junction of p-i-n switch 
and converting it into heat.
Analysis of high frequency (35 GHz) p-i-n 
switch under continuous wave thermal operation 
is done through COMSOL Multiphysics software. 
Figure 3 shows the steady state thermal image 
of p-i-n switch under high power condition and 
Figure 4 shows the thermal power dissipation 
pattern of a p-i-n switch which is mounted on a 
Cu substrate. It is interesting to observe that even 
under a high power operation, the junction tem-
perature rise is not so significant; this is due to the 
good thermal conductivity property of SiC and 
this is the importance of using such wide band gap 
semiconductor for RF switch fabrication.
REFERENCES
Caverly, R.H. & Hiller, G. (1990) The small signal ac 
impedance of gallium arsenide and silicon p-i-n diode, 
solid state electron, Vol.33, no.10, (PP.1255–1263).
Ghosh, D. & Ray (Kanjilal), M. & Kundu, A. (2013) 
Electrical Response on MESFET using WBG Semi-
conductor as Potential Substrate, IEE Conference 
on Computation and Communication Advancement 
(IC3 A).
Gated, E., & et al. (2007) An improved physics- Based 
Formulation of the Microwave p-i-n diode impedance, 
IEEE microwave and Wireless components Letters, 
Vol.17. No.3.
Hiller, C.R. (1987) Microwave resistance of Gallium Arse-
nide and Silicon p-i-n Diode, IEEE MTT-S Digest.
Hinojosa A.I. & Resendize, L.M. & Torchynska, T.V 
(2010) Numerical Analysis of the Performance of p-i-n 
Diode Microwave Switches Based on Different Semi-
conductor Materials, Int. J. Pure Appl. Sci. Tech.
Kundu, A. & Ray (Kanjilal) & Mukherjee, M. & Ghosh, 
D. (2013) Switching Characteristics of p-i-n Diode 
Using Different Semiconductor Materials, Interna-
tional Journal of Advanced Technology and Engineer-
ing Research (IJATER) (ISSN 2250–3536),(pp-19), 
Volume 3, Issue 1.
Konczakowska, A. & Cichosk, J. & Dokupil, D. & 
Flisikowski, P. (2011) The Low Frequency Noise 
Behavior of SiC MESFETs, 21st International Con-
ference on Noise and Fluctuation, IEEE.
Leenov, D. (1964) The Silicon p-i-n diode as a microwave 
radar protector at megawatt levels, IEEE Trans. Elec-
tron Devices, Vol. ED-11, no.2 (PP.53–61).
Milligan, J.W. & Henning, J. & Allen, S.T. & Ward, A. & 
Parikh, P &.Smith, R.P. Transition of SiC MESFET 
Technology”, Cree, Inc., 4600 Silicon Drive, Durham, 
NC27703.
Size, S.M. (1989) “Physics of Semiconductor Devices”, 
John Willy and Sons, New York.
Figure 2. (a) Breakdown voltage of p-i-n switch
(b) Power dissipation of p-i-n switch.
Figure 3. The junction temperature in Kelvin (K) of 
SiC based p-i-n switch.
Figure 4. Thermal diffusion pattern of p-i-n switch.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

187
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Load balancing in cloud computing using a local search 
technique—Tabu Search
Brototi Mondal, Madhuchanda Das, Chayanti Mukherjee & Oishika Das
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Cloud computing offers distributed, virtualized, and elastic resources as utilities to end 
users, which has the potential to support full realization of “computing as a utility” in the near future. 
Cloud computing uses Virtual Machine (VM) instead of physical machine to host, store, and interconnect 
the different components. Load balancing is being used to assign massive amount of requests to different 
VMs in such a way that none of the nodes can get loaded heavily or lightly. Thus, it can be considered 
as an optimization problem. In this paper, a load balancing strategy based on Tabu Search has been pro-
posed which balances the load of the cloud infrastructure. The proposed algorithm is tested and evaluated 
on universal datasets using an existing simulator known as CloudAnalyst. The overall performance of the 
proposed algorithm is compared with the existing approaches like First Come First Serve (FCFS), Round 
Robing (RR), and a local search algorithm i.e. Stochastic Hill Climbing (SHC).
is followed by the simulation results and analysis 
with an overview of CloudAnalyst (Wickremas-
inghe et al. 2010) that is described in section 3. And 
finally, section 4 concludes this paper.
2 LOAD BALANCING USING 
TABU SEARCH
To handle a massive amount of requests by equally 
spreading the work load on each computing node, 
to maximize their utilization and minimize the 
response time, efficient load balancing algorithms 
are needed.
2.1 Tabu Search
Tabu search is a “meta-heuristic” as well as “local-
search” algorithm for finding the optimized result 
to a wide variety of classical and practical prob-
lems. One main ingredient of Tabu Search (TS) 
is the use of adaptive memory to guide problem 
solving.
For a given problem to be solved, using tabu 
search, three things need to be defined: a set V of 
feasible solutions (for the problem), a neighbor-
hood structure N(s) for a given solution s ∈ V, and 
a tabu list, TL. An initial solution sκ is chosen from 
the set of feasible solution V. This initial solution 
is usually chosen randomly. Once an initial solu-
tion is chosen, the algorithm goes into a loop that 
terminates when one or more of the stopping con-
ditions are met. After that, the next solution si+1 is 
selected from the neighbors of the current solution 
1 INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing is an area that is experiencing a 
rapid advancement in both academia and industry. 
This distributing computing mechanism utilizes 
the high speed of the internet to move jobs from 
private PC to the remote computer clusters (big 
data centers owned by the cloud service provid-
ers) for data processing. Load balancing in cloud 
refers to distributing client requests across multi-
ple application servers that are running in a cloud 
environment.
As load balancing is one of the hot topics among 
the researchers, there have been various research 
efforts on the approaches of load balancing, like 
Minimum Execution Time (MET) scheduling, 
Min-Min scheduling algorithms, Minimum Com-
pletion Time (MCT) etc., are reported in literature. 
Also a few soft computing techniques are used to 
optimize the work load like Ant Colony (Mishra 
et al. 2012), Stochastic Hill Climbing (Mondal et al. 
2012), and Simulated Annealing (Mondal et al. 
2015). Load balancing using Genetic Algorithm 
(GA) improves the response time and the resource 
utilization effectively (Dasgupta et al. 2013).
In this paper, we propose the use of Tabu Search 
(TS) to find efficient solutions to the cloud load 
balancing problem which improves the overall per-
formance by reducing the average Response Time 
(RT) by a significant amount. A comparison on 
the improved performance is also investigated.
The rest of paper is organized as follows.
In section 2, we describe the development of 
proposed TS algorithm for load balancing which 

188
si, si+1 ∈ ≤ N(si). In a basic tabu search, all possi-
ble solutions s ∈ ≤ N(si) is considered, and the best 
solution is chosen as the next solution si+1.
2.2 Load balancing based on Tabu Search
The parameters used in our proposed algorithm 
are described as follows:
Let us assume s0 contains the initial candidate 
VM chosen randomly and s contains the interme-
diate best candidate VM. The tabuList is used to 
remember the last k solutions that have been vis-
ited, and to avoid these solutions sCandidate and 
bestCandidate represent each candidate and best 
candidate of sNeighborhood respectively.
To calculate the fitness value, we formulate the 
problem of load balancing as follows:
Let’s assume n is the number of VMs that is 
present in the cloud at any particular instance of 
time and m is the number of jobs submitted by 
cloud users which have to be allocated. Each VM 
will have a Virtual Machine Vector (VMV) indicat-
ing the current status of VM’s utilization. MIPS 
indicate how many million instructions can be 
executed by that machine per second. β and DL is 
the cost of execution of instruction and delay cost 
respectively. The delay cost is an estimate of pen-
alty, which the cloud service provider needs to pay 
to the customer in the event of job being finished 
in the actual time rather than being more than the 
deadline advertised by the service provider,
VMV = g (MIPS, β, DL) 
(1)
Similarly each request submitted by cloud user 
can be represented by a request unit vector (RUV).
The type of service that is required by a request 
are, Software as a Service (SAAS), Infrastructure 
as a Service (IAAS) and Platform-as-a-Service 
(PAAS) is represented by T. NIC indicates the 
count of instruction in the request determined by 
the processor. Request Arrival Time (RAT) is the 
clock time of arrival of request in the system and 
the worst case completion time (wc) is the mini-
mum time required to complete the request by a 
processing unit. Thus Equation 2 gives the differ-
ent attributes of requests.
RUV = g (T, NIC, RAT, wc) 
(2)
The cloud service provider needs to allocate 
these N jobs among M number of processors such 
that C cost function as indicated in equation 3 is 
minimized.
C = w1 * β (NIC ÷ MIPS) + w2 * DL 
(3)
The proposed algorithm is given below:
3 EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
This section presents our experimental study; sim-
ulation environment, and performance evaluation 
of our proposed algorithm.
3.1 Simulation environment
We have conducted this research with CloudAna-
lyst simulation toolkit which is modified with our 
proposed algorithm.
The CloudAnalyst also enables a modeler to 
repeatedly execute a series of simulation experi-
ments with slight parameters variations in a quick 
and easy manner. The simulation configuration is 
provided in Table 1. The world is divided into six 
regions, modeling a group of users, which repre-
sents the six major continents of the world. It is 
assumed out of the total registered users 5% are 
online simultaneously during the peak time and 
only one tenth is online during the off-peak. Size 
of VMs used to host applications in the experiment 
is 100MB. VMs have 1GB of RAM memory and 
have 10MB of available bandwidth. Simulated hosts 
have x86 architecture. Each simulated data center 
hosts a particular amount of VMs dedicated for 
the application. Machines have 4 GB of RAM and 
100GB of storage. Each machine has 4 CPUs, and 
each CPU has a capacity power of 10000 MIPS.
3.2 Result
We consider several scenarios for experimenta-
tion. Experiment is started by taking one Data 

189
Center (DC) having 25, 50, and 75 VMs to proc-
ess all the requests around the world. Table 2 
describes this simulation setup with the calculated 
overall average Response Time (RT) in ms for TS, 
SHC, RR, and FCFS. The performance analysis 
graph for it is depicted in Figure 1 where cloud 
configuration is along x-axis and response time in 
ms is along y-axis. Subsequently two, three, four, 
five DCs are considered with combination 25, 50, 
and 75 VMs for each CCs as given in Tables 3, 4, 
5, and 6. The corresponding performance analysis 
graphs are displayed beside them in Figures 2, 3, 
4, and 5.
Table 1. Simulation configurations.
S. 
no
User 
base
Region
Simultaneous 
online users 
during peak 
hrs
Simultaneous 
online users 
during 
off-peak hrs
1
UB1
0–N. America
5,70,000
57,000
2
UB2
1–S. America
7,00,000
70,000
3
UB3
2–Europe
4,50,000
45,000
4
UB4
3–Asia
9,00,000
90,000
5
UB5
4–Africa
1,25,000
12500
6
UB6
5–Oceania
1,50,000
30,500
Figure 1. Performance analysis of proposed TS with 
SHC, FCFS and RR using One Data Center.
Table 2. Simulation scenario and calculated overall 
average Response Time (RT) in (MS) using one data 
center.
Sl.
no
Cloud 
configu-
ration
DC 
specification
RT 
using
TS
RT
using
SHC
RT
using
RR
RT
using
FCFS
1
CC1
Each with 
25 VMs
327.34 329.02 330
330.11
2
CC2
Each with 
50 VMs
326.11 329.01 329.42 329.42
3
CC3
Each with 
75 VMs
326.66 329.34 329.67 329.44
Table 3. Simulation scenario and calculated overall aver-
age Response Time (RT) in (MS) using two data centers.
Sl.
no
Cloud 
configu-
ration
DC 
specification
RT 
using
TS
RT
using
SHC
RT
using
RR
RT
using
FCFS
1
CC1
Each with 
25 VMs
362.12 370.44 376.27 381.34
2
CC2
Each with 
50 VMs
357.47 365.15 372.49 377.52
3
CC3
Each with 
75 VMs
356.21 364.73 369.78 375.56
4
CC4
Two DCs 
with 25, 
50 VMs 
each
353.33 361.72 367.91 373.87
5
CC5
Two DCs 
with 25, 
75 VMs 
each
354.24 362.23 369.45 372.23
6
CC6
Two DCs 
with 75, 
50 VMs 
each
349.54 357.04 356.01 361.61
Table 4. Simulation scenario and calculated overall aver-
age Response Time (RT) in (MS) using three data centers.
Sl.
no
Cloud 
configu-
ration
DC 
specification
RT
using
TS
RT
using
SHC
RT
using
RR
RT
using
FCFS
1
CC1
Each with 
25 VMs
351.34 361.82 366.17 368.34
2
CC2
Each with 
50 VMs
350.11 358.25 363.52 367.52
3
CC3
Each with 
75 VMs
347.66 355.73 360.18 366.56
4
CC4
Each with 
25, 50 and 
75 VMs
351.34 359.01 361.21 367.87
Table 5. Simulation scenario and calculated overall aver-
age Response Time (RT) in (MS) using four data centers.
Sl.
no
Cloud 
configu-
ration
DC 
specification
RT 
using
TS
RT
using
SHC
RT
using
RR
RT
using
FCFS
1
CC1
Each with 
25 VMs
346.64 354.35 359.35 360.95
2
CC2
Each with 
50 VMs
342.16 350.71 356.93 359.97
3
CC3
Each with 
75 VMs
338.36 346.46 352.09 358.44
4
CC4
Each with 
25, 50 and 
75 VMs
336.74 344.31 351
355.94

190
4 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed an efficient algo-
rithm to distribute massive work load in cloud 
computing, based on a well-known optimization 
method, Tabu Search (TS). The performance anal-
ysis in terms of response time (ms) among the pro-
posed TS algorithm and some existing algorithms 
shows that the proposed method not only outper-
forms but also guarantees the QoS requirement of 
customer requests. Though TS algorithm based 
on load balancing strategy balances the incoming 
requests among the available VM efficiently, we 
shall strive to find more and more efficient meth-
ods using soft computing approaches for load bal-
ancing to obtain better results.
REFERENCES
Dasgupta, K., Mandal, B., Dutta, P., Mondal, J. K. & 
Dam, S (2013). A Genetic Algorithm (GA) based Load 
Balancing Strategy for Cloud Computing. CIMTA- 
2013, Procedia Technology 10 ( 2013 ) 340–347.
Mishra, R., & Jaiswal, A. (2012). Ant colony Optimi-
zation: A Solution of Load balancing in Cloud. 
International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology 
(IJWesT), 2(3), pp. 33–50.
Mondal, B., Dasgupta, K., and Dutta, P. (2012). Load 
Balanc ing in Cloud Computing using Stochastic 
Hill Climbing-A Soft Computing Approach. Proc. 
of C3IT2012, Elsevier, Procedia Technology 4(2012), 
pp.783–789.
Mondal, B., Choudhury, A. (2015). Simulated Annealing 
(SA) based Load Balancing Strategy for Cloud Com-
puting. (IJCSIT) International Journal of Computer 
Science and Information Technologies, Vol. 6 (4), 
2015, 3307–3312
Wickremasinghe,B., Calheiros, R. N., and Buyya,R.
(2010). CloudAnalyst: A CloudSim-based Visual 
Modeller for Analysing Cloud Computing Environ-
ments and Applications. Proceedings of the 24th 
International Conference on Advanced Information 
Networking and Applications (AINA 2010), Perth, 
Australia.
Figure 2. Performance analysis of proposed TS with 
SHC, FCFS and RR using Two Data Center.
Figure 3. Performance analysis of proposed TS with 
SHC, FCFS and RR using Three Data Center.
Figure 4. Performance analysis of proposed TS with 
SHC, FCFS and RR using Four Data Center.
Figure 5. Performance analysis of proposed TS with 
SHC, FCFS and RR using Five Data Center.
Table 6. Simulation scenario and calculated overall aver-
age Response Time (RT) in (MS) using five data centers.
Sl.
no
Cloud 
configu-
ration
DC
specification
RT
using
TS
RT
using
SHC
RT
using
RR
RT
using
FCFS
1
CC1
Each with 
25 VMs
337.24 342.86 348.57 352.05
2
CC2
Each with 
50 VMs
326.56 332.84 339.76 345.44
3
CC3
Each with 
75 VMs
324.32 329.46 335.88 342.79
4
CC4
Each with 
25, 50 and 
75 VMs
321.67 326.64 334.01 338.01

191
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
High density salt and pepper noise removal by selective mean filter
A. Bandyopadhyay, K. Chakraborty & R. Bag
Department of Computer Science Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, 
Mankundu, West Bengal, India
A. Das
Department of Computer Science Engineering, Netaji Subhash Engineering College, Garia, Kolkata, 
West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper, a selective mean filter is proposed. A two stage method has been implemented, 
comprising of Noisy pixel detection followed by restoration. Primarily the noisy pixels are determined by 
a detection procedure and a binary flag image is generated. Then the selective mean operation is applied 
on the each of the noisy pixel and replacement is done by the approximated value. A prefixed threshold 
value is used to re-approximate the recently replaced pixels. Those pixels are further smoothed by a con-
ditional mean operation. Finally, the four border pixels are considered and checked for noisiness which is 
then removed by neighborhood pixel replacement. This filter provides improbable noise removal result on 
corrupted images; it clearly outperform the existing filters with respect to MSE and PSNR comparison. 
It also shows to be robust to very high levels of noise, retrieving meaningful detail at noise levels as high 
as 90%.
The filter used a 3 × 3 window for smoothing, but it 
did not consider whether the pixel was corrupted or 
not, hence replacing the non-noisy pixel in the proc-
ess. Then the Standard Median Filter (Tukey. 1971) 
was introduced and revised by Tukey, which had the 
disadvantage of poor performance if the number 
of corrupted pixels surpassed the number of non-
corrupted pixels in the 3 × 3 window. To overcome 
this shortfall, the Decision Based Algorithm (DBA) 
(Srinivasan et al. 2007) came through; this replaced 
only the pixel that was detected as corrupt. But this 
method also had its share of disadvantage by pro-
ducing a streaking effect due to consecutive replace-
ment of the neighborhood pixels. Ultimately the 
Decision Based Un-symmetric Trimmed Median 
Filter (DBUTMF) (Aiswarya et al. 2010) and 
Modified Decision Based Un-symmetric Trimmed 
Median Filter (MDBUTMF) (Esakkirajan et al. 
2011) was introduced which had the advantage that 
the actual value could be regained from the mean if 
all the pixels were noisy in the 3 × 3 window, though 
this filter didn’t perform good in the noise density 
70%–90%. Further a filter (Banerjee et al. 2015) 
was designed by S. Banerjee which performed bet-
ter at moderate noise densities. Then a Noise Adap-
tive Fuzzy Switching Median Filter (NAFSMF) 
(Toh et al. 2010) was proposed which applied fuzzy 
reasoning to handle the noise present. But effec-
tive noise removal at high noise density was still 
un-achievable.
1 INTRODUCTION
Noise is a random variation of intensities in an 
image which is visible as grains in the image. In 
other words, the pixels in the image portray varied 
intensity values instead of true (noise-free) pixel 
values. To remove or reduce the noise in images 
certain noise removal filters are deployed. Those 
filters help in enhancing the visibility of the image 
by smoothing the entire image, but they do produce 
a vague result in cases of fine, low contrast details. 
One of the types of noise in images is the Impulse 
Noise (Bandyopadhyay et al. 2015), also called as 
spike noise or independent noise. The visibility of 
this noise appears on an image as random black and 
white dots, hence the name salt and pepper noise 
(Banerjee et al. 2014). Sharp and sudden changes of 
image signal results in the production of this type 
of noise. Dust particles in the image acquisition 
source or over heated faulty components may also 
cause this type of noise. Here the noisy pixels take 
either maximum or minimum gray levels i.e. ‘255’ or 
‘0’, (Bandyopadhyay et al. 2015) respectively; pro-
ducing white dot for the maximum value and black 
dot for the minimum value (Chan et al. 2005). Now, 
to remove these noises from images, ample image 
de-noising filters are available, which removes the 
noise from the image, while preserving the details. 
The Mean Filter (Kundu et al. 1984) was the first 
filter used by A. Kundu (in 1984) for noise removal. 

192
In this paper a selective mean filter is proposed 
where arithmetic mean is used in different stages 
and noisy pixels are approximated by checking 
with a prefixed threshold value. The proposed 
filter outperforms the above discussed filters 
in high noise densities (70%–90%). The whole 
noise detection and removal procedure has been 
divided into sections where section 2 illustrates 
the proposed methodology, section 3 represents 
Result and Discussion and section 4 depicts the 
conclusion.
2 PROPOSED METHOD
Here we consider xi,j for (i,j) 
 A ≡ {1,2,3, 
… M} × {1,2,3, …… N} be the gray intensity level 
at pixel location (i,j) of a true M × N image G. A 
salt and pepper noisy grayscale image G1 (M × N) 
is taken where a pixel having intensity value ‘0–4’ 
or ‘251–255’ will be considered as a noisy one. The 
proposed method consist of two segments: 2.1 
noise detection and 2.2 restoration.
2.1 Noise detection
The image G1 (M × N) is taken and every pixel is 
considered for checking. Concurrently a same size 
binary flag image F1 (M × N) is generated where fi,j 
is considered a pixel value at the location (i,j).
If xi,j = 0 or xi,j = 1 or xi,j = 2 or xi,j = 3 or xi,j = 4 
or
  xi,j = 255 or xi,j = 254 or xi,j = 253 or
  xi,j = 252 or xi,j = 251
then
  fi,j = 0
else
  fi,j = xi,j
Repeating the above procedure a same size 
image G2 (M × N) is generated.
2.2 Restoration
The noisy image has to be restored after being 
affected by salt & pepper noise. We perform the 
Restoration using the Selective Mean Operation.
STEP 2.2.1  Replacement by selective mean 
operation
Consider G2 (M × N) for (i,j) starting from (2,2) to 
(M–1,N–1).
If xi,j = 0 and (xi−1,j, xi+1,j, xi,j−1, xi,j+1) ≠ 0 then
Replace xi,j = (
r
j
j
k i
i
−
j
+
−
i
+
∑
∑
1
1
1
1
xk,r)/n
where n is the no of non noisy pixels in the said 
matrix. Repeating the above procedure image G3 
(M × N) is generated.
STEP 2.2.2 Neighborhood mean operation
The image G3 (M × N) is taken. Consider G3 
(M × N) for (i,j) starting from (2,2) to (M–1, N–1).
Taking xi,j as the center we create a (3 × 3) matrix. 
Calculate for each pixel in the said matrix
A1 = ( xi,j−1 + xi,j + xi,j+1)/3
if (xi,j) > A1
then 
A2 = (xi,j) – A1
else
A2 = A1 – (xi,j)
After completing this process an image G4 
(M × N) is generated.
STEP 2.2.3  Threshold comparison & flag image 
re-creation
If A2 is greater than the pre-fixed threshold
value = 10, then,
fi,j = 1
else
fi,j = 0
Repeating the above procedure a Flag image F2 
(M × N) is generated.
STEP 2.2.4  Flag Image converted to the noisy image
In F2 If (fi,j = 1) Replace fi,j = 0.
Examine G4 (M × N) for (i,j) starting from (2,2) 
to (M–1,N–1).pixels Repeat STEP 2.2.1 until all 
the pixels are traversed.
The above procedure is performed so that the 
transformed pixels that exceed the threshold value are 
once again denoted as noisy and hence the Selective 
Mean is re-applied to ensure ultimate noise removal.
STEP 2.2.5 Border Operation
• Upper Border Mean Calculation
 Examine F2 (M × N) for (i,j) starting from (1,2) 
to (1,N–1).
if xi,j = 0 then
      replace xi,j = (xi,j−1+xi,j+1)/2
 If adjacent pixels corresponding to xi,j are ‘0’ 
then consider the next neighborhood pixels 
(both in the left and right direction) for row wise 
replacement.
• Left Border Mean Calculation
 Examine F2 (M × N) for (i,j) starting from (2,1) 
to (M–1,1).
if xi,j = 0 then
      replace xi,j = (xi−1,j + xi+1,j)/2
 If adjacent pixels corresponding to xi,j are ‘0’ 
then consider the next neighborhood pixels 

193
(both above and below the column) for column 
wise replacement.
• Right Border Mean Calculation
 Examine F2 (M × N) for (i,j) starting from (2,N) 
to (M–1,N).
if xi,j = 0 then
      replace xi,j = (xi−1,j + xi+1,j)/2
 If adjacent pixels corresponding to xi,j are ‘0’ 
then consider the next neighborhood pixels 
(both above and below the column) for column 
wise replacement.
• Lower Border Mean Calculation
 Examine F2 (M × N) for (i,j) starting from (M,2) 
to (M, N–1).
if xi,j = 0 then
      replace xi,j = (xi,j−1+xi,j+1)/2
 If adjacent pixels corresponding to xi,j are ‘0’ 
then consider the next neighborhood pixels 
(both in the left and right direction) for row wise 
replacement.
 The four corner pixels, i.e. (1,1), (M,1), (1,N), 
(M,N) are replaced by the mean of the adjacent 
neighborhood uncorrupted pixels.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The proposed method is assessed on the base of 
Mean Square Error (MSE), Peak Signal-to-Noise 
Ratio (PSNR).The visual performances of proposed 
work are tested step-wise and the results are shown 
in Figure.3 Quantitative performances of the de-
noising techniques are measured by Mean Square 
Error (MSE), Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) 
as defined in equation (I) and (II) respectively.
MSE =
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
⎟
∧
∑
I
I m
M
N
×
M N
(
)
(I
−
, )
n
,
2
 
(I)
MSE is the mean square error between origi-
nal image (Ι ) and de-noised image ( ˆI ). M and N 
are the number of rows and columns in the input 
image, respectively.
PSNR
MSE
S
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
10
255
10
2
log
 
(II)
Table 1 shows the PSNR comparison with respect 
to Lena image for different existing filters with the 
proposed filter at variable noise density (50%–90%).
Figure 1 and Figure 2 shows the visual result of 
proposed filter after application on Barbara and 
Cameraman image respectively. Figure 3 shows 
Figure 1. Proposed filter on Barbara image: a) Original 
image b) 70% noisy image c) Output image.
Figure 2. Proposed filter on Cameraman image: 
a) Original image b) 70% noisy image c) Output image.
Figure 3. Comparison of output of different filters with 
the proposed filter: (a) Original Lena image (b) 60% noisy 
image (c) SMF (d) DBA (e) DBUTMF (f) MDBUTMF 
(g) S. BANERJEE (h) NAFSMF (i) Proposed.
Table 1. PSNR for different filters for Lena image at 
different noise densities.
Image Filters
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Lena SMF
15.42 11.13
9.93
8.70
6.60
DBA
26.42 24.81 22.62 20.37 17.11
DBUTMF
27.08 25.52 23.41 20.93 17.92
MDBUTMF
28.18 26.40 24.30 21.70 18.40
S. BANERJEE 30.02 28.73 27.20 25.37 22.52
NAFSMF
29.87 28.75 27.58 26.08 22.72
Proposed
30.20 29.52 27.86 26.61 24.92

194
the quality of the reconstructed image for different 
filters compared to the proposed filter at 60% noise 
density. Table 2 illustrates the comparison of MSE 
between different filters with the proposed at var-
ied noise density (50%–90%). The qualitative and 
quantitative result shows that the proposed filter 
outperforms the above stated filters in all respect.
4 CONCLUSION
A varied Mean filter is proposed in this paper based 
on the selective arithmetic mean of the corrupted 
pixels. Further, in this method, the noise removal 
is significant even at very high noise density cases. 
Qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the pro-
posed method proves that it outperforms other 
existing methods for all the considered images. 
Though this filter outdoes most of the conven-
tional filters it still may be enhanced by introduc-
ing further modification in future.
REFERENCES
Aiswarya, K., Jayaraj, V., and Ebenezer, D. (2010). A new 
and efficient algorithm for the removal of high den-
sity salt and pepper noise in image and video. Proc. of 
Second Int. Conf. Computer Modeling and Simulation. 
409–413.
Bandyopadhyay, A., Kumari, M., Pooja., Das, A., and 
Bag, R. (2015). Detection and Removal of High Den-
sity Random Valued Impulse Noise. CiiT International 
Journal of Digital Image Processing, 8(7), 242–246.
Bandyopadhyay, A., Banerjee, S., Das, A., and Bag, 
R. (2015). A Relook and Renovation over State-of-
Art Salt and Pepper Noise Removal Techniques. I.J. 
Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, vol–9, 61–69.
Banerjee, S., Bandyopadhyay, A., Bag, R., and Das, 
A. (2015). Moderate Density Salt & Pepper Noise 
Removal. IJECT 10(6), Issue 1, Spl- 1 Jan–March.
Banerjee, S., Bandyopadhyay, A., Bag, R., and Das, A. 
(2014). Neighborhood Based Pixel Approximation 
for High Level Salt and Pepper Noise Removal. CiiT 
International Journal of Digital Image Processing, 
8(6), 346–351.
Chan, H. R., Ho, W. C., and Nikolova, M. (2005). Salt-
and-pepper noise removalby median-type noise detec-
tors and detail-preserving regularization. IEEE Trans. 
Image Process., 10(14), 1479–1485.
Esakkirajan, S., Veerakumar, T., Subramanyam, N. A., 
and PremChand, H. C. (2011). Removal of High 
Density Salt and Pepper Noise Through Modified 
Decision Based Un-symmetric Trimmed Median Fil-
ter. IEEE Signal Process. Lett., 5(18).
Kundu, A., Mitra, S. K., and Vaidyanathan, P. P. (1984). 
Application of Two-Dimensional Generalized Mean 
Filtering for Removal of Impulse Noises from Images. 
IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal 
Processing, 3(32).
Srinivasan, S. K., and Ebenezer, D. (2007). A new fast 
and efficient decision based algorithm for removal 
of high density impulse noise. IEEE Signal Process. 
Lett., 3(14), 189–192.
Toh V. K. K., and Isa, M. A. N. (2010). Noise adaptive 
fuzzy switching median filter for salt-and-pepper noise 
reduction. IEEE Signal Process. Lett., 3(17) 281–284.
Tukey, W. J. (1971). Exploratory Data Analysis (prelimi-
nary ed.). Reading, MA: Addision-Wesley.
Table 2. Mse for different filters for Lena image at different noise densities.
Image
Filters
60%
70%
80%
90%
Lena
SMF
5047.54
6608.15
8771.63
14225.91
DBA
 215.31
 357.33
 597.14
 1267.88
DBUTMF
 183.26
 297.22
 524.90
 1054.88
MDBUTMF
 148.96
 241.59
 439.62
  939.89
S. BANERJEE
  87.70
 123.90
 191.92
  365.66
NAFSMF
  87.71
 115.63
 163.33
  349.20
Proposed
  72.95
 107.91
 142.25
  210.41

195
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Comparison of electric and thermal stress distribution in underground 
cable for different insulating materials
Soumita Pal, Vishwanath Gupta & Abhijit Lahiri
Department of Electrical Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this proposed work, a single phase underground cable is considered to study the electric 
stress and thermal stress distribution as a means to find out the location and value of maximum electric 
stress and thermal stress when operated at a system voltage of 1kV under power frequency condition. 
Three different insulating materials viz. Teflon, nylon and polyethylene are considered to study the effect 
of these stress distributions. The cable under consideration is simulated and the electric and thermal stress 
distributions are both obtained by using COMSOL Multiphysics version 4.3b software. This compara-
tive study of the electric and thermal stress distribution, the location and value of maximum electric and 
thermal stress will help to assess the type of insulating material that is to be used in an underground cable 
in a particular application.
The cable under consideration is shown in Figure 1. 
In Figure 1, AB denotes the conductor-insulator 
boundary, CD represents the insulator-sheath 
boundary, EF rwepresents the sheath boundary in 
contact with outside environment. GH, IJ and KL 
are the horizontal sections along which the electric 
and thermal stress distributions are calculated. The 
dimensions of the cable are given in Table 1 and the 
1 INTRODUCTION
The increased need for electric power combined 
with a competitive deregulated market environ-
ment have forced utilities to refocus their attention 
on reliability. This has created a significant need 
for diagnostic methods and technologies to assess 
the condition of the underground cable systems, 
commonly used in low voltage and medium volt-
age solutions (Kanikella 2014).
Insulating materials plays a vital role in the 
electrical and thermal design and performance 
of underground cables for both steady state and 
transient state conditions. The choice of insulat-
ing material for high voltage and medium voltage 
applications depends on the electrical and thermal 
properties of the materials (Mejia 2008). A good 
underground cable should have uniform electrical 
and thermal stress distribution.
The aim of the proposed work is to obtain the 
electric stress and thermal stress distribution in an 
underground cable which will be to locate the point 
of occurrence of maximum electric stress and 
thermal stress and the maximum values (Shaker, 
El-Hag, Patel U, Jayaram 2014).
2 MODEL DESCRIPTION
In this proposed work electric and thermal stress 
distribution in a XLPE insulated PVC sheathed 
1kV (normalized voltage) single core underground 
cable operated at power frequency has been stud-
ied to observe their effects for different insulating 
materials keeping the material of the sheath same. 
Figure 1. Schematic 
diagram 
of 
cable 
under 
consideration.

196
dielectric and thermal properties of the different 
insulating materials are provided in Table 2.
3 SIMULATION DETAILS
For obtaining electrical and thermal stress distri-
bution corresponding differential equations are 
solved using proper boundary conditions. The dif-
ferential equations related with electrical stress are 
as follows:
∇⋅D
v
= ρv 
(1)
E
V
∇
 
(2)
D
E  
(3)
Where
D = Electric flux in Coulombs/metre2
E = Electric field in Volt/metre
V = Electric Potential in Volts
ρv = Volume charge in Coulombs/metre3
∈ = Permittivity in Farads/metre
The surface charge density is incorporated using 
equation 4.
n
s
(
)
D
D
1
2
D
D
=
)
D
ρs  
(4)
The conductor insulator boundary is assigned 
with ρs = 0.
In the proposed work temperature is considered 
as a measure of the thermal stress. More is the tem-
perature more is the thermal stress generated. The 
differential equations related with thermal stress 
are as follows:
ρρ
μ
ρ
μμ
C
ρ
μ
ρ
μμ
Q
p
(
)
T
∇∇
∇
∇
∇
T
∇
∇.(
∇∇
∇
(K
∇
∇∇
+
)
T
∇∇.(K
∇
 
(5)
∇∇∇.J = Q j  
(6)
E
V
∇
 
(7)
J
E
Je
+
E
σE
 
(8)
where,
ρ = Density of material in kg/metre3
Cp = Heat capacity at constant pressure in Joule/
(kg.K)
T = Temperature in Kelvin
K = Thermal conductivity in Watt/(metre.
Kelvin)
J = Surface radiosity in Watt/metre2
Q = Heat source in Watt/metre3
E = Electric field in Volt/metre
V = Electric Potential in Volts
The differential equations for conductive heat 
flux is given by equation (9)
−n
K
T
ext
.(
)
.h
=
(
)
T
T
ex
T
t
h
=
(T
∇∇∇
 
(9)
Where,
h = Heat transfer coefficient in Watt/(metre2.
Kelvin) and the differential equation for surface to 
ambient radiation is given by equation (10)
−
∇
=
(
)
−
n
K
−
= ∈(
.(
)
σ
 
(10)
Where
σ = Electrical conductivity in Seimens/metre
∈ = Surface emissivity
The solutions of the above differential equa-
tions are obtained by using COMSOL Multiphys-
ics software that works on the principle of Finite 
Element Method (FEM).
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
4.1 Electric stress distribution
The variations of electric stress along the radial 
directions GH, IJ and KL that are at 2.5 m, 2.0 m 
Table 1. Cable under consideration.
Name
Conductor 
area
(in mm2)
Insulation 
thickness
(in mm)
Sheath 
thickness
(in mm)
XLPE insulated 
PVC sheathed 
single core 
cable
1.5
0.7
1.4
Table 2. Properties of insulating materials.
Materials used as 
insulating materials
Relative 
permittivity
Thermal 
conductivity
(w/m-k)
Density
(kg/m2)
Specific heat 
at constant 
pressure (J/kg-k)
Emissivity
Break down 
strength 
(v/m)
Polyethylene
2.3
0.51
960
1250
0.9
160
Nylon
4
0.25
1150
1700
0.85
56
Teflon
2
0.25
2200
1172
0.92
173

197
and 1.5 m from BDF are studied. Figure 2 presents 
such variations for different insulating materi-
als along GH. Figure 3 and Figure 4 present the 
same along IJ and KL respectively. In each of these 
cases it may be observed that the maximum value 
of electric stress is maximum when Teflon is used 
as the insulating material while it is minimum when 
Nylon is used in the place of Teflon.
Moreover, the point of occurrence of the maxi-
mum stress in each of these cases is close to the 
conductor-dielectric boundary as indicated by the 
points P, Q and R at the three different heights 
respectively.
Table 3 presents the values of the maximum 
electric stresses along the radial direction of the 
cable at the three different heights that are con-
sidered for the three different insulating materials. 
From Table 3 it may be observed that the maxi-
mum electric stress varies from 1.44 × 103 kV/m/
kV to 1.36 × 103 kV/m/kV when Polyethylene is 
used as the insulating material while it ranges from 
1.24 × 103 kV/m/kV to 1.11 × 103 kV/m/kV in the 
case of Nylon used as the insulating material. For 
Teflon, the maximum electric stress is observed 
to vary from 1.47 × 103 kV/m/kV to 1.41 × 103 
kV/m/kV.
The variation of electric stress for different insu-
lating materials along the insulator-sheath bound-
ary i.e. along the line CD has also been studied. The 
results are presented in Figure 5. From Figure 5, it 
is seen that the electric stress in each of the cases 
increases at the two ends while it decreases in the 
region between the terminals.
4.2 Thermal stress calculation
Similar to the case of electric stress, the varia-
tions of thermal stress due to different insulating 
materials along the radial directions along GH, IJ 
and KL are studied and are presented in Figure 6, 
Figure 7 and Figure 8 respectively.
From each of these figures it may be observed 
that the maximum value of the thermal stress is 
greatest at each of the three cross sections con-
sidered when Nylon insulation is used while it is 
least when Polyethylene is used as the insulating 
material.
Table 3. Maximum electric stress at different cross-
sections for different materials.
Cross-section
Maximum electric stress in kV/m/kV
Materials
Polyethylene
Nylon
Teflon
GH
1.44E+03
1.24E+03
1.47E+03
IJ
1.36E+03
1.11E+03
1.41E+03
KL
1.38E+03
1.14E+03
1.44E+03
Figure 2. Variation of electric stress along GH using 
different insulating materials.
Figure 3. Variation of electric stress along IJ using dif-
ferent insulating materials.
Figure 4. Variation of electric stress along KL using 
different insulating materials.

198
The points of occurrence of the maximum tem-
perature for each of the three insulating materials 
at the three different cross sections GH, IJ and KL 
are P, Q and R respectively. Table 4 presents the 
maximum temperature at different cross sections 
Figure 5. Variation of electric stress using different 
insulating materials along the insulator sheath boundary 
CD.
Table 4. Maximum 
temperature 
at 
different 
cross-sections for different materials.
Cross-section
Maximum temperature in degree Celsius
Materials
Polyethylene
Nylon
Teflon
GH
140.15
146.38
140.68
IJ
140.33
146.67
140.98
KL
140.33
146.67
140.98
Figure 6. Variation of temperature along GH using 
different insulating materials.
Figure 7. Variation of temperature along PQ using 
different insulating materials.
Figure 8. Variation of temperature along RS using dif-
ferent insulating materials.
Figure 9. Variation of temperature along the insu-
lator sheath boundary CD using different insulating 
materials.

199
stress at the insulation-sheath boundary are 
different in nature. For each of the cases under 
study it is noted that from C to D electric stress has 
decreased uniformly first and after reaching point 
S on CD at a height of 1.5 m it again changes its 
curvature and starts increasing. When the ther-
mal stress is computed along the same direction, 
it also increases uniformly and after reaching the 
same point S on CD, it changes its curvature and 
decreases uniformly. Moreover, if electric stress at 
the insulator-sheath boundary is considered then 
Nylon is the best choice among the three materials 
but if thermal stress is considered at the insulator-
sheath boundary the Teflon proves to be a better 
choice over the other two materials.
REFERENCES
Kanikella S.K. (2013). Electric Field and Thermal 
properties of dry cable using FEM. TELKOMNIKA, 
Vol.11, No.5, e-ISSN: 2087–278X.
Kanikella S.K. (2014). Electric Field and Thermal prop-
erties of wet cable using FEM. International journal of 
innovative research in Engineering and science, ISSN: 
2319–5665, Issue 3 volume 4.
Mejia J.C.H. (2008). Characterization of Real Power 
cable defects by diagnostic measurement. Geargia 
Institute of Technology.
Rajagopal K., Vittal K.P & Hemsingh L. (2012). Elec-
tric Field and Thermal properties of wet cable 10 KV 
and 15 KV. TELKOMNIKA, Vol.10, No.7, e-ISSN: 
2087–278X.
Shaker Y.O., El-Hag A.H., Patel U. & Jayaram S.H. 
(2014). Thermal Modeling of medium Volatge Cable 
Terminations under square pulses. IEEE Transactions 
on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation Vol. 21, No. 3.
with different insulating materials. From Table 4 
it may be observed that for a particular material, 
the value of the maximum temperature is fairly 
constant at three different cross sections.
The variations of temperature distribution along 
the insulation-sheath boundary CD due to differ-
ent insulating materials are studied and are shown 
in Figure 9. From Figure 9 it may be noted that 
along CD, the value of the maximum temperature 
is maximum when Nylon is used while it is mini-
mum with Teflon.
5 CONCLUSIONS
The proposed work gives an idea how different 
material properties affects the electric stress distri-
bution, thermal stress distribution and the maxi-
mum value of electric stress and thermal stress a 
single core underground cable operating at power 
frequency. However, the different material prop-
erties do not affect the location of occurrence of 
maximum electric stress and thermal stress.
Also from the results obtained it may be said 
that the point of occurrences of the maximum 
electric stress and the maximum thermal stress are 
same at three different cross-sections of the cable 
when measured along its radial direction.
With respect to the electric stress, Teflon seems 
to be a better choice over Nylon and Polyethylene 
while with respect to thermal stress; Polyethyl-
ene seems to be superior compared to Nylon and 
Teflon.
From Figure 5 and Figure 9 it may be observed 
that the distribution of electric stress and thermal 

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

201
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
An improved approach of cloud service brokerage 
model in multi-cloud environment
Bidisha Bhabani
Computer Science Engineering Department, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, 
Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Cloud computing has emerged as one of the most promising and challenging technolo-
gies at present. Cloud Service Broker (CSB) creates a governed and secure cloud management platform 
to simplify the delivery of complex cloud services to cloud service customers. They enable customers 
to realize the full potential that cloud provider has to offer. CSB leads to creation of a system of highly 
distributed, task-oriented, modular, and collaborative cloud services managed by a broker. In order to 
effectively manage the complexity inherent in such systems, enterprises are anticipated to crucially depend 
upon CSB mechanisms. Here in this paper, an improved approach is proposed that serves secure broker-
age in multi-cloud environment.
1 INTRODUCTION
According to NIST cloud computing is a model 
for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of configurable 
computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, stor-
age, applications, and services) that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal manage-
ment effort or service provider interaction. (NIST 
sp: 500–292, 2011)
The five Essential Characteristics of cloud 
computing are a) On-demand self-service b) Broad 
network access c) Resource pooling d) Rapid elas-
ticity and e) Measured service. The three Service 
Models are a) Software as a Service (SaaS) b) Plat-
form as a Service (PaaS) and c) Infrastructure as a 
Service (IaaS). And the four Deployment Models 
are as follows: a) Private cloud b) Community cloud 
c) Public cloud and d) Hybrid cloud.
According to NIST Actors in Cloud are 
described in Table 1.
This paper is concerned about the Cloud Broker 
among all the actors in cloud computing.
The NIST Reference Architecture (Figure 1) 
defines a Cloud Broker as an entity that manages 
the use, performance, and delivery of cloud serv-
ices, and negotiates relationships between Cloud 
Providers and Cloud Consumers. A Cloud Con-
sumer may request cloud services from a Cloud 
Broker instead of directly contacting a Cloud 
Provider. Cloud Brokers provide a single point of 
entry for managing multiple cloud services. The 
key defining feature that distinguishes a Cloud 
Broker from a Cloud Service Provider is the ability 
Figure 1. Cloud reference architecture.
Table 1. Actors in cloud computing.
Actors
Definition
Cloud 
consumer
A person or organization that maintains 
a business relationship with, and uses 
service from, cloud providers.
Cloud 
provider
A person, organization, or entity 
responsible for making a service 
available to interested parties.
Cloud 
auditor
A party that can conduct independent 
assessment of cloud services, information 
system operations, performance and 
security of the cloud implementation.
Cloud 
broker
An entity that manages the use, 
performance and delivery of cloud serv-
ices, and negotiates relationships between 
cloud providers and cloud consumers.
Cloud 
carrier
An intermediary that provides connectiv-
ity and transport of cloud services from 
cloud providers to cloud consumers.

202
to provide a single consistent interface to multiple 
differing providers, whether the interface is for 
business or technical purposes. In general, Cloud 
Brokers provide services in three categories:
a. Intermediation—A Cloud Broker enhances a 
given service by improving some specific capa-
bility and providing value-added services to 
Cloud Consumers by managing access to cloud 
services, identity management, performance 
reporting, enhanced security, etc.
b. Aggregation—A Cloud Broker combines and 
integrates multiple services into one or more 
new services and provides data & service inte-
gration and ensures the secure data movement 
between the Cloud Consumer and multiple 
Cloud Providers.
c. Arbitrage—Service arbitrage is similar to serv-
ice aggregation except that the services being 
combined/consolidated are not fixed. Service 
arbitrage means a Broker has the flexibility to 
choose services from multiple service Providers.
2 LITERATURE REVIEW
The concepts of cloud bursting and cloud bro-
kerage models are discussed in (Nair et al. 2010). 
The open management and security issues associ-
ated with the two models are also discussed in this 
paper. A possible architectural framework capable 
of powering the brokerage based cloud services 
that had been considered in the scope of OPTI-
MIS (OPTIMIS) (an EU FP7 project) is being 
proposed.
A new cloud brokerage service that reserves a 
large pool of instances from cloud providers and 
serves users with price discounts is proposed in 
(Wang et al. 2013). The design of dynamic strate-
gies for the broker to make instance reservations 
with the objective of minimizing its service cost 
has been proposed.
A broker framework for balancing costs against 
security risks is presented in (Goettelmann et al. 
2014). This framework selects cloud offers and 
generates deployment-ready business processes in 
a multi-cloud environment.
A framework of the cloud components is pro-
posed and the role of cloud service broker system 
is discussed in (Jeon et al. 2014) that supports the 
allocation and control and management of virtual 
system based on the brokering function between 
the Cloud Service Provider (CSP) and Cloud Serv-
ice Customer (CSC) by integrating and managing 
cloud resources in multiple heterogeneous cloud 
environment.
A model based execution-ware is proposed in 
(Baur et al. 2015) that helps coping with the chal-
lenges like heterogeneous nature of cloud, selec-
tion of cloud provider and its divergent offerings 
etc., by allowing the deployment of applications in 
a multi-cloud environment, based on a high-level 
model created by the user.
After having a detailed study of all these works 
it is known that a CSB model is actually expected 
to do all the functionalities which a real life broker 
does. We generally deal with brokers to make our 
work done without having any headache to search 
for and deal with the providers/suppliers, their 
offerings etc., be it renting/buying house, buying 
lands or buying railway/air tickets anything. We 
just have to inform about our requirements to the 
broker and the broker comes up with the best deal. 
But at the same time we are concerned about the 
authenticity of the broker so as the broker does. 
Keeping this in mind I have considered the work 
in (Nair et al. 2010) in which security is incorpo-
rated. But this work has some loopholes as follows. 
If after matching the user requirements, any sin-
gle CSP is not able to fulfill them then no solu-
tion is given for this situation. If more than one 
request is made at a time then how the requests 
will be served is not mentioned. In this paper, an 
improved approach has been proposed consider-
ing the same architecture as mentioned in (Nair 
et al.) that can solve the above mentioned issues 
and serve in multi-cloud environment.
3 CLOUD BROKERAGE MODEL
CSB can stand for three different models as 
follows:
a. Use of multiple CSP—in this model, a user 
makes use of services provided by various cloud 
providers to fulfil an internal process.
b. Brokering multiple providers to provide a Serv-
ice Level Agreement (SLA)-based tiered pricing 
model—in this, a user approaches a cloud broker 
with a given set of functional and SLA-based 
requirements and the cloud broker then picks 
up the best match in terms of the functions as 
well as variables like pricing, SLA parameters 
and other non-functional requirements like 
compliance and certification capabilities.
c. Cloud Aggregation Ecosystem (CAE)—this sce-
nario offers the potential to treat both IT and 
business functions as a series of interconnected 
cloud services.
4 CLOUD BROKER ARCHITECTURE
In this section a more detailed look has been taken 
at the architecture that can be used to implement 

203
the broker model involving the brokering of mul-
tiple providers to provide a SLA-based tiered pric-
ing model to the customers of the broker.
The functional components (Figure 2), which 
are needed by the broker to provide these broker 
capabilities are specified below.
a. The cloud API is a mechanism through which 
consumers can interact with the cloud broker 
for performing cloud related actions includ-
ing creating and managing cloud resources like 
compute and storage components.
b. The deployment service unit helps the broker 
to inform the cloud provider to start a Virtual 
Machine (VM) which consumer can use for 
compute purpose or to create a storage space 
for user’s data.
c. The staging/pooling service ensures the abil-
ity of the cloud broker to provide a satisfac-
tory performance for the various cloud actions 
requested by the customer. Since Cloud Serv-
ices are offered on pay-as-you-go basis, and are 
highly scalable, service consumers can demand 
extra resources and the broker needs to ensure 
that a suitable cloud provider is in place to han-
dle the request.
d. Identity Access Management (IAM) unit is a 
vital unit as it keeps record of all the service 
consumer required enterprise details, assigned 
cloud providers, type of service like storage or 
compute. Furthermore, the classification crite-
ria’s that broker decides with the service con-
sumer is also stored in this unit.
e. The SLA monitoring unit constantly monitors 
SLAs negotiated by the SLA management unit. 
It checks to see if there are any impending SLA 
violations and if any, to take the specified pre-
ventive measure.
f. The capability management and matching unit 
keeps tab of all the capabilities provided by 
the various providers. Whenever a service con-
sumer approaches the broker for cloud services, 
this unit matches the consumer’s functional and 
SLA requirements with the services each cloud 
provider offer and finds the most appropriate 
match.
g. The audit unit periodically audits broker’s plat-
form as much as possible using capabilities pro-
vided by the cloud provider. Audit is performed 
to ascertain the validity and reliability of infor-
mation and to provide an assessment of internal 
controls.
h. The risk management unit identifies, assess 
and prioritize risks on the basis of effects of 
events. Its target is to minimize, monitor, and 
control the probability of such unfortunate 
events.
i. Network/platform security unit manages the 
overall security of the broker’s platform. Pro-
visions and policies have been adopted to pre-
vent unauthorized access, misuse, modification, 
or denial of network or network accessible 
resources.
j. The usage monitoring unit monitors the usage of 
the services by the cloud consumer, and gener-
ates monthly bills for them.
k. The SLA management unit controls all the SLAs 
in place between the broker and consumer.
5 PROPOSED APPROACH
User needs to register itself with the Enter-
prise cloud portal to access cloud computing 
facility.
Authentication Phase:
Step 1: User asks for Digital Certificate (DC) of 
the cloud portal.
Step 2: Cloud portal provides its DC (acquired by 
a renowned Certificate Authority (CA)) to the 
user and asks for the user’s DC as well.
Step 3: User sends its digital certificate (acquired 
by a renowned CA) while registering itself with 
the cloud portal.
Login Phase:
Step 1: User sends the request along with its user id 
and password to enterprise cloud portal.
Step 2: Enterprise cloud portal then sends this 
request to enterprise IAM. IAM authenticates 
the user on the basis of its user id and password 
and then the access user is entitled and grants 
access permission to the user.
Step 3: After authenticating the user if IAM 
responds positively, cloud portal converts the 
packet received in step 2 to an external token and 
encrypts it together with the compute request 
and forwards it to the broker. If the response of 
IAM is a negative, cloud portal informs the user 
about the denial of request.
Figure 2. Cloud Broker Architecture.

204
Step 4: Broker decrypts the packet using its 
public key. On the basis of the request, bro-
ker contacts CSPs to start a VM and SLA 
negotiation.
4.1: The broker requests for initial proposals from 
all CSPs.
4.2: All providers propose initial offers based on 
their current capabilities and availability to ful-
fill brokers’ requirements.
4.3: Negotiation Process with providers: 
4.3.1: If there are multiple CSPs who can fulfill 
all the requirements, then the broker selects the 
best CSP.
4.3.2: If there is no CSP that can fulfill all the 
requirements, then the broker starts the nego-
tiation process with CSPs.
4.3.2.1: Broker selects the best initial offer from all 
offers that are proposed by all CSPs according 
to the objective.
4.3.2.2: Broker adjusts its initial offer according 
to the offer selected in 4.3.2.1 to generate new 
counter offer and propose it to all CSPs.
4.3.2.3: A Provider evaluates broker’s counter 
proposal.
4.3.2.4: If the counter offer proposed by Broker 
cannot be accepted, then a Provider proposes 
the counter offer.
4.3.2.5: Termination of negotiation. There are three 
termination conditions:
4.3.2.5.1: When negotiation deadline expires.
4.3.2.5.2: When the offer is mutually agreed by 
both the Customer and the Provider.
4.3.2.5.3: When a Broker is not able to accept any 
counter offer proposed by all the providers 
within the negotiation deadline.
Step 5: After a successful negotiation CSP(s) 
which is/are selected launches VM(s). CSP(s) 
replies back to the broker with the accepted 
proposal along with encrypted packet con-
taining the information about the location of 
the VM; IP is the address of the VM and key 
through which a user can SSH (Secure Shell) 
(SSH) to the VM.
Step 6: Broker decrypts the packet received from 
the cloud provider using its secret key. It maps 
the ID with UID and forwards an encrypted 
packet containing UID, where IP is the address 
of the VM and key to the enterprise cloud 
portal.
Step 7: Enterprise cloud portal decrypts the packet 
received from the broker using its private key. 
It then forwards the decrypted packet to the 
respective user.
Step 8: User stores the UID for future refer-
ence and with the help of IP address and key, 
it SSH to the virtual machine. By this way a 
connection is established between the virtual 
machine and the user. The most important 
part is that the broker is successful in SLA 
negotiation between the Customer and the 
Provider.
6 CONCLUSION
Cloud computing is still evolving day by day 
with its new wings. For a detailed study of cloud 
computing and cloud broker one can refer the 
book (Buyya et al: Mastering Cloud computing 
2013) and (Lucas-Simarro et al: A Cloud Broker 
Architecture for Multicloud Environments Chap-
15 2014) respectively. Among various research 
areas in cloud computing CSB is a hot topic for 
researchers since CSB models are not standardized 
yet. There are still doubts regarding the necessity 
of cloud broker and its functions. In contribution 
to this research, this paper elaborates the func-
tions of a cloud broker which further helps in an 
improved approach that has been proposed for a 
multi-cloud environment. There is always a scope 
for further improvement. Details of SLA negotia-
tion with all its parameters can be taken care off in 
the future work.
REFERENCES
Baur, D., Wesner, S. and Domaschka, J. (2015). “Towards 
a Model-based Execution-Ware for Deploying Multi-
Cloud Applications” ESOCC 2014, CCIS 508, 124–
138, SpringerInternational Publishing Switzerland 
2015.
Buyya, Dr. R., Vecchiolan Dr. C. and Selvi Dr. S.T. 
(2013). “Mastering Cloud Computing” Tata McGraw 
Hill.
Goettelmann, E., Dahman, K., Gateau, B. and Godart, 
C. (2014). “A Broker Framework for Secure and 
Cost-Effective 
Business 
Process 
Deployment 
on Multiple Clouds.” CAiSE (Forum/Doctoral 
Consortium)2014: 49–56.
Jeon, H., Kim, J., Min, Y. and Seo, K.K. (2014). 
“A Framework of Cloud Service Broker System for 
Managing and Integrating Multiple Cloud Services” 
Advanced Science and Technology Letters, 64, 93–96 
http://dx.doi.org/10.14257/astl.2014.64.23.
Lucas-Simarro, J.L., Aniceto, S.I., Moreno-Vozmediano, 
R., Montero, S.R. and M. Llorente, I. (2014). A Cloud 
Broker Architecture for Multicloud Environments. In 
Large Scale Network-Centric Distributed Systems, 
A.Y. Zomaya H. Sarbazi-Azad (ed.), Chap. 15, John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Nair, S.K., Porwal, S., Dimitrakos, T., Ferrer, A.J., 
Tordsson, J., Sharif, T., Sheridan, C., Rajarajan, M. 

205
and Khan, A.U. (2010). “Towards Secure Cloud 
Bursting, Brokerage and Aggregation” Web Services 
(ECOWS), 2010 IEEE 8th European Conference, 
189–196.
NIST cloud computing reference architecture sp 500–
292 
(2011) 
http://www.nist.gov/customcf/get_pdf.
cfm?pub_id = 909505.
OPTIMIS – Optimized Infrastructure Services, (2013). 
http://optimis-project.eu/
SSH http://support.suso.com/supki/SSH_Tutorial_for_
Linux
Wang, W., Niu, D., Li, B. and Liang, B. (2013). 
“Dynamic cloud resource reservation via cloud bro-
kerage,” Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), 
IEEE 33rd International Conference, 400–409, ISSN: 
1063–6927.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

207
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A study to find the most suitable set of prominent genes from 
microarray data for disease prediction
S. Dasgupta & G. Saha
Government College of Engineering and Leather Technology, Kolkata, India 
R. Mondal
Government College of Engineering and Ceramic Technology, Kolkata, India
A. Chanda & R.K. Pal
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: Selection of prominent or significantly expressed genes from microarray data has become 
a very well-known area of research. There are different methods for attaining the purpose. It has been 
found that the gene lists returned by these methods are not always similar. In this work we have gener-
ated reduced gene lists as outputs from two different feature selection methods applied on two different 
microarray data sets. The feature selection methods are the random-forest method and a modified t-test 
based method. These reduced gene-sets are then used to train classifiers based on methods like Random 
forest, SVM and KNN Classifier. The classification accuracy of the classifiers give some idea about the 
most suitable list of candidate genes. These candidate gene sets are then further evaluated using biological 
tools or GO tools to find out the biological significance.
classifiers like SVM, K-NN and RF. These models 
are then used to classify test datasets. The classifi-
cation accuracies then evaluated in each case.
2 RELATED DEFINITIONS AND TERMS
2.1 Microarray
Microarrays are high dimensional data compris-
ing of a large number of genes or features in con-
trast to the smaller or fewer number of samples or 
cases. A DNA microarray experiment can be used 
to simultaneously interpret the expression levels 
for thousands of genes [3,10]. The raw microarray 
data is transformed into gene expression matrices. 
Figure 1 shows an example. Usually, a row in the 
matrix represents a gene and a column represents 
a sample. The numeric value in each cell represents 
the expression level of a particular gene in a spe-
cific sample.
2.2 t-test and p-values
A statistical test measures the statistical signifi-
cance of an experiment. A parametric test is usually 
conducted with an assumption that the underlying 
distribution of the data is known [2]. The outcome 
of any statistical test is measured by p-value [7]. In 
1 INTRODUCTION
The major set back in extracting and analyzing 
information from microarray data is the problem 
of high-dimensionality. Typically, such high dimen-
sional data is characterized by thousands of genes 
in a few sample sizes. Studies on microarrays is an 
ever evolving area of research [1,2,3]. They help us 
to simultaneously measure the expression levels of 
a large (in the order tens of thousands) of genes 
and can be used extensively in applications related 
to biology and biomedicine. Microarrays used to 
pick out differentially expressed genes between two 
or more groups of patients can be used for many 
applications [4,5].
Clinically identifying a disease including cancer 
using gene expression data has two broad objec-
tives: one is to obtain a genuine diagnosis for a 
patient with greatest accuracy and the second 
target is to identify the gene or the set of genes 
responsible for a particular type of disease [1,9].
In the current work we investigate two feature 
selection methods: the first being t-test along with 
False Detection Ratio and Fold-change value and 
the second being Random Forest (RF). The subset 
of genes selected by these methods is used to build 
classification models from training datasets which 
are samples with known class labels using standard 

208
gene selection problem, a large variance of distri-
bution among different phenotypes means that the 
particular gene can strongly discriminate different 
phenotypes. Generally, the 2-sample t-statistic still 
can to some extent measure the difference in the 
distributions between the different groups. All sta-
tistical tests are represented in the form of a null 
hypothesis. The null hypothesis in this case is that 
the mean of two populations are equal to each 
other. A gene which opposes this hypothesis has 
a low p-value and is considered to be significantly 
differentially expressed. To test the null hypothesis, 
one needs to calculate the following values: x1, x2 
(the means of the two samples), s12, s22 (the vari-
ances of the two samples), and n1, n2 (the sample 
sizes respectively of the two samples)
t
x
x
n
s
=
+
1
2
x
1
2
1
2s
+
2
2
(
/
s1
2
/
)
n2
2.3 FDR (False Detection Ratio)
In the process of generating differentially expressed 
genes from microarray data, as the number of 
genes that are tested gets large the probability of 
false error or type I error increases sharply. FDR is 
used as a control measure to lay stress on the ratio 
of errors among the set of differentially expressed 
genes [6].
2.4 Fold change
Fold change [8] does not give any assessment of sta-
tistical significance. The common t-statistic is used 
to pick up genes with small standard deviations; 
the fold-changes select genes with high degree of 
shift between control and treatment conditions. 
Since fold-change method produces gene lists that 
are more reproducible, it has recently been put as 
a suggestion that differentially-expressed genes a 
microarray experiment are best identified using 
fold-change.
2.5 Random forest for feature selection
The concept of Random Forest was first intro-
duced by Leo Breiman in early 2001 [11]. Random 
Forest is an ensemble of classification trees. To 
classify a new object from an input vector, the 
same is put down each of the trees in the forest. 
Each tree gives a classification, and it is said that 
the tree “votes” for that class. Each tree is grown in 
the following way-
• From the original dataset N cases are sampled 
at random, with replacement to create a training 
set of N cases. This sampled set is used as the 
training set for growing the tree.
• Of the M input variables, a number m is cho-
sen such that m is much smaller than M. Now 
at each node, m variables are selected at ran-
domly from the M variables. The best split 
on these m variables is used to split the node. 
The value of m is fixed and does not change 
throughout the forest growing. Every tree is 
grown to the maximum size possible. There 
can be no pruning.
2.6 Classifiers
2.6.1 Support Vector Machine (SVM)
SVM is used to classify large data sets by intro-
ducing a linear or non-linear separating plane in 
the input space of a data set [14]. The separating 
surface depends only on a set of support vectors 
which is a subset of the original data. SVM builds 
a hyper plane or set of hyper planes in a high 
dimensional space, which used to achieve a good 
separation between training data points of any 
class and is called functional margin. The larger 
the functional margin the smaller the generaliza-
tion error of the classifier. SVM models are built 
based on a kernel function [15,16]. This function 
transforms the input data into an n-dimensional 
space, the data is then partitioned with the con-
struction of a hyper plane [12].
2.6.2 K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN)
The K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) classier has been 
used extensively as a benchmark classifier [13]. The 
k-NN approach of classification, outputs a class 
membership value. The majority number votes that 
an object gets from its neighbors, is used to clas-
sify a particular object. The object is assigned to 
the class most common among its k nearest neigh-
bors (k is a positive integer, typically small). When 
k = 1, then the object is put to the class of that 
single nearest neighbor.
2.6.3 Random-forest for classification
A tree with a low error rate is a considered as good 
classifier or the tree is said to be strong. Thus by 
Figure 1. A typical microarray data.

209
increasing the strength of the individual trees the 
forest error rate is also lowered.
In the random-forest method there is a concept 
of OOB (out-of-bag) error. This itself is a measure 
of classification accuracy.
2.7 Gene-Ontolology (GO)
Gene ontology or GO, is a major bioinformatics 
tool used to relate gene and gene product attributes 
across all species [18]. GO is again used for GO 
annotations which relates sets of genes or gene-
products with
3 METHODS AND FLOW CHARTS
In this work we have compared 2 different 
approaches of gene selection from microarray data 
on 2 different datasets. In the first method we have 
modified the existing 2 sample t-test by consider-
ing the false detection ratio as well as the log fold 
change in the gene expression and in the second 
method we have employed the random forest based 
gene selection method.
We have performed our work using the R soft-
ware along with its Bioconductor Library. The 
datasets used for the experiment are given in 
Table 1. The flowchart of the work has been shown 
in Figure 2.
4 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We have presented two different sets of 
results.
Classifier based results: The classification results 
are obtained from Tables 2 and 3.
GO results: In our experiment we have used 
the functional Annotation Tool of David [19] to 
determine the corresponding percentage of genes 
annotated along with their GO ID and the corre-
sponding p-value. Such databases have also inte-
grated many tools which can be used to measure 
the biological significance of a given gene list as 
shown in Table 4.
Figure 2. Flowchart of the work.
Table 1. Datasets used.
Name
Reference
No. of
genes
No. of
samples
GDS3715
http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov
12626
110
Golub
Leukemia
http://www.
broadinstitute.org
 3015
 38
Table 2. Classification accuracy with random forest as feature selection method.
Dataset Name
Size of Test set used
Classifiers
RF
SVM
KNN
Importance 
Cut-off
Accuracy
Accuracy
Accuracy
GDS 3715
20
0.005
85
50
 50
0.01
80
50
 60
0.05
50
50
 45
0.1
55
45
 65
Golub
15
0.005
66.7
46.7
100
0.01
73.3
46.7
 93.3
0.05
86.7
86.7
 80
0.1
86.7
93.33
 93.33

210
5 DISCUSSION
We have used the Affymetrix probe_id of the genes 
as the gene signatures. It is to be noted that although 
the selected gene lists are different, yet most of the 
gene_ids are common to both the methods.
5.1 Analysis of classifier based results
The results with Random Forest as feature selec-
tion method measure accuracy at different impor-
tance cut off levels. These thresholds are based on 
permutation index of importance of the random 
forest algorithm. It is found that the accuracy val-
ues measured with cut off <0.01 with the GDS3715 
dataset are over all moderate. It is this subset of list 
that has been chosen for verification with GO. The 
values measured with Golub et al [17] dataset gives 
good classification results with cut-off <0.1.
When corrected t-test is used as the feature 
selection algorithm, it gives very good classifica-
tion results with both datasets.
5.2 Analysis of GO results
After verification with GO we find that the p-values 
obtained has the lowest degree of the order −15. 
There are also values which are not so significant. 
So we are yet to obtain better results using GO.
We have presented the results of the GO 
Annotations obtained using DAVID annotation 
Tool. The 4 lists of genes that have been gen-
erated using the 2 data sets and the 2 different 
approaches, are run using in the DAVID Tool. 
Each dataset is evaluated under the BP (Biologi-
cal Process), CC (Cellular Condition) and MF 
(Molecular Function) category of GO as shown 
in column 2.
Table 4. GO results using David’s annotation tool.
List name
Category of 
GO
Total
% of genes 
annotated
GO ID
P-value
GDS_corrected
t-test
BP
92.0
GO:0051252
regulation of wRNA metabolic 
process
1.1E-6
CC
88.6
GO:004424
intracellular part
1.3E-7
MF
86.8
GO:0003700 sequence-specific DNA 
binding transcription factor activity
6.2E-9
Golub’s corrected
t-test
BP
95.8
GO:0002376 immune system process
4.2E-15
CC
98.9
GO:0009986
Cell surface
3.6E-5
MF
93.7
GO:0005515 protein binding
8.2E-9
GDS_RF
(with cut-off <0.01)
BP
88.1
GO:0010557 positive regulation of 
micromolecule biosynthetic process
7.3E-8
CC
87.0
GO:0005654 nucleoplasm
3.2E-3
MF
91.0
GO:0030528 transcription regulator 
activity
6.3E-6
Golub’s RF
(with cut-off <0.1)
BP
95.1
GO:0051704
multiorganism prpcess
3.3E-6
CC
98.8
GO:0005829 cytosol
3.1E-3
MF
95.1
GO:0005515 protein binding
1.3E-8
Table 3. Classifiction accuracy with modified t-test as feature selection method.
Dataset name
Size of test set used
Classifiers
RF
SVM
KNN
Accuracy
Accuracy
Accuracy
GDS3715
20
100
 75
100
Golub
15
 93.3
100
100

211
The number of genes annotated over the 
number of genes presented as the signature is 
represented in percentage form in column 3. The 
highest value being 98.9 for CC group of Golub’s 
corrected t-test and the lowest being 86.8% for MF 
group of GDS corrected t-test. The lowest p-values 
for that particular group is reported. The highest 
being 3.2E-3 for CC group of GDS_RF signa-
ture and the lowest being 4.2E-15 for BP group of 
Golub’s corrected t-test signature in column 5. The 
corresponding GO IDs and terms are reported in 
column 4.
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Gene sets which have been verified by classifiers 
and give high accuracies may not always be bio-
logically significant. Also biologically significant 
genes may not give high accuracies when evalu-
ated through classifiers. We are trying to find a 
gene-set which will yield high accuracies both sta-
tistically and biologically. We will also explore the 
network that exists between a gene and a particular 
state. The final results are to be further verified in 
wet lab.
REFERENCES
[1]  Debahuti Mishra, Barnali Sahu “Feature Selection 
for Cancer Classification: A Signal-to-noise Ratio 
Approach” International Journal of Scientific & 
Engineering Research, Volume 2, Issue 4, April-2011 
1 ISSN 2229–5518.
[2]  L. Ding, J. Pei, J. Ma and D.L. lee “A Rank Sum Test 
Method for Informative Gene Discovery” KDD ‘04 
Seatle USA.
[3]  Ian B Jeffery*1, Desmond G Higgins1 and Aedín C 
Culhane2J. DeRisi and L. Penland et al. Use of a 
cdna microarray to analyse gene expression patterns 
in human cancer. Nature Genetics, 14:457–460, 1996.
[4]  Hsi-Che Liu, Pei-Chen Peng, Tzung-Chien Hsieh, 
Ting-Chi Yeh, Chih-Jen Lin, Chien-Yu Chen, Jen-Yin 
Hou, Lee-Yung Shih, Der-Cherng Liang, “Compari-
son of feature selection methods for cross-laboratory 
microarray analysis” IEEE/ACM Transaction on 
Computational Biology and Bioinformatatics 2013.
[5]  Herbert Pang, Stephen L. George, Ken Hui, and 
Tiejun Tong, “Gene Selection Using Iterative Feature 
Elimination Random Forests for Survival Outcomes.” 
IEEE/ACM Transaction on Computational Biology 
and Bioinformatatics Vol. 9, NO. 5, September/
October 2012.
 [6]  Anat Reiner, Daniel Yekutieli and Yoav Benjam 
“Identifying differentially expressed genes using 
False discovery rate controlling procedures” 19 no. 3 
2003, pages 368–375 DOI: 10.1093 /bioinformatics/
btf87.
 [7]  Theo A. Knijnenburg, Lodewyk F.A. Wessels, 
Marcel J.T. Reinders and Ilya Shmulevich, “Fewer 
permutations, more accurate P-values’’ Bioinformat-
ics Vol. 25 ISMB 2009, pages i161–i168 doi:10.109.
 [8]  Daniela M. Witten, Robert Tibshirani “A compari-
son of fold-change and the t-statistic for microarray 
data analysis” Stanford University, Stanford.
 [9]  Cheng-San Yang, Li-Yeh Chuang, Chao-Hsuan 
Ke, and Cheng-Hong Yang, “A Hybrid Feature 
Selection Method for Microarray Classification’’ 
IAENG International Journal of Computer Science 
IJGS 35_3_05.
[10]  Guo, L. and Lobenhofer E.K. et al. (2006), “Rat 
toxicogenomic study reveals analytical consistency 
across microarray platforms”, Nature Biotechnol-
ogy 24, 1162–1169.
[11]  Leo Breiman, “RANDOM FORESTS”, 2001 avail-
able at https://www.stat.berkeley.edu/∼breiman/ran-
domforest2001.pdf
[12]  Seeja, K.R., Shweta “Microarray Data Classifica-
tion Using Support Vector Machine” International 
Journal of Biometrics and Bioinformatics (IJBB), 
Volume (5): Issue (1): 2011.
[13]  Yang Song1, Jian Huang2, DingZhou1, Hongyuan 
Zha1,2, and C. Lee Giles1 “IKNN: Informative 
K-Nearest Neighbor Pattern Classification”
[14]  Guyon, I., et al. (2002) “Gene selection for can-
cer classification using support vector machines.” 
Mach. Learn., 46:389–422.
[15]  Joachims, T., “Making large-scale SVM learning 
practical”, Advances in Kernel Methods –Support 
Vector Learning, B. Schokopf et al. (ed.), MIT 
Press, 1999.
[16]  Ben-Hur A, Ong CS, Sonnenburg S, Schölkopf B, 
Rätsch G, “Support Vector Machines and Kernels 
for Computational Biology.” PLoS Comput Biol 
4(10), 2008.
[17]  T.R. Golub, D.K. Slonim, P. Tamayo, C. 
Huard, 
M. 
Gaasenbeek, 
J.P. 
Mesirov, 
H. 
Coller, 
M.L. 
Loh, 
J.R. 
Downing, 
M.A. 
Caligiuri, C.D. Bloomfield, E.S. Lander “Molecu-
lar Classification of Cancer: Class Discovery and 
Class Prediction by Gene Expression Monitoring” 
REPORTS www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE vol 286 
15 October 1999.
[18]  The Gene Ontology Consortium (January 2008). 
“The Gene Ontology project in 2008”. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 36 (Database issue): D440–4. doi:10.1093/nar/
gkm883. PMC 2238979. PMID 17984083.
[19]  DAVID’s Bioinformatics Resources available at 
http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

213
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Magnetic Field Tunable Avalanche Transit Time (MAGTATT) device
Partha Banerjee
Department of Electronics and Communication, Techno India, Kolkata, India
Aritra Acharyya
Department of Electronics and Communication, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, 
Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
Arindam Biswas
Department of Electronics and Communication, NSHM Knowledge Campus, Durgapur, West Bengal. India
A.K. Bhattacharjee
Department of Electronics and Communication, NIT, Durgapur, West Bengal, India
literature, which studies the effect of magnetic 
field on the RF performance of IMPATT sources 
in detail.
The authors have developed a complete two-
dimensional (2-D) large-signal model to study the 
above mentioned effect (Banerjee et al. 2015). The 
model is capable of analyzing the effects of the 
magnetic field applied along any direction on the 
RF performance of IMPATT sources. However, 
in this paper, a special case has been presented 
in which the magnetic field is applied along the 
transverse direction of the carrier flow, since it 
is the maximum influential direction that causes 
maximum carrier deflection leading to a highest 
modulation of RF properties of the device. The 
sensitivity of various static and large-signal 
parameters on externally applied transverse steady 
magnetic field of a DDR IMPATT diode, which 
are designed to operate at 94 GHz, have been cal-
culated. The arrangement proposed in this paper 
as a whole may be regarded as Magnetic Field 
Tunable Avalanche Transit Time (MAGTATT) 
device.
2 A BRIEF VIEW ON THE DEVICE 
STRUCTURE, 2-D MODEL AND 
SIMULATION TECHNIQUE
For the simplicity in the arrangement of mag-
netic field coupling and 2-D devices modeling, the 
cross-sectional shape of the DDR IMPATT device 
is considered as rectangular instead of circular. 
This assumption ensures the use of Cartesian 
coordinate system which is far more convenient 
than the cylindrical coordinate system. However, 
the choice for the shape of the cross-section of the 
ABSTRACT: In this paper, a new device named 
Magnetic Field Tunable Avalanche Transit Time 
(MAGTATT) diode has been proposed. Besides 
the conventional electronic and optical tuning 
mechanisms, a third, new terminal frequency 
tuning technique of double-drift region Impact 
Avalanche Transit Time (IMPATT) has been for-
mulated and studied by the authors. Here the static 
magnetic field is used for tuning the power output 
and operating the frequency of a 94 GHz DDR 
Si IMPATT source. A few more results have been 
presented in this paper; however the detail analysis 
and simulation results are reported elsewhere.
1 INTRODUCTION
Besides the electronic and optical tuning mecha-
nisms, there is also another method available 
that can control the IMPATT properties exter-
nally, i.e. magnetic field tuning. The application 
of magnetic field in properly biased IMPATT 
diode causes a number of effects in its operation 
such as changes of the carrier motion, the carrier 
distributions and the electrostatic potential dis-
tribution. Only in certain limits the effect of the 
magnetic field on device properties can simply be 
visualized in terms of Hall voltage or car-
rier deflection. B. Glance was the first, who 
reported the frequency tuning of IMPATT 
oscillator by means of magnetic field, in the 
year 1973 (Glance 1973). Later, Hartnagel 
et al. reported the magnetic field tuning of frequency 
and power output of a 7.480 GHz Double-Drift 
Region (DDR) IMPATT oscillator (Hartnagel et al. 
1975). But as far as authors’ knowledge is concerned 
there is no theoretical analysis available in published 

214
diode hardly affects the simulation results since the 
cross-sectional area of the diode is more important 
than its shape.
The 3-D model of the aforementioned device 
structure is shown in Figure 1. However, in the 
modeling, z-direction need not be taken into 
account and 2-D model is enough for the analy-
sis; the reason behind this is discussed later. In 
the present model, the cross-sectional shape of 
the metallurgical junction (i.e. the n-p junction) is 
taken to be rectangular for simplicity as mentioned 
earlier (Acharyya 2015). In Figure 1, the lengths 
of n+, n, p, p+-layers are denoted by Wn+, Wn, Wp 
and Wp+ respectively. The doping concentrations 
of the above mentioned layers are denoted by Nn+, 
ND, NA and Np+ respectively. Width of the device 
along x-direction is D and height of the device 
along z-direction is H. Thus the cross-sectional 
area of the metallurgical junction is Aj = DH. In 
order to achieve high-quality RF performance of 
the device at 94 GHz and above, Molecular Beam 
Epitaxy (MBE) growth technique is the most 
favorable process to fabricate DDR Si IMPATT 
diode. However for the simplicity in mathematical 
formulation of the 2-D doping profile of the said 
device, simple formulation of diffusion technique 
has been adopted.
Optimizing some of the most important para-
meters, which is related to the diffusion technique, 
sharp, and the most favorable doping profile of 
the device must be achieved which almost matches 
with the MBE grown DDR structure, especially 
for the devices operating at or above 94 GHz. This 
consideration is justified from the prospective of 
realistic device simulation.
Due to the shortage of space, the details of the 
2-D static and large-signal simulation techniques 
have not been included, in this paper. However, 
those detail formulations can be obtained from 
other source (Banerjee et al. 2015).
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A DDR IMPATT diode based on Si has been 
designed to operate at W-band (75–110 GHz) by 
choosing the optimum values of Wn, Wp, ND, NA, 
Nn+, and Np+ (Acharyya et al. 2013). As discussed the 
design parameters are given in Table 1. The width 
(along x-direction) and height (along z-direction) 
of the diode have been taken as D = 10.0 μm and 
H = 96.211 μm. Therefore the junction area of the 
diode is Aj = DH = 9.6211 × 10−10 m2 which is same 
as the junction area of the diode having circular 
cross-section of radius 35.0 μm (Luy et al. 1987). 
The simulation procedure described in the earlier 
section has been used to simulate both the static 
and large-signal properties of the device for the 
bias current densities ranging from 2.6 × 108 to 
3.8 × 108 A m−2 in the absence of the magnetic field 
(i.e. Bz = 0). After that the abovementioned simula-
tions have been repeated by varying the magnetic 
field from 1.0 to 5.0 Tesla (T).
Variation of magnetic field sensitivity of break-
down voltage with magnetic field is shown in 
Figure 2 (a). It is observed that the value of break-
down voltage increases with the increase of mag-
Table 1. Structural and doping parameters.
Design parameters
Values
Wn (μm)
0.400
Wp (μm)
0.380
ND (×1023 m−3)
1.200
NA (×1023 m−3)
1.250
Nn+ (×1025 m−3)
5.000
Np+ (×1025 m−3)
2.700
Aj (m-2)
9.6211 × 10−10
Figure 2. Graphs showing the sensitivities of (a) break-
down voltage, (b) avalanche region voltage drop and (c) 
avalanche region width with respect to the applied mag-
netic field for different bias current densities.
Figure 1. 3-D model of the n+-n-p-p+ structured DDR 
IMPATT diode (w1 = w2 = 0.1 μm).

215
netic field. Application of magnetic filed in the 
perpendicular direction of the carrier movement 
(i.e. z- and y-directions respectively) consequences 
deflection of carries in ±x directions depending on 
their polarities. This, in turn, increases the effective 
depletion region width of the device for a given bias 
current density. Therefore, the breakdown occurs 
at higher voltage. In Figure 2 (a), its shown that 
the magnetic field sensitivity of breakdown volt-
age varies from 0.0025 to 0.1047 V T−1 due to the 
increase of magnetic field from ±1.0 to ±5.0 T for 
the bias current density of 2.6 × 108 A m−2. It can 
also be observed that the avalanche region broad-
ens due to the application of magnetic field which 
leads to increase in the avalanche region voltage 
drop. The magnetic field sensitivities of VA and xA 
are shown in the bar graphs of Figures 2 (b) and 
(c) respectively. Those are varying from 0.0010 to 
0.0022 V T−1 and 0.2 × 10−4 to 0.5 × 10−4 μm T−1 for 
the same increase of magnetic field for the bias cur-
rent density of 2.6 × 108 A m−2. Due to the increase 
of both the VA and xA, the VD/VB and xA/W increases 
with the increase of Bz. Increase of the ratio 
VD/VB indicates the increase in DC to RF conver-
sion efficiency of the device (Scharfetter 1969) 
operating under magnetic field. Another notewor-
thy fact which can be observed from Figure 3 is that 
the sensitivities of abovementioned DC parameters 
are higher at higher bias current densities for the 
same magnetic field. Larger bias current increases 
the amount of carriers moving through the device 
under operational condition. Higher carrier densi-
ties show higher values of magnetic field sensitiv-
ity. The highest magnetic field sensitivities of VB, 
VA, and xA are found to be 0.2128 V T−1, 0.0074 V 
Figure 3. Admittance characteristics of the device 
under magnetic field intensities of 0 and ±5 T for differ-
ent bias current densities.
Figure 4. Bar graphs showing the sensitivities of (a) RF power output and (b) DC to RF conversion efficiency with 
respect to the applied magnetic field for different bias current densities.

216
T−1, and 1.20 × 10−4 μm T−1 for |Bz| varying from 4.0 
to 5.0 T and for J0 = 3.8 × 108 A m−2.
The admittance characteristics of the DDR Si 
IMPATT for different bias current densities are 
shown in Figure 3 in the absence of the magnetic 
field as well as in the presence of the magnetic 
field of ±5 T. It is noteworthy from Figure 3 that 
the magnitudes of the peak negative conductance 
slightly increase due to the presence of magnetic 
field while the values of the corresponding sus-
ceptance increase significantly. This fact leads to 
significant decrease in Q-factor which, in turn, 
improves both the oscillation growth rate and sta-
bility of oscillation due to the presence of mag-
netic field. It can be noted from the above study 
that both the breakdown voltage and magnitude 
of the peak negative conductance increases due to 
the application of external magnetic field, conse-
quently the RF power output is increased. How-
ever the DC to RF conversion efficiency decreases 
in presence of the magnetic field due to the sig-
nificant increase of input DC power as results of 
increased breakdown voltage.
The variations of the magnetic field sensitivity 
of PRF and ηL with magnetic field are shown in 
the bar graphs in Figures 4 (a) and (b). These are 
monotonically increasing and decreasing functions 
of magnetic field respectively for a fixed bias cur-
rent density. On the hand, these are also monot-
onically increasing and decreasing functions of 
bias current density respectively for a fixed value 
of magnetic field. The maximum values of mag-
netic field sensitivity of PRF and ηL are obtained as 
12.95 mW T−1 and 0.08% T−1 for |Bz| varying from 
4.0 to 5.0 T and for J0 = 3.8 × 108 A m−2. The appli-
cation of transverse static magnetic field causes 
lengthening of the transit distance of the charge 
carriers. This fact changes the transit time delay 
and hence affects the phase relationship between 
the terminal current and voltage waveforms. This 
leads to alteration in the admittance characteristics 
of the device and therefore causing the change in 
the large-signal properties.
4 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed the magnetic 
field sensitivities of various static and large-signal 
parameters of the device that have been designed 
to operate at W-band have been calculated from 
the large-signal simulation of MAGTATT device. 
Results show that the frequency and power tuning 
of the source of around 3.64 GHz and 26 mW are 
achievable with maximum sensitivities of about 
−1.59 GHz T−1 and 12.95 mW T−1 respectively for 
the application of transverse magnetic field vary-
ing from 4.0 to 5.0 T. The nature of both frequency 
and power tuning of the device due to application 
of transverse magnetic field is in well agreement 
with the experimental results carried out earlier.
REFERENCES
Acharyya, A. (2015). RF Performance of IMPATT 
Sources and Their Optical Control. Lambert Aca-
demic Publishing, Germany.
Acharyya, A., Banerjee, S., and Banerjee, J.P. (2013). 
Effect of Junction Temperature on the Large-Signal 
Properties of a 94 GHz Silicon Based Double-Drift 
Region Impact Avalanche Transit Time Device. Jour-
nal of Semiconductors 34, 024001–12.
Banerjee, P., Acharyya, A., Biswas, A., and Bhattacharjee, 
A.K. (2015). Effect of Magnetic Field on the RF 
Performance of Millimeter-Wave IMPATT Source, 
Unpublished.
Glance, B. (1973). A Magnetically Tunable Microstrip 
IMPATT Oscillator. IEEE Transaction of Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, 21, 425–426.
Hartnagel, H.L., Srivastava, G.P., Mathur, P.C., and 
Sharma, V. (1975). Effect of Transverse Magnetic 
Field on the Power Output and Frequency of IMPATT 
Oscillators. physica status solidi (a) 3,1 K147–K149.
Luy, J.F., Casel, A., Behr, W., and Kasper, E. (1987). 
A 90-GHz double-drift IMPATT diode made with Si 
MBE. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 34, 1084–1089.
Scharfetter, D.L., and Gummel, H.K. (1969). Large-Signal 
Analysis of a Silicon Read Diode Oscillator. IEEE 
Trans. on Electron Devices 6, 64–77.

217
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A deviation based identification of random valued impulse noise 
towards image filtering using neighborhood approximation
S. Banerjee
Department of Computer Science Engineering, Narula Institute of Technology, Agarpara, Kolkata, West Bengal, 
India
A. Bandyopadhyay & R. Bag
Department of Computer Science Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, 
Mankundu, West Bengal, India
A. Das
Department of Computer Science Engineering, Netaji Subhash Engineering College, Garia, Kolkata, 
West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper a two phase scheme has been proposed for removal of random valued impulse 
noise from digital gray scale images. First phase detects the noisy pixels and second phase removes those 
by using updated neighbourhood based pixel approximation method. A same size binary flag image is 
also been generated using a variable threshold value which depends upon the standard deviation of the 
noisy image. The quantitative and qualitative result shows that the proposed filter outperform the existing 
with respect to MSE, PSNR and SSIM comparison even at 60% high noise density levels.
A few years later Luo filter (Luo et al. 2007) was 
introduced which was able to preserve the minute 
details of images. But in this method the detec-
tion did not yield fruitfull result. The genetic pro-
gramming (GP) filter (Petrovic et al. 2008) tried 
to solve this issue by a two cascaded detectors 
for detection and two corresponding estimators 
for reduction. This detection method was more 
successful than Luo filter. Then after a new PDE 
based method (Wu et al. 2011) was evolved for 
random valued impulse noise removal which fol-
lowed anisotropic diffusion for filtering impulse 
noise. This gave a new dimension in detection 
and removal of Impulse noise. It was followed 
by robust outlyingness ratio (ROR) filter (Xiong 
et al. 2012) where all the pixels were divided into 
four clusters according to the ROR values. A two 
stage detection process was used for fine detection 
from each cluster. Based on ROR a robust direc-
tion based detector (RDD) (Prathiba et al. 2013) 
was proposed which used standard deviation of 
images for superior detection. In the recent years 
another filter named TDWM (Sarkar et al. 2014) 
was introduced. It has been tried to detect the 
noise by calculated threshold. Times to time many 
efforts were made to produce a satisfactory result 
over random valued impulse noise. But at high 
noise density effective detection is still an issue.
1 INTRODUCTION
Images are usually corrupted by impulse noise due 
to bit errors in transmission, circuitry of a digital 
camera, or signal acquisition (Banerjee et al. 2015). 
Generally impulse noise can be classified into two 
categories namely Salt and Pepper Noise (SVN) 
and Random Valued Impulse Noise (RVIN). The 
intensity of a gray scale image is accumulated in 
a 8 bit integer giving 256 possible gray levels in 
the range ‘0’ to ‘255’ (Bandyopadhyay et al. 2015). 
The random valued impulse noise picks any value 
between the dynamic ranges (0–255) randomly 
(Dong et al. 2007, Bandyopadhyay et al. 2015). 
So, detection of noisy pixels takes a very impor-
tant role to design a random valued impulse noise 
removal filter. There are several filters for Ran-
dom Valued impulse noise removal. Among them 
median filter (Tukey 1971) is often used for its 
noise containment capability while preserving 
edges. But as all the pixels (both corrupted and 
uncorrupted) are changed by the median opera-
tion the median filter does not perform well at 
moderate or high noise densities. To remove 
these drawbacks different improvised median 
filters (Chen et al. 1999, Chen et al. 2001) were 
proposed. Those filters tried to remove the previ-
ous drawbacks but lagged in detail preservation. 

218
This paper takes a challenge to overcome the 
above said problems. In this paper standard devia-
tion of the noisy image takes a vital role to assume 
the threshold value which is applied to announce 
the center pixel of a 3 × 3 matrix whether it is cor-
rupted or uncorrupted. The whole noise detection 
and removal procedure has been divided into sec-
tions where section 2 presents the review of the 
filter used for noise removal, section 3 describes 
the proposed methodology, section 4 constitutes 
result and discussion and section 5 contains the 
conclusion.
2 NEIGHBOURHOOD BASED PIXEL 
APPROXIMATION
2.1 Review of Neighbourhood Based Pixel 
Approximation (NBPA) (Banerjee et al. 2014)
Firstly all the noisy pixels xi,j in the corrupted 
image are mapped by ‘0’ (zero) then those are 
tried to de-noise by xi−1,j, xi+1,j, xi,j−1, xi,j+1 pixels 
when all the functioning pixels are not ‘0’ (zero). 
The row, column and clumping operations are 
introduced to decrease the noise density and to 
preserve the edges of the image. After that the 
remaining corrupted pixels are replaced by the 
arithmetic mean of non-zero pixels in the cre-
ated 7 × 7 matrix centering the said pixel. The 
border operation is introduced to maintain the 
size of the image with the arithmetic mean of 
non-zero pixels in the created 6 × 6 matrix tak-
ing the said pixel at different corners for differ-
ent side’s border operations. The flowchart of 
NBPA is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Flow chart of NBPA.
3 PROPOSED METHOD
Let xi,j for (i,j)  A ≡ {1,2,3,…M} × {1,2,3,……N} 
be the gray intensity level at pixel location (i,j) of a 
true M × N image X and X1 is the random valued 
noisy image of X. Now standard deviation of X1 
has been calculated with equation no (I).
σ
μ
=∑
1
2
1
N
i
i
N
(
)
μ
 
(I)
Simultaniously a same size binary flag image F1 
has been generated where fi j
f
= 0 represents xi,j is 
uncorrupted and fi j
f
= 1; a noisy one. Firstly it has 
been assumed that all the pixels in the image X1 are 
uncorrupted i.e. fi j
f
= 0.
After completion an image X3 is generated 
from X2.
The rest uncorrupted pixels in image X3 are 
removed by NBPA (Banerjee et al. 2014) method.
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The proposed method is assessed on the base of 
Mean Square Error (MSE), Peak Signal-to-Noise 

219
Ratio 
(PSNR), 
Structural 
Similarity 
Index 
Measurement (SSIM), and Mean Structural Simi-
larity Index Measurement (MSSIM).Quantita-
tive performances of the de-noising techniques 
are measured by Mean Square Error (MSE), 
Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) as defined in 
equation (II) and (III) respectively. Edge preserva-
tion is shown by the Structural Similarity Index 
Measurement, and Mean Structural Similarity 
Index Measurement (MSSIM) as defined in the 
equation (IV) and (V) respectively.
MSE
S
M
N
M N
=
(
)
I
n
m
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎠
∑
m
n
,
I
2
 
(II)
MSE is the mean square error between origi-
nal image (I) and de-noised image ( I	 ). M and N 
are the number of rows and columns in the input 
image, respectively.
PSNR
MSE
S
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
10
255
10
2
log
 
(III)
SSIM
I
y
x
y
xy
x
y
x
y
( ,
x
)
(
)
C
y
(
)
C
(
)
C
y
(
)
C
x
y
=
y
)
C
y
(
C1
2
xy
)
C
(
C
xy
C
2
2
1
C
2
2
2
C
μx
μx
x
 (IV)
MSSIM
I
y
M
xm
m
y
m
M
( ,
x
(
SSIM
I
)
M
,
)
ym
y
=∑
1
1
 
(V)
where μx is the mean of image x and σ x is the 
standard deviation of image x, similarly μy is the 
mean of image y and σ y
σ  is the standard deviation 
of image y, C1, C2 are the constants σ xy is the co-
variance of x and y, given by:
μx
i
μ
i
N
N
x
=
=∑
1
1
σ
μ
x
i
σ
x
i i
N
N −
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
∑
1
1
2
1
2
(
)
μx
σ xy
σ
i
x
μ
i i
N
N −
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∑
1
1
(
)
μx
μ
Table 1 shows the PSNR comparison with 
respect to Lena image for different new filters 
with the proposed filter at variable noise density 
(30%–60%). The result shows that the quality of 
the reconstructed image for different filters.
So from the comparison it can be inferred that 
proposed filter produces better result than the 
existing filters reviewed in this paper.
Figure 2 shows the qualitative comparison of 
the restored output of different filters with the 
proposed. The visual result clarifies the superior 
image quality of the proposed with respect to the 
other filters discussed in this paper.
Figure 3 presents the SSIM and the Figure 4 
presents the Mean Square Error graph respec-
tively. The SSIM specifies the structural symmetry 
of an image after reconstruction. The index value 
shows that the proposed filter effectively preserves 
the edge details. The MSE graph in Figure 4 shows 
that the proposed method generates minimum 
error than the other filters.
Table 1. PSNR for different filters for Lena image at 
different noise densities.
Image
Filters
30%
40%
50%
60%
Lena
LUO
30.29
28.27
26.23
24.21
GP
31.87
28.42
24.86
21.68
NSDD
30.86
28.35
26.39
24.08
ROR
24.93
21.51
18.69
15.61
RDD
26.14
22.98
19.99
16.72
TDWM
28.02
26.85
25.88
25.00
Proposed
30.68
29.41
27.41
25.10
Figure 2. Comparison of output of different filters 
with the proposed filter: (a) Original Lena image (b) 50% 
noise corrupted image (c) Luo (d) GP (e) NSDD (f) ROR 
(g) RDD (h) A. Sarkar (i) Proposed.

220
5 CONCLUSIONS
The quality of a filter over random valued impulse 
noise depends upon the capability of noise detec-
tion. If the detection accuracy is elevated, there are 
so many existing filters for effective restoration. 
Here a detection based random valued impulse 
noise removal is introduced in this paper. Quan-
titative performance and the structural symmetry 
are analyzed using the PSNR, MSE and SSIM 
respectively. The analysis shows that the proposed 
method outperforms the existing methods is all 
respect. This method can produce better results 
for other types of noise removal which is left for 
further study.
REFERENCES
Banerjee, S., Bandyopadhyay, A., Bag, R., and Das, A. 
(2014). Neighborhood Based Pixel Approximation 
for High Level Salt and Pepper Noise Remov al. CiiT 
International Journal of Digital Image Processing, 
8(6), 346–351.
Banerjee, S., Bandyopadhyay, A., Bag, R., and Das, A. 
(2015). Moderate Density Salt & Pepper Noise 
Removal. IJECT 10(6), Issue 1, Spl–1 Jan–March.
Bandyopadhyay, A., Banerjee, S., Das, A., and Bag, R. 
(2015). A Relook and Renovation over State-of-Art 
Salt and Pepper Noise Removal Techniques. I.J. 
Image, Graphics and Signal Processing, vol–9, 61–69.
Bandyopadhyay, A., Kumari, M., Pooja., Das, A., and 
Bag, R. (2015). Detection and Removal of High Density 
Random Valued Impulse Noise. CiiT International 
Journal of Digital Image Processing, 8(7), 242–246.
Chen, T., Ma, K.K., and Chen, H.L. (1999). Tri-state 
median-based filters in image denoising. IEEE Trans. 
Image Process.12(8), 1834–1838. (TSM).
Chen, T., and Wu, H. (2001). Adaptive impulse detection 
using center-weighted median filters. IEEE Signal 
Process. Lett., 1(8), 1–3. (ACWM).
Dong, Y., Chan, H.R., and Xu, S. (2007). A detection 
statistic for random valued impulse noise. IEEE Trans. 
Image Process. 4(16), 1112–1120.
Luo, W. (2007). An efficient algorithm for the removal of 
impulse noise from corrupted images. Int. J. Electron. 
Commun. 8(61), 551–555. (Luo).
Prathiba, K., Rathi R., and Christopher C.S. (2013). 
Random Valued Impulse Denoising using Robust 
Direction based Detection. Proceedings of 2013 IEEE 
conference on Information and Communica tion Tech-
nologies (ICT 2013). (RDD).
Petrovic, N., and Crnojevic, V. (2008). Universal impulse 
noise filter based on genetic programming. IEEE 
Trans. Image Process., 7(17), 1109–1120. (GP).
Sarkar, A., Changder, S., and Mandal, K.J. (2014). 
A Threshold based Directional Weighted Median Filter 
for Removal of Random Impulses in Thermal Images. 
IEEE 2nd International Conference on Business and 
Information Management (ICBIM). (J K Mandal).
Tukey, W.J. (1971). Exploratory Data Analysis (prelimi-
nary ed.). Reading, MA: Addision-Wesley.
Wu, J., and Tang, C. (2011). PDE-Based Random-Valued 
Impulse Noise Removal Based on New Class of 
Controlling Functions. IEEE Transactions on Image 
Processing, 9(20). (NSDD).
Xiong., and Zhouping, Y. (2012). A Universal de noising 
framework with a new impulse detector and nonlinear 
means. (ROR).
Figure 3. SSIM index map (MSSIM) of Lena image 
at noise density: (a) 30% (MSSIM = 0.9006 ), (b) 40% 
(MSSIM = 0.8819), (c) 50% (MSSIM = 0.8364), (d) 60% 
(MSSIM = 0.7756).
Figure 4. MSE vs noise density for Lena image ranges 
from 30% to 60%.

221
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A variable gain CMOS phase shifter for phased array beamformer 
applications
Dipankar Mitra, Alarka Sanyal, Palash Roy & Debasis Dawn
North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND, USA
ABSTRACT: In this paper, a variable gain phase shifter is developed using 180 nm CMOS process at 
S-band, which can control phase and gain independently. This has a potential application in a conformal 
phased array antenna, for beamforming within 360° range. The integrated phase shifter, along with the 
variable gain amplifier, helps in recovering the degraded radiation pattern precisely due to the conformal 
shaping of the antenna. The simulation results show state-of-the-art performances of 7dB conversion 
gain with variable gain and a continuous phase rotation of 360°. The fabricated chip, measuring an area 
of 1.125 mm2, consumes a very low power of 17 mW.
(VGAs) and two buffers. We used 180 nm CMOS 
process for the design. This paper has the following 
sections: 2. Phase Shifter Design, 3. Simulations 
Results, 4. Measurement Results and 5. Summary 
and Future Work.
2 PHASE SHIFTER DESIGN
The heart of the Phase shifter is a Double balanced 
Gilbert Cell (Fig. 2).
We have used a co-design methodology to opti-
mize the design of the chip by taking into consid-
eration the input/output impedances of each block 
in order to maximize the performance of the chip.
The input RF signal is fed into a passive hybrid 
(Fig. 3) to get two signals with phase difference of 
90°: I (in phase) and Q (quadrature phase) signals. 
They are then passed through two active baluns 
(Fig. 4) to get 4 RF signals I+ (0°), I− (180°), Q+ 
(90°), and Q− (270°), which are fed to the Gilbert 
Cell of the phase shifter. The active baluns also 
compensate any amplitude loss to the input signal 
when it is passed through the passive hybrid. The 
1 INTRODUCTION
Phased array antenna systems can be used for 
wireless communication during space explorations 
where the antenna array can be placed on the suits 
of the astronauts. But due to movement of the 
astronauts, the radiation pattern of the antenna 
changes. A phase shifter can be used in this case to 
recover the degradation of the radiation pattern, 
by providing the required amount of phase shifts 
to each of the antenna array elements (Braaten, 
et al. 2013). There are several classifications of phase 
shifters, like passive phase shifters, active phase 
shifters (Vadivelu, Praveen Babu, et al. 2009), ana-
log and digital phase shifters (Nagra, Amit S., et al. 
1999), switched line phase shifters (Kang, Dong-
Woo, et al. 2006), loaded-line phase shifters (Yu, 
Yikun, et al. 2008), and reflection type phase shift-
ers (Malczewski, A., et al. 1999) among others.
Now a days, it is possible to integrate a high 
number of transistors into a single chip, with the 
transistors exhibiting both analog and digital func-
tionality (Masaki, Ichiro, et al. 1995). The reali-
zation of System-On-Chip (SOC) solutions was 
possible using CMOS RFIC (Radio Frequency 
Integrated Circuits), where both analog and digital 
functionality can be integrated into a single pro-
cess platform and where the digital circuitry can 
control analog radio with computer programs.
In our work, we have designed and fabricated a 
CMOS phase shifter, which is to be operated at the 
S frequency band. There are several circuits, which 
are integrated together in a single chip to create the 
variable gain phase shifter as shown in Fig. 1 are 
a passive hybrid, two active baluns, a double bal-
anced Gilbert Cell, two Variable Gain Amplifiers 
Figure 1. Integrated CMOS phase shifter.

222
Gilbert Cell has 4 control voltage arms and the 
four controlling voltages are fed to the tail transis-
tors of the Gilbert Cell. The output phase can be 
controlled by supplying control voltages to any of 
these two arms. This principle of operation is as 
depicted in Fig. 5.
For example, to get a 45° phase shift in the out-
put signal, we can provide equal control voltages in 
the I+ Control and Q+ Control arms. The outputs 
of the Gilbert Cell are then passed through a two 
stage VGA in order to obtain an amplified output 
signal with variable gain capability. The output of 
the VGA is passed through two buffers where we 
get the final outputs of the phase shifter. All the 
blocks shown in Fig. 1, have been designed with 
a co-design methodology, taking into the consid-
erations the input/output impedances matching of 
each block in order to maximize the performance 
of the chip.
3 SIMULATION RESULTS
We have used CADENCE® Spectre® (Cadence 
Design Systems, Inc.) simulator and layout is done 
using Virtuoso® tool. The input and the output of 
the phase shifter are matched to 50Ω for better RF 
performance. Table 1 shows the performance sum-
mary of the chip.
We have used a 2.2 GHz input RF signal with 
−30 dBm (10 mV peak) amplitude to carry out the 
simulations. The simulation results show an output 
signal of ∼20 mV (peak) for single ended output 
and ∼40 mV (peak) for differential output. Using 
the VGA, the output signal amplitude can be var-
ied, as shown for single ended output in Fig. 6.
Fig. 7 shows the phase shifting property of the 
circuit in time domain over a range of 0° to 180° 
with 22.5° steps for better presentation, although 
the phase can be varied over the entire 0° to 360° 
range. Similarly, the frequency characteristics 
of the phase variation in the entire 360°degree is 
shown in Fig. 8.
The S parameter analysis S11 (input return loss), 
S22, S33 (output return loss), and S21 (conver-
sion gain) are shown in Fig. 9. The circuit has an 
input return loss of better than −25 dB, and output 
Figure 2. The schematic of the double balanced Gilbert 
cell with VGA and buffers.
Figure 3. Passive hybrid.
Figure 4. Active balun.
Figure 5. Phase control mechanism.

223
return loss better than −11 dB and a conversion 
gain of close to 7 dB at 2.2 GHz frequency.
The uniqueness of the circuit is that the input/
output return losses (S11, S22) and the conversion 
gain (S21) remains almost constant with the varia-
tion of the phase as shown in Fig. 10.
The large signal performances are shown in 
Fig. 11, where we can see that the 1 dB output 
compression power lies at around −15 dBm, which 
is sufficient to integrate the phase shifter in the LO 
path of the transmitter circuitry.
The microphotograph of the chip with a dimen-
sion of 1.5 mm × 0.75 mm with all the bond pads 
included is shown in Fig. 12.
4 MEASUREMENT
We used Cascade Microtech probe station for prob-
ing the chip and Agilent N5230 PNA-L Network 
Analyzer for measuring S-parameters perform-
ances. The measured insertion loss is 7 dB at 2.2 
GHz and the input and output is well matched with 
input return loss is 20.04 dB and output return loss 
Table 1. Performance summary (Simulated).
Technology
0.18 um CMOS
Frequency
1 ∼ 3 GHz
Phase Range
360°
Gain
+7 dB @ 2.2 GHz (variable)
Input Return Loss
<−25 dB @ 2.2 GHz
Output Return Loss
<−11 dB @ 2.2 GHz
Power Consumption
17 mW
Chip Area
1.5 mm × 0.75 mm (with pads)
Figure 6. Gain variation of the circuit with a particular 
phase setting.
Figure 7. Phase shifting performance in time domain.
Figure 9. S parameter analysis.
Figure 10. Stability of conversion gain and return loss 
with phase shifting.
Figure 8. Phase shifting performance in the entire 360° 
range in frequency domain.

224
is 10.05 dB @ 2.2 GHz. The measured phase rota-
tion is 75° and we got measured 3.27 dB gain vari-
ation from 1 GHz to 4 GHz. These discrepancies 
with the simulation results are thought to be due 
to the active and passive device model mismatch. 
Table 2 summarizes the measured results.
5 CONCLUSION
A variable gain CMOS phase shifter is designed, 
fabricated and measured using 180 nm CMOS 
technology working at S-band frequency, which 
is to be integrated into a conformal phased array 
antenna for beamformer applications. The vector-
modulator based phase shifter is integrated with an 
on-chip passive hybrid and active baluns capable 
of controlling each other, the phase and gain inde-
pendently. This functionality of the phase shifter 
helps it to be integrated with conformal phased 
array beamformer to recover a degraded radiation 
pattern due to the conformal shape of the antenna 
array, which requires separate control of phase and 
amplitude of the input signal. The phase shifter 
exhibits state-of-the-art performances including a 
conversion gain of 7 dB and control of phase over 
the entire 360° range with a very low power con-
sumption of 17 mW. The discrepancies between 
simulations and measured performances are 
thought due to the foundry supplied design model 
mismatch. As an extension of this work we are 
developing a phase shifter array with a closed loop 
digital control system for taking care of dynami-
cal changes of surface curvature of a conformal 
phased array antenna.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Authors would like to thank ND NASA EPSCoR 
for their support during this project under the 
agreement FAR0020852.
REFERENCES
Braaten, B.D., M.A. Aziz, S. Roy, S. Nariyal, I. Irfanul-
lah, N.F. Chamberlain, M.T. Reich and D.E. Anag-
nostou. (2013). A Self-Adapting Flexible (SELFLEX) 
Antenna Array for Changing Conformal Surface 
Applications. IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, vol. 61, no. 2, (pp. 655–665).
Cadence spectre/virtuoso Simulator by Cadence Design 
Systems, Inc., 2655 Seely Avenue, San Jose, CA 
95134.
Kang, Dong-Woo, et al. (2006). Ku-band MMIC phase 
shifter using a parallel resonator with 0.18-/spl mu/m 
CMOS technology. Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
IEEE Transactions on 54.1: 294–301.
Malczewski, A., et al. (1999). X-band RF MEMS phase 
shifters for phased array applications. Microwave and 
Guided Wave Letters, IEEE 9.12: 517–519.
Masaki, Ichiro, et al. (1995). New architecture paradigms 
for analog VLSI chips. Vision Chips, Implement-
ing Vision Algorithms Using Analog VLSI Circuits: 
353–375.
Nagra, Amit S., and Robert A. York. (1999). Distributed 
analog phase shifters with low insertion loss. Micro-
wave Theory and Techniques, IEEE Transactions on 
47.9: 1705–1711.
Vadivelu, Praveen Babu, et al. (2009). Integrated CMOS 
mm-wave phase shifters for single chip portable radar. 
Microwave Symposium Digest. MTT’09. IEEE MTT-S 
International.
Yu, Yikun, et al. (2008). A 60GHz digitally controlled 
phase shifter in CMOS. Solid-State Circuits Confer-
ence. (ESSCIRC) 34th European. IEEE.
Figure 11. Large-signal performance of the phase 
shifter.
Figure 12. Microphotograph of the fabricated phase 
shifter die (1.5 mm × 0.75 mm).
Table 2. Summary of measured results.
Phase Range
75°
Insertion Loss
7 dB @ 2.2 GHz
Input Return loss
20.0 dB @ 2.2 GHz
Output Return Loss
10.0 dB @ 2.2 GHz
Gain Variation
3.27 dB
DC Power Consumption
17.48 mW

225
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Calculating absorption coefficient of Gaussian double quantum well 
structured with band nonparabolicity for photodetector in microwave 
spectra
Debasmita Sarkar & Arpan Deyasi
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, RCC Institute of Information Technology, 
Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: Since the absorption coefficient of double Gaussian quantum well is analytically 
computed in the presence of electric field (applied along the direction of confinement) incorporating 
Lorentzian lineshape function for photodetector application in IR and Microwave region. The results are 
derived for the intraband transition between lowest three energy states, which are computed by solving 
time-independent Schrodinger equation by using the appropriate boundary conditions. First order band 
nonparabolicity of Kane type is used for near accurate estimation. Gaussian potential profile is consid-
ered due to its closest resemblance with ideal parabolic potential configuration. Structural parameters, 
material composition, and electric field are tailored to observe the effect on absorption coefficient. These 
results are important for the design of optical detector for microwave applications.
transition between lowest three energy states in 
presence of conduction band nonparabolicity. 
The reason behind the consideration of Gaussian 
potential profile is that it is very close to the ideal 
parabolic potential profile and fabrication method-
ologies that are available till this date, is very much 
suitable for designing Gaussian variation of poten-
tial. Hence, computation using Gaussian potential 
well provides very close and accurate simulation 
results compared with theoretically ideal parabolic 
potential configuration. Structural parameters, 
material composition, and electric field are tuned 
to study the variation of absorbance. Lorentzian 
lineshape function is considered to include the 
effect of pulse broadening. The results are impor-
tant for the application of these devices in phot-
onic detection.
2 THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
Optical absorption coefficient for quantum well 
can be written as
α
ε ε
ω
( )
α ω
α
(
)
ω
*
,
=
(
× ∑
q m
cn Lm
P
g
gvg m
c
n
mn
n m
,
2
0
0
ε ε
ε
cn Lm
r
r
ε cn
2
2
2
ℏ
ℏ
Θ
 
(1)
where the bracket vectors gives the overlap inte-
gral between z-dependent envelope functions of 
1 INTRODUCTION
Electronic and optoelectronic properties of a low-
dimensional semiconductor structure has enticed 
interest among theoretical (Parashar et al., 2011, 
Far et. al., 2012) and experimental (Urban et al., 
2007, Kim et al., 2012) researchers in the last dec-
ade, who were influenced by the advancements of 
numerical techniques (Ogawa et al., 1998, Deyasi 
et al., 2013) and fabrication methodologies (Wu 
et al., 2009). Quantum well, wires, and dots are the 
choice of candidates among the nanostructures, 
where motion of carriers is confined along one, two, 
or three dimensions. Eigenenergy states of these 
structures are originated due to the quantization, 
geometrical shapes (Gangopadhyay et al., 1997, Li 
et al., 2001), and material compositions (Jia et al., 
2011, Balet et al., 2004), which are the controllable 
parameters. These quantum structures are already 
used in designing optical transmitters (Zhang et al., 
2011, Raihan et al., 2011), detectors (Deyasi et al., 
2014, Jha et al., 2014), defense (Philips et al., 2010), 
medical (Perera et al., 2006), communication (Wei 
et al., 2006), memory (Muller et al., 2006), and 
applications. Photonic application of these devices, 
precisely for detector applications; can be studied 
from the knowledge of absorption coefficient, and 
hence its accurate estimation plays an important 
role for the device design.
In this paper, absorption coefficient of Gaussian 
double quantum well structure is theoretically cal-
culated in presence of electric field for intraband 

226
conduction band and valence band respectively. 
This provides the selection rule for transition 
between the subbands, and also for band-to-band 
transition. L is the width of quantum well, Θ is 
the Heaviside step function, nr is the refractive 
index of the well material, Nw is the number of 
well, and P, the momentum matrix element is 
defined as
P
N
d r
k
celll
k
c
v
k
A
kk
∫
ψ
ψ
p
k
A
k
c
k
A
*(r
pp
(
)
r
ψ
′
′
)
(
)
(
′
3  
(2)
The overlap integral can be reformatted as
g
g
dz
vg m
c
n
k k
m
h
n
e
L
L
=
−∫
δ
χ
k k
k
∫
χ
,
/
/
( )
z
( )
z
2
2
 
(3)
where ‘χ’ denotes the wave functions. For quantum 
well,
χ
π
n
L
n z
π
L
( )
z
cos
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
2
 
(4.1)
for odd ‘n’
χ
π
n
L
n z
π
L
( )
z
sin
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
2
 
(4.2)
for even ‘n’
Hence, Eq. (1) may be modified as
α
π
ε ε
ω
δ
( )
α ω
α
δ
ω (
)
*
=
× ∑
2
1
π
2
0
ε
2
2
q
π
cn m V
*2
i p
j
E
δ(
δ
2
f
)
ω ()
ω (
f
r
r
ε cn
z
i j,
j
i
FD
f
i
FD
f
j
ℏ
ℏ
 
 
(5.1)
where ‘i’ and ‘j’ are the initial and final states 
respectively, and fFD is the Fermi-Dirac distribu-
tion function. The factor 2 is incorporated for spin 
degeneracy, and δ function is introduced to con-
serve the momentum.
For two consecutive states, Equation (5) may be 
written as
α
π
ε ε
ω
δ
ω
( )
α ω
α
(
)
δ
ω
δ
ω (
)
*
=
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
×
δ
)
ω (
2
1
π
8
3
2
0
ε
2
2
q
π
cn m V
*2
L
f
f
r
r
ε cn
j
i
FD
f
i
FD
f
j
ℏ
ℏ
ℏ
i j
i∑
 
(5.2)
We assume that the well is doped. We further 
consider that the Fermi energy level is above the 
ground state and first excited state is completely 
empty, then Equation (5) may be simplified as
α
π
ε ε
ω
δ
ω
( )
α ω
α
(
)
δ
ω
δ
ω
*
=
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
n
q
π
cn m L
*
L
s
r
r
ε cn
2
0
ε
2
2
1
8
⎡
3
ℏ
ℏ
ℏ
 
(6)
Where ns is the charge density per unit area, 
other parameters has the usual significances. 
Defining oscillator strength between 1st state to 
2nd state as
f
m
L
21
f
2
2
8
3
=
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
*ℏ
ℏ
ω
 
(7)
Equation (7) can be put into the form
α
π
ε ε
δ
( )
α ω
α
)
δ
ω
*
=
n
q
π
cn m L
*
f
E
δ(
δ
f δ
s
r
r
ε cn
2
0
ε
21
f
2
ℏ
 
(8)
By incorporating Lorentzian lineshape function 
and replacing the ideal delta function in order to 
consider the broadening of peaks, final expression 
of absorption coefficient may be written as
α
π
ε ε
π
( )
α ω
α
*
=
(
)
ω −
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎤
n
q
π
cn m L
*
f
s
r
r
ε cn
2
0
ε
21
f
2
2
2
ℏ
Γ
Γ
) +
2
 
(9)
where Γ is half-width at half of the maximum.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Using Equation (9), absorption coefficient of the 
proposed structure is computed and plotted as a 
function of wavelength for different structural 
parameters. Electric field is applied along the 
direction of quantum confinement, and first order 
nonparabolic dispersion relation is considered for 
simulation purpose. Fig. 1 shows the absorption 
coefficient with wavelength in presence of electric 
field for band nonparabolicity for Gaussian double 
quantum well and compared with overestimated 
parabolic band structure. Absorption coefficient 
is computed and plotted for the first three intra-
band transitions considering the first three eigen-
states. It is observed that with increase of energy 
difference between the bands, i.e. intersubband 
transition energy increases. Band nonparabolicity 
consideration reduces the eigenenergy than that 
obtained for parabolic structure, and hence the 
separation between two consecutive states also 
reduces. This lowering of subband energy makes 
a shift of the peak of absorption coefficient profile 
higher towards the wavelength, and magnitude of 
the peak also increases.
In Fig. 2, absorption coefficient profile with 
wavelength for different material compositions in 

227
barrier layer is plotted. The nonparabolic band 
structure is considered here for this simulation. It 
is observed that the peak value of absorption coef-
ficient is increased with the increment of material 
composition value, i.e., with increasing the AlAs 
composition in barrier material, peak is redshifted. 
This is a fact that due to the increase of x, quan-
tum confinement also increases. This enhances the 
relative magnitude of absorption coefficient, and it 
appears at a higher wavelength. Another important 
observation that can be made from the plot is that 
with lower percentage of x in AlxGa1−x As, only two 
eigenenergy levels exist which makes it possible for 
the absorption coefficient for ΔE2,1.
In the absence of electric field it is observed 
that electron confinement is possible only in 
ground states, there is no eigenenergies hence, no 
intersubband transition energies exist. So, it may 
be concluded that only in the presence of exter-
nal force this electron confinement is possible and 
absorption profile can be plotted. This is plotted in 
Fig. 3. It can also be observed that with the higher 
value of x, the magnitude of peaks also increases; 
hence, shift in absorption value is considerable.
Absorption coefficient is calculated as a func-
tion of operating wavelength for different well 
width, as shown in Fig. 4. This absorption profile 
depends on well width and difference of eigenener-
gies (ΔEj,i). For lower well dimension, it is found 
that the coefficient is more compared with that 
obtained for higher well width. This is due to the 
fact that with decrease of quantum well length, 
confinement decreases, but there is equal energy 
difference between the bands, i.e. intersubband 
Figure 1. Absorption coefficient for Gaussian DQW 
for nonparbolic and parabolic dispersion relations.
Figure 2. Absorption coefficient for Gaussian DQW 
for different material composition in presence of band 
nonparabolicity in presence of electric field.
Figure 3. Absorption coefficient for Gaussian DQW 
for different material composition in presence of band 
nonparabolicity in presence & absence of electric field.
Figure 4. Absorption coefficient for Gaussian DQW 
for different well widths for band nonparabolicity in 
presence of electric field.

228
transition energy decreases. This reduces the peak 
of absorbance amplitude provided half-width at 
half maximum is kept constant throughout the 
simulation. ΔE is kept same for all cases of well 
widths, so it is also constant. From the equation we 
can say that absorption coefficient is inversely pro-
portional with total device length (well + barrier) so 
as the length of the well increases and the absorp-
tion coefficient decreases.
In Fig. 5, variation is calculated and plotted for 
different contact barrier width dimension. It is 
found that the coefficient is more compared with 
that obtained for higher contact barrier width. This 
can be explained as follows: As the barrier width 
increases the total length also increases, the elec-
tron confinement is less and absorption coefficient 
is inversely proportional to total length; absorption 
decreases with increase of length, here the energy 
difference between the bands remains the same, 
i.e., intersubband transition energy is invariant. 
This reduces the peak of absorbance amplitude.
In Fig. 6, comparative study is prepared for 
the absorption coefficient for different middle 
barrier widths without any external applied field 
with already estimated results of absorption pro-
file in presence of the electric field. In the plot 
it is observed that without any external field 
applied the intersubband transition is not possi-
ble; to take the electron confinement form ground 
state to higher energy state electric field must be 
applied.
4 CONCLUSION
Absorption coefficient of Gaussian double quan-
tum well structure is analytically computed in 
presence of the electric field and conduction band 
nonparabolicity for intraband transition between 
lowest three quantum states of conduction band. 
Lorentzian lineshape function is considered to 
include the effect of pulse broadening, which 
makes the result very close to experimental find-
ings. Gaussian potential profile is chosen to find 
the performance near accurately, as it is very close 
to the ideal parabolic potential configuration. 
Suitable tuning of structural parameters is made 
to observe the required blueshift/redshift, which 
essentially speaks in favor of using the device in 
microwave spectra.
REFERENCES
Balet. L.P., Ivanov. S.A., Priyatinski. A., Achermann. M., 
Kilmov. V.I., 2004, Inverted core/shell nanocrystals 
continuously tunable between Type-I and Type-II 
localization regimes, Nano Letters 4, 1485–1488.
Deyasi. A., Bhattacharyya. S., Das. N.R., 2013, 
Computation of intersubband transition energy in 
normal and inverted core-shell quantum dots using 
finite difference technique, Superlattices & Micro-
structures, 60, 414–425.
Deyasi. A., Das. N.R., 2014, Oscillator strength and 
absorption cross-section of core-shell triangular 
quantum wire for intersubband transition, Springer 
Proceedings in Physics: Advances in Optical Science 
and Engineering, 166, Chapter no: 78, pp. 629–635.
Far. S., Sterian. P., Fara. L., Iancu. M., Sterian. A., 2012, 
New Results in Optical Modeling of Quantum Well 
Solar Cells, International Journal of Photoenergy, 
p. 810801.
Gangopadhyay. S., Nag. B.R., 1997, Energy levels in 
finite barrier triangular and arrowhead-shaped quan-
tum wires, Journal of Applied Physics 81, 7885–7889.
Figure 5. Absorption coefficient for Gaussian DQW 
for different contact barrier widths for band nonpara-
bolicity in presence of electric field.
Figure 6. Absorption coefficient for Gaussian DQW for 
different middle barrier widths for band nonparabolicity 
in presence & absence of electric field.

229
Jha. N., 2014, IR photodetector based on rectangular 
quantum wire in magnetic field, AIP Conference Pro-
ceedings, 1591, 434–436.
Jia. G., Wang. Y., Gong. L., Yao. J., 2011, Heterostruc-
ture type transformation of ternary ZnTexSe1−x/ZnSe 
core-shell quantum dots, Digital Journal of Nanoma-
terials and Biostructures 6, 43–53.
Kim. D.H., You. J.H., Kim. J.H., Yoo. K.H., Kim. T.W., 
2012, Electronic structures and carrier distributions 
of T-Shaped AlxGa1−xAs/AlyGa1−yAs quantum wires 
fabricated by a Cleaved-Edge Overgrowth method, 
Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 12, 
5687–5690.
Li. Y., Voskoboynikov. O., Lee. C.P., Sze. S.M., 2001, 
Electron energy state dependence on the shape and 
size of semiconductor quantum dots, Journal of 
Applied Physics, 90, 6416–6420.
Muller. C.R., Worschech. L., Forchel. A., 2006, Mem-
ory inhibition in quantum-wire transistors control-
led by quantum dots, Physica Status Solidi (C), 3, 
3794–3797.
Ogawa. M., Kunimasa. T., Ito. T., Miyoshi. T., 1998, 
Finite-Element analysis of quantum wires with arbi-
trary cross sections, Journal of Applied Physics 84, 
3242–3249.
Parashar. T.K., Pal. R.K., 2011, Modeling of GaAs/
Al0.2Ga0.8 As quantum well gas detector for LWIR 
region, MIT International Journal of Electronics and 
Communication Engineering. 1, 97–100.
Perera. A.G.U., 2006, Quantum structures for multi-
band photon detection, Opto-Electronics Review, 14, 
103–112.
Phillips. M.C., Taubman. M.S., Bernacki. B.E., 2010, 
Design and performance of a sensor system for 
detection of multiple chemicals using an external 
cavity quantum cascade laser, Proceedings of SPIE, 
76080D.
Raihan. M.R., Li. Z., Liu. D., Hattori. H.T., Prema-
ratne. M., 2011, Combining different in-plane phot-
onic wire lasers and coupling the resulting field into a 
single-mode waveguide, Progress In Electromagnetics 
Research C, 21, 191–203.
Urban. D., Braun. M., König. J., 2007, Theory of a 
magnetically controlled quantum-dot spin transistor, 
Physical Review B, 76, 125306.
Wei. R., Deng. N., Wang. M., Zhang. S., Chen. P., 
Liu. L., Zhang. J., 2006, Study of self-assembled Ge 
quantum dot infrared photodetectors, 1st IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Nano/Micro Engineered and 
Molecular Systems, 330–333.
Wu. Y. R., Lin. Y. Y., Huang. H. H., Singh. J., 2009, Elec-
tronic and optical properties of InGaN quantum dot 
based light emitters for solid state lighting, Journal of 
Applied Physics, 105, 013117.
Zhang. L., Yu. Z., Yao. W., Liu. Y., Feng. H., 2011, 
Optical properties of GaN/AlN quantum dots under 
intense laser field, Proceedings of SPIE, Optoelec-
tronic Materials and Devices VI, 830813.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

231
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Application of STATCOM in power quality improvement under 
different fault conditions in a power system network
Nabamita Roy
Electrical Engineering Department, MCKV Institute of Engineering, Liluah, Howrah, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: The present work proposes a model of STATCOM for power quality improvement under 
different fault conditions. A two bus double feed system has been considered for the study. Ten types of 
faults have been simulated for different locations on the transmission line. Total Harmonic Distortion 
(THD) of the voltage signal across the load has been computed in the MATLAB Simulink software. THD 
of all the voltage signals with and without the presence of STATCOM has been tabulated. Significant 
improvement has been obtained in the THD of the voltage signals in presence of STATCOM. All the 
simulations have been done in MATLAB software.
Distribution Static Compensator (DSTATCOM), 
Dynamic Voltage Restorer (DVR), Unified Power 
Quality Conditioner (UPQC), Battery Energy 
Storage System (BESS), and many more such 
controllers. These devices may be quite helpful in 
solving power quality problems. However, due to 
high cost, and for effective control they are to be 
optimally placed in the system.
A Fault is an unavoidable phenomenon in a 
power system. Power system faults are the major 
causes of deterioration of power quality causing 
interruption in power supply and voltage distor-
tion. Detection of fault and its mitigation is a chal-
lenging task. THD of a voltage/current signal is an 
important measurable parameter of power quality. 
The present work involves determination of THD 
of the voltage profiles across a load in a 2-bus sys-
tem under different fault conditions with and with-
out STATCOM in the system.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 describes the simulated power system 
model in detail without STATCOM. The simulation 
of STATCOM in MATLAB has been discussed in 
section 3. The results of simulation followed by cal-
culation of THD have been presented in section 4. 
Section 5 gives the conclusion of the present work.
2 POWER SYSTEM UNDER STUDY
A two bus double feed, 50 Hz, 3-phase power sys-
tem network has been simulated using the Sim-
power Toolbox of MATLAB-7 and is shown in 
Figure 1. The length of the transmission line is 
200 km. A 3-phase load is connected near the bus 
B2 of the transmission line. The system parameters 
have been provided in table 1.
1 INTRODUCTION
Electric power systems providing energy to a large 
number of customers are spread over vast areas 
stretching from huge cities to remote location and 
rural places. This task is achieved through various 
power system components like generators, trans-
formers, motors, and transmission and distribution 
lines which run thousands of miles, satisfying the 
customer needs through careful planning, design, 
installation and operation of such very complex 
networks. The network is subjected to constant 
disturbances, both natural and component gen-
erated, which may prove dangerous not only to 
the faculty component, but also to the neighbor-
ing equipment. It is therefore impervious that the 
damage caused by the disturbances is limited to a 
minimum by speedy isolation of the faulty section 
without hampering the functioning of the rest of 
the system.
Consumer awareness regarding reliable power 
supply has been growing day by day. Power quality 
is most common concern for power utilizes as well 
as for consumers. Today, the world needs increased 
amount of quality power for its growing popula-
tion and industrial growth.
Development of compensation to enhance 
power quality has been an area of active interest for 
the past few decades (Ghosh et al. 2002, L. Gyugyi 
1979, Y.H. Song et al. 1999, R. Arnold 2001, 
Olimpo et al. 2002, D.R. Patel et al. 2011). Passive 
compensators like shunt reactors and capacitors 
are uncontrolled devices and incapable of con-
tinuous variation in parameters. The emergence of 
custom power devices has led to development of 
new and fast compensators [R. Arnold, 2001]. The 
custom power devices include compensators like 

232
The sampling times of all the signals has been 
taken to be 78.28 μs and the time period of simula-
tion in MATLAB has been taken up to 0.06 secs. 
The sampling frequency is 12.8 kHz. The follow-
ing ten types of faults have been simulated in this 
system:
Single Line-Ground fault for phase A, B and C 
respectively, (i.e. AG, BG and CG).
Double Line fault (i.e. AB, BC and CA).
Double Line-Ground fault (i.e. ABG, BCG and 
CAG).
Three phase fault, i.e. LLL
All the faults have been initiated at 19 different 
locations starting from B1, each being 10 km apart. 
The fault resistance considered for the simulation is 
0 Ω. The faults have been initiated after 20 ms (i.e. 
one cycle) and cleared at 30 ms. The fault inception 
angle is 0°. The total number of fault simulations 
made in this system are 19 × 10 = 190.
3 MODELLING OF STATCOM
The modeling of STATCOM with power system 
has been done in MATLAB SIMULINK envi-
ronment. The STATCOM consists of a VSC, 
(Akil Ahemad et al. 2014, T. Devaraju et al. 2012, 
D.K. Tanti et al. 2011). The VSC in STATCOM 
has been modeled by connecting 3 arm IGBT 
bridge. Each IGBT is paralleled by a diode. The 
output of the converter should be a sine wave. In 
order to get the sine wave output at the converter 
end, a sine triangular PWM output is given to the 
IGBT’s gates. When the IGBT is ‘ON’, the con-
verter will act as an inverter and the DC capacitor 
voltage is inverted to 3 phase AC. During the 
‘OFF’ period of the IGBT, the converter will 
act as a full wave uncontrolled rectifier and the 
capacitor gets charged to the maximum value 
of the line voltage. The PWM generator is used 
to generate the gate pulses for the IGBTs of the 
VSC. Here, the sine and the triangular waveforms 
are generated. The sine wave which is of 50 Hz 
is compared with the triangular wave of 20 kHz. 
According to the comparison, the PWM pulses 
are produced. These pulses are given to gates of 
the IGBTs. By varying the modulation index, the 
magnitude of the converter output will vary and 
as well as by varying the phase angle of the mod-
ulating wave, the converter output voltage phase 
angle will also vary. Modulation index is defined 
as the ratio of the magnitude of modulating wave 
to carrier wave.
A SLD of the power system network with 
STATCOM is shown in Figure 2. Table 2 shows 
the system parameters.
4 RESULTS OF SIMULATION
The voltage profiles across the load in the 
present system for a specific LLL fault condition 
with and without STATCOM have been shown 
in Figure 3. The magnitudes of THD for a few 
particular fault conditions have been given in 
Table 3. It is observed that the proposed model 
of STATCOM has improved the THD of the 
load voltage signals in the present system during 
Figure 2. Single line diagram of the system with 
STATCOM.
Table 2. System parameters of figure 2.
System components
Specifications
Rectifier with Filter
Forward voltage 0.8 V
Snubber Resistance = 100 Ω
L = 200μ H, C = 5000 μ F
IGBT Inverter
Snubber Resistance = 5000 Ω
LC Filter
100 H, 50 MVAR
Voltage
Regulator
Proportional Gain = 0.8,
Integral gain = 500
PWM
Generator
Carrier frequency = 2 kHz
Figure 1. Single line diagram of three phase network 
without STATCOM.
Table 1. System parameters of Figure 1.
System components
Specifications
Generator 1 & 
Generator 2
18 KV, 50 Hz, 
X/R = 7
Transmission
Line
3 phase, 50 Hz,
200 Km
Load
Three Phase RL load in parallel,
P = 100 KW,
Q = 100 MVAR

233
Figure 3. (a) Voltage profiles across load without STAT-
COM and (b) with STATCOM for LLL faults occurring 
at 100 km from B1.
Table 3. Magnitudes of THD under different fault conditions with and without STATCOM.
Fault Condition
Magnitude of THD 
for each phase 
(without STATCOM)
Fault Condition
Magnitude of THD 
for each phase 
(with STATCOM)
Fault Location = 
100 Km from B1
A
B
C
Fault Location = 
100 Km from B1
A
B
C
AG
0.68
0.61
0.53
AG
0.01
0.00
0.00
BG
0.03
0.05
0.03
BG
0.00
0.01
0.00
CG
0.02
0.02
0.04
CG
0.00
0.00
0.01
AB
0.22
0.22
0.00
AB
0.02
0.02
0.00
BC
0.00
0.06
0.06
BC
0.00
0.31
0.31
CA
0.12
0.00
0.12
CA
0.03
0.00
0.03
ABG
0.16
0.07
0.14
ABG
0.03
0.02
0.03
BCG
0.04
0.03
0.03
BCG
0.03
0.03
0.01
CAG
0.08
0.03
0.06
CAG
0.02
0.03
0.02
LLL
0.16
0.07
0.14
LLL
0.02
0.03
0.04
D = 10 KM, RF = 0 
Ω, θ = 0°
A
B
C
D = 10 KM, RF = 0 
Ω, θ = 0°
A
B
C
AG
0.45
0.94
0.39
AG
0.00
0.00
0.00
BG
0.16
0.31
0.16
BG
0.00
0.00
0.00
CG
0.03
0.03
0.06
CG
0.00
0.00
0.00
AB
0.06
0.06
0.00
AB
0.00
0.00
0.00
BC
0.00
0.05
0.05
BC
0.00
0.00
0.00
CA
0.09
0.00
0.09
CA
0.00
0.00
0.00
ABG
0.02
0.03
0.02
ABG
0.00
0.00
0.00
BCG
0.04
0.03
0.05
BCG
0.01
0.04
0.01
CAG
0.05
0.02
0.05
CAG
0.00
0.00
0.00
LLL
0.09
0.05
0.06
LLL
0.00
0.00
0.00
(Continued)
fault conditions. The best performance of the 
STATCOM model has been obtained for the 
faults occurring at 10 km and 50 km from B1 in 
the present system.
5 CONCLUSION
The proposed model of STATCOM has improved 
the THD of the voltage signals in the present 
system. This study can be further extended for a 
multi-terminal system. STATCOM can be further 
tested by simulating fault conditions for differ-
ent values of fault resistances and fault inception 
angles. For a multi-terminal system location of the 
STATCOM plays an important role in improve-
ment of the power quality. The best location can 
be determined by application of Artificial Neural 
Network.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The author is thankful to the 6 final year students 
(Suraj Yadav, Arijit Das, Diptesh Koley, Prabhat 

234
Table 3. (Continued)
Fault Condition
Magnitude of THD 
for each phase 
(without STATCOM)
Fault Condition
Magnitude of THD 
for each phase 
(with STATCOM)
Fault Location = 
150 Km from B1
A
B
C
Fault Location = 
150 Km from B1
A
B
C
AG
0.72
0.80
0.75
AG
0.01
0.00
0.00
BG
0.10
0.20
0.10
BG
0.00
0.01
0.00
CG
0.11
0.11
0.19
CG
0.00
0.00
0.01
AB
0.29
0.29
0.00
AB
0.02
0.02
0.00
BC
0.00
0.09
0.09
BC
0.00
0.30
0.30
CA
0.18
0.00
0.18
CA
0.03
0.00
0.03
ABG
0.18
0.00
0.19
ABG
0.03
0.02
0.03
BCG
0.02
0.12
0.13
BCG
0.02
0.03
0.01
CAG
0.09
0.02
0.09
CAG
0.02
0.03
0.04
LLL
0.03
0.10
0.13
LLL
0.02
0.02
0.04
Fault Location = 
190 Km from B1
A
B
C
Fault Location = 
190 Km from B1
A
B
C
AG
0.07
0.36
0.24
AG
0.11
0.07
0.07
BG
0.17
0.17
0.32
BG
0.07
0.14
0.07
CG
0.13
0.13
0.23
CG
0.07
0.07
0.13
AB
0.43
0.43
0.00
AB
0.19
0.19
0.00
BC
0.00
0.25
0.25
BC
0.00
0.23
0.23
CA
0.47
0.60
0.58
CA
0.11
0.00
0.11
ABG
0.28
0.19
0.18
ABG
0.1
0.01
0.16
BCG
0.19
0.27
0.36
BCG
0.76
0.81
0.45
CAG
0.36
0.18
0.38
CAG
0.19
0.21
0.22
LLL
0.81
0.23
0.64
LLL
0.11
0.21
0.29
Fault Location = 
50 Km from B1
A
B
C
Fault Location = 
50 Km from B1
A
B
C
AG
0.07
0.36
0.24
AG
0.00
0.00
0.00
BG
0.17
0.17
0.32
BG
0.00
0.00
0.00
CG
0.13
0.13
0.23
CG
0.00
0.00
0.01
AB
0.43
0.43
0.00
AB
0.00
0.00
0.00
BC
0.00
0.25
0.25
BC
0.00
0.00
0.00
CA
0.47
0.60
0.58
CA
0.00
0.00
0.00
ABG
0.28
0.19
0.18
ABG
0.00
0.00
0.00
BCG
0.19
0.27
0.36
BCG
0.00
0.01
0.00
CAG
0.36
0.18
0.38
CAG
0.00
0.00
0.00
LLL
0.81
0.23
0.64
LLL
0.00
0.12
0.11
Kumar, Priyendu Ghosh and Monojit Das) of 
Electrical Engineering Department (2015 batch), 
MCKV Institute of Engineering, for their contri-
bution to whom a part of this study was given as 
B.Tech project.
REFERENCES
Akil Ahemad, Sayyad Naimuddin, Simulation Of 
D-Statcom In Power System, IOSR Journal of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineering (IOSR-
JEEE) e-ISSN: 2278–1676, p-ISSN: 2320–3331 
PP 01–08.
Arnold, R. Solutions to the Power quality problems, Power 
Engineering Journal, Vol.–15, No.–2, pp. 65–73, April 
2001.
Ghosh and G. Ledwich, Power quality enhancement using 
custom power devices, Kluwer Academic Publisher, 
London 2002.
Gyugyi, L. Reactive power generation and control by thy-
ristor circuits, IEEE Transactions on Industry appli-
cations, Vol IA-15, No.–5, pp. 521–532, Sept/Oct 
1979.
Olimpo Anaya-Lara and Acha, E. Modeling and analy-
sis of custom power systems by PSCAD/EMTDC, 
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 17, No. 1, 
pp. 266–272, January 2002.

235
Patil, D.R., & Komal K. Madhale, Design And Simulation 
Studies Of D-Statcom For Voltage Sag, Swell Mitiga-
tion, International Journal of Power System Operation 
and Energy Management ISSN (PRINT): 2231–4407, 
Volume–2, Issue–1, 2.
Song, Y.H., and Johns, A.T. Flexible AC Transmission 
Systems ( FACTs), IEE Power and Energy Series, 
London, UK, 1999.
Thangellamudi 
Devaraju, 
Akula 
Muni 
Sankar, 
Vyza. C. Veera Reddy, Mallapu Vijaya Kumar, Under-
standing of voltage sag mitigation using PWM switched 
autotransformer through MATLAB Simulation, World 
Journal of Modelling and Simulation, ISSN: 1746–
7233, England, UK Vol. 8 (2012) No. 2, pp. 154–160.
Tanti, D.K., Brijesh Singh, Dr. Verma, M.K., Dr. Mehrotra, 
O.N. An ANN Based Approach For Optimal Placement 
Of DSTATCOM For Voltage Sag Mitigation, Interna-
tional Journal of Engineering Science and Technology 
(IJEST), ISSN: 0975–5462 Vol. 3 No. 2, pp.-827–835, 
Feb 2011.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

237
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Effects of close proximity and hybrid operation of HVAC & HVDC 
transmission lines under steady-state and fault conditions: A literature 
survey
Brajagopal Datta
National Institute of Technology, Yupia, Arunachal Pradesh, India
Kamaljyoti Gogoi & Saibal Chatterjee
NERIST, Nirjuli, Arunachal Pradesh, India
ABSTRACT: With the recent requirements of bulk power transfer, HVDC transmission lines has 
become more popular than the conventional HVAC transmission lines due to their ease of operation 
and certain benefits like more power transfer capability with same Right of Way, etc. One of the ways to 
incorporate the new HVDC transmission lines is to add them to the same mechanical poles of the existing 
HVAC networks leading to formation of a hybrid HVAC-HVDC transmission corridor. Also due to lack 
of geographical area, many a times there is a probability that the new HVDC transmission lines will be 
erected in close proximity of existing HVAC lines. When an AC line approaches a DC line, interferences 
would be generated upon the DC line due to the electromagnetic induction between the AC and DC lines. 
The interference includes the transverse voltage caused by capacitive coupling, the longitudinal electro-
motive force, and the fundamental frequency current on the DC line caused by inductive coupling. Thus 
elaborative study of this effects is required to understand them in both steady state and fault conditions. 
This becomes more important as many HVDC projects are operational or is going to be added soon to 
Indian Power Grid. The paper presents the work done in this area and scope of work that could be done 
for Indian Power Grid in this area. Focus of the study is to identify the prominent effects during steady 
state and fault conditions.
[1]. The prior method is beneficial not only because 
of low economy but also due to no requirement 
of new right of way for new power transfer paths. 
However it has been observed that whenever an 
AC line approaches a DC line, interferences would 
be generated upon the DC line due to the electro-
magnetic induction between the AC and DC lines 
[2]. The interference includes the transverse volt-
age caused by capacitive coupling, the longitudinal 
electromotive force, and the fundamental frequency 
current on the DC line caused by inductive cou-
pling. The transverse voltage induced upon the DC 
line would cause the insulation of the converting 
equipment connected to the DC transmission line 
breakdown. Moreover, the fundamental frequency 
current induced on the dc line would be converted 
to direct current component and harmonic cur-
rent components after it flows into the converting 
equipment. The direct current component may 
cause saturation, noise and irregular operation of 
the converting transformer.
The complexity of the problem increases with 
different possibilities of abnormal operations of 
the lines due to both AC and DC faults of different 
1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, many HVDC power transmission 
systems has been introduced in our country, due its 
advantages over conventional HVAC transmission 
systems in long and bulk power transmission capa-
bilities. Also, HVDC power transmission technol-
ogy is an attractive solution for non-conventional 
power transmission applications in terms of 
increase in transfer capability with same right of 
way as is required by HVAC transmission system. 
HVDC connections can be justified from an eco-
nomic and technical point of view for high trans-
mitted power and/or long lines; in particular they 
are the adopted solutions for submarine cables and 
asynchronous interconnections. The higher initial 
costs of the conversion plants are compensated 
by the reduced losses during the line operations 
[1]. The operation of HVDC transmission lines in 
existing HVAC network can be done in two ways, 
hybrid transmission system where same mechanical 
structure can be used for both the lines and close 
proximity operation where the distance between 
two lines is usually between few hundred metres 

238
types resulting into different kinds of responses 
obtained, as it has been seen from the literature 
survey. Limited work has been observed which 
addresses these issues of Indian Power Grid. The 
work therefore is important for the country because 
of its increasing HVDC networks for connecting 
the major generating region located in north-east 
region to the major loads in main lands with the 
limited right of way as available due to geographi-
cal distributions. So it is required to properly clas-
sify the major effects that are required to be studied 
on operation of these lines in both steady state and 
fault conditions with proper mathematical mod-
elling of the system which may lead to modifica-
tions, if any.
In Section 2 induced overvoltage phenomena 
has been studied in detail for faults in both HVAC 
& HVDC transmission lines. Section 3 studies the 
effect of line length of HVDC transmission lines 
on transient stability. Section 4 describes work 
done in area of electromagnetic interference detec-
tion in close proximity operation of HVAC & 
HVDC transmission lines. Section 5 highlights the 
Indian Power Sector scenario where the aforesaid 
problem is expected to arise and the importance 
of the work.
2 INDUCED OVERVOLTAGES IN HVAC-
HVDC HYBRID TRANSMISSION 
CORRIDOR
Adding a HVDC line to an existing HVAC trans-
mission circuit or converting one circuit of a double 
circuit HVAC transmission system to HVDC has 
been proposed as an effective method of signifi-
cantly increasing the transmission capacity of the 
power corridor [2]. Fig. 1 shows an example of how 
the existing tower of a Gulfport structure has been 
modified to include two dc conductors and two 
shield wires in addition to the three conductors of 
the 230 kV ac transmission circuit. This design was 
proposed by the Manitoba HVDC Research Centre 
[3], and takes into account factors such as structural 
integrity of the tower, electric field effects, insulation 
clearance and hot line maintenance. The HVDC 
circuit can be rated to carry up to 600 MW of 
power (bipolar operation). This would give a 200% 
increase in total power carrying capacity of the cor-
ridor, based on a maximum capacity of 300 MW 
for the HVAC line alone. The work has investigated 
the overvoltage on a hybrid HVDC-HVAC trans-
mission system and suggests some design consider-
ations which could be taken into account to reduce 
stresses on certain critical components which result 
from such an arrangement [3].
An ElectroMagnetic Transient simulation program 
(EMTDC) was used in the study. Fig. 2 shows a 
single line diagram of the study system. It includes 
a 230 kV, 300 MW ac circuit with a ±250 kV, 
600 MW dc circuit connected into the same receiv-
ing and sending end ac systems. The study was car-
ried out with an applied on the transmission lines 
at either the sending or receiving ends or at selected 
points along the 390 km right of way. The ac trans-
mission line is rated at 230 kV, 300 MW and the 
HVDC scheme is a bipolar ±250 kV, 600 MW 
transmission system.
Sensitivity studies is performed at resistivity 
of 10 and l000 Ω-m. The AC filters include tuned 
11th, 13th filter, a high pass filter and, together 
with a fixed shunt capacitor, provide 300 MVAR 
of reactive power. The study system was adapted 
from an earlier investigation [4], and is based on 
a potential upgrade of an existing tie line between 
Manitoba Hydro and the Northern United States. 
Figure 1. Gulfport structure: Modified top to accom-
modate HVDC transmission line for hybrid HVAC-
HVDC transmission corridor [3].
Figure 2. Simplified single line diagram of HVAC-
HVDC hybrid transmission corridor [3].

239
The strong sending and receiving end systems 
(6800 MVA) are typical of this situation. The DC 
filters include a 12th harmonic filter and a high 
pass filter. A blocking filter (BF) consisting of a 
parallel L-C combination was included to limit the 
flow of 60 Hz current in the dc line. The electrodes 
and electrode lines were modelled as lumped R-L 
elements.
The results obtained from the study are shown 
in Fig. 3. The highest overvoltage occurs for a 
smoothing reactor inductance of 0.5 H which cor-
responds to a DC circuit resonance of approxi-
mately 120 Hz. Fig. 4 indicates that the magnitude 
of the overvoltage reduces rapidly when the dc 
circuit resonance is moved away from the second 
harmonics.
AC and DC Line overvoltage were calculated 
for the following types of faults:
• AC Single Line to Ground (LG)
• AC Line to Line to Ground (LLG)
• AC Line to Line (LL)
• AC 3Ø to Ground (LLLG)
• AC-DC Conductor (CF)
• AC-DC Conductor to Ground (CFG)
• DC-Conductor to Ground (LGDC)
These faults were applied at either the sending 
or receiving ends or at any one of the five equally 
spaced locations in between. Each segment repre-
sents 65 km of line. The overvoltage were recorded 
at these locations for all faults at all locations. 
Faults were simulated at time intervals of 15o and 
the maximum overvoltage at any of the measuring 
locations was recorded. Different fault types for 
two different systems in terms of AC Short Circuit 
Capacity of 6800 and 1700 MVA, was performed. 
These correspond to short circuit ratios of 11.36 
and 2.84 respectively.
As expected the HVDC line overvoltage are 
more severe for the weaker (1700 MVA) system. 
Note also that the HVAC-HVDC hybrid line con-
sidered here can also experience overvoltage due 
to the new fault types (CFG, LGDC, etc.) which 
would not be experienced by a HVDC line in isola-
tion. The latter would experience only the LG DC 
type of fault.
The overvoltage are larger when the system 
is weaker for all faults involving only the HVAC 
conductors (LL, LLG, LLLG, and LG). However 
when the fault involves a dc conductor (CFG, CF, 
LGDC), the overvoltage is larger for the stronger 
system. This is due to the fact that the HVDC fault 
current is larger for the stronger system and thus 
there is a larger coupling into the healthy HVAC 
conductor.
The impact of not transposing the HVAC 
conductors was also studied for a contact fault 
between an HVAC and HVDC conductor not 
involving ground. The results indicated that sig-
nificantly higher overvoltage can occur on the 
HVDC conductors if the HVAC conductors are 
not transposed.
3 IMPACT OF HVDC LINE LENGTH ON 
TRANSIENT STABILITY
Rotor angle stability is the ability of synchronous 
machines in a power system to remain in syn-
chronism after been subjected to a disturbance. It 
depends on the ability of the machines to maintain 
equilibrium between the electromagnetic torque 
and the mechanical torque. The movement of the 
rotor is governed by the Newton’s second law of 
motion as given by Equation 1.
2
2
2
H d
dt
P
P
o
m
e
P
P
P
P
ωo
δ = P
 
(1)
where, H is the per-unit inertia constant in sec 
δ is the rotor angle in rad.
Figure 3. DC line overvoltage for single line to ground 
fault for different values of inductance [3].
Figure 4. 2nd harmonic overvoltage on the DC line for 
an AC LG fault, L = 0.5 H [3].

240
ωo is the synchronous speed in rad/sec.
Pe is the electrical torque in per unit
Pm is the mechanical power in per unit.
When the power system is in steady state of 
equilibrium, the mechanical power and the electri-
cal power of the generator in Equation 1 remain 
the same [5]. Hence, there is no accelerating power. 
This means that the rotor angle of the synchronous 
machines in the interconnected power system will 
be at a fixed angular position. If the systems is per-
turbed by a disturbance such as a three-phase AC 
fault, DC line fault or the loss of a generating unit, 
the equilibrium between Pe and Pm is lost and the 
speed of the generator changes. This change will 
lead to an imbalance in the active power generation 
by all the machines in the power system [5] [6].
The stability of such power systems containing 
HVDC transmission schemes are affected by DC 
line faults, converter faults, etc. In HVAC systems, 
relays and circuit breakers are used for fault detec-
tion and clearance. On the contrary, most of the 
faults in HVDC systems are self-clearing or are 
cleared through the action of converter controls 
[6]. In some cases, it may become necessary to 
take out a bridge or an entire pole out of service. 
The most common type of faults on HVDC lines 
is pole-to-ground faults. This fault blocks power 
transfer on the affected pole with the rest poles 
remaining intact.
During this fault, the short circuit causes the rec-
tifier current to increase while the inverter current 
decrease. The rectifier current control acts to reduce 
the direct voltage and also reduce the current back 
to the current set point (normal operation current 
level). At the inverter side, the current level reduces 
below its current reference value. This causes the 
inverter to change from Constant Extinction Angle 
(CEA) control to Constant Current (CC) control. 
As a result, the voltage of the inverter reduces to 
zero and then reverses its polarity. Typically, the 
total time it takes for fault clearance and return to 
service is between 200 ms to 300 ms. The HVDC 
system response to HVAC fault is faster than that 
of the HVAC system. The HVDC system is capa-
ble of self-sustenance through the HVAC system 
fault or in severe cases, there will be a reduction 
in power or a complete shutdown till the HVAC 
system recovers from the fault.
When the HVAC fault is a distant 3-phase fault, 
there will be a reduction in the rectifier commuta-
tion voltage, which will lead to a reduction in the 
HVDC voltage and current. If the firing angle 
reaches its minimum value, the control measure will 
switch the rectifier from CC mode to Constant Igni-
tion Angle (CIA) mode while the inverter changes 
to CC mode. Although in theory, DC power may 
be transmitted via the HVDC transmission line 
when the rectifier voltage is very low, the resulting 
increase in reactive power consumption could 
damage the generators. This is mainly because the 
inverter would have to change from CEA to CC 
mode by lowering its voltage and increasing β [6]. 
DigSILENT power factory was used in the simula-
tions. Fig. 5 shows the power system that was used 
in the simulations. There are four generators located 
in two areas; each has a capacity of 1800 MVA. 
In addition, area 2 has two distribution centres. 
The first distribution centre is at bus 7. This bus 
is connected to bus 5 via a 1600 MVA 500/11 kV 
step down transformer. The second distribution 
centre is at bus 8 which is connected to bus 5 via a 
1,600 MVA 500/11 kV step down transformer. The 
load at bus 7 is 1,064 MW while the load at bus 8 
is 1379 MW. Capacitor banks are connected to bus 
5 and Bus 6 and contribute a total reactive power 
compensation of 1000 MVAR. In the following 
sub-sections, the impact of AC three-phase fault 
and DC line fault with respect to varying HVDC 
line length on the transient stability is investigated. 
First the DC fault is applied at the middle of the 
HVDC transmission line while the HVDC line 
length is varying. The same scenario is considered 
when there is a three-phase AC fault on the HVAC 
transmission line occurs in the system [7].
The study performed, used a 50 ms DC fault 
applied at 50% of the HVDC transmission line. 
The length of the HVAC line is fixed at 500 km, 
while the length of the HVDC line is varied 
between 100 km and 3,000 km. The pre-fault 
rotor angle of G2 decreases (i.e. the absolute value 
decreases) as the length of the HVDC transmis-
sion line increases. Also, the amplitude of the rotor 
angle oscillations decreased with the increase in the 
HVDC transmission line length. After the fault is 
cleared, it took on average about 20 seconds for 
the rotor angle to stabilize when the HVDC trans-
mission line length is less than 3000 km. When the 
HVDC line length is 3000 km, it took about 16 sec-
onds for the rotor angle to settle down. This is 
Figure 5. Power transmission network used for 
simulation [7].

241
expected because, as the length of the transmission 
line increases, the distance between the fault and 
G2 increases. Therefore, the effect of the fault on 
G2 reduces [7].
At steady state, G2 generated about 400 MW 
active power. At the time of the fault, the active 
power generation increased from 400 MW to 
about 1,300 MW to compensate for the reduction 
of power transmitted from area 1 due to the fault. 
After the fault was cleared, the active power oscil-
lated between 500 MW and 300 MW before reach-
ing its pre-fault value of 400 MW. The amplitude 
of the active power oscillations was the lowest when 
the HVDC line was at 3000 km. However, at this line 
length, the system experienced a dip in active power 
after the fault occurs. The time taken for the active 
power to reach its pre-fault value was the same for 
all the HVDC transmission line lengths [7].
Before the fault, the terminal voltage at G2 
was 1.0 p.u. During the fault, the terminal voltage 
increased to 1.03 p.u. before it dipped to 0.98 p.u. 
Then the voltage oscillated between 1.03 p.u. and 
0.98 p.u. before settling to 1.0 p.u. after the fault 
was cleared. The largest dip in terminal voltage 
was experienced at 100 km, while the largest post 
fault oscillations occur at 1,500 km line length [7].
At 3000 km, the system experiences the small-
est terminal voltage oscillations. The time taken for 
the terminal voltage to settle was about 18 seconds, 
which is found to be the same across all transmis-
sion lines [7].
The amount of reactive power generated by G2 
decreases as the length of the HVDC transmis-
sion line increases [7]. Similarly, the amplitude of 
the reactive power oscillation and the time taken 
to reach steady state also reduced as the length of 
the HVDC transmission line increased. For the 
3,000 km HVDC transmission line, the reactive 
power generation settled to steady state at 15 sec-
onds as compared to about 18 seconds for HVDC 
line length smaller than 3000 km [7].
The study further continued with introducing 
fault in HVAC line with fixed length while varying 
the length of HVDC line. A three phase fault was 
initiated at 50% of the HVAC transmission line 
for 50 ms. The HVAC transmission line is fixed at 
500 km, while the length of the HVDC line is var-
ied between 100 km and 3,000 km as before. The 
rotor angle decreased from −83.770 to −83.830 
with the increase in the length of the HVDC trans-
mission line. During the fault, the rotor angle of 
G2 oscillated between −83.610 and −83.850 across 
the four transmission lines before reaching steady 
state. The amplitude of the rotor angle oscillations 
and the time taken to reach steady state increased 
with the increase in length of the HVDC trans-
mission line. The results of the terminal voltage 
indicated that the HVDC transmission line length 
has no impact on the terminal voltage dip at G2 
during the 3-phase to ground fault on the HVAC 
transmission line. Before the HVAC line fault, G2 
was generating 400 MW. The highest increase in 
active power generation during the fault is with the 
100 km HVDC transmission line. Although the 
time taken for the active power to stabilize using 
the four HVDC transmission line was the same, the 
amplitude of the active power oscillation increased 
with the increase in the length of the HVDC trans-
mission line.
4 ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE 
STUDIES IN CLOSE PROXIMITY 
OPERATION
When an HVAC line approaches a HVDC line, 
interferences would be generated upon the HVDC 
line due to the electromagnetic induction between 
the HVAC and HVDC lines. The interference 
includes the transverse voltage caused by capaci-
tive coupling, the longitudinal ElectroMotive 
Force (EMF), and the fundamental frequency cur-
rent on the dc line caused by inductive coupling [8]. 
The transverse voltage induced upon the HVDC 
line would cause the insulation of the converting 
equipment connected to the HVDC transmission 
line breakdown. Moreover, the fundamental fre-
quency current induced on the HVDC line would 
be converted to direct current component and har-
monic current components after it flows into the 
converting equipment [9]. The direct current com-
ponent may cause saturation, noise and irregular 
operation of the converting transformer. Thus, it is 
necessary to analyze the electromagnetic interfer-
ence in the HVDC line from the parallel ac line in 
close proximity.
The transverse voltage and the longitudi-
nal EMF induced on a HVDC line by a parallel 
HVAC line in close proximity is calculated with 
the ElectroMagnetic Transient Program (EMTP) 
in this study [9]. In order to simulate the parallel 
HVAC-HVDC transmission lines system as shown 
in Fig. 6, a multi-conductor overhead transmission 
line model is established in EMTP. Three conduc-
tors marked A, B and C represent the phase con-
ductors of HVAC line, two conductors marked and 
represent the positive and negative conductors of 
HVDC line and another four conductors marked 
N represent the ground wires of HVAC line and 
HVDC line. In order to obtain the electromagnetic 
interferences in different cases, the HVAC line is 
supposed to be operating in steady state; also the 
multi-conductor overhead transmission line model 
will be affected by a single-phase-to-ground fault.
To obtain the direct current component flowing 
into the converting transformer induced from the 

242
HVAC line, the total impedance of HVDC line 
circuit should be computed firstly, which includes 
the pole conductor self-impedance of HVDC line, 
the impedances of smoothing reactors at both 
ends of the HVDC line and the internal imped-
ance of converting equipment. Compared with the 
pole conductor self-impedance of HVDC line and 
the impedances of smoothing reactors, the internal 
impedance of converting equipment is very small 
and can be neglected.
Therefore, the total impedance of HVDC line 
circuit can be approximated to the summation of 
the pole conductor self-impedance of dc line and 
the impedances of smoothing reactors.
For overhead pole conductor of the HVDC line, 
the per-unit-length self-impedance can be calcu-
lated by Carson’s model [10] accurately, but Car-
son’s model is given by expressions with complex 
infinite integrals, which are very time-consuming 
to evaluate.
The study results showed that the transverse 
voltage induced on the HVDC line decreases 
rapidly with the separation distance between the 
HVAC and HVDC lines from 50 m to 150 m, but 
then reduces slowly when the separation distance is 
larger than 150 m. Taking the positive conductor as 
an example, it is observed that the induced trans-
verse voltage decreases from 9.99 kV to 0.66 kV 
when the separation distance between the HVAC 
and HVDC lines increases from 50 m to 150 m. It 
means that the separation distance increases three 
times, the induced transverse voltage decreases to 
1/15 of the original value. In addition, the trans-
verse voltage induced on the positive conductor is 
much higher than that on the negative conductor 
when the separation distance between the HVAC 
and HVDC lines is small [10]. Two types of con-
ductor arrangements were compared called as 
typical and compact arrangement where the phase 
conductors are arranged with separation of 11 m 
and 50 m respectively. The variation obtained in 
measurement of transverse and longitudinal EMF 
is as given in Table 1.
The study is further performed with single-line 
to ground fault in each of the HVAC conduc-
tors and then fault on HVDC conductors. The 
induced longitudinal EMF is much lower than 
the induced transverse voltage and the decreas-
ing speed of the induced longitudinal EMF with 
the separation distance is slower than that of 
the induced transverse voltage [10]. However the 
obtained result showed that the characteristic of 
transverse and longitudinal EMF is very much 
dependent on type of fault and geometrical con-
figuration of conductors.
5 CONCLUSIONS
From this literature survey, the complexity of the 
issue has been realized. The effects are not only 
dependent on types of fault but also on the geo-
metrical configuration and system parameters. 
Overvoltage on the HVDC line increases with a 
decrease in system strength. The same is true for 
the HVAC lines for faults involving the HVAC con-
ductors only. With HVAC-HVDC contact faults 
and HVDC line faults the HVAC overvoltage are 
smaller for the weaker system. Overvoltage for the 
DC line in a hybrid AC-DC environment is higher 
than for a DC line alone. However, transposition 
of the HVAC conductors reduces the overvoltage. 
Transient stability of the system after a HVDC 
transmission line fault is improved when longer 
HVDC transmission lines are used in parallel with 
a relatively shorter HVAC transmission lines. It can 
Figure 6. Cross section of parallel HVAC-HVDC trans-
mission system [9].
Table 1. Effect of arrangement of HVAC phase conductors upon generated electromagnetic interference.
Seperation
Distance (m)
Transverse
Voltage (kV)
Longitudinal
Voltage (kV)
COMAPCT
TYPICAL
COMAPCT
TYPICAL
50
9.99
18.34
1.38
5.18
100
1.8
2.49
0.57
2.16
200
0.337
0.287
0.309
0.92

243
also be mentioned that the generator terminal volt-
age dip is reduced with the increasing length of the 
HVDC transmission line. The effects developed 
in various fault conditions during a hybrid cor-
ridor are dependent on system configuration and 
design parameters. System behaviour is depend-
ent on large number of factors. With new HVDC 
projects emerging in India, this kind of study on 
Indian power grid becomes very important as no 
such work has been done yet. The major HVDC 
projects of India where this study could be feasible 
are as listed in Table 2.
All this lines passes through the area where 
HVAC lines already exists and thus provides 
chances for study of the aforesaid problems. The 
obtained results from the study could also be used 
for design of Hybrid Transmission corridors for 
future projects of the country.
REFERENCES
Clerici, A., L. Paris, Per Danfors, “HVDC Conversion 
of HVAC to Provide Substantial Power Upgrading”, 
IEEE Trans.onPowerDelivery,Vol.6, No. 1, January 
1991, pp. 324–333.
Larsen, E.V., Walling, R.A. & Bridenbaugh, “Parallel ac/
dc Transmission Lines Steady State Induction Issues”, 
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 4, No. 1, 
January 1989, pp. 67–673.
Nakra H.L., Bui L.X., Iyoda L., “System Considera-
tion in Converting One Circuit of a Double Circuit 
ac Line to dc”, IEEE Transaction on Power Appara-
tus and System, Vol. PAS-103, No.10, October 1984, 
pp. 3096–3103.
Oyedokun, D.T., K.A. Folly, A.V. Ubisse & L.C. Azimoh, 
“Interaction between HVAC- HVDC System: Impact 
of Line Length on Transient Stability”, UPEC 2010, 
45th International IEEE Conference, Aug 2010.
Oyedokun, D.T., K.A Folly, “Power Flow studies in 
HVAC and HVDC Transmision Lines”, IASTED 
Africa PES 2008, Garborone, Botswana, 2008. 
SIEMENS, “International Workshop for 800 kV High 
Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) Systems”, New 
Delhi-India, 25th–26th Feb, 2005.
Szechtman, M., et. al., “CIGRE Benchmark Model for dc 
Controls”, Electra, Vol. 135, April 1991, pp. 54–73.
Verdolin, R., A.M. Gole, E. Kuffel, N. Diseko & 
B. Bisewski, “Induced Overvoltages On AC-DC 
Hybrid Transmission System”, IEEE Transactions on 
Power Delivery, Vol. 10, No. 3, July 1995.
Woodford, D.A. & Young, A.H., “Using dc to Increase 
Capacity of AC Transmission Circuits”, IEEE Cana-
dian Review, March 1989 pp. 15–18.
Woodford, D.A., “Secondary Arc Effect in ac/dc Hybrid 
Transmission”, CEA report ST-3 12, February 1991.
Table 2. Possibilities of close proximity operation in 
India.
Name
Voltage
kV
Length
km
Power
MW
Biswanath Chariali To Agra
800
1825
6000
Rihand To Dadri
500
814
1500
Talcher* To Kolar 
(East-South Connector)
500
1376
2000
*April 2006, work started for upgradation to 2500 MW.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

245
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Studies on frequency domain spectroscopy of transformer insulation 
considering distributed relaxation process
Sandip Kumar Ojha, Prithwiraj Purkait, Anchit Kumar, Asif Sultan, Indrajeet Kumar, 
Jayant Kumar Singh & S. Satyam
Department of Electrical Engineering, Haldia Institute of Technology, Haldia, India
ABSTRACT: In recent times, dielectric response measurements have gained immense attention for 
assessment of transformer oil-paper insulation condition. Time domain polarization measurements are 
one of the most popular dielectric testing techniques for the purpose. For accurate interpretation of 
test data various mathematical models of the dielectric response process have been proposed by various 
researchers over the years. Frequency domain spectroscopic results obtained from mathematical transfor-
mation of the time domain data has been found to be useful in analyzing dielectric test results. In complex 
dielectrics, it seems however, that the overall response be represented by a distribution of relaxation times 
(or frequencies), rather than a single “average” response characteristic. The present contribution provides 
in brief, the mathematical background for estimating the functions representing distribution of relaxation 
frequencies from dielectric response measurement data and further transforming it to frequency domain 
spectrum. Experimental results on laboratory scaled down models and also on real transformers have been 
presented to support the theoretical formulations.
system from experimentally obtained data. The 
characteristic response function most commonly 
used in time domain to interpret the experimen-
tal data is the dielectric response function f(t) 
[Jonscher 1983]. Most of the dielectric response 
functions are however, based on the assumption 
of a single relaxation process. In practical insu-
lation systems,it is difficult to separate processes 
that have inherently close relaxation times (fre-
quencies), or those with non-exponential relaxa-
tion properties, or those with relaxation times (or 
frequencies) that are spread out in time (or fre-
quency) domain. Such models thus cause practi-
cal processes to deviate from that predicted by the 
classical Debye theory. In such processes, it can be 
assumed that the dipoles relax according to a dis-
tribution of elementary Debye relaxation frequen-
cies. Researchers [Tuncer et al. 2002, Macutkevic 
et al. 2001, Macdonald et al. 2004, Macdonald 
et al. 1962, Bello et al. 2008, Dias et al. 1997, 
Farag et al. 2003, Kliem et al. 1988, Liedermann 
et al. 1994] have proposed models that can simu-
late such many-body interaction processes with 
the help of suitable distribution density functions. 
Frequency Domain Spectroscopy (FDS) data can 
further be computed from the distribution den-
sity function thus formulated. Several researchers 
have reported their findings about the influence 
on operating temperature, moisture content, age-
ing etc. on the FDS characteristics [Fofana et al. 
1 INTRODUCTION
Information about the condition of oil-paper 
insulation is of extreme importance for evaluat-
ing ageing status and maintenance requirement 
of transformers. Dielectric testing techniques in 
both time domain [Gubanski et al. 2003] and fre-
quency domain [Zaengl et al. 2003, Fofana et al. 
2010, Setayeshmehr et al. 2008] are being assessed 
in recent years as supplements to traditional 
techniques by researchers and utilities. The main 
impediment on dielectric testing techniques being 
widely adopted by practicing engineers has been 
the level of expertise necessary to interpret the 
test results. Interpretation of dielectric test data 
both in time and frequency domain have involved 
uses of expert systems, and modern classification 
tools [Saha et al. 2004, Hui et al. 2012]. Several 
attempts have thus been made to understand the 
physical processes of dielectric relaxation taking 
place during such tests by correlating conven-
tional tests, time domain and frequency domain 
dielectric measurements, and chemical techniques 
[Saha et al. 1999, Saha et al. 2004, Dervos et al. 
2006].Various models of the oil-paper insula-
tion system, starting from the very basic Debye 
model [Debye 1945], have henceforth been pro-
posed by various researchers. These simulation 
models are often useful for characterizing dif-
ferent components of the complex insulation 

246
2010, Setayeshmehr et al. 2008, Hao et al. 2011, 
Liu et al. 2012, Martin et al. 2011].
The present contribution discusses result of 
dielectric tests performed on scaled down model 
of transformer oil-paper insulation system with 
varying ageing status, moisture content, geometry, 
excitation voltage, temperature etc. Results of tests 
on field transformers are also presented. Math-
ematical formulations used for transforming time 
domain data to distribution domain and further 
to frequency domain are summarized. Nature of 
FDS characteristics displaying the nature of dis-
tribution of relaxation frequencies of oil-paper 
insulation under different operating conditions is 
described.
2 EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Series of experiments were performed on a scaled 
down transformer insulation model under control-
led laboratory conditions. A computer controlled 
instrument consisting of a Keithley 6517B elec-
trometer, Siemens high voltage relays, timer and 
switching control blocks was developed to perform 
polarization and depolarization current measure-
ments. Photograph of the transformer model, 
and temperature and humidity controlled furnace 
along with the dielectric test equipment, and Karl 
Fischer Titration (KFT) setup for oil and paper 
moisture measurement are shown in Fig. 1.
Test parameters such as voltage, temperature, 
Moisture Content (MC) of the insulation, age-
ing status etc. were varied during the experiments. 
Tests were also conducted on several real trans-
formers in field. Details of all the test samples are 
provided in Table 1.
3 TRANSFORMATION OF TIME DOMAIN 
DATA
In real dielectric materials, the range of fre-
quency dispersion of the molecules during relax-
ation extends over much larger frequency region 
than that predicted by the Debye. In such cases, 
the assumption of a distribution of relaxation 
times or relaxation frequencies, rather than a 
single relaxation frequency, is one possible way 
of interpretation of the experimental observa-
tions. In this work, time domain dielectric test 
measurement data have been used to identify the 
nature of distribution of relaxation frequencies 
for more authentic interpretation of insulation 
behavior.
3.1 Formulation of relaxation frequency 
distribution function
The dielectric response function f(t) according to 
the classical Debye model can be written as:
f t
A e
D
t
D
)t =
−
τ D
τ D  
(1)
The time constant τD in (1) is called the ‘Debye 
dielectric relaxation time’ or simply the ‘relaxation 
time’.
With a single relaxation time τD, or single relaxa-
tion frequency ν
τ
= 1
D
τ
, the polarization process can 
be expressed as:
1
0
0
0
ν
ε
χ
0
0
0
d
dt P
P
LimP
i
E
ε0
0
t
( )t +
( )t =
( )t
→∞
 
(2)
Figure 1. Experimental setup (a) Scaled down trans-
former insulation model, (b) KFT setup for moisture 
measurement in oil and paper, (c) control chamber for per-
forming dielectric tests and the measuring instrument.
Table 1. Description of test samples.
Sample 
identifier
Description
A11
Charging voltage 100 V
A21
Charging voltage 200 V
A31
Charging voltage 300 V
B1
Test temperature 400 C
B3
Test temperature 700 C
G122
Paper MC 12.98%, Oil MC 10.5 ppm
G124
Paper MC 12.88%, Oil MC 28.2 ppm
D42
Dry paper (<2% MC), Aged Oil (30 years 
old, 16 ppm MC)
D43
Dry paper (<2% MC), New Oil 
(<5 ppm MC)
H8
70 MVA, 220/132 kV, Transformer before 
oil filtering and drying
H9
Same 70 MVA, 220/132 kV, Transformer 
after oil filtering and drying

247
As discussed earlier, all practical dielectric 
systems consist of more than one relaxation proc-
esses going on at the same time, each having dif-
ferent relaxation frequencies, depending on its 
condition and operating state. The response func-
tion of such dielectric system cannot be described 
by a single differential equation as (1) but rather 
by a distribution of relaxation times or relaxation 
frequencies.
If the total polarization at equilibrium condition 
in such a practical dielectric is given by Pot which 
consists of different polarization processes, then a 
distribution function f(ν) can be defined as:
f
P
dP
dv
tP
tP
( )
v = 1
 
(3)
Where Pt is the total polarization corresponding 
to all the processes involved at the instant t. The 
frequency distribution function f(ν) is normally 
distributed with the property [Farag et al. 2003, 
Kliem et al. 1988]:
f
dv
( )
v
=
∞
∫
0
 
(4)
From (3) we have
dP
P
f
dv
tP
tP ( )t
( )t
( )
v
 
(5)
The current corresponding to the polarization 
dPt(t) belonging to the relaxation frequency ν is 
thus:
di
d
dt dP
d
dt
P f
dv
e
P v f
e
dv
t
dt dP
ti
ot
P
t
ot
P
t
( )t =
=
( )
v
(
)
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
=
( )
v
−
1
ν
ν
.
 
(6)
When all the individual relaxation processes 
present inside a composite dielectric material are 
considered to be acting simultaneously, the total 
current can be found out by simple superposition 
of the individual currents due to different relaxa-
tion processes:
i
P v f
e
dv
o
P t
t
( )t =
( )
v
∫
∫
diti ( )t
∞
−
0
ν
 
(7)
Defining vf
F
( )
v
( )
v , we have
i
P
F
e
dv
ot
P
t
( )t =
( )
v
−
∞
∫
ν
0
 
(8)
Also this total current can be related to the total 
polarization as:
i
dP
dt
tP
( )t =
( )t  
(9)
Thus, combining (8) and (9):
dP
dt
i
P
F
e
dv
i
P L F
tP
ot
P
t
ot
P
( )t = ( )t =
( )
v
( )t =
( )
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
−
∞
∫
ν
)
0
or,
 
(10)
Where L F ( )
ν
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤ is the Laplace Transform of 
F(ν).
3.2 Identifying frequency distribution function 
from time domain data
In this case, a set of time domain experimental 
data points of depolarization current (tdi, idi) is 
given and a distribution density function (νk, Fk) 
need to be calculated.
Thus (8) can be re-written as:
i
P
F
e
dv
dii
ot
P
k
F
t
k
di
k
(
)
tdi =
( )
vkv
−
∞
∫
νk
0
 
(11)
Setting Pot = 1 [19], (11) can be expressed 
in discrete form by a linear set of discrete 
equation as
i
v F
e
dii
k
k
F
t
k
i
N
N
di
k
(
)
tdi =
(
)
vk
−
=∑Δ
νk
1
1 2, ,
 
(12)
Equation (12) represent a set of equation with 
N measured (known) parameters idi(tdi) and N 
unknown parameters Fk(νk), to be estimated. 
In practice, direct numerical solution of (12) 
is often unstable due to the fact that the corre-
sponding matrix may be ill-conditioned [Tuncer 
et al. 2002, Farag et al. 2003, Kliem et al. 1988]. 
Certain numerical and analytical techniques for 
solution of such ill-conditioned equations have 
been presented in [Tuncer et al. 2002, Dias et al. 
1997, Farag et al. 2003, Kliem et al. 1988]. In the 
present work, the iterative procedure explained 
by the authors of [Farag et al. 2003, Kliem et al. 
1988] has been adopted to compute the relaxation 
frequency distribution spectra from time domain 
depolarization current data following (12). 
Figure 2 shows the nature of distribution density 
functions obtained when the test temperature was 
varied.

248
3.3 Transformation from distribution domain to 
frequency domain
The frequency domain parameter often used to 
characterize insulation condition is the complex 
susceptibility χ* = χ’ + jχ”.
For obtaining the FDS data from the frequency 
distribution function, it is necessary to calculate 
the set of data points (
,
*)
ω
χ
,
i
i
ω
χ
,
 from the given set 
(v
F
k
k
F ). Set the an angular frequency ω
τ
i
i
ω
k
τ
v =
i
= v
1
, 
with k
N
i
−
N
+1.
The imaginary part of susceptibility can be 
computed following [19] as a linear set of N 
equations:
χ
ω
″ (
)
ω
(
)(
/
ω
)
(
)
i
k
)
ω
k
N
k
k
(
i
k
/
ω
i
(ω
k
k
v
F (
k(
v
v
(ω
k
i
=
+ (ω
(ω
(ω
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
=
=∑Δ
1
2
1
1
.
............,. N
 
(13)
The real part of susceptibility can be computed 
following [19] as:
χ
ω
′ (
)
ω
,
i
k
)
ω
k
v
k
N
F
vk
i
N
.........,
=
=
(
)
kv
+ (
)
ω /
i
ω
kv
ω /
i
ω
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎤
∑Δ
1
1
1
2
 
(14)
Plots of χ
ω
′ (
)
ωi
ω  and χ
ω
″ (
)
ωi
ω  for all test samples 
are provided in the next section.
4 ANALYSIS OF FDS RESULTS
FDS plots for different test samples are shown in 
Figure 3–7.
As expected, FDS plots are having higher values 
for higher operating voltages as can be seen from 
Figure 3. Loss peaks are also found to get more 
pronounced at higher operating voltages.
As seen in Figure 4, with the increase of 
temperature the values of χ’and χ” increase at 
lower frequencies. Similar findings were reported 
by [Hao et al. 2011]. This is because, with the 
increased temperature, the ions mobility in oil gets 
enhanced. The dipole-dipole interactions due to 
the increased mobility of flexible portions in the 
cellulose chains decrease with the increase of test-
ing temperature, which enhances the ease of rota-
tion and polarizability of the side groups and the 
other flexible portion of cellulose. All the χ’ and 
χ” values decrease with the increasing frequency at 
each testing temperature. Presence of a loss peak 
is also visible in the χ” plots (Figure 4b) at higher 
frequencies.
FDS plots of χ’ and χ” are lower for insulation 
with lower oil moisture content as compared to 
the one with higher oil moisture content. Authors 
in [Liu et al. 2012] have reported similar findings 
where the appearance of a loss peak at higher fre-
quency has been demonstrated as has also been 
found in Figure 5(b).
Figure 2. Relaxation frequency distribution functions 
of B1, and B3 at different test temperatures.
Figure 3. FDS plots for test samples at different operat-
ing voltages (a) χ’, (b) χ”.

249
Figure 4. FDS plots for test samples at different 
operating temperatures (a) χ’, (b) χ”.
Figure 5. FDS plots for test samples with different oil 
moisture contents (a) χ’, (b) χ”.
Figure 6. FDS plots for test samples with different 
aging status of insulation (a) χ’, (b) χ”.
Figure 7. FDS plots for a transformer before and after 
oil filtering (a) χ’, (b) χ”.

250
FDS plots of χ’ and χ” are lower for newer 
insulation as compared to aged insulation. [Martin 
et al. 2011] also reported similar findings where the 
plots for new oil were found to be lower than those 
for aged oil over the entire frequency range.
The intersection of plots at medium frequency 
range indicates that due to oil filtration and dry-
ing, the moisture could be driven out from the oil, 
but the paper condition could not be improved 
much. Also the loss peak is found to occur at higher 
frequencies for the case when the transformer oil 
was not filtered and dried.
5 CONCLUSION
This paper presents brief mathematical back-
ground of transforming time domain dielectric 
measurement data of transformer insulation first 
to distribution domain and then to frequency 
domain. Experimental results of transformer oil-
paper insulation under various conditions of insu-
lation and also field transformer are presented. 
Frequency Domain Spectroscopy (FDS) plots 
of different test samples are presented and are 
related to the operating state and condition of the 
oil-paper insulation.
REFERENCES
Bello. A., Laredo E., Grimau M., Nogales A., and 
Ezquerra. T.A., “Relaxation Time Distribution from 
Time And Frequency Domain Dielectric Spectros-
copy In Poly (Aryl Ether Ether Ketone)”, Journal of 
Chemical Physics, Vol. 113, No. 2, pp. 863–868, 2008.
Debye. P., Polar Molecules, Dover publication, New York, 
1945.
Dervos. C.T., Paraskevas C.D., Skafidas P.D., and 
Stefanou N., “Dielectric Spectroscopy and Gas Chro-
matography Methods Applied on High-Voltage Trans-
former Oils”, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., Vol. 
13, No. 3, pp. 586–592, 2006.
Dias. C.J., “Determination of a Distribution of Relaxa-
tion Frequencies Using a Combination of Time and 
Frequency Dielectric Spectroscopies”, in Proc. IEEE 
1997 Annual Report Conf. Electr. Insul. Dielectr. 
Phenomena (CEIDP 97), Minnepolis, October, 
pp. 875–478, 1997.
Farag. N., Holten. S., Wagner. A., and Kliem. H., 
“Numerical Transformations of Wide-Range Time 
and Frequency Domain Relaxation Spectra”, IEE 
Proc. Science, Measurement and Technology, Vol. 
150, No. 2, pp. 65–74, 2003.
Fofana. I., Hemmatjou H., Meghnefi F., Farzaneh M., 
Setayeshmehr A., Borsi H., and Gockenbach E., “On 
the Frequency Domain Dielectric Response of Oil-
Paper Insulation at Low Temperatures”, IEEE Trans. 
Dielectr. Electr. Insul., Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 799–807, 
2010.
Gubanski. S.M., Boss. P, Csepes. G., Houhanessia V. der 
n, Filippini. J., Guuinic. P., Gafvert. U., Karius. V,. 
Lapworth. J, Urbani. G., Werelius. P., and Zaengl. W., 
“Dielectric Response Methods for Diagnostics of 
Power Transformers”, IEEE Electr. Insul. Mag., 
pp. 12–18, 2003.
Hao, J, Ma, Z, Liao, R, Chen, G and Yang, L., “ A com-
parative study of moisture and temperature effect 
on the frequency dielectric response behaviour of 
pressboard immersed in natural ester and min-
eral oil”, International Symposium on high voltage 
engineering,Germany, 2011.
Hui Ma, Saha T.K., and Ekanayake C., “Statistical Learn-
ing Techniques and their Applications for Condition 
Assessment of Power Transformer”, IEEE Trans. Die-
lectr. Electr. Insul., Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 481–489, 2012.
Jonscher. A.K., Dielectric Relaxation in Solids, Chelsea 
Dielectric, Press, 1983.
Kliem. H., Fuhrmann. P. and Arlt. G., “A Numerical 
Method for the Determination of First-Order Kinet-
ics Relaxation Time Spectra”, IEEE Trans. Electr. 
Insul., Vol. 23, No. 6, pp. 919–927, 1988.
Liedermann. K., “The Calculation of a Distribution 
of Relaxation Times from the Frequency Depend-
ence of the Real Permittivity with the Inverse Fourier 
Transformation”, Journal on Non-crystalline Solids, 
Vol. 175, No 1., pp. 21–30, 1994.
Liu Jun, Zhou Lijun, Guangning Wu, Yingfeng Zhao, 
Ping liu, Qian Peng, “Dielectric frequency response of 
oil-paper composite insulation modified by nanopar-
ticles”, IEEE, transaction on dielectric and electrical 
insulation,Vol-19, pp. 510–520, 2012.
Macdonald. J.R., “Some Statistical Aspects of Relaxa-
tion Time Distributions”, Physica, Elsevier, Vol. 28, 
No. 5, pp. 485–492, 1962.
Macutkevic. J., Banys J., and Matulis A., “Determination 
of Distribution of Relaxation Times from Dielectric 
Spectra”, Juournal of Nonlinear Analysis, Modelling 
and Control, Vol. 9. No. 1, pp. 75–88, 2004.
Martin Sirueek, Vaclav Mentlik, Trukapavel, Bocek, Jiri, 
Pihera Josef, MrazPetr, “cole-cole diagram as diag-
nostic tool for dielectric liquids”, IEEE, dielectric liq-
uids (ICDL), pp. 1–4, 2011.
Saha. T.K., Darveniza M., Yao Z.T., Hill D.J.T., and 
Yeung G., “Investigating the Effects of Oxidation 
and Thermal Degradation on Electrical and Chemical 
Properties of Power Transformers Insulation”, IEEE 
Trans. Power Delivery, Vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 1359–1367, 
1999.
Saha. T.K. and Purkait. P., “Investigation of Polarization 
and Depolarization CurrentMeasurements for the 
Assessment of Oil-paper Insulationof Aged Trans-
formers”, IEEE Trans. Dielectr.Electr. Insul., Vol. 11, 
No. 1, pp. 144–154, 2004.
Saha. T.K., Purkait P., “Investigation of an Expert 
System for the Condition Assessment of Trans-
former Insulation Based on Dielectric Response 
Measurements”, IEEE Trans. Power Delivery, Vol. 19, 
No. 3, pp. 1127–1134, 2004.
Saha. T.K., Purkait P., and Muller F., “An attempt to 
correlate time & Frequency Domain Polarisation 
Measurements for the Insulation Diagnosis of Power 
Transformer”, in Proc. IEEE Power Engineering Soci-
ety General Meeting, Vol. 2, pp. 1793–1798, 2004.

251
Setayeshmehr. A., Fofana I., Eichler C., Akbari A., 
Borsi H., Gockenbach E., “Dielectric Spectroscopic 
Measurements on Transformer Oil-Paper Insula-
tion Under Controlled Laboratory Conditions”, 
IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., Vol. 15, No. 4, 
pp. 1100–1111, 2008.
Tuncer. E. and Gubanski S.M., “On Dielectric Data 
Analysis Using the Monte Carlo Method to Obtain 
Relaxation time Distribution and Comparing Non-
linear Spectral Function Fits”, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. 
Electr. Insul, Vol. 8, No. 3, pp. 310–320, 2001.
Tuncer. E., Serdyuk Y.V., and Gubanski S.M., “Dielectric 
Mixtures: Electrical Properties and Modeling”, IEEE 
Trans. Electr. Insul. Vol. 9, No. 5, pp. 809–828, 2002.
Zaengl. W. S., “Applications of Dielectric Spectroscopy 
in Time and Frequency Domain for HV Power Equip-
ment”, IEEE Electr. Insul. Mag., Vol. 19, No. 6, 
pp. 9–22, 2003.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

253
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Generation of air gap rotating magnetic field using switched dc supply 
for sensor-less Brushless DC motor drive
Ujjal Dey, Ayandeep Ganguly & Sourav Tola
Haldia Institute of Technology, Haldia, East Medinipur, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: A Brushless DC (BLDC) motor is a permanent magnet synchronous motor that uses 
position detectors and inverter to control the armature current. The motor drive system requires a rotor 
position sensor to provide the proper commutation sequence. The position sensors such as resolvers, 
absolute position encoders and Hall sensors increase the cost and size of the motor. A proposed scheme 
for rotor position sensor-less speed control of BLDC motors with different possible modes of stator pole 
generations is explained in this paper. Proper stator voltage sequence has to be generated to match with the 
rotor magnetic polarity to eliminate the requirement of rotor position sensors. Since the detected position 
information on the sensor-less rotor has some uncertainty, the brushless DC motor cannot be driven with 
a maximum torque.
netic theory. The rotating magnetic field can be 
generated by controlling the direction of excitation 
current of the stator phases by using DC power 
source along with power electronics switches (Park 
et al. 2006).
It has also been shown here that the two or three 
winding configuration can also be used for the 
above purpose and different degree of rotation in 
each stapes is also possible. In the following para-
graphs it is discussed in details:
2.1 Three winding configurations
2.1.1 2 pole machine:
1. 60° rotation
2. 120° rotation
1 INTRODUCTION
The BLDC motor is a rotating electric machine 
where the stator is a classical three-phase stator 
similar to an induction motor. If the permanent 
magnets are mounted on the surface of the rotor, 
the construction is known as surface mounted per-
manent magnet rotor. If the magnets are placed 
on the slots on the rotor such that their surfaces 
are flush with the rotor surface, then those are 
known as interior PM rotors. These motors are 
generally controlled using a three-phase inverter 
(Bose Bimal K, 1988), requiring a rotor position 
sensor for starting. In brushless DC machines 
commutation is performed by power electronic 
devices forming part of Inverter Bridge. However, 
switching of the power electronic devices has to 
be synchronised with rotor position (Jang et al. 
2002).
Unlike permanent magnet synchronous motors, 
the stator windings of BLDC motors are not 
energized by a 3 phase balanced ac supply to 
produce smooth rotating magnetic field; instead 
stator windings sequentially switched with a dc 
supply through the inverter. Each switching pat-
tern remains constant for 60° electrical rotation of 
the rotor.
2 PROPOSED SCHEMES FOR STATOR 
FIELD GENERATION
Orientation of stator fields in different angular 
positions can be explained by basic electromag-
Figure 1. Switched DC generation using three phase 
inverter.

254
2.1.2 4 pole machine:
1. 30° rotation
2. 60° rotation
3. 90° rotation
2.2 Two winding configurations:
2.2.1 2 pole machine:
1. 60° rotation
2. 120° rotation
2.2.2 4 pole machine:
1. 30° rotation
2. 60° rotation
3. 90° rotation
CONFIGURATION FOR RMF OF 
3 WINDING 2 POLE 60º ROTATION
Let us consider a, b and c are the 3 stator phases 
and A−A’, B−B’, C−C’, are the three coil which 
are connected as shown in the Fig. 2 to create 
the 2 pole stator winding. All possible switching 
sequences for 2 poles are described in Table 1.
For three winding configuration all three stator 
phases are excited. Let us start from the instant 
that the stator phases are excited such that positive 
terminal of dc source (+DC) is connected to the 
phase “A” & “B” and the negative terminal (−DC) 
with phase “C” by firing the appropriate semicon-
ductor switches which result the excitation current 
to enter the stator through phase “A” & “B” and 
leaving through the phase “C”.
Thus connectivity of supply to the terminal 
at any instant will decide the direction of flow 
of current through the stator winding which will 
determine the formation of polarity of the rotat-
ing magnetic field. Terminals of same polarity can 
be grouped together to create flux in clockwise or 
anticlockwise direction following cork-screw rule 
and it is observed from Sequence-1 in Figure 3, 
that two poles have been generated.
Now if the phase “B” is made positive and 
phase “A” & “C” are made negative by firing the 
appropriate semiconductor switches and terminals 
are again grouped together, as discussed before to 
create 2-poles, but compared to sequence-1 it can 
be seen that there is 60° rotation of poles in clock-
wise direction (Sequence-2).
Thus by exciting the coil combination by a semi-
conductor switching circuit from the 1st instant 
(Fig–3.1) to 2nd instant (Fig–3.2) will cause the 
stator pole to rotate by 60° clockwise, which is 
known as 60° switching algorithm.
Complete switching sequence to complete 
the rotation of the stator poles through the 
excitation sequence 3 to 6 as shown in Fig–3.3 
to 3.6.
In case of two winding configuration one of 
the windings is always at No Connection (NC) 
state.
Figure 2. Different arrangement of three phase stator 
winding.
Figure 3. Switching sequences for three winding two 
pole 60º clockwise rotation of rotating magnetic field.

255
CONFIGURATION FOR RMF OF 
3 WINDING 4 POLE 30º ROTATION
Let a, b and c are the 3 stator phases and A1−A1’, 
A2−A2’, B1−B1’, B2−B2’, C1−C1’, C2−C2’ are 
the six coil which are connected as shown in the 
Figure 2 to create the 4 pole stator winding.
Let us start from the instant that the stator 
phases are excited such that positive terminal of 
dc source is connected to the phase “A” & “C” and 
the negative terminal with phase “B” by firing the 
appropriate semiconductor switches which result 
the excitation current to enter the stator through 
phase “A” & “C” and leaving through the phase 
“B”. The situation is shown in Figure 4. Similarly 
as in case of two pole generations, if similar polari-
ties are grouped together, a 4 pole stator winding 
will be obtained.
All possible switching sequences for 4 poles are 
described in Table 2.
3 DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED 
WORK
In the proposed scheme, 4 pole 30º rotation con-
figurations are adopted. The block diagram of 
the scheme is shown in Figure 5 (Kim et al. 2003). 
Single phase variable ac supply is obtained from a 
230 volt supply with an auto transformer. MOS-
FET bridge inverter circuit is employed to get 
the switched dc input for the BLDC motor. The 
switching instances are controlled by a micro con-
troller based control circuit.
According to the orientation of four stator 
poles, in each step the stator field rotates by 30º 
mechanical angle, so 6 steps are required for 180º 
rotation and for one complete rotation of 360º the 
same six steps are to be repeated.
The switching sequence of the MOSFET 
inverter for such orientation is:
(M1, M6), (M2, M6), (M2, M4), (M3, M4), (M3, 
M5) and (M1, M5) from Figure 1 and Table 2.
Figure 4. Starting sequence of 4 pole generation.
Figure 5. Block diagram of the proposed work.
Table 1. Different modes for two pole generation.
No. of windings 
employed
Angle of rotation of 
the RMF in degree
Polarity of stator terminals
Sequence of 
switching
A
B
C
3
120
Seq-1
+DC
+DC
−DC
Seq-2
−DC
+DC
+DC
Seq-3
+DC
−DC
+DC
2
60
Seq-1
+DC
−DC
NC
Seq-2
+DC
NC
−DC
Seq-3
NC
+DC
−DC
Seq-4
−DC
+DC
NC
Seq-5
−DC
NC
+DC
Seq-6
NC
−DC
+DC
120
Seq-1
+DC
−DC
NC
Seq-2
NC
+DC
−DC
Seq-3
−DC
NC
+DC

256
3.1 Description of the firmware
The speed of the rotating magnetic field depends on 
the time delay between two consecutive sequences. 
As such 12 numbers of steps required as discussed 
before, for a time delay of 3.3 ms between two con-
secutive steps, the speed of the rotating field will 
be 1500 rpm.
Initially a program was written for 3.3 ms delay 
but no rotation observed of the motor. After 
number of programs developed for different 
time delay it is observed that for a time delay of 
0.078 sec and dc supply voltage of 30V at no load 
smooth starting is observed and the speed of the 
motor was recorded as 68 rpm. But for any fur-
ther decrease in time delay the motor lost its self-
starting property.
To overcome this problem a new program with 
dynamically decreased time delay is being devel-
oped. At starting the time delay is set to 0.078 sec 
and it is reduced by 0.00039 sec after one complete 
rotation of stator magnetic field i.e. the speed 
gradually increased to its final value which is set 
for the scheme as double the starting. For that the 
final time delay is set as 0.039 sec.
The set-up of control circuit of upper half 
MOSFET switches (only M1) and lower half switches 
are shown in Figure 6 and Figure 8 respectively.
Experimental set up for the proposed work is 
shown in Figure 7, Figure 9 and Figure 10.
3.2 Algorithm of variable time delay program
Main Program:
 1.  Define Port D, Port B, Counter 2 and 
Counter 3.
 2.  Configure all the pins as digital inputs and Port 
B is set as output and Port D as input port.
 3. Set six output pins of port B.
 4. Load counter3 by 200.
 5. Delay subroutine (Xmsdelay) is called.
 6. Reset output 1 and 6 and repeat step 5.
 7.  Set output 6 and reset output 5 and repeat 
step 5.
 8.  Set output 1 and reset output 3 and repeat 
step 5.
 9.  Set output 5 and reset output 4 and repeat 
step 5.
10.  Set output 3 and reset output 2 and repeat 
step 5.
11.  Set output 4 and reset output 6 and repeat 
step 5.
12.  Set output 2 and reset output 1 and repeat 
step 5.
13. Repeat step 7 to step 12.
Table 2. Different modes for four pole generation.
No. of windings 
employed
Angle of rotation of 
the RMF in degree
Polarity of stator terminals
Sequence of switching
A
B
C
3
30
Seq-1
+DC
−DC
+DC
Seq-2
−DC
−DC
+DC
Seq-3
−DC
+DC
+DC
Seq-4
−DC
+DC
−DC
Seq-5
+DC
−DC
−DC
60
Seq-1
+DC
−DC
+DC
Seq-2
−DC
+DC
+DC
Seq-3
+DC
+DC
−DC
90
Seq-1
+DC
−DC
+DC
Seq-2
−DC
+DC
−DC
2
30
Seq-1
+DC
−DC
NC
Seq-2
NC
−DC
+DC
Seq-3
−DC
NC
+DC
Seq-4
−DC
+DC
NC
Seq-5
NC
+DC
−DC
Seq-6
+DC
NC
−DC
60
Seq-1
+DC
−DC
NC
Seq-2
−DC
NC
+DC
Seq-3
NC
+DC
−DC
90
Seq-1
+DC
−DC
NC
Seq-2
−DC
+DC
NC
Seq-3
+DC
−DC
NC

257
14.  Compare counter 3 content with desired 
minimum count value and if condition is 
satisfied then go to step 16.
15.  Decrease Counter 3 by one and repeat step 4 to 
step 14.
16.  Repeat step 4 to step 14.
Figure 6. Power and gate triggering circuit of MOSFET 
M1.
Figure 7. Overall set up of the proposed work.
Figure 8. Power and gate triggering circuit of MOS-
FET M4, M5 and M6.
Figure 9. MOSFET based inverter bridge circuit.
Xmsdelay Subroutine:
1. Counter 2 is loaded by content of counter 3.
2. ‘Delay’ subroutine is called.

258
3. Decrement Counter2 and go to step 2.
4. Repeat step 3 until Counter 2 becomes zero.
Delay Subroutine:
1. Timer 0 register is loaded by hex equivalent of 
the result of calculation of the delay.
2. Set the status of Timer Control Register.
3. Monitor Interrupt controller second bit used as 
timer overflow flag.
4. If condition in step 3 is not satisfied repeat 
step 3.
5. Reset timer overflow flag.
4 CONCLUSION
The speed control scheme is developed using a 
modern microcomputer (PIC 18F4520) to mini-
mize the measurement and calculation error 
results to the computation delay. Instead of vary-
ing the voltage manually, a chopper circuit can be 
used for automatic voltage control purpose which 
is effective to reduce torque pulsation and better 
transient response.
REFERENCES
Bose Bimal K, (November/December, 1988) A High-
Performance Inverter-Fed Drive System of an Interior 
Permanent Magnet Synchronous Machine,” IEEE 
transactions on industry applications, vol. 24, no. 6.
Jang G.H., Park J.H. and Chang J.H. (March 2002), Posi-
tion detection and start-up algorithm of a rotor in a 
sensorless BLDC motor utilising inductance varia-
tion, IEE Proc -Eleclr Power Appl, Vol 149, No 2.
Kim Tae Heoung, Choi Jae-Hak, Ko Kwang Cheol, and 
Lee Ju (September 2003), Finite-Element Analysis 
of Brushless DC Motor Considering Freewheeling 
Diodes and DC Link Voltage Ripple, IEEE TRANS-
ACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 39, NO. 5.
Park Byoung-Gun, Kim Tae-Sung, Ryu Ji-Su, and Hyun 
Dong-Seok (2006), Fuzzy Back-EMF Observer for 
Improving Performance of Sensorless Brushless DC 
Motor Drive, IEEE.
Figure 10. Control circuit using PIC18F4520.

259
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Dependence of photonic bandgap on material composition for 
two-dimensional photonic crystal with triangular geometry
Shubhankar Mukherjee & Arpan Roy
Department of Electronics Science, A.P.C College, West Bengal, India
Arpan Deyasi
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, RCC Institute of Information Technology, 
West Bengal, India
Subhro Ghosal
Department of Electronics Science, A.P.C College, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Complete photonic bandgap is formed inside the first Brillouin zone in two-dimensional 
triangular photonic crystal for TE mode propagation along either direction of refractive index variation. 
Maxwell’s equations are solved using plane wave propagation method, from which TM and TE mode 
eigen-equations are obtained with appropriate boundary conditions. Different material compositions are 
considered to compute the width of photonic band between ‘X’ and ‘Γ’ points, and result is compared 
with that obtained for rectangular lattice (for TM mode propagation) with identical configuration. Result 
shows that width of bandgap increases with higher refractive index difference between the constituent 
materials whereas the variation is less for triangular geometry, i.e., triangular PC will provide better tun-
ing of photonic bandgap. Analytical findings will become important in designing optical insulator in 
selected spectrum, and geometry of the structure will play crucial role in this regard.
(Jiang et al., 1999). For analyzing property of 2D 
photonic crystal, knowledge of band structure is 
extremely important; and its accurate calculation 
inside the first Brillouin zone along with relative 
position and magnitude plays a major role for 
specific applications. Moreover, geometry of the 
structure also critically important as it controls the 
propagation mode inside the structure.
Different numerical techniques are already avail-
able for calculating the band structure of photonic 
crystal (Badaoui et al., 2011, He et al., 2000). In 
this paper, author choose the plane wave propaga-
tion method for computing the band structure as it 
provides near accurate result inside first Brillouin 
zone subject to the appropriate boundary condi-
tions, and it also reduces the mathematical com-
plexity. It does not require any grid structure for 
computation purpose. Authors choose differ-
ent material composition to study the tuning of 
bandgap for triangular lattice, and result is com-
pared with that obtained for rectangular lattice 
with identical structural parameters. It has been 
observed that very good optical insulator with pre-
cise control can be made by triangular geometry, 
whereas rectangular structure provides wider vari-
ation. Result is critically important for designing 
photonic isolator for optical integrated circuit.
1 INTRODUCTION
Photonic crystal is the subject of research for the 
last two decades (Loudon 1970, Yablonovitch 
et al., 1987, Andreani et al., 2003) due to its possi-
ble novel applications in device (Szczepański et al., 
1988) and communication (D’Orazio et al., 2003, 
Russell 2006, Robinson et al., 2011) area which 
may replace the existing electronic and optoelec-
tronic counterparts. It is the periodic array of die-
lectric/metal-dielectric composites in one, two or 
three dimensions; which exhibit the restriction of 
electromagnetic wave propagation in certain spec-
tra (Fogel et al., 1998), and allowed in other ranges. 
This becomes possible due to the existence of phot-
onic bandgap, in analogous to the electronic band-
gap. Though one-dimensional photonic crystal 
has been investigated a lot during the last decade 
both theoretically (Prasad et al., 2012, Sanga et al., 
2006) and experimentally (Xu et al., 2007, Steph-
anie et al., 2008) due to the ease of mathematical 
formalism and fabrication advantages respectively; 
but 2D structures are now gaining the interest of 
researchers due to novel properties (Limpert et al., 
2004, Limpert et al., 2003) with superior perform-
ance. This is achieved precisely due to the higher 
confinement of propagating electromagnetic waves 

260
2 THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
For computation purpose, we assume sinusoidal 
nature of electric field and magnetic fields propa-
gating inside the structure. Under this condition, 
modified Maxwell equations can be written as:
∇
=
( )
( )
0  
(1)
∇
=
( , )
0  
(2)
∇×
=
H
i
E
( )r
( )r
( )r
ωε ε
0
 
(3)
∇×
= −
E
i
H
( )r
( )r
ωμ0
 
(4)
where ω is the oscillation frequency of the electro-
magnetic field, ε (r) is the corresponding dielectric 
constant.
Assuming medium as non-dispersive with har-
monic time dependence, Helmhotz equation may 
be put into the following form
∇×
∇×
=
1
2
2
ε
ω 2
( )
ε
( )
( )
H(
C
H(


ω
 
(5)
If we consider that the dielectric function has 
full translational variance in either of the confine-
ment direction, magnetic intensity can be expressed 
as a sum of infinite number of plane waves
H
h
e
e
G
h
i k
r
G
i
G
i
i
G
( )r
,
(
)
k Gi
G
,
= ∑
λe
λ
λ




	
 
(6)
where λ = 1, 2, k denotes wave vector, 

G is the 
reciprocal lattice vector, e	 λ  is used to denote the 
two unit axes perpendicular to the propagation 
direction k
G hG
h
i
G



,
,λ  represents the coefficient of 
the H component along the axes e	 λ. It may be 
noted in this context that (e e
k
G
	
	
1
2
e
,
,
2
e



) are per-
pendicular to each other.
Dielectric function can also be written as
ε
ε
( )
ε
( )
ε
exp(
. )



V
i
)exp(
G.
ε(
ε
)exp(
∫∫∫

∫∫∫

1
Ω
 
(7)
where Ω is the unit cell and V is the volume of the 
unit cell. Using Eq. (6) and Eq. (7), one can write
∇×
∑
ε
λ
∇×
−
∑
λ
λ
1(
)
(
, )
λ
(
)
+
,
,


∑
 






e
e
(
)
i
iG r
i
i(
r
).).
k G
+
G
G
i
G
i
G
i
G
	
∑
∑
= ω
λ
λ
λ
2
ω
2
C
h G
e
e
i
i k
r
G
k G
+
i
i
G
i
G
(
,
Gi
G
)
λ
(
)
+
k Gi
G
,
,







	
 
 
(8)
Decoupling the x-y plane along both of the 
basis vectors, one can obtain
h G
G
G e
e
i
i
G
i
G
i k
r
i
k G
i
i
G
(
,
Gi
G
(
)
(
)
k
Gi
G
(
)
k Gi
G
,
′
G
(
×
(k
×
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
G
λ ε)
′ )
λ
1 







	
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
=
∑
∑
∑
∑
′
λ
λ
λ
ω
λ
iλ
i
i
i
i
i
G
G
′−
i
i
Gi
i
i k
r
k G
+
i
C
h G
e
e







,
(
)
+
i
k Gi
,
(
,
i
Gi
)
λ
2
ω
2
	
 
(9)
The final equation may be modified and written 
in the following form
(
)
(
)
(
) (
,
)
,







e
e
G
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
′
′
′
G
	
	


⎤⎡
λ
λ
ε
λ
(
) (
,
h(
)h(
′
−
′
1
λ′
ω
λ
∑
=
2
ω
2
C
h G
( ,
G
)
λ

 
 
(10)
where λ’ = 1,2. [for the two decoupled axes]. Eq. (10) 
may be put into the matrix form
k
G k
G
e e
e e
e e
e e
h
G k
′
G
−
−
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
′h
−
ε 1
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
(
)
G
G′
G
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
′
′
e e
′
′
e e
1h
2
2
2
1
2
′
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
=
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
′∑
h2′
C
h1
h2
G′

ω 2
 
(11)
Here, the 2 × 2 matrix provides the direction 
of wave propagation at the time of scattering 
with a lattice, ‘h’ matrix is an N × 1 matrix which 
satisfies the number of plane waves propagating 
inside the crystal. Thus the ‘e’ matrix basically 
causes the diffraction inside the first Brillouin 
zone.
For oblique incidence, both K and G are in 
the same x-y plane, and one of the unit vectors 
can be constantly set to: e
z
k G
	
	
2,
=
 the other unit 
e k G
	1,
 vector is also in the x-y plane. Therefore, 
2N × 2N equation group is decoupled into two 
equation groups: TE and TM. One group only 
contains H components along e	1, no components 
along e
z
	
	
2 =
, and so is called TM wave. The other 
group only contains H component along e
z
	
	
2 =
, 
and E has no component along z which is why it is 
called the TE wave.
Now the TM mode can be formulated as:
k
G k
G
h G
C
h G
G
G k
′
h
=
−
′∑
ε
ω
1
1h
2
ω
2
1h
(
)
G
G′
(
)
G′
G
( )
G




ω
 (12)
The TE mode can be formulated as
k
G k
G
h G
C
h G
G
G k
′
G
×
=
−
′
G∑
ε
ω
1
1
2h
2
ω
2
2h
(
)
G
G′
G
(
)
e
e
1
1
(
)
G′
G
( )
G




ω
	
	′
 
(13)

261
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Using Eq. (12) and Eq. (13), TM and TE mode 
propagations inside rectangular and triangular lat-
tice can be obtained respectively. In this respect, 
it may be mentioned that TM mode propagation 
inside triangular lattice and TE mode propagation 
in rectangular lattice cause incomplete bandgap, 
and hence their discussions are omitted from the 
text.
Fig. 1 shows the behavior of photonic band 
gap in triangular lattice inside the first Brillouin 
zone for SiO2/air composition. The dark region 
in the plot is called the photonic bandgap as it 
gives the region of forbidden frequency. From the 
figure, magnitude of MBF (mid-band frequency) 
is 0.35856 arb. unit, and magnitude of bandgap is 
0.0221 arb. unit. where we consider lattice filling 
factor as 0.25. The figure suggests the photonic 
nature of the structure is exactly symmetric with 
the electrical nature.
Fig. 2 shows the bandgap profile for 2D trian-
gular lattice with Air (ε1 = 1)/Alumina (ε2 = 8.9) 
interface. In this case, PBG becomes 0.0359 arb. 
unit., and magnitude of mid band frequency is 
0.2494 arb. unit. Thus it may be concluded that 
with increase of index differences, magnitude of 
bandgap increases, whereas mid-band frequency 
decreases. This claim is justified once alumina is 
replaced by GaN. This is plotted in Fig. 3. In this 
case, PBG becomes 0.036 arb. unit., whereas MBF 
can be obtained as 0.2397 arb. unit.
But replacing GaN by Si shows opposite behav-
ior. In this case, though refractive index contrast 
increases, but both PBG and MBF decreases. The 
magnitude of PBF is obtained as 0.0356 arb. unit., 
whereas MBF becomes 0.219 arb. unit. This is 
plotted in Fig. 4.
Figure 1. Band structure of 2D triangular lattice of Air 
(ε1 = 1) / SiO2 (ε2 = 3.9) system in TE mode with filing 
r/a = 0.25.
Figure 2. Band structure of 2D triangular lattice of Air 
(ε1 = 1)/–Alumina (ε2 = 8.9) system in TE mode with filing 
r/a = 0.25.
Figure 3. Band structure of 2D triangular lattice of Air 
(ε1 = 1)/–GaN (ε2 = 9.7) system in TE mode with filing 
r/a = 0.25.
Figure 4. Band structure of 2D triangular lattice of 
Air (ε1 = 1)/Si (ε2 = 11.8) system in TE mode with filing 
r/a = 0.25.

262
The variation of the width of the photonic 
bandgap with respect to the difference in refractive 
indices of the two materials is plotted in Fig. 5. The 
refractive index of the inner layer (air) is kept fixed 
whether that of the outer material is increased. 
Here the filling factor is kept constant at 0.25. We 
have taken the difference of refractive index of two 
materials from 2.9 to 12.7 to get a smoother graph. 
The plot indicates that the width of photonic band 
gap initially increased and then becomes almost 
constant.
Next we made the comparative study with rec-
tangular structure. Figure 6 to Figure 9 show the 
profiles for rectangular geometry for TM mode 
propagation.
Comparative study reveals that changing geo-
metry increases the magnitude of PBG. For SiO2, 
Figure 5. Width of photonic bandgap with gradient of 
refractive index of constituent materials.
Figure 6. Band structure of 2D rectangular lattice of 
Air (ε1 = 1)/SiO2 (ε2 = 3.9) system in TM mode with filing 
r/a = 0.25.
Figure 7. Band structure of 2D rectangular lattice of 
Air (ε1 = 1)/Alumina (ε2 = 8.9) system in TM mode with 
filing r/a = 0.25.
Figure 8. Band structure of 2D rectangular lattice of 
Air (ε1 = 1)/GaN (ε2 = 9.7) system in TM mode with filing 
r/a = 0.25.
Figure 9. Band structure of 2D rectangular lattice of 
Air (ε1 = 1)/Si (ε2 = 11.8) system in TM mode with filing 
r/a = 0.25.

263
Alumina, GaN, Si; it is obtained as 0.0355, 0.1, 
0.1021, 0.104 (all are in arb. unit.); whereas MBF 
decreases continuously. The magnitude of MBF 
are 0.44005, 0.3356, 0.32805, 0.3106 (all are in arb. 
unit.). Hence better tuning can be obtained for tri-
angular geometry.
4 CONCLUSION
Photonic bandgap is computed for triangular 
2D photonic crystal for TE mode propagation 
with different constituent materials, and result is 
compared with rectangular geometry with identi-
cal lattice filling factor. Simulated findings shows 
that controlled tailoring of bandgap can be 
obtained for triangular lattice, whereas for rectan-
gular structure, bandgap varies in a wider range. 
Result is important for designing optical isolator 
in required frequency spectrum for different appli-
cations, more precisely for optical communication 
and information processing domain.
REFERENCES
Andreani. L.C., Agio. M., Bajoni. D., Belotti. M., Galli. 
M., Guizzetti. G., Malvezzi. A. M., Marabelli. F., 
Patrini. M., Vecchi. G., 2003, Optical Properties and 
Photonic Mode Dispersion in Two-Dimensional and 
Waveguide-Embedded Photonic Crystals, Synthetic 
Metals, 139, 695–700.
Badaoui. H., Feham. M., Abri. M, 2011, Photonic-Crystal 
Band-pass Resonant Filters Design using the Two-
dimensional FDTD Method, International Journal of 
Computer Science Issues, 8, 127–132.
D’Orazio. A., De Palo. V., De Sario. M., Petruzzelli. V., 
Prudenzano. F., 2003, Finite Difference Time Domain 
Modeling of Light Amplification in Active Photonic 
Bandgap Structures, Progress In Electromagnetics 
Research, 39, 299–339.
Fogel. I.S., Bendickson. J.M., Tocci. M.D., Bloemer. M.J., 
Scalora. M., Bowden. C.M., Dowling. J.P., 1998, Spon-
taneous Emission and Nonlinear Effects in Photonic 
Bandgap Materials, Pure and Applied Optics, 7, 
393–408.
He. S., Qiu. M., Simovski. C., 2000, An Averaged Field 
Approach for Obtaining the Band Structure of a 
Dielectric Photonic Crystal, Journal of Physics: Con-
densed Matter, 12, 99.
Jiang. Z., Niu. C.N., Lin. D.L., 1999, Resonance Tun-
neling through Photonic Quantum Wells, Physical 
Review B, 59, 9981–9986.
Limpert. J., Liem. A., Reich. M., Schreiber. T., Nolte. S., 
Zellmer. H., Tünnermann. T., Broeng. J., Petersson. A., 
Jakobsen. C., 2004, Low-Nonlinearity Single-Transverse-
Mode Ytterbium-Doped Photonic Crystal Fiber 
Amplifier, Optic Express, 12, 1313.
Limpert. J., Schreiber. T., Nolte. S., Zellmer. H., 
Tunnermann. T., Iliew. R., Lederer. F., Broeng. J., 
Vienne. G., Petersson. A., Jakobsen. C., 2003, High 
Power Air-Clad Large-Mode-Area Photonic Crystal 
Fiber Laser, Optic Express, 11, 818.
Loudon. R., 1970, The Propagation of Electromagnetic 
Energy through an Absorbing Dielectric, Journal of 
Physics A, 3, 233–245.
Prasad. S., Singh. V., Singh. A.K., 2012, To Control 
the Propagation Characteristic of One-Dimensional 
Plasma Photonic Crystal using Exponentially Graded 
Dielectric Material, Progress in Electromagnetics 
Research M, 22, 123–136.
Robinson. S., Nakkeeran. R., 2011, Photonic Crystal Ring 
Resonator based Add-Drop Filter using Hexagonal 
Rods for CWDM Systems, Optoelectronics Letters, 7, 
164–166.
Russell. P.S.J., 2006, Photonic-Crystal Fibers, Journal of 
Lightwave Technology, 24, 472–474.
Sanga. Z.F., Li. Z.Y., 2006, Optical Properties of One-
Dimensional Photonic Crystals containing Graded 
Materials, Optics Communications, 259, 174–178.
Stephanie. A.R., Florencio. G.S., Paul. V.B., 2008, 
Embedded Cavities and Waveguides in Three-dimen-
sional Silicon Photonic Crystals, Nature - Photonics, 
2, 52–56.
Szczepański. P., 1988, Semiclassical Theory of Multimode 
Operation of a Distributed Feedback Laser, IEEE 
Journal of Quantum Electronics, 24, 1248–1257.
Xu. X., Chen. H., Xiong. Z., Jin. A., Gu. C., Cheng. B., 
Zhang. D., 2007, Fabrication of Photonic Crystals on 
Several Kinds of Semiconductor Materials by using 
Focused-Ion Beam Method, Thin Solid Films, 515, 
8297–8300.
Yablonovitch. E., Gmitter. T.J., 1987, Photonic band 
structure: The face-centered-cubic case, Physical 
Review Letters, 63, 1950–1953.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

265
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Design and simulation of a power factor corrected boost converter
Sourav Tola, Ayandeep Ganguly, Ujjal Dey, Megha, Soumitra Mukherjee, Amit Kumar Das, 
Tanushree Dey, Ishita Mondal & Sourav Mondal
Haldia Institute of Technology, Haldia, East Medinipur, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: The interest towards improving the quality of power, which are supplied to the electronic 
equipments has been increasing to ensure the optimum utilization of power generated. A low power 
factor is responsible for reducing the active power that’s available from the grid. Thus, it causes a high 
harmonic distortion of the line current eventually, which results in electromagnetic interference problems 
and cross-interferences, through the line impedance, between different systems connected to the same sup-
ply. The standard rectifier employing a diode bridge followed by a filter capacitor for DC utilities gives 
unacceptable performances in terms of power quality according to the rising benchmark set by recent 
developments in the relevant field. The most popular topology for power factor correction is certainly the 
boost topology. In this work, a power factor corrected boost converter has been designed and simulated 
in MATLAB and the proposed control strategy has been implemented.
current drawn by bridge rectifier is to be sinusoidal 
and in phase with the input voltage. The choice of 
the power electronic converter is based on different 
considerations. In most applications, it is accept-
able, and in many cases desirable, to stabilize the 
DC voltage slightly in excess of the peak of the 
maximum of the AC input voltage. The input cur-
rent drawn should ideally be at a unity power fac-
tor so that the power electronic interface emulates 
a resistor supplied by the utility source (Erickson 
et al. 2004). The cost, power losses, and size of 
the current shaping circuit should be as small as 
possible. Based on these considerations, the obvi-
ous choice for current shaping circuit is a step-up 
DC-DC converter.
2 PFC BOOST CONVERTER
2.1 Basic principle of boost converter
Figure 1 shows a boost converter. Its main appli-
cation is in regulated DC power supplies and the 
regenerative braking of DC motors. As the name 
implies, the output voltage is always greater than 
the input voltage. When the switch is on, the diode 
is reverse biased, thus isolating the output stage. 
The input supplies energy to the inductor. When 
the switch is off, the output stage receives energy 
from the inductor as well as from the input. The 
output filter capacitor is assumed to be very large 
to ensure a constant output voltage at steady state.
The switch used in the boost converter configu-
ration is typically a power BJT, power MOSFET, 
1 INTRODUCTION
The conventional AC/DC power converters that 
are connected to the line through diode rectifier 
draw a non-sinusoidal input current. Because of 
the large harmonic content, a typical diode recti-
fier is used for interfacing the power electronic 
equipment with the utility system and exceeds the 
limits on individual current harmonics and THD 
specified (IEEE guide 1992). These harmonic cur-
rents flowing through the impedances in the elec-
trical utility distribution system can cause several 
problems such as voltage distortion, heating, and 
noises. These harmonics distort the local voltage 
waveform; potentially interfering with other elec-
trical equipment connected to the same electrical 
service and reduces the capabilities of the line to 
provide energy. In addition to, the effect on the 
power line quality and the poor waveform of the 
input current also affects the power electronic 
component itself in different ways (Mohan et al. 
2003). Due to this fact, the presence of standards 
or recommendations is forced to use power factor 
correction in power supplies.
Inductors and capacitors can be used in con-
junction with the diode bridge rectifier to improve 
the waveform of the current, drawn from the utility 
grid. The obvious disadvantages of such arrange-
ments are cost, size, losses, and the significant 
dependence of the average DC voltage on the 
power drawn by the load.
By using a power electronic converter for cur-
rent shaping, it is possible to shape the input line 

266
or IGBT. DC power is obtained by rectifying the 
power from an AC source using a diode bridge 
rectifier. The boost converter converts the rectified 
DC voltage to a higher output voltage.
The key principle that drives the boost converter 
is the tendency of an inductor to resist changes in 
the current. The operation of the boost converter 
has two distinct states.
• The switch is closed. The current IL(t) flows 
through L, RL and back to the voltage source. In 
this mode, the inductor stores energy.
• The switch is opened. The path for the induc-
tor current to flow is through the freewheeling 
diode D1, capacitor C, and load R. The stored 
energy in the inductor collapses and the polar-
ity across the inductor is reversed. The energy 
is transferred from the inductor to the capaci-
tor and the capacitor gets charged to a voltage 
higher than the source voltage.
At the end of On-state, the increase of IL is
ΔI
L
V dt
DT
L V
LO
I
N
i
L
V
DT
i
V
=
V dt
V
=
∫
1
0
 
(1)
D is the duty cycle which represents the fraction 
of the total time period T that the switch is kept 
on. So, D varies from 0 to 1. During, the off period 
the change in IL is:
V
V
L dI
dt
i
o
V
V
V
V
L
I
=
V
 
(2)
So, the variation of IL during the off period is
ΔI
dt
L
T
L
LO
I
FF
i
i
dt
o
DT
T
=
=
∫
(
)
V
V
i
V
V
V
(
)
V
V
i
V
o
V (
)
D
−
V
 
(3)
The inductor current has to be the same at the 
start and end of the cycle at steady state. So,
Δ
ΔI
Δ
LON
LOFF
F
=
I
Δ L
I
Δ
OFF
F
0  
(4)
Substituting the values of ΔILON and ΔILOFF we 
get V
V
D
o
V
i
V =
1
1
 which can be rearranged to find
D
V
V
i
V
o
V
= −
1
 
(5)
So, from this expression we can see that the 
output voltage is always higher than the input 
voltage.
2.2 Proposed control strategy
The control strategy proposed in this work is hys-
teresis control. In hysteresis current control the 
current is made to vary within a specific band, 
as shown in Figure 2. Current–mode control can 
be achieved by sensing the current of the switch-
ing power devices or energy storage element and 
integrating it into main voltage control loop 
(Fagerstrom et al. 2012). Whenever the actual cur-
rent reaches the upper limit of the band the switch 
of the boost converter must be off and whenever 
the current falls to the lower limit of the band, 
the switch must be ON. In this control scheme the 
switching frequency is not constant.
The block diagram of the implemented control 
strategy is shown in Figure 3.
2.3 Implementation of PI controller
Output voltage from the boost converter is com-
pared with reference voltage level before feeding 
in the controller circuit. Proper choice of the PI 
controller parameters are decided by the transfer 
function obtained from the DC-to-DCconverter 
model.
From Figure1, when the switch is at position 1,
V
V
i
R
L
g
V
V
L
L
i
R
( )t
( )t
=V
 
(6)
Using small ripple approximation, iL(t) replaced 
by its DC component IL, hence
Figure 1. Boost converter operational circuit.
Figure 2. Input current waveform of PFC boost con-
verter with hysteresis control.

267
V
V
I R
L
g
V
V
L
L
I R
( )t =V
 
(7)
Similarly,
i
V
R
ci ( )t = −
 
(8)
During the first subinterval, the switches are 
in position 1 for time dTs and during the second 
subinterval, of length of switching duration is 
(1 – d)Ts. The duty cycle d(t) may now be a time-
varying quantity. Using small signal approxi-
mation, the state equations of the circuit can be 
developed considering that natural frequency of 
the converter network is much smaller than the 
switching frequency.
Small signal control (d(s)) to output transfer 
function is described by (Mahmood et al. 2014),
G
G
s
s
Q
s
d
d
G
G
z
( )s =
−
+
+ ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
0
0
0
⎝
2
1
1
ωz
ω
ω
⎝
0
0
0
0
⎝
 
(9)
With the condition Vg(s) = 0
Line to output transfer function can be obtained 
with d(s) = 0 as,
G
G
s
Q
s
g
g
G
G
( )s =
+
+ ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
0
0
0
⎝
2
1
1
ω
ω
⎝
0
0
0
0
⎝
 
(10)
where,
G
D
D
LC
G
V
D
R
L
D R LC
g
G
d
z
G
D
0
0
D
2
1
1
1
1
1
=
−
=
−
=
−
= (
)
D
1−
,
(
Q
)
ω0
ωz
Design of PI controller requires transient analysis 
and without detail analysis of each mode of switch-
ing cycle. Combined state equation model is formed 
for both ON and OFF state in the form of a set 
of two linear time-variant state equations ignor-
ing ripple components. Linearization technique to 
optimize proportional and integral constant values 
using Ziegler-Nichols tuning method is applied.
3 RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
The simulation of both the normal boost converter 
and the power factor corrected boost converter has 
been done in MATLAB and the results have been 
compared.
Figure 4 shows the simulation diagram of the 
boost converter without power factor correction.
The rectified DC voltage, output DC voltage, 
and the inductor current waveforms for a boost 
converter without power factor correction are 
shown in Figure 5. Input AC voltage and current 
waveforms are shown in Figure 6. It can clearly be 
seen that the current waveform is not following the 
voltage waveform and the power factor obtained 
from the simulation is 0.822 and the THD is 
0.5176. The current waveform is observed to be far 
from sinusoidal.
Circuit diagram for Power Factor Corrected 
boost converter operation has been shown in 
Figure 7. The rectified DC voltage, output DC 
voltage, and the inductor current waveforms for a 
power factor corrected boost converter are shown 
in Figure 8. Input AC voltage and current wave-
forms are shown in Figure 9. The inductor current 
is following the rectified voltage obtained from the 
diode bridge rectifier. Hence, current drawn from 
supply is in same phase with the voltage waveform. 
Consequently, the power factor obtained is 0.999 
Figure 3. Block diagram of the proposed control strategy.
Figure 4. Circuit diagram for the rectifier fed boost 
converter without power factor correction.

268
Figure 5. Rectified DC input voltage, output voltage 
across the capacitor and inductor current waveforms of 
the boost converter without power factor correction.
Figure 6. Input voltage and input current waveforms 
of the rectifier fed boost converter without power factor 
correction.
Figure 7. Circuit diagram for power factor corrected 
boost converter operation.
Figure 8. Rectified DC input voltage, output voltage 
across the capacitor and inductor current waveforms of 
the Power Factor Corrected boost converter.
Figure 9. Input voltage and input current waveforms 
of the rectifier fed Power Factor Corrected boost 
converter.
and the THD is 0.0319. Both of these values show 
improved operation compared to a boost converter 
without power factor correction.
4 CONCLUSION
The speed controlled scheme is developed using 
a modern microcomputer (PIC 18F4520) to 
minimize the measurement and calculation error 
results to the computation delay. Instead of vary-
ing the voltage manually, a chopper circuit can be 
used for automatic voltage control purpose which 
is effective to reduce torque pulsation and better 
transient response.
REFERENCES
Erickson, R.W., Maksimovic, D. (2004). Fundamentals 
of Power Electronics. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Fagerstrom, S., Bengiamin, N. (2012). Modelling and 
Characterization of Power Electronics Converters 
Using Matlab Tools. InTech, http://www.intechopen.
com.
Mohan, N., Undeland, T.M., Robbins, W.P. (2003). Power 
Electronics Converters, Applications and Design. 
John Wiley & Sons.
Mahmood, O.Y., Mashhadany Y.I., Khadim, J.S. (2014). 
High Performance DC-DC Boost Converter Based 
on Tuning PI controller”, The Second Engineering 
Conference of Control, Computers and Mechatronics 
Engineering (ECCCM2). 
(1992). IEEE Guide for Harmonic control and Reactive 
Compensation of Static Power converter. ANSI/IEEE 
Std. 519–1981, revised in 1992 to 519–1992.

269
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Smart shoes with cueing system and remote monitoring of Parkinson’s 
patients: SCARP
Piyali Das
The Ohio State University, Ohio, USA
Rupendra N. Mitra & Nuthapol Suppakitjarak
University of Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
ABSTRACT: In this paper, we present an innovated design and evaluation of SCARP (Smart shoes 
with Cueing system And Remote monitoring of Parkinson’s patients), a system comprising of sensor 
based wearable pair of smart shoes for online-offline monitoring and detecting gait impairment of Par-
kinson’s Disease (PD) patients. This novel system, hidden inside a shoe sole, is capable of providing visual 
cue on automatically recognizing Freezing of Gait (FoG), which then continues till the freezing is ceased. 
The shoe is equipped with a WiFi module to send the data from wearable sensors to a centralized server 
for remote monitoring. Health providers and doctors can access patients’ gait data in real-time and could 
also use it later for offline analysis. The data in the server may be used to create an online gait repository. 
We also developed a User Interface (UI) to aid online monitoring of gait data. This UI is provisioned 
with user’s selection of date-time as input for graphical representation of the data stored in database. 
This helps to graphically observe the variation of data over a period of days, week, and month. Thus, the 
work herein presented shows that wearable sensors combined with an embedded system makes real-time 
decision of initiating visual cue, provides reliable detection of FoG and sends the information that can be 
further used for clinical inferences.
severity analysis of PD (Hoehn et al. 2015) and 
reports the advancement in patient’s condition. 
Changes in footsteps, stride length, gait cycle, and 
walking pattern during FoG collectively provides a 
quantifiable platform to measure the gait impair-
ment among patients. Gait cycle is the time elapsed 
between one of the foot making contact with the 
ground for two successions. The gait cycle starts 
when one foot makes contact with ground and ends 
when that same foot contacts the ground again 
(Definition and Description of Gait Cycle, 2015). 
We mapped this cycle to our results in section 4.
In our bid to address and classify one or more 
of the above mentioned stages, we propose a novel 
non-invasive hidden system in a shoe sole. It is a 
FoG monitoring system with the capability of pro-
viding visual cue where FoG will be is detected. A 
preliminary version of this work has been reported 
(Mitra et al. 2014). This system has been extended 
for storing data for future analysis as well as real 
time online data monitoring.
2 RELATED WORK
In last couple of years, we have seen a number 
of attempts to address the issues of Parkinson’s 
1 INTRODUCTION
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative 
disorder that affects motor and non-motor func-
tions of human body. The symptom of PD contin-
ues life long and it keeps on deteriorating with time. 
Personalized monitoring of motor status between 
in-clinic evaluations is expected to facilitate tailor-
ing of therapy and improvement of health-related 
outcomes. Gait impairment, including shuffling, 
festination (progressive reduction in stride length 
with inefficient increase in cadence), and Freezing 
of Gait (FoG) are important variables in the assess-
ment of the risk for falls and other ambulation-
related injuries. FoG is defined as the paroxysmal 
inability to lift the feet off the ground and carry 
out effective stepping. Out of all the symptoms of 
PD, FoG has always been the major area of inter-
est as it results in the analysis of several key fac-
tors in PD patients. How frequent the FoG is, how 
long it persists, how critical the tremor is during 
FoG event together tells the degree of severity of 
illness of a PD patient. The most commonly used 
rating scale for the clinical study of PD is the Uni-
fied Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) 
(Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale, 2015). 
The Hoehn and Yahr (H&Y) scale is used for 

270
patient well-being and better management. Many 
literatures report a wide spectrum of applica-
tions based on the different techniques that meas-
ure or monitor PD out of which sensor system is 
proven to be the most useful. Most of the com-
monly known systems that are currently available 
are based on wearable sensors like motion sensors, 
accelerometers, gyroscope, and pressure and force 
sensors. Patel et al. 2010, proposed a monitoring 
system for PD patients using accelerometer sensors 
and predicted the UPDRS score. In another work, 
Caldara et al. 2014, used five sensors across a body 
to quantify Gait quality, gait direction, bradyki-
nesia, tremor etc., and thereby transmit the data 
using Bluetooth technology. Mariani et al. 2013, 
developed a wearable shoe strap that was enabled 
with accelerometers and gyroscope. Jamthe et al. 
2013, proposed a home monitoring system using 
Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) from 
sensor motes placed on walls and floors of a room 
and the base station located in the center of the 
room. A real time remote monitoring system has 
also been proposed for PD patients by Chen et al. 
2014. They aimed at remote tuning of post opera-
tion deep brain stimulators though client-server 
architecture.
Another well-known project for improving self-
management of PD patients is REMPARK 2015. 
The principle aim of this project is a state-of-art 
device for accurate and non-invasive monitoring 
of Parkinson’s motor symptoms. This device is 
capable of detecting the rhythm of patient’s gait 
and providing auditory cue as soon as the rhythm 
is falling than its usual tempo. Moreover, not many 
devices have been designed to continuously trans-
mit the wireless gait data to any central processing 
unit for further analysis. SD-card has been used 
in some cases but it lacks much data storage and 
in this regard, real-time monitoring also seems to 
be challenging. Bluetooth has a limited range of 
transmission that normally restricts a patient’s 
free movement. Even in REMPARK, the system 
itself is not hidden and needs to be carried by the 
patient.
3 PROPOSED SYSTEM
In this system we propose a wearable smart hid-
den shoe, which is a stand-alone device with the 
capability of detecting FoG, which then wire-
lessly transmits that information to a web server 
and projects LED light on the floor that acts as a 
visual cue. When a patient is aware that he is being 
monitored by someone, his motor-neural behav-
ior may differ and his symptom does not seem to 
show properly, leading to an improper prediction. 
A patient’s symptom varies considerably when 
measured at doctor’s clinic as compared with home 
environment. That is why a ‘hidden’ non-invasive 
monitoring system is one of the major needs for 
PD patients. Moreover, a wearable system capa-
ble of collecting a patient’s gait data for a longer 
period say over weeks or month is needed. Also a 
method of assisting PD patients with automated 
visual cue at the time of their FoG and turning off 
the cue on a successful recovery from freezing is 
highly desired. It has been clinically proven that 
visual cue stimulates the patient in overcoming the 
freezing state more than any other cue mechanism, 
like auditory cue or impulsive cue.
Salient features of SCARP:
• Hidden monitoring and data collection platform 
in shoe,
• Light weight wearable sensor system,
• Low cost non-invasive system
• Automatic real-time detection of FoG,
• Remote monitoring of gait data,
• Online and Offline monitoring, and
• Upon detection of FoG, automatically turns on 
visual cue and keeps it on until freezing ceases.
We developed the prototype of SCARP by 
using two shoes that are having 4 sensors fitted 
in each. Each shoe has an Arduino UNO micro-
controller. Micro-controller of one shoe equipped 
with LED, detects FoG episode and turns on the 
visual cue. On the other hand micro-controller in 
the other shoe drives the WiFi module to continu-
ously transmit the sensed gait data.
The block diagram of SCARP architecture 
is shown in Figure 1. Data transmitted over the 
internet is stored in database and is retrieved by 
the server. A web application with a simple user 
interface (UI) is designed to retrieve this data 
from server. This application can be used to moni-
tor real-time gait pattern of patient’s gait. There 
is a provision to select the preferred start and 
end dates and times to obtain gait history of a 
Figure 1. Block diagram representing architecture of 
SCARP.

271
patient. The patient data can be viewed remotely 
by any authorized person by logging into the web 
page thus enabling online and offline monitor-
ing. The working principle of SCARP is shown in 
Figure 2 in a systematic flowchart. We gathered the 
gait data from six volunteers who simulated PD 
patient’s gait pattern.
3.1 Wearable hardware component
The prototype of the shoe has been made up using 
the components mentioned in Table 1. The sensors 
are light in weight and flexible with high sensitivity 
and having a response time that is less than 5 μs. 
Arduino has a Flash Memory of 32 KB hence, a 
little onboard computation was performed and 
the pressure sensor data is sent to the central stor-
age for further processing. Figure 4 represents the 
circuit diagram of the Arduino attached with four 
sensors and the WiFi breakout module in one shoe. 
An LED is used in the front of the other shoe that 
projects light beam in front of the other foot on 
detection of freezing acting as a visual cue.
3.2 Sensing and monitoring
We have used four sensors hidden inside the shoe 
sole. Based on the theories of R.W. Soames, 
1985 the location of the sensors are chosen con-
sidering the points (heel, metatarsal heads, and 
mid foot) where in the selected zones the magni-
tude of pressure exerted is maximum. Scott et al. 
1973 mentioned that heavier people tend to put 
more pressure on the lateral side of foot, hence we 
placed 1 sensor in the lateral area. Different other 
survey and literatures have proven this theory as 
well (Kapandji 2010, Soames 1985, Mazumder 
et al. 2012). We have used the first sensor to record 
the thumb pressure, second one just below the 
thumb area, third sensor in the lateral foot region 
and fourth one in the heel. The schematic diagram 
of the strategic positions of the sensors under 
foot is shown in Figure 3. Though the pressures 
in these points vary drastically in different patients 
as shown in Figure 9 but in general, these regions 
cumulatively gather the information of pressure 
variation to detect FoG. We have been interested 
only in taking into account the change in the 
Table 1. Components used for prototyping.
Components
Count Specification
Flexiforce & FSR 
402 Sensors
8
diameter of sensing circle: 
14 mm; weight: 0.26 g
Arduino UNO 
Atmega 328 
micro-controller
2
operating voltage: 5V; clock: 
16 Mz; weight: 25g; flash 
memory: 32 KB
IL081 LED
1
5 mm
Onboard Power 
Supply
2
9V battery & power circuit
Pair of shoes
1
US Size 8
Adafruit CC3000 
Wifi Breakout
1
IEEE 802.11 b/g; security 
mode: WPA2; weight: 
3.4 g
Figure 2. A flow chart of SCARP.
Figure 3. Pressure points for sensor placement in shoe 
sole.
Figure 4. Schematic circuit diagram of Arduino with 
WiFi and sensors.

272
pressure value instead of the absolute pressure 
value. Arduino scales the pressure measurements 
onto a scale of 0 to 1023 where 0 denotes absence of 
pressure and 1023 denotes maximum pressure. The 
pressure variation from different sensors cumula-
tively allows to determine whether freezing has 
occurred or not. Exceeding the threshold pressure 
value for a certain period of time (in our experi-
ment 5 seconds) it enables the embedded system to 
make a decision whether freezing has occurred or 
not and thereby decision of firing LED is made. 
This threshold value of 950 is determined from the 
histogram of the FoG samples collected from the 
simulated patients as shown in Figure 5.
3.3 Online data collection
We used WiFi connectivity to send the data using 
TCP. We created windows compatible web devel-
opment environment using WAMP server for this 
purpose. We collected the real time data from 
the Arduino and transferred it via HTTP POST 
request. MySQL database is used to store the 
data and an Apache server is used to process user 
request. Figure 6 shows the screen shot of real-
time data getting recorded in the server. The data is 
recorded along with the original timestamp, which 
thereby helps in future analysis. This data can eas-
ily be accessed from anywhere across the world by 
someone having a valid access rights. It gives the 
caregivers and health care providers to monitor 
patient’s data on real time basis or even later.
The Graphical User Interface (GUI) that was 
designed also has the option of displaying the 
data based on a user’s choice. The GUI provides 
choice of data filtering based on one to many days, 
weeks or even month. Figures 10 and 11 displays 
the screenshot of the system designed for display-
ing gait data for a date selection. Based on user’s 
input, stored gait repository is searched for the 
gait data and is displayed in the form of graph. 
The pattern presented in the graph helps doctors 
and physicians in making decision on data and to 
graphically view a large dataset.
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section we briefly showcase the gait data 
collected from the sensors and analyze them. As 
mentioned earlier, we created a gait data repository 
from volunteers. These initial data helped us to 
determine the threshold pressure value to differen-
tiate a normal gait pattern from an impaired one. 
Figure 8 shows different episodes of human gait 
Figure 5. Histogram of FoG sample distribution.
Figure 6. UI displaying sensor values from server.
Figure 7. Pressor sensor data plotted against time 
(10 samples per second) showing FoG.
Figure 8. Gait cycle identified from pressure sensor 
data [Photo courtesy: ref.3].

273
and corresponding sensor data pattern collected 
from volunteers. In order to map the gait episodes 
to the recorded sensor data, we illustrate a complete 
gait cycle in the diagram. During the experiment 
we observed the subject’s gait pause and noted the 
pattern of the graph that was being generated by 
the sensor data in real-time. The graph shown in 
Figure 7 confirmed that the rapid pressure varia-
tions in the data values is due to the gait pause. 
During this time he tries to continue his motion 
but is not being able to complete the gait properly 
and a rapid shaking and trembling is noticeable. 
This results in a quick change of a pressure value 
giving the thick lines in the shown graph. Apart 
from this the crest and troughs in the graphs is 
generated because of the pressure exerted during 
walking and having normal footsteps.
We used samples from gait data repository for 
analyzing gait behavior of the simulated patient 
volunteers. From these derived values we plotted a 
histogram in Figure 5 to study the frequency and 
range of the pressure values that is prevalent in 
these data.
These statistics were used to determine a good 
choice of threshold. Figure 5 shows the histogram 
that confirms the threshold value being 950; con-
sidering the FoG instances from the datasets we 
generated. The reason behind choosing the thresh-
old value of 950 is that the occurrence of sensor 
value samples hence the information contained in 
the data beyond 950 is more frequent during FoG. 
That implies this is a critical value to for the data-
set considered.
5 CONCLUSION
The work herein presented is a smart PD patient 
monitoring system that leverages wearable sensor 
technology, WiFi connectivity, and a client-server 
application to collect and analyze gait movement 
data. Our endeavor results in a smart shoe that 
demonstrates the capability of analyzing a weara-
ble sensor data, detecting FoG and providing visual 
cue automatically. SCARP, could be considered for 
further upgrading by adding artificial intelligence 
into it. We can implement learning mechanism for 
personalized FoG detection with minimal latency 
in providing visual cue. The system can be even 
tested with a large number of PD patients and the 
huge gait movement data thus generated could be 
gathered in an online repository as a large variety 
of database for further gait data analysis and pat-
tern mining.
REFERENCES
Caldara, M. et al., “A novel Body Sensor Network for 
Parkinson’s disease patients rehabilitation assess-
ment”, Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Net-
works (BSN), 11th International Conference Zurich, 
published by IEEE, 2014, pp. 81–86.
Chen, Y. et al., “The Study on A Real-time Remote Mon-
itoring System for Parkinson’s Disease Patients with 
Deep Brain Stimulators”, Engineering in Medicine 
and Biology Society (EMBC), 36th Annual Interna-
tional Conference of the IEEE, 2014, pp. 1358–1361.
Figure 9. Variation in gait data collected simultaneously.
Figure 10. UI for graphical display of data based on 
date selection.
Figure 11. UI for graphical display of data and Live 
data display functionality.

274
Hoehn, M.M., Yahr, M.D. “Parkinsonism: onset, pro-
gression, and mortality”, Neurology, 1967, Vol. 17, 
Number 5 Internet: http://www.neurology.org/con-
tent/17/5/427.full.pdf, [Feb 25, 2015].
Jamthe, A. S. Chakraborty, S.K. Ghosh, D.P. Agrawal, 
“An implementation of Wireless Sensor Networks in 
monitoring of Parkinson’s Patients using Received 
Signal Strength Indicator”, Distributed Computing in 
Sensor Systems (DCOSS), IEEE International Con-
ference, 2013, ISBN: 978–1-4799–0206–4 ( Print Ver-
sion), pp. 442–447.
Kapandji, I.A. “The Physiology of the Joints”,6th edi-
tion, Churchill Livingstone, Vol. 2, p.199.
Mariani, B., Jimenez, M., Vingerhoets, F., Aminian, K. 
“On-shoe wearable sensors for gait and turning assess-
ment of patients with Parkinson’s disease”, Biomedical 
Engineering, IEEE Transactions, 2013, vol. 60, Issue 
1, pp. 155–158.
Mazumder, O., Kundu, A.S., Bhaumik, S. “Development 
of Wireless Insole Foot Pressure Data Acquisition 
Device”,International Conference onCommunica-
tions, Devices and Intelligent Systems (CODIS), IEEE, 
Kolkata, 2012, ISBN: 978–1-4673–4699–3 (Print Ver-
sion), pp. 302–305.
Mitra, R.N., Das, P., Espay, A., Agrawal, D.P. “Recog-
nition of Gait Impairment and Data Analysis for 
Parkinson’s Patients Using Low-cost Sensor Based 
Embedded System”, 36th Annual International IEEE 
EMBS Conference, 26 Aug’14 to 30 Aug’14, Chicago, 
USA.
Patel, S. et al., “Home Monitoring of Patients with Par-
kinson’s Disease via Wearable Technology and a Web-
based Application”, EMBC, Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE, 2010, pp. 4411–4414.
Rempark Project Website, Internet: http://rempark.cetpd.
upc.edu/project [Jul 05, 2015].
Soames, R.W. “Foot Pressure Patterns during Gait”, 
Journal of Biomedical Engineering, 1985, Vol. 7, Issue 2, 
pp. 120–126.
Stott, J.R.R., Hutton, W.C., and Stokes, I.A.F. “Forces 
under the foot,” The Journal of Bone and Joint Sur-
gery, London, England, May 1973, vol. 55-B, no. 2, 
pp. 335–344.
Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale, Internet:http://
www.etas.ee/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/updrs.pdf, 
[Feb 20, 2015].
University of Glasgow, “Definition and Description of 
Gait Cycle”, Internet: http://www.gla.ac.uk/t4/∼fbls/
files/fab/tutorial/anatomy/hfgait.html.

275
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A survey on cloud computing and networking in the next generation
Piyali Das
The Ohio State University, Ohio, USA
Rupendra N. Mitra
University of Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
ABSTRACT: In this paper, we consolidate on the numerous research and development, whichendeavors 
towards seamless convergence of cloud computing, telecommunication, and networking. The advanced 
telecommunications and wireless networking technologies could further be accelerated successfully with 
the overlapping from cloud computing. Classically, networking, especially wireless and mobile network-
ing, and cloud computing, have been taken under consideration by scientific literatures but through sepa-
rate approaches. Recently, the need of virtual resource sharing is felt important through cloud computing 
in mobile networking due to the enhanced requirements of capacity and quality of services. As a result, 
we can see a large number of efforts are made to converge with wireless technology and cloud computing. 
It gives rise to the Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) for the purpose of network virtualization thereby 
making Network as a Service (NaaS) a prospective dimension of cloud based networking. This survey 
comprehensively summarizes the endeavors from the perspective of next generation cellular networking 
and also takes into account the open research areas to get the utmost benefit from the amalgamation of 
telecommunication and cloud computing.
are fortunate enough to have different network 
service providers to address these concerns. Dif-
ferent constraints of wireless networking like 
spectrum 
unavailability, 
resource 
allocation, 
capacity enhancement, energy efficiency, security, 
scalability, flexibility etc., have tried to overcome 
with proper integration of cloud technologies in 
the recent literature. We are on the verge of the 
5th generation of cellular networking, which will 
cater to more than 50 billion connected devices 
and ten thousand times of the data requirements 
(Ericsson white paper, 2015). So in this article, we 
will discuss briefly how cloud computing is going 
to converge with the next generation of wireless 
networking.
After the introduction, this paper is organized 
in the following five sections. Section two and 
three gives the overview of the cloud architecture 
and Software Defined Networking (SDN) respec-
tively. Section four describes the Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA). The subsequent subsections 
further describe the advancements in different 
aspects of SOA. Since, it is an important part of 
modern wireless networks, as a part of service we 
have provided a detailed insight of Radio Access 
Network (RAN). Section five covers the security 
aspects of the futuristic converged system. Finally, 
we conclude this letter with section six.
1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, cloud computing has become one 
of the biggest area of research and technological 
advancement. On the other hand, telecommunica-
tion and wireless networking industry have become 
an highly advanced industry catering to many peo-
ple worldwide. Merging of wireless networks and 
cloud has helped in understanding the Mobile 
Cloud Computing (MCC) (Zin et al. 2015). As the 
demand of connected world is increasing, telecom-
munication and networking industry have faced 
several challenges that are addressed by the flex-
ibility offered by cloud computing. Cloud comput-
ing is an architectural platform to get access to and 
share resources like software, applications, storage, 
or services by remote users. This special comput-
ing technique makes these resources available to 
users on basis of demand. The basic characteristic 
of the cloud enables virtualization of computing 
resources, thereby creating a partition among the 
use of the actual physical resources to map the 
logical functions. This abstract layer is responsible 
for this mapping of logical entities with that of the 
essential physical components.
As a result of persistent issues of connectivity 
control, trust, security, privacy, and local presence 
the cloud service faces numerous challenges. We 

276
2 OVERVIEW OF CLOUD COMPUTING
Following the footsteps of cloud computing, 
sharing of files, storing data along with process-
ing power distribution, we have experienced a 
new dimension altogether. The three models of 
services that are inherent in cloud computing are 
Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Serv-
ice (PaaS), and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). 
They act as the business models of cloud comput-
ing. In essence, SaaS enables consumers to use 
applications that run on a cloud infrastructure. 
SaaS applications uses the web to provide appli-
cations that are managed by a third-party vendor. 
Google Apps for Work could be an example of 
SaaS. With PaaS, consumers can create and deploy 
applications onto the cloud infrastructure. PaaS 
provides the computing platform like Operating 
System, Database, Web Server, environment for 
running an application etc. It acts as a middleware 
system to help create applications using software 
components like Apprenda is a PaaS provider for 
Java. IaaS, on the other hand, provides the user 
with computing infrastructure, physical machines, 
or virtual machines, and resources. It acts as the 
remote delivery center or model of computing 
resources to let the users’ access, monitor, and use 
resource center facilities like CPU, networking 
service, storage, and other essential resources. It 
enables the user to run software’s like Operating 
System or deploy other applications. Amazon Web 
Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure are among the 
IaaS provider.
3 SOFTWARE DEFINED NETWORKING
The next generation network is truly going to be 
‘open’. That means no proprietary software will 
be used to ensure the open programmability of the 
networks. This will also help in getting rid of ven-
dor specific hardware incompatibility issue. And 
this ‘openness’ is offered by Software Defined Net-
working (SDN).
3.1 What is new in SDN?
Software Defined Networking is a concept that 
cumulatively considers all software that is responsi-
ble in running a network and supports other appli-
cations. There are some network protocols and 
policies that together form SDN that enables the 
network to be open and programmable. SDN acts 
as the whole ecosystem. This ecosystem comprises 
of controller, network application, data plane or 
network forwarding devices, network services that 
manages the network as shown in Figure 1. The 
forwarding devices embedded with cached memory 
makes packet forwarding way faster through SDN. 
In SDN the network has been logically separated 
into controller and the data plane and yet it has 
a global view of the entire network (Banikazemi 
et al. 2013). The Network Operating System (NOS) 
or controller is the middleware of the SDN net-
work. We will discuss the NOS in more details.
3.2 Need of agile networking
The type of networks we have today is sufficient 
but it needs to evolve. The major demand of such 
technology comes from the need of having custom 
security policy, constant monitoring and testing 
of network, use of architecture and features from 
multiple domains (Essens et al. 2007). An agile net-
work also requires the system to be fault tolerant 
so that they can recover from both hard and soft 
failures, which can be due to fiber out or link fail-
ure, or other reasons. The future networking model 
needs to adapt network virtualization, become scal-
able with more traffic, store data in data repository 
with transparency and is enabled to use the distrib-
uted applications concurrently for ease, robustness, 
and faster execution of processes. This can help the 
network to evolve as fast as the software.
3.3 Network operating system
Network Operating System (NOS) is a special type 
of operating system dedicated to computer net-
working. NOS can be fed onto a router or other 
network component that conducts the functions 
of network layer. As shown in Figure 1 the NOS 
is responsible for coupling network services and 
distributed applications. It controls and manages 
the packet forwarding devices, routers, switches, 
and other hardware components to actually make 
a decision about forwarding a packet from source 
Figure 1. SDN architecture.

277
to destination (Gude et al. 2008). Major feature of 
the NOS is the abstraction it provides to the other 
network components and the applications that 
interact with this SDN. It also maintains a global 
view of the entire network. The SDN controller 
can be used to serve multiple purposes like Topol-
ogy service, Host tracking, Inventory services etc. 
It also manages the interaction of the north bound 
APIs above it. These API could be the Java API for 
making the network programmable. This makes 
the network open and programmable interface and 
easy to customize the network.
4 SERVICE-ORIENTED VIRTUAL 
NETWORKING
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) is a power-
ful tool, which is used in network virtualization 
and cloud computing. SOA is a software designed 
approach in which the apps provide services 
independently to physical or other components 
connected through wide network via robust com-
munication protocols. Web Service is a true exam-
ple of SOA architecture. In this architecture we 
have a service provider, a registry, and a service 
consumer. For example, a web service is following 
the Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP), where 
we have the service provider having its service avail-
able and published in the UDDI registry, which is 
then accessed by any service consumer.
The telecom industry has segregated the serv-
ice based functionality and traffic transportation 
mechanism. Next Generation Network (NGN) 
and IP based network are the pivotal landmark 
in the future of telecom. NGN follows the above 
mentioned dissociation of the two layers, which 
actually creates the platform of virtual infra-
structure. This effort has been made to make the 
system open rather than the traditional network, 
which was cohesive and was closely interdepend-
ent among the individual components that used to 
make the entire network difficult to manage. Use 
of some API’s like Java Remote Method Invoca-
tion (RMI), Open Service Architecture (OSA), 
and Parlay are some of the intelligent ways to 
make a programmable network and efficient net-
work resource abstraction.
4.1 Cloud networking
The next generation of networking is architecture, 
which aims at separating and abstracting the net-
work controller and packet forwarding scheme and 
making the network easily scalable and program-
mable. For this, the SDN cloud based architecture 
plays a significant role. This model (Azodolmolky 
et al. 2013) includes:
• OpenFlow based peripheral or edge nodes that 
connects to the data center via a cloud backbone 
infrastructure
• Some core nodes that is responsible for traffic 
between these edge nodes,
• SDN controller to manage the forwarding of 
packets via the cloud backbone and achieve net-
work virtualization,
• A software for resource management, data stor-
age, retrieval process, and efficient utilization of 
network bandwidth.
4.2 Networking-as-a-Service (NaaS)
To virtualize the network the service providers need 
to bind the network services together into network 
infrastructure services and abstract it together. 
Till date network resources has been underuti-
lized. Hence, sharing of resources was necessary 
and is done via Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS). 
Network-as-a-Service (NaaS) is a platform that 
allows the network parameters to be controlled 
at real-time. In the NaaS domain, the end users 
of this virtual network access these platform and 
services without knowing the physical existence of 
the network devices and other infrastructure. The 
service providers are indeed responsible for this 
mapping of various on-demand network services 
with actual network resources. This is similar to 
the virtual mapping of cloud services to comput-
ing resources.
4.3 Mobile Network-as-a-Service (MNaaS)
Another significant role in cloud computing is pro-
vided by the network operators. They are responsi-
ble of providing reliable and low cost service to the 
end users. As mentioned in [1] Mobile Network-as-
a-Service can be used to benefit low cost servi ces 
with the help of mobile cloud computing and util-
ity payment model. The Telecom Operator Cloud 
(TOC) acts as cloud connectivity management pro-
vider. At their end they apply both SaaS and PaaS 
model to become the cloud broker. TOC performs 
cloud connectivity, deliver cloud services, and effi-
ciently utilize cloud assets which thereby makes 
user cost dynamic. A Schematic diagram of net-
work cloudification has been shown in Figure 2.
4.4 SoftRAN: RAN-as-a-Service
This section summarizes the latest advancements on 
Cloudification of Radio Access Networks (C-RAN) 
of cellular communication system. This technol-
ogy is expected to be prevalently available with 
the release of 5G telecommunication standards. 
All the cellular service providers are experiencing 

278
an exponential increase in their capex (capital 
expenditure) and opex (operating expense).
Radio Access Network (RAN) is an important 
segment of cellular network. It provides wireless 
connectivity to the user equipped by radio cov-
erage over a wide geographical region. Managing 
interference, balancing load among neighboring 
cells, and ensuring seem-less handovers becomes 
more difficult for the conventional RAN with dis-
tributed protocols and node architecture with the 
growth of network. This is where the concept of 
Cloud RAN or SoftRAN comes to play. C-RAN, 
as an integrated part of next generation access 
network, can minimize the operators’ costs by 
eliminating most of the challenges faced by legacy 
RANs mentioned above. Moreover, the subscrib-
ers will get an uninterrupted services on demand.
China Mobile Research Institute introduced 
a cloud computing based architecture of RAN, 
unlike the conventional decentralized RAN 
(China Mobile 2010). It envisaged a centralized 
control plane protocol to manage the RAN as a 
single entity instead of the traditional decentrali-
zed protocols to control each node independently. 
Gudipati et al. argued for the convention archi-
tecture as suboptimal for Key Performance Indi-
cators’ (KPI’s) of RAN and proposed their own 
framework SoftRan (Gudipati et al. 2008).
Moreover, the RAN part is gradually becoming 
more dense, chaotic, and heterogeneous in nature 
after the rapid implementations of small, pico, and 
femto cells. Since the cell radii are decreasing in 
dense network, there are more chances of inter-cell 
interference due to overshooting. The smaller the 
cells the faster the requirement of load balancing. 
Hence, to reduce the cost cellular service providers 
considered cloudification to form a much larger 
processing resource pool shared in a large geo-
graphical area.
4.4.1 Key concept of C-Ran
They key concept behind this disruptive C-RAN 
technology is to virtually unify all the RAN 
nodes (which includes the base stations, their base 
band units, and inter node links) of an area in a 
centralized control plane. Then, logically allocate 
the radio resources as per the demand of a cell and 
improve the other KPIs viz. Handover, signal to 
interference ratio, throughput etc. The next gen-
eration access technology thus, will be able to serve 
the following needs.
• Virtual pool of Base-band unit: A pool of all 
available radio resources and nodes is logically 
formed at a centralized server. Now the process-
ing resources and capabilities are dynamically 
allocated and reconfigured based on the real-
time demands [3].
• SOARAN: He and Song presented SOARAN 
(Jun et al. 2015), a service oriented framework 
for RAN. SOARAN provides a set of abstract 
applications, which are configurable with respect 
to differentiated Quality of Experience (QoE) 
requirements. This may help operators to map 
their applications to the abstract pool of appli-
cations and allocate required bandwidth. So, it 
takes care of lower-layer resource allocation and 
makes radio allocation responsibilities by ena-
bling resource virtualization.
• Support to multi-air interface Standards: Next 
generation access technology must support dif-
ferent air interfaces standards. Provision for easy 
software upgradation will be another feature.
4.4.2 Architecture
Many well-known companies and research bod-
ies are engaged in C-RAN project to establish 
RAN-as-a-service. From operators’ point of 
view spectrum utilization, unified RAN manage-
ment and cost reductions are major issues to be 
address by the C-RAN architecture. Senjie et al. 
2012, suggested a C-RAN architecture with three 
logical planes (service plane, control plane and 
PHY plane) that supports multi-mode (WiMax, 
LTE, WCDMA etc.) air interface. Similarly, Lin 
et al. 2009, reported their QoS report which is 
pretty impressive in terms of radio KPIs. Hong 
et al. 2012, implemented and reported PICASSO, 
a novel spectrum slicing that allows simultaneous 
trans-receiving using single RF front end circuitry 
and antenna system.
4.4.3 Convergence of RAN and Cloud
Virtualization technologies are well practiced in 
modern data centers. Network Function Virtu-
alization (NFV) mainly consolidates the network 
nodes, links, and other resources. This cloud com-
putation inspired the C-RAN for radio resource 
and computational resource cloudification so that 
dynamic allocation of radio capacity (base-band 
resource) can be done in more real-time and in an 
optimized way.
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of network cloudification.

279
4.4.4 Challenges & Advantages
There are few challenges C-RAN may face and one 
of those is higher compression ratio for control 
and data plane. Because the resources are shared 
over the network connected with limited band-
width links. Hence, higher rate of compression is 
required to provide more real-time services. Again, 
concept of virtualization is simple but actual 
implementation in a live network is more difficult. 
For an example, cloudification of multi-protocol, 
multi-vendor, multi-standard IT services requires 
a novel design of additional system accelerator. 
This accelerator in conjunction with web based 
cache, will make the computation-intensive Real-
Time Operating System (RTOS) function properly 
(Primet et al. 2007). Moreover, optimization of the 
RTOS and the virtualization micro-management 
system are yet to be functional.
5 SECURITY AND THREAT 
ADMINISTRATION
Cloud computing offers a number of benefits and 
advantages as well as poses serious threats in dif-
ferent areas. Martucci et al. 2012, have discussed 
various trust and security problems that the com-
munication industry had observed. Protection of 
data becomes a genuine issue in cloud architecture. 
Data retention, data availability, and legal compli-
cations are related to a flow of data beyond terri-
tory. Trust relationship among the cloud providers 
and their customers are also at stake in terms of 
security and privacy. Since, no more roaming and 
feebly international boundaries are considered, the 
cost policies that were to be charged to the custom-
ers is an issue as well. Most noteworthy of them 
is the trust worthy functionality of each network 
component.
To handle these security challenges a number of 
protocols like cryptographic techniques, encryp-
tion, and other regulatory acts have been enforced. 
(Modi et al. 2013) As transfer rate increases, IDS 
(intruder Detection System), which are software 
based, struggle to keep up and also requires more 
intelligence classifying flows. According to custom 
security policies, along with constant network test-
ing, monitoring is also required.
6 CONCLUSION
This paper underlines that cloud computing solu-
tions are obvious for the wireless networking and 
especially for telecom industry in near future. We 
brief different aspects of cloud computing, next 
generation network virtualization approaches, and 
research directions. However, we have also discussed 
the challenges like device privacy in cloud, security 
of the network etc. So, cloud computing solutions 
are to be converged with and deployed by telecom-
munication providers in the next generation net-
work deployment. Telecommunication technology 
is awaiting its next generation to appear by 2020 
and that is going to be a zero latency gigabit service 
oriented network (Nokia White Papers 2015). This 
article also surveys the cloud-migration and pos-
sibly the delivery model in multi-operator or multi-
cloud environment.
Thus, overlapping among different areas like tel-
ecom, networking, cloud computing etc., provides 
a diction towards telecom-cloud convergence that 
will revolutionize cloud-based future networks.
REFERENCES
Azodolmolky, S., Wieder, P., and Yahyapour, R. “SDN-
Based Cloud Computing Networking,” Transparent 
Optical Networks (ICTON), Cartagena, 2013.
Banikazemi, M., Olshefski, D., Shaikh, A. et al.” Merid-
ian: an SDN platform for cloud network services,” 
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 51 no. 2, pp. 
120–127, Feb. 2013.
Ericsson White Paper, Website: http://www.akosrs.si/files/
Telekomunikacije/Digitalna_agenda/Internetni_pro-
tokol_Ipv6/More-than-50-billion-connected-devices.
pdf, Sep. 2015
Essens, P., Spaans, M., and Treurniet, W., “Agile net-
working in command and control,” The International 
C2 Journal, 2007.
Gude, N., Koponen, T., Pettit, J. et al., “Nox: Towards 
an operating system for networks,” ACM SIGCOMM 
Computer Comm. Review, vol. 38 no.3, pp.105–110, 
2008.
Gudipati, A., Perry, D., Li, L.E., & Katti, S. SoftRAN: 
Software defined radio access network. In Proceedings 
of the second ACM SIGCOMM workshop on Hot 
topics in software defined networking (pp. 25–30). 
ACM, 2013.
He, Jun, and Wei Song. “SOARAN: A Service-ori-
ented Architecture for Radio Access Network Shar-
ing in Evolving Mobile Networks.” arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1508.00306 (2015).
Hong, Steven S., Jeffrey Mehlman, and Sachin Katti. 
“Picasso: flexible RF and spectrum slicing.” ACM 
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 42, 
no. 4 (2012): 37–48.
Martucci, L.A., Zuccato, A., Smeets, B. et al. “Privacy, 
Security and Trust in Cloud Computing: The Perspec-
tive of the Telecommunication Industry,” Ubiquitous 
Intelligence & Computing UIC/ATC, Fukuoka, Sep. 
2012.
Modi, C., Patel, D., Patel, H. et al., “A survey of intru-
sion detection techniques in Cloud,” Journal of Net-
work and Computer Applications, vol. 36 no. 1, pp. 
42–57, 2013.
Mobile, China. “C-RAN Road towards Green Radio 
Access Network.” C-RAN Int’l. Wksp (2010).
Online resources, 2015 Nokia 5G white papers: http://
networks.nokia.com/file/28771/5 g-white-paper

280
Primet, Pascale, Jean-Patrick Gelas Vicat-Blanc, Olivier 
Mornard, Dinil Mon Divakaran, Pierre Bozonnet, 
Mathieu Jan, Vincent Roca, and Lionel Giraud. 
“HIPCAL: State of the Art of OS and Network virtu-
alization solutions for Grids.” Sep 14 (2007): 38.
Siyu Lin; Zhangdui Zhong; Bo Ai, “Quality of Service 
Evaluation Scheme for Heterogeneous Wireless Net-
work”, Wireless Communications, Networking and 
Mobile Computing, 2009. WiCom ‘09. 5th Interna-
tional Conference on, Beijing, 2009, pp. 1–4.
Yin, Z., Yu, F.R., Shengrong, B., and Zhu, H. “Joint 
Cloud and Wireless Networks Operations in Mobile 
Cloud Computing Environments with Telecom Oper-
ator Cloud,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 14, no. 7, July 2015 
Zhang Senjie; Yang Xuebin; Liao Fanglan; Ngai Tin-
fook; Zhang, S.; Kuilin Chen, “Architecture of GPP 
based, scalable, large-scale C-RAN BBU pool”, 
Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2012 IEEE, 
Anaheim, CA, pp. 267–272, 2012.

281
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Tilaiya reservoir catchment segmentation using hybrid 
soft cellular approach
Kalyan Mahata
Government College of Engineering and Leather Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Rajib Das
School of Water Resources Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Anasua Sarkar
SMIEEE, Government College of Engineering and Leather Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Image segmentation among overlapping land cover areas in satellite images is a very cru-
cial task. Detection of belongingness is the important problem for classifying mixed pixels. This paper 
proposes an approach for pixel classification using a hybrid approach of Fuzzy C-Means and Cellular 
automata methods. This new unsupervised method is able to detect clusters using 2-Dimensional Cellular 
Automata model based on fuzzy segmentations. This approach detects the overlapping regions in remote 
sensing images by uncertainties using fuzzy set membership values. As a discrete and dynamical system, 
cellular automaton explores the uniformly interconnected cells with states. In the second phase of our 
method, we utilize a 2-dimensional cellular automaton to prioritize allocations of mixed pixels among 
overlapping land cover areas. We experiment our method on Tilaiya Reservoir Catchment on Barakar 
river for the first time. The clustered regions are compared with well-known FCM and K-Means methods 
and also with the ground truth knowledge. The results show the superiority of our new method.
In the remote sensing image, a crisp object C is a 
subset of P C
P
,
⊆
. Hence, a fuzzy object is defined 
as a fuzzy subset F 
P F
P
of
,
⊆
. This fuzzy object 
F  is defined bi-univoquely by its membership func-
tion, μ. μF
μ ( )
( , ]
∈
1,  is known as the membership 
function, which represents the membership degree 
of the point x to the fuzzy set F . When the value 
of μF
μ ( )  is closer to 1, the degree of member-
ship of x in F  will be higher. Such a representation 
allows for a direct mapping of mixed pixels in over-
lapping land cover areas in remote sensing images. 
Let F  denotes the set of all fuzzy sets defined on 
P . For any two pixels x,y, we denote d
x y
F
d ( ,
x
) as 
their distance in fuzzy perspective. The definition 
of a new method utilizing the cellular automata 
over fuzzy segmentation solutions is the scope of 
this chapter.
In the unsupervised classification method, clus-
tering is based on maximum intra-class similarity 
and minimum inter-class similarity. State-of-the-
art clustering methods are–K-Means clustering 
(Hoon et al., 2004), simulated annealing (Lukashin & 
Futchs, 1999), graph theoretic approach (Xu, 
1999), fuzzy c-means clustering (Dembele, 2003) 
and scattered object clustering (de Souto, 2008). 
Different perspectives methods like the supervised 
1 INTRODUCTION
Cogalton and Green in 1999, defined remote sens-
ing as “the art and science of obtaining information 
about an object without being in direct physi-
cal contact with the object” (Cogalton & Green, 
1999). Canopy of methods exist for classifying pix-
els into known classes (for example, an urban area 
or turbid water) in satellite images. Theoretically, 
a remote sensing image can be defined as a set,
P =
≤
≤
{
|
,
≤
}
i
|
r
j
≤
, ≤
s
k
≤
,
n
ijk 1
1
≤
i
≤
 
(1)
of r × s × n information units for pixels, where pij ∈ 
{pij1, pij2, … pijk} is the set of spectral band values for 
n bands related with the pixel of coordinate (i, j). 
In order to find similar regions, we segment this 
image by fuzzy sets, that considers both the spatial 
image objects and the imprecision attached to them.
Let P  (usually R
Z
n
n
Z
o
) denotes the space of 
the remote sensing image. Consequently, the points 
of P  (pixels or voxels) are the spatial variables x,y. 
Let d
x y
P
d ( ,
x
) denotes the spatial distance between 
two pixels { , }
x y
,
∈P. In existing works, dP
d  is taken 
as the Euclidean distance on P  (Maulik & Sarkar, 
2012), (Bandyopadhyay, 2005).

282
multi-objective learning approach (Maulik & 
Sarkar, 2012), also efficiently detect arbitrary 
shaped land cover areas in satellite images.
The membership functions of soft computing 
approaches like fuzzy sets, also efficiently detects 
overlapping partitions. Fuzzy set theory is a meth-
odology to illustrate how to handle uncertainty 
and imprecise information in the dataset. The 
fuzzy models have been experimented for land 
cover detection of remote sensing images and pat-
tern recognitions (Bandyopadhyay, 2005), (Dave, 
1989). Applying the concepts of fuzzy membership 
function (Wang, 1997), (Pappis, 1993), fuzzy clus-
tering (Huang, 2008), and fuzzy-rule based systems 
(Bardossy, 2002) in algorithms, the remote sensing 
image identification becomes more feasible.
A cellular automaton is a discrete and dynami-
cal system composed of a very simple, uniformly 
and interconnected cells. A cellular automaton 
is a well-known method to detect states in cel-
lular spaces. Therefore, to predict pixel classifi-
cation of remote sensing imagery, we propose a 
2-dimensional cellular automata to fuzzy set based 
initial clustering.
The present study focuses on the integration 
of fuzzy-set theoretic optimal classification with 
cellular automata based neighbourhood priority 
correction for pixel classification in remote sens-
ing imagery. We demonstrate the performance of 
the new distance metric in pixel classification of 
a chosen LANDSAT remote sensing image of the 
catchment area of one Indian River. The quantita-
tive evaluation over three existing validity indices 
indicates the satisfactory performance of our new 
hybrid Fuzzy set based and Cellular Automata 
(CA) Corrected Algorithm (FCA) to detect impre-
cise clusters. We compare our obtained solutions 
with those of K-Means and FCM algorithms to 
verify with the ground truth knowledge. The sta-
tistical tests also demonstrate the significance of 
our new FCA algorithm over K-Means and FCM 
algorithms.
2 FUZZY C-MEANS ALGORITHM 
Clustering is an unsupervised pattern classification 
method based on maximum intra-class similar-
ity and minimum inter-class similarity. In a well-
known partitional clustering approach, named 
fuzzy clustering, points may belong to more than 
one cluster. Therefore, for each point in a cluster, 
one set of membership levels is associated. This 
set of levels indicates the amount of association 
between the point and each of the clusters. One of 
the most widely used fuzzy clustering algorithms 
is the Fuzzy C Means algorithm. Fuzzy set theory 
was introduced in 1965 by Zadeh (Zadeh, 1965) 
as a mean to model the vagueness and ambiguity 
in complex systems. Fuzzy set theory handles the 
concept of partial membership to a set, with real 
valued membership degrees ranging from 0 to 1.
Introduced by Ruspini (Ruspini, 1970) and 
improved by Dune and Bezdek (Dunn, 1974) 
(Bezdek, 1981), the Fuzzy C-Means (FCM) algo-
rithm partitions a finite dataset X = {x1, x2, …, 
xN} into a collection of K fuzzy clusters, satisfying 
criterions (Reddi, 1984). Let m be the exponen-
tial weight of membership degree, m ∈ (1, ∞]. The 
objective function Wmμ of FCM is defined as:
W
C
d
m
i
W
C
ji
m
ij
d
j
K
i
N
(U
) (
)
=
= ∑
∑
2
1
1
 
(2)
Where μij is the membership degree of point xi 
to centroid Cj and dij is the distance between xi and 
cj. Let Uj = (μ1j, μ2j, …, μKj,)T.
Then U = (U1, U2, …, UN) is the membership 
degree matrix and C = (c1, c2, …, cK) is the set of 
cluster centroids. Wm indicates the compactness 
and uniformity degree of clusters. Generally, a 
smaller Wm reflects a more compact cluster set.
The algorithm of FCM is an iteration process 
mathematically described as follows:
1. Initialize m, M and initial cluster centroid set 
C(0). Set the iteration terminating threshold ε 
to a small positive value and iteration time q to 
zero. Calculate U(0) according to C(0) with the 
following equation:
μij
μ
ij
ik
k
K
di
di
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
=
∑
1
2
1
(
)
m−1  
(3)
where 
j Ck k
C
K
iji
=
Ck k
C
∑
,
,
k
,
1
1
…
μi = . If dij = 0, then μij = 1 
and sets μik,k ≠ j = 0 for membership of this pixel to 
other clusters.
2. Update c(q+1) according to U(q) with the following 
equation:
c
x
j
ij
m
i
i
N
ij
m
i
N
=
=
=
∑
∑
(
)
ij
(
)
ij
μi
μi
1
1
 
(4)
3. Calculate U(q+1) according to c(q+1).
4. Compare U(q+1) with U(q). If ||U(q+1) – U(q)|| ≤ ε, 
stop iteration. Otherwise, go to (2).
3 CELLULAR AUTOMATA METHOD
Cellular Automata (CA) are defined to be the 
discrete spatially-extended dynamical systems to 

283
study models of physical systems (Smith, 1971). 
It evolves the computational devices in discrete 
space and time. A CA, which is seeded with any 
state from the set of states with all 0 and single 1 
at different position, generates a fixed number of 
unique patterns.
Stephen Wolfram (Wolfram, 1986) proposes its 
simplest CA in a form of a spatial lattice of cells. 
Each cell stores a discrete variable at time t that 
refers to the present state of the cell. The next state 
of the cell at (t + 1) is affected by its state and 
the states of its neighbors at time t. In the current 
work, we consider 3-neighborhood (self, left and 
right neighbors) CA, where a CA cell is having two 
states, either 0 or 1. The next state of each cell of 
such a CA is
S
f
S
iSt
i
t
i
t
i
t
+1
1
SiS
+
SiS
i
(
,
SiSt
−
,
)
St
1
SiS +
SiS
 
(5)
where f  is the next state function. Si-1
t, Si
t and Si+1
t 
are the present states of the left neighbor, self and 
right neighbor of the i th CA cell at a time t. The 
f can be expressed as a look-up table as shown in 
Table 1. The decimal equivalent of the 8 outputs 
in Table 1, is called ‘Rule’ Ri (Wolfram, 1983). In a 
two-state 3-neighborhood CA, there can be a total 
of 28 (256) rules.
One such rule is 30 in Table 1. Rule 30 CA can 
generate a sequence of random patterns. The sci-
entists observed in this experiment is that an n-cell 
rule 30 CA, seeded with a state all 0 and single 1, 
generates a state with fair distribution of 0 and 1 
after n iterations. However, it is not guaranteed 
that after n iterations not all 0 pattern will come. 
It can be proved that for every, n > 1, an n-cell rule 
30 CA seeded with any state with all 0 and single 
1 at different positions, generates a non-zero states 
after n/2 iterations. Using Wolfram’s classification 
scheme, rule 30 is a class III rule (Wolfram, 1986), 
displaying a periodic and chaotic behavior. Rule 
30 of the elementary Cellular Automata (CA) was 
among the first rules, in which Stephen Wolfram 
noticed the appearance of intrinsic randomness in 
a deterministic system. When initialized with a sin-
gle black pixel there is a pattern behavior down both 
sides of the unfolding CA which gives way to the 
randomly patterned center, is shown in Figure 1. 
This rule is of particular interest because it pro-
duces complex, seemingly-random patterns from 
simple, well-defined rules. In fact, Mathematica 
uses the center column of pixel values as one of its 
random number generator.
If the leftmost and right most cells are neigh-
bors of each other, the CA is defined to be with 
periodic boundary; otherwise it is a null bound-
ary CA. Cellular automata can further be divided 
as deterministic and probabilistic (or, stochastic). 
Elementary CA as stated above is deterministic in 
nature. On the other hand, in case of probabilistic 
CA, the next state of each cell is updated based on 
not only the present states of its neighbors but also 
on a predetermined probability.
4 HYBRID FUZZY-CA CLUSTERING 
ALGORITHM
The new hybrid FCA algorithm consist of two 
phases–initial FCM clustering of remote sensing 
image to generate Fuzzy membership matrix U 
and fine-tuning using the cellular automata based 
on neighborhood priority correction method, is 
shown in Figure 2.
Initial random assignment put N pixels in 
K clusters for initializing FCM algorithm, as 
described in previous subsection. Then, we obtain 
the initial cluster centroids C(0). The iteration ter-
minating threshold value ∈ is set to 1E−05. We ini-
tialize the membership degree matrix U from the 
initial random allocations. Then, we repeat the cen-
troid updation method iteratively and compute the 
membership degree matrix U(q) for each of the q 
iterations. The iterations converge and stop, when 
the difference between the membership degree 
matrix in previous and current iterations becomes 
less than the iteration-terminating threshold.
After the first phase of FCM algorithm, we 
compute the new cellular automata based on 
neighborhood priority correction method over all 
pixels as described in next subsection. Depending 
on the final CA-corrected solutions, the validity 
indices values are also calculated.
4.1 Cellular automata based on neighborhood 
priority correction method
In our 2-dimensional CA model for neighborhood 
based priority correction, we have considered the 
Table 1. Look-up table for rule 30.
Present state
111 110
101 100
011 010
001 000
Rule
(7)
(6)
(5)
(4)
(3)
(2)
(1)
(0)
Next State
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
Figure 1. Example of Wolfram rule 30.

284
states of the cells in each CA according to the clus-
tering allocations from the fuzzy set based initial 
clustering phase. The cells in CA denote the pix-
els in their positions in the chosen remote sens-
ing image. The state numbers of the cells in the 
model initially denote the assigned clusters from 
the first phase of our algorithm. State 0 denotes 
that the pixel has been assigned to cluster 0 in 
the first phase. In our proposed model, we adopt 
the CA with null boundary condition. We have 
used deterministic CA for our experiments. Our 
2-dimensional CA model has been depicted in the 
flowchart in Figure 2.
The first stage CA is developed based on 
the cluster allocations outputs from the initial 
fuzzy set based clustering method FCM on the 
chosen remote sensing image. Now if among 4 
neighbors (left, right, top, bottom), at least two 
neighbors show lower cluster values, the priority 
of current cell decreases to be of lower cluster 
value. Therefore, in this case, the present state 
of current cell decreases by 1 towards 0 priority. 
Similarly, if more than 2 neighbors have similar 
cluster values other than the current cell, then 
the next state of current cell is assigned to that 
value, and makes it belong to the similar clus-
ters depending on the neighborhood pixels and 
reducing number of cluster outliers. We iterate 
through the CA matrices to obtain proper neigh-
borhood corrections for pixels in the chosen 
remote sensing image.
5 APPLICATION TO PIXEL 
CLASSIFICATION
The new FCA algorithm is implemented using 
MATLAB 7.0 on HP 2 quad processor with 2.40 
GHz. Comparing with the well-known K-Means 
and FCM methods are also being executed. Dunn 
(Dunn, 1973) and Davies-Bouldin (DB) (Davies & 
Bouldin, 1979) validity indices evaluate the effec-
tiveness of FCA over K-Means and FCM quan-
titatively. The efficiency of FCA is also verified 
visually from the clustered images considering 
the ground truth information of land cover areas. 
The chosen LANDSAT image of the catchment 
region of Barakar River, which has been extracted 
for further research works, is available in 3 bands 
viz. green, red, and blue bands with original image 
as shown in Figure 3. Figure 3 shows the origi-
nal LANDAST image of Barakar River catch-
ment with histogram equalization with 7 classes: 
Turbid Water (TW), Pond Water (PW), Concrete 
(Concr.), Vegetarian (Veg), Habitation (Hab), Open 
space (OS), and roads (including bridges) (B/R). 
The River Barakar cuts through the image, in the 
middle of the catchment area. From the upper 
left corner of the catchment area the river is flow-
ing through the middle part of the selected area. 
The river is shown as a thin line in the middle of 
the catchment area of blue and river colors. The 
Barakar Dam is shown as deep gray color in up-
left corner in Figure 3. The segmented catchment 
area of Barakar River and the images obtained by 
K-Means and FCM algorithms respectively are 
shown in Figures 4 and 5 for (K = 7). In Figure 3, 
K-Means algorithm fails to classify the catchment 
area from the background. FCM clustering solu-
tions in Figure 5 also fails to detect the catchment 
area properly from the background in the middle 
part. Some water bodies part and the background 
are mixed in both K-Means and FCM clustering 
solutions in Figures 4 and 5 respectively. How-
ever, our new FCA algorithm in Figure 6 is able to 
Figure 3. Original image of the catchment area of 
Barakar river.
Figure 2. The flowchart of FCA algorithm for remote 
sensing classification.

285
separate all catchment areas from the background. 
These indicate that FCA algorithm detects the 
overlapping arbitrary shaped regions significantly 
with better efficiency than K-Means and FCM 
algorithms.
5.1 Quantitative analysis
The clustering results have been evaluated objectively 
by measuring validity measures Davies-Bouldin 
(DB) and Dunn index, as defined in (Dunn, 
1973) and (Davies & Bouldin, 1979) respectively, 
for K-Means, FCM and FCA algorithms on the 
Barakar River catchment remote sensing image 
in Table 1. It can be noticed that, FCA produces 
best final value for minimized DB index as 0.5135, 
while K-Means obtains a DB value of 0.7342 and 
FCM obtains 0.5780. Similarly the Dunn index 
produced by FCA algorithm (maximizing Dunn) 
is 1.3845, but K-Means algorithm provides smaller 
Dunn value.
These results imply that FCA optimizes DB and 
Dunn indices more than both K-Means and FCM. 
Hence, it is evident that FCA is comparable with 
good solutions to K-Means and FCM algorithms 
and even FCA sometimes outperforms to obtain 
superior fuzzy clustering results.
5.2 Statistical analysis
A non-parametric statistical significance test called 
Wilcoxon’s rank sum for independent samples has 
been conducted at 5% significance level (Hollander & 
Wolfe, 1999). Two groups have been created with 
the performance scores, DB index values produced 
by 10 consecutive runs of K-Means, FCM and 
FCA algorithms on the chosen remote sensing 
Image. From the medians of each group on the 
dataset in Table 2, it is observed that FCA provides 
better median values than K-Means and FCM 
algorithms. Table 3 Median values of performance 
parameter DB index over 10 consecutive runs on 
different algorithms
Table 3 shows the P-values and H-values pro-
duced by Wilcoxon’s rank sum test for comparison 
of two groups, FCA-K-Means and FCA-FCM. 
All the P-values reported in the table are less than 
0.005 (5% significance level). The chosen remote 
Figure 4. Pixel classification of Barakar river catch-
ment area obtained by K-Means algorithm (with K = 7).
Figure 5. Pixel classification of Barakar river catch-
ment area obtained FCM algorithm (with K = 7).
Figure 6. Pixel classification of Barakar river catch-
ment area obtained by FCA algorithm.
Table 2. Validity indices values of the classified remote 
sensing image provided by K-means, FCM and FCA 
algorithms.
Index
Shanghai image
K-Means
FCM
FCA    
Davies-Bouldin index
0.7342
0.5780
0.5135
Dunn index
0.6716
0.8406
1.3845

286
sensing image on the catchment area of Barakar, is 
very small 2.00E-003 compared to P-value of rank 
sum test between FCA and K-Means. Thus, indi-
cating the performance metrics produced by FCA 
to be statistically significant and not occurring 
by chance. Similar results are obtained for other 
group with FCM algorithm also. Hence, all results 
establish the significant superiority of FCA over 
K-Means and FCM algorithms.
6 CONCLUSIONS
In the realm of the remotely sensed imagery, the 
mixed pixel problems are common. This problem 
denotes the presence of multiple and partial class 
memberships for them. Therefore, the conventional 
crisp methodology fails to map land covers, prop-
erly to different regions similar to the ground truth 
information. The soft computing theory may over-
come this problem. Therefore fuzzy sets may be 
applied to map overlapping regions in the image.
The contribution of this article lies in better 
detection of overlapping land cover areas in the 
remote sensing image than other crisp partitioning 
methodology by utilizing new fuzzy set based pixel 
segmentation in our FCA clustering algorithm. The 
primary contributions are–to utilize one new fuzzy 
set based initial clustering in remote sensing images 
with CA based neighborhood correction. The 
neighborhood correction phase helps to correct the 
wrong allocation of a single pixel to a cluster. It ver-
ifies the overall allocations with respect to the neigh-
borhood, to obtain improved land cover areas.
The efficiency of the new FCA algorithm is 
demonstrated over one chosen remote sensing 
image of the catchment region of Barakar River. 
Superiority of new FCA clustering algorithm over 
the widely used K-Means and FCM algorithms is 
established quantitatively over two validity indices. 
The verification with ground truth information 
also shows significant efficiency of new FCA algo-
rithm over other two existing methods. Statistical 
tests also establish the statistical significance of 
FCA over K-Means and FCM algorithms.
REFERENCES
(Bandyopadhyay, 2005) Bandyopadhyay, S. 2005. Satel-
lite image classification using genetically guided fuzzy 
clustering with spatial information”, Int J Remote 
Sens, 26(3), 579–593.
(Bardossy, 2002) Bardossy, A. & Samaniego, L. 2002. 
Fuzzy 
Rule-Based 
Classification 
of 
Remotely 
Sensed Imagery, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEO-
SCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, 40, 2.
(Bezdek, 1981) Bezdek, J.C. 1981. Pattern Recognition 
with Fuzzy Objective Function Algorithms, Plenum 
Press, New York.
(Cogalton & Green, 1999) Cogalton, R.G. & Green, K. 
1999. Assessing the accuracy of remote sensed data: 
principles and practices. Lewis publishers, London, 
New York.
(Davies & Bouldin, 1979) Davies, D.L. & Bouldin, D.W. 
1979 A Cluster Separation Measure, IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 
PAMI, 1(2), 224–227.
(de Souto et al., 2008) de Souto, M.C.P., R RBCP, Soares, 
R.G.F, de Araujo, D.S.A, Costa, I.G., Ludermir, T.B. 
& Schliep, A. 2008. Ranking and Selecting Cluster-
ing Algorithms Using a Meta-Learning Approach. In 
Proc. of IEEE International Joint Conference on Neu-
ral Networks. IEEE Computer Society. 3728–3734. 
(Dave, 1989) Dave, R.N. 1989. Use of the adaptive fuzzy 
clustering algorithm to detect lines in digital images. 
Intell. Robots Comput. Vision VIII, 1192, 600–611.
(Dembele & Kastner, 2003) Dembele, D. & Kastner, P. 
2003. Fuzzy c-means method for clustering microar-
ray data. Bioinformatics. 19, 973–980.
(Dunn, 1973) Dunn, J.C. 1973. A Fuzzy Relative of the 
ISODATA Process and Its Use in Detecting Compact 
Well-Separated Clusters, Journal of Cybernetics, 3(3), 
32–57.
(Dunn, 1974) Dunn, J.C. 1974. A fuzzy relative of the 
ISODATA process and its use in detecting compact, 
well separated clusters, Cybernetics, 3, 95–104.
(Hoon et al., 2004) Hoon, M.J.L. de, Imoto, S., Nolan, J., & 
Miyano, S. 2004. Open source clustering software. 
Bioinformatics. 20(9), 1453–1454.
(Huang, 2008) Hung, C.C. Liu, W. & Kuo, B.C. 2008. 
A New Adaptive Fuzzy Clustering Algorithm for 
Remotely Sensed Images, in Geoscience and Remote 
Sensing Symposium, 2008,. 2, II-863-II-866.
(Lukashin & Futchs, 1999) Lukashin, A. & Futchs, R. 
1999. Analysis of temporal gene expression profiles, 
clustering by simulated annealing and determining 
optimal number of clusters. Nat. Genet. 22, 281–285.
(Maulik & Sarkar, 2012) Maulik, U. & Sarkar, A. 2012. 
Efficient parallel algorithm for pixel classification 
Table 3. Median values of performance parameter DB 
index over 10 consecutive runs on different algorithms.
Data
Algorithms
K-Means
FCM
FCA
Catchment Area of 
Barakar River Image
0.9754
0.5390
0.5135
Table 4. P-values produced by rank sum while com-
paring with FCA with k-means and FCA with FCM 
respectively.
Algorithm
Comparison with FCA
H
P-value
K-Means
1
2.00E-003
FCM
1
2.00E-003

287
in remote sensing imagery, GeoInformatica, 16(2), 
391–407.
(Pappis, 1993), Pappis, C.P. & Karacapilidis, N.I. 1993. 
A comparative assessment of measures of similarity 
of fuzzy values, Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 56, 171–174.
(Ruspini, 1970) Ruspini, E. 1970. Numerical methods for 
fuzzy clustering, Information Science, 2., 319–350.
(Reddi, 1984) Reddi, S.S., Rudin, S.F. & Keshavan, H.R. 
1984. An optimal multiple threshold Scheme for image 
segmentation, IEEE–System, Man and Cybernetics, 
14, 611–665.
(Smith, 1971) Smith III, A.R. 1971. Two-dimensional 
Formal Languages and Pattern Recognition by Cel-
lular Automata. In IEEE Conference Record of 
12th Annual Symposium on Switchinh and Automata 
Theory.
(Wang, 1997) Wang, W.J. 1997. New similarity measures 
on fuzzy sets and on elements, Fuzzy Sets and Sys-
tems, 85, 305–309.
(Wolfram, 1986) Wolfram, S. 1986. Cryptography with 
cellular automata. Lecture Notes on computer Science, 
218, 429–432.
(Wolfram, 1983) Wolfram, S. 1983. Statistical mechan-
ics of cellular automata. Rev. Mod. Phys., 55(3), 
601–644.
(Xu et al., 1999) Xu, Y., Olman, V., & Xu, D. 1999. Clus-
tering gene expression data using a graph theoretic 
approach, an application of minimum spanning trees. 
Bioinformatics. 17 309–318.
(Zadeh, 1965) Zadeh, L.A. 1965. Fuzzy sets, Information 
and Control., 8, 338–353, 1965.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

289
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
MIMO channel capacity in non-uniform phase distributed Nakagami 
channel with ZF Receiver
S.N. Sur, S. Bera & R. Bera
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Sikkim Manipal Institute of Technology, Sikkim 
Manipal University, Sikkim, India
B. Maji
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Durgapur, 
West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Multiple-Input–Multiple-Output (MIMO) systems have appeared as a promising solu-
tion to provide high speed wireless services in extreme hostile environment. This paper deals with the per-
formance analysis of Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) system in non-uniform phase distributed 
Nakagami-m channel with zero forcing (ZF) receiver. The effect of Doppler shift and Nakagami-m fading 
parameter m on the channel ergodic and outage capacity have been analyzed here.
A great deal of research has been carried out to 
the study of the ergodic capacity of MIMO chan-
nels under various environments, e.g., [Shin et al. 
2003, Shin et al. 2008, Chiani et al. 2003, Shin 
et al. 2006, Oyman et al. 2003 and Kang et al. 
2006]. In [Shin et al. 2003], the asymptotic per-
formance of MIMO systems in Rayleigh-fading 
channels was investigated. Though Rayleigh and 
Rician are popular and commonly used statisti-
cal models for fading. But a more versatile model 
that correspond to variety of physical environ-
ments is the Nakagami fading model [Nakagami 
1960, Zhong 2009 and Sur et al. 2013]. Most of 
the papers having the assumption that the phase 
of Nakagami-m channel coefficients follows a uni-
form distribution. As in [Yacoub et al. 2005] the 
phase distribution of a fading channel is generally 
non-uniform. Therefore it is required to explore 
the performance of MIMO system in non-uniform 
phase distributed Nakagami channel.
The objective of this paper is to study the 
ergodic capacity and outage capacity of MIMO 
non-uniform phased distributed Nakagami-fading 
channels with arbitrary finite number of antennas 
at both ends. This paper also include the effect of 
Doppler shift and Nakagami-m fading parameter 
m on the capacity of a MIMO system.
2 MATHEMATICAL MODEL
Let us consider a MIMO with t antennas at the 
transmitter and r antennas at the receiver. Also we 
1 INTRODUCTION
To fulfil the demand of future generation wireless 
communication systems, MIMO systems have been 
recognized as one of the key and foremost technol-
ogy. Starting from the research work by Foschini 
et al. [Gu et al 2006], lots of work have been done 
and also going on throughout the world to explore 
the capability of MIMO system in a better and 
sophisticated way.
With the growing demand of data seeking 
application under the spectral limitation and rich 
scattering environment, MIMO systems offer the 
possibility of spatial diversity which enables very 
high spectral efficiencies [Foschini 1996, Winters 
1987 and Vucetic et al. 2003]. This features of 
MIMO encourage the researchers to the develop-
ment of advanced signal processing architecture to 
support new age user demand. Vertical Bell labo-
ratories Layered space-Time (V-BLAST) [Foschini 
1996, Jiang et al. 2005, and Foschini 1998] is a 
MIMO architecture known to have high spec-
tral efficiencies at average SNR without coding 
[Wolniansky et al. 1998].
Linear receivers like Zero-Forcing (ZF) which 
provide sub-optimal performance but offer signifi-
cant computational complexity reduction with tol-
erable performance degradation. But these receiver 
required accurate Channel State Information (CSI) 
for its proper operation. In paper authors investi-
gate the performance of MIMO ZF receivers in 
non-uniform phased distributed Nakagami-m 
channel.

290
assume that Channel State Information (CSI) is 
known perfectly at the receiver and equal power P is 
distributed throughout the transmitter antennas.
y = Hx + n 
(1)
H is the r
t channel matrix contains the chan-
nel coefficients. The column-vector y and x con-
tains r received and t transmitted complex symbols 
respectively. And n is the complex AWGN vector 
with zero mean and. 
†
0
E [n n ] = N I
†
0
The ergodic capacity of a MIMO system is 
given by,
⎡
⎤
⎢
⎥
⎡
⎤
⎡
⎤
⎛
⎞⎞
⎥
⎢
⎣
⎦
⎝
⎠⎥
⎥
⎢
⎢
⎝
⎠
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎛
+
⎛
+
C
E
=
⎢
 
(2)
For convenience, we define s
r
min{ , }
t  and 
k
r
a { , }
t  and
⎧
= ⎨
⎧
⎩
⎨
†
†
HH
r
t
<
†
W
H H r
t
≥
†
 
(3)
The capacity can be written in terms of the 
eigenvalues λ
λ
1
λ
n
λ  of W as
C
E
I
P
N t
i
i
n
+
E
I
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎦
=∑log2
0
N
1
λi
 
(4)
The channel is assumed to be independent and 
identically distributed (i.i.d) and which follows a 
Nakagami–m fading probability distribution func-
tion (pdf). Let γ represent the instantaneous SNR 
and it can be defined as
γ
β 2
β
0
E
N0
s
E
 
(5)
Where β  is the fading amplitude, Es
E  is the 
energy per symbol, and N0
N  is the noise spectral 
density. The probability distribution function of β  
for the Nakagami-m fading channel is given by
P
m
m
m
m
m
β
P
β
β
m
β
β
(β
(
)
m
ex
,
β
p
,
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
≥
m
,
≥
2
0
1
2
2
1
m
β
−
2
β
Γ
Ω
(
)
(m ⎝
Ω
 (6)
Where Γ (.) represents the gamma function, 
Ω =
⎡⎣⎡
E
β 2
β  and m is the parameter of fading depth 
that ranges from 0.5 to infinity and this parameter 
is responsible for the variation in fading condition. 
The fading parameter m is defined by the equation 
as given below
m
var
= E 2
2
2
]
2
[
[
]
2 .
β 2
β 2
 
(7)
As in [Zhong 2009], the ergodic capacity of a 
MIMO system in Nakagami channel can be repre-
sented in terms of Meijer G-function [Prudnikov 
et al. 1990] as
C
s
G
P
N t m
km
=
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟⎠
⎟
Γ
Ω
(
)
km
Γ
,
,
, ,
ln2
3 2
G ,
1 3,
0
N
1
1
km
−
, 1
 
(8)
And also as in [Zhong 2009], at high SNR con-
dition, we have
C
s
P
tN
s
km
m
hsnr
C
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
km
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
log
(
P
tN
s
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
)
l
−n
2
0
N
2
ln
ψ
Ω
 (9)
Where ψ (.
ψ ) is the digamma function.
Now in zero forcing receiver, it estimate the 
transmitted symbols based on the pseudo inverse 
operation of the complex channel gain matrix H 
i.e, 
(
)
−)
1
†
H
H
)
1
H
H
H
H
(
)
=
†
H )
. Therefore to have high 
post processing SNR, accurate channel state infor-
mation (CSI) is essential but in practical scenario it 
is hardly available.
In this paper, we considered the effective post 
processing SINR of a ZF receiver in order to 
effectively analyze the impact of the time varying 
multipath channel. This analysis will help us to 
understand the impact of the Doppler shift on the 
channel capacity.
In presence of the time varying channel condi-
tion, the received signal can be represented as
y = Hx + E(t)x + n  
(10)
As in [Pohl et al. 2005], the pseudo inverse of the 
estimated channel can be represented
(
)
	
†
†
(
( )
r
G
H
I
E t H
(
≅
−
(
†(
( )
r
 
(11)
Now, the zero-forcing estimation of the trans-
mitted symbol vector can be given by,
	
†
†
†
†
( )
( )
†
r
s
H n
H E t s
H E t H n
≅
+
−
+
−
	
†
†
†
†
†
†
( )
( )
)
(
−
†
 
(12)
As in above equation, last three terms represents 
additional noises and interferences generated by 
the post processing channel estimation error and 
noise and it can be expressed as
	
†
†
†
†
( )
( )
†
n
H n
H E t s
H E t H n
≅
−
	
†
†
†
†
†
†
( )
( )
)
(
−
†
 
(13)

291
The noise covariance is
E
n n
N
E
I
N tr H
H
H
s
E
tI
H
	 	
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
+
N
(
)
f t
df
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
+
(
)
f t
df
(
)
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
−
0
N
2
2
2
2
0
N
1
4
3
4
3
π 2
H
H
H H
(
)
−1
 
 
(14)
Therefore the post processing SINR per symbol 
of any ith stream can be written as
σ
π
i
σ
s
s
t
H
H
E
N
s
E π
sπ
N
It
tr H
H
H
H
H
H
=
−
+
(
)
dfdt
+
(
)
df t
d
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥(
/
0
N
2
π
2
0
N
2
π
2
1
1
4
3
4
3
)
−1
ii  
 
(15)
As in above equation, for a time varying channel 
the SINR per symbol for any stream received sig-
nal of a MIMO system is highly influenced by the 
Doppler shift. Therefore at high SINR condition 
the sub channel capacity of a MIMO system can 
be represented as
C
s
t
s
km
m
r
h
C
i
s
lo
(
s
t
i
g
)
ln
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
km
(
)
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
2
2
σi
ψ
ln
Ω
 (16)
The above equation leads to the fact that with 
the increase in the Doppler shift value the channel 
capacity decreases.
3 RESULTS
In this paper, all the results are evaluated through 
the MATLAB simulation. Authors have consider 
MIMO system in non-uniformly phase distributed 
Nakagami-m channel condition.
Figure 1 shows the PDF and CDF of Uniformly 
Phase (UP) distributed and Non-Uniformly Phase 
(NUP) distributed Nakagami-m channel.
Figure 2 shows phase distribution of Non-
Uniformly Phase (NUP) distributed Nakagami-m 
channel with the variation in m. As it is there in 
figure apart from m = 1, the phase distribution of 
the Nakagami-m channel is not uniform.
Figure 3 shows the ergodic capacity variation 
of MIMO system with the variation in transmit-
ter and receiver antenna variation. Here, authors 
have consider Nakagami-m channel fade param-
eter m = 0.5. During the variation in antennas 
(receiver and transmitter side), authors have kept 
the number antennas at other side as 2. As in fig-
ure, at SNR = 1dB, for (t = 10, r = 2) the capacity of 
the system is 1.084 bps/Hz and for (t = 2, r = 10) it 
is 3.112 bps/Hz. At SNR = 15dB, for (t = 10, r = 2) 
the capacity of the system is 5.311 bps/Hz and for 
(t = 2, r = 10) it is 9.364 bps/Hz. Therefore one can 
conclude that increment of number of antenna at 
Figure 1. PDF and CDF of Uniform and Non-uniform 
phase distributed Nakagami-m channel.
Figure 2. Phase distribution of Non-uniform phase dis-
tributed Nakagami-m channel.
Figure 3. Ergodic capacity variation with the variation 
in number of antennas (Transmitter (t)/Receiver (r)).

292
4 CONCLUSION
The ergodic capacity and outage capacity of MIMO 
Nakagami-m fading channels is analyzed here. 
Results also show that the effect of non-uniform 
phase distribution on the PDF and CDF of the 
channel is negligible. Therefore its effect on the 
ergodic capacity is also negligible. And also in this 
paper, the mathematical formulation of Doppler 
effect and corresponding effect on the ergodic and 
outage capacity is presented. The simulated result 
shows the influence of Doppler shift and Nak-
agami channel fading parameter m over channel 
capacity.
REFERENCES
Chiani, M. Win, M.Z. & Zanella, A. 2003. On the capac-
ity of spatially correlated MIMO Rayleigh-fading 
channels, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 10, 
Oct. 2003, pp. 2363–2371.
Foschini, G.J. 1998. Layered space-time architecture for 
wireless communication, Bell Labs. Technology. Jour-
nal, Vol. 6, No.3, 1998, pp. 311–335.
Foschini, G.J. 1996. Layered Space-Time Architecture 
For Wireless Communication In A Fading Environ-
ment When Using Multi-Element Antenna, Bell Lab-
oratories Technical Journal, Oct. 1996, pp. 41–59.
Gu, X. Peng, X-H and Zhang, G.C. 2006. MIMO systems 
for broadband wireless communications, BT Technol-
ogy Journal, Vol. 24 No. 2, April 2006, pp. 90–96.
Jiang, Y. Zheng, X. & Li, J. 2005. Asymptotic Perform-
ance Analysis of V-BLAST, GLOBECOM, 2005, pp. 
3382–3886.
Kang, M. and Alouini, M.S. 2006. Capacity of corre-
lated MIMO Rayleigh channels, IEEE Trans. Wireless 
Commun., vol. 5, no. 1, Jan. 2006, pp. 143–155.
Nakagami, M. 1960. The distribution-a general formula 
for intensity distribution of rapid fading, in Statisti-
cal Methods in Radio Wave Prop, W.G. Hoffman, Ed. 
Oxford, U.K.: Pergamon, 1960.
Figure 4. Ergodic capacity comparison for Uniform 
Phased (UP) and Non Uniform Phased (NUP) distrib-
uted Nakagami-m channel.
Figure 5. Outage capacity variation with Doppler 
shift.
Figure 6. Outage capacity variation with Doppler 
shift.
the receiver side have significant effect on channel 
capacity in comparison to increment in transmitter 
side antenna. But the total capacity of the system 
saturate as the number of antenna increases to a 
large number.
As represented in figure 4, phase distribution of 
Nakagami-m channel have very negligible effect on 
ergodic capacity.
Figure 5 and 6 shows the change in outage 
capacity with the variation in Doppler shift. In 
both the cases authors have consider 4 × 4 MIMO 
system in Nakagami-m channel with non-uniform 
phased distribution. A Doppler frequency of 
100 Hz corresponds to about 35 miles/hour for 
carrier frequency of 2 GHz. For figure 5, m = 1 is 
considered and for figure 6, Pout = 0.1 is consid-
ered. It is clear from the figure that Nakagami-m 
fading parameter m and Doppler shift having sig-
nificant impact on the capacity of the system. The 
throughput decreases as Doppler frequency (Fd) 
value increases.

293
Oyman, O. Nabar, R.U. Bolcskei, H. & Paulraj, A.J. 2003. 
Characterizing the statistical properties of mutual 
information in MIMO channels, IEEE Trans. Signal 
Process., vol. 51, no. 11, Nov. 2003, pp. 2784–2795.
Pohl, V. Nguyen, P.H. & Jungnickel,V. 2005. Continu-
ous flat-fading MIMO channels: achievable rate and 
optimal length of the Training and data phases, IEEE 
Transactions on Wireless Communication, vol. 4, no. 
4, July 2005, pp. 1889–1900.
Prudnikov, A.P. Brychkov, Y.A. & Marichev, O.I. 1990. 
Integrals and Series, Volume 3: More Special Func-
tions. New York: Gordon and Breach, 1990.
Shin, H. and Lee, J.H. 2003. Capacity of multiple-an-
tenna fading channels: Spatial fading correlation, 
double scattering, and keyhole, IEEETrans. Inf. Tho-
ery, vol. 49, no. 10, Oct. 2003, pp. 2636–2647.
Shin, H. Win, M.Z. & Chiani, M. 2008. Asymptotic sta-
tistics of mutual information for doubly correlated 
MIMO channels, IEEETrans.Wireless Commun., vol. 
7, no. 2, Feb. 2008, pp. 562–573.
Shin, H. Win, M.Z. Lee, J.H. and Chiani, M.2006. On 
the capacity of doubly correlated MIMO channels, 
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 5, no. 8, Aug. 
2006, pp. 2253–2265.
Sur,S.N. & Ghosh, D. 2013. Channel Capacity and BER 
Performance Analysis of MIMO System with Lin-
ear Receiver in Nakagami Channel, I.J. Wireless and 
Microwave Technologies, vol. 3, no. 1, 2013, pp. 26–36.
Vucetic, B. & Yuan, J. 2003. Space-Time Coding, John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2003.
Winters, J.H. 1987. On the capacity of radio communica-
tions systemswith diversity in rayleigh fading environ-
ments, IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. JSAC-5, 
June 1987, pp. 871–878.
Wolniansky, P.W. Foschini, G.J. Golden, G.D. and Valen-
zue, R.A. 1998. V-BLAST: An Architecture For Real-
izing Very High Data Rate Over The Rich-Scattering 
Wireless Channel, Proc. of URS International Sym-
posium on Signals, Systems and Electronics (ISSS 
’98),, Sep/Oct 1998, pp. 295–300. (doi: 10.1109/
ISSSE.1998.738086).
Yacoub, M.D. Fraidenraich, G. and Santos Filho, J.C.S. 
2005. Nakagami-m phase-envelope joint distribution, 
Elect. Letters, vol. 41, no. 5, Mar. 2005, pp. 259–261.
Zhong, C. Wong, K-K, & Jin, S. 2009. Capacity Bounds 
for MIMO Nakagami-Fading Channels, IEEE Trans-
actions on Signal Processing, Volume 57, Issue 9, 
2009, pp- 3613–3623.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

295
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Decision feedback equalization for large scale MIMO system
S.N. Sur & R. Bera
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,  Sikkim Manipal Institute of Technology, Sikkim 
Manipal University, Sikkim, India
B. Maji
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Durgapur, 
West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Large Scale MIMO (LS-MIMO) is emerging as one of the basic requirements for the 
evolution of future generation wireless communication system. This paper represents the implementation 
of Decision Feedback Equalization (DFE)-based receivers for large scale MIMO systems in Nakagami-m 
channel. Moreover, sub-optimal, pre-equalization combining of DFE receivers, architectures are exam-
ined, and the performance is compared with its linear counter-parts.
[Lamare et al. 2008 and Kominakis et al. 2002] and 
Decision Feedback Equalization (DFE) receiver [Sur 
et al. 2013]. Generally in MIMO, Zero Forcing 
(ZF) and Minimum Mean Square Error (MMSE) 
based receivers are used as linear receiver. In this 
paper, the performance comparison between ZF 
and MMSE criterion based on linear (LE) and 
nonlinear (DFE) receiver has been carried out. 
Also in this paper, QR factorization is utilized to 
design DFE receiver.
This paper presents the performance analysis of 
different MIMO receiver (linear and non-linear) 
over the doubly correlated Nakagami-m fading 
channel. Here Channel State Information (CSI) 
is assumed to be present at the receiver side only. 
And it is also considered that the transmit power 
is uniformly distributed across the transmitting 
antennas.
2 SYSTEM MODEL
2.1 Channel model
We consider the MIMO system [Shin et al. 2004], 
as shown in Fig. 1, with Nt
N  transmitting antenna 
and Nr
N  receiving antennas. The received signal y 
can be described by
ψ = Ηξ + ν 
(1)
Where x is transmit symbols vector and it sat-
isfies E
P
{
}
x
2 ≤
 (P is the total power), and n is 
the Nr
N ×1 Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) 
vector. The correlated channels are represented by 
1 INTRODUCTION
The need for a secured and high throughput com-
munication system has forced the researchers 
towards the development of several signal process-
ing and communications techniques for employing 
the resources efficiently [Foschini et al. 1998, and 
Alamouti. 1998]. And to deliver such a highly spec-
tral efficient secure communication system, MIMO 
plays an important role [Verd´u, 1986]. To support 
high data rate under severe channel condition, the 
receiver architecture for the MIMO system should 
be designed in a proper way to compensate for 
both intersymbol and multi-access interstream 
interference.
Massive MIMO (also known as “Large-
Scale Antenna Systems”, “Very Large MIMO”, 
“Hyper MIMO”, “Full-Dimension MIMO” and 
“ARGOS”) [Duel-Hallen 1992] emerge as a key 
technology for 5G communication. From the lat-
est research, it has already been proven that mas-
sive MIMO is a fundamental requirement for the 
development of future broadband or 5G commu-
nication networks which will be energy-efficient, 
secure and robust, and spectrum efficient [Duel-
Hallen 1992].
Now, to provide reliable and secure communica-
tions in such severe multipath channel condition, 
Maximum-Likelihood (ML) detection would be 
the optimum receiver. However, implementation 
of this receiver is practically impossible as the com-
plexity of the receiver increases substantially with 
the increase in the number of transmit antennas 
[Larsson et al. 2014]. Therefore, it is required to 
design low complexity receiver such as linear receiver 

296
vector H. The envelope of the channel is distrib-
uted according to the Nakagami –m statistic. Let 
γ represent the instantaneous SNR and it can be 
defined as
γ
β 2
β
0
E
N0
s
E
 
(2)
Where β  represents the fading amplitude, Es
E  is 
the energy per symbol, and N0
N  is the noise spec-
tral density. The Probability Distribution Function 
(PDF) of β  for the Nakagami-m fading channel 
is given by
P
m
m
m
m
m
β
P
β
β
m
β
β
(β
(
)
m
ex
,
β
p
,
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
≥
m
,
≥
2
0
1
2
2
1
m
β
−
2
β
Γ
Ω
(
)
(m ⎝
Ω
 
 
(3)
Where Γ (.) represents the gamma function, 
Ω =
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
E β 2
β
 and m is the parameter of fading depth 
that ranges from 0.5 to infinity. Different kinds of 
fading condition can be simulated by varying the 
m values. The fading parameter m is defined by the 
equation as given below
m
E
=
2
2
2
[
]
2
]
2
[
β 2
β 2
var
 
(3)
Then, the pdf of the instantaneous SNR γ is 
given by [9]
P
m
m
m
m
γP γ
γ
γ m
γ
γ
γ
( )
γ
(
)
m
,
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
≥
−
1
0
1
Γ (
exp
x
 (4)
2.2 Decision feedback equalizer
A simplified architectural overview of DFE 
[Sur et al. 2015, Dhahir et al. 1997], with QR 
decomposing algorithm has been investigated 
in this paper. There are different kind of MIMO 
channel matrix factorization techniques present, 
out of wich QR factorization is regorously used 
for DFE implementations [Dhahir et al. 1997]. 
The QR decomposed MIMO channel matrix can 
be represented as given below,
H
QR  
(6)
Where Q is unitary and R is upper triangular. 
Now, the received vector can be manupulated by 
the relation as mentioned below,
w
Q y
Rx
Q n
Rx
n
Q y
Q n
+
*
*
R
Q
 
(7)
With E n n
I
x N
I
t
*
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
σ 2
Then w is passed through the feedforward filter 
as represented by the equation given below,
K
[
]
dia
d g
−
R
1  
(8)
where diag (R) denotes a diagonal matrix whose 
elements are equal to the diagonal elements of R.
The coefficients of the feedback filter can be 
calculated by
B
I
KR
−
I
 
(9)
Here B represents an upper triangular matrix 
with zero diagonal elements.
The block level diagram for one-shot MIMO 
DFE systems in combination with QR factoriza-
tion is shown in Fig. 2.
Similarly, the MMSE-DFE can be inplemented 
by using the QR decomposition of the augmented 
matrix,
H
H
I
= ⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
σI  
(10)
where 1/σ  is the SNR.
2.3 Results
Fig. 3 shows the performance assessment of a 
10 × 10 MIMO system in Nakagami-m channel 
with QPSK modulation. As represented in the 
figure the optimal pre-equalization combining 
DFE that forms soft estimates based on all received 
symbols performs better than its linear equalizer. 
Therefore, one can conclude that the performance 
improvement due to DFE receiver over LE receiver 
is clearly visible.
Figure 1. MIMO system architecture.
Figure 2. DFE architecture.

297
Fig. 4 represents the performance comparison 
of MMSE-DFE with different antenna configura-
tion. In this simulation, authors have considered 
QPSK modulation, correlation coefficient = 0, and 
m = 0.5. As represented in the simulated results, 
fading parameter m have noteworthy impact over 
the MIMO system performance. And m = 0.5 can 
be considered as severe channel condition as it 
represents one sided Gaussian distribution. From 
the simulated results, it is clearly visible that with 
the increase in the number of antenna, the fad-
ing margin improve significantly. Therefore large 
MIMO with MMSE-DFE have the capability to 
improve the system performance in severe channel 
condition.
As presented in Table 1, the required SNR level 
decreases as the number of antennas increases. 
Figs. 5 and 6 represents performance comparison 
large scale MIMO systems with linear (ZF) and 
non-linear (DFE) receiver with respect to single 
antenna system. This performance analysis has 
been carried out to point out the fading margin 
gain due to large scale MIMO system.
Fig. 7 represents the fading margin gap between 
the linear and non-linear receivers. Fading margin 
Figure 3. Comparison between LF and DFE.
Figure 4. Performance comparison for MMSE DFE.
Figure 5. Performance comparison for ZF receiver.
Figure 6. Performance comparison for MMSE-DFE 
receiver.
Table 1. Required SNR comparison for different 
MIMO system.
BER = 10−3
5 × 5
10 × 10
15 × 15
20 × 20
25 × 25
SNR (dB)
20
12.2
9.2
5
3.6
Figure 7. Fading margin comparison for linear and 
DFE receiver.

298
has been calculated for achieving BER of 10−3 and 
it is calculated with respect to a single antenna sys-
tem. As depicted in the figure, it is clear that with 
Large MIMO system and low complex single shoot 
MMSE-DFE receiver, there is a large improvement 
in fading margin.
3 CONCLUSION
This paper focused on the design of Decision 
Feedback Equalization-based receivers for MIMO 
systems in correlated Nakagami-m channel. The 
equalizer coefficient matrices were derived using 
the QR decomposition along MMSE/ZF opti-
mization. From the simulated results, it can be 
concluded that pre-equalization combining single 
shoot DFE achieve optimal performance and can 
be implemented to overcome severe channel condi-
tion. Therefore, low complex single shoot receiver 
is best suitable for large MIMO system, in order to 
reduce the interference effect.
REFERENCES
Alamouti, S.1998. A simple transmit diversity tech-
nique for wireless communications,” IEEE J. Select. 
Areas Communication, vol. 16, no. 8, Oct. 1998, 
pp. 1451–1458.
Dhahir, A and Sayed, A.H. 1997. A parallel 
low-complexity coefficient computation processor 
for the MMSE-DFE, inProc. Thirty-First Asilomar 
Conference on Signals, Systems & Computers, Pacific 
Grove, CA, Nov 2–5, 1997, pp. 1586–1590.
Duel-Hallen, A. 1992. Equalizers for Multiple Input 
Multiple Output Channels and PAM Systems with 
Cyclostationary Input Sequences,” IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 10, April, 
1992, pp. 630–639.
Foschini, G.J. and Gans, M.J. 1998. On limits of wireless 
communications in a fading environment when using 
multiple antennas, Wireless Person. Communication, 
vol. 6, Mar. 1998, pp. 311–335.
Kominakis, C. Fragouli, C. Sayed, A.H. and Wesel, R. 
2002. Multi-input multi-output fading channel track-
ing and equalization using Kalman estimation,” IEEE 
Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 50, no. 5, May, 
2002, pp. 1065–1076.
Lamare, R.C. De. Hjørungnes A. and Sampaio-Neto, R. 
2008. Adaptive Decision Feedback Reduced-Rank 
Equalization Based on Joint Iterative Optimization of 
Adaptive Estimation Algorithms for Multi-Antenna 
Systems”,IEEE WCNC, 2008, pp. 413–418.
Larsson, E.G. Edfors, O. Tufvesson, F and Marzetta, T L. 
2014. Massive MIMO For Next Generation Wireless 
S Ystems”, IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 
52, No. 2, Feb. 2014, pp. 186–195.
Shin, H and Lee, J. 2004. On the Error Probability of 
Binary and M-ary Signals in Nakagami-m Fading 
Channels, IEEE Transactions On Communications, 
Vol.52, No.4, April 2004, pp. 536–539.
Sur, S.N. Bera, R. and Maji, B. 2015.Decision Feedback 
Equalization for MIMO Systems”, Intelligent Com-
puting and Applications, Advances in Intelligent Sys-
tems and Computing Volume 343, 2015, pp. 205–212.
Sur, S.N. & Ghosh, D. 2013. Channel Capacity and BER 
Performance Analysis of MIMO System with Linear 
Receiver in Nakagami Channel, I.J. Wireless and.
Verd´u, S. 1986. Minimum Probability of Error for Asyn-
chronous Gaussian Multiple-Access Channels, IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, vol.IT-32, no. 1, 
Jan., 1986, pp. 85–96.

299
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Comparative study of DR image De-noising method based on quality 
parameters
Monisha Chakraborty
School of Bio-Science and Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India
Manishankar Mondal
Student of Master of Bio-Medical Engineering, School of Bio-Science and Engineering, Jadavpur University, 
Kolkata, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Automated Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) detection in an early stage is very necessary for 
the patients. Medical images taken from various sources are sometimes noisy. For this reason, it is very 
difficult for the doctors to identify the specific problem. The noise removal is very much essential for 
getting better quality of images. Noise removal of images is mainly done by using suitable filters. In this 
work, noise removal from images is done using Average, Gaussian, and Wiener filters. Noise removal from 
DR images which are collected from Standard Diabetic Retinopathy Database using Gaussian filtering 
method gives better image quality. The quality analysis is done by using image quality matrices PSNR, 
SSIM, and UIQI. The result of statistical analysis of the quality parameters signifies that the results of 
the parameters are statistically significant.
Image quality parameters e.g. PSNR, SSIM, and 
UIQI are obtained from noise free images and 
these results are subjected to statistical analysis. 
Here, 24 cases of DR images have been taken from 
Standard Diabetic Retinopathy Database.
2 METHOD
The de-noising and statistical analysis of the qual-
ity parameters of DR images has been done in this 
paper using the following steps as shown in Fig. 1.
3 FILTERING TECHNIQUES
There are different ways to remove or reduce noise 
in an image. Different methods are better for dif-
ferent kinds of noise. The methods considered in 
this study are:
• Average Filtering
• Wiener Filtering
• Gaussian Filtering
3.1 Average filtering
Average filter is a linear filter. We can use aver-
age filter for removing certain types of noise. For 
example, an averaging filter is useful for removing 
1 INTRODUCTION
The population of diabetic patients has been 
increasing day by day. Uncontrolled and prolonged 
diabetes can damage the microvasculature of the 
vital organs of the body such as eyes and kidneys. 
The damage caused to the tiny blood vessels in 
the retina of the human eye, is known as Diabetic 
Retinopathy (DR). Due to elevated amounts of 
glucose circulating through the body, the walls of 
blood vessels get damaged and several anomalies 
such as Microaneurysms, hemorrhages, Hard Exu-
dates, Cotton wool spots start developing at vari-
ous phases of retinopathy. The patient affected by 
DR may not experience visual impairment until 
the disease has progressed to a severe stage, when 
the treatment is less effective. Therefore the early 
detection and the regular follow-ups are necessary 
to treat DR (Paranjpe et al. 2014).
The process of Automatic Diabetic Retinopa-
thy detection involves detection and segmentation 
of the abnormal features from the input images. 
Therefore, noise removal of the retinal images is 
necessary. Previously, there are several research 
works carried out on DR images like localization 
of retinal landmarks from DR images (Shivram 
et al. 2010), segmentation of red lesions in DR 
images (Kalaivaani et al. 2014). In this work, noise 
removal of DR images is done by using suitable 
filters like Average, Wiener, and Gaussian filters. 

300
grain noise from a photograph. Because each pixel 
set to the average of the pixels in its neighborhood, 
local variations caused by grain are reduced but 
with blurring of edges (Kanagalakshi et al. 2011).
The mathematical form of average filter in an m 
x n region can be expressed as in Equation (1)
h x y
mn
f
k
m
l
n
( ,
x
)
f (
)l,
k
=∑∑
1
1
1
l=
l
 
(1)
3.2 Wiener filtering
Wiener filter is a low pass filter that filters images 
that has been degraded by constant power additive 
noise (Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2011). 
This filter uses a pixel wise adaptive method based 
on statistical estimation from a local neighbor-
hood of each pixel. Equations (2), (3), and (4) are 
used in the calculation of wiener filter in an m x n 
neighborhood
μ
εη
=
(
)
∑
1
1
2
mn
a(
n n
1,
 
(2)
σ
μ
εη
2
2
σ
2
μ
1
1
2
(
)
1
2
∑
mn n n
1,
 
(3)
b n n
a
n
(
,
n
)
( (
,
n
)
)
1
2
n
,
2
2
2
1
2
n
,
μ
σ
ν
2
2
2
2
−
σ 2
μ)  
(4)
where μ and σ2 respectively are the local mean and 
variance around each pixel, and η and v2 are the 
n-by-m local neighborhood of each pixel in an 
image and noise variance.
3.3 Gaussian filtering
Gaussian filter is used for blurred images and 
for removing noise in detail. This filter works by 
using 2D distribution as a point–spread function. 
The Gaussian filter is a non-uniform low pass fil-
ter. The kernel coefficients diminish with increas-
ing distance from the kernel’s center (Hsiao et al. 
2007).
2-D Gaussian filter can be expressed as given in 
Equation (5)
g
y
e
x
y
( ,
x
)
−
1
2
2
2
2
2
y
+
2
πσ 2
σ 2  
(5)
4 IMAGE QUALITY EVALUTION 
METRICES
Any image scanned or captured can never be fully 
noise free. These are affected by various types of 
noise. Depending on the noise density present in 
the image, pixel intensity values carrying signifi-
cant information are altered from that of the origi-
nal image thereby affecting the overall quality of 
the image (Bhattacharjee et al. 2012). There are 
various mathematically defined parameters in this 
context are Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), 
Structural Similarity Index Measurement (SSIM), 
and Universal Image Quality Index (UIQI).
4.1 Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR)
Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), is the math-
ematical measure of image quality based on the 
pixel difference between two images (Al-Najjar 
et al. 2012, Jean-Bernard Martens et al. 1998). 
PSNR can be defined as in Equation (6)
PSNR = 10
2
log
s
MSE
S
 
(6)
            Here, MSE = 1
0
1
0
1
2
MN
e
m
M
n
N
=
−
=
−
∑∑(
)
m n
where s = 255 for an 8-bit image, e (m, n) is the 
error difference between the original and the dis-
torted images.
4.2 Structural Similarity Index Measurement 
(SSIM)
The mean Structural Similarity Index (Al-Najjar 
et al. 2012) is computed as follows:
x
μ
i
T
y
i
T
i
T
T
y
=∑
∑
μ
i
y
μ
T
=
μ
1
1
T
∑
1
1
i
T
=
i
 
(7)
Figure 1. The proposed work sequence.

301
σ x
σ
i
T
y
i
T
T
T
2
σ
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
−
−
(
)
iy
y
i
=
=
i
1∑
∑
σ
i
y
σ
T
2
2
σ
1
1
(
)
i
=
 (8)
σ xy
i
T
T
2
σ
1
1
1
=
−
(
)
ix
x
i
(
)
iy
y
i
=∑
 
(9)
First, the original and distorted images are 
divided into blocks of size 8 × 8 and then the 
blocks are converted into vectors. Second, two 
means and two standard deviations, and one cov-
ariance value are computed from the images as in 
(7), (8), and (9). Third, luminance, contrast, and 
structure comparisons based on statistical values 
are computed like in UIQI, the structural similar-
ity index measure between images x and y is given 
in Equation (10)
SSIM( , )
x y
,
c
c
x
y
x
y
=
(
)
c
x
y
(
)
c
xy +
+
y
(
)
+
(
)
)
c
y +
()(
c
xy
2
2
+
1
2
2
+
2
x
μx +
2 +
σ x
2 +
 
(10)
Where c1 and c2 is constant.
4.3 Universal Image Quality Index (UIQI)
The Universal Image Quality Index (UIQI) (Wang 
et al. 2002) can be mathematically expressed as:
UIQI ( , )
x y
,
xy
xy
x
y
=
(
) ( )
x
+ ( )
y
(
4
2
2
+
2
( )
σ
σ
σ
x
y
+
2
2
2
2
+
 
(11)
Where x
N
x
i
N
i
=
=∑
1
1
, y
N
y
i
N
i
=
=∑
1
1
,
σ x
i
N
N
2
σ
1
2
1
1
=
−
(
)
ix
x
i
=∑
, σ y
i
N
N
2
σ
1
2
1
1
=
−
(
)
iy
y
i
=∑
,
σ xy
i
N
N
=
−
(
)
ix
x
i
(
)
iy
y
i
=∑
1
1
1
UIQI and SSIM are more accurate and consist-
ent than PSNR.
5 RESULTS
In this work, 24 DR images are collected from the 
standard database. Out of these 24 cases, an exam-
ple image, its gray scale image and subsequent fil-
tered images using the various filters as considered 
in this work are shown in Figures 2, 3, 4, and 5 
respectively.
Figure 2. Original image in gray.
Figure 3. Average filtered.
Figure 4. Gaussian filtered.
Figure 5. Wiener filtered.
5.1 Diseased image and their de-noised form
5.1.1 Values of PSNR, SSIM and UIQI after 
image de-noising
PSNR, SSIM, and UIQI values of 24 diseased 
cases are shown respectively in Table 1, Table 2, 
and Table 3.

302
5.2 Results of ANOVA calculation of PSNR, 
SSIM and UIQI
ANOVA is the statistical tool for the separation of 
variation due to a group of causes from the varia-
tion due to other groups (Das 2005). The results of 
ANOVA calculation of PSNR, SSIM, and UIQI 
are shown in the following tables respectively.
6 DISCUSSION
Results of this work reveal that the noise removal of 
DR images, are done by using Average, Gaussian, 
and Wiener Filters, which statistically gave signifi-
cant results as seen in Tables 4, 5, and 6.
The image quality parameters have important 
role; higher values of PSNR, SSIM, and UIQI 
indicate better quality of image. The image analy-
sis, as done in this study, show that, de-noising of 
DR images using Gaussian filter gives better qual-
ity of image.
7 CONCLUSION
This study concludes that Gaussian filter is the best 
amongst all other filters considered in this work 
Table 1. PSNR values.
Average
filter
Gaussian
filter
Wiener
filter
24.2953
24.6697
24.3460
24.2996
24.6697
24.3471
24.2929
24.6697
24.3457
24.2823
24.6697
24.3453
24.2895
24.6697
24.3460
24.3747
24.7767
24.4462
24.2581
24.6697
24.3460
24.3010
24.6697
24.6697
24.3027
24.6697
24.3481
24.3027
24.6697
24.3481
24.2952
24.6697
24.3460
24.3013
24.6697
24.3474
24.3016
24.6697
24.3479
24.2870
24.6697
24.3445
24.2944
24.6697
24.3459
24.2907
24.6697
24.3451
24.2879
24.6697
24.3464
24.2988
24.6697
24.3473
24.2939
24.6697
24.3471
24.2639
24.6697
24.3382
24.2900
24.6697
24.3457
24.2938
24.6697
24.3454
24.2949
24.6697
24.3456
24.3002
24.6697
24.3475
Table 2. SSIM values.
Average
filter
Gaussian
filter
Wiener
filter
0.9719
0.9785
0.9744
0.9729
0.9785
0.9748
0.9725
0.9784
0.9741
0.9726
0.9783
0.9746
0.9724
0.9784
0.9746
0.9715
0.9784
0.9733
0.9722
0.9779
0.9740
0.9743
0.9785
0.9754
0.9740
0.9786
0.9754
0.9740
0.9786
0.9754
0.9728
0.9785
0.9745
0.9736
0.9785
0.9749
0.9737
0.9786
0.9753
0.9723
0.9784
0.9739
0.9728
0.9784
0.9744
0.9719
0.9784
0.9739
0.9736
0.9784
0.9748
0.9736
0.9784
0.9748
0.9734
0.9785
0.9750
0.9706
0.9783
0.9733
0.9728
0.9784
0.9742
0.9719
0.9785
0.9740
0.9727
0.9785
0.9745
0.9734
0.9785
0.9748
Table 3. UIQI values.
Average
filter
Gaussian
filter
Wiener
filter
0.9459
0.9773
0.9553
0.9474
0.9773
0.9536
0.9529
0.9772
0.9580
0.9564
0.9770
0.9616
0.9589
0.9772
0.9635
0.9416
0.9750
0.9515
0.9387
0.9763
0.9446
0.9446
0.9773
0.9487
0.9479
0.9774
0.9521
0.9479
0.9774
0.9521
0.9591
0.9772
0.9633
0.9511
0.9773
0.9549
0.9506
0.9774
0.9550
0.9554
0.9772
0.9596
0.9585
0.9772
0.9632
0.9550
0.9772
0.9606
0.9520
0.9771
0.9565
0.9540
0.9772
0.9582
0.9540
0.9772
0.9595
0.9474
0.9771
0.9544
0.9451
0.9771
0.9524
0.9407
0.9772
0.9502
0.9554
0.9773
0.9604
0.9405
0.9773
0.9460

303
REFERENCES
Advances in Artificial Intelligence, Springer, 10th Mexi-
can International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, Proceedings, Part 1, 2011.
Al-Najjar, Y.A.Y & Soong, D.C. (2012). Comparison of 
image quality assessment: PSNR, HVS, SSIM, UIQI.
International Journal of Scientific & Engineering 
Research, Volume 3, pp.1–5.
Bhattacharjee, R. & Chakraborty, M. (2012). Brain 
tumor detection from MR images: image processing, 
slicing and PCA reconstruction.IEEE, Third Interna-
tional Conference on Emerging Applications of Infor-
mation Technology, pp.97–101.
Das, N.G. (2005). Statistical Methods, M Das & Co.
Hsiao, P.Y. Chou, S.S. & Huang, F.C. (2007). Generic 2-D 
gaussian smoothing filter for noisy image processing. 
TENCON-IEEE Region 10 Conference, pp.1–4.
Jean-Bernard Martens, A.L.M. (1998). Image quality 
dissimilarity. Signal Processing, vol. 7, pp.155–176.
Kalaivaani, J. & Santhi, D. (2014).Segmentation of red 
lesions in Diabetic Retinopathy images. International 
Conference on Electronics and Communication Sys-
tem. http://www.it.lut.fi/project/imageret/diaretdb0/
Kanagalakshi, K. & Chandra, E. (2011). Performance 
evalution of filters in noise removal of fingerprint 
image. IEEE, pp.117–121.
Paranjpe, M.J. & Kakatkar, M.N. (2014). Review of 
methods for Diabetic Retinopathy detection and sever-
ity classification. International Journal of Research in 
Engineering and Technology, vol. 3, pp. 619–624.
Shivram, J.M. & Patil, R. (2010). Knowledge based frame-
work for localization of retinal landmarks from Dia-
betic Retinopathy images.IEEE, vol. 2, pp.220–224.
Wang, Z. & Bovik, A.C. (2002). A Universal Image Qual-
ity Index. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, Vol. 9, 
pp.271–350.
Table 4. Result of ANOVA calculation for PSNR.
Source
SS
df
MS
F
P value
Columns
1.95532
2
0.97766
528.2
1.47979e-42
Error
0.12771
69
0.00185
Total
2.08303
71
Table 5. Result of ANOVA calculation for SSIM.
Source
SS
df
MS
F
P value
Columns
0.0004
2
0.0002
507.68
5.332e-42
Error
0.00003
69
0
Total
0.00043
71
Table 6. Result of ANOVA calculation for UIQI.
Source
SS
df
MS
F
P value
Columns
0.00978
2
0.00489
220.24
1.10837e-30
Error
0.00153
69
0.00002
Total
0.01131
71
with respect to PSNR, SSIM, and UIQI values. 
Moreover, the results are statistically significant.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors are thankful to all the members of the 
Standard Diabetic Retinopathy Database. All the 
images used in this paper have been taken from this 
database.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

305
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Energy efficient adaptive power control in indoor wireless sensor 
networks
Debraj Basu, Gourab Sen Gupta, Giovanni Moretti & Xiang Gui
School of Engineering and Advanced Technology, Massey University, New Zealand
ABSTRACT: In an energy-constrained wireless sensor node, the use of ARQ (Automatic Repeat 
reQuest) protocol will lead to retransmissions when an attempt to send a packet fails. In an indoor wire-
less environment, the channel conditions change very slowly. This block-fading effect may lead to subse-
quent retries also failing, which adds to the total energy expenditure of transmission. The received signal 
power and therefore the ratio of the average bit energy and noise power spectral density (Eb/N0) values 
may also change over time, mainly due to obstructions, partitions and human movement between the 
transmitter and the receiver. The proposed adaptive power control algorithm does away with channel 
estimation methods before transmission, and was studied using just four of the output power levels avail-
able in CC2420 transceiver module. It is designed to meet the challenge of responding to an unknown 
and variable radio channel in an energy-efficient manner. The adaptive protocol uses past transmission 
experience or memory to decide the power level at which the new packet transmission will start. Signal 
strength measurements from real world indoor radio environment were combined with the adaptive algo-
rithm and used as the basis for experiments described in this paper. The results obtained show that such 
a state-based approach can outperform the fixed-power transmissions in terms of cost and delay for a 
given packet success rate.
(Karl & Willig 2005) so the energy consumption 
calculations in this paper are based solely on cur-
rent ratings during the transmission and reception 
of packets.
Indoor radio channels are considered to be 
very dynamic in time domain because of frequent 
movement of objects between (or near) a transmit-
ter and a receiver. These can cause fluctuations of 
the received signal and therefore the received sig-
nal to noise ratio (Hashemi 1993, Lin et al. 2006). 
Static obstructions also have an effect. The focus 
of the paper is on single-hop communication 
between sensor nodes and a base station. It rules 
out any possibility of packet exchange between 
neighboring nodes for link/channel quality estima-
tions in a multi-hop network. The performance of 
the proposed adaptive algorithm is evaluated based 
on its response to an unknown radio environment 
and compared with fixed-power transmission 
performance.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Power saving solutions
Power saving approaches can be broadly clas-
sified into Media Access Control (MAC) layer 
solutionsand network layer solutions (Sheu et al. 
2009).
1 INTRODUCTION
Wireless sensor networks are increasingly used in 
a wide variety of indoor communications appli-
cations including smart home networks, office, 
industrial sensing and security surveillance. These 
sensors communicate with acentral hub or base 
station, using either single or multi-hop links. Most 
of the sensors are battery powered with limited or 
no energy harvesting options. Battery life impacts 
the operational cost so it is important to minimize 
energy wastage as battery replacement is disruptive 
and expensive, as is the recycling and proper dis-
posal of batteries.
Wireless channels have higher error rates and 
more bursty error patterns than do wire-line links. 
Due to limited lifetime of the sensor battery, mini-
mizing power consumption in the sensors is crucial 
to reliable network operation. The retransmission 
of lost packets should be minimized as it increases 
the total cost of packet delivery.
There have been several energy models that have 
detailedthe energy drainage pattern of wireless 
sensors (Karl & Willig 2005). Broadly speaking, a 
wireless node has three broad modes of operation: 
sensing, computational mode (involving the micro-
controller) and the transmission/reception of data.
Measurements indicate that communication is 
significantly more expensive than computation 

306
In MAC layer solutions, energy efficiency is 
achieved by scheduling the sleep/wake-up times of 
the sensors. One major issue with energy-saving 
MAC protocols is the way they handle the data. 
If there is a fixed periodic sleep/wakeup time 
as in Sensor-MAC (S-MAC) (Ye et al. 2002), or 
dynamic SMAC which controls the periods of 
sleep/wake-up, then there can be latency issues, 
unlike in TDMA (Time Division Multiple Access), 
where the delay is constant. In wireless sensor net-
works, data transmission can be either periodic or 
event-driven. Under such circumstances, SMAC 
will fail completelybecause packets can get lost 
in between sleep/wake up time. In (Polastre et al. 
2006), Polastre et al. propose aBerkeley-MAC 
(B-MAC) protocol that provides a flexible inter-
face to obtain ultra-low power operation, effective 
collision avoidance, and high channel utilization. 
However, the inherent weakness of low-duty-cycled 
MAC protocols are that, in order for neighboring 
nodes to synchronize for receiving data, preamble 
packets are required before receiving message data. 
Even in low power wireless transceivers, such as 
theCC2420, Si4464/63/62/61/60 and nRF24 L01, 
the energy cost for reception is comparable to that 
fortransmission [Texas Instruments, Silicon Labo-
ratories, Nordic Semiconductor]. Therefore thecost 
of a preamble exchange cannot be ignored, even if 
the preamble packet receive time is small compared 
to that of actual data packets.
The framework for adaptive transmission has 
been explained by Andrea Goldsmith in chapters 4 
and 9 of (Goldsmith 2005). Link quality estima-
tion is an integral part of adaptive transmission. 
This involves link monitoring, link measurement 
and metric evaluation (Baccour et al. 2012). The 
transceiver sends probe packets to the destination 
nodes, either in unicast or broadcast modes, and 
senses the channel usingfeedback packets before 
the actual transmission commences, which unfor-
tunately consumes power.
2.2 Adaptive power control in wireless sensor 
networks
There are several transmission parameters that 
can be variedto suite the requirement of the 
application:
• transmission power
• modulation technique
• datarate
• error correction coding
• retransmission number control if using ARQ 
protocol
However, as mentioned in (Karl & Willig), trans-
ceivers use the mostenergy during transmission;so 
this paper focuses on adjusting transmission power 
to reduce the packet error rates, thereby minimizing 
the number of retries and extending the battery 
lifetime.
(Marabissi et al. 2008), present a power and 
retransmission control policy for use over a fading 
channel. The approach is not suitable for radios that 
can only switch between discrete transmit power 
levels. (Farrokh et al. 2008), utilized retransmission 
in a short range wireless network to reduce power 
consumption, butt heuse of AWGN (additive white 
Gaussian noise) channel is very simplistic. The use 
of Hybrid ARQ (HARQ) protocol in LTE (Long 
Term Evolution) has gained momentum in the past 
few years, with the general approach of dynami-
cally adapting the coding rates for failed packet 
transmission to reduce packet losses. In (Soltani 
et al. 2011), an energy-efficient link layer proto-
col has been proposed that primarily targets delay 
sensitive applications such as real-time video com-
munication. Unfortunately, there is a significant 
overhead in both data transmission and computa-
tional costs due to decoding (Karl & Willig).
In paper (Lin et al. 2006), Shan Lin and etal have 
introduced Adaptive Transmission Power Control 
(ATPC) that maintains a neighbor table at each 
node and a feedback loop for transmission power 
control between each pair of nodes. ATPC pro-
vided the first dynamic transmission power algo-
rithm for WSN that uses all the available power 
output levels of CC2420 [Texas Instruments]. The 
CC2420 radio transceiver module operates in the 
ISM 2.4 GHz band and has 32 output power levels, 
ranging from 0 dBm to −25 dBm.
Practical-TPC (Lin et al. 2006), is a receiver ori-
ented protocol that is considered robust against 
dynamic wireless environments and uses Packet 
Reception Rate (PRR) values to compute the 
transmission power that should be used by the 
sender in the next attempt. However, these power 
control protocols use initial probe packets for link 
estimation. In most of the adaptive power control 
algorithms for wireless sensors, the nodes exchange 
probe packets to build the model that relates packet 
reception ratio with LQI (Link Quality Indicator) 
and RSSI. While ATPC uses all 32 power levels, 
there are some algorithms that divide these 32 
power levels into 8 levels, as in (Sheu et al. 2009). 
The work described is this paper aims to avoid the 
need for such probe packets.
2.3 Dynamic indoor radio channel
References from (Lin et al. 2006), and (Lai et al. 
2003), suggest that the received Eb/N0 value can 
vary cyclically over a period of 24 hours. Empiri-
cal values measured locally from RSSI readings of 
the beacon signals from a WiFi Access Point (AP) 
shows such a temporal variation. The Net Survey or 

307
tool [http://nutsaboutnets.com/netsurveyor-wifi-
scanner/] was used to collect RSSI of beacon signals 
from a wireless access point. These RSSI values give 
a measurement of how thereceived Eb/N0 over time. 
They are mapped with the received Eb/N0 values 
with the maximum value of RSSI equal to 20 dB. 
The tool used samples the signals every 5 seconds. 
Therefore in our testing scenario, the model used 
the wireless sensors that send data every 5 seconds. 
Two sets of data werecollected from WiFi access 
points in public places: a University dining hall 
during busy hour (weekday), and a shopping mall 
during the busy hour (weekend).
Figure 1 showsa snapshot of the received Eb/N0 
values in these two radio environments. The duration 
of the plots is from 12:30 till 12:45 pm. The tradi-
tional power control protocols like ATPC and P-TPC 
use closed-loop feedback to adapt the link quality 
over time. While it is fine in a natural environment to 
exchange packets every hour to update the model, it 
can be extremely difficult to track the channel varia-
tion in a dynamic indoor radio channel environment.
Variations, even in the range of 5 to 10 dB, can 
cause a significant change in the packet success 
rate and the overall energy efficiency perform-
ance. The proposed algorithm is able to track these 
changes and find anenergy efficient way of switch-
ing between different states. In this paper ‘states’ 
refers to aset of output power levels that can be 
used are used to transmit packets. The next section 
describes the algorithm in detail.
3 ADAPTIVE POWER CONTROL 
ALGORITHM
The objectives of the energy-efficient adaptive 
power control algorithm are to:
• minimize retries inbad channel conditions by 
transmitting at the highest or maximum avail-
able output power level, and
• stay operating at low output power level when 
the channel condition is good because there is 
ahigh probability of successful packet transmis-
sion in that level.
3.1 The adaptive power control model
The adaptive power control has four states. In each 
state there is a predefined number of discrete out-
put power levels. Four levels were used: −15 dBm, 
−10 dBm, −5 dBm and 0 dBm. These power levels 
are from the hardware specification of CC2420 
transceiver module. Table 1 shows the states and 
the power levels used in each of the states.
3.2 Description of the algorithm
The output power levels are Low (L), −15 dBm: 
Medium (M), −10 dBm; High (H), −5 dBm, and 
Maximum (X), 0 dBm. Packet transmission 
always starts by using the lowest power level of 
astate. Each state represents one complete cycle of 
packet transmission. The state transition diagram 
is shown in Figure 2 and the corresponding state 
transition matrix is presented in Table 2. The state 
transition probabilities depend on the packet error 
probability in that state. It can be seen from the 
state transition table that the system uses transmis-
sion experience to determine the power level for 
the next fresh packet transmission. In each state, 
it will use a fixed number of power levels to send 
Figure 1. Snapshots of the variation of Eb/N0 in two 
locations.
Table 1. States and power levels.
State
1
2
3
4
Available power levels
L
M
M
H
H
H
X
X
X
X
Figure 2. State transition diagram of the adaptive 
model.

308
the packets but a failure will always retry at the 
next higher power level. Due to the limitations of 
the hardware, the output power step size is fixed 
at 5 dB.
3.3 Evaluation parameters
One of the parameters for the optimization is the 
energy consumed per useful bit transmitted over a 
wireless link (Lettieri et al 2002). Similarly, this paper 
uses the average cost of successful transmission as 
the optimization parameter. This is defined as:
Cost
Total Cost
Total number of fresh packets sent
total number of f
=
−
ailed packets  
 
(1)
All cost values are measured in mA-sec. The effi-
ciency of the adaptive protocol is also defined by 
the average number of retries (Keshavarzian et al. 
2007). This paper introduces packet success rate 
with retries as a new parameter for evaluation that 
takes into account the retries needed to achieve a 
particular packet success rate (PSR):
Packet Success Rate with retries
PSR
Average retry
=
+
1
 
 
(2)
where
PSR
Total number of successfully transmitted packets
Total number
=
of fresh packets sent
and
Average retry
total number of retries
Total number of fresh packets
=
sent
Some applications of wireless sensors are sen-
sitive to delays in data delivery. To evaluate the 
algorithm from this perspective, the cost and 
packet success rate with retries are compared to 
fixed-power transmissions in single-hop network. 
A retransmission penalty is added to the cost of 
transmission to account for the time needed to 
buffer the packet to be resent multiplied by the 
current consumption of that state of the trans-
ceiver. The buffered time is calculated based on 
the autocorrelation function in a fading channel 
that expresses how significantly the channel has 
changed over a time delay (Td) for a given maximum 
Doppler spread (Fd). A high correlation value indi-
cates that channel state has not changed enough to 
make packet error rate independent in each time 
slot of transmission. Due to this bursty behavior 
of the channel, errors tend to occur in blocks and 
the fading effect can affectthrough several packet 
transmissions (Sajadieh et al 1996). To avoid block 
fading effects, retransmitted packets are buffered 
and are sent in different time slots. The autocorre-
lation function for an indoor fading radio channel 
is a sin(x)/x function where x is the product of Fd 
and delay (Td) (Clarke & Khoo 1996).
This paper assumes an autocorrelation value of 
0.75 or less for packet retransmission which accounts 
for the normalized delay value of 0.2 as shown from 
the autocorrelation plot of Figure 3. To find the 
buffer time for penalty calculations, it is necessary 
Table 2. State transition matrix.
Next state
1 (LMHX)
2 (MHX)
3 (HX)
4 (X)
Current 
State
1 (LMHX)
Succeed at level L
Succeed at level M
Succeed at level H
Failed or Succeed 
 at level X
2 (MHX)
Succeed at level M
Succeed at level H
Succeed at level X
Failed
3 (HX)
No transition
Succeed at level H
Succeed at level X
Failed
4 (X)
No transition
No transition
Succeed at level X
Failed
Figure 3. Autocorrelation plot in indoor radio fading 
channel.

309
to determine the maximum Doppler spread in the 
indoor radio environments. Results in (Howard & 
Pahlavan 1990) shows that the maximum Doppler 
spread value is around 20 Hz. Since we are consider-
ing all types of indoor radio environment, including 
factory setup as well as sensors with limited mobil-
ity options, the Fd in an indoor radio channel can 
be maximum around 40 Hz in 2.4 GHz ISM band. 
Therefore the delay or buffer time is approximately 
5 milliseconds. The cost of buffering before retrans-
mission in fixed-power transmission is the product 
of buffer time and the current used by the CC2420 
while in theidle state (0.426 mA).
3.4 Results and discussions
The simulations are used to study the behavior of 
the adaptive algorithm when the channel condition 
is not changing with time and the average received 
Eb/N0 is fixed. The simulation parameters are pre-
sented in Table 3. The evaluation parameters are 
compared with those withtransmissions at fixed 
power levels of −15 dBm, −10 dBm, −5 dBm and 
0 dBm. Based on the path loss model for indoor 
radio communication [Universal Mobile], these 
power levels result inmean received Eb/N0 values 
of 10 dB, 15 dB, 20 dB and 25 dB, respectively. In 
order to have a fair comparison, the transmission 
limit in fixed power mode is set at 4 as the adaptive 
system can use up to 4 power levels.
The algorithm wastested with these fixed Eb/N0 
values. The response of the system isshown in 
Figures 4 to 7, where it can be seenthat when chan-
nel Eb/N0 is in the order of 25–20 dB, the system 
rarely switches to state 4, which will start withthe 
maximum output power level. However, when the 
received Eb/N0 value has dropped to 10–15 dB, the 
system frequently switches to state 4.
The comparison of the packet success rate, 
cost and success rate with retries are presented in 
Table 3. Simulation parameters.
Modulation technique
DPSK
Channel data Rate
250 kbps
Maximum Doppler spread
20 Hz
Cyclic redundancy check
CRC-8
Multi-path Fading channel 
model
UMTS Indoor Office 
Test Environment 
[Universal Mobile]
Distance between sensor 
node and base station
20 meters (∼65 ft)
Maximum number 
transmissions allowed 
when transmitting in 
fixed power
4
Figure 4. Adaptive 4 power levels used for fixed Eb/
N0 = 10 dB.
Figure 5. Adaptive 4 power levels used for fixed Eb/
N0 = 15 dB.
Figures 8–10. These bar plots show that the adap-
tive protocol improves energy efficiency between 
5% and 42%, while achieving a PSR of more than 
99.97%. The average retry performance for a given 
PSR can also improve by up to 30%, depending on 
the output power level of transmission.
The next set of simulations used the empirical 
received Eb/N0 values. Figures 11–16 compares the 
evaluation parameters in two different radio chan-
nel scenarios.
Figures 11 to 13 show that the adaptive system 
achieves its maximum energy efficiency when sys-
tem has a PSR of around 94% and packet success 

310
Figure 7. Adaptive 4 power levels used for fixed Eb/
N0 = 25 dB.
Figure 8. Comparison of the packet success rate (PSR)
for the adaptive and fixed-power transmission protocols.
Figure 9. Comparing the power consumption of the 
adaptive and fixed-power transmission protocols.
Figure 10. Comparing the packet success rate (with 
retries) of the adaptive and fixed-power transmission 
protocols.
Figure 11. University dining hall: PSR comparison 
between the adaptive and fixed-power transmission 
protocols.
Figure 6. Adaptive 4 power levels used for fixed Eb/
N0 = 20 dB.

311
Figure 12. University dining hall: Cost comparison of 
adaptive and fixed-power transmission protocols.
Figure 13. University dining hall: Packet success rate 
with retries comparison of adaptive and fixed-power 
transmission protocols.
Figure 14. Shopping mall: Comparing the PSR of the 
adaptive and fixed-power transmission protocols.
Figure 15. Shopping mall: Cost comparison of adap-
tive and fixed-power transmission protocols.
Figure 16. Shopping mall: Packet success rate with 
retries comparison of adaptive and fixed-power trans-
mission protocols.
rate with retries of 75%. In fact, the energy effi-
ciency has improved by a margin of up to 30%.
Figures 14 to 16 show that the adaptive system 
employed in the shopping mall scenario improves 
the energy efficiency by up to 36% for a given PSR 
of around 80% and packet success rate with retries 
of 49%.
4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has proposed a state-based adaptive 
power control protocol that uses discrete power 
levels. This protocol was evaluated using real world 
channel characteristics derived from measure-
ments of a populated indoor environment, and the 
current consumption of a widely used low-power 
transceiver. The experiments calculated the energy 

312
Lettieri Paul, Schurgers Curt, Srivastava Mani (1999), 
“Adaptive link layer strategies for energy efficient 
wireless networking”, Wireless Networks, Volume 5, 
Issue 5, pp 339–355.
Lin S., Zhang J., Zhou G., Gu L., He T. & Stankovic J. A. 
(2006), “ATPC: Adaptive Transmission Power Con-
trol for Wireless Sensor Networks,” SenSys’06, pp. 
223–236.
Lin Shan, Zhang Jingbin, Zhou Gang, Gu Lin, He Tian, 
Stankovic John A. (2006), “ATPC: Adaptive Trans-
mission Power Control for Wireless Sensor Networks,” 
SenSys’06, November 1–3, pp. 223–236.
Marabissi Dania, Tarchi Daniele, Fantacci Romano & 
Balleri Francesco (2008), “Efficient Adaptive Modu-
lation and Coding techniques for WiMAX systems”, 
IEEE communication society, pp. 3383–3387.
Nordic Semiconductor, nRF24 L01 Single Chip 2.4 GHz 
Transceiver, https://www.sparkfun.com/datasheets/Com-
ponents/SMD/nRF24 L01Pluss_Preliminary_Product_
Specification_v1_0.pdf
Polastre Joseph, Hill Jason, Culler David (2004), “Ver-
satile Low Power Media Access for Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, SenSys’04, November 3–5, pp. 95–107.
Sajadieh M., Kschischang F.R., and Leon-Garcia A. 
(1996), “A Block Memory Model for Correlated 
Rayleigh Fading Channels”, IEEE International 
Conference on Communications, ICC ‘96, Vol 1, 
pp. 282–286.
Sheu J,, Hsieh K. & Cheng Y. (2009), “Distributed Trans-
mission Power Control Algorithm for Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, Journal Of Information Science And Engi-
neering 25, pp. 1447–1463.
Silicon Laboratories, Si4464/63/62/61/60 datasheet, http://
www.silabs.com/Support%20Documents/Technical-
Docs/Si4464–63–61–60.pdf.
Soltani Sohraab, Ilyas Muhammad U., Radha Hayder 
(2011),” An Energy Effcient Link Layer Protocol for 
Power-Constrained Wireless Networks”, Proceedings 
of 20th International Conference on Computer Com-
munications and Networks (ICCCN), pp. 1–6.
Texas Instruments, CC2420 datasheet, http://www.mtl.
mit.edu/Courses/6.111/labkit/datasheets/CC2420.pdf.
Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); 
Selection procedures for the choice of radio transmis-
sion technologies of the UMTS (UMTS 30.03 version 
3.1.0) http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_tr/101100_10119
9/101112/03.01.00_60/tr_101112v030100p.pdf.
Ye Wei, Heidemann John, Estrin Deborah (2002), “An 
Energy-Effcient MAC Protocol for Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, IEEE INFOCOM, pp. 1567–1576.
http://nutsaboutnets.com/netsurveyor-wifi-scanner/
cost of transmission and the associated delay in 
delivery. Using the described protocol, there is 
marked improvement in the energy efficiency, 
especially when the radio channel conditions are 
varying widely and the transceiver is required to 
track the channel dynamics. The adaptive model 
can be represented using a state transition diagram 
and is therefore mathematically tractable and sim-
ple to implement. The practical implementation of 
the adaptive algorithm is planned to validate the 
results.
REFERENCES
Baccour Nouha, Koubaa Anis, Mottola Luca, Zuniga 
Marco Antonio, Youssef Habib, Boana Carlo Alberto, 
Alves Mario (2012), “Radio Link Quality Estimation 
in Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey”, ACM Trans-
actions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 8, No. 4, Article 34, 
pp. 34:1–34:33.
Clarke Richard H. & Khoo Wee Lin (1997), “3-D Mobile 
Radio Channel Statistics”, IEEE Transactions on 
Vehicular Technology, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 798–799.
Farrokh Arsalan, Krishnamurthy Vikram, Schober 
Robert (2008), “Optimal Power and Retransmission 
Control Policiesover Fading Channels with Packet 
Drop Penalty Costs”,IEEE International Conference 
on Communications, pp. 4021–4027.
Fu Yong, Sha Mo, Hackmann Gregory, Lu Chenyang 
(2012),” Practical Control of Transmission Power for 
Wireless Sensor Networks”, 20th IEEE International 
Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP), pp. 1–10.
Goldsmith Andrea (2005), “Wireless Communication” 
Cambridge University Press, chapters 4 and 9.
[6] Hashemi H. (1993), “The Indoor Radio Propagation 
Channel”, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 81, No. 7 
pp. 943–968.
Howard S.J., Pahlavan K. (1990), “Doppler Spread 
Measurements Of Indoor Radio Channel”, Electron-
ics Letters Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 107–108.
Karl H. & Willig A. (2005),“Protocols and Architectures 
for Wireless Sensor Networks”, Wiley publishers, 
chapter 2, pp. 36–44.
Keshavarzian A., Uysal-Biyikoglu E., Lal D., and 
Chintalapudi K. (2007), “From Experience with 
Indoor Wireless Networks: A Link Quality Metric 
that Captures Channel Memory”, IEEE Communica-
tions Letters, Vol. 11, No. 9, pp. 72922–731.
Lai Dhananjay, Manjeshwar Arati, Herrmann Falk, 
Uysal-Biyikoglu Elif, Keshavarzian Abtin (2003), 
“Measurement and characterization of link qual-
ity metrics in energy constrained wireless sensor 
networks”, Global Telecommunications Conference, 
pp. 446–452.

313
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
The present energy scenario and need of microgrid in India
Arshdeep Singh & Prasenjit Basak
Department of Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering, Thapar University, Patiala, India
ABSTRACT: The rapid development of economy has led to an increase in energy crisis and environ-
mental pollution. So, maximum utilization of renewable energy resources is in hour of need. There is a 
huge amount of various renewable energy resources that are available in India. In the present scenario, 
microgrid is one of the alternatives for electricity generation. It can satisfy the customers load demand at 
optimum cost by reducing the grid congestion. At present the paper deals with the current power genera-
tion scenario, availability, and utilization of renewable resources in India. Aspects of microgrid in India 
have been explored. Salient features of microgrid operation, such as renewable energy resources intercon-
nection, meeting of load demand through grid connected operation, also including the scope of supplying 
surplus power to the grid have been verified through modeling and simulation using MATLAB software. 
Dispatch scheme has been studied in simulation and the results are analyzed.
(PV) systems, small-scale hydroelectric generation, 
storage devices are all suitable for India [Sule et al. 
2011]
According to the geographical location of India 
a good amount of solar energy potential is availa-
ble. Moreover, most of the population is dependent 
upon agriculture and a huge amount of biomass is 
available. India has a large number of sugar indus-
tries. The biomass available with the sugar industry 
can be utilized in combined heat and power gen-
eration in the industry itself. In the southern region 
good amount of wind power is available along the 
coastal area. So the combination of DER’s like 
wind energy conversion system, photovoltaic sys-
tems, biomass, CHP, and small-scale hydroelectric 
generation with storage devices are highly accept-
able for India [Kaushal et al. 2014].
Different types of biomass can be burned or 
digested to produce energy. Biomass is a kind 
of versatile material and can be used to produce 
electricity, Additionally, combination of heat and 
power in a combined heat and power plant, gener-
ation of heat for space and hot water, a liquid fuel 
like biodiesel and vegetable oil all can be used to 
power vehicles or produce heat energy [Chouhan 
et al. 2014].
2 ASPECTS OF MICROGRID IN INDIA
The standard of living of low-income households 
in rural areas suffered from energy, poverty, and 
lack of human and economic development. Indian 
government is committed to implement reforms 
1 INTRODUCTION
At present the demand of electricity is increasing 
with the need of improved energy utilization effi-
ciency and reliability of the power system network. 
To cope up with this changing scenario, the new 
renewable energy based on power generation tech-
niques are to be implemented by those having less 
carbon footprints. Microgrid is one of the expected 
local power supply system that consists of distrib-
uted generators, loads, power storage devices, and 
heat recovery equipment’s (Li et al. 2007). Micro-
grid provides higher flexibility and reliability as it 
is able to run in both grid-connected and islanded 
mode of operation. It is connected to both the local 
generating units and the utility grid thus preventing 
power outages and the excess power can be sold to 
the utility grid. The microgrid has to be designed in 
such a manner so that there is ease in installation, 
commissioning, operation, and maintenance. The 
microgrid helps in reducing the congestion cost by 
reducing network congestion, line losses, and line 
costs and there by rising energy efficiency [Singh et 
al. 2014]. It has many other important aspects such 
as reduction in transmission losses, utilization of 
large land by installing PV generators and reduc-
tion in environmental impacts of existing fossil 
fuels are based on the generating systems.
The choice of Distributed Energy Resources 
(DER) for microgrid depends on the geographical 
conditions of the site, the climate and topology of 
the region, and fuel availability. DER technologies 
like Combined Heat and Power (CHP) systems, 
wind energy conversion system, solar PhotoVoltaic 

314
Table 2. Energy resources available in various sectors of India.
Region
Coal (MW)
Gas (MW)
Diesel (MW)
Nuclear (MW)
Hydro (MW)
Renewable (MW)
Central
46775
7428
0
5780
10661
0
State
55890
6974
602
0
27482
3803
Private
55830
8568
597
0
2694
27888
All India
158495
22971
1199
5780
40867
31692
and encourage foreign investment to improve the 
living conditions of 1.1 billion citizens. This com-
mitment increases the GDP growth rate to 8.2% 
(As per the data given by Trading Economics). 
However, because of its technically inefficient 
electrical grid, India losses money for every unit 
of electricity sold. So, it is mandatory for India to 
build a smart grid power infrastructure concept, as 
it has one of the largest grid networks in the world. 
This smart grid concept should be technically per-
fect and financially secured.
Instead of single source, the hybrid renew-
able energy has greater potential to provide higher 
quality to customers. A very large percentage of 
Indian population is dependent on agriculture. So, 
agriculture waste in the form of biomass can be 
utilized in producing electricity. These, renewable 
energy sources can complement each other in a 
healthy way. Hybrid energy sources are commer-
cial, and can be used in remote areas for power 
applications where the grid supply is either not 
possible, or expensive. Despite of all the sources of 
renewable energy sources, the solar energy has got 
greater attention because of its availability in all 
regions of the world.
2.1 All India installed capacity (MW) as on 
28-02-2015 region—wise
(Executive Summary report from Ministry of 
Power Central Electricity Authority New Delhi-
February 2015)
Installed Capacity of  Energy resources in 
various regions of India are listed in Table 2. In 
southern region, the production of electricity is 
maximum from renewable energy based plants as 
compared to other plants due to the utilization of 
Table 1. Installed capacity of energy resources in various regions of India.
Region
Coal (MW)
Gas (MW)
Diesel (MW)
Nuclear (MW)
Hydro (MW)
Rene-wable (MW)
North
39431
5331
12
1620
16666
5935
West
62384
10915
17
1840
7447
11271
South
28892
4962
939
2320
11398
13784
East
27727
190
17
0
4113
432
North East
60
1571
142
0
1242
256
Islands
0
0
70
0
0
11
Figure 1. Graphical representation of installed capacity 
of energy resources in various regions of India.
wind energy. Also in western region, the renewable 
energy resources are playing a vital role in energy 
production.
Figure 1 shows the graphical representation of 
energy resources available in various regions in 
India. It depicts, that the total energy production is 
261006.46 MW in India as on Feb 2015. Maximum 
energy of 182666.89 MW is produced using coal. 
Hydro, RES, and nuclear produces 40867.43 MW, 
31692.14 MW, and 5780.00 MW respectively.
Figure 1 also reveals that approximately 12% of the 
total installed capacity of power generation in India 
is contributed by the renewable energy resources. 
Whereas, nuclear energy technology is contributes 
only 2.21% of the total present capacity. This national 
status of energy resources shows the great aspect of 
installation of renewable energy based microgrid 
system. Graphical representation of sector-wise pro-

315
duction of energy from various resources have been 
represented as a pi-chart in Figure 2.
2.2 All India installed capacity (MW)
Table 2 shows the production of energy from the 
different sectors such as Central, State, and Private 
using various sources.
At central level the major part of the energy 
46775.01 MW is produced using coal, also it pro-
duces energy of 5780.00 MW using the nuclear 
resources which is zero in case of state and private 
sectors. Hydro energy is also produced in large 
amount of 10661.43 MW. State sector is utilizing 
maximum of the Hydro energy sources for produc-
ing 27482.00 MW and simultaneously it also pro-
duces 55890.50 MW using coal. Private sector is 
producing 27888.47 MW using RES which is more 
than the other sectors.
2.3 Availability of renewable energy sources in 
India
2.3.1 Solar
India is endowed with vast solar energy potential. 
Every year about 5,000 trillion kWh energy inci-
dents over India’s land area with most of the parts 
receiving 4–7 kWh per sq. m per day. Hence, both 
technology routes for conversion of solar radiation 
into heat and electricity, namely, solar thermal and 
solar photovoltaic’s, can effectively be harnessed 
providing huge scalability for solar in India.
2.3.2 Wind
The potential for wind power generation for grid 
interaction has been estimated about 1,02,788 MW 
taking sites having wind power density greater 
than 200 W/m2 at 80 m hub-height with 2% land 
availability in potential areas for setting up wind 
farms i.e. 9 MW/km2.
2.3.3 Biomass
The current availability of biomass in India is esti-
mated at about 500 million metric tons per year. 
Studies sponsored by the Ministry has estimated 
surplus biomass availability at about 120–150 mil-
lion metric tons per annum covering agricultural 
and forestry residues corresponding to a potential 
of about 18,000 MW (As per the information given 
by Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, India).
From the above data it has been clear that 
renewable sources energy are abundantly avail-
able in India in various regions, so there is a dire 
need to utilize all these for the welfare of mankind. 
Table. 3 given below shows the installed capacity of 
various renewable energy sources.
From the above discussion it has been found that 
renewable sources of energy are available in greater 
Figure 2. Graphical representation of sector-wise pro-
duction of energy from various resources.
Table 3. Installed capacity of various renewable energy 
sources as on March, 2015 (according to the physical 
progress report by ministry of new and renewable energy, 
India, March 2015).
Installed capacity of various renewable energy sources 
as on March, 2015
Type of resource
Capacity(MW)
Wind power
23444.00
Biomass power & gasification
1410
Solar power
3743.97
amount but we are utilizing only 7.8% of the avail-
able biomass and 22.8% of the available wind for 
the generation of power. Also, in case of solar as 
compared to availability the usage is very less.
3 SIMULATION OF MICROGRID
This work aims to develop a dispatching scheme 
for 24 hours of different distributed resources such 
as solar and wind. It depends upon the weather 
conditions. The microgrid model consisting of PV 
and wind turbine using MATLAB software.
3.1 Modeling of a microgrid
Figure 3 shows the simple model of a microgrid, 
which consists of two renewable energy resources 
i.e. PV and wind. The microgrid is connected to a 
particular load and utility grid.
Its operation depends upon the weather con-
ditions affecting power output of PV array and 
wind turbine which are delivered to a microgrid. 
The operating cost of PV and wind turbine is 
very less and the power generated from the solar 
and wind energy is free from pollution. So maxi-
mum amount of power generated from these two 

316
sources is delivered to the load. If at any time the 
total power generated by the PV and wind genera-
tor is less than the load demand then the rest of the 
power is taken from utility grid connected to the 
microgrid, so that at every hour the load demand is 
fulfilled. In case, at any hour the total power gener-
ated from these two sources is greater then the load 
demand then the microgrid will supply the surplus 
power to utility grid.
3.2 Problem formulation
3.2.1 Wind turbine
Wind turbine is used to convert the kinetic energy 
of wind into mechanical energy and then the 
mechanical energy is used to produce electrical 
energy. The power generated by the wind genera-
tor depends upon wind speed, size of turbine, air 
density, and the efficiency factor Cp [10].
P
R
V
C
WT
P
WT
P
C
∗V
1
2
2
3
V
∗V
ρ
πR
 
(1)
Where, PWT is the quantity of power generated 
by wind turbine. ρ, V, RWT are the air density, wind 
speed, and the blade radius of the turbine respec-
tively. CP represents the wind energy utilization 
efficiency.
For a fixed wind turbine and installation site, we 
can assume the air density and blade radius as con-
stant. The relationship between PWT and V can be 
written into a MATLAB function as:
P
V
V
WT
P
ci
V
<
V
,0
P
aV
bV
cV
d V
V
V
WT
P
ci
V
r
V
aV
cV
<
V
3
2
bV
,
P
P V
V
V
WT
P
r
r
V
co
V
P V
rP V
<
P
V
V
WT
P
co
V
<
V
,0
Where Pr , Vr , Vci , Vco are the rated power, rated 
wind speed, cut-in, and cut-out wind speed respec-
tively. Moreover, the constants a, b, c, and d depend 
on the type of WT and the installation site. The 
type of wind turbine in this article is selected as 
AOC 15/50 made by Seaforth Energy, Inc. and the 
parameters used to model the power output-wind 
speed curve are as follows [Deng et al. 2010]:
V
m
m s
ci
V
r
r
V
5
1
s V =
s V
4 6
2
V
8m
2
/
m/
2 m
6m
,Vr
V
1
Vr
V
4
/ s
.
/
m
40
P
kw a
b
rP
=
kw a
−
=
b
0 0609
1 7882
,
.
a
0
,
.
b
1
,
c
d =16 3773
.
,
8
.
3.2.2 PV array
From a single module we cannot generate enough 
power to meet our load demand. A linked collec-
tion of solar panels used to convert the sunlight into 
electricity is called PV array. PV array has no mov-
ing parts and generate electricity without emission.
The output power of the module can be calcu-
lated as [10]:
P
P
G
G
pv
P
STC
I
G NG
I
ST
G
C
P
G
G
ST
P
C G
ST
G
C (
)
T
T
c
T
r
T
−
K
+
 
(2)
where: Ppv -Output power of the module at Irra-
diance (GING), PSTC -Module maximum power at 
Standard Test Condition (STC), GING -Incident 
Irradiance, GSTC- Irradiance at STC 1000 (W/m2), 
k -Temperature coefficient of power, Tc -Cell tem-
perature, Tr -Reference temperature. In the micro 
grid studied in this article the maximum power of 
pv array measured in STC is
P
kw K
ST
P
C
=
kw K
0 1067
,
.
K
0
3.2.3 Weather conditions
For mathematical modeling of PV and wind tur-
bine in MATLAB, we need weather conditions 
including temperature, wind speed, light intensity 
along with its variation with time that is taken from 
[Mohamed et al. 2010]. Figures 4, 5, and 6 shows 
the variation of temperature, solar radiation and 
wind speed with time.
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Power output and load demand has been shown in 
Figure 6. It depicts that during first four hours there 
is less power consumption and the output power 
from the wind turbine is more than the demand. 
After 4th hour solar power also is also available 
and simultaneously the load is increasing. In first 
six hours power from PV and wind turbine is more 
than the load demand. During this interval of time 
the surplus power has been sent to the grid.
After 6th hour the power demand is increasing 
continously and reach its maximum value at 15th 
hour, therafter load demand decreases as depicted 
in Figure 7. The power output of PV and wind 
Figure 3. Schematic of simple microgrid.

317
more than the requirement. Also, at this time inter-
val microgrid supply the surplus power to the grid.
5 CONCLUSION
Nowadays at central level the major part of the 
energy is produced using coal. As good potential 
of several renewable energy resources is available in 
India, but utilization is very less. Microgrid seems 
to be the reliable solution for the problems such 
as pollution and energy crisis. From the simulation 
result, it has been found that during 24 hour of 
load demand PV and wind turbine can contribute 
a good amount of power which is environment 
friendly. It reduces the overall load of utility grid. 
The surplus power can be sold to the utility grid 
which is economically favorable. Various distrib-
uted energy resources can be used as per avail-
ability. Using optimisation techniques the most 
suitable combination of DER’s can be assembled 
for a particular load demand for successful imple-
mentation of this emerging technology.
REFERENCES
Chouhan, K., Ladhe, Y., Upadhayay. V. (2014). Biomass 
a Versatile Fuel for Energy and Power Generation. 
IOSR Journal of Mechanical and Civil Engineering 
(IOSR-JMCE). 8–11.
Deng, Q., Gao X., Zhou, H., Hu, W. (2011). System mod-
eling and optimization of microgrid using Genetic 
Algorithm. The 2nd International Conference on 
Intelligent control and Information Processing.
Kaushal, J., Basak, P. (2014). The Deployment of Micro-
grid as an Emerging Power System in India and its 
Simulation using Matlab-Simulik. International Jour-
nal of Advanced Research in Electrical, Electronics 
and Instrumentation Engineering. 3(4), 9163–9170.
Li, Xi., Song, Y.J., Han, S.B. (2007). Study on power 
quality control in multiple renewable energy hybrid 
microgrid system. In: Proceedings of the Power Tech.
Mohamed, F.A., Koivo, H.N. (2010). System modelling 
and online optimal management of MicroGrid using 
Mesh Adaptive Direct Search, International Journal 
of Electrical Power & Energy Systems.32(5),398–407.
Singh, A., Surjan, B.S. (2014). MICROGRID: A REVIEW, 
International Journal of Research in Engineering and 
Technology 3(2), 185–198.
Sule, V., Kwasinski, A. (2011). Active Anti-Islanding 
Method Based on Harmonic Content Detection from 
Overmodulating Inverters Presented at Applied Power 
Electronics Conference and Exposition (APEC), 2011 
Twenty-Sixth Annual IEEE\
http://www.tradingeconomics.com/india/gdp-growth-
annual
http://www.cea.nic.in/reports/monthly/executive_rep/
feb15.pdf
http://mnre.gov.in/schemes/grid-connected/solar-
thermal-2/
http://mnre.gov.in/mission-and-vision-2/achievements/
Figure 4. Temperature variation with time.
Figure 5. Light intensity variation with time.
Figure 6. Wind speed variation with time.
Figure 7. Power output and load demand.
turbine is not sufficient to meet the load demand 
from 6th to 20th hour. During this time interval 
microgrid provides rest of the power from the util-
ity grid. From 20th to 24th hour solar power is not 
available, but power output of the wind turbine is 

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

319
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Influence of temperature on field emission from finite barrier quantum 
structures in presence of image force
Shubhasree Biswas Sett
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata, India
Chayanika Bose
Department of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: The influence of temperature on the field emission from a finite quantum well is investi-
gated in this communication. Here a constant carrier concentration is maintained for a particular quan-
tum well by adjusting the Fermi Energy with variation in temperature. The emission is found to depend 
both on the position of the modified Fermi Energy and the number of electric subbands contributing to 
the emission.
where e is electronic charge; the factor ½ includes 
electrons moving only along the field direction; 
Δnn is the carrier concentration of the nth energy 
level and vn is their velocity in the direction of the 
applied field given by
v
m
n
a
n =
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
ℏ
*
π
 
(2)
The transmission coefficient t, under the influ-
ence of image force, takes the form (Bose et al. 
1987)
t
m
=
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(
)
V
En
E
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟⎠
⎟( )
exp
*
/
/
4
3
2
2
1 2
/
V
3 2
/
ℏ
θ ( ))  
(3)
where, V0 is the height of the potential energy bar-
rier, En is the energy of the nth quantum level and 
θ
α
α
λ
α
λ
( )
θ α
θ α
( )
λ
( )
λ
=
−
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
1
2
1
1
2
α
K
E
α
(λ
 with K(λ) 
and E(λ) as complete elliptical normal integrals of 
first and second kind respectively.
Here the following substitutions are used
λ
α
α
=
+
2
1
1
2
2
−
=
y
α 2,
y
e eF
W
s
n
W
=
∈
4π
, where ∈s is permittivity of the 
semiconductor barrier material and Wn = V0 − En
1 INTRODUCTION
Field emission due to Fowler Nordheim Tunnel-
ling from infinite quantum wells is well studied 
since late 80s (Majumdar et al. 1987, Bose et al. 
1987, Sett et al. 2012 a,b). In all the cases, WKB 
approximation (Davis 1998, Harrison 2005) 
was used to estimate the probability of electron-
 tunnelling through the barrier. The current density 
is observed to vary exponentially with the applied 
field and oscillate with increasing well thickness. In 
(Sett et al. 2014), field emission from finite quan-
tum structures were analysed in presence of image 
charge originating due to discontinuity in permit-
tivity at the well boundary (Delerue et al. 2004). 
The emission is found to increase for finite struc-
tures with higher barriers and also due to incor-
poration of effect of image charge. In the present 
communication, we study the influence of temper-
ature on the field emission from a finite quantum 
well in presence of image force.
2 THEORY
Let us consider a quantum well (QW) of width a 
(∼ nm) in the z direction, where the width in the 
nanometre scale results in quantization of energy lev-
els. When an electric field of strength F (∼ 109 V/m) 
is applied to the well in –z direction, field emission 
is observed and the general expression of the cur-
rent density is given by (Majumdar et al. 1987)
J
ev
n t
n
n
n
∑
1
2
Δ
 
(1)

320
At temperature T = 0 K, Δnn can be written as
Δn
m
a
n =
(
)
E
E
F
E
n
E
E
*
πℏ
π
2
 
(4)
whereas, for higher temperatures, the carrier 
concentration for nth level should be taken as 
( Bandyopadhyay et al. 2008)
Δn
m k T
a
k T
n
B
k
B
k
=
B
+ (
)
E
E
F
n
E
E
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
*
l
e p
πℏ
π
2
1
1
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
exp
 
(5)
The total carrier concentration considering all 
the subbands can therefore be expressed as
n
m
a
n
0
2
0
=
(
)
E
E
F
n
E
E
E
∑
*
,
πℏ
π
for
K
T
0
=
 
(6)
and
n
m k T
a
k T
B
k
B
k
n
0
2
1
1
=
+
B
2
1
+ (
)
E
E
F
n
E
E
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∑
*
l
e p
,
k T
1+ (
)
F
n
⎝
⎠⎟⎠⎠⎟⎠
πℏ
π
for higher tempe
p ratures
 
(7)
Substituting equation (2), equation (3) and 
equation (7) in equation (1), the current density 
can finally be formulated as
J
ek T
a
n
k T
m
B
k
B
k
n
=
n
B
+ (
)
E
E
F
n
E
E
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
×
−
⎛
⎝
∑
2
1
1
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
4
3
2
2
2
ℏ
ℏ
l
e p
exp
*
⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(
)
(
)
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟⎠
⎟
1 2
3 2
1
/
/
eF
−
θ(
)
(
 
 
(8)
The effect of temperature T on the field emis-
sion from a finite quantum well is studied using 
equation (8).
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We consider an n-type GaAs film sandwiched 
between two AlxGa1-xAs barrier layers to form the 
QW, where x is the Al-composition. The electronic 
energy levels in such finite barrier structures are 
computed by graphical solution of transcendental 
equations. The parameters used for simulation are 
taken from (Adachi 2008).
At T = 4.2 K, the carrier concentration for nth 
energy level Δnn, as given by equation (4) is initially 
considered for a 10 nm QW. The Fermi energy is 
computed using equation (6). As the temperature 
is increased the electrons are redistributed among 
the energy levels following Fermi Dirac distribu-
tion function f(E). The highest contributing energy 
level is now limited to the energy (EF′) at which the 
Fermi Dirac distribution function attains (1/e) of 
its value at E=EF, i.e., EF′ should be determined 
from 
F
f
e f
e f
(
)
EF
E ′
=
(
)
EF
E
1
. The resulting current 
density due to the applied field is computed using 
equation (8). The variations of current density for 
different temperatures are shown in Figure 1. The 
current density is found to increase with increas-
ing temperature. For T = 77 K and T = 4.2 K the 
field emission currents are more or less same. At 
T = 300 K, the emission increases considerably due 
to contribution from an additional energy level.
However, while using the above method, the 
total carrier concentration increases at higher tem-
peratures when the spread of Fermi Dirac distribu-
tion function increases. But this is not acceptable 
for a system having a specific doping level. To keep 
the carrier concentration unchanged, the Fermi 
energy itself needs to be modified with changing 
temperature (Davis 1998). Equation (7) is therefore 
employed to compute the modified Fermi energy 
for each temperature. Table 1 presents these Fermi 
energies for the cases considered in Figure 1. It is 
observed that the Fermi energies are lowered for 
higher temperatures to compensate the increase in 
carrier concentration.
These modified Fermi energies for the 10 nm 
QW are used for computation of current densities 
with increasing field strength and are plotted in 
Figure 2. The current density in this case decreases 
Figure 1. Field emission current density vs. electric field 
for a 10 nm QW at different temperatures.

321
Table 1. Fermi Energies at different temperatures for a n-GaAs/Al0.2Ga0.8 As QW with n0 = 1024 m−3.
Sl No.
Temperature
a = 10 nm
a = 20 nm
Fermi Energy
Number of Contributing 
Energy Levels
Fermi Energy
Number of Contributing 
Energy Levels
K
eV
eV
1
4.2
0.062
1
0.059
2
2
77
0.056
2
0.056
3
3
300
0.037
2
0.046
4
Figure 2. Field emission current density vs. electric field 
for a 10 nm QW at different temperatures.
Figure 3. Variation of current density with electric 
field for a 20 nm n-GaAs/Al0.2Ga0.8 As QW at different 
temperatures.
with temperature. This can be explained with the 
help of equation (8), which clearly indicates that 
as Fermi energy decreases, the factor (EF–En) 
decreases, which in turn reduces the overall carrier 
concentration. This results in lowering of current 
density.
Now, we consider another QW of length 20 nm 
and the computed results are plotted in Figure 3. 
However, in this case, the emission for T = 300K is 
higher than that for T = 77 K. Here the current den-
sity differs due to the change in number of contrib-
uting levels, as shown in Table 1. At T = 300 K, an 
additional energy level takes part in the emission, 
in comparison to that at T = 77 K. The number of 
energy levels taking part in the emission for both 
the temperatures remains same for the 10 nm well, 
as evident from Table 1.
4 CONCLUSION
In this paper, the influence of temperature on the 
field emission from a finite quantum well is formu-
lated and the results are computed for a n-GaAs/
Al0.2Ga0.8 As QW. It is observed that for main-
taining a constant carrier concentration, as tem-
perature is varied, the Fermi energy needs to be 
modified, which is found to decrease with increas-
ing temperature. This results in reduction in the 
magnitude of current density for higher tempera-
tures for the 10 nm QW. For a 20 nm QW, due to its 
larger width, inter subband separation decreases 
and thereby number of contributing level increases, 
resulting in increase in field emission current den-
sity with temperature.
REFERENCES
Adachi, S. 1985. GaAs, AlAs, and AlxGa1−x As: material 
parameters for use in research and device applications. 
J. Appl. Phys. 58(3): R1–R29.
Bandyopadhyay, S. & Cahay, M. 2008 Introduction To 
Spintronics. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis.

322
Bose, M.K. Majumdar, C. Maity, A.B. & Chakravarti, 
A.N. 1987. Field emission from ultrathin films of 
semiconductors with image forces. Phys. Stat. Sol. 
(B) 143: 113–120.
Davies, J.H. 1998. The physics of low-dimensional semi-
conductors an introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Delerue, C. & Lannoo, M. 2004. Nanostructures: theory 
and modelling. New York: Springer-Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg.
Harrison, P. 2005. Quantum wells, wires and dots: theo-
retical and computational physics of semiconductor 
nanostructures. England: John Wiley & Sons.
Majumdar, C. Bose, M.K. Maity, A.B. & Chakravarti, 
A.N. 1987. Effect of size quantization on field emis-
sion from ultrathin films of degenerate wide-gap semi-
conductors. Phys. Stat. Sol. (B) 141: 435–439.
Sett, S.B. & Bose, C. 2012a. Fowler-Nordheim tunneling 
from quantum wires of different cross-sections. Inter-
national Conference on Communications, Devices and 
Intelligent Systems 172–175.
Sett, S.B. & Bose, C. 2012b. Influence of geometrical 
shape of quantum dot on field emission. 5th Interna-
tional Conference on Computers and Devices for Com-
munication. 1–4.
Sett, S.B. & Bose, C. 2014. Field emission from finite bar-
rier quantum structures. Physica B: Condensed Matter 
450: 162–166.

323
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Tuning of fractional-order PID controller—a review
D. Shah, S. Chatterjee & K. Bharati
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, NIT, Yupia Deemed University, Arunachal Pradesh, India
S. Chatterjee
Department of Electrical Engineering NERIST, Nirjuli, Arunachal Pradesh, India
ABSTRACT: Fractional-order PID controller is a generalization of classical integer order PID  controller using 
the concept of fractional calculus. FOPID controller is far more superior to its integer order  counterpart, 
besides setting proportional, integral, and derivative gain; it has two more parameters that is the order of 
integrator λ and differentiator μ, which widens the scope of control system design. This paper gives an over-
view of the various tuning method of FOPID controller available in literature. The tuning method include: 
Ziegler Nichol type tuning rule, Padula and Visioli method, frequency domain design, time domain design, 
and IMC tuning. The difficulties in the implementation of FOPID controller has also been indicated.
closed loop system is robust to gain variation and step 
response exhibits an iso-damping property (phase-
bode plot of the system is flat at the gain crossover 
frequency) as a result system gets more robustness 
to gain variation and aging effects (Chen, Moore, 
Vinagre & Podlubny). The width of the flat phase 
region can be adjusted with the help of fractional 
order phase shaper (Monje, Vinagre, Feliu & Chen 
2008) resulting into a more robust system. Most of 
the real world process can be efficiently modeled 
with the help of fractional order differential equa-
tion rather than integer ones. Therefore, fractional 
order controller is naturally suitable for these frac-
tional order models to imply a better control.
3 REVIEW OF TUNING METHOD 
OF FOPID CONTROLLER
Recently lots of tuning techniques have been pro-
posed by many researchers among which some 
1 INTRODUCTION
Fractional order PID controller, proposed by Pod-
lubny is a generalization (Podlubny, 1999) of the 
classical integer order PID controller using the con-
cept of fractional calculus (Miller & Ross 1993). A 
FOPID controller is characterized by five parame-
ters, i.e., the proportional gain, the integral gain, the 
derivative gain, the integral order, and the derivative 
order. Many researcher’s results show that FOPID 
controller has better performance and robustness 
than classical PID controller (Chen, Hu & Moore 
2003). Though it is so, the para meter tuning of 
FOPID controller is an important and critical issue. 
In literature, many approaches have been docu-
mented to design FOPID controller which is based 
on both analytic and heuristic search method.
2 FRACTIONAL ORDER PID 
CONTROLLER
Two more parameter of FOPID widens the scope of 
control system design. The fractional order control-
ler generalizes the integer order PID controller design 
and expands it from point to plane (Monje, Chen, 
Vinagre, Xue & Feliu-Batlle 2010). This expansion 
adds more flexibility to control system design and we 
can control our real world process more accurately 
(Valerio & da Costa 2010). This is shown in Figure 1.
With the help of fractional order PID controller 
it is possible to design a controller to ensure that the 
Figure 1. Expanding the order of controller from point 
to plane.

324
are reviewed here. The various tuning method are 
organized in this section as:
1. Ziegler Nichol type tuning rule
2. Padula and Visioli method
3. Frequency domain design method
4. Time domain design
• Dominant pole placement method
• Optimal tuning based on time domain  integral 
performance index
5. IMC Tuning
3.1 Ziegler-nichol tuning rule
This tuning rule (Valerió & da Costa 2005) assumes 
the dynamics of system to have s-shaped unit step 
response and have transfer function of the form 
given by:
G
K
sT e Ls
( )s =
+
−
1
 
(1)
When the minimization tuning method, proposed 
by Monje (Monje, Calderon, Vinagre, Chen & 
Feliu 2004) was applied to plants given by (1) for 
several values of L and T, with K = 1. Thus, the 
parameters of fractional PID obtained vary in 
a regular manner with L and T. Using the least-
squares method; it is possible to translate that 
regularity into polynomial formulas to find accept-
able values of the parameters from the values of L 
and T.
FIRST SET OF TUNING RULES: A first set 
of tuning rule is given in Table 1 of (Valerió & da 
Costa 2006), which is to be read as
P = −0.0048 + 0.266L + 0.49820T + 0.0232L2 − 
0.0720T 2 − 0.0348LT
And so on. They may be used if
0.1 ≤ T ≤ 50, and L ≤ 2
And were designed for following specification: 
ωcg = 0.5 rad/s 
ϕ    = 2/3 rad = 38 degree 
ωh  = 10 rad/s 
ω l  = 0.1 rad/s
H   = −10 dB
N   = −20 dB
SECOND SET OF TUNING RULES: A sec-
ond set of rules is given in Table 2 of (Valerió & 
da Costa 2006). This second set of rules is applied 
for-
0.1 ≤ T ≤ 50 and
L ≤ 0.5
3.2 The padula and visioli method
Padula and Visioli proposed a set of tuning rules 
(Padula & Visioli 2011) based on first order plus 
time delay models. The tuning rules have been 
devised in order to minimize the integral abso-
lute error with a constraint on the maximum 
sensitivity.
3.2.1 Tuning rules
First, the process is considered to have dynamics 
described by first order plus time delay model. The 
process dynamics can be conveniently character-
ized by the normalized dead time and defined as
τ =
L
L
T
+
 
(2)
Which represents a measure of difficulty in con-
trolling the process. The tuning rules are devised 
for values of the normalized dead time in the range 
0.05 to 0.8. The FOPID controller is modeled by 
the following transfer function-
G
K K s
K s
s
K s
N
p
K
i
K
i
K
d
d
K
( )s =
+
+
λ
λ
μ
μ
1
1
K
+
K s
K
μ
1
 
(3)
The major difference of FOPID defined by this 
equation with the standard form of FOPID is that 
an additional first-order filter has been employed 
in this case, in order to, make the controller proper. 
The parameter N is chosen as N = 10Tμ−1. The per-
formance index is integrated absolute error which 
is defined as follows
IAE
t
dt
∞
∫| (e ) |
0
 
(4)
Table 1. Value of parameter Kp, Ki and Kd for Ms = 1.4.
Value
a
b
c
Kp
0.2776
−1.10970
−0.1426
Kd
0.6241
0.5573
0.0442
Ki
0.4793
0.7469
−0.0239
Table 2. Value of parameter Kp, Ki and Kd for Ms = 2.
Value
a
b
c
Kp
0.1640
−1.449
−0.2108
Kd
0.6426
0.8069
0.0563
Ki
0.5970
0.5568
−0.0954

325
Using this equation as performance index yields 
a low overshoot and a low settling time at the same 
time. The maximum sensitivity is defined as
M
G
G
s
M
c
G
=
+
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
max
( )s
( )s
1
1
 
(5)
Which represent the inverse of the maximum dis-
tance of the Nyquist plot (Walter, 1986) from the 
critical point −1 + j0. Obviously, the higher value of 
Ms yields less robustness against the uncertainties. 
Tuning rules are devised such that the typical val-
ues of Ms = 1.4 and Ms = 2.0 are achieved. If only 
the load disturbance rejection task is addressed, we 
have
K
K
p
K
=
(
)
a
c
b +
a b
1
b
 
(6)
K
T
a
c
i
K
b
(
)
L T
(
)
λ
 
(7)
K
T
a
c
d
K
b
(
)
L T
(
)
λ
 
(8)
Where the values of the parameters are shown 
in Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4.
3.3 Frequency domain design based on 
constrained optimization
It is an optimization based frequency domain 
tuning method proposed by Monje and Dorcak 
(Monje, Vinagre, Feliu & Chen 2008). This takes 
two extra specifications on the maximum value 
of magnitude of sensitivity and complementary 
sensitivity function along with the specifications 
presented in frequency domain design of FOPID 
controller.
3.3.1 Design specification and compensation 
problem
1. No steady-state error: Properly implemented a 
fractional integrator of order k + λ, 0 < λ <1 is, 
for steady error cancellation as efficient as 
 integer order integrator of order k + 1.
2. Phase margin (ϕm) and gain crossover frequency 
(ωcg) specifications: The conditions must be 
fulfilled:
G
G
dB
c
G
p
G
(
)
j
c
j
g
c
ωcg
c
(
)
j
cg
ω
j
c
= 0
 
(9)
Arg
j
j
c
c
j
g
p
c
cg
m
(
(
Gc
G
(
p
)
(
G
))
ω
j
c
(
Gp
G
π
ϕm
= −
+
 
(10)
Where Gc(s) is controller and Gp(s) is the plant 
transfer function and ωcg is the gain crossover 
frequency.
3. Robustness to variations in the gain of the plant: 
To this respect, the next constraint must be ful-
filled is-
d
d
cg
ω
ω
ωc
(
)
Arg G
j
j
c
p
G
j
(
(
G
)
(
G
))
ω
j
ω)G
)
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟⎠
⎟
= 0  
(11)
With this condition the phase is forced to be flat 
at ωcg and so, to be almost constant within an inter-
val around ωcg. It means that the system is more 
robust to gain changes and the overshoot of the 
response is almost constant within the interval.
4. Robustness to high frequency noise: To ensure a 
good measurement of noise rejection, it must 
fulfill the below condition:
T j
G
G
j
G
G
j
AdB
d
c
p
G
j
G
c
p
G
j
G
dB
(
)
j
(
)
j
(
)
j
(
)
j
(
)
j
)
G
)
)
j
G
)
)
j
=
+
≤
1
 
(12)
∀ω ≥ ωt rad/sec
Where A is the desired noise attenuation for fre-
quencies ω ≥ ωt rad/s.
5. To ensure a good output disturbance rejection: 
The next constraint must be reached:
S j
G
G
j
BdB
d
c
p
G
j
G
dB
(
)
j
(
)
j
(
)
j
)
G
)
)
j
=
+
≤
1
1
 
(13)
∀ω ≤ ωs rad/s
With B the desired value of the sensitivity func-
tion for frequencies ω ≥ ωsrad/s
3.3.2 The problem of nonlinear minimization
From the specifications above, a set of five nonlin-
ear equations with five unknown parameters (Kp, 
Ki, Kd, λ, μ) is obtained. The complexity of this 
set of nonlinear equations is very significant. The 
function used for this purpose is called fmincon 
(.) (Rao & Rao 2009), which finds the constrained 
minimum of a function of several variables. In this 
Table 3. Value of parameter Kp, Ki and Kd for Ms = 1.4.
λ
μ
1
1.0,if τ ≤ 0.1
1
1.1if 0.1 ≤ τ ≤ 0.4 and 1.2,if 0.4 ≤ τ
Table 4. Value of parameter Kp, Ki and Kd for Ms = 2.
λ
μ
1
1.0,if τ ≤ 0.2
1
1.1if 0.2 ≤ τ ≤ 0.6 and 1.2,if 0.6 ≤ τ

326
case, the specification in (10) is taken as the main 
function to minimize, and the rest of specifications 
are taken as constrains for the minimization, all 
of them subjected to the optimization parameters 
defined within the function fmincon (.).
3.4 Time domain design
3.4.1 Dominant pole placement method
The approach is based on the root locus method of 
designing PID controllers (Petras, 2000). As, in the 
traditional root locus method, the peak overshoot 
Mp and rise time trise are specified, then from these 
specifications, damping ratio ζ and the undamped 
natural frequency ωn are calculated according to 
(14) and (15).
ζ
π
= −
+
ln(
)
{ln(
)}
M
p
p
M
2
2
π
+
 
(14)
ω
π
ζ
ζ
ζ
n
ω
rise
t
=
−
−
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟⎠
⎟
−
−
tan 1
2
ζ
2
ζ
1
1
 
(15)
Using these computed values of ζ and ωn, desired 
positions of the dominant poles P1,2 of the closed 
loop pole of the system aredetermined as:
p
j
a
jbj
n
n
j
1 2
2
,
j
= −
ζω
ω
ζ
n
2
1−
n 1
Where a
n
= ζωn
b
n
= ω
ζ
n
−
2
ζ
The closed loop transfer function of the con-
trolled system is given as-
T
G
G
H
( )s
( )s
( )s
( )s
=
+
1
 
(16)
G
G
G
c
G
p
G
( )s =
( )s
( )s  Being the forward path transfer 
function and Gc(s), the controller transfer function 
given by-
G
K
T s
T s
c
p
G
i
d
T s
TT
( )s = K p
K
λ
μ  
(17)
Assuming unity feedback, then H(s) = 1. In 
this case, the characteristic equation becomes 
1 + G(s) = 0,
1+
( )
( ) =
G (
G (
c
p
( )
G (
G
0  
(18)
1
0
G
P
Q
( )s
( )s
( )s
 
(19)
Q
G
P
c
G
( )s
( )s
( )s
+
=
G
P
G
)s
)s
0  
(20)
Where P(s) and Q(s) are respectively the numer-
ator and denominator polynomials of G(s), P(s) 
and Q(s) have no common factor. As P1,2 is poles 
of the closed loop system, each of them must be a 
root of the characteristic equation and hence must 
satisfy (20). Thus, putting s = p1 = −a + jbin (20), 
we get
Q
G
P
c
Gc
G
( )
p1 +
( )
p1p
( )
p1 = 0  
(21)
Q(−a + jb) +  (Kp+ Ki(−a + jb)−λ + Kd (−a + jb)μ)
P(−a + jb) = 0
Equation (21) is a complex equation in five 
unknowns, namely Kp, Ki, Kd, λ and μ. The prob-
lem of designing a controller that makes the closed 
loop dominant poles of the system coincide with 
p1,2 now reduces the determination of the set values 
of [Kp Ki Kd λ μ] for which (21) holds good. But, 
as the number of unknowns exceeds the number 
of equations, there exists an infinite number of 
solution sets and the equation cannot be unam-
biguously solved by traditional methods. This 
necessitates the application of stochastic global 
search techniques, which, in turn, requires the for-
mulation of a suitable objective function or cost 
function.
Let,
R = real part of the L.H.S. of (21)
I = imaginary part of the L.H.S. of (21) and
P
I
R
=
−
tan 1
 
(22)
We define F [Kp, Ki, Kd, λ, μ] = |R| + |I| + |P| as 
our objective function. Clearly, f ≥ 0, in general 
and f = 0 if and only if R = 0, I = 0 & P = 0.
Now at this point, different search technique 
can be applied to scour the five-dimensional search 
space and find the optimal solution set of [Kp Ki 
Kd λ μ] for which f = fmin = 0. This method of find-
ing the parameter of PID and FOPID is widely 
used in control engineering.
Deepyaman Maiti, et al. (Singhal, Padhee & 
Kaur 2012) uses particle swarm optimization for 
searching optimal value of parameter of FOPID. 
Subhransu Padhee, et al. (Das, Saha, Das & Gupta 
2011) uses genetic algorithm for searching optimal 
value of Kp Ki Kd, λ and μ. Apart from this opti-
mization technique many optimization technique 
is used by many researchers including differential 
evolution, chaotic ant swarm, simulated annealing, 
artificial bee colony etc.

327
The dominant pole placement tuning is only 
valid for strictly second order type systems and it 
does not give satisfactory result for higher order 
systems having several dominant poles and/or 
zeros (Maiti, Acharya, Chakraborty, Konar & 
Janarthanan 2008). Also, the dominant pole 
placement tuning gives inferior closed loop per-
formance and often unstable response for time 
delay systems, since the Pade approximation of 
delay term effectively raises the order of the over-
all system.
3.4.2 Optmal tuning based on time domain 
integral performance
A typical unity feedback closed loop system is 
shown in Figure 2
• IAE index
J
e t dt
∞
∫
( )t
0
 
(23)
• ISE index
J
e t
dt
∞
∫
( )t
2
0
 
(24)
• ITAE index
J
t e
dt
∞
∫
( )t
0
 
(25)
Let e (kT) be the sampled value of the error e(t) 
at an instant (kT), where T is the sampling interval. 
k = 0,1,...,N. For the given T, N is an integer which 
depends on the time span considered for comput-
ing e(t). The following cost functions are defined 
corresponding to the performance indices
• IAE cost function
J
e
c
J
k
N
=∑
(
)
kT
0
 
(26)
• ISE cost function
J
e
c
J
k
N
=∑
(
)
kT
2
0
 
(27)
• ITAE cost function
J
kT e
c
J
k
N
=∑
(
)
kT
0
 
(28)
Each performance index emphasizes different 
aspects of the system response. Large errors con-
tribute more to ISE than IAE. Consequently, the 
controller tuned for minimizing ISE ensures lower 
overshoot in the transient response than the IAE 
minimizing controller. The ISE, however, tends to 
give larger settling time. This is because, smaller 
errors (e(t) <1) are less quantified in ISE than IAE. 
The ITAE is the most sensitive of the three criteria. 
Due to the presence of the t (time) product term, 
ITAE weighs more heavily errors that occur later 
in the time (i.e. near to steady state). Therefore, 
the settling time is the shortest. Also, as compared 
to ISE, large errors occurring in the transient part 
(i.e. for smaller t values) are less quantified. This 
leads to larger overshoots than the ISE case.
The controller parameters [Kp Ki Kd] are tuned by 
minimizing the selected performance index (Maiti, 
Acharya, Chakraborty, Konar & Janarthanan 
2008).
3.5 Internal model control tuning
Valerio and Sa Da Costa show that the IMC meth-
odology may be used in some cases to obtain PID 
or FOPID (Abadi & Jalali, 2012). IMC refer to 
the internal model control that corresponds to the 
control scheme which is shown in the figure below, 
where G1 is an inverse of G. G2 is a model of G 
and F is some judiciously chosen filter. If G2 were 
exact, the error e would be equal to disturbance d. 
If, additionally, G 1 were the exact inverse of G and 
F were unity, control would be perfect. Since no 
models are perfect, e exactly will not be the distur-
bance. This is exactly why F exists and is usually 
a low-pass filter, to reduce the influence of high-
frequency modeling errors. It also helps ensuring 
that product FG1 is realizable.
This is equivalent to the second block diagram 
of Figure 3 if controller C is given by
C
FG
FG G
=
−
1
1
2
G
1
 
(29)
C is not, in the general case, a PID or a frac-
tional PID, but in some cases it will if
Figure 2. Block diagram of unity feedback closed loop 
system.

328
G
K
S T
e Ls
=
+
−
1
αT
 
(30)
Firstly, let F
sTF
T
=
+
1
1
G
s T
K
1
1
=
+
αT  
(31)
G
K
s T
2
1
=
+
α
(
)
sL
1−
 
(32)
Notice that the delay of G was neglected in G1 
but not in G2, where an approximation consisting 
of a truncated McLaurin series has been used.
C
K
s
T
K
s
F
F
K
=
+
−
1
1
(
)
T
L
F
T
L
+
(
)
T
l
F
T +
α
 
(33)
This is a fractional PID controller with the pro-
portional part equal to zero.
Secondly, let F = 1
G
S T
K
1
1
= +
α
 
(34)
G
K
s T
sL
2
1
1
1
=
+
+
α
 
(35)
Equation (29) becomes
C
K
KL
s
T
KL
s
T
K s
=
+
+
+
KL
−
1
1
1 α
α  
(36)
If one of the two integral parts can be neglected, 
will be a fractional PID controller. Finally, if a 
Pades approximation with one pole and one zero 
is used in G2
F =1
G
s T
K
1
1
= +
α
G
K
s T
s
s
2
1
1
2
sL
1
2
sL
=
+
α
/
/
 
(37)
C
K
KL
s
T
KL
s
T
K s
=
+
+
+
KL
−
1
2
1
2
1 α
α  
(38)
Again, (38) will be a fractional PID if one of the 
two integral parts is neglectable.
4 LIMITATION OF FRACTIONAL ORDER 
PID CONTROLLER
However, in spite of this research effort, the use of 
FOPID controllers in industry is still quite limited. 
This can be due to many reasons such as:
1. The performance improvement that can be 
obtained by using a FOPID controller has not 
been fully characterized yet, especially if all the 
control specifications such as set point follow-
ing, load disturbance rejection, noise rejection, 
control effort are considered.
2. Simple, effective and robust tuning rules are still 
not available.
3. Additional functionality that are well estab-
lished for standard integer order PID con-
trollers have not been fully developed yet for 
FOPID controllers.
4. It is a matter of fact, in any case, that the design 
of FOPID controllers is a more complex task 
with respect to the setting of standard inte-
gerorder PID controllers. Indeed, there are five 
parameters to tune instead of three, if the basic 
controller expressions are considered, and the 
physical meaning of the parameters of a FOPID 
controller is not very intuitive.
This is a significant obstacle for the use of this 
kind of controllers by the process operators.
5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a brief review of 
the FOPID controller and its important tuning 
methods available in literature. Some of the limita-
tion of fractional order PID controller is also indi-
cated in this paper.
REFERENCES
Abadi, M.R.R.M. & A.A. Jalali (2012). Fractional order 
pid controller tuning based on imc. Int. J. Inf. Technol. 
Control Autom. 2, 4.
Chen, Y., C. Hu & K.L. Moore (2003). Relay feedback 
tuning of robust pid controllers with iso-damping 
Figure 3. Block diagram of IMC (top) and block dia-
gram equivalent to that above (bottom).

329
property. In Decision and Control, 2003. Proceedings. 
42nd IEEE Conference on, Volume 3, pp. 2180–2185. 
IEEE.
Chen, Y., K.L. Moore, B.M. Vinagre & I. Podlubny. 
Robust pid controller autotuning with an iso- damping 
property through a phase shaper.
Das, S., S. Saha, S. Das & A. Gupta (2011). On the selec-
tion of tuning methodology of fopid controllers for 
the control of higher order processes. ISA transactions 
50(3), 376–388.
Maiti, D., A. Acharya, M. Chakraborty, A. Konar & 
R. Janarthanan (2008). Tuning pid and pi/λ d δ con-
trollers using the integral time absolute error criterion. 
In Information and Automation for Sustainability, 
2008. ICIAFS 2008. 4th International Conference on, 
pp. 457–462. IEEE.
Miller, K.S. & B. Ross (1993). An introduction to the frac-
tional calculus and fractional differential equations.
Monje, C.A., A.J. Calderon, B.M. Vinagre, Y. Chen & 
V. Feliu (2004). On fractional pi λ controllers: some 
tuning rules for robustness to plant uncertainties. 
Nonlinear Dynamics 38(14), 369–381.
Monje, C.A., Y. Chen, B.M. Vinagre, D. Xue & V. Feliu-
Batlle (2010). Fractional-order systems and controls: 
fundamentals and applications. Springer Science & 
Business Media.
Monje, C.A., B.M. Vinagre, V. Feliu & Y. Chen (2008). 
Tuning and auto-tuning of fractional order control-
lers for industry applications. Control Engineering 
Practice 16(7), 798–812.
Padula, F. & A. Visioli (2011). Tuning rules for optimal 
pid and fractional-order pid controllers. Journal of 
Process Control 21(1), 69–81.
Petras, I. (2000). The fractional-order controllers: 
methods for their synthesis and application. arXiv 
preprint math/0004064.
Podlubny, I. (1999). Fractional-order systems and pi/
sup/spl lambda//d/sup/spl mu//-controllers. Automatic 
Control, IEEE Transactions on 44(1), 208–214.
Rao, S.S. & S. Rao (2009). Engineering optimization: 
 theory and practice. John Wiley & Sons.
Singhal, R., S. Padhee & G. Kaur (2012). Design of 
fractional order pid controller for speed control of dc 
motor. International Journal of Scientific and Research 
Publications 2(6), 1–8.
Valerió, D. & J.S. da Costa (2005). Ziegler-nichols type 
tuning rules for fractional pid controllers. In ASME 
2005 International Design Engineering Technical Con-
ferences and Computers and Information in Engineer-
ing Conference, pp. 1431–1440. American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers.
Valerió, D. & J.S. da Costa (2006). Tuning of fractional 
pid controllers with ziegler–nichols-type rules. Signal 
Processing 86(10), 2771–2784.
Valerio, D. & J.S. da Costa (2010). A review of tuning 
methods for fractional pids. In 4th IFAC Workshop on 
Fractional Differentiation and its Applications, FDA, 
Volume 10.
Walter, G. (1986). A review of impedance plot methods 
used for corrosion performance analysis of painted 
metals. Corrosion Science 26(9), 681–703.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

331
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Effect of void geometry on noise rejection in 1D photonic crystal with 
metamaterial/air interface
Bhaswati Das & Arpan Deyasi
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, RCC Institute of Information Technology, 
Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: In one-dimensional photonic crystal, transmittiivity is analytically computed to solve 
coupled mode equation for different structural parameters and internal conditions. Two different nano-
fishnet structures are considered for simulation with rectangular and elliptical void as photonic crystal, 
and computation is being carried out at 1550 nm for the sole purpose of optical communication, respec-
tively. The structure is considered as Bragg grating where increase in grating length enhances the reflection 
of electromagnetic wave, and strong coupling provides larger bandgap spectral width. Simulated findings 
show that elliptical void can provide better noise rejection due to smaller spectral width, whereas rectan-
gular void can be considered as efficient candidate for higher transmittivity at the central wavelength, 
when computed with identical structural parameters and coupling condition. Compared to the results 
obtained from conventional photonic crystal, it can be stated that DNG materials provide better spectral 
response for communication application.
them, 1D structure is very convenient to study 
because of the ease of mathematical modeling and 
also from fabrication stand-point. Materials used 
so far by theoretical and experimental researchers 
in design and construction of photonic crystal and 
crystal-based devices are SiO2/air (Andreani et al., 
2003, Robinson et al., 2011) and semiconductor 
heterostructures (Maity et al., 2013, Xu et al., 
2007), where refractive indices of them are posi-
tive. But these structures are not very suitable when 
design of the integrated circuit involves antenna, 
and noise rejection from the incoming electro-
magnetic wave at desired spectrum becomes very 
critical from application stand-point. As per the 
knowledge of the authors, research has not been 
conducted in this area so far. In the present paper, 
noise rejection property at the desired spectrum 
is analyzed using DNG material, which is already 
used in antenna design to improve SNR. Two dif-
ferent metamaterials, namely nano-fishnet with 
rectangular void and elliptical void are considered 
for simulation purpose when Bragg wavelength is 
set at 1550 nm. Coupled mode theory is used to 
solve the problem, whereas the simulated find-
ings show that with the change of void geometry, 
structural parameters and coupling conditions; 
transmittiivity can be tuned at the desired central 
frequency. Spectral width of the structure, i.e., pho-
tonic bandgap can be measured from the reflection 
coefficient analysis.
1 INTRODUCTION
Photonic crystal is the periodic arrangement of 
dielectric/metal-dielectric 
materials 
(Yablono-
vitch 1987) where propagating electromagnetic 
waves can be localized in the desired spectrum, 
and can be allowed to transmit in the other region 
(Fogel et al., 1998). This novel exhibition, is pos-
sible due to the formation of electromagnetic 
bandgap (D’Orazio et al., 2003), analogous to 
electronic bandgap. The property is already effec-
tively utilized in the design of optical transmitter 
(Szczepanski, 1988), optical receiver (Kalchmair 
et al., 2011), photonic crystal fiber (Russel 2006), 
resonant tunneling device (Jiang et al., 1999); 
and also in the domain of quantum information 
processing (Azuma 2008), photonic integrated cir-
cuit (Bayat et al., 2010). This novel microstructure 
is one of the pioneering developments in the field 
of photonics, and has already become the promis-
ing candidate in the domain of optical communi-
cation by replacing its conventional counterpart 
optical fibre (Limpert et al., 2004, Limpert et al., 
2003).
Research has already been carried out in the 
last decade regarding the various possible confine-
ments in photonic crystal, but it is suggested that 
only 1D and 2D structures are efficient enough to 
fabricate and also implementation purpose for dif-
ferent optoelectronic integrated circuits. Among 

332
2 THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
Inside a photonic crystal, the forward and back-
ward propagating waves may be represented as
B
t
b
j
( ,z )
e
b xp −
e
b xp
(
)t
b
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
(
z
t
b −
 
(1.1)
A
t
j
( ,z )
e
a xp j
e
a xp
(
)t
a
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
(
z
t
a +
z
 
(1.2)
where βb and βa are the propagation constants. 
Considering the propagation part along with the 
d.c magnitude, equations may be rewritten as
A
t
( ,z )
e
a( )
z
[
]
j
t  
(2.1)
B
t
b
( ,z )
e
b( )
z
[
]
j
t  
(2.2)
Hence, coupling of total power is dependent on 
a (z) and b (z) only. In absence of any coupling,
da
dz
j
a
a
( )
z =
( )
z
β
j
 
(3.1)
db
dz
j
b
b
( )
z = −
( )
z
β
j
 
(3.2)
When the waves are coupled, the Equation (3.1) 
and Equation (3.2) will be modified as
da
dz
j
b
a
a
b
( )
z =
( )
( )
( )
z
β
j
a
j
aa( )
z
 
(4.1)
db
dz
j
a
b
b
a
( )
z = −
( )
( )
( )
z
κ
β
j
b
j
bb( )
z +
 
(4.2)
Due to the fact that A(z,t) and B(z,t) propagate 
in opposite directions, net power can be given by
P
b
a
( )
z
( )
z
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
2
2
( )
 
(5)
From power conservation principle,
dP
dz = 0  
(6)
From Equation (4.1), we can write
b
a
ab
( )
z = (
)
D
j
a
a
D
j
D
( )
z
a
j
κ a
 
(7)
From Equation (4.2), we can write
D
a
a
j
a
b
D
ab
ba
b
ab
(
)
D
j
a
a
D
j
D
( )
z
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
=
( )
z −
(
)
a
a
( )
z
a
j
κ
κ b
β
j
b( D
j
a
D −
κ
 
 
(8)
This can give a second order differential 
equation
D D a
j D
a
a
b
D D
a
b
b
a
( )
z + j
( )
z
+ (
)
b
a
ab
ba
−
a
( )
z =
)
a
(Da
Da
D
b
b
β
β
D
b
b
a
D
−
b
b
a
b
a
b
a
ab
b
0
 
(9)
Solution of Equation (9) gives
a
D
jz
z
ab
ba
( )
z =
(
)
a
b
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
×
−(
)
a
b
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
+
exp
exp
a
b
a
b
−
κ κ
ab
b
a
bb
+
a
2
4
2
2
E
jz
z
ab
ba
exp
exp
κ κ
ab
b
(
)
a
b
β
β
a
b
a
b
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
×
−
b
κ κ
b
b
−
(
)
a
b
β
β
a
b
a
b
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
2
4
2
2
 (10)
Since, the wave is propagating along—ve Z 
direction, it will consider that component only. 
For such physical assumption, Equation (10) can 
be rewritten as
a
D
jz
z
ab
ba
( )
z =
(
)
a
b
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
×
−(
)
a
b
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
exp
exp
a
b
a
b
−
κ κ
ab
b
a
bb
+
a
2
4
2
2
 
(11)
Subject to the appropriate boundary condition, 
Equation (11) may be modified as
a
a
jz
z
ab
ba
( )
z =
(
)
a
b
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
×
−(
)
a
b
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
exp
exp
a
b
a
b
−
κ κ
ab
b
a
bb
+
a
2
4
2
2
 
(12)
Similarly, we can write
b
b
jz
z
ab
ba
( )
z =
(
)
a
b
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
×
−
b
−
(
)
a
b
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
exp
exp
a
b
a
b
−
κ κ
ab
b
κ κ
b
b
a
b
a
b
+
2
4
2
2
 
(13)

333
Using Equation (6), we may write
exp 4
2
2
κ κ
ab
κ
ba
κ
z
j b
a
−(
)
β
β
a
b
β
β
β
β
β
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
 
(14)
As the right-hand side of Equation (14) is imag-
inary, so the term in the square-root should be less 
than zero, i.e., we can write this in the mathemati-
cal form
κ κ
ab
κ
ba
κ
<
(
)
β
β
a
b
β
β
β
β
β
1
4
2  
(15)
This can be written as
κ
κ
κ
ab
κ
ba
κ
=
κ b
κ *
 
(16)
With the boundary conditions b(0) = b0 and 
a(L) = 0 these equations may be solved analytically. 
Expressions of forward and backward waves thus 
can be given as
a
b
L
j
L
( )
z =
[
]
z
(
)
z
L
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
0b κ
[ j
zz
α
β
αL
α
αL
s]
z
[ j
zz
−
inh
β
h
Δ
 
(17)
b
b
j
z
( )
z =
[
]
z
×
(
)
z
L
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
−
0b κ
[ j
z
β
α(
β
β
}
c
j
+ j
h{ (
)
z
L
−
z
}
si
β nh
Δ
Δ
α
α
α
α
L
i
α
L
α
cosh
 
(18)
where α
κ
β
−
κ 2
2
κ
β
Δ
, L is the grating length. 
Transmittiivity can be computed as a function 
of operating wavelength from the knowledge of 
forward and backward waves, given by
T
a
b
L
L
j
L
=
=
( )
( )
i h
h
2
κ
αL
sinh
β
αL
sinh
α
αL
cosh
Δ
 
(19)
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Using Equation (19), transmittiivity of the pro-
posed structure is calculated and plotted as a func-
tion of operating wavelength for different coupling 
conditions and different length of crystal structure. 
Fig 1 shows the profile for rectangular void geom-
etry inside nano-fishnet, whereas Fig 2 exhibits for 
elliptical void geometry.
From the plot, it may be stated that transmit-
tivity becomes higher for larger value of grating 
length. At resonance condition, due to the forma-
tion of photonic bandgap, most part of the light is 
transmitted, and smaller portion is reflected. Out-
side of this bandgap, transmittivity closes to zero, 
Figure 1a. Transmittivity profile with wavelength 
for different length of the structure for weak coupling 
condition with nano-fishnet (rectangular void)/air 
composition.
Figure 1b. Transmittivity profile with wavelength for 
different length of the structure for medium coupling 
condition with nano-fishnet (rectangular void)/air 
composition.
Figure 1c. Transmittivity profile with wavelength for 
different length of the structure for strong coupling 
condition with nano-fishnet (rectangular void)/air 
composition.

334
as we move away from Bragg wavelength. This phe-
nomenon is also observed for medium and strong 
coupling conditions, and transmittivity reaches to 
unity for large grating length. This is plotted in Fig 
1b and Fig 1c respec tively. A comparative study 
between these results indicates the fact that mag-
nitude of transmittivity increases with increase of 
coupling coefficient.
Comparative analysis is carried out with nano-
fishnet structure with elliptical void. Results are 
plotted in Fig 2. The change of void geometry 
increases the refractive index in negative scale, and 
hence the contrast ratio also increases. This reduces 
the magnitude of peak transmittivity, compared 
with that obtained for rectangular void geometry, 
with identical grating length and coupling condi-
tion. But the spectral width obtained for this case is 
lower compared to the previous case, which favors 
for its use in terms of noise rejection. The results 
are plotted for three different grating lengths.
4 CONCLUSION
Comparative analysis shows that void geometry 
in nano-fishnet structure is the critical parameter 
in rejecting noise for the optical communication 
application. Elliptical void provides lower spec-
tral width, which is the key for rejecting noise, 
whereas rectangular void provides higher trans-
mittivity in the desired domain. Hence, appropri-
ate choice of DNG material plays the key role in 
design of photonic integrated circuit embedded 
with antenna.
REFERENCES
Andreani. L.C., Agio. M., Bajoni. D., Belotti. M., Galli. 
M., Guizzetti. G., Malvezzi. A.M., Marabelli. F., 
Patrini. M. and Vecchi. G. 2003, Optical Properties 
and Photonic Mode Dispersion in Two-Dimensional 
and Waveguide-Embedded Photonic Crystals, Syn-
thetic Metals, 139, 695–700.
Azuma. H. 2008, Quantum Computation with Kerr-
Nonlinear Photonic Crystals, Journal of Physics D: 
Applied Physics, 41, 025102.
Bayat. K., Rafi. G.Z., Shaker. G.S.A., Ranjkesh. N., 
Chaudhuri. S.K. and Safavi-Naeini. S. 2010, Photonic-
Crystal based Polarization Converter for Terahertz 
Integrated Circuit, IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, 58, 1976–1984.
D’Orazio. A., De Palo. V., De Sario. M., Petruzzelli. 
V. and Prudenzano. F. 2003, Finite Difference Time 
Domain Modeling of Light Amplification in Active 
Photonic Bandgap Structures, Progress In Electro-
magnetics Research, 39, 299–339.
Fogel. I.S., Bendickson. J.M., Tocci. M.D., Bloemer. M.J., 
Scalora. M., Bowden. C.M. and Dowling. J.P. 1998, 
Spontaneous Emission and Nonlinear Effects in 
Figure 2a. Transmittivity profile with wavelength for 
different length of the structure for weak coupling condi-
tion with nano-fishnet (elliptical void)/air composition.
Figure 2b. Transmittivity profile with wavelength for 
different length of the structure for medium coupling con-
dition with nano-fishnet(elliptical void)/air composition.
Figure 2c. Transmittivity profile with wavelength for 
different length of the structure for strong coupling condi-
tion with nano-fishnet (elliptical void)/air composition.

335
Photonic Bandgap Materials, Pure and Applied 
Optics, 7, 393–408.
Jiang. Z., Niu. C.N. and Lin. D.L. 1999, Resonance Tun-
neling through Photonic Quantum Wells, Physical 
Review B, 59, 9981–9986.
Kalchmair. S., Detz. H., Cole. G.D., Andrews. A.M., 
Klang. P., Nobile. M., Gansch. R., Ostermair. C., 
Schrenk. W. and Strasser. G. 2011, Photonic Crystal 
Slab Quantum Well Infrared Photodetector, Appied 
Physics Letters, 98, 011105.
Limpert. J., Liem. A., Reich. M., Schreiber. T., Nolte. S., 
Zellmer. H., Tünnermann. T., Broeng. J., Petersson. 
A. and Jakobsen. C. 2004, Low-Nonlinearity Single-
Transverse-Mode Ytterbium-Doped Photonic Crystal 
Fiber Amplifier, Optic Express, 12, 1313.
Limpert. J., Schreiber. T., Nolte. S., Zellmer. H., 
Tunnermann. T., Iliew. R., Lederer. F., Broeng. J., 
Vienne. G., Petersson. A. and Jakobsen. C. 2003, High 
Power Air-Clad Large-Mode-Area Photonic Crystal 
Fiber Laser, Optic Express, 11, 818.
Maity. A., Chottopadhyay. B., Banerjee. U. and Deyasi. A. 
2013, Novel Band-Pass Filter Design using Photonic 
Multiple Quantum Well Structure with p-polarized 
Incident Wave at 1550 μm, Journal of Electron 
Devices, 17, 1400–1405.
Robinson. S. and Nakkeeran. R. 2011, Photonic Crystal 
Ring Resonator based Add-Drop Filter using Hex-
agonal Rods for CWDM Systems, Optoelectronics 
Letters, 7, 164–166.
Russell. P.S.J. 2006, Photonic-Crystal Fibers, Journal of 
Lightwave Technology, 24, 4729–4749.
Szczepanski. P. 1988, Semiclassical Theory of Multimode 
Operation of a Distributed Feedback Laser, IEEE 
Journal of Quantum Electronics, 24, 1248–1257.
Xu. X., Chen. H., Xiong. Z., Jin. A., Gu. C., Cheng. B. 
and Zhang. D. 2007, Fabrication of Photonic Crys-
tals on Several Kinds of Semiconductor Materials by 
using Focused-Ion Beam Method, Thin Solid Films, 
515, 8297–8300.
Yablonovitch. E. 1987, Inhibited Spontaneous Emis-
sion in Solid-State Physics and Electronics, Physical 
Review Letters, 58, 2059–2061.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

337
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A second-order bandpass response with a wideband frequency 
selective surface
Ayan Chatterjee & Susanta Kumar Parui
Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur, Howrah, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper, the design of a low-profile, bandpass Frequency Selective Surface (FSS) 
operating over a wide bandwidth is being presented. The FSS is obtained by cascading two hexagon 
shaped patch type metal layers with a cross grid metal layer in between for coupling and dielectrics for 
separation. The hexagon shaped patches are closely spaced to achieve compactness. The proposed FSS 
exhibits a second-order bandpass response with two closely spaced transmission poles near 3.5 GHz and 
4.7 GHz leading to a wide transmission bandwidth of 48% with respect to 3 dB level. The FSS also gives a 
linear variation of transmission phase with a frequency that makes it useful for enhancing antenna radia-
tion as a superstrate.
dielectric layers of thickness much less than wave-
length corresponding to resonating frequency. 
Capacitive patch type layers and inductive grids 
provide a second-order response of the filter. An 
equivalent circuit model for the cascaded FSS is 
also shown and explained.
2 DESIGN OF THE FSS
The proposed FSS structure is composed of three 
layers of capacitive patch type metallic layers and 
inductive grid layer as shown in the Fig. 1(a). The 
three metallic layers are separated by two thin die-
lectric layers of Arlon AD270 whose relative per-
mittivity is 2.7 and loss tangent is 0.002. The upper 
and lower layers are arrays of hexagon shaped 
unit cells and they are closely spaced to reduce the 
1 INTRODUCTION
Since 1960, Frequency Selective Surface (FSS) has 
always been an important field of research for its 
applications as radomes for reducing Radar Cross 
Section (RCS) of objects, absorber, polarizer, and 
subreflector. (Wu 1995, Bayatpur 2009). FSS is the 
wireless counterpart of traditional filters that are 
used in radio frequency circuits and it is a periodic 
array of metallic patches or apertures on metallic 
screen over a dielectric slab that gives bandstop 
(patch) or bandpass (aperture) response (Munk 
2000, Bayatpur 2009). Bandpass FSSs are mainly 
used for radome structures but recently they 
are being used as superstrate above antennas to 
enhance their radiation (gain, bandwidth) at their 
resonating frequency or over a wide bandwidth. 
An Electromagnetic BandGap (EBG) antenna was 
proposed where a FSS with square loop cells was 
used as superstrate above the radiating patch, 
leading to enhanced directivity and broadband 
response (Pirhadi et al. 2012). The application 
of FSS superstrates for directivity enhancement 
over two separate frequency bands was presented 
(Lee et al. 2007). Broadband FSS is designed by 
cascading multiple layers of FSS with dielectric 
(Behdad et al. 2009, Chatterjee et al. 2013) or by 
cascading FSS cells of different shapes horizontally. 
FSS increases the order of the filter by cascading 
multiple layers of a patch and aperture type.
In this paper, two patch type FSS screens with 
closely spaced hexagon shaped unit cells are cou-
pled by an aperture type FSS made of metallic 
grids to exhibit a bandpass response with wide 
bandwidth. The three layers are separated by two 
Figure 1. (a) Three dimensional view of the cascaded 
FSS. Unit cell dimensions of the metal (b) patch layers 
and (c) grid layer.

338
overall dimension whereas the middle layer is an 
array of cross shaped grids.
Both the unit cells of FSS are shown in Fig. 1(b) 
and (c) along with dimensions. The unit cell 
dimension used for simulation is PX = 31mm and 
PY = 17.82 mm for both the layers. Side length of 
the hexagonal patch is D = 10 mm and spacing 
between two consecutive patches is 0.5mm whereas 
the width of the grids = 6mm. A thickness (hU = hL) 
of 1mm is used for dielectric layers.
3 EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT MODEL
An equivalent circuit of the multilayered FSS is 
given in Fig. 2(a), valid for normal incidence of the 
electromagnetic wave on it.
The first and third patch type layers are mod-
eled as capacitors C1 and C3 respectively and are 
connected in shunt path, whereas the aperture type 
cross shaped grid layer is modeled as a parallel 
inductor L2. The two dielectric substrates of height 
hU and hL (h = hU = hL) separating the metallic FSS 
layers can be modeled as two pieces of transmission 
line sections of characteristic impedances Z0/√εr1 
and Z0/√εr2 respectively, where εr1 and εr2 are dielec-
tric constants of the two substrates (εr1 = εr2 = 2.7) 
and Z0 = 377Ω is the free space impedance. The 
transmission line sections are modeled by a series 
inductor (LD1, LD2) and a shunt capacitor (CD1, 
CD2). Their values can be found by the following 
Equations (1) and (2) (Chatterjee et al. 2015).
L
L
h
D
L
r
1
2
D
L
0
=
L 2
LD
L
μ μ
0
 
(1)
C
C
h
D
C
r
1
2
D
C
0
=
C
2
CD
C
ε εr
0
 
(2)
Here μ0 and ε0 are permeability and permittivity 
of free space. The spaces on both ends of the FSS 
are modeled as semi-infinite transmission lines with 
characteristic impedances of Z0r1 and Z0r2 respec-
tively where r1 and r2 are the normalized source 
and load impedances and for free space r1 = r2 = 1. 
The T network (consisting LD1, L2 and LD2) of the 
circuit in Fig. 2(a) is converted into a π network 
(consisting L1, Lm and L3). The values of L1, Lm 
and L3 can then be easily found from the values of 
LD1, L2 and LD2 using the following Equations (3), 
(4), and (5).
L
L
L
L
L
D
L
D
L
1
1
L
D
2
L
1
2
1
+
L 1
LD
L
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(3)
L
L
L
L
L
D
L
D
L
3
2
L
D
2
L
2
1
1
+
L 2
LD
L
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(4)
L
L
L
L
L
L
m
D
L
D
L
+
LD
L
+
1
2
LD
L
+
1
2
LD
L
2
L
 
(5)
Second, order nature of the filter is clearly vis-
ible in the circuit as shown in Fig. 2(b) where two 
parallel LC resonators (L1, C1+CD1 and L3, C3+CD2) 
are coupled by a mutual inductance Lm and so the 
proposed FSS will act like a second-order band-
pass filter with two transmission poles at two 
frequencies.
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Simulations have been performed for the proposed 
FSS using ANSYS HFSS using Finite Element 
Method (FEM). Simulation results for normalized 
transmission coefficient (dB) of the FSS are given 
below in the Fig. 3 for normal incidence of plane 
wave and different values of the inductive grid 
width w mm. It can be seen that the FSS exhibits 
two transmission poles at 3.5 GHz and 4.7 GHz 
that ensures the second order bandpass response. 
The 3 dB transmission band ranges from 3.2 GHz 
to 4.9 GHz for w = 5.4mm leading to a bandwidth 
of 48% with an insertion loss of about 2.8 dB. The 
parametric study shows reducing w lowers the first 
transmission pole. Reducing width of the inductive 
strips lowers its inductance and this accounts for 
the lowering of frequency.
Simulation results for reflection coefficient (dB) 
are also shown in Fig. 4 for different values of w mm 
and it is seen that the FSS exhibits upto −38 dB of 
reflectivity. Transmission phase (degree) variation 
with frequency for the FSS is given in Fig. 5 which 
shows an almost linear variation of phase with 
Figure 2. (a) Simple equivalent circuit model of the cas-
caded FSS (b) Second order schematic of the filter with 
π network (L1, Lm and L3) representation of T network 
(LD1, L2 and LD2).

339
frequency in the frequency band of operation. This 
makes the FSS useful for antennas with broadside 
radiation to enhance their radiation such as gain, 
directivity in the direction of radiation when used 
as a superstrate above the antenna. This is because 
when the FSS is placed above the antenna, a part 
of the radiated waves from antenna gets reflected 
by the lower patch type FSS thus facing multiple 
reflections between the antenna plane and lower 
layer of FSS and phase of these waves increases 
linearly with the frequency which gets cancelled 
by the linearly reduced transmission phase of FSS 
leading to constructive interference of waves in 
broadside direction of radiation.
5 CONCLUSION
A second-order, bandpass FSS with the broad-
band response has been studied in this paper. The 
FSS exhibits a wide transmission bandwidth (3 dB) 
of about 48% but with an insertion loss of about 
2.8 dB for the separation between transmission 
poles by 1.2 GHz, lowering of which will reduce 
the insertion loss. Tuning of the first resonant fre-
quency is done by changing the width of induc-
tive wire grids which again changes the insertion 
loss and transmission bandwidth. The proposed 
design can be used to increase the gain, directiv-
ity of any antenna with broadside radiation over a 
wide bandwidth.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research, India (award 
no. 08/003(0101)/2014-EMR-I) for funding.
REFERENCES
Al-Joumayly, M. & Behdad, N. 2009. A New Technique 
for Design of Low-Profile, Second-Order, Bandpass 
Frequency Selective Surfaces, IEEE Transactions on 
Antennas & Propagation. 57(2). pp. 452–459.
Bayatpur, F. 2009. Metamaterial-Inspired Frequency-
Selective Surfaces. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of 
Michigan.
Chatterjee, Ayan & Parui, S.K. 2013. A multi-layered 
bandpass frequency selective surface designed for Ku 
band applications, In Proc. of IEEE Applied Electro-
magnetics Conference (AEMC). India. pp. 1–2.
Chatterjee, Ayan & Parui, S.K. 2013. A Multi-layered 
Broadband Frequency Selective Surface for X and Ku 
band Applications, In Proc. of International Confer-
ence on Technical and Managerial Innovation in Com-
puting and Communications in Industry and Academia 
(IEMCON). India. pp. 284–287.
Figure 3. Simulated transmission coefficient of the 
FSS.
Figure 4. Simulated reflection coefficients of the FSS.
Figure 5. Simulated transmission phase response of the 
FSS.

340
Chatterjee, Ayan & Parui, S.K. 2015. Gain Enhancement 
of a Wide-Slot Antenna using Dual-Layer, Bandstop 
Frequency Selective Surface as a Substrate, Microwave 
& Optical Technology Letters. 57(9). pp. 2016–2020.
Chatterjee, Ayan & Parui, S.K. 2015. Gain Enhancement 
of a Wide-Slot Antenna using Second-Order Band-
pass Frequency Selective Surface, Radioengineering 
Journal. 24(2). pp. 455–461.
Foroozesh, A. & Shafai, L. 2010. Investigation Into 
the Effects of the Patch-Type FSS Superstrate on 
the High-Gain Cavity Resonance Antenna Design, 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas & Propagation. 58(2). 
pp. 258–270.
Lee, D.H., Lee, Y.J., Yeo, J., Mttra, R., & Park, W.S. 
2007. Design of novel thin frequency selective surface 
superstrates for dual-band directivity enhancement, 
IET Microwaves Antennas and Propagation. 1(1). 
pp. 248–254.
Munk, B.A. 2000. Frequency Selective Surfaces—Theory 
and Design. New York: Wiley Interscience.
Pirhadi, A., Bahrami, H., & Nasri, J. 2012. Wideband 
High 
Directive 
Aperture 
Coupled 
Microstrip 
Antenna Design by Using a FSS Superstrate Layer, 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas & Propagation. 60(4). 
pp. 2101–2106.
Wu, T.K. 1995. Frequency Selective Surfaces and Grid 
Arrays. New York: Wiley.
Zvere, A.I. 1967. Handbook of Filter Synthesis. New York: 
Wiley Interscience.

341
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
An acrylic sheet based frequency selective surface for GSM 1800 MHz 
band shielding
Pradipta Sasmal, Ayan Chatterjee & Susanta Kumar Parui
Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur, Howrah, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: This paper presents a Frequency Selective Surface (FSS) that functions as a reflector at 
the GSM 1800 MHz downlink band for mobile communication and allows the uplink frequency signals 
to pass through it without significant attenuation. The FSS is designed to exhibit a stopband in the 
1805–1880 MHz band with a transmission level below −10 dB and a passband in the 1710–1785 MHz 
band. The structure is based on a transparent acrylic substrate and can be used in the wall, window of the 
top floors of high rise buildings close to the mobile phone towers to reduce the radiation hazards caused 
by cell tower radiation.
sight. In this paper, a FSS design has been proposed 
in the GSM 1800 frequency band that can be used in 
such building walls, curtains, window glass to reduce 
the radiation hazards at the same time allowing suc-
cessful communication. A lot of research activities 
have been carried out on shielding mobile tower radi-
ation using different substrate and FR4 is the leading 
one to be used for FSS design. The dielectric constant 
of FR4 is 4.4 and it is opaque which makes it non-
popular to be used in house or in hospital, office and 
other areas. To use a FSS structure one would look 
whether it is transparent (for light to pass) or perfo-
rated (for air to pass through) or may be fabric based 
to be used as a window screen. The other important 
factor is that it should not disturb other band and 
shielding efficiency should be very high.
2 DESIGN OF THE FSS
The proposed FSS structure is an array of square 
loops on a dielectric substrate made of acrylic 
sheet and is shown in Figure 1. As can be seen the 
FSS cells are connected to form the array and thus 
unit cell dimension is same as the periodicity of the 
structure. All the dimensions of FSS unit cell are 
given in the figure. The acrylic sheet used here as 
substrate has a dielectric constant of 2.8 with a loss 
tangent of 0.02 and thickness of 1 mm. The perio-
dicity of unit cell is 120 × 120 mm2. The fabricated 
prototype is shown in figure 2.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Full wave EM simulations have been performed 
for the proposed structure using Ansoft HFSS 
1 INTRODUCTION
With the enormous use of wireless communica-
tion, electromagnetic interference due to undesired 
radiation from different sources has become a seri-
ous problem. To overcome this problem, shield-
ing has become an important technology (Celozzi 
2008) that generally uses frequency selective filters 
such as Frequency Selective Surfaces (FSS) of 
both patch and aperture types to provide shielding 
against undesired radiation from external nearby 
sources. FSS, the wireless counterpart of the fil-
ters of traditional Radio Frequency (RF) circuit, 
is a periodic array consisting of conducting patch 
or apertures on metallic screen having band-stop 
or band-pass spectral behavior (Bayatpur 2009). 
In order to protect a flat array antenna system 
operating in the Ku-band from damage caused by 
the external environment such as rain, moisture, 
aerodynamic effects, etc., FSS coated on the glass 
(Gatti et al. 2008, Chen et al. 2012) has been used 
to effectively pass the Ku-band signals and stop 
interference of external noises. A band-pass shield-
ing enclosure of dimensions 16 × 10 × 2.1 cm for 
the portable digital wireless device was designed 
(Chiu et al. 2008) using single layer of multi-pole 
slot array FSS, with high transmittance in the 
specified wireless-signal band and high shield-
ing effectiveness outside this band. This FSS wall 
is made by printing metal aperture array on the 
FR4 substrate.
Now-a-days with the increasing number of mobile 
phone users, density of cell phone towers has been 
increased very much especially in the urban areas with 
huge population. As a result, radiation from base sta-
tion antennas are affecting people more who live in 
the high rise buildings near to these towers at a line of 

342
that uses Finite Element Method (FEM) for 
analysis. Analysis has been done for the compos-
ite structure and the simulation results for nor-
malized transmission coefficient (dB) are given 
below in the Fig. 3 for two different angles of 
incidence of the plane wave and they are theta 
0° and 60°.
From the plot of Figure 3 it is clear that for 
theta 0° i.e. for normal incidence the maximum 
attenuation is at around 1.85 GHz and the −10 dB 
band width is achieved in frequency range 1843–
1885 GHz. Similarly for theta 60° there is not much 
variation in resonance frequency and band width 
but peak attenuation achieved is around –13dB. 
The important thing from this simulation is that 
there is hardly any loss in the uplink frequency 
band which is from 1710 MHz–1780 MHz range.
A 3 × 3 array of the proposed FSS was fabricated 
in the lab by incorporating thin aluminum sheet 
over the acrylic sheet. Two monopole antennas 
were designed to operate in the GSM 1800 band 
for measurement of FSS transmission coefficient. 
The measurement was performed using vector 
network analyzer as a source and keeping the FSS 
screen in between two antennas. The transmission 
coefficients of the receiving monopole antenna 
before introducing FSS and after introduction of 
FSS were analyzed and it is shown in the Figure 4 
that there is a shielding effectiveness of around 
15 dB has been achieved with slightly shifting in 
resonance. The shift in resonating frequency may 
be attributed due to non-idle environment and 
finite FSS structure.
Surface current distribution (A/m) for unit cell 
of the FSS structure is shown in the Figure 5 at 
1.85 GHz and the flow of current through the 
square loop confirms the peak attenuation at 
1.85 GHz.
Figure 1. Unit cell dimensions of the proposed FSS.
Figure 2. A 3 × 3 fabricated prototype of the proposed 
FSS.
Figure 3. Simulated transmission coefficient of the 
FSS.
Figure 4. Measured transmission levels without and 
with FSS.

343
4 CONCLUSION
A frequency selective surface for achieving shield-
ing against the GSM 1800 MHz downlink band is 
proposed with the simulation and measurement 
results. The proposed design provides a reduction 
in power level by about 15 dB for the downlink fre-
quency band only, allowing the uplink frequency 
signals to pass through it without significant atten-
uation. The proposed structure uses a transparent 
material as substrate for visibility making it use-
ful for windows in the high rise buildings situated 
near cell phone towers. The future scope of this 
work will be implementing the design into fabrics 
for curtain as well as air as the substrate for the 
structure.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research, India (award 
no. 08/003(0101)/2014-EMR-I) for funding. The 
authors are also grateful to DETCE, IIEST Shib-
pur for measurement.
REFERENCES
Al-Joumayly, M. & Behdad, N. 2009. A New Technique 
for Design of Low-Profile, Second-Order, Bandpass 
Frequency Selective Surfaces, IEEE Transactions on 
Antennas & Propagation. 57(2). pp. 452–459.
Bayatpur, F. 2009. Metamaterial-Inspired Frequency-
Selective Surfaces. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of 
Michigan.
Celozzi, S. 2008. Electromagnetic Shielding. New York: 
Wiley Interscience.
Chatterjee, Ayan & Parui, S.K. 2013. A multi-layered 
bandpass frequency selective surface designed for Ku 
band applications, In Proc. of IEEE Applied Electro-
magnetics Conference (AEMC). India. pp. 1–2.
Chatterjee, Ayan & Parui, S.K. 2013. A Multi-layered 
Broadband Frequency Selective Surface for X and Ku 
band Applications, In Proc. of International Confer-
ence on Technical and Managerial Innovation in Com-
puting and Communications in Industry and Academia 
(IEMCON). India. pp. 284–287.
Chatterjee, Ayan & Parui, S.K. 2015. Gain Enhancement 
of a Wide-Slot Antenna using Dual-Layer, Bandstop 
Frequency Selective Surface as a Substrate, Microwave 
& Optical Technology Letters. 57(9). pp. 2016–2020.
Chatterjee, Ayan & Parui, S.K. 2015. Gain Enhancement 
of a Wide-Slot Antenna using Second-Order Band-
pass Frequency Selective Surface, Radioengineering 
Journal. 24(2). pp. 455–461.
Chen, H.Y., & Chou, Y.K. 2012. An EMI Shielding FSS 
for Ku-Band Applications, In Proc. of IEEE Anten-
nas and Propagation Society International Symposium 
(APSURSI).
Chiu, C.N. 2008. Bandpass Shielding Enclosure Design 
Using Multipole-Slot Arrays for Modern Portable 
Digital Device, IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic 
Compatibility. 50(4). pp. 895–904.
Gatti, R.V., Marcaccioli, L., Sbarra, E. & Sorrentino, R. 
2008. Flat array antennas for Ku-band mobile satellite 
terminals, In Proc. of the 30th ESA Antenna Workshop 
on Antennas for Earth Observation, Science, Telecom-
munications and Navigation Space Missions. PP. 534–
537. Noordwijk.
Munk, B.A. 2000. Frequency Selective Surfaces—Theory 
and Design. New York: Wiley Interscience.
Sung, G.H.-h, Sowerby, K.W. Neve, M.J. & Williamson 
A.G. 2006. A Frequency selective Wall for Interface 
Reduction in Wireless Indoor Environments, IEEE 
Antennas & Propagation Magazine. 48(5). pp. 29–37.
Zvere, A.I. 1967. Handbook of Filter Synthesis. New 
York: Wiley Interscience.
Figure 5. Surface current (A/m) for the FSS at 1.85 
GHz.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

345
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Design of efficient second harmonics injection based solar inverter for 
standalone application
Sudip Mondal & Sumana Chowdhuri
Department of Applied Physics, University College of Science Technology and Agriculture, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: This proposed work is based on the design and development of pic-microcontroller and 
Second Harmonics Injection Based full bridge inverter with rated frequency output. The proposed hard-
ware model shows a low THD with minimum filter requirement and reduction of sub-harmonics in the 
system. The developed inverter is tested with resistive, inductive, and motor load.
Patangia, et al. 2012). This makes output frequency 
constant. For controlling the speed of a single-
phase induction machine with variable voltage, 
variable frequency is required as speed is depend-
ent on supply frequency. Nowadays there is a grow-
ing interest in development of Pic- microcontroller 
based SPWM + 2 nd harmonics (Lalit Patnaik, 
et al. 2010) module system compared to other 
conventional ones like dedicated analog and dig-
ital control (IEEE Std 519–1992). The standalone 
model embedded the working features of a pic-
microcontroller to simplify the hardware with 
reduced components, improved performance, 
enhanced reliability of the system, less aging than 
analog devices etc. More precisely the standalone 
pic-microcontroller based system offers modular-
ity which can readily be integrated with power 
electronics with proper isolation in between. This 
single chip module can control the power electron-
ics devices along with other features, like protection 
of the devices, and also all kind of annunciations. 
Thus, the flexibility in control with cost effective-
ness is one of the major advantages of any micro 
controller based dedicated module.
This work is based on Microcontroller generated 
Sinusoidal Pulse Width Modulation (SPWM) + 
second harmonics injection technique to produce 
a pulsed waveform that can be filtered in a rela-
tively easy way to achieve a good approximation 
to a sine wave for variable frequency application. 
The significant advantage of this SPWM + sec-
ond harmonics (Lalit Patnaik, et al. 2010) injec-
tion approach is that easily variable frequency 
output can be obtained by single input control. In 
this proposed scheme, the inverter operates with 
an integral ratio of carrier to modulating signal 
frequency, where the modulating wave remains 
synchronized with the carrier wave for the entire 
region of frequency of operation (this causes low 
I INTRODUCTION
Inverters used in general applications are generally 
of quasi-square wave output, which requires a huge 
filter for converting this square wave to sinusoidal 
for different load applications. In this regard, a 
sinewave inverter which generates sinusoidal cur-
rent is more efficient since there is no requirement 
of filter, and consequently, the power loss in the 
inverter decreases, and hence, the inverter effi-
ciency increases. To generate sine waves at inverter 
output, in the control circuit, a high frequency 
carrier wave is compared with a modulating sine 
wave, and this output is fed to the inverter devices. 
This is called Sinusoidal Pulse Width Modulation 
(SPWM) technique. Similarly second harmonics 
are also generated in this technique. SPWM tech-
niques have been the subject of intensive research 
during the last few decades toward the better-
ment of electrical power flow control to various 
applications (Rashid, M.H. 2004, Mohan, Ned, 
et al. 2003). In ref to (Pankaj H Zope1, et al. 2012, 
G. Eason, et al. 1955), the concept of Pulse Width 
Modulation (PWM) for inverters is described with 
analyses extending to different kinds of PWM 
strategies. Finally, the simulation results for a single-
phase inverter (unipolar) with second harmonics 
injection using the PWM strategies described are 
presented. In general, we get 60.17% output from 
the inverter, but using the second harmonics injec-
tion technology we can increase the output by 
about 15.5%. So we can increase the efficiency.
In digital controller designs, this has been done 
by keeping the sampling values of sine + second 
harmonics and the triangles in the look-up table 
in RAM. Sinusoidal pulse +2nd harmonics modu-
lation is the most used method in motor control 
and inverter application. This technique generally 
uses regular sampling of these three values (Hirak 

346
carrier frequency as the fundamental frequency 
goes down). This proposed inverter is a relatively 
highly efficient inverter. Without adding any equip-
ment we can easily increase the output voltage level 
of the inverter which gives sinusoidal output with 
lower sub-harmonics for all kind of loads. The 
inherent advantage of this method is that lower 
order harmonics are almost eliminated. Instead 
small magnitude higher order harmonics are intro-
duced in the system, which can easily be eliminated 
or minimized with the help of a smaller size filter. 
By increasing the number of pulses per half cycle, 
the process is also enhanced. The SPWM +2nd 
harmonics injection technique, however, inhibits 
poor performance with regard to maximum attain-
able voltage and power.
In this work, we used a 36-volt battery for the 
input source and from the output we get approxi-
mately 27 volts (rms) of output. Now for the grid 
tie-up application, we used a step-up transformer 
(27/230), and for the grid we used a replica of our 
laboratory busbar which is 230 volt and 50 Hz. 
Phase Lock Loop (PLL) technology is also used in 
this inverter for connecting the synchronizing grid.
2 DESIGN OF SPWM INVERTER
A. Working principle
The inverter taken for study is the H-bridge inverter 
shown in Figure 1 with unipolar control strategy 
and is preferred over other topologies of inverter 
in higher power ratings. With the DC input volt-
age, the maximum output voltage of the inverter 
increases in this topology.
In unipolar SPWM control strategy, a sinusoi-
dal modulating signal is compared with a repeti-
tive switching frequency, triangular or saw-tooth 
waveform, to generate the switching signals for the 
inverter devices (Fig 2). By changing the control 
signal magnitude, the width of the gate drive for 
the devices can be changed and so can output volt-
age magnitude. By changing the frequency of the 
modulating wave, the fundamental frequency at the 
inverter output changes. The inverter output volt-
age will not be of a perfect sinewave and will con-
tain voltage components at harmonics frequency 
of f1. f1 is the desired fundamental frequency of 
the inverter voltage output (f1 is also called the 
modulating frequency). The amplitude modula-
tion ratio is defined as
m
v
v
a
control
Tri
=
 
(1)
where vcontrol  is the peak amplitude of the control 
modulating signal and vTri the peak amplitude of 
triangular signal, which is generally kept constant. 
Generally, ma ≤1 to reduce overmodulation. Fre-
quency modulation index, mf, is defined as
m
f
f
f
Tr
f
i
=
mo
f
d
 
(2)
where ftri is the frequency of Carrier signal and 
fmod is the frequency of modulating signal. Gener-
ally, mf 1 to reduce the harmonics at the output. 
Theoretically, the frequencies at which voltage har-
monic occur will be for unipolar full bridge invert-
ers at f
j
f
h
f
f
j
f
)
jm
k
j
f
jm
jm
jm
j
mo
f
d, where h is the order of 
harmonic, j is the even multiple of the frequency 
modulation index and k is the sideband number, 
and fmod is the fundamental frequency.
Figure 1. Single phase full bridge inverter.
Figure 2. a) Unipolar SPWM control strategy b) Gate-
pulses c) Output voltage waveform.

347
B. Second harmonics injection scheme
In the case of second harmonics injection, we 
inject a common signal which also presents itself 
in the inverter. As a result, we can increase the out-
put voltage upto a certain level. This waveform is 
also symmetrical about the axis. Lets assume that a 
common mode signal is injected in the modulating 
wave (mA) for pole-A. In order to preserve the sym-
metry of waveforms at the two poles, the modu-
lating wave (mB) for pole-B is obtained by phase 
shifting mA. To get the maximum peak value of the 
peak line-line voltage, this phase shift must equal 
180°. so the equation is
Sinθ + k*Sin (2θ + ϕ) 
(3)
where from the Fourier analysis, we get the value 
of k is nearly {1/5}. So, with the addition of sec-
ond harmonics component, we can increase the 
pole voltage about 16% and therefore the output 
voltage increases.
C. Schematic diagram of the control scheme and
The block diagram in Figure 3 shows that the pic-
 microcontroller 16F877a is designed to get the out-
put of SPWM waveform shown in Figure 4, and it is 
fed to the four Gate pulses of MOSFET H-bridge. 
The inverter DC input is the battery itself. The 
inverter output is stepped up using a transformer 
for load connection. In the output of the trans-
former, a small low-pass filter circuit is provided to 
smoothen out the load current waveform. Now for 
the second harmonics injection shown in Figure 5, 
the pic-microcontroller program is modified, and it 
is fed to the MOSFET H-bridge driver circuit. Now 
from the graphical analysis we see that if we create 
phase difference between the fundamental and the 
second harmonics we get a better waveform. There 
are some waveforms obtained from the simulation 
results followed by the equation (3).
D. Designing the firmware
Here the algorithm of the pic-microcontroller is 
developed to perform the key features of the whole 
circuit, i.e., to generate SPWM + second harmonic 
(Lalit Patnaik, et al. 2010) signals from four pins of 
the controller. The sine wave for 0–60° is generated 
from stored look-up tables of sine functions of 
fixed number samples. The desired frequency can 
be obtained simply by changing the time delay in 
between the samples of the sine function. Accord-
ing to equation (3), the carrier triangular function 
of high frequency is generated from the triangu-
lar look-up table of the same number of samples. 
According to equation (4), in the software both 
Figure 3. Proteus block diagram of triggering circuit of 
inverter.
Figure 4. Proteus output of SPWM for triggering cir-
cuit of inverter.
Figure 5. Second harmonics injection (k = 0.20, 
ϕ = 0°).

348
these waves are compared for each cycle of the sine 
wave at each “Δt” interval.
fmo
f
d
(
)
s
t
=
1
 
(4)
The design of the controller for frequency con-
trol is such that it maintains accuracy at the inverter 
output. As already considered that the modulating 
signal is generated from a look-up table of “S” 
number of samples of sine function, to generate 
particular frequency (fmod) of SPWM, the delay 
(Δt) between the samples is to be estimated from 
the controller ADC input.
The flowchart of the firmware has been demon-
strated below. The technique is that it has to com-
pare the sampled values of two modulating signals 
(sinwave) with sampled values of triangular wave.
f
m
trf i
f
= (
)
s
t  
(5)
where mf is the frequency modulation index.
For unipolar inverters, one port pin is the com-
plement to the other, which are used to generate 
gate pulses to trigger the upper and lower MOS-
FETS of the same leg of full bridge inverter. To 
avoid “shoot through” faults, a certain amount of 
delay has been provided in the software.
Now for the second harmonics injection, we only 
make relative minor alterations to the already exist-
ing software needed to cater to this introduction.
The flow chart for the second harmonics injec-
tion method is given below
3 HARDWARE DESCRIPTION
A. Circuit elements:
MOSFET (4 NO.S), IR2110 Driver, 12V DC 
and 5V DC supply, Snubber (4 no.s), microcontrol-
ler (PIC16f877 A).
1. The power circuit for load has chosen H-Bridge 
inverter so that the voltage rating of the devices 
gets reduced to half of the maximum DC bus 
voltage. So the device rating and as well as cost 
will be reduced. Again for H-Bridge inverters, 
sinusoidal output waveform is better compared 
to Push Pull Inverter. Here, MOSFET IRF 
P250 N has been used (datasheet 1).
2. To protect the MOSFETs from transients here, 
the RC turn off Snubber (R = 10 ohm, 2 W 
C = 0.1μF) circuit has been used.
3. A freewheeling diode of fast recovery is used 
in anti-parallel with each MOSFET to provide 
freewheeling paths for inductive currents.
4. Here the firing pulses for SPWM have been gener-
ated by using programming in assembly language 
for microcontroller PIC16f877A. Two output 
ports are used to generate SPWM waveforms. 
Here unipolar SPWM topology has been taken.
 IRFP250 NN Channel power MOSFET 200V, 
30 A, 0.075Ω
The data sheet of the Mosfet used is provided 
in Table 1.
B. Power MOSFET gate driver
IR2110
This unit is 14-lead DIP package.
VDD: Logic supply
HIN: Logic input for high side gate driver out-
put (HO), in phase
SD: Logic input for shutdown
LIN: Logic input for low side gate driver output 
(LO), in phase
VSS: Logic ground
VB: High side floating supply
HO: High side gate drive output
VS: High side floating supply return
VCC: Low side supply
LO: Low side gate drive output
COM: Low side return
Figure 6. Second harmonics injection (k = 0.20, 
ϕ = 45°).
Figure 7. Second harmonics injection (k = 0.20, 
ϕ = 90°).

349
4 OUTPUT FROM HARDWARE
Tektronix TDS 2024B, a two-channel digital stor-
age oscilloscope is used to measure the experi-
mental results. SPWM1 and SPWM2 (in Fig. 13, 
applied to upper and lower switches) are the pulses 
generated from the controller for 50 Hz.
Fig. 14 shows that two MOSFET in the same 
leg cannot be fired at the same instant to avoid the 
shoot through fault. To prevent this fault, a certain 
amount of delay in microseconds has been incor-
porated in the logic of the firmware. Here the delay 
of 2 μs is sufficient enough to protect the devices.
The output is passed through a first-order fil-
ter to eliminate the harmonics and the output 
obtained is given below
SPWM1 is leads SPWM2 by a half cycle of the 
switching pulses in frequency command signals. 
Here the number of pulses per half cycle has taken 
an odd number. Hence Fig 6 shows the inverter 
voltage and current waveform for resistive loads of 
50 Hz frequency.
For resistive loads, the THD in current is very 
high. The output current waveforms from a single-
phase inverter with inductive load have been shown 
in Fig. 7. For inductive loads, the THD in current 
is 21.01% (in conventional SPWM technique, it is 
very high) as shown in Fig. 8.
Figure 8. Flow chart of the program logic.
Figure 9. Circuit Diagram.
Figure 10. Mosfet.
Figure 11. Mosfet symbol.

350
Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 show 40-Hz and 75-Hz fre-
quency outputs, respectively, for inductive loads. 
For inductive load with 50 Hz, the THD in voltage 
is 30.6% and for 75 Hz, THD is 24.01%. Fig. 11 
and Fig. 12 show the frequency sweep from 17.48 
to 75.76 Hz.
The inverter voltages with different PWM tech-
niques have been implemented and the results are 
analyzed in Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) analysis 
to find the fundamental component and the har-
monic component presented. The different volt-
ages with different PWM techniques are shown 
in Figures 15 to 22 and tabulated in Table 2; it 
also increase the fundamental output to near 15% 
which is very important than others.
The snaps of the hardware setup are shown in 
Figure 23 and 24.
Table 1. Mosfet data sheet.
Symbol
Parameter
Ratings
Unit
VDSS
Drain to source voltage
200
V
VGS
Gate to source voltage
+ –20
V
ID
Drain Current 
continuous (Tc = 25°c, 
VGS = 10V)
30
A
Continuous (Tc = 100°c, 
VGS = 10V)
21
A
EAS
Single pulse avalanche 
energy
315
mJ
PD
Power dissipation
Derate above 25°C
214
1.4
W
W/°C
TJ, TSTG
Operating and Storage 
Temperature
−55 to 175
°C
Figure 12. Pin diagram of IR2110.
Figure 13. Four gate pulses.
Figure 14. Delay to avoid “Shoot Through Fault”.
Figure 15. Output after passing through first-order filter.
Figure 16. Voltage and current waveform for resistive 
load at 50 Hz.
Figure 17. Voltage and current waveform for inductive 
load at 50 Hz.

351
Figure 18. THD for current in resistive load.
Figure 19. THD of Voltage at 41.5 Hz in Inductive Load.
Figure 20. THD of voltage at 41.5 Hz in inductive 
load.
Table 2. FFT analysis of various techniques.
Types of inverters
THD (%)
Two level single 
bridge inverter 
(using SPWM)
85.49
Two level double 
bridge inverter 
(using SPWM)
70.43
Second harmonics + 
SPWM inverter
30.6
Figure 21. Voltage and current waveform at 17.48 Hz.
Figure 22. Voltage and current waveform at 17.48 Hz.
Figure 23. Picture of experimental setup.
5 PICTURES OF HARDWARE SETUP

352
6 DISCUSSION
The observed voltage waveform shows that there 
is a distinct dead time effect for current transition 
from positive to negative and negative to positive 
value. This dead time effect can be compensated in 
future work.
For resistive load, THD of the current is much 
higher than the THD of current in inductive load, 
since the current in inductive load is more sinusoi-
dal than the resistive load.
REFERENCES
Eason, G., B. Noble, and I.N. Sneddon, “On certain inte-
grals of Lipschitz-Hankel type involving products of 
Bessel functions,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London, vol. 
A247, pp. 529–551, April 1955.
Figure 24. Picture of main circuit board.
Hirak Patangia, and Sri Nikhil Gupta Gourisetti, 
“A Novel Strategy for Selective Harmonic Elimina-
tion Based on a Sine-Sine PWM Model”, MWSCAS, 
U.S.A, Aug 2012.
IEEE Std 519–1992, “IEEE Recommended Practices 
and Requirements for Harmonic Control In Electric 
Power Systems,” Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers, Inc. 1993.
Ismail, B.S.T. “Development of a Single Phase SPWM 
Microcontroller-Based Inverter” First International 
Power and Energy Conference PEC, Putrajaya, 
Malaysia: IEEE, Nov, 28–29, 2006.
Lalit Patnaik, G. Narayanan, and L. Umanand “An 
Investigation into Even Harmonics Injection In Pole 
Voltages of A Single Phase Inverter”, IIT ROOR-
KEE, Nov 2010.
Mohan, Ned. M. Undiland, T.P. Robbins, William, and 
2003. Power Electronics: Converter, Application and 
Design. United States of America: John Willey & 
Son.
Pankaj H Zope1, Pravin G.Bhangale2, Prashant Sonare3, 
S.R. Suralkar, “Design and Implementation of car-
rier based Sinusoidal PWM Inverter”, International 
Journal of Advanced Research in Electrical, Electron-
ics and Instrumentation Engineering, Vol. 1, Issue 4, 
October 2012, pp. 230–236.
Rashid, M.H. 2004. Power Electronics; Circuits, Devices 
and Applications. New Jersey Prentice Hall.

353
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Proxima-Talk: A proposed framework for network assisted 
device-to-device communication
Rupendra N. Mitra & D.P. Agrawal
University of Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
ABSTRACT: Device-to-Device (D2D) wireless communication has been significantly researched in 
recent years due to its immense potential of multi-gigabit data transfer rate while using a 60-GHz unli-
censed spectrum along with mmWave beamforming. Still, 60-GHz communications are yet to be available 
commercially due to its high loss and limited coverage. In this letter, we propose proxima-talk, a new D2D 
communication framework. The salient feature of proxima-talk is unlike many other D2D communica-
tion protocols. It can switch the data transfer link between D2D direct channel and conventional cellular 
network. It uses mmWave beamforming for D2D communication, reports Channel Quality Index (CQI) 
to the base station, and depending on the CQI of the D2D channel, it hands over the traffic to the cel-
lular network for seamless data transfer. We conclude by showing possibilities and requirements of such 
futuristic D2D protocol.
agility of switching between D2D channel and 
conventional cellular channels for seamless data 
connectivity and thereafter propose Proxima-Talk, 
a novel network assisted D2D framework.
The rest of this letter is organized in following 
four sections. Section two highlights the theoreti-
cal foundations of D2D communication. Sec-
tion three presents a brief survey of literatures 
addressing several issues and proposes advance-
ments in D2D communication. Section four iden-
tifies an open possibility in D2D communication 
and proposes Proxima-Talk as a potential futur-
istic D2D communication framework to ensure 
uninterrupted data connectivity. Finally, section 
five concludes this letter with future research 
directions and possible applications of this tech-
nique in daily life.
2 MORE ON D2D COMMUNICATION
By definition, D2D communication is a point-to-
point direct link between two end users without 
traversing the base station or the core network of 
cellular networks (Asadi et al. 2014). Generally 
this D2D channel can use the unlicensed spectrum 
or the cellular spectrum. Thus, D2D communica-
tion can be broadly classified into two categories, 
inband and outband [Figure 1]. Many researchers 
used cellular spectrum for D2D communication in 
their literatures because the licensed spectrum is 
well researched and highly controllable (Doppler 
et al. 2009). The supporting hardware is already 
1 INTRODUCTION
Device-to-Device (D2D) communication was first 
introduced to enhance the performance of conven-
tional cellular networks. New data intensive apps 
for cell-phones are coming every day and require-
ment of higher data transfer rates becomes obvi-
ous in wireless communication. Apps like content 
distribution, proximity aware services, multi-player 
gaming, and cellular offloading of multimedia data 
are making D2D communications an integrated 
feature to modern digital devices. D2D commu-
nication provides improved spectral efficiency 
and very low latency since there is no networking 
involved with it. Earlier the infrared band was used 
in cell-phones to share files among devices (Dack 
et al. 1994). Then Bluetooth (BT) made an impor-
tant contribution to change the way D2D com-
munications was used on ISM band. It certainly 
added more agility in connecting devices, allowed 
increased distances between two communicating 
devices, and made possible wireless file transfer, 
wireless printing, and personal D2D communi-
cation easier and cheaper (Bray et at. 2002). But 
D2D was first proposed in cellular networks for 
multi-hop relaying by Lin and Hsu, 2000. Keeping 
in mind the features it enables in cellular commu-
nication, the next generation’s 5G cellular standard 
may include D2D as an integrated feature to it.
In this letter, we discuss the various advance-
ments of D2D communication since 2000 when it 
was first proposed. We identified one major open 
area of futuristic D2D communication with the 

354
advanced, and Quality of service (QoS) could be 
ensured therefore.
On the other hand, unlicensed spectrum is pro-
posed by some researchers because it eliminates 
the chances of interference between cellular chan-
nels and direct D2D channels. In this case, the 
D2D channels use Bluetooth, Wifi-direct (Wi-Fi 
Alliance, 2010), etc.
This broad classification of D2D communication 
can further be categorized as follows: underlay and 
overlay communication come under inband D2D. 
Outband D2D are categorized into controlled and 
uncontrolled. In inband underlay, D2D communi-
cation framework, both cellular and D2D chan-
nels, use the same licensed radio resources. On the 
other hand, overlay communication D2D channels 
are dedicated cellular resources non-overlapping 
with cellular spectrum. Thus, inband D2D signifi-
cantly improves spectrum efficiency of cellular net-
works but to avoid the key disadvantage of inband 
D2D, i.e., the interference between D2D channels 
and cellular channels, complex resource scheduling 
algorithms are implemented leading to significant 
computational overhead base stations and end 
user equipment. Many researchers who proposed 
outband D2D communication frameworks so that 
cellular spectra remain untouched by D2D chan-
nels have mainly two types of approaches. Some of 
them proposed the controlled outband framework 
where the link establishment is controlled by the 
cellular base station and other types that do not 
involve base station are called uncontrolled.
Tehrani et al. 2014, classified the D2D clas-
sification into four subsequent classes depending 
on the involvement of the cellular base station in 
assigning control channels in D2D link establish-
ments and peer discovery. The second hierarchy of 
Figure 1 shows the four classes. In DR-OC, a user 
device in a poor cellular coverage area can com-
municate with the BS through relaying its informa-
tion via other neighboring devices. In DC-OC, the 
peering devices communicate with each other inde-
pendently but BS helps them to establish the link 
and initial discovery. In DR-DC, just like Ad-hoc 
network, several peering devices can communicate 
relaying their information through the neighboring 
peers without any involvement of BS. In DC-DC, 
two or more peering devices communicate directly 
without relay or without any involvement of BS.
In this letter, we propose Proxima-talk, a net-
work assisted (DC-OC) D2D communication 
framework for futuristic cellular networks. The 
term “network assisted” is used because it is a 
supervised D2D communication and the cellular 
base station will monitor the quality and surviv-
ability of the D2D channel. The D2D link is being 
monitored by the cellular base station in terms 
of Channel Quality Index (CQI) and with other 
factors. If the base station observes a severe drop 
in the quality of the D2D communication chan-
nel, the data transfer gets switched through the 
cellular network. Base station is programmed to 
take the decision on detail supervision of the D2D 
channel quality logs. Thus, Proxima-Talk ensures 
uninterrupted data connectivity using both D2D 
link and cellular channels, and moreover, the con-
nectivity between the two end users are constantly 
monitored by the base station during the entire 
period of the data transfer. Therefore, we suggest 
proxima-talk as a network assisted D2D communi-
cation. Although we ideate it as an outband D2D 
communication protocol, it may be extended as 
an inband underlay technique in future when the 
next generation of cellular networks will use higher 
frequency unlicensed spectrum, e.g., 60 Ghz, in a 
more controlled manner (Ohyun et al. 2015).
3 BACKGROUND WORKS
Since its introduction, many literatures discussed 
important aspects of D2D communication. Spec-
trum efficiency, interference, resource allocation 
method, throughput improvement, power efficiency, 
and QoS performance are major areas of D2D lit-
eratures to be discussed in a brief survey.
Kaufman et al. (2008) proposed to use the 
uplink channels of cellular licensed spectra for 
D2D link establishment to improve spectrum effi-
ciency. Interference between cellular channels and 
Figure 1. Two different classifications of D2D commu-
nication. First one is based on the spectrum usage and 
second one is based on the involvement of cellular base 
stations in D2D communication. OC stands for Opera-
tor Controlled and DC stands for Device controlled. 
DR stands for Device Relaying. OC means the channel 
assignment is taken care by the base station.

355
D2D channel is a key factor. In (Peng et al. 2009), 
authors proposed to read radio resource block 
assignment information from the cellular control 
channel and then cognitively use the cellular uplink 
channel for D2D communication to minimize the 
interference. Zhang et al. 2013, mathematically 
formulate resource allocation in an optimal way 
in D2D communication. Yu et al. 2012 suggested 
rate splitting techniques to improve the through-
put of D2D communications. The key essence in 
rate splitting is that it divides the message in to two 
parts, public and private. The private message part 
can be decoded only by the intendent peer, and the 
public part is decodable by any peer. This scheme 
helps D2D channels to minimize the effect of 
interference. Doppler et al. 2009, studied session 
interference management between D2D and LTE 
networks. Moreover, several techniques, such as 
cloudification of resource (Fodor et al. 2012), non-
cooperative game or bargaining game (Hossain 
et al. 2009), optimal power allocation algorithms 
(Feng et al. 2013), clustering based on SNR and 
relaying peer selection algorithms (Zhou et al. 
2013), are proposed for interference management 
and power controlling. Xiao et al. 2011, proposed 
a heuristic algorithm for power control and sub-
carrier bit allocation in OFDMA-based cellular 
networks. Feng et al. 2013, mathematically formu-
lated and optimized resource allocation problem, 
a non-linear constraint optimization problem, for 
D2D underlaying cellular network. This algorithm 
takes care of QoS requirements for both cellular 
and D2D users and cellular users.
4 PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
Most of the D2D techniques cannot guarantee 
uninterrupted data connectivity because of limited 
coverage. Specially, when two users are moving 
in comparatively high speed with respect to each 
other and the distance between them is varying 
randomly, D2D channel experiences poor chan-
nel quality and heavy data loss. This may lead to 
low data transfer rate or even complete loss of 
connectivity.
To address this issue, we propose Proxima-
talk which ensures connectivity during the entire 
period of data transfer by handing over the con-
nection to cellular network in case of poor D2D 
channel quality. So it is evident that Proxima-Talk 
is a network controlled (OC) protocol and BS plays 
the key role in peer discovery, link establishment, 
supervising the D2D channel quality, and decides 
when to take handover from D2D channel to cel-
lular data network.
Neighbor discovery is an important step to initi-
ate D2D communication between two end users. 
At first, UE needs to get the knowledge of the 
location of the intended peer and decide if it is in 
an allowable range of D2D communication. Yang 
et al. 2013, mathematically modeled a random 
access based distributed UE discovery protocol for 
LTE-advanced cellular networks. The proposed 
algorithm also supports mobility while discovering 
peers with a discovery probability close to 0.99%. 
Hence, in proxima-talk we can use this peer discov-
ery technology for initial simulation.
Millimeter wave (mmWave) communication 
is the next big technology to explore in cellular 
spectra because high frequency carriers give faster 
bit rate provisioning along with less interference 
with existing in-use spectra. Many researches are 
currently focused on 34-GHz and 60-GHz radio 
spectrum attenuations and hardware realization 
for the next generation of wireless communica-
tion. A recent survey forecasts that a 1500-million-
dollar market will be created by the 60-GHz Wi-Fi 
chipset until 2018 (Solis and Cooney, 2013). The 
60-GHz Wi-Fi radio signals suffer more signal 
attenuation than the legacy radio signal due to loss 
of air propagation and high absorption rate by oxy-
gen. A mmWave array beamforming technology is 
thus adopted by the 60 GHz system to overcome 
the issues. Proxima-Talk can use this 60-GHz radio 
and beamforming for D2D channel establishment. 
This is an outband approach which will provide a 
high data transfer rate in D2D communication.
Beamforming is another signal processing tech-
nique which is used nowadays in directional com-
munication. By means of beamforming, we can a 
direct majority of the transmitting signal energy 
from an array of antenna elements to a particular 
angular direction where the receiver is. Proxima-
talk uses such directional antenna elements for 
constructive and destructive superpositions for 
beam steering. There are several beam searching 
algorithms to find out the best TX/RX beam pairs, 
viz., full search algorithm and sequential search 
with beam shaping or without beam shaping [8]. 
Hence, Proxima-talk can use this beamforming 
for D2D link establishment. Figure 2 sequentially 
shows a scenario of Proxima-talk how beamform-
ing can be used in D2D transmission, how the 
obstacle makes the D2D channel quality poor to 
force data transfer to switche its path onto cellu-
lar network and then resumes after the obstacle is 
gone.
5 CONCLUSION
The first four generations of cellular standards did 
not consider the D2D communication functionality 
seriously. However, technologies like wifi-direct or 
BT are in use as unsupervised D2D communication 

356
protocols. But these unlicensed band D2D inter-
faces cannot ensure QoS provisioning like cellular 
networks do. Operators, after closely following the 
current market trends, have now started insisting 
on D2D functionality in the next generation of 
cellular standards. Because highly congested data 
networks are envisaging exponential growth in 
data traffic, by numerous context aware services, 
location based cell phone applications, video dis-
semination etc., D2D communication can provide 
cellular data offloading provision to help reduce 
the cellular network congestion. D2D feature can 
play a vital role in mobile cloudification to facili-
tate effective sharing of base band resources. D2D 
can not only be used for commercial usage, but also 
during natural disasters since it may allow creating 
local relay based communication networks until 
the cellular networks get restored. A comprehen-
sive diagram to illustrate the working principle and 
beamforming in Proxima-Talk as a DC-OC D2D 
communication framework is shown in Figure 3.
In this letter, we briefly discussed the progress 
of D2D communication and why it should be an 
integral part of upcoming cellular standards. We 
also proposed Proxima-Talk, a futuristic D2D 
communication framework which enables unin-
terrupted data connectivity between the peering 
devices, no matter how their inter-device distance 
or in-sight obstruction varies. This may be a very 
useful and required approach in future D2D func-
tionality that is going to be an integrated feature of 
the next generation cellular networks.
REFERENCES
Asadi, Arash, Qing Wang, and Vincenzo Mancuso. “A 
survey on device-to-device communication in cellu-
lar networks.” Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 
IEEE 16.4 (2014): 1801–1819.
Dack. D., Colin I’Anson and Graeme Proudler,” Use of 
115kb/s Infra-Red Interface for Mobile Multi-Me-
dia”, Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communica-
tions, 1994. Wireless Networks—Catching the Mobile 
Future., 5th Ieee International Symposium on, 1994, 
vol 3, pp. 980–985.
Doppler. K., Rinne, M.P., Janis. P., Ribeiro. C., and 
Hugl. K., “Deviceto-device communications; func-
tional prospects for LTE-Advanced networks,” in 
Proc. IEEE ICC Workshops, 2009, pp. 1–6.
Feng. D. et al., “Device-to-Device Communications 
Underlaying Cellular Networks,” IEEE Trans. Com-
mun., vol. 61, no. 8, 2013, pp. 3541–51.
Feng. D. et al., “Device-to-device communications 
underlaying cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. Com-
mun., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 3541–3551, Aug. 2013.
Fodor. G. et al., “Design Aspects of Network Assisted 
Device-to-Device Communications,” IEEE Commun. 
Mag., vol. 50, no. 3, Mar. 2012, pp. 170–77.
Hossain. E., Niyato. D., and Han. Z., “Dynamic Spec-
trum Access and Management in Cognitive Radio 
Networks”, 1st ed., Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
Jennifer Bray and Charles F Sturman, “Bluetooth: con-
nect without cables”, 2nd ed, ISBN 0132442396, 2002.
Jo Ohyun. et al,” 60 GHz Wireless Communication for 
Future Wi-Fi”, ICT Express, Volume 1, Issue 1, June 
2015, Pages 30–33.
Kaufman. B. and Aazhang. B., “Cellular networks with an 
overlaid device to device network,” in Proc. Asilomar 
Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., 2008, pp. 1537–1541.
Lin. Y.-D and Hsu. Y.-C., “Multihop cellular: A new 
architecture for wireless communications,” in Proc. 
IEEE INFOCOM, 2000, vol. 3, pp. 1273–1282.
Peng. T., Lu. Q., Wang. H., Xu. S. and Wang. W., “Inter-
ference avoidance mechanisms in the hybrid cellular 
and device-to-device systems,” in Proc. IEEE PIMRC, 
2009, pp. 617–621.
Solis. P., Cooney. P., “Wi-Fi Semiconductors: 802.11 ac, 
MIMO, and 802.11ad”, ABI research, 2013.
Tehrani, Mohsen Nader, Mustafa Uysal, and Halim Yan-
ikomeroglu. “Device-to-device communication in 5G 
cellular networks: challenges, solutions, and future 
directions.” Communications Magazine, IEEE 52.5 
(2014): 86–92.
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of Proxima-Talk as a 
DC-OC D2D communication framework.
Figure 3. A comprehensive diagram to illustrate the 
working principle and beamforming in Proxima-Talk as 
a DC-OC D2D communication framework.

357
Wi-Fi Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Specification v1.1, Wi-Fi Alli-
ance, 2010, vol. 1, pp.1–159.
Xiao. X., Tao. X., and Lu. J., “A QoS-aware power opti-
mization scheme in OFDMA systems with inte-
grated Device-to-Device (D2D) communications,” 
in Proc. IEEE VTC-Fall, 2011, pp. 1–5.
Yang, Zhu-Jun, et al. “Peer discovery for device-to-de-
vice (D2D) communication in LTE-A networks.” 
Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2013 IEEE, 
2013.
Yu. C.-H. and Tirkkonen. O., “Device-to-device under-
lay cellular network based on rate splitting,” in Proc. 
IEEE WCNC, 2012, pp. 262–266.
Zhang. R., Cheng. X., Yang. L., and Jiao. B., “Interfer-
ence-aware graph based resource sharing for device-
to-device 
communications 
underlaying 
cellular 
networks,” in Proc. IEEE WCNC, 2013, pp. 140–145.
Zhou. B. et al., “Intracluster Device-to-Device Relay 
Algorithm with Optimal Resource Utilization,” IEEE 
Trans. Vehic. Tech., vol. 62, no. 5, 2013, pp. 2315–2326.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

359
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Effect of slow decaying trapped charges on PDC data and associated 
diagnosis of power transformer insulation
Nitanshi Verma & Arijit Baral
Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India
ABSTRACT: The operational age of a significant number of power transformers have already exceeded 
their designed lives. Though prone to failures, such transformers are still in use to maximize asset utiliza-
tion and defer major capital investment. Ensuring fault free operation of such crucial HV power equip-
ment by strategies based on reliable insulation diagnosis can mean substantial saving for the utilities. 
Modern non-invasive techniques based on measurement and analysis of Time Domain Spectroscopy data 
provides information regarding the behavior of solid insulation in power transformer insulation. Com-
mercially available equipment (capable of analyzing dielectric response function) being extremely costly, 
researchers are actively engaged in devising methods to assess insulation conditions. However, very few 
of such reported techniques consider the effect of trapped charge and its influence on the results of insu-
lation diagnosis. The focus of this paper is aimed at addressing this issue. The data used for the present 
work is obtained from a real-life power transformer making the findings extremely relevant to the field of 
insulation diagnosis.
provided for a relaxation time tr after shutdown 
with its terminals short circuited. This allows the 
equipment to reach thermo-hydrodynamic equilib-
rium. This phase also helps to neutralize trapped 
charge, i.e., generated mechanisms like charge sep-
aration and flow-electrification. It is reported that 
such charge decays at an extremely slow rate espe-
cially if the walls of the tank are insulated (Roach 
et al. 1988). Furthermore, due to unavailability of 
standards, the value of tr is decided by the opera-
tor. Involvement of the human factor combined 
with slow decay rate may result in a finite amount 
of trapped charge within the insulation prior to 
PDC measurement. It is understood that it is prac-
tically difficult to ensure that the insulation system 
will contain negligible trapped charge every time 
PDC measurement is performed.
The characteristics of trapped and space charge 
along with the location of the same have been 
investigated by several researchers. The popu-
lar acoustic pulsed method is used to determine 
the space charge profile in dielectrics (Tang et al. 
2010). It is reported that the applied DC voltage 
affects the amount of space charge whereas the 
temperature affects the mobility and distribution 
of space charge (Lewiner et al. 1986). Application 
of DC voltage causes homocharge injection (Tang 
et al. 1986). It is also reported that magnitude of 
the applied voltage maintains a direct correlation 
with the amount of positive charge that gets accu-
mulated at the interface of multilayer insulation. 
1 INTRODUCTION
The demand for a reliable electricity supply has 
significantly increased during the last few decades. 
The reliability of service provided by power utili-
ties is heavily dependent on satisfactory operation 
of high-voltage equipment. Due to high cost of 
power system equipment, like transformers, they 
are not replaced to increase reliability of the sys-
tem by considering their age only. On the contrary, 
a large number of such equipments that are operat-
ing today have already exceeded their designed life. 
Extending the life of such equipments by policies 
based on proper condition assessments can mean 
substantial saving for the utilities besides providing 
fault-free operation. Therefore, correct condition 
assessments based on reliable non-invasive diag-
nosis of equipments, like power transformers, is 
required before taking any decisions about replace-
ment of such capital intensive equipment.
It is reported that the value of paper moisture 
in cellulosic parts of power transformer insulation 
can be predicted using the transfer function of 
Modified Debye Model (Baral et al. 2014). How-
ever, the data used for predicting paper moisture 
is recorded from equipment which have negligi-
ble trapped charge content. Such a condition was 
ensured at the time of data measurement by allow-
ing sufficient relaxation time for the equipment 
after shutdown. PDC measurement is an offline 
measurement technique. Equipment is generally 

360
Effect of temperature on the characteristics of 
space charge has also been reported (Wang et al. 
2011). Researchers have observed that at elevate 
temperatures (during charging the test sample), 
charge injection occurs at a much faster rate and 
causes deeper space charge distribution (Wang 
et al. 2011). Oil property is also known to be an 
important factor in determining the overall dis-
tribution of trapped charge within the insulation 
(Hao et al. 2011). In the case of deteriorated oil, 
charge density injected into the sample is observed 
to increase.
2 THEORY
2.1 Effect of radial temperature gradient 
on insulation model parameters
In the case of a real-life power transformer, while 
viewing from core to tank (Houhanessian et al. 
1988), it can be observed that the temperature 
of the insulation decreases as the distance from 
the winding (closest to the core) increases. After 
attaining a minimum value, the temperature value 
again increases due to the presence of the second 
winding. Though the value of minimum tempera-
ture and distance of the insulation region exposed 
to it is influenced by the physical parameter of 
the insulation concerned, values of maximum and 
minimum temperatures rarely undergo any change 
during the operating life of the equipment.
A long time of exposure to this radial tempera-
ture gradient causes maximum aging to occur in 
regions close to either winding while minimum 
aging occurs in the region exposed to the minimum 
temperature. It is a known fact that this non-uni-
form aging of oil-paper insulation is an irreversible 
process and affects all dielectric measurement data 
including PDC measurement. This further implies 
that the characteristic of a particular dipole group 
present close to the HV and LV winding will be dif-
ferent from that of the same dipole group exposed 
to minimum temperature. It is shown by the second 
author of this paper that such a non-uniform aging 
in insulation can be modeled using the Modified 
Debye Model (Baral et al. 2013). The parameters 
of such model can be easily derived from the polar-
ization current of the insulation.
2.2 Modeling PDC data affected by slow 
decaying trapped charge
It can be observed that the presence of trapped 
charge will influence the characteristics of dipole 
characteristics. If the decay rate of the trapped 
charge is sufficiently slow, as in the case of trans-
formers in an insulated tank, the effect of the 
trapped charge will create a non-zero initial con-
dition for the capacitors present in a particular 
branch of MDM. Such non-zero initial conditions 
can be simulated by placing a constant magnitude 
DC voltage source in series with the branch sub-
elements of MDM.
It is reported that trapped charge mainly 
resides at the interface of solid and liquid insula-
tion. Furthermore, the polarity of the slow decay-
ing trapped charge is primarily positive in nature 
(Tang et al. 2010). This implies that the effect of 
the trapped charge will be to reduce the effect 
of the applied DC field (during PDC measure-
ment) for dipoles present in the interfacial region 
and solid dielectric while keeping the effect on 
dipoles present in oil relatively unaffected. Hence, 
in order to simulate the effect of such trapped 
charge, a DC voltage source, Vi, having a suitable 
magnitude, is placed in branches of MDM whose 
time constant is greater than 100 s. The pictorial 
representation of such a model is illustrated in 
Figure 1.
In Figure 1, the element Z0(s) represents the 
effect of insulation geometry. On the other hand, 
the values of resistance and capacitance, models 
Zi(k,s) in Figure 1, are related to the time constant 
of the ith branch τi by equation (1)
R k
Z k
C k
Z k
R k
i
i
R
i
i
C
i
i
R
)
k
Re[
(
Zi
Z
, )s ]
)
k
Im
(
i
Z
[Z
, )s)s ]
( )
k
=
=
k
= Im[Z
)s ]
×
⎫
⎬⎪⎫
⎬
⎭⎪
⎬
⎭
τi
1
 
(1)
In the present work, the author simulated the 
presence of trapped charge by considering the 
poling field (Tang et al. 2010) to be generated by 
Vpoling = 2000 V DC source. In the present work, 
the poling field is assumed to be applied for tpoling s. 
It can be understood that the trapped charge gets 
introduced into the insulation by a process, which 
is similar to the polarization phase in PDC meas-
urement. Hence, the magnitude of voltage source 
Vi is given by equations (2a) and (2b)
Figure 1. MDM structure with effect of trapped charge.

361
V
V
t
s
i
V
polin
V
g
polin
t
g
i
i
×
Vpolin
V
g
−
−
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
≥
1
100
exp
;
p
g
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠⎠⎟⎠
τi
τi
 
(2a)
V
s
i
i
V
0
100
i
 
(2b)
In equations (2a) and (2b), the time constant 
τi of the ith branch is related to MDM branch 
parameters by equation (3).
τi
R
τ
i
C
i
R
i
i
k
no el
R
i
i
k
no el
Ri
Ci
=
=
( )
k
=
( )
k
=
=
∑
∑
Λ
Λ
R
i
Λ
Λ
1
1
1
_
_
 
(3)
The parameter of the insulation model con-
sidered for the present case is already reported 
in (Baral et al. 2013). In the present work, the 
value of tpoling varies within the limits of 0–400 s 
in steps of 100 s. It is worth mentioning here that 
the range of tpoling chosen is exemplary in nature. 
The proposed analysis is valid for any range of 
tpoling chosen.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
It is reported by the second author of this paper 
that the value of paper moisture can be esti-
mated reliably by investigating the performance 
parameter evaluated from the transfer function 
of MDM. The performance parameter mentioned 
above refers to the magnitude of system zero (Z1) 
located farthest away from the origin in the LHS 
of the s-plane. It can be observed from Figure 1 
that dipole groups present in interfacial and solid 
insulation will be subjected to a charging voltage 
which is less than Vdc. In fact, equations (2a) and 
(2b) show that different dipole groups will be sub-
jected to different charging voltage (Vdc − Vi). It 
can be understood that the polarization current 
recorded under such a condition will not provide 
proper information related to dipole characteris-
tics. As a result, MDM parameters (evaluated from 
recorded PDC data) and consequently the value of 
Z1 is also likely to get affected. This implies that 
the value of dielectric dissipation factor and paper 
moisture evaluated using Z1 will become unreli-
able and inaccurate. Figure 2 shows the values 
of polarization current for different quantities of 
trapped charge.
Polarization current at a larger value of time is 
influenced by the condition of dipoles present in 
the interfacial region and solid insulation (Saha 
et al.. 2005). It can be observed from Figure 2 
that the effect of the trapped charge on polariza-
tion current is more prominent in a larger value of 
time. In order to demonstrate the effect of trapped 
charge on MDM parameters, the value of equiva-
lent resistance and capacitance in the largest time 
constant branch of the insulation model evaluated 
for the transformer under test is given in Table 1.
Table 2 shows the value of Z1, trapped charge 
quantity, and paper moisture value (evaluated 
using the reported relation (Baral, A. et al 2014)). 
It should be mentioned here that these parameters 
are evaluated using the information of excitation 
voltage Vdc (used for measurement of PDC data) 
and the trapped charge affected polarization cur-
rent. The data presented in Table 2 is expected as 
majority of trapped charge (having positive polar-
ity) is assumed to reside in the interfacial region 
and solid part.
It can be understood that evaluation of MDM 
parameters using affected PDC data will invari-
ably lead to inaccurate results. Figure 3 shows 
the pictorial representation of the data presented 
in Table 2. Data presented in Table 2 along with 
Figures 1 and 2 show that the effect of trapped 
charge may significantly affect the measured Time 
Domain Spectroscopy data especially at larger 
values of time. This in turn will invariably lead to 
inaccurate parameterization of MDM and incor-
rect diagnosis of the insulation concerned. It can 
be further observed that depending on the magni-
tude of the trapped charge, the error in insulation 
diagnosis can reach a substantial value. Hence, it 
can be reasoned that insulation diagnosis using 
PDC data is always associated with a level of 
uncertainty if the influence of trapped charge 
(present in the insulation) at the time of data 
measurement is ignored.
Figure 2. Influence of trapped charge on polarization 
current.

362
4 CONCLUSIONS
The analysis presented in this paper suggests that 
the effect of slow decaying trapped charge cannot 
be neglected while modeling the dielectric response 
function of transformer insulation. A methodol-
ogy is proposed in this paper using which the effect 
of positive trapped charge (located at the solid-liq-
uid interface) on insulation model parameters can 
be studied. The presented technique can also be 
used for studying the influence of trapped charge 
on recorded PDC data and hence on the dielectric 
response of the insulation. Related analysis pre-
sented in this paper shows that the use of PDC 
data affected by trapped charge for estimation of 
paper moisture will invariably lead to inaccurate 
diagnosis.
REFERENCES
Baral, A. & Chakravorti, S. (2013). Modified Maxwell 
Model for characterization of relaxation processes 
within insulation system having Non-uniform Aging 
due to temperature gradient, IEEE Transactions on 
Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation, 20(2), 524–534.
Baral, A. & Chakrovarti, S. (2014). Condition Assess-
ment of Cellulosic Part in Power Transformer Insula-
tion using Transfer Function Zero of Modified Debye 
Model IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical 
Insulation, 21(5), 2028–2036.
Houhanessian, V. & Zaengl, W.S. (1988). On-Site diag-
nosis of power transformers by means of relaxation 
current measurements, Int’l. Sympos. Electr. Insul., 
28–34.
Lewiner, J. (1986). Evolution of experimental techniques 
for the study of the electrical properties of insulating 
materials. IEEE Transactions on Electrical Insulation, 
EI-21(3), 351–360.
Roach, J.F. & Templeton, J.B. (1988). An Engineering 
Model for Streaming Electrification in Power Trans-
formers, Electrical Insulating Oils, STP 998, H.G Erd-
man Ed., American Society for Testing and Materials. 
Philadelphia, 119–135.
Saha, T.K., Purkait, P. & Müller, F. (2005). Deriving an 
Equivalent Circuit of Transformers Insulation for 
Understanding the Dielectric Response Measure-
ments, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 20(1), 
149–157.
Tang, C., Chen, G., Fu, M. & Liao, R. (2010). Space 
charge behavior in multilayer oil paper insulation 
under different DC voltages and temperatures’. IEEE 
transactions on Dielectric and electrical Insulation, 
17(3), 775–784.
Wang, D., Wang, S., Lei, M., Mu, H. & Zhang, G. (2011). 
Temperature Effect on Space Charge Behavior in oil 
impregnated paper insulation. In Proc. of Conf. Elec-
trical Insulating Material (ISEIM), 378–382.
Table 1. Influence of trapped charge on the largest time 
constant branch of MDM.
Charge (μC)
ΛR
i (GΩ)
1/ΛC
i (μF )
0
17.06
8.51
11.33
19.67
7.38
21.90
22.96
6.32
31.77
27.20
5.34
40.99
32.88
4.42
Table 2. Influence of trapped charge on performance 
parameter.
Zero Z1
Charge (μC)
Paper moisture (%)
0.988
0
1.71
0.943
11.33
1.69
0.913
21.90
1.67
0.893
31.77
1.67
0.879
40.99
1.66
Figure 3. Variation of paper moisture and Z1 with 
trapped charge.

363
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Priority based service scheduling in Enterprise Cloud Bus architecture
G. Khan & S. Sengupta
B. P. Poddar Institute of Management and Technology, Kolkata, India
A. Sarkar
National Institute of Technology, Durgapur, India
ABSTRACT: Cloud computing has emerged as a high performance dynamic computing environ-
ment that leverages on-demand enterprise service applications. Since, there has been a rapid increase in 
number of clouds and its services so the demand for delivering services to a large number of users has also 
increased. This leads to efficient and dynamic scheduling of services as a major and challenging issue in 
cloud computing domain. Under this situation the cloud service providers need to use resource efficiently 
and gain maximum profit by delivering the service to the users as per their quality requirements. To 
accomplish this, in this paper we have proposed an approach for scheduling service in Enterprise Cloud 
Bus (ECB) based on Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) theory. Based on this approach an algorithm 
called Priority Based Service Scheduling (PSS) is also discussed where each of the services are assigned 
a fixed priority based on some set of criteria before the services are processed in a specific order.. The 
proposed algorithm also helps to reduce waiting time of the services in the scheduler and maximizes the 
quality of service before delivering it to the client. We illustrate the approach with the help of a case study 
on airline reservation system.
scheduling, negotiation and composition of serv-
ices are facing complexity and performances issues. 
To address these issues, earlier we have proposed 
an approach by integrating agent technology in an 
Enterprise Cloud Bus, an abstraction layer frame-
work (1Khan et al. 2014, 2Khan et al. 2014, 3Khan 
et al. 2015, 4Khan et al. 2015, 5Khan et al. 2015) 
that automatically allocates service resources suit-
able for various cloud consumers bolstering some 
challenges of cloud services like, service registra-
tion, service discovery, service scheduling and serv-
ice evaluation and performance.
To increase the efficiency of delivering services 
in inter cloud architecture, scheduling is one of the 
most prominent activities performed to get maxi-
mum profit. This paper proposes a service schedul-
ing approach in Enterprise Cloud Bus (ECB) that 
helps to reduce the service overhead and minimize 
the waiting time of the service. This paper focuses 
on the Priority based Service Scheduling algorithm 
called (PSS) based on set of criteria which required 
for assigning the priority to each service.
2 REVIEW OF RELATED WORK
Several job scheduling algorithms have been pro-
posed in distributed computing area. Most of them 
can be applied in the cloud environment with suitable 
1 INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing is an emerging distributed com-
puting paradigm that uses Service Oriented Archi-
tecture (SOA) for delivering on demand service 
over the network as per user’s requirement. With 
the advancement of this technology, the enterprise 
software application has become a predominant 
domain. Nowadays, the growing interest of enter-
prise towards cloud computing technology leads to 
the problem of delivering services to the users as 
per their quality requirements. An SOA application 
is composed of multiple services that communicate 
with each other via messages over a distributed 
Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) (Bhattacharya et al. 
2011) where various cloud publish their services in 
the ESB platform independently and the consum-
ers can discover their services according to their 
demand made at the initial stage of request publish 
in the Service Registry.
In the domain of SOA, Enterprise Service Bus 
(ESB) technology provides an abstraction layer on 
top of an implementation of an enterprise messag-
ing system, but still it is expected to have limitations 
like virtualization, resource pooling, scalability and 
it also increases overhead and slower the commu-
nication speed of many compatible cloud services. 
Therefore, with the increase in no of clouds and 
no of services in a cloud registration, discovery, 

364
verifications (Patel et al. 2013, Assuncao et al. 2012, 
Khan et al. 2014 Ghanbari et al. 2012). The main goal 
of service scheduling is to achieve a high performance 
computing and the best system throughput. In (Patel 
et al. 2013), the author proposes a systematic review 
of various priority based job scheduling that focus 
on priority of jobs and reduces service response time 
and improving performance etc. In (Assuncao et al. 
2012), the author discusses about the rationalizing 
the resource utilization in cloud computing environ-
ment that leads to significant improvement of quality 
of service. In (Khan et al. 2014), the author proposes 
a conceptual framework to address these challenges 
for citizens and public administrations of smart cit-
ies, identify the artifacts and stakeholders involved at 
both ends of the spectrum.
In (Ghanbari et al. 2012), the authors have 
proposed a new priority based job scheduling 
algorithm (PJSC) in cloud computing based on 
multiple criteria decision making model. (Shimpy 
et al. 2014) study different scheduling algorithms in 
different environments with their respective param-
eters. (Sharma et al. 2013) proposed an algorithm 
which is based on 3-tier cloud architecture which 
benefits both the user (QoS) and the service pro-
vider (Cost) through effective schedule reallocation 
based on utilization ratio leading to better resource 
utilization. In (Li et al. 2014) the authors have 
proposed Greedy-Based Algorithm in cloud com-
puting. (Paxar et al. 2012) proposes an algorithm 
which considered Preempt able task execution and 
multiple SLA parameters such as memory, network 
bandwidth, and required CPU time. In (Agawam 
et al. 2014) the author presented a Generalized 
Priority algorithm for efficient execution of task 
and comparison with FCFS and Round Robin 
Scheduling. For the scheduling model, a solving 
method based on multi-objective genetic algorithm 
(MO-GA) is designed in (Liu et al. 2013).
Recently several researches (Bhoi et al. 2013, 
Dubey et al. 2013, Sun et al. 2013, Jayadivya et al. 
2012) are based on scheduling of services in cloud 
environment. A unique modification of Improved 
Max-min task scheduling algorithm is proposed 
in (Bhoi et al. 2013). (Dubey et al. 2013) explores 
various methods of task scheduling done in cloud 
computing. (Sun et al. 2013) focuses on the task 
scheduling algorithms based on comprehensive 
QoS and constraint of expectation. In (Jayadivya 
et al. 2012) the authors introduce a strategy, QoS 
based Workflow Scheduling (QWS) to schedule 
many workflows based on user given QoS param-
eters like Deadline, Reliability, Cost etc.
Traditional service scheduling algorithms does 
not provide support in multi cloud architecture. 
Therefore, this paper proposes a new priority 
based service scheduling algorithm called PSS 
which schedule the services in ECB platform.
3 A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF ECB 
FRAMEWORK
Cloud Enterprise Service Bus (CESB) and Enter-
prise Cloud Bus (ECB) in (1Khan et al. 2015) are 
the abstraction layers of Software as Service (SaaS) 
architecture in cloud computing environment. CESB 
is the extension of ESB that enhance the ESB’s to 
register their services for single cloud environment. 
ECB is a hierarchical layer of SaaS architecture that 
extends the CESB’s to register their services from 
various locations through cloud agent for inter 
cloud environment and is shown in Figure 1.
The following subsections portray briefly the 
building blocks of the ECB system:
Service Consumer: Service Consumer is the 
end-users in cloud computing environment. Here, 
the consumer placed the request for service in 
Service Level Agreement (SLA) that is made 
between the consumer and the service provider. 
In the other hand, a provider agent is deployed 
in ECB to invoke the request from the customer 
and publish it in Cloud Universal Description 
Discovery and Integration (CUDDI), a meta-
service registry. During this process a timestamp 
is maintained to track time for several consumer 
registration requests made by the provider agent 
in CUDDI.
Figure 1. Enterprise Cloud Bus framework.

365
Service Provider: A Cloud Service Provider is 
the entity responsible for providing web services 
available to customer. A cloud agent is deployed for 
collecting various services from different cloud 
service providers based on various locations, 
context, etc. in SaaS platform and publishes the 
services in Hierarchical Universal Description 
Discovery and Integration (HUDDI), an extended 
meta-Service Registry of CESB’s in ECB.
Service Scheduler: A Scheduling Agent is 
deployed in ECB to configure, discover and sched-
ule the cloud services as per Quality of Service 
(QoS) parameters.
4 PROPOSED SERVICE SCHEDULING 
APPROACH IN ECB
4.1 Service scheduling framework in ECB
Figure 2 represents a service scheduling framework 
where Scheduler Agent schedules the discovered 
services [4Khan et al. 2015] before delivered it to 
the client. The Cloud Mapper of Figure 2 maps 
the set of discovered cloud services so that the cli-
ent receives the optimal cloud service. The opti-
mal cloud service is found based on some service 
criteria like availability, budget, facility, features. 
And subsequently the list of discovered services is 
scheduled.
4.2 Priority based Service Scheduling Algorithm 
in ECB: PSS
Scheduling an appropriate Web Service published 
in the HUDDI registry of ECB framework is a 
critical issue. Therefore, in this section an algo-
rithm for service scheduling is proposed based on 
AHP theory so that users can find the appropri-
ate service as they offered. In this algorithm we 
consider some service criteria like Budget, Facility 
and Features with respect to a set of discovered 
services for a particular client request. Initially, 
the matrix Δ for each nxn discovered services is 
calculated based on Eigen values. Secondly, using 
the Eigen values the priority matrix λ of all dxd 
criteria is evaluated. Finally, the Priority Value 
Scheduling is calculated by multiplying the matrix 
Δ and λ. It is observed that the higher the Eigen 
value of PVS equation (5) greater will be the serv-
ice priority value.
4.3 Mathematical representation of PSS
Let n be the number of criteria, and m be the 
number of services.
Figure 2. Service scheduling framework.

366
Let the Criteria PCM =
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
n
n
11
1 2
1
2 1
2 2
2
,
,
1
1
,
,
,
1
2
,
..
..
..
..
..
..
n
n n
c
c
,
,n
,
..
1
2
ncn,n
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
 
(1)
Corresponding Criteria EV (
)=
λ
λ
λ
λ
1
λ
2
λ
..
n
λ
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎥ 
(2)
Let the Service PCMs and their EVs
=
s
s
s
s
s
m
11
1
1 2
1
1
1
2 1
1
,
,
1
1
,
,
..
2 2
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
11
2
1
,
,
2
2
,
,
,
,
..
..
..
..
..
..
s
s
s
1
1
s
s
s
11
2
m
m
m
1,1
s
1
m m
,
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
2
2
1
2
2 1,
2
2 2,
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
s
s
s
2 1
2
s
s
s
1
2
s
m
m
m
m
,1
s
1
m m
,
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
n
ns
m
n
n
ns
m
n
m
11,
1 2,
1
2 1,
2 2,
2
1
n
m
n
m m
n
m
s
s
m
n
,
,
m
..
..
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ2
2
1
2
..
..
..
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
m
n
n
m
n
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
⎧
⎨
⎪
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎫
⎬
⎪
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎪
 
(3)
where cij is the input of set of criteria in equation 
(1), PCM is the Priority Comparison in equation 
(2) Matrix for all Criteria, and λ is the Eigen Vec-
tor in equation (3).
Then Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
Δ
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
n
n
m
m
Δ
m
n
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
 
(4)
PVS =
⋅
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎥
Δ λ
p
p
pm
1
2
..
 
(5)
Eigenvector (EV) calculation:
Let A =
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
n
n
n
n n
11
1 2
1
2 1
2 2
2
2
an
a
,
,
1
1
,
,
,
1
2
,
,
,n
,
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
 
(6)
Firstly, we compute B to be the square of A, then B
=
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
A2
11
1 2
1
2 1
2 2
2
2
b
b
11
1
1
b1
b
b
2 1
2
2
b2
b
b
1
b
n
n
n 1
b 1
n n
b
,
,
1
1
,
,
,
1
2
,
,
,n
1
,
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
 
(7)
Then we compute the row sums (S) =
s
s
sn
1
2
..
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎥ 
(8)
where, s
b
i
ib j
j
n
=∑
,
1
 Therefore, sum of the row-sums 
(T) = 
si
i
n
=∑
1
Normalized eigenvectors E =
e
e
en
1
2
.. ,
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎥ 
(9)
where ei
s
T
i
=
(ei and si is taken as general param-
eters for e1, e2... en, and s1, s2 …. sn). We now set 
B equation (7) to be the new A equation (6) for 
the next round and using the value of the equa-
tion (8) we calculate E equation (9). This process 
is repeated till there is negligible change between 
the E values from two successive rounds. When E 
becomes stable, it is assumed to be the eigenvector 
for the original A matrix.
5 CASE STUDY
In order to validate the proposed service schedul-
ing methodology in our proposed architecture, 
we establish our approach with the help of a case 
study of an airline reservation system.
Steps for service scheduling in airline reserva-
tion system:
• Input number of Criteria (Budget, Feature, and 
Facility and available service (Indigo, Spice Jet, 
Kingfisher, Emirates) for a request->3 (d), 4(n).
 Input criteria using pair wise priority matrix 
(dxd) and compute Eigen value for the entire d+ 
1 matrix.
• Form a matrix Δ equation (4) and λ using 
the Eigen values of priority matrix of all nxn 
service and dxd criteria and calculate the 
PVS value which helps to identify the service 
priority.
The following Figure 3 shows the snapshot for 
airline reservation system:

367
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper we have proposed a priority based service 
scheduling algorithm in ECB that helps in decreasing 
overhead and minimize service waiting time. Future 
work includes simulation of Service Scheduling proc-
ess for ECB architecture for verification and valida-
tion of the proposed system. In addition, improving 
the proposed algorithm in order to gain less response 
time will be a challenging domain to work in.
REFERENCES
Agarwal, Dr, & Saloni Jain. (2014). Efficient optimal 
algorithm of task scheduling in cloud computing envi-
ronment.” arXiv preprint, 1404–2076.
Assuncao, Marcos D., Marco Netto, Friedrich Koch, 
& Silvio Bianchi. (2012). Context-aware job schedul-
ing for cloud computing environments. In Utility and 
Cloud Computing (UCC), IEEE Fifth International 
Conference on, 255–262.
Bhattacharya Swapan, Chanda Jayeeta, Sengupta, Sab-
nam & Kanjilal Ananya, (2011). Dynamic Service 
Choreography using Context Aware Enterprise Serv-
ice Bus. In SEKE, 319–324.
Bhoi Upendra, & Purvi N. Ramanuj. (2013). Enhanced 
Max-min task scheduling algorithm in cloud comput-
ing. International Journal of Application or Innovation 
in Engineering and Management, 259–264.
Dubey Sonal, & Sanjay Agrawal. (2013). QoS Driven 
Task Scheduling in Cloud Computing. International 
Journal of Computer Applications Technology and 
Research 2, no. 5 595-meta.
Ghanbari Shamsollah, & Mohamed Othman. (2012). A 
priority based job scheduling algorithm in cloud com-
puting. Procedia Engineering 50, 778–785.
Jayadivya, S.K. & S. Mary Saira Bhanu. (2012). Qos 
based scheduling of workflows in cloud comput-
ing. International Journal of Computer Science and 
Electrical Engineering, 2315–4209.
Khan Zaheer, Saad Liaquat Kiani, & Kamran Soomro. 
(2014). A framework for cloud-based context-aware 
information services for citizens in smart cities. Jour-
nal of Cloud Computing 3, no. 1, 1–17.
1Khan 
Gitosree, 
Sengupta 
Sabnam, 
Sarkar 
Anirban, & Debnath C. Narayan. (2014). Mod-
eling of Inter-Cloud Architecture using UML 2.0: 
Multi-Agent Abstraction based Approach. In Proc. of 
23rd International Conference on Software Engineering 
and Data Engineering (SEDE), New Orleans, Louisi-
ana, USA, 149–154.
2Khan Gitosree, Sengupta Sabnam,  Sarkar Anirban, 
& Debnath C. Narayan. (2014). WSRM: A Rela-
tional Model for Web Service Discovery in Enterprise 
Cloud Bus (ECB). In proc of Int. Conference at NITK 
Surathkal, Mangalore, 117–122.
3Khan Gitosree, Sengupta Sabnam, Sarkar Anirban, & 
Debnath C. Narayan. (2015). Modeling of Services 
and their Collaboration in Enterprise Cloud Bus 
(ECB) using UML 2.0. In proc. Of 2015 International 
Conference on Advances in Computer Engineering and 
Applications (ICACEA), IMS Engineering College, 
Ghaziabad, India, 207–213.
4Khan Gitosree, Sengupta Sabnam, Sarkar Anirban, & 
Debnath C. Narayan. (2015). Web Service Discov-
ery in Enterprise Cloud Bus Framework: T Vector 
Based Model. In proc.of 13th IEEE International 
Conference on Industrial Informatics, Cambridge, UK, 
1672–1677.
5Khan Gitosree, Sengupta Sabnam, Sarkar Anirban, 
& Debnath C. Narayan. (2015). XML based Serv-
ice Registration System for Enterprise Cloud Bus. In 
proc. Of 3rd IEEE International Conference on Com-
puting, Management and Communications DaNang, 
Vietnam.
Li, Ji, Longhua Feng, & Shenglong Fang. (2014).An 
greedy-based job scheduling algorithm in cloud com-
puting. Journal of Software 9, no. 4, 921–925.
Liu, Jing, Xing-Guo Luo, Xing-Ming Zhang, Fan 
Zhang, & Bai-Nan Li. (2013). Job scheduling model 
for cloud computing based on multi-objective genetic 
algorithm. IJCSI International Journal of Computer 
Science Issues 10, no. 1, 134–139.
Patel, Swachil, S. Upendra Bhoi. (2013). Priority Based 
Job Scheduling Techniques In Cloud Computing: 
Figure 3. Service Scheduling in Airline Reservation 
System.
Criteria:

368
A Systematic Review. International journal of 
scientific & technology research, 147–152.
Pawar, Chandrashekhar S. & Rajnikant B. Wagh.
(2012). Priority based dynamic resource allocation in 
cloud computing. In Cloud and Services Computing 
(ISCOS), 2012 International Symposium on, 1–6.
Sharma, Ram Kumar, & Nagesh Sharma. (2013). A 
Dynamic Optimization Algorithm for Task Schedul-
ing in Cloud Computing With Resource Utilization. 
International Journal of Scientific Engineering and 
Technology, Volume 2, 1062–1068.
Shimpy, Er, & Mr Jagandeep Sidhu. (2014). Differ-
ent Scheduling Algorithms In Different Cloud 
Environment.
Sun, Hong, Shi-ping Chen, Chen Jin, & Kai Guo. 2013). 
Research and simulation of task scheduling algorithm 
in cloud computing. TELKOMNIKA Indonesian Jour-
nal of Electrical Engineering 11, no. 11, 6664–6672.

369
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Real-time vehicle safety monitoring and recording system using 
microcontroller Atmega16 and ultrasonic sensor
S.S. Thakur
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, MCKV Institute of Engineering, Liluah, 
Howrah, Kolkata, India
J.K. Sing
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: The anti-collision system is proposed here in order to avoid vehicular head to head/back 
collision that estimates the distance between the two vehicles running under extreme traffic conditions. It 
incorporates distance finding between two vehicles using an ultrasonic range finder. The vehicle collision 
and its impact emerged as a major problem in the last two decades when the use of automobiles increased 
significantly. In order to avoid vehicle collision/road accidents, this system will work in two stages: a range 
finder will continuously track the distance between two vehicles moving and sends it to the display using 
these inputs; if it finds the vehicle in the vicinity of the other, it will automatically display the LED/lamp 
and put the sound buzzer on. This system is reliable, cost-efficient, and fault tolerable. These characteris-
tics enable the vehicle anti-collision system to be effectively used in local traffic environment.
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), there 
were 5,811,000 vehicle crashes reported in 2008 by 
police across US; 37,261 people were killed and 
2,346,000 people were injured [1]. Road safety has 
been considered important the world over the past 
few years. If vehicle drivers were provided with 
early warnings, a large number of crashes could 
have been avoided. Only the drivers’ observation 
and reaction may not be sufficient to avoid acci-
dents. Thus, if a device for observation is designed 
and incorporated into the cars it will reduce the 
incidence of accidents on our roads and various 
premises. A lot of research has been conducted to 
develop collision warning systems to aid driving. 
Therefore, several initiatives, such as Coopera-
tive Intersection Collision Avoidance systems and 
integrated vehicle based safety systems, have been 
proposed in USDOT’s intelligent transportation 
system program. As a collision avoidance system 
[2, 3, 4], an automatic braking system that oper-
ates under critical conditions would be ideal. Prac-
tically, it is impossible to develop such a braking 
system which operates only in extreme emergen-
cies [3, 4]. In the 1970s, a number of systems used 
microwave radars to avoid collisions [5, 6]. But 
such radar systems are not practical due to large 
antenna size, high cost, and difficulties in getting 
approval with regard to the Radio Law in Japan. 
Ultrasonic sensors are used for distance measure-
ment between the cars. Communicating systems 
1 INTRODUCTION
Among all the greatest achievements of the his-
tory, the invention of automobiles is most prob-
ably the one that significantly changed human life. 
The periodic improvement in technology gives 
the human race a new height. In the later years 
after independence, the number of vehicles sub-
sequently increased. But in the last two decades 
it spread drastically in every level of the society; 
hence, safety becomes the main concern. Road 
accidents pose a severe threat to lives in both ways 
physical as well as financial, even after digital con-
trol of vehicles. However, due to human avoid-
ance, circumstantial error, and negligible accidents 
occur. A large number of vehicle accidents occur 
each year. Road accidents account pose a severe 
threat to human lives from both an injurious as 
well as a financial perspective. Given that vehicles 
are designed to facilitate a smooth means of trans-
portation, manufacturers have long been in the 
process of designing vehicles based on principles 
of reliability and safety. Today, special attention is 
focused on the technologies that can reduce traf-
fic accidents [1]. Many people lose their lives every 
year in vehicle collisions due to the driver’s inabil-
ity to keenly observe the vehicles’ vicinity while 
driving [2].
Safety is a necessary part of man’s life. Accord-
ing to the statistics provided by National Highway 

370
use well-defined formats for exchanging messages. 
Such a system should have the capability of sup-
porting real-time systems that can warn drivers. 
Thus, ultrasonic sensors are used with a transmit-
ter and transmit messages to LCD outputs on the 
drivers’ side.
Services provided by the Intelligent Transpor-
tation System (ITS), including collision warning; 
collision avoidance; and automatic control, are 
eventually expected to result in a reduction of 
critical traffic accidents. The data are provided by 
sensors, information systems, and analyzer devices 
located inside the vehicles. Low-cost vehicular 
enhancements are an impediment for large scale 
deployment. What is desired is a simple in-serv-
ice upgradeable method for avoiding collisions 
amongst moving vehicles. Vehicular communica-
tion (V2V) resulting from ad hoc and peer-to-peer 
networking has recently gathered significant atten-
tion [7, 8, 9] as both a communication technology 
as well as for providing possible collision avoidance. 
V2V technologies are also expected to augment the 
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) services. 
V2V technologies are simple to implement prima-
rily because of their reliance on wireless communi-
cation. A wireless location aware ad hoc network 
of mobile nodes (vehicles) facilitates a framework 
for collision avoidance. Creating a wireless ad hoc 
location aware communicating [10, 11, 13] infra-
structure involves several components—location 
awareness, real-time communication, mapping 
of mobile entities, and taking appropriate action 
upon detection of collision courses.
2 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The earliest research into inter-vehicular commu-
nications was conducted by JSK (Association of 
Electronic Technology for Automobile Traffic and 
Driving) of Japan in the early 1980s (Tsugawa, 
2005). This work treated inter-vehicular communi-
cations primarily as traffic and driver information 
systems incorporated in ATMS (Asynchronous 
Transfer Mode). From the 1990s through 2000, 
American PATH (Hedrick et al., 1994) and Euro-
pean “Chaffeur” (Gehring et al., 1997) projects 
investigated and deployed automated platooning 
systems through the transmission of data among 
vehicles. Recently, the promises of wireless com-
munications to support vehicular safety applica-
tions have led to several national/international 
projects around the world. Since 2000, many Euro-
pean projects (CarTALK2000, FleetNet, etc.), 
supported by automobile manufacturers, private 
companies, and research institutes, have been pro-
posed a common goal to create a communication 
platform for inter-vehicle communication [5, 10, 11, 
12, 14]. The IST European Project CarTALK2000 
focused on new driver assistance systems which are 
based upon inter-vehicle communication. The main 
objectives were the development of co-operative 
driver assistance systems and the development of 
a self-organizing ad-hoc radio network as a com-
munication basis with the aim of preparing a future 
standard. The FleetNet project in Germany (Fleet-
Net project—Internet on the road, supported by 
six manufacturers and three universities from the 
2000 through 2003) produced important results in 
several research areas, including the experimental 
characterization of VANETs, the proposal of novel 
network protocols (MAC, routing), and the explo-
ration of different wireless technologies.
Recently some research was carried out on the 
anti-collision device using an ad hoc wireless net-
work, V2V communication [15, 16] GPS, and Radar 
implementation. However, all these efforts were 
informatory in nature which only give signals to the 
driver or produce some buzzing sound, but finally 
the action will be taken by the driver in which there 
are chances of the collision [17, 18]. This work is 
originally motivated from the local traffic condition 
of Howrah specially where slow moving traffic on 
roads often leads to minor or major accidents. We 
have developed a system which will provide the driv-
ers a safe warning. The paper is organized as follows. 
The block diagram of the complete system is given 
in Section 3. Section 4 deals with the details of hard-
ware developed. Software development is explained 
in detail in Section 5. Section 6 explains the results 
obtained from the developed system. Conclusion 
and future work is mentioned in Section 7.
3 BLOCK DIAGRAM
The block diagram of the developed system is given in 
Figure 1. A micro controller (ATMEGA 16) receives 
echo signals from the ultrasonic range finding sen-
sor. Ultrasonic sensors continuously read distances 
between two vehicles and the output is displayed on 
Figure 1. Block Diagram of the complete system.

371
the dashboard of the vehicle. If the distance reduces 
to a certain level, the data is recorded and displayed. 
The developed Circuit is interfaced with a PC/Lap-
top with the help of USB to serial cable. The power 
measuring unit measures the power from the main 
line. This data is fed to the microcontroller. The pro-
gram is written on an embedded C using a coder and 
debugger AVR studio 4 and compiling is done.
4 HARDWARE DEVELOPMENT
The following is the list of the components used in 
the proposed model:
 ATmega16
 MAX232
 Power supply units
 Ultrasonic Sensor
 LCD Display
4.1 Atmega16
It is a microcontroller from Atmel which is pow-
ered by the AVR core. It is an 8-bit, low powered 
microcontroller with 16-kilobyte built in self-
programmable flash. This core is capable of run-
ning 16 MIPS with a 16-MHz crystal. It has an 
advanced RISC architecture with 32 X 8 general 
purpose working registers. The microcontroller 
features programmable serial USART and master/
slave SPI serial interface. It has 32 programmable 
I/O lines and a 40-pin PDIP. It is capable of execut-
ing one instruction per cycle.
The AVR core combines a rich instruction set with 
32 general purpose working registers. All the 32 reg-
isters are directly connected to the Arithmetic Logic 
Unit (ALU), allowing two independent registers to 
be accessed in one single instruction executed in one 
clock cycle. The resulting architecture is more code 
efficient while achieving throughputs upto ten times 
faster than the conventional CISC microcontrollers.
The ATmega16 provides the following features:
16-K bytes of In-System Programmable Flash 
Program memory with Read-While-Write capabili-
ties, 512 bytes EEPROM, 1 K byte SRAM, 32 gen-
eral purpose I/O lines, 32 general purpose working 
registers, JTAG interface for boundary scan, on-
chip programming and debugging support, three 
flexible timer/counters with compare modes, inter-
nal and external interrupts, a serial programmable 
USART, a byte oriented a two-wire serial interface, 
an 8-channel 10-bit ADC with optional differential 
input stage with programmable gain (TQFP pack-
age only), a programmable Watchdog timer with 
internal oscillator, an SPI serial port, and six soft-
ware selectable power savings modes.
The idle mode stops the CPU while allowing 
the USART, a two-wire interface, A/D converter, 
SRAM, timer/counters, SPI port, and interrupt 
system to continue functioning. The power-down 
mode saves the register contents but freezes the 
Oscillator, disabling all other chip functions until 
the next external Interrupt or hardware resets. 
In the power-save mode, the asynchronous timer 
continues to run, allowing the user to a time base 
while the rest of the device is sleeping. The ADC 
noise reduction mode stops the CPU and all I/O 
modules except an asynchronous timer and ADC 
to minimize the switching noise during ADC con-
versions. In standby mode, the crystal/resonator 
oscillator is running while the rest of the device 
is sleeping. This allows a rapid start-up combined 
with less power consumption. In the extended 
standby mode, both the main oscillator and the 
asynchronous timer continue to run.
4.2 MAX232
This is the level converter IC from MAXIM which 
is used to create logic compatibility between 
TTL and RS232 logic. The IC converts the 5-V 
logic into an 8-V negative logic. This converter is 
located between the almega16 microcontroller and 
the zigbee module. The microcontroller uses TTL 
logic whereas the zigbee module uses RS logic. The 
main purpose of this converter is to convert the 
TTL logic to RS logic.
4.3 Power supply unit
This unit is basically designed to power up node 
1 and node 2. This provides 5 V a 500-mA output 
to drive the nodes. Here, the AC voltage at 220 V 
is stepped down to 20 V using a 220/20-V step-
down transformer. This AC voltage at 20 V is fed 
to the rectifier that converts it to DC voltage and 
is then filtered using a 40-Farad shunt capacitor. 
The filtered DC voltage is then regulated using a 
7805-regulator, and is then supplied to the micro-
controller at 5 V, 500 mA.
4.4 Ultrasonic sensor
The HC-SR04 ultrasonic sensor uses sonar to 
determine the distance from an object like bats or 
dolphins do. It offers excellent noncontact range 
detection with high accuracy and stable readings 
in an easy-to-use package. From 2 cm to 400 cm 
or 1” to 13 feet. Its operation is not affected by 
sunlight or black material like Sharp rangefind-
ers are (although acoustically soft materials like 
cloth can be difficult to detect). It comes complete 
with ultrasonic transmitter and receiver module as 
shown in Figure 2.
To start the measurement, the Trig of SR04 must 
receive a high pulse (5 V) for at least 10 us. This will 

372
initiate the sensor and transmit 8 cycles of ultra-
sonic bursts at 40 kHz and wait for the reflected 
ultrasonic burst. When the sensor detects an ultra-
sonic burst from the receiver, it will set the echo pin 
to high (5 V) and delay for a period (width) pro-
portionate to the distance. To obtain the distance, 
measure the width (Ton) of the Echo pin.
4.5 LCD display
This is the most widely used display device for 
embedded systems. The LCD unit receives char-
acter codes (8 bits per character) from a micro-
processor or microcomputer, latches the codes 
to its display data RAM (80-byte DD RAM for 
storing 80 characters), transforms each character 
code into a 5′ 7 dot-matrix character pattern, and 
displays the characters on its LCD screen.
5 SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
Embedded C is asset of language extensions for 
the C programming language by the C standards 
committee to address the commonality issues that 
exist between C extensions for different embedded 
systems. Historically, embedded C programming 
requires nonstandard extensions to the C language 
in order to support exotic features such as fixed-
point arithmetic, multiple distinct memory banks, 
and basic I/O operations. In 2008, the C standards 
committee extended the C language to address 
these issues by providing a common standard for 
all implementations to adhere to. It includes a 
number of features not available to normal C, such 
as fixed-point arithmetic, named address space, 
and basic I/O hardware addressing. Embedded C 
uses most of the syntax and semantics of standard 
C, e.g., main () function, variable definition, data-
type declaration, conditional statement (if, switch, 
case), loops (while, for), functions, arrays and 
strings, structures and union, bit operations, mac-
ros, unions etc. A technical report was published 
in 2004 and a second revision in 2006. Embedded 
systems programming is different from developing 
applications on a desktop computer. Key charac-
teristics of an embedded system as compared to 
PC are as follows:
• Embedded devices have resource constraints 
(limited ROM, RAM, stack space, and less 
processing power).
• Components used in embedded systems and 
PCs are different: embedded systems typically 
use smaller, less power-consuming compo-
nents. Embedded systems are more tied to the 
hardware.
• Two salient features of embedded program-
ming are core speed and code size. Code speed 
is governed by the processing power and timing 
constraints, whereas code size is governed by the 
available program memory and use of program-
ming language. The goal of embedded system 
programming is to get maximum features, using 
minimum space and time.
The front end of the vehicle safety and moni-
toring system is developed using Microsoft Visual 
C++ (often abbreviated as MSVC or VC++), a com-
mercial (free version available), Integrated Devel-
opment Environment (IDE) product for Microsoft 
for the C, C++, and C++/CLI programming lan-
guages. It features tools for developing and debug-
ging the C++ code, especially the code written for 
Microsoft Windows API, the DirectX API, and 
the Microsft.NET framework.
Many applications require redistributable Visual 
C++ packages to function correctly. These pack-
ages are often installed independent of applications, 
allowing multiple applications to make use of the 
package while only having to install it once. The 
predecessor to Visual C++ was called Microsoft C/
C++. Visual C++ ships with different versions of C 
runtime libraries. This means users can compile their 
code with any of the available libraries. However, 
this can cause some problems when using different 
components (DLLs, EXEs) in the same program. 
Microsoft recommends using the multithreaded, 
dynamic link library to avoid possible problems.
Although the product originated as an IDE for 
the C programming language, the compilers’ sup-
port for that language conforms only to the origi-
nal edition of the C standard from 1989. The later 
revisions of the standard c99 and C11 are not sup-
ported. According to Herb Sutter, the C compiler 
is only included for “historical reasons” and is not 
planned to be further developed. Users are advised 
to either use only the subset of C language that is 
also valid C++, and then use the C++ compiler to 
compile their code, or to just use a different com-
piler, such as Intel C++ Compiler or the GNU 
Compiler collection, instead.
Figure 2. Ultrasonic Sensor—Transmitter and Receiver 
Module.

373
5.1 Coding/debugging
Coding/debugging in a high-level language (such 
as C or Java) or assembler. A compiler for a high 
level language helps to reduce production time. 
To program the microcontrollers, the WinAVR 
was used. Although inline assembly was possible, 
the programming was done strictly in the C lan-
guage. The source code has been commented to 
facilitate any occasional future improvement and 
maintenance. Test Source Code has been written 
in the C Language to test the microcontroller.
5.2 Compiling
The compilation of the C program converts it into 
machine language file (.hex). This is the only lan-
guage the microcontroller will understand because it 
contains the original program code converted into a 
hexadecimal format. During this step there were some 
warnings about eventual errors in the program.
5.3 Burning
Machine language (hex) files of compile programs 
burned into the microcontroller’s program memory 
is achieved with a dedicated programmer, which 
attaches to a PC’s peripheral. A PC’s serial port 
has been used for the purpose. Its purpose is read-
ing and writing every serial device. It supports I2C 
Bus, Micro wire, SPI eeprom, and the Atmel AVR 
and Microchip PIC microcontroller. The micro-
controllers were programmed in approximately 
two seconds with a high speed-programming mode. 
The program memory, which is of Flash type, has, 
just like the EEPROM, a limited lifespan. The 
Atmega16 Programmer (ISP) is used to burn the 
program into AVR microcontrollers.
5.4 Central processor
Every vehicle is equipped with a central proces-
sor. Its function is to extract information from the 
data received (on the information frequency) and 
then execute the protocol described in the next sec-
tion. Based on the protocol, the central processor 
computes a collision course and then undertakes a 
recourse action that results in collision avoidance. 
Recourse is done by sending signals to either the 
subsystems of a vehicle (automatic recourse) or to 
the driver enabling collision avoidance.
6 RESULT ANALYSIS
The module was successfully developed and tested 
in the roads with actual traffic conditions. The 
ultrasonic was able to measure the data up to 
1300 cms distance. The results are accurate with a 
minor tolerance value.
As shown in Figure 3, it can be noted that the 
data was recorded from Bally to Salkia at 9.15 am, 
and the speed of the vehicle at that moment of 
time was 20–40 km/hour and the recording was 
done for 21 minutes, in which 63 data points were 
recorded. The result shows that 27 times the other 
vehicles following the vehicle (in which developed 
system is installed) entered the danger zone, i.e., 
an unacceptable limit; 21 times it was in the tol-
erable zone; and 15 times it was in the allowable 
zone.
As shown in Figure 4, it can be noted that the 
data was recorded from Salkia to Bally at 1.30 pm, 
and the speed of the vehicle at that moment of time 
was 20–25 km/hour. The recording was done for 
35 minutes, in which 63 data points were recorded. 
The result shows that 34 times the other vehicles 
following the vehicle (in which developed system 
is installed) entered the danger zone, i.e., unaccept-
able limit, 18 times it was in the tolerable zone, and 
11 times it was in the allowable zone.
As shown in Figure 5, it can be noted that the 
data was recorded from Bally to Salkia at 6.30 pm 
and the speed of the vehicle at that moment of 
time was 20–30 km/hour. The recording was 
done for 27 minutes, in which 63 data points were 
recorded. The result shows that 31 times the other 
vehicles following the vehicle (in which developed 
Figure 3. Plot of recorded data at 9.15 am.
Figure 4. Plot of recorded data at 1.30 pm.

374
system is installed) entered the danger zone, i.e., 
unacceptable limit, 19 times it was in the tolerable 
zone, and 13 times it was in the allowable zone.
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE
In this paper we have proposed and analyzed the 
effectiveness of an active vehicle anti-collision sys-
tem, in which the ultrasonic range finder helps to 
find the gap between two vehicles. Based on the 
distance, the lamp in the system glows either red, 
yellow, or green which alerts the driver following 
the said vehicle as it is working as a signaling sys-
tem. From the above results, it can be concluded 
that during rush hours, i.e., between afternoon 
1.30 pm and 6.30 pm mostly the other vehicles 
following the vehicle (in which the developed sys-
tem is installed) are entering the danger zone and 
hence gives an indication or high possibility that 
accidents may takes place. In case of accidents, it 
is possible to see recorded images captured by the 
camera as stored in the developed database which 
helps to find which vehicle is at fault. In future, 
we are developing this system with GPS to log the 
position of collided vehicles to help transmit the 
location of the accident to the emergency helpline.
REFERENCES
 [1] U.S. Dept. of Transportation “Advanced Vehicle 
Collision Safety Systems,” Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems, 2005.
 [2] A. Gamester, R. Singhai and A. Sahoo, IntelliCarTS: 
Intelligent Car Transportation System,” Proc. IEEE 
LANMAN, June 2007.
 [3] Kiyoshi Minami, Tohru Yasuma, Shigeru Okaba-
yashi, Masao Sakata and Itsuro Muramoto, Tadao 
Kohzu, “A collision—avoidance warning system 
using Laser Radar”, SAE international paper,19.
 [4] Huang Zhu, Gurdip Singh, “A Communication 
Protocol for a Vehicle Collision Warning System”, 
2010 IEEE International Conference on Green 
Computing and Communications & 2010 IEEE 
International Conference on Cyber, Physical and 
Social Computing, 2010.
 [5] Nobuyoshi Mutoh, Yusuke Sasaki, “A Driver 
Assisting System for Eco-Vehicles with Motor Drive 
Systems Which Avoids Collision with Running 
Vehicles by Using Inter-Vehicle Communications”, 
proceedings of the 2007 IEEE Intelligent Transpor-
tation Systems Conference Seattle, WA, USA, Sept. 
30–Oct. 3, 2007.
 [6] A. Gumaste and A. Sahoo, “VehACol: Vehicular 
Anti-Collision Mechanism,” Technical Report, ITB/
KReSIT/2006/April/2, April 2006.
 [7] Dr. A.G. Keskar, S.S. Dorle, et.al, “Design of Proto-
col for Intersection Collision Detection & Warning 
In Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)”, Proc. 
IEEE ICETET, July 2008.
 [8] P. Bahl and V.N. Padmanabhan, “RADAR: An in-
building RF-based user location and tracking sys-
tem,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, March 2000.
 [9] Y. Morioka,T Sota, M.Nakagawa,” Anti-car colli-
sion system using DGSP and 5.8 GHz Inter-Vehicle 
Communication at an off-sight Intersection ” Tech-
nical report of IEICE ITS 2000-4, 2000, pp. 19–24.
 [10] X. Yang et al., “A Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communica-
tion Protocol for Cooperative Collision Warning,” 
Proc. 1st Annual Int’l. Conf. Mobile and Ubiqui-
tous Syst: Networking and Services, 2004.
 [11] S. Biswas et. al.“Vehicle-to-Vehicle Wireless Com-
munication Protocols for Enhancing Highway Traf-
fic Safety,” IEEE Commun Mag Vol. 22 No. 1 Jan 
2006.
 [12] Yusuke Takatori, Hiroyuki Yashima,” A study of 
driving assistance system based on a fusion network 
of inter-vehicle communication and in-vehicle exter-
nal sensors”, 14th International IEEE Conference 
on Intelligent Transportation Systems Washington, 
DC, USA. October 5–7, 2011.
 [13] Benliang Li, Houjun Wang Bin Yan and Chijun Zhang, 
“The Research of Applying Wireless Sensor Network 
to intelligent Transportation System Based on IEEE 
802.15.4”, 6th international Conference on ITS Tel-
ecommunication proceeding, 2006, pp. 939–942.
 [14] Mimoza Durresi, Arjan Durresi and Leonard 
Barolli,“Sensor Inter-vehicle Communication for 
Safer Highways”, in proceedings of the 19th Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Information Net-
working and Applications, AINA 2005.
 [15] Samer Ammoun, Fawzi Nashashibi, Claude Lau-
rgeau “Real-time crash avoidance system on cross-
roads based on 802.11 devices and GPS receivers”, 
in proceedings of the IEEE ITSC 2006, IEEE Intel-
ligent Transportation Systems Conference Toronto, 
Canada, September 2006.
 [16] X. Yang, J. Liu, F. Zhao and N.H. Vaidya, “A Vehi-
cle-to-Vehicle Communication Protocol for Coop-
erative Collision Warning,” Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Systems: Networking and Services, pages 114–123, 
August 2004.
 [17] Qiang Ji, Zhiwei Zhu, and Peilin Lan, Real-Time 
Nonintrusive Monitoring and Prediction of Driver 
Fatigue. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technol-
ogy, Vol. 53, No. 4, July 2004, pp. 1052–1068.
 [18] Zutao Zhang, Jiashu Zhang, “A Novel Vehicle 
Safety Model: Vehicle speed Controller under 
Driver Fatigue”, “IJCSNS International Journal of 
Computer Science and Network Security”, Vol. 9 
No. 1, January 2009.
Figure 5. Plot of recorded data at 6.30 pm.

375
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Innovative structures for Stepped Impedance Resonator 
filters for wireless applications
Amit K. Varshney, Sumit K. Varshney, R.K. Saw, S.K. Shaw & T. Biswas
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Two innovative techniques for achieving miniaturization and wide band in the design 
of Inward Folded Stepped Impedance Resonator band-pass filter are proposed. The filter is designed 
at a center frequency of 2.4 GHz. A bandwidth enhancement of 570 MHz around the center frequency 
2.4 GHz is achieved by introducing interdigital capacitors between the two resonators and etching slots in 
the ground plane compared to that obtained without using IDCs and etched slots for the given inter-res-
onator spacing. A new method of achieving miniaturization is proposed where two resonators are placed 
one below the other on either side of the ground plane and the coupling between the two resonators is 
achieved by etching slots in the ground plane. A size reduction by almost half in the transverse plane and 
the bandwidth enhancement of 280 MHz around the center frequency 2.4 GHz is achieved with this new 
technique compared to that obtained when the two resonators are placed side by side without using Inter-
Digital Capacitors (IDCs) and etched slots.
less than 180 degrees with an optimum impedance 
ratio of 0.54665. The filter is realized on a dielec-
tric substrate of height 0.795 mm and permittivity 
2.2, the etching of the slot in the ground plane just 
below the BPF improves the bandwidth as mag-
netic coupling is increased. The use of slots in the 
ground plane of a conventional edge coupled filter 
in enhancing the bandwidth has also been demon-
strated (Medina et al. 2004). The cutting slot in the 
ground plane enhances magnetic coupling thereby 
enhancing the bandwidth. Square open loop reso-
nators have been proposed that help in making the 
band-pass filter compact in size (Jiang et al. 2007). 
Several others have proposed various methods to 
miniaturize the filter and/or improve bandwidth 
(Cohn et al. 1958, Makimoto et al. 1980, Castillo 
et al. 2004, Ming et al. 2008).
The authors in this paper have presented two 
innovative structures for achieving miniaturization 
and broadband to some extent.
2 SIR FORMULATION
The basic structure of a Stepped Impedance Reso-
nator (SIR) filter is shown in Fig. 1(a). The most 
important parameter of SIR is Rz, the impedance 
ratio, expressed as (Lancaster et al. 1958)
R
Z
Z
Z
R
=
2
Z
1
Z  
(1)
1 INTRODUCTION
Designing broadband band-pass filters using micro-
strip filters is a challenging task because any filter 
designed using microstrip lines tends to be narrow 
band. Band-pass filters are generally used in the 
receiver’s front end. When filters are used for wire-
less applications, achieving miniaturization becomes 
a challenging task because achieving miniaturization 
and broadband simultaneously is a difficult task. If 
conventional structures of designing filters are used, 
such as hairpin-like filters (Frankel 1971), end cou-
pled filters, edge coupled filters etc., then for enhanc-
ing the bandwidth we have to increase the number of 
resonators, and miniaturization is jeopardized. So it 
is necessary to go for non- conventional techniques 
where the structures are optimized in full-wave sim-
ulation software and various miniaturization tech-
niques are used. However, initial design formulation 
is required to start with.
Techniques for achieving miniaturization and 
broadband characteristics have been explored in 
the past. A band-pass filter based on internally cou-
pled λg/2 stepped impedance resonator has been 
proposed (Varshney, et al. 2009). New methods of 
extracting the coupling coefficient has been intro-
duced that is found suitable for these resonators. 
The impedance bandwidth obtained is 280 MHz 
with an overall dimension of 17 mm by 10.2 mm. 
A modified SIR-based band-pass filter has been 
proposed (Varshney et al. 2010) with slots in the 
ground plane. The total electrical length is kept 

376
Resonance conditions demand
RZ
R
= tanθ
θ
tan
1
2
θ
θ
θ
θ
tan
 
(2)
The normalized length Ln can be written as
Ln
L =
(
)
2
π
+
 
(3)
L
R
n
L
Z
R
=
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
−
2
1
1
1
π θ1
θ1
tan
tan
 
(4)
It can be shown that (Fig. 1(c)) Ln attains mini-
mum values for different values of RZ only when 
RZ<1 and maximum value when RZ>1 and the con-
dition for yielding the minimum resonator length 
for a constant RZ is given as
θ
θ
θ
1
2
θ
θ
θ
θ =
θ2
θ
o
θ  
(5)
RZ
o
R
=
=
tan
tan
θ
θ
tan
θo
2
 
(6)
θo
Z
θ
RZ
=
−
tan 1
 
(7)
To further miniaturize the structure, capacitive 
coupling can be enhanced to reduce inductance 
introduced by the length of the microstrip lines 
(Fig. 1(b)).
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Considering the optimum value of Impedance 
Ratio RZ  = 0.5, we obtain
θ
θ
o
Z
θ
o
θ =
θ
,
Z
.
1
35 26°.
As per the band-pass filter design specifications, 
the electrical parameters of the microstrip realiza-
tion obtained using the above relations are given 
below using the following specifications of the 
substrate:
Type: Dielectric; Material: FR4_epoxy
Thickness: 0.795 mm
Rz = Zp/Zs = 0.5, Zs = 100 Ω, Zp = 50 Ω
Using the synthesis expression for the micros-
trip realization [Pozar 2007], we obtain the physical 
parameters as
lP = 6.74152 mm, WP = 1.49621 mm, 
lS = 7.11816 mm
WS = 0.32563 mm, where lp is the physical length 
of the strip of electrical length θp and physical 
width Wp, and ls is the physical length of the strip 
of electrical length θs and physical width Ws.
The dimensions are further optimized (Fig. 2) 
in full wave electromagnetic software and suit-
able results are obtained (Fig. 3). It is found that a 
wider bandwidth is obtained if two resonators are 
antiparallel.
However due to restriction in the fabrication, 
the distance between the two resonators cannot be 
reduced much. In order to relax the spacing, the cou-
pling length between the two resonators is increased. 
Figure 1. (a) Basic SIR and its parameters (b) An (inter-
nally coupled) inward folded SIR with all its parameters 
(c) Diagram illustrating the change of normalized length 
Ln of SIR with θ1 for different values of Rz.
Figure 2. The layout of the designed SIR filter consists 
of two internally coupled SIR resonators anti-parallel to 
each other. All dimensions shown are in mm. Input and 
output ports are designed to provide 50 Ω impedance.

377
slots in the ground plane further enhance the band-
width. The dimension of the IDC between the two 
resonators and the slot in the ground plane beneath 
the IDC are optimized for the center frequency and 
bandwidth (Fig. 4). The results have clearly shown 
the improvement of bandwidth by 570 MHz (Fig. 5) 
Figure 3. S11 and S21 parameters of the proposed 
structure whose layout is shown in Fig. 4(a) and 4(b).
Figure 4. (a) The layout of the proposed innovative 
structure showing the introduction of IDC between reso-
nators with etched slots in the ground plane. Etched slots 
in the ground plane is at the center of the entire micros-
trip structure with dimensions of 12.84 mm by 2.35 mm. 
All dimensions are in mm, (b) 3D view of the proposed 
structure shown in (a).
Figure 5. S11 and S21 parameters of the proposed 
innovative structure shown in Fig. 6(a) showing enhance-
ment of the bandwidth by about 570 MHz.
Figure 6. (a) Layout of another proposed innovative 
structure in which the two resonators are placed one 
below the other with the ground plane in between and an 
etched slot in the ground plane, (b) 3D views of (a). The 
dimension of the etched slot is 19.0 mm by 0.26 mm. All 
dimensions are in mm.
There are several techniques to do so. One such 
technique is to use Interdigital Capacitors (IDC); by 
doing so, the effective length available for coupling 
increases which increases the bandwidth. Etching 

378
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are thankful to B.N. Basu and B.N. 
Biswas for encouraging us to carry out the work.
REFERENCES
Castillo Maria del, et al., “Parallel Coupled Microstrip 
Filters With Ground-Plane Aperture for Spurious 
Band Suppression and Enhanced Coupling”, IEEE 
transactions on microwave theory and techniques, vol. 
52, no. 3, march 2004, pp. 1082–1086.
Cohn S.B., “Parallel-coupled Transmission Line Reso-
nator Filters”, IRE Trans. MTTS, vol. MTT-6, April 
1958, pp. 223–231
Cristal E.G. and Frankel S., “Design of hairpin-line and 
hybrid hairpin parallel coupled line filters”, IEEE-
MTTS Digest, pp. 12–13, 1971.
Hong Jia-Sheng and Lancaster M.J., “Microstrip filters 
for RF/Microwave Applications”, John Wiley and 
Sons, Inc.
Jiang Xin-Hua, et al., “Compact designs of a Band Pass 
Filter With Novel Open-Loop Resonators”, Micro-
wave and Optical Technology Letters, vol. 49, No. 11, 
November 2007, pp. 2755–2757.
Makimoto Mitsuo, et al., “Bandpass Filters Using Par-
allel Coupled Stripline Stepped Impedance Resona-
tors”, IEEE transactions on microwave theory and 
techniques, vol. Mit-28, no. 12, December 1980, pp. 
1413–1417
Medina Francisco, et al., “Parallel Coupled Microstrip 
Filters With Ground-Plane Aperture for Spurious 
Band Suppression and Enhanced Coupling”, IEEE 
transactions on microwave theory and techniques, vol. 
52, no. 3, march 2004, pp. 1082–1086.
Pozar David M., Microwave Engineering, John Wiley 
and Sons, 2007, pp. 144–145.
Varshney Amit Kumar, Das Chirantan, Mukherjee 
Paramita, Chakrabarty Joydeep, and Ghatak Row-
dra, “miniaturization wide band stepped impedence 
resonator filter for wireless application national con-
ference on computing and communication system, 
CoCoSys-09, Jan 2009 organized by the University 
Institute of Technology, The University of Burdwan, 
pp. 38–40.
Varshney Amit Kumar, Manimala Pal, Chakravorty J 
and Ghatak Rowdra, “A Wideband Stepped Imped-
ance Resonator Band Pass Filter With Ground Slots 
For Dcs And Ieee 802.11b Application”, ICRPA 2010 
organized by Department of Physics, Burdwan-713104, 
India, 16th and 17th January, 2010, pp. 63–65.
Yu Ming, et al., “Adjustable Bandwidth Filter Design 
Based on Interdigital Capacitors”, IEEE microwave 
and wireless components letters, vol. 18, no. 1, Janu-
ary 2008, pp. 16–18.
Figure 7. S11 and S22 parameters of the proposed 
structure shown in Fig. 6(a) and 8(b).
compared to the structure where neither IDC is 
included nor slots are etched in the ground plane 
(Fig. 3).
In order to further miniaturize the dimension, 
the two resonators are placed one below the other 
instead of placing side by side (Fig. 6). The coupling 
is achieved through slots in the ground plane. A size 
reduction by almost half in the transverse plane and 
the bandwidth enhancement of 280 MHz around 
the center frequency 2.4 GHz is achieved (Fig. 7) 
with this new technique compared to that obtained 
when the two resonators are placed side by side 
without using IDCs and etched slots (Fig. 3).
4 CONCLUSION
Inward folded Stepped Impedance Resonator Filter 
is an obvious advantage over the conventional uni-
form impedance resonator filter as far as miniaturi-
zation of the overall structure is concerned. It has 
been found that the impedance ratio should be less 
than one in order to achieve miniaturization. This is 
a must in wireless communication especially when 
the communication is in the microwave region. 
Moreover, it is the non-conventional technique 
that governs a successful design. The closer the gap 
between two resonators, the higher is the coupling 
and consequently the wider is the bandwidth. IDC 
enhances the bandwidth by increasing the coupling 
length without reducing the coupling gap. Etched 
slots in the ground plane increases coupling. Placing 
one resonator below the other reduces the size.

379
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Effect of variation of load demand on bus voltage magnitude 
in radial distribution system
Vishwanath Gupta & Manas Mukherjee
Department of Electrical Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In the proposed work, a radial distributed system (IEEE 33 Bus radial system) is consid-
ered to study the effects on the bus voltage magnitude of the weakest bus due to variation of load demand 
on individual buses. The weakest bus is first recognized and then the variation of its voltage magnitude 
is studied due to the variation of load demand on individual buses. This study will help to determine the 
range of load demand for satisfactory distribution of electric power.
load demand. In this work, the weakest bus which 
is the bus having lowest voltage magnitude is first 
recognized. Then the load demands on the other 
buses both at the same layer (2, 3, 6, 13, and 17) as 
well as on different layers (22, 25 and 33) are varied 
in steps of 10% one at a time to observe the varia-
tion of voltage on the weakest bus with change in 
load demand at different buses.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Under normal operating conditions Bus 18 is 
obtained as the weakest bus. The magnitude of 
voltages at different buses under normal condition 
is given in Table 2.
1 INTRODUCTION
To study radial distribution system, load flow solu-
tion is the most efficient tool. The steady operating 
point of the system is obtained by load flow analysis 
at fixed load demand. Due to radial structure and 
high R/X ratio, popularly used Newton-Raphson 
and Fast Decoupled solution technique can be 
used for this system (Goswami & Basu 1991). 
Many solution techniques are available to solve 
this problem (Das 2006, Das 2002, Das et al. 1995, 
Goswami & Basu 1991, Baran & Wu 1989).
But in most of the literature, load flow solutions 
are done at a fixed load demand which differs from 
the reality because load demand at each and every 
bus may vary from the forecasted load data. Due 
to this variation the voltage magnitude (and phase 
angle) for each and every bus should also vary 
and it may also violate the permissible bus voltage 
limit. This work reports the variation of bus volt-
age magnitude for variation of load demand. First, 
the weakest bus i.e. the bus having lowest voltage is 
identified and the effect of change in voltage mag-
nitude is observed in this bus by the variation of 
load demand on other bus.
2 PROBLEM FORMULATION
The IEEE 33 bus radial system shown in Figure 1 
is considered in the proposed work to study the 
effect of variation of load demand on bus voltage 
magnitude on radial distribution system.
The designated values of the various param-
eters of the system are given in Table 1. Bus 1 is 
the substation node, the voltage at which is fixed 
at 12.66 kV.
The load flow solution is done by using forward 
and backward sweep algorithm (Das 2002) at fixed 
Figure 1. IEEE 33 bus radial system.

380
Table 2. Magnitude of voltages at different buses under 
normal condition.
Bus no.
Voltage magnitude in pu
 2
0.997032325318559
 3
0.982938397954372
 4
0.975457067395126
 5
0.968060132460940
 6
0.949659700098616
 7
0.946174252256271
 8
0.941330239067279
 9
0.935061404870701
10
0.929246673535228
11
0.928386516078442
12
0.926886992671924
13
0.920774146242436
14
0.918507484523395
15
0.917095230661316
16
0.915727367504944
17
0.913700241247472
18
0.913093200044191
19
0.996503961710157
20
0.992926368806490
21
0.992221865726037
22
0.991584447333775
23
0.979352695363598
24
0.972681583033030
25
0.969356617055071
26
0.947730502852262
27
0.945166851943039
28
0.933727694050550
29
0.925509900711659
30
0.921952618631052
31
0.917791607995075
32
0.916876221967295
33
0.916592589340710
Table 3. Voltage magnitude of bus 18 for variation of load on different buses
Percentage 
change
Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 2
Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 3
Voltage at 
bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 6
Voltage 
at bus 
18 for load 
variation 
on Bus 13
Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 17
Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 22
Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 25
Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 33
10
0.913099556 0.913129991 0.913186036 0.913404473
0.913541365 0.913099
0.91327
0.913192
20
0.913105913 0.913166779 0.913278849 0.913715479
0.913988936 0.913105
0.913446
0.91329
30
0.913112269 0.913203563 0.91337164
0.914026218
0.914435913 0.913111
0.913621
0.913389
40
0.913118625 0.913240345 0.913464409 0.914336691
0.914882301 0.913116
0.913797
0.913487
50
0.913124981 0.913277123 0.913557155 0.914646899
0.915328099 0.913122
0.913972
0.913586
60
0.913131337 0.913313898 0.913649879 0.914956842
0.915773311 0.913128
0.914146
0.913684
70
0.913137692 0.91335067
0.913742581 0.91526652
0.916217938 0.913134
0.91432
0.913782
80
0.913144048 0.913387439 0.91383526
0.915575935
0.916661982 0.913139
0.914494
0.91388
90
0.913150404 0.913424205 0.913927917 0.915885087
0.917105445 0.913145
0.914668
0.913978
Table 1. IEEE 33 Bus Radial System.
From 
bus
To 
bus
Impedance between 
‘From Bus’ and ‘To 
Bus’ (Ω)
Load 
connected 
at ‘To Bus’
R
X
kW
kVAR
1
2
0.0922
0.0477
100
60
2
3
0.4930
0.2511
90
40
3
4
0.3660
0.1864
120
80
4
5
0.3811
0.1941
60
30
5
6
0.8190
0.7070
60
20
6
7
0.1872
0.6188
200
100
7
8
1.7114
1.2351
200
100
8
9
1.0300
0.7400
60
20
9
10
1.0400
0.7400
60
20
10
11
0.1966
0.0650
45
30
11
12
0.3744
0.1238
60
35
12
13
1.4680
1.1550
60
35
13
14
0.5416
0.7129
120
80
14
15
0.5910
0.5260
60
10
15
16
0.7463
0.5450
60
20
16
17
1.2890
1.7210
60
20
17
18
0.7320
0.5740
90
40
2
19
0.1640
0.1565
90
40
19
20
1.5042
1.3554
90
40
20
21
0.4095
0.4784
90
40
21
22
0.7089
0.9373
90
40
3
23
0.4512
0.3083
90
50
23
24
0.8980
0.7091
420
200
24
25
0.8960
0.7011
420
200
6
26
0.2030
0.1034
60
25
26
27
0.2842
0.1447
60
25
27
28
1.0590
0.9337
60
20
28
29
0.8042
0.7006
120
70
29
30
0.5075
0.2585
200
600
30
31
0.9744
0.9630
150
70
31
32
0.3105
0.3619
210
100
32
33
0.3410
0.5302
60
40

381
After the weakest bus has been identified as was 
obvious from practical findings, the effect of vary-
ing the load on different buses was studied. The 
load on buses 2, 3, 6, 13, 17, 22, 25 and 33 were 
varied in steps of 10% one at a time. The values of 
voltage magnitude and the percentage change of 
voltage magnitude of bus 18 for variation of load 
on each of the above mentioned bus is given in 
Table 3 and Table 4 respectively. The variation of 
voltage magnitude and the percentage change of 
voltage magnitude of bus 18 for variation of load 
are shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3 respectively.
From the obtained results it is observed that the 
effect of change in load demand at buses nearer 
(Bus 17 and Bus 13) to the weakest bus (Bus 18) 
has a more pronounced effect on the voltage mag-
nitude of the weakest bus than the change in load 
demand at buses far away (Bus 2, Bus 3, Bus 5) 
from it on the same layer and the buses on other 
layers (Bus 22 and Bus 33). It is also observed that 
the change in voltage magnitude of the weakest 
bus varies linearly with variation in load demand.
4 CONCLUSIONS
From the proposed work, it can be concluded that 
the change of load demand on buses nearer to the 
weakest bus affect the voltage magnitude of the 
weakest bus. So in order to maintain minimum oper-
ating voltage on weakest bus, the load demand on 
buses nearer to it should be kept within appropriate 
range.
REFERENCES
Baran M. E & Wu F.F. (1989), “Optimal Sizing of Capac-
itors Placed on a Radial Distribution System”, IEEE 
Trans. Power Delivery, vol.no.1, pp. 1105–1117.
Figure 2. Voltage magnitude of Bus 18 for variation in 
load demand.
Figure 3. Percent Change in Voltage magnitude of Bus 
18 for variation in load demand.
Table 4. Percent change in Voltage magnitude of bus 18 for variation of load on different buses.
Percentage 
change
Percent 
change 
in Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 2
Percent 
change 
in Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 3
Percent 
change in 
Voltage at 
bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 6
Percent 
change 
in Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 13
Percent 
change 
in Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 17
Percent 
change 
in Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 22
Percent 
change 
in Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 25
Percent 
change 
in Voltage 
at bus 18 
for load 
variation 
on Bus 33
10
−0.00069613
−0.00403
−0.01017
−0.03409
−0.04908
−0.00063
−0.01933
−0.01081
20
−0.00139225
−0.00806
−0.02033
−0.06815
−0.0981
−0.00127
−0.03861
−0.0216
30
−0.00208836
−0.01209
−0.03049
−0.10218
−0.14705
−0.0019
−0.05785
−0.03239
40
−0.002784459
−0.01611
−0.04065
−0.13618
−0.19594
−0.00253
−0.07705
−0.04316
50
−0.003480549
−0.02014
−0.05081
−0.17016
−0.24476
−0.00316
−0.09621
−0.05393
60
−0.004176629
−0.02417
−0.06097
−0.2041
−0.29352
−0.0038
−0.11532
−0.06469
70
−0.004872698
−0.0282
−0.07112
−0.23802
−0.34221
−0.00443
−0.1344
−0.07543
80
−0.005568758
−0.03222
−0.08127
−0.2719
−0.39085
−0.00506
−0.15343
−0.08617
90
−0.006264807
−0.03625
−0.09142
−0.30576
−0.43941
−0.00569
−0.17243
−0.0969

382
Das B. (2002), “Radial distribution system power flow 
using interval arithmetic”, Electric Power Energy Sys-
tem, 24:827–36.
Das B. (2006), “Consideration of input parameter uncer-
tainties in load flow solution of three-Phase unbal-
anced radial distribution system”, IEEE Trans Power 
System, 21(3):1088–95.
Das D., Kothari D P., Kalam A. (1995), “Simple and effi-
cient method for load flow solution of radial distribu-
tion networks”, Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 
Vol. 17, No. 5, pp. 335–346
Goswami S. K., Basu S.K. (1991), “Direct solution of 
distribution system”, IEE Proc C, 138(1):78–88.

383
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A hybrid distribution state estimation algorithm with regard 
to distributed generations
Ujjal Sur & Gautam Sarkar
Department of Applied Physics, University College of Science and Technology, 
University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: Nowadays, power flow is no longer the same as in the conventional systems, since the 
dispersed generating plants provide power at the distribution grid level too. Connecting generating plants 
to distribution grids is impossible unless some special control and monitoring tools are available and 
utilized. The state estimation in these kinds of networks is often called mixtribution. Actually, state esti-
mation is an optimization problem including discrete and continuous variables, whose objective function 
is to minimize the difference between calculated and measured values of variables, i.e., node voltage and 
active and reactive powers, in the branches. In this paper, a new hybrid approach based on Genetic Algo-
rithm (GA) and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) is proposed to solve this optimization problem using 
Distributed Generation (DG). The feasibility of the proposed approach is demonstrated and compared 
separately for the IEEE 34 bus radial distribution test systems.
equations (Abur et al. 2004). In the conventional 
estimation methods, it is assumed that the objective 
functions and constraints should be continuous and 
differentiable, respectively. Existence of distributed 
generations, Static VAR Compensators (SVCs), and 
transformer tap changers having discrete perform-
ances showed that compared to ordinary math-
ematical methods, evolutionary methods would 
be good alternatives. Many stochastic algorithms 
are available which can be used to implement DSE 
problems, but here we use the most reliable opti-
mization technique; Particle Swarm Optimization 
(PSO) (Kennedy et al. 1995) and a hybrid operation 
of Genetic Algorithm (GA) (Bies et al. 2006).
In this paper, a practical distribution state esti-
mation, including DGs, Static VAR Compensators 
(SVCs), and Voltage Regulators (VRs), is pre-
sented and loads of variable outputs are consid-
ered as state variables where the difference between 
measured and calculated values is assumed as the 
objective function.
2 OBJECTIVE FUNCTION CREATION
The above said estimation problem can be math-
ematically expressed as an optimization prob-
lem with equality and inequality constraints. The 
objective function is the summation of differ-
ence between the calculated and measured values. 
Therefore, Distribution State Estimation (DSE) 
can be expressed as follows:
1 INTRODUCTION
Deregulation creates the opportunity for pri-
vate sectors to increase their share in power sys-
tem investments and gives the opportunity to the 
customers to be responsible for their own power 
consumption with new types of small-sized gen-
erations and user-friendly performance. Due to 
this, the flow of power is no longer the same as in 
the conventional systems, as distribution systems 
have some kinds of generations by themselves. 
Therefore, the development of a new system and 
algorithms to enhance the performance of whole 
system will be required.
Here in this paper, the distribution system’s 
state estimation including DGs has been analyzed. 
It is clear that while a huge number of small-sized 
generations are connected to distribution systems, 
appropriate monitoring and controlling algorithms 
are required to control the state variables of the 
system and minimize the operational cost of the 
whole network. For this, an estimation algorithm 
is needed as in the case of a distribution network. 
All the nodes cannot be measured and therefore 
has to be estimated based on some measured data. 
This paper presents an algorithm for a distribution 
state estimation where there are limited measuring 
devices used.
The typical state estimation method based on 
the Weighted Least Square (WLS) approach is used 
which solves the system states by minimizing the 
mean square error of an overdetermined  system of 

384
min
( )
(
( ))
[
,
]
[
,
]
f x
(
z
(
h (
x
[
P
P
[
P
P
P
i
i
(z
(
ih
i
N
D
L
, P
D
D
[
P
[
D
D
,
,
P
P
P
P
,
,
N
L
P
d
N
−
z
( iz
(
=
=∑
2
1
1
2
P
[
,
,
]
P
,
P
L
L
, P
,
L
PNl
N
1
2
P
 
(1)
The above equations must satisfy some con-
straints as follows:
min
max
,
, ,
,
P
i,
N
D
i
d
N
(
)
PD
i
≤
Pi
(
)
PD
Pi
= 1 2
,
min
max
,
, ,
,
P
i,
N
L
i
l
N
(
)
PL
i
≤
Pi
(
)
PL
Pi
= 1 2
,
||
|
ma
P |
max
L
Pij
(
)
PL
Pij
min(
)
max(
),
, ,
,
Vr
Vr
i
N
, ,
,
i
i
)
i
v
N
1 2
,
…
0
1 2
(
)
Q
(
i
N
1 2
c
Qi
c
N
,)
(
, ,2
,
…
where x  is the state variables’ vector including 
load and DG outputs; zi is measured values; Wi 
is weighting factor of the ith measured variable; 
hi is the state equation of the ith measured vari-
able; N is number of measurements; Nd and Nl are 
number of DGs and loads with variable outputs, 
respectively; PD
Pi  is active power of the ith DG; PL
i is 
active power of the ith load; Nv and Nc are number 
of VRs and capacitors installed along the feeder; 
PL
Pij is transmission line power flow; Vri is tap posi-
tion of ith VR, and Qc
Qi is reactive power of the ith 
capacitor.
3 DISTRIBUTED GENERATION 
MODELING
Depending on the control status of a generator, the 
DGs can be operated in any one of the following 
modes:
• Constant output power at a specified power factor.
• Constant output power at a specified terminal 
voltage.
• In “parallel operation” with the feeder, i.e., the 
generator is located near the loads and designed 
to supply a large load with a fixed real and reac-
tive power output.
An approach based on the compensation 
method to model the generator as a PV node is 
given here (Niknam et al. 2002). In this paper, DGs 
are considered as PQ nodes.
4 HYBRID GA-PSO ALGORITHM
At first some basic idea about GA and PSO is 
described here to have a better understanding of the 
hybrid one. Genetic Algorithm (GA) is a compu-
tational method designed to simulate the evolution 
processes and natural selection in organisms, which 
follows the sequence as generating the initial popu-
lation, evaluation, selection, crossover, mutation, 
and regeneration (Banga et al. 2007). The initial 
population becomes important as this represents 
the solution and it is normally randomly generated. 
Using a problem-specific function, the population is 
then evaluated. GA will select some of them based 
on certain probability that they will mate in the next 
process. Crossover and Mutation will be performed 
on them to get new and better ones.
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm 
is represented as a simulation of social activities of 
insects, birds, and animals which simulates the nat-
ural procedure of group communication to share 
individual knowledge when such swarms flock or 
migrate. In fact PSO simulates a case that a mem-
ber of a swarm recognizes as a favorite path to go, 
and the other members follow it soon. For each 
particle i, the velocity and position of particles can 
be updated by the following equations (Kennedy 
et al. 1995):
V
C r and
P
X
C rand
G
X t
i
i
V
V
best
i
X
best
G
i
X
(
)
t
( )t
(.)(
( )t )
(.)(
(
=
)
P
+C r and(.)(
G
+ C rand(.)(
1
C
2
C
ωV
)))
(
)
( )
(
)
(
)
max
max
min
max
X (
(
V (
tm
t
i
i
(
)
X (
i
V
)
−
∗
)
( )
(
X (
V (
X
=
)
+V (
V
ω
ω
(
)
(
m
=
)
ω
ω
max
m
−
 
(2)
where,
i = 1, 2, …, n = number of particle; Pbest is the pre-
vious best value of the ith particle; Gbest is the best 
value of the entire population; rand(.) is the ran-
dom number; ω is the inertia weight; and C1 and C2 
are the weighting factors for the algorithm. Below, 
the steps of hybrid algorithm are given based on 
the theoretical approach of both the stochastic 
algorithms used here.
Step 1: Define the input data like line parameters, 
value of load and DG, initialization of different 
GA and PSO parameters.
Step 2: Calculate the objective function based on 
Equation 1 and calculate the Gbest value using 
the initial input data. According to the input 
state variables, a randomly generated initial 
population and velocity is written as follows:
Velocity
v
v
v
v
v
d
P
P
n
i
jv
n
j
D
rand
P
D
P
j
j
D
D
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤
= rand
rand
∗
1
1

( ) (
∗
m
j
D
inn
m
n
in
min
min
)
( ) (
)
+
(
=
)
+
)
P
v =
d
P
P
−
P
D
P
j
L
(.) (
( )
r
= and
P
L
L
min ) +
)
P
j
D
j
j
max
L
L
j
L
 
(3)

385
Population
X
X
X
X
X
r
d
P
P
n
X
i
j
X
X
n
j
D
X
rand
P
D
P
j
j
D
D
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
⎡⎣
⎤⎦⎤
rand
rand
∗
1
X
1

( ) (
∗
m
j
D mi
m n
min
min
min
)
( ) (
)
+
( )
+
)
P
X
r
=
d
P
P
−
P
D
P
j
L
(.) (
( )
X
r
= and
P
L
L
min ) +
)
P
j
D
j
j
max
L
L
j
L
 
(4)
where n is the number of measurements and PD, PL 
are the state variables.
Step 3: Now Genetic Algorithm (GA) is applied 
to find a suitable best value of Gbest using selec-
tion, crossover, mutation, and reproduction 
processes.
Step 4: Then compare the new Gbest value with the 
old one and replace the old one if the new value 
is superior.
Step 5: Now select the ith particle and its corre-
sponding best solution Pbest, locally then evalu-
ate new velocity and position using these Gbest 
and Pbest values. Check the given limit for the 
new value of position.
Step 6: Check whether all particles have been 
selected or not, if not then repeat step 5, else 
go to step 7.
Step 7: Now to check the convergence criteria for 
the algorithm and if it is not converging then 
repeat steps 2–6, else collect the global optimum 
value Gbest.
Here, two flowcharts of Genetic algorithm and 
hybrid GA-PSO algorithm are given which have 
been used in this estimation problem.
5 SIMULATION RESULTS
The flowcharts of the Generic Algorithm as well 
as hybrid GA-PSO algorithm are shown in Figures 
1 and 2. The given hybrid algorithm is simulated 
using MATLAB software and tested over the 
IEEE 34-bus radial distribution system network 
(Kersting 1991) shown in Figure 3 with the follow-
ing parameters.
For a GA population of 50, crossover 0.8, muta-
tion rate 0.001, and for a PSO swarm of 30, C1 and 
C2 value is 2, ωmin is 0.5, ωmax is 1, and the number 
of iterations for both methods is 500. Three DGs 
have been installed at buses 9, 20, and 31 of values 
60, 70, and 90 KW, respectively, and power factor 
Figure 1. Flowchart of Genetic Algorithm.
Figure 2. Flowchart of hybrid GA-PSO algorithm.

386
of 0.8 and with a standard deviation of 10%. Also, 
two variable loads of value 85 and 95 KW are con-
nected at buses 17 and 25, respectively, of power 
factor 0.75 and with a standard deviation of 10%. 
Three measurement devices are installed at buses 6, 
17, and 30; therefore, n is 3 in this case.
Table 1. Comparison of estimated values.
Method
True 
value 
(KW)
Calculated 
values (KW)
Worst
Best
GA
65
64.73
66.03
G1
PSO
65
64.32
65.54
Hybrid
65
64.12
65.31
GA
76
76.14
77.09
G2
PSO
76
75.85
76.47
Hybrid
76
75.64
76.28
GA
85
85.23
85.97
G3
PSO
85
84.73
85.50
Hybrid
85
84.35
85.22
GA
81
80.23
81.87
L1
PSO
81
81.39
81.79
Hybrid
81
81.11
81.40
GA
90
89.66
91.11
L2
PSO
90
90.48
90.69
Hybrid
90
90.25
90.09
Table 2. Comparison of different parameters.
Method
Execution 
time (s)
Average 
(10−3)
Standard 
deviation (%)
GA
100
0.03
12
PSO
 40
0.24
10
Hybrid
 20
0.18
 8
Figure 3. IEEE 34-bus radial distribution network.
Also, it is assumed that the following informa-
tion is available:
• Value of output for each of the constant loads 
and DGs.
• Average value and standard deviation for each 
of the variable DGs and loads.
• Values of the measured points
• Power factors of loads and DGs
• Set points of VRs and local capacitors
Comparison of estimated values have been 
listed in Table 1. As shown in Table 2, the average 
evaluation value of the proposed algorithm for 
the different runs is 0.18 × 10−3; this is approxi-
mately 60% and 15% of that obtained by GA and 
PSO, respectively.
6 CONCLUSION
With the increase in the number of DGs, their 
impacts on power system have to be studied more. 
The most important issue in distribution systems is 
Distribution Management System (DMS), which 
is severely affected by installing DGs. State estima-
tion in DMS plays a major role in estimating the 
system in a real-time state. In this paper, a reliable 
approach to estimate distribution state variables in 
the presence of DGs is presented. The simulation 
results indicate that the method can estimate the 
targeted system conditions accurately. Not only 
that, the proposed algorithm could be applied to 
similar problems associated with state estimation. 
The execution time of the proposed method is 
remarkably short and pointed that the method can 
be implemented without any restriction in practi-
cal networks.
REFERENCES
Abur, A., & Exposito, A.G. (2004). Power System State 
Estimation: Theory and implementation, Marcel 
Dekkered., New York.
Banga, V.K., Singh, Y. and Kumar, R. (2007). Simulation 
of Robotic Arm using Genetic Algorithm & AHP, 
Journal of Engineering and Technology, 25, 95–101.
Bies, R.R., Muldoon, M.F., Pollock, B.G., Manuck, S., 
Smith, G. and Sale, M.E. (2006). A Genetic Algorithm 
Based Hybrid Machine Learning Approach to Model 
Selection, Journal of Pharmacokinetics and Pharmaco-
dynamics, 196–221.
Kennedy, J. and Eberhart, R. (1995). Particle swarm opti-
mization, IEEE International Conference on Neural 
Networks, Piscataway, NJ, 1942–1948.
Kersting, W.H. (1991)Radial distribution test feeders, 
IEEE Trans. On Power Systems, 6(3), 975–985.
Niknam, T. and Ranjbar, A.M. (2002). Impact of Dis-
tributed Generation on Distribution Load Flow, 
International Power System Conference, Tehran, Iran.

387
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Electric stress control on post-type porcelain insulators using a coating 
of RTV Silicone Rubber with BaTiO3 nanofillers
Argha Kamal Pal
Department of Electrical Engineering, Birbhum Institute of Engineering and Technology, 
Birbhum, West Bengal, India
Arijit Baral
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India
Abhijit Lahiri
Department of Electrical Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, 
Mankundu, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In order to ensure continuous supply of power, the reliability of power transmission line 
must be high. One of the requirements is to minimize the flashover of the insulators when stressed under 
extreme harsh environmental conditions. To ensure the reliability of the ceramic insulators, coating of 
Room Temperature Vulcanized Silicone Rubber (RTV SIR) on the surface of the insulator has gained a 
lot of attention due to its several mechanical and electrical properties. In the recent years, use of nano-
composites as dielectric materials have gained edge because of their high permittivities and low dielectric 
losses. The present work examines the effect of using nanofillers of Barium Titanium Oxide (BaTiO3) 
with RTV SIR coating on the resultant electric stress distribution over the surface of a post type insulator 
made of porcelain.
The effect of wetting conditions on the flashover 
voltage of non-ceramic insulating materials was 
studied by R.S Gorur et al. (de la O 1993). The 
effect of water salinity and temperature on Ethylene 
Propelene Diene Monomer (EPDM) was studied 
by R. Hackam (Tokoro & Hackam 1996).
Insulators 
possess 
different 
characteristics 
under different environmental conditions. Taking 
this into account, calculation of electric stress on a 
HV insulator under wet condition was performed 
by B. Sarang et al. (Sarang & Basappa 2009). Con-
sidering RTV SIR, the effect of natural tropical 
climate to the surface properties of silicone rubber 
was observed by H.C Kerner et al. (Sirait & Kerner 
1998).
At 100 Hz frequency, the effect of filler 
con centration on the dielectric properties of 
nanocomposites was evaluated by R. Balakumar 
et al. (Babu 2012). F. Madidi et al. (Madidi & 
Farzaneh 2013) reported the effect of filler 
concentration of Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) on 
dielectric properties of RTV silicon rubber.
1 INTRODUCTION
Insulators that are used in overhead transmis-
sion lines are not only exposed to environmental 
stresses but are also electrically stressed through-
out their service period. Because of these, the 
insulators should be designed in such a way that 
the electrical stress distribution along the insulator 
surface must be uniform to ensure uninterrupted 
power transmission.
In the case of ceramic insulator, various meth-
ods have been adopted for minimizing the electric 
stress over its surface. In the recent past, RTV SIR 
has gained importance worldwide because of its 
electrical and mechanical properties.
E.A Cherney and R.S Gorur (Cherney & Gorur 
1999) observed the application of RTV Silicone 
rubber coatings for outdoor ceramic insulators. R. 
Hackam (Cherney & Hackam 1990) showed that 
the formation of leakage current strongly depends 
on the intensity of water droplets on the insulator 
surface.

388
In the present case, a study has been carried 
out to find out the effect of BaTiO3 nanofillers 
of different concentrations and having different 
Aspect Ratios (AR) on electric stress distribution 
along the surface of a post type insulator made of 
porcelain with a RTV SIR coating over it. Three 
different combinations of concentrations and AR 
of BaTiO3 are considered in the present study 
those are, 10% vol BaTiO3 with AR = 6, 20% vol 
BaTiO3 with AR = 6 and 20% vol BaTiO3 with 
AR = 15.
2 MODEL DESCRIPTION
The electrode-insulator arrangement that has 
been considered in the present work is shown in 
Figure 1. It is a post-type insulator which is made 
of porcelain whose relative permittivity 6 and is 
stressed between the two electrodes. The surround-
ing medium is taken as air. A normalized voltage 
of 1 V is applied to the live electrode for ready ref-
erence. The other electrode is grounded. The total 
arrangement is rotationally symmetric.
The major dimensions of the arrangement are 
shown in Figure 1. The entire system is simulated 
by using COMSOL Multiphysics 4.3 b, software.
3 ELECTRIC FIELD DISTRIBUTION 
ALONG THE SURFACE OF THE POST 
INSULATOR
Studies on electric field distribution on the insula-
tor surface have been carried out for the following 
three cases:
1. When the insulator is made of porcelain
2. When the insulator is made of porcelain and 
having an outer coating of RTV SIR
3. When the insulator is made of porcelain and 
having an outer coating of RTV SIR loaded 
with BaTiO3 nanofillers as mentioned earlier
The dielectric properties of each of the above 
materials are presented in Table 1.
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The variation of the potential along the surface 
of the insulator has been studied. It has been 
observed that for each of the cases under study, 
potential along the insulator surface has varied 
uniformly from 1 V to zero when measured from 
live electrode to ground electrode. Since the nature 
Figure 1. Post type insulator.
Table 1. Permittivities of different materials used.
Serial 
no.
Material
Relative 
permittivity (εr)
1.
Porcelain
 6.0
2.
RTV SIR
 3.1
3.
RTV SIR with 
10 vol. % BaTiO3; AR = 6
 5.0
4.
RTV SIR with 
20 vol. % BaTiO3; AR = 6
 8.9
5.
RTV SIR with 
20 vol. % BaTiO3; AR = 15
11.7
Figure 2. Potential distribution along the insulator 
surface.

389
Figure 4. Resultant along the Insulator Surface (i) Por-
celain (ii) RTV SIR (iii) 10% BaTiO3, AR = 6 (iv) 20% 
BaTiO3, AR = 6 and 20% BaTiO3, AR = 15.
Figure 3. Equipotential lines when the insulator is made 
of (i) Porcelain and (ii) Porcelain with RTV SIR coating 
loaded with 20% BaTiO3 of AR = 15.
Table 2. Er (V/mm/V) along the insulator surface.
Insulating 
material
Er 
at A
% 
reduction
Er 
at B
% 
reduction
Er 
at C
% 
reduction
Er 
at D
% 
reduction
Er 
at E
% 
reduction
Porcelain
8.109
–
3.65
–
3.13
–
3.96
–
9.15
–
RTV SIR
7.7
 5.04
2.84
22.19
1.61
48.5
1.69
57.3
8.40
 8.19
10% vol. 
BaTiO3 
AR = 6
7.55
 6.89
2.75
24.65
1.38
55.9
1.28
67.6
8.25
 9.83
20% vol. 
BaTiO3 
AR = 6
7.32
 9.72
2.69
26.30
1.24
60.38
0.99
75.0
8.14
11.03
20% vol. 
BaTiO3 
AR = 15
7.29
10.09
2.67
26.84
1.20
61.66
0.906
77.27
8.05
12.02
of the variation of the potential along the insula-
tor surface is same in each of the cases hence this 
variation has been plotted only when porcelain is 
used as the insulating material and the variation 
has been presented in Figure 2.
The equipotential lines are plotted for each of 
the three cases under study. From the plots of the 
equipotential lines no significant deviation has 
been observed either with RTV SIR coating or 
when coating of RTV SIR with nanofiller loading 
is used as compared with the case when the insula-
tor is simply made of porcelain. Since all the plots 
are same hence equipotential lines have been shown 
in Figure 3 only for two cases (i) when the insula-
tor is made of porcelain and (ii) when 20% BaTiO3 
with AR = 15 is present in RTV SIR coating. From 
the plot of the potential distribution along the 
insulator surface and the plots of the equipotential 
lines, it may be said that the coating of RTV SIR 
or the coating of RTV SIR with nanofillers can be 
used with porcelain insulators provided they serve 
as better electrical stress reducing materials over 
the insulator surface.
Electric stress distribution over the insulator 
surface has been studied to observe the effects of 
RTV SIR coating and the effects of the presence of 
nanofillers in RTV SIR coating. The distribution 
of electric stress along the surface of the insula-
tor has been presented in Figure 4. From Figure 4 
it may be observed that resultant stress along the 
insulator surface is more near the electrodes com-
pared to the other regions. It may also be observed 
from Figure 4 that the resultant stress is maximum 
when the insulator is made only of porcelain. 
A decrease in the resultant stress near the two elec-
trode ends is observed when the insulator has a 
outer coating of RTV SIR which further decreases 
when nanofillers are used with RTV SIR.
Table 2 presents the resultant stress at five differ-
ent points on the insulator surface including those 
the points A and E where the value of the result-
ant stress is maximum. The value of the resultant 
stress at these points are tabulated for each of the 
cases under consideration. From Table 2 it may 
be observed that as compared to porcelain, the 
% reduction in stress is maximum at each of the 

390
points under consideration when 20% vol. BaTiO3 
with AR = 15 is used with RTV SIR coating over 
the porcelain.
5 CONCLUSIONS
The electric field computations performed here 
is based on the capacitive field using COMSOL 
Multiphysics 4.3 b. It is to be noted that the entire 
observation is performed at power frequency. From 
the obtained results the following conclusions may 
be made.
 i. On the insulator surface, maximum electric 
stress occurs in the regions near the live and 
the ground electrodes.
 ii. Use of RTV SIR coating over the insulator 
surface causes a reduction in electric stress 
distribution over the insulator surface particu-
larly at the electrode ends.
 iii. Use of BaTiO3 with RTV SIR does not dis-
tort electric field on and around the insulator 
surface.
 iv. Use of BaTiO3 with RTV SIR proves to be a 
more effective means for stress control over the 
insulator surface than using RTV SIR coating 
only.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The author also acknowledges the financial support 
provided by The Institution of Engineers (India) 
through awarding the project entitled “Studies on 
Designing of Durable Superhydrophobic Surfaces 
for Outdoor Insulators” by Project ID No. 
PG2015012 in the academic year 2015–16.
REFERENCES
Babu, B.G., S.E. e. a. (2012). Analysis of relative 
permittivity and tan delta characteristics of Silicone 
Rubber based nanocomposites. International Journal 
of Scientific Engineering and Technology 1, 201–206.
Cherney, E. & R. Gorur (1999). RTV Silicone Rubber 
coatings for outdoor insulators. IEEE Transactions on 
Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 6, 605–611.
Cherney, E.A., K.S. & R. Hackam (1990). Evaluation of 
RTV Silicone Rubber insulator coatings in a salt-fog 
chamber. Annual Report 10.1109/CEIDP.1990.201365, 
Dept. of Electr. Eng., Windsor Univ., Ontario.
de la O, A., G.R.S.C.J. (1993). Effect of wetting conditions 
on the flashover voltage of non-ceramic insulating 
materials. Conference report, Electrical Insulation 
and Dielectric Phenomena.
Madidi, F., M.G. & M. Farzaneh (2013). Effect of 
filler concentration on dielectric properties of RTV 
Silicone Rubber / TiO2 nanocomposite. Conference 
report, 2013 Electrical Insulation Conference, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.
Sarang, B., L.V. & P. Basappa (2009). Electric field 
calculations on a high voltage insulator under wet 
conditions. Conference report, 2009 IEEE Electrical 
Insulation Conference, Montreal, QC, Canada.
Sirait, K.T., S.S. & H. Kerner (1998). The effect of natural 
tropical climate to the surface properties of Silicone 
Rubber. In Proc. of 1998 International Symposium on 
Electrical Insulating Materials, Toyohashi, Japan.
Tokoro, T. & R. Hackam (1996). Effect of water salinity 
and temperature on the hydrophobicity of Ethylene 
Propelene Diene monomer insulator. Annual report, 
Conference on Electrical Insulation and Dielectric 
Phenomena, San Fransisco.

391
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Mapping forest cover of Gautala Autramghat ecosystems using 
geospatial technology
Yogesh Rajendra
Srinivasa Ramanujan Geospatial Chair, Geospatial Technology Research Laboratory, 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, Geospatial Technology Research Laboratory, 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India
Sandip Thorat & Ajay Nagne
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, Geospatial Technology Research Laboratory, 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India
Rajesh Dhumal
Srinivasa Ramanujan Geospatial Chair, Geospatial Technology Research Laboratory, 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, Geospatial Technology Research Laboratory, 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India
Amol Vibhute & Amarsinh Varpe
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, Geospatial Technology Research Laboratory, 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India
S.C. Mehrotra
Srinivasa Ramanujan Geospatial Chair, Geospatial Technology Research Laboratory, 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, Geospatial Technology Research Laboratory, 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India
K.V. Kale
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, Geospatial Technology Research Laboratory, 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India
ABSTRACT: Monitoring of the forest area has gained recognition in the worldwide scenario due to 
the understanding of its role in carbon appropriation and global warming. Gautala Autramghat is a pro-
tected area of the Marathwada region of Maharashtra state, India. It is situated in the Satmala and Ajan-
tha hill ranges of the Western Ghats; it is administrated by Aurangabad and Jalgaon District. The wildlife 
sanctuary was established in an existing reserved forest area in 1986. The area is a southern tropical dry 
deciduous forest with scattered bush and grasslands. India, being a mega-biodiversity country, supports 
diverse forest vegetation of tropical, sub-tropical and temperate types. The remote-sensing techniques 
are employed to map the forest cover. IRS RS2 LISS III sensor data are used to generate a medium-scale 
vegetation cover map. One scene of 01-Feb-2015 with minimum cloud cover was acquired, preprocessed, 
and georeferenced to Survey of India toposheets. The satellite image was then subjected to the Maximum 
Likelihood Classification, assuming six types of objects, namely Open Forest, Moderate Dense Forest, 
Shrubs Forest, Barren Land, Crop, and Water. A standard forest vegetation cover classification legend 
was used for this purpose. The vegetation classes were visited on ground to collect information on their 
structure and composition, which was utilized in the classification exercise.

392
1 INTRODUCTION
Satellite images are an important basis for vegetation 
mapping and monitoring of ecosystem functions, 
mainly through relationships between reflectance 
from vegetation structure and its composition. 
Mapping is a method of depicting nature, and the 
classification permits the mapper to estimate true 
environments as clearly as possible. Although maps 
show objects with respect to characteristics, their 
purpose is to represent objects in terms of their rela-
tive location (Thakker, P. S 1999). A good and useful 
mapping exercise requires a large amount of informa-
tion that comes from various sources such as satellite 
images and ground truths (Behera, M. D 2000).
Forest ecosystem plays a very important role in 
the global carbon cycle. Increased human popu-
lation demanding development in diverse sectors 
has resulted in unexpected disturbances in forest 
ecosystems. The drastic changes in forest ecosys-
tems erode the capability to provide the goods and 
services (Costanza, R 1997, Lodhi, M. S (2014). In 
India, the most widely adopted classification sys-
tem for forest cover is derived from the classifica-
tion (Champion, H. G 1968).
The present study highlights the significance 
of remote sensing in the vegetation mapping of 
Gautala Autramghat of the Marathwada region 
using the satellite image from the LISS III sensor. 
A supervised Maximum Likelihood Classification 
was implemented in our approach (Das S. 2013). 
The final classification product provided the iden-
tification and mapping of dominant forest cover 
types, including forest types and non-forest veg-
etation. Remote-sensing datasets were calibrated 
using a variety of field verification measurements. 
Field methods included the identification of domi-
nant forest species, forest type, and relative health 
of selected tree species. Information from an 
extensive ground truth survey was used to assess 
the accuracy of the classification. The vegetation 
type map was prepared from the classified satel-
lite image. The dry deciduous forests constitute a 
major portion of the total forest area.
The Maximum Likelihood Classifier calculates 
the probability that a pixel belongs to a class. Data 
from the training sets are assumed to be usually 
distributed, which allows the mean vector and the 
covariance matrix of the spectral cluster of each 
category of brightness values to be calculated 
(Lillesand T. M. 2000).
2 STUDY AREA
Gautala Autramghat is mega-biodiversity regions 
of Marathwada. It is covered in three districts 
in Maharashtra. These districts are Auranga-
bad, Nashik, and Jalgaon. The present study was 
conducted in the area shown in Figure 1. Gautala 
Autramghat Wildlife Sanctuary is a protected area 
of Maharashtra state. It is situated in the Satmala 
and Ajantha hill ranges of the Western Ghats. The 
wildlife sanctuary was established in 1986 in an 
existing reserved forest area (Bhatt Shankarlal C. 
2006).
It covers a total area of 26,061.19 hectares 
(64,399 acres) with reserved forest areas of 19706 
ha. in Aurangabad and 6355.19 ha. in Jalgaon Co-
ordinator Conservator of Forests, Aurangabad 
Forest Division (2010).
It is located between the north latitude 
20°36’2.93”N and 74°48’16.50”E and the east lon-
gitude 20°13’41.09”N and 75°59’11.26”E. It has a 
semi-tropical climate and remains humid through-
out the year. Its average annual precipitation varies 
from 700 mm to about 800 mm, while the annual 
mean temperature varies from 16°C to 32°C. The 
altitude of the study area varies from 300 to 380 m. 
The summer is extremely hot, lasting from March 
to June, with May being the hottest month, while 
the winter lasts from November to January.
3 DATA
The spatial data for the year 2015 were selected for 
the study. The vector database for the forest was 
generated from the forest vegetation maps prepared 
by the Forest Survey of India at the 1:50,000 scale. 
The map for the year 2015 was generated from the 
cloud-free IRS LISS III data of 2015 (path/row: 
96/58) obtained from National Remote Sensing 
Centre, Hyderabad. The radiometric and geomet-
ric corrections were already taken into account in 
the data by the agency. The LISS III camera pro-
vides multispectral data in four bands. The spatial 
resolution for visible (two bands) and near infra-
red (one band) is 23.5 meters with a ground swath 
of 141 km. The fourth band (short-wave infrared 
band) has a spatial resolution of 70.5 meters with a 
ground swath of 148 km. The temporal resolution 
Figure 1. Study area location of Gautala Autramghat 
Wildlife Sanctuary.

393
of LISS III is 24 days. The LISS III sensor charac-
teristics are presented in Table 1.
The vector map was overlaid with the 2015 
image database to study the forest vegetation 
change. An interpretation key, prepared from the 
ground survey and image analysis for different 
classes, was used for discriminating different veg-
etation types. All the data generation and analysis 
were performed using the ERDAS Imagine 2014 
and ArcGIS 10.2v software environment.
4 METHODOLOGY
The entire methodology included pre-processing 
and classification of satellite images followed 
by accuracy assessment; the final map prepara-
tion, quantification, and analysis were also made. 
The workflow for the digital image classification 
included image segmentation and sample selection 
of target land use/cover classes; The Maximum 
Likelihood and Mahalanobis Classification were 
performed. The LISS III image was obtained in 
GeoTIFF format for processing. The study area 
was extracted by subsetting from the whole image.
The flowchart of the research methodology can 
be divided into five stages, as shown in Figure 2.
(i) Procurement of satellite data of IRS P7 LISS 
III sensor data of the year 2015, (ii) preprocessing 
and georeferencing of the satellite data, (iii) apply-
ing the Maximum Likelihood Classifier based on 
area of interest, (iv) creation of classified maps, and 
(v) accuracy assessment of classified maps based 
on reference data collected from an extensive field 
survey. The spectral variation of each vegetation 
type was extracted from digital data by interpret-
ing satellite images based on interpretation ele-
ments such as image color, texture, tone, pattern, 
and association information. In the standard “false 
color” composite, vegetation looks in shades of 
red. Trees will appear darker red than hardwoods. 
This is a very popular band combination and use-
ful for vegetation studies. Usually, deep red hues 
indicate broad leaf and/or healthier vegetation, 
while lighter red hues signify grasslands or sparsely 
vegetated areas (M. Jakubauskas 1998).
Diverse methods were developed for this study. 
Those methods can be broadly grouped into unsu-
pervised classification or supervised classification 
depending on whether or not true ground data are 
inputted as references. The general steps involved 
in vegetation mapping include image preprocess-
ing and image classification (S. Saura 2002). The 
image preprocessing comprises certain necessary 
preparatory steps such as radiometric correc-
tion, geometric correction, and image enhance-
ment in order to improve the quality of original 
images, which then results in the assignment of 
each pixel of the scene to one of the vegetation 
groups defined in a vegetation classification sys-
tem. The supervised classification was done with 
the Maximum Likelihood Classifier algorithm in 
Erdas Imagine software 2014 (Thorat, S.S 2015, 
Rajendra, Y.D. 2014). Supervised classification 
techniques are based on external knowledge of the 
area displayed in the image. The supervised clas-
sification can be specified generally as the method 
of samples of known identity to classify pixels of 
unknown identity. Samples of known identity are 
those pixels placed within the training areas (K.V.S. 
Badarinath 2009).
Pixels located within these areas are included in 
the training samples used to guide the classifica-
tion algorithm to assign particular spectral values 
to suitable information classes. Supervised classifi-
cation techniques require prior knowledge of the 
number, and in the case of statistical classifiers, 
certain aspects of the statistical nature of the infor-
mation classes with which the pixels establishing 
an image are to be discovered (Pant, D.N 1992). 
Training sites are areas representing each known 
land cover category that appear fairly homogene-
ous on the image classification, and subjected to 
statistical processing in which every pixel is com-
pared with the various signatures and assigned to 
Table 1. LISS III sensor characteristics.
Type
Linear Imaging Self Scanner (LISS) III
Spectrum
VIS (∼0.40μm to ∼0.75μm)
NIR (∼0.75μm to ∼1.3μm)
SWIR (∼1.3μm to ∼3.0μm)
Resolution 
class
Medium (20m–200m)
MS resolution
23.5m
Swath
141km
Revisit time
24 days
On-board
IRS 1C, 1D, P6, P7
Figure 2. Workflow of methodology.

394
the class whose signature matches closely. A few 
pixels in a scene do not match and remain unclas-
sified, because these may belong to a class not rec-
ognized or defined (A. Kumar 2007).
5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results clearly demonstrated the forest cover 
of the state of Gautala Autramghat forest regions, 
Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India. Satellite moni-
toring of forests has detected the events of for-
est cover change in Gautala Biosphere Reserve. 
Geospatial analysis has addressed the distribution 
of forest cover. Among the six class types mapped 
(Open Forest, Moderate Dense Forest, Shrubs 
Forest, Barren Land, Crop, and Water), as shown 
in Figure 3, the Moderate Dense Forest is the most 
predominant forest type of the biosphere reserve.
Figure 4 shows the classified map of Gautala 
Autramghat Wildlife Sanctuary of the year 2015. 
The result of the accuracy assessment is summa-
rized in Table 2, and the area covered by each class 
type is presented in Table 3. To validate the clas-
sification accuracy, the stratified random sampling 
method was used to collect the sample data on 
the field. The equal number of sample points was 
selected to each stratum. Using these field data, the 
confusion and error matrices were determined. The 
present study was carried out at the 1:50,000 scale, 
which is suitable for regional level interpretation. 
Therefore, it is recommended to carry out detailed 
targeted studies at finer resolutions to fine-tune 
the present findings and prioritize the conserva-
tion of forest cover at the local level. The change 
in forest cover exhibits a great deal of variation in 
both spatial and temporal contexts, maybe a result 
of different strategies and efforts made by the for-
est department and due to the change in climatic 
conditions and other socio-economic factors.
6 CONCLUSION
The results show the forest cover in the Gautala 
Autramghat region for the year 2015. The study 
provides useful direction for future monitoring 
Figure 3. Original FCC image of Gautala Autramghat 
of the year 2015.
Figure 4. Classified image of Gautala Autramghat of 
the year 2015.
Table 2. Accuracy assessment.
Class 
name
Ref 
total
Class 
total
Number 
correct
Producer 
accuracy
User 
accuracy
Shrubs 
forest
 19
 19
17
 89.47%
 89.47%
Moderate 
dense 
forest
 13
 12
12
 92.31%
100.00%
Barren 
land
 20
 21
18
 90.00%
 85.71%
Open 
forest
 24
 24
20
 83.33%
 83.33%
Water
  9
 10
 9
100.00%
 90.00%
Crop
 15
 14
12
 80.00%
 85.71%
Total
100
100
88
Classification Accuracy Assessment Report.
Maximum Likelihood Classification 2015.
Table 3. Land cover area statistics.
Class name
Area (in hectare)
Shrubs forest
26942.4
Moderate dense forest
 5754.59
Barren land
33663.6
Open forest
42757.8
Water
 2388.84
Crop
14676
Overall classification accuracy = 88.00%.
Overall kappa statistics = 0.8534.

395
efforts to support organization policies and ini-
tiatives taken by the Government of India such 
as Green India Programme. In this study, we esti-
mated the actual area covered by the forest from 
the LISS III image, and we found that the results 
are very satisfactory, after comparing the results 
achieved by the maximum likelihood with the 
ground reference data. The overall accuracy of 
the system determined using the Maximum Likeli-
hood approach were 88%. It is concluded that the 
Maximum Likelihood Classifier is more reliable 
and satisfactory for the classification of the forest 
area using the remote-sensing images. The support 
from local public will be important for applying 
conservation actions and long-term supervision. 
However, there is a need to consider other threats 
such as forest fires and illegal tree cutting for the 
complete management of forest biodiversity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr Babasaheb 
Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad, 
Maharashtra, INDIA for financial assistance 
through DST/NRDMS Srinivasa Ramanujan 
Geospatial Chair, the State Forest Department, 
Maharashtra, India for reference information and 
to UGC-DRS SAP Phase II and DST-FIST pro-
grammes for infrastructure facilities.
REFERENCES
Badarinath, K. V. S., T. R. Kiran Chand & V. Krishna 
Prasad 2009, Emissions from grassland burning 
in Kaziranga National Park, India—analysis from 
IRS-P6 AWiFS satellite remote sensing datasets, Geo-
carto International, 24:2, 89–97.
Behera, M. D., Srivastava, S., Kushwaha, S. P. S. and 
Roy, P. S., 2000, Stratification and mapping of Taxus 
baccata L. bearing forests in Tale valley using RS and 
GIS. Current Science 78(8): 1008–1013.
Bhatt, Shankarlal C. and Bhargava, Gopal K. 2006, 
“Wildlife”. Land and people of Indian states and 
union territories in 36 volumes, volume 16 Maharash-
tra. Delhi, India: Gyan Publishing House.
Champion, H. G., & Seth, S. K. 1968, Revised survey of 
forest types of India. Nasik: Govt. of India publisher. 
pp. 404.
Co-ordinator Conservator of Forests, Aurangabad 
Forest Division 2010, “Vision 2020: Aurangabad For-
est, Wildlife & Social Forestry” (pdf). Aurangabad 
(Maharashtra). p. 13.
Costanza, R., et al. 1997, The value of the world’s ecosys-
tem services and natural capital, Nature, 387, 253–260.
Das, S., & Singh, T. P. 2013, Mapping Vegetation and 
Forest Types using Landsat TM in the Western Ghat 
Region of Maharashtra, India. IJCA, 76(1), 33–37.
Jakubauskas, M., K. Kindscher & Diane Debinski 
1998, Multitemporal characterization and mapping 
of montane sagebrush communities using Indian 
IRS LISS-II imagery, Geocarto International, 13:4, 
65–74.
Kumar, A., S. K. Uniyal & B. Lal 2007, Stratification of 
forest density and its validation by NDVI analysis in 
a part of western Himalaya, India using RS and GIS 
techniques, IJRS, 28:11, 2485–2495.
Lillesand T. M. & Kiefer R. W., 2000, RS and Image 
Interpretation, 4th ed. Wiley & Sons.
Lodhi, M. S., Samal, P. K., Chaudhry, S., Palni, L. M. S., 
& Dhyani, P. P. 2014, Land Cover Mapping for Nam-
dapha National Park (Arunachal Pradesh), India 
Using Harmonized Land Cover Legends. Journal of 
the ISRS, 42(2), 461–467.
Pant, D. N., Das, K. K., & Roy, P. S. 1992, Mapping of 
tropical dry deciduous forest and landuse in part of 
Vindhyan range using satellite remote sensing. JISRS, 
20(1), 9–20.
Rajendra, Y. D., Mehrotra, S. C., Kale, K. V., Manza, 
R. R., Dhumal, R. K., Nagne, A. D., & Vibhute, A. 
D. 2014. Evaluation Of Partially Overlapping 3d 
Point Cloud’s Registration By Using Icp Variant And 
Cloudcompare. ISPRS-International Archives of the 
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Infor-
mation Sciences, 1, 891–897.
Saura, S. & J. San Miguel-Ayanz 2002, Forest cover map-
ping in Central Spain with IRS-WIFS images and 
multi-extent textual-contextual measures, IJRS, 23:3, 
603–608.
Thakker, P. S., Sastry, K. L. N., Kandya, A. K., Kimothi, 
M. M. and Jadav, r. N., 1999, Forest vegetation map-
ping using remote sensing and GIS—a case study in 
Gir (Sasan) forest. Proceedings of ISRS. Hyderabad, 
January 18–20.
Thorat, S. S., Rajendra, Y. D., Kale, K. V., & Mehrotra, 
S. C. 2015, Estimation of Crop and Forest Areas using 
Expert System based Knowledge Classifier Approach 
for Aurangabad District. International Journal of 
Computer Applications, 121(23).
Wang L, Sousa W, Gong P 2004, Integration of object-
based and pixel based classification for mapping man-
groves with IKONOS imagery. IJRS 25(24): 5655–68.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

397
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Synthesis of linear array antenna of a large number of elements 
using Restricted Search Particle Swarm Optimization
Archit Ghosh, Tamal Das & Soumyo Chatterjee
Department of ECE, Heritage Institute of Technology, Kolkata, India
Sayan Chatterjee
Department of ETCE, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper, synthesis of a large number of linear arrays with Restricted Search Particle 
Swarm Optimization (RSPSO) is presented. The multi-objective synthesis problem of a reduced side-lobe 
level and a narrow beamwidth is considered. Accordingly, excitation amplitude of each array element 
and uniform inter-element spacing are optimized using the RSPSO. Restriction in search space is defined 
using the nested product algorithm. The effectiveness of the proposed method is highlighted through two 
design examples of 51- and 60-element linear arrays. The zero convergence value of the RSPSO algorithm 
in the design of the 60-element array indicates superiority over other contestant algorithms.
overcomes such limitation but is still ineffective in 
the multi-objective design situation. Consequently, 
it is necessary to apply algorithms with restriction 
in search space to achieve multiple objectives of 
SLL suppression and beamwidth reduction.
In this work, the synthesis problem of reduced 
SLL and narrow beamwidth is addressed for a 
large number of element arrays with excitation 
amplitude and inter-element spacing as optimi-
zation parameters for PSO algorithms with and 
without restriction. Restriction is developed using 
Bresler’s method (Bresler et al., 1980) of Cheby-
shev amplitude distribution and newly developed 
design expression for the FNBW of the Dolph–
Chebyshev array. In order to prove the effective-
ness of restriction in search space, a comparative 
study involving random and restricted search DE 
was carried out.
2 PROBLEM FORMULATION
In order to realize the maximum SLL reduction 
along with narrow beamwidth for higher number 
of linear arrays, two independent error functions 
(Archit et al., 2015) were defined in (1) and (2). 
The first error function (EF1) was introduced as 
the difference between the desired SLL and the 
peak SLL obtained at each iteration:
EF
SL
AF
AF
d
SL
F
L
SL
F
L
1
SLLd
L
0
10
SLLd
L
⎧
⎨
⎧
⎩
⎨
⎫
⎬
⎫
⎭
⎬
ma
l
20
⎧
⎨
⎧
og
( )
max(
( ))
)
)
 (1)
1 INTRODUCTION
In present-day communication systems, ultra-low 
side-lobe level and narrow beamwidth are one of 
the most important design criteria. In the conven-
tional synthesis, simultaneous reductions in peak 
side-lobe level and beamwidth are somewhat con-
flicting in nature, as improvement in one param-
eter introduces degradation in the other. Thus, 
analytical array design techniques distinctly offer 
a side-lobe suppression or beamwidth reduction 
but are ineffective in the multi-objective situation 
(Dolph et al., 1946, Taylor et al., 1955, Bresler 
et al., 1980). Hence, evolutionary approaches are 
applied to solve the aforementioned objectives 
(Bhargav et al., 2013, Basu et al., 2011). Accord-
ing to the open literature, the most popular and 
efficient approaches in solving the aforementioned 
multi-objective problem are Particle Swarm Opti-
mization (PSO) and Differential Evolution (DE) 
(Das et al., 2012, Pal et al., 2010).
Generally, the aforementioned approaches suf-
fer from the randomness in the initial search space. 
Recently, restriction in search space in PSO has 
been introduced with the improvement in optimi-
zation efficiency (Chatterjee et al., 2014 & 2012; 
Archit et al., 2015). Chatterjee et al. (2012) reported 
the synthesis of a 16-element linear array with the 
reduced side-lobe level of −20 dB, with restriction 
defined from the Dolph–Chebyshev distribution. 
However, such distribution introduces distortion 
for a large number (>45) of arrays. Bresler’s Nested 
Product (NP) algorithm (Bresler et al., 1980) 

398
SLLd is the desired SLL and AFSLL(θ) is the 
array factor in the side-lobe region. The second 
error function (EF2) is the difference between the 
desired beamwidth (FNBWd) and the calculated 
FNBW (FNBWc) at each iteration:
EF
FNBW
N
FNBW
N
d
c
W
FNBW
W
N
2 =
−
FNBW
N
d
W
 
(2)
The overall Cost Function (CF) can be formu-
lated by combining the two error functions by the 
weighted sum method as follows:
CF
EF
= α
β
EF
E
+
EF
E 1
2
EFF
βE
+
F
 
(3)
Here, both α and β are chosen to be 1 as two 
different error functions are perturbed by two dif-
ferent sets of optimization parameters. According 
to the open literature (S. Chatterjee et al., 2014; 
Bhargav et al., 2013, Archit et al., 2015), the SLL 
reduction and narrow beamwidth problem can be 
handled separately by varying excitation amplitude 
and inter-element spacing, respectively. Hence, in 
this particular case, EF1 is primarily affected by 
excitation amplitude variation, whereas EF2 by 
inter-element spacing. Hence, keeping 100% influ-
ence on both the error functions does not intro-
duce any subjective nature and, consequently, no 
trade-off is needed.
3 EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS AND 
RESTRICTION IN SEARCH SPACE
Evolutionary algorithms use mechanisms inspired 
by biological evolution, such as reproduction, 
recombination, mutation, and selection of the 
population and then processed through repeated 
iterations, and fitness function determines the 
quality of solutions (Kennedy et al., 1995, Storn 
et al., 1997). Mathematical background of PSO 
and DE algorithms is explained in the following 
sections.
3.1 Particle Swarm Optimization algorithm
The PSO is a population-based algorithm pro-
posed by Kennedy and Eberhart, inspired mainly 
by a flock of birds. In the standard PSO (SPSO), a 
swarm consists of a set of particles and each parti-
cle represents a potential solution of an optimiza-
tion problem. The position and velocity at iteration 
t of the ith particle are denoted by Xi(t) and Vi(t), 
respectively. The velocity of each particle can be 
updated using (4):
V
wV
C rand
Pbest
x
C rand
Gbes
i
V d
i
V d
i
d
i
d
(
)
t
( )t
()(
( )t( )t
( )t )
()(
=
)
−
Pbest
C rand()(
)t
+
1
C
2
C
t
x
d
d
i
( )t
( )t )
−
 
(4)
where rand () is a uniformly distributed random 
numbers in the interval [0,1]; acceleration coefficients 
C1 and C2 are non-negative acceleration coefficients; 
Pbesti(t) is the personal best solution representing 
the best solution found by the ith particle itself until 
iteration t; GbestD(t) is called the global best solu-
tion, representing the best solution found by all par-
ticles globally until iteration t; w is the inertia weight 
to balance the global and local search abilities of 
particles in search space, which is given by:
w
w
w
T
t
=
×
max
m
w
in
 
(5)
where wmax is the initial weight; wmin is the final 
weight; t is the current iteration number; and T is 
the maximum iteration number. The updated par-
ticle position is represented as follows:
x
x
V
i
d
i
d
i
V d
(
)
t
( )t( )
(
)
t
V
xd
d
)
( )t
(t
=
)
+V
t
 
(6)
3.2 Restriction in search space
The concept of restriction in search space is to 
first report with the PSO algorithm (S. Chatterjee 
et al., 2012, 2014). Later, in Archit et al. (2015), 
it is also extended in the DE algorithm. With the 
restriction, the initial randomness of search space 
is eliminated, and in the first generation, the set of 
the parameter values is much closer to the optimal 
solution. Once again, with the restriction, it is not 
necessary that the designer should have an idea 
about the optimal solution.
In this work, all the restrictions are derived from 
Chebyshev array parameters. Excitation amplitudes 
are restricted from the Chebyshev amplitude dis-
tribution of the NP algorithm, whereas the upper 
bound of the inter-element spacing (d) is calculated 
from the newly defined closed-form expression 
of FNBW of the Chebyshev array (Tamal et al., 
2015). The lower bound of d is set to 0.5λ. Restric-
tion is applied to both PSO and DE algorithms, and 
restricted search PSO (RSPSO) and RSDE are used 
as acronyms for their restricted search versions.
4 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In order to prove the effectiveness of restriction 
in search space on both PSO and DE, 51- and 60-
element linear arrays with the SLL objective of −20 
and −30dB and the FNBW of 3.2 and 3.8 degrees, 
respectively, were considered.
4.1 Experimental setup
In this table, ri is the difference between the maxi-
mum and minimum possible values of optimization 
parameters at the ith iteration. The dimension D 

399
depends on the number of elements (N) consid-
ered. Consequently, for even number of elements 
D = (N + 1) and for odd number of elements, it is 
D = ((N + 1)/2 + 1). The number of independent 
runs considered in each case is 20.
4.2 Parametric analysis
In this article, datasets were randomly varied and 
required a statistical hypothesis test. Wilcoxon’s 
rank-sum test was done with a null hypothesis of 
no difference between the set of minimum cost 
function values for different optimization objec-
tives, at each iteration of the best independent run 
obtained using conventional DE and PSO and 
their restricted counterparts (RSDE and RSPSO). 
The p-values are given in Table 2, reflecting the 
significant difference in the best set of minimum 
cost function data obtained by the contestant algo-
rithms over 20 independent trials.
A further comparative study of Standard Devia-
tion (SD), Mean Cost Function (MCF), and other 
antenna parameters revealed the effectiveness of 
restriction in search space.
From Table 3, it can be concluded that among 
all the design instances, RSPSO had achieved the 
least MCF and SD. Consequently, the quality of 
optimal solution was observed with a minimum 
CPU execution time. Also, the excitation ampli-
tude ratio and optimal spacing was minimum (in 
the case of the 60-element array, though the exci-
tation amplitude ratio was less for the subsequent 
algorithms, it had not reached the given objective) 
for RSPSO, whose effectiveness can be anticipated 
subject to design and fabrication of array. It can 
also be observed that restriction was effective for 
both the algorithms, but RSPSO was more robust 
compared with RSDE.
4.3 Graphical comparison
For graphical comparison, the convergence 
graph and the array-factor pattern are shown in 
Figures 2 and 3. From the convergence graph, 
it can be concluded that only RSPSO had com-
pletely achieved the objective at the 47th iteration. 
It is also evident that RSPSO was the fastest to 
Table 1. Experimental setup for SPSO/RSPSO and 
DE/RSDE algorithms.
SPSO/RSPSO
DE/RSDE
Parameters Value
Parameters
Value
Iteration
100
Iteration
100
Swarm 
size
100
No. of 
agents
100
C1
Linearly 
increased 
from 0.5 
to 2.5
CR 
(cross-
over)
Linearly 
increased 
from 0.2 
to 0.95 
C2
Linearly 
decreased 
from 2.5 
to 0.5
F (mutation) Exponentially 
decreased 
from 0.6 
to 0.1
W (inertia 
weight)
Linearly 
decreased 
from 0.9 
to 0.4
Vd, max
0.9 × ri
Table 2. Comparison of p-values for RSPSO.
No. of 
elements
Method 
comparison
p-value
51
RSPSO/SPSO
0.0884
RSPSO/DE
1.49 × 10−5
RSPSO/RSDE
0.0073
60
RSPSO/SPSO
5.12 × 10−27
RSPSO/DE
1.95 × 10−26
RSPSO/RSDE
1.11 × 10−24
Table 3. Comparison of statistical and antenna param-
eters for each contestant algorithm.
Design 
instance
Statistical/
antenna 
parameters RSPSO SPSO
DE
RSDE
51
SD
0.0001
0.032
0.002
0.0018
MCF
0
0
0
0
Exec. Time 80.1s
119.8s 249.8s 194.4s
SLLd = 
−20dB
Excitation
Amplitude 2.462
3.792
9.011
6.5605
Ratio
FNBWd = 
3.20
Optimum
Inter-
element
0.8078
0.8516 0.9309 0.9262
Spacing
HPBW
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
60
SD
0.00002 0.6512 1.1215 0.8373
MCF
0
4.8071 3.263
1.600
Exec. Time  74.51s
121.3s 248.5s 183.03s
SLLd = 
−30dB
Excitation
Amplitude 4.3270
2.9600 3.467
2.275
Ratio
FNBWd =
3.80
Optimum
Inter-
element
0.7802
0.8345 0.9563 0.9206
Spacing
HPBW
1.4
1.0
1.0
1.0

400
converge with an average CPU execution time of 
1.5358s/iteration. From Figure 3, it can be observed 
that only RSPSO provided all the side lobes below 
the desired SLL of −30 dB. Also, FNBW reduction 
was achieved successfully.
5 CONCLUSION
The present work focused on the synthesis of high 
number of linear arrays with and without restric-
tion in search space on the PSO algorithm. The 
design objective of SLL suppression and FNBW 
reduction was given with array excitation ampli-
tudes and uniform inter-element spacing that were 
considered as optimization parameters. Previously, 
restriction using the Chebyshev distribution was 
not defined for high number of arrays as Dolph’s 
solution deviated for number of elements exceed-
ing 45. In this work, restriction was extended for 
high number of arrays with the help of the NP 
algorithm. The results were obtained using two 
design instances of the 51- and 60-element arrays. 
A comparative study with DE and RSDE justified 
the need and advantage of restriction in terms of 
speed, quality of solution (i.e., MCF and SD), and 
elimination of initial randomness of search space. 
Further, it was also concluded that the concept of 
restriction was more effective on PSO than on DE, 
highlighting the superiority of the PSO algorithm. 
Also, RSPSO had greater flexibility from the 
design point of view as it achieved the best design 
parameters compared with the other contestant 
algorithms.
Figure 1. Convergence graph for all the four algorithms 
for the 60-element array, with desired SLLd = −30 dB and 
FNBWd = 3.8 degrees.
Figure 2. Array factor for N = 60 synthesized with 
SLLd = −30 dB and FNBWd = 3.8 degrees by all the four 
algorithms with the main beam region.
Figure 3. Side-lobe region for the aforementioned design instance of the 60-element array, SLLd = −30 dB and 
FNBWd = 3.8 degrees.

401
REFERENCES
Basu B & Mahanti G K, “Fire Fly and Artificial Bees 
Colony Algorithm for Synthesis of Scanned and 
Broadside Linear Array Antenna”, Progress in Elec-
tromagnetics Research B, Vol. 32, 2011, pp. 169–190.
Bhargav A & Gupta N (2013) “Multiobjective Genetic 
Optimization of Nonuniform Linear Array With 
Low Sidelobes and Beamwidth,” IEEE Antennas 
and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 12, 2013, 
pp. 1547–1549.
Bresler A.D. (1980) “A new algorithm for calculating cur-
rent distribution of Dolph-Chebyshev Arrays”, IEEE 
Transactions on Antennas & Propagation, November, 
1980.
Chatterjee S & Chatterjee Sayan (2014) Pattern synthe-
sis of centre fed linear array using Taylor one param-
eter distribution and restricted search Particle Swarm 
Optimization, Journal of Communications Technology 
and Electronics, Vol. 59, No. 11, 2014, 1112–1127.
Chatterjee S, Chatterjee S & Poddar D R (2012) “Side 
lobe level reduction of a linear array using Cheby-
shev polynomial and particle swarm optimization,” 
IJCA Proc. Of Int. Conf. on Communication, Circuits 
and Systems, Bhubaneshwar, India, 2012, Oct. 6–7, 
Bhubneswar, India.
Das T, Ghosh Archit, Chatterjee Soumyo & Chatterjee 
Sayan (2015) “Design Expression for First Null 
Beamwidth of Broadside Dolph Chebyshev Antenna 
Array,” Proc. of C3IT, Adisaptagram, India, Feb. 7–8, 
2015.
Das S, Bhattacharya M, Sen A & Mandal D, “Linear 
Antenna Array Synthesis with Decreasing Sidelobe and 
Narrow Beamwidth,” ACEEE International Journal on 
Communications, Vol. 3, No. 1, 2012, pp. 10–14.
Dolph C. (1946) “A Current Distribution for Broadside 
Arrays which optimizes the Relationship between 
Beamwidth and Side Lobe Level”, Proceeding IRE, 
Vol.34, No. 5, 1946.
Ghosh A, Das Tamal, Chatterjee Soumyo & Chatterjee 
Sayan (2015) Linear Array Pattern Synthesis Using 
restriction Search Space for evolutionary Algorithms: 
A Comparative Study, Proc. of ReTIS-2015, pp 92–97, 
Jadavpur, Kolkata, India, July 9–11, 2015.
Kennedy J & Eberhart R, “Particle swarm optimization,” 
Proc. Conf.   IEEE Int. Conf. Neural Networks, 1995.
Pal S, Qu B Y, Das S & Suganthan P N, “Optimal Syn-
thesis of Linear Antenna Arrays with Multi-objective 
Differential Evolution,” Progress In Electromagnetics 
Research B, Vol. 21, 2010, pp. 87–111.
Storn R & Price K, “Differential Evolution—A Simple 
and Efficient Heuristic for Global Optimization Over 
Continuous Spaces”, Journal of Global Optimization, 
Vol. 11, No. 4, 1997, pp. 341–359.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

403
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Effect of a high-k dielectric material on the surface potential 
and the induced lateral field in short-channel MOSFET
Akash Ganguly, Chandrima Ghosh & Arpan Deyasi
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, RCC Institute of Information Technology, 
West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper, the surface potential and the induced lateral electric field in the short-channel 
MOSFET with a high-k dielectric material were analytically computed by solving the two-dimensional 
Poisson’s equation. TiO2 was considered as the dielectric material for the simulation purpose, and the 
result was compared with that obtained for the Si–SiO2 system. Doping concentration and dielectric 
thickness were varied within the practical limit to observe the deviation of electrical parameters as a func-
tion of normalized channel length. The result indicated that better tuning of the threshold voltage was 
possible for the Si–TiO2-based system than the conventional Si–SiO2 system, which was predicted from 
the variation of the surface potential. Also, higher induced field was obtained for the high-k dielectric 
material in the presence of the virtual cathode even for low doping and higher dielectric thickness. This 
result is critically important for designing the short-channel MOSFET with the required threshold voltage 
and induced field with smaller dielectric thickness and moderate doping.
Limit on gate dielectric thickness has already 
been studied (Hirose et al., 2000) to analyze the 
magnitude of tunneling current flow and possible 
dielectric breakdown (Cellere et al., 2005). Scaling 
to the sub-nanometer dielectric thickness is pos-
sible, thanks to the microelectronics fabrication 
technology; however, this puts restriction on the 
doping of source and drain regions. High doping 
of these regions will lead to dielectric breakdown, 
which essentially makes burn-out of the MOSFET. 
Hence, low-to-moderate doping is required for 
lower dielectric thickness. Again, lower channel 
length increases the lateral induced electric field. 
This along with moderate doping and lower dielec-
tric thickness are the constraints in designing the 
short-channel MOSFET.
In this paper, the surface potential and the lat-
eral electric field in the short-channel MOSFET 
were analytically computed by solving the two-
dimensional Poisson’s equation with appropriate 
boundary conditions. Low-to-moderate doping 
concentrations and lower dielectric thickness were 
considered for the simulation purpose. Calculation 
was made for the Si–TiO2 system, and the result 
was compared with that obtained for the Si–SiO2 
system. The results were very important in analyz-
ing the performance of the short-channel MOS-
FET and the corresponding VLSI circuit.
1 INTRODUCTION
Research on short-channel MOSFET has always 
been the choice of VLSI engineers in order to find 
the solution of the problems that arise due to the 
short-channel effect (Kawaura et al., 2000, Doris 
et al., 2002, Hokazono et al., 2002), although recent 
work has suggested that scaling beyond 20 nm gate 
length is possible with a remarkable result on elec-
trical performance (Frank et al., 2001, Solomon 
et al., 2002, Likharev et al., 2003). Achievement 
of the ITRS roadmap projections 2001 (Interna-
tional Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, 
2001 Edition) is the main objective of the decade, 
where gate length can be scaled beyond 10 nm. One 
of the major modifications already considered to 
achieve the target is the replacement of a con-
ventional dielectric material by a high-k material 
(Frank et al., 2009, Mohapatra et al., 2014). With 
the introduction of novel dielectric materials, bet-
ter performance can be achieved (Zaunert et al., 
2007). Among other electrical parameters, deter-
mination of threshold voltage is extremely crucial 
as it controls the magnitude of sub-threshold cur-
rent (Kumar et al., 2012). This is essentially deter-
mined by the surface potential, and its accurate 
estimation plays a pivotal role in controlling the 
short-channel effect in the VLSI circuit.

404
2 THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
For a short-channel MOSFET, charge density in 
the channel is characterized by the two-dimen-
sional Poisson’s equation:
∂
∂
+ ∂
∂
= −
E
x
E
y
qN
x
E
y
E
A
N
ε
 
(1)
where Ex and Ey are the field distributions inside 
the depletion region. For the solution of the surface 
potential, boundary conditions can be written as
φ
φ
ss
φ
bi
φ
( )
 
(2.1)
φ
φ
ss
φ
DS
bi
φ
V
( )
L
 
(2.2)
where we assume that the device is free of the body 
effect.
If we consider that Ed(0,y) is the electric field in 
the dielectric region, and Ex(0,y) is the electric field 
at the dielectric–semiconductor interface, then 
continuity of the displacement vector is given by
εd
d
ε
x
E
y
d
y
(
)
(
εx
, )
y
0
)
(
εx
ε
 
(3)
where the fields are represented in the following 
form:
E
y
t
V
V
y
d
E
d
GS
V
fb
V
ss
(
)
[
t
( )
y ]
1 V
[
−φs
 
(4.1)
E
y
t
V
V
y
x
E
d
s dt
GS
V
fb
V
ss
(
)
[
t
d
( )
y ]
V
[
−
εd
εs
φs
 
(4.2)
For the computation purpose, we can safely 
assume that the normal electric field component 
in the substrate region just below the channel 
is zero, i.e., Ex(Wd, y) = 0. Then, from Poisson’s 
equation
∂
∂
=
E
x
E
y
W y
W
x
x
E
E
d
(
)
(
−Ed
E
, )
y  
(5)
This can be written in the following manner:
∂
∂
=
E
x
t W
y
x
d
E
s dt
d
W
GS
fb
ss
εd
ε
φ
[
(
−
V
V
−
GS
V
fb
V
ss
φs
)]  
(6)
Substituting the magnitude of Ex in Equation 
(1), Poisson’s equation can be represented in the 
following form:
∂
∂
+
= −
E
y
l
y
qN
y
E
GS
fb
ss
A
N
1
2 [
(
−
V
V
−
GS
V
fb
V
ss
)]
φs
ηq
ε
 
(7)
where l is the characteristic length of the channel. 
Since
E
d
dy
y
E
ss
= −φs
So, we can modify Equation (7) as
d
dy
l
qN
l
ss
A
N
GS
fb
2
2
2l
2
φs
φ
η
sss
y
q
ε
−
=
−
( )
y
(
)
V
V
GS
V
fb
V
 
(8)
Solution of Equation (8) is given by
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
ss
φ
ss
DS
bi
φ
ss
bi
φ
ss
L
φss
φ
L
y l
L l
( )
)
( )
L
[
(
φ
φ
DS
φ
ss
φ
V
φ
φ
DS
φ
ss
φ
)] sinh(
)l
sinh(
/ )l
[
(
φ
φ
φ
ss
φ
+
φss
φ
)
L
φ
+ [φ
L
y
L l
)]sinh[(
)
L
y / ]l
sinh(
/ )l
 (9)
Thus, the induced lateral electric field is
E
E
l
L
y l
L l
E
y
y
s
E
E
DS
bi
ss
s
E
−
E
−
( )
L
( )
L
[
(
VDS
V
ss
)] cosh(y
)
sinh(
/ )l
( )
L sinh(
/
1
φ
φ
bibi
s
l
L l
E
y
L l
l
L
s
E
bi
ss
)
sinh(
/ )l
( )
L sinh[(
)
L
y / ]l
sinh(
/ )l
[
(
ss
[
)] cos
+
×
[
1 φ
φ
bibi
s
bib
h[
h (
) / ]
sinh(
/ )
y
L /
 
(10)
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Using Equations (9) and (10), the surface poten-
tial and the induced lateral electric field were cal-
culated and plotted as a function of normalized 
length for different structural and internal param-
eters. TiO2 was considered as the high-k dielectric 
material, and the result was compared with that 
obtained for the conventional SiO2 dielectric sys-
tem. Doping concentrations and dielectric layer 
thickness were varied to observe the effect on the 
electrical parameters, and a comparative study was 
also performed.
Figure 1 shows the variation of the surface 
potential for different doping concentrations for 
both the dielectric materials under consideration. 
From Figure 1a, it can be observed that for lower 
concentrations, the surface potential becomes a 
linear function of normalized length, whereas non-
linearity arises when the concentration increases. 
A comparative study with Figure 1b reveals the 
fact that even for very high concentrations, the sur-
face potential remains constant for a wider range 
of channel length; and it also exhibits minima. 
Thus, the high-k dielectric system provides a bet-
ter response than the conventional SiO2 dielectric 
system for a wider range of channel length with a 

405
constant surface potential even for a high doping 
condition. This variation helps us to conclude that 
for the high-k dielectric material, the threshold 
voltage increases much faster with channel length 
variation in a lower range, whereas for higher 
dimensions, it almost saturates.
Figure 2 shows the effect of doping concentra-
tion on the induced electric field. For the high-k 
dielectric material, induced field variation shows 
the existence of minima at a particular channel 
length, whereas it increases for either reducing 
or increasing the magnitude. This is plotted in 
Fig. 2a. Moreover, it shows a higher magnitude 
than that obtained for the conventional SiO2 sys-
tem. For lower doping, the induced field remains 
almost constant for SiO2. Thus, the existence of the 
virtual cathode can be determined for the high-k 
dielectric material at moderate and higher concen-
trations, but it is only traceable for high doping 
when a low-k dielectric material is used.
Figure 3 shows the variation of the surface 
potential with channel length for different oxide 
thicknesses. The result is plotted for both TiO2 
and SiO2 in Figures 3a and 3b, respectively. It can 
be observed from the plot that the thickness of 
the dielectric material hardly affects the surface 
potential except the higher channel length for the 
TiO2-based system, whereas it modifies the surface 
potential from a moderate to higher channel length 
range for the SiO2-based system. This suggests 
that the threshold voltage tuning is possible at the 
desired range when the high-k dielectric material 
is used (as the constant surface potential indicates 
an increase in the threshold voltage) compared 
Figure 1a. Variation of the surface potential with the 
normalized channel length for different doping concen-
trations of TiO2.
Figure 1b. Variation of the surface potential with the 
normalized channel length for different doping concen-
trations of SiO2.
Figure 2a. Variation of the induced lateral electric field 
with normalized channel length for different doping con-
centrations of TiO2.
Figure 2b. Variation of the induced lateral electric field 
with normalized channel length for different doping con-
centrations of SiO2.

406
with that obtained for the conventional material 
system.
Figure 4 shows the variation of the lateral 
induced electric field for different dielectric thick-
nesses. Comparative analysis reveals that the mag-
nitude of the induced field is higher for the high-k 
dielectric system. The position for the field minima 
shifts right as the thickness of the dielectric mate-
rial decreases, whereas the magnitude of the shift 
(with respect to channel length) remains negligible 
for the low-k dielectric system. However, for both 
the material systems, it can be observed that the 
rate of increase in field is lower for higher thick-
ness with the increase in channel length. Thus, 
higher induced field generation is possible for the 
high-k dielectric system, and its tuning in a wider 
range can be made by selecting the dielectric thick-
ness prior to fabrication.
4 CONCLUSION
The surface potential and the induced lateral elec-
tric field for the short-channel MOSFET were 
analytically computed as a function of normalized 
channel length. Doping concentration and dielec-
tric thickness were varied to observe the effect on 
those parameters. The high-k dielectric material 
was used for the simulation purpose, which resulted 
in the increase of the induced field and also bet-
ter tuning of the surface potential. The results 
indicated that the use of the high-k dielectric mate-
Figur 3a. Variation of the surface potential with nor-
malized channel length for different dielectric thicknesses 
for TiO2.
Figure 3b. Variation of the surface potential with nor-
malized channel length for different dielectric thicknesses 
for SiO2.
Figure 4a. Variation of the induced lateral electric field 
with normalized channel length for different dielectric 
thicknesses for TiO2.
Figure 4b. Variation of the induced lateral electric field 
with normalized channel length for different dielectric 
thicknesses for SiO2.

407
rial enhanced the tuning ability of the threshold 
voltage compared with that obtained for the con-
ventional low-k dielectric material.
REFERENCES
Cellere. G., Paccagnella. A., Valentini. M.G., 2005, Influ-
ence of dielectric breakdown on MOSFET drain current, 
IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 52, 211–217.
Doris. B., Meikei. I., Kanarsky. T., Ying. Z., Roy. 
R.A., Dokumaci. O., Ren. Z., Jamin. F.F., Shi. L., 
Natzle. W., Huang. H.J., Mezzapelle. J., Mocuta. A., 
Womack. S., Gribelyuk. M., Jones. E.C., Miller. R.J., 
Wong. H.S.P., Haensch. W., 2002, Extreme scaling 
with ultrathin Si channel MOSFETs, IEDM Technical 
Digest, 267–270.
Frank. D.J., Dennard. R.H., Nowak. E., Solomon. P.M., 
Taur. Y., Wong. H.S.P., 2001, Device scaling limits of 
Si MOSFETs and their application dependencies, Pro-
ceedings of IEEE, 89, 259–288.
Frank. M.M., Kim. S.B., Brown. S.L., Bruley. J., Copel. 
M., Hopstaken. M., Chudzik. M., Narayanan. V., 
2009, Scaling the MOSFET gate dielectric: From 
high-k to higher-k? Microelectronic Engineering, 86, 
1603–1608.
Hirose. M., Koh. M., Mizubayashi. W., Murakami. H., 
Shibahara. K., Miyazaki. S., 2000, Fundamental limit 
of gate oxide thickness scaling in advanced MOS-
FETs, Semiconductor Science and Technology, 15, 
485–490.
Hokazono. A., Ohuchi. K., Takayanagi. M., Watanabe. 
Y., Magoshi. S., Kato. Y., Shimizu. T., Mori. S., 
Oguma. H., Sasaki. T., Yoshimura. H., Miyano. 
K., Yasutake. N., Suto. H., Adachi. K., Fukui. H., 
Watanabe. T., Tamaoki. N., Toyoshima. Y., Ishiuchi. 
H., 2002, 14 nm gate length CMOSFETs utilizing low 
thermal budget process with poly-SiGe and Ni sali-
cide, IEDM Technical Digest, 639–642.
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, 
2001 Edition: http://public.itrs.net/.
Kawaura. H., Sakamoto. T., Baba. T., 2000, Observation 
of source-to-drain direct tunneling in 8 nm gate elec-
trically variable shallow junction MOSFETs, Applied 
Physics Letters, 76, 3810–3812.
Kumar. K.K., Rao. N.B., 2012, Characterization of 
Variable Gate Oxide Thickness MOSFET with Non-
Uniform Oxide Thicknesses for Sub-Threshold Leak-
age Current Reduction, International Conference on 
Solid-State and Integrated Circuit, 78–83.
Likharev. K., Greer. J., Korkin. A., Labanowski. J., 2003, 
Electronics below 10 nm, Nano and Giga Challenges in 
Microelectronics, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: 
Elsevier.
Mohapatra. S.K., Pradhan. K.P., Sahu. P.K., 2014, Influ-
ence of High-k Gate Dielectric on Nanoscale DG-
MOSFET, International Journal of Advanced Science 
and Technology, 65, 19–26.
Solomon. P.M., Luryi. S., Xu. J., Zaslavsky. A., 2002, 
Strategies at the end of CMOS scaling, Future Trends 
in Microelectronics, Eds. New York: Wiley, 28–42.
Zaunert. F., Endres. R., Stefanov. Y., Schwalke. U., 2007, 
Evaluation of MOSFETs with crystalline high-k gate-
dielectrics: device simulation and experimental data, 
Journal of Telecommunications and Information 
Technology, 2, 78–85.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

409
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Effect of carrier-carrier collisions on RF performance 
of millimeter-wave IMPATT sources
Prasit Kumar Bandyopadhyay
Department of Electronics and Communication, Dumkal Institute of Engineering and Technology, 
Murshidabad, West Bengal, India
Subhendu Chakraborty
Department of Electronics and Communication, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, 
Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
Arindam Biswas
Department of Electronics and Communication, NSHM Knowledge Campus, Durgapur, West Bengal, India
Aritra Acharyya
Department of Electronics and Communication, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, 
Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
A.K. Bhattacharjee
Department of Electronics and Communication, NIT, Dugrapur, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper, the authors have studied the effect of carrier-carrier collisions on the static 
(DC) and large-signal characteristics of Double-Drift Region (DDR) IMPATTs based on Si designed 
to operate at mm-wave atmospheric window frequencies such as 94, 140 and 220 GHz. Simulations are 
carried out to study the RF performance of those diodes by taking into account both empirical relation of 
field dependence of ionization rates developed from experimental data as well as a appropriate analytical 
model of same parameter which takes into account the energy loss of charge carriers due to carrier-carrier 
collisions. Studies have been carried out to investigate how far extent the carrier-carrier interactions affects 
the RF performance of the device especially at higher mm-wave frequencies.
those from photo multiplication measurements on 
Si p+-n mega diodes as functions of both electric 
field and junction temperature. At present also the 
experimental data of W.N. Grant are considered 
as the most acceptable and authentic ionization 
rate values of Si. W.N. Grant reported empirical 
relations representing the ionization rates of elec-
trons and holes fitted from his experimental data 
as functions of both field and temperature. Those 
are given by (Grant 1973)
α
ξ
ξ
e
α
j
e h
e h
j
Tj
Be h
,
,
ξ
h
j
e
,
,ξ
)
e
e h
Ae,e
xp
(
)
j
Tj
,
−
e
h
A
xp⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
 
(1)
where α
ξ
α
ξ
e
j
α
ξ
α
h
j
α
ξ
α
Tj
Tj
α
ξ
),
ξ
) are the ionization rate 
of electrons and holes respectively at the electric 
field of ξ and for the junction temperature of 
Tj, Ae, Be
j
B (
)
Tj
T  and Ah, Bh
j
B (
)
Tj
T
 are the ionization 
1 INTRODUCTION
Impact Avalanche Transit Time (IMPATT) diodes 
are well recognized two terminal solid-state sources 
to generate sufficiently high RF power with ade-
quate DC to RF conversion efficiency at both 
microwave (1–30 GHz) and millimeter-wave (mm-
wave) (30–300 GHz) frequency regimes (Luy et al. 
1987, Wollitzer et al. 1996, Midford et al. 1979). 
The principle of operation of IMPATT diode and 
its negative resistance property is based on impact 
ionization followed by avalanche multiplication 
and transit time of charge carriers to cross the 
depletion layer of the device. Therefore the ioniza-
tion rates of charge carrier in the semiconductor 
base material are the key parameters which govern 
the RF performance of IMPATT oscillators. In the 
year 1973, W.N. Grant (Grant 1973) reported ioni-
zation rates of electrons and holes by extracting 

410
coefficients associated with electrons and holes 
respectively. Both coefficients Ae and Ah are inde-
pendent of Tj; however, both Be
j
B (
)
Tj
T  and Bh
j
B (
)
Tj
T
 
are the functions of Tj.
Two years later in 1975, Ghosh et al. (Ghosh 
et al. 1975) shown that the higher carrier density in 
a semiconductor enhances the energy loss due to 
carrier-carrier collisions which causes significant 
deterioration in ionization rate of charge carriers. 
This influence of carrier-carrier interactions at 
higher doping levels of the semiconductor material 
is not reflected in equation (1) reported by Grant 
(Grant 1973) which was based the Shockley’s 
model. The doping densities taken into account by 
Grant were 1023 m−3 (Grant 1973) which is more 
or less appropriate for the IMPATTs operating 
around 100 GHz. Thus the empirical relation given 
in equation (1) can be used for analyzing IMPATT 
diodes designed to operate at 94 GHz or slightly 
higher frequency than it. However, for analyzing 
higher mm-wave frequency diodes such as 140 or 
220 GHz IMPATTs in which the doping densities 
of epitaxial layers are appreciably more than those 
taken into account by Grant (Grant 1973), i.e. the 
equation (1) is insufficient.
In the year 2014, Acharyya et al. (Acharyya 
et al. 2014) formulated a generalized analytical 
model to evaluate the ionization rate of charge car-
riers in semiconductors which takes into account 
the multistage scattering phenomena. All possi-
ble combinations of optical phonon scattering as 
well as carrier-carrier collision events prior to the 
ionizing collision have been taken into account 
in that model to obtain the probability of impact 
ionization. And finally from the energy-balance 
equation, the analytical expressions of ionization 
rates of charge carriers have been obtained (Ach-
aryya et al. 2014). In the present paper, the authors 
have adopted the ionization rate model proposed 
by Acharyya et al. (Acharyya et al. 2014) to carry 
out both static (DC) and large-signal simulation 
of DDR IMPATTs based on Si designed to oper-
ate at mm-wave atmospheric window frequencies 
such as 94, 140 and 220 GHz. Simulations are 
carried out to study the RF performance of those 
diodes by taking into account both ionization rate 
models reported by Grant (Grant 1973) as well as 
Acharyya et al. (Acharyya et al. 2014) to investi-
gate how far extent the carrier-carrier interactions 
affects the RF performance of the device especially 
at higher mm-wave frequencies.
2 IONIZATION RATES
The analytical expressions impact ionization rates 
of electrons and holes developed by Acharyya 
et al. (Acharyya et al. 2014) are given by
α
ξ
ξ
ξ
e h
α
T
ee hh
ee hh
T
PT
l
le
ξ
dEe
dx
PT
e h
T
e h
T
,
,
,
)
ξ
(ξ
(
,
,
=
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
−
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
−
1
ξ
ξ
ξ
)
ξ
,
,
,
(
)
+
ξ)
ξ
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
(
)
,
l
l
E
r
T
rl
ee
l
hh
i(
E
e h,
T
1
 
(2)
where PT
P
e
T ( )
ξ  and PT
P
h
T ( )
ξ  are the probability of 
impact ionization of electrons and holes respectively 
obtained by considering the multistage scattering 
phenomena (Acharyya et al. 2014), Er is the energy 
of optical phonons, Eee and Ehh are the average energy 
loss due to electron-electron and hole-hole collision 
events respectively, Ei
E ( )
e  and Ei
E ( )
h  are the ionization 
threshold energies of electrons and holes respec-
tively, lr, lee, lhh are the mean free paths associated 
with optical phonon scattering, electron-electron and 
hole-hole collisions respectively, q is the charge of an 
electron (q = 1.6 × 10−19 C). The terms dE
dx
ee
E
 and 
dE
dx
hh
E
 in equation (2) represents average energy 
loss per unit length due to electron-electron and hole-
hole collisions respectively (Acharyya et al. 2014).
The variations of αe and αh in Si obtained from 
equations (2) with inverse of the electric field for differ-
ent electron and hole densities are shown in Figure 1. 
The other material parameters of Si such as band-
gap Eg = 1.0659 eV, Eie = 1.5989 eV, Eih = 1.3324 eV, 
Er = 0.063 eV, lr = 65–100 Å, mean free path of 
ionizing collision for electrons lie = 1300 Å and for 
holes lih = 1120 Å at 500 K are taken from published 
reports (Electronic Archive 2015). The temperature 
Figure 1. Ionization rate of electrons and holes in Si 
versus inverse of the applied electric field at 500 K. Points 
(filled triangle and filled circle) represent plot of the exper-
imental data of Grant (Grant 1973) (electron and hole 
concentrations in the experiment were n, p = 1023 m−3).

411
is taken to be 500 K. Since the junction temperature 
of the IMPATT devices are kept nearly 500 K (just 
below the burnout temperature of Si, i.e. 575 K) by 
appropriate heat sinking arrangement in order to 
obtain maximum RF Power output (Acharyya et al. 
2013). The αe,h versus 1/ξ graphs plotted from the 
equations (1) and Grant’s experimental data (Grant 
1973) are also shown in Figure 1. The best fittings 
of the αe and αh described by equations (2) with the 
Grant’s αe and αh values for electron (n) and holes (p) 
densities of 1023 m−3 have been obtained by adjusting 
four fitting parameters relating n and p with lee and lhh 
respectively; those relations are l
E
n
ee
l
c
−
(
)
E
/1 3
/  and 
l
H
p
hl
d
−
(
)
H
/3
1/ , where E, c, H and d are the above 
mentioned fitting parameters. Best fittings of equa-
tion (2) with equations (1) for n, p = 1023 m−3 (which 
are the n and p values taken into account in Grant’s 
experiment (Grant 1973)) are obtained for E = 6.13, 
c = 0.81, H = 4.79, d = 1.02.
It is interesting to observe from Figure 1 that the 
analytical model proposed by Acharyya et al. (Ach-
aryya et al. 2014) provides close arrangement with 
the experimental data (Grant 1973) for n, p = 1023 
m−3 and Tj = 500 K within the electric field range 
of 2.0 × 107–8.0 × 107 V m−1. However, it is note-
worthy from Figure 1 that impact ionization rate of 
charge carriers decrease significantly when the car-
rier densities are increased. Degradation of impact 
ionization probabilities of charge carriers as a con-
sequence of increase of energy loss per unit length 
due to increased amount of carrier-carrier collision 
is the cause of reduction in impact ionization rates 
at higher carrier densities. The carrier densities in 
epitaxial layers of IMPATT diodes operating at 
higher mm-wave frequencies are much larger than 
1023 m−3, thus the ionization rate of charge carriers 
are reduced significantly within the active region of 
those. Therefore a detail investigation is required to 
estimate how far extent this reduced impact ioniza-
tion rates affects the RF performance of the device 
at different mm-wave frequency bands.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The n- and p-epitaxial layer widths (Wn and Wp) 
and corresponding doping concentrations (ND 
and NA) of DDR IMPATT diodes are designed 
for operation at 94, 140 and 220 GHz frequencies 
respectively by following a well established method 
reported earlier (Acharyya et al. 2013). The dop-
ing concentrations of the n+- and p+- contact lay-
ers (Nn+ and Np+) are taken to be in the order of 
1025 m−3 (Luy et al. 1987). Bias current density 
parameters (J0) are optimized subject to obtain 
maximum DC to RF conversion efficiency (ηL) 
at peak optimum frequency (fp) (Acharyya et al. 
2013). The design parameters such as Wn, Wp, ND, 
NA, Nn+, Np+ and J0 are given in Table 1. The junc-
tion diameters of 94, 140, and 220 GHz diodes are 
chosen to be 35, 25 and 20 μm keeping in mind the 
rigorous thermal analysis reported earlier (Ach-
aryya et al. 2013). The realistic field dependence 
of drift velocity of charge carriers (ve and vh) and 
other material parameters such as intrinsic carrier 
concentration (ni), effective density of states in 
conduction and valance bands (Nc and Nv), diffu-
sivities (De and Dh), motilities (μe and μh) and dif-
fusion lengths (Le and Lh) of charge carriers in Si 
for realistic junction temperature of 500 K (Ach-
aryya et al. 2013) have been taken the published 
experimental reports (Electronic Archive 2015) to 
carry out both DC and large-signal simulations. 
Important breakdown voltage (VB), avalanche 
zone voltage drop (VA), ratio of drift zone voltage 
drop to breakdown voltage (VD/VB; VD = VB – VA), 
avalanche zone width (xA) and ratio of avalanche 
zone width to total depletion layer width (xA/W; 
W = Wn + Wp) of DDR Si IMPATTs designed 
to operated at 94, 140 and 220 GHz at optimum 
bias current densities (J0) have been obtained 
from the present DC simulation. It is observed 
that ξp, VB, VA and xA obtained in present simu-
lation are significantly larger especially in higher 
frequency diodes as compared to those given by 
the earlier simulation. Percentage of charges in 
the said parameters observed in the present simu-
lation with respect to the earlier counterpart are 
shown as bar graphs in Figure 2. The percentage 
of charges (Δχ
Δ
χ
(
)
χ
χ
−
χ
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎤
⎦
⎤×
χ
χ
(
)
χ
100% ; 
where χ
ξp
ξ  or VB or VA or xA, the superscripts 
(ES) and (PS) stand for earlier and present simu-
lation obtained values respectively) of the said 
parameters are observed to be increasing as the 
frequency of operation of the device is increasing.
Table 1. Structural, doping and bias current density parameters.
Serial 
number
fd
(GHz)
Wn
(μm)
Wp
(μm)
ND
(×1023 m−3)
NA
(×1023 m−3)
Nn+
(×1025 m−3)
Np+
(×1025 m−3)
J0
(×108 Am−2)
1
 94
0.400
0.380
1.200
1.250
5.000
2.700
 3.40
2
140
0.280
0.245
1.800
2.100
5.000
2.700
 5.80
3
220
0.180
0.160
3.950
4.590
5.000
2.700
14.5

412
The important large-signal parameters of the 
diodes such as peak optimum frequency (fp), ava-
lanche resonance frequency (fa), peak negative 
conductance (Gp), corresponding susceptance 
(Bp), quality factor or Q-factor Qp
Q
(
)
p
B
G
p
B
p
G
(
), 
RF power output (PRF) and DC to RF conversion 
efficiency (ηL) for 50% voltage modulation are 
obtained from the large-signal simulation. It is 
observed that due to the enhanced energy loss per 
unit length as a result of higher carrier-carrier col-
lisions at higher doping densities, fp, fa, Gp
G  and 
Bp decrease significantly. Since the doping densi-
ties of the higher frequency diodes are more, thus 
the above mentioned effect is found to more pro-
nounced in those diodes. Percentage of decrease in 
Bp of all diodes are found to be smaller as com-
pared to those of |
|
p . As a result the Q-factors 
increase significantly causing degradation of oscil-
lation growth rate and less stability of oscillation 
(Acharyya et al. 2013). Both PRF and ηL are found 
to be decreased in the present simulation as com-
pared its earlier counterpart.
Percentage of changes in Gp
G , Bp, PRF and ηL 
with respect to the earlier reported values (Ach-
aryya et al. 2013) are shown as bar graphs in 
Figure 3. It is observed from Figures 2 and 3 that 
percentage of decrease in Gp
G  is more pronounced 
than percentage of increase in VB due to the effect 
under consideration. Consequently the values of 
PRF decreases (∵P
V
G
A
RF
P
RF
V
p
j
G
A
( / )(
) |
|
2
/
2
) and the 
input DC power (P
J V A
DC
P
B
j
V A
V
0
J
) increases for all 
diodes which ultimately leads to deterioration in 
DC to RF conversion efficiency (ηL
R
η
F
DC
PD
= (
/
RF
PRF
)).
Figure 4 shows the variations of RF power 
output of DDR Si IMPATTs, with optimum fre-
quency obtained from present simulation as well as 
the earlier reported results (Acharyya et al. 2013) 
for different values of RS. Figure 4 also show the 
experimentally measured values of PRF of 94, 140 
and 220 GHz DDR IMPATTs (Luy et al. 1987, 
Wollitzer et al. 1996, Midford et al. 1979). In the 
year 1987, Luy et al. (Luy et al. 1987) experimen-
tally obtained peak RF power of 600 mW with 
6.7% efficiency from 94 GHz DDR Si IMPATT 
oscillators. He used molecular bean epitaxy (MBE) 
growth technique to fabricate 94 GHz diodes he 
also measured the maximum series resistance 
of 0.2 Ω from the diodes under experimenta-
tion. Large-signal simulation of 94 GHz DDR Si 
IMPATT presented in this paper provides vari-
ations of PRF and ηL from 625.30 to 593.04 mW 
and 7.49 to 7.10% respectively the variation of RS 
from 0 to 0.3 Ω. The simulation results are very 
close to the experimental results of Luy et al. (Luy 
et al. 1987). Especially for RS = 0.2 Ω (which is the 
measured value of RS in 94 GHz DDR (Luy et al. 
1987)), simulation provides PRF = 603.84 mW and 
ηL = 7.10% which are very much close in agreement 
with the experimental results. Wollitzer et al. (Wol-
litzer et al. 1996) and Midford et al. (Midford et al. 
1979) reported around 225 and 50 mW RF power 
outputs from 140 and 220 GHz DDR Si IMPATT 
Figure 2. Bar graphs showing the percentage of changes 
in peak electric field, breakdown voltage, avalanche zone 
voltage drop and avalanche zone width of 94, 140 and 
220 GHz DDR Si IMPATTs obtained in present simu-
lation with respect to the earlier work (Acharyya et al. 
2013).
Figure 3. Bar graphs showing the percentage of 
changes in peak negative conductance, corresponding 
susceptance, RF power output and DC to RF conversion 
efficiency of 94, 140 and 220 GHz DDR Si IMPATTs 
obtained in present simulation with respect to the earlier 
work (Acharyya et al. 2013).

413
oscillators respectively. Present simulation shows 
that RF power outputs of 140 and 220 GHz DDR 
Si IMPATTs can vary from 276.65 to 243.28 mW 
and 209.07 to 169.36 mW respectively for RS val-
ues ranging from 0.0 to 0.3 Ω. Simulation obtained 
power output in 140 GHz diode is fairly close in 
agreement with the experimental results of Wol-
litzer et al. (Wollitzer et al. 1996). However, the 
large-signal simulation of 220 GHz diode is pre-
dicting larger power can be drawn from the source 
as compared to the experiment carried out by Mid-
ford et al. (Midford et al. 1979). This discrepancy 
is may be due to the un-optimized device structure, 
different biasing conditions, inappropriate experi-
mental arrangements, etc. adopted by the experi-
mentalists at 220 GHz (Midford et al. 1979).
4 CONCLUSION
The authors have studied the effect of carrier-carrier 
collisions on the DC and large-signal characteris-
tics of DDR Si IMPATTs Si designed to operate at 
mm-wave atmospheric window frequencies such as 
94, 140 and 220 GHz. Simulations are carried out 
to study the RF performance of those diodes by 
taking into account both empirical relation of field 
dependence of ionization rates developed from 
experimental data as well as a appropriate ana-
lytical model of same parameter which takes into 
account the energy loss of charge carriers due to 
carrier-carrier collisions. Studies have been carried 
out to investigate how far extent the carrier-carrier 
interactions affects the RF performance of the 
device especially at higher mm-wave frequencies. It 
is observed that the simulation results obtained in 
the present simulation- (i.e. by taking into account 
the carrier-carrier interactions) are significantly 
closer in arrangement as compared its earlier 
counterpart (i.e. by taking into account the empiri-
cal relation of field dependence of ionization rates 
obtained from experiment). Therefore, the effect of 
reduced ionization rates at higher doping densities 
must be incorporated in the simulation in order to 
obtain better and more realistic results.
REFERENCES
Acharyya, A. and Banerjee, J.P. (2014) A Generalized 
Analytical Model Based on Multistage Scattering 
Phenomena for Estimating the Impact Ionization 
Rate of Charge Carriers in Semiconductors. Journal 
of Computational Electronics 13, 917–924.
Acharyya, A., J. Chakraborty, K. Das, S. Datta, P. De, 
S. Banerjee and J.P. Banerjee, “Large-Signal Charac-
terization of DDR Silicon IMPATTs Operating in 
Millimeter-Wave and Terahertz Regime,” Journal of 
Semiconductors, vol. 34, no. 10, 104003–8, 2013.
Electronic Archive: New Semiconductor Materials, 
Characteristics and Properties. Available from: http://
www.ioffe.ru/SVA/NSM/Semicond/index.html (Last 
accessed on: October 2015).
Grant, W.N. (1973) Electron and hole ionization rates 
in epitaxial Silicon at high electric fields. Solid-State 
Electronics 16, 1189–1203.
Luy, J.F., Casel, A., Behr, W., and Kasper, E. (1987) A 
90-GHz double-drift IMPATT diode made with Si 
MBE. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 34, 1084–1089.
Midford, T.A., and Bernick, R.L. (1979) Millimeter Wave 
CW IMPATT diodes and Oscillators. IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech. 27, 483–492, 1979.
Scharfetter, D.L., and Gummel, H.K. (1969) Large-Sig-
nal Analysis of a Silicon Read Diode Oscillator. IEEE 
Trans. on Electron Devices 6, 64–77.
Wollitzer, M., Buchler, J., Schafflr, F., and Luy, J.F. (1996) 
D-band Si-IMPATT diodes with 300 mW CW output 
power at 140 GHz. Electronic Letters 32, 122–123.
Figure 4. RF power output versus optimum frequency 
of DDR Si IMPATTs obtained from experimental meas-
urement (Luy et al. 1987, Wollitzer et al. 1996, Midford 
et al. 1979), earlier simulation (Acharyya et al. 2013) as 
well as present simulation.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

415
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Removal of the baseline wander and the power line interference 
from ECG signals using the Median–Kalman filter
Kiron Nandi & Abhijit Lahiri
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In order to improve the accuracy and reliability of the diagnosis of a patient’s cardiac 
condition, the first important requirement is to denoise the Electrocardiograph (ECG) signal before 
recording it. The most common noises that are present in an ECG signal are due to the baseline wander 
and the power line interference. So far, different types of adaptive and non-adaptive digital filters have 
been proposed to remove these noises from an ECG signal. In this paper, the Kalman filter coupled 
with the median filter was applied to denoise ECG signals. To evaluate the performance of this method, 
a simulated ECG signal corrupted with 0.25 Hz and 50 Hz signals was considered. The method was 
then extended to the ECG signals available in the MIT-BIH arrhythmia database. The accuracy of the 
proposed Median–Kalman (M-K) filter was measured by the detection rate of the R-peak of the denoised 
signal and is discussed in this paper.
preferred, since this operation also removes the 
information-bearing frequency components of the 
ECG signal that lie in the same frequency range. 
Kalman filter-based BLW removal is not a good 
idea because of the adaptability and convergence 
factor of the Kalman filter and the unpredictabil-
ity of the BLW (Mneimneh et al. 2006).
The 50–60 Hz PLI also often corrupts ECG sig-
nals, which comes from the power supply lines to 
the measurement systems despite proper ground-
ing, shielding, and amplifier design. This may be 
either due to the change in either coupling capaci-
tance or coupling inductance, or both. The value 
of coupling capacitance decreases with the increase 
in the separation distance of the electrode and the 
patient’s body. It is responsible for the high-fre-
quency noise. On the other hand, inductive cou-
pling is caused by mutual inductance between two 
conductors, which introduces low-frequency noise.
Although various precautions can be taken to 
reduce the effect of the PLI, it may still be neces-
sary to perform signal processing to remove such 
noise characterized by the 50–60 Hz sinusoidal 
interference, possibly accompanied by a number of 
harmonics (Bond et al. 1993, Visinescu et al. 2006, 
Bushra et al. 2010).
Traditionally, one ECG cycle is labeled using the 
alphabets P, Q, R, S, and T for individual peaks. 
The P wave arises from the depolarization of the 
atrium. The QRS complex arises from the depo-
larization of the ventricles. The T wave arises from 
the repolarization of the ventricle muscle. The 
R-peak is always positive and is the most striking 
point among all the waves, as shown in Figure 1.
1 INTRODUCTION
Electrocardiograph (ECG) is the graphical repre-
sentation of the electrical signal that is generated 
by the depolarization and repolarization of the 
atria and ventricles in the human heart, which 
appears as a nearly periodic signal. The direction 
and magnitude of temporal differences in poten-
tial electrical forces provides information about 
the heart rate, rhythm, and morphology. ECG var-
ies from person to person due to the difference in 
position, size, anatomy of the heart, chest configu-
ration, age, and relative body weight, altered by 
cardiovascular diseases and abnormalities.
Each portion of the ECG waveform carries 
valuable clinical information for proper diagnosis. 
The ECG signal taken from a patient can be cor-
rupted by an external noise (Yeh et al. 2008, Al. 
Mahamdy et al. 2014). Two types of predominant 
sources of interference in ECG signals are the Base-
line Wander (BLW) and the 50–60 Hz Power Line 
Interference (PLI). Breathing electrode impedance 
changes due to perspiration and increased move-
ments of the body are the important sources of 
the BLW. Usually, the BLW is expected to have 
undesired frequency components that normally lie 
in the range of 0–0.5 Hz, which is the same as the 
frequency range of the ST segment and influences 
the visual interpretation of the ECG. Detection of 
ischemia is done by analyzing the ST segment of 
the ECG. So, before analyzing the ECG signal, the 
removal of the BLW is essential.
Removing the undesired frequency components 
due to the BLW using linear filtering is not generally 

416
The detection of the R-peak is the first step of 
feature extraction. In fact, R-peak detection is very 
difficult because of the noisy ECG signal with the 
BLW and the PLI. To get the correct information 
from an ECG signal, the above problems must be 
eliminated (Kumar et al. 2010).
2 DATASETS
Evaluation of performance is even more difficult 
because of the absence of a normal ECG file in the 
database for comparison. The proposed approach 
was applied to two datasets. The first dataset was a 
simulated ECG signal corrupted with two signals, 
one with a frequency of 0.25 Hz and the other with 
a frequency of 50 Hz. Since there is no quantita-
tive measurement of noise, the simulated ECG can 
be used to measure the performance of the filters 
used in the present work.
The second dataset was the ECG signals taken 
from the MIT-BIH arrhythmia database, which is 
available at http://www.physionet.org/physiobank/
database/mitdb/. Those ECGs were sampled at the 
rate of 360 samples/sec for 30 min duration.
3 METHODOLOGY
3.1 Median filtering
The BLW can be eliminated without changing or 
disturbing the characteristics of ECG signals by 
median filtering. To compute the output of the 
median filter, an odd number of samples of the 
input signal was taken, i.e., the length of the win-
dow should be an odd number so that the value 
of the middle most sample within the window cor-
responds to the median value of all the samples 
within the window. Thus, if the window length is 
L = 2M + 1, the filtering procedure is denoted as 
(Yin et al. 1996):
Y(n) = MED[X(n − M), …, X(n), …, X(n + M)] (1)
where X(n) and Y(n) are the nth sample of the 
input and output sequences, respectively.
In the present case, the simulated ECG signal 
corrupted with the 0.25 Hz signal was processed 
with a window of length 45 to remove the R-peak. 
The output signal was again processed through 
a window of length 301 to remove the P and T 
waves. The resultant signal represents the noise 
responsible for the BLW. Subtracting this noise sig-
nal from the simulated ECG signal corrupted with 
the 0.25 Hz signal, the signal without BLW can be 
obtained, as shown in Figure 1.
3.2 Kalman filtering
The presence of the PLI greatly affects the fea-
ture extraction of an ECG signal. To remove this 
noise without affecting the underlying physiologi-
cal information of an ECG signal, the Kalman fil-
tering technique was proposed in the present case 
because of its ability to estimate the information 
accurately from inaccurate data. It essentially esti-
mates the state of a system based on the system 
output measurements that contain random errors 
(Sameni et al. 2005).
An autoregressive model is assumed for the 
ECG signal, which is not contaminated by noise 
contaminated, such that
yi = a1yi−1 + a2yi−2 + … + an−1yi−n 
(2)
and the 50 Hz PLI is represented as follows:
e = ae1 k + ae2 
(3)
where, k is time sample of the signal. Therefore, the 
signal with the 50 Hz PLI is
yn = a1yi−1 + … + an−1 yi−n+1 + ae1k + ae2 
(4)
The general form of the updated equations can 
be written as follows:
Xk+1 = A • Xk 
(5)
Zk = H • Xk 
(6)
where Xk is an n-dimensional vector and Zk is the 
measured value.
Figure 1. Median filtering to reduce the BLW.

417
The solution can be represented in terms of 
Equations (5) and (6) as follows (Haykin 2010):
Kk = A • Pk • HT/(H • Pk • HT + ε)
k+1 = A • 
k + Kk • (Zk − H • 
k) 
(7)
Pk+1 = (A − Kk • H) • Pk • (A − Kk • H)T + ε KkKk
T
where K is the Kalman gain; k is the discrete time 
sample; P is the uncertainty covariance matrix; 
and ε is added to model the measurement noise. 
Equations (7) are iterated over the input signal. 
The performance of the method for removing the 
power line hum is shown in Figure 2.
Once the performances of both the filters were 
tested with the simulated ECG signal, the tech-
nique was applied to nine different ECG signals 
obtained from the MIT-BIH arrhythmia database.
Figure 3 shows the performance of the median 
filter in removing the BLW from the ECG signal of 
record number 103 in the MIT-BIH database. As 
shown in Figure 3, the BLW can also be eliminated 
from other EGC signals by using the median filter-
ing technique.
The output of the median filter is then passed 
through the Kalman filter for suppressing the 
PLI effect that is still present in the signal. The 
pre-processed and post-processed signals are 
shown in Figure 4. As shown in Figure 4, the 
Kalman filtering technique can be adopted to 
eliminate the noise due to the PLI from the ECG 
signals.
3.3 Detection of the R-peak
The efficiency of the Median–Kalman (M-K) filter 
was tested in terms of its capability of detecting the 
R-peaks after eliminating the noises. Detection of 
the R-peaks was done in two ways. The first was to 
Figure 2. Kalman filtering to reduce the 50 Hz PLI.
Figure 3. Comparison of an ECG signal with the BLW 
and the ECG signal after the BLW is removed.
Figure 4. Comparison of an ECG signal with the PLI 
and the ECG signal after the PLI is removed.

418
identify whether any R-peak was eliminated in the 
process of eliminating the noises and the second 
was to identify whether any R-peak was shifted 
along the time axis after the suppression of the 
noises. Normally, the R-peak is that point where 
the heartbeat has the highest amplitude. Hence, the 
accuracy of the proposed work was evaluated in 
terms of accurate detection of the R-peaks after 
noise filtering.
To detect the R-peaks of the signal finally 
obtained from the M-K filter, the output of the 
M-K filter was again passed through the median 
filter of window length equal to 45 to suppress the 
R-peaks present in the signal that was obtained 
from the M-K filter.
The output of the median filter was then sub-
tracted from the output of the M-K filter to extract 
the number of R-peaks present in the output of the 
M-K filter, which was actually the denoised signal. 
Figure 5 shows the result of such a removal from 
the ECG signal of record number 103 in the MIT-
BIH database. From Figure 5, it can be observed 
that the R-peaks are predominantly visible approx-
imately over 311 cycles.
Table 1 presents the percentage of the R-peaks 
that were retained by each of the nine signals that 
were obtained from the MIT-BIH database after 
denoising by the M-K filtering technique. From 
Table 1, it can be seen that the detection rate of the 
R-peaks is as high as 99.7% with the ECG signal of 
record number 103, and the lowest detection rate is 
97.4% with record number 219. The average suc-
cessful rate of detection of the R-peaks is 99.3%.
Next, the locations of these R-peaks were com-
pared with those of the R-peaks of the original 
signal to check whether there was any distortion in 
local time-scale characteristics. The study was car-
ried with the ECG signal of record number 219, 
and the comparison is shown in Figure 6. From 
Figure 6, it can be observed that denoising an ECG 
signal by the M-K filtering technique satisfactorily 
restores the local time-scale characteristics of the 
signal.
Among the other suggested methods observed, 
the wavelet-based zero-crossing detector misinter-
preted when finding out the exact locations of the 
R-peaks (Sasikala et al. 2010). In the case of the 
wavelet-based zero-crossing R-peak detector, the 
analysis was performed on a frame-by-frame basis 
until the end of the data was reached. Therefore, it 
is not suitable for use in any real-time application.
However, the proposed method may produce 
discontinuities in the resulting signal at the initial 
Figure 5. R-peak detection in the QRS complex.
Table 1. Results on the detection of the R-peaks for the 
signals in the MIT-BIH arrhythmia database.
Record 
number
Total 
beats
Detected 
beats
% of 
detection
103
2084
2078
99.7121
112
2539
2530
99.6455
115
1953
1946
99.6416
117
1535
1530
99.6743
122
2476
2468
99.6769
123
1518
1510
99.4730
219
2154
2097
97.3538
230
2256
2247
99.6011
234
2753
2721
98.8376
Average
2141
2125
99.2907
Figure 6. Comparison of R-peak locations in local 
time-scale characteristics.

419
and final points. Therefore, for a reliable detection 
of the signal, this issue may be fixed by implement-
ing the weighted median filter.
4 CONCLUSION
A two-stage algorithm was applied in this work 
for the removal of noises from an ECG signal that 
originates due to the BLW and the PLI. Although 
the proposed method uses the M-K filtering tech-
nique, M-K filtering can also be done without 
affecting the efficiency of the algorithm. In that 
case, first, the noise due to the PLI will be elimi-
nated followed by the elimination of the noise 
caused by the BLW.
The accuracy of the proposed method was meas-
ured in terms of the successful detection of the 
R-peaks. The validation was done using nine ECG 
records obtained from the MIT-BIH arrhythmia 
database. In the method adopted in this work, the 
average rate of successful detection of the R-peaks 
was as high as 99.29%. Also, the method did not 
cause any shift in the signal along the time axis.
REFERENCES
AlMahamdy, M. & Bryan R.H. (2014). Performance 
Study of Different Denoising Methods for ECG 
Signals. ELSEVIER, 4th International Conference 
on Current and Future Trends of Information and 
Communication Technologies in Healthcare, Procedia 
Computer Science, 37, 325–332.
Bond, A.B., Greco, E.C., Bowser, R., Kadri, N.N. & 
Sketch, M.H. (1993). Robust and computational effi-
cient QRS detection. IEEE Conference Publications, 
Computers in Cardiology, Proceedings, 507–510.
Bushra, J., Beya, O., Fauvet, E. & Laligent, O. (2010). 
QRS Complex Detection by Non Linear Thresholding 
of Modulus Maxima. IEEE Conference Publications, 
Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 20th International 
Conference, 4500–4503.
Haykin, S. (2002). Adaptive Filter Theory. Fourth Edi-
tion, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Kumar, Y. & Malik, G.K. (2010). Performance Analysis 
of different filters for power line interface reduction 
in ECG signal. International Journal of Computer 
Applications, 3(7), 1–6.
Mneimneh, MA., Yaz, EE., Johnson, MT. & Povinelli. 
(2006). An Adaptive Kalman Filter for Removing 
Baseline Wandering in ECG Signals. IEEE Conference 
Publications, Computers in Cardiology, 253–256.
Sameni, R., Shamsollahi, M.B., Jutten, C. & Babaie-
Zadeh, M. (2005). Filtering noisy ECG signals using 
the extended Kalman filter based on a modified 
dynamic ECG model. IEEE Conference Publications, 
Computers in Cardiology, 1017–1020.
Sasikala, P. & Wahidabanu, R.S.D. (2010). Robust R. 
Peak and QRS detection in Electrocardiogram using 
Wavelet Transform. International Journal of Advanced 
Computer Science and Applications, 1(6), 48–53.
Visinescu, M., Bashour, C.A., Bakri, M. & Nair, B.G. 
(2006). Automatic detection of QRS complexes in 
ECG signals collected from patients after cardiac 
surgery. Proceedings of the 28th IEEE, EMBS Annual 
International Conference, 3724–3727.
Yeh, Y.C. & Wang, W.J. (2008). QRS complexes detection 
for ECG signal: The Difference Operation Method. 
ELSEVIER, computer methods and programs in 
biomedicine, 9I, 245–254.
Yin, L., Yang, R., Gabbouj, M. & Neuvo, Y. (1996). 
Weighted 
Median 
Filters: 
A 
Tutorial. 
IEEE 
Transactions on Circuits and Systems-II: Analog and 
Digital Signal Processing, 43(3), 157–192.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

421
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A practical approach for power system state estimation 
based on the hybrid Particle Swarm Optimization algorithm
Ujjal Sur & Gautam Sarkar
Department of Applied Physics, University College of Science and Technology, University of Calcutta, 
Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: Power system dynamic state estimation is an important tool for the analysis, planning, 
and operation of a power system. In this paper, a new hybrid state estimation method based on the 
Nelder–Mead (NM) simplex search method and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) is proposed. State 
estimation is an optimization problem including continuous variables, whose objective is to minimize the 
difference between the calculated and measured values of variables. Here, the NM-PSO hybrid method 
tries to find the global optima solutions much efficiently in comparison with other artificial intelligence 
techniques such as genetic algorithm. The two main state estimation methods, namely weighted least 
square and weighted least absolute value, were used to construct the objective function over which this 
hybrid stochastic algorithm was applied, and a comparison was made over the data obtained from a case 
study on the IEEE 14 bus test system for a better understanding of this paper.
flow algorithm. The solutions obtained from load 
flow (before introducing errors) are, therefore, con-
sidered as true solutions and used as benchmark 
solutions in evaluating the effectiveness of NM-
PSO solutions. GA is used in order to compare the 
performance over other AI algorithms.
2 STATE ESTIMATION
The general state estimation equation involves the 
estimation of the state vector x in the presence 
of an error e based on a set of measurements z. 
A mathematically synthesized model describing 
the functional relations between the parameters z, 
x, and e is given by Equation (1). This model is 
expressed in a set of nonlinear equations in rela-
tion to the measurements z and the true state vec-
tor x:
z
f
e
f x
i
if
i
i
i
if
+
fif ( )
x
( )
x
,
e
z
f
ie
i
f
−
zi
)
or
 
(1)
where, i =1, 2, 3, ….., n; zi is the ith measurement 
(measurement vector of dimension n); and fi(x) is 
the nonlinear function relating state variables with 
measurements. This is basically the power flow or 
power injection equations, where ei is the ith meas-
urement error vector; x is the state vector of dimen-
sion m; and n is the number of measurements. The 
state estimation problem is basically interpreted as 
a Weighted Least Square (WLS) problem, which 
is solved using different numerical techniques 
1 INTRODUCTION
To solve the Power System State Estimation (PSSE) 
problem, several authors have used traditional 
approaches based on derivative methods such as 
Newton, gradient descent, and linear programming 
methods (Kamireddy et al. 2008). However, it has 
been shown that these traditional methods present 
some inadequacies. The Newton and gradient 
methods both suffer from the difficulty in handling 
inequality constraints. On the other hand, the linear 
programming method suffers from oscillation and 
slow convergence problems. A common limitation 
of traditional optimization methods is the fact that 
they are local minima-based algorithms while the 
PSSE is a highly nonlinear problem. The advantage 
of Artificial Intelligence (AI) algorithms is due to 
the fact that they only require the fitness function 
(performance index or objective function) to guide 
the search, unlike the traditional algorithms that 
need gradient (derivative) information. One of the 
AI algorithms is the Particle Swarm Optimization 
(PSO), which has many advantages over other AI 
algorithms such as Genetic Algorithm (GA) (Bies 
et al. 2006). However, here, we used the Nelder–
Mead (NM) simplex search method with the PSO 
to have the best global optimum value with less 
computational time. With this in mind, this paper 
applies the advantages of PSO in solving the PSSE 
problem. The corruption of telemetric raw data 
measurements is simulated by introducing statisti-
cally a random error in the measurements obtained 
after running the Newton–Raphson (NR) load 

422
(Abur et al. 2004). Another method that we use is 
the weighted least absolute value (WLAV) method.
2.1 WLS state estimation
The WLS estimation method can be formed by 
minimizing the objective function:
Min J
z
f x
x
i
iz
if
i
n
i
i
if
i
n
( )
x
[Wi
W
[W
)
x ) ]
(
(
z
fif
))
−
ziz
=
[W
(z
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
=
=
∑
∑
2
2
f x
(
)
x )
1
2
2
1
1
σ
 
(2)
where Wi is the weight of the measurement i and 
σi
σ 2
σ  is the variance of the ith measurement.
2.2 WLAV state estimation
The WLAV estimation method can be formed as 
that of the WLS as follows:
Min J
z
f x
i
iz
if
i
n
( )
x
[Wi
W
[
|
W
)
x |]
−
ziz
=
[W
=
∑
1
 
(3)
The nonlinear function fi(x) contains the active 
and reactive power flows and power injections 
whose equations can be obtained. The active and 
reactive power injections in the polar form are 
given as follows:
P
V
Y
i
i
P
V
P
V
j
i
Y j
i
i
Y
j
iji
j
nb
Y ji
Y
Vi
V
=
∑
[Vj
V
[
|
V
| cos(
)
i
j
iji
−
]
δ
δ
i
j
−
i
i
1
 
(4)
Q
V
Y
i
i
Q
V
Q
V
j
i
Y j
i
i
Y
j
iji
j
nb
Y ji
Y
Vi
V
=
∑
[Vj
V
[
|
V
| sin(
)
i
j
iji
−
]
δ
δ
i
j
−
i
i
1
 
(5)
where Pi is the active power injection at bus i; Qi 
is the reactive power injection at bus i; Vi and Vj 
are voltage magnitudes at buses i and j; δi and δj are 
voltage angles at buses i and j; |Yij| is the magnitude 
of the bus admittance elements i, j; θij is the angle 
of the bus admittance elements i, j; and nb is the 
number of buses.
3 NM SEARCH METHOD
The NM method (Chelouah et al. 2005) is a non-
linear optimization algorithm, where the numerical 
method is used to optimize an objective function in 
a multidimensional space using four different pro-
cedures, namely reflection, expansion, contraction, 
and reduction, which are described in detail below.
3.1 Initialize
Form an m-dimensional simplex by generating 
(m + 1) individuals randomly. At each vertex point 
of the simplex, we calculate the objective function 
value. Based on the objective function values, indi-
vidual sorting proceeds as follows:
z
f
z
f
l
lf
h
nf


⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
(
)
m+
(
)
n
∗
) (n+
 
(6)
where zl and zh are the vertices with the lowest and 
the highest function values, respectively; fl and fh 
are the corresponding objective function values; 
and n is the number of state variables.
3.2 Reflection
To find zc, the center of the simplex in the minimi-
zation problem without using zh and generates a 
new vertex zr by reflecting the worst point by the 
following equation:
z
m
z
z
z
c
iz
i
z
zh
m
r
c
h
i
=
∗
∗
≠
+
∑
1
1
1
(
)
+
1
α
zcz
∗
−
z
)
 
(7)
where α is the reflection coefficient (α > 0). Now, 
according to the NM method, four different judg-
ments are considered:
1. If fl < fr < fh, then, by reflection, replace zh with 
zr and the reflection process will be repeated for 
the next iteration;
2. If fr< fl, then perform the expansion process 
stated below;
3. If fl > fr > fh, then replace zh with zr and go to the 
contraction process below; and
4. If fh < fr, go to the contraction process below 
without replacing zh with zr.
3.3 Expansion
If fr < fl, then the reflection process is expanded to 
extend the search space in the same direction, and 
the expansion point is given as
z
z
e
r
c
∗
β
β
zrz
∗
+
)
β
−
 
(8)
where β is the expansion coefficient (β > 1). Now, 
if fe < fl, then, by reflection, replace zh with ze and 
the reflection process will be repeated for the next 
iteration.
3.4 Contraction
The contraction vertex is now calculated using the 
following equation:
z
z
co
h
cz
∗
β
γ
zh
∗
+
)
γ
−
 
(9)

423
where γ is the contraction coefficient (0 < γ < 1). 
Now, if fco < fl, then, by reflection, replace zh with 
zco and the reflection process will be repeated for 
the next iteration, else fco > fh and the reduction 
process will begin as stated below.
3.5 Reduction
Here, in this step, the entire simplex will be shrink-
ing except zl given by
z
z
i
l
l
∗
β
γ
zlz
∗
+
)
γ
−
 
(10)
If the criterion given for convergence is met, 
then it is the end or otherwise go to the reflec-
tion step and start the algorithm from there again. 
Now, according to the NM method, the values of 
the different coefficients α, β and γ are α = 1, β = 2, 
and γ = 0.5. Here, in this paper, we use these same 
values for the simulation process.
4 PARTICLE SWARM OPTIMIZATION
PSO is one of the best AI applications in a popu-
lation-based random stochastic algorithm domain. 
This algorithm is actually based on the simulation 
of animals’ social activities such as insects and 
birds, which shows the natural habit of the group 
or swarm communication to share an individual’s 
idea when such swarms flock or migrate. For each 
particle i, the velocity and position of the parti-
cles can be updated by the following equations 
(Kennedy et al. 1995):
V
V
C rand
P
X
C rand
G
X t
i
i
V
V
best
i
X
best
G
i
X
(
)
t
( )t
(.)(
( )t )
(.)(
(
=
)
P
+C rand(.)(
G
+ C rand(.)(
1
C
2
C
ωV
)))
(
)
( )
(
)
(
)
max
max
min
X (
(
V (
t
t
i
i
(
)
X (
i
V
)
−
∗
)
( )
(
X (
V (
X
=
)
+V (
V
ω
ω
(
)
(
m
=
)
ω
ω
max
m
−
 
(11)
where i = 1, 2, …….., n, with n being the number 
of particles; Pbest is the previous best value of the 
ith particle; Gbest is the best value of the entire 
population; rand(.) is the random number; ω 
is the inertia weight; ωmax = 1, ωmin = 0.5, and 
C1 and C2 = 2 are the weighting factors of the 
algorithm.
5 HYBRID PSO ALGORITHM
By combining PSO with the NM algorithm, we 
obtain a new PSO-NM hybrid optimization algo-
rithm. The application of the hybrid algorithm is 
detailed below.
5.1 Input data statement
Here, in this step, all the input data relating to the 
real and pseudo-measurement values, the distribu-
tion line network, the RES and load output, and 
the standard and average deviations of RES and 
loads are stated and incorporated in the search 
algorithm.
5.2 Generation of initial population and velocity
According to the input state variables, a randomly 
generated initial population and velocity can be 
written as follows:
Velocity
v
v
population
X
X
v
n
n
X
i
j
n
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
1
1
X
⎤
⎥
⎤
⎡
⎢
⎡
1


population
⎥
= ⎢
,
[
]
vjv
,
*
X
v
d
V
V
V
v
d
i
j
X
n
j
j
rand
V
j
j
V
j
j
rand
= rand
rand
+
Vj
V
= rand
rand
[
]
X j
X
( ) (
∗
)
( ) (
∗
*
max
Vj
Vj
V
min
max
1
δ j
−
+
δ
δ
+
δ
j
j
δ
δ
+
j
j
j
j
+
j
j
δ
X
r
=
j =
d
V
V
−
j
Vj
X
r
=
j =
d
m
j
δ
+
in
max
j
Vj
min
( ) (
∗
)
( ) (
∗
ma
m x
min
−δ
δ
)
i
+
)
j
j
min)
δ
min) +
min)
 
(12)
where n is the number of measurements, and V and 
δ are the state variables.
5.3 Objective function calculation and selection 
of Gbest and initial population
In this step, the objective function based on the 
WLS method (Equation (2)) or the WLAV method 
(Equation (3)) is to calculate for each individual 
using the result of load flow analysis. Selection of 
the initial population value is in ascending order 
based on the value of the objective function. Also, 
the minimum objective function is to select the best 
global position (Gbest).
5.4 Application of the NM search method
We apply the NM simplex search method to search 
the global solution. Here, in this step, the NM 
method searches the Gbest, and if the obtained solu-
tion is better than the Gbest, then it swaps it.
5.5 Application of the PSO algorithm
First, select the ith individual and then the best 
local position Pbest for the ith individual. Next, 
calculate the modified velocity for each individual 
based on Pbest and Gbest. Then, calculate the modi-
fied position for each individual based on Equation 
(11) and then check its limit. Next, check whether 
all individuals are selected or not, and if not, then 
go back to the first step of the PSO algorithm, 

424
where the ith individual is selected. Finally, check 
the convergence criteria if it is ok and then end. 
Gbest is the required solution and if not satisfied, 
then go to the initial state of the objective function 
calculation.
6 SIMULATION RESULTS
The application of both the traditional WLS and 
WLAV state estimation methods employing the 
NM-PSO hybrid algorithm approaches for the 
state estimation of the IEEE 14 bus test case is 
presented (shown in Figure 1) here. Here, the NR 
load flow results are taken as the benchmark values 
Figure 1. IEEE 14 bus test case.
of the state variables. The NR load flow method 
can be applied to obtain the load flow results of 
the system. To have a fair comparison of the state 
estimation accuracy for both the WLS and WLAV 
approaches using GA and NM-PSO, the Mean 
Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) is introduced 
as follows:
MAPE
n
A
F
A
i
i
A
FF
i
A
i
n
=
∗
=
∑
1
100
1
%  
(13)
where Ai is the actual value and Fi is the final cal-
culated value.
The comparison of the estimated values of the 
WLS and WLAV objective functions are given in 
Tables 1 and 2.
7 CONCLUSION
In this paper, the application of the NM-PSO 
hybrid algorithm for the PSSE is discussed. Here, 
the NR load flow algorithm was used to generate 
the required data to be taken as the true values of 
the state variables to be estimated from the cor-
rupted measurements present in the power system 
network. GA was used as another Artificial Intel-
ligent (AI) algorithm to evaluate the performance 
of the NM-PSO hybrid algorithm, using two for-
mulations of the objective functions, which are 
the WLS and the WLAV techniques. The simula-
tion result showed a higher accuracy with lower 
Table 2. Comparison of the estimated values of the 
WLAV objective function.
Bus 
no.
True value
GA
NM-PSO
V 
(pu)
δ 
(degree)
V 
(pu)
δ 
(degree)
V 
(pu)
δ 
(degree)
 1
1.060
0
1.043
0
1.046
0
 2
1.045
−04.99
1.027
−05.15
1.030
−05.12
 3
1.010
−12.75
0.989
−13.21
0.993
−13.13
 4
1.013
−01.24
0.996
−10.63
0.998
−10.56
 5
1.017
−08.76
0.999
−09.10
1.002
−09.04
 6
1.070
−14.45
1.055
−15.07
1.058
−14.99
 7
1.046
−13.24
1.038
−14.66
1.040
−14.58
 8
1.080
−13.24
1.074
−14.62
1.076
−14.54
 9
1.031
−14.82
1.023
−16.20
1.025
−16.09
10
1.030
−15.04
1.020
−16.24
1.023
−16.15
11
1.046
−14.86
1.033
−15.69
1.035
−15.64
12
1.053
−15.30
1.038
−15.95
1.041
−15.87
13
1.047
−15.33
1.031
−15.98
1.034
–15.90
14
1.019
−16.08
1.008
−17.16
1.010
−17.06
MAPE (%)
1.34
  5.61
1.08
  5.06
Computational time (s)
0.6137
0.4133
Table 1. Comparison of the estimated values of the 
WLS objective function.
Bus 
no.
True value
GA
NM-PSO
V 
(pu)
δ 
(degree)
V 
(pu)
δ 
(degree)
V 
(pu)
δ 
(degree)
 1
1.060 0
1.041
0
1.045
0
 2
1.045 −04.99
1.026
−05.16
1.029
−05.13
 3
1.010 −12.75
0.988
−13.24
0.992
−13.16
 4
1.013 −01.24
0.994
−10.65
0.997
−10.59
 5
1.017 −08.76
0.998
−09.12
1.001
−09.06
 6
1.070 −14.45
1.053
−15.01
1.055
−14.92
 7
1.046 −13.24
1.027
−13.76
1.030
−13.68
 8
1.080 −13.24
1.063
−13.76
1.065
−13.68
 9
1.031 −14.82
1.012
−15.40
1.015
−15.31
10
1.030 −15.04
1.012
−15.62
1.014
−15.53
11
1.046 −14.86
1.028
−15.44
1.031
−15.34
12
1.053 −15.30
1.036
−15.89
1.038
−15.79
13
1.047 −15.33
1.029
−15.92
1.004
−15.83
14
1.019 −16.08
1.001
−16.69
1.004
−16.60
MAPE (%)
1.78
 3.62
1.51
 3.05
Computational time (s)
0.6490
0.4381

425
computational time for the NM-PSO hybrid algo-
rithm compared with the GA algorithm. In future 
work, it can be extended to the distribution net-
work state estimation, where distributed genera-
tions and renewable energy connections play an 
important role, which can be handled smoothly by 
using this NM-PSO hybrid algorithm.
REFERENCES
Abur, A., & Exposito, A.G. (2004). Power System State 
Estimation: Theory and implementation, Marcel 
Dekkered., New York.
Bies, R.R., Muldoon, M.F., Pollock, B.G., Manuck, S., 
Smith, G. and Sale, M.E. (2006). A Genetic Algo-
rithm Based Hybrid Machine Learning Approach 
to Model Selection, Journal of Pharmacokinetics and 
Pharmacodynamics,196–221.
Chelouah, R. and Siarry, P. (2005). A hybrid method 
combining continuous tabu search and Nelder-Mead 
simplex algorithms for the global optimization of 
multi minima functions. European Journal of Opera-
tional Research, 161(3), 636–654.
Kamireddy, S., Schulz, N.N. and Srivastava, A.K. 
(2008). Comparison of state estimation algorithms 
for extreme contingencies, 40th North American Power 
Symposium,  NAPS’08, 1–5.
Kennedy, J. and Eberhart, R. (1995). Particle swarm 
optimization, IEEE International Conference on Neu-
ral Networks, Piscataway, NJ, 1942–1948. http://www.
ee.washington.edu/research/pstca/, Power System Test 
Case Archive.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

427
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Design of the Leaky-Wave Antenna using the Composite Right/Left-
Handed Transmission Line metamaterial at the center frequency of 
2.33GHz
Sumit K. Varshney, Amit K. Varshney, A.M. Chowdhury, A. Ganguly & A. Samanta
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: In this paper, the author tries to simulate a transmission line-based Composite Right/Left-
Handed (CRLH) metamaterial Leaky Wave Antenna (LWA) with the center frequency of 2.33 GHz, where 
it will radiate in the broadside direction only when it is operated in the fast wave region. Also, its frequency 
scanning capability is tested by changing the excitation frequency of the antenna and observing the far-
field radiation pattern. A CRLH metamaterial LWA has the unique property of continuous frequency 
scanning from the backward end fire to the forward end fire through the broadside direction unlike in the 
conventional Right-Handed (RH) LWA, where the radiation angles are highly restricted and also there is 
no broadside radiation. It finds its application in scanning radar where the loss of target cannot be toler-
ated because of the absence of the broadside radiation lobe in the RH frequency scanning LWA.
number. On the other hand, it operates in the fast 
wave region when β < k0. In this fast wave region, 
it progressively leaks out power as it travels down 
the line, giving rise to radiation. β determines the 
angle θMB of radiation (measured from vertical) of 
the main beam following the simple relation:
θ
β
MB
θ
k
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
−
sin 1
0
k
 
(1)
And the width of the mail lobe Δθ by
Δθ
λ
θ
=
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
⎟
−
2
1
1
0
λ
sin
cos
l
MB
θ
 
(2)
where l is the length of the leaky wave antenna 
(LWA) and λ0 is the free space wavelength.
Leaky-wave antennas (Itoh Tatsuo et al. 2006) 
belong to the class of traveling wave antenna and 
exhibit superior directivity owing to their large radiat-
ing aperture when compared with any other resonant 
antennas. If they are designed using metamaterials, 
then they can be made to radiate both in the forward 
and backward directions as well as in the broadside 
direction, i.e., −90° ≤ θMB ≤ +90°–0°. Negative values 
of angles are obtained as β is negative for the left-
handed region and positive for the right-handed 
region. This seamless transition from the left- to 
right-handed region is possible only when the CRLH 
TL is a balanced one, i.e., there is no band gap region 
1 INTRODUCTION
Metamaterials are the artificial or engineered 
materials that exhibit properties not readily found 
in nature. Its theory was first given by Veselago 
in 1967, which states that metamaterials exhibit a 
negative refractive index due to both ε and μ being 
negative (Veselago V. 1968). The Transmission Line 
(TL) approach (Caloz C. et al. 2002) towards the 
design of a metamaterial is necessary as it can be 
used to analyze and design novel wideband micro-
wave components at high frequency with minimum 
loss as TLs are non-resonant structures unlike 
split-ring resonator–thin wire-based metamaterials, 
which are resonant structures with a narrow band 
and offer high losses at the microwave frequency. 
Conventional materials or Right-Handed (RH) 
materials are non-dispersive, exhibiting a straight 
line in the ω-β diagram, while the Composite 
Right/Right-Handed (CRLH) TL dispersion dia-
gram exhibits a nonlinear nature. It has left-handed 
properties at low frequencies and right-handed 
properties at high frequencies, hence the name. The 
incremental model of a TL can be practically real-
ized by a bandpass LC filter (Eleftheriades G.V. 
et al. 2002) whose physical dimension ‘p’ is infini-
tesimally small. We used the distributed component 
realization of the LC network, i.e., the microstrip 
form which when cascaded forms the CRLH TL. 
So, each LC network will be called a unit cell.
A right-handed TL operates in the slow wave 
region (guided mode) when β > k0, where β is the 
propagation constant in the direction of the propa-
gation of the wave and k0 is the free space wave 

428
during the transition from left to right during which β 
becomes imaginary and no propagation takes place.
2 DESIGN AND SIMULATION OF THE 
BALANCED CRLH TL UNIT CELL
The interdigital capacitor shorted stub CRLH TL 
unit cell was designed in the microstrip form in 
Ansoft Designer. Design values for the Inter-dig-
ital capacitor shorted stub based one dimensional 
CRLH balanced unit cell are given in Table 1. The 
voltage gradient between the digits of the unit cell 
gives the effect of the left-handed capacitance CL, 
the current flow through the via (for shorted stub) 
realizes the left-handed inductance LL, the current 
flow through the digits of the interdigital capacitor 
and the associated flux linkage realizes the right-
handed inductance LR and the voltage gradient 
developed between the trace and the ground plane 
of the microstrip realizes the right-handed capaci-
tance CR. The schematic of the Inter-digital capac-
itor shorted stub based one dimensional CRLH 
balanced unit cell is shown in Figure 1. Simulation 
results are presented in Figures 2–6. 
Figure 1. Inter-digital capacitor shorted stub based one 
dimensional CRLH balanced unit cell. (Inset) 3D view 
of via.
Figure 3. 20 unit cell CRLH balanced TL with feed sec-
tions at both the ends.
Figure 4. Radiation Pattern of CRLH Leaky Wave 
Antenna at the frequency of 2 GHz (Backward radiation). 
β is negative in the left hand region, so θ
β
MB
θ
k
=
( )
−
sin 1
0
k
 is 
negative indicating backward angle radiation.
Table 1. Design values for the Inter-digital capacitor 
shorted stub based one dimensional CRLH balanced 
unit cell.
Parameters
Symbols
Design values 
mm
Unit cell period
p
11.4
Stub length
ls
10.9
Stub width
ws
1.00
Interdigital finger length
lc
10.2
Interdigital finger width
wc
0.30
Spacing between fingers
S
0.20
Via radius
r
0.12
Substrate* heigh
h
1.57
Substrate* permittivity
εr
2.2**
*Rogers Duroid 5880; **Unit less.
Figure 2. One-dimensional CRLH balanced unit cell 
dispersion diagram.
The dispersion diagram is extracted from the 
unit cell, and it is plotted over the free space dis-
persion diagram with the following equation (air 
line equation):
airline
p
p
c
=
p
βp
βp
ω p
0
 
(3)
where c0 is the free space velocity of the wave. The 
airline is plotted in order to get the slow wave and 
fast wave regions.

429
The dispersion diagram can be directly obtained 
from the de-embedded S parameters using the 
relation
βp
β
S S
S S
S
=
−
+
S S
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
−
cos 1
11
S
22
S
12
S
21
S
21
S
1
2
 
(4)
From the dispersion diagram,
Forward radiation: 2.33 to 3.51GHz
Backward radiation: 1.85 to 2.33GHz
Broadside radiation: 2.33 GHz
These 20 unit cells are cascaded along with the 
feed sections (to avoid abrupt discontinuity) to 
form a CRLH TL, which starts radiating when 
operated in the fast wave (radiating) region, i.e., 
from 1.85 to 3.51 GHz, and its far-field radiation 
pattern is simulated. The simulation results clearly 
show the forward, backward, and broadside lobes.
3 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
From the radiation patterns it is clear that when 
CRLH TL based Leaky Wave antenna is operated 
at a frequency which falls in the left hand fast wave 
region of the dispersion curve of the balanced two 
dimensional unit cell, i.e., from 1.85 to 2.33 GHz, 
it radiates in the backward direction, i.e., from 
θ = 0° to −90°. In this left-handed fast wave region 
(region above the airline), β ranges from −k0 when 
θ becomes −90° to 0 when θ becomes 0 as per the 
equation (1). Similarly, when the CRLH TL-based 
LW antenna is operated with the frequency that 
falls in the RH fast wave region, i.e., from 2.33 to 
3.51 GHz, it radiates in the forward angle direction, 
i.e., from θ = 0° to +90°. In this RH fast wave region 
(region above the airline), β ranges from 0 when θ 
becomes 0° to +k0 when θ becomes +90°. Interest-
ingly, for the case of a balanced unit cell, at β = 0, 
the group velocity of the wave in non-zero, i.e., there 
is radiation of energy and we get a broadside lobe. 
Hence, in case of a balanced design, there is contin-
uous scanning of the beam from the backward end 
fire to the forward end fire through the broadside 
direction, a feature very unique to the metamaterial 
LWA unlike the uniform conventional or purely RH 
LWA that radiates in very small restricted angles in 
the forward direction, and periodic conventional 
LWA that can radiate in the backward direction (if 
excited by negative space harmonics) but not in the 
broadside direction. Such conventional LWA used 
in the frequency scanning radar may result in the 
loss of target due to the absence of broadside radi-
ation. LWA exhibit superior directivity compared 
with conventional resonant antennas if the leakage 
factor can be made as small as possible.
REFERENCES
Caloz, C., Okabe, H., Iwai, T. & Itoh, T. 2002. “Trans-
mission line approach of left-handed (LH) materials”, 
in Proc. USNC/URSI National Radio Science Meet-
ing, San Antonio, TX, vol. 1, p. 39.
Eleftheriades, G.V., Iyer A.K. & Kremer P.C. 2002, “Pla-
nar negative refractive index media using periodically 
L-C loaded transmission lines”, IEEE Trans. Micro-
wave Theory Tech., vol. 50, pp. 2702–2712.
Itoh Tatsuo & Christophe Caloz. 2006, Electromagnetic 
Metamaterials: Transmission Line Theory and Micro-
wave Applications, the Engineering Approach, A John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Veselago, V. 1968. “The electrodynamics of substances 
with simultaneously negative values of ε and μ”, 
Soviet Physics Uspekhi, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 509–514.
Figure 5. Radiation pattern of the CRLH LW antenna 
at the frequency of 2.33 GHz (broadside radiation). β is 0 
at the center frequency, so θ
β
MB
θ
k
=
( )
−
sin 1
0
k
 is 0, indicating 
broadside radiation.
Figure 6. Radiation Pattern of CRLH LW Antenna 
at the frequency of 2.5 GHz (Forward radiation). β is 
positive in the right hand region, so θ
β
MB
θ
k
=
( )
−
sin 1
0
k
 is 
positive indicating forward angle radiation.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

431
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
An artificial neural network-based temperature measurement 
system using a thermistor in astable multivibrator circuit
Saket Kumar Sahu & Kiron Nandi
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: This paper presents a novel, cheap, and unique adaptation technique of a PC-based tem-
perature measurement system. This adaptation revolves around a 555 timer, made to operate in an astable 
multivibrator configuration. The negative temperature coefficient thermistor is used in this mode, which 
acts as a timing resistor of the astable multivibrator using the 555 timer. The ‘HIGH’ and ‘LOW’ level 
durations from the multivibrator output are taken for consideration, and these values are used to deter-
mine the temperature by the appropriate training of artificial neural network.
increases with an increase in the temperature. A 
main advantage of a NTC thermistor is that they 
are highly temperature sensitive, which can detect 
a very minute temperature change in comparison 
with a RTD or thermocouple. NTC thermistors 
are prepared from metal oxides through ceramic 
or film technology and used in any medium such 
as gas, liquid, or solid; however, in all cases, the 
medium should not be allowed to chemically, elec-
trically, or physically contaminate.
A NTC thermistor has gained popularity among 
the researchers who study the linearity schemes 
of transducers because of its non-linear transfer 
characteristics (Brady et al. 1951, Kay et al. 1970). 
Linearization can be achieved by two schemes: 
the analog hardware-based scheme and the digital 
software cum hardware-based scheme. Obviously, 
the latter has an advantage over the former with 
respect to accuracy and efficiency and is con-
stantly replacing the former (Rathore 2003, Khan 
et al. 1984, Sengupta et al. 1988). One of the soft 
computing techniques is Artificial Neural Network 
(ANN), which employs the numerical linearization 
of sensor characteristics.
This paper is divided into four main parts. The 
first part contains a design approach for thermis-
tor sensing systems based on a 555 timer circuit 
working in the astable multivibrator mode. The 
second part includes the development of a data 
acquisition system employed for capturing the 
output of the timer circuit using LabVIEW. The 
third part describes an ANN (linearizer) for 
obtaining the temperature value from the pulse 
train parameters. The last part of the paper pro-
vides results, conclusions, and future research 
directions.
1 INTRODUCTION
Measuring temperature has been a scientific 
procedure conducted since aeons because it is 
one of the building blocks of science, technol-
ogy, and industry. The SI unit of temperature 
measurement is degree centigrade. Temperature 
measurement has a plethora of applications 
including domestic, industrial, manufacturing, 
and medical applications. Temperature meas-
urement dates back to the 17th Century. In 170 
AD, Claudius Galenus made a yardstick for 
measuring the temperature by mixing an equal 
proportion of ice and boiling water to formu-
late a neutral mixture to measure the tempera-
ture. In 1600s, Galileo constructed a device to 
measure the relative change in the temperature 
called the thermoscope. The modern-day ther-
mometer received its first shape in the 18th 
century by Gabriel Fahrenheit by calibrating a 
mercury thermometer against a scale. After the 
rapid development of electronic instrumentation 
systems and as the requirement of temperature 
sensing spread to newer domains, the necessity 
of having electronic temperature sensors was 
felt consistently. This triggered the development 
of temperature sensors, such as thermocouples, 
thermistors, Resistance Temperature Detectors 
(RTDs), fiber optic sensors, and IR sensors.
A ‘thermistor’ is a portmanteau of ‘thermal’ 
and ‘resistor’, i.e., the resistance of a thermis-
tor depends on its temperature. In this respect, 
a thermistor is generally of two types: Negative 
Temperature Coefficient (NTC) whose resistance 
decreases with an increase in the temperature and 
positive temperature coefficient whose resistance 

432
2 METHODOLOGY
Characteristic linearization of a NTC thermistor 
is possible by converting temperature into fre-
quency or time intervals (Stankovic et al. 1977). 
This is achieved by using the thermistor as one of 
the timing resistors for an astable multivibrator 
employing a 555 timer IC. It is the most common 
of the IC chip that is used in complex electronic 
circuit systems. In the present system as shown in 
Figure 1, the frequency or time intervals of the 
output pulses from the 555 timer operating in the 
astable multivibrator mode depend and vary with 
R1, Rth, and C as follows (Coughlin 2002):
f = 1.44/[(R1+Rth)/C] 
(1)
The duration of the LOW level and that of the 
HIGH level of the pulse train are indicated as 
follows:
TOFF = 0.69RthC 
(2)
TON = 0.69(R1+Rth)C 
(3)
Therefore, the total time period is given by
T = TOFF+TON = 0.693(R1+2Rth)C 
 
(4)
where R1 = 1000 Ω; Rth is the variable thermistor 
resistance, and C = 470 μF.
An astable multivibrator is simply used as an 
oscillator. It generates a continuous rectangular 
‘LOW-HIGH’ pulse varying between two voltage 
levels, as shown in Figure 2. Here, the resistance R1 
and the capacitance C are constant. So, the only 
variable parameter is the thermistor resistance Rth. 
As this resistance varies with change in the tem-
perature, the timer will generate the output with 
different values of TOFF, TON, and T.
3 DATA ACQUISITION SYSTEM
USING LABVIEW
LabVIEW contains a comprehensive set of tools 
for acquiring, analyzing, displaying, and storing 
data. In the present scheme, pin no. 3 and no. 1 
of the 555 timer are connected to pin no. 2 and 
ground pin no. 18 of the parallel port, respectively. 
So, the communication between the 555 timer and 
the parallel port is a single-bit communication. 
Data acquisition is done with the help of Lab-
VIEW for the status record as a Text file (.txt) in 
the desired address. In the calibration phase, the 
values of TOFF, TON, and T from the multivibra-
tor output are recorded at known temperatures, 
which can be determined using a mercury-in-
glass thermometer. A program code is written in 
MATLAB, which reads the stored file and finds 
the average TOFF, TON, and T at the corresponding 
temperature.
As shown in Figure 2, it is evident that the 
starting of the pulse train may be either LOW or 
HIGH. It is also clear that the starting and ending 
pulses of the train cannot be considered for cal-
culation, as it is not a complete pulse. The rest of 
the ‘LOW-HIGH’ sequences of the available pulses 
can be used for the calculation of average TOFF, 
TON, and T. For this purpose, the MATLAB code 
calculates the LOW number of samples and the 
HIGH number of samples present in the effective 
length. The program also calculates the number of 
times the LOW and
Figure 1. 555 Timer connected in the astable 
multivibrator mode.
Figure 2. Output waveform of the 555 timer.

433
HIGH states occurs. Therefore, the average TOFF 
and the average TON can be calculated as
Average T
Total number of LOW samples
Total number of LOW states
OF
T
F =
×
p
1 m
1
s
 
(5)
Average T
Total number of HIGH samples
Total number of HIGH states
ON
T
=
×
p
×1 ms
 
(6)
While calculating the average T, the number of 
LOW states and the number of HIGH states in the 
effective length have to be the same. If not, then 
the extra one (LOW or HIGH) is eliminated for 
further calculations.
4 ANN-BASED LINEARIZATION SYSTEM
NTC thermistors have one of the most nonlinear 
transfer characteristics among all the commonly used 
sensors. The overwhelming use of the computer-
based data acquisition system acts as a booster for 
software-based linearizers. However, the quest for 
achieving more and more accurate results similar to 
the actual values is still a benchmark problem in all 
research work (Aggoune et al. 1993, Pau et al. 1990).
With application of the ANN as a competent 
soft computing technique, it is quite natural that this 
would also be used for the numerical linearization 
of signal processing. Although some work has been 
reported in this field (Dey et al. 2010, Chatterjee et al. 
2000, Mondal et al. 2009), there is still a wide scope 
for further advancement. This paper explores the 
feasibility of employing ANN-based linearization 
techniques for a single thermistor thermometer.
In the present work, after testing many com-
binations for the number of neurons per layer, a 
multilayer neural network (3-50-1) was found to be 
the best combination, as shown in Figure 3. That is, 
it has three neurons at the input layer, 50 neurons 
at the hidden layer, and one neuron at the output 
layer. The three parameters, namely the average 
TOFF, TON, and T, are used as network inputs, where 
the temperature is used as the network output.
A feedforward back propagation network per-
forms the function of input–output nonlinear 
mapping. With a set of input data patterns, the 
network can be ‘trained’ to give the correspond-
ing desired pattern at the output. It is a processing 
element in the brain’s nervous system that receives 
and combines the input patterns (TK) with the 
desired output (D) to find the weights (WK) and 
the bias signal (b). The weights can be positive or 
negative. Mathematically, the output expression 
can be given as detailed below (Bose 2001).
This input–output supervised learning con-
tinues up to 500 iterations to measure the appro-
priate weights by a training algorithm called the 
Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm until the pattern 
matching occurs. At the end of the training, not 
only the network should be capable of recalling 
all the trained input–output patterns, but also for 
each new input pattern of the signal, there should 
be a corresponding ANN output pattern by alter-
ing these weights (Haykin 1994).
5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
An ANN requires supervised training by recorded 
data. This is similar to the training of a biologi-
cal neural network from experience. At the begin-
ning, the average TOFF, TON, and T as the input 
data pattern and the corresponding temperature 
as the output data pattern are used for the train-
ing. Transfer functions (TFs) for hidden and out-
put layers are TANSIG (tan-sigmoid TF) and 
PURELIN (linear TF), respectively. The deriva-
tive dF(S)/dS is maximum at S = 0, and gradually 
decreases with an increasing value of S in either 
direction (Charalambous et al. 1992, Masters 
et al. 1997).
With one input pattern, the output is calcu-
lated (defined as the forward pass) and compared 
with the desired output pattern. The weights are 
then altered in the backward direction (defined as 
the reverse pass) by a back propagation algorithm 
until the error between the calculated pattern and 
the desired pattern is very small and acceptable. A 
round-trip (forward and reverse passes) of the cal-
culation is defined as an epoch (iteration). Simi-
lar training is repeated with all the input patterns, 
so that the mean square error (MSE) is minimum 
and acceptable, as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 3. A 3-50-1 multilayer feedforward neural 
network.

434
Figure 5. Time vs. temperature curve (ANN training 
response).
Table 1. Performance of an ANN-based linearizer at 
training.
Sl No.
ANN Output 
Temp (°C)
Desired 
Temp (°C)
Error
% Error
 1
40.0321
40.0
 0.0321
 0.0803
 2
41.9535
42.0
−0.0465
−0.1107
 3
44.0254
44.0
 0.0254
 0.0577
 4
45.9605
46.0
−0.0395
−0.0859
 5
48.0025
48.0
 0.0025
 0.0052
 6
50.0259
50.0
 0.0259
 0.0519
 7
51.9978
52.0
−0.0022
−0.0043
 8
54.0019
54.0
 0.0019
 0.0035
 9
56.0003
56.0
 0.0003
 0.0005
10
58.0000
58.0
−0.0000
−0.0001
11
60.0031
60.0
 0.0031
 0.0052
12
62.0126
62.0
 0.0126
 0.0204
13
64.0476
64.0
 0.0476
 0.0744
14
66.0146
66.0
 0.0146
 0.0222
15
67.8977
68.0
−0.1023
−0.1505
16
70.0774
70.0
 0.0774
 0.1105
17
71.9466
72.0
−0.0534
−0.0742
18
73.8965
74.0
−0.1035
−0.1399
19
75.8879
76.0
−0.1121
−0.1475
20
78.1522
78.0
 0.1522
 0.1952
21
80.1518
80.0
 0.1518
 0.1897
22
82.0700
82.0
 0.0700
 0.0854
23
83.9089
84.0
−0.0911
−0.1084
24
85.9815
86.0
−0.0185
−0.0215
25
87.8757
88.0
−0.1243
−0.1412
26
90.0749
90.0
 0.0749
 0.0832
MSE
0.0051
 0.0093
Root MSE
 0.0713
 0.0962
Figure 6. Time vs. Temperature curve (ANN testing 
response).
In Figure 5 and Table 1, the network is trained 
and its output plotted against the desired targets.
D
F
F
T W
b
K
K
T W
T W
k
N
F
+
⎡
⎣
⎡
⎣
⎡
⎤
⎦
⎤
⎦
⎤
=
∑
( )
S
1
 
(7)
Once the neural network is trained properly, it 
is tested with intermediate data to verify that the 
training is efficient and capable of giving accept-
able performance with unknown inputs, as shown 
in Figure 6 and Table 2.
From the results summarized in Tables 1 and 
2, it can be found that the assessed measure-
ment errors are substantially low, which is well 
within the acceptable range. Thus, the perform-
ance of the proposed thermistor-based scheme 
with respect to the temperature measurement is 
satisfactory.
Figure 4. MSE reduces with the increase in epochs.

435
Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata for their 
endless encouragement and valuable suggestions.
REFERENCES
Aggoune, M.E., Boudjema, F., Bensenouci, A., Hellal, 
A., Vadari, S.V., & El Mesai, M.R. (1993). Design of 
an adaptive-structure voltage regulator using artificial 
neural networks. Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Confer-
ence on Control Applications, 337–343.
Bose, B.K. (2001). Modern Power Electronics and AC 
Drives. Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Brady, A.P., Huff, H., & McBain, J.W. (1951). Meas-
urement of Vapour Pressure By Means of Matched 
Thermistors. Journal of Physical Colloid Chemistry, 
55, 304–311.
Charalambous, C. (1992). Conjugate gradient algorithm 
for efficient training of artificial neural networks. IEE 
Proceedings (Circuits, Devices and Systems), 301–310.
Chatterjee, A., Munshi, S., & Rakshit, A. (2000). ANN 
based linearising technique for constant temperature 
anemometer system. Journal of the Instrument Society 
of India, 109–114.
Coughlin, R.F., & Driscoll, F.F. (2002). Operational 
Amplifiers and Linear Integrated Circuits. Pearson 
Education, Inc., NJ.
Dey, D., & Munshi, S. (2010). Simulation studies on a 
new intelligent scheme for relative humidity and tem-
perature measurement using thermistors in 555 timer 
circuit. International Journal on Smart Sensing and 
Intelligent Systems, 3(2), 217–229.
Haykin, S. (1994). Neural Networks, A Comprehensive 
Foundation, Macmillan.
Kay, B.D., & Low, P.F. (1970). Measurement of the Total 
Suction of Soils by a Thermistor Psychrometer. Soil 
Sciences Society of America, Proceedings, 34, 373–376.
Khan, A.A., & Sengupta, R. (1984). A linear temperature/
voltage convertor using thermistor in log-network. 
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation. and Measure-
ment. 2–4.
Masters, T., & Land, W. (1997). A new training algorithm 
for the general regression neural network. IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Systems, Man., and Cyber-
netics, Computational Cybernetics and Simulation, 3, 
1990–1994.
Mondal, N., Abudhahir, A., Jana, S.K., Munshi, S., & 
Bhattacharya, D.P. (2009). A Log Amplifier Based 
Linearization Scheme for Thermocouples. Sensors & 
Transducers Journal, 100(1), 1–10.
Pau, L.F., & Johansen, F.S. (1990). Neural Network Signal 
Understanding for Instrumentation. IEEE Transactions 
on Instrumentation & Measurement, 39(4), 558–564.
Rathore, T.S. (2003). Digital Measurement Techniques. 
Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi.
Sengupta, R.N. (1988). A widely linear temperature-
to-frequency converter using a thermistor in a pulse 
generator. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation. and 
Measurement., 62–65.
Stankovic, D., & Elazar, J. (1977). Thermistor multi-
vibrator as the temperature-to-frequency converter 
and as a bridge for temperature measurement. IEEE 
Transaction on Instrumentation and Measurement, 
1M-26(1), 41–46.
Table 2. Performance of an ANN-based linearizer at 
testing.
Sl No.
ANN Output 
Temp (°C)
Desired 
Temp (°C)
Error
% Error
 1
40.8949
41.0
−0.1051
−0.2564
 2
43.0869
43.0
 0.0869
 0.2021
 3
44.9669
45.0
−0.0331
−0.0735
 4
47.0308
47.0
 0.0308
 0.0656
 5
49.0994
49.0
 0.0994
 0.2029
 6
51.0463
51.0
 0.0463
 0.0908
 7
52.9621
53.0
−0.0379
−0.0716
 8
55.1380
55.0
 0.1380
 0.2510
 9
56.8566
57.0
−0.1434
−0.2516
10
58.9522
59.0
−0.0478
−0.0810
11
61.1563
61.0
 0.1563
 0.2562
12
63.1003
63.0
 0.1003
 0.1591
13
65.1051
65.0
 0.1051
 0.1617
14
66.8797
67.0
−0.1203
−0.1795
15
68.9656
69.0
−0.0344
−0.0498
16
71.0767
71.0
 0.0767
 0.1080
17
73.1417
73.0
 0.1417
 0.1942
18
74.8872
75.0
−0.1128
−0.1503
19
77.1298
77.0
 0.1298
 0.1686
20
79.0415
79.0
 0.0415
 0.0525
21
80.9663
81.0
−0.0337
−0.0416
22
83.2835
83.0
 0.2835
 0.3415
23
84.8581
85.0
−0.1419
−0.1670
24
86.7151
87.0
−0.2849
−0.3275
25
89.1383
89.0
 0.1383
 0.1554
MSE
 0.0159
 0.0335
Root MSE
 0.1259
 0.1829
6 CONCLUSIONS
The aim of this study was to develop an ANN-based 
real-time temperature measurement technique using 
a thermistor as a temperature-sensing device in an 
astable multivibrator circuit. The output of the mul-
tivibrator was fed to a PC where the features of this 
signal were extracted. A pre-trained ANN was used to 
compute the unknown temperature from the above-
mentioned features. The computed temperature was 
displayed on the user interface using LabVIEW. 
The results revealed that the developed scheme gives 
acceptable accuracy in determining the unknown 
temperature over the specified range. However, it is 
evident that the range of operation can be extended 
by increasing the training data set of the ANN.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to express their sincere 
acknowledgement to Prof. Sugata Munshi and 
Dr Debangshu Dey, Department of Electrical 

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

437
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Valence Band Anticrossing model for InAs1-xBix by k⋅p method
D.P. Samajdar
Department of ECE, Heritage Institute of Technology, Anandapur, Kolkata, India
T.D. Das
Department of Electronic Science, National Institute of Technology, Yupia, Arunachal Pradesh, India
S. Dhar
Department of Electronic Science, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: The band gap reduction and the increase in spin-orbit splitting energy in InAs1-xBix is 
explained by the Valence Band Anticrossing (VBAC) model. The valence band structure is modified due 
to the interaction of the Bi related impurity levels with the extended states of the valence band of the host 
semiconductor InAs. The VBAC band gap reduction in InAs1-xBix is found out to be 42.8 meV/at%. The 
spin-orbit splitting energy in InAsBi increases by 18.2 meV/at%Bi which is responsible for the suppression 
of Auger recombination processes making it a potential candidate for optoelectronic applications in the 
3–5 μm regime.
processes that degrade the efficiency of LASERs 
and photodetectors. Degradation of electron 
mobility in bismides is also reported to be less than 
nitrides since the Bi incorporation results in least 
perturbation of the conduction band in the bis-
mides [Kini et al. 2009, Cooke et al. 2006].
There are a number of reports on the growth 
and characterization of InAs1-xBix. InAs1-xBix is a 
narrow band gap semiconductor and it is investi-
gated for applications in the 3–5 μm spectral region 
[Okamoto et al. 1998]. In the recent years, InAs 
has become a source of attraction for the research-
ers for making possible the fabrication of optoe-
lectronic devices with single carrier multiplication, 
low excess noise [Marshall et al. 2008, 2011] and 
low dark currents [Maddox et al. (2012), Ker et al. 
(2011) and Sandall et al. 2013]. However, it is not 
suitable for Mid Wave Infrared (MWIR) applica-
tions due to its cut-off wavelength of 3.5 μm. This 
necessitates the incorporation of Bi into InAs. 
Okamoto et al. (1999) reported a band gap reduc-
tion of 42 meV/%Bi in InAsBi layers, grown by 
MOVPE. A band gap reduction of 58 meV/%Bi is 
obtained from PL measurements for thick InAsBi 
layers (Svensson et al. (2012)]. Ma et al. [1990] 
reported a band gap decrease of 55 meV/% Bi in 
InAsBi using PL measurements. In this paper, we 
have calculated the details of the valence band 
structure of InAsBi using a 12 × 12 Hamiltonian. 
The VBAC calculated values of bandgap energy 
are compared with the Virtual Crystal Approxi-
mation (VCA) calculated values. The spin-orbit 
1 INTRODUCTION
III-V-Bi alloy systems have been a source of inter-
est for the researchers worldwide for potential near- 
and mid-infrared optoelectronic applications. A 
recent Springer Series volume [Li et al. (Eds.) 2013] 
reviewed the surprising yet interesting properties 
of this novel class of materials. The most promi-
nent property of III-V-bismides is the substantial 
reduction in band gap caused by the incorpora-
tion of a dilute concentration of Bi. This property 
makes the bismides similar to comparatively more 
studied alloy systems-dilute III-V-nitrides [Henini 
et al. (Ed.) 2005]. In dilute nitrides, the interaction 
of the N related resonant state with the conduction 
band of the host semiconductor causes the reduc-
tion in band gap. Unlike the dilute nitrides, the 
band gap reduction in bismides occurs due to the 
anticrossing interaction of the host valence band 
matrix with the Bi related impurity levels formed 
close to its valence band edge due to Bi incorpora-
tion into the III-V alloys [Alberi et al. 2007]. These 
impurity states interact with the valence band 
states, i.e. the Light Hole (LH) and Heavy Hole 
(HH) bands, resulting in an reduction of the mate-
rial bandgap [Alberi et al. 2007] and the interaction 
with the spin-orbit Split-Off (SO) band causes the 
increase in spin-orbit splitting energy [Okamoto 
et al. 1998]. This results in the formation of ΔSO>Eg 
regime which helps to reduce or even suppress 
Auger recombination and Inter Valence Band 
Absorption (IVBA) [Li et al. (Eds.) 2013] loss 

438
coupling energy is calculated to find out the Bi at% 
required to obtain the ΔSO>Eg regime.
2 MATHEMATICAL MODELLING
The incorporation of Bi atoms into InAs leads 
to the formation of localized defect states near 
the valence band edge of the host semiconduc-
tor. These Bi related impurity states interact with 
the extended states of the host resulting in the 
restructuring of the valence band by splitting the 
LH, HH and SO bands into a series of E+ and E− 
sub bands which are reduces the band gap in one 
hand and enhances spin-orbit splitting energy on 
the other. The valence band structure of InAsBi 
in the <100> direction can be best described by 
a 12 × 12 Hamiltonian given below [Alberi et al. 
2007]:
At the Γ point, where k = 0, the solution of the 
Hamiltonian yields four distinct eigenvalues corre-
sponding to the E+ and E− sub bands of the LH/
HH and SO energy levels. The solutions of the 
Hamiltonian for k = 0 are given by the following 
set of equations [Samajdar et al. 2014],
ELH HH
/
±
(
)
H
E
H
E
V
Bi
Bi
Bi
+
H
−
H
1
2
HEBi + E
HE
E
+ E
 
(1)
ESO±
(
)
S
E
S
SE
E
V
i so
Bi so
Bi so
−
S
EBi
−
−
so
Bi
+
S
−
S
1
2
SEBi so + E
SE
E
+ E
 
 
(2)
where  H = L = ΔEVBM x, S = ΔEVBM x − Δ0 ΔESO 
x and V
C
x
E
Bi
C
VB
E
M
. Δ
 and ΔESO
E
 respectively 
denote the valence band and spin-orbit split-off 
band offset between the end point compounds.  
Δ0 is the spin orbit splitting energy InAs. V takes 
into account the coupling between the host 
valence band and the Bi-related impurity levels 
with CBi used as a fitting parameter [Jefferson 
et al. 2006]. EBi and EBi-so are the Bi related impu-
rity levels corresponding to the LH/HH and SO 
bands.
Figure 1. Valence Band Structure for InAs0.96Bi0.04 in the 
<100> direction.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The value of the spin orbit splitting energy for InAs 
and InBi is reported as 0.39 eV [Vurgaftman et al. 
2001] and 2.2 eV [Carrier et al. 2004] respectively. 
The direct E0 energy gap for InBi is calculated as 
−1.62 eV [Barnett et al. 2014]. The values of the 
Valence Band Offset (VBO), Conduction Band 
Offset (CBO) and spin orbit split-off band offset 
between InAs and InBi are calculated as 0.94 eV, 
−1.03 eV and −0.87 eV respectively [Samajdar et al. 
(2016)]. Valence Band Offset (VBO) for InBi is 
obtained by extrapolating the graph between VBO 
and lattice constant for In containing binary com-
pounds using Reference [Samajdar et al. 2014]. 
The location of the heavy/light hole levels for Bi 
EBi and corresponding spin-orbit split-off level 
EBi-so is found to be 0.4 eV and 1.9 eV respectively 
below the valence band maximum (VBM) of InAs. 
The value of the fitting parameter CBi is calculated 
to be 1.00 eV [Samajdar et al. 2016]. The coupling 
parameter CBi determines the magnitude of shift 
of the E+ and E− levels of the HH,LH and SO 
sub bands as is evident from equations (1) and (2) 
[Samajdar et al. 2015].
Figure 1 shows the restructuring of the valence 
band structure of InAs due to the incorporation of 
bismuth. The E+ and E− energy levels corresponding 
to the LH, HH and SO sub bands are obtained by 
solving the 12 × 12 Hamiltonian discussed above.
Figure 2 shows the band structure of InAs1-xBix 
as a function of Bi mole fraction, calculated at Γ 
point. The positions of the E+ and E− related energy 
levels are calculated using equations (1) and (2). 
The E+ and E− levels corresponding to the HH/LH 
and SO energy bands repel each other. The HH/LH 
E+ band moves upward by about 32.5 meV/at% Bi 

439
which is primarily responsible for the most part of 
energy gap reduction in III-V bismides. The lower-
ing of the conduction band minimum for InAs-xBix 
is obtained from the VCA calculations, ECB-VCA can 
be written as [Alberi et al. 2007],
E
x
CB
E
VCA
g
C
E
E BM
C
−
−
E
Δ
 
(3)
where Eg is the band gap energy of the InAs and 
ΔECB
E
M  is its conduction band offset. For InAs, 
Eg = 0.35 eV and ΔECB
E
M  = 1.03 eV at T = 300 K. 
It has been calculated from the plot that for a Bi 
mole fraction of 0.5 at%, ΔSO becomes greater than 
Eg which suppresses the Auger recombination loss 
processes in InAsBi based optoelectronic devices.
Figure 3 shows a comparison of the VCA and 
VBAC calculated values of bandgap for InAsBi. 
Indeed, the plot shows a fair agreement of the 
VBAC calculated values and the experimental data. 
However, the VBAC values deviate slightly from 
the VCA calculated values indicating the existence 
of mismatch between InAsBi and InAs due to Bi 
incorporation.
Figure 4 shows the variation of VBAC calculated 
band gap and spin-orbit splitting energy as a func-
tion of Bi mole fraction. It can be seen that for a Bi 
concentration of about 0.05 at%, spin-orbit split-
ting energy becomes greater than band gap energy 
which results in the formation of ΔSO>Eg regime.
4 CONCLUSIONS
VBAC model has been used to draw the band struc-
ture of InAs1-xBix for x = 0.04 and the reduction in 
band gap occurring due to the upward movement of 
the HH/LH E+ energy level. VBAC model predicts 
the upward movement of the HH/LH E+ level by 
about 32.5 meV/at%Bi and downward movement of 
the conduction band minimum by 10.5 meV/at%Bi 
resulting in a band gap reduction of 42.8 meV.
at%Bi. The upward shift in the SO E+ energy level 
by about 18.2 meV/at%Bi results in ΔSO>Eg regime 
at Bi mole fraction of 0.005 which suppresses the 
Auger and IVBA recombination processes.
REFERENCES
Alberi, K. et al, (2007). Valence-band anticrossing in mis-
matched III-V semiconductor alloys. Phys. Rev. B 75, 
045203.
Alberi, K., Dubon, O.D., Walukiez, W., Yu, K.M., 
Bertulis, K. & Kroktus, A. (2007). Valence band anti-
crossing in GaBixAs1-x. Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 051909.
Figure 2. Relative positions of the E+ and E− energy lev-
els corresponding to the HH/LH and SO sub bands for 
InAsBi as a function of Bi mole fraction.
Figure 3. Comparison of band gap values for different 
Bi mole fractions using VCA and VBAC Models.
Figure 4. Plot of VBAC band gap and spin-orbit split-
ting energy versus Bi mole fraction for InAsBi.

440
Barnett, S.A., (1987). Direct E. 0 energy gaps of bismuth-
containing III-V alloys predicted using quantum die-
lectric theory. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 5 2845.
Carrier, P. & Wei, S.H., (2004). Calculated spin-orbit 
splitting of all diamondlike and zinc-blende semi-
conductors: Effects of p1/2 local orbitals and chemical 
trends. Phys. Rev. B 70, 035212.
Cooke, D.G., Hegmann, F.A, Young, E.C, Tiedje, T., 
(2006). Electron mobility in dilute GaAs bismide and 
nitride alloys measured by time-resolved terahertz 
spectroscopy. Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 122103.
Henini M. (Ed.), Dilute Nitride Semiconductors, Elsevier, 
Oxford, 2005.
Ker, P.J., Marshall, A., Krysa, A., David, J.P.R & Tan, 
C.H. (2011). Temperature Dependence of Leakage 
Current in InAs Avalanche Photodiodes. IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 47, 1123.
Kini, R.N., Bhusal, L., Ptak, A.J., France, R. & 
Mascarenhas, A., (2009). Electron Hall mobility in 
GaAsBi. J. Appl. Phys. 106, 043705.
Li H. & Wang Z.M. (Eds.), Bismuth-containing com-
pounds, Springer series in Materials Science, vol. 186, 
Springer Science + Business Media, NewYork, 2013.
Ma, K.Y., Fang, Z.M., Cohen, R.M & Stringfellow, G.B., 
(1990). Organometallic vapor-phase epitaxy growth 
and characterization of Bi-containing III/V alloys. J. 
Appl. Phys. 68, 4586.
Maddox, S.J., et al. (2012). Enhanced low-noise gain 
from InAs avalanche photodiodes with reduced dark 
current and background doping. Appl. Phys. Lett. 
101, 151124.
Marshall, A.R.J, Tan, C.H, Steer, M.J. & David, J.P.R., 
(2008). Electron dominated impact ionization and 
avalanche gain characteristics in InAs photodiodes. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 111107.
Marshall, A.R.J, Vines, P., Ker, P.J, David, J.P.R & Tan, 
C.H., (2011). Avalanche Multiplication and Excess 
Noise in InAs Electron Avalanche Photodiodes at 
77 K. IEEE J. Quantum Electron 47, 858.
Okamoto, H. & Oe, K., (1998). Growth of Metastable 
Alloy InAsBi by Low-Pressure MOVPE. Jpn. J. Appl. 
Phys. 37, 1608.
Okamoto, H., & Oe, K., (1999). Structural and Ener-
gy-Gap Characterization of Metalorganic-Vapor-
Phase-Epitaxy-Grown InAsBi. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 
38, 1022.
Samajdar, D.P. & Dhar, S., (2014).Valence Band Struc-
ture of InAs1−xBix and InSb1−xBix Alloy Semiconduc-
tors Calculated Using Valence Band Anticrossing 
Model. The Sci. World. J. 2014, 704830.
Samajdar, D.P., Das, T.D. & Dhar, S., (2015). Valence 
Band Anticrossing model for GaSb1-xBix and 
GaP1-xBix using k.p Method. Mater. Sci. Semicond. 
Proc. 40, 539.
Samajdar, D.P., Das, T.D. & Dhar, S., (2016). Calcula-
tion of Valence Band Structure and Band Dispersion 
in Indium containing III-V Bismides by k⋅p method. 
Comp. Mater. Sci. 111, 497.
Sandall, I., Zhang, S., & Tan, C.H., (2013). Linear Array 
of InAs APDs operating at 2 μm. Opt. Express 21, 
25780.
Svensson, S.P, Hier, H., Sarney, W.L, Donetsky, D., 
Wang, D. & Belenky, G., (2012). Molecular beam 
epitaxy control and photoluminescence properties of 
InAsBi. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 30, 02B109.
Vurgaftman, I., Meyer, J.R., & Ram-Mohan, L.R., 
(2001). Band parameters for III–V compound semi-
conductors and their alloys J. Appl. Phys, 89, 5815.

441
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Assessment of different transient conditions in a radial 
feeder by THD- and DWT-based Skewness analysis
A. Maji & A. Chattopadhyaya
S.K.F.G.I., West Bengal, India
B. Das
Government College of Engineering and Textile Technology, West Bengal, India
S. Chattopadhyay
G.K.C.I.E.T., West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: This study deals with the assessment of transient conditions in a radial feeder system. At 
first, different transient conditions, including capacitor switching transient condition in a radial feeder, 
were simulated in a MATLAB environment; then R-phase current signal at the load bus was captured and 
different analyses were performed to assess the transient conditions in that feeder. Total Harmonic Distor-
tion (THD) was calculated on the captured current signals in different conditions and then Discrete Wave-
let Transform (DWT) was performed on those captured signals where significant differences in results 
were observed which clearly suggest the transient conditions of radial feeder. After DWT decomposition, 
Skewness values for DWT detail and approximate level coefficients have been calculated to assess the 
transient conditions of the radial feeder. Using these techniques the results which have come out are very 
much optimistic for proper discrimination of transient conditions in a radial feeder.
software. A new approach of Discrete Wavelet 
Transform (DWT) for analyzing the transient was 
proposed by M. A. Beg, Dr. M. K. Khedkar, and 
Dr. G. M. Dhole. Later they made some modifica-
tions over the previous one and solved the same 
problem using DWT-PAC method, showing how 
easily fault current and switching current can be dis-
criminated with their distinguishing nature. A study 
had been done by Sayed A. Ward hesham Said et 
al. and Mahmoud N. Ali estimating the nature of 
transient overvoltage, and a model was developed 
using an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) tool to 
estimate the different types of over—voltage switch-
ing. Various investigations were done on discrimina-
tion and protection of feeder to enhance reliability, 
and different techniques were proposed, one such 
useful method that discriminates the fault current 
from switching current is by using the Phase Locked 
Loop (PLL) method. Some methods to limit this 
current have also been proposed like installing reac-
tor, zero-voltage closing control, three DC reactors 
type etc. Some other techniques proposed by differ-
ent researches are on Clarke plane, Park plane, sym-
metrical components, Skewness, and Kurtosis based 
Discrete Wavelet Transform to analyze signals for 
detection and classification of different faults in 
electrical systems.
1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, capacitor placement in radial 
feeder has become very important to reduce line 
losses and improve the power factor. Energizing a 
capacitor bank into the feeder is a bit tricky as it 
introduces a large inrush current and transient volt-
age. As the inrush current is much higher than the 
normal current, discriminating them from faults is 
also necessary as capacitor switching can mal-op-
erate the relays. So it has drawn separate attention 
and a lot of research works are being done.
Some studies done earlier showed the necessity of 
capacitor bank and its direct effects on bus voltages 
and power factor. A proposal on selecting different 
capacitor banks for different commercial or indus-
trial loads and their effects on the harmonics level 
had been analyzed. The transient effects on volt-
ages and inrush currents due to capacitor switching 
were proposed by ShehabAbdulwadood Ali et al. 
The same was shown in various studies and further 
researches showed how an inductor can limit the 
transient effect. Later on an analysis showed the 
effects on Total Harmonic Distortion (THD) due to 
capacitor switching using Fast Fourier Transform 
(FFT). Further investigation showed the effects of 
transients on radial feeder using MATLAB/Simulink 

442
This paper emphasizes on the analysis of tran-
sient currents due to capacitor switching and dif-
ferent types of faults using different techniques 
like THD-and DWT-based Skewness analysis. A 
simple radial feeder is chosen for this purpose and 
from the analysis proper discrimination of tran-
sient conditions has been achieved for proper pro-
tection of the radial feeder.
2 MATLAB MODELING
Total analysis has been done in MATLAB. The 
above circuit of Figure 1 was simulated in MAT-
LAB simulink environment. Here generation volt-
age is considered as 33 kV and transmission line 
voltage is considered as 132 kV. A 100-km trans-
mission line and five buses are considered for this 
network. Load is connected at bus 5, and capacitor 
bank is added at bus 4. Using the above circuit, four 
different conditions have been created: (i) Normal 
condition (ii) Capacitor switching transient condi-
tion (iii) Fault condition (three phase, L-L, L-G 
fault) (iv) Capacitor switching and L-G fault con-
dition. All the faults are created in between bus 4 
and bus 5 and in all the cases, current and voltage 
is considered at bus 4 for assessment of the tran-
sient conditions in that radial feeder.
3 PROPOSED METHODS FOR ANALYSIS
In this paper to assess the transient conditions 
three different methods have been used, which are 
(i) THD-based technique (ii) DWT-based tech-
nique (iii) DWT-based Skewness analysis.
3.1 Total Harmonic Distortion (THD)
In this paper, THD is used as a method to assess the 
transient conditions in the above mentioned radial 
feeder for proper protection purpose. Total harmonic 
distortion is the degree to which a waveform deviates 
from its pure sinusoidal values due to summation of 
harmonics present in a signal. THD can be used in 
voltage and as well as current signal to measure the 
harmonic distortion present in that particular signal 
and it can be defined as the ratio of the square root 
of the sum of the currents of all harmonic compo-
nents to the current of fundamental frequency. It is 
also used for linearizing the power quality in electric 
power systems. To calculate the THD of bus 4 cur-
rent, we consider up to the seventh harmonics.
THD
H
I
I
I
I
I
X
nI
=
+
I
I
I
(
.......
)
2I 2
3I 2
4I 2
2
I
+
1I
100  
(1)
where, n = nth harmonics
3.2 DWT based technique
Using Wavelet Transform (WT), better time fre-
quency representation can be achieved from non-
stationery signals which were the shortcomings 
of other signal processing techniques like, FFT, 
STFT etc. Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT) 
and Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) are the 
two classifications of WT. Due to some compu-
tational difficulties of CWT DWT is considered 
as a technique in this work to assess the transient 
conditions for protecting a radial feeder. In DWT, 
signals pass through high pass and low pass filter 
banks in each decomposition level to get differ-
ent frequency bands present in the signal. In this 
paper, nine levels of DWT decomposition and‘db4’ 
mother wavelet is considered for DWT analysis.
3.3 DWT-based Skewness analysis
Skewness is a statistical parameter. Skewness can 
be mathematically defined as the average cubed 
deviation from the mean divided by the standard 
deviation cubed. If the result of the computation 
is greater than zero, the distribution is positively 
skewed. If it’s less than zero, it’s negatively skewed, 
and equal to zero means it’s symmetric. For uni-
variate data Y1, Y2, …, YN, the formula for Skew-
ness is:
Skewness =
=
∑
(
) /
−
N
S
i
i
N
3
1
3
 
(2)
where Y  is the mean, S is the standard deviation, 
and N is the number of data points. In this work, 
the signal is first decomposed by ‘db4’-based DWT 
decomposition. Then the Skewness value was cal-
culated for detail along with approximate (approxi-
mation) level coefficients up to nine levels of DWT 
decomposition.
4 RESULTS
The above circuit of Figure 1 was simulated in 
MATLAB, and three phase voltages and currents 
Figure 1. Simulation model of radial feeder system.

443
at bus 4 due to the addition of capacitor banks are 
depicted in Figures 2 and 3 respectively. Switching 
transient occurred due to the sudden addition of 
capacitor bank which is clearly observed in bus 4 
voltages and currents. Transient inrush current is 
observed in three phases due to switching transient 
but for assessment of transient inrush current, 
R-phase current at bus 4 is considered for all the 
cases. Figure 4 is used to show the transient inrush 
current due to capacitor bank switching.
4.1 Case 1: Results of THD analysis
Using the MATLAB model, the abovementioned 
four different conditions simulated in MAT-
LAB and all the cases of R-phase current at bus 
4 was captured at the proper sampling frequency 
and then THD was calculated. THD results are 
mentioned in Table 1. There is a clear difference 
of THD values in the four different conditions; 
amongst them, THD value is maximum in capaci-
tor switching condition.
4.2 Case 2: Results of DWT analysis
For assessment of the transient condition, DWT 
has been done on R-phase current in all the 
Figure 2. Three phase voltages (at bus 4) due to capaci-
tor bank switching.
Figure 3. Three phase currents (at bus 4) due to capaci-
tor bank switching.
Figure 4. R phase current (at bus 4) due to capacitor 
bank switching.
Table 1. Calculation of THD in different conditions.
Sl 
no
Different 
Conditions
1st 
harmonic
(%)
2nd 
harmonic
(%)
3rd 
harmonic
(%)
4th 
harmonic
(%)
5th 
harmonic
(%)
6th 
harmonic
(%)
7th 
harmonic
(%)
THD in 
percentage
(%)
1
Normal
100
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
Capacitor 
switching
100
14.62
14.42
10.17
8.11
10.54
11.31
28.75
3a
3 Phase 
fault
100
6.06
4.83
2.60
1.62
1.71
1.60
9.05
3b
L-L fault
100
4.55
3.51
1.49
1.85
1.43
0.93
7.14
3c
L-G fault
100
6.15
4.89
2.58
1.62
1.72
1.60
9.05
4
Switching & 
fault
100
1.03
0.12
0.11
0.13
0.09
0.03
6
conditions. In DWT, up to level three is considered 
in all the cases. Figures 5–9 are used to depict the 
DWT results of bus 4 current in all the above men-
tioned conditions.
4.3 Case 3 Results of DWT-based 
skewness analysis
R-phase signal is decomposed by ‘db4’ mother 
wavelet-based DWT decomposition (up to level 
nine of decomposition) and each level for detail and 
approximation coefficients Skewness values has been 
calculated which are depicted in Figures 11 and 12.

444
Figure 5. DWT of R-phase current in normal 
condition.
Figure 6. DWT of R-phase current in capacitor switch-
ing transient condition.
Figure 7. DWT of R-phase current in three-phase fault 
condition.
Figure 8. DWT of R-phase current in L-L fault 
condition.
Figure 9. DWT of R-phase current in L–G condition.
Figure 10. DWT of R-phase current in capacitor 
switching transient and L–G fault condition.
Figure 11. Skewness values of detail coefficients with 
respect to DWT decomposition level.
Figure 12. Skewness values of approximation coeffi-
cients with respect to DWT decomposition level.

445
5 OBSERVATIONS
Figures 2 and 3 are used to depict the bus voltage 
and currents respectively after the capacitor bank 
switching, and Figure 4 is used to show R-phase 
current at bus 4 due to capacitor switching. The 
maximum value of R-phase inrush current due to 
capacitor bank switching is almost 50 amp which 
is shown in Figure 4.
THD of R-phase current at bus 4 in different 
conditions have been recorded in Table 1, where 
THD is maximum in capacitor switching condition 
and THD is minimum (0.0) in normal condition. 
In fault conditions, THD values are in between 7 
and 9. THD value is 6 (in percentage) when capaci-
tor switching and fault, both the transient condi-
tions, were present in the system. Considering the 
THD values in Table 1, all the conditions can be 
classified properly.
To asses and classify the transient inrush current 
at bus 4 R-phase current, ‘db4’-based DWT analy-
sis has been done for R-phase current at different 
conditions which are depicted in Figures 5–10, 
where maximum changes have been observed in 
level coefficients. DWT decomposition is con-
sidered up to level nine (9), though DWT result 
is shown up to level three (3) in all these figures. 
Using all these DWT results, different conditions 
of the radial feeder can be assessed and classi-
fied which will be helpful for proper protection of 
radial feeder.
Figures 11 and 12 are used to depict the Skewness 
values for detail and approximate level coefficients 
of DWT decomposition at different conditions. In 
both the figures maximum difference is observed 
at DWT decomposition level 2 from where inrush 
current at bus 4 due to capacitor switching can 
be easily discriminated from other conditions 
properly.
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, assessment of transient conditions 
in a radial feeder has been assessed by THD—and 
DWT-based Skewness analysis techniques. Assess-
ment was done by capturing the R-phase current 
at bus 4 of the abovementioned radial feeder. THD 
has been calculated in normal condition and other 
different conditions; then DWT was done on the 
captured R-phase current at bus 4 on those con-
ditions and comparing the results, transient con-
ditions of radial feeder have been detected and 
discriminated. Further Skewness values of DWT 
detail and approximate level coefficients were cal-
culated from where transient conditions of that 
radial feeder were detected and assessed which will 
be helpful for proper protection of radial feeder.
REFERENCES
Abdelsalam. H.A. Hamz, Eimanali al-jazzaf, Mohamed 
and a. H. A badr, 2013. “Inrush current and Total Har-
monic Distortion Transient of Power Transformer with 
Switching Capacitor Bank,” Engineering Science and 
Technology: An International Journal (ESTIJ), ISSN: 
2250-3498, Vol.3, No.3, June 2013.
Ananwattanaporn, S., Patcharoen, T. Yoomak, S. 
Ngaopitakkul, A. and Pothisarn, C. 2014. “Charac-
teristics and Behavior of Voltage Transient and Inrush 
Current due to Switching Capacitor Bank,” Proceed-
ings of the 2nd International Conference on Intelli-
gent Systems and Image Processing 2014.
Beg, M.A., Dr. Khedkar M.K. and Dr. Dhole, G.M. 2012. 
“Discrimination of Capacitor Switching Transients 
Using Wavelet,” pratibha: international journal of sci-
ence, spirituality, business and technology (ijssbt), vol. 
1, no.1, march 2012 issn (Print) 2277–7261.
Beg, M.A., Khedkar, M.K. Paraskar S.R. and Dhole, 
G.M. 2011. “Classification of fault originated transients 
in high voltage network using DWT–PCA approach,” 
International Journal of Engineering, Science and 
Technology Vol. 3, No. 11, 2011, pp. 1–14.
Chattopadhyay, S., Chattopadhyaya, A. and Sengupta, S. 
2013. “Analysis of Stator Current of Induction Motor 
Used in Transport System at Single Phasing by Meas-
uring Phase Angle, Symmetrical Components, Skew-
ness, Kurtosis and Harmonic Distortion in Park plane”, 
IET Electrical System in Transportation, September, 
2013, pp. 1–8.
Chattopadhyaya, A., Chattopadhyay S. and Sengupta, S. 
2013.“Stator Current Assessment of an Induction 
Motor at Crawling in Clarke Plane,” International 
Journal of Electronics & Communication Technology, 
Volume 4, ISSUE-SPL1, ISSN: 2230-7109 (Online), 
2230–9543 (Print), Jan.–Mar., 2013.
Chattopadhyay, S., Chattopadhyaya, A. and Sengupta, S. 
2014. “Measurement of Harmonic Distortion and 
Skewness of Stator Current of Induction Motor at 
Crawling in Clarke plane”, IET Science, Measurement 
and Technology, March, 2014, pp. 1–9.
Chattopadhyay, S., Chattopadhyaya, A. and Sengupta, S. 
2014.“Harmonic Power Distortion Measurement in 
Park Plane”, ELSEVIER, Measurement 51, February, 
2014, pp. 197–205.
Chattopadhyaya, A., Chattopadhyay, S., Mitra, M. and 
Sengupta, S. 2012.“Wavelet Analysis for Assessment 
of Crawling of an Induction Motor in Clarke Plane” 
International Journal of Electrical, Electronics and 
Computer Engineering, (IJEECE ISSN: ONLINE 
2277 2626), Special Edition for Best Papers of 
Michael Faraday IET India Summit-2012, MFIIS-12, 
November, 2012, pp. 71–76.
Chattopadhyaya, A., Ghosh, A., Chattopadhyay, S. and 
Sengupta, S. 2013. “Stator Current Harmonic 
Assessment of Induction Motor for Fault Diagnosis” 
International Journal of Electronics & Communica-
tion Technology, Volume 4, ISSUE-SPL1, ISSN: 
2230-7109 (Online), 2230–9543 (Print), Jan–Mar, 
2013.
NIST, 2012 “Engineering Statistics Handbook”, NIST/
SEMATECH e-Handbook of Statistical Methods, 
Retrieved 18th March 2012.

446
Omar, A.S., Badr, M.A.L. Abdel-Hamid, W.H. and 
Abdin, A.M. 2014. “Selection of Industrial Capacitor 
Banks for Power Factor Correction in Industrial Load 
Application,” International Journal on Power Engineer-
ing and Energy (IJPEE) Vol. (5) – No. (3) July 2014.
OodoOgidiStephen, Liu Yanli and Sun Hui,2011. “Appli-
cation of Switched Capacitor banks for Power Factor 
Improvement and Harmonics Reduction on the Nigerian 
Distribution Electric Network,” International Journal 
of Electrical & Computer Sciences IJECS-IJENS 
Vol: 11 No: 06 Dec’ 2011.
Rajkumar Nagar, Yadav, D.K. 2015. “Analysis of switch-
ing transient and fault detection of strong power sys-
tem using PLL,” International Journal of Engineering 
Development and Research Volume 3, Issue 2, 2015, 
ISSN: 2321-9939.
Sayed A. Ward, Hesham Said and Mahmoud N. Ali, 
“Estimation of capacitor bank switching overvoltages 
using artificial neural network,” Journal of Electrical 
Engineering.
Shehab Abdulwadood Ali, 2011 “Capacitor Banks 
Switching Transients in Power Systems,” Energy 
Science and Technology Vol. 2, No. 2, 2011, pp. 
62–73.
Surendar J., and Dr. Loganathan, N. 2014. “Development 
and Analysis of Radial Feeder Protection for Capaci-
tor Switching Transients,” International Conference 
on Engineering Technology and Science-(ICETS’14) 
Volume 3, Special Issue 1, February 2014.
Teenu Jose, Divya K, Marymol Paul and Ann Sonia M, 
2015. “A Method for Reducing Three-Phase Power 
Capacitor Switching Transients,” International Journal 
of Advanced Research in Electrical, Electronics and 
Instrumentation Engineering Vol 4, Issue 3, March 
2015 ISSN (Print): 2320–3765.

447
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Study of dynamic responses of an interconnected power system 
using a zero-order hold circuit
Subhankar Mukherjee, Soumya Kanti Bandyopadhyay & Aveek Chattopadhyaya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, West Bengal, India
Bikash Das
Government College of Engineering and Textile Technology, Berhampore, India
ABSTRACT: Power system engineering was and still has themaximum preoccupation and concern 
of  controllingmega-watt power since it is the basic governing element of revenue.This paperis entirely 
focused on the study of dynamic responses of single-area and two-area interconnected power systems. 
Here two area systems with reheat turbine, non-reheat turbine, and hydro-turbine areconsidered for study. 
The state space model of an interconnected system is developed for the studies of dynamic responses. The 
main objective of the present work is to demonstrate the effect of change of speed regulation parameters 
and sampling time constant. Dynamic responses are analyzed in MATLAB-SIMULINK environment 
with 10% load (severe case) change in any control area.
of electricity has increased. Today we have to serve 
electricity in rural areas also which has made the 
supply as well as production of electricity a chal-
lenge. As a result the concept of interconnection 
of two areas has come into the picture. We are also 
thinking of some alternative sources of energy 
with which we can generate power to meet the 
desired level. As thermal is a nonrenewable source 
of energy, we are also thinking of hydro (water) as 
a medium for the generation, using which the cost 
of production will be reduced.
Planning, operation, and control of an intercon-
nected power system is a challenging and impor-
tant problem where planning, scheduling, and 
operation of the system in unit wise, plan wise and 
interconnection wise must be optimal for proper 
operation of the power system in terms of abso-
lute economy. Economic operation of power sys-
tem along with the suitable analytical model results 
in meaningful savings.
2 SYSTEM INVESTIGATED
This paper modeled MW frequency control system 
assuming a small signal assumption. In this paper, 
a two-area interconnected power system with one 
thermal and one hydel unit has been considered. 
For simplicity, different nonlinear elements and 
other parametric uncertainties, such as dead zone 
of turbines, GRC of governor etc., are discarded. 
Literature survey shows that in practice measure-
ment of frequency or tie line power errors are done 
1 INTRODUCTION
Power system engineering was and still has the 
maximum preoccupation and concern to control-
ling mega-watt power since it is the basic govern-
ing element of revenue. In the earlier days, power 
system network, transmissions, and utilities were 
not so complicated; therefore, there was no obvi-
ous great concern of controlling the system. Due 
to the advent of modern technology, power sys-
tem networks become more and more extensive 
because of long transmission lines, more load 
demand, frequent load fluctuations etc. Therefore, 
we must pay more attention on control strategy, 
which minimizes disturbances occurring in the 
system while maintaining the other system’s con-
straints like as security, reliability, and stability. 
Nowadays our power system networks are con-
nected through transmission lines called Tie lines. 
All generating units contribute their generations 
in interconnected systems. Change of load in any 
unit results in changes in steady state frequency. 
In a large interconnected power system, the gen-
eration comprises a suitable mix of thermal, hydro 
and nuclear generations. Nuclear units has higher 
efficiency, usually operated at its base load, i.e., it 
is close to the maximum load. Therefore, it has no 
participation in system frequency control. Thus, 
the natural duty for load frequency control falls on 
thermal and hydel systems only.
In the early days, the distribution of electric 
energy was only meant for limited areas. Now as 
days are passing on, it can be seen that the need 

448
in a fixed interval of time using a zero-order hold 
circuit. Based on the above knowledge and assump-
tion, this paper modeled the two-area hydrothermal 
system in discrete data form. Fig. 1 shows the pro-
posed model of an interconnected hydrothermal 
system with a Zero-Order Hold circuit. Simulink 
model of a two-area hydrothermal system using a 
zero-order hold is shown in Fig. 2.
3 MODELING OF AN INTERCONNECTED 
SYSTEM
X
Ax
Bu
Gw
•
= Ax
 
(1)
Equation (1) gives a differential equation which 
defines the dynamic behavior of a continuous time 
system. A, B and G are called as system matrix, 
input matrix, and disturbance matrix, respectively, 
which depend on different system parameters and 
operating conditions of the system. Whereas x, 
u, and w are known as state variables, controlled 
input, and disturbance input, respectively.
The state space matrix of a two-area system is 
given by:
4 SIMULATION RESULTS
Figure 1. Block Diagram of interconnected hydro-
thermal system.
Figure 2. Simulink model of a two-area hydrothermal 
system using a zero-order hold.
Figure 3. Frequency error of a two—area system with 
I controller.
Figure 4. Frequency error of a two-area system with PI 
controller.

449
 2.  Interconnected power systems provides more 
stable operation compared to control areas oper-
ating individually. It takes 6–8 sec to settle down 
the oscillation which is depicted in Fig. (6).
 3.  In Fig. (5), the system has high peak overshoot 
which is highly minimized with proper choice 
of frequency bias constraint (Bi) as shown in 
Fig (5).
 4.  It is observed from Fig. (4) that tie-line power 
flow deviates from nominal setting, with sud-
den load changes in both the areas and it takes 
10–12 sec to settle down.
 5.  From the investigation carried out in this work, 
it has been observed that PI-controller strategy 
offers an ameliorated dynamic performance of 
a system compared to P-controller.
 6.  Peaks of undershoots of hydrounits are less 
compares to thermal unit.
 7.  Frequency errors in hydel units get damped 
faster than that of thermal areas.
 8.  With the replacement of conventional integral 
controller by PI and PID controller, over-
shoots of a dynamic performance is highly 
minimized.
 9.  The results reveal that for a small gain of 
integral controller gain, (KI) gives better per-
formance so far as out-of-system oscillation is 
considered, Fig. (7).
10.  Fig. (7) shows that a higher value of speed 
regulation parameter (Ri) causes deviation of 
frequency as well as tie-line power that leads to 
unstable operation of system dynamics.
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, an attempt has been made to evaluate 
the state space model of a two-area interconnected 
power system. Further, the study is extended to 
obtain a discrete model of a power system. This 
method is very much realistic since both frequency 
and tie-line power flow is measured at discrete 
intervals of time.
A comparison has also been made for the analy-
sis of the dynamic performances of a hydrothermal 
coordinated system. The reheat type system has 
sluggish performances compare to the nonreheat 
type system though the efficiency of the power 
plant is high when it is operated with a reheat tur-
bine. In real situations, a large power system net-
work comprises different power generating sources 
such as hydro, thermal, gas, and nuclear. From the 
study, it is observed that the dynamic perform-
ances of hydro-thermal system is quite better than 
the thermal-thermal system. The optimum sam-
pling period of zero-order-hold circuit is to be set 
judiciously considering the large value of sampling 
time as long as the system dynamics maintains 
its stability. From the analysis it is also observed 
Figure 5. Frequency error of a two area system with 
PID controller.
Figure 6. Frequency error of a two-area system with 
PID controller.
Figure 7. Frequency error of a two-area system for 
PID-controller using ZOH.
5 OBSERVATIONS
The interconnected two-area and multi-area power 
system theory and hydrothermal system is studied 
in MATLB–SIMULINK environment both in 
continuous time and discrete time form.
The following things have been observed:
1.  In Fig (3), the settling time of hydro and Reheat 
thermal systems are 7 sec and 11 sec, respec-
tively (approximately), which shows that reheat 
system has sluggish dynamic response compare 
to non-reheat system.

450
that the range of sampling time period is better 
in hydro-thermal system compared to thermal-
thermal system, and the effectiveness of PI and 
PID controllers in lieu of conventional integral 
controller on dynamics of power system is better. 
Finally, the importance of change of Kr and Tr on 
dynamics of power system is understood which 
can be implemented in real-time power systems.
REFERENCES
Dipayan Guha et al., “Dynamic Response Analysis of 
Automatic Generation Control in a 2–area (Reheat 
and Non–reheat) Interconnected Power System and a 
scheme for Improvement for the same”, International 
Journal of Modern Engineering Research, Vol. 3, 
Issue 1 Jan–Feb 2013.
Dipayan Guha, T.K. Sengupta, A. Das, “Study of Sampled 
data analysis of Dynamic Response of an interconnected 
Hydro—Thermal System”, International Journal of 
Electronics and Communication Technology, Vol. 1, 
Issue 1, pp. 157–161. [Impact Factor 0.306]
Dipayan Guha, P.K. Prasad, “Problem analysis in MW 
frequency control of an Interconnected Power system 
using sampled data technique”, IJLTET, Vol.2, Issue 
2, March – 2013, pp: 54–62. 
Hossein Shayeghi et. al., “Automatic generation con-
trol of Interconnected power system using ANN 
technique based on μ synthesis”, Journal of Electrical 
Engg., vol. 55, No. 11–12, 2004, pp: 306–313.
Hemin Golpira et. al., “Effect of physical constraints on 
AGC dynamic behavior in an interconnected power sys-
tem”, Int. Journal of Advanced Mechartronics Syst., 
vol. 3, no. 2, 2011, pp: 79–87.
Ignacio Egido et al., “Modeling of Thermal Generating 
units for Automatic Generation Control Purpose”, 
IEEE Trans. On Control System Technology, vol. 12, 
No. 1, Jan 2004, pp: 205–210.
Indulkar, C.S. “Analysis of MW frequency control prob-
lem using sampled data theory”, IEEE trans., January 
1, 1992.
Mohamed et al., “Decentralized model predictive based 
load   frequency control in an interconnected power sys-
tem”, Energy conversion and Management, vol. 52, 
2011, pp: 1208–1214
Nanda, J., Kothari, M.L. “Sample data AGC of Hydro-
Thermal system considering GRC”, IEEE-trans., 
September 25, 1989
Prabhat Kumar, Ibraheem, “Dynamic performance 
evaluation of 2-area interconnected power system—a 
comparative study”, IEEE-trans, August 14, 1996.
Sengupta, T.K. “Studies on assessment of power frequency 
in interconnected grid – its computer based control & 
protection”, 2008, thesis paper in JU.
Un-Chul Moon et al., “A Boiler—Turbine System 
Control using Fuzzy Auto—Regressive Moving Average 
Model”, IEEE Trans. On Energy Conversion, Vol. 18, 
No. 1, March 2003, pp: 142–148
APPENDIX
Nominal values of all parameters for an Intercon-
nected system:
f = 50 Hz 
 
Pri = 2000 MW
T12 = 0.086 
 
Bi = 0.425
KPS = 120 
 
TPS = 20 sec
Tt = 0.3 sec 
 
Tsg = 0.08 sec
Ri = 2.4 Hz/p.u. MW 
Kr = 0.5
Tr = 10 sec 
 
TR = 5 sec
 T1, T2 = 48.75 sec and 0.513 sec, respectively. 
Tw = 1 sec
 KP, KD, KI = 0.8036, 0.6356, and 0.1832, 
respectively.

451
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Nanorobot—the expected ever reliable future asset in diagnosis, 
treatment, and therapy
Orijit Biswas & Anindya Sen
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Heritage Institute of Technology, 
Kolkata, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Nanorobot or nanobot, an emerging technology of the current time, is a robotic machine 
of nanoscale dimensions that can be programmed and viewed under a microscope. Nanorobot, an appli-
cation of nanotechnology, has versatile applications in areas such as material defect detecting and repair-
ing, oil resource extraction, oil spill clean-up, solar power harnessing, and repairing the depletion of the 
ozone layer, thus protecting the environment. It also plays an essential role in critical care applications 
of medicine and health. Its superior role as a substitute to conventional medical care was investigated, as 
well as the absence of its side effects while effecting the cure was also investigated. This work evaluates 
the potential of inorganic and organic nanobots for their diagnostic and therapeutic roles under different 
critical care conditions with examples.
innovative manifestation of one of the prime non-
conventional technologies of the modern times 
in nanotechnology1. It can control, manipulate, 
and implement the properties of a matter at the 
molecular level1 within the maximum dimension of 
150 nm. For a particular substance, its properties 
vary widely from discrete atomic levels to the bulk 
macroscopic levels. However, in the domain of a cer-
tain definite number of atoms or molecules within 
the maximum dimension of 150 nm, the properties 
of the substance or material are of a unique kind 
matching neither with the properties of the dis-
crete atom or molecule nor with the properties of 
the bulk material or substance at the macroscopic 
domain. The study of the unique properties of mat-
ter in this domain is nanoscience, and the domain 
of application of nanoscience is nanotechnology. 
Nanotechnology is the study, design, creation, syn-
thesis, manipulation, and application of materials, 
devices, and systems at the nanometer scale. Cur-
rently, nanotechnology is becoming increasingly 
important in fields such as engineering, agriculture, 
construction, microelectronics, and healthcare. 
Nanorobot, one of the most revolutionary applica-
tions of nanotechnology, has versatile applications 
in areas such as material defect detecting and repair-
ing, oil resource extraction, oil spill clean-up, solar 
power harnessing, and repairing the depletion of 
the ozone layer, thus protecting the environment.4 
This work focuses on its applications to medicine 
and health care. We studied the constructional and 
constitutional features, functional components and 
parts, scopes, and limitations of this device, and the 
1 MOTIVATION
Nanorobot plays an essential role in critical care 
applications. It is an ultramicroscopic machine of 
suitable dimensions, capable of working upon liv-
ing cells, and acting like a universal solvent for pre-
vention of all kinds of diseases. It is programmable 
and, according to the set program, will act upon 
all the diseased cells by biophysical and biochemi-
cal actions to bring them back to a natural, healthy 
state. Nanotechnology and nanorobotics guarantee 
the cure while avoiding the choice of taking several 
medicines at different times1. This work demon-
strates the current applications of nanorobots in 
therapies of cancer, myocardial infarction, genetic 
disorders, and tetanus, and highlights the advan-
tages of methods to overcome the disadvantages.1,2
2 INTRODUCTION
Nanorobot or nanobot, an emerging technology 
of the current time, is literally a robot or machine 
of nanoscale dimensions that can be viewed under 
a microscope. Such devices are constructed of 
nanoscale or molecular components. The device 
size ranges from 0.1 μm to 10 μm.1
3 BACKGROUND
Nanorobot or nanobot, also known as nanoids, 
nanites, nanomachines, or nanomites, is the most 

452
ways to overcome the limitations by utilization of 
the basic laws of science and nature, and eventually 
applying this technology to fight targeted diseases, 
which are discussed below.
4 APPLICATION IN MEDICAL 
TREATMENT
Nanorobot, a machine of nanoscale dimensions, 
is comparable with the dimension of the cell of a 
living organism. The amazing aspect of this nano-
robot is that it can be exploited for diagnosis, treat-
ment, and therapy at the cellular level, which is in 
contrast to the conventional medication methods 
at the macroscopic level of organs and systems.
5 TYPICAL APPLICATION SCENARIOS
5.1 Tetanus
Tetanus is caused by puncture of the surface of the 
body by rusty nails lying unnoticed due to negligence 
or aging. Once the mishap occurs, mortality is immi-
nent if there is a delay in the initiation of treatment. 
The factor responsible for this deadly condition is 
the pathogen (bacteria) called Clostridium tetani that 
is naturally present on the surfaces of rusting nails 
and metallic objects. This bacteria entering the body 
releases the neurotoxin pair TeTx within a short time, 
which causes paralysis or locking of the whole body 
from head to foot, leading to subsequent death. The 
conventional treatment involves injecting anti-teta-
nus vaccine to counteract the Clostridium tetani bac-
teria and the TeTx neurotoxin pair released within 
a limited time duration. An alternative treatment to 
avoid mortality is to use a programmable nanobot. 
When these nanorobots are injected into the body, 
they will annihilate the Clostridium tetani bacteria 
and the released deadly neurotoxin pair TeTx by 
biophysical and biochemical actions, which leads to 
total healing at the cellular level and also spares the 
side effects of conventional vaccination. Thus, we 
can shift to a nonconventional treatment method, 
which will mark the all-round revolution in the field 
of medical treatment in the new era.
5.2 Myocardial infarction
This is generally caused by blockage due to the 
cholesterol deposit in arteries, veins, and blood ves-
sels. These vessel blocking factors or plaques can 
be detected and removed by nanorobots, molecule 
by molecule, thus healing the ailment. While the 
current plaque moving techniques, such as angi-
oplasty, depend on surgical skills and sometimes 
have some side effects, the process using nanobots 
is free from these effects, as shown in Figure 1.1
5.3 Cancer
Nanorobots can distinguish between the malignant 
and benign cells. They sense surface antigens and 
their moves are directed by chemotactic sensors that 
are embedded in the machine. Nanorobots have 
excellent specificity, i.e., they target only cancerous 
cells and heal them by acting upon them both bio-
chemically and biophysically. Thus, a cell’s abnor-
mal biochemical behavior of overgrowth could be 
checked, and the cell could be repaired to a natural 
healthy state. Nanobots do not harm the healthy 
and normal cells as conventional methods do, thus 
preventing the sickening and damaging side effects. 
Nanobots do not harm the immune system (being 
localized), thus making patients healthier through-
out the treatment. Nanorobots are highly effective 
and can be reused and reprogrammed for the treat-
ment of various cancer-affected cells.
5.4 Tumors
Tumors are usually caused by the excessive 
unwanted growth of the tissues. This can be treated 
by the first set of nanorobots inflaming the tumor-
infested tissues and the second set of nanorobots 
detecting the inflamed tissues and releasing the 
payload, which is the chemotherapy drug to heal 
the tissue, as shown in Figure 2.2
Figure 1. Nanorobots preventing heart attacks.
Figure 2. Nanobot targeting the tumor site.

453
5.5 Genetic disease
This is due to do the presence of defective genes 
in the genetic sequence. Nanorobots approach the 
gene sequence and detect the defective genes. After 
that, they dissociate them and place the payload, 
which is the healthy gene in its place, thus curing 
the generations of long-genetic defect.
5.6 Damaged tissue repair
Nanorobots can easily repair and heal the dam-
aged tissues by taking existing molecules, replicat-
ing them, and assembling new molecules into new 
layers of the tissues. Nanorobots can slowly regrow 
the portions of the damaged bone and might one 
day be able to reproduce the bone marrow.
• Other functional possibilities in the aspect of 
damaged tissue repair include:
− Closing of a split vein
− Reforming the damaged skin
− Reducing dead flesh (from a wound), result-
ing in little scarring.
6 ADVANTAGES OF NANOROBOTS 
WITH RESPECT TO CONVENTIONAL 
MEDICINE, RADIATION THERAPY, 
AND SURGERY
Nanobots heal at the cellular level. Thus, if each 
and every cell gets healed, then the entire body 
gets healed. If we look at the advantages of this, 
then we cannot help without accepting this newly 
emerged technology over the conventional exist-
ing one. In conventional medication methods, the 
medicine applied obviously affects and heals the 
diseased cells; however, its application is not tar-
geted but acts on all the cells of the whole body so 
that along with the diseased cells, the healthy and 
normal cells are also subjected to the biochemi-
cal reaction of the applied medicine with the cells 
having the serious occurrence of side effects. But 
the action of nanorobots is targeted. By virtue of 
being a programmable machine, the nanorobot is 
programmed to detect the diseased cells only and 
to act upon them leaving aside the healthy cells, 
thus rendering no medicinal side effects.1,2 This 
method of healing by nanorobot can also be a safe 
substitute for radiation therapy. The current ongo-
ing research on radiation therapy is conducted to 
selectively work upon the defective cells, leaving 
aside the healthy and normal cells. Conventional 
medicine cannot guarantee to act upon all the 
diseased cells of the body, since the action of the 
medicine is based on the probability of association 
with the cells. However, the nanorobot, which is 
a programmable machine, is programmed before 
being injected into the body and, upon entering 
into the body, acts according to the programming 
upon all the diseased cells and roams throughout 
the body by navigation, thus guarantying the com-
plete elimination of the disease.1,2
Surgical methods in treatments are invasive and 
liable to injury. Depending on the ailment, surgi-
cal methods can be expensive and time consum-
ing, with the success depending on the skill and 
efficiency of the operating surgeon and his team. 
It carries high risk: a minor error made by one 
surgical team member may cost the patient’s life. 
But the action of nanorobots on the defective cells 
evades this risk. In the conventional surgical pro-
cedure, the treatment of the interior of the body 
is externally controlled by the surgical team using 
therapeutic tools, involving instruments, machines, 
and devices, to invade the body. However, when 
nanorobots treat the interior of the body, the con-
trolling is preset to be done by the single machine 
itself, thus guarantying much safer and exact 
treatment.1,2
7 FEATURES (CONSTRUCTIONAL 
AND FUNCTIONAL) OF NANOROBOTS
Nanorobots are often less than 100 nm in length 
and, the pieces or components that make up the 
machine are generally as small as 1 nm. The com-
ponent pieces are primarily created of carbon, 
most often in the form of diamondoid or fuller-
ene nanocomposites, i.e., carbon nanotubes. A 
very smooth exterior passive diamond coating 
shields the device from being attacked by the host’s 
immune system.4
Nanorobot is a programmable machine that 
can be programmed or set in order to perform 
the desired operation inside the body. After being 
injected into the body, it is steered or remote con-
trolled from outside the human body, according to 
which the device roams or navigates throughout 
the whole body, accesses the remote sites where 
access is impossible without invasive surgical tech-
niques, and performs its desired operation.
There are two basic kinds of nanorobots: 
assemblers and self-replicators. Assemblers are 
simple cell-shaped nanorobots that are able to 
interpret molecules or atoms of different types and 
are controlled by specific specialized programs. 
Self-replicators are fundamentally assemblers that 
are capable of duplicating themselves at a very 
large, fast rate, the sort of duplication that aids the 
deployment of nanobots for large-scale applica-
tions and tasks.1
In order to perform the desired functions, the 
nanorobots require the structural-cum-functional 
features as follows1:

454
I.    Size and shape – The size and shape will 
depend on the intended function and operat-
ing environment of the nanorobot. A major 
design criterion is the minimum size.1
II.    Sensors – For the nanorobot to fulfill its desired 
operation, it must be capable of sensing differ-
ent parameters of the cells upon which it will 
act, such as the various physical, chemical, 
biophysical, biochemical, and physiological 
properties, based on which the nanorobot will 
distinguish between the normal healthy cells 
from the diseased cells.1
III.  Means of mobility/propulsion – Propulsion is 
necessary for the nanorobot in order to travel 
throughout the whole body and to perform 
its desired operation, as shown in Figure 3.1 
One kind of propulsion method is to have a 
simple ball-shaped nanorobot, which has no 
propulsion mechanism of its own, but rather 
flows with the pressure of the fluid flow inside 
the blood vessel into which the nanorobot is 
injected. Another kind of propulsion method 
involves the nanorobot having a propulsion 
method of its own, imitating the principle of 
locomotion of microorganisms in nature where 
bacteria, notably, move with the help of flag-
ella, where the waving motion of the flagella 
causes a net motion in the forward direction.1,2
IV.    Power generation1,3 – Power generation is the 
major requirement of the nanorobot device in 
order to perform its desired operation. Power 
generation method becomes a very sensitive 
issue for nanoscopic devices, as in nanorobots 
the power requirement is in the nanoscale. 
Taking this into consideration, various meth-
ods of power generation can be used for the 
nanorobot device as follows:
a.  In-built battery inside the nanorobot device.
b.  Induction of electrical power inside the 
nanorobot device by an externally induced 
electric, magnetic, or electromagnetic field, 
e.g., the electromagnetic field generated by 
the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) 
device. It induces considerable electrical 
power inside the nanorobot device compat-
ible with nanoscale dimensions.
c.  Another inexpensive method of generating 
power is to convert the body temperature 
(thermal energy) or fluid flow (blood flow) 
motion inside the body (mechanical energy) 
into the electrical power. A pair of electrode 
terminals, i.e., cathode and anode, which are 
placed inside the nanorobot, break down 
the glucose in the blood by the electrolysis 
method and become the positive and nega-
tive terminals of a battery.
V.    Data acquisition and storage1 – Upon moni-
toring the cells, various conditions of the 
cells are collected or acquired as data by the 
nanorobot, which need to be stored in the 
device. Thus, data acquisition and storage are 
crucial for the nanorobot, and this aspect will 
be fulfilled by the quantum computing that is 
appropriate to the ultra-small dimensions, i.e., 
nanoscale dimensions.
VI.  Telemetry and data storage1 – Nanobots, which 
are injected into the body, must be steered all 
along the body to monitor the cells, to sense or 
detect the condition of the cells, and to collect 
the associated information, as the data should 
be sent to the controller outside the body, who 
is steering the nanobots, and the data should be 
stored there using the method of telemetry. The 
data storage for the nanorobot performance is 
a tough design function that needs to be incor-
porated into these ultra-small domains. Recent 
findings by the researchers in the University of 
California Irvine have unveiled a working radio 
built from carbon nanotubes of dimension of 
only few atoms that show some possibilities of 
transmitting data at the nanoscale.
VII.  Control and navigation – Nanobots after being 
injected into the body are required to be con-
trolled and steered throughout the body from 
outside, thus marking the necessity of the 
control and navigation system1. A remarkable 
method to achieve this is the “Swarm” method 
or the “Swarm Intelligence” method, in which 
the intelligent and programmable nanoro-
bots work together in a synchronized manner 
(the term “Swarm” implying collectiveness 
or togetherness). The same programming 
is set by the controller to all the nanorobots 
together and then the nanorobots are injected 
into the body and travel all over, synchronized 
among themselves, steered together by the 
external controller, and act upon the body 
cells at various sites simultaneously according 
to the set program.2
Figure 3. Propulsion in the nanorobot.

455
Navigation systems can be implemented exter-
nally by ultrasonic signals, MRI device, injecting a 
radioactive dye, X-rays, radio waves, microwaves, 
or heat and internally or on-board by chemical 
sensors and miniature television camera.3
8 LIMITATIONS OF NANOROBOTS 
AND THE SCOPES TO OVERCOME 
THEM
Notably, two usable approaches related to the limi-
tations and scopes are the “Top–Down” approach 
and the “Bottom–Up” approach.2 In the “Top–
Down” approach, the currently used machines in 
the microscopic scale, known as MEMS (micro 
electro mechanical systems), the devices, and the 
components are scaled down to the nano level, thus 
starting from the bigger scale and progressing to the 
smaller scale (“Top–Down”). But this scaling down 
to the smaller scale is obviously not unbounded, 
ultimately meeting the quantum mechanical con-
straints at the molecular and atomic levels (in the 
domain of atom quantum mechanics acts). Also, 
the smallest constituents of matter are atoms and 
molecules, so the miniaturization cannot be done 
beyond the level of molecules and atoms. Thus, 
ultimately, there lies the margin that needs to be 
overcome by alternative methods. Because of this 
limitation, two vital components of nanorobots, 
i.e., sensors (which measure and store the measured 
parameters as data) and actuators (which enable 
the device to act according to the measured param-
eters), cannot be incorporated into the nanorobot 
device, but only one of them can be incorporated.2
Also, power-generation compatibility to such 
ultra-small dimension becomes a big problem. 
Although power at such a small scale can be gen-
erated by alternative methods, but the storage of 
power becomes another big problem because at 
that dimension, the sizes of the devices and the 
components are so small that the generated power 
is comparably of bigger magnitude, implying the 
increase of storage power density to such a level 
that the shrinking down of the size of storage bat-
teries becomes unfeasible and practically impos-
sible. This implies that in-built power supply in 
the nanorobot is not feasible because of the bat-
tery size of the nanorobot device. One suggested 
method against this is fabrication, engineering, 
and embedding such materials that facilitate the 
ultra-high power storage density.2
Though there are alternative methods such 
as Peltier effect (utilization of thermal energy or 
temperature of the body), utilization of glucose in 
the blood as fuel and natural flow of fluids such 
as blood in the body are used to generate power. 
However, they are also not of much use.2
Also to note that at the nanoscale, a kind of 
resistive force known as viscous drag force becomes 
predominant, and to overcome such high resist-
ance, a lot more power needs to be generated.2
Therefore, to generate a lot more power to 
avoid the problem of power storage, the feasible 
solution is to generate power externally rather 
than internally. This would solve the problem of 
energy generation, as well as provide a better guid-
ance system for the nanomachine. The inspiration 
for this technique comes from Mother Nature, 
which shows that a certain kind of bacteria, called 
as magnetotactic bacteria (discovered in 1975 by 
Richard Blakemore), have been found to be sen-
sitive to magnetic fields,2 most of them tending 
to naturally orient themselves along the magnetic 
north and indicating a similar guidance system 
for future nanobots containing small magnets as 
steering wheels under the influence of an external 
magnetic field generated by, for example, an MRI 
device. Another way of generating power is by elec-
tromagnetic induction where an external magnetic 
field could be used to charge the internal batteries 
of our nanorobots by induction.2
In the “Top–Down” approach involving scaling 
down of MEMS technology to nanoscale, using 
NEMS (Nano Electro Mechanical Systems) tech-
nology, we ought to know about the very prominent 
limitations. Though newer materials and technology 
could bypass this, the molecular approach seems to 
be the most promising one, which involves build-
ing up the nanomachine molecule by molecule or 
atom by atom, thus progressing from the minute 
basis to the bigger structure. Molecular chemistry 
has played a significant role in this field in the last 
decade. Nanoscale versions of macroscopic actua-
tors like motors could be built from the bottom-up 
approach in future. Montemagno and Bachand were 
the pioneers in this field, who created the first arti-
ficial hybrid motor. Recent developments suggest 
that we could soon have nanogears and nanobear-
ings at our disposal. Considering the assembly part, 
molecular self-assembly is possible using various 
methods already being employed, such as biological 
or chemical programming. One of the methods of 
self-assembly is called SAM (self-assembled monol-
ayers). It involves a monolayer of molecules, fixed 
to a surface upon which a structure can be built ver-
tically, like a building being built floor by floor. An 
innovative idea is to “program” biobots to use in 
situ molecules to create copies of themselves. This 
would help keep a healthy bot count, just like our 
body replaces worn-out blood cells.2
In 2005, a nanoswimmer was developed using an 
external magnetic field to beat a filament attached 
to the red blood cells. Also, a nanocar was devel-
oped using buckyballs (fullerenes) as wheels. How-
ever, these developments are a few among many in 

456
recent years, and could lead to the first nanorobots 
in the near future. The development of nanofabrica-
tion techniques such as electron beam lithography 
and scanning probe lithography has been a huge 
leap forward, allowing for fabrication of features 
as small as 3 nm in size. We also have a lot of aid 
from the nature in making artificial biobots with 
respect to the availability of biological resources. 
A lot of the materials that are needed to build a 
nanorobot are available naturally such as rhodopsin 
and bacteriorhodopsin, proteins that capture solar 
energy. After having an energy source, an actuator is 
needed, which can be implemented by ATP synthe-
sized by rhodopsin or bacteriorhodopsin, to be used 
by certain molecules such as F1-ATPase to rotate 
nanoscopic shafts. Research is ongoing to develop 
more efficient motors, which can be actuated by a 
variety of signals, such as certain chemicals, which 
detect and provide data by reacting with the constit-
uents inside the body and body cells, thus acting as 
sensors.2 However, the limitations that creep in natu-
rally are due to the physics of the nanodomain that 
is entirely different from that of the macroscopic 
domain. Fluid effects such as viscous forces about 
five orders of magnitude greater now and surface 
effects such as electrostatic forces dominate over 
conventional forces due to mass that is now negligi-
ble. Frictional force is dependent on load and veloc-
ity, which is not the case in the classical mechanics 
in the macroscopic domain. Also, nanorobots, being 
of about the size of molecules, act as molecules or 
pseudo-molecules rather, being subjected to colli-
sional forces among the molecules such as ‘Brown-
ian motion’ that is tremendously frequent and of 
titanic magnitude comparatively, causing deforma-
tion in the nanorobots that alter the mechanics of 
the motion considerably, which can be corrected by 
artificial intelligence that is, however, unlikely to be 
embedded in such a small scale. So, the possible way 
to overcome this is the biobot, which would be essen-
tially rigid under all the circumstances by virtue of 
being built by molecular self-assembly and rendered 
practically rigid by strong intermolecular forces. As 
it can be observed, to overcome the predominant 
resistive forces in the nanodomain, the innovative 
solution comes from the nature, where the micro-
organisms such as bacteria move with the help of 
cilia or flagella that beat asymmetrically, causing net 
motion/displacement in one direction.2
Generation and storage of power remains a 
major challenge. Another challenge is developing 
engineering materials usable for the manufacture of 
nanobots using NEMS or NEMS-like technology 
and being biocompatible at the same time. Effective 
ways of power generation still have to be figured out. 
A much bigger challenge is on-board power storage 
(as in the case of NEMS bots) or continuous power 
generation (as in the case of biological bots).2
The nanorobots that first come into the scenario 
are the inorganic nanorobots that are constituted of 
those materials and components from which larger 
machines are made, with the difference being in the 
size. Inorganic nanorobots have the advantages of 
well-understood component behavior, ease of pro-
gramming, and ease of external control. However, 
what vitally required is several nanobots rather 
than a single one to be injected into the body to 
perform the treatment in the whole body. But the 
inorganic nanorobot is difficult and expensive to 
make, leaving behind the making of several nano-
robots. So, the convenient way is to replicate one 
nanorobot, which is not having the capability of 
the inorganic nanorobot. Also, inorganic nanoro-
bots are not biocompatible; they have difficulty in 
communicating with the organic systems. Another 
point is that inorganic nanorobots can carry lim-
ited payload i.e., the drug to be delivered to the 
diseased cells.3
The disadvantages of inorganic nanorobots can 
be overcome by organic or bionanorobots, which 
are made of organic or biological components that 
make up the body. Organic nanorobots have the 
advantages of ease in making use of genetic engi-
neering, and capability of self-reproducing, thus 
making it cheaper, easily communicable with other 
organic systems, and the payload being manufac-
tured by protein factories. However, organic nano-
robots have the difficulty of poorly understood 
component behavior (behavior of proteins), dif-
ficulty in programming, and limited external con-
trol mechanisms such as navigation, telemetry, and 
data transmission. These limitations need to be 
overcome by exploiting the natural biological prop-
erties of cells and tissues, for which much further 
research is utmost and indispensably necessary.3
REFERENCES
[1] Nagal, D., Mehta, Dr. S.S., Sharma, S., Singh Mehta, 
G.,  & Mehta, H. 2012. Nanobots and their applica-
tion in Biomedical Engineering. In Dr. R.K. Singh 
(ed.), Proc. of the Intl. Conf. on Advances in Electron-
ics, Electrical and Computer Science Engineering— 
EEC 2012: 215–219.
[2] Bhat, A.S. 2014. Nanobots: The Future of Medicine, 
In International Journal of Engineering and Manage-
ment Sciences 5 (1): 44–49.
[3] Electrical Engineering Lab of Biomedical Engineering, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, National 
Taiwan University, 2012. Medical Revolution – 
Nanobots: 1–24. http://cc.ee.ntu.edu.tw/∼ultrasound/
belab/midterm_oral_files/2012_101_1/101-1-mid−5.pdf.
[4] Armstrong, L., Arnold, C., Banjara, K.,  & Al-
douah, A. 2000. Nanomachines and Robots – Devel-
opments and Applications. http://research.che.tamu.
edu/groups/Seminario/materials/G01_Nanoma-
chines.pdf.

457
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Fabrication and resilience measurement of thin aluminium cantilevers 
using scanning probe microscopy
Aviru Kumar Basu
Design Programme, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India
Hansaraj Sarkar
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India
Shantanu Bhattacharya
Design Programme, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India
ABSTRACT: Metallic cantilevers have found major applications in MEMS devices. Of significant 
mention in the use of such cantilevers in bio-sensor devices for the diagnostic industry. In this work we 
report the fabrication ofsmall Aluminium cantilevers without the use of any hard sacrificial layer for the 
releasing step of the cantilever structures. Furthermore, the fabrication process just uses a coating of 
positive photoresist (acting as the sacrificial soft polymeric layer) (M/s Shipley) as a masking agent for 
releasing the aluminium patterns so that they can formulate hanging structures. We have also performed 
a characterization study on the aluminum cantilever filmsby performing Scanning Probe Microscopy in 
Nanoindentation and Tapping mode over the films.
of longer release time because the sacrificial layer 
material is removed through wet or dry etching 
processes which involve additional steps. Moreover, 
it may also lead to stiction due to the presence of 
surface tension forces mainly capillary forces while 
release using wet etching (Bartek et al. 1997).
In this paper, a new method of etching and 
releasing aluminium microcantilevers on by using 
a photoresist sacrificial layer has been reported. 
The cantielever like hanging structures are further 
assessed for the resilience. The modulus of resil-
ience is measured of the aluminium cantilevers by 
use of Scanning Probe Microscopy in Nanoinden-
tation and Tapping mode.
2 MATERIALS AND METHODS
A p-type (100) silicon wafer is properly cleaned 
using TCE, Acetone, I.P.A. (Isopropyl Alcohol) 
and D.I (deionized) water. Several films of Alumi-
num of thicknesses ranging between 200–800 nm 
are deposited on cleaned Si-wafers through sputter-
ing. On the top surface of this deposited Al film, 
cantilever structures are patterned through positive 
photoresist S-1813 (M/s Shipley). The photoresist 
is coated at 1000 rpm for 10 secs and at 3000 rpm 
for 25 secs. The thickness of the film obtained 1.4 
μm. The thin photoresist is hard baked for 1 hr at 
1 INTRODUCTION
Metallic micro and nano structures have a wide 
range of applications in Sensing and diagnostic 
applications. Of high significance is the metallic can-
tilever where wide ranging research has been carried 
out using such structures in biosensing, gas sensing 
chemical/biochemical sensing etc. Easy fabrication 
with as less steps as possible forms a major challenge 
to pattern and structure such cantilever structures. 
The most complex step involved in the fabrication of 
such structures is the release of the cantilever struc-
ture from the remaining substrate surface where a lot 
of techniques like wet or dry etching using sacrificial 
hard films like silicon oxide or nitride are commonly 
used (Azad et al. 2013). Some earlier research that 
has been carried out of cantilever fabrication with-
out the use of hard sacrificial layer always reports 
of stiction or damage of these structures during the 
release process (Yan et al. 2001).
Xiao et al (1999) has used polysilicon as a hard 
sacrificial layer for releasing the anchor and Phos-
phosilicate Glass (PSG) as the sacrificial layer 
for final release of cantilever beams using oxygen 
plasma etching and Hydrofluoric acid (40%) for 
complete etching of the PSG layer. DeVoe et al 
(2001) has reported releasing the accelerometers 
using SiO2 as the hard sacrificial layer. However, use 
of hard sacrificial layer has an additional drawback 

458
95°C. The positive photoresist structure acts as a 
mask or protective layer for the TMAH etching 
process that is used subsequently for releasing of 
the cantilever structures. If the positive photoresist 
is prebaked for a higher duration 1 to 1.5 hr it takes 
a higher time to get dissolved. The Al thin film is 
first etched off through the vias opened up for the 
remaining portion of the film. [Refer to Figure 1(a) 
for the top elevation of the mask drawing]. The 
etching of the aluminum from the opened positions 
are further etched using Transene solution with 
a composition of 80% H3PO4 + 5% HNO3 + 5% 
Acetic Acid + 10% DI Water which is commonly 
used for Al etching. The temperature used while 
carrying out the wet etching is around 50oC. For 
releasing the Al Micro-cantilever a second step of 
masking and anisotropic wet etching is done by 
TMAH Etch process [Composition of the etching 
process (5 ml TMAH + 95 ml water) ++(0.4–0.7 ml 
Ammonium Peroxidisulphate (NH4)2S2O8 + 99.5 ml 
water)] (Yan et al. 2001). Figure 1(b) shows a fabri-
cation flowchart of the process used for etching of 
silicon cantilevers. Mask layout for the microcanti-
lever fabrication and the schematic representation 
of Al microcantilever fabrication have been shown 
in Figures 1(a) and (b) respectively.
3 CANTILEVER 
CHARACTERIATION SET-UP
Scanning probe microscopy has been used for char-
acterization of the hanging cantilever structures for-
mulated in the last step. A Hystiron TI 750 Ubi L, D 
and H machine was used for the measurements. For 
our purpose we have used the standard load inden-
tation with a maximum load of 10 mN. Standard 
nanoindentation probes Berkovich probes with total 
included angle from one edge to the opposite side 
142.35° with half angle of 65.35° and radius of cur-
vature of approximately 150 nm are deployed to carry 
out the force deflection testing of the cantilevers.
During the indentation test, the probe is 
indented into a sample and then slowly retracted 
or withdrawn by decreasing the applied force.
The applied load versus displacement plot is 
acquired and plotted on the cantilever structure 
shown in Figure 2 and the data plotted in Figure 3.
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Micro cantilever structures 70 μm × 20 μm were 
used for evaluating the resilience. We observed all 
the cantilever structures formulated to have a pre-
strained induced by the fabrication process which 
helped in self releasing of these structures from the 
substrate surface. We hypothesize that this prestrain 
Figure 1(a). Mask layout for the microcantilever 
fabrication.
Figure 1(b). Schematic representation of Al microcan-
tilever fabrication.

459
Figure 2. FESEM image of Al microcantilever.
Figure 3. Load-Displacement curves obtained from 
nanoindentation.
Table 1. Mechanical parameters of Aluminium thin 
film obtained during Nanoindentation.
Er (GPa)
7.79
Hardness (MPa)
262.61
Contact depth (nm)
338.6
Contact Stiffness (μN/nm)
17.1
Max Force (μN)
997.8
Max depth (nm)
382.3
Contact area (nm2)
3799603.6
can be possibly caused by the liquid surface ten-
sion during contact etching of both the top and 
bottom surface of the cantilever. The resolution 
of the hanging structures still needs improvement 
but this process of pre-straining definitely seems 
to have value and problems like stiction of the lip 
etc. may get resolved if we are able to pre-strain the 
films as in our case. Detailed studies are further on 
as to ascertain the real cause of this pre-strain and 
are not reported here for the sake of brevity.
Figure 3 reflects the acquired data on the force 
displacement as acquired by the nano-indentor 
using a Berkovich tip. The curve reflects a flat in-
between the loading and unloading cylces which 
signifies hold duration between the loading and 
unloading cycle. This is indicative of the reversal 
of forces as provided by the berkovich tip on the 
concerned surface. After that the tip unloads or 
retracts we observe a hysteresis between the load-
ing and unloading cycle which only points out a 
plastic bending of the cantilevers in our case due 
to the loading cycle. [Refer to Figure 3 indicating 
similar load values although the overall displace-
ment shows a general shift].
Huson et al. (2006) has performed similar test-
ing over a polymeric material and in our case we 
have focused to thin metal films and we find out the 
modulus of resilience by looking at the area under 
the loading or the unloading curve. Area under the 
loading curve means the work done considering 
upto maximum load = 2.4596e+05 μN-nm, Area 
under the unloading curve = 1.7474e+05 μN-nm. 
R value computed as percentile using the formula 
as mentioned by Huson et al. (2006) is calculated 
as 71.2. The maximum load applied in our case for 
freestanding thin Al films is 997.8 μN while Huson 
et al. (2006) has used a maximum load of 10e-05 N 
on polymeric materials. The resilience studies are 
performed on thin cantilevers of aluminum metal 
show similar resilience properties to a polymer like 
Natural Rubber whose resilience has been report by 
Huson et al. (2006) as 86%. The rate of deflection is 
53.8 nm/sec of the cantilever structure in our case.
Obviously resilience is the ability of a material 
to store and return energy when subjected to rapid 
deformation. In polymers this property has been 
earlier explained to happen because of the ability 
of the polymer chains to rotate freely whereas in 
the said case as the cantilever film is thin to the 
meso-scopic case it may have a very large surface 
area in comparison to the bulk volume. We hypoth-
esize that the surface of the Al cantilever film may 
demonstrate a reversible movement of dislocation 
leading to a polymer like behavior in the resilience 
of the cantilever films.
5 CONCLUSION
Fabrication methodology of thin film alumunium 
microcantilevers have been studied without using 
any sacrificial layer. So in our case the problem 
of stiction is completely removed. The cantilevers 
are pre-strained as can be seen in Figure 3 which 
gives an advantage of reduced stiction in our 
cantilevers.
The resilience measurements are carried out in 
accordance to SPM studies done earlier by Huson 

460
et al. (2006) in which a indentation through an 
SPM probe is performed on the polymer surface. 
The measurements indicate similar resilience values 
for a lower load and a similar rate of deformation 
on the Al Cantilever film. More studies are car-
ried out to ascertain the exact reason of the simi-
lar resilience values in comparisons to polymers 
but it seems that the surface dislocations and their 
reversible movement within the grain boundaries 
may be possibly responsible for comparative values 
of resilience to polymers like Natural rubber.
REFERENCES
Azad, J.B., Rezadad, I, Nath, J, Smith, E, Peale, R.E. 
(2013) Release of MEMS devices with hard-baked 
polyimide sacrificial layer. SPIE Proceedings, 8682, 26.
Barteky, M, & Wolffenbuttel, R.F. (1998) Dry release 
of metal structures in oxygen plasma process charac-
terization and optimization. J. Micromech. Microeng, 
8(1998), 91–94.
DeVoe, D.L., Pisano, A.P. (2001) Surface micromachined 
piezoelectric accelerometers. Journal of Microelectro-
mechanical System, 10, (2001), 180–186
Huson, M.G., & Maxwell J.M. (2006) The measure-
ment of resilience with a scanning probe microscope. 
Polymer Testing, 25, 2–11.
Raccurt, O., Tardif, F., Arnaud, D., Vareine, T. (2004) 
Influence of liquid surface tension on stiction 
of SOI MEMS. Journal of Micromechanics and 
Microengineering, 14, 1083–1090.
Xiao, Z., Hao, Y., Li, T., Zhang, G., Liu, S., Wu, G. (1999) 
A new release process for polysilicon surface microma-
chining using sacrificial polysilicon anchor and on thin 
films. photolithography after sacrificial etching. IOP, 
Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 9, 
300–304.
Yan, G., Chan, P.C.H., Hsing, I.M., Sharma, R.K., 
Sin, J.K.O., Wan, Y. (2001) An improved TMAH Si-
etching solution without attacking exposed aluminum. 
Sensors and Actuator, 89,135–141

461
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Comparative analysis of AODV routing protocols based on network 
performance parameters in Mobile Adhoc Networks
Mamata Rath
C.V. Raman Computer Academy, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
Binod Kumar Pattanayak
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
Bibudhendu Pati
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, C.V. Raman College of Engineering, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
ABSTRACT: Power deficiency of the nodes, multi-hop wireless connectivity, and high frequency of 
variation in topology of the network are major challenges that a Mobile Adhoc Network (MANET) has 
to face due to which it is very demanding to develop a dynamic and efficient routing protocol for this net-
work. Adhoc On Demand Distance Vector (AODV) is an efficient reactive routing protocol in MANET 
in which the route is established only when it is required, so this protocol minimizes the overhead routing 
by not consuming enough energy in continuous route maintenance and repairing at time if there is no 
route request. In resource constraint environments, like an MANET, AODV protocol satisfies the neces-
sary conditions of routing by considering stimulating matters such as highly mobile nodes, frequent link 
failure, limited battery power, variation in topology, satisfying quality of service. There are many improved 
AODV protocols, which are implemented for better network performance and intelligent routing. This 
paper presents a detailed study and comparative analysis of three leading protocols of MANET.
of nodes, very robust and highly reliable routing 
protocols are necessary for communication. There 
are basically two types of routing protocols in 
MANET, such as proactive and reactive routing 
protocols. Routing information regarding every 
possible destination node is stored in routing tables 
of proactive routing protocols. Any little change in 
the position of nodes due to their highly mobile 
nature is immediately updated in all the related 
nodes with broadcasting by the neighboring nodes. 
Whereas in reactive routing protocols, the network 
bandwidth is better utilized by avoiding unneces-
sary continuous broadcast of information and by 
creating routes only when desired, hence perform-
ing efficient bandwidth utilization.
2 LITERATURE SURVEY
Many valuable works have been carried out in this 
direction till date. Maintaining Quality of Support 
in the network is a challenging issue, which is to be 
considered during the design of AODV protocol. 
The objective of QoS support is satisfaction of the 
1 INTRODUCTION
Mobile Adhoc Network is a collection of autono-
mous mobile stations which can communicate with 
each other in wireless environments. Those mobile 
nodes which are not in the same range can com-
municate with other through multiple intermediate 
nodes. These nodes are flexible, self configurable, 
robust, and part of a distributed network. So, 
though routing in such mobile networks is efficient, 
it is still a challenging task to maintain the routing 
by applying efficient routing strategies. Though 
many improved routing protocols have already been 
implemented considering the above issues, high 
level research is still going on in this technical area 
of MANET routing. Officially, an MANET can be 
defined as a communication network that combines 
a group of mobile nodes with limited resources tak-
ing part in data communication. The neighboring 
stations behave as routers or relay nodes that carry 
and forward the data packets while transmitting 
from one source station to destination.
Due to change in network physical organiza-
tion, high node mobility, and limited power level 

462
required flow characteristics during transmission. 
QAODV [6] fulfills network parameters such as 
available bandwidth estimation, Cumulative delay 
calculation occurs during transmission network 
load in particular routes and hop counts. The 
nodes in MANET suffer from energy restriction 
since a mobile station uses a battery with limited 
power [5]. For reliable data delivery in MANET, 
before possibility of a link failure, a warning mes-
sage can be generated by every alternate node in 
a path to alert the neighbor before forwarding the 
packet to failed links, thus eliminating the chance 
of delay due to route repair or retransmission. In 
this regard, two eminent protocols are designed 
AODV-RD(AODV with Reliable Delivery) and 
AODV-BR(AODV for Broken Route) [7]. Simula-
tion results when compared between AODV-RD, 
AODV-BR, and AODV signifies that there is sig-
nificant improvement in Packet Delivery Ratio in 
AODV-RD with a short end-to-end delay than 
AODV-BR. There is enhancement in the perform-
ance of the network and improved throughput.
3 ANALYSIS AND OVERVIEW 
OF AODV PROTOCOL
It is the basic objective of AODV protocol to find 
the route from a specific source station to a destina-
tion station as and when required without continu-
ously maintaining the existing route and repairing 
it when not in an active state. Link failures and 
change in network topology are handled properly 
by AODV protocol. In the route discovery proc-
ess of AODV, it is checked if a direct path from 
source to destination node exists in the routing 
table or not. If there is no such information then 
a route request process gets started which includes 
broadcasting of RREQ packet by the source node; 
then all other nodes after increasing their sequence 
numbers, pass the RREQ packet which is a control 
packet such as a hello message for alert. Any node 
which has a direct route to the destination node 
in its routing table, forwards the RREQ towards 
the destination. An RREP packet in the form 
of a reply to the route, is sent back to the source 
node, hence conforming the route. During the data 
transmission in the reserved route, if there is any 
link failure, then it is taken care by the RERR and 
route maintenance mechanism of AODV.
4 BASIC  ISSUES OF AODV DESIGN AND 
IMPLEMENTATION
4.1 QoS Support in AODV
Maintaining Quality of Support in the network 
is a challenging issue, which is to be considered 
during the design of AODV protocol. Objective 
of QoS support is satisfaction of required flow 
characteristics during transmission. QAODV [6] 
considers to fulfill network parameters such as 
available bandwidth estimation, cumulative delay 
calculation during transmission network load in 
particular route, and hop count. Depending on the 
number of hops, if there are less number of hops, 
and light congestion, then it has a smaller routing 
cost and if there are more number of hops, and 
more congestion, then routing cost is high.
4.2 Identification of link interference
Two types of interferences exit. One is called Link 
Interference which is a routing metric based on 
any interference that affects the links in the trans-
mission of a source to a destination and another 
metric called node interference [8] which is based 
on global interference calculated by nodes used[8] 
to determine the path in an improved method of 
AODV. This proposal was validated by changing 
most of the concurrent connections keeping stable 
the number of nodes in the network.
4.3 Multicast tree based on node mobility
In a multicast tree-based Wireless Network, the 
leader of the group creates and does the mainte-
nance of low cast multicast trees that contain all 
member nodes of the group[1]. Only the members 
of the group actively forward the data to the next 
nodes, so this scheme has a strong forwarding effi-
ciency. The group information is maintained by 
the group leader. This DMT-Based AODV pro-
posal selects the forwarding routes which further 
connect multicast receivers to satisfy the routing 
condition.
4.4 MANET AODV in ANDROID OS
Basic Standards of Wifi connection are formu-
lated by Wifi and IEEE 802.11 alliance. Using 
these provisions, a wifi card may be joined with an 
Access Point which serves as the connection. Other 
services, such as communication and sharing of 
resources, can also be availed in this approach [9]. 
Every node in an infrastructure-based network can 
access the AP by co-ordinating the communication 
and resources can be shared among all the nodes.
4.5 Balanced energy consumption among 
all participating nodes
The nodes in MANET suffer from energy restric-
tion since a mobile station uses a battery with 
limited power [5]. Therefore, the performance of 
a network mostly depends on its energy efficiency 

463
mechanism. So, developing an optimized routing 
protocol becomes the basic factor for network per-
formance. A Local Energy Aware protocol uses 
balanced energy consumption at every node which 
all take part in routing. This approach is useful in 
applications like business partners sharing infor-
mation during conference and communication in 
military applications, persons co-ordinating dur-
ing disaster relief, and emergency scenarios.
4.6 AODV with reliable delivery
For reliable data delivery in MANET, before pos-
sibility of a link failure, a warning message can be 
generated by every alternate node in a path to alert 
the neighbor before forwarding the packet to failed 
links, thus eliminating the chance of delay due to 
route repair or retransmission. In this regard, two 
eminent protocols are designed AODV-RD(AODV 
with Reliable Delivery) and AODV-BR(AODV 
for Broken Route) [7]. Simulation results when 
compared between AODV-RD,AODV-BR and 
AODV signifies that there is significant improve-
ment in Packet Delivery Ratio in AODV-RD with 
a short end-to-end delay than AODV-BR. There is 
enhancement in performance of the network and 
improved throughput.
4.7 Security based AODV
Security based routing protocol, a useful algorithm 
is presented [2] based on Wait time. A Request 
Reply table is constructed to check the black hole 
attacks and a method is used to prevent the attack 
which is based on AODV protocol.
Table 1 describes summary of protocols and 
issues considered in AODV implementation in this 
article.
Table 2 describes protocol names along with 
methods used for routing and their advantages.
Selecting three protocols for analysis
Out of the studied protocols, three protocols 
QAODV, PHAODV, and EAODV are selected for 
comparison of performance as they strongly repre-
sent QoS aware, Power Efficient, and Delay Man-
aged protocols.
Table 3 below describes network performance 
parameters considered in different protocols as 
per our study and analysis. We have selected three 
main protocols which suitably represent power 
and delay-based AODV protocols. The follow-
ing parameters are considered for performance 
evaluation.
Power consumption
Nodes in MANET have limited battery power. 
They use this power during transmission, forward-
ing, and receiving of the data packets. When the 
nodes are in sleeping state or idle state in waiting 
mode to receive packets, they are also in active 
state and consume some power. The power gradu-
ally gets reduced as the mobile nodes increase; this 
is taken as a routing metric.
Table 1. Issues implemented in protocols.
ISSUEs considered in AODV
Protocol
QoS Support in AODV
Q AODV [6]
Identification of Link Intereference
IA AODV [8]
Multicast tree based on Node Mobility DMT AODV [1]
AODV in Android
FB AODV [9]
Balanced Enrgy consumption
PC AODV [10]
Reliable Delivery in MANET
AODV RD [7]
Security based AODV
M AODV [2]
Table 2. Summary of studied routing protocols.
Protocol
Mechanism
Advantages
Q-AODV
Considers Network 
parameter Delay 
and Bandwidth
Improved 
throughput
IA-AODV
Global interference 
and local 
interference
Fast idea about 
interference by 
all nodes
EAODV
Distributed minimum 
transmission tech-
nique used
Supports multi cast 
routing
PC AODV Required power is 
checked before 
node selection
Minimum power 
level used
FB-AODV WCIM* mechanism 
used
Improved perform-
ance in Smart 
phones
PH-AODV Residual battery 
power considered
Even load distribu-
tion among nodes
MAODV
Checks security of 
network
Delay avoidance
*Weighted contention Interface Routing.
Table 3. Comparison of network performance param-
eters in three leading protocols.
Protocol
Power 
Consum-
ption
End 
to end 
delay
Network 
life time PDR
QoS 
Support
PH AODV Low
Low
More
High
Medium
E AODV
Medium Medium Medium Medium Low
Q AODV
High
High
Low
low
High

464
End to end delay
End to end delay refers to the time taken (aver-
age) by the packet to reach the destination, which 
includes the route discovery time and queue han-
dling time during transmission. A low value for 
end to end delay shows better protocol perform-
ance. It can be calculated as –∑(reaching time—
sending time )/∑(No. of hops).
Network lifetime
It is the time period starting from the implementa-
tion of the protocol till the end of protocol func-
tionality, which is always application dependent. 
This depends on the simulation time taken. Many 
factors greatly affect the network life time, such as 
sudden death of mobile nodes, link failures etc., 
due to which the transmission time is more. The 
increase in battery power directly increases the net-
work lifetime.
PDR (Packet Delivery Ratio)
It is the ratio of the total number of packets suc-
cessfully delivered to the destination to the total 
number of packets sent. It can be calculated as 
−∑ no. of packets received at destination/∑ no. of 
packets initially sent.
A high value of packet delivery ratio ensures 
better protocol performance.
QoS support
The objective of Quality of Service support is 
to guarantee the delivery according to specific 
requirement satisfaction such as bandwidth, timely 
delivery, Channel Quality, speed, throughput, error 
rate, prioritized service, etc.
To measure the parameters we have consid-
ered three possible values, high, medium, and 
low, as we are considering three leading AODV 
protocols for evaluation purpose. So out of the 
three candidate protocols, the one which exhibits 
excellent performance is considered as High/more 
and similar measurements are taken for Low and 
Medium.
5 SIMULATION AND RESULTS
Ns 2.33 tool was used for simulation purpose. In 
total, 120 of nodes were scattered randomly in an 
area of 2000 × 2000 m during the beginning of 
the simulation. In the mobility scenario, mobiles 
nodes were moving in six different speeds within 
a range of 0–10 m/s. Table 4 shows the simulation 
parameters used in the simulation.
From the graph in Figure 1 it can be observed 
that out of three AODV-based MANET routing 
protocols studied above, QAODV consumes more 
power in comparison to PH AODV and EAODV. 
The reason is that it handles the QoS requirement 
of the flow, so for processing, more residual energy 
is utilized by the node as per the protocol require-
ment. Next, in comparison to PH AODV and 
EAODV, PHAODV performs better by utilizing 
less energy and hence, preserving more energy as a 
result of which the lifetime of the network extends. 
EAODV consumes more power than PHAODV 
and less than QAODV and hence exhibits an aver-
age network performance showing an average 
end-to-end delay as compared to QAODV and 
PHAODV.
Fig. 2 shows end-to-end delay analysis among 
three leading protocols and the output graph 
shows that QAODV exhibits higher delay specifi-
cally when the speed of the moving nodes gradu-
ally increases, This is due to the relocation of nodes 
due to which path finding and route maintenance 
takes more time in addition to taking care of QoS 
processing parameters. PHAODV shows minimum 
delay out of three protocols which proves that it is 
more power efficient and delays managed protocol. 
But it does not take care of the Quality of Serv-
ice support; hence, its performance can be further 
Table 4. Simulation parameters.
Parameters
Value
No. of Nodes
120
Area Size
2000 × 2000
Mobility model
Random Way Point
Traffic Type
CBR
Channel capacity
2 Mbps
Communication System
MAC/IEEE 802.11 G
Routing Protocols
QAODV,PHAODV,EAODV
Figure 1. Avg. power consumption vs. node mobility.

465
evaluated to check the Quality of Service Support. 
EAODV handles delay up to some extent so it also 
exhibits less delay when compared to QAODV.
Fig. 3 shows that PHAODV performs better by 
lengthening the network’s lifetime due to use of 
better power management techniques in compari-
son to EAODV and QAODV.
Fig. 4 shows that with increase in node mobility, 
packet delivery ration steadily increases up to 60 
nodes in three protocols, whereas after 60 mobile 
nodes, there is a slight varation in the increase of 
PDR in the three protocol cases.
6 CONCLUSION
This research paper first discusses about the 
need of an energy-efficient routing protocol for 
MANET. Then it discusses about the issues that 
are considered by many novel proposals which 
are implemented as extended AODV protocols 
and then, three leading protocols are selected on 
the basis of their power and delay mechanism to 
compare their performance on the basis of powr 
consumption and delay handling capability. We 
conclude that PHAODV, which is based on power 
management technique, performs better than the 
other two QAODV and EAODV, as it requires 
more processing time for Quality of Service sat-
isfaction. This analysis will be helpful for devel-
oping a more robust AODV protocol for Mobile 
Adhoc Networks. In future work, we are planning 
to develop an innovative AODV-based protocol as 
per the analysis done in this research work.
REFERENCES
 [1] De-gan Zhang, Xiao-dong Songa, b, Xiang Wanga, 
b, Yuan-ye. 2015, “Extended AODV routing method 
based on distributed minimum transmission (DMT) 
for WSN, Int. J. Electron. Commun. (AEÜ), 69 Page 
No 371–381.
 [2] D. Roy Choudhury, Dr. Leena Ragha, Prof. Nilesh 
Marathe, 2015, “Implementing and improving the 
performance of AODV by receive reply method and 
securing it from Black hole attack”, International 
Conference on Advanced Computing Technologies 
and Applications (ICACTA-2015), Procedia Com-
puter Science, Vol.45, Pages 564–570.
 [3] H. Safa, MarcelKaram, Bassam Moussa, 2014, 
“PHAODV: Power aware heterogeneous routing 
protocol for MANETs” Journal of Network and 
Computer Applications, 46, Pages 60–71.
 [4] Haldar T.K., 2014 “Power Aware AODV Routing 
Protocol for MANET”, Advances in Computing 
and Communications (ICACC), Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on, 27–29 Aug., Pages 331–334.
 [5] R. Madhan Mohan, K. Selvakumar, 2013“Power 
controlled routing in wireless ad hoc networks using 
cross layer approach,” Egyptian Informatics Journal, 
Vol. 13, Pages 95–101.
 [6] Ling Liu1, Lei Zhu1, Long Lin2, Qihui Wu1, 2012, 
“Improvement of AODV Routing Protocol with QoS 
Support in Wireless Mesh Networks” 2012 Interna-
tional Conference on Solid State Devices and Mate-
rials Science, Physics Procedia 25 Pages 1133–1140.
 [7] A Gabri Maleka, Chunlin LIb, Hiyong Yangc, Naji 
Hasan. A. Hd, Xiaoqing Zhang, 2012. “Improved 
the Energy of Ad Hoc On-Demand Distance Vector 
Figure 2. End to end delay analysis.
Figure 3. Network lifetime vs. node mobility.
Figure 4. PDR vs. node mobility.

466
Routing Protocol” 2012 International Conference 
on Future Computer Supported Education, IERI 
Procedia, 2, Pages 355–361.
 [8] Floriano De Rango, Fiore Veltri, Peppino Fazio, 
2011, “Interference Aware-based Ad-Hoc On 
Demand 
Distance 
Vector 
(IA-AODV) 
ultra 
wideband system routing protocol” Computer 
Communications 34, Pages 1475–1483.
 [9] Nicola Corriero and Emanuele Covino and Angelo 
Mottola, 2011, “An approach to use FB-AODV 
with Android”, The 2nd International Conference 
on Ambient Systems, Networks and Technolo-
gies (ANT), Procedia Computer Science 5, Pages 
336–343.
 [10] Zhu Qiankun, XuTingxue, Zhou Hongqing, Yang 
Chunying, Li Tingjun, 2011 “A Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networks Algorithm Improved AODV Protocol,” 
Procedia Engineering, Vol. 23, Pages 229–234.

467
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Pseudo mesh schema based data warehouse architecture employing 
encryption request algorithm and intelligent sensor algorithm for 
secured transmission and performance enhancement
Rajdeep Chowdhury
Department of Computer Application, JIS College of Engineering, Kalyani, India
Prasenjit Chatterjee
Wipro Limited, Kolkata, India
Soupayan Datta
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, JIS College of Engineering, Kalyani, India
Mallika De
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Dr. Sudhir Chandra Sur Degree Engineering College, 
Dumdum, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: Data warehouse is a set of integrated databases purposeful to inflate decision-making and 
problem solving, espousing exceptionally condensed data. Data warehouse happens to be increasingly 
more established theme for contemporary researchers with respect to current proclivity towards business 
and decision-making purview.
A Data Warehouse is a repository which includes all facts and figures of the organization. With the 
latest inclination of hacking along with the advent of novel hacking expertise, the security for Data Ware-
house has befallen to be a decisive fraction.
The number of links could be precisely calcu-
lated using n*(n−1)/2, wherein n embodies the 
number of tables present within the structure.
The structure is evidently a flexible one, as any 
increase or decrease of one or more databases within 
the structure, does not affect the entire schema 
structure of the Data Warehouse in concern. The 
structure employs the concept of Fact Views to 
connect with the existing Dimension Tables.
In a nutshell, the couple of stated figures con-
jure up the very essence of the originated concept 
and its impact, on the whole.
The Figures 1 (a) and (b) illustrate the View con-
cept amid various Dimension Tables.
Improvement in time complexity is an allied 
component and could be adhered with utmost 
ease. The figure illustrates Pseudo Mesh Schema 
Architecture with View Table amid intermediary 
nodes.
The Fact Table consists of kn number of keys, 
with those set of keys being copied in the View 
Table. If the schema consists of n number of 
Dimension Tables, then for setting up relation amid 
apiece Dimension Table with others, n*(n−1)/2 
numbers of View Tables are requisite.
1 INTRODUCTION
In the proposed Data Warehouse Architecture, 
appliances of Pseudo Mesh Schema Architecture 
(Chowdhury, Pal, Ghosh, De, 2012) have been ref-
erenced and instantiated, as an alternative to con-
ventional Star Schema Architecture or Snowflake 
Schema Architecture (Chowdhury, Pal, Ghosh, 
De, 2012. Chowdhury, Pal, 2010). Initially, a trans-
lucent discussion on the said schema is requisite.
As the name entails, the concept of Mesh Topol-
ogy from Computer Networking is the basis of the 
Pseudo Mesh Schema Architecture and its func-
tionality (Chowdhury, Pal, Ghosh, De, 2012).
A set of Dimension Tables interlinked with one 
another, ensuring improvement in the time com-
plexity of a Data Warehouse is presented through 
the formulation. Fact Tables and Dimension Tables 
have been employed in their normalized form to 
diminish redundancy.
The notion of Pseudo Mesh Schema Architec-
ture, conforming interlinking of all Dimension 
Tables and Fact Tables to one another, have been 
proposed at the very inception of the referenced 
work.

468
A View Table comprises of kn set of keys, from 
which a specific ki key has to be selected, for setting 
up relation amid two Dimension Tables.
Apiece Dimension Table is anticipated to be 
exceedingly normalized, in lieu with the architec-
tural design formulated. A Dimension Table could 
be conked out into n number of sub-dimension 
tables. The architectural design comprises only of 
one Fact Table and n number of Dimension Tables 
attached to the Fact Table. Nevertheless, the speed 
could be optimized as there are unswerving rela-
tionships amid the various Dimension Tables, 
which in the process diminishes gratuitous com-
parisons amid the various Dimension Tables in a 
Data Warehouse.
The concept not only diminishes the query 
processing time but also diminishes storage 
complexity.
Establishment of relationships amid various 
Dimension Tables requires some space and for 
massive Data Warehouses, the space gradually 
intensifies. The relation amid various tables is 
established through View, which is a logical con-
cept and requires no memory space.
Conclusively, it could be inferred that main-
taining a Data Warehouse using Mesh Schema 
could be relatively intricate, as with increase in 
Dimension Tables, the number of View Tables 
also increases. However, increase in View Tables 
does not engender the problem of space complex-
ity rather it further enhances direct relation amid 
Dimension Tables.
2 PROPOSED WORK
The prime focus is on how the proposed work 
could be applied on the proposed schema. The 
proposed work depicts that whenever any user 
attempts to access the data, it sends a query to the 
Warehouse. After a successful execution of the 
query by the Warehouse Query Processor, the data 
in the encrypted form would be returned to the 
apt View Table of the Dimension Table (Chowd-
hury, Dey, Datta, Shaw, 2014. Chowdhury, Chat-
terjee, Mitra, Roy, 2014. Chowdhury, Pal, Ghosh, 
De, 2012).
In the compiled paper, it has been proposed that 
apiece Dimension Table has an allied Intelligent 
Sensor Algorithm, which senses and determines 
whether the data requested by the user is already 
encrypted or not.
If the data is encrypted, then it dispatches the 
data unswervingly to the apt View Table, otherwise 
it sends a request to the Encryptor for encrypting 
the data.
Here Encryptor is a hardware device which 
is built into the Data Warehouse Architecture. 
For the entire Data Warehouse, there is only one 
Encryptor and hence it might be busy for most of 
the time.
It is duty of the Intelligent Sensor Algorithm to 
check whether the Encryptor is busy or not before 
sending any request. Subsequently, the Intelligent 
Sensor Algorithm employs another Encryption 
Request Algorithm.
Figure 1a. Mesh Schema having Two Dimension 
Tables.
Figure 1b. Mesh Schema having Many Dimension 
Tables.

469
2.1 General work
Prior to stating any sort of theoretical elucidation, 
the proposed work necessitates to be ascertained 
pictorially, followed by indulgence in fragmented 
discussion.
In Figure 2, apiece Dimension Table contains an 
Intelligent Sensor Programming which is evident 
by the acronym IS in the rectangular box along-
side apiece Dimension Table. The overview of the 
Entire Process is illustrated in Figure 3.
The focal rationale for Intelligent Sensor Pro-
gramming is to determine whether the data that 
is presently being requested by a user query is 
encrypted or not. If the data is already encrypted 
by the Encryptor, then it needs to be dispatched to 
its apt View Fact, otherwise the data needs to be 
send to the Encryptor for encryption. For presid-
ing over aptly, the Intelligent Sensor employs an 
algorithm called Decision Making Algorithm.
Encryptor is a hardware device which would 
be entrenched along with the Data Warehouse 
Architecture. Additionally, Encryptor contains 
the proposed algorithm for encrypting data. For 
complete Data Warehouse, apiece Encryptor is 
employed. Hence, when the Intelligent Sensor of 
the Dimension Table desires to send any data, it 
might so transpire that Encryptor is busy. To pre-
vail over such an intricate circumstance, Intelligent 
Sensor employs another algorithm coined Request 
Algorithm.
Encryptor would contain certain keys which 
would be exclusive for apiece user and for apiece 
user those keys would be amassed with the 
Encryptor.
Presumably there are ‘n’ users; the Encryptor 
would comprise ‘n’ keys, that is, K1, K2, K3…Kn 
(Kith key for ith user).
The formulation of the immaculate Encryp-
tion Request Algorithm and Intelligent Sensor 
Algorithm ensures that there would be substantial 
diminution of access time, keeping in mind for the 
secured transmission, improved intrusion preven-
tion and performance enhancement in due course.
2.2 Encryption request algorithm
Initially Encryptor Semaphore is 0.
After a user is verified, its query is taken into 
consideration.
Whenever any data enters the Encryptor, the 
Encryptor_Semaphore becomes 1.
Step–1:
 
 Access the Encryptor_Semaphore variable 
state.
Step–2:
 
 If the Encryptor_Semaphore is 0, then 
finally enter the Encryptor.
Now, Encryptor does the following:
 
 i. Set the Encryptor_Semaphore to 1.
 
ii. Call the Encryption Function.
Figure 2. Functioning of the Intelligent Sensor.
Figure 3. Overview of the Entire Process.

470
Else
 
 Enter into the Encryptor waiting queue 
and set the Priority as per the entry posi-
tion in the waiting queue and wait till the 
arrival of turn.
When a user is authorized and endorsed to use the 
data warehouse, an administrator would amass a 
unique set of keys in the warehouse’s Encryptor.
2.3 Intelligent sensor algorithm
Initially flag is set to 0.
Step–1:
 
 
 If flag is 0 then prepare to send the 
requested data from Dimension Table to 
Encryptor and do the following:
  
 i. Increment the flag by 1.
  
ii. Call the Encryption Request Algorithm.
Else
 
 
 Send the Dimension Table data to its 
appropriate View Table and Decrement the 
flag by 1, so that it is again 0.
3 CONCLUSION
The proposed architectural design endows with a 
proficient and much secure procedure for perform-
ing transaction in Data Warehouse.
With the emergent significance of Data Ware-
house, it could be effortlessly envisaged that what sort 
of function the proposed design should engage in.
REFERENCES
Chowdhury, R., Dey, K., S., Datta, S., Shaw, S., 2014, 
“Design and Implementation of Proposed Drawer 
Model Based Data Warehouse Architecture Incorpo-
rating DNA Translation Cryptographic Algorithm for 
Security Enhancement”, Proceedings of International 
Conference on Contemporary Computing and Infor-
matics: 55–60.
Chowdhury, R., Chatterjee, P., Mitra, P., Roy, O., 2014, 
“Design and Implementation of Security Mecha-
nism for Data Warehouse Performance Enhancement 
Using Two Tier User Authentication Techniques”, 
International Journal of Innovative Research in Sci-
ence, Engineering and Technology, 3(6): 441–449.
Chowdhury, R., Pal, B., Ghosh, A., De, M., 2012, “A 
Data Warehouse Architectural Design Using Pro-
posed Pseudo Mesh Schema”, Proceedings of First 
International Conference on Intelligent Infrastruc-
ture: 138–141.
Chowdhury, R., Pal, B., 2010, “Proposed Hybrid Data 
Warehouse Architecture Based on Data Model”, 
International Journal of Computer Science and Com-
munication, 1(2): 211–213.
Saurabh, A., K., Nagpal, B., 2011, “A Survey on Current 
Security Strategies in Data Warehouses”, Interna-
tional Journal of Engineering Science and Technol-
ogy, 3(4): 3484–3488.
Vieira, M., Vieira, J., Madeira, H., 2008, “Towards Data 
Security in Affordable Data Warehouse”, 7th Euro-
pean Dependable Computing Conference.
Patel, A., Patel, J., M., 2012, “Data Modeling Techniques 
for Data Warehouse”, International Journal of Multi-
disciplinary Research, 2(2): 240–246.
Chaudhuri, S., Dayal, U., 1997, “An Overview of Data 
Warehousing and OLAP Technology”, ACM SIG-
MOD Record, 26(1).

471
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Simulation study on variation of attenuation and power handling 
capacity of micro-coaxial line for different characteristic impedances
Manish Kumar Sharma, Adrish Bhattacharya & Raka Ramona Day
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Rectangular micro-coaxial lines having low loss, high power handling capacity and broad 
bandwidth have been demonstrated. Such lines of different characteristic impedances are simulated and 
studied. On comparing them, it is found they behave similar to circular coaxial lines, having minimum 
attenuation (0.12 dB/cm when simulated upto 20 GHz) for 70 Ω line. But maximum power handling limit 
is 314.5 W for 8.8 Ω line unlike circular coaxial lines.
straps with periodicity of 700 μm. After copper 
layer deposition, the photoresist filled in all spaces 
unoccupied by copper and dielectric straps, is 
rinsed away (“released”) through 200 μm × 200 μm 
release holes. The structure of micro-coaxial line is 
shown in Figure 1.
The characteristic impedance of micro-coaxial 
line can be varied by changing their dimensions 
(w, b, g, h) as shown by Chen 1960, in equation 1.
Z
b
g
w
h
C
C
f
f
C
C
=
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
+
f
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
376 62
2
4
b
w
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠+
2
f
C
.
∈
∈
 
(1)
where, ‘Z’ is characteristic impedance of the line 
in ohm, ‘b’ is height of inner conductor in μm, 
‘w’ is width of inner conductor in μm, ‘g’ is lateral 
1 INTRODUCTION
Recent years show minimization of millimeter 
wave circuits to micron order. The transmission 
lines used previously were microstrip line and 
coplanar wave-guide, which were dispersive and 
suffered losses. But the introduction of rectangu-
lar micro-coaxial line (Brown et al. 2004, Filipovi’c 
et al. 2006, Ehsan et al. 2005) fabricated through 
multi-layer photolithography process, evolved 
transmission lines which are non dispersive, low 
loss, high power handling capability and broad 
bandwidth. The various millimeter wave compo-
nents implemented with rectangular micro-coaxial 
lines, designed by polystrata process are passive 
devices such as couplers (Vanhille et al. 2007), 
antennas (Luki’c et al. 2007), resonators (Vanhille 
et al. 2006), and filters (Chen et al. 2004).
In this paper, the design and simulation of 
micro-coaxial line at different characteristic 
impedances are demonstrated. From the simula-
tion result, comparison of losses and calculation 
of power handling capacity of different impedance 
lines are done. In this paper, four impedance (8.8 
Ω, 50 Ω, 30 Ω and 70 Ω) line design and simulation 
have been demonstrated.
2 DESIGN AND SIMULATION 
OF MICRO-COAXIAL LINE
2.1 Structural design of micro-coaxial line
The fabrication of micro-coaxial line involves 
sequential deposition of copper layers and pho-
toresist on a silicon wafer. Copper layer thick-
ness ranges from 10 μm to 100 μm. The inner 
conductor is supported by 100 μm long dielectric 
Figure 1. Isometric view of the rectangular micro-
coaxial line.

472
spacing in μm, ‘h’ is vertical spacing in μm, ‘Cf1’ 
is fringing capacitance produced by flux distur-
bance along half of the horizontal side in farads 
per meter, ‘Cf2’ is fringing capacitance produced by 
flux disturbance along half of the vertical side in 
farads per meter. The dimension parameters are 
labeled in Figure 1.
Thus the dimensions have been calculated 
for four different characteristic impedances 
(8.8 Ω, 30 Ω, 50 Ω, 70 Ω). The dimensions of 
the rectangular micro-coaxial lines of differ-
ent characteristic impedance are as following: 
(i) 8.8 Ω line (w = 960 μm, b = 100 μm, g = 120 μm, 
h = 50 μm, Wa = 1200 μm, Wo = 1400 μm), (ii) 30 Ω 
line (w = 125 μm, b = 100 μm, g = 37.5 μm, 
h = 50 μm, Wa = 200 μm, Wo = 400 μm), (iii) 50 Ω 
line (w = 82 μm, b = 100 μm, g = 159 μm, h = 50 μm, 
Wa = 400 μm, Wo = 600 μm) and (iv) 70 Ω line 
(w = 40 μm, b = 75 μm, g = 180 μm, h = 150 μm, 
Wa = 400 μm, Wo = 600 μm). Wa is the inner width 
of the outer conductor and Wo is the outer width 
of the outer conductor of the micro-coaxial line, as 
shown in Figure 1.
These lines are analyzed with Ansoft High Fre-
quency Structure Simulator (HFSS) with setup fre-
quency ranges from 1 to 100 GHz. The simulated 
structure of the four micro-coaxial lines with dif-
ferent characteristic impedances (8.8 Ω, 30 Ω, 50 Ω 
and 70 Ω) are shown in Figure 2.
2.2 Simulation results of micro-coaxial line
A comparison study on the simulation results 
of micro-coaxial lines of different characteris-
tic impedances (i.e. 8.8 Ω, 50 Ω, 30 Ω and 70 Ω) 
have been done to understand the difference in 
their behavior. From the comparison study on 
input return loss as shown in Figure 3(a), we see 
Figure 2. Isometric view of rectangular micro-coaxial 
lines of different characteristic impedances: a) 8.8 Ω, 
b) 30 Ω, c) 50 Ω and d) 70 Ω.
Figure 3. (a) Comparison of input return loss for dif-
ferent characteristic Impedances (8.8 Ω, 30 Ω, 50 Ω and 
70 Ω) lines. (b) Comparison of attenuation for different 
characteristic Impedances (8.8 Ω, 30 Ω, 50 Ω and 70 Ω). 
(c) Plot of characteristic impedance of the simulated 
lines (8.8 Ω, 30 Ω, 50 Ω and 70 Ω).

473
the return loss for different characteristic imped-
ances is below 29.5 dB upto 20 GHz. While the 8.8 
Ω line has return loss 37.3 dB up to 20 GHz. When 
simulated upto 100 GHz, return loss of all lines is 
below 27.6 dB. Thus the micro-coaxial lines are 
very broadband circuits.
Since the line is reciprocal and symmetric, the 
result of S11 and S22 are same. Figure 3(b) shows 
the comparison study on the attenuation for dif-
ferent characteristic impedances. The attenuation 
of all lines is below 0.23 dB/cm upto 20 GHz, 
whereas the minimum attenuation is 0.12 dB/cm 
for 70 Ω line, when simulated upto 20 GHz. When 
all lines are simulated upto 100 GHz, maximum 
attenuation is 0.47 dB/cm (for 30 Ω impedance) 
and minimum attenuation is 0.25 dB/cm (for 70 Ω 
line). Thus 70 Ω line has minimum loss similar to 
circular coaxial line. Figure 4(a) and 4(b) shows the 
magnitude of electric field distribution and electric 
field vector distribution of a rectangular micro-
coaxial transmission line of characteristic imped-
ance 50 Ω, respectively. The field lines show TEM 
mode propagation with maximum intensity around 
the central conductor.
2.3 Measurement of power handling capacity 
of simulated micro-coaxial line
Maximum Power handling limit is measured by 
giving maximum power to the line until the air 
break down voltage (3 × 106 V/m) or polyamide 
breakdown voltage (2.5 × 107 V/m) is reached. 
Electric field breakdown was estimated based on 
magnitude of electric field distribution in HFSS 
simulations. The transverse field distribution is 
strongest in the narrow air gaps around the inner 
conductor corners as shown in Figure 4(a). The 
maximum power handling limit and attenuation 
of each micro-coaxial line of different impedances, 
simulated at 20 GHz is shown in Table 1. It clearly 
depicts that the 8.8 Ω lines has maximum power 
handling limit (314 W) and 30 Ω line has minimum 
power handling limit (88.45 W) unlike circular 
coaxial line. So power handling capacity depends 
on structural dimensions.
3 CONCLUSION
The rectangular micro-coaxial lines designed and 
simulated over 1 to 100 GHz frequency range, have 
minimum loss 0.25 dB/cm for 70 Ω and maximum 
loss 0.47 dB/cm for 30 Ω lines. The 8.8 Ω line is 
found to handle maximum power at 20 GHz. The 
micro-coaxial lines are very wide bandwidth hav-
ing maximum loss of 28.655 dB at 100 GHz for 
30 ohm impedance. Thus these micro-coaxial lines 
are broad bandwidth, low loss, and high power 
handling transmission lines carrying TEM mode 
propagation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge Arijit 
Majumder of SAMEER Kolkata Centre, Sayan 
Chatterjee of Jadavpur University and authori-
ties of Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of 
Institutions for the help and encouragement pro-
vided to carry out the work.
Figure 4. (a) Magnitude of electric field distribution 
of micro-coaxial lines of characteristic impedance 50 Ω 
(isometric view). (b) Electric field vector distribution of 
micro-coaxial lines of characteristic impedance 50 Ω (iso-
metric view).
Table 1. Attenuation and maximum power handling 
limit for different characteristics impedance lines.
Impedances
Attenuations 
(dB/cm) at 
20 GHz
Maximum 
power handling 
limit
8.8 Ω
0.1732
314 W
30 Ω
0.2306
88.45 W
50 Ω
0.1731
127.675 W
70 Ω
0.1164
128.75 W

474
REFERENCES
Brown, E.R., et al. (2004). Characteristics of microfabri-
cated rectangular coax in the Ka band. Microwave and 
Optical Technology Letters. vol. 40, no. 5, 365–368.
Chen, R.T., E.R. Brown, & C.A. Bang (2004). A compact 
low loss Kaband filter using 3-dimensional microma-
chined integrated coax. 17th IEEE International Con-
ference on MEMS, 801–804.
Chen, T. (1960). Determination of the capacitance, 
inductance, and characteristic impedance of rectan-
gular lines. Microwave Theory and Techniques, IRE 
Transactions, vol.8, no. 5, 510–519.
Ehsan, N., et al. (2009). Micro-Coaxial Lines for Active 
Hybrid-Monolithic Circuits. IEEE Conference.
Filipović, D.S. et al. (2006). Modelling, design, fabrica-
tion, and performance of rectangular μ-coaxial lines 
and components. IEEE MTT-S International Micro-
wave Symposium Digest.
Lukić, M.V., & D.S. Filipović (2007). Surface-
micromachined dual Ka-band cavity backed patch 
antenna. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat., vol. 55, no. 
7, 2107–2110.
Vanhille, K.J., D.L. Fontaine, C. Nichols, D.S. Filipović, & 
Z. Popović (2006). Quasi-planar high-Q millimeter-
wave resonators. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. 
vol. 54, no. 6, 2439–2446.
Vanhille, K.J., et al. (2007). Balanced low-loss Ka-band 
μ-coaxial hybrids. IEEE MTT-S International Micro-
wave Symposium. 1157–1160.

475
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Design and development of a web-based teaching performance 
assessment tool with student feedback and fuzzy logic
Sonali Banerjee, Rajib Bag & Atanu Das
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Assessment of teaching performance is a significant part of any quality education system. 
Such performance is normally taken in to account by manual student feedback often found biased due to 
human interventions. The present work is toward designing an automated web-based tool for collection 
and processing of student feedback. The collected information is habitually imprecise and it is uncertain 
to arrive at a conclusion while processing that feedback. This work used a fuzzy logic based scheme for 
integrating the accumulated teaching attributes perceived and supplied by student users for improvement 
of the teaching quality. The design is evaluated through some case studies where the prototype of the tool 
is tested in-house and if found useful by the college level education system, it could be advocated for use 
by others.
prototype development issues of the said TPAT 
based on fuzzy approach. Academic auditors and 
administrators need such a mechanized tool to 
keep teachers on correct direction. The traditional 
method of teacher performance evaluation often 
suffers due to involvement of a lot of qualitative 
(subjective or formative) data which is required to 
be transformed in to quantity (objective) for trans-
parent and interpretable conclusion. The consid-
ered fuzzy approach does not only automate the 
decision-making process but can effectively pro-
vide periodic confidential feedback mechanisms 
for decision-makers in any institutions. The TPAT 
takes a set of parameters as input and accord-
ingly analyzes teaching performance by assigning 
weights to the corresponding parameters.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: 
The following section presents the proposed sys-
tem, the methodology of teachers’ competency 
analysis, and the proposed method for integrating 
user feedbacks or inputs using fuzzy rule. Ulti-
mately, the paper ends with conclusions indicating 
the limitations, contributions, and future scope of 
the present design and development.
2 FUZZY ASSESMENT METHOD
The teacher assessment processes are described in 
natural terms to avoid complexity. A fuzzy assess-
ment method is presented here. Let G be a set of 
grades (For example, G = {Excellent, Very Good, 
Good, Average, Below Average, Poor}. The evalu-
ator’s evaluation can be represented as fuzzy rela-
tion (matrix) E:
1 INTRODUCTION
The education system has become entirely outcome 
based throughout the world. Outcome-based edu-
cation is enforced by continuous evaluation and 
improvement which enhance the quality of educa-
tion. So, continuous evaluation of the teaching-
learning process is very important and could be 
applicable in the existing education system. There 
is a huge shortage of properly qualified and experi-
enced teachers particularly in rural India. Teaching 
performance based evaluation of teachers is usually 
treated as a mandate to enhance the quality of the 
education setup. There are various performance eval-
uation techniques (Adim et al. 2009, Djam et al. 2013, 
Jamsandekar et al. 2013, Khan et al. 2012, Gupta 
et al. 2012, Mago et al. 2014, Wei et al. 2009) which 
have been developed in the recent past. None of these 
approaches focused on processing of students’ impre-
cise and uncertain feedback processing. It is also 
observed that users’ imprecise and uncertain infor-
mation processing could be taken care of by using 
fuzzy logic (Zhou and Huang, 2004; Mitra and Das 
2015) This paper proposes a design and advocates for 
the development of a web based automated student 
feedback processing tool (named henceforth Teach-
ing Performance Assessment Tool or TPAT), where 
the teaching performance information is integrated 
using fuzzy logic to reach a conclusion on the same.
A computer based expert system can be designed 
based on a set of rules to determine what action 
to perform when a certain situation is triggered 
(Khan et al. 2012). To analyze the efficiency of the 
teaching ability and prevent occurrence of aca-
demic uncertainties, this paper also presents the 

476
Grades
g
g
g
s
s
s
d
n
d
d
1
2
g
g
g
1
2
11
12
1
21
22
2





   
 
μ
μ
11
1
1
μ1
μ
μ
21
2
2
μ2




μ
μ
μ
n
n
μ
nd
μ
2
μn
μ
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
where s1, s2,....,.sn are the sub-features. μij
μ ∈[ , ]
0 1, ; 
1 ≤ i ≤ n, and 1 ≤ j ≤ d. μi,j reflects the relation-
ship between pairs of sub-features and grade. It 
may be impractical or not easy for evaluators to 
specify their subjective judgments using such a 
matrix. Therefore, in order to simplify this proc-
ess for those evaluators that cannot or do not wish 
to assign specific numerical values μij. A judgment 
term is an ordered d-tuple <A1, A2, A3, ……, Ad>, 
where Aj ∈ [0, 1], 1 ≤ j ≤ d. The values of the judg-
ment term, i.e., d-tuple, of a sub-feature, represent 
the degrees that a specific sub-feature belongs to 
the grades g1, g2, g3, ……, gd, respectively.
For example, let G = {Excellent, Very Good, 
Good, Average, Below Average, Poor}, then a state-
ment “The grade of a sub-feature is less than Very 
Good” can be expressed as < 0.7,0.3,0,0,0,0>, and a 
statement “The grade of a sub-feature is Average” 
can be expressed as < 0,0,0.2,0.8,0,0>. Due to the 
different importance of the sub-features, the evalu-
ators may want to assign different levels of impor-
tance to the sub-features. The weights are expressed 
as a “weight vector” W = {w1, w2, w3, ……, wn}.
To calculate the competence, we derived the 
fuzzy evaluation relation E and the fuzzy weight 
W. The composition relation is applied to calculate 
the final grade of the teachers by W
E. The result 
is a fuzzy vector (evaluation vector), denoted as Y, 
containing the membership values in each of the 
evaluation grades g1, g2, g3,....., gd:
Y
W
E
y y
yd
W  E
y
E
(y
)
1
2
y
,
where
yj
j
w
j
n
nj
⊕
⊕
⊕
(
)
w
(
)
j
(
)
wn
w
nj
2
2
j ⊕
)
j
(w
⊕(w2
⊕
j
(w
μ
and “°”, “⊕” are defined as: algebraic product, 
a ° b: s = ab and bounded sum, a ⊕ b: s = a ⊕ b = min 
{1, a + b}.
According to the principles of fuzzy classifica-
tion, we have yi = Max (y1, y2, y3, ……, yd). Thus, 
the corresponding grade gj is the grade of the 
teacher. In the practical evaluation process, we set 
a parameter δ to check if |
|
yi
iy +1 < δ, i < d. If it 
happens, then we can say this teachers evaluation 
is between grades gi and gi+1. If |yi – yj| < δ, and i < j, 
j ≠ i+1, i < d−1, that means the teacher has strong 
contradicting sub-feature performance.
3 PROPOSED SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
STEP 1: Gradation
1.1  Initially the set of abstract data values are 
considered, on which the “Fuzzyfication” will 
be applied.
1.2  We choose the input variables as the set of 
abstract data values converted to true values.
1.3  Respective weights are entitled to the input 
values based on the evaluation criteria.
1.4  Fuzzy logic (Yes/No) is applied in calculat-
ing the output true values of the concerned 
inputs.
STEP 2: Qualitative Evaluation Relation
2.1  The second set of input values is considered 
and assigned weightage as per the quality.
2.2  Based on the quality inferred on the Teach-
ers, the Evaluation Relation is implied and 
the judgment value is computed
Case Study:
Assume the set of Grades of a student Feed-
back is G1 = {YES(1),NO(0)} and G2 = {Excellent 
(5), Very Good (4), Good (3), Average (2), Below 
Average(1), Poor (0)}. The Student is asked to eval-
uate the Teacher’s performance in the College.
For Grade 1 (G1), the Criteria are (Table 1):
• Has the teacher covered entire syllabus as pre-
scribed by University?
• Has the teacher covered relevant topic beyond 
the syllabus?
The weights of the two criteria W1 = {0.75, 
0.25} and the 2-tuple is denoted as A1 and A2.
For Grade 2(G2), the Criteria are:
• Delivered lectures with emphasis on fundamen-
tal concepts and with illustrative examples?
• Whether any audiovisual aids were used?
• Technical Content
• Communication Skills
• Overall effectiveness
• How do you rate the contents of the lecture 
delivered?
The weights of the six criteria W2 = {0.3, 0.3, 
0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1}
Table 1. Judgment terms and 
corresponding 2-tuple.
Judgment term
2-tuple
YES
<1,0>
NO
<0,1>

477
Evaluation Result:
A1 = 1
0
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞, W1 = (0.75, 0.25)
Result 1 = W1 * A1 = (0.75, 0.25) * 1
0
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
A2 = 0
1
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞, W1 = (0.75, 0.25)
Result2 = W1 * A2 = (0.75, 0.25) * 0
1
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
From Table 2: Evaluation relation E:
1 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 2
0 8
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 2
0 8
0 0
0 0
0 7
0
.
.
.
.
.
.
0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0
.
.
.
0
0 0
0
.
.
8
0
.
.
.
.
0
0 0
0
.
.
8
0
.
.
.
7
0.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
3
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0.
0 0.
1 0.
0 0.
0 0.
0 0.
0 0.
0 0.
1 0.
0 0.
0 0.
0 0.
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
⎟
W2 = (0.3, 0.3, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1)
Y = W2 °E = (0.3, 0.0, 0.0, 0.07, 0.0, 0.0)
MAX{Y} =  0.3 The position is first. Hence, the 
positional point is 1.0 (From Table 3)
RESULT =  ((Result1+Result2+Positional point of 
MAX{Y})/m*MAX{W1}+1))*100 
= ((.75+.25+1.0)/(2*.75+1))*100 = 80
(m = no of criteria for Grade 1, here 
m = 2)
From the above result it is found that the per-
formance of the Teacher is VERY GOOD (From 
Table 4).
Now the calculations on the basis of examples 1 
and 2 have been listed in Tables 5 and 6.
Evaluation Result:
A1 = 0
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
, W1 = (0.75,0.25)
Result 1 = W1 * A1 = (0.75, 0.25) * 1
0
⎛
⎝⎜⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟⎞
⎠
A2 = 0
1
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞, W1 = (0.75,0.25)
Result2 = W1 * A2 = (0.75, 0.25) * 0
1
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
From Table 2: Evaluation relation E:
0 0
0 0
0 2
0 8
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 2
0 8
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 2
0 8
0 0
0 0
0 0
0
.
.
.
0
0 0
0
.
.
8
0
.
.
.
.
0
0 0
0
.
.
8
0
.
.
.
.
0
0 0
0
.
.
8
0
.
.
.
0
0.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
0
1 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0.
0 0.
0 2.
0 8.
0 0.
0 0.
0 0.
0 0.
1 0.
0 0.
0 0.
0 0.
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
⎟
W2 = (0.3, 0.3, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, 0.1)
Y = W2 °E = (0.0, 0.0, 0.36, 0.64, 0, 0)
MAX{Y} =  0.64. The position is 4th whose posi-
tional point is 0.7 (From Table 3)
RESULT =  ((Result1 + Result2 + Positional point of 
MAX{Y})/m * MAX{W1}+1)) * 100 
= ((.75 + .25 + 0.7)/(2 * .75 + 1)) * 100 = 68 
where, m = no of criteria for Grade 1(here m = 2)
From the above result, it is found that the perform-
ance of the Teacher is AVERAGE (From Table 4).
4 SYSTEM EVALUATION 
AND DISCUSSION
The proposed designed is evaluated by a simple pro-
totype development and case studies are presented 
above. The flow diagram of the proposed algorithm 
(shown in Fig. 1) is applied for the assessment of 
teaching by computer simulation. The student 
feedback form as a processing tool is also designed 
with the help of computer programming (shown 
in Fig. 2). These show that simple functionalities 
are working even more efficiently than our expec-
tations. It was also found useful in an undergradu-
ate engineering institution functioning around 
50 Km away from the main city. In-house testing 
Table 2. Judgment terms and corresponding 
6-tuple.
Judgment term
6-tuple
Excellent (5)
<1,0,0,0,0,0>
Very Good (4)
<0.7,0.3,0,0,0,0>
Good (3)
<0,0,1,0,0,0>
Average (2)
<0,0,0.2,0.8,0,0>
Below Average (1)
<0,0,0,0,1,0>
Poor(0)
<0,0,0,0,0.2,0.8>
Table 3. Judgment position and corresponding 
positional points.
Judgment position
Positional point
1st
1.0
2nd
0.9
3rd
0.8
4th
0.7
5th
0.6
6th
0.5
Table 4. Judgment terms and corresponding 
ranges.
Judgment term
Range
Excellent
90 <= result <= 100
Very Good
80 <= result <= 89
Good
70 <= result <= 79
Average
60 <= result <= 69
Below Average
50 <= result <= 59
Poor
Result  50

478
Figure 1. Flow diagraom of the proposed algorithm.

479
practices. Even, the teachers themselves can iden-
tify some of their limitations along with the exist-
ing infrastructural shortage.
5 CONCLUSION
This paper identified a fuzzy logic based approach 
to assess teaching practices in an academic institu-
tion. An assessment tool, called TPAT, has been 
designed and developed to support the proposed 
approach. Students’ imprecise formative feed-
back (input) has been transformed automatically 
to summative judgment terms using fuzzy logic 
applications in this present research. These judg-
ments are expected to be exceptionally useful for 
academic audits and formulation of correspond-
ing corrective measures. The proposed design may 
be enhanced to incorporate various levels and 
streams of teaching practice assessment. The pro-
posed algorithm may also help as an assessment 
tool in modern Learning Management Systems 
(LMS) and Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS).
REFERENCES
Amin, H., Khan, A.R. (2009). Acquiring Know ledge for 
Evaluation of Teachers ‘Performance in Higher Educa-
tion—using a Questionnaire. Int. Journal of Computer 
Science and Information Security (IJCSIS), 2180–187.
Djam, X., Mishra, A. (2013). Fuzzy Cognitive Map Based 
Approach for Teachers Performance Evaluation. The 
Pacific Journal of Science and Technology.
Gupta, L.R. & Dhawan, A.K. (2012). Diagnosis, Modeling 
and Prognosis of Learning System using Fuzzy Logic 
and Intelligent Decision Vectors. International Journal 
of Computer Applications by IJCA Journal 37 (6).
Jamsandekar, S.S., Mudholkar, R.R., (2013). Perform-
ance Evaluation by Fuzzy Inference Technique. Inter-
national Journal of Soft Computing and Engineering 
(IJSCE), ISSN: 2231–2307, 3(2).
Khan, A., Amin, H., & Rehman, Z. (2012). Applica-
tion of Expert System with Fuzzy Logic in Teachers‘ 
Performance Evaluation. (IJACSA) Int. Journal of 
Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 2(2).
Mago, J., & Sandhu, P. (2014). Model to Evaluate Edu-
cation System in India using Fuzzy Logic. Apeejay 
Journal of Computer Science and Application. ISSN: 
0974–5742.
Mitra, M., Das, A. (2015), A Fuzzy Logic Approach to 
Assess Web Learner’s Joint Skills, I.J. Modern Educa-
tion and Computer Science, 2015, 9, 14–21.
Wei, W.G. (2009). Some geometric aggregation func-
tions and their application to dynamic multiple 
attribute decision making in intuitionist fuzzy setting. 
International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and 
Knowledge-Based Systems, 17(2), 179–196.
Zhou, D., Huang, W. (2004), Fuzzy Set Approach to Assess-
ing E-commerce Websites, Proc. of the 10th Americas 
Conf. on Inf. Sys., NY, pp. 2376–2383, August.
Table 6. Calculation on the basis of Example 2.
Sl. 
no
Effectiveness of teachers in terms of
Linguistic
1
Has the teacher covered entire 
syllabus as prescribed by University?
Yes
2
Has the teacher covered relevant topic 
beyond syllabus
No
3
Delivered lectures with emphasize 
on fundamental concepts and 
with illustrative examples?
Average
4
Whether any Audio visual Aids used?
Average
5
Technical Content
Average
6
Communication Skills
Good
7
Overall effectiveness
Average
8
How do you rate the contents 
of the lecture delivered?
Good
Figure 2. Design of the student feedback form.
Table 5. Calculation on the basis of Example 1.
Sl. 
no
Effectiveness of teachers in terms of
Linguistic
1
Has the teacher covered entire 
syllabus as prescribed by University?
Yes
2
Has the teacher covered relevant 
topic beyond syllabus
No
3
Delivered lectures with emphasize 
on fundamental concepts and 
with illustrative examples?
Excellent
4
Whether any Audio visual Aids used?
Average
5
Technical Content
Average
6
Communication Skills
Very Good
7
Overall effectiveness
Good
8
How do you rate the contents 
of the lecture delivered?
Good
of the prototype demonstrated that the institu-
tional administration could identify a considerable 
number of limitations of the existing teaching 

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

481
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A comparison of the performance analysis between 
the PWM- and SVPWM-Fed induction motor drive
S.K. Bandyopadhyay, S. Mukherjee & Aveek Chattopadhyaya
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
S. Naha
Regent Education and Research Foundation, Kolkata, India
R. Bhadra
Heritage Institute of Technology, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: This study presents a comparison between the Space Vector Pulse Width Modulation 
(SVPWM) and the sinusoidal Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) technique for the induction motor 
drive application. For this purpose, MATLAB/SIMULINK-based simulation was used. Also, a study 
of steady-state and transient performance characteristics was carried out for both the cases. Different 
methods for PWM generation and SVPWM were broadly classified to reduce the switching losses and 
harmonic content in the system. The simulation results indicate that the transient response is similar 
for both schemes, but the SVPWM technique has the advantage because it has less harmonic content, 
which is useful in real-time applications of SVPWM. In addition, due to the low harmonic content, the 
SVPWM system can avoid overheat and malfunction in the proper system operation. Total harmonic 
distortion—and continuous wavelet transform-based techniques were used for this purpose to analyze the 
performance of the PWM and SVPWM techniques for the induction motor drive application.
Keywords: Pulse Width Modulation; Space Vector Pulse Width Modulation; MATLAB/SIMULINK; 
three phase inverter; induction motor
Space 
Vector 
Pulse 
Width 
Modulation 
(SVPWM) is one of the most important PWM 
methods for the applications of a three-phase 
inverter as it uses the space vector concept to 
compute the duty cycle of the switches. In other 
words, it is simply the digital implementation 
of PWM modulators. The relationship between 
space vectors and fundamental modulation sig-
nals is derived. In this paper, a comparison of 
the performance analysis between the PWM and 
SVPWM techniques for induction motor drive 
applications was made.
2 PWM INVERTER
The DC–AC converter, also known as the inverter, 
converts DC power to AC power at a desired 
output voltage and frequency. A complete three-
phase PWM inverter consists of three single-phase 
inverters with sinusoidal control voltages shifted 
by 120° between phases. Frequency control in a 
PWM inverter is accomplished by changing the 
frequency of the input control voltage.
1 INTRODUCTION
The use of power converters has been increasing 
day by day in many applications. The electric util-
ity in many cases has used power electronics-based 
devices because finer and more intelligent controls 
are needed to improve the electrical grid perform-
ance at different voltage levels. Three-phase voltage 
source inverters are widely used in variable-speed 
AC motor drive applications since they provide 
a variable voltage and variable frequency out-
put through the pulse width modulation control. 
Continuous improvement in terms of cost and 
high switching frequency of power semiconductor 
devices and development of machine control algo-
rithms leads to the growing interest in more precise 
Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) techniques. The 
PWM technique has been studied extensively dur-
ing the past decades by researchers. Many differ-
ent PWM methods have been developed to achieve 
the following aims:wide linear modulation range; 
less switching loss; less Total Harmonic Distortion 
(THD) in the spectrum of switching waveform; and 
easy implementation and less computation time.

482
The following parameters needs to be defined 
for the design of the PWM inverter system:
 i.  model that defines different processes of 
pulses,
 ii.  implementation of the zero-order hold and the 
relational operator to the sine wave, and
 iii.  a periodic scalar signal having a waveform that 
is specified using the time values and output 
values.
The following parameters also need to be defined 
to implement a PWM Inverter:
 i.  sine wave operation in the time-based or 
sample-based mode,
 ii.  repeating sequence of a periodic scalar signal 
having a waveform that is specified using the 
time values and output value parameters,
 iii.  zero-order hold in the input for the sample 
period, and
 iv. relational operator for comparing two inputs.
3 SVPWM SCHEME
Space Vector Pulse Width Modulation (SVPWM) 
was originally developed as a vector approach to 
the PWM for three-phase inverter applications. 
The SVPWM method is an advanced, computa-
tion-intensive PWM method and possibly the best 
technique for induction motor drive applications. 
In this paper, we used this method for less switch-
ing losses and thus less THD.
3.1 Basic principle of SVPWM
SVPWM is a special switching scheme of six power 
transistors of a three-phase power converter. A 
three-phase voltage source PWM inverter model 
is shown in Figure 1. S1 to S6 are the six power 
switches of the inverter that shape the output wave-
form. When an upper transistor is switched on, i.e., 
S or S3 or S5 is 1 (for the switch-on condition), the 
corresponding lower transistor is switched off, i.e., 
S2 or S4 or S6 is 0 (for the switch-off condition). 
Hence, the on and off states of the upper transis-
tors S1, S3, and S5 can be used to control the out-
put waveform.
The main idea behind the SVPWM is to divide 
the 2D plane into six equal areas, and each of them 
is called a sector. Each sector is determined by four 
vectors via Vi+1, where I ∈ {1..5}. These vectors are 
called active vectors because when these vectors are 
applied to the power module, the output voltage 
of the power module will be greater than zero, i.e., 
one of the switches will not be switched off. The 
other two vectors V0 and V7 are called the inac-
tive vector because all switches will be switched off 
or on. These two vectors allocate the center of the 
circle C, as shown in Figure 1.
Vref vector will scan all sectors with the time. For 
every sample time, the sector can be determined 
to contain Vref for calculating the time period for 
each vector of the determined sector. Sector imple-
mentation is shown in Figure 2; whereas the eight 
switching states are shown in Figure 3.
Figure 1. PWM inverter.
Figure 2. Sector implementation.
Figure 3. Eight switching states.

483
Table 1 presents the space vectors and switching 
states.
T1 = TS x(VS)/Vdc x2/ 3  sin (60 − α) 
(1a)
T2 = TS x(VS)/Vdc x2/ 3  sin (α) 
(1b)
T0 = TS–(T1+T2) 
(1c)
VA(avg) = [(Vdc/2)/TS] (T1+T2) 
(2a)
VB(avg) = [(Vdc/2)/TS] (−T1 + T2) 
(2b)
VC(avg) = [(Vdc/2)/TS] (−T1 − T2) 
(2c)
TAS = VA(TS/Vdc) 
(3a)
TBS = VB(TS/Vdc) 
(3b)
TCS = VC(TS/Vdc) 
(3c)
The procedure of sector selection has been illus-
trated in Figure 4. Figure 5 shows the block dia-
gram of SVPWM inverter.
4 SIMULATION RESULTS FOR THE PWM 
INVERTER
Figure 4. Sector selection.
Figure 5. SVPWM inverter.
Figure 6. Circuit model.
Figure 7. Line current waveform.
Figure 8. Line voltage waveform.
Table 1. Space vectors and switching states.
Space 
vectors
Switching 
state
On-state 
switch
Vector 
definition
V0
[000]
S4,S6,S2
V0 = 0
V1
[100]
S1,S6,S2
V1 = 2/3 Vdcej0
V2
[110]
S1,S3,S2
V2 = 2/3 Vdcejπ/3
V3
[010]
S4,S3,S2
V3 = 2/3 Vdcej2π/3
V4
[011]
S4,S3,S5
V4 = 2/3 Vdcej3π/3
V5
[001]
S4,S6,S5
V5 = 2/3 Vdcej4π/3
V6
[101]
S1,S6,S5
V6 = 2/3 Vdcej4π/3
V7
[111]
S1,S3,S5
V7 = 0

484
5 SIMULATION RESULTS FOR THE 
SVPWM INVERTER
The circuit model is shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9. Circuit model.
Figure 10. Line current waveform.
Figure 11. Line voltage waveform.
Figure 12. Electromagnetic torque of the induction 
motor for SVPWM.
Figure 13. Electromagnetic torque of the induction 
motor for PWM.
Table 2. Percentage of harmonic distortion of the 
PWM and SVPWM inverters.
Harmonic
SVPWM
PWM
1st (50 Hz)
100
100
2nd (100 Hz)
11.9
16.2
3rd (150 Hz)
2.13
8.16
4th (200 Hz)
0.87
5.79
5th (250 Hz)
0.45
4.48
6th (300 Hz)
0.29
3.8
7th (350 Hz)
0.17
3.27
8th (400 Hz)
0.15
2.85
9th (450 Hz)
0.15
2.51
THD
12.15
40.89
6 RESULT ANALYSIS OF THE PWM 
AND SVPWM INVERTERS
Calculated results are presented in Table 2.
7 RESULT ANALYSIS OF THE PWM 
AND SVPWM INVERTERS WITH 
MATHEMATICAL MODEL OF 
INDUCTION MOTOR
The THD of the PWM inverter is 40.89% and that 
of the SVPWM inverter is 12.14%. To observe the 
lower-order harmonic content ‘db4’, the mother 
wavelet-based Continuous Wavelet Transform 
(CWT) was conducted in both the cases. CWT, 
which is used to achieve the time–frequency rep-
resentation from a signal x (t), can be defined as 
follows:
X
x
t
s
dt
WT
X
s
( , )
|
|
s
( )t( )t
*
,
ψ
τ
⋅
x
=
)t
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
∫
1
 
(1)
The transformed signal XWT (τ, s) is a function of 
the translation parameter τ and the scale param-
eter s. The mother wavelet is denoted as ψ (t) and * 
(asterisk) indicates the complex conjugate, which is 
used in the case of a complex wavelet.
From the graph presented above, the following 
observations can be made:
 i.  In Figures 7 and 8, the line current and line 
voltage waveforms of the PWM inverter are 
shown, where the presence of harmonic con-
tent can be observed, whereas in Figures 10 and 
11 showing the waveforms, it is clear that using 
the SVPWM inverter, the harmonic content for 
both the line current and voltage is reduced.

485
Figure 14. FFT analysis of the current of the SVPWM 
inverter with induction motor.
Figure 15. FFT analysis of the current of the PWM 
inverter with induction motor.
Figure 16. FFT analysis of the voltage of the SVPWM 
inverter with induction motor.
Figure 17. FFT analysis of the voltage of the PWM 
inverter with induction motor.
Figure 18. Wavelet analysis of the current of the 
SVPWM inverter with induction motor.
Figure 19. Wavelet analysis of the current of the PWM 
inverter with induction motor.
Figure 20. Wavelet analysis of the voltage of the 
SVPWM inverter with induction motor.
 ii.  In Figures 12 and 13, the electromagnetic 
torque waveform is shown, where it can be easily 
observed that the SVPWM-fed induction motor 
drive has less harmonic content in comparison 
with the PWM-fed induction motor drive.
 iii.  FFT analysis of both SVPWM and PWM 
inverter fed induction motors is shown in 
Figures 14, 15, 16 and 17.
 iv.  In this paper, CWT analysis shows that more 
lower-order harmonic content is present in the 
PWM inverter than in the SVPWM inverter, as 
shown in Figures 18–21.
Figure 21. Wavelet analysis of the voltage of the PWM 
inverter with induction motor.

486
8 CONCLUSION
In this paper, simulation studies clearly show the 
comparison of the performance analysis between 
the PWM and SVPWM inverters for induction 
motor drive applications. To analyze the perform-
ance of the PWM and SVPWM techniques, the 
THD-and CWT-based techniques were used. The 
analysis revealed that in the PWM technique, THD 
was higher than that in the SVPWM technique due 
to the presence of more harmonic content in the 
PWM inverter to control the induction motor drive. 
CWT was also conducted in both the cases, which 
clearly depicted that more lower-order harmonic 
content are present in the PWM technique than 
in the SVPWM technique, and that this is the 
advantage of the SVPWM technique over the con-
ventional PWM technique to control the induction 
motor drive for the proper system operation.
REFERENCES
Bose, B.K. 1986. Power electronics and ac drives. Prentice 
hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Erfidan, T., S. Urugun, Y. Karabag and B. Cakir.2004. 
New Software implementation of the Space Vec-
tor Modulation. Proceedings of IEEE Conference. 
pp. 1113–1115.
Holmes D.G. and T.A. Lipo. 2003. Pulse Width Modu-
lation for Power Converters: Principles and Practice. 
M.E. El-Hawary, Ed. New Jersey: IEEE Press, Wiley 
Interscience. pp. 215–313.
Shao-Liang An, Xiang-Dong Sun Member, IEEE, Qi 
Zhang, Yan-Ru Zhong, and Bi-Ying Ren, “Study 
on the Novel Generalized Discontinuous SVPWM 
Strategies for Three-Phase Voltage Source Inverters”, 
IEEE Transactions on Ind. App. May-2011.
Sinusoidal and Space Vector Pulse Width Modulation 
for Inverter K. Mounika, B. Kiran Babu Interna-
tional Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology 
(IJETT)—Volume 4 Issue 4- April 2013.

487
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A study on the switching life test of low-power-factor Compact 
Fluorescent Lamps
S. Naha
Department of Electrical Engineering, Regent Education and Research Foundation, Hooghly, India
S.K. Bandyopadhyay, S. Mukherjee & S. Datta
Department of Electrical Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation, Hooghly, India
ABSTRACT In this paper, we reveal the real picture of a parametric study designed to test key hypoth-
eses regarding the impact of ballast parameters on Compact Fluorescent Lamp (CFL) life. Here, samples 
of 5 W to 14 W CFL lamps from different lamp manufacturers were operated on duty cycles of 5 min on 
and 5 min off. The results indicate which parameters seem to have the biggest effect on lamp life and can 
be used in establishing new performance standards for CFL. The changes made during the life cycle test 
are remarkable.
factors that lead to early lamp failures should be 
better understood. The failure of fluorescent lamps 
is caused mainly by the loss of electron emissive 
coating of lamp electrodes, and the electrode tem-
perature directly determines the rate of loss of this 
emissive coating. Thus, it is important for a ballast 
to provide an appropriate electrode heating during 
lamp starting and operation to reduce the damage 
to lamp electrodes and maintain a long lamp life. 
However, the electrode temperature is relatively 
difficult to measure.
The average life of a CFL is defined as the 
time during which 50% of the lamps reach the 
end of their individual life. A large number of 
previous studies have shown that when linear 
fluorescent lamps are started more frequently 
than the standard 3 h on/20 min off, they will 
have a statistically shorter life than their average 
life. However, none of the previous studies has 
reported on the effects of frequent switching of 
CFL products.
2 PROCEDURE
Several numbers of retrofit CFLs were used in 
this experiment. These lamps were purchased 
from the market. They were of different wattages 
1 INTRODUCTION
Fluorescent lamp systems became commercially 
available in the late 1930s. Since then, they have 
been used as an alternative to incandescent lamp 
systems in commercial and industrial applications 
because they have a higher output, are more effi-
cient, and have longer life. Fluorescent lamps were 
first developed in the shape of a linear tube. Over 
the years, these lamps have gradually acquired dif-
ferent shapes, sizes, wattages, and color character-
istics. The use of rare-earth activated phosphors 
allowed the development of Compact Fluores-
cent Lamps (CFLs) that have a tube diameter of 
≤16 mm. They are available in different wattages, 
shapes, and sizes. CFL products are used to replace 
incandescent lamps in luminaires with medium 
screwbase sockets, such as ceiling and wall-
mounted luminaires, exterior luminaires, recessed 
downlights, track lighting, and floor and table 
lamps. Extended lamp life is one of the main jus-
tifications for using CFL products, compared with 
incandescent lamps. However, a recent survey has 
revealed that early burnout of CFLs accounted for 
22% of the complaints received about the product. 
If lamp life is one of the main reasons for the con-
sideration of CFLs, a consumer will spend more 
for a CFL than for an incandescent lamp. Thus, 

488
(from 5 W to 15 W) and obtained from different 
companies. The companies were Philips, Havells, 
and Osram. First, eight lamps were selected for 
the experiment. More lamps were then used 
gradually. As in the life testing equipment, the 
number of lamp holders is even, thus an even 
number of lamps was selected. Moreover, this 
selection of even number of lamps is suitable 
for determining the average life of lamps. At the 
initial stage, illuminance of different lamps was 
measured. Then, lamp electrodes were detached 
from the ballast part of lamps. The resistance 
value of lamp electrodes was measured by a mul-
timeter at the cold condition or room tempera-
ture (generally 25°C), and then these values were 
recorded. The values were generally in the range 
of 6 Ω–15 Ω. The electrode and the ballast part 
of lamps were considered to measure electrical 
characteristics such as input voltage, input cur-
rent, output voltage, output current, input watt, 
lamp watt, input power factor, lamp power factor, 
total output, and efficiency. This measurement 
was done using the High-Frequency Data Acqui-
sition System (HFDAS) with computer interface. 
These parameter values were recorded and saved 
at a particular location in the computer. V-I char-
acteristics of each lamp were also determined 
from the HFDAS. After obtaining the electrical 
characteristics, the lamp electrode and the ballast 
part were reconnected to test whether the lamp 
glowed or not. These lamps were placed at the 
specific holder of the life testing equipment for 
switching operation, and programming was done 
for 100 cycles. The counter indicated how many 
cycles were completed during the experiment. 
Each cycle consisted of 5 min on and 5 min off 
duration. Thus, each cycle was of 10 min dura-
tion. The above-mentioned measurements were 
repeated after completing 100 cycles, and these 
processes were iterated after each 100 cycle of 
measurement.
In this operation, one question may arise: how 
many times will this process of measurement take 
place? The answer is, first, this is an experimental 
study and thus the time at which the lamps burn 
out is not predictable, so due to the limitation of 
the time, the whole process was decided to be run 
for 1000 cycles. However, it should be noted that 
while performing the experiment, some lamps 
failed to start even after about 300 or 400 cycles.
Therefore, the main objective of this study was 
to determine the effect of some lamp parameters 
on lamp life and V-I characteristics from time to 
time. The average life of lamps of different watt-
ages can be predicted in some cases.
3 ANALYSIS
The analysis involved the measurement of lamp 
parameter values. The lamp parameters were Rc, 
Rh, Rh/Rc, Th, and lamp illuminance. In addition to 
these parameters, V-I characteristics of lamps were 
also included in the analysis of the lamp life. The 
lamp parameters are defined as follows:
Rc 
=  resistance of the electrode of the lamp 
measured at room temperature (25°C), 
without switching on the lamp.
Rh 
=  hot cathode resistance at the time of 
ignition of the lamp and Rc is the cold 
cathode resistance measured without 
switching on the lamp. It is measured by 
the ratio of the time-integrated value of 
the lamp voltage at the starting period 
to the time-integrated value of the lamp 
current at the starting period.
Vdt
start
0∫0
   correlates well with high-frequency 
switching life of the lamps tested.
Rh/Rc 
 =  ratio which is used to determine the 
temperature of the lamp electrode at 
the time of the ignition of the lamp.
Tc 
=  temperature of the lamp electrode at 
the cold condition (25°C or 298 K).
Th 
=  temperature of the lamp electrode at 
the time of the ignition of the lamp. In 
general, it is measured by the following 
mathematical expression:
Th 
= room temperature × (Rh/Rc)0.814.
The equation is taken as a reference equation 
from a lamp life predictor.
Simulation results are presented in Figures 1–14 
and Tables 1–3.
Comparative analysis was carried out with the 
following different wattages of lamps for the same 
parameter values: data 1–5W(1) CFL Philips; data 
2–5W(2) CFL Philips; data 3–11W(1) CFL Philips; 
data 4–11W(2) CFL Philips; data 5–14W(1) CFL 
Philips; data 6–14W(2) CFL Philips.

489
Figure 1. Initial voltage and current waveform for 
5W(1) and 5W(2) Philips lamps.
Figure 2. Output voltage and current waveform for 
5W(1) and 5W(2) Philips lamps after 400 cycles.
Figure 3. Output voltage and current waveform for 
5W(1) and 5W(2) Philips lamps after 1000 cycles.
Figure 4. Initial voltage and current waveform for 
11W(1) and 11W(2) Philips lamps.
Figure 5. Output voltage and current waveform for 
11W(1) and 11W(2) Philips lamps after 400 cycles.
Figure 6. Output voltage and current waveform for 
11W(1) and 11W(2) Philips lamps after 700 cycles.

490
Figure 9. Output voltage and current waveform for 
14W(1) and 14W(2) Philips lamps after 1000 cycles.
Figure 10. Rc vs. no. of cycles.
Figure 11. Rh vs. no. of cycles.
Figure 12. Rh/Rc vs. no. of cycles.
Figure 13. Th vs. no. of cycles.
Figure 14. Lumen output vs. no. of cycles.
Figure 8. Output voltage and current waveform for 
14W(1) and 14W(2) Philips lamps after 500 cycles.
Figure 7. Initial voltage and current waveform for 
14W(1) and 14W(2) Philips lamps.

491
Table 3. Calculated parameters (3rd set).
Serial 
no.
No. of 
cycles
Ignition time for 
voltage curve (ms)
Ignition time for
current curve (ms)
1
Initial
0.2212
0.2212
0.2054
0.2054
2
500
0.5688
0.1896
0.5372
0.1580
3
1000
0.3950
0.3160
0.3792
0.3634
Table 2. Calculated parameters (2nd set).
Serial 
no.
No. of 
cycles
Ignition time for 
voltage curve (ms)
Ignition time for 
current curve (ms)
1
Initial
0.3160
0.0158
0.3160
0.1738
2
400
0.1580
0.3160
0.1580
0.3160
3
700
0.2528
0.1580
0.2212
0.1580
Table 1. Calculated parameters (1st set).
Serial 
no.
No. of 
cycles
Ignition time for 
voltage curve (ms)
Ignition time for 
current curve (ms)
1
Initial
0.1896
0.2212
0.1580
0.1896
2
400
0.3160
0.4740
0.3160
0.4424
3
1000
0.3792
0.3634
0.3160
0.3002
4 CONCLUSION
Although corroborating data from the standard 5 
min on/ 5 min off cycle are not yet available, the 
switching-cycle testing results indicate that the cur-
rent ANSI standards are not adequate for selecting 
ballasts to ensure good lamp life. The Rh/Rc ratio 
appears to be a very good predictor for lamp life 
based on lamp starting. A low Rh/Rc ratio indicates 
that the lamp electrodes have not been heated suf-
ficiently during lamp starting, resulting in reduced 
lamp life. The standard cycle results also provide 
an insight into the impact of the lamp operating 
parameters (e.g., lamp operating current, ballast 
factor) on lamp life. For higher wattages of lamps 
(11–15 W), the rate of failure is higher than that 
for lower wattages of lamps, as revealed by the 
experiment. The probable factors that the quality 
of the ballast components is poor or that the heat 
dissipation is improper reduces the life of the com-
ponents used in CFLs.
REFERENCES
[1] Hand Book on Lighting Engineering:  IESNA
[2]  Frequently Switched Instant Start Fluorescent Systems 
by N Narendran, T Yin, C O Rourke, A Bierman and 
A Malyagoda Lighting Research Center, Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

493
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Demonstration of edge detection technology using the coupling 
of the IR sensor and robotics
Subhankar Mukherjee
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, India
Suranjan Ghosh
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, West Bengal University of Technology, 
West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Edge detection technology is best demonstrated by the edge avoider robot, a mobile 
device, which “senses” and “avoids” the absence of the surface below it. Demonstration of the concept of 
edge detection technology is done with the help of a microcontroller that also helps the robot to prevent 
it from falling. The specific microcontroller used here is the P89V51RD2 microcontroller, also known as 
the “bit and byte processor”, which is programmed accordingly for the specified action of edge avoiding. 
The goal of the robot is to drive forward as long as it does see the floor, turn away from the side when 
one IR sensor does not detect an obstacle, and withdraw when neither IR sensor detects an obstacle. This 
activity could be done on a tabletop, but the results might be disastrous to the robot if something goes 
wrong.
and detected by the sensor. Generally, an IR-based 
obstacle detection sensor is used to perform the 
edge-avoiding operation. The mechanical assem-
bly consists of chassis and two tires mounted on a 
two-geared DC motor. The DC motor is control-
led by the main board. The main board consists of 
a microcontroller circuit and also a motor driver 
circuit with the remaining ports expansion for sen-
sor interfacing. Sensor is an IR proximity sensor 
that generates a high signal pulse when something 
obstructs its path. This high signal pulse is passed 
to the microcontroller ports by which the micro-
controller decides where to rotate the chassis or the 
robot as programmed in it.
2 A CONCEPT OF EDGE DETECTION
Edge detection technique is demonstrated using 
the IR-based line detecting module. The modules 
are connected in front of the iBOT so as to detect 
the edge early and take a proper action in time. 
The distance maintained between the sensors is 
greater than the width of the iBOT, considering 
the turning radius of the wheels. When the sur-
face is detected, the IR module sends a high pulse 
signal to the microcontroller, and when the edge is 
detected, the IR module does not reflect the light, 
thus giving a low pulse to the microcontroller.
1 INTRODUCTION
Robotics is defined as “A reprogrammable, mul-
tifunctional manipulator designed to move mate-
rial, parts, tools, or specialized devices through 
various programmed motions for the performance 
of a variety of tasks.” Robots in movies are por-
trayed as fantastic, intelligent, and even dangerous 
forms of artificial life. However, today’s robots 
are not exactly the walking and talking intelli-
gent machines of movies, stories, and our dreams. 
Today, we find most robots working for people in 
factories, warehouses, and laboratories. In future, 
robots may show up in other places: our schools, 
our homes, and even our bodies. Robots have the 
potential to change our economy, health, standard 
of living, knowledge, and the world in which we 
live. As technology progresses, we find new ways 
to use robots. Each new use brings new hope and 
possibilities, but also potential dangers and risks. 
An Edge Avoider Robot (EAR) is a robot which 
avoids the edges of, for example, a table and does 
not fall down. The robot will be autonomous. 
This robot working depends on the sensor used to 
detect the edge and warn the brain of the robot to 
change the direction. The main idea behind edge 
detection using Infrared (IR) is to send IR light in 
a certain direction: if an edge is present not too 
far from the sensor, then IR will be reflected back 

494
3 CIRCUIT DIAGRAM
Figures 1 and 2 illustrates the schematics of the 
main circuit board and sensor board.
4 PCB TESTING
Step 1: Testing the Power Supply Section
 Switch on the supply and check whether power 
LED glows or not. If it does not glow, then check 
its polarity. Check the voltage at the terminal block 
whether it receives the power or not. Then, check 
the voltage at the voltage regulator IC. See the 
reading of the multimeter at the time of testing of 
its both pins, i.e., input and output. Its input pin 
has AC supply through the adaptor and its output 
is +5 V.
Step 2: 
Testing the Microcontroller Section
 Check the voltage at pin 40, i.e., Vcc whether it 
gets +5 V or not. If the multimeter shows the 5 V 
reading, then it means that it is normal, otherwise 
check the tracks of PCB and connections. Check 
the ground connection at pin 20 of the microcon-
troller. Check the voltage at pin 31 of the micro-
controller. It must show the +5 V reading on the 
multimeter, which indicates that the microcon-
troller uses the internal memory. Check the volt-
age at pin 9 of the microcontroller. First, it shows 
0 V and then after pressing the Reset switch only 
once, it starts showing the +5 V reading on the 
multimeter.
Step 3:  Testing the communication between RX 
and TX
Test and program the microcontroller supported 
over the robot microcontroller chassis using the 
software named ‘Flash Magic’ in a Window-in-
stalled PC or laptop. A serial cable for program-
ming as well as a serial port are needed at the back 
of the PC. If there is no serial port in the PC or lap-
top, then use the serial to USB converter and pro-
gram the microcontroller through the USB port.
The robot microcontroller’s controller board is 
tested and programmed by connecting it to a PC 
running Microsoft Windows. For this purpose, the 
serial port (9-pin male connector) should be used. 
A 9-pin male–female cable is included to connect 
the PC’s serial port to the robot microcontrol-
ler. It may be necessary to remove the modem or 
other devices (except the mouse) to release the 
serial port. Switch boxes are also available from 
computer stores that allow one serial port to serve 
two devices. Most computer stores also offer serial 
port cards that can be added to the computer.
4.1 Testing the communication between the RX 
and TX of the microcontroller
Plug in the DB9 serial cable male connector into 
the female serial connector over the board. Plug 
in the DB9 serial cable female connector into the 
male serial port at the back of the PC. If there is 
no serial port in the PC, use the serial to USB con-
nector and plug in USB into the PC.
Short pin 10 and pin 11 of the microcontrol-
ler with the help of a screwdriver to check that 
the transmitted data should be received by the 
microcontroller.
4.2 Checking the COM port
Set the device to 89C51RD2 and then set COM 
port to COM3 (COM port of the PC or laptop) 
(See Figure 3).
Go to the “Tools” and then to the “Terminal.” (See 
Figure 4)
A window is opened. If the input is obtained as it is 
at the output, then the pins of the microcontroller 
Figure 1. Main circuit board.
Figure 2. Sensor board.

495
are working properly. This means that the microcon-
troller receives the same data that are transmitted.
 If output is not obtained, then check the commu-
nication through MAX232 IC.
4.3  Testing the communication between the RX 
and TX of the MAX232 IC section
If we want to check the communication between 
the RX and TX of MAX232 IC, then we have to 
short its TX and RX pins.
 Short its pin 11 and pin 12, i.e., TX and RX, respec-
tively, with the help of a screwdriver.
 Plug in the DB9 serial cable male connector into 
the female serial connector over the board.
Plug in the DB9 serial cable female connector into 
the male serial port at the back of the PC.
 If there is no serial port in the PC, use the serial to 
USB connector and plug in USB into the PC.
 Repeat the same process with Flash Magic software.
 If no output is obtained, then check the communi-
cation in the DB9 connector.
 4.4 Testing the communication between the RX 
and TX of the DB9 connector section 
 If we want to check the communication between 
the RX and TX of the DB9 connector cable, then 
we have to short its TX and RX pins. Short its pin 
2 and pin 3, i.e., RX and TX, respectively, with 
the help of fly leads, and repeat the same proc-
ess with Flash Magic software. If no output is 
obtained, then replace the connector. If no out-
put is obtained while testing with MAX232 IC 
and the output is obtained while testing the DB9 
connector, then replace the MAX232 IC after 
checking the PCB tracks. Also, check whether 
there is any unwanted shorting on the PCB and 
then unshort them. If no output is obtained 
from testing the communication with the micro-
controller, then check MAX232 and get the 
output. Thereafter, replace the microcontroller 
after checking the unwanted shorting between 
the PCB tracks.
Step 4: Testing the L293D IC section
Checking the voltage through the multimeter at 
the following pins of L293D IC:
 Pin 1, pin 2, pin 9, pin 15, and pin 16 to +5 V
Pin 4, pin 5, pin 7, pin 10, pin 12, and pin 13 to 
ground.
Check the continuity between pin 8 of 
L283D IC and pin 1 of the voltage regulator 
IC 7805.
5 IR SENSOR TESTING
First, we need a small screwdriver to adjust the 
potentiometer VR1. We then connect the ground 
and the supply with CON1. In the circuit board, 
pin no. 1 is for GND, pin no. 2 is for output, and 
pin no. 3 is for supply (+5 V DC (preferred), +9 V 
Figure 3. Flash Magic software.
Figure 5. IR sensor testing.
Figure 4. Terminal.

496
DC, or +12 V DC). Next, we turn the potentiometer 
VR1 towards the left position and then place our 
hand at a curtain distance away from the IR sensor 
LED. We then start turning VR1 towards the right 
position until LED3 just glows, and then we remove 
our hand from the IR sensor LED and it will turn 
off LED3. Again, when we place our hand or any 
object near the IR LED3, it will just glow. If the IR 
LED does not glow, we have to adjust VR1. Figure 
5 shows the arrangement for IR sensor testing.
6 IR SENSOR AND MAIN PCB 
CONNECTION
Figure 6 illustrates the sensor board and main 
board connection. First, we connect the CON1 ter-
minal to the IR sensor PCB with a 3-pin terminal 
named SENSOR over the main board PCB using 
a 3-wire cable connector. Then, we place the micro-
controller over the 40-pin IC base, which is pre-
programmed with the edge avoider program. We 
then connect +12 V power supply to the POWER 
terminal block. Next, we press the POWER ON 
switch to start the EAR.
7 FLOW CHART OF EDGE AVOIDANCE
The flowchart of the edge avoidance algorithm is 
shown in Figure 7.
8 OBSERVATION
The following points were observed from the hard-
ware experiment:
1. The EAR was found to avoid edges.
2. The EAR was found to turn and withdraw away 
from edges.
3. Back and forth movements.
4. Right and left movements were found to be 
functional.
5. Speed of the motors attached to the wheels can 
be changed by changing the microcontroller 
programming.
9 CONCLUSION
The EAR was found to avoid edges and thus pre-
vented it from falling. Therefore, it can be seen 
that it demonstrates the concept of edge detection 
along with the implementation of robotics to some 
extent. When the surface is detected, the IR mod-
ule sends a high pulse signal to the microcontroller, 
and when the edge is detected, the IR module does 
not reflect the light, thus giving a low pulse signal 
to the microcontroller. Thus, this would greatly 
help in detecting edges when vehicles are driven in 
hilly areas and thus would reduce the chances of 
accidents.
REFERENCES
Basavaraj Prof. B. & Dr. H.N. Shivashankar., “BASIC 
ELECTRONICS” Second Edition VIKAS publication.
LMP90100/LMP90099/LMP90098/LMP90097 
Sensor 
AFE System: Multi-Channel, Low Power 24-Bit 
Sensor AFE with True Continuous Background 
Calibration, SNAS510P–JANUARY 2011–REVISED 
MARCH 2013, Texas Instruments.
Resistor Array, Document Number: 31043248 Revisions: 
13-Oct-08.
Kasap, S.O. Principles of Electrical Engineering Materials 
and Devices, McGraw-Hill. New York. 2002.
Marshall Leach, Jr., W. Professor, Georgia Institute 
of Technology, School of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering.
Figure 6. Sensor board and main board connection.
Figure 7. Flow chart of edge avoidance.

497
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Measurement and analysis of harmonics contribution 
by HID lamp systems 
S. Datta, S.K. Bandyopadhyay & S. Mukherjee
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Harmonic contributions of electrical devices are one of the major reasons behind the 
poor quality of power. High Intensity Discharge (HID) Lamps are known as non linear electrical loads. 
Hence, these types of lamps are a major contributor of harmonics in electrical distribution systems. The 
work presented in this paper, emphasizes on measurement of harmonic contribution by 250 W High Pres-
sure Sodium Vapour (HPSV) lamp and 250 W Metal Halide (MH) lamps when driven by electromagnetic 
ballast at 240V, 50 Hz power supply. These types of lamp systems are widely used in outdoor lighting 
especially in road lighting & sports lighting applications and also for indoor lighting such as in shopping 
malls. The purpose is to know the harmonic contribution by such type of lamp systems and to draw 
a comparison.
Keywords: high intensity discharge lamp; lamp voltage harmonics; lamp current harmonics; electromag-
netic ballast; Total Harmonic Distortion (THD); power quality
current signals, by 250 W High Pressure Sodium 
Vapour and Metal Halide lamp systems. To com-
pare the harmonic contributions of these types of 
lamp systems, an analysis has also been carried out 
with recorded voltage and current waveforms.
2 LAMPS AND BALLASTS USED FOR 
EXPERIMENTATION 
For the purpose of above said measurements dif-
ferent lamps, electromagnetic ballasts and ignitors 
are used. In Tables 1, 2 and 3 lists of the lamps, 
electromagnetic ballast and ignitors used for the 
measurement are shown.
1 INTRODUCTION
Harmonics in electrical circuits mainly depend 
upon the nature of the load connected with the 
circuit. There are two types of electrical loads viz. 
linear and non-linear. Non-linear types of loads 
do not follow linear relation between voltage and 
current. V-I characteristics of such loads cause the 
current waveform to distort and it results in produc-
tion of harmonics. All discharge lamps (both low 
and high pressure) are non-linear loads owing to 
its discharge phenomena [1]. When the supply volt-
age itself is distorted, considerable amount of rise 
in lamp current Total Harmonic Distortion (THD) 
has been observed and along with reduction in light 
output. Hence, it can be said that in presence of 
supply voltage harmonics both electrical and pho-
tometric performances of lamps get degraded[2]. 
In comparison of conventional incandescent lamps, 
discharge are harmful to power quality. Mass 
deployment of CFLs can cause poor power quality 
[3]. In case of High Intensity Discharge (HID) lamp 
systems, use of electronic ballasts reduce the har-
monic contribution of the lamp systems [4]. In most 
of the earlier works, only one lamp system, viz. 
CFL, FTL or HPSV is considered separately but 
the comparison of harmonic contribution of dif-
ferent lamp systems had not been evaluated. This 
work emphasizes on the methods of measurement 
of harmonic contribution, both in voltage and 
Table 1. List of lamps.
Lamp 
type
Lamp 
wattage
(Watt)
Maker’s 
name
Model/ 
trade 
name
Supply 
voltage 
rating (Volt)
High 
Pressure 
Sodium 
Vapour
250
Philips
SON-T 
Plus 
250 W
200–250
Metal 
Halide
250
Philips
HPI-T 
Plus
250 W
240

498
3 AQUISITION AND ANALYSIS 
OF VOLTAGE AND CURRENT 
WAVEFORMS OF LAMP SYSTEM
In a normal HID lamp circuit there are mainly 
two sources of harmonics; discharge lamp itself 
and the inductive electromagnetic ballast. Here 
the harmonic contribution of lamps in presence 
of electromagnetic ballast in the circuit is exam-
ined. Capacitor is not used for power factor 
correction.
3.1 Circuit diagram
The circuit diagram of an HID lamp system driven 
by electromagnetic ballast, is shown in Figure 1. A 
very low resistance (shunt) of value 0.194 Ω is put 
in series in the circuit and two terminals are pro-
vided for the measurement of voltage waveform 
across it with the help of an oscilloscope. This 
resistive element being a linear electrical load has a 
voltage waveform which is similar to the waveform 
of current following through it. Hence, by record-
ing the waveform of voltage across it we can record 
the nature of the waveform of circuit current. For 
analysis of data values of current was found out 
from the recorded voltages as the value of resist-
ance of that shunt was known.
3.2 Experimental steps
The steps given below are followed to obtain the 
wave forms and record data:
• STEP 1: Supply voltage is set at 240V and fre-
quency kept constant at 50 Hz. An AC pro-
grammable power source is used for feeding the 
lamp.
• STEP 2: At stable condition of lamp, the wave-
forms of lamp voltage and current are recorded 
with oscilloscope.
• STEP 3: The data obtained are then analyzed 
with the help of a developed MATLAB pro-
gram to evaluate the different components of 
the harmonics.
Table 2. List of ballasts.
Ballast 
type
Maker’s 
name
Sl. No.
Rated 
voltage & 
frequency
Lamp 
watt
(Watt)
Rated 
current
(Amp)
Rated 
pf
Electro-
mag-
netic 
Ballast
Philips
C8325-
X100
240V, 
50 Hz
250
(SON 
+MH)
3
0.4
Table 3. List of ignitors.
Ignitor 
trade 
name
Maker’s 
name
Specified lamp 
wattage
Lamp 
voltage
(Volt)
Frequency
(Hz)
SN 58/01 Philips
SON(-T): 100–150–250–
400 W
MH: 35–70–150–250 W
CDM: 35–70–150 W
220–240 50/60
SI 51/02
Philips
HPI(-T): 250–400 W
220–240 50/60
As pointed out in Table 2, only one ballast is used to drive both 
HPSV and MH lamps of same rating.
Figure 1. Circuit diagram of HID lamp system with 
conventional control gear.
Figure 2. Voltage waveform of (a) 250W HPSV lamp 
and (b) 250W MH lamp.
Figure 3. Current waveform of (a) 250W HPSV lamp 
and (b) 250W MH lamp.

499
• STEP 4: From the evaluated harmonic com-
ponents, 
Total 
Harmonic 
Distortion 
is 
determined.
3.3 Acquired waveform
Lamp voltage and circuit current waveforms 
recorded with oscilloscope are shown below.
In Figure 2(a) and 2(b), the voltage waveforms 
of 250 W HPSV and MH lamps driven by elec-
tromagnetic ballast are shown respectively. In Fig-
ures 3(a) and 3(b), current waveforms of 250 W 
HPSV and MH lamps driven by electromagnetic 
ballast are given respectively.
3.4 Analysis of acquired waveforms
The analyses of above measured waveforms (Figs. 2 
and 3) have been done with developed MATLAB 
programme to compute the harmonic contents 
of the voltage and current. The analyzed data are 
tabulated below for comparison between the har-
monic contents in voltage and current waveforms 
of different types of lamps having same wattage 
ratings.
It is shown in Table 4, that 250 W HPSV lamp 
driven by electromagnetic ballast has much higher 
harmonic content in its voltage waveform com-
pared to that present in voltage waveform of 
250 W MH.
Table 4. Voltage Harmonics of 250 W HPSV & 250 W MH lamps when driven by electromagnetic ballast 
(at 240V, 50 Hz).
Harmonic order
Voltage Harmonics
250 W HPSV
250 W MH
Volt
% of Fundamental
Volt
% of Fundamental
Fundamental Component
127.463
179.676
2nd Harmonic
 0.089
 0.069824
 0.7982
 0.444244
3rd Harmonic
 47.4827
37.25214
 52.8446
29.41105
4th Harmonic
 0.0134
 0.010513
 0.205
 0.114094
5th Harmonic
 30.4385
23.88026
 21.7715
12.11709
6th Harmonic
 0.0153
 0.012003
 0.0836
 0.046528
7th Harmonic
 20.4167
16.01775
 8.8961
 4.95119
8th Harmonic
 0.0094
 0.007375
 0.0713
 0.039683
9th Harmonic
 14.2638
11.19054
 4.6793
 2.604299
THD (%)
 44.6
 22.9
RMS (Volt)
 90.19
131.5
Table 5. Current Harmonics of 250 W HPSV & 250 W MH lamps when driven by electromagnetic ballast (at 240V, 
50 Hz).
Harmonic order
Current Harmonics
250 W HPSV
250 W MH
Ampere
% of Fundamental Ampere
% of Fundamental
Fundamental Component
 3.771744
2.24155
2nd Harmonic
 0.001061
 0.028121
0.002828
0.126183
3rd Harmonic
 0.421086
11.16423
0.201527
8.990536
4th Harmonic
 0.000707
 0.018748
0.000354
0.015773
5th Harmonic
 0.06364
 1.687289
0.028992
1.293375
6th Harmonic
 0.000707
 0.018748
0.001061
0.047319
7th Harmonic
 0.076722
 2.034121
0.018031
0.804416
8th Harmonic
 0.000707
 0.018748
0.000707
0.031546
9th Harmonic
 0.003182
 0.084364
0.002121
0.094637
THD (%)
11.49
9.1
RMS (Ampere)
 3.8
2.25

500
Figure 4a. Comparison between voltage harmonics of 
250W HPSV & MH.
Figure 4b. Comparison between current harmonics of 
250W HPSV & MH.
Observation of data given in Table 5, shows that 
250 W HPSV has more harmonics present in its 
current waveform in comparison with harmonic 
content in current waveform of 250 W MH.
4 COMPARISON OF HARMONIC 
CONTRIBUTION OF DIFFERENT 
LAMPS USING ANALYZED DATA
With the help of data provided in Tables (4 and 5), 
charts have been prepared to compare harmonic 
contribution by different lamps driven by electro-
magnetic ballast.
Comparison done in Figure 4(a) reveals that 
at 250 W rating MH lamp is having considerably 
lower harmonic content in their voltage waveforms 
in comparison to 250 W HPSV lamp. From Fig-
ure 4(b) it is seen that at 250 W rating MH lamp 
is having considerably lower harmonic content in 
their current waveforms in comparison to 250 W 
HPSV lamp.
5 CONCLUSION
From this work the following conclusions can be 
drawn:
• Metal Halide (MH) lamp working with electro-
magnetic ballast generates much less harmonics 
in their voltage and current waveforms than that 
of High Pressure Sodium Vapour lamps.
• In both the cases of HPSV and MH; for higher 
power rated lamps (400 W), harmonic content 
in the current waveform is less than that of the 
lower power rated lamps (250 W).
• In all the cases voltage waveforms are more dis-
torted than current waveforms.
REFERENCES
Arseneau R., Ouellette M, “The Effects of supply har-
monics on the performance of CFL”, IEEE Transac-
tions on Power Delivery, Vol. – 8, 2002.
Chang, Y.N., Moo, C.S., Jeng, J.C., “Harmonic Analysis 
of FTL with Electromagnetic Ballast”, Tencon ‘93. 
Proceedings. Computer, Communication, Control 
and Power Engineering.1993 IEEE.
Faranda R., Guzzetti S., Leva S., “Power Quality in Pub-
lic Lighting Systems”, IEEE 978–1-4244–7245—1/10, 
2011.
Richard M.K., Sen P.K., “CFL and Their Effects on 
Power Quality and Application Guidelines”, IEEE 
978–1-4244–6395–4/10, 2010. 

501
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Optimization of electrode-spacer geometry of a gas insulated system 
for minimization of electric stress using SVM
Suryendu Dasgupta & Abhijit Lahiri
Department of Electrical Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, 
Mankundu, West Bengal, India
Arijit Baral
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India
ABSTRACT: In order to design a High Voltage (HV) system, it is compulsory to have a thorough 
knowledge of electric field distribution on and around the system. The design should ensure reliability 
of the system to withstand the electric stress and simultaneously it should not be over dimensioned. The 
dielectric properties of the insulating material is also of great importance while designing the insula-
tion of HV apparatus between phases and the earth and also between phases. The electric field intensity 
on the surface of the electrodes also determines the withstand voltage of the external insulation of HV 
apparatus. Thus, a comprehensive study of the electric field distribution on and around HV equipments 
is of great significance. For better economy and increased system reliability, it often becomes essential to 
optimize the dimensions of the HV equipments. In this paper live electrode contour of a gas insulated 
substation (GIS) is done using support vector machine (SVM). The GIS system considered in the present 
case is normally preferred for 12 kV, 36 kV, 72.5 kV, 145 kV, 245 kV, 420 kV and above.
fied contour. The design combined the classical 
approach of changing the distances between sys-
tem elements and simultaneously optimizing their 
contours.
A. Lahiri and S. Chakravorti applied Genetic 
Algorithm (Lahiri & Chakravorti 2004) and Simu-
lated Annealing Algorithm (Lahiri & Chakravorti 
2005) both coupled with a trained Artificial Neural 
Network and optimized asymmetric electric field 
intensity of complex GIS geometries. S. Banerjee, 
A. Lahiri and K. Bhattacharya (Banerjee, Lahiri, 
& Bhattacharya 2007) optimized support insula-
tors that are used in HV applications using SVM 
algorithm. Dot kernel was used to generalize the 
Support Vector Algorithm (SVA).
The objective of the present work is to optimize 
the electric field distribution on an axi-symmetric 
electrode-spacer configuration used in GIS. The 
contour of the electrode under consideration is a 
curved surface. Modeling the configuration and 
subsequently calculating the electric field is done 
by using COMSOL Multiphysics 4.3b Software.
2 MODEL DESCRIPTION
The electrode-insulator arrangement considered 
in the present work is shown in Figure 1. It is a 
GIS, a technology that has been developed to meet 
1 INTRODUCTION
A considerable effort has been given by differ-
ent researchers to optimize electrode-spacer con-
tours in order to minimize electric field intensity 
on and around the HV equipments. P. Grafoner 
and H. Singer (Grafoner & Singer 1975) studied 
on optimization of electrode and insulator con-
tours. H. Singer (Singer 1979) optimized electrode 
geometries. Both of these methods were based on 
classical approaches.
A computer based design of electrode and 
insulator profile was reported by H. Gronewald 
(Gronewald 1983) where a functional relationship 
was established between the electric field and the 
geometry of the dielectric boundary considering 
the mathematical expression of tangential field 
intensity. Algorithm for optimization of insulator 
contour was developed based on the given tan-
gential stress distribution over the surface of the 
insulator.
Stih (Stih 1986) did a study on design of HV 
insulators. The method was based on Integral 
Equation Method (IEM) where the surface charge 
density was approximated with bi-cubic spline 
function. For contour optimization circular arcs 
were considered for smooth approximation of the 
modified contours which thereby provided a rela-
tively simple geometrical description of the modi-

502
the requirement of this century. It is normally pre-
ferred for 12 kV, 36 kV, 72.5 kV, 145 kV, 245 kV, 
420 kV and above. In this arrangement, various 
apparatus like current transformers, voltage trans-
formers, load break switches, circuit breakers, bus 
bars, isolators, earthling switches etc. are housed in 
different metal enclosures and each of these mod-
ules is filled with a gas mixture of Nitrogen (N2) 
and Sulphur Hexafluoride (SF6). These enclosures 
are made of Aluminum or Stainless Steels which 
are non-magnetic materials and are earthed on 
both sides to provide protection to shock.
All the components within the enclosures are 
maintained at live potential, in this case it is a 
normalized voltage of 1V used for reference. The 
components within the enclosure are supported 
by insulators made of epoxy cast resin whose per-
mittivity is 5. For centering theconductors inside 
the enclosure, the insulators are placed at regular 
intervals of which some are designed as barriers 
between adjacent modules so as to prevent the flow 
of gas through them.
Gaseous insulation in GIS requires a bulk 
amount of gas. Though SF6 has good insulation 
capability, it is very expensive. Carbon Tetrafluo-
ride or Tetrafluoromethane (CH4) and Octafluor-
ocyclobutane (C4F8) have higher insulation 
capabilities than SF6 but owing to high toxicity 
and low withstand capability under partial dis-
charge, they are not generally not considered in 
GIS. Considering all aspects, a gas mixture con-
taining 80% N2 and 20% SF6, having permittivity 
of 1.005 is considered to be the most suitable gas-
eous dielectric for GIS (Christophorou & Burnt 
1995).
The electrode-spacer arrangement considered in 
this paper consists of four boundaries:
1. The first one is the boundary between the live 
electrode and the insulating gas mixture.
2. The second boundary is the boundary between 
the ground electrode and the insulating gas 
mixture.
3. The third one is between the epoxy resin spacer 
and the gas mixture above the spacer.
4. The fourth boundary is the one between the 
epoxy resin spacer and the gas mixture below 
the spacer.
At the first boundary, the curved portion of the 
live electrode on the convex side of the insulator 
consists of three elliptical segments having three 
different radius of curvature r1 = 0.1 m, r2 = 0.2 m 
and r3 = 0.05 m, while the curved portion of the 
live electrode on the concave side of the insulator 
comprises of four elliptical segments whose radii 
of curvature are denoted as r4, r5, r6 and r7 respec-
tively. In the present work, r1, r2 and r3 are kept 
constant at the values mentioned above while r4 to 
r7 are varied over a wide range to study the effect 
of electric field distribution on the live electrode 
boundary.
3 BASIC THEORY OF SVM
SVM, introduced by Vapnik (Christophorou & 
Burnt 1995), has two aspects viz., classification 
and regression.
3.1 Support vector classification
For classification, the goal is to classify the classes 
by introducing a function. If the training data 
are linearly separable then this function will be 
the optimal separating hyperplane. If a two class 
data is considered then this plane is the one that 
will maximize the Euclidian distance between the 
nearest data point of each class and itself. This 
linear boundary is expected to offer the best pos-
sible generalization in contrary to the other pos-
sible classifiers that can be defined for the given set 
of data. For a given class of data this plane is an 
unique one. For a linearly separable class of data 
the generalized optimal separating hyperplane can 
be determined by the vector ω (Vapnik 1995) that 
minimizes the function
Figure 1. Electrode-Spacer Arrangement.

503
Φ( )) 0 5
2


ω
 
(1)
subject to the constraints of the equation:
y
i
k
i
i
]
i
≥
, ,...
ρ]
xix
1 i
 
(2)
The parameters ω and ρ are constrained by:
min
i
|<
>
i
+
|=
ω,
>
xi
+
1 
(3)
But in most of the real time problems, the data 
classes are not linearly separable. In that case 
 equation (1) is modified as:
Φ(
)
ψ )
ω
λ
ψ
=
)
.
∑
λ
0 5.
2


ω
i
i
ψ  
(4)
and accordingly the constraint is modified as:
y
i
k
i
i
i
)
]
ρ
x )
]]
ψ
i )
xix )
≥
,i
, ,...
1
i
i
ψ i
−
,i
 
(5)
where, λ is a given constant and ψ i
ψ ≥0 are the mis-
classification errors.
The solution of the optimization problem given 
by equation (4) under the constraints given by 
equation (5) is given by the saddle point of the 
Lagrangian (Minoux 1986) as:
φ
φ
φ
φ
<
,
>−
=
=
∑∑
∑
y y
x
, j
x
i
k
j
k
j
i
φ y
j
i
<
l
k
lφ
0 5
1
1
=
j
1
 
(6)
subject to the constraints:
0
0
1
, ,....,
=
=∑
φ
λ
φ
iφ
j
k
j
j
φ
i
k
1 2
= ,1 ,....,
y
 
(7)
The solution is same as that obtained for the 
case when the data are linearly separable. The 
only difference is in modification of the Lagrang-
ian multipliers. The parameter λ strengthens the 
controlling ability of the classifier but it has to be 
defined first in such a way that λ should represent 
the noise present in the data.
But typically the data are linearly separable 
only in higher dimensional space. When the data 
are corrupted by noise then only with a finite 
number of training data it is not possible to clas-
sify the data without ambiguity. This leads to the 
adoption of the method of classifying the data 
considering the data set as linearly non-separable 
type putting an upper limit on the Lagrangian 
multipliers but that again leads to a problem of 
defining λ.
3.2 Kernel functions
As mentioned in the previous section, to ensure 
proper functioning of the machine, one of the 
methods to have linearly separable data is to map 
the data into higher dimensional feature space. 
But this mapping into higher dimensional space 
requires a large training set to make the vector 
machine an efficient classifier. This problem is 
obviated by using Kernel functions such that an 
inner product in feature space which is potentially 
higher dimensional has an equivalent kernel in the 
input space (Schölkopf, Burges, & Smola 1999).
A proper choice of kernel is now the only task 
to have a linearly separable data for proper func-
tioning of SVM as a classifier. Among the several 
kernels that are commonly used, only dot kernel 
and radial kernel are found to be suitable for the 
present set of data.
A dot kernel is defined as:
κ (
)
y
x y
=
)
•
 
(8)
i.e., it is the inner product of the input-output data 
set x and y respectively. A radial kernel is defined 
as:
κ (
)
y
e
y
=
)
−
|
γ | −
x
||2  
(9)
where γ is a parameter of the kernel which has to 
be tuned properly for proper mapping of the data.
3.3 Support vector regression
By introducing an alternative loss function, SVM 
can also be applied to regression problems (Smola 
1996). If a set of data given by
 = {(x1,y1), (x2,y2),..(xk,yk)}, x∈
n,y∈ 
(10)
is approximated using a linear function:
ϕ = <
>+
ω
ρ
,
>+
 
(11)
then the optimal regression function is given by the 
minimum of the function:
Φ(
)
)
ψ
ψ
ω
)
λ
ψ
(
||
||
(
+λ
+
+
∑
0 5
2
i
i
i
ψ
 
(12)
subject to the conditions:
((
)
)
ω
)
ε
ψ
)
−
≤+
+
ψ
)
)
−
i
i
ρ
y
)
ρ
)
)
)
i
ψ  
(13)
yi
i
i
≤+
−
((
)
)
+
ω
ρ
xix
•
)+
ε
ψ i
+
 
(14)
ψ i
i
ψ
ψ
ψ +
−
ψ
≥
ψ i
ψ −
ψ
0 
(15)

504
where, i
k
, ,.. , the parameter λ should have a 
pre-specified value and ψ
ψ
i
i
ψ
ψ
ψ +
−
ψ
ψ  are the two slack 
variables that defines the upper and the lower con-
straints on the outputs of the systems. For any 
error smaller than ε then ψ
ψ
i
i
ψ
ψ
ψ +
−
ψ
ψ  need not to be 
introduced in the objective function represented by 
equation (12).
SV Regression (SVR) faces the same problem as 
that of a SV Classifier (SVC) for a non-separable 
data. Similar to the SVC approach, a non-linear 
mapping may be applied to map the data in a 
higher dimension feature space to perform linear 
regression but the kernel trick again is a solution 
to a non-linear SVR problem.
4 TRAINING AND TESTING OF THE SVM
The input-output data for training the SVM is 
obtained by varying the radii of the elliptical seg-
ments of the curved portion i.e. r4 to r7 and noting 
down the maximum resultant electric stress, Erma
r
x, 
on the live electrode boundary. The radii are varied 
by adjusting the span of the segments while main-
taining the smooth profile of the electrode bound-
ary. The radii are varied by considering any one at 
a time, any two at a time, any three at a time and 
all four at a time.
The input data set i.e. the different combination 
of radii, are normalized according to the following 
equations:
x
x
x
x
x
i norm
i
m
x in
max
m
x in
,
=
 
(16)
where,
xi, norm is the normalized value of the ith input 
variable.
xmax is the maximum value of the input variable.
xmin is the minimum value of the input variable.
Similarly, the output data set i.e. the correspond-
ing maximum resultant stress on the live electrode 
boundary, is normalized according to the follow-
ing equation:
y
y
y
y
y
j norm
j
m
y in
max
m
y in
,
=
 
(17)
where,
yj,norm is the normalized value of the jth output 
variable.
ymax is the maximum value of the output 
variable.
ymin is the minimum value of the output 
variable.
During training, total number of input-output 
data considered is 100. The accuracy of the train-
ing is measured in terms of Root Mean Squared 
Error (RMSE). For the purpose of testing, only six 
data set have been considered and the accuracy of 
testing is measured in terms of % mean absolute 
error (% MAE). A representative training data set 
is shown in Table 1. The data set for testing is pre-
sented in Table 2.
Table 1. Representative training data set.
Variation of radius
r4
r5
r6
r7
Ermax
r4 (+%2.5)
1.6
2.0
10.0
2.4
11.4
r4 (−%2.5)
0.9
2.0
10.0
2.4
11.4
r5 (+%5.0)
1.3
3.5
10.0
2.4
10.0
r5 (−%5.0)
1.3
0.5
10.0
2.4
13.3
r6 (+%7.5)
1.3
2.0
17.5
2.4
4.9
r6 (−%7.5)
1.3
2.0
2.5
2.4
18.0
r7 (+%4.0)
1.3
2.0
10.0
3.3
11.8
r7 (−%4.0)
1.3
2.0
10.0
1.6
12.2
r4 & r5 (+%2.5)
1.6
2.7
10.0
2.4
10.1
r4 & r5 (−%2.5)
1.6
1.2
10.0
2.4
12.4
r4 & r6 (+%2.5)
1.6
2.0
12.5
2.4
8.9
r4 & r6 (−%2.5)
0.9
2.0
7.5
2.4
13.9
r4 & r7 (+%6.0)
2.1
2.0
10.0
3.3
11.5
r4 & r7 (−%7.5)
0.5
2.0
10.0
0.8
11.8
r5 & r6 (+%5.0)
1.3
3.5
15.0
2.4
6.8
r5 & r6 (−%5.0)
1.3
0.5
5.0
2.4
18.7
r5 & r7 (+%7.5)
1.3
4.2
10.0
4.0
9.5
r5 & r7 (−%2.5)
1.2
4.2
10.0
1.9
12.7
r6 & r7 (+%2.5)
1.3
2.0
12.5
3.0
9.0
r6 & r7 (−%2.5)
1.3
2.0
7.5
1.9
14.6
r4, r5 & r6 (+%5.0)
1.9
3.5
15.0
2.4
5.8
r4, r5 & r6 (−%5.0)
0.7
0.5
5.0
2.4
17.5
r4, r5 & r7 (+%10.0)
2.5
5.0
10.0
4.0
8.6
r4, r5 & r7 (−%5.0)
0.7
0.5
10.0
1.6
14.0
r4, r6 & r7 (+%7.5)
2.2
2.0
17.5
3.9
5.5
r4, r6 & r7 (−%7.5)
0.5
2.0
2.5
1.2
19.2
r5, r6 & r7 (+%5.0)
1.3
3.5
15.0
3.5
4.8
r5, r6 & r7 (−%5.0)
1.3
0.5
5.0
1.5
17.8
r4, r5, r6 & r7 (+%7.5)
2.2
4.2
17.5
3.9
2.0
r4, r5, r6 & r7 (−%5.0)
0.7
0.5
5.0
1.5
17.3
Table 2. Data set for testing.
r4
r5
r6
r7
Ermax
(Calculated)
2.1
2.0
10.0
2.4
12.4
1.3
4.2
10.0
2.4
9.5
1.6
2.0
10.0
3.3
11.7
1.3
2.0
15.0
3.5
7.5
0.7
2.0
5.0
1.5
16.5
1.3
1.2
7.5
1.9
15.5

505
The parameter λ that appears in the objective 
function of the optimization problem of SVC or 
SVR is to be chosen by the user to assign penalties 
to the errors. A high value of the parameter implies 
that more penalty is assigned to the errors and thus 
the SVM, which is meant to minimize the error, 
is considered to have lower generalization capabil-
ity. In contrary to this, if a low value is assigned 
to λ then less penalty is assigned to the errors so 
in turn SVM is trained to minimize the margin 
while allowing the error will and thus will have bet-
ter generalization capability. Thus, it can be said 
that a judicious choice of the kernel and a proper 
selection of the parameter λ will finally define the 
sensitivity of the performance of the SVM.
5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In the present work, both dot kernel and radial ker-
nel are used. To optimize the performance of the 
SVM, the parameter λ is optimized in each case. 
With dot kernel, λ is varied over a wide range from 
1 to 100 and the corresponding % MAE are noted. 
Table 3 presents the % MAE for each value of λ. 
From Table 3 it may be observed that for λ equal 
to 35, the value of % MAE is the least and is equal 
to 0.721275. Since it is observed that the value of % 
MAE remains constant at 0.726271 from λ equal 
to 69 and onwards hence it is not been reported in 
Table 3 after λ equal to 75.
With radial kernel, two parameters are tuned 
to obtain the least value of % MAE viz., λ and γ. 
In this study, γ is varied over a wide range and for 
each value of γ, the parameter λ is varied from 1 
to 100. The optimum combination of these two 
parameters will be the one for which % MAE will 
be least. Table 4 presents that value of λ which 
gives the minimum value of % MAE for a given 
value of γ and also presents the corresponding 
minimum value of the % MAE. From Table 4 it 
may be observed that with radial kernel, the opti-
mum combination is achieved with γ and λ equals 
to 0.002 and 50 respectively corresponding to 
which % MAE is equal to 0.762827. From Table 3 
and Table 4, it may be concluded that for the given 
problem, though both the kernels, dot and radial, 
are almost equally efficient in training the SVM 
but dot kernel has an edge on the error as com-
pared to radial kernel.
6 CONCLUSIONS
SVM is generalized with four critical dimensions 
of the GIS arrangement considered in the present 
work. This generalized architecture of SVM is 
achieved with dot kernel and radial kernel. The 
%MAE with which the accuracy of testing SVM is 
measured is 0.05% more when radial kernel is used 
instead of dot kernel. Both Artificial Neural Net-
work (ANN) and SVM need problem specific gen-
eralization but with SVM the task is easy as SVM 
has got very less tunable parameters compared to 
ANN. %MAE with which the degree of accuracy is 
Table 3. Sensitivity analysis using dot Kernel.
λ
%MAE
λ
%MAE
λ
%MAE
1
0.745534
26
0.722162
51
0.722328
2
0.734834
27
0.722325
52
0.721865
3
0.745994
28
0.721935
53
0.721917
4
0.744845
29
0.721999
54
0.722437
5
0.727155
30
0.722161
55
0.721966
6
0.746034
31
0.721959
56
0.721819
7
0.722024
32
0.721959
57
0.721278
8
0.722163
33
0.721942
58
0.725979
9
0.721967
34
0.722514
59
0.721955
10
0.722173
35
0.721275 
60
0.727013
11
0.721960
36
0.725982
61
0.722441
12
0.721915
37
0.722241
62
0.722299
13
0.721973
38
0.722427
63
0.721960
14
0.727524
39
0.721904
64
0.722170
15
0.727643
40
0.721975
65
0.721779
16
0.727100
41
0.721817
66
0.721964
17
0.721729
42
0.722242
67
0.722160
18
0.721779
43
0.721837
68
0.721975
19
0.721975
44
0.722163
69
0.726271
20
0.721962
45
0.722436
70
0.726271
21
0.722058
46
0.722105
71
0.726271
22
0.721780
47
0.721961
72
0.726271
23
0.726478
48
0.721898
73
0.726271
24
0.722148
49
0.722437
74
0.726271
25
0.721865
50
0.722335
75
0.726271
Table 4. Sensitivity analysis using radial Kernel.
γ
λ
%MAE
γ
λ
%MAE
0.001
47
0.817983
0.040
14
1.354354
0.002
50
0.762827 
0.050
17
1.349619
0.003
50
0.782900
0.060
15
1.319088
0.004
19
0.805337
0.070
17
1.226336
0.005
50
0.803303
0.080
14
1.311884
0.006
48
0.788243
0.090
11
1.401832
0.007
40
0.803662
0.1
16
1.477675
0.008
50
0.816138
0.2
5
1.989675
0.009
42
0.819160
0.3
4
2.366003
0.010
19
1.283168
0.4
4
2.707852
0.020
13
1.344594
0.5
3
3.035025
0.030
22
1.380147
0.6
3
3.303871

506
measured reflects the potency of SVM in optimiz-
ing electric field intensity of HV arrangements.
REFERENCES
Banerjee, S., A. Lahiri, & K. Bhattacharya (2007). Opti-
mization of support insulators used in hv systems 
using support vector machine. IEEE Transactions on 
Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 19(2).
Christophorou, G. & R.J. Burnt (1995). SF6/N2 mixtures, 
basic and hv insulation properties. IEEE Transactions 
on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 2(5).
Grafoner, P. & H. Singer (1975). Optimization of elec-
trode and insulator contours. Conference report, 2nd 
International Symp. on HV Engg., Zurich.
Gronewald, H. (1983). Computer aided design of hv 
insulators. Conference Report 11.01, 4th International 
Symp. on HV Engg., Athens.
Lahiri, A. & S. Chakravorti (2004). Electrode-spacer 
contour optimization by ann aided genetic algorithm. 
IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insu-
lation 11(6).
Lahiri, A. & S. Chakravorti (2005). A novel approach 
based on simulated annealing coupled to artificial 
neural network for 3d electric field optimization. 
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 20(3).
Minoux, M. (1986). Mathematical Programming: 
Theory and Algorithms. New York: John Wiley and 
Sons.
Schölkopf, B., C.J.C. Burges, & A.J. Smola (1999). 
Advances in Kernel Methods—Support Vector Learn-
ing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Singer, H. (1979). Computation of optimized electrode 
geometries. Conference Report 11.06, 3rd Interna-
tional Symp. On HV Engg., Milan.
Smola, A.J. (1996). Regression estimation with support 
vector learning machines. Technical report, Tech-
nische Universität München, München, Germany.
Stih, Z. (1986). High voltage insulating system design by 
application of electrode and insulator contour opti-
mization. IEEE Transactions on Electrical Insulation 
21, 579–584.
Vapnik, V. (1995). The Statistical Learning Theory. New 
York: Springer.

507
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Study of electrical and thermal stress distribution using boron nitride 
with Silicon Rubber in HV cable termination
Mayur Basu, Vishwanath Gupta & Abhijit Lahiri
Department of Electrical Engineering, Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, West Bengal, India
Arijit Baral
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India
ABSTRACT: Due to high electrical and thermal stresses in High-Voltage (HV) cable terminations, 
breakdown of insulation has become a common fault nowadays. This can be avoided by using high per-
mittivity and good thermal conductive material at the stress cone. To ensure the reliability of the stress 
cone, the use of Silicon Rubber (SIR) and polymer nanocomposites as the stress control material has 
gained a lot of attention in recent time. In this proposed work, different volumes of nano-sized boron 
nitride-reinforced SIR composites were used as the stress control material. The use of these nanocompos-
ite materials showed a substantial amount of reduction in electrical as well as thermal stress in the cable 
termination compared with pure SIR, which is practically significant for any HV equipment.
1 INTRODUCTION
The majority of the High-Voltage (HV) cable line 
failures in underground distribution systems are 
caused by the defects in cable joints or cable ter-
minations as it is the weakest link in it. The break-
down of cable terminations mostly occurs due to 
the strong electric field in the cable insulation, close 
to the cable screen end. Excessive electrical stress 
on cable terminations can cause local discharge, 
flashover, or puncture, and may further lead to the 
system failure (Wei et al. 2005). Recent research has 
experimentally shown that the thermal failure of 
the stress grading layer due to the high-frequency 
components of the applied voltage waveform has 
become very common (Ming et al. 2004).
Several approaches such as application of geo-
metrical potential shaping, non-linear resistive field 
grading coatings, refractive field grading coatings, 
and capacitive coatings have been used (Revenc & 
Lebey 1999, Nikolajevic et al. 1997). Commonly, it 
is controlled by the deflector’s cones (conventional 
stress relief cones), which are the geometric solu-
tion to the problem.
An ideal stress cone must possess high thermal 
conductivity, low coefficient of thermal expansion, 
high dielectric constant, and low loss tangent (Tan-
aka et al. 2004). Thus, elastomeric polymers, such as 
Silicon Rubber (SIR), reinforced with highly ther-
mally conductive but electrically insulating nanofill-
ers, such as Aluminum nitride, Boron Nitride (BN), 
silicon carbide, and alumina (Al2O3), can be useful 
materials for HV insulation applications.
To improve the thermal conductivity of SIR, the 
study of electrical and thermal properties of Al2O3- 
and ZnO-reinforced SIR that can be used for HV 
applications has also been carried out (Sim et al. 
2005).
A high aspect ratio of barium titanate fiber and 
graphene platelet mixed into a polymer matrix to 
improve the dielectric constant of the polymer 
composite has also been presented in another study 
(Wang et al. 2012).
The aim of the proposed work was to study the 
effect of reinforcing BN fillers with silicon elas-
tomers (Kemaloglu et al. 2010) used as the stress 
cone material in the cable termination when com-
pared with conventional SIR.
2 MODEL DESCRIPTION
The model of the cable termination considered in 
the proposed work is shown in Figure 1. It is an 
axis-symmetric model consisting of a copper con-
ductor, XLPE insulation, a SIR stress cone, and 
a semiconductor screen. The whole arrangement 
is immersed in silicon oil. Normally, the material 
used in the stress cone is SIR. Relative permittivity 
and thermal conductivity of XLPE, silicon oil, and 
SIR are detailed in Table 1. The potential of the 
conductor is considered to be 1 V, which is the nor-
malized potential used as the reference, and that of 
the semiconductor screen is zero.
The major dimensions of the arrangement 
are shown in Figure 1. The entire system is 

508
 simulated by using COMSOL Multiphysics ver-
sion 4.3b software.
3 DIFFERENT NANOCOMPOSITES USED
Silicon elastomers with considerable high aspect 
ratio nanofillers have gained attention as the stress 
cone material in the cable termination due to their 
high permittivity and low dielectric loss (Wang 
et al. 2012). Specific heat and thermal conductivity 
are also another criterion for improvement, which 
are determined using different nanofiller loadings 
of SIR to reduce the thermal stress.
In the present work, BN powder named MK-
hBNN70 (Kemaloglu et al. 2010) reinforced with 
SIR was used as the stress control material to study 
the electrical and thermal stress distribution at the 
surface from L to M of the stress cone as well as 
along the line AB of the cable termination. MK-
hBNN70 is irregularly shaped, nano-sized par-
tially aggregated particles of BN with an average 
particle size of 70 nm (Kemaloglu et al. 2010). The 
permittivity and thermal conductivity at different 
loading levels by weight are given in Table 2.
4 EFFECT OF NANOCOMPOSITE 
MATERIALS ON ELECTRIC FIELD 
AND TEMPERATURE DISTRIBUTION 
ALONG THE SURFACE OF THE STRESS 
CONE AT POWER FREQUENCY
The variation in electrical and thermal stresses 
along the surface of the stress cone on the 
 dielectric–dielectric boundary between the stress 
cone and silicon oil from L to M for different mate-
rials, listed in Table 2, is shown in Figures 2 and 3, 
along with SIR to find out the effect of reinforcing 
BN nanofillers in the stress cone.
In the proposed work, the temperature is con-
sidered as the measure of the thermal stress. The 
more the temperature is, the more the thermal 
stress generated.
From Figures 2 and 3, it can be observed that 
as the loading of the nanofillers is increased, the 
percentage reduction of electrical as well as ther-
mal stress is decreased. The material 40% MK-
hBNN70+SIR showed the maximum reduction in 
both electrical and thermal stresses.
5 EFFECT OF NANOCOMPOSITE 
MATERIALS ON ELECTRIC FIELD 
AND THERMAL STRESS 
DISTRIBUTION ALONG THE RADIAL 
DIRECTION FROM A TO B OF THE 
STRESS CONE AT POWER FREQUENCY
Comparison of electrical resultant stress and ther-
mal stress at the maximum point along the sur-
face from M to N of the stress cone with different 
stress cone materials has been given in Table 3. 
Figure 1. Typical cable termination model.
Table 1. Electrical and thermal properties of the mate-
rials used in the cable termination model.
Material
Permittivity (εr)
Thermal conductivity 
[W/(m.k)]
XLPE
2.3
0.38
Silicon oil
2.7
0.1
SIR
3.3
0.2
Table 2. Electrical and thermal properties of nano-sized 
BN-reinforced SIR composites (Kemaloglu et al 2010).
Material
Permittivity (εr)
Thermal 
conductivity 
[W/(m.k)]
10% MK-hBNN70+SIR 3.46
0.45
20% MK-hBNN70+SIR 3.55
0.63
40% MK-hBNN70+SIR 3.69
0.86

509
The  variation in electrical and thermal stresses 
along the radial direction from A to B of the stress 
cone along with SIR is shown in Figures 4 and 5. 
The comparison of the resultant electrical stress 
and thermal stress at the maximum point along the 
radial direction from A to B of the stress cone with 
different stress cone materials is given in Table 4. 
From Table 4, it can be observed that a subsequent 
amount of change in the percentage reduction of 
electrical and thermal stresses occurs by increasing 
the loading level of BN fillers at the very end of the 
cable screen where both the electrical and thermal 
stresses are expected to be highest.
Figure 2. Resultant stress distribution along the stress 
cone surface for different materials.
Table 3. Comparison of electrical resultant stress and 
thermal stress at the maximum point along the surface 
from M to N of the stress cone with different stress cone 
materials.
Material
Resultant 
stress, Er
(V/m/V) at 
maximum 
point
Reduction 
(%)
Thermal 
stress, T 
(degree 
Celsius) at 
maximum 
point
Reduction 
(%)
SIR
0.421094
–
511.9639
–
10% MK-
hBNN70+SIR
0.419235
0.45
511.9624
0.01
20% MK-
hBNN70+SIR
0.41845
0.63
511.9446
0.01
40% MK-
hBNN70+SIR
0.417563
0.84
511.9072
0.03
Figure 3. Thermal stress distribution along the stress 
cone surface for different materials.
Figure 4. Resultant stress distribution in the radial 
direction between A to B within the stress cone material 
for different materials.
Figure 5. Thermal stress distribution in the radial direc-
tion between A to B within the stress cone material for 
different materials.

510
Table 4. Comparison of electrical resultant stress and 
thermal stress at the maximum point along the radial 
direction from A to B of the stress cone with different 
stress cone materials.
Material
Resultant 
stress, Er
(V/m/V) at 
maximum 
point
Reduction 
(%)
Thermal 
stress, T 
(degree 
Celsius) at 
maximum 
point
Reduction 
(%)
SIR
0.929174
–
12021.57
–
10% MK-
hBNN70+SIR
0.915188
1.54
5594.404
53.47
20% MK-
hBNN70+SIR
0.907567
2.33
4125.234
65.69
40% MK-
hBNN70+SIR
0.896047
3.57
3142.871
73.86
Again, the material 40% MK-hBNN70+SIR 
with the highest loading level showed a maximum 
reduction of 3.57% of electrical stress and 73.86% 
of thermal stress distribution at their correspond-
ing maximum point.
6 CONCLUSIONS
An electro-thermal model using nano-sized BN-
reinforced SIR as the stress cone material was 
proposed in this paper. For obtaining the electrical 
and thermal stress distribution on and around the 
stress cone, corresponding differential equations 
were solved using proper boundary conditions. 
The convection and radiation heat transfer mecha-
nisms were applied to the model. A substantial 
amount of reduction in electrical as well as thermal 
stress was found in the BN-reinforced SIR com-
pared with pure SIR.
REFERENCES
Wei H.J., Jayaram S. & Cherney E.A. (2005), “A study 
of electrical stress grading of composite bushings by 
means of a resistive silicone rubber coating”, Journal 
of Electrostatics 63.
Ming L., Sahlen F., Halen S., Brosig G., & Palmqvist 
L. (2004), “Impacts of High-frequency Voltage on 
Cable-termination with Resistive Stress grading”, 
International Conference on Solid Dielectric, Toulouse, 
France.
Revenc J. P. & Lebey T. (1999), “An overview of electri-
cal properties for stress grading optimization”, IEEE 
Trans.Dielec. & Elec. Insul., Vol. 6, pp 309–318.
Nikolajevic S.V., Pekaric-Nadj N.M. & Dimitrijevic R.M. 
(1997), “Optimization of cable terminations”, IEEE 
Trans. Power Deliv. pp. 527–532.
Tanaka T., Montanari G.C. & Mulhaupt (2004), “Poly-
mer nano-composites as dielectrics and electrical 
insulation-perspectives for processing technologies, 
material characterizations and future applications”, 
IEEE Electr. Insul.Mag., Vol. 11, No.5, pp. 863–784.
Sim L.C., Ramanan S.L., Ismail H. & Seetharamu K.N. 
(2005), “Thermal characterization of Al2O3 and ZnO 
reinforced silicone rubber as thermal pads for heat dis-
sipation purposes”, Thermochimica Acta 430.
Wang Z., Nelson J., Miao J., Linhardt R., Schadler L., 
Hillborg H. & Zhao S. (2012), “Effect of high aspect 
ratio filler on dielectric properties of polymer compos-
ites: A study on barium titanate fibers and grapheme 
platelets”, IEEE Trans. Dielec. & Elec. Insul., Vol. 19, 
No.3, pp. 960–967.
Kemaloglu S., Ozkoc G., Aytac A. (2010), “Properties 
of thermally conductive micro and nano size boron 
nitride reinforced silicon rubber composites”, Ther-
mochimica Acta 499, pp. 40–47.

511
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A hybrid compartmental epidemic model for predicting 
the Ebola outbreak
Suman Roy & Soham Basu Chaudhury
Department of Electrical Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India
ABSTRACT: The deadliest epidemic of the Ebola virus disease is currently ongoing in some of the coun-
tries of Africa. The most affected countries are Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. Using mathematical mod-
els (e.g., SIR, SIRS, SEIR), it is possible to simulate this ongoing outbreak. All the data used in this study 
were from Liberia. The main purpose of this model was to detect the epidemic at an early stage in future and 
predict the possible outbreak in an area. In doing so, two main parameters were considered, namely β and μ. 
β is the daily contact rate, i.e., the average number of adequate contacts per infective per day. μ is the daily 
death removal rate. R is the ratio of β and μ, and expressed as the basic reproductive number.
2 VARIOUS MODELS ON EBOLA 
OUTBREAK IN LIBERIA IN 2014
2.1 SIR model
The population of a specific area or country taken 
into consideration is classified into three disjoint 
classes as follows:
1. Class of Susceptible (S): this class consists of 
those individuals who are not yet infected by 
the disease, but can develop the disease and 
become infected at any time. Such an individual 
is known as susceptible.
2. Class of Infective (I): this class consists of those 
individuals who have been infected by the dis-
ease and can transmit the disease to others. 
Such an individual is known as infective.
3. Class of Removal (R): this class consists of 
those individuals who have had the disease and 
are removed from the population. The individ-
ual can be dead or might have recovered from 
the disease.
These three classes will form the total popula-
tion N. It is assumed that the size of each class is 
a continuous variable depending on time (Astacio 
et al. 1996).
So,
N = S (t) + I(t) + R(t)
We assume that as N is very large, N is consid-
ered to be constant throughout the time, i.e., the 
assumption is that births and natural deaths occur 
at an equal rate.
1 INTRODUCTION
Over the last half of the century, Ebola has struck 
the human population and victimized the lives 
of countless people. Over the last 50 years, the 
advent of epidemic Ebola has shown a consider-
able increase in its virulence and thus claiming 
more lives with each strike. Thus, Ebola forecast-
ing has become critically important. Equipped 
with the knowledge of its movement and growth 
parameters, prior planning and prior preparation 
to combat this lethal disease can be taken. With a 
successive increase in the virulence of Ebola, cor-
respondingly, the incubation period of the disease 
has drastically decreased over the years and hence 
medical science needs to progress at an equal or 
greater velocity to combat this lethal disease.
Thus, for the manufacture of proper drugs and 
to combat Ebola, the knowledge of certain param-
eters, such as growth rate, disease-related death 
rate, and population class ratio, and other physi-
cal parameters becomes crucially important. The 
knowledge about whether Ebola will propagate in 
a certain region or will die out with time will ensure 
the best and proper use of human resources/medi-
cal/engineering resources.
In this paper, we compare various epidemic 
models and try to generate a hybrid model com-
bining the various epidemic related compartmen-
tal models with the ulterior aim of generating a 
mathematical model, which will help us predict the 
growth and future advances of Ebola, and will give 
us a rough idea of the total lives it might claim in 
the future and hence help us to be prepared to fend 
off its virulence.

512
Two parameters are used in this model, namely β 
and μ. Individuals are removed from the class “Infec-
tive” due to death at a rate proportional to the size 
of class having proportionality constant μ, which is 
called the daily death removal rate. 1/μ is the average 
time for an individual from the infection to death. For 
the parameter β, it is assumed that the population is 
homogeneously mixing, which is known as the daily 
contact ratio. The number of people getting infected 
due to direct contact with an infected individual at a 
time interval (t,t+Δt) is (βSIΔt/N) (Hethcote 1976):
dS/dt = −βSI/N dI/dt = βSI/N −μI dR/dt = μI
2.2 SIR model with the natural birth rate 
and the death rate
With the increasing complexity of the epi-
demic, more parameters are gradually taken into 
account.
Normally, until now, the SIR model has taken 
simply the natural birth rate and the natural death 
rate into account for changing the compartmental 
class population along with other epidemic param-
eters. However, now we assign a “disease-related 
death rate ‘d’,” which causes the reduction in the 
infected class of the population:
dS/dt = bN−βSI/N−wS −dI/dt = βSI/N−(μ + w + d)I
dR/dt = μI−wR (natural birth rate b and death 
rate w)
2.3 SIRS model
The SIRS model considers the fact that within the 
recovered/removed class of the population, a cer-
tain part of the population can get cured from the 
disease and return to the class of the susceptible 
population, due to the lack of immunity against 
the disease. Thus, the cycle goes something like 
this: S→ I→ R→S 
Thus, we conceive our first hybrid model, in 
which we try to combine the characteristics of 
this SIRS model along with the traits of the model 
developed so far in this paper.
So, the new model will take into account the fol-
lowing parameters: specific birth rate b and natural 
death rate w, effective recovery rate f, and disease 
induced death rate d. (O’Regan 2010)
dS/dt=bN− βSI/N−wS + fR
dI/dt= βSI/N−(μ+w+d)I dR/dt=μI−wR−fR
2.4 SEIR model
In this new model, an incubation period is taken 
into account, during which the virus (when 
infects an individual) cultivates within the indi-
vidual’s bloodstream and takes a certain time to 
do so. After the completion of this process, the 
individual becomes a part of the infected class. 
It roughly takes about 4–10 days for incubation, 
and thus the incubation constant = 1/(incubation 
period). Since Ebola is a virulent epidemic, we 
take the lowest case into account and a = 0.25.
With the explanation of this model, we now 
move on to our next hybridization model in HII, 
in which we combine the features of HI with the 
features of the SEIR model, so that the model now 
takes account of the following parameters:
natural birth rate (b), natural death rate (w), 
disease-related death rate (d), recovery rate (f), 
incubation constant (a) along with four different 
classes S, E, I, and R.
dS/dt = bN− βSI/N−wS + fR dE/dt = βSI/
N−wE-aE dI/dt = aE−( μ + w + d)I dR/
dt = μI−wR−fR (Hethcote 2008).
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1 Solution of the differential equations
For the SIR model, dI/dt = βSI/N−μI.
For small t, S≈N. So, dI/dt≈I−μI.
Solving this, we obtain the following equation: 
I(t) = I(0) exp(t(β−μ)).
Here, for the sake of simplicity and as t is very 
small, I(0) = 1(assumed) (Pundir 2010).
Now, it has been already stated that is the aver-
age time taken by an individual from being infected 
to be dead. So, it can be written as
I(t) ⊥ R(t + 1/μ)
I(t) = k R(t + 1/μ)
exp {t(β−μ)} = k R(t + 1/μ)
where k is a constant and defined as follows:
k = 1/(the fraction of total infected individuals 
who will die)
Here, calculating from the data, k = 0.64 [6].
Again,
t(β−μ) = ln(1/0.64) + ln{R(t + 1/μ)}
So, the data of the total number of dead indi-
viduals at the time t is linearly (taking natural log) 
fit with the curve.
For t being very small, there is only one data 
available (after 9 days, total number of dead peo-
ple = 2) and fitting with this data, we get
β−μ = 0.12

513
Now, the average time taken for an infected indi-
vidual to die varies from 4 to 10 days. So, it can 
take values from 0.1 to 0.25.
Until now, 8331 people have been infected and 
3538 people have died in the Ebola outbreak.
So, the lowest possible value for N(0) will be 
8000. In this model, the differential equations have 
been solved using three different values of N(0): 
8000, 10000, and 12000.
3.2 Simulation of the SIR model
This is the simplest model used here and many real-
life factors have not been considered just to make 
it simple. So, it is quite possible that in the actual 
case, the epidemic dynamic may be somewhat dif-
ferent from this model, which has been shown 
below. Results are illustrated in Figures 1 and 2.
As shown in Figure 3, in the solution of I(t) 
from differential equations, the initial time has been 
taken as t = 150 days. From t = 0 to t = 150 days, 
the epidemic was still in its early stage, this is a 
well-guessed alteration to make the values obtained 
from the model more fit with the actual data.
3.3 Simulation of the hybrid compartmental 
SEIRS model
This is our finalized model, in which we com-
bine the parameters and traits of all the vari-
ous compartmental models and plot it against 
the real-time data. Here, the plot is made with 
three pairs of (β, μ) values to test the variation 
of the model with reference to these parameters. 
N(0) = 9000, S(0) = 8200, E(0) = 8, I(0) = 1, R(0) = 0 
remains constant for all the three plots.
Interestingly, the basic parameters of the model, 
i.e., (β, μ) have different values over different values 
over different periods of time, and this complicates 
the model even further. After due consideration 
of the deviations and timelines, the time period 
of 300 days is roughly divided into three unequal 
parts and hence three different pairs of value of (β, 
μ) are used in each of these periods with minute 
variations in the values of other parameters in the 
order of 10(−3) or 10(−4).
Some of the worked out cases are given as follows 
and the results are shown in the Figures 4–9.
SET-1
300 days is roughly divided into three periods 
as follows:
Figure 1. Plotting of S, I, and R. For N(0) = 8000, 
S(0) = 7990, I(0) = 10, β = 0.22, μ = 0.1.
Figure 2. Comparison between the real and mod-
eled data of I. For N(0) = 10000, S(0) = 9990, I(0) = 10, 
β = 0.22, μ = 0.1.
Figure 3. Comparison between the real and modeled 
data of R when N(0) = 8000, S(0) = 7990, I(0) = 10, 
β = 0.14, μ = 0.11.

514
Figure 4. Variation of the class E with time plotted 
against real-time data.
Figure 5. Variation of the classes E and I with time 
plotted against real-time data.
Figure 6. Variation of the class R with time plotted 
against real-time data.
Figure 7. Variation of the class E with time plotted 
against real-time data.
Figure 8. Variation of the classes E and I with time 
plotted against real-time data.
Figure 9. Variation of the class R with time plotted 
against real-time data.
[0,200] – [200,250] – [250,300]
The values of (β, μ) used in these periods are as 
follows:
[0.27,0.15] – [0.33,0.11] – [0.35,0.13]
The results are given below.
SET-2
300 days is roughly divided into three periods:
[0,170] – [170,230] – [230,300]
The values of (β, μ) used in these periods are as 
follows:
[0.27,0.15] – [0.32,0.11] – [0.39,0.18]
The results are given below.

515
3.4 Effect of the natural recovery rate on the 
outbreak of the disease
Thus, we see that with a variation in the value of 
the parameters, the curves thus obtained are much 
closer to the original value after some constant 
variation.
The value of ‘f’ or the recovery rate is of criti-
cal importance as this is responsible for drastic 
changes in the trajectory or propagation of the dis-
ease as an epidemic. Thus, by adjusting the value 
of ‘f’ to a proper value, the course of the epidemic 
can be adjusted to curb the effect on the victims.
First, changes in the value of ‘f’ can change the 
course of the disease. Unlike the other parame-
ters, this parameter is dependent on our choice. 
Second, the natural recovery rate can be increased 
by artificial vaccination and proper medication 
and treatment offered to the victims of the epi-
demic. This will artificially increase the recovery 
rate f, which will quickly drive the class popula-
tion to a lower maximum value and quicker satu-
ration. Third, one of the most noted features of 
this model is that the basic parameters of the 
model, i.e., (β, μ) have different values over dif-
ferent values over different periods of time, and 
this complicates the model even further. These 
values are assumed based on the real-time data 
of the previous outbreak of the disease. Finally, 
with this model, we can be certain that exactly 
how much the recovery rate should be in order 
to quickly eradicate Ebola even before it becomes 
an epidemic. From the above figures, it can be 
observed that with the increase in the value of 
the parameter f, the removed class population 
has a lower maximum value and thus a quicker 
saturation and lower chances of becoming an epi-
demic. From the above-mentioned calculations, it 
amounts to the fact that approximately 11 out of 
1000 people recovered only to become suscepti-
ble again. Thus, increasing this value will cause 
a large proportion of people to recover, and with 
inoculation, these people will gain permanent 
immunity or at least temporary immunity against 
the disease, and can thus stop Ebola from becom-
ing a deadly epidemic.
REFERENCES
Astacio Jamie, Bierce Delmer, Guillen Milton, Martinez 
Josue, Rodriguez Francisco, ValenZuela-Campos Noe 
(1996), “Mathematical models to study the outbreak 
of Ebola”.
Hethcote, H.W. (1976), “Qualitative analyses of commu-
nicable disease models”, Mathematical Biosciences.
O’Regan Suzanne M., Kelly Thomas C., Korobeinikov 
Andrei, O’Callaghan Michael J.A., Pokrovskii Alexei 
V. (2010), “Lyapunov functions for SIR and SIRS epi-
demic models” Elsevier
Hethcote H.W., Herbert W. (2008), “Epidemiology Mod-
els with Variable Population Size”, Lecture notes 
series, Institute for Mathematical Sciences National 
University of Singapore
Pundir Sudhir K., Pundir Rimple (2010), Bio-Mathemat-
ics, 2nd ed., Pragati Prakashan, pp. 195–234
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ebola_virus_epidemic_ 
in_West_Africa
Amin Nikakhtar, Simon M.Hsiang. “Incorporating 
the dynamics of epidemics in simulation models of 
healthcare systems”,Elsevier.
P.K.Das, S.S.De, “A susceptible-infected removal(SIR) 
epidemic model”, Indian J pure applied Math.
If the calculation is based on the SET-2 of data, 
we have three different values of f in motion, which 
are as follows:
f1 = 0.009, f2 = 0.015, f3 = 0.0085
f avg = (f1 + f2 + f3)/3 = 0.01083.
This is the rate of recovery. This amounts to 
the fact that approximately 11 out of 1000 people 
recovered only to become susceptible again.
4 CONCLUSION
Thus, throughout this paper, a hybrid model has 
been developed, and it is evident through this 
endeavor that the spread of the epidemic Ebola 
is entirely dependent on the physical parameters 
that govern the progress of the disease. There-
fore, whether the disease will become an epidemic/
endemic all depends on the physical parameters 
such as β, μ, f, and d. If changes occur in these 
parameters, the entire build-up of the disease is 
disturbed.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

517
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Lighting design technique of the sports arena
A. Khanra & T. Halder
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, West Bengal, India
B. Das
Government College of Engineering and Textile Technology, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Sports lighting is a multi—objective tasks and needs to satisfy the user (e.g., players, spec-
tators and referees) requirements, so that their abilities and skills can be justified properly. The lighting 
ambience can also enhance the spectator’s participation. So, the best suitable lighting design is important 
to enhance the quality of high-resolution pictures. To provide the best lighting design solution, a list of 
lighting design software is available. For this case study, the lighting design software ‘DIALux’ is used. 
Flood lighting is a type of lighting system where the V-H or B-β coordinate system is used. Lighting of 
sports area is important for providing satisfaction to the players, spectators, and color television viewers. 
Lighting and lighting arrangement affects the game played, so that the design should be according to the 
required parameters of particular sports.
dependent on the speed and the direction of the 
movement relative to the direction of view.
1.4 Class of play
Class of play depends on which type of game is 
being played, such as practice, warm up, national, 
and international game with live coverage.
2 USER OPTICAL REQUIREMENT
Players must be able to clearly see the playing field. 
Spectators must be able to watch clearly the per-
formance of the players. Players and spectators 
must be able to see their respective surroundings 
as well as their immediate neighbors’ perform-
ance. Lastly, for television or film coverage, light-
ing should provide necessary conditions to provide 
good slow motion-based high-resolution pictures, 
shooting without the production of glare.
3 SPORTS LIGHTING DESIGN 
PARAMETERS
The lighting criteria for sports area should be such 
that it can meet the user requirements. For satis-
faction, there are some parameters that will have 
to be taken into consideration. The parameters are 
as follows:
1 BASIC DEPENDENT FACTORS
The lighting design of the floodlighting area 
depends on the factors detailed below.
1.1 Type of field
The type of area in which the sports is played is very 
important. Depending on the shape of the working 
field, the lighting design technique will be differ-
ent. The other important consideration regarding 
a sports area, as far as lighting is concerned, is its 
dimensions, whether or not it is covered (indoor 
based or outdoor based), the spectator facilities, 
and reflectance of boundary surfaces (e.g., ground, 
walls, and ceiling). The dimension of the sports 
arena affects the quality requirements of lighting 
and also the position of luminaires.
1.2 Type of object
The type of playing object required for the game 
is a major influence on the quantity of optical 
requirement. This is dependent on the physical size 
of the object (e.g., cricket, football, tennis) and the 
viewing distance of both players and spectators.
1.3 Speed of the object
The quantity of lighting required also depends on 
the apparent speed of the playing object. This is 

518
 i. Illuminance (horizontal, vertical, and inclined),
ii. Luminance,
iii. Uniformity on various working planes,
iv. Gradient for horizontal surface,
 v. Modeling effect,
  vi. Glare restriction,
 vii. Color properties of the lamp, and
viii. Lamp and luminaire selection.
Simulation results are presented in Figures 1 – 9 
and Table 1.
Figure 1. Wide beam luminaire Cartesian diagram.
Figure 2. Narrow beam luminaire Cartesian diagram.
Figure 3. Recommended and designed illuminance 
comparison at the right-hand side of the field.
Figure 4. Recommended and designed illuminance 
comparison at the left-hand side of the field.
Figure 5. Recommended and designed illuminance 
comparison in front of the goal post.
Figure 6. Recommended and designed illuminance 
comparison from goal post 1 to 2.
4 COMPARISON BETWEE THE 
RECOMMENDED AND DESIGNED 
ILLUMINANCE VALUES OF 
DIFFERENT CALCULATION SURFACES

519
Table 1. Lighting level for football as per FIFA: for televised events.
Class
Calculation toward
Vertical illuminance
Horizontal illuminance
Ev Cam Avg.
Uniformity
Eh Avg
Uniformity
Lux
U1 (Min/Max)
U2 (Min/Avg)
Lux
U1
U2
International
Slow motion camera
800
0.5
0.7
1500 to 3000
0.6
0.6
Fixed camera
400
0.5
0.7
Class V
Mobile camera 
(at pitch level)
1000
0.3
0.7
Figure 7. Glare evaluation of UGR data of the narrow 
beam luminaire.
Figure 8. Ray track view of the stadium.
Figure 9. 3D simulation view.

520
5 CALCULATION OF TOTAL LIGHTING 
LOAD AND LIGHTING POWER 
DENSITY
5.1 Lighting load
Power consumed by the lighting system that is used 
to design the football stadium is called the lighting 
load, which is expressed in watt or kilo watt.
5.2 Type of luminaire: Philips HNF 012
The number of luminaires of 2 kW(narrow beam) 
is given by
140*4 = 560
The total wattage of 2 kW (narrow beam) lumi-
naire is given by
140*4*2 kW = 1120 kW
5.3 Type of luminaire: Philips MVF-403 CAT-A7
The number of luminaires of 1 kW (wide beam) 
is given by
16*2+15*2 = 32+30 = 62
The total wattage of 1 kW (wide beam) lumi-
naire is given by
62*1 kW = 62 kW
The total electrical load of the stadium for light-
ing is given as follows:
design: = (1120+62)kW = 1182 kW
5.4 Lighting power density
Lighting power density is defined as the lighting 
power consumed per unit of area.
It technically represents the load of any light-
ing equipment in any defined area, or the watts per 
square meter of the lighting equipment.
6 CONCLUSION
For designing the sports lighting area, all the ener-
gy-efficient lighting design step parameters are 
taken into account. The types of lamp and lumi-
naire are selected depending on selection param-
eters. For sports lighting, color is one important 
criterion. The lamp is selected depending on the 
high values of CCT and CRI. For luminaire selec-
tion, better optical and distribution characteristics 
of the luminaire are used depending on the require-
ment. For finding the layout of the luminaire, 
DIALux 4.11 software is used. Here, the projec-
tion of the luminaire is an important parameter. 
This is also incorporated in this design. For find-
ing the best possible lighting design solution, sev-
eral designs are implemented and lighting design 
parameters are found. Sports lighting is one of the 
critical working areas where the lighting design is 
implemented. This design is performed following 
the National Lighting Code 2010 criteria. The rec-
ommended illuminance level is 1500 lux, but the 
achieved lux level is 2381 lux due to the speed of 
the game, the presence of electronic media, and the 
size of the object.
It is worth mentioning that that the average 
maintained illuminance level is not only the light-
ing design parameter for the design of indoor 
and outdoor lighting systems, but also uniform-
ity of illuminance, glare parameters and color are 
important lighting design parameters. All of these 
lighting design parameters are considered when 
designing the sports arena, but are not reported 
here due to the scarcity of space.
REFERENCES
Ashim Datta, Prof. (Dr) Biswanath Roy, 2009. “Sports 
lighting - Fundamentals & Lighting Design concepts” 
“DIALux 4.7 lighting design software manual.” “Rec-
ommended Practice for Sport Lighting” IESNA:RP-
6-01.
Bhaumik, S. “2009. Indian Society of Lighting Engineers. 
Newsletter publication”; Vol. IX No.I: 21–26.
2005. “CIE 16x:Technical Report, Practical Design 
Guidelines for the lighting of sport event for television 
and filming.
2005. “Commission Internationale del’ Eclairage, Practice 
design guidelines for lighting up of sports events for col-
our television and filming”, CIE169.
2007.”British Standard, Light & Lighting –SportsLight-
ing”, BS EN 12193.
2009. “The Society of Light and Lighting.Sports Light-
ing”, SSL LG04.
2012. “Artificial-sports-lighting-design-guide”.

521
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Numerical experiment on a modified PLL with the Euler method. 
Part-1: Locking boundary and stability
S. Roy, S. Ghosh & S. De
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
S. Guha Mallick
ISM, Dhanbad, India
B.N. Biswas
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: This paper re-examines the use of the Euler methods (forward and backward) in designing 
a numerical experiment on a modified phase-locked loop. This paper gives some interesting new results, 
which have not yet been reported.
In this paper, we study the locking characteris-
tics of the modified PLL, as shown in Figure 1.
2 MATHEMATICAL APPROACH
Taking the transmission delay into account, the 
system equation can be written as follows:
d
dt
K
t
d
dt
Kp
d
dt
φ
φ
τ
t
ψ
φ
τ
t
φ
τ
=
−
+
τ
−Kp
t
Ω
sin (
φ
)
τ
cos (
φ
)
[
d
dt
τ
(
)
φ
τ
φ
τ
t
]  
(1)
where
Ω =  open loop frequency error between the two 
oscillations;
φ =  phase difference between the local oscillator 
and the external signal;
K = open loop gain;
τ = transmission delay;
θ = angle modulation; and
Kp = phase modulation constant
2.1 Forward euler algorithm
φ
φ
φ
φ
( )
φ
(
)
sin (
φ
)
cos (
φ
)
φ
)
(
φ
tK
k
k
cos (
φ
K
k
(
p
φ(
φ
−
−
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
1
1
1
K
k
(
φ
+
−
K
k
cos (
φ
K
Δ
 
(2)
Before attempting to arrive at the solution, let 
us check the numerical stability. Let us assume that 
the loop parameters are such that they generate an 
unstable solution. That is, from (2), the successive 
1 INTRODUCTION
The origin of the phase-locking technique goes 
back to the times of Huygens who observed the 
phenomenon of synchronization of two pendulums 
hung on a thin wooden plank. The present form of 
phase locking was observed by H. de Bollesuze in 
1932 through an automatic phase control circuit, 
presently known as a Phase-Locked Loop (PLL).
Unlike the basic PLL structure, incorporating 
a phase detector, a low-pass filter, and a voltage-
controlled oscillator, the present-day PLL incorpo-
rates a narrowband bandpass filter for noise. Thus, 
it introduces a transmission delay τ. The configu-
ration is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Block diagram of the PLL with adaptive gain 
and modulation.

522
values of φ can be written as φ
φ
φ
φ
( )
φ
, (
φ
), ( )
φ
, (
φ
)
2
1
2
φ
), (
φ
), ( )
φ
, (
φ
… . 
We can write
φ
φ
φ
φ
( )
φ
( )
sin (
φ )
cos (
φ( )
φ
)
(
φ
1
1
1
cos (
φ
−
)
φ(
φ
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
K t
p
Δ
 
(3)
φ
φ
φ
φ
( )
φ
( )
sin (
φ
)
cos (
φ( )
φ
)
(
φ
2
1
2
cos (
φ
−
)
φ(
φ
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
K t
p
Δ
 
(4)
By adding, we find
K t
p
p
Δ
sin ( )
( )
sin ( )
cos( )
φ(
φ(
1
1
1
K
(
2
1
2
K p
K cos(
0
+
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥=
Therefore, substituting φ
φ
( )
φ
( )
φ
)
(
φ
 in one of 
the above equations, we obtain
2
1
1
1
φ
φ
φ
( )1
sin (
φ )
cos (
φ )
=
K t
p
Δ
2
1
1
1
1
K t
p
Δ = sin ( )
( )1
.
s ( )
φ
φ
φ
1
p
( )
(1
cos
 
(5)
The maximum value of the right-hand side will 
determine the minimum value of K t
Δ  for instabil-
ity and vice versa for stability. That is,
2
1
1
2
2
2
K t
p
Δ >
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
max si
.
s ( )
φ2
φ
φ
1
2
p cos
or
K t
Kp
p
Kp
Δ <
t
+
Kp
2 00
0
+
492
7 66
8
Kp −
793
2
3
Kp
8 793
.
.
00
0
+
.
.
p
66
8
Kp
Variation of the stability zone with variation of 
the phase modulation constant Kp (forward algo-
rithm) is shown in Figure 2.
2.2 Stability analysis
φ
φ
φ
φ
R
R
φ
φ
φ
s
s
φ
φ
φ
−
=
φR
φ
1
s
φs
φ = in (
)
θ
−
We substitute
φ
φ
φ
φ
R
s
φ
R
φ
s
R
φ
x
x
φ
φ
φ
s
φ
+
φ
+
φs
φ
xR+
s
φ
R
xR
+
φs
φ
and
.
where xR+1 is much smaller than φR
φ
+1.
Then,
x
x
K t
x
K
K
x
x
t K
R
R
x
s
s
R
p
s
p
s
R
R
−
xR
x
⋅
s
+
+ K
⋅
= x
⋅
−
1
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
sin
i
φ
φ
s
s
+
s
s +
θ
φ
K
s
p
s
s
K
s
p
K
in
θ
θ
θ ⋅
θ
=
−
⋅
1
1
1
+
1
1
1
+
2
2
2
(
)
θ
(
)
θ
(
)
θ
(
Δ
⋅
+
2)
θ
θ
Δ
x
−
1
( θ
x
x
t
−Δ K
x
R
p
p
(
)
θ
( θ
R
R
R
p
−Δθ
θ
Δ
+
)
θ 2
x
⋅
θ
Δ
⋅
p
R
θ x
θ
Δ
3 BACKWARD EULER ALGORITHM
Numerical results are presented in Figures 3–7.
φ
φ
φ
φ
θ
φ
(
)
φ
( )
si
(
φ
)
sin (
φ
)
cos (
φ
)
φ
)
(
φ
t
K
k
sin
(
φ
tK
k
K
k
cos (
φ
p
K
−
−
+
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
1
Δ
Δ
⎢⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
+
−
+
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
1
1
K
k
tK
k
K
k
p
K
p
K
cos
(
⎢
⎢
⎢
)
sin ( )
cos ( )
φ
φ
θ
+
k
( )
φ
Δ
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
⎥
In the case of stability, it can be easily shown that
Figure 2. Variation of the stability zone with variation of 
the phase modulation constant Kp (forward algorithm).
Figure 3. Variation of the stability zone with variation of 
the phase modulation constant Kp (backward algorithm).

523
1
1
1
2
2
2
K t
p
Δ =
⋅
si
s ( )
φ2
φ
φ
1
2
p cos
Therefore, for stability,
1
1
1
2
2
2
K t
p
Δ
⋅
2
>
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
a
si
s ( )
φ2
φ
φ
1
2
p cos
 
(6)
K t
Kp
Kp
Kp
Δ <
t
−
−
Kp
+
1
1 0
0 368
2 069
2 652
2
3
Kp
+ 2 652
.
.
0
0
.
.
Kp +
069
2
3.1 Stability of the backward euler method
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
x
x
K t
Δ
x
t
Δ K
K
x
Δ
k
k
s
k
x
p
s
K
k
+ =
−
Δx
Δx
[
]
s
k
+ K
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
1
1
si
sin
(
φs
θ
Δ
]
Δ
s
k
Δx
+
s
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
+
+
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
1
1
K
x
+
⎢
K t
x
+
K
p
s
⎣
⎢
⎢⎣
⎢
k
s
k
p
s
K
k
sin(
)
(
)
s
φ
θ
+
s
k
+
x )
s
Δ
Δ
−
x
K
k
+
)
Δ
⎥⎦
⎥
4 CONCLUSION
The forward Euler algorithm gives a larger lock-
ing boundary, but it takes a longer time to set-
tle down from any perturbation. On the other 
hand, the backward Euler algorithm generates 
a smaller locking boundary, but it settles down 
very quickly from any perturbation. The effect of 
phase modulation produces a strong effect on the 
forward Euler algorithm, whereas it can run into 
numerical instability in the backward Euler algo-
rithm. However, the effect of delay has not been 
considered in this paper, thereby leaving scope for 
further study.
Figure 4. Phase detector output response without the 
phase modulation constant (forward algorithm).
Figure 5. Phase detector output response with the 
phase modulation constant of 0.8 (forward algorithm).
Figure 6. Phase detector output response without the 
phase modulation constant (backward algorithm).
Figure 7. Phase detector output response with the phase 
modulation constant of 0.8 (backward algorithm).

524
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to Mr B. GuhaMallick, 
Chairman, SKFGI Management for providing all 
the assistance for carrying out this work at the Sir 
J C Bose Creativity Centre of SKFGI. They are 
also thankful to Mr Somnath Chatterjee, Head of 
Kanailal Vidyamandir (French section), Chandan-
nagar, Hooghly.
REFERENCES
Biswas, B.N., Chatterjee, S., Mukherjee, S.P.,& Pal, S., 
(2013) “A Discussion On Euler Method: A Review” 
Electronic Journal Of Mathematical Analysis And 
Applications, Vol. 1(2) July 2013, pp. 294–317.
Biswas, B.N. (1988), Phase Lock Theories And Applica-
tion. Oxford & Ibh, New Delhi.
Gardner, Phase Lock Techniques, Third Edition (2005), 
Wiley.

525
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Numerical experiment on a modified PLL with the Euler method. 
Part-2: Demodulation criteria
S. De, S. Roy, S. Ghosh & B.N. Biswas
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: This paper re-examines the demodulation aspects of a modified Phase-Locked 
Demodulator (PLD). This paper also takes into account the transmission delay in a commonly used PLD. 
It also checks the merits and demerits of the modified PLD.
1 INTRODUCTION
Although phase-locked demodulators (PLDs) 
are commonly used, the problem lies in the signal 
handling capacity. In order to increase the signal 
handling capacity, a new modified PLD (MPLD) 
is proposed, which is depicted in Figure 1. One of 
the main uses of the PLD is the signal from a mov-
ing vehicle.
In this paper, we study the demodulation crite-
ria of a delayed PLL and suggest a method for the 
elimination of this detection error using an adap-
tive phase control.
Numerically calculated results are presented in 
Figures 3–10.
Figure 1. Block diagram of a Phase-Locked Loop 
(PLL) with a phase modulator and transmission delay.
Figure 2. Transient response to the frequency step.
2 ANALYSIS
The system equation governing the delayed PLL 
system can be expressed as follows (Biswas 1988, 
Gardner 2005):
d
dt
K
t
Kp
d
dt
φ
φ
τ
t
ωt
φ
τ
t
φ
τ
=
−Kp
t
τ
t
Ω
K
−
τ
si φ(
)
c
⋅
Δ
+
τ
os
cos (
φ
)
[
d
dt
τ
(
)
φ
τ
φ
τ
t
]
Ω =  open loop frequency error between two 
oscillations;
φ =  phase difference between the local oscillator 
and the external signal;
K =  open loop gain;
Kp =  phase modulation constant;
τ = transmission delay; and
ω = frequency of the modulating signal.

526
BEAT FREQUENCY
The study of frequency is necessary because it 
clearly gives an insight into the locking phenom-
enon in a PLL.
Figure 3. Frequency domain representation of beat 
variation (with no delay).
Figure 4. Frequency domain representation of beat 
variation (with delay Kp = 0).
Figure 5. Demodulated signal spectrum of an FM sig-
nal with and without the phase control.
Figure 6. Effect of large delay on the output.
BEAT FREQUENCY WITH DELAY

527
EFFECT OF Kp ON DEMODULATION
Figure 7. Modulation characteristics.
Figure 8. Beat frequency dependence on phase control 
with no delay.
The above figure depicts the effect of Kp on the 
demodulation characteristics of the MPLD. The 
smaller value of the output with Kp simply indi-
cates better tracking capability.
The above two figures show that the phase con-
trol has almost no effect on the beat frequency of 
the loop when there is no delay.
Figure 9. Effect of delay on beat frequency, showing the 
effect on the beat frequency of the loop for large delay.
Figure 10. Effect of large delay on the spectrum when 
there is no frequency error (instability).

528
3 CONCLUSION
In the transient response (Figure 2), the delay indi-
cates an under-damped response that is oscillatory, 
leading to a longer settling time; however, control-
ling the delay can improve the rise time of the sys-
tem. The over-damped response is observed in the 
presence of the phase modulator, making the sys-
tem slow and sluggish. The signal handling capa-
bility of the system increases in the presence of the 
phase modulator. However, a large value of Kp 
leads to a new phenomenon called the chaotic phe-
nomenon. This is again observed when the delay 
is large. This phenomenon has not been reported 
earlier, and the details of this phenomenon have 
been left for further study.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to Mr B. GuhaMallick, 
Chairman, SKFGI Management for providing all 
the assistance for carrying out this work at the Sir 
J. C. Bose Creativity Centre of SKFGI. They are 
also thankful to Dr Somnath Chatterjee, Head of 
Kanailal Vidyamandir (French section), Chandan-
nagar, Hooghly.
REFERENCES
Biswas, B.N., Chatterjee, S., Mukherjee, S.P., & Pal, S., 
(2013) “A Discussion On Euler Method: A Review” 
Electronic Journal Of Mathematical Analysis And 
Applications, Vol. 1(2) July 2013, pp. 294–317.
Biswas, B.N. (1988), Phase Lock Theories And Applica-
tion. Oxford & Ibh, New Delhi.
Gardner, Phase Lock Techniques, Third Edition (2005), 
Wiley.

529
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Design of band pass filter at 13.325 GHz
Souma Guha Mallick & Sushrut Das
Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad, Jharkhand, India
S. Bhanja
SAMEER, Kolkata, India
Tarun Kumar Dey
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, Mankundu, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: A band pass filter having centre frequency 13.32 GHz is to be designed for use in the 
exciter in a communication system related to an air borne radar. Previously a design was available with 
PCB of type RO TMM10 provided by the Rogers Corpsubstrate. In this paper RT/DUROID 5880 has 
been used as the substrate. Further improvements have been obtained using ALUMINA in place of 
RT/DUROID as the substrate so that it could be integrated with the other components. The design shows 
results with less error.
cially in frequency regions, which have the potential 
to interfere the information signals. In designing 
the bandpass filter, we face the questions, what is 
the maximal loss inside the pass region, and the 
minimal attenuation in the reject/stop regions, and 
how the filter characteristics must look like in tran-
sition regions (Matthaei, Young & Jones 1980).
There are several strategies taken in realization 
of the filters, for example, the choice of waveguide 
technology for different applications. The effort to 
fabricate waveguide filters prevents its application 
in huge amounts. As an alternative, microstrip fil-
ter based on Printed Circuit Board (PCB) offers 
the advantages easyand cheap in mass production 
with the disadvantages higher insertion losses and 
wider transition region (Pozar). Based on (Alayd-
rus 2010) the authors tried to give a way to con-
ceive, design and fabricate bandpass filter for the 
exciter of an air borne radar application at Ku- 
Band with parallel-coupled microstrips.
2 DESIGN OF BAND PASS FILTER
A parallel coupled band pass filter has been 
designed to work in Ku- Band. The centre fre-
quency selected was 13.32 GHz having a stop band 
attenuation of 50 dB at 1 GHz offset. The order of 
the filter calculated was 3 by using the following 
equation [3].
1 INTRODUCTION
The advances of telecommunication technology 
arising hand in hand with the market demands and 
governmental regulations have given a push to the 
invention and development of new applications in 
wireless communication. These new applications 
offer certain features in telecommunication serv-
ices that in turn offer three important items to the 
customers. The first is the coverage, meaning each 
customer must be supported with a minimal signal 
level of electromagnetic waves, the second is capac-
ity that means the customer must have sufficient 
data rate for uploading and downloading of data, 
and the last is the Quality of Services (QoS) which 
guarantee the quality of the transmission of data 
from the transmitter to the receiver with no error. In 
order to provide additional transmission capacity, a 
strategy would be to open certain frequency regions 
for new applications or systems. WiMAX (World 
Wide Interoperability Microwave Access) which is 
believed as a key application for solving many actual 
problems today is an example (Pozar 2012).
In realization of systems like air borne radar a 
bandpass filter is an important component found 
in the transmitter orreceiver or in any of its sub-
systems like the exciter. Bandpass filter is a passive 
component which is able to select signals inside a 
specific bandwidth at a certain center frequency 
and reject signals in another frequency region, espe-

530
n
s
≥
(
)
LAs
L −
=
log
log
.
2
2 1. 6
Ω
 
(1)
where n is the order of the filter, Ωs is the centre 
frequency in GHz and LAs is the stop band attenu-
ation in dB.
A prototype of low pass filter with Butterworth 
response of order 3 having element values g0 = 1, 
g1 = 1, g2 = 2, g3 = 1, g4 = 1,has been initially selected 
inconsultation with the standard formula and 
Table (Hong & Lancaster 2001).
Then the characteristic impedances of the 
J-inverters has been selected from the standard 
formula (Hong & Lancaster 2001) and hence the 
electrical parameters for even mode and odd mode 
have been found out and tabulated (Table 1).
The electrical parameters have been used to 
obtain the physical parameters through the LIN-
CALC tool from the Agilent ADS software. The 
results have been shown in Table 2 for ROGERS 
RT/DUROID 5880 and Table 3 for ALUMINA.
Automatic Design System (ADS), a CAD based 
software, from AGILENT TECHNOLOGIES has 
been used to carry out the simulation study which 
will be shown next.
3 RESULTS
The results obtained on optimization with the 
band pass filter, shown in Figure 1, are as under:
A comparison study between simulated value 
obtained in Figure 1 and desired values are given in 
Table 4.
This design has some disadvantages stated below:
• Fabrication is difficult and unrealizable
• The passband has ripples even though Butter-
worth’s technique has been incorporated
• The results obtained are not suitable for achiev-
ing the goal.
Hence modification had to be done.
So Alumina has been selected as the substrate 
(
)
εrε =
. On using Alumina, performance of the 
filter has been improved. Once the Ripple has been 
reduced the fabrication becomes a reality.
Table 1. Electrical parameters of the Band Pass Filter.
i
gi
Ji,i+1
(Z0E)i,i+1 
in ohms
(Z0O)i,i+1 
in ohms
0
1
0.00686683
73.0612445
38.7270945
1
1
2
2
0.001667123
54.51522
46.179605
3
1
0.001667123
54.51522
46.179605
4
1
0.00686683
73.0612445
38.7270945
Table 2. Physical parameters of the Band Pass Filter 
with Rogers Rt/Duroid substrate.
Z0E 
in ohms
Z0O 
in ohms
Width
(mm)
Space 
(mm)
Length
(mm)
73.0612445 38.7270945 0.589124
0.042817 4.194660
54.51522
46.179605
0.764661
0.395741 4.112580
54.51522
46.179605
0.764661
0.395741 4.112580
73.0612445 38.7270945 0.589124
0.042817 4.194660
Table 3. Physical parameters of the Band Pass Filter 
with Alumina Substrate.
Z0E 
in ohms
Z0O 
in ohms
Width
(mm)
Space 
(mm)
Length
(mm)
73.0612445 38.7270945
0.180634 0.092660 2.275130
54.51522
46.179605
0.239742 0.417861 2.210500
54.51522
46.179605
0.239742 0.417861 2.210500
73.0612445 38.7270945
0.180634 0.092660 2.275130
Figure 1. Simulated results for BPF having Rogers Rt/
Duroid 5880 as substrate.
Table 4. Comparison study between simulated value 
obtained in Figure 1 and desired values.
Desired 
values
Simulated 
values
% Bandwidth
7%
6%
Stop band attenuation
>30 db
25.505 Db
Insertion loss
<1 db
2.659 Db
Return loss
>15 db
4.401(S11),
4.401 db(S22)

531
A comparison study between simulated value 
obtained in Figure 2 and desired values are given 
in Table 5.
Thus simulated results show that this design 
with alumina as the substrate may generate the 
desired results.
4 REMEDY AGAINST COUPLING
Even after these results there was scope for fur-
ther improvement. Screws can be used for fitting 
this BPF to the total system but this may create 
problem due to unwanted coupling. Hence results 
may show some errors. So some distance has to 
be maintained in between the structure and the 
screws. There may be some reception of unwanted 
electromagnetic waves and pulses which may affect 
the result. To eliminate this, grounding has been 
incorporated as shown in figure. The initial and 
final structures have been shown in Figure 3 and 
Figure 4 respectively.
Figure 2. Simulation results for BPF having Alumina 
as substrate.
Table 5. Comparison between the values obtained on 
simulation as shown in Figure 2 and desired values.
Desired 
values
Simulated 
values
% Bandwidth
7%
6.45%
Stop band attenuation
>30 dB
30.385 dB
Insertion loss
<1 dB
0.036 dB
Return loss
>15 dB
32.124 dB(S11),
32.414 dB(S22)
Figure 3. Layout of BPF using alumina as substrate.
Figure 4. Layout for reduction of unwanted additional 
coupling in the BPF using alumina as substrate.
Figure 5. Results on simulation for the design imple-
menting technique to reduce unwanted additional cou-
pling in the BPF.

532
In both the cases, optimization by trial and 
error method has been adopted. These two Alu-
mina BAND PASS FILTERS are compared in 
Table 6.
The final result, though deviates from the pre-
vious ideal results, suits our requirements. Such 
design is practically realizable.
5 CONCLUSIONS
 i.  The designed BPF is to be fitted on the system 
structure of the transceiver mentioned above.
 ii.  Such procedure may be applied to different 
miniaturized structures.
iii.  To develop/design a planar subsystem with 
structures of different substrates such proce-
dures may be applied during integration of the 
structures.
 iv.  Theoretical results are satisfactory.
 v. The actual performance with the practical 
fittings in the open air test site has not yet been 
tested. The results may show some deviation from 
the theoretical data. Hence once again some opti-
mization should be incorporated.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I sincerely thank Sameer—Kolkata Centre for 
providing the necessary infrastructure to carry 
out this study. Thanks to Indian School of Mines, 
Dhanbad for allowing me to undergo this study.
REFERENCES
Alaydrus M. (2010), “Designing Microstrip Bandpass 
Filter at 3.2 GHz”, International Journal on Electrical 
Engineering and Informatics - Volume 2, Number 2.
Hong J.S. & Lancaster M.J. (2001), “Microstrip Filters 
for RF/Microwave Applications”, Wiley, New York.
Matthaei G., Young L. & Jones E.M.T. (1980) “Micro-
wave Filters, Impedance-matching Networks, and 
Coupling Structures”, Artech House, Norwood, MA.
Pozar D.M. (2012), “Microwave Engineering”, John 
Wiley & Sons Inc., Fourth Edition.
Table 6. Comparison between the values obtained on 
simulation as shown in Figure 2 and Figure 5.
Results without 
taking steps to 
control unwanted 
coupling
Results with taking 
steps to control 
unwanted coupling
% Bandwidth
6.45%
6.15%
Stop band 
attenuation
30.385 Db
30.611 Db
Insertion loss
0.036 Db
0.064 Db
Return loss
32.124 db(S11),
32.414 db(S22)
25.065 db(S11),
25.039 db(S22)

533
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Bose Einstein Condensation in lithium tantalate ferroelectrics
Arindam Biswas
Department of Electronics and Communication, NSHM Knowledge Campus, Durgapur, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: Lithium tantalate is technologically one of the most important ferroelectric materials with 
a low poling field that has several applications in the field of photonics and memory switching devices. In 
a Hamiltonian system, such as dipolar system, the polarization behavior of such ferroelectrics can be well-
modeled by Klein–Gordon (K-G) equation. For small oscillations, the modal dynamicsis characterized as 
bound states, revealed via Associated Legendre polynomial. Bose Einstein condensation exclusively takes 
place around bosonicparticles having different wave functions within the bound states. This paper tried to 
explore BEC in the realm of bound state for better understanding of switching phenomenon of devices.
2002). An excellent work was done by Kivshar 
et al on solitons in nonlinear optics (Kivshar 
et al. 1998);the dynamical generation and control 
of both bright and dark solitons in matter-wave 
BEC in optical lattices wereextensively studied 
by several authors (Kivshar et al. 1998). In this 
context, a review on dark solitons in atomic BEC 
by Frantzeskakis and Kevrekedis et al also needs 
a mention.In atomic optics, the formation of 
coherent molecular BEC was explained in one-
dimension by mean field theories of parametric 
nonlinearities that convert two solutions to one 
(and vice-versa) for non-integrable equations 
(Werner et al. 1996); molecular BEC was invoked 
for a new type of reaction between molecules 
(multispecies) to engineer condensates of heav-
ier molecules where macroscopic occupation of 
single molecular quantum state gives rise to the 
coherent bosonic stimulation (Werner et al. 1996)
BEC was also reported on 105 Li2 molecules in 
an optical trap with spin mixture of fermionic Li 
atoms by measuring a collective excitation mode 
(Jochim et al. 2003). This gives us further motiva-
tion to explore BEC in the realm of bound state 
that might help towards better understanding of 
switching phenomenon in a vast area of devices 
including many nano devices. Now, let us look at 
the potential and the bound states.
2 THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT
Let us consider an idealized one-dimensional array 
of N identical rectangular domains along the x 
direction. Between the neighboring domains, there 
is domain wall and nearest neighbor coupling 
(K) is considered. For the mode dynamics of the 
extended modes and modes that are localized, non-
linear K-G equation relating P against space (x) 
1 INTRODUCTION
The most outstanding experimental discovery in 
recent times is Bose-Einstein Condensation (BEC) 
in 1995 (Ketterle et al. 2002). Theoretically, BEC 
is already claimed for Lithium Niobate type fer-
roelectrics (Biswas et al. 2015). This discovery has 
triggered both theoretical and experimental works 
on this fascinating topic of research.The reasons for 
these vigorous activities are: a) it gives an opportu-
nity to open a new window for a macroscopic view 
of quantum mechanics, and b) it makes such studies 
most lucrative in the field of matter-wave relations. 
On the latter issue, experiments show unusual excita-
tions within the wave that is known as solitons. The 
unusual properties of such quasi-particles, i.e. both 
bright and dark solitons (henceforth called bosonic 
particles or simply particles), in a condensate would 
allow us to manipulate them in periodic or other 
potential. There is some evidence for the formation 
of both dark and bright solitions in the condensate, 
but the concept of bound state still remains some-
what illusive, despite a lot of activities on nonlinear 
optical systems that are important for many devices. 
This gives us motivation to study bound state with a 
connection to BEC. Further, we find out both lower 
and upper bounds in relation to frequency and the 
extent of condensation in the bound state. Although 
we use data on lithium tantalate ferroelectrics for 
general theoretical study, it can also be extended to 
other relevant systems, e.g. in magnon system with 
two-well Landau potential (Biswas et al. 2015). This 
effort is made through Klein-Gordon (K-G) equa-
tion which on perturbation gives rise to Nonlinear 
Schrodinger Equation (NLSE) that is a variant of 
Gross-Pitaevskii Equation (GPE), which is popular 
and commonly used for studying BEC.
There are excellent reviews on BEC in the vast 
ocean of literature, notably Ref (Ketterle et al. 

534
and time (t) with a non-dimensional driving field 
(E0) is (Kivshar et al. 1998):
∂
∂
−
∂
∂
−
−
=
2
2
2
2
1
2
3
0
0
P
t
K
P
x
P
P
+
2
E0
α1
2
+
2
+
 
(1)
K-G equation is a well-known equation of mathe-
matical physics that exhibits a variety of interesting 
properties with applications in different physical 
systems (Dauxois et al. 2006). K-G equation is 
useful for both dark and bright discrete breathers 
that throw light on quantum localization (Dauxois 
et al. 2006). e to the localization, the length scale 
of excitation assumes more significance that obvi-
ously drives us to the nano domain, whose impor-
tance in the field of solid state physics cannot be 
denied. Next, let us go for the solutions: In the 
continuum limit, let P be the solution of Eq. (1) 
that is replaced by P
P x
f
t
= P(x
(x
( ,
x ). Here, P(x) 
and f(x,t) are the functions of x and (x,t) respec-
tively. From physics point of view this combination 
describes a periodic kink which, a priori, can expe-
rience the presence of phonons about its center of 
mass regardless of its dynamical property. Thus, 
the resulting eigen value equation will be governed 
by a linearized problem. Let us write the space 
dependent equation:
−
∂
∂
−
+
=
K
P
x
P
P
_
( )
x
( )
( )
x
2
2
1
2
( )
3
0
α
α
+
2
+
1 ( )
x
 
(2)
After some mathematical steps, our Klein-Gor-
don equation can be expressed in term of wave 
function ψ [2].
(
)
(
)
2
)
1
0
2
2
2
2
2
∂
∂
∂
∂
(
+
−
−
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
=
z
z
z
n(
m
z
ψ
ψ
2 ∂
z
ψ
 (4)
where, m
X
2
1
2
1
2X
2
X /
(
1
/
(
4
/
)
1
ω2
2
(
1
4
1
−
1 . The solu-
tion of Eq. (3) is: ψ = pm
2 ( )
z . In the bound state, 
ω is denoted as ωb and wave function ψ as ψb. If 
0
2
1
ω
α
2
1
b
ω
, then ‘m’ is real and ALP is only 
valid if n = 2. The existence of different states is 
considered in the bound state in this limited range 
of frequency or energy. Here, all our solutions are 
‘real’ and ‘stable’ in terms of interplay between the 
mode index and the frequency. The ‘lower bound’ 
of the non-degenerate state is at ωb = 0 for which 
the wave function (ψb) with translation symmetry 
gives rise to Goldstone Mode (GM) for m = 2:
ψ b
ψ
P
h qx
=
=
P2
P2
2
h
3
( )
z
sec
 
(4)
To note that bright solitons predominate. This 
wave function for bosonic particles is not shown 
here, as it simply shows a typical Gaussian band. 
The wave functions for other symmetries of GM 
were not worked out to remain within our main 
focus onthe bound state and BEC formation. As 
the frequency increases to: ωb
ω >
(
)
α /2
)
α /
1
α
, the sys-
tem starts showing polarization within a band of 
m = ±1, whose wave functions are:
ψ b
ψ
P
qx
hqx
=
=
P2
P1
3
( )
z
tanh
.sec
 
(5)
ψ b
ψ
P
q
hqx
=
=
P
−
2
P 1
6
( )
z
( /
1
)tanh
.
qx sec
 
(6)
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To note that both dark and bright solitons exist, 
and a pairing or coupling has started in the system. 
A small number of particles become polarized in 
opposite directions with the above value of eigen 
frequency. Wave functions, as per Eq. (5) and 
(6), are shown in Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b respectively 
Figure 1. The wave function (ψb) for the quasi-particle, (a) As per Eqs. (5), when m = + 1; (b) As per Eqs. (6), when 
m = −1.

535
indicating that these behaviors manifest in 
both + and—directions starting at zero. With the 
compact operator, the number density of bosons 
is clearly related to the frequency, which has not 
been attempted before, and BEC exclusively forms 
within this bound state. Above critical limit, the 
phonon is dominant in the system in the unbound 
state.
4 CONCLUSION
Bose-Einstein condensation is shown in the realm 
of bound state. This paper tried to explore BEC 
in the realm of bound state for better understand-
ing of switching phenomenon of devices. This 
piece of information is considered useful for a 
future study in this new field of investigation of 
quantum breathers in ferroelectrics and other 
applications of BEC in important nonlinear opti-
cal materials.
REFERENCES
Biswas, A., Y M Song, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater 17, 
(2015).
Dauxois, T., M. Peyrard, Physics of Solitons, Cambridge 
Univ. Press, Cambridge, (2006.).
Frantzeskakis, D.J., J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 43 
213001(2010).
He, H., M.J. Werner, P.D. Drummond, Phys. Rev. E 54, 
896(1996).
Jochim, S., M. Bertenstein, A. Altmeyer, G. Hendl, 
S. Reidl, C. Chin, J.H. Denschlag, and R. Grimm, 
Science.302, 2102(2003).
Ketterle, W. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 1132 (2002).
Kivshar, Y.S., B. Luther-Davis, Phys. Rep. 298, 
81(1998).

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

537
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Gain and bandwidth enhancement of a microstrip antenna 
by incorporating air gap
Arindam Biswas
Department of Electronics and Communication, NSHM Knowledge Campus, Durgapur, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: This paper presents a design of a rectangular microstrip patch antenna having a large 
bandwidth using the coaxial feeding method. For this purpose, two substrates were considered. The value 
of the dielectric constant of the upper substrate was 4.4 and that of the lower substrate was 1 (an air gap 
was included between the substrate and the ground plane). The height of the upper substrate was con-
sidered as 0.158 cm, and the height of the air gap height was also the same. The width and length of the 
ground plane were also modified. Gain and bandwidth were modified accordingly.
2 COAXIAL PROBE FEED 
RECTANGULAR PATCH 
ANTENNA WITH AN AIR GAP
The drawbacks of the patch antenna are nar-
row bandwidth and low gain. The bandwidth is 
affected primarily by substrate height and permit-
tivity. In this section, a rectangular patch antenna 
is presented, which has a high gain region and a 
relatively large bandwidth region. The geometry of 
the antenna is shown in Figure 1.
The antenna is fed with a 50-Ω coax probe. 
The feed position taken along the x-axis is 
0.45 cm and along the y-axis is 0.59 cm from the 
center of the patch. In this section, the antenna 
is designed for a larger bandwidth by using the 
electromagnetic software IE3D. In this simula-
tion, the resonant frequency of the antenna is 
defined as the frequency at which the maximum 
resistance occurs. The simulation of the antenna 
was carried out over a frequency range from 
3 GHz to 7 GHz.
1 INTRODUCTION
Planar antenna designs, such as “microstrip anten-
nas,” are often preferred for mobile and satel-
lite communication antennas due to their added 
advantage of small size, low manufacturing cost, 
and conformability. In recent years, there has been 
an increasing demand for square microstrip anten-
nas in the communication scenario due to their 
polarization diversity, particularly the ability to 
realize dual or circularly polarized radiation pat-
terns (Bahl et al. 2001).
Microstrip patch antennas are widely used 
because of their many advantages such as low 
profile, lightweight, low cost, and planar design. 
However, patch antennas have a disadvantage of 
a narrow bandwidth, typically 1–5% impedance 
bandwidth. Researchers have made many efforts to 
overcome this problem, and many configurations 
have been presented to increase the bandwidth 
(Abdelaziz et al. 2006). Many configurations have 
increased the bandwidth, but have also increased 
the production cost of the antenna due to the 
misalignment of stacked patches. To overcome 
the misalignment problem, we use less number of 
patches. This paper describes the concept of the air 
gap structure to enhance the antenna’s gain and 
bandwidth (Guha et al. 2001). In a normal rectan-
gular patch antenna, we introduce an air gap and 
find the total field gain ranges from about 3.4 to 
4.4 dBi in the bandwidth region. The antenna effi-
ciency ranges from about 67% to 92% within the 
bandwidth. It can also be seen that the radiation 
efficiency ranges from about 71% to 97% within 
the bandwidth.
Figure 1. Proposed geometry.

538
3 SIMULATED RESULTS
In this section, the simulated results of the rectan-
gular patch antenna are presented. The simulated 
result of the return loss is shown in Figure 2.
It can be seen that it consists of a patch on the 
top of the substrate and an air gap between the 
ground plane and the substrate with εr = 4.4. The 
height of the substrate with εr = 4.4 and the air gap 
is h1 = h2 = 0.158 cm. To improve the bandwidth, 
the air gap is introduced, and the ground plane 
width and length are modified as 2.5 cm and 2 cm, 
respectively. The physical width and length of the 
patch for the dominant TM01 mode are considered 
as W = 1.3 cm and L = 1.51 cm, respectively.
The total field gain ranges from about 3.4 to 
4.4 dBi in the bandwidth, as given in Table 2. It 
can also be seen that the directivity obtained 
within that frequency range is between 4.6 dBi and 
5.32 dBi. The total field gain and the directivity 
versus frequency plots are shown in Figures 4 and 
5, respectively.
The antenna resonates at the frequency range 
of 3.588 GHz to 6.127 GHz with RL rang-
ing between −10.2 dB and 17.2 dB. The band-
width (S[1,1] ≤ −10 dB) of the antenna is about 
2.54 GHz with a maximum gain of 4.38 dBi. 
Return loss S[1,1] and input impedance Z[1,1] 
at different frequencies are given in Table 1. 
The Z-parameter is shown in  Figure 3. Real Z[1,1] 
ranges from 52.6 Ω to 82 Ω within the bandwidth.
Table 1. Return loss and input impedance at different 
frequencies.
f0 GHz
Output parameters of the antenna
Return loss 
S[1,1]dB
Real 
Z[1,1] Ω
Imag 
Z[1,1] Ω
3.58838
−10.020
52.590
−34.190
3.59
−10.032
52.642
−34.378
3.68
−10.991
53.476
−30.575
3.92
−13.905
62.286
−19.253
4.25
−11.101
79.596
−20.581
4.55
−10.200
78.422
−28.575
5.00
−12.640
67.670
−21.403
5.47872
−17.178
66.110
−2.1020
5.51
−17.125
66.390
−0.7400
5.63
−16.206
67.900
4.700
6.11
−10.214
81.430
27.220
6.12684
−10.049
81.990
27.830
Figure 3. Frequency versus Z-parameter.
Figure 4. Frequency versus gain.
Table 2. Total field gain, directivity and voltage source 
gain at different frequencies.
f0 GHz
Output Parameters of the Antenna
Total field 
gain dBi
Total field 
directivity 
dBi
Total field 
voltage 
source 
gain dBi
3.50
3.844580487
4.5040584
1.437796
3.68
4.035360906
4.5767002
1.541965
3.86
4.332925985
4.7265079
1.885397
4.25
4.381467697
5.108824
2.624661
4.55
4.219653487
5.2661915
2.513313
5.00
4.113968424
5.3204146
1.948622
5.63
3.766679843
5.2479775
1.468934
5.93
3.364557553
5.1555993
1.403343
6.11
2.472270124
4.9872449
1.700386
Figure 2. Frequency versus return loss.

539
As can be seen from Figure 6 that the VSWR 
ranges from 1.72 to 1.8, and from Figure 7, it can 
be seen that the VSWR dB is in the range of 2.7 dB 
to 4.9 dB within the bandwidth. The antenna effi-
ciency ranges from about 67% to 92% within the 
bandwidth. It can also be seen that the radiation 
efficiency ranges from about 71% to 97% within the 
bandwidth. The 3-dB beam width in the E-plane at 
Φ = 0 deg is 57°. The beam width in the E-plane of 
this antenna is narrower than that of the single-
layer antenna.
The simulated results are summarized in 
Tables 2 and 3.
4 CONCLUSION
The final result shows that the bandwidth of this 
antenna is 2.53846 GHz. This antenna works 
between the frequency range of 3.58838 GHz to 
6.12684 GHz. The total field gain obtained is in 
the range between 3.4 dBi and 4.38 dBi, and the 
directivity obtained ranges between 4.6 dBi and 
5.32 dBi. This concept of bandwidth enhancement 
will be very useful for antenna applications.
REFERENCES
Abboud F., Damiano J.P., Papiernik A. (1990) A new 
model for calculating the input impedance of coax-
fed circular microstrip antennas with and without air 
gaps. “IEEE Transaction on Antenna and Propagation 
38: 1882–1885”
Abdelaziz A.A.;” bandwidth enhancement of micros-
trip antenna” Progress In Electromagnetics Research, 
PIER 63, 311–317, 2006.
Bahl, I.J.; Bhartia, P., “Microstrip Antennas Design 
Handbook”. Artech House, USA, 2001.
Costantine A. Balanis, “Antenna Theory Analysis And 
Desingn”, Wiley, 2nd edition.
Guha D. (2001) Resonant frequency of circular micros-
trip antennas with and without air gaps. IEEE Trans-
action on Antenna and Propagation 49: 55–59.
James, J.R.; Hall, P.S., (Eds.), “Handbook of Microstrip 
Antennas”. IEE Electromagnetic Waves Series 28, 
Pete Peregrinus Ltd., United Kingdom, 198
Nakano, H. and K. Vichien, “Dual frequency square 
patch antenna with rectangular notch,”Elec. Letters, 
Vol. 25, No. 16, 1067–1068, 1989.
Richards, W.F., S.E. Davidson, and S.A. Long, “Dual 
band reactively loaded microstrip antenna,” IEEE 
Trans. Ant. Prop.,Vol. AP-33, No. 5, 556–561, 
1985.
Figure 5. Frequency versus directivity.
Figure 6. Frequency versus VSWR dB.
Figure 7. Frequency versus VSWR.
Table 3. Efficiency and VSWR at different frequencies.
f0 GHz
Output parameters of the antenna
Antenna 
efficiency %
Radiation 
efficiency %
VSWR
VSWR 
dB
3.50
85.9117
96.7158
2.020
6.1092
3.68
88.2808
95.9159
1.798
5.0956
3.86
91.3360
95.5737
1.534
3.7174
4.25
84.5794
91.6948
1.758
4.8981
4.55
78.5862
86.8841
1.883
5.4982
5.00
75.7452
80.1066
1.604
4.1061
5.63
71.1001
72.8449
1.372
2.7472
5.93
66.2058
70.4120
1.653
4.3684
6.11
56.0406
69.4855
2.574
8.2133

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

541
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
A brief study of the ESPRIT Direction-Of-Arrival estimation 
algorithm in an uncorrelated environment for application 
in the Smart Antenna System
Dhusar Kumar Mondal
Assistant Director of Operations, Director General of Civil Aviation, Government of India
Biswajit Dian, Chirantan Dutta, Aniket Chatterjee & Abhik Ray
Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institution, Mankundu, Hooghly, West Bengal, India
ABSTRACT: The requirement of today’s mobile communication is spectrum efficiency, better cover-
age, and high quality of service with minimum transmitted power. The smart antenna system promises 
to solve these technological requirements of wireless communication. The extent up to which the smart 
antenna system fulfills these requirement depends on the performance of two different algorithms, i.e., 
the Direction-Of-Arrival (DOA) estimation algorithm and the beamforming algorithm. Among different 
high-resolution subspaced-based methods of the DOA estimation algorithm, ESPRIT is preferred for 
analysis in this paper, as it requires less computation and storage space compared with its near competitor 
MUSIC. This work generates the plots of the error curve for the determination of the signal arrival angle 
and its dependency on different system parameters from a large number of simulation work performed in 
MATLAB software. The results enhance the possibility of preferring ESPRIT for practical applications, 
as it will require less cost compared with MUSIC though its performance is quite acceptable.
antenna array where the radiation pattern of the 
array is controlled by adjusting the amplitude and 
the relative phase on each element of the array. 
The radiation pattern of an antenna array can 
be adjusted by adaptively controlling the ampli-
tude and the phase of the signal feed on differ-
ent elements of the array. So, the antenna array 
has the capability to focus the radiation pattern 
on a desired direction, i.e., steering capability of 
the radiation pattern. The modern SAS steers the 
radiation pattern to the desired user and simulta-
neously forms the null of the radiation pattern in 
the direction of interference. The complete func-
tion of the SAS is performed by two different tech-
nologies: (1) determining the direction of the user 
where the radiation pattern is to be focused, which 
is performed by the Direction-Of-Arrival (DOA) 
estimation algorithm; (2) transmitting a focused 
beam towards the user, which is performed by the 
beamforming algorithm [1,2]. Both the functions 
are possible by the combination of software and 
hardware. The DOA estimation and the steering of 
the radiation pattern in the same direction are done 
in a synchronized and adaptive manner, and thus it 
is also known as the adaptive array smart antenna 
system. So, the successful design and operation of 
the adaptive array smart antenna system depends 
highly on the performance of the DOA estimation 
1 INTRODUCTION
In the last decade, mobile communication has 
experienced a rapid growth in demand for the pro-
vision of new wireless multimedia services such as 
internet access from a wireless handset, multime-
dia services, data transfer, and video call. As the 
conventional single-input single-output system has 
limited capacity, it is unable to fulfill this demand. 
Thus, the use of the Multiple Antenna System 
(MAS) has been under consideration, as it is able 
to offer greater capacity than the Single Antenna 
System. A MAS increases the diversity of com-
munication reliability as well as the data rate by 
spatial multiplexing (SDMA) [1]. therefore, the 
Multiple Antenna System offers performance as 
well as capacity enhancement without additional 
power. Also, the application of spatial multiplex-
ing increases the frequency reuse factor and thus 
saves the spectrum bandwidth. The concept of 
the Smart Antenna System (SAS) arises from the 
above feature of the Multiple Antenna System.
2 CONCEPT OF THE SAS
The SAS basically utilizes the advance features 
of the Multiple Antenna System, i.e., an adaptive 

542
algorithm, the beamforming algorithm, and the 
beam-steering capacity of the antenna array. In 
this paper, the study of the DOA estimation algo-
rithm is undertaken.
3 DOA ESTIMATION
The performance of the DOA estimation algorithm 
depends on many parameters such as number of 
mobile users using the same frequency in the same 
cell, their spatial separation, number of antenna 
elements in the array and inter-element distance, 
number of signal samples taken for calculation, 
and Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) of the received 
signal [3]. Many DOA estimation algorithms have 
been developed in the last few decades. Basically, 
the non-parametric DOA estimation algorithm 
can be classified as follows:
1. Conventional DOA estimation method.
2. Subspaced DOA estimation method.
Methods that fall under the class conventional 
DOA estimation method include Bartlett’s method 
and Capon’s method. However, these methods 
suffer from a lack of angular resolution. For 
these high-angular resolution subspaced meth-
ods, MUSIC and ESPRIT algorithms are mostly 
used. MUSIC is an acronym that stands for MUl-
tiple SIgnal Classification. The MUSIC algorithm 
is highly accurate and stable, but requires a large 
number of computation and storage space, which 
is an area of concern from the viewpoint of practi-
cal implementation costs [4,5].
In this paper, the performance of the ESPRIT 
algorithm is studied in detail, so that its advan-
tages in terms of its practical application can be 
judged and simultaneously compared with the 
MUSIC algorithm. For analyzing its perform-
ance, simulations are carried out in MATLAB 
software.
4 ESPRIT DOA ESTIMATION 
ALGORITHM
ESPRIT stands for Estimation of Signal Param-
eters via Rotational Invariance Techniques and 
was first proposed by Roy and Kailath in 1989. 
ESPRIT is a computationally efficient and robust 
method of DOA estimation. It uses two identical 
arrays in the sense that array elements need to form 
matched pairs with an identical displacement vec-
tor, i.e., the second element of each pair ought to 
be displaced at the same distance and in the same 
direction relative to the first element.
The signals induced on each of the arrays from 
D uncorrelated sources are given by
x
AS k
n k
1
1
A
1
+
AS
1
A ( )
k)
k
( )
k  
(1)
x
A S k
n k
2
2
A
2
+
S
A2
A φS( )
k
( )
k  
(2)
where d is the inter-element distance and k is the 
wave number and
φ
θ
θ
= diag
jkd
j
θ
kd
jkd
e
e
e
D
θ
{
θ
jkd
θ
e
θ
,.........
}
i θ
i
sin
2
θ
e
θ
 
(3)
A
matrix o
i
f s
o
teering vector for subarray i
a
i
A
=
matrix o
i
f s
o
teering vector for subarray i
a
1 2
,
The complete received signal considering the con-
tributions of both sub arrays is given as follows:
x k
x
x
A
A
s k
n
n
( )
k
( )
k
( )
k
( )
k
( )
k
( )
k
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥= ⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
+
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥⎦
⎥
1
2
1
2
1
2
φ⎦
2
 
(4)
We can now calculate the correlation matrix for 
either the complete array or for the two sub-arrays. 
The correlation matrix for the complete array is 
given by
R
E xx
A R R
I
xx
R
H
ss
H
n
⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤=
+
A R R
ss
R
σ 2
 
(5)
Creating the signal subspace for the entire array 
results in one signal subspace given by Equation 
(5). Because of the invariance structure of the 
array, Equation (5) can be decomposed into the 
subspaces E1and E2. Next, a 2D × 2D matrix 
can be formed using the signal subspaces, such 
that
C
E
E
E
E
E
E
H
H
C
c
E
H
=
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎢
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎥
⎦
⎥⎡⎣⎡
⎤⎦⎤=
1
2
1
2
E
Λ
 
(6)
where Ec is the eigen vector decomposition of C, 
such that {
,......
}
1
2
2
λ λ
,1,
λ D  and
Λ = diag
D
{
,......
}
1
2
2
λ λ
,1,
λ
 
(7)
We then partition Ec into four D × D sub-matrices, 
such that
E
E
E
E
E
C
E
= ⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
11
12
21
22
 
(8)
The rotational operator can be estimated as
ψ = −
−
12
22
1
E
E
 
(9)

543
The angle of arrival can be uniquely determined 
from the following relation:
θiθ
kd
i
D
=
( )
λiλ
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
−1
1 2 3
sin
arg
, , ,.......


 
(10)
where λi is the eigen value of ψ, and →d is the dis-
placement vector between two sub-arrays [5,6].
5 SIMULATION RESULTS
All the simulations in this work were carried out 
considering the following parameters:
The number of uncorrelated sources is 3, the 
type of antenna array is one-dimensional linear 
array with 12 isotropic elements, and the number 
of snapshots used is 100.
a. Error in the estimation of DOA using ESPRIT 
with SNR:
A large number of simulations were carried out 
in MATLAB software to determine the error in 
the estimation of DOA by the ESPRIT algorithm. 
Table 1 presents the error for each angle of arrival 
for different values of the SNR in dB. Further-
more, the normalized error vs SNR for each angle 
of arrival as well as the average error for all the 
angles of arrival vs SNR were plotted individually, 
as shown in the below figures. Detection error vs. 
SNR for −40 deg and 30 deg DOA have been swon 
in Figure 1 and Figure 2 respectively.
b. Error in the estimation of DOA using ESPRIT 
with number of elements in the array.
Table 2 presents a large number of simulations, 
from which the effect of the number of elements 
in the array on the average error for three sources 
can be observed. Three sources are detectable only 
Table 1. The error for each angle of arrival for different 
values of the SNR in dB.
Signal-
to-Noise 
Ratio
Error for 
DOA −40 
degree
Error for 
DOA 30 
degree
Error 
for DOA 
60 degree
0
0.1667
0.2333
0.3875
5
0.0090
0.0025
0.0473
10
0.0018
0.0015
0.0059
20
0.0022
0.0003
0.0060
30
0.0006
0.0003
0.0006
50
0.0003
0.0001
0.0007
60
0.0001
0.0001
0.0004
70
0.0001
0.0001
0
80
0
0
0
90
0
0
0
100
0
0
0
Figure 1. Detection error vs SNR for −40 deg DOA.
Figure 2. Detection error vs SNR for 30 deg DOA.
Table 2. The effect of the number of elements in the 
array on the average error for three sources.
Number of elements
Error in the estimation 
of angle
1
Not detectable
2
Not detectable
3
Not detectable
4
0.0024
5
0.0015
10
0.0004
15
0.0001
20
0.0001
25
0.0001
30
0.0001
35
0.0001
40
0.0002
50
0.0001
100
0

544
size, and thus the miniaturization objective is not 
achieved. Figure 3 shows variation of normalized 
error vs number of elements.
c. Error in the estimation of DOA using ESPRIT 
with inter-element spacing.
Table 3 presents the effect of inter-element 
spacing on individual DOA estimation. The error 
decreases with an increase in inter-element spac-
ing. Furthermore, the outcome of the simulation 
listed in the Table 3 indicates that the DOA detec-
tion error depends on the angular separation of 
the desired source from the undesired one. When 
two sources are spatially closer to each other, the 
detection error increases. Average error vs. inter-
element spacing is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 3a. Detection error vs SNR for 60 deg DOA.
Figure 3b. Average detection error vs SNR.
Figure 3c. Average detection error vs number of 
elements.
Table 3. The effect of inter-element spacing on indi-
vidual DOA estimation.
Inter-
element 
spacing 
(cm)
Error for 
DOA -40 
degree
Error for 
DOA 30 
degree
Error 
for 
DOA 60 
degree
 2
0.0254
0.5671
0.0712
 3
0.0100
0.0523
0.1056
 4
0.0149
0.0234
0.0252
 5
0.0054
0.0136
0.0321
 6
0.0021
0.0041
0.0362
 7
0.0020
0.0071
0.0030
 8
0.0034
0.0043
0.0022
 9
0.0003
0.0048
0.0081
10
0.0015
0.0037
0.0023
11
0.0005
0.0022
0.0009
12
0.0004
0.0002
0.0019
13
0.0004
0.0001
0.0010
14
0.0005
0.0006
0.0006
15
0.0001
0.0009
0.0008
Figure 4. Average error vs inter-element spacing.
when the number of elements is 4 or more and thus 
the theory is verified. When the number of ele-
ments is 5, the detection capability is satisfactory 
and for beyond 10, it is quite good. However, an 
increased number in elements increases the array 

545
6 CONCLUSION
In the first author’s earlier work [1,2,3], MUSIC 
has been thoroughly analyzed. Now, the outcome 
of this paper clearly shows that the performance 
of ESPRIT is quite acceptable as the performance 
is close to that of MUSIC, but the implementation 
cost of MUSIC will be higher as it needs a large 
number of computation and storage space. Thus, 
ESPRIT can be implemented for DOA estimation 
in the SAS.
REFERENCES
[1]  Dhusar Kumar Mondal, “Studies of Different Direc-
tion of Arrival (DOA) Estimation Algorithm for 
Smart Antenna in Wireless Communication”, Inter-
national Journal of Electronics & Communication, 
Vol. 4, Issue-SPL-2, Jan Mar2013.
[2]  Dhusar Kumar Mondal, “Study of Spectral Music 
Direction of Arrival Estimation Algorithm of Smart 
Antenna Using Half Wavelength Dipole Uniform 
Linear Array”, International Journal of Electronics & 
Communication, Vol. 5, Issue, SPL-2, Jan-Mar 2014.
[3]  Dhusar Kumar Mondal, Aritra Mondal, Pranoy 
Das, Chayan Seth, B N Biswas, “Analysing Resolu-
tion Parameters of Different Direction of Arrival 
Estimation Algorithm for Un-correlated Envi-
ronment”, International Journal of Electronics & 
Communication,vol-6–1-spl-1-jan-mar-2015.
[4]  Franck B. Gross, “Smart Antenna for Wireless Com-
munication”, 2005 by the McGraw-Hill Companies.
[5]  Constantine A. Balanis, Panagiotis L, Ioannidcs, 
“Introduction to Smart Antenna”, Synthesis Lec-
ture on Antennas#5. 2007 Morgan & Claypool 
Publishers.
[6]  Lal.C.Godra, “Application of Antenna Arrays to 
Mobile Communications, Part II: Beam-Forming 
and Direction of Arrival Considerations”, Proceed-
ings of IEEE, Vol. 85, No. 8, August 1997.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

547
Frontiers in Computer, Communication and Electrical Engineering – Acharyya (Ed.)
© 2016 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN: 978-1-138-02877-7
Photonic Integrated Circuit technology for ultra high speed 
wireless communications
G. Carpintero
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain
ABSTRACT: We provide an overview of photonic-based schemes to generate signals within the 
millimeter and terahertz wave range, providing a brief summary of some of the application scenarios 
where these signals are needed. Photonics techniques present unique advantages, but need to address 
the cost, size, and reliability. Efforts to address these are directed toward the use of generic integration 
technology platforms, in which sub-systems can be integrated as a photonic integrated circuit.
projects, developing a generic integration platform 
for Photonic Integrated Circuit (PIC) technology. 
The challenge turns into being able to develop the 
required photonic systems using a small set of 
standardized Building Blocks (BB) of a given fabri-
cation platform. The building blocks are frequently 
used basic components, which are brought together 
in a single integration process that can be optimized 
for providing high performance. This significantly 
reduces the design effort, as Process Development 
Tools can be produced. On top of this, having a 
unique technological process allows us to establish 
access to the process through Multi-Project Wafer 
(MPW) fabrication runs, in which the fabrication 
costs are shared among several users. In this contri-
bution, we will analyze some results of the integra-
tion efforts that have already been conducted.
2 PHOTONIC-BASED GENERATION
2.1 Photonic-techniques
Photonic techniques are an alternative approach 
having some inherent key advantages such as being 
broadly tunable, having an ultra-wide bandwidth, 
and being able to be seamlessly connected to wired 
(fiber optic) networks. As shown in Fig. 1, the two 
key components for a photonics-based wireless 
1 INTRODUCTION
The future of wireless communications needs to 
address the increasing need for bandwidth in order 
to enable transmission of data rates up to 100 Gb/s, 
aiming to get close to those used in fiber-optic 
communications [1,2]. An increase of bandwidth 
can be achieved either through maintaining carrier 
frequency and using higher order modulation for-
mats or using simple modulation techniques and 
increasing the carrier frequency into the Millimeter- 
(MMW) and Terahertz-wave (THz) range [3], from 
30 GHz to 10 THz. The latter offers a cost effec-
tive solution which has the additional advantage of 
avoiding coding/decoding latencies.
Particularly, above 275 GHz, there are extremely 
large bandwidths for “radio” communications 
available since these frequency bands have not yet 
been allocated at specific active services. Recent 
experimental experiments reported data rates up 
to 48 Gb/s on a 300-GHz carrier frequency [4].
However, one of the bottlenecks for these sys-
tems is the generation of the carrier waves at these 
frequencies with the required signal quality. Phot-
onics-based technologies are at the forefront in the 
generation of high frequency waves thanks to the 
availability of telecom-based high-frequency com-
ponents, lasers, optical modulators, and high-speed 
photodiodes. Using the photonic approach brings 
important advantages, especially enabling the use 
of optical fibers to distribute high-frequency RF 
signals over long distances. In order to become a 
competitive technology against electronic alterna-
tives, the photonic approach must address the chal-
lenge of realizing small and compact transmitter 
frontends which are light and have a low cost.
A new road has recently been paved within 
the framework of different European research 
Figure 1. Building blocks of a photonic-based wireless 
transmitter.

548
transmitter are the photonic Continuous-Wave 
(CW) signal generation and a high speed optical-
to-electrical (O/E) converter [5]. There are various 
photonic techniques to generate MMW and THz 
frequencies, among which optical heterodyning 
and pulsed techniques are commonly used.
Optical heterodyning is based on mixing two 
single frequency lasers (λ1 and λ2). This tech-
nique provides a large tuning range over 10 THz. 
On the other hand, the performance in terms of 
phase noise greatly depends on the types of lasers 
that are used, usually requiring locking the two 
together. The linewidth of the output millimeter 
wave is determined by the sum of the linewidth of 
λ1 and λ2 [6].
Pulsed sources are usually based on mode locked 
laser structures [7], having recently reported that it 
can increase the radiated emitted power about 7 
dBm above heterodyning schemes [8]. Mode locked 
sources can either be passive or hybrid, depending 
on whether the pulse train is locked to an electronic 
reference. Passive mode locking requires only fixed 
direct current and reverse voltage to generate the 
pulsed signal, which lacks stability [9]. The stabil-
ity can be addressed through hybrid mode locking, 
in which the reverse voltage is combined with a 
Continuous Wave (CW) signal at the fundamental 
frequency. The stability is inherited from the elec-
tronic source [10], but is limited by the electrical 
modulation bandwidth, usually below 30 GHz.
The major drawback of photonic-based app-
roach is that it requires the combination of differ-
ent photonic components. This requires a costly 
packaging process, with high impact in the over-
all cost of the system. Another important factor 
is that every fiber introduces coupling losses and 
is a potential source for back-reflections. In order 
to achieve higher performance levels and introduce 
fabrication rationale basic idea behind the work 
presented here is to investigate photonic integra-
tion technology.
2.2 Photonic technology platforms
Currently there are several technology platforms, 
each based on a different material. The most prom-
ising material is Silicon, which allows passive light 
manipulation [11]. It has many advantages such as 
having a very small footprint for the components, 
due to the relative high contrast index of silicon, 
is a cheap base material, which has mechanical 
strength so that the wafers can be made larger, 
and more importantly it is compatible with cur-
rent CMOS technology, making photonics and 
electronics compatible. It has one severe drawback 
which is that there is neither light generation nor 
amplification. Other silicon-based platforms are 
available, especially silicon nitride, which allow 
passive light manipulation, but very importantly 
have very low transmission loss. This is a key factor 
for high Q resonators. However, the low refractive 
index contrast results in large chip sizes.
The most important technology platform is 
Indium Phosphide, which provides light generation 
and amplification, and supports modulation and 
detection, wavelength multiplexing, demultiplex-
ing, optical attenuation, switching, and dispersion 
compensation. This enables this platform to offer a 
monolithic integration of all the components into 
a single chip that performs all the functions.
2.3 Generic integration
Most of the photonic systems can be spelled out 
using different combinations of a reduced set of 
components, which are known as basic building 
blocks [12]. Most of these can be composed of a 
combination of passive waveguides of different 
widths and lengths such as straight and curved 
waveguides, Multi-Mode Interference (MMI) cou-
plers, and so on.
The powerful idea that this brings in is that we 
do not need to design every component every time, 
but rather provide these building blocks, investing 
in developing the technology for a very high per-
formance at the level of the basic building blocks, 
tested and with a known performance. These basic 
building blocks are the elements of design software 
libraries, enabling users to design their own systems 
using design tools. All this investment is fully jus-
tified as the generic integration technology is not 
application specific and can serve a large market.
The second key ingredient is a low-cost access 
to the technology, which is achieved through 
the Multi-Project Wafer (MPW) run approach, 
Figure 2. Photonic signal generation techniques: 
(a) optical heterodyne and (b) Mode-locking.

549
combining designs from several users into a single 
chip mask design. Many small customers are trans-
formed into a bigger one with sufficient volume to 
get access to the foundry.
3 PHOTONIC INTEGRATED CIRCUIT 
EXAMPLES
3.1 Dedicated integration platform
In order to demonstrate the highest level of inte-
gration, we developed a single-chip millimeter-
wave wireless transmitter, shown in Fig. 3. The 
dual wavelength source is based on the monolithic 
integration of two single mode Distributed Feed-
back (DFB) lasers combined through a Multimode 
Interference coupler (MMI). This is done at both 
ends of the DFB lasers. The left hand side provides 
an optical output of the dual wavelength for analy-
sis, and the right hand side implements the optical 
path toward the monolithic high-speed Photodi-
odes (PD) where the two wavelengths are mixed 
to generate the millimeter electrical signal pass-
ing through Electro-Absorption modulators (EA) 
for data modulation and Semiconductor Opti-
cal Amplifiers (SOA) to boost the optical power 
within the waveguide. With this approach we have 
achieved a continuous tuning of wavelength spac-
ing from 5 GHz to 110 GHz. In terms of emitted 
electrical power, we probed onto the PD with a 
probe having a DC bias tee and WR08 output, to 
which we connected a horn antenna. Fig. 4 shows 
the emitted power detected on an Agilent E4418B 
EPM series power meter with a W8486 A power 
sensor (75–110 GHz) when the two DFB lasers 
were biased at 95 mA (generating a 95.7-GHz 
beat note frequency). These photodiodes, when 
diced out, have been proven to have a bandwidth 
up to 175 GHz and provide up to 0 dBm [13]. 
The main drawbacks of this approach are that it 
requires a dedicated fabrication process flow and 
the relatively broad linewidth of the optical modes 
(around 1 MHz) [14].
3.2 Photonic Multi-Project Wafer run 
in a Generic Integration Platform
An on-chip dual wavelength source suitable for 
fabrication on a Generic InP-based technology 
platform to access the cost reduction of a Multi-
Project Wafer (MPW) run has been also devel-
oped. The design is then restricted to the available 
building blocks of the platform, which in our case 
did not include gratings of any kind. The dual 
wavelength source that was developed, shown in 
Fig. 5, is based on an Arrayed Waveguide Grating 
(AWG) laser. The emitted wavelengths originate 
by forward biasing the SOAs on two channels 
simultaneously; thus, the spacing is an inte-
ger multiple of the AWG channel spacing (Δλ), 
which usually due to fabrication issues has to be 
Δλ > 100 GHz. This is the main drawback of this 
structure, as the wavelength spacing is not tunable 
because it is fixed by the AWG. The novelty of our 
design is that it is an on-chip solution through the 
use of novel Multimode Interference Reflectors 
(MIR) to create the required Fabry-Perot cavity 
of the AWG laser without requiring the facets of 
the chip. The main advantage of this structure is 
the linewidth of the signal generated from beat-
ing the two modes on a high speed photodiode. 
Fig. 6 shows the linewidth of the optical mode 
from Channel 2 measured by the self-heterodyne 
technique. Assuming a Lorentzian shape, optical 
−3 dB linewidth is 254 KHz, without any stabiliza-
tion scheme. For this reason, we have selected this 
structure for a wireless data transmission experi-
ment, described in the next section.
Figure 4. Electrical power emitted by the photodiode 
at 95,7 GHz, at two different current levels into the EA. 
Each laser was biased at 95 mA, SOA1.2 at 40 mA, and 
SOA1.3 at 45 mA.
Figure 3. (Top) Picture of the fully integrated dual wave-
length source for millimeter wave generation, (bottom) 
Block diagram of the integrated elements.

550
REFERENCES
[1] 
S. Hisatake, G. Carpintero, Y. Yoshimizu, Y. 
Minamikata, K. Oogimoto, Y. Yasuda, T. Nagat-
suma, 2015 “W-band Coherent Wireless Link Using 
Injection Locked Laser Diodes,”. IEEE Photon. 
Technol. Lett., 27(14), pp. 1565–1568.
Figure 5. (Top) Picture of the on-chip AWG laser with 
Δλ = 109 GHz, capable of generating two wavelengths 
spaced at 109, 218, and 327 GHz (bottom) Block diagram 
of the integrated elements.
Figure 6. (Red) Measured optical linewidth of the 
AWG laser modes by self-heterodyning (RBW = 30 kHz), 
(Blue) lorentzian fit.
 [2] A.J. Seeds, H. Shams, M.J. Fice, C.C. Renaud, 2015 
“TeraHertz Photonics for Wireless Communica-
tions, ” J. Lightw. Technol., 33(3), pp. 579–587.
 [3] S. Koenig et al., 2013 “Wireless sub-THz communi-
cation system with high data rate,” Nature Photon. 
7, 977–981.
 [4] T. Nagatsuma et al., 2013 “Terahertz wireless com-
munications based on photonics technologies,” Opt. 
Exp., 21(20), pp. 23736–23747.
 [5] A. Stöhr et al., 2010 “Millimeter-Wave Photonic 
Components for Broadband Wireless Systems,” 
IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and Tech. 58(11), 
pp. 3071–3082.
 [6] G. Carpintero et al., 2012 “95 GHz millimeter wave 
signal generation using an arrayed waveguide grat-
ing dual wavelength semiconductor laser”, Optics 
Letters, 37(17), pp. 3657–3659.
 [7] T. Nagatsuma, N. Kukutsu, and Y. Kado, 2007 
“Photonic Generation of Millimeter and Terahertz 
Waves and Its Applications,” Applied Electromag-
netics and Communications ICECom, Dubrovnik,, 
pp. 1–4.
 [8] L. Moeller, A. Shen, C. Caillaud, and M. Achouche, 
2013 “Enhanced THz generation for wireless com-
munications using short optical pulses, ” In Infrared, 
Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves (IRMMW-THz),, 
pp. 1–3.
 [9] K.A. Williams, M.G. Thompson, and I.H. White, 
2004 “Long-wavelength mononolithic mode-locked 
diode lasers,” New. J. Phys., vol. 6, p. 179.
[10] G. Carpintero, M.G. Thompson, R.V. Penty, and 
I.H. White, 2009 “Low noise performance of pas-
sively mode-locked 10-GHz quantum-dot laser 
diode, ” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 21, no. 6, 
pp. 389–391.
[11] C. Doerr 2013 “Integrated Photonic Platforms 
for Telecomunications: InP and Si” IEICE Trans. 
Electron. Vol. E96-C, No. 7.
[12] M. Smit et al., 2011, “Generic foundry model for 
InP-based photonics” IET Optoelectron., Vol. 5, 
Iss. 5, pp. 187–194.
[13] E. Rouvalis et al., 2012 “High-speed photodiodes 
for InP-based photonic integrated circuits” Optics 
Express 20(8), pp. 9172–9177.
[14] G. Carpintero et al., 2014 “ Microwave Photonic 
Integrated Circuits for Millimeter-Wave Wireless 
Communications,” J. Lightwave Technology, 32(20), 
pp. 511–520.

an informa business
This book contains all the research papers accepted for oral presentation at the 3rd 
International Conference on “Foundations and Frontiers in Computer, Communication 
and Electrical Engineering – 2016 (C2E2 – 2016)”. The conference was held on the 15th 
and 16th of January 2016, at the Supreme Knowledge Foundation Group of Institutions, 
Mankundu, Hooghly, India, in order to celebrate the 100 year anniversary of a historical 
moment: the first transcontinental telephone call between Alexander Graham Bell in 
New York and his assistant Thomas Watson in San Francisco, occurred on 25th January 
1915. The scope of the conference includes all the key areas of Electrical Engineering, 
Electronics & Communication Engineering and Computer Engineering disciplines. 
More than 150 research papers from authors of all around the world were submitted 
for presentation during the conference. After double blind peer review of those 
submitted papers by the experts of respective areas, a total 107 papers were accepted 
for presentation during the conference. All those accepted papers have been included 
in this Proceedings of C2E2 – 2016.

