
Foundations of social ecological economics

Foundations of social ecological
economics
The fight for revolutionary change in
economic thought
Clive L. Spash
MANCHESTER UNIVERSITY PRESS

Copyright © Clive L. Spash 2024
The right of Clive L. Spash to be identified as the author of this work has been
asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Published by Manchester University Press
Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL
www.manchesteruniversitypress.co.uk
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978 1 5261 7148 1 hardback
First published 2024
The publisher has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for any
external or third-party internet websites referred to in this book, and does not
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or
appropriate.
Cover images: Allan So / Pexels; Naja Bertolt Jensen / Unsplash; School Strike 4
Climate / Flickr (CC BY 2.0)
Typeset by Newgen Publishing UK

Contents
List of figures and tables
Preface
Part I:  Radical foundations
1 Historical foundations and foundational conflicts
2
Addressing the environmental crisis: Orthodox versus heterodox
economics
Part II:  Philosophical foundations
3
Issues in history and philosophy of science with implications for
economics
4
The philosophical basis for advancing knowledge in ecological
economics
5 Revolutionary transformative science
Part III:  Social ecological economic foundations
6
Reorienting to social ecological economics: The preanalytic
vision
7
Integration of social, ecological and economic knowledge
8 Clarifying division and seeking unity
9
An alternative economics for alternative economies
References
Index

Figures and tables
Figures
2.1 Dissenting from the orthodox paradigm
8.1 Seven positions on research in ecological economics
8.2 Two opposing paradigms and a connecting strategy
Tables
2.1 Orthodox versus heterodox institutional economic paradigms
7.1 Different concepts of refusal to make trade-offs

Preface
I have been generally concerned about environmental issues for half
a century and with ecological economics since a coauthored plenary
paper at the first International Society for Ecological Economics
conference in 1989. My research on economics and the environment
started in the early 1980s and continued through a series of degrees
and dissertations covering a variety of topics, including acidic
deposition, ozone pollution and climate change. I have aimed to
combine economic understanding with other disciplinary knowledge,
for example, environmental science, values, ethics, social psychology
and political science. I have spent the last decade or so researching
and teaching history and philosophy of science, including the history
of natural science interactions with economics, a second book
currently in process. The social dimensions and the formation of
human economies in their various institutional forms as systems of
social provisioning will form a third volume. My initial intention to
capture ecological, social and economic aspects of the human
predicament in a single volume resulted in an accumulation of
material beyond modern expectations for a single book. The impetus
to create the current work arose due to Pedro Lomas and Monica Di
Donato urging me to explain and bring together my writing on social
ecological economics. Here, I give a few details on the origins and
development of the ideas to be presented.
Let me start by noting that collaboration and integration of
scientific ideas across cultures is a challenging task, and the
difficulties of past communication are too easily forgotten. Thirty
years or so ago, there was no internet, few personal computers and
email had only just started as an experimental trial in academia after
military development. The European Union was not established until
1993 and within Europe there were concerns in research and policy
about Northern dominance over Southern perspectives, and Western
over Eastern after the Berlin Wall fell in 1989.

Ecological economics has, from its formal foundation, struggled to
achieve integration. I established a democratic constitutional
structure for the European Society of Ecological Economics (ESEE)
and helped Dick Norgaard do the same internationally, which
empowered the regional societies. I also helped establish the African
Society and have worked with colleagues and doctoral students from
South America (Chile, Argentina, Brazil). The struggles of Indigenous
communities where I have lived – native Americans, Australian
Aboriginals and Norwegian Sami – pose another challenge. I
mention all this because the kind of science advocated in this book
should not be simplistically dismissed as following a tradition
uninformed as to different cultural and institutional approaches to
knowledge or variety in conceptualisations of reality (see also
Graeber 2015; Knudsen 2023).
My engagement with international and diverse communities and
scholars is exactly why my ideas have developed into their current
form. Understanding the differences in types of knowledge and ways
of being is necessary to realise the positive and negative roles
science can play and has played. More specifically, I will explore in
this book how a critical and realist approach to science can aid our –
very much needed – attempts to transform social and economic
systems away from exploitative, destructive and harmful practices.
Social ecological economics and radical ideas around it were
already being discussed at the first conference of the ESEE, held in
1996 at Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines and organised by Martin O’Connor
and Sylvie Faucheux, who became the first ESEE secretary and
president respectively. There was a recognised need to bring in
social aspects and this was at the time termed ‘socio-ecological
economics’. Early discussions involved Michael Jacobs, Inge Røpke,
Fritz Hinterberger, Joan Martinez-Alier and Jan van der Straaten. Jan
and I were elected as joint ESEE vice-presidents, and Fritz became a
co–vice-president with Arild Vatn when I became president. Thus,
the social ecological economics approach was strongly present in the
ESEE from the start.
At this time, a range of related topics were being addressed by
researchers at Lancaster University – Robin Grove-White, Brian

Wynne, John O’Neill, Alan Holland, Jeremy Roxbee Cox and Michael
Jacobs – who came together through collaboration between the
Centre for the Study of Environmental Change (CSEC) and Lancaster
University’s Philosophy Department. I was a member of their project
on environmental economics in the early 1990s, through which I
met, and later conducted projects with, Jonathan Aldred and Andy
Sterling. The philosophers established the journal Environmental
Values, which became an important forum for social ecological
economists (Spash 2022b).
From the mid- to late 1990s, this network expanded through
organised meetings, joint European research projects and ESEE
conferences. Silvio Funtowicz stimulated interest in post-normal
science, and this connected with participatory approaches.
Internationally, a range of people engaged in this community in
addition to those already mentioned, including: from Europe, Paula
Antunes, Beat Burgenmeier, Mario Giampetro, Juha Hiedanpää, Jörg
Köhn, Roderick Lawrence, Angela Liberatore, Fred Luks, Giuseppe
Munda, Angela Pereira, Irmi Seidel, Peter Söderbaum, Sigrid Stagl,
Joachim Spandenberg; from Australia, Wendy Proctor and Simon
Niemeyer; and from the USA, John Gowdy, Dick Norgaard and
Sabine O’Hara. Ideas were evolving and questions arose as to the
paradigmatic potential and distinctiveness of ecological economics.
European Commission-funded interdisciplinary projects aided the
advance of our research, especially on environmental values, ethics,
public policy and institutions for inclusive deliberative participation.
Claudia Carter and I managed several of these, building from
existing research teams (O’Connor, Funtowicz, Giampietro, Martinez-
Alier, Munda, O’Neill, Sterling) and adding others: Bruna de Marchi,
Arild Vatn, Federico Aguilera-Klink, Juan Sanchez-Garcia, Jacquie
Burgess and Ortwin Renn. We also organised two ESEE ‘Frontiers’
conferences, with one hosted by Juan and Federico in Tenerife. The
importance of emphasising the ‘social’ aspect was increasing and the
term ‘socio-economic’, as I had used for my research group in
Aberdeen, began to appear as somewhat derogatory.
Another developing insight was the impossibility of any
meaningful engagement between mainstream environmental and

heterodox 
ecological 
economists. 
Some 
of 
our 
academic
community’s attempts had seemed to work in this direction, for
example, engaging with Jack Knetsch on values and psychology.
However, the logic of this work meant overthrowing, not reforming
or trying to include, some basically unreconstituted, neoclassical
theory. The rising neoliberal ideology empowered a form of market
capitalism 
that 
made 
government 
subservient 
to 
business,
corporations, bankers and financiers. This created a distinct divide
between academic communities, raising questions as to the role of
ideology in science.
After the first decade of the ESEE, during which I served as vice-
president and president, there was some reflection in the community
as to its content and direction. I undertook a major review that
appeared as a four-volume collection (Spash 2009a). This required
serious consideration of what constituted ecological economics, and
further stimulated my interest in the conflicts involved in going
beyond mainstream economics. I presented my developing ideas at
the Association for Heterodox Economics (AHE) conference in 2009,
where Ali Douai had been helping organise the theme ‘Heterodox
Economics and Sustainable Development’. I had been corresponding
with Ali for a few years about what I was now calling ‘social
ecological economics’. Fred Lee was at the conference and contacted
me to publish in the American Journal of Economics and Sociology
(AJES), which he edited (Spash 2011). By then, I was undertaking
empirical research with Anthony Ryan on the divisions within
ecological economics and this appeared in a special issue coedited
by Ali (Spash and Ryan 2012).
My contact with what has become called heterodoxy goes back to
my undergraduate studies with lecturers including Peter Bird, Mick
Common, Shelia Dow, Peter Earl and Brian Loasby. Back then, it
seemed just normal economics. By the early 1990s things had
started to go wrong and by the early 2000s institutional reactions
like AHE were underway. This further stimulated my interest in the
cross-fertilisation of ideas across economic schools of thought. I
revisited macroeconomics, linked up with some Post Keynesians like
Marc Lavoie, explored connections with ecological economics,

presented a plenary on the topic at an AHE conference and
produced an edited volume (Holt et al. 2009).
Around the same time, Rich Howarth, then editor-in-chief of
Ecological Economics, had been encouraging me to write an article
reflecting on the state of play in the field. During the drafting I
corresponded with Peter Söderbaum, who highlighted ideology as a
concern, which stimulated my interest in that direction. John O’Neill
introduced me to Thomas Uebel and I benefited from reading his
work on Otto Neurath and the Vienna Circle. The project expanded
to two articles. One explored the philosophy of science behind
ecological economics (Spash 2012) and the other sought to capture
debates, disagreements and positions within the field (Spash 2013b)
in a classification now developed over several years.
In the mid-1990s, I became familiar with critical realism while a
lecturer at Cambridge, where I met Tony Lawson and attended
seminars, workshops and conferences that he organised. Since the
early 1990s I had been learning much on philosophical topics from
discussions and work with Alan Holland and John O’Neill. All three
provided feedback on an early draft of my new foundations paper
(Spash 2012). After moving to Austria, I was also engaged in
establishing the Vienna Critical Realist Workshop, co-ordinated by
Armin Puller and Tone Smith. This provided a stimulating forum, with
visitors like Andrew Sayer and engagement with political scientists –
Armin, Ulrich Brand, Hans Puehretmayer. I have really appreciated
bouncing ideas off and engaging with Armin on critical realism and
various topics. An additional contribution to my developing
understanding has been teaching history and philosophy of science
since 2012 on the M.Sc. in Social Ecological Economics and Policy
(SEEP). Teaching is the most effective means of discovering what
you do not know! So, thanks to the SEEP students for the education.
A last aspect of relevance is Karl William Kapp’s work. I appreciate
him both for his pathbreaking social ecological economic research
and as a kindred spirit, seeking to find pathways for humanity
through the combined crises created by industrial modernity and its
various capital-accumulating forms and exploitative institutions. His
work includes important insights into the role of business enterprises

and the operation of price-making markets, including his concept of
cost-shifting. My interest in Kapp extends back some decades, but
was stimulated further by meeting Rolf Steppacher in 2007 at the
ESEE Conference in Leipzig, after a plenary in which I cited Kapp.
Rolf was Kapp’s last research assistant before he died, and he gave
me Kapp’s book on integration of the sciences. Around the same
time, I met Sebastian Berger, a significant Kapp scholar, with whom I
have maintained correspondence.
This book brings various of my ideas together, including
perspectives on environmentalism, orthodoxy versus heterodoxy,
naturalism, value and ethics, logical empiricism, ideology, critical
realism, integration of knowledge, unity of science, interdisciplinarity
and more generally ways forward for humanity. While based in a
tradition of Western philosophical understanding, the insights and
approaches are not a rejection of different knowledge per se. Critical
realism has many aspects that make it open to alternative
understandings 
(e.g., 
in 
its 
epistemic 
relativity, 
structured
methodological pluralism and openness to methods), just as social
ecological economics is open to alternative forms of social
provisioning and satisfiers to meet needs. However, not just any
philosophy of science will progress our understanding of the open-
systems reality in which we live. Similarly, not just any economic
structure will do if the aim is to provide a means for humans to live
meaningful lives that also address the moral considerability of
‘others’, both human and non-human, present and future. Indeed,
both economic science and the current hegemonic economic
systems are seen as failing and creating social ecological crises. The
aim is to clear some ground and identify the foundations of social
ecological economics as a radical new economic paradigm that can
inform social ecological transformation and support the full variety of
potential economies that can sustain meaningful lives for all.

Part I
Radical foundations

1
Historical foundations and foundational
conflicts
Introduction
The interaction of human society with Nature, and the dependency
of the former on the latter, means the environmental crisis has a
fundamental social aspect. This is also an economic crisis because
environmental degradation – pollution of air, soil and water,
desertification, deforestation, species loss, climate change – is
integrally linked to the way in which economies are instituted and
run. The structural relationships of power, distribution of resources
and exploitation of human and animal labour add concerns for
ethics, values, justice and inequalities. The exponential growth in
fossil fuel energy dependency during the last century has repeatedly
led to imperialist interventions, colonialism, deliberate destabilisation
of regimes and wars to obtain control of resources and especially oil
and gas reserves (e.g., land-grabbing from Indigenous communities,
wars and invasions from the Americas to the Middle East to Ukraine).
Ecological devastation and violation of human rights goes along with
the wanton extraction of such resources and the attempts of nation-
states to securitise supply chains for their own ends. Under capital-
accumulating competitive economies the social, ecological and
economic interact to create recurring multiple crises. In recent times
humanity has faced a triple-conjuncture of global crises: climate

change and ecological breakdown; a systemic crisis of global
capitalism and neoliberal economic globalisation; and the global
COVID-19 pandemic (Gills and Morgan 2020).
However, accepting multiple crises and their interconnections as
serious imminent threats has been repeatedly ignored in public
policy debates, and when crises resurface their systemic structural
causes are consistently downplayed. Recognising how economic
systems are structured, operate and are reproduced to cause such
crises remains ‘off the agenda’. Recommended ‘solutions’ are end-of-
pipe, and not those necessary to address the cumulative and self-
reinforcing causes. Crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, expose
the inequity and exploitative essence of capitalist markets and
political obsession with growth (Spash 2021d) but have failed to
have any substantive systemic impact. Neither has opposition to
mainstream economics seen any revolutionary change. Like
capitalism itself, the neoclassical orthodoxy has remained hegemonic
despite its problems, and has seemingly managed to respond to
paradigmatic crises and maintain power. This is no accident because
orthodox mainstream economists provide rhetorical legitimation for
the capitalist political economy within which they work and operate
as professionals.1
Understanding the ongoing failure to address the multiple crises
of our times and what should be done about them are core aspects
of this book. The contention is that a radically different form of
economics is necessary which addresses both the co-emergence of
economies with social structure and human dependencies on
biophysical structures. In this chapter the historical context is
provided for why a radical form of ecological economics is necessary.
‘Radical’ is used in its historical sense throughout this book, which
derives from the Latin radicalis, from radix or root, meaning getting
to the fundamental underlying cause. Although ‘radical’ is often used
to deride such insights as farfetched and (unacceptably) extremist,
this can be seen as simply a conservative rhetorical response in the
face of change.

In this chapter, ecological economics is identified as arising from
late-twentieth-century 
environmentalism 
and 
the 
failure 
of
environmental economics to create an academic community
prepared to challenge mainstream economic thinking, and more
specifically economic growth and price-making markets (Spash
2020c). This provides the background for the rest of the book and
explains why, paradoxically, ecological economics has been partially
entrapped by an orthodox mainstream economic conceptual
discourse. Rather than deny the relevance of divisions, as too often
occurs under the guise of some forms of poorly defined pluralism,
the aim is to clarify the role of conflicting positions in creating the
current community in order to understand and distinguish the most
scientifically progressive elements and groupings for achieving the
much-needed social ecological transformation.
Economics and the environment
Ecological economics engages with a range of topics which recur
across time and space and have been debated in Western
philosophy since the ancient Greeks. As such the subject matter
includes the ontological aspects of Nature and society, limits to
wealth creation, the psychological and social impact of ostentatious
consumption, what constitutes a meaningful or good life, how to
achieve such a life individually and socially, ethics and behaviour, and
the epistemology of value. Threads of reasoning and ideas that are
represented in the modern subject can be identified in a range of
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century sources and call upon many
topics discarded or ignored by orthodox mainstream economists,
including: population and poverty (Malthus 1986 [1798]), morality
and social motivation (Smith 1982 [1759]), non-renewable energy
dependence (Jevons 1965 [1865]), stationary-state economy (Mill
1848: Book IV, chapter VI), commodification, exploitation, class
conflict and conditions of capital accumulation (Marx 1974 [1887]),
and conspicuous consumption (Veblen 1991 [1899]). There is also

the Romantic critique of capitalist economics (Ruskin 1907 [1862])
and the potentiality for alternative societies (Morris 1993 [1890]). In
ecological economics some limited forays have been made into this
historical context (e.g., Becker et al. 2005; Christensen 1989; Smith
1980; Spash 1999; Vianna Franco 2018; Vianna Franco and
Missemer 2023), but most substantively with respect to the energy-
environment interface, first significantly addressed in the work on
history 
of 
thought 
by 
Martinez-Alier 
(1990). 
While 
these
subconscious roots may run deep, the conscious ones lie more
directly in the second half of the twentieth century.
Ciriacy-Wantrup’s (1938; 1952a) work on water management, soil
conservation, land and resource use is a precursor to later
developments in environmental economics. His applied public policy
work on water management offers one of the earliest occurrences of
the term ‘externality’ in relation to pollution (Spash 2021b), which is
associated with his criticism of standard economic approaches
(Ciriacy-Wantrup 1959). He contributed the idea of setting a safe
minimum standard when confronting uncertainty in public policy
(Ciriacy-Wantrup 1952b; Seidl 2017). This resonates with Kapp’s
(1965) recommendation of setting social minima (e.g., basic
standards of air and water quality) and the more recent concept of a
precautionary principle (Stirling 2017). His influence remains an
unrecognised undercurrent to a more radical environmental
economics.
However, Kapp (1950) published the first book to seriously
address the relationship of economic structure, especially the
business enterprise, to the environment (e.g., air and water
pollution). This work was a good decade ahead of the beginnings of
popular environmentalism, and half a century in advance of most
economists 
in 
its 
understanding 
of 
economy-environment
interactions. Kapp dedicated his life to researching the relationship
between economic structure and the environment (Kapp 1950;
1974a; 1978 [1963]). He also explored the relationship between
social and natural sciences, the need for knowledge integration and
the meaning of interdisciplinarity (Kapp 1961). He and his wife Lore
L. Kapp wrote on history of thought and methodology (Kapp and

Kapp 1963). He produced an extensive empirically based institutional
analysis of environmental problems as deliberate acts of social cost-
shifting in competitive productivist social structures (Kapp 1950;
1978 [1963]). Indeed, the reason he is largely unknown is that his
critique was so far ahead of its time in breadth and depth (Berger
2017).
The likes of Kapp and Ciriacy-Wantrup were significant outliers in
the economic community. Thus, other relevant work from this period
proves lacking on explicit environmental coverage. In this regard
there is the critical institutional analysis of Polanyi (1944) on the rise
of self-regulating price-making market economies, and Galbraith
(1969 [1958]; 2007 [1967]) on corporate abuse of power. Both
include passing links to environmental degradation and provide
insights into social, ecological and economic interactions. While
Polanyi and Galbraith address the operation of modern industrial –
and especially capitalist market – economies, important connections
to the structural causes of environmental problems lack the kind of
explicit attention that soon arose.
The emergence of environmentalism
In the 1960s a more widespread and popular awakening to
environmental problems arrived with books such as Carson’s (1987
[1962]) Silent Spring on agro-chemical pollution and Ehrlich’s (1968)
Population Bomb. The problematic social and environmental aspects
of economic growth were placed on the economists’ agenda
(Boulding 1966; Mishan 1967; 1969). In popular culture, the hippie
movement 
raised 
the 
ideal 
of 
harmony 
with 
Nature,
dematerialisation and alternative modes of living (from self-
sufficiency to communes). However, the popular environmental
literature really took off in the 1970s and then spread into wider
economic debates. Topics expanded from population growth (Ehrlich
and Holdren 1971), to general limits to economic growth (Meadows
et al. 1972), to questioning the means of production (Schumacher
1973) and social impacts of growth (Hirsch 1977b). Radical
environmental activism was being born (Abbey 1975), and an

associated 
protest 
movement 
became 
institutionalised 
in
environmental non-governmental organisations (NGOs) from Friends
of the Earth and Greenpeace to Earth First and Sea Shepherd.
In economics a major factor that helped concentrate minds on
limits due to environmental and natural resource issues was the
energy crisis (Commoner 1976; Tanzer 1974). World War II had
highlighted the importance of maintaining supply chains and this
concern was heightened by the Cold War. In the USA, the idea of
freedom was linked to the necessity of securing resource supplies at
low cost to ensure economic growth (Paley 1952). The orthodox
mainstream economic think-tank Resources for the Future was
established in 1952 as a direct result. The nationalisation of oil
production by members of the Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC) was a major blow to British and
American interests, because their oil corporations had previously
monopolised supplies,2 supported by secret services and military
forces. The oil crisis of the early 1970s – created by OPEC restricting
supply, leading to price increases – exposed the fossil fuel
dependency that lies at the heart of the modern economy.
Lack of a crucial, finite non-renewable resource could collapse the
whole system – an idea neglected since the time of Jevons (1965
[1865]). Limits to growth were firmly put back on the economists’
agenda by Meadows et al. (1972). There was inevitably also a
backlash against systems critique and defensive arguments from
orthodox mainstream economists defending price-making markets
against both environmental and resource concerns that might mean
a need for central planning. For example, Beckerman (1974) not
only attacked those raising concerns over finite natural resources,
but also Kapp’s environmental work (see reply by Kapp 1978 [1963]:
305–318).
Despite such orthodox mainstream economists’ attempts to
downplay the environmental crisis, awareness of pollution as a
techno-industrial threat to life on Earth was rising among the public
in Europe and North America. The link of DDT to non-human and
human birth defects was widely publicised, as were similar

consequences resulting from heavy-metal contamination and its
bioaccumulation in food chains (e.g., inedible fish of the Great
Lakes) and similarly concerns over nuclear fallout from weapons
testing. In 1959, contamination of the food chain became evident
when radioactive deposits were found in wheat and milk in the
northern USA. A ‘Partial Test Ban Treaty’ was signed in 1963, with
nuclear weapons testing going underground, although France and
China persisted with above-ground testing and creating global
radioactive contamination (Simpson et al. 1981). The military-related
nuclear power industry, supplying weapons-grade plutonium,
threatened both catastrophic accidents and pollution from waste
disposal. Problems became actualised with the 1979 partial
meltdown of the reactor at Three Mile Island in the USA, radioactive
releases in the UK from the reprocessing plant at Windscale (later
rebranded Sellafield) and the global radioactive fallout from the
nuclear reactor accident at Chernobyl, Ukraine in 1986.
The increasing geographical scope of pollution threats was
moving from environmentalists’ fears to established science. That air
pollutants could be transported internationally was contested into
the 1980s, and persistently denied by those – the USA, UK and
Germany – burning coal for centralised electricity generation. Such
large-scale point source emissions were responsible for sulphur
dioxide and nitrous oxides causing acidic deposition (popularly called
acid rain). In Europe, confirming the sources of acidic deposition
impacting Scandinavian ecosystems became a political issue,
creating an international research project that finally achieved global
recognition of the problem with the 1979 United Nations Convention
on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution. Despite this, political
opinion only changed in Germany once damages became evident
domestically due to severe tree loss in the nationally treasured Black
Forest. Meanwhile, the aircraft industry’s proposal for large fleets of
supersonic aircraft as the future for international travel raised the
spectre of polluting the upper atmosphere and affecting global
climate. Under a government-funded project in the USA, this
received some analytical attention from economists (d’Arge 1975).
The next global alarm was raised by the depletion of stratospheric

ozone (the ozone hole), caused by the use of aerosol propellants
and mainly chlorofluorocarbons at the time, which gained some
attention from economists at Resources for the Future (Cumberland
et al. 1982).
In a few decades pollution had moved from being regarded as
localised smog from domestic fires to international and global, with
numerous sources and seriously threatening consequences –
including genetic mutation and irreversible damage to life-supporting
ecosystems and their functioning. The connectivity of life, energy,
nutrients, chemicals and materials was being encapsulated in the
concept of ecosystems and researched by the new science of
systems ecology. Dilution was no longer the solution to pollution.
The rise and fall of radical environmental economics
Environmental economics arose, along with the growth in public
awareness, as a direct response to pollution problems (Kneese
1971). By the late 1960s, the promise of material wealth for all and
post-World War II optimism in the abilities of science and technology
were faltering. Boulding (1966) characterised economies as being
run like the Wild West, populated by cowboys who exploited
resources, chucked their waste on the ground and rode away to
infinite horizons – where lay the promise of fresh resources and new
environments to exploit and degrade. This was contrasted with Earth
as a materially closed system like a spaceship. Economic growth was
seen as positively misleading in terms of the consequences for
human society (Mishan 1967; 1969). The challenge was for a new
approach to economics.
Environmental economics, by incorporating biophysical knowledge
and wider values than typical in economic preference utilitarianism,
appeared both innovative and progressive, if not downright
revolutionary. For example, Bohm and Kneese (1971: ix–x)
introduced their edited volume The Economics of the Environment,
stating that this was ‘a profession rethinking, extending, and revising
its concepts, and finding new applications for them’. They drew a
parallel with ‘the ferment in the profession when the Keynesian

revolution was in progress’ and claimed history was in the making.
The reality was a little different.
Any serious challenge by such key figures of the time, which
might have been posed to core economic paradigms (i.e., growth
and price-making markets), theoretical models or even economists’
non-environmental preoccupations, was muted. Indeed, besides
some passing rhetorical comments, time was mostly devoted to
developing orthodox mainstream economic thought and applying
this to environmental issues. Materials balance theory brought in the
laws of thermodynamics, but for compatibility with the orthodox
mainstream this needed to fit within a general equilibrium
framework (Kneese et al. 1970). Pollution was seen as all-pervasive
(Hunt and d’Arge 1973), but this needed to fit within an optimal
control framework (d’Arge and Kogiku 1973). The environment was
seen to involve a range of values neglected by and outside of
economics (Krutilla 1967), but these had to fit within cost-benefit
analysis and a welfare theoretical framework (Kneese 1984). Thus,
despite long-range transport of multiple air pollutants from dispersed
sources 
being 
a 
major 
topic 
of 
environmental 
concern,
environmental economists persisted in teaching a core model which
characterised pollution as a local problem between two actors, easily
corrected as a one-off market failure.
Pollution as all-pervasive meant recognising that neoclassical price
theory was fundamentally flawed. This threat to the paradigmatic
core was neutralised by claiming that environmental damages could
be valued in monetary terms and market prices adjusted (Spash
2021b). Yet, problems repeatedly arose. Environmental valuation via
social cost-benefit analysis introduced new methods meant to
estimate marginal damage functions. Early on, the travel cost
method was developed (Clawson and Knetsch 1966), and later
contingent valuation opened a whole new research agenda
(Cummings et al. 1986). This move to primary data collection from
face-to-face interviews produced results questioning the economic
model of human psychology and motivation (Spash 2008a). Such
developments were too much for mainstream orthodox theorists, as
exemplified by a key workshop on contingent valuation run by

Cummings et al. (1986). This brought together a range of people,
including psychologists (e.g., Kahneman), but those advocating
behavioural models from social psychology met opposition: ‘We
certainly 
underestimated 
the 
barriers 
to 
interdisciplinary
communication. Our proposal that economists consider the attitudes-
behaviour literature has met with indifference or hostility. CBS are no
exception’ (Bishop and Heberlein 1986: 141).
Value theory was also subject to potentially radical change.
Environmental values expanded from pure use to option, existence
and bequest values (Krutilla 1967; Krutilla and Fisher 1978). This
contributed to discussions over the ethical basis of economics
(Kneese and Schulze 1985; Schulze and Brookshire 1982; Schulze et
al. 1981). Climate change and the treatment of future generations
were also topics on the valuation agenda (d’Arge 1979), which raised
ethical concerns (d’Arge et al. 1982; Spash and d’Arge 1989).
Kahneman and Knetsch (1992b) referred to willingness-to-pay under
contingent valuation as the purchase of moral satisfaction rather
than an exchange value, which again provoked strong defensive
reactions.3 Despite being a pioneer of travel cost and hedonic
pricing, Knetsch became highly critical of valuation practice (e.g.,
Knetsch 1994; 2005), and in particular its failure to learn from
empirical evidence with respect to loss-gain differences (Knetsch
1985; 1989; Knetsch and Sinden 1984).
Working inside orthodox mainstream economics – preference
utilitarianism, optimal control modelling, discounting, a monistic
value system and mathematics as a doctrine of rigour – heavily
constrained criticism, innovation and the ability to address
environmental and social problems. The entire thrust of the work
towards a new and challenging research agenda was being denied.
By the mid-1980s university education in environmental economics
was mainly limited to North America, where the approach to topics
was controlled and the curriculum restricted. In this atmosphere
ecological economics emerged as a challenge to what had become a
captured orthodox mainstream economics of the environment.4

Environmentalism delimited by the orthodox mainstream
Neoclassical theorists gave resource and environmental economics a
technocentric optimism and ideological faith in self-regulating, price-
making markets that circumvented recognising any need for
fundamental change in human behaviour or major government
intervention to directly regulate corporations or control market
players. If government interventions are regarded as necessary, they
should leave the basic role of ‘the market’, as the most efficient
resource-allocating institution, unaffected. That is, the self-regulating
interactions of supply and demand are claimed to set stable
equilibrium prices that reflect resource scarcity – the price-making
market model.5
The 
response 
of 
economic 
neoclassical 
orthodoxy 
to
environmentalists’ concerns, resource depletion and ecological
crises, can be summarised as follows. If an economy is constrained
by a lack of resources, then technology must provide the solution by
creating the ability to employ new substitutes and access new
resource deposits. Scarcity will appear in higher prices, which are
expected to stimulate resource conservation and new technologies.
Resource use includes the assimilative capacity of the environment
to absorb human wastes and pollutants. Lack of resource supply, or
overuse of a resource, may result due to market failures. These
occur due to a lack of private property rights or where markets are
missing, which is taken to mean these should be created. Doing so is
meant to provide a price for everything of value to humans, so that
the value of all resources is reflected in monetary terms within the
market exchange economy. Markets, unfettered by government
regulation, are expected to set prices that reflect the ‘true’ cost of
resources through mechanisms of competition, trade and exchange
and the interaction of supply and demand. What exactly ‘truth’ is
meant to mean here remains totally obscure.
Pollution may therefore already be designated as economically
optimal due to the (transaction) costs involved in controlling it. Thus,
we live in the best of all possible worlds with our polluted
environment, because the alternatives cost more (Mishan 1971). If

the environment appears excessively polluted this is a cost-benefit
issue, awaiting either technology to provide low-cost solutions (i.e.,
new means of clean-up) or damages to get measurably worse.
However, in the meantime a polluted environment is the most
efficient outcome.
A concession to a role for government is that markets may fail
and need correcting due to ‘externalities’ (i.e., things the market has
failed to consider). Products creating pollution may need to be taxed
to give a price inclusive of the cost of associated harm (e.g.,
mortality, morbidity, material damages, ecosystem 
impacts),
measured in terms of monetary social costs, including those
occurring anywhere in time or space (in order to claim the
theoretical legitimacy of welfare maximisation and efficiency). This is
termed internalising pollution externalities. However, government
intervention is generally regarded as inefficient. While in theory
neoclassical economists could justify a form of centrally planned,
socialist, market economy, this has in fact not seriously been on the
agenda since the 1930s (e.g., Lange and Taylor 1938), and was
eradicated from mainstream economic debate by the rise of
neoliberalism in the 1980s. Only after the 2008 economic crisis did
questioning capitalism start to re-emerge, but without substantive
policy impact (Mirowski 2013).
Development is defined as requiring exploitation of resources and
environmental degradation in order to achieve technological
advancement 
and 
capital 
accumulation 
to 
get 
back 
the
environmental quality lost in the process of development. In that
process, humans as self-centred hedonists compete with one
another to meet their personal wants and desires. This justifies the
emphasis on the growth of resource and energy throughput as being
necessary to meet human demands for more consumer goods and
services. Environmental concerns are portrayed as a modern
phenomenon, a rich-country preoccupation, a preference of the new
middle classes, and environmental quality is conceptualised as an
optional luxury commodity. Environmental problems are at best
secondary issues relative to growth in material and energy

throughput, 
wealth 
creation, 
capital 
accumulation 
and 
full
employment of the population in waged productivist activities.
Despite being a pure fallacy – ignoring history and human
dependence on Nature regardless of wealth (Martinez-Alier 2002) –
this characterisation, or establishment discourse, enables some
common elements to be maintained across those schools of
economic thought which relegate environmental issues to the side-
lines. Such elements include believing that economic growth is an
unquestionable end, economics should be preoccupied with how to
achieve growth, such growth equates to human development and
progress, consumption is inherently good and increasing it raises
wellbeing. A series of implicit ontological positions that underlie this
approach go unquestioned. There are no irreversible environmental
damages (e.g., species loss) because the theory is based upon
mechanistic understanding. Human affairs are treated as divorced
from biological and physical reality and context. Economies are
conceptualised as taking only one form and ‘the economy’ is
discussed without any reference to its material and energy
dependences. This conceptualisation acts as a means of organising
economics as a discipline while defining what are regarded as the
legitimate areas of research and policy ‘solutions’.
Resource 
and 
environmental 
economics 
became 
the
subdisciplinary fields to assuage those economists who felt the need
to express a concern for natural resource depletion and/or
environmental degradation. It allowed orthodox dissent without
blasphemy. 
Meanwhile 
mainstream 
microeconomics 
and
macroeconomics could continue with theories that assume
economies can operate independently of either the natural resource
base or the assimilative capacity of the environment, and so
completely marginalised such concerns. The treatment of resource
and environmental issues as special cases of more general
mainstream economic theoretical constructs combined with the
establishment discourse (e.g., price theory, efficient resource
allocation, capital-accumulating economic growth, free trade, full
employment) to dominate and delimit debate.

The rise of ecological economics and the roots
of conflict
Economists voicing strong environmental critiques proved too
revolutionary for the orthodox mainstream of the profession. Kapp
(1970a; 1970b; 1978 [1963]) pointed out the basic failure of a
competitive system that shifts social costs onto others and
characterises them as ‘externalities’, as if these were not deliberate
pervasive acts of creating avoidable harm and could instead be
treated as minor aberrations in an otherwise perfectly efficient price-
making market economy. Georgescu-Roegen (1971) wrote a major
thesis on the importance of entropy for economic processes which
basically concluded that economic growth was infeasible over the
long run and as a result policy needed fundamental reform. His
reasoning led to questioning human society, from the size of the
population and the pressure placed upon systems, to the
accelerating rate of human-imposed change. The operation of
economic systems could then be recognised as inseparable from
ethical judgements – who gets what, where and for what purposes?
– both concerning others currently living and future generations.
Daly (1977a; 1992a) came to the conclusion that the best option in
the face of entropy laws and critiques of growth was to aim for a
steady-state economy. Kapp, Georgescu-Roegen and Daly all found
themselves and their ideas marginalised.
The arrival of ecological economics in the late 1980s offered the
potential for picking up on the more radical literature and giving
serious attention to such researchers. That at least became the hope
of the associated social economists, for if the field were no different
from 
the 
orthodox 
mainstream 
subfields 
of 
resource 
and
environmental economics the entire exercise of galvanising a new
community would be a rather pointless repetition of what had gone
before. History pointed in the direction of a more blasphemous
heterodox economics of the environment which dared to reject
neoclassical economics in totalitus. However, developing a heterodox
interdisciplinary research field with a distinct philosophy of science

and approach to society-economy-environment interactions was not
on everyone’s agenda and resulted in conflict.
In an in-depth study, involving interviews with several noted
ecological economists, Ropke (2004; 2005) found the international
society started by forming an uneasy alliance of people holding
divergent ecological and economic positions on the basis of sharing
some very broad environmental concerns. The unifying position
might be summarised as consisting of little more than: the
environment matters for the functioning of economies; environments
are being degraded; and ecology has important messages for
economics which are being neglected. Ecologists, such as AnnMari
Jansson, came forward who were passionate about connecting
ecological understanding with economics in order to better address
environmental problems in the public arena (Røpke 2004). Any
economist prepared to talk to an ecologist concerning the
environment was a bonus. Ecologist Paul Ehrlich (2008: 1) has
regarded ecological economics as identical to environmental and
resource economics. Such ecologists appear to have been largely
(often wilfully) ignorant of differences between types of economists,
and many remain so. Yet such ecologists filled key roles running the
newly founded International Society for Ecological Economics (ISEE)
and its journal.
The result was substantial involvement by economists supporting
core neoclassical positions in terms of ontology, epistemology,
methodology, axiology and ideology. This was further encouraged by
the strategy for popular recognition and headline-breaking articles in
Science and Nature. The bigger the name in the field, the better for
getting the environmental message across, and as far as economists
are concerned that clearly favoured the hegemonic orthodoxy. A core
group of ecologists – including Bob Costanza, Brian Walker, Paul
Ehrlich, David Pimentel and Carl Folke – chose to associate with
orthodox mainstream economic theorists such as Ken Arrow, Karl
Göran Mäler and Partha Dasgupta. In the first issue of the ISEE’s
journal Ecological Economics the subject was defined by Costanza
(1989: 1) as including neoclassical environmental economics and
ecological impact studies, as well as encouraging new ways of

thinking. A popular approach to ecological economics, especially in
North America, was trying to combine models from its two named
disciplines. While the linking of ecology and economics was an
interesting initial step, the narrow confines of model interactions and
multidisciplinary collaboration failed to advance the field of
knowledge beyond some minimal orthodox dissent. Mainstream
economists were placed on the board of the journal, which
increasingly published much falling well within neoclassical thought,
including the mechanistic equilibrium models and preference
utilitarianism which had previously constrained the radical and
critical ideas of environmental economists.
The UK’s most high-profile environmental economist of the time,
David Pearce, became an early associate editor of the journal
Ecological Economics. His orthodox mainstream position was
expressed by advocacy of pervasive monetary valuation of Nature,
and pursued via political allies in the ruling Conservative government
(Grove-White 1997). He became increasingly hostile to anything
heterodox. At the 1996 inaugural conference of the European
Society for Ecological Economics (ESEE), he questioned the reason
for ecological economics being anything distinct from neoclassical
economic thought (Røpke 2005: 271), and went on to point at
Charles Perrings and rhetorically question his presence. Pearce was
not separated from the journal for another two years. Perrings, later
an ISEE president, has pursued abstract mathematical modelling in
the mode of neoclassical resource economics (Perrings 1987).
So, mainstream economic approaches were from the outset
brought into ecological economics, although the aim for many had
been explicitly to move away from this orthodoxy (e.g., Söderbaum
1999; 2008). The potential for divisiveness was apparent to some
early on. For example, in 1990 the Swedish Beijer Institute was
rebranded under the title ‘ecological economics’, supported by a
management board mixing orthodox mainstream economists
(Dasgupta, Mäler, Pearce, Zylicz) and ecologists (Ehrlich, Holling)
with one dissenting economist (Daly). The Institute was headed by
Mäler, the board chaired by Dasgupta and two research programmes
were directed by Perrings and Costanza. As has been documented

by Røpke (2005: 272), the decisions made by Dasgupta soon drove
Daly to resign, which allowed the Beijer Institute to concentrate on
methods from orthodox mainstream economics models that were
linked to ecological models.6 As Daly later stated: ‘I felt it was a kind
of take-over – here is something called ecological economics, it is
beginning to get a little following, it might get in the way someday,
let’s just take it over’ (quoted in Røpke 2005: 272).
As the field has matured, these divisions, which signify a
paradigmatic battle, have remained strong and resurfaced on various
occasions. In 2002 the journal Ecological Economics saw the
incoming editor, Cutler Cleveland, expel from the board the more
heterodox European representatives from the social ecological
economics camp (including Inge Røpke, an associate editor, and
both the founding and then current ESEE presidents, Sylvie
Faucheux and myself). This went unnoticed by most people. The
ISEE executive at the time refused to take any counter-action and
preferred to brush over the incident in the name of avoiding open
conflict.
In 2004 a more public controversy occurred concerning the award
of the ISEE prize in the name of Kenneth Boulding. The recipients
were Dasgupta and Mäler. In the Society newsletter (distributed at
the biennial conference), Perrings, then ISEE president, rejoiced in
this as signifying a change towards the approach of the Beijer
Institute, that is, mainstream economic formalism. However, the
award came as something of a shock to many when announced at
the opening session of the biennial ISEE conference. It was debated
and contested by the membership at the Society’s business meeting
(Røpke 2005: 284–285; Söderbaum 2007: 212–213). Neither
Dasgupta nor Mäler had previously engaged with the wider
community (e.g., despite being European residents, never attending
the European conferences), nor were ever members of ISEE. Their
work was felt by many to be incongruent with the developing field
and Røpke (2004: 309) notes Mäler’s dislike of ‘socio-economics’.
Obviously, those making this award had a different perspective7 from

the concerned ISEE membership, and their active involvement with
the Beijer Institute appears a unifying factor.
Such occurrences will not surprise those familiar with the book A
History of Heterodox Economics by Fred Lee (2009). In a Kuhnian-
type approach, he explains that scientific knowledge develops within
a community which defines how work is conducted, what is valid and
who is part of the community of scholars. In self-definition an
academic community selects the goal-dependent central issues of
research and those designated as colleagues are meant to work on
broadly the same or supportive issues. Scientific knowledge is
produced by an elaborate intellectual and social organisation
embedded in educational systems, academic departments and
research institutes. There is a system of dependency and
interdependence. As Lee (2009: 12) notes:
scientists that do not ‘fit’ into this structure of dependency, do not produce
the right kind of knowledge, can be marginalized and excluded from the
community, but still exist within the field or they can be cleansed from the
field altogether.
The concern over dogmatic power and exclusion operating in
economics led to the establishment of heterodox economics and
advocacy of ‘pluralism’ in economics, meaning the inclusion of all
schools of thought in the university system, and especially
economics departments and their curricula. Ecological economics
was part of this same phenomenon.
At the same time, a lack of clarity as to the extent to which
ecological economics should be heterodox has permitted a confusing
array of literature to appear under this title. For example, consider
environmental valuation. Measurement and value issues have been
high on the agenda of ecological economists. For some this has
consisted of attempts to get old wine into new bottles to attract
economic and political support for action. This includes lauding as a
success the production of large monetary numbers (e.g., Costanza et
al. 1997b), regardless of their theoretical inadequacies, and
supporting social cost-benefit studies to treat ecosystems as service
providers (e.g., Daily 1997). Ecologists, or economists, pragmatically

plucking numbers from the air to claim importance for ecosystems
undermines an alternative theoretically grounded research agenda.
Hence a mix, or muddle, of literature has appeared, none of which
learns from experience or addresses the basic problem of developing
a coherent theory of value. Value theory is confused with pluralism
in pedagogics, the result being to simultaneously support the
monistic value theory of the orthodox mainstream alongside the
value pluralism and incommensurability of ecological economics.
Pluralism is sometimes misleadingly referenced as justifying
incoherence and contradiction under the guise of toleration and
diversity (Goddard et al. 2019; Norgaard 1989), but this is quite
simply to misconceive the requirements for advancing scientific
knowledge. A core concern of this book is for understanding
scientific knowledge as grounded in ontology and meeting epistemic
criteria but also connected to ideological positions. This should not
be confused (as is too often done) with pluralist pedagogics, where
all schools should be taught in order to create comprehensive
understanding within the context of critical thinking that nurtures the
ability to judge inadequacies and failures, especially those of the
mainstream orthodoxy (Morgan 2021b). Indeed, judgemental
rationality needs to be applied because not all theories are equally
valid, and choosing between them is part of scientific practice.
Conclusions
The subconscious roots of ecological economics run deep into the
past, but the modern community arose from the ashes of radical
environmental economics. Environmental economists were taken
along with the political turmoil of the 1960s but failed to realise the
paradigm-shifting revolutionary potential they once saw in their field.
That failure reflects the institutional power which lies in orthodox
mainstream economics to control debate, forgive some and expel
others (quite literally, in the case of university economics
departments).

Early on, ecologists within the ISEE advanced collaboration with
orthodox mainstream economists who had little interest in any
heterodox agenda or were openly hostile towards such an approach.
Orthodox mainstream economists were also placed in positions of
power. None of this aided the development of the new community in
providing an alternative research agenda or a coherent paradigm.
Instead, 
some 
pragmatically 
adopted 
orthodox 
mainstream
economic models, concepts and valuation methods, despite the
conflict this created. This meant denying that environmental
degradation and economic systems are fundamentally intertwined
with social structure. Unfortunately, the importance of social,
political, ethical and institutional factors is something which
ecologists are not trained to detect, and orthodox mainstream
economists are trained to neglect.
Differences and divisions have in many ways since become clearer
due to the developing alternative research agendas. The desire to
combine different heterodox schools of thought – ecological, critical
institutional, eco-social, neo-Marxist, feminist, Post Keynesian – is in
direct contrast to the drive for seeking recognition within
establishment discourses and by orthodox mainstream economists.
How such a heterodox approach might advance in the face of a
hegemonic orthodox mainstream economics is the subject of the
next chapter.
Notes
 1
The term ‘orthodox mainstream’ includes neoclassical economics; see Chap
ter 2.
 2
The anti-trust breakup of John D. Rockefeller’s corporation Standard Oil in
1911 led over time to the oligopoly known as the Seven Sisters, which thro
ugh acquisitions and mergers became the four extant multinational corpora
tions BP, Shell, Chevron and ExxonMobil.
 3
After a protracted review process the article appeared simultaneously with
a critique (Smith 1992), commissioned by the editor (Cummings), and a re
ply (Kahneman and Knetsch 1992a). Cummings then published a second cr

itique and refused the authors’ right to reply. Knetsch, personal communica
tion, June 2004 and January 2006. Ironically, the article was soon the most
highly cited in the field’s leading journal.
 4
While environmental economics became more realistic with respect to pollu
tion, and qualified concerning ability to estimate associated costs and bene
fits, the core ideas of efficiency through pricing and internalising externaliti
es into market decisions have necessarily remained untouched (e.g., see Ti
etenberg and Lewis 2018).
 5
All markets are social constructions, institutionally defined and subject to p
ower relations. Price-making markets is a term I use based on Polanyi (195
7). This form of market has prices resulting from (formal or informal) contr
actual ‘negotiations’ between actors (e.g., firm–consumers; employer–empl
oyee), in contrast to being set by an administrative, or other, authority. In n
eoclassical and neo-Austrian theory, the price-making market is typically re
garded to be ‘self-regulating’.
 6
Despite adopting the term ‘ecological economics’ in its title, the Beijer Instit
ute has maintained a strong presence of mainstream and specifically neocl
assical resource and environmental economists, including Scott Barrett, Par
tha Dasgupta, Geoffrey Heal, Karine Nyborg, David Pearce, Stephen Polask
y, Paul Portney, Jason Shogren, Domenico Siniscalco, Robert Solow, David
Starett, Thomas Sterner, Anastasios Xepapadeas. Aart de Zeeuw and Toma
sz Zylicz.
 7
Three ecologists: David Rapport (Canada; chair), Brian Walker (Australia),
Buzz Holling (USA). One environmental scientist: Kerry Turner (UK). Two ec
onomists: Clem Tisdell (Australia); Perrings (UK/USA).

2
Addressing the environmental crisis:
Orthodox versus heterodox economics
Introduction
Adopting an orthodox mainstream paradigmatic perspective, in part
or whole, has serious implications for the conduct and relevance of
economic science. Lee (2009: 7) summarises what is wrong as
follows.
The mainstream explanation focuses on how asocial, ahistorical individuals
choose among scarce resources to meet competing ends given unlimited
wants and explains it using fictitious concepts and a deductivist, closed-
system methodology.
A central contention of Chapter 1 was that the institutionalised
power of mainstream economic theory has played an important role
in delimiting the field of environmental research and preventing a
more realist approach. This chapter focuses on dissent from the
mainstream and the extent to which heterodox economics offers a
radical alternative for addressing environmental crises. Heterodox
economics serves as an umbrella term to cover the coming together
of – sometimes longstanding – separate projects or traditions. This
academic collective includes Marxists, critical institutionalists,
feminists and Post Keynesians, among others.1 Lee (2009: 11)
argues 
that 
the 
heterodoxy 
constitutes 
an 
‘interwoven,

interdependent narrative of ideas and community’. The questions
then arise as to what makes this a united scholarly community,
beyond the negative definition of being in opposition to mainstream
economic thought, and why social ecological economics should be
counted as part of this collective.
Kuhn (1970 [1962]: 10), in his paradigm theory of what makes a
scientific community, specifies books and textbooks as the
publications that ‘define the legitimate problems and methods of a
research field for succeeding generations of practitioners’. They are
also regarded as identifying and defining what are legitimate
problems left open to be resolved. Today, in many fields, peer-
reviewed journals would also be added as fulfilling this definitional
role, with editors acting as gatekeepers of what is designated as
legitimate knowledge. In this way a scientific field and its boundaries
might be purposefully established via publications and so empirically
identified, 
but 
Kuhn 
undertheorised 
ongoing 
paradigmatic
disputation.
Textbooks in ecological economics exemplify the field becoming
entwined with or subsumed under neoclassical economics. The first
introductory book on ecological economics (Costanza et al. 1997a),
by leading American figures in the ISEE, maintained an uneasy
balance between requesting a new worldview to address our social
and environmental woes, and not ejecting the body of orthodox
mainstream thinking. Daly, as a coauthor of that book, appears to
have later developed a more radical position. The introductory
textbook by Daly and Farley (2011) invokes the concepts of both a
new preanalytic vision for economics and a Kuhnian revolutionary
change (i.e., a paradigm shift). However, elsewhere, they call upon
what they have attacked (e.g., marginal analysis, utilitarian
explanations, mainstream models and concepts) and are happy to
endorse tradeable permits markets as consistent with ecological
economic principles. The other main introductory text, by Common
and Stagl (2005), has no revolutionary claims to make and falls back
rather quickly on orthodox mainstream economic theory and
methodology. This includes using the same philosophy of science

(neo-positivism) and ethical theory (preference utilitarianism) as
associated with neoclassical economics.
The journal Ecological Economics acts as a unifying node, but it
also publishes substantive quantities of unreconstituted neoclassical
economic work that brings into question its heterodox credentials.
Thus, while Cronin (2010) found Ecological Economics to be related
to the heterodoxy, he lists it as a non-heterodox journal. Indeed,
bibliometric studies attempting to empirically identify what
constitutes ecological economics have proven highly misleading
exactly because of the ongoing paradigmatic contestation over the
heterodox content and direction (Spash 2013a). For example, claims
by Silva and Teixeira (2011) that ecological economics is now a post-
normal science appear based upon the antithesis of the post-normal
epistemology redefined as mainstream conformity and pragmatism
(e.g., the spread of mathematical formalism, abstract expert
modelling and low-quality uncritical monetary quantification).
Similarly, the citations analysis of Hoepner et al. (2012) redefines
ecological economics as no different from and perhaps a branch of
the orthodox mainstream subdisciplines of agricultural, resource and
environmental economics (see critique by Spash 2013a). The
blurring of the lines as to what is distinct about ecological economics
is also something continually repeated in the journal.
The overall aim of the current chapter is to clarify the divisions in
economics between orthodoxy and heterodoxy, and to show how
this has impacted understanding of the environmental crisis. The
concept of orthodox – as opposed to radical – dissent is introduced,
and the meaning of paradigmatic conformity is outlined. What will be
revealed is how orthodox dissenters appear within heterodox schools
of thought and how they often justify their stance as being
pragmatic and moderating what is caricatured as being too radical. I
will argue that the fight for a paradigm shift in economics is
undercut by such conformity and pragmatism. What constitutes
heterodox thought on the environment is critically reviewed in terms
four economic schools: Marxist/socialist, institutionalist, feminist and
Post Keynesian. The unifying aspect of heterodoxy will be seen to
arise from common conceptualisations of reality. Along the way, I

will reveal the paradigmatic and ideological struggle in which
heterodoxy in general is engaged and how this plays out with
respect to ecological economics in particular.
Heterodoxy versus mainstream and dissenting
orthodoxy
Mainstreaming environmentalism
In microeconomics, core theoretical ideas set the stage in terms of a
price theory that has dominated for over a century (see Lee 2009:
2–3), providing a restricted orthodox mainstream worldview. In
macroeconomics, the type of subjects which dominate (e.g.,
economic growth, trade, money supply, full employment and
inflation) have appeared as totally divorced from biophysical reality.
This has meant that economists working on the environment who
dare to question such foundational concepts as economic growth
and market efficiency have easily been dismissed as having
consigned themselves to irrelevance. Even among heterodox
schools, where such voices might have been expected to be heard
more readily, serious attention has too often been lacking.
Economists of all schools have generally been able to ignore the
evidence of environmental problems and ecological crisis as having
anything to do with their work.
Even 
after 
more 
general 
recognition 
of 
environmental
degradation, outlined in Chapter 1, most economists have persisted
in treating pollution as a market failure, an externality, easily
corrected by a simple tax or extension of private property rights
(Spash 2021b). This was established economic dogma by the 1980s.
Environmental problems appear in economics as minor aberrations
or freakish anomalies. They are matters left to subdisciplinary
specialists in environmental economics and have been disregarded
by most other economists.
Yet in more recent times we might ask: ‘Hasn’t this been
changing? Don’t Sveriges Riksbank Nobel Prize-winning economists

now address the environment?’2 Indeed, since the early 1990s a
range of prize-winning economists (e.g., Kenneth Arrow, Daniel
Kahneman, William Nordhaus, Elinor Ostrom, Amartya Sen, Robert
Solow, Joseph Stiglitz) have been found imparting their wisdom on
environmental matters.3 Some have engaged directly with ecological
economics (e.g., Arrow, Ostrom, Sen) and commented on its anti-
growth position (Solow 1997; Stiglitz 1997).4 Does this indicate a
progressive environmental shift by economists?
Let us consider the work on greenhouse gas control. In 2018,
Nordhaus was awarded the Sveriges Riksbank Prize for integrating
climate change into long-run macroeconomic analysis via a model he
developed in the 1990s. For decades he has published a range of
claims supporting a policy of minimal intervention, arguing that
greenhouse gases are too costly to control significantly, and
damages are a non-issue for ‘the economy’. The Economist (27
October 1990) ran a leader referring to the work of Nordhaus as ‘the
best (though magnificently simplified) cost-benefit analysis’ on the
issue and referred to his monetary estimates of damages as
‘hardnosed calculations’. His work has from the start employed
unbelievably naive and unrealistic models that have ignored major
ecosystem and health impacts or attributed to them ad hoc money
figures (Spash 2002c). In the 1990s, his work divided the USA into
three sectors by susceptibility to climate change: very susceptible,
such as agriculture; medium susceptibility, such as construction; and
unsusceptible, such as finance. He assumed climate change would
have little impact because sectors he judged susceptible counted for
little dollar value in terms of the USA’s gross domestic product
(GDP). So, the loss of domestic agricultural production (i.e., food
supply) was deemed irrelevant because of its low present dollar
value, without any consideration of dynamic impacts. Interestingly,
food security and climate change have since become major
international concerns, while the finance sector now seems among
the most vulnerable due to billion-dollar insurance claims associated
with the increasing frequency of climatic disasters and extreme
weather events (e.g., catastrophic droughts, fires and floods).

Nordhaus’s work has always been clearly identifiable as an
ideological defence of American capitalism, and deliberately
designed to downplay any necessity for government policy
(especially direct regulation and planning) to seriously and
substantively reduce emissions. Nordhaus’s supposedly hardnosed
and objective cost-benefit calculations are easily exposed as lacking
scientific credibility (e.g., Keen 2021; Spash 2002c; 2007c; 2008d).
However, as the Riksbank Prize signifies, his basic approach has
remained 
unquestioned 
by 
orthodox 
mainstream 
economic
discourse, while the conclusions have been popular among fossil fuel
lobbyists and capitalist elites and in the financial and economic
media.
Another economist applying social cost-benefit calculations to
climate change is Nicholas Stern. He and his associates have
promoted optimal greenhouse gas control, carbon trading and the
techno-fix ‘green economy’ (GCEC 2014; Stern 2007). The work has
been celebrated as a major policy success. It includes an underlying
expected utility model, discounting future generations and use of
growth in GDP as means for justifying human action/inaction (see
critiques by Baer and Spash 2008; Spash 2007b). Stern has heavily
promoted the fallacy of treating the systemic climate crises as a
correctible market failure.
Even among those who seem less politically aligned to defence of
the capital-accumulating growth agenda than Nordhaus and Stern,
engagement with the realities of environmental crises appears
superficial. For example, Sen dissents from orthodox mainstream
economics and offers insights on development, poverty, justice,
ethics and gender issues. Yet his 2006 plenary to the ISEE
conference in New Delhi was environmentally vacuous. Worse, in
answer to my post-talk questioning, he expressed support for and
legitimised the monistic global social cost-benefit analysis of Stern
and later endorsed the book version (Stern 2007). This contradicts
his own work promoting capabilities and deconstructing welfarism.
The next questioner’s criticism of economic growth was derided by
Sen as wanting to return to ‘grass huts’. The chair, Martinez-Alier,
then tried to inform Sen about the Solow/Stiglitz confrontation with

Daly in ecological economics over economic growth (Daly 1997a;
1997b; Solow 1997; Stiglitz 1997). What Sen revealed was his
support for an elite economic orthodoxy and his basic ignorance of
environmental issues and the ecological economics community he
was supposedly addressing.
That eminent figures in the economic establishment can
rhetorically conduct an environmental discourse that avoids the
systemic substance of the ecological crisis is seriously problematic.
In recounting his attempt to get Solow and Stiglitz to address
Georgescu-Roegen’s critique of their work, Daly stated that:
‘Complacent arrogance of leaders is only half the problem – the
other half is the unwillingness of the rest of us to challenge
complacent error when we see it, especially in leaders who in other
ways deserve respect’ (Daly and Morgan 2019: 147).
The continued neglect of the environment as anything to do with
the core of economics as a subject can be explained by considering
two alternative ways in which economists seek to accommodate
environmental issues.
• The first is the treatment of environmental problems as special
cases of more general theoretical constructs found in mainstream
economics. This maintains an establishment discourse as to what
constitutes relevant economic problems without needing to pay
much attention to the specifics of environmental issues. For
example, human-induced climate change might be taken on-board
as transforming to a low-carbon economy, which becomes framed
as creating green jobs, green growth and green finance. These
are treated as aspects of existing macroeconomic policy. This
conversion of environmental problems into pre-existing theoretical
constructs has been the preferred approach for most economists
(both orthodox and heterodox). Classic examples are turning
Nature into capital and ecosystems into services.
• The second is the recognition that serious attention to social
ecological structure requires interdisciplinary learning and an
approach based in political economy. This is the raison d’être of
social ecological economics. Thus, work by the majority of ISEE

presidents – Sabine O’Hara, Marina Fischer-Kowalski, Bina
Agarwal, John Gowdy, Joan Martinez-Alier, Richard Norgaard,
Joshua Farley, Roldan Muradian, Erik Gomez-Baggethun – has
included the social and political as well as the economic, while
emphasising the need to address the implications of interactions
with ecosystems and the embeddedness of economies in Nature.
Emphasis is placed on social-ecological transformation of modern
economies.
The first position consists of complacency and lack of critique. The
second position raises the necessity of radical dissent from the
orthodox mainstream of economics.
Distinguishing radical from orthodox dissent
Lee (2009: 6) has defined heterodoxy as blasphemous economists
whose ideas are a rejection of and challenge to the orthodoxy. They
are non-brethren, and their persecution is a legitimate act in defence
of the orthodoxy. He distinguishes them from merely heretical
economists, who criticise the mainstream but are tolerated. Heretical
economists maintain a core position in orthodox conceptualisation,
thought and ideology. Lavoie (2014: 8–10), based on Backhouse
(2009), refers to the group between the heterodox and orthodox
mainstream as orthodox dissenters, matching Lee’s heretics. Both
Lee and Lavoie note how such economists may be lauded as part of
the establishment and are often awarded the Sveriges Riksbank
Prize in economics; for example, George Akerlof, Ronald Coase,
Milton Friedman, Paul Krugman, Wassily Leontief, Amartya Sen,
Herbert Simon, Joseph Stiglitz,5 William Vickrey and Oliver
Williamson are explicitly named by Lavoie (2014: 10). Interestingly,
Lavoie, like Backhouse (2009), also classifies John Maynard Keynes
as an orthodox dissenter.
Orthodox dissenters employ mainstream concepts and theories to
frame their work in various ways and tend to have ideological
commitment to some form of capitalism. Core orthodox beliefs, such
as price-making markets as efficient and (more or less) self-

regulating stable institutions, may be questioned and qualified but
not overthrown. As a result, their ideas have led to theoretical
‘advances’ in the orthodoxy. Under the guise of inclusiveness and
learning, their works end up protecting and defending the orthodox
core and they hold back from pursuing the logic of their ideas to
revolutionary paradigm-shifting ends. Lawson (2009) provides a
good account of why the claims of a variety of developments in
economics (i.e., game theory, behavioural economics, experimental
economics, 
evolutionary 
economics, 
neuroeconomics, 
and
complexity economics) to be heterodox are fallacious, and Boldizzoni
(2011) does likewise for new economic history and new
institutionalism.
These positions on paradigmatic disputation in economics are
shown 
graphically 
in 
Figure 
2.1. 
This 
combines 
the
Lavoie/Backhouse approach with Lee’s and adds indicators of
paradigmatic conformity and divergence. Rather than a dichotomy,
Figure 2.1 presents a kind of dialectical approach (see Chapter 7)
that allows for an overlap of orthodox dissenters with the
heterodoxy, although strictly there should be none. The aim is to
show graphically the dynamic of adopting a classification involving
disagreement, controversy, dissent and heterodoxy (as suggested by
Backhouse 2009). Figure 2.1 provides a reference point to which the
reader can return as different schools of thought are explored.

Figure 2.1  Dissenting from the orthodox paradigm
Often unrecognised in such classifications is the role of individuals
who do not self-identify as economists. For example, this appears
especially important for eco-Marxist/eco-socialist thought where
political scientists, sociologists and anthropologists actively engage
on economic topics. Such non-economists appear to fall outside the
strict economic heterodox/orthodox classification, and so create a
novel aspect of influential economic commentators. In ecological
economics there is in addition the role of natural scientists, who may
understand little and care less about orthodox versus heterodox
divisions.
Despite this agnostic grouping, discontent with the mainstream
economic paradigm, and the need to move beyond neoclassical
environmental and resource economics, was clearly a defining factor
in establishing ecological economics. It gathered a variety of
perspectives 
and 
interests 
concerned 
with 
addressing 
the
accelerating environmental crisis driven by exponential growth in

material and energy use, human population and impacts of
technological change (Martinez-Alier 2009; Røpke 2005; Spash
1999). The interdisciplinary promise and prospect on its foundation
was to respond to the environmental crisis by changing both the
paradigm of mainstream economics as a discipline and the operation
of actual economies as institutionalised social structures.
Social ecological economists maintain this radical dissent.
Foundational thinkers in the field Kapp (1978 [1963]) and the
mature Georgescu-Roegen (e.g., 1971; 2009 [1975]; 2009 [1979])
fit among their ranks.6 Mainstream economics is identified as
watering down interdisciplinary research and changing heterodox
concepts to make research fit within and conform to its own
dogmatic approach (Lee 2009). This can be viewed as a form of
mainstream economic imperialism (as exemplified for economic
psychology by Earl 2005). However, this also impacts on how
heterodox economists conduct their own research and the concepts
they employ.
Heterodox economists appear susceptible to obsessing about
mainstream ideas and approaches to the exclusion of their own. This
is evident in their citation of orthodox, more than heterodox,
literature (Dolfsma and Leydesdorff 2008). In the USA, for example,
heterodox economics has been identified with a concentration of
research 
activity 
in 
five 
areas 
– 
microeconomic 
theory;
macroeconomic theory; labour theory; history of thought; and
industrial organisation – while nine of the top ten heterodox
departments publish nothing related to the environment (Lee et al.
2010: 1366–1367). This is far from inspiring for a radical shift in
economic thinking to address social ecological crises.
When introducing a special issue of the Cambridge Journal of
Economics on the prospects for a heterodox economics of the
environment and sustainability, Douai et al. (2012) noted that
contributions from traditional heterodox schools of thought have had
relatively little to say about resource scarcity and the environmental
challenges facing humanity. They specifically state that ‘the
economic analysis of environmental issues has been dominated by

approaches inspired by neoclassical economics’ (Douai et al. 2012:
1019). However, ecological economics is also noted to offer a recent
alternative with which heterodox economists could possibly unite.
Over the intervening decade less progress appears to have
occurred than might have been expected, despite the rising
recognition of ecological crises. For example, consider recent edited
volumes on heterodox thought. The Handbook of Heterodox
Economics (Jo et al. 2018), with thirty-seven chapters, has two
explicitly addressing the environment (Chester 2018; Ekeland and
Sæther 2018). However, elsewhere in the handbook there are just
three brief mentions of environmental topics and no discussion of
the two major current global ecological crises, climate change and
biodiversity loss. The edited volume Heterodox Economics: Legacy
and Prospects (Chester and Jo 2022) gives no attention to
environmental issues, merely noting the existence of climate change
a few times without any discussion. The book Rethinking Economics
(Fischer et al. 2018) introduces nine schools of thought, including a
chapter on ecological economics (Spash and Asara 2018), but with
no coverage of environmental issues in other chapters.7
Four heterodox schools on the environment
In general, as noted, addressing the environment has been at best a
minority pursuit and at worst ignored by heterodox economists. In
this section I will reflect upon where there has been coverage and
how it has been conducted. This provides insight into the conflicts
within schools of thought as well as barriers to, and potential for,
greater unity between heterodox schools. A critical review is
undertaken of environmental coverage by four heterodox schools:
Marxist, institutionalist, feminist and Post Keynesian. The aim is to
identify foundational aspects held in common which link with social
ecological economics.
Eco-Marxists and eco-socialists

This school of thought originated with the writings of Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels. Of the three volumes of Das Kapital, only the first
was published before Marx died and Engels edited the second and
third volumes. The core of Marxist thought is an explanation of
capitalism and its exploitation of labour through commodification
and monetary exchange in (price-making) markets protected by
private property rights. This includes a monetary theory,8 which is a
precursor of macroeconomics. Marxist theory also aims to explain
how labour is exploited by capitalists through their ownership of the
means of production. Capitalism is seen as the hegemonic, politically
dominant, economic system that impressively increases production
but at the expense of the working/under-class or subalterns. Implicit
within capitalism is its own destruction leading to a new social
economic structure of socialism and then communism. However,
capitalism has proven more robust than hypothesised and has shown
an ability to compensate for its own excesses. Polanyi (1944)
explained this as a double-movement where exploitation on the part
of a minority (movement in one direction) becomes so extreme that
some payback, to prevent political revolutionary change, has to be
undertaken (counter-movement). The idea is developed extensively
by the French Regulation School, building from the 1976 book
Régulation et Crises du Capitalism (Aglietta 2015 [1979]).
In many ways the most serious attention to environmental issues
among the heterodox schools considered in this chapter has been
within the Marxist tradition, informing an eco-Marxist and eco-
socialist literature. The journal Capitalism, Nature, Socialism was
established in 1988 with the aim of covering research in the area of
Red–Green thought and radical social ecology. Besides economists
like Paul Burkett, this left-wing, political economy, environmental
agenda has seen substantive contributions from non-economists,
including: political scientists Elmar Altvater and Ulrich Brand and
sociologist Christoph Georg in Austria/Germany; sociologist Ted
Benton in the UK; social scientist Max Koch and anthropologist Alf
Hornborg in Sweden; and sociologists James O’Connor and John
Bellamy Foster in the USA. In South America the literature is less

accessible to the non-Spanish/Portuguese speaker, but has involved
the likes of social ecologist Eduardo Gudynas (2021) and economist
Alberto Acosta with concerns relating to decolonialism, post-
development, extractivism, buen vivir (Gudynas 2014; Lang and
Mokrani 2013) and political ecology (Porto-Gonçalves and Leff 2015).
On the left anarchist end of the spectrum there is the social
ecological work of Murray Bookchin (1921–2006) exploring the
development of human society and attributing the ecological crisis to
the domination of capitalism. He published a book on pollution and
toxic chemicals under the pseudonym Lewis Herber (1962), which,
unlike Carson’s (1987 [1962]) Silent Spring, was too directly political
to gain populist media attention in the USA. Later works included
critiques of Marxist theory (Bookchin 1982), and explored the
potential for a social-ecological economic system that avoids
hierarchy (Bookchin 2014). Most notably, his ideas influenced the
Kurdish freedom movement in its struggles to achieve autonomy
(Gerber and Brincat 2021).
In recent times Andreas Malm has applied Marxist material
realism to understanding the role of fossil fuels in the development
of capitalism (Malm 2016), criticised various perspectives on climate
change (Malm 2020) and deconstructed Bruno Latour’s social
constructionist concept of hybrid nature (Malm 2019). Malm’s (2021)
call for direct action by environmentalists might appear reminiscent
of Edward Abbey (1975), but he is an advocate of a variant of
Leninist war communism that seemingly lacks the role of workers
and has a strong role for a vanguard controlling a strong centralised
State, rather than anarchism. This places him in an uneasy position
relative to other leftist environmentalists and eco-socialists who
advocate worker coalitions, bottom-up action and democratic
governance structures (Asara 2022).
Connecting a left political perspective with ecological economics
has been suggested by various authors. Jakobsen (2018) provides
an account of why ecological economics should pay more attention
to anarchism. Links have been drawn with political ecology as in the
edited book by Martin O’Connor (1994), later secretary of the ESEE.
Political ecology has appeared as part of the approach adopted by

ecological economists of the Barcelona degrowth grouping (D’Alisa et
al. 2014). Burkett (2006) advocates unity between ecological
economists and Marxists in order to create a Red–Green alliance.
Indeed, there are historical links in ecological economic thought.
This is evident in the social idealism of the ecological utopians of the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (Martinez-Alier 1990;
Vianna Franco and Missemer 2023), and the concept of social
metabolism in ecological economics originating in the work of Marx
(Fischer-Kowalski 1998; Krausmann 2017). Such concerns over
energy and materials use are core to ecological economics
(Georgescu-Roegen 1971), and connect to theories of ecological
unequal exchange (Hornborg 2017) and the politics of the imperial
mode of living (Brand and Wissen 2017). These theories highlight
exploitative practices in securing supply chains to support modern
consumer societies. Various aspects of eco-Marxist/socialist thought
strongly link with and could potentially feed further into
understanding of economy-environment interactions by social
ecological economists.
Douai (2017) discusses eco-Marxism as developing along three
lines of reasoning. First, the metabolic character of production
involves unavoidable environment impacts because resources are
extracted, and wastes are returned to the environment. Links to
natural processes (such as nutrient cycles) are broken by capitalist
production via substitution of artificial for natural fertilisers,
industrialisation and separation of town and country. Substantive
change in social metabolism may form a social ecological regime
transition, or metabolic rift, as in the switch to fossil fuels
(Krausmann et al. 2008). Second, Marxism conceptualises two value
aspects of commodities labelled use value and exchange value.
Capitalism is totally oriented to creating the commodity form in order
to maximise the latter in search of profits. The former, according to
Douai, relates to real social needs which will be neglected under
capitalism, along with the value of Nature in providing them. Third,
based on the suggestions of James O’Connor (1988; 1991), there is
an ecological contradiction of capitalist production undermining its
own reproducibility via capital-accumulating processes that destroy

its base in Nature. While there is some debate about whether this is
additional to or akin with Marxist theories of social exploitation
(Douai 2017: 60–61), the eminent eco-Marxist Elmar Altvater (cited
by Speckmann and King 2018) made clear that: ‘The ecological
question is a social question and the social question can only be
adequately addressed today as an ecological question.’
Yet in their promotion of economic growth, a range of traditional
Marxist/socialists appear to only pay lip-service to the social
ecological crisis and ignore Altvater’s clear point that the two aspects
cannot be addressed individually.
Even today the left treats the social and the ecological as separate
thoughts. Marxists who talk about the development of productive forces and
Keynesian trade unionists calling for government stimulus packages alike
forget that the forces of production and destruction can turn into one
another, and that more growth means more natural consumption and
environmental pollution.
(Speckmann and King 2018)
This can easily lead to policies supporting technocentric green
growth and market-reformist environmentalism that (excepting a
stronger State role) appear little different from the pro-capitalist
policies of the orthodox mainstream and neoliberals.
A case-in-point is that of eco-socialist Michael Jacobs, former
general secretary of the Fabian Society and at one time actively
engaged in ecological economics (e.g., Jacobs 1996). According to
his own website, in the early 2000s as a government advisor to the
UK Treasury under the (new) Labour Party he was responsible for
commissioning the climate economics review by Stern (2007)
criticised earlier. He claims responsibility for and heavy engagement
in Stern’s later work, including Better Growth, Better Climate (see
critique by Spash 2014). Jacobs and Mazzucato (2016) have
promoted technological investment and economic growth as
sustainable 
and 
inclusive. 
They 
believe 
capital-accumulating
economies can be harnessed, by centralised government, to create
technologically driven growth economies that produce surplus that

can be redistributed to the masses, and that this can be socially,
ecologically and economically sustained.9
This contradicts both eco-Marxist and ecological economic
knowledge about the structure and operation of capital-accumulating
growth economies, and so attempts to remove (not address) both
ecological and social critiques. On the ecological side there is
reliance on the claim that technology will allow capital-accumulating
economies to be decoupled from their environmental impacts (i.e.,
material reality) and so continue to grow despite evidence to the
contrary (Fletcher and Rammelt 2017; Hickel and Kallis 2020;
Parrique et al. 2019). On the social side, impacts are to be negated
by compensatory welfare (i.e., income) policies, not structural reform
of the economic system.
Such positions are not uncommon among Marxists/socialists
lacking any environmental concern. For example, Fine and Saad-
Filho (2018: 28), who are advocates of the labour theory of value as
core to Marxist economics, state that: ‘The development of
technology increases the productivity of labour, and it potentially
allows even the poor members of society to enjoy relatively
comfortable lifestyles, however high the rate of exploitation might
be.’ Typically, this position ignores supply chains and the
international nature of modern economies (Brand and Wissen 2021;
Hornborg 1998; 2017). Hornborg (2023: 24) states the following.
To celebrate this development of the productive forces under capitalism is to
ignore its demands on the human time and natural space of other sectors of
the world-system. Not least adherents of a labour theory of value should
hesitate about praising technologies that raise the productivity of local
labour but are themselves products of lower-paid labour invested elsewhere
in extraction, transports, and manufacture. The labour-power of factory
workers is not the only source of capital accumulation in industries
dependent on the net appropriation of embodied labour and other resources
through remote markets. Deliberations on the appropriation of surplus value
from factory workers thus cannot provide exhaustive accounts of the logic
of capitalism.
Hence, Koch (2021) argues for social policy without economic
growth because it drives ecological crises. The aim of an economy is

not to grow in order to fund a welfare State to ameliorate the social
impacts of growth, but rather to engage directly in social
provisioning to meet needs, not consumer wants. Long ago, Kapp
(1970a) emphasised the social-ecological imperative for orienting
economic policy towards needs, the requirements of human life and
social minima.
In addition to the growth issue, a fundamental tension between
Marxists/socialists 
and 
Greens/environmentalists 
concerns 
the
relative importance given to value-in-humans as opposed to value-
in-Nature, and the moral standing of non-humans, and so the
priority of social versus ecological objectives.10 In Marx’s theory,
labour alone creates economic value while natural resources provide
use values when processed by the application of labour-power. Does
an apple on a tree only have value in-use when combined with
labour? Douai (2009) points out that Marx did allow for use value to
exist in Nature independently of labour, as in the air we humans
breathe, but that this is not of economic value under capitalism. In
order to avoid confusion, Rammelt (2020) suggests referring to
Nature’s contribution as potential or natural use values, while labour
creates commodity or embodied value. Yet, the tension remains
between understanding these forms of value as social or Nature-
based. An evident problem here is how the spiralling expansion of
exchange value relates to the unsustainable appropriation of
Nature’s use value upon which it appears to ultimately depend.
More than this, the labour theory of economic value creation, by
wage labour through a process of transformation of matter and
energy, appears inadequate as an expression of determinants of
value (Spash 2020b). This ignores the unpaid daily reproduction and
care work undertaken in the household and mainly performed by
women. As Salleh (2017: 50) notes: ‘The labour theory of value
downplays that reproductive dimension, just as it under-theorises
the theft of value from nature-at-large.’ Value from Nature also goes
beyond the concern of Salleh for materiality, production and
reproduction. Consider the aesthetic appreciation of a sunset, an
‘unproduced’ but actualised value. Of course, the aim may be taken

as providing an explanation limited to understanding capitalist value
exploitation, but it also seems problematic even within those
confines. Clean water and fresh air are being commodified and
financialised, and the qualities of the latter are being traded via the
likes of carbon markets. Capitalists do seek means to appropriate
and commodify sunsets by buying advantageous viewpoints and
privatising properties with ‘natural views’ and restricting access to
aesthetic sites for profit. Regarding such things as produced by
labour, as if in an industrial factory, makes little sense, and
acknowledging this class of things but then regarding them as
‘incidental phenomena, playing no fundamental roles in economic
and social reproduction other than exceptions’ (Fine and Saad-Filho
2010: 16) seems untenable. Commodification has come a long way
since Marx wrote Das Kapital.
The approach is also narrowly anthropocentric. What of the air
breathed by non-humans? Non-humans are being pushed out of the
picture while resources needed for their survival are removed and
commodified, in a parallel with land-grabbing from peasants and
Indigenous peoples. The labour theory of value also creates a divide
between human and non-human animal labour. What if a non-
human animal (e.g., a donkey) replaces a human one in an identical
role in a production process (e.g., turning a treadmill) – does this
mean less or no surplus value is now created? Does appropriation of
honey from a wild bee colony have less value than from an artificial-
labour-managed beehive or the fish-farmed salmon over a wild one?
There seems more to productive transformation and economic value
than labour-power applied to raw materials. Some account of the
role of natural conditions and ecological contributions seems
necessary (Benton 1989).
Along these lines, a recent debate in ecological economics is
worth mentioning. Pirgmaier (2021) has proposed classic Marxist
labour theory of value for ecological economists and Røpke (2021)
has deconstructed her arguments, advocating instead a subjectivist
theory. Hornborg (2023: chapter 7) has commented on the side of
rejecting labour theory of value for reasons similar to my concerns
above over the contribution of Nature, while questioning the

objectivity of values. Røpke’s (2021) contribution is of particular
interest because, as an ecological economist and educated Marxist
(who nevertheless rejects labour theory of value), she also combines
ideas from the heterodox schools of critical institutionalism and
feminist economics. This reflects unity of thought across heterodox
schools. However, a totally subjectivist, constructionist value theory,
as apparently advocated in Røpke’s (2021) article, appears
problematic because this ignores too much – objective aspects of
needs, and the philosophical understanding of value as things
humans seek, not construct or attribute to things (McShane 2017).
Such debates are sorely needed and might open up the ground
for understanding processes of exploitation of non-human Nature,
not just human labour, under capitalism. At the same time, as
Benton (1989: 52) notes, there has been a tendency for oppositional
positions to arise between the socially and environmentally
concerned. This is evident in the political left’s responses to
environmentalism and comments by ecological economists when
critiquing Marx/Marxist positions. Typical of the latter is the claim by
Georgescu-Roegen (1975) that mainstream and Marxist economists
alike have held to a thesis that the power of technology is without
limits. Similarly, Daly (1992a: 196) criticises Marx for being
committed to economic growth without limit, and Marxists for being
unrealistic and failing to see the benefits of capitalist price-making
markets (Daly 2010), which he seems to believe can exist without
capital-accumulating growth (Spash 2020c). There are also Martinez-
Alier’s (1990) claims that Engels dismissed entropy (p. xviii), Marx
failed to take account of the productive forces of ecological systems
(p. 5) and, more generally, that Marxism lacks an energetic basis for
the economy and so fails to account for ecological and resource
limits (pp. 218–225). Burkett (2005) has challenged such criticisms,
while Douai (2017) has argued that misunderstandings between
ecological Marxists and ecological economists should be put aside. In
contrast, Hornborg (2023) has substantively supported the critiques,
but in so doing offers ways forward inclusive of Marxist insights.
Hornborg (2014: 14) believes the positive aspects of Marxist theory
need to proceed without some of the historical baggage, and more

specifically he cites the need to exclude Marx’s ‘Promethean trust in
technological progress and his commitment to a labour theory of
value’.
This suggests the need for attention to the underlying eco-
socialist value theory and indeed what is the role of such a theory in
social ecological economics. Synthesis may prove contentious for
some, but there certainly seems more to unite than divide those
concerned about the impacts – both societal and environmental –
from current capital-accumulating competitive economic systems.
Synthesising eco-Marxism, eco-socialism and ecological economics
can also be seen as following up with theory the call for a Red–
Green alliance (Altvater 2007; Burkett 2006).
Critical institutional economics
The origins of institutional economics go back to Thorstein Veblen
(1857–1929), who connected economics to an evolutionary
approach (Veblen 1898),11 worked on understanding the capitalist
business enterprise (Veblen 1915 [1904]) and consumerism (Veblen
1991 [1899]), although some claim Marx as the original
institutionalist, with his substantive economic theory of capitalism
(Gruchy, cited by Dugger 1996). Veblen understood the market as
wasteful and the real economy as a social provisioning process that
included women’s domestic activities (Jennings 1993). This indicates
potential for unity across heterodox schools.
However, institutional economics is diverse and divided. The main
division here is between the heterodox classical/critical approach,
originating in the work of Veblen, looking at structure, power and
how norms of behaviour are formed, as well as how rules of society
become imposed, and the more recent orthodox dissent of ‘new
institutionalism’. Boldizzoni (2011: 6) explains the rise of new
institutionalism as follows.
The new institutionalists collected the accusations of unrealism that had
tormented neoclassical theory since its beginnings and exploited them to
their own advantage. They patiently subjected it to a patching-up operation
and then presented themselves to mainstream economists as the ones who

could save them from the attacks of historians, sociologists, anthropologists,
and the like; and this way their [professorial] chairs were kept safe.
Institutionalism is then captured and narrowed down to match
orthodox mainstream theory with a strong emphasis placed on
transaction costs, economic efficiency and business organisation,
stimulated by the work of Oliver Williamson, a student of Ronald
Coase.
Transaction costs have been employed to counter government
intervention in existing (market) arrangements of the economy and
oppose environmental policy in particular (Mishan 1971). Bird (1982:
587) criticises those applying the approach to pollution control.
[T]‌hey can conceive the individual house owner trading rights to clean air
by bribing her neighbour not to start a garden fire, but they deny the
possibility of residents of a city trading rights to clean air with a major
industrial polluter, or of a single pedestrian transacting with numerous
motorists.
Unsurprisingly some of its main advocates come from the neoliberal
Chicago School, with the unwitting leader on environmental policy
being Coase. His misleading and erroneous criticisms of Arthur C.
Pigou’s work on pollution, and his presentation of totally
contradictory passages on public policy, earned him the Sveriges
Riksbank Prize. Pigou neither advocated an optimal pollution tax nor
ignored contract law, as Coase (1960) and his followers claim
(Aguilera Klink 1994; Spash 2021b). Coase’s own work was taken to
be promoting private property rights and opposed to government
intervention, while he actually accepted that government action
could reduce pollution control costs and was therefore justifiable,
unlike the theorem in his name created by Stigler, and which he
disavowed (Coase 1991). As this indicates, the major division
between the new institutionalists and others can be understood as a
paradigmatic and ideological struggle.
Indeed, Vatn (2021) has put the divisions into the framing of
Kuhn’s (1970 [1962]) paradigm theory. He employs the variation by
Lakatos (1970), which adds a protective belt of auxiliary hypotheses
that basically serve to prevent the hard core of the paradigm from

being attacked.12 The two approaches are distinguished from each
other and contrast with mainstream neoclassical economics in Table
2.1, which is translated and adapted from Vatn’s (2021: 104, table 1)
Norwegian original. This distinguishes some key aspects in the move
from orthodoxy to heterodoxy, as well as points held in common, but
with different degrees of emphasis (e.g., transaction costs). For
current purposes the main heterodox aspect to highlight is the
interaction between individuals and social structure, which creates
preferences and provides the context for what form rationality takes
(e.g., what is rational in the marketplace in contrast to family
relations). Thus, the social aspect is emphasised by critical
institutionalism while being absent from orthodox mainstream
approaches.
Table 2.1  Orthodox versus heterodox institutional economic
paradigms
Orthodox economics
Heterodox
economics
Neoclassical
theory
New
institutionalism
Classic/critical
institutionalism
Hard
core
•
Individual
as utility-
maximiser
•
Rationality
as ability
to choose
•
Preferenc
es
exogenou
sly given
and stable
• Individual
rationality
• Some
highlight
bounded
rationality
• Preferences
exogenously
given and
stable
• Equilibrium
• Individual
and social
rationality
• Bounded
rationality
• Preferences
mainly socially
created and
subject to
change
• Evolution

•
Equilibriu
m
Protectiv
e belt
• Full
informatio
n
• Weak
uncertaint
y
(probabilit
y)
• No
transactio
n costs
•
Unregulat
ed
competitiv
e
markets,
universal
property
rights
• Information
costs
• Weak
uncertainty
(probability)
• Transaction
costs
• Different
economic
structures are
characterised
by different
transaction
costs
• Information
costs
• Weak and
strong
uncertainty
(ignorance)
• Transaction
costs
• Different
economic
structures are
characterised
by different
transaction
costs and
contextual
rationalities
Adapted from Vatn (2021: 104, table 1); translated from Norwegian by Tone
Smith.
Critical institutional economics has substantive contributions to
make in understanding ecological crises and especially the failure of
policy (Spash and Villena 1999). For example, Veblen’s concept of
conspicuous consumption links directly to concerns over the
consumer society voiced by social ecological economists (Fellner and
Spash 2015). However, the most important early work on the
environment from a critical institutional economic perspective is that
of Kapp (1950; 1978 [1963]). Among his contributions are defining
the role of cost-shifting as an explanation for pollution contra

mainstream externality theory (Spash 2021b). Kapp (1978 [1963]:
viii) noted that his own work related to the:
intellectual tradition of that branch of institutional economic theory which
has stressed not only the cumulative character of social causation and the
need for objective criteria of social welfare for the appraisal of the social
efficiency of economic systems, but also the importance of raising the
question of the quality of human life and behaviour under different
institutional arrangements. It was Veblen who, as early as 1921, called for
an investigation by economists in consultation with the technical expert, ‘of
the various kinds and lines of waste that are necessarily involved in the
present business like control of industry’.
Kapp died before his own institutional monograph was completed
(now published as Kapp et al. 2011). Following this line of thought,
and referencing the work of Gunnar Myrdal, with whom Kapp
corresponded and whom he influenced, has been Söderbaum (e.g.,
1992; 2000), who has also been actively engaged with ecological
economics. He suggests linking with institutional economics,
especially in the critical mode of Kapp (1970b; 1976) and Myrdal
(1978), as do several other ecological economists (Munda 1997;
Røpke 1998; Spash 2009a; Spash and Villena 1999; Vatn 2005).
In terms of applying a classic institutional approach, two other
twentieth-century economists are worth mentioning, although their
direct environmental engagement is more minimal. These are
Polanyi (1944) and Galbraith (1969 [1958]), who provide insights
into the operation of capitalism and its corporate form respectively.
Polanyi (1957) also addresses alternative structures of economies
that have occurred throughout human history and the different
institutional arrangements that can constitute markets. Both topics
are informative for developing social ecological alternatives to the
current economic system.
In more recent times, there is the work of the political scientist
Elinor Ostrom, who also engaged with ecological economists. She
won the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in 2009 for her analysis of economic
governance, especially common-pool resources compared to those
under private property rights. Ostrom’s work is most well-known for
countering Garett Hardin’s conclusion that public commons will

inevitably be over-exploited, so justifying their privatisation. The
argument was also discredited by the extensive historical analysis of
institutional practices by E. P. Thompson, which describes the
customs among commoners that protected and regulated resource
use until the rise of capitalism. He referred to Hardin’s work as
‘historically uninformed’ (Thompson 1993: 108). Similarly, Ostrom
showed 
how 
common-pool 
resources 
have 
been 
managed
successfully in community (e.g., Ostrom 1991), not destroyed by
self-interested individuals acting against the common good
(something incentivised under the private-property institutions of
capitalism). However, Ostrom also embraced mainstream game
theory and transaction cost explanations that went down the new
institutionalist route, and this is the category in which Hodgson
(2018: 45) places her. Vatn (2015: 97) notes that she is regarded as
a rational-choice institutionalist (i.e., conforming to the hard core of
orthodox mainstream economics), but that she allows preferences to
be socially influenced (counter to the core of new institutional
economics). She therefore qualifies as an orthodox dissenter,
pushing the boundaries, but not too much, and contributing to the
protective belt, which is consistent with her receiving the Sveriges
Riksbank Prize.
Most substantively in terms of contributing directly to modern
ecological economics is the work of Vatn (2005; 2015), a past
president of the ESEE. Vatn (2005: see especially chapter 3) has
provided a synthesis of positions in institutional economics and
across a range of disciplinary perspectives that gives a clear
definition of its concerns. This distinguishes institutions from simply
being regarded as organisations, contrary to common use of the
term as equivalent and interchangeable. His succinct definition is as
follows.
Institutions are the conventions, norms and formally sanctioned rules of a
society. They provide expectations, stability and meaning essential to
human existence and coordination. Institutions support certain values, and
produce and protect specific interests.
(Vatn 2015: 78)

This broad definition covers human social constructs from customs
and language to money and markets. While a useful definition, the
second sentence requires some qualification; although such
institutions are undoubtably necessary, they are certainly not
sufficient. For example, institutions can be used by fascists, Nazis,
authoritarian regimes and dictators to create a securitised and
militarised society and initiate wars. Of course, Vatn is aware of the
failings of existing institutions concerning the environment and the
need for their reform. As he states (Vatn 2017: 37):
[t]‌hey create interests and motivations that are largely irresponsible and
insensitive regarding environmental limits. The failure seems to demand a
fundamental restructuring of the economy making it much less dependent
on growth and the interests protected by growth. It demands policies and
economic actors that are socially and ecologically responsible.
Vatn argues that institutions do not determine action, but rather
create expectations and provide structures that require individuals to
interpret and evaluate the institutional context (e.g., market, firm,
family, community). Organisations such as corporations, banks,
universities, unions and so on are constituted of institutions –
conventions, norms and formally sanctioned rules. Institutional
analysis aims to reveal this structure and in the environmental area
has focused on four key aspects: rights and responsibilities;
transaction costs; perceptions; and preference and motivations (Vatn
2017: 32–35).
Douai and Montalban (2012) offer a sympathetic but critical
examination of Vatn’s work and suggest that he include the French
Regulation School and Marxist perspectives, although, despite some
attempts, the former lacks systematic integration of society–
environment relationships (Labrousse and Michel 2018). In terms of
the latter, Vatn’s (2000) critique of commodification can be seen as
already informed by Marxist thought. It was Marx who first raised
the commodity as a form, although in Vatn this is not explicit and
comes through via referencing Polanyi.13 The concern for power
relationships and its various forms, especially under the structure of
capitalism, is also actually present in Vatn’s work, such as on

multilevel governance, and he has now explicitly addressed the topic
(Vatn 2015: 86–92).
In relation to ecological economics, institutional analysis has been
prominent in the area of valuation and how plural values can be
expressed. Here the idea of designing value-articulating institutions
has been proposed (Vatn 2015: chapter 11), and especially the role
for inclusive participatory deliberation using methods such as
citizens’ juries (Blackstock 2017; O’Neill 2007; O’Neill and Spash
2000). Expert-driven top-down cost-benefit analysis is broadly
rejected and, where financial assessment is legitimate, forms of
participatory budgeting or deliberative monetary valuation are
recommended (Lo and Spash 2013; Spash 2007a; 2008c). The idea
of ‘getting the prices right’ is rejected because prices are artefacts of
existing institutional structures and have little meaning beyond this
(Vatn 2017: 36).
Feminist economics and eco-feminism
Economics has been a male-dominated profession in a male-
dominated society (i.e., subject to patriarchy). In the past there
were some notable female writers engaging on economic issues. For
example, Rosa Luxemburg (2003 [1913]) developed theoretical
insights relating critically to the Marxist theory of capitalism while
advancing understanding of its ability to reproduce itself.
Luxemburg’s theory of the accumulation of capital was later
regarded as a pioneering work on effective demand by Keynesians,
and Joan Robinson, in her introduction to the 1951 English
translation (Luxemberg 2003 [1913]: xxi–xxxvii), attempted to
express its main message in terms of Keynesian economics. Hence
Luxemburg’s work serves as an interesting historical example of
commonalities across different heterodox schools of thought –
Marxist, feminist, Keynesian.
However, feminist economics is not about women doing
economics, but a school of thought that arose forty years ago
concerned with the overt discrimination against women in capitalist
economies. By implication, economic analysis is flawed in supporting

this system as efficient and leading to a greater good for all. Salleh
(2017) notes how both the regenerative contribution of non-human
Nature and the reproductive role of human actors (domestic,
peasant and Indigenous) are excluded from economic theories.
Feminist economics seeks a realism absent from neoclassical
economics but goes beyond criticism of the mainstream and raises
important aspects of the functioning of economic systems that seem
absent from other accounts, including heterodox ones.
Commonly cited as foundational is the book by Marilyn Waring
(1988), raising the absence of women’s work in national accounts,
although the rise of feminist economic thought can be put in a
broader perspective of political feminist activism during the
preceding two decades, rather than attributed to an individual. For
example, feminist economics papers presented at the International
Economic Association conference in 1989 fail to reference Waring
(Folbre et al. 1992), and another early edited volume only does so
minimally (Ferber and Nelson 1993). In the 1960s feminists had
begun emphasising inequalities and treatment of women in the
economic structure (e.g., working conditions, childcare for working
women, unrecognised work). By the late 1980s this provided a broad
political base that facilitated the establishment of the International
Association of Feminist Economics (IAFFE) in 1992 and its journal
Feminist Economics in 1995.
The school of feminist economics appears heterodox from the
outset, due to the vocal discontent with neoclassical economics as a
male theoretical construct (e.g., homo œconomicus) and the
operations of market capitalism (e.g., unrecognised female
exploitation). However, like all schools of thought reviewed here,
there is variety and the appearance of mainstream policy approaches
and methods despite the critiques. One aspect of this relates to the
underlying politics of the feminist movement from which feminist
economics arose. There is a recognised divide between the
liberal/conservative and socialist/radical strands, with the former
closer to market-based ‘solutions’ and what became neoliberal
policies. Already at the outset Folbre (1995) distinguished between
pro-market (i.e., price-making capitalist markets) and anti-market

(i.e., public policy, government intervention, planning) positions
within feminist economics. The rise of neoliberalism and its alliance
with neoclassical economics has seen critique of the mainstream
decline within feminist economics. Nelson, an early contributor,
states the following.
What I’ve seen increasingly, though, in the Feminist Economics journal and
the conferences, are a preponderance of papers that use fairly conventional
methods to study ‘women and ______ (fill in the blank)’. And it’s not like
the mainstream no longer needs critique!
(Nelson and Morgan 2020: 151)
The deconstruction of mainstream concepts includes: opening-up
the role and meaning of work; how economies are reproduced; and
the essential importance of social relations and caring activities for
the operation of any economy. A unifying aspect common to these
insights is the operation of mechanisms of patriarchal economic
systems and gender-biased institutions (including social norms).
However, the conceptual advances have general applicability, venture
beyond a mere focus on gender relations and are radical in the
sense of going to the root causes.
Himmelweit (2018: 61), referencing Amartya Sen, defines feminist
economics as recognising that gender relations are a structural
characteristic of any economy. This immediately implies there should
be a concern for explaining and understanding the social structure
and changing it as necessary, not just working within the existing
structure. A key issue that has been present from the start is
reorienting economics to provisioning (Nelson 1993), or rather social
provisioning (Jennings 1993; Power 2004), that is based within
community and raises the profile of caring activities in the
(re-)production of society (Dengler and Lang 2022).
Environmental concerns are explicitly addressed by eco-feminists
(Salleh 2017). Eco-feminism emerged simultaneously with the
second wave of women’s movements across various cultures, and
the term ‘eco-fem’ arose spontaneously (Peterson and Merchant
1986; Salleh 1984; 1997). The ecological crisis became connected
with capitalist patriarchal culture, seen as built and maintained by

the subordination of both women and Nature (Griffin 1980; Salleh
1997; 2017; Shiva 1997; Warren 1990). Several writers from this
perspective were connected to eco-socialist debates (e.g., British
social scientist Mary Mellor, American philosopher Carolyn Merchant,
Australian sociologist Ariel Salleh and German sociologist Maria
Mies). Physicist and eco-feminist author Vandana Shiva points out
the connection between gender and the environment in the non-
industrialised world. She highlights how women are deprived of
control over natural resources and disproportionally affected by
environmental degradation. Shiva (1988: 47) argues that ‘women
and Nature are intimately related, and their domination and
liberation similarly interlinked’ and therefore concludes that ‘the
women’s and ecology movements are therefore one, and are
primarily counter trends to a patriarchal maldevelopment’. Among
such thinkers and activists, a radical position arises on the need for
change and transformation of economic structure, especially
capitalism and corporate power (e.g., multinationals and their use of
copyright and private property rights) and colonialism.
In contrast, Nelson states that she rejects radical views –
exemplified as post-capitalist utopias, no-growth and dismantling
capitalism (Nelson and Morgan 2020: 150). She is important as a
founding mother of feminist economics who has also engaged with
ecological economics (Nelson 1997; 2008; 2009; Nelson and Power
2018). For her, both mainstream and radical critiques are as if two
sides of the same coin, which, in her opinion, misrepresent
capitalism as being inherently profit-seeking and competitive,
concepts she regards as constructs of economists. All concepts are,
of course, constructs of the human mind, but Nelson claims a
derogatory meaning of unscientific mythmaking by economists.
This position seems to fly in the face of the evidence from
heterodox economic schools on the actual social economic structure
of capitalist economies and price-making market institutions. Marxist
structural analysis explains surplus extraction and exploitation.
Historical accounts of the rise of capitalism provide descriptive causal
explanation of how profit-seeking as ‘making money’ required
extensive reforms to institutionalise private property rights and

legitimised making people pay for what was previously outside of
market structures (Meiksins Wood 2003; Thompson 1993).
Institutional economists show how business enterprises and
corporations operate ‘competitively’ – not in the naive economic
textbook sense of perfect competition – by seeking to capture
government, manipulate consumer wants and profit by cost-shifting
(Galbraith 2007 [1967]; Kapp 1978 [1963]). The way in which
corporations have arisen, especially under legislation in the USA, has
made them into powerful international organisations, and their
resulting behaviour has been detailed as consistent with the
characteristics of psychopathy in an individual (Bakan 2004). Profit-
seeking and competitive practices must be understood as real
phenomena within the institutional setting of price-making markets
and structures of capitalism, not myths made up by economists.
Strangely, while arguing against dichotomies Nelson (2009)
employs a mainstream/hard-versus-radical/soft dichotomy to classify
and criticise others, which seems rather contradictory. Elsewhere,
she describes her own position as being actualist, rather than based
on what she calls ‘those myths’, and says she is happy to be called ‘a
pragmatist reformer’ – so creating a third category (Nelson and
Morgan 2020). This position appears as an attempt to synthesise the
dichotomous categories (Nelson 2009), although what such a
synthesis implies remains unclear.
Incorporating the mainstream while maintaining feminist and
ecological economic insights that reject its central tenets appears
simply impossible. Consider, for example, Nelson’s coauthored
textbooks that teach ‘mainstream material’ to explain the economy
because, she argues, it has some value and areas of applicability as
well as limitations (Nelson and Morgan 2020). Most striking is the
comprehensive adoption of capital theory – physical, natural,
human, social – as the foundation of the economy (see Goodwin et
al. 2019: chapter 14; Goodwin et al. 2015: chapter 15).14 Nelson
does not regard this as problematic, but rather a successful
approach, and she explains how: ‘This made it easy to integrate
issues of environmental damage, the contribution of unpaid

household labor, and the social strain that comes from extreme
income inequality’ (Nelson and Morgan 2020: 152). However, such a
mainstream conversion of artefacts, Nature, education and social
relations into forms of capital is highly ‘mythical’ and problematic,
was deconstructed during the Cambridge capital controversy and
forms a core aspect of orthodox thought (see Spash and Hache
2022). 
Furthermore, 
Nelson’s 
coauthored 
textbook 
on
microeconomics presents environmental problems in a completely
orthodox mainstream neoclassical economic approach, including:
efficiency analysis; externality theory; optimal pollution control; total
economic valuation; social cost-benefit analysis; discounting;
Pigouvian taxes; and tradeable permits (Goodwin et al. 2019: see
chapter 12). As a noted critic of neoclassical economics, Nelson
herself has deconstructed or rejected several of these aspects, but
now appears to promote and empower them as a self-defined
‘pragmatist reformer’.
Other feminist economists take a different position on what is
required to make advances against hegemonic patriarchy both in
economics and a male-capitalist-dominated society. Rather than
Nelson’s rejection of no-growth, anti-capitalist and utopian thought,
Bauhardt (2014) has sought to explore feminist utopias and how to
imagine the economy beyond capitalism including degrowth. She is
part of a feminist collective engaging in political ecology (Bauhardt
and Harcourt 2019), which is Marxist and neo-Marxist, informed with
concerns over the impacts of colonialism. More recently there have
been attempts to combine feminist economics with ideas from both
the degrowth and decolonial movements (Dengler and Seebacher
2019; Dengler and Strunk 2018). Degrowth has itself been
connected to political ecology, especially via the Barcelona collective
(e.g., D’Alisa et al. 2014) and has some common foundations with
ecological economics via Georgescu-Roegen (1995 [1979]). The
international network Feminisms and Degrowth Alliance (FaDA) first
met in 2016 and shows a new generation of scholars and activists
taking the radical agenda forward with potential links to social
ecological economics.

Attempts have been made to connect ecological and feminist
economics, such as the special issues in Feminist Economics (Nelson
and Power 2018; Perkins and Kuiper 2005). However, while
ecological economics has mushroomed, it barely mentions gender or
women (Perkins and Kuiper 2005: 108), and feminist economics has
largely ignored ecological concerns (Mellor 2005; Nelson and Power
2018). Part of the reason for the latter may be that in feminist circles
eco-feminism is shunned and discussions of women’s relations to
Nature and environmental crises are ignored as a result (e.g.,
Becchio 2020; Himmelweit 2018). Bauhart (2019) notes the common
and general animosity of feminists towards eco-feminism, including
her own personal antagonism towards it before she obtained a
better understanding. Such dismissal by feminists appears to be due
to (incorrectly) equating eco-feminism with a form of essentialism
(i.e., that women are closer to Nature), and then assuming that this
reproduces patriarchal assumptions about female characteristics (as
emotional, soft) and the place of women (as subordinate to men).
Actually, the core of eco-feminism concerns the close proximity of
women’s exploitation and domination to that of Nature’s and non-
humans’ under the dominant male and capitalist political economies
(Oksala 2020). Common elements across these understandings are
the systemic undervaluing, ignoring of values, reduction of plural
values to monistic money values and attempts to convert everything
into a commodity form. Indeed, there is much to be gained from
bringing a feminist perspective to bear on ecological and economic
issues (Spash and Aslaksen 2015).
However, while feminist economics is an important part of the
heterodoxy, which forms a recognised school of thought (Fischer et
al. 2018; Smith et al. 2021), it remains marginalised more than other
schools reviewed in this chapter. The core ideas of feminist and eco-
feminist economists have not been widely adopted so far within the
economics profession, and it appears siloed in its own society and
journal, even within the heterodoxy. In the study by Spash and Ryan
(2012) on heterodox economics and the environment, feminist
economic journals failed to appear as nodes among either of the two
heterodox groupings (ESEE or AHE), let alone among the

mainstream neoclassical. Bauhardt (2019) notes her surprise at
finding that ‘the core concept of Feminist Political Economy, the care
for and about the well-being of others and of oneself, did not appear
in most of the alternative economic conceptions by critical male
thinkers ([e.g.,] Jackson 2009a; Speth 2008)’.
The marginalised status of feminist economics remains in
ecological economics. This is despite two feminist economists having
been ISEE presidents: Bina Agarwal, working on gender and
development (Agarwal 2009), and Sabine O’Hara, who explicitly
advocated a feminist ecological economics (O’Hara 2009). There
have been occasional articles in the journal Ecological Economics
(e.g., Bauhardt 2014; Dengler and Seebacher 2019; Nelson 2008;
2009; Spencer et al. 2018; Veuthey and Gerber 2010), and an early
special issue (Perkins 1997). However, few ecological economists
seem to have picked up on core aspects of feminist economics, let
alone sought to develop a feminist ecological economics.
Most recently, in terms of creating a firm theoretical basis for
connecting feminist and ecological economics, Dengler (2022) has
argued for employing the meta-theory of critical realism (discussed
further in Part II of this book). This combines ontological realism
with epistemological relativism and judgemental rationality. She
argues that there is correspondence with feminist standpoint theory.
Critical realist philosophy of science is described as under-labourer to
a feminist ecological economics and its social theory (see also
Mussell 2020), which is totally consistent with social ecological
economics (see Chapter 4).
Support for such a position goes back to critical realist Tony
Lawson’s (1999) appeal for making explicit the ontology of feminist
economics. The journal Feminist Economics published a series of
commentaries on the topic (Barker 2003; Harding 2003; Nelson
2003a; Peter 2003) and replies by Lawson (2003a; 2003b). Dengler
(2022: 8–9) summarises the debate as revealing a mixture of
scepticism (Barker and Peter) and qualified acceptance (Harding and
Nelson). Harding worried that, strategically, epistemology should be
the focus for fear of outing the naive realism of economics and
marginalising feminist economics. Barker’s concerns over power and

Peter’s over who decides scientific validity reveal a misunderstanding
of the role of an under-labouring philosophy of science as distinct
from a social theory that would explain power relations and
institutional arrangements. Nelson accepted the need for ontology
but recommended mathematician/philosopher Whitehead’s process
philosophy (which gave rise to process theology),15 while noting the
proximity of critical realism to her own ontological position.
Elsewhere she argues for an ontology combining the metaphysics of
process philosophy with aspects of American Pragmatism (Nelson
2003b). Dengler (2022) argues for a realist-relational ontology; an
intersectional and postcolonial feminist standpoint epistemology;
critical methodological pluralism; and a relational-ethical approach
with the sustainability of life at its centre. This is a more
comprehensive philosophy-of-science approach – moving from
ontology to epistemology to methodology and placing arguments
within an ethical/ideological context – that matches the approach of
social ecological economics.
Post Keynesian economics and ecological macroeconomics
This school originated with Keynes’s (1978 [1936]) The General
Theory, which led to the establishment of macroeconomics. His
ideas were mainstreamed by John Hicks, who reframed them as an
equilibrium theory using mathematical formalism to create ISLM
models – investment–saving (IS), liquidity preference–money supply
(LM). Discontent with this neo-Keynesian neoclassical co-optation
was increasingly expressed by some of Keynes’s followers, who
regarded it as a bastardisation of the original theory. For example,
Keynes’s explorations of the motives and psychology of market
players is irreducible to a mathematical formula and so is lost to
ISLM modelling. Dow (2014) argues that the concept of animal
spirits in Keynes’s theory is a prime example of how Keynesian
concepts are made to mean something very different within a
mainstream framework and therefore lose their power. Such
discontent with orthodox mainstream reformulation of Keynes’s ideas
led to the founding of a Post Keynesian faction in the 1970s,

including the Journal of Post Keynesian Economics (1979) in the USA
and the Cambridge Journal of Economics (1977) in the UK.16 This
school has since gone beyond the original thesis, influenced notably
by Polish economist Michal Kalecki, to include institutional critiques
of existing capitalist markets (Galbraith 1978), a heterodox
consumer theory (Lavoie 2009), a range of insights relating to the
conduct of economic science (Davidson 1981) and now includes
class relations, income distribution, endogenous money and financial
instability (Stockhammer 2018).
Keynes’s General Theory was revolutionary in terms of economic
thought (Eichner and Kregel 1975), but not in terms of economic
systems. Galbraith (1978: 8) regarded Post Keynesian policy
prescriptions, like Keynes’s original thesis, to be amendatory, not
revolutionary: ‘Its commitment is to reformist change, but it does
not consider this commitment any slight or passive thing.’
Stockhammer (2018: 15) regards Post Keynesian economics as being
value-free when he states that: ‘it should be kept in mind that PKE is
a set of theories about the working of capitalist economies, not a
political ideology’. The problem with such a naive objectivist claim is
that there are both ideological and political implications of
committing to such theories, even if they are compatible with a
variety of political philosophies (e.g., various forms of liberalism or
State socialism). For example, there is a commitment to discussing
policy in terms of creating wage labour for all, stabilising and
maintaining capitalism and doing so using corrective central
government interventions (e.g., the welfare State). The aim of
preserving 
capitalism 
is 
inherently 
politically 
conservative,
ideologically loaded and based on the premise that there are no
better alternatives. It also appears ultimately both self-defeating and
harmful due to its social and ecological consequences. Even Keynes
(1930) recognised the economic growth system he was proposing
would lead to an undesirable love of money and an unethical society
in need of transformation, he knew not how, but he thought the
price was worth paying to get a century of capital accumulation.

In the decades following World War II, Keynesian economics was
influential and encouraged central government intervention with the
aim of controlling aggregate demand (i.e., consumption and
investment) to maintain ‘full employment’. This influence declined
with the rise of monetarism and neoliberalism in the 1980s, which
brought privatisation of government assets, subcontracting of
government services and deregulation of financial markets. The
ensuing 2008 financial crash saw a revival of interest in Keynesian
policies, and the school has since gained more attention, although
national austerity politics goes against its policy prescriptions and
neoliberalism soon rebounded (Mirowski 2013). Clearly, fighting
austerity politics and neoliberal deregulation are major challenges for
Post Keynesians.
In addition, they face renewed attempts to merge Keynesian
ideas into orthodox mainstream theory – termed the neoclassical-
Keynesian synthesis or New Keynesianism. Orthodox mainstream
economics has become generally hostile to government intervention,
contra The General Theory, which places control of effective demand
via government expenditures at the centre of national economic
policy. Post Keynesian economics today is a paradigm that is
‘intellectually 
consolidated 
but 
academically 
marginalised’
(Stockhammer 2018: 9), although this appears to have been the
situation for some time (see Davidson 1996).
At the end of his book on new foundations for Post Keynesian
economics, Lavoie (2014: 578–581) outlines ways forward and
explicitly advocates linking with ecological economics, and in the
second edition expands with a review of the developing literature
(Lavoie 2022: 634–641). However, while Post Keynesian economics
has the laudable aims of preventing instability, social deprivation and
taking responsibility for those at the bottom of the system (i.e., the
‘unemployed’), its failure to recognise biophysical dependency of ‘the
economy’ and its social implications are serious flaws for such an
economic science. In contrast to the three heterodox schools
discussed so far, the Post Keynesians have persistently ignored
environmental issues, as well as resource and energy constraints, in

the tradition of maintaining capital accumulation, consumerism and
full employment.
Although Keynes (1930) recognised social and psychological
problems with long-term growth and Post Keynesians emphasise
distributional inequity (as monetary income differences), they share
with mainstream economists the presumption that economies can be
treated as physically isolated systems. This is a fundamental flaw
even within the typical macroeconomic confines of the nation-state.
For example, the terms of trade for energy and other raw materials
are determinants of excess supply and excess demand. Put more
simply, economic activity is dependent upon natural resources and
the modern capitalist economy is built on fossil fuels, so control of
those resources coming from around the world is central to its
operation and continuation or demise. Similarly, control over waste
sink resources is also necessary if the affluent society is not to
become the effluent society!
A search of the Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, over its
forty-year history, reveals little natural resource or environmental
awareness among 1,743 contributions.17 In the first two decades
there was one editorial on oil conservation (Davidson 1979) and one
article criticising environmental economics (Bird 1982), with a
response (Brown and Shaw 1983). Since then only three articles
have appeared relating to environmental and resource topics (Berr
2015; Marangos and Williams 2005; Roncaglia 2003). Over forty
years ago Bird (1982) proposed a new Post Keynesian environmental
economics as a response to the orthodox mainstream approach to
pollution and environmental problems. He stated that: ‘Development
of the paradigm in the whole environmental area is still very
tentative. But it is urgently required.’ That call for an urgent
paradigmatic response by Post Keynesians fell on deaf ears, and
their environmental inaction has since been lamented (Mearman
2005; 2007).
The journal Ecological Economics shows far greater interest in the
opposite direction. Early on, Daly (1991a; 1991b) advocated an
‘environmental macroeconomics’ and Gowdy (1991) proposed linking

with Post Keynesian economics. The first decade of its publication
saw little explicitly on macroeconomics and the second minimal but
regular articles before the third decade, in which Post Keynesian
economics reappeared more generally after the financial crash of
2008 (e.g., Harris 2009; Holt et al. 2009; Kronenberg 2010;
McConnell 2012), and formal ecological macroeconomic modelling
arose. Over its thirty-year history, the journal has published 6,785
articles (circa January 2023), of which seventy-nine explicitly
mention macroeconomic(s) – twenty include the term in the title and
the remainder in the abstract or keywords – with over half published
since 2013, including a special section in 2016.
More generally, ecological economics has long advanced
foundational concerns over unrelenting growth and so the scale of
the macroeconomy and consumerism (Georgescu-Roegen 1971;
1977; Kapp 1950). The scale issue has especially been the
longstanding focus of work by Daly (1977a; 1992b), and
macroeconomic issues have appeared via growth-critical debates
(e.g., Daly 1997a; 1997b; Solow 1997; Stiglitz 1997) and promotion
of adjusted GDP and sustainability indicators (Roman and Thiry
2017). However, various questions have seemed to loom large but
remain unaddressed. For example, Daly’s critique appears to
conclude in favour of a simple side constraint on the scale of
economic activity, when actually stopping growth removes a
fundamental mechanism in the structure of capitalist economies
(Spash 2020c). A basic problem appears to be that ecological
economics 
offers 
insight 
into 
the 
role 
and 
meaning 
of
macroeconomic growth that is in diametric opposition to a pro-
growth productivist ideology of ever-increasing material and energy
throughput as the means to human happiness (Spash and Schandl
2009). In more recent times an expanding radical growth-critical
literature has developed around ideas of ‘degrowth’ (Buch-Hansen
2018; Kallis et al. 2012; Weiss and Cattaneo 2017).
Dobusch and Kapeller (2012) point out the difficulty of integrating
the divergent positions of Post Keynesian and ecological economists

with respect to growth. They cite a 2009 conference paper by
Lavoie, as follows.18
Obviously, some work is also needed to reconcile the post-Keynesian target
of full-employment with the requirements of ecological economics and its
call for slower or zero economic growth. So far, post-Keynesians have
written very little on the subject of the environment.
Belief in economic growth as progress, and the solution to human
problems under capitalism, appears common to Post Keynesian
approaches, and Lavoie (2022: chapter 1) notes one of their primary
research questions as being how to use more (not less) of the
existing productive capacity. The idea of sufficiency, suggested by
Bird (1982) as part of an environmental Post Keynesian paradigm,
seems distinctly more radical. The focus of Post Keynesians on
unemployed resources means scarcity is disregarded as an issue,
and this is combined with a strong techno-optimist stance. In this
last regard, while discussing linkages with ecological economics,
Lavoie (2022: 636) notes that his own position has long been that
‘even natural resources are reproducible: technical progress brings
the discovery of new deposits or new substitutes, perhaps
synthesized ones’, but he does recognise declining environmental
quality – global warming and climate change – may pose a different
challenge. Still, this concluding section of his book on Post Keynesian
economics highlights not only the possibility but the need for
cooperation with ecological economists, and reviews developments
in this direction.
Some might then see promise in the rise of formal ecological
macroeconomic modelling, including the thirteen Post Keynesian
type models appearing between 2014 and 2017 (Hardt and O’Neill
2017). Several reviews have also appeared, sometimes contrasting
orthodox 
mainstream 
and 
heterodox 
models, 
covering:
methodological approaches (Saes and Romeiro 2019), energy
transition and ‘low-carbon’ climate models (Hafner et al. 2020), more
heterodox post-growth models (Hardt and O’Neill 2017) and
dichotomous 
comparison 
of 
pro-growth- 
versus 
no-growth-
modellers’ discourses (Urhammer and Røpke 2013). Perhaps the

unifying general concerns across this modelling literature are
whether capitalism can address the ecological crisis and survive,
whether it can continue under conditions of low, zero or declining
economic growth, and what the implications might be of deliberately
aiming for a steady-state economy, degrowth economy or similar.
There are some serious tensions between what models can do, what
modellers 
are 
trying 
to 
do 
and 
(preanalytic) 
ontological
commitments as to what constitutes an economy – all of which
affect the potential for and nature of cooperation between Post
Keynesian and ecological economists and how the latter should
proceed.
Prominent among the modelling work from the ecological
economic side has been that of Peter Victor (2008), focused on the
Canadian economy, and his collaborations with Tim Jackson,
including Post Keynesian stock-flow-consistent models (Jackson and
Victor 2013; 2015; 2020). The modelling approach appears
heterodox but could also be seen more as leaning towards orthodox
dissent. For example, Victor’s (2008) LowGrow model for the
Canadian economy kept the mainstream macroeconomic Cobb-
Douglas production function, allowing continuous substitution
between input factors. As noted long ago by Georgescu-Roegen
(2009 [1979]: 106):
mathematical economists have recently come out with a fantastic conjuring
trick. We must not worry about the exhaustion of natural resources, since
with the aid of the ubiquitous Cobb-Douglas production function it can be
proved that capital equipment can be substituted without limit for those
resources.
In contrast to such mainstreaming, the overarching goal of Victor
and Jackson’s ecological macroeconomic modelling appears more
radical.
This goal is given as investigating and promoting transitions to
economies that deliver ‘sustainable prosperity for all’ (Victor and
Jackson 2020), which is defined, referencing Jackson (2017: 212),
as the ability of humans to flourish within the ecological limits of the
planet. Underlying this is a neo-Aristotelian conceptualisation of

wellbeing with reference to capabilities. At one point, Jackson (2017:
46–47) equates human flourishing to a set of ‘basic entitlements’,
but mostly the concept is highly abstract and employs vague
references to an amorphous set of things (e.g., trust, democracy,
health, education). Victor and Jackson (2020: 360) also note that
their phrase ‘for all’ includes ‘the well-being of other species’, which
seems to make their concept of ‘prosperity’ a misnomer (I return to
this topic in Chapter 6).
We might ask: why does any of this justify or even require
formalist 
mathematical 
modelling, 
let 
alone 
macroeconomic
modelling of capitalist economies? In an interview, Victor and
Jackson state that their modelling ‘Approach is to dialogue with
those not necessarily in agreement and use their terms, language’
(CANSEE Quarterly Newsletter January 2014). This requires
squeezing concepts into an orthodox mainstream box or simply
leaving them out.
The problem is explored in detail by Morgan (2017) with respect
to work by Jackson and Victor (2016) addressing Piketty’s claim that
without economic growth income inequity increases. Jackson and
Victor (2016) construct a comparable model to Piketty’s in order to
show that the values of key variables can be adjusted to change the
outcome (i.e., to demonstrate that rising inequality is not inevitable
under low/zero growth). Accommodation to mainstream economics
via modelling includes a neoclassical production function, constant
elasticity and marginal analysis, and the large conceptual error of
reducing inequalities to income (excluding class, gender, race). The
orthodox mainstream framing ignores basic differences in approach
to conceptualisation and the potentialities for systems change. As
Morgan (2017) puts it:
within ecological economics no/low and degrowth are deliberate-by-design.
They involve social redesign, economic restructuring, different values, and
different meanings of work. As such, Jackson and Victor’s point of departure
seems inherently inconsistent because the problem to be addressed is also
inconsistent.

Morgan goes on to point out that there are other and better ways to
argue. In particular, critique can be conducted in methodological,
philosophical or conceptual terms, and arguments directed at the
role of institutions in historical processes, which brings into question
what others (like Piketty) claim as an inevitable outcome of
economic processes. Victor and Jackson are not alone in going down
this formalist ecological macroeconomic route that betrays their own
fundamental insights and denies the conceptual differences of
heterodoxy from orthodoxy.
Also pursuing Piketty, there is the joint modelling work between
proclaimed ‘agnostic about growth’ van den Bergh (2011) and
established degrowth advocate Kallis (2011). Once having placed all
variables into a formalist model to compare with Piketty, and so
again reducing inequalities to income, they conclude (as headlined in
their abstract) that income inequality cannot be prevented in non-
growing economies (Hartley et al. 2020: 243).19 The concluding
section in the paper seemingly contradicts the abstract by claiming
that ‘a wide variety of solutions can help prevent rising income
inequality in a non-growing economy’. If so, why bother with the
modelling or the contradictorily-headlined conclusion? In any case,
why would anyone who understands degrowth – a social-institutional
systemic reconfiguration – frame everything in a mainstream
discourse about income, and then agree to validate a conclusion
based upon ignoring all the substance of social and institutional
issues, including non-monetary aspects of the economy, involved in
such a transformation?
The problem of misconceptualisations of basic ecological
economic 
understanding 
appears 
common 
to 
ecological
macroeconomic modelling. Hardt and O’Neill (2017: 200) note, with
reference to work by Harris, that ‘the idea of continued economic
growth to increase prosperity is still an important feature for many
post-Keynesian authors’.20 Harris’s (2013) work exemplifies the
resulting problems. He claims that ecological macroeconomics can
be complemented by a Keynesian analysis of the relationship
between investment and consumption without depending on its

‘typical’ growth orientation. The basic aim, in line with Victor and
Jackson, is to maintain macroeconomic growth, but restricted to
sectors involving ‘nonmaterial aspects of consumption’, while limiting
or reducing physical resource throughput. As he states: ‘To reconcile
ecological and economic growth perspectives, it is crucial to exploit
environmentally beneficial forms of economic growth’ (Harris 2013:
41). Decoupling based on techno-optimism appears, so that
‘limitations on economic growth are not the first option for
responding to climate change, though some growth limits may
ultimately be necessary’ (Harris 2013: 42). He reproduces the
orthodox mainstream attribution of ecological crisis to market
failures solved by internalising externalities (Harris 2013: 42). Then
there is the assumption that an increasing need for healthcare due
to an ageing population is positive because this creates an
opportunity for employment (Harris 2013: 42), a claim that clearly
ignores the role of unpaid female care work. At the same time, like
Jackson (2009a: 41, 175), he regards economic growth as ‘essential
in the currently developing world’. This means continued extractivism
and allocating remaining ecological sinks in order to reproduce the
industrialised nations’ massively polluting ‘development’ (Spash
2021a). Harris (2013: 44) claims that ‘the trend to development of a
global middle class is hardly one which can, or morally should, be
opposed’. Contra Harris, such development appears totally unethical
given its environmental destructiveness, dependency on the creation
of an under-class and, once placed in a global perspective of supply
chains – land-grabbing, mistreatment of Indigenous peoples,
colonialism and militarisation – unequal exchange (Althouse et al.
2020; Hornborg 1998; 2017) and the imperial mode of living (Brand
and Wissen 2021).
Instead of such ideological mainstreaming, ecological economists
can find correspondences for collaboration with Post Keynesian
thought and researchers, without betraying their foundational
knowledge, by identifying common conceptual approaches, insights
on economic processes and developing common understanding of
their implications (systems thinking, uncertainty, realism and
pluralism have been suggested, e.g., Holt and Spash 2009; Mearman

2007). Post Keynesian economics has been explained by Davidson
(1981) as involving a methodology of descriptive realism in
modelling and three constitutive propositions: historical time,
uncertainty and institutions. Each of these three elements can also
be found in ecological economics (Spash and Schandl 2009). In
addition, Lavoie (2004; 2009) has argued for a Post Keynesian
consumer theory, referencing Earl (1986), Bird (1982) and Galbraith
(1969 [1958]), but most substantively Georgescu-Roegen (1954;
1966). He enumerates a set of principles that contain a central role
for needs and Earl’s non-compensatory choices. Both Earl and Lavoie
have discussed how the core mainstream concept of trade-offs (i.e.,
gross substitution) fails and is at best a minor phenomenon. Lavoie
(2022: 114–119) has noted the correspondence of this position with
work by ecological economists on lexicographic preferences (Gowdy
and Mayumi 2001; Spash 1998; 2000b; Spash and Hanley 1995).
What Post Keynesian economics might contribute to the social
ecological economic paradigm may well be outside what is regarded
by the mainstream as macroeconomics, and especially so given the
unsustainability of its growth orientation. At the end of his book,
Lavoie (2014: 633, table 9.1) summarises his advice to Post
Keynesians as: stop trying to reform the mainstream; be eclectic and
cooperate with other heterodox schools of thought; cooperate with
other social sciences; expand the research agenda; focus on real-
world problems and be politically relevant. What then might
constitute an alternative ecological macroeconomics?
There is a clear requirement to avoid an economic approach that
is either captured by orthodox mainstream conceptualisations or
turns into orthodox dissent that denies the radical social-ecological
critique of current economic systems. Røpke (2013) outlines what
might constitute research areas and aims of an ecological
macroeconomics, and there is strong correspondence with
arguments and concerns raised above. My own variation runs as
follows: (i) moving beyond the national perspective to include
interdependencies (within and between nations) raising issues of
supply chains, trade of embodied resources and multilevel
governance; (ii) removing the concept of GDP and related (hedonic)

indicators 
and 
moving 
to 
multiple 
criteria 
that 
include
incommensurabilties; (iii) taking seriously non-monetary and unpaid
care work, on its own terms, as part of the reproduction of society;
(iv) understanding markets as instituted processes, not monolithic
uniform arrangements, identifying unacceptable market institutional
arrangements and designing alternatives to price-making markets;
(v) researching alternative forms of currency arrangements, such as
local currencies and special-purpose money, as well as the role of
non-monetary provisioning; (vi) opening up the black box of
technology, recognising its social-ecological impact and implications
and seeking appropriate technologies, rather than hi-tech; (vii)
researching the links between the industrial–military complex and
growth economies; (viii) extending consideration to the ‘long run’
and pathological consequences of growth economies that Keynes
chose wilfully to ignore; (ix) reorienting the macroeconomic goal
towards social provisioning of needs within an ethical framework.
Conclusions
Those 
whom 
Lee 
terms 
the 
heretical 
economists 
and
Lavoie/Backhouse categorise as orthodox dissenters are to be found
tweaking mainstream ideas and adding to its protective belt of
auxiliary 
hypotheses. 
Some 
are 
rewarded 
by 
the 
highest
international accreditation in economics – the Sveriges Riksbank
Prize. Despite clear heterodox foundations, pragmatic mainstreaming
is common across all the economic schools reviewed. The attempt to
use unrealistic, orthodox mainstream, hegemonic theory, simply
because it is hegemonic, is a repeated failure of heterodox
economics and a strategy that leads to self-marginalisation,
misconceptualisation and bad science. Perhaps the most prevalent
results are apologetics for capital accumulation, price-making
markets and capitalist institutions. In short, orthodox dissent has
entailed arguments for maintaining hi-tech growth economies and
redistributing the surplus regardless of core counter-arguments from

Marxists, feminists, institutionalists, Post Keynesians and ecological
economists.
A more radical position on transformation is required and one that
calls for the abandonment of hedonistic individual wellbeing and so a
fundamental redesign of the modus operandi of modern economic
systems. The design of economies should be concerned with
achieving social provisioning for all, while avoiding environmental
degradation, social inequalities, injustice and unethical behaviour.
The ‘for all’ should include non-humans, as noted by Victor and
Jackson, but raises the basis on which to do so and their moral
standing. Economics as a discipline requires reform; however, rather
than immersing oneself in the orthodox mainstream and its theories
or using its concepts and models in an apologetic attempt to show
they are wrong, an alternative programme and paradigmatic agenda
needs to be developed.
The critiques reviewed call for a transformation of economic
systems away from consumerism and material- and energy-intensive
lifestyles. The economic orthodoxy is a block to progress and not an
aid to social-ecological transformation, but it is in another sense
irrelevant because it is unnecessary for developing a progressive
agenda. Heterodox economic schools offer positive alternatives to
the orthodoxy rather than being simply in opposition to the
mainstream (a negative derogatory definition that avoids paying
attention to content).
So if mainstream economics disappeared, heterodox economics would be
unaffected. 
Therefore, 
from 
a 
heterodox 
perspective, 
mainstream
economics is not the enemy to be vanquished, but a body of ideas and
arguments that have no substantive meaning or explanatory power
regarding the social provisioning process.
(Lee 2012: 339)
Among the heterodox schools, there are ideas in common and
potential for unity despite many differences. How that might be
achieved and the philosophy of science necessary to do are topics
addressed in Part II.

Notes
 1
Lawson (2006) includes Austrian economics, which I exclude because, sinc
e the rise of neoliberalism, it has informed and influenced the orthodoxy, s
pecifically through the promotion of corporate capitalism, entrepreneurship,
technological innovation, price-making markets and so profit-seeking and c
apital-accumulating growth. While differences exist between neoclassical or
thodoxy and neo-Austrian economics, in practice they have become ideolog
ically united. In assessing economic schools of thought, Lavoie (2014: 29–3
0) considers neo-Austrian economists as orthodox dissenters.
 2
The so-called Nobel Prize in Economics is in fact a bankers’ prize for largely
conformist economists disputed by members of the Nobel family – the Sver
iges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel.
 3
Prior to Nordhaus, only Ostrom’s was environmentally related. Others’ passi
ng environmental interests have been unrelated to their award; e.g., Kahne
man, Arrow, Solow and Sen have all commented on contingent environmen
tal valuation, while Arrow and Stiglitz were authors for the Intergovernmen
tal Panel on Climate Change Third Assessment Report.
 4
Ostrom’s level of engagement on common-pool resource management and
membership of ISEE makes her something of an exception (see the section
in this chapter on institutional economics).
 5
Stiglitz is used as an example by Backhouse (2009: 266).
 6
Georgescu-Roegen moved from being a leading light in the mainstream of
his time, lauded by the likes of Paul Samuelson, to becoming a major critic
of mainstream thought.
 7
The book is published as pluralist but is ostensibly heterodox, excluding ne
oclassical economics, although including behavioural economics, regarded
as mainstream by Dobusch and Kapeller (2012: figure 1).
 8
Money as a store of value provides the means to accumulate and convert g
ains from market exchange of commodities into a means for wealth accum
ulation – expressed in classic Marxism as money becomes commodity that
becomes more money (M-C-M´).
 9
Jacobs incongruously argues that ‘green growth’ is compatible with degrow
th (see Barth and Jacobs 2022), and that this aligns with Kate Raworth, Ti
m Jackson and Jeroen van den Bergh. Indeed, all these authors qualify as
apologists for growth and passive revolutionaries (Spash 2021a). Jacobs se
ems well placed to join them.

10
This tension is also revealed to be present among those associating with th
e degrowth movement, many of whom associate with a leftist agenda (Eve
rsberg and Schmelzer 2018).
11
Evolutionary economics is sometimes regarded as a distinct school of thoug
ht but has, since originating with Veblen, been closely associated with instit
utional economics. It also has connections to Austrian economics, via Schu
mpeter, as evident in a focus on entrepreneurs, firms, technology and inno
vation.
12
As Lakatos (1970: 133) himself explains: ‘It is this protective belt of auxiliar
y hypotheses which has to bear the brunt of tests and get adjusted and re-
adjusted, or even completely replaced, to defend the thus-hardened core.’
13
Polanyi (1944: chapter 6) developed a concept of fictitious commodities, w
hile Marx (1974 [1887]), in chapter 1 of Das Kapital, explores the commodi
ty form in detail and discusses ‘the fetishism of commodities’ (pp. 76–87) a
nd that informs Polanyi’s approach.
14
Nelson, Neva Goodwin and Johnathan Harris work at the Global Developme
nt and Environment Institute, Tufts University. Harris’s work on ecological
macroeconomics is discussed in the next section.
15
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy notes that Whitehead was influen
ced by electrodynamics and relativity. His approach promotes: (i) a radical
empiricist methodology involving both sense data and a manifold of natural
relations, and (ii) an electrodynamics-like worldview where fundamental co
ncepts are internally related processes and events rather than substances o
r bits of matter.
16
The latter is now a hub for heterodox economics (Spash and Ryan 2012).
17
Undertaken via the Web of Science database in July 2020, with additional c
hecks in October 2022.
18
Marc Lavoie, ‘After the Crisis: Perspectives for Post Keynesian Economics’. P
aper presented at the Second Encontro Internacional de Associacao Keynes
iana Brasileiro, Porto Alegre, Brazil, September 2009.
19
The exact statement is that ‘several strategies may prevent an increase in i
ncome inequality during periods of low growth and may slow rising inequali
ty, but not prevent it, in non-growing economies’.
20
The same Harris who coauthored textbooks with Nelson criticised earlier.

Part II
Philosophical foundations

3
Issues in history and philosophy of
science with implications for economics
Introduction
In order to provide firm foundations for social ecological economics a
basic understanding of issues relevant to developing scientific
knowledge is required.1 This is the topic of philosophy of science. If
we wish to avoid the mistakes of the past, then we had better have
some idea of the debates that have taken place and the lessons
learnt. Unfortunately, history of thought and philosophy of science
have been largely cut out of the economics curricula and more
generally appear absent from degree programmes. Instead, scientific
training focuses on preselected, discipline-approved, specific means
for conducting analysis without any critical reflection, and these days
that involves a preoccupation with how to use software for statistical
analysis.
In order to get started, some terminology needs to be introduced
that will likely be unfamiliar to many readers. Our basic concern is
how best to go about understanding the world around us. Our
beliefs about reality link to the approaches we expect to help us gain
knowledge about that reality, or, more formally, there is a
progression from ontology to epistemology to methodology to
methods. Positions on all these aspects are necessary and should be
informed by an understanding of history and philosophy of science.

Ontology (reasoning about being) asks questions as to what exists,
and so what constitute the primary entities of concern in any given
field and their most general features and relationships. Logically
these questions come prior to addressing how we can know
(epistemology). They are part of metaphysics, things beyond the
physical.2 Ontology has been sorely neglected and so left implicit in
economics and more generally in the social sciences.
As will be discussed, a common failing is to convert ontological
questions into epistemological ones. Indeed, epistemology and
methodology have been the almost exclusive concern of those
discussing anything to do with philosophy of science in ecological
economics. Epistemology, from the Greek epistashai ‘know, know
how to do’ plus logy ‘the art of reason’, means reasoning about
knowing, and concerns the theoretical basis on which we create
understanding of the world. This involves theories about the origin
and limits of knowledge. It describes how we can form knowledge
about the world and what is meant by truly knowing something.
Methodology follows on from epistemology and concerns
reasoning about developing the way of investigating. The tools of
scientific investigation form the methods and the term ‘method’ (a
mode of investigation) should not be confused with or used as
shorthand for ‘methodology’ (as is too often done). Methodology
concerns how such tools are deployed and interpreted. Methodology
is used in two senses, referring to: (i) the principles and practices
that underlie research in a discipline or subject area; and (ii) the
appropriateness of the methods. Methodology requires general
principles about the formation of knowledge in practice and so
becomes 
interrelated 
with 
the 
theory 
of 
knowledge 
(i.e.,
epistemology).
This chapter provides an overview of the history and philosophy
of modern science as it developed in Europe and then spread. A
particular concern is the rise of empiricism, with its claim that the
objects of experience constitute reality, and these can be known
with certainty using an appropriate methodology. Following the
historical overview, I proceed to a more detailed explanation of

logical empiricism, as developed by the Vienna Circle, not least
because empirical claims have been core to environmentalism, but
also because of the general tendency to refer to ‘positivism’ as if this
were some unified singular school of thought. This background will
enable ongoing controversies to be understood and put into
perspective. A range of topics will be introduced that have direct
relevance for claims being made today about the validity of
economic research and the form it should take. To that end the
methodological practice and epistemology in economics are critically
reviewed to reveal the paucity of its approach to these topics.
Overall, the aim is to show how understanding history of thought
and philosophy of science can inform as to the best way forward,
and what to avoid.
Modern Western philosophy of science: A brief
history
The rise of modern empirical scientific investigation is typically
traced back to Francis Bacon (1561–1626) and his Novum Organum
Scientiarum, published in 1620. Empiricism and an emerging
inductive methodology of inference was later adopted by The Royal
Society of London for the Improving of Natural Knowledge,
established in 1660, with direct reference to Bacon.3 In between,
René Descartes (1596–1650) developed the mathematics of
geometry and his mechanical philosophy that treated the divinely
informed human intellect as distinct from a mechanical mind-
independent 
world. 
Isaac 
Newton 
(1642–1727) 
combined
mechanistic science with his newly formulated mathematics of
calculus to advance physics, which became the paradigmatic
example of modern scientific progress. Both deductive inference
(theoretically abstract logic) using mathematics and inductive
inference (appealing to empirical and experiment studies) are
evident in the works of Descartes and Newton; however, debate has

persisted ever since as to which approach is more foundational for
science (i.e., should science be theory- or data-driven).
Observation as a personal experience was substantively
developed by the British empiricists John Locke (1632–1704) and
David Hume (1711–1776). This strongly emphasised the role of the
senses as the main fountain of knowledge and influenced the
phenomenalism of Immanuel Kant (1724–1804). Under Hume’s
approach science becomes the establishment of causal relations via
observed event regularities. That is, if a person repeatedly observes
event A followed by event B, then they expect event B to always
follow event A, regardless of whether such uniformity of nature can
be philosophically justified (commonly termed Hume’s problem of
induction). Hume’s anti-metaphysical position and scepticism about
causation woke Kant from his dogmatic slumbers and led him to
create a theory combining a priori (pure) and a posteriori (empirical)
knowledge – his synthetic a priori – by which he explained causation
(as one of his twelve categories or pure concepts of understanding).
A dichotomy of ‘is’ versus ‘ought’ also traces back to arguments
by Hume, and the later more substantive division of reality by Kant
(2007 [1787/1781]) into the phenomenal world of appearances and
the noumenal world of ‘things in themselves’. Kant reaffirms a
traditional distinction between sensory and intellectual objects (as
also evident in Descartes). The phenomenal becomes the legitimate
area for scientific investigation using the senses and a priori
concepts, while the noumenal is the realm for exploring moral topics
using the intellect. Thus, a division is asserted to exist between
is/facts and ought/values, with knowledge of one now meant to be
totally separate from knowledge of the other. Indeed, along these
lines, economists have generally taken science to be the pursuit of a
‘positive’, meaning value-free, form of investigation in order to
establish cause–effect relationships as ‘objectively true’ in the belief
that nobody could rationally deny them because the facts ‘speak for
themselves’ – naive objectivism. Mainstream undergraduate texts
start by distinguishing positive economics from normative, or value-
laden, economics.

Positivism was a product of the Enlightenment, founded as a
system of thought by Auguste Comte (1798–1857). Comte’s
positivism did not separate philosophy of science from political
philosophy (Bourdeau 2011). However, during the nineteenth
century positivism developed away from its originator’s ideas and
became associated with an objective non-political foundation for
science on the basis of using observation. Actually, there is no
singular or even dominant meaning of positivism, because it has
varied considerably and been hotly debated, especially in the form
known as logical empiricism.
In the twentieth century logical empiricism arose, inspired by
developments in physics and philosophy of science appearing in the
work of Ernest Mach (1838–1916). It was advanced in Austria and
Germany, and most notably by the Vienna Circle. The founding
group – social scientist Otto Neurath (1882–1945), mathematician
Hans Hahn (1879–1934) and physicist Philipp Frank (1884–1966) –
was socialist/Marxist in orientation and, with the later addition of
Rudolph Carnap (1891–1970), is now referred to as the left wing of
the Vienna Circle. When the group was expanded in the 1920s a
more conservative (or apolitical) wing was added, led by physicist
Moritz Schlick (Uebel 2011). Schlick was not the founder of the
Vienna Circle, as claimed by Caldwell (1980), but rather chaired
regular sessions from 1924 after having been invited to join by Hans
Hahn. The name for the group was adopted from the 1929
manifesto The Scientific World Conception: The Vienna Circle by
Carnap, Hahn and Neurath, and in opposition to Schlick’s preferred
title ‘Verein Ernst Mach’.
The Vienna Circle sought to combine a logical analytical approach
for framing scientific propositions with the requirement for empirical
testing of those propositions. Strong development in the 1920s and
1930s was followed by dispersal of key thinkers due to the rise of
Austro-fascism followed by German Nazism, which ironically led to
logical empiricism spreading widely, especially to the USA. It
dominated philosophy of science over several decades. Some refer
to this philosophy as ‘logical positivism’, although this terminology
was little used by members of the Vienna Circle themselves, and

tends to represent a specific narrow characterisation (Uebel 2011).
The term ‘logical empiricism’ is more accurate, generally applicable
to and inclusive of Vienna Circle members (Creath 2011).
After the demise of logical empiricism there arose a more
prominent sociology of science and Kuhn’s (1970 [1962]) paradigm
theory (discussed further in Chapter 5). Postmodernism – a term
coined by Jean-François Lyotard in 1979 – saw the rejection of naive
objectivism and the rise of relativism and constructionism. This is
also related to the linguistic turn, where there is no object beyond
discourse, science is regarded as a form of fiction or discourse and
the organisation of discourse is taken as the object (as in Latour and
Woolgar 1986 [1979]). On these grounds science is merely
storytelling and a social construction.
Following Steup (2010), weak constructionism can be defined as
asserting the epistemological claim that scientific theories are laden
with social, cultural and historical presuppositions and biases, while
strong constructionism asserts the metaphysical claim that truth and
reality are themselves socially constructed. The latter position
corresponds to what Sayer (2010: 46) terms:
‘radical relativism’, in which truth is purely relative to one’s theory,
‘paradigm’, ‘problematic’ or ‘world-view’ and for which no independent tests
exist. It is not uncommon to find such scientists saying ‘it all depends on
your paradigm’ or that ‘such-and-such a concept is employed not because it
is claimed to be “true”, but because it is “useful”’.
Instead, Sayer argues in favour of critical realism. This is a meta-
theory that builds from reflection on problems with empiricism and
Humean event regularity, but also critiques relativist strong
constructionism (ontological idealism). The form I will advance in
this book is associated primarily with two works by Roy Bhaskar
(1975 [2008]; 1979), and a literature developed further by others
(e.g., Collier 1994a; Danermark et al. 2019; Sayer 2000; 2010). It
theorises the connection between the empirical and underlying
structure and mechanisms in what is termed a depth ontology
(Collier 1994a: 42–45). Critical realism steers a path between both
naive objectivism and radical relativism, and offers a way forward for

ecological economists (Puller and Smith 2017).4 I will return to
critical realism in the next chapter. Here I will give more detail on
logical empiricism and then the state of play in economics.
Lessons from the Vienna Circle
Clearly ecological economics is in part an empirically based body of
knowledge and cannot ignore the form and meaning of observational
investigation which it accepts as valid, or the role it attributes to
scientific investigation. So, learning from the explorations, advances
and failures of logical empiricists is important and helps place
current debates in context. Key common aspects of their approach
were: (i) a rejection of metaphysics; (ii) unifying science; and (iii)
establishing a criterion of validity and a related scientific
methodology. These are distinct but interrelated considerations.
Logically metaphysics was deemed meaningless for creating
scientific knowledge (contra Kant), because it did not conform to
experiential verification, which was initially taken as the criterion of
validity for a statement to be deemed scientific (i.e., testable against
evidence). For the Circle’s left wing this was also politically
motivated, because the totalitarianism of the time made use of
pseudo-scientific claims which they felt scientific truth-seeking could
expose as false and so help avoid (Creath 2011). Unscientific
metaphysical ways of thinking might entrap people in anti-Semitism,
racial hatred, sexism, homophobia and so on. Articulating and
defending a scientific worldview was both an academic position and
a political act aimed at social reform and emancipation.
However, rejection of metaphysical concepts means being unable
to address statements which refer to non-observable theoretical
entities (e.g., at the time, atoms). A problem arises because science
advances by positing the existence of such non-observable things
and seems unable to address the structure of reality without them.
One response is to argue that only complete systems of thought
need validation, which allows for the inclusion of non-observables as

part of such systems. Within the context of a hypothetico-deductive
methodology this could be formalised by recognising its constituent
elements as including axioms (primitives), non-observable entities
and theorems (derivatives). All terms gain meaningfulness to the
extent that the theory as a whole is validated, which was argued as
possible by checking the derivative theorems (via prediction) against
evidence and seeking confirmation.
From the logical analytical perspective, a stress on observability
led to a unity-of-science position. Some took this to mean that all
knowledge about Nature could be expressed in a single language of
logic. However, for those on the Circle’s left wing, this also had a
political pluralist and social reformist character, because empiricism
would reveal grounds for reasonable disagreement and absence of
dominant solutions. Unity of science could be linked to improving
communication and public participation (O’Neill 2003). It also related
to internationalism as an aim of Marxism by connecting people and
ideas through seeking common understanding of reality. In this way
the logical and analytical advances being made were complementary
to a socialist political agenda. At the same time theoretical advances
in analytical philosophy could be made independently of this political
agenda.
On the Circle’s analytical agenda were the grounds for validating a
proposition as true and the implications for moving from logically
deduced theoretical propositional statements to applied matching
observational statements (the protocol sentence debate). Some
logical empiricists, following Mach, argued for complete verification
by observational evidence as the criterion of validity.5 Verifiability
proved problematic because it rules out as meaningless certain
statements of universal form, which are often used in the
specification of general scientific laws, as not being conclusively
verifiable. One exception could falsify them, and no number of
confirming instances can guarantee that such an exception will never
be found. This is commonly exemplified by noting that claiming all
swans are white can be repeatedly verified as true but one observed
black swan shows the claim to be false.

Self-criticism was prevalent within the Circle and while verification
was upheld by Schlick it was rejected by Neurath and colleagues.
However, criticism of verification is often associated with Karl Popper
(1902–1994), who is attributed with advocating falsification. Popper
was a deductivist who regarded the idea of consciously and
constantly trying to falsify a hypothesis as the essence of the
scientific methodology for establishing provisionally true laws. The
demarcation of what counts as science as opposed to pseudoscience
is a valid issue in philosophy of science (e.g., separating climate
denialism from scientific scepticism). However, it can also be
ideologically motivated, as seems the case for Popper. He was a
member of the neoliberal thought collective known as the Mont
Pèlerin Society (Mirowski and Plehwe 2009), and his prescriptive
approach to science was directed at undermining the credibility of
Marxism (Thornton 2013). He believed Marx’s theory was saved from
falsification by the addition of auxiliary hypotheses that made it
compatible with the facts, but this proved a common problem for all
scientific theories. Popper tried to salvage his attack by claiming
such use of auxiliary hypotheses could be scientific but in Marxism
had been ad hoc.
As Popper later realised (Caldwell 1991), falsification is highly
problematic for a number of reasons that apply to both natural and
social sciences (see Chalmers 1999: chapter 7). One of the main
difficulties is that scientific theories involve numerous assumptions
within their structure so that knowing which part of a theory is
responsible for an apparent falsification proves problematic. A
related fundamental challenge is open systems reality because
intervening factors allow for multiple mechanisms of causation,
making isolation of single mechanisms, or their failings, problematic.
Knowledge claims can become dependent upon ad hoc ceteris
paribus assumptions. Many still refer to Popper as a simple
falsificationist, ignoring his shift to a combination of critical
rationalism, corroboration and situational analysis (Lawson 2008).
According to Caldwell (1991), critical rationalism argues for
sometimes evaluating a theory on strict empirical falsification
grounds, but allows at other times, especially for the social sciences,

for criticising a theory by applying logic or other methods.
Metaphysical aspects of theories are accepted but need to be
rationally justified via critical reflection.
An 
alternative 
to 
both 
verifiability 
and 
falsifiability 
is
‘confirmability’, that is, seeking confirmation. However, in all cases
the issue of implicit assumptions about test conditions arises and
this includes accepting conceptualisations and secondary, or
auxiliary, hypotheses as valid. For example, an observation using a
telescope assumes various things (e.g., accuracy, magnification,
refraction) about the instrument itself and validity of related theories
concerning its operation, and these must hold true in order for the
phenomena being observed to have the meaning attributed to them.
When confirming an observation as consistent with a theory, a whole
system of warranted beliefs are actually being tested (the Duhem-
Neurath-Quine problem; see Rutte 1991: 87). Confidence that a test
accurately confirms, or disconfirms, a hypothesis requires that initial
test conditions and auxiliary hypotheses should be known, specified,
realised and empirically validated as holding true.
Caldwell (1980: 65) notes: ‘Thus, paradoxically, a number of
auxiliary hypotheses may be implicit in any test situation, but their
presence can go undetected until they fail to hold.’ Actually, even
then there is no guarantee of ‘detection’ because of the tendency to
maintain a paradigmatic theory against the evidence or claim some
‘irrelevant’ factor explains a result which appears as an anomaly, so
that core ideas remain untouched. Neurath (2004 [1910]: 286)
noted the problematic use of auxiliary hypotheses to defend a
theoretical system, and Frank discussed a similar use of ‘auxiliary
concepts’ (O’Neill and Uebel 2004: 91). Adding or dropping auxiliary
hypotheses can sustain a theory against the evidence.
As a result, Hempel (1988), after decades of advocating the
deductive-nomological model,6 along with Popper, finally accepted
that there is no way to formulate a precise ‘proviso’ ruling out all
disturbing factors when linking a theory to observation. He noted
that any seemingly disconfirming observational evidence can always

be accommodated to any theory. Thus, a practitioner can never be
forced to deny a theory based purely on the empirical evidence.
Neurath also wrote on the conditional nature of all science and
the sociological dimensions of the acceptance of knowledge claims
(Uebel 1996: 92). He rejected the standard accounts of scientific
methodology, including falsification and confirmation. He recognised
that choice enters at various levels in framing any test for
compatibility between a hypothesis-system and the data/facts.
Systematically different choices lead to different systems of
understanding. Neurath therefore came to believe that no data could
falsify a system of hypotheses; they could only shake one’s
confidence in it. He accepted that additional social and political
criteria were necessary to judge between competing hypotheses
(Cartwright and Cat 1996: 84–85).7 The core issue was to analyse
‘which concepts and statements can be considered as part of
genuine science and which not’ and this ‘requires concrete analysis
of reality on the fundamental basis of the sharpened conceptual
tools now at our disposal’ (Neurath 1973 [1931]: 421). Neurath
argued that theories were systems of statements and truth consisted
in freedom from contradiction and agreement between sentences
themselves (something akin to a coherence theory of justification).8
As summarised by Rutte (1991: 84):
hypotheses are to be considered as confirmed which agree with many
observation sentences and contradict only a few of those observation
sentences which are not deeply grounded in the mass of sentences (are
relatively isolated), so that challenging them would have no great
consequences.
Thus, Neurath maintained an aspect of empirical confirmation but
placed this in the context of a holistic conventionalism (i.e.,
sentences are accepted by convention). This raises the issue of how
the conventions come about (e.g., historical experience, accident,
political process). For Neurath science was ordered by conventions
that were to be judged on the basis of pragmatic, functional criteria
to secure the rationality of science on the basis of explicit, conscious

decisions by those partaking in science and interested in it (Uebel
1996).
Logical empiricism faced serious problems in trying to achieve a
unified formulation and by the 1970s had been abandoned as an
active philosophy of science. However, some significant aspects of its
mature but contested formulation might be summarised and
qualified as follows.9 First, testing individual statements contained in
a theory separately was rejected in favour of testing an entire
theory. For Schlick this meant seeing if its observable deduced
consequences corresponded to reality, while for Neurath, who
rejected such a correspondence theory of truth, coherence of
statements with each other was key. Second, confirmability
appeared to be the preferred criterion of validity over verification or
falsification, but there was no consensus. This was also qualified by
the provisional nature of all such claims (fallibilism) recognised by
Neurath, Frank and later Hempel. Third, whether all theoretical
terms referred to empirically confirmable entities (the realist-
instrumentalist controversy) might be circumvented by the weaker
requirement that the hypotheses which contained them could be
confirmed. Neurath is known for strongly advocating the need to
remove all metaphysical statements, although over time he softened
and relativised his anti-metaphysical position (Rutte 1991: 84–85).10
In summary, logical empiricism evolved as a distinct approach to
scientific understanding which strongly diverged from nineteenth-
century ‘positivism’. There were competing forms of logical
empiricism and distinct groupings even within the Vienna Circle.
Common derogatory characterisation is a misrepresentation of
diversity and self-criticism within the Circle and beyond.11 This brief
overview should make clear that logical empiricism cannot be simply
dismissed, and certainly not on the basis of being some generic
uniform ‘positivism’. Its tenure as a philosophy of science saw many
advances in understanding the challenges facing science that
informed what came after in terms of sociology of science and
constructionism. The problem today is that many of the lessons have

been forgotten by researchers (let alone more widely) and in
economics it appears they were never learnt in the first place.
The confused basis for knowledge claims in
economics
Hutchinson (1938) has been attributed with first introducing a form
of logical empiricism into economics (Caldwell 1980). The desire for
economics to be a science, in the mode of physics, meant the
rhetoric of logical empiricism spread even if its actual practice did
not. The physics here is backward-looking to Cartesian and
Newtonian mechanics of the 1600s. The mathematics of economics
involves adoption of optimal control theory from the calculus of
variations perfected by Joseph-Louis Lagrange (1736–1813),
originating in the mechanistic calculus of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
(1646–1716) and Isaac Newton (1642–1727). Such mathematical
formalism became the basis for theorising and modelling enforced
dogmatically in economics to become the defining feature of an
economist. In orthodox mainstream economics the quantifiable is
seen as objective, and the qualitative is dismissed, reducing reality
to what can be measured and counted. This quantitative focus arose
in science with Descartes’ (1596–1650) rejection of the longstanding
Aristotelian qualitative approach to physics of the universe (i.e., the
substances of earth, water, air, fire and aether). As wrong as
followers of Aristotle might have been on this point, the removal of
qualities from science is clearly unjustifiable. Both quantity and
quality 
are 
longstanding 
foundational 
ontological 
categories
(recognised as such by both Aristotle and Kant).
The exclusive search for discrete quantifiable variables is what
Georgescu-Roegen (2009 [1979]) termed ‘arithmomorphism’ (i.e.,
imposing the form of arithmetic). He clearly spelled out the failures
of economists in this regard.
What the prevailing arithmomania ignores is that the most carefully
constructed defence of positivism, of what its adepts like to call ‘no

nonsense’, cannot even get started without using dialectical concepts.
Indeed, most of our fundamental concepts are dialectical: justice,
democracy, good, evil, abstraction, workable competition, entrepreneur,
farmer, occupation, belief, and so forth.
(Georgescu-Roegen 2009 [1979]: 110)
A ‘positivist’ analytical approach is doomed to failure because its
methodology excludes qualitative change and dialectical concepts
(discussed further in Chapter 7). Perhaps the most basic
philosophical deficiency here is the implication that all concepts must
be monolithic blocks welded together with no shades of difference of
meaning, only either total conformity or total incompatibility. This
fails to address the real characteristics of the economists’ objects of
study.
This means to use words, instead of numbers, for truly qualitative changes
cannot be represented by an arithmomorphic model. Qualities are not
preordered, as numbers are, by their own special nature. The most relevant
part of history is a story told in words, even when it is accompanied by
some time series that mark the passage of time.
Georgescu-Roegen (2009 [1979]: 112–113)
Categorisation that is not arithmomorphic has validity and relevance
and raises questions as to the qualities of an object of study. Indeed,
economists who are blind to qualities cannot hope to understand
actual economies.
This exemplifies how economics makes ontological assumptions
implicitly via its epistemology. Bhaskar (1975 [2008]: 36) termed
such practice the epistemic fallacy. In brief, this is operative when a
researcher fails to make explicit what constitutes their objects of
study while maintaining claims to knowledge, and so by default
defines what exists by their methodology. What exists (ontology) is
effectively merged into how knowledge is gathered (epistemology),
or, put another way, being is reduced to knowing (see Collier 1994a:
76–85). The problem has become prevalent across the social
sciences.
Epistemology in economics, often termed methodology, is
problematic in other ways, as evident in the variety of positions and

their contestation. Friedman (1953) published a widely cited, but
muddled and confused (Pheby 1988: 88), essay in which he
advocates the primacy of prediction in testing theories and
denigrates the role of realist description and causal explanation. In
the early 1960s, his position was debated in the American Economic
Review, where Samuelson attacked Friedman, and others, in his call
for empirical realism, defining science as (Humean) observation of
event regularities. Caldwell (1980: 70) describes Samuelson’s
contribution as ‘advocacy of the nineteenth-century view of
explanation’ with regards to positivism, and notes that this
‘obfuscated all intelligible discussion’ in economic methodology for
decades. Why he believes Samuelson should be held responsible for
economists’ repeated epistemological failings is unclear, and the neo-
Popperianism into which it emerged was hardly more progressive.
This was most prominently undertaken by Blaug (1980), who
critically appraised the state of economic epistemology and strongly
advocated Popperian falsificationism. He introduced this as a highly
prescriptive epistemological principle, instructing how science should
be conducted, and demarcating what counts as science (or in this
case economics). Lawson argues Popper has been effectively
caricatured by economists adopting falsificationism.
The truth, then, is that Popper the critical rationalist is hardly understood by
economists at all. […] The aspect of modern economics that warrants
criticism is not the making of errors but the widespread reluctance to learn
from them, including the pretence that they do not matter. Errors provide a
scientific opportunity.
In his book Blaug (1980) never once mentions critical rationalism.
His target is the assumed prevalence of verification in economics,
although what he describes as ‘measurement without theory’ hardly
conforms to a verifiability principle. Blaug (1980: 256–257) notes the
state of affairs as follows.
The journals abound with papers that apply regression analysis to every
conceivable economic problem, but it is no secret that success in such
endeavours frequently relies on ‘cookbook econometrics’: express a
hypothesis in terms of an equation, estimate a variety of forms for that

equation, select the best fit, discard the rest, and then adjust the theoretical
arguments to rationalise the hypothesis that is being tested.
This shows employment of ad hoc procedures to justify knowledge
claims and is typically conducted while avoiding any criticism of the
paradigmatic core. Nothing has been learnt from the protocol
sentence debate of the Vienna Circle. The deductive theory present
at one level (e.g., neoclassical microeconomics) is divorced from the
empiricism ongoing at another, and even the practitioners of the two
operate 
separately. 
Numerous 
‘anomalies’ 
are 
subject 
to
sophisticated studies without any impact on theory; they are simply
noted and tolerated, or explained away via auxiliary hypotheses.
There is a widespread discrepancy between the conduct of theory
and practice within econometrics itself, a situation noted to exist
going back to the 1970s (see quotations of Lipsey and Lerner by
Lawson 2008: 106–107), and the extensive critique of Georgescu-
Roegen (2009 [1979]).
McCloskey (1983: 484) has described the ‘official’ methodological
approach of economics as combining ‘an amalgam of logical
positivism, behaviorism, operationalism, and the hypothetico-
deductive model of science’. She argues that, if economics is nothing
more than rhetoric, then it may as well adopt this form of persuasion
as its methodology, which would effectively mean giving up on
seeking knowledge. Her argument is flawed. That some economists
practise bad science is not a reason for giving up on science, just
bad practice!
Part of that bad practice is the failure to address the nature of
reality and assuming event regularities, which rarely occur in the
social realm. As Galbraith (1970: 469) once noted, economics has a
history of ‘persuading its communicants to avert their eyes from
reality’. In this regard, an interesting development is the introduction
of critical realism to economics (Archer et al. 1998; Fleetwood 1999;
Lawson 1997). This posits the existence of an objective reality that is
knowable and can be described, while accepting that all knowledge
claims are fallible. Critical realists in economics conclude that social
explanation is possible, but only if we move away from deductivist

methodology. Lawson (1997: 36), a major advocate, states the
following.
Specifically, social explanation, appropriately conceived, is not the
attempted deduction of events from sets of individual conditions and
constant-conjunction ‘laws’, but identification and illumination of structures
and/or mechanisms responsible for producing, or facilitating, social
phenomena of interest.
In contrast, the mainstream appears highly prescriptive and
restrictive in its ever-increasing rhetorical and dogmatic reliance on
mathematical formalism as a monist methodology (Dow 2007), and
matching quantitative formalist empirical methodology.
Conclusions
Officially, economists follow a rigorous and scientific epistemological
approach connected to logical empiricism. This sets a procedure for
gaining knowledge on the basis of logical deductive theory
development, leading to hypotheses which are meant to be
empirically tested by observation, resulting in validation (whether
verification, falsification or confirmation) – the hypothetico-deductive
methodology. A summary of the key failures in mainstream
economics which have been outlined is that: (i) the philosophy of
science from which this approach is supposedly derived has been
caricatured in a singular form when it was a diverse and contested
body of work from which valuable lessons could be learnt; (ii)
economists do not actually follow their supposed methodology; (iii)
their practice lacks an explicit ontology, leading to the epistemic
fallacy; (iv) mathematical formalism and quantification do not equate
to scientific rigour and can reduce the ability to advance economic
understanding; (v) qualitative aspects are excluded; (vi) axiomatic
deductive theory bears no relation to reality with the truth of the
foundational claims dogmatically imposed. There is then no reason
why ecological economists should seek to emulate the mainstream,
but as will be shown next that is exactly what has been occurring

under a misguided set of arguments falling under the heading of
‘methodological pluralism’.
Notes
 1
No distinction is drawn between social and natural sciences, unless specifie
d, so that the discussion of ‘science’ is taken to cover both.
 2
A term derived from the separation of Aristotle’s works between the natural
sciences and his other philosophical writings. Aristotle never uses the term
metaphysics (Barnes 2000: 42). The term ‘natural science’ is phusikê in Gre
ek, and often misleadingly transliterated as physics. Aristotle’s Physics is a t
reatise about natural science. The post-Aristotelian title ‘Metaphysics’ mean
s literally ‘What comes after natural science’ and is taken to refer to things
that transcend such science.
 3
Early members included: Robert Boyle (chemist/physicist); Robert Hooke (c
hemist/physicist, microscopic studies); Isaac Newton (mathematician, physi
cist); John Locke (physician, philosopher); Christopher Wren (architect).
 4
Prior to my raising this possibility in the literature (Spash 2012), I could fin
d only two references to such a potential link by ecological economists. On
e was in a footnote to a book chapter by Røpke (1998: 144) and the other
a brief mention in the book on institutions and the environment by Vatn (2
005: 55–56).
 5
Interestingly, the ecological economics textbook by Common and Stagl (20
05) supports verification as a criterion of validity based on a fact-based (val
ue-free) objective approach to economic science.
 6
Nomological means law-like principles and the approach requires a valid de
ductive argument, and explanans that must contain a law, have empirical c
ontent and be true.
 7
Neurath’s work directly informed the development of the sociology of scien
ce. For example, Howard (2000: footnote 29) references the acknowledgm
ent of Neurath by Quine. See also Rutte (1991).
 8
Uebel (1996: 111) states that: ‘What in Neurath may be mistaken for a coh
erence theory of truth is, if anything, a coherence theory of justification – a
nd of claim acceptance, not merely of a belief.’

 9
Logical empiricism also has elements which are more peripheral to concern
s here and space precludes covering them (e.g., the role of probability).
10
While logical empiricists of the Vienna Circle denied the meaningfulness of
ontological questions, in scientific enquiry, they in fact started from concern
s of physicists and mathematicians, making their view implicitly based upon
some quite specific ontological presuppositions.
11
Caldwell (1980) has added to this caricature by relying on the analytical phi
losophical ideas of the exiles in America (e.g., Carnap) to the exclusion of c
ompeting ideas. In this respect, account must be taken of the influence Mc
Carthyism had on science policy in the USA and in restricting the political e
ngagement of the exiles’ work (Howard 2000; 2009; Reisch 2005).

4
The philosophical basis for advancing
knowledge in ecological economics
Introduction
Despite the importance of having clear grounds on which to base and
validate knowledge claims, and avoid mistakes from the past, philosophy
of science has received relatively little attention in ecological economics.
In the first thirty years of the journal Ecological Economics a
keyword/abstract/title search reveals just ten articles mentioning
ontology and twelve epistemology out of over 4,000. Røpke (2005) has
argued that the knowledge base is neither well-structured nor
systematically organised, and that the identity of the field is weak. Faber
(2008: 4) has bemoaned the fragility of ecological economics, stating
that ‘a generally accepted theoretical framework or methodology has yet
to be defined’. Eclecticism has led to entertaining diametrically opposed
epistemologies from naive objectivism to radical relativism. Ecological
economics has then been labelled both a subfield of mainstream
neoclassical economics (Hoepner et al. 2012), in a modern positivist
tradition, and a post-normal science (Silva and Teixeira 2011), in a
postmodern constructionist tradition. Confusion has reigned in these
muddied epistemological waters.
As was explained in Chapter 2, domination of economics by the
orthodox mainstream led to a backlash which saw the organisation of
schools of thought as heterodox, and the promotion of there being
multiple economic theories and approaches. Advocacy of this pluralism
in economic heterodoxy has become commonly accepted as inherently

good, but without much differentiation between the subjects of
application. That is, the different forms of pluralism in economics are
poorly distinguished and what exactly is being recommended is often
unclear, that is, pluralism in economic education, scientific practice
(methods, methodology, epistemology), realities (ontology), values and
so on. Misleading argumentation has resulted from conflating different
meanings of pluralism (as noted by Spash 2021e), which has been a
repeated problem in ecological economics (e.g., Goddard et al. 2019;
Levrel and Martinet 2021; Norgaard 1989).
More specifically, the prevalence of eclecticism, promoted under the
banner of ‘methodological pluralism’, has created an anything-goes
attitude, resulting in self-contradiction. Its advocates go so far as to
legitimise orthodox economics as part of ecological economics while
simultaneously wishing to exclude it as imperialist. I will therefore start
by explaining the arguments for and meaning of pluralism. I will reveal
the contradictions of its ecological economic advocates and particularly
criticise their failure to reject orthodox mainstream economics and
instead present apologetic arguments for continued use of its
methodology and methods. I next turn to the foundational positions that
can create a positive alternative social ecological economics. Employing
critical realism as an aid, I work through a series of philosophical
presuppositions – reality independent of humans, truth in science, limits
to empirical knowledge, how we can have knowledge in a changing
world and the similarities across social and natural sciences. A final
section brings together various reflections on how knowledge can be
created and some of the problems that exist with current proposals for
plural ontologies.
Pluralism in ecological economics
In the very first issue of Ecological Economics the idea of seeking
pluralism, in the guise of anything-goes, appeared in an article by
Norgaard (1989) under the title of ‘methodological pluralism’. I have
argued against this approach (Spash 2012). Contrary to what some have
suggested (Levrel and Martinet 2021), my critique does not entail
denying political freedom, pluralism in pedagogics or use of diverse

methods (see brief reply, Spash 2021e). In addition, plural values are a
core aspect of ecological economics and also a separate matter
concerning social ontology and axiology (see Chapter 6). What is
criticised here is eclecticism, strategic and rhetorical use of scientific
methods and methodologies, radical relativism, denial of judgemental
rationality with respect to theories and a general failure to attend to
reality and the object of study.
The contradictory arguments for pluralism
The openness of ecological economists to borrowing from any discipline
was advocated early on as a form of weak transdisciplinarity interpreted
as using whatever methods/tools were deemed necessary for ‘problem
solving’ (Costanza 1991). Plurality of methods is not necessarily a
problem, but, as Dow (2007) notes, they must be incommensurate,
otherwise they would collapse into one method. For scientific purposes
methods should also be appropriate for addressing the research
question and object of study as well as being epistemically justified.
Modern economic training produces economists who apply a limited set
of quantitative methods and parametric statistics to everything. Bad
reasons for applying methods include paradigmatic strictures, popularity,
prior training and software availability. Ecological economics has also
suffered from theoretically unhinged, pragmatic use of monetary
environmental valuation methods (e.g., contingent valuation and benefit
transfer). There is a contrast between seeking knowledge and using
methods and methodologies for rhetorical persuasion and presumed
strategic influence. The basis on which methods should be employed in
ecological economics has remained obscure due to epistemological
confusion.
Baumgärtner et al. (2008) recognise the need to save ecological
economics from an ‘arbitrary openness to just everything’ and call for a
unified methodological basis that is consistent with and systematically
directed towards the subject matter and aims of ecological economics,
and in doing so highlight the role of conceptualisation. However, they
claim an epistemological plurality to support ‘plurality of methods’.
Besides being unnecessary, there is a problem in proposing multiple
epistemologies without either synthesis or an explicit recognition of

relevance as to what is being studied. They specifically claim defence for
methodological pluralism on the basis that:
[t]‌he rationale behind the plurality of methods in, and approaches to, ecological
economics is the underlying plurality of fundamental philosophical positions –
such as rationalism and empiricism […] – which are all legitimate and potentially
valuable with respect to the subject matter and aims of EE.
(Baumgärtner et al. 2008: 391)
On what grounds could totally conflicting philosophies of science, their
opposing 
ontologies 
(idealism 
versus 
realism) 
and 
associated
epistemologies (rationalism versus empiricism) possibly be held as ‘all
legitimate and potentially valuable’, let alone contribute to progress in
any science? The ‘such as’ here is also telling because they present a
classic dichotomy that goes back to Kant (2007 [1787/1781]), not a
plurality. However, there appears to be nothing on the agenda akin to
the Kantian synthesis of empiricism and rationalism or a return to his
epistemological concept that combines the two (i.e., the synthetic a
priori). Thus, the modern dichotomy between radical relativism and
naive objectivism is all that appears to be left.
This could entail claiming as legitimate switching back and forth from
empiricist naive objectivism to rationalist radical relativism. One minute
the facts as observed speak for themselves and the next only ideas
count, and all is a deduced mental construct or simply storytelling. The
position appears illogical and totally philosophically untenable. It is also,
as mentioned, unnecessary. Use of multiple methods can be justified on
the basis that there are different aspects of reality (different objects and
characteristics 
of 
the 
same 
object) 
revealed 
by 
different
incommensurable methods – in the same way that screwdrivers are
good for one job and hammers for another. Reality determines which
tool is best to use, but coming to that conclusion means accepting a
realist philosophy of science. Actually, their pluralism seems to fall away
in their section on ‘epistemological foundation’, where they adopt an
idealist ontology as expressed by strong social constructionism. That is,
they claim that knowledge ‘is a mental construction which is inspired by
experience’ and ‘human intellect and empirical experience may result in
different forms of knowledge or constructions of reality’ (Baumgärtner et
al. 2008: 387).

In ecological economics strong social constructionism with its
subjectivist relativism conflicts with ontological realism. As Tacconi
(1998: 99) notes, ‘in constructionist ontology being is determined by
knowledge. Consider the Earth without human beings. A reality would
exist but would not be socially constructed.’ Neither does conceptualising
reality in different ways equate to human ability to construct reality.
Tacconi accepts the existence of a reality independent of human
cognition as an ontological position and rejects reduction of ontology to
epistemology by strong constructionism (i.e., the epistemic fallacy). A
related ontological issue is the existence of biophysical limits. Under
strong social constructionism these once again become subjective and
relative to an extent that the concepts would no longer match the
ontological 
presuppositions 
of 
ecological 
economists 
(e.g., 
the
importance of entropy). In addition, Tacconi (1998: 100) criticises the
constructionist claim that an observer can never be independent of what
they observe. However, Tacconi (1998: 103) also cites Norgaard (1989)
approvingly and states that a ‘diversity of paradigms’ should be
maintained, where paradigm is taken to be an all-encompassing
worldview. This rather avoids the issue of the grounds for inclusion and
exclusion of knowledge claims, and also the paradigmatic fight into
which ecological economics entered from its foundation. Tacconi (1998)
himself argues for the rejection of logical empiricism and for developing
a more specific ontology and epistemology suited to ecological
economics.
A different argument is that of Norgaard (1989: 37), who believes
that ‘a diversity of methodologies is appropriate and pressures to
eliminate methodologies for the sake of conformity should be avoided’.
Of course, adopting methodologies for the sake of disciplinary
conformity appears just as problematic, but that is what he then
recommends. More specifically, Norgaard (1989: 51) argues ecological
economics should strategically include ‘logical positivism’ as the
dominant methodology in economics, something which Chapter 3 has
shown to be fallacious. His account is flawed in several other respects:
equating epistemology with methodology; ignoring varieties of
positivism; claiming falsification as the established criterion of validity;
and showing no awareness of logical empiricism or its demise. He claims
that adopting an alternative to ‘logical positivism’ would exclude ‘nearly

all of economics’. However, he also advocates adopting a historical
descriptive methodology, with reference to the German historical
school.1
Norgaard’s argument that rejecting approaches creates unwanted
conformity is actually an argument against prescriptive epistemology,
which need not entail banning rejection of some epistemologies or
methodologies per se. Indeed, he derides ‘logical positivism’ as a narrow
dogmatic scientific approach dominant for several centuries. He explicitly
criticises both ecologists and economists for their adherence to such a
prescriptive methodology and states he is in ‘opposition to this long-
standing belief in a right way of knowing and precise prediction’
(Norgaard 1989: 38). Of course, in doing so he is unwittingly offering
another ‘right way of knowing’ (an epistemological approach).
Elsewhere, Norgaard (1987; 1994b) has been highly critical of what he
regards as nineteenth-century thought and its attributes – universalism,
atomism, monism – and, like Georgescu-Roegen (2009 [1979]), has
rejected a mechanistic epistemology in economics on what amount to
realist ontological grounds. He has criticised specific epistemological
features – unity of science, universal laws, independence of reality from
observer and culture – and he clearly favours their rejection from any
epistemology for ecological economics (Norgaard 1989). He also
recognises the importance of ‘the intellectual environment we create to
sort the good from the bad’ (Norgaard 1989: 38). Clearly, Norgaard does
not regard all epistemologies and methodologies as equally valid.
However, rather than sorting the good from the bad, Norgaard (1989:
44) claims that: ‘In fact, few scientists study methodology or make their
beliefs explicit. Individual scientists, and eventually whole disciplines,
succeed by being pragmatic.’ The form of this pragmatism is left
undefined. Later he concludes that ‘logical positivism is inappropriate
but necessary’, and it is necessary ‘because modern people perceive
science in terms of objective, universal truths’ (Norgaard 1989: 51). So,
despite his own critiques and arguments, ecological economists are told
to pragmatically adopt what he himself regards as bad scientific practice
because of its presumed popularity!
Norgaard is not alone in such contradictory attempts to justify eclectic
pluralism. Söderbaum (2011: 1019) has stated that ‘there will certainly
be a role for positivism also in the future’, although he then proposes

social constructionism and hermeneutics as better able to aid our
understanding of sustainability policy. Like Norgaard, whom he cites,
Söderbaum wants to be inclusive, even of mainstream economists’ ideas
under what he terms ‘paradigmatic pluralism’. However, this ‘tolerance’
goes against his own positions. His arguments for being open-minded
and respectful of others’ ideas are clear enough, but why include ideas
regarded as creating intolerance and submit to the institutions spreading
those ideas? In this regard the mainstream orthodoxy appears as the
antithesis of his approach. He states: ‘For instance, mainstream
economists tend to use their power positions to build cartels and to
discriminate against all kinds of economists who represent a threat to
orthodoxy’ (Söderbaum 1990: 482). He also believes, on what appear to
be realist ontological grounds, that institutional economics is a better
approach for addressing environmental problems. His reasons for
suggesting that fruitful dialogue might be possible between those
holding orthodox mainstream and heterodox economic ideas become
increasingly incredulous given the following concluding remarks.
As I see it, neoclassical environmental economists are wasting scarce
intellectual and financial resources by trying to do what is impossible or not
meaningful. […] In my experiences, the problem here is that many neoclassical
environmental economists are more eager to save their theories and methods
than to improve the chances of human survival on this planet.
(Söderbaum 1990: 490–491)
Elsewhere, he has also been highly critical of neoclassical economics
(Söderbaum 1992) and referred to the mainstream methodology of cost-
benefit analysis as incompatible with democracy (Söderbaum 1999:
162). Söderbaum (1990) also notes that heterodox economists are
normally versed in the mainstream, while the reverse is rare because
mainstream economists are closed-minded. In discussing his work,
Morgan (2021b) puts the case as follows: ‘Ultimately neoclassical
economics is not just narrow (conflating quantification with scientific
status, despite that it pays little to no attention to the material processes
of its primary object of study), it is an exclusionary paradigm and as
such it has been antithetical to pluralism.’
Others have recognised these aspects as economic imperialism.
Goddard et al. (2019: 8) state that they want ‘to set clear boundaries
that would leave what we called here as “economism” out of ecological

economics’, because this is a colonising force and they reject ‘both its
logic and its practice’. However, in contradiction of this position, they
also want to remain open to using neoclassical models and
mathematical formalism in their economics. Then, déjà vu, they argue
that no single epistemology can or should be applied, all are equally
valid, ecological economists are eclectic and pluralism means using
whatever seems appropriate. They simultaneously argue for both total
openness and the need for closure relating to economic imperialism. The
same contradictory arguments are put forward by Buchs et al. (2020),
discussed further in Chapter 8.
The article by Goddard et al. (2019) also picks up on Norgaard’s
earlier argument about popularity being the means of choosing how to
conduct science. They recommend that ecological economics adopt
‘guiding beliefs’ they call ‘doxa’. Vague notions of deliberation and
community are proposed, around which beliefs are meant to form. In
philosophical terms they adopt conventionalism – appealing to ‘defining
and sustaining the processes that constitute us as a community,
deciding through practice who can contribute to our “commons”, under
what conditions and rules, and who not’ (Goddard et al. 2019: 8). Their
discussion of doxa (or belief systems) mixes and confuses religious,
ethical and scientific beliefs as if they were all the same, and so appears
to equate scientific knowledge claims with a religious faith-based belief
system. Their pluralism amounts to something akin to religious
tolerance, while wishing to spread their own religion.
Regardless of all its advocates’ contradictions, the idea of an uncritical
pluralism has spread within ecological economics. This has been
supported by journal editors (Lundgren 2022) and ISEE presidents,
including Norgaard, of course. Costanza, Perrings and Cleveland (1997c:
xiii) – two former editors of the journal and two former ISEE presidents
– opine that: ‘Ecological economics is necessarily eclectic and pluralistic.
It is therefore difficult to pin down and summarize.’ The conundrum for
such pluralists is that they must either indiscriminately accept
everything, and so lose any meaning for the concept of knowledge, or
accept some grounds for rejecting ideas and approaches which they find
strongly objectionable and which contradict each other. Dow (2007: 448)
summarises the problem: ‘unstructured pluralism or eclecticism,

understood as an absence of selection criteria, or “anything goes”, is
antithetical to the building up of knowledge’.
Rejecting mainstream orthodoxy
There has been a persistent reluctance to move beyond association with
mainstream economics and to recognise this is actually detrimental to
the stated aims of developing a compelling alternative (e.g., Common
and Stagl 2005; Daly and Farley 2011; Farley and Washington 2018;
Goddard et al. 2019; Nelson 2009; Norton and Noonan 2007).
Interestingly, having condemned economic imperialism, Goddard et al.
(2019: 8) go so far as to state the following.
Our case here for openness to neo-classical models, statistical analyses or
mathematical formalism is […] that the different ways of seeing among scholars
are too complex, nuanced and contradictory to be neatly labeled into
categories, one of which then gets rejected entirely from ecological economics.
Our responsibility as a community is to work thoughtfully and critically to
determine which scholars’ works fit with the core principles and commitments of
the field, and which not.
They claim that: (i) ‘neoclassical models do illuminate aspects of reality’
but they offer no evidence; and (ii) there are works by ecological
economists using ‘some of the conventions of neoclassical economics’
that appear unproblematic, and reference work by Jackson and Victor,
and also Piketty. They conclude: ‘We remain unconvinced why such
works should be kept out of ecological economics on the basis of
epistemological purity’ (Goddard et al. 2019: 8). Their critique is directed
against my work on new foundations for ecological economics (Spash
2012).
Not only does this critique fail to address the ontological arguments I
raised, because they reduce everything to epistemology, but it actually
cites studies under (ii) that exemplify exactly why using orthodox
mainstream conceptualisation leads the heterodoxy astray. These were
reviewed in Chapter 2 and specifically work by Victor, Jackson and
Piketty, plus a study by Kallis himself. In addition, this comes fifty years
after the substantive ecological economic critiques of orthodox
mainstream theory by Georgescu-Roegen (1971) and seventy years
after those by Kapp (1950), and a lot more in between, as also shown in

Chapter 2. Unfortunately, Goddard et al. (2019) fail to address my
summary of problems arising from attempts to combine with the
orthodoxy (Spash 2012). So let me reiterate how association with and
use of mainstream economics can, has and does negatively impact
ecological economics and why it should be excluded.
1. Misconceptualisations. Extension of mainstream thought to 
environment means removing specific conceptual understanding
conform to mainstream economic concepts and make all concepts
within mathematical formalism and conform with its paradigm
positions concerning economic growth and price-making markets. 
example, this is clear with respect to economic approaches on clim
change where harm is equated to good, intergenerational ethics red
to discounting and strong uncertainty becomes risk management (Sp
2002c). Similarly, conversion of ecological concepts into mainstre
economic concepts (e.g., services, capital) has removed the orig
content and meaning that informed ecological economic critiques
corporate capitalism and markets (Spash 2015a; Spash and Aslak
2015).
2. Incoherence, contradiction and confusion. The basic positions advan
from the foundation of modern ecological economics stood in opposi
to mainstream thinking, which means trying to combine ideas sim
leads to incoherent advocacy of opposing ideas (Spash 2020c). 
example, ecological economists have argued for the importance
incommensurability (Aldred 2006; 2013; O’Neill 1997; 2017), the role
weak comparability in decision-processes (Martinez-Alier et al. 1998) 
the existence of multiple values in society (Spash 2000c; 2008c) 
conflicting meta-values (Spash 2000b; 2006). This means value mon
is rejected and value pluralism accepted, and the two are incompat
(Norton and Noonan 2007).
3. Imperialism. Economic imperialism means ecological economics
treated as a subfield of orthodox mainstream environmental 
resource economics. The Journal of Economic Literature classifica
system of the American Economic Association relegates ecolog
economics to being a subfield of neoclassical environmental economi
Attempts are made to marginalise and eradicate content, as eviden

biased bibliometric studies (Spash 2013a). Mainstream economics 
be identified as having watered down or changed interdisciplin
research and heterodox concepts in order to make the results fit wit
and conform to its methodology and ideology (Earl 2005; Lee 200
Advocates of pluralism also recognise mainstream economic imperiali
resulting in their contradictory arguments.
4. Misdirection and misrepresentations. The creation of a clear sense
direction and meaning is made far more difficult. This has b
particularly problematic for the journal Ecological Economics, but is a
evident in the textbooks (Spash 2020c). Some organisations have a
adopted the title for research (e.g., Beijer Institute) and deg
programmes (e.g., University of Edinburgh) while maintaining str
neoclassical content, the name apparently being employed as
marketing device, rebranding for superficial product differentiation.
5. Self-deprecation and denigration of social realism. Most importan
there will never be progress in knowledge if what ecological econom
themselves deem as better for understanding social, ecological 
economic problems is swamped by that which they explicitly argue 
acknowledge is detrimental to understanding. If ecological econom
want to create insight into real social ecological problems and t
political aspects, then they cannot accept the relevance of an appro
that reduces society to the individual and rejects any role for powe
ethical judgement or value conflicts. These aspects of social reality m
be an explicit part of analysis in order to understand real econo
systems. Why waste time discussing theories and ideas that 
anything to do with this, or, worse, argue this reality is itself irrelevan
Neoclassical economics is rejected because the reality (ontology) it
conjures up is a total fiction that fails to prove its worth either as a
description of or means for comprehending what goes on, or why and
what will happen in the future. At its best, it is a nice deductive and
logical model that has no relevance for understanding real social-
ecological-economic interactions. Deductive models are, by definition,
divorced from reality and so their practitioners can, and economists do,
ignore empirical criticism and avoid reflection upon the nature of that
reality.

Insofar as mainstream economic orthodoxy is based upon a
fundamentally different ontology and epistemology, there are no
grounds for collaboration – the assumptions of closed systems,
equilibrium theories, ad hoc ceteris paribus conditions, axiomatic
foundationalism, deductive mathematical formalism, arithmomorphism
and specific conceptual closure as to the meaning of economies (i.e., as
idealised market capitalism). In an empirical investigation of why the
journal editors of Ecological Economics persist with eclectic pluralism,
Lundgren (2022: 7) concludes as follows.
In the disciplinary discourse of ecological economics, actors value consistency,
societal relevance, and novelty. However, the political dominance of mainstream
economic discourse represents a mismatch with the ambition to achieve both
consistency and societal relevance, if relevance is operationalized in terms of
current governance regimes.
Those who have called for paradigm shifts and revolutions in economics
would be more consistent in looking to heterodox schools of thought
than pretending there are bridges to be built and fruitful avenues to be
walked down with orthodox mainstream economists, who have already
heavily invested in the defence of their paradigmatic positions and the
maintenance of existing power structures in capitalist society (Spash
2020c). So, let us turn to what might provide better philosophical
foundations.
Philosophical presuppositions of social ecological
economics
In terms of philosophy of science researchers tend to divide. On one
side are the reductionist naive objectivists of the supposedly hard
natural sciences (e.g., physics), and ‘wannabe’ social sciences such as
mainstream economics, claiming absolute truth, and on the other are
radical relativists of the supposedly soft social sciences (e.g., various
factions of sociology, social anthropology, political ecology) claiming
everything is a subjective discourse. Interestingly, those claiming to be
pluralists adopt the latter stance and actually dismiss realism. Learning
from both ends of the spectrum means steering a course between the

postmodern temptation to be nihilistic, denying any truth, while avoiding
the modernist temptation to claim objective truth (Spash 2002d: 144).
Ecological economists struggling with epistemological issues are aware
of the need for something of a middle path (Baumgärtner et al. 2008;
Tacconi 1998). As Jacobs (1996: 16) realised some time ago, ecological
economics requires an approach that ‘accepts neither the scientific
reduction of the natural environment to its physical characteristics, nor
the constructionist position which denies biophysical constraints on
social life’.
The issue becomes a matter of explicitly considering the best
alternative philosophy of science that can help, and here I have
proposed the adoption of critical realism (Spash 2012). In attempting to
reject this, Goddard et al. (2019) have confusingly proposed the
scientific theory of coevolution, as if it were a philosophy of science,
while rejecting critical realism based on their claim that it is a narrow
singular form of epistemological purity! Similarly, Dube (2021: 4–5)
confuses and treats as equivalent what he terms three ‘meta models’:
critical realism, systems theory and sociobiology. To clarify, a philosophy
of science is neither a natural nor a social science theory, and neither is
critical realism some narrow-minded epistemology.
Bhaskar (1975 [2008]: 10) proposed that critical realism act as
‘under-labourer’ for science and I have been proposing that it perform
the same role for ecological economics, as have some eco-feminists, as
we saw in Chapter 2. This role dates back to an understanding of
philosophy of science originating with Locke (2008 [1689]: 6).
The Commonwealth of Learning, is not at this time without Master-Builders,
whose mighty Designs, in advancing the Sciences, will leave lasting Monuments
to the Admiration of Posterity; But every one must not hope to be a Boyle or a
Sydenham; and in an Age that produces such Masters as the Great –
Huygenius, and the incomparable Mr. Newton, with some others of that Strain,
’tis Ambition enough to be employed as an Under-Labourer in clearing the
Ground a little, and removing some of the rubbish that lies in the way to
Knowledge.
Since his time this has developed into understanding the role of
philosophy of science as informing scientific practice rather than
conducting scientific research itself. What critical realism can help us do

is to clarify ontological and epistemological positions to inform and
structure methodology and practice in ecological economics.
In order to proceed, some general defining ontological features can
be drawn from the preceding discussion of pluralism and how ecological
economics as a scientific endeavour should move forward. In particular,
several ontological questions that have epistemological implications need
clarification: the existence of non-human reality; what constitutes
scientific truth; how knowledge can exist if things are subject to change;
the limits of empirical knowledge; and the distinction, if any, between
natural and social sciences.
Reality independent of humanity
There are two aspects of concern here: the independence of reality from
the human mind and the independence of Nature from human action.
Modern idealists deny that there is a world independent of the
knowledge that human minds may have of it, but (unlike classic idealists
such as Kant) also treat the world as dependent on human cognitive
choices. A radical relativist, modern idealist, strong subjectivist position
exists that claims the world is a mind-dependent construct (see
examples quoted by Collier 1994a: 87). Attempts have arisen, in related
strong social constructionist debates, that try to totally dismiss the
concept of Nature as distinct from human society, such as Latour’s
flawed concept of hybrid nature (Malm 2019; Pollini 2013). A motivation
behind such positions has been opposition to Descartes’ (2003 [1641])
dichotomous division that split the human intellect/mind from
body/matter (and so human from non-human Nature). However, the
counter became an idealist approach that totally dismissed the existence
of anything but the human mind (total anthropocentrism), rather than
identifying connections and relations between two distinct aspects of
reality, the human and non-human (Malm 2019). Pollini (2013) makes
the important point that because two things are distinct they need not
be separate, for example, my hand is distinct from my arm but not
separate from it. Interestingly, Descartes’ own retraction of the strict
mind–body separation in his later work – Passions of the Soul (1649) –
is almost totally overlooked (Gaukroger 2004).
In fact, the case for the existence of non-human reality seems rather
uncontroversial common sense and one of the basic ontological

presuppositions of ecological economics. For example, anyone who
accepts the validity of the theory of evolution must believe in the
existence of a world prior to the emergence of Homo sapiens. Similarly,
anyone who accepts thermodynamics and entropy must believe in a
structure outside human control and this also lies at the foundation of
degrowth (Georgescu-Roegen 1995 [1979]). Independence does not
mean there is no interaction and clearly the concern of the
environmental movement is that humans are actually causing planetary
destruction.
The point here is that there are structures independent of humans,
and that non-human Nature can operate autonomously, while humans
actualise events within those structures at any given point in time and
space. Consider how the Anthropocene discourse has developed and
created confusion by failing to make these distinctions. The impact of
humans on the environment is seen as pushing the possibility of survival
to limits set by biophysical structure. Yet this has been taken up by
Promethean advocates of the Anthropocene discourse as meaning
humans are now creating planetary conditions and have become a God-
like species (see discussion and literature cited by Baskin 2015). The
argument is a total logical contradiction that fails to recognise what
humans control and what is beyond their control, making no
differentiation between deep structure and actualised events (Spash
2015b). Vetlesen (2015) argues that this denial of the causal powers of
non-human Nature is motivated by the massive psychological investment
many people have made in a materialist way of life promoted under
capitalism and mediated by technology.
The independence of reality is also why different people have
common understandings, because the objects in the world are the
same, that is, mind-independent. This independence is evident in why
we get things wrong, because if the world were our own cognitive
construct there would be no reason for any error. At the same time,
postmodernism has contributed to the acceptance that knowledge is
socially constructed through our conceptualisations and theories. The
problem arises that reality may differ from how humans conceptualise it
and different humans may have different conceptualisations. So how do
we know what is true and which concepts and theories to choose?

Truth in science
Radical relativists argue that truth is purely relative to one’s theory, and
strong subjectivists that each individual creates their own reality, so
there could be as many truths as theories and as many theories as
people! More commonly, the number of theories is reduced to those
created by communities or groups that believe the same things. This
explains knowledge claims as merely subjective beliefs relative to a
group or collective, that is, conventionalism. Truth is relativised as a
construction of particular communities or dominant groups (Sayer 2000:
47). These postmodernist positions often involve anti-realism. However,
the existence of a mind-independent reality can also be taken seriously
while accepting that concepts are socially constructed. There are lessons
to learn from postmodernism, but this need not entail rejecting realism
or eradicating a general concept of truth – denied to exist but implicitly
employed by postmodernists for their own theories! So, we can accept
that a mind-independent reality can only be known in terms of available
descriptions or discourses that are relative to a specific social context
(epistemic relativism), but without rejecting the ability to judge rationally
between different conceptual theories, phenomenal claims and causal
explanations.
The realist approach traditionally gives the grounds for such
judgement as a correspondence theory of truth, that is, that a
proposition is true if and only if it corresponds to reality. As we saw in
Chapter 3, the Vienna Circle struggled with this topic in seeking logical
statements from theory that could match with observational statements
in order to validate knowledge claims of science (the protocol sentence
debate). Schlick thought this possible and Neurath did not, preferring
coherence among propositional statements, while replacing the search
for truth with justification for phenomenal claims (Uebel 1996).
Besides correspondence and coherence theories two American
Pragmatist theories of truth are of interest. Under the instrumentalism of
John Dewey and William James truth requires that propositional
statements lead to beneficial outcomes and groups select accordingly.
Under C. S. Peirce’s Pragmaticism a true propositional statement is one
that would be endorsed unanimously by qualified individuals. Defining
truth as whatever a group intersubjectively agrees is a conventionalist
theory of truth and is relativist. For American Pragmatists scientific

theories are open to refutation, or change, but may still prove beneficial
for a group within a given context for a specific task, that is, be
adequate for the job at hand, for example, Newton’s physics may be
used despite its inadequacies compared to Einstein’s.
Mackie (1970: 332) notes that a correspondence theory stands
opposed to such ‘sceptical or otherwise evasive theories as the
coherence theory and pragmatist theory’. The reason philosophers like
Mackie regard these approaches as evasive is because they in effect
hide their call upon truth rather than defining it. More specifically, Collier
(1994a: 240) argues they are plausible if taken as criteria of truth but
not as definitions.
If these theories are used to define truth, we get only circular definitions, since
coherence theories pre-suppose that we understand the concepts of consistency
and contradiction, which can only be defined in terms of truth; and pragmatic
theories tacitly work with the notion that ‘everything is as if’ the pragmatically
verified statement were true (in the correspondence sense).
That is, these criteria require a definition of truth to operate, and the
definition is left implicit. Thus, they do not stand in opposition as
alternative definitions, but they are standards for judging the attainment
of truth. If their claims hold then each might be phrased as follows.
Truth is attained by the extent to which all the beliefs/statements of a
given individual/theory are coherent. Truth is attained by the extent to
which a specific practice is able to achieve beneficial aims or the extent
to which experts agree, that is, it is useful to believe what is true. The
reason coherent theories are accepted, conventions are adopted and
predictive theories are selected is because they match reality.
Mackie (1970: 332) argues that: ‘A correspondence theory of truth is
analogous to representative realism as a theory of perception, whereas
what we want, at least with regards to truth, is direct realism.’ His
answer is a modest proposal: ‘To say that a statement is true is to say
that things are as the statement states.’ The importance of this lies in
enabling propositional statements to be answerable to how things are,
something outside themselves, to reality. This position means we look to
reality for confirmation of truth rather than, for example, justifying
statements on the basis of their current usefulness or coherence with
other statements or acceptance by some group or organisation.

Collier (1994a: 240–242) comes to the same conclusion as the
modest proposal, but argues that interpreting correspondence theory as
representative realism, or requiring strict resemblance, is erroneous.
Correspondence concerns checking for meaning and looking for relations
of comparison (without resemblance) and that is why the word
‘correspondence’ is appropriate in Collier’s opinion. For example, we do
not expect our words to resemble their objects, but rather convey
meaning that corresponds to objects. This is the distinction made in
critical realism between thought objects and real objects, as Sayer
(2010) puts it. In other words, all our concepts and theories are
abstractions from reality, but they should be validated by their ability to
explain reality and so provide means for practices that work well.
A final development is worthy of mention here. Sayer (2000: 42–43)
does not reject correspondence theory per se but finds it awkward and
elusive, and seeks a more operational form for truth. He argues for
understanding truth as the extent to which it generates expectations
about the world and about results of our actions that are actualised,
which he terms ‘practical adequacy’ (see also Sayer 2010: chapter 2).
This is more than pragmatic instrumentalism because it requires
descriptive realism of mechanisms and causal relationships. However,
like coherence and Pragmatist theories, it does not appear to be a
definition of truth, but rather a criterion. The more practically adequate
our knowledge, the closer we appear to be to the truth, that is, the
better is the correspondence of our theory to practice that works. Sayer
notes the difficulties in defining truth but also that this age-old concept
cannot be jettisoned because it relates to something fundamental to
human understanding of reality.
Knowledge beyond the empirical: Depth ontology
A critical realist perspective clarifies the relationships between the real,
the actual and the empirical (called depth ontology). The naive
objectivist typically reduces reality to space–time-specific events and
regularities between them, basing their knowledge claims only on what
is observable. This means what is observed is taken to be what exists
and reality is equated to the empirical, the epistemic fallacy. Yet
empirical observation is limited and only forms a subset of actual events,
that is, to simplify, not everything that happens is measured or

measurable. Similarly, the actualised is a subset of the potential, that is,
what could have happened if… This recognises that the reduction of
reality to activated and/or realised mechanisms neglects unactivated
and/or unrealised mechanisms that exist as potentials, for example,
potential policies that go unformulated and unrealised, or potential life
choices unfulfilled. There is a distinction between real structures and
their mechanism and the actualised events they cause, as well as
between actual events and empirical experience of them.
Rather than seeking regularities between empirically observed events,
causation can be understood as a matter of potential powers held by
objects that may or may not be realised or actuated. As Sayer (2010: 2–
3) explains, this insight:
replaces the regularity model with one in which objects and social relations have
causal powers which may or may not produce regularities, and which can be
explained independently of them. In view of this, less weight is put on
quantitative methods for discovering and assessing regularities and more on
methods of establishing the qualitative nature of social objects and relations on
which causal mechanisms depend. And this in turn, brings us back to the vital
task of conceptualization.
This is a critique of standard Humean causality, addresses open systems
reality and emphasises theorising as conceptualisation. Correspondences
can be drawn with Kapp’s work on circular and cumulative causation
(e.g., see Berger 2009), which also helps explain the persistence and
reproduction of social structure and phenomena (e.g., racism, sexism,
colonialism).
The insights from critical realism enable us to put empirical analysis in
perspective as an important but limited way in which to gain knowledge.
For example, humans may maintain exploitative relationships with
Nature that falsely appear empirically as unproblematic. While the
structure of our material- and energy-throughput economy is
incompatible with maintaining the structure and functioning of social
and ecological systems, empiricism is backward-looking and will only
reveal the full scale of the disaster after the event, when action is too
late. As Meadows et al. (1972) explained, exponential growth patterns in
human society could lead to collapse without being recognised. Focusing
on what has been observed in the past can prevent us seeing what
might happen in the future. For example, converting capitalist

economies to social ecological economies, such as advocated by the
degrowth 
movement, 
is 
an 
unrealised 
unobservable 
potential.
Empiricism can only reveal limited aspects of what has been actualised,
not what remains unactualised or what could be actualised.
Knowledge, change and structure
In an ever-changing world the ability to gather knowledge appears
challenged and limited. The problem is expressed by the metaphor of
Cratylus, follower of Heraclitus, that ‘You cannot step in the same river
twice.’ If all things were continuously changing knowledge would appear
impossible. Goddard et al. (2019) claim an ever-changing world requires
making no selection as to how we should best understand the world. On
the contrary, we can recognise that knowledge is founded on what does
not change – Plato’s and Aristotle’s response. Reconsider the river
metaphor. This has conveyed the same idea for 2,500 years because it is
based on our unchanged conceptualisation of certain fixed elements
(e.g., a riverbed, water, flowing) that constitute real rivers. How else
would you even know you were stepping in a river, let alone the same
one!? Clearly humans can and do identify stable and lasting phenomena
and structures on which to base knowledge claims. Indeed, Goddard et
al. (2019) promote the scientific concept of coevolution as their core
unchanging phenomena and their justifications cannot be just anything
and appear rather realist. As we have seen, there are good and bad
grounds on which to validate knowledge, but change is not a reason to
claim anything goes in epistemology. Indeed, exactly the opposite is true
because we need means to gain knowledge that work in understanding
evolving, dynamic open systems.
Another aspect of change affecting knowledge is in how far
researchers themselves unintentionally affect what they observe, that is,
the extent to which there is independence of the observer from the
observed. Some methods, such as face-to-face interviews, appear more
susceptible than others. An extreme claim would be that observers
always substantively change their objects of study so that all knowledge
is totally relative and subjective. However, as Sayer (2000) has pointed
out, the observer as a social scientist rarely has the power to influence
their object of study, and even when they do there is (more often than
not) a clear separation between observation and influence. For example,

a Marxist studying capitalism and the role of international corporations is
highly unlikely to have any influence on the object of study during their
research and would be lucky to have any after! Social structure can and
does change, but not as fast as some constructionists claim, nor in most
circumstances due to simply studying an object. Indeed, deliberate
attempts to change social structure prove hard to achieve and may take
a generation or two (Porpora 1998).
More generally, investigation might be considered as consisting of
distinct steps involving research, followed by publication and then, if
lucky, some impact, even where this is purposefully sought. Social
science researchers do aim to use knowledge to change the structure of
the object of study (e.g., the economy) and in doing so hope to improve
the human condition (see explanatory critique in Chapter 5). In contrast,
natural sciences have traditionally worked to understand the structure
and causal mechanism relating to their objects of study, taken as given,
working within those structural constraints to achieve outcomes for
human ends. This is a tradition going back to Francis Bacon’s 1620
Instauratio Magna, Book I, Aphorism III: ‘where the cause is not known
the effect cannot be produced. Nature to be commanded must be
obeyed; and that which in contemplation is as the cause is in operation
as the rule’ (Robertson 1905: 259). Science aims to describe and explain
causal mechanisms that are part of structure in order to both
understand change and create specific outcomes.
Core to the insights from critical realism is the importance of
structure and part of the reason is because of its unchanging qualities
that enable us to study, create and revisit our knowledge claims. The
existence of unchanging structure and mechanisms studied by physics,
chemistry and biology are often taken as absent from social science, as
if no social structure (e.g., capitalism, feudalism, chieftain communities
and hunter-gatherer societies) ever existed. At the same time there
appear to be differences due to the objects of study. For example, social
sciences engage in hermeneutics and the search for new and deeper
concepts, while natural sciences tend to work with established and more
stable interpretations. Whether such things create a significant division
is the question I turn to next.
The possibility of naturalism: Connecting the sciences

Methodological naturalism proposes that the approach of both natural
and social-scientific investigations should be the same, and ontological
naturalism that the realities they confront have the same basic features,
which implies the means to knowledge would be identical, that is,
epistemological naturalism. Methodological naturalism has a tradition of
making the practice of natural science the focus and has typically been
associated with a reductionist naive objectivism due to a strong regard
for mechanistic physics as a role model. In contrast, a non-reductionist
naturalism opens up to the possibility of and conditions for obtaining
knowledge from a variety of sources, going beyond the traditions based
on inductive inference from sense perception and deductive inference
from logical reasoning, and critical realism advances the role of
abduction and retroduction (Danermark et al. 2019).
Distinctions are often assumed to be easily drawn between natural
and social science investigation or, less dichotomously, between different
sciences moving from the study of non-human entities to human
relationships. The physics-inspired Kuhnian definition of science as
problem-solving is narrow and, for example, downplays the role of
descriptive explanation and interpretation across the sciences. That a
limited range of natural sciences have tended to provide the
paradigmatic case for creating objective knowledge has meant defining
progress as solving quantitative problems, while qualitative explanation
might diminish (Kuhn 1970 [1962] actually proscribes this as
progressive). Such a quantitative focus is highly problematic for both
natural and social sciences, and, as we saw in Chapter 3, the importance
of qualitative aspects of reality is something economists ignore due to
their arithmomania. More generally, a judgement as to superiority is
implicit in dichotomous designations – hard versus soft, objective versus
subjective, 
experimental 
versus 
descriptive, 
quantitative 
versus
qualitative – drawn between natural and social sciences. The question of
naturalism is the extent to which such divisions actually hold.
Tait (2019) argues that the social sciences cannot meet the same
epistemic criteria as the natural sciences, and they therefore have a
different role to play. This is based on the idea that naturalisation of the
social sciences would require them to adopt a narrow approach
inappropriate to their object of study, leading to failure. For example,
neoclassical economics has adopted a methodology (deductive

mathematical formalism) that prevents it from doing basic social science
research, that is, addressing the human, political and social aspects of
its object of study. Seeking to emulate physics has meant the blanket
application of an inappropriate epistemology, creating a dogmatic
disciplinary field of practice (Lawson 1997). However, the impossibility of
epistemological and methodological naturalism argued by Tait is based
on limiting epistemic criteria and neglecting natural science practice that
goes 
beyond 
epistemic 
qualities 
founded 
on 
empiricism 
and
experimental methodology.
The inability to employ experimental methodology is at core due to
the inability to create closure in open systems. Benton (1998) notes that
the direct use of experimental methodology is rarely possible in the
social sciences because of the inability to control extraneous variables as
well as ethical and legal constraints. Collier (1994a: chapter 5) believes
the lack of experimental methodology poses a serious limit on the extent
to which insight can be achieved into social reality. While Collier is
pessimistic about this, he does offer ways forward using ‘retroduction’
and transcendental argumentation, and other critical realists have also
advanced a range of other approaches that are applicable in an open-
systems context (Danermark et al. 2019; Lawson 1997). Knowledge
creation in the absence of experimental methodology must rely on other
approaches, and clearly not all natural sciences rely on it anyway.
If, instead of physics and laboratory experiments, natural sciences
such as evolutionary biology, ecology, geology and palaeontology are
considered, then the result is to recognise variety in natural science
practice. Indeed, Tait’s discussion of Darwinian evolutionary theory
exemplifies elements of what would otherwise have to be regarded as
exclusively social science epistemology and methodology. Darwin’s
theory was not based on the experimental laboratory, but it is no less
scientific for that. Once the experimental empiricist methodology is
dropped as defining the requirements for good science, there seems to
be less basis for drawing epistemic boundaries between the natural and
social sciences. The issue is not that social scientists are unable to
practise natural science methodology, but rather that neither natural
scientists nor social scientists are limited to classically defined
experimental empiricism. Benton (1998) points out that there are shared
methods and many parallels in methodology between natural and social

sciences, such as between the fieldwork methods of animal ethologists
and the qualitative research of social-scientific ethnographers.
A more specific ontological issue concerns humans as the object of
study because they hold beliefs and opinions and interpret the world.
Natural scientists may be regarded as mostly studying objects that do
not engage in such self-interpretation. In contrast, social scientists study
humans and must both interpret them and how they conceptualise the
world (termed the double-hermeneutic; see Sayer 2010: chapter 1). The
need for understanding human conceptualisations led to the rise of
hermeneutics and a ‘linguistic turn’ in the social sciences that introduced
literary modes of social analysis as part of postmodernism. Yet an
exclusive focus on hermeneutics as social science removes part of the
object of study from sight. Thus, as Benton (1998) notes, ontological
naturalists have argued that ‘the reduction of human social life to “text”,
which is implicit in the “linguistic turn”, obscures or renders marginal the
material dimensions of human deprivation, oppression, and unnecessary
suffering that has been at the heart of much critical social science’. In
addition, the dichotomy between human and non-human animal
behaviour has been breaking down, for example, tool-use by birds, the
learning of elements of sign language by chimps, evidence of prevalent
social cooperation and emotion in other animal species. This means that
biologists, ecologists and animal behaviourists can face similar issues to
social scientists in terms of their objects of study.
Foundations for creating knowledge
Earlier we saw how those claiming epistemological/methodological
pluralism, and equal validity of all ideas, contradict themselves
repeatedly and fail to provide explicit grounds for creating meaningful
knowledge. They engage in judgemental relativism, which claims that
one cannot judge between different discourses and conceptualisations in
order to decide that some accounts are better than others (Sayer 2000:
47). As has also been shown, those advocating eclectic pluralism
actually argue against their own position because in fact they are far
from open to everything, reject a variety of ideas and approaches and
implicitly impose epistemic criteria. Recognising that we can and do

engage in the rejection of conceptualisations and theories as better or
worse means we engage in rational judgement.
The basis for rational judgement is how knowledge relates to reality
and so enables good practice. For example, how should we create better
understanding of human behaviour? Mainstream economics has offered
a theory of a fully informed, rational, atomistic agent that makes optimal
calculations and choices, meant to be explicable using mathematical
formalist models. In contrast, humans can be identified as complex,
fallible, multiply motivated, emotional, social beings that act on the basis
of heuristics. The former proves inadequate and prevents a more
descriptively realistic and relevant model from developing. The approach
fails both on epistemological and methodological grounds. For example,
formalism has a limited role in research subject to meeting epistemic
criteria (e.g., what does it contribute to our knowledge, is it the best
approach and in what context is it applicable). As Georgescu-Roegen
(2009 [1979]) explained, mathematical formalism is applicable only for
engineering economics (i.e., production analysis), and as a thought
process providing a simile. More generally, bad practice can be
identified, and bad methodologies and inappropriate application of
methods rejected.
Neither does recognising that humans construct their ideas mean
adopting radical relativism or idealism (as Baumgärtner et al. 2008 seem
to think). Critical realism argues for epistemic relativity – sometimes
termed epistemological relativism – which is the view that knowledge
consists of concepts that are contextual culturally, historically and
linguistically; they are thought objects. However, they are attempts to
understand a reality independent of human minds, which also provides a
means for revealing their practical adequacy, that is, what succeeds or
fails to meet epistemic criteria and works in practice. Knowledge is
theory-laden but not theory-determined, where theory is understood as
conceptualisation (Sayer 2010: chapter 2). The mind-independent reality
is our object of study (the intransitive realm), while concepts and their
joining together in theories are the thought objects by which we try to
understand that reality (transitive realm). This is qualified by the double-
hermeneutic mentioned in the preceding section. Reality consists of
more than simply materiality and in the social sciences ideas are

important causal mechanisms acting as human motivators and
themselves form objects of study.
The nature of what is studied informs as to how it can be understood,
the appropriate means of doing so and the tools to be employed. For
example, while arguments have been presented against mechanistic
thinking in economics, that does not mean mechanistic approaches can
be totally rejected because there are objects of study for which they can
be appropriate, for example, a mechanical wind-up clock, steam and
combustion engines. Research proceeds through a process of making
sense of the objects of study and developing common means of
reference (i.e., conceptualisation) within communities of researchers.
Agreement upon what is held to be true may appear to be a convention,
but what is agreed upon is not arbitrary, nor will just anything work. If
truth were merely convention, then ‘we could prove this by flouting with
impunity any conventions about what is the case’, for example, drive on
the wrong side of the road, touch bare electrical wires (Sayer 2000: 42).
The test of our knowledge is what happens in practice, or the practical
adequacy of our conceptual theories. For example, can knowledge
enable building or repairing a clock and to what quality? If a clockmaker
is to train an apprentice, they will need a common understanding and
conceptualisation or else they will be unable to even communicate. The
same applies whether learning to gather or grow food in an Indigenous
community or navigating life in a modern city. What distinguishes good
science from daily practice is its ability to provide descriptively realist
causal explanation, as well as meeting a variety of other epistemic
criteria, for example, coherence, consistency, robustness, generalisability
(Sayer 2010: 70–71).
At the same time, there is awareness in ecological economics that we
cannot know for certain ‘the truth’ about reality (Røpke 1998: 144).
Hence the status given to ignorance and social indeterminacy captured
by the term ‘strong uncertainty’ (Spash 2002d). Critical realism provides
arguments – anti-foundationalism, fallibilism – for why we can never
demonstrate that we have discovered the truth, even if we actually
have. A science based on there being infallible claims upon which to
build an axiomatic theory is rejected. However, that we are always
fallible neither means that all knowledge claims are equally fallible or
valid, nor that choosing between theories and propositions is impossible.

Neither are there endless numbers of understandings, or theories, for
successfully undertaking a given practice related to a given context.
Typically, at any given time there are a limited number of alternative
causal explanations for a phenomenon and a few leading contestants.
As Dow (2007: 455) remarks: ‘There is a limit to how far there can be
plurality of understandings of the nature of reality, approaches to
knowledge, and meaning, when knowledge needs to be developed
within groups of researchers and communicated to others. Plurality in
practice cannot be infinite.’ She argues for ‘structured pluralism’, which
she sees as the need for structured methodological approaches within
schools of thought and communication across them. Scientific
collaboration requires commonalities and means of integration (see
Chapter 7).
However, unifying integration is regarded with suspicion by those who
emphasise knowledge as subjective group-based beliefs and the
diversity of ways of knowing as requiring that we should ‘agree to
disagree’ rather than seek common understanding. Confusion here has
been compounded by the desire for celebrating diversity and pluralism
as a political project of the new left and decolonial literatures, such as
Escobar’s (2018) pluriversalism. Graeber (2015) has pointed out
numerous problems with the related ‘ontological turn’ that has
attempted to justify the existence of multiple incommensurable realities
in social anthropology. This not only subsumes ontology under
epistemology (engaging in the epistemic fallacy), but also means being
unable to critically reflect on Western science itself, because it is just
another idealist construct (Graeber 2015). Of course, criticism is not
withheld from Western science, despite the obvious contradiction,
because of ideological opposition and concerns over Western
imperialism. As we saw earlier the same inconsistency and contradictory
argumentation has been introduced into ecological economics (e.g.,
Buchs et al. 2020; Goddard et al. 2019). The claim of incommensurable
ontologies is a political project meant to defend Indigenous
communities, but in fact it prevents any critique of modernity, capitalism
or any other supposed ‘ontology’, because all are defined as culturally
relative worldviews and should be respected as such. Perversely, there is
nothing crucial to be learnt about our interactions with Nature from the
way others live.

Indeed, the lack of ability to integrate and unify understanding of
social-ecological 
economic 
systems 
is 
highly 
problematic 
both
scientifically and politically. Gills and Hosseini put the case as follows.
Mottoes like ‘to agree to disagree’ in the current conditions of looming
catastrophic changes and rising rebellions, now appear as a fanatical idea that
the broad global left may no longer be able to afford to hold onto, given the
imperative for common ground and common action. Pluriversalism, however,
seems to be investing its hope on the magic of interactions around common
goals and causes and mutual learning, but also on collective actions for
strategizing advocacy and action, and building collaborative initiatives.
(Gills and Hosseini 2022: 1187)
Their conclusion is as follows.
Developing the know-how of how to actively establish and empower self-
sustaining, self-determining communal economies, in complementary and
harmonious alliances with one another, is surely a central element of such
projects. However, even more crucial is the operationalization of integrative
frameworks developed to reflect the radical interdependence and structural
entanglements of our failing world civilization system.
(Gills and Hosseini 2022: 1192)
The bottom line is how alternative economies as ethical social
provisioning systems can be made to work, how current economic and
political structures operate to prevent change and how we get from here
to there. The political concern with diversity is that colonialism, whether
Western or Eastern, Northern or Southern, has destroyed independent
traditional self-sustaining social provisioning systems, and continues to
do so. Understanding the ongoing crises requires social and economic
theory connected to ecological structure and functioning, which means
seeking unity of science in terms of common understanding.
While resolving cross-disciplinary and inter-theory disputes can be
extremely difficult and time-consuming, claiming that this is impossible
is defeatist. Sayer (2010) notes that such defeatism leads to either
dogmatism, where critiques of paradigms by outsiders are dismissed a
priori, or ineffectual eclecticism, where all theories are regarded as
having something to contribute (as we saw with the advocates of
eclectic pluralism).
Taken to its logical conclusion, this latter, apparently open-minded and liberal
view becomes empty-headed and conservative in that it makes light of the fact

that opposing theories are likely to contain at least some contradictory claims,
some of which may be fundamental. It can therefore neutralize the key role of
criticism in the development of knowledge. At the extreme, such a view could,
for example, see the origin of profit both in surplus value and in the ‘marginal
efficiency of capital’, or see Britain as both a class society and as classless.
(Sayer 2010: 77)
Radical relativism as promoted by eclectic pluralists is inherently
conservative because it denies grounds for critique and theory selection.
Ecological economics as a conservative movement is an unnecessary
waste of time. Ecological economics as a radical science offering a new
economic paradigm is required today, more than ever, in order to
criticise and change the social organisations and institutions that spread
false beliefs about economic, social and environmental reality.
Conclusions
Ecological economics has an empirical aspect and some possible
intellectual roots among members of the left Vienna Circle, especially
Neurath. However, the form of that empirical element needs
development and should not be restricted to methodologies based on
narrow, dogmatic, prescriptive caricatures of positivism, nor appeals to
the supposedly most popular methodology in economics. Neither should
seeking empirical evidence be equated with adopting an empiricist
epistemology. Empiricism is not the aim here because there is more to
reality (i.e., depth ontology), which is scientifically relevant, than that
which humans can observe and measure. Thus, other means of
investigation and inference are necessary.
In criticising eclectic pluralism my aim has been to point out that
knowledge creation requires refining and rejecting what does not work
and theories that fail to offer descriptively real causal explanation. This
means that methods are employed that are appropriate to the object of
study, not that some single approach to knowledge is imposed
dogmatically. Rather, grounds are required for making interdisciplinary
cooperation and structured scientific pluralism meaningful, and that
implies finding common ground for interaction and communication using
common concepts. I have argued that in creating a social ecological
economics those commonalities lie with heterodox economic schools of

thought and primarily in terms of ontology, which has epistemological
and methodological implications.
Orthodox mainstream economic approaches have been argued to be
detrimental to developing an alternative economic vision and in conflict
with epistemological progress. If people wish to undertake such
approaches they can and should do so elsewhere, there is no lack of
mainstream journals, departments and conferences. Political tolerance
allows for orthodox economists, just as people who believe in a flat
Earth and creationist theories are tolerated in democracies and can be
debated with, but do not have their ideas included as part of modern
science. Ecological economics could then be freed from orthodox
mainstream fallacies, including the pretence that there is no biophysical
or social reality, that there is only one form of economy (i.e., capitalism)
and that everything can be valued in money terms and traded off.
After three decades of eclecticism and incoherence the time for a
more progressive stance is long overdue. In the ultimate contradiction,
the eclecticism of the relativist position has been shown in this chapter
to actually defend the naive objectivism of mainstream economics which
it rejects. Economists of all sorts can happily agree to paradigmatic
pluralism as long as their own paradigm is left alone. Relativism is also
self-defeating, because if all systems of thought are equally valid and
beyond challenge then this must also be true of anti-relativism.
Ecological economics requires a better philosophy of science, not
multiple conflicting and contradictory ones chosen at random or
enforced imposition of scientific theories as philosophies. Here critical
realism offers a potential way forward as a meta-theory informing the
conduct of science. Critical realism provides the under-labouring task of
informing about the operation of science from a philosophical
perspective and helps clear the ground for social ecological economics to
conceptualise and explain interactions between physical and social
systems. A range of philosophical presuppositions were then discussed
in light of critical realism to show how this helps clarify the way forward.
In order to make scientific progress ecological economists must
explicitly formulate their substantively different vision of economics from
that of the orthodox mainstream. Ecological economics is not free from
ontological or epistemological positions which have methodological
implications. As will be explored next, it is also ideologically motivated to

seek radical transformation of both economics as a discipline and social
and economic systems.
Notes
 1
For a brief overview of the historical school, see Sandeline (2008: 64–78).
 2
The more specific entry is ‘Q5 Environmental Economics – Q57 Ecological Econ
omics: Ecosystem Services; Biodiversity Conservation; Bioeconomics; Industrial
Ecology’.

5
Revolutionary transformative science
Introduction
So far, we have seen how ecological economics holds tremendous
potential for creating change in economic science, and so
progressing social ecological transformation, if its distinct vision is
allowed to be developed. This can be seen as relating to various
calls for developing a preanalytic vision as something which should
inform and help establish a new research agenda (Costanza 1996;
Costanza et al. 1997a; Daly 1991a; Daly and Farley 2011; Munda
1997; Özkaynak et al. 2002). Explicitly undertaking to develop such
a vision seems necessary and will help form the foundations of social
ecological economics. A detailed account of the substance of such a
vision will be presented in Chapter 6, but first we must understand
the role of such an act and what it entails.
The idea of a preanalytic vision as explaining scientific change
was originally proposed by Joseph Schumpeter (1883–1950) in his
posthumously published History of Economic Analysis. Schumpeter
argued that new knowledge becomes established in a process,
outside of formal scientific analysis, that involves a mixture of vision
and ideology. This process emphasises the importance of
establishing what constitute the objects of study in any field of
science as an essential starting point.

Obviously, in order to be able to posit to ourselves any problems at all, we
should first have to visualize a distinct set of coherent phenomena as a
worth-while object of our analytic efforts.
(Schumpeter 1994 [1954]: 42)
Such ontological foundations are part of designating a field of
knowledge and setting its scope and objectives. Schumpeter’s
central point was to explain how scientific theories undergo
substantive change. In doing so a vision is required before we can
proceed and this is what Schumpeter refers to as a ‘preanalytic
cognitive act’. In practice research is likely to build upon the work of
our predecessors, and so their visions. Vision as an explicit cognitive
act is less common. Although,
vision of this kind not only must precede historically the emergence of
analytical effort in any field but also may re-enter the history of every
established science each time somebody teaches us to see things in a light
of which the source is not to be found in the facts, methods, and the results
of the pre-existing science.
(Schumpeter 1994 [1954]: 42)
Thus, Schumpeter indicates that the preanalytic cognitive act is
especially relevant when there is a failure in a disciplinary field to
account for some phenomena, an inability to explain and a re-
evaluation is in process.
Early on in the establishment of modern ecological economics,
first Daly (1991a: 33) and then Costanza (1996: 11) appealed
directly to Schumpeter’s exposition, quoting the exact same text
(Schumpeter 1994 [1954]: 41, paragraph 2), and taking it as
something of an injunction to action. However, Schumpeter’s ‘distinct
set of coherent phenomena’ are not readily identifiable as forming
the basis of ecological economists’ analytical efforts and little has
been contributed to developing such a vision. Daly (1991a) mentions
open systems as the concrete aspect of his preanalytic vision. His
concern, as later expressed in Daly and Farley (2011: 58), is for
placing economies in their relations of dependence on biophysical
reality so that: ‘Ecological economics distinguishes itself from
mainstream economics in its preanalytic vision of the economic

system as a subsystem of the sustaining and containing global
ecosystem.’ This new vision is regarded as constituting ‘a major
paradigm shift in economics’, although, strangely (especially for a
Kuhnian paradigm shift), few analytical differences or changes in
tools of analysis are stated to be expected (Daly and Farley 2011:
24). Özkaynak et al. (2002) offer a richer account of a preanalytic
vision 
for 
ecological 
economics 
that 
includes 
coevolution,
thermodynamics, uncertainty and complexity. Their vision also
specifies a change in analytical approach to one that is qualitatively
distinct. However, they pre-empt their approach by quoting from a
book, of which Daly is a coauthor, which claims that: ‘ecological
economics is not a new single paradigm based in shared
assumptions and theory’ (Costanza et al. 1997a: 49), which clearly
contradicts Daly’s later position and seems to run counter to their
own, although they appear to accept it.
What should be expected from invoking such things as preanalytic
vision and paradigm shift? Kuhn’s idea of a paradigm shift is a
response in the face of anomalies overwhelming a rather
dogmatically imposed theory, which is seen as an incommensurable
break in scientific understanding. Earlier, and in contrast to this,
Neurath described scientific change as a process of ongoing re-
evaluation. Schumpeter appears somewhere in-between the two.
What all three suggest is the need to recognise the explicit
engagement of scientists in a communal process of conceptualising a
field of knowledge. As explained in the preceding chapter, making
sense of the world involves conceptualising what exists, and the
relations involved, to enable practice and action, whether for daily
living or scientific research. In daily life our conceptualisations
appear largely implicit and subconscious, but in science they are
made explicit as part of formal conceptual theorising.
The preanalytic cognising of the scope and ontology of a field of
study appears as distinct from, but related to, the epistemology of
exploring the field. As will be explained, for Schumpeter this relates
to a division between the sociology of science, where ontological
clarification occurs, and an empiricist philosophy of science, where
truth-seeking analytical investigation is undertaken. Schumpeter’s

understanding often appears consistent with an epistemological
naturalism in a very traditional form, that is, building on reductionist
naive objectivism. On occasions his description of scientific process
broadens to a non-reductionist epistemological naturalism. However,
overall, he describes the analytical in terms of logical empiricism and
his economic science as value-free, while his preanalytic vision is
ideologically loaded.
What this introduction indicates is the need to clarify the role and
meaning of a preanalytic vision, and especially so because those
appealing to such a vision for ecological economics have failed to
address the role of ideology which, as we will see, is at the heart of
Schumpeter’s approach. In the next section, Schumpeter’s proposal
is put into a broader perspective by comparison with the theories of
Neurath and Kuhn and issues in the sociology of science that they all
raise. I then turn to clarifying the meaning and role of ideology and
the differences that have occurred over time and between different
authors – Marx, Engels, Schumpeter and Gramsci. I will argue
against the removal of ideology from science and for the
impossibility of removing values from social science. Instead, I turn
to the critical realist approach termed ‘explanatory critique’, and the
implications this has for social ecological economics and the role of
researchers in the transformation of society.
Revolutionary change in science: Schumpeter,
Neurath and Kuhn
There are clearly points in the conduct of science, within a field of
knowledge, where reflection upon the content becomes contentious.
What Schumpeter (1994 [1954]) raised as the preanalytic cognitive
act involves issues that parallel calling for an explicit account of
philosophical presuppositions. Although he tends to be preoccupied
with epistemology, and explicit coverage of ontology is absent, the
preanalytic vision involves answering a series of ontological
questions: What do we understand as existing? What is the reality

with which we are engaging? What are its key features and how do
the various elements fit together? What are their properties?
Preanalytic vision and logical empiricism
Schumpeter uses Keynes’s General Theory, from which modern
macroeconomics arose, as a prime example of a preanalytic vision in
practice. In explaining the economic processes of his day Keynes
invoked concepts describing the special characteristics of his
worldview. Schumpeter (1994 [1954]: 41–42) notes that there was
no question of these characteristics being established by antecedent
factual research. Schumpeter (1994 [1954]: 42) quotes Keynes:
‘They are “plausibly ascribed to our world, on our general knowledge
of contemporary human nature” (p. 250).’1 This account seems to
diverge from the claim by Pasinetti (2005: 841) that Keynes said
‘when the facts changed he changed his mind’ and that Keynesian
theory is based upon realism interpreted as respecting facts, that is,
naive objectivism. The preanalytic vision also diverges from the Post
Keynesian concept of stylised facts, first introduced by Kaldor
(1961), which are supposed to be empirically based reflections of an
objective reality (i.e., derived from an analytical empiricist scientific
process).
However, there need be no inconsistency here, as far as
Schumpeter is concerned, because the role of fact-finding in his
approach comes once analytical effort starts, that is, after
conception of the vision. Schumpeter (1994 [1954]: 42) states the
following.
The first [analytic] task is to verbalize the vision or to conceptualize it in
such a way that its elements take their places, with names attached to
them that facilitate recognition and manipulation, in a more or less orderly
schema or picture. But in doing so we almost automatically perform two
other tasks. On the one hand, we assemble further facts in addition to
those perceived already, and learn to distrust others that figured in the
original vision; on the other hand, the very work of constructing the schema
or picture will add further relations and concepts to, and in general also
eliminate others from, the original stock.

Schumpeter goes on to mention ‘the surviving elements of the
original vision’ as being subject to the more rigorous epistemic
standards of consistency and adequacy. The preanalytic process
feeds into and interacts with a process of acceptance and rejection
of ideas. Through such a process he believes scientific models can
be developed and scientific propositions refined. He specifies the
rules of procedure for conducting analytical research as being:
described by two salient characteristics: they reduce the facts we are
invited to accept on scientific grounds to the narrower category of ‘facts
verifiable by observation or experiment’; and they reduce the range of
admissible methods to ‘logical inference from verifiable facts’.
(Schumpeter 1994 [1954]: 8)
This clearly employs a specific logical empiricist approach, appealing
to Schlick’s verifiability criterion of validity (see Chapter 3). The
extent to which the preanalytic and analytic stages overlap is unclear
and elsewhere Schumpeter (1949: 350) also describes the same
process of creating a vision as ‘prescientific’ and explicitly states it is
not preanalytic. However, given his (above-quoted) logical empiricist
definition of analytical science, it would seem the definition is
preanalytic, as described in his History, and that this is more precise
and consistent with the cognitive explanation given of the process.
As noted, his philosophy of science was empiricist, holding that
objective truth could be achieved following a correct logical
empiricist methodology including verification as the criterion of
validity. The three main problems he saw that might prevent this
are: (i) ideological bias; (ii) tampering with facts or with rules of
procedure; and (iii) value judgements (Schumpeter 1994 [1954]:
35). There is something of an unreconciled conflict between his
empiricist naive objectivism and his recognition of social group
processes that include ideology, affecting knowledge formation.
Sociology of science and paradigms
Schumpeter distinguished between the philosophy of science (i.e.,
his logical empiricism) as relating to epistemic rules of procedure,

and the sociology of science as relating to how scientists conduct
themselves as a social group. Typically the sociology of science is
attributed to developments in the 1970s building from Kuhn (1970
[1962]). However, Schumpeter had already used the term in his
1948 American Economic Association presidential address on
‘Science and Ideology’ and it also appears in his History (Schumpeter
1994 [1954]; 1949). He had presented on the sociology of science
as early as 1911 and published on this in 1915 (Shionoya 1997: 62).
In several respects Schumpeter describes a process that bears
some striking similarities to Neurath’s repeatedly used metaphorical
story of knowledge creation being like continuously rebuilding a boat
while at sea. Uebel (1996: 91) has explained how Neurath was
himself in the midst of countering and moving beyond a specific
hegemonic empiricist approach: ‘Neurath’s social-science-oriented
overcoming of logical positivism realized a distinctively activist
understanding of the Enlightenment program he shared with his
colleagues on the left wing of the Vienna Circle.’ He pursued an anti-
foundationalist, naturalistic epistemology in which the focus is on
how interdisciplinary scientific effort is conducted. At the same time,
he was a strong advocate of the unity of science. As in Schumpeter’s
explanation of a typical preanalytic vision, the work of our
predecessors is noted as the basis from which we start and from
which we rebuild. Neurath explains as follows.
We are like sailors who are forced to totally reconstruct their boat on the
open sea with beams they carry along, by replacing beam for beam and
thus changing the form of the whole. Since they cannot land they are never
able to pull apart the ship entirely in order to build it anew. The new ship
emerges from the old through a process of continuous transformation.
(Neurath 1913, cited and translated by Uebel 1996: 100–101)
For Neurath the process of transformation would progress by
removing metaphysical concepts which could ‘be allowed to vanish
without trace’ (Neurath 1932 [1983]). Both Schumpeter’s narrowing
and refining and Neurath’s process of continuous transformation
involve rethinking, remoulding and rejecting ideas. Schumpeter
clearly believes the ship can also call into port for fresh supplies,

remove rotten planks and replace them with new, that is, more
substantive changes can occur that are breaks from the past.
In a similar vein, Kuhn (1970 [1962]) explained scientific change
as a paradigm shift. His concept of a paradigm describes group
consensus during a period when science is normalised. He contrasts
periods of ‘normal science’ with periods of revolutionary scientific
change, when paradigms are in flux, as old ones collapse and new
ones appear. A paradigm is more than a theory and involves: how
future research in a field should proceed; which problems are to be
tackled; what are the appropriate methods for ‘solving’ problems;
and what would constitute an ‘acceptable solution’. Kuhn’s
recognition of the importance of the scientific community in defining
knowledge in a given field stimulated the development of the
sociology of science and boosted constructionism (e.g., science and
technology studies). Thus, a paradigm combines scientific theory
and practice along with community beliefs and institutions (i.e.,
conventions, norms, rules) affecting content and conduct. The
sociological aspects mean commitment by the relevant scientific
community to their shared ontology, assumptions, theoretical beliefs,
values, instruments and techniques. This makes paradigms
inherently conservative in Khun’s approach, because they define
what unites a scientific community and what is ‘normal’ in the
scientific practice of a given field of knowledge. Contrary to Popper,
Kuhn argues that, in periods of normal science, scientists avoid
novelty in facts and theories and defend the paradigm using auxiliary
hypotheses. Scientific revolutions, or paradigm shifts, only occur
when anomalies become overwhelming. A period of revolutionary
crisis arises and is resolved when a new paradigm attracts enough
scientists and the old one is abandoned.
Rutte 
(1991: 
92) 
notes 
that 
there 
are 
some 
strong
correspondences between Neurath’s and Kuhn’s accounts of science
(whether there was any direct influence is unclear). Neurath’s
common positions with Kuhn include recognising: the role of
practitioners of science defending against their opponents; decisions
being made according to social rules of the scientific community,
scientifically-historically-sociologically; and observation being theory-

laden (but not theory-determined). As evident in the boat metaphor,
Neurath argues that scientific theories are subject to change of
meaning and the newer need not approximate or represent the
older.
Schumpeter (1994 [1954]: 46) regards science as being passed
on via professional education and so recognises the aspect of social
groups in the formation of scientific knowledge that parallels Kuhn’s.
Education via expert knowledge is termed a ‘social mechanism’. This
has the benefit of bringing students up to speed so they can move
on to explore the frontiers of knowledge in a field, but also the
downside that teaching of established science will ‘stereotype the
mind’. He warns that suppressed change leads to revolution.
Resistance against the potential for loss of knowledge is regarded by
Schumpeter as justified and involves defence of old insights against
new. Thus, ‘analytic work that is embodied in a given structure of a
science has a way of resisting change’. Beyond the ideas of science
there are the scientists and their mode of operation and here he
advances ideas that only later appear in theories of paradigms and
the sociology of science. Schumpeter (1994 [1954]: 44) states that:
‘all the professionals who devote themselves to scientific work in any
field tend to become a sociological group. […] The group accepts or
refuses to accept co-workers also for reasons other than their
professional competence or incompetence.’ More specifically the
establishment of economics into a profession is attributed with what
amount to sociologically based common ideologies expressing social
and political value commitments.
These ideas of formation and transformation of science appear
largely absent from ecological economics. Costanza (1996: 12), for
example, merely states: ‘Scholars from various disciplines collaborate
side-by-side using their own tools and techniques, and in the
process develop new theory, tools, and techniques as needed to
effectively 
deal 
with 
sustainability.’ 
Contrary 
to 
Neurath’s
interdisciplinarity unity of science, everyone appears to be in their
own boat, rather than joining together to renew/transform the
communal ship. This clearly feeds into the advocacy of an eclectic
methodological pluralism criticised in Chapter 4, but leaves

unanswered how scientific progress is meant to be achieved and on
what grounds ‘effectiveness’ is to be judged. Costanza (1996) seems
to regard any potential attempts to reject content or question the
use of tools as a violation of his (weak) transdisciplinary approach
and akin to an intellectual turf war. The aspects of scientific
contention and disagreement between scholars is absent, along with
the need to use judgemental rationalism in reflecting on the
adequacy of conceptualisations and the validity of theories. The
conflicts and contradictions discussed in this book are pushed aside
rather than analysed. Another missing element from previous
contributions to a preanalytic vision for ecological economics is the
role of ideology.
Science and ideology
Schumpeter’s exploration of the preanalytic vision is embedded
within a text concerned with ideological bias. His aim is to describe
the role of ideology in forming knowledge, and outline in which
areas ideological bias must be accepted and where and how it might
be excluded. As explained in Chapter 3, removing the influence of
ideology in science was a key aim of logical empiricism and
especially the left wing of the Vienna Circle. However, for
Schumpeter, ideology enters at the ground floor and the preanalytic
vision is ideological by definition. His negative neo-Marxist position
on ideology can be contrasted with Gramsci’s theory of hegemony
and more recent conceptualisations of ideology.
Ideology and Schumpeter’s preanalytic vision
Schumpeter noted, with reference to Marx, that the sociology of
science concerned a ‘kind of relativism’, where science becomes
dependent ‘on the social location of scientific workers that
determines their outlook upon reality and hence what they see of it
and how they see it’ (Schumpeter 1949: 348). This is what he
referred to as ‘ideological bias’. He notes that Marx’s ‘contention was

that a large part of the economics of his time was nothing but the
ideology of the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie’ (Schumpeter
1994 [1954]: 35). He follows the Marxist interpretation of ideology
as creating a delusion but goes beyond the classic Marxist approach.
For Marx and Engels ideology was specifically a problem under
capitalist social relations of production, where ideological illusions
were employed and empowered through the State. Logically it could
disappear under alternative social relations. Schumpeter regards his
approach as modifying that of Marxism by arguing that: (i) ideology
is general and not limited to the capitalist ruling class and would
apply to Marxism itself; (ii) the origin of ideology need not be purely
economic class; (iii) ideology is a motivation for a claim but whether
that claim is true or false is a totally separate matter.2
For Schumpeter, ideological bias is necessary to stimulate new
thinking, but something that needs to be removed in the process of
conducting analytical science, because of the distortions it creates
that prevent discovery of the truth. It affects all the sciences, both
natural and social.
Even for mathematics and logic and still more for physics, the scientific
worker’s choice of problems and of approaches to them, hence the pattern
of an epoch’s scientific thought, becomes socially conditioned – which is
precisely what we mean when speaking of scientific ideology rather than of
the ever more perfect perception of objective scientific truths.
(Schumpeter 1949: 348)
He still maintained that there are discoverable objective truths which
are not much affected by choice of problems and approaches due to
class because of the independence of the observed from the
observer. He believed that the social sciences, where the distinction
might blur, were more susceptible to ideological bias. Value
judgements and policy recommendations are not part of what he
regards as analytical science, but ideological bias might in effect
bring these in and contaminate pure science.
Schumpeter (1994 [1954]: 32) describes causes of ideological
bias at both the level of individual psychology and the societal level,
as the following passages exemplify.

This habit consists in comforting our-selves and impressing others by
drawing a picture of ourselves, our motives, our friends, our enemies, our
vocation, our church, our country, which may have more to do with what
we like them to be than with what they are. […] people’s ideas are likely to
glorify the interests and actions of the classes that are in a position to
assert themselves and therefore are likely to draw or to imply pictures of
them that may be seriously at variance with the truth.
For Schumpeter, ideological bias was also related to what motivated
the passions, and especially strong emotions – things people love or
hate. This meant where such feelings were absent ideological bias
would not appear, and he believed ‘there are a large number of
phenomena that fail to affect our emotions, one way or the other’
(Schumpeter 1994 [1954]: 42). This allows neutral phenomena to
enter, which would be uncontroversial, presumably because for
Schumpeter such phenomena represent an objective reality and
underlying factual truth, where the facts speak for themselves (i.e.,
naive objectivism).
The other area where ideology is believed potentially absent is in
the rules of procedure for conducting analytical research. Here
something of logical empiricism in the mode of Schlick seems to be
behind the text. Schumpeter talks of new facts accumulating,
leading to new concepts and relations being formulated and these
either verifying or destroying ideological positions. Thus, ideology is
expected to disappear over time, but simultaneously he recognises it
would be renewed whenever new preanalytic visions arise.
Ideology, hegemony and public policy
The concept of ideology in Schumpeter persists with the negative
Marxist treatment and regarding it as something to be removed, but
developments in political science have changed this understanding.
Gramsci (1971) introduced the concept of ideological hegemony
(Freeden 2003). He had a broader conceptualisation of ideology that
goes beyond belief in a system of ideas and introduces social
practice (e.g., encompassing experiences, rituals, routines). Ideology
in Gramsci is a mode of political thought and a practice that is

actualised through actions and discourses. Ideologies could be seen
as in contestation, where new intellectual and moral orders arise and
replace older ones. Hegemony is the result of social struggles
involving integration, incorporation, formation of alliances and/or
universalising of social visions. Intellectuals develop ideas but the
masses regard the hegemonic ideology as their own. Ideology is
analysed from the perspective of hegemony as connected to the
balance of social forces.
This contestation over ideological beliefs moves the concept closer
to modern specifications that are no longer purely negative or about
removing ideologies, but rather accept them as a normal part of life
in its political dimension. Thus, ideology becomes more about a
commitment to a specific set of values and beliefs about society and
how it should be organised. Gramsci’s theory of hegemony and his
ideas of passive revolutions (i.e., revolutions that are neutralised by
hegemonic powers) describes how forces must operate to change
the hegemonic economic and political system. This has direct
implications for how to achieve social ecological transformation and
reasons for failures to do so (Spash 2021a).
Ideologies as connected to political systems emphasise the
political traditions that they are organised around. On this basis
Freeden (2003: 32) offers the following functional definition.
A political ideology is a set of ideas, beliefs, opinions, and values that: (i)
exhibit a recurring pattern; (ii) are held by significant groups; (iii) compete
over providing controlling plans for public policy; (iv) do so with the aim of
justifying, contesting or changing the social and political arrangements and
processes of a political community.
If we take this definition of ideology as informing our preanalytic
vision (i.e., the process of conceiving our initial ontology in a time of
scientific transformation of ideas) then we have a rather different
perspective on the task. That is, the motivation for science involves
ideas, beliefs, opinions and values, and has an intention to relate to
public policy and its transformation. For example, Marxism can be
seen as seeking to transform capitalist ideology to socialist ideology;

modernism can be seen as transforming the social/natural means of
social provisioning to technological/artificial ones.
While Schumpeter had a different understanding of ideology, he
also took it to be an essential part of our motivation for conducting
science and undertaking new research. The interaction between
vision and ideology was the stimulus that drove new research
agendas.
No new departure in any science is possible without it. Through it we
acquire new material for our scientific endeavors and something to
formulate, to defend, to attack. Our stock of facts and tools grows and
rejuvenates itself in the process. And so – though we proceed slowly
because of our ideologies, we might not proceed at all without them.
(Schumpeter 1949: 359)
Ideology is not something to be removed, even if that were possible,
which under the definition above it appears not to be. So how
should ideology be addressed?
The traditional concern over both ideologies and values coming
into science is that they lead to bias. However, this is more of a
problem where specific constellations of scientific ideas are
dogmatically enforced. The role of critical thinking is essential to
maintain openness and debate and to progress ideas. In traditional
philosophy of science this is the role of scepticism, understood as
informed rational and reasoned debate (as opposed to nihilistic, anti-
scientific denialism). While Schumpeter’s faith in logical empiricism
revealing a verifiable objective truth was flawed, the aim of
questioning and seeking to improve understanding through reasoned
debate shares the belief that there is a reality that ultimately stands
in judgement over our conceptualisations and will test their
adequacy when we put ideas into practice. Explanation in social
science research entails critique of ideas in society about the social
world and human behaviour and as a result researching and
conceptualising theories is never a value-free exercise. Thus,
scientific knowledge involves judging the practical adequacy of our
knowledge claims and engaging in explanatory critique.

Explanatory critique
Critical thinking is in one respect a counter to the possibility of
dogmatism, but more than this it is a call to action. Critical realism
makes scientists aware of structures and mechanism and the causes
of dominance and reasons for the persistence of undesirable
phenomena. The critical aspect refers to the emancipatory potential
arising from revealing the practices and beliefs that reproduce
unsustainable and unjust social relations (Puller and Smith 2017:
18). Social science, including economics, can be differentiated on a
substantive basis from the natural sciences because they involve
(contra Hume) an inseparability of facts and values.
Contrary to the belief in value-neutrality, a critical scientific approach needs
to engage in developing explicit and well-reasoned (hence debatable)
concepts of the human good and environmental sustainability. This position
rejects hiding normative standpoints or restricting critique to mere attitudes
of enhanced self-reflection.
(Puller and Smith 2017: 18)
Here the link is made between scientific investigation and societal
aims and the researcher cannot remain value-neutral or free from
ideological beliefs, despite claiming the contrary.
Social science presents ideas claimed to be true of the object
studied. Unlike the natural sciences, the object (i.e., society) includes
ideas. Society can only exist on the basis of human agents acting,
reproducing and transforming social structure. Human agents act in
accordance with ideas (e.g., religion, politics). This means an
account of social structure and human motivation requires an
account of ideas as constituting elements and reasons as causal
mechanisms. Significant ideas in any society include ideas about
features of that society. Understanding social phenomena requires
addressing the real structural causes and prevalent ideas. Those
ideas appear as social attitudes and political behaviour.
Explanations arising from a social-scientific study inevitably and
unavoidably entail criticism of some ideas in society. Critical realism

offers an epistemological argument for rejecting value neutrality in
research. Puller and Smith (2017: 22) state the following.
By showing that human sciences necessarily evaluate their subject matter
(be it positive or negative), the common positivist dichotomies between
facts and values or between analysis and critique are rejected in favour of
uncovering and reflecting their implicit complex dynamics, as well as ethical
standpoints (Bhaskar 2009: 169–211; Collier 1994a: 169–204). In an
emerging normative turn, critical realists engage in examining the
intransitive dimension of ethics (ethical naturalism) based on human beings’
(objective and pluralist rather than relativist) capacities for flourishing and
suffering. This allows the inclusion of reasoning on ethical life within
scientific enquiry.
Scientific enquiry is no longer to be recognised as a neutral fact-
finding mission that is free from having ethical implications. If the
social science is correct, then the people it describes who have an
opposite explanation must be wrong. Social science criticises part of
its object of study and in this regard is different from much of
natural science. For example, that black holes exist and cause
planets to disappear is no criticism of them, even if we find them
unpleasant. In contrast, Collier (1998: 446) explains as follows.
To say that some institution causes false beliefs is to criticise it. Given that
(other things being equal) it is better to believe what is true than what is
false, it is also better (other things being equal) that institutions that cause
false beliefs should be replaced by, or transformed into, those that cause
true ones.
Furthermore, there is often a functional relationship between
organisations that cause false beliefs and beliefs about those
organisations. False beliefs may be spread in order to preserve an
organisational structure and those it empowers. Thus, the rhetoric of
the liberating character of ‘free markets’ and benefits of material
growth are used by corporations and governments colonising others,
extracting resources, dislocating Indigenous populations and
creating environmental destruction. In such cases, to propound the
truth is not just to criticise, but to undermine the organisation and
its institutional structure.

Hence, the production of explanations of social institutions is not only, as a
general rule, a precondition of criticizing and changing them; sometimes, it
is criticizing them, and beginning the work of their subversion.
(Collier 1998: 446)
For example, this point is highly relevant to the failure of climate
scientists to realise their science is a criticism of ideas about
economies based on fossil fuels and those who promote such
resource extraction and use as benign or purely beneficial, as well as
some basic ideas of progress in modernity promoted over the last
century. Climate science shows how natural scientists cannot always
expect to separate their object of study and so explanations from
social and value implications that involve criticism of ideas and
organisations.
Open realisation and acceptance of explanatory critique makes
social ecological economics far more radical than orthodox
mainstream economics, which pretends to give objective value free
advice while actually supporting the existing institutional structures
of capitalism. Söderbaum (2011) points out the following.
Neoclassical economics is science but at the same time ideology. As
ideology, neoclassical economics can be described as the ideology of the
present capitalist system. Some other institutional arrangement or kind of
capitalism appears to be needed if we wish to deal constructively with
present problems.
Being open about these fact–value relationships means ecological
economics has a clear role in communicating its findings –
concerning the character of social and environmental problems, the
structures behind them and the organisations involved – to those
who will implement institutional change and address the false beliefs
in society. More than this, a moral imperative to act arises from
research findings and acting on the basis of scientific findings. This
justifies, supports and can require that academics turn to activism in
light of their research.
Conclusions

In this chapter we saw how calls for change in economic thought
have appealed to concepts of a preanalytic vision and paradigm shift
as invoking a revolutionary change and substantive transformation.
Yet following through on this promise has been largely absent from
ecological economics. The ideas invoked have tended to be
employed rhetorically rather than considering the meanings given by
their originators. Reviewing the original sources reveals how science
is placed in a sociological and ideological context.
Contrary to traditional approaches to science, the role of ideology
is seen as motivating scientific research from its foundation. Ethical
neutrality in the social sciences is rejected because social science
research always engages in criticism of the ideas held in society and
the institutions that purvey them. Explanatory critique is a necessary
part of social-ecological transformation. These factors combine to
make ecological economics a critical social science engaged in
addressing the structure of the political economy to achieve
transformation to a more socially and environmentally just system.
Notes
 1
This is a misquotation because Keynes (1978 [1936]: 250) actually states t
hat he will assess ‘whether these propensities can be plausibly ascribed, on
our general knowledge of contemporary human nature, to the world in whi
ch we live’. The edition I cite has no changes here over the first edition cite
d by Schumpeter.
 2
Whether Schumpeter accurately reflects what Marx and Engels actually wro
te and believed could be contested and some points may appear oversimpli
fications or not actual points of disagreement.

Part III
Social ecological economic foundations

6
Reorienting to social ecological
economics: The preanalytic vision
Introduction
Trying to define a preanalytic vision as an explicit cognitive act is not
an easy task and especially if the hope, as here, is to make this
more comprehensive and extend from philosophy of science to
ideology and axiology. The ontological level is perhaps easier
because the aspects of reality on which ecological economics is
founded have been explicitly related to the ecological and
biophysical, especially in terms of material and energy flows. As has
been argued so far, rejection of mainstream economics is a
foundational aspect of social ecological economics, which allies with
heterodox schools on the grounds of commonalities relating to
ontology and ideology. I will argue that the economic needs
redefinition in terms of social provisioning. The social is to be
addressed in terms of institutional arrangements, power relations,
ethics, justice and equity. Social ecological economics can be
understood as in opposition to two paradigmatic positions, one
constituted by economic growth and the other price-making markets
(Spash 2020c). Opposition to growth has been generally accepted by
ecological economists based on the work of Daly (1977a; 1992b)
rooted in the ideas of Georgescu-Roegen (1971). The role of
markets has been more commonly brought into question by

researchers outside of North America, and social ecological economic
critique going back to the work of Kapp (1961; 1971 [1950]; 1978
[1963]).
As should be clear from Chapter 5, there is no value neutrality
here. By this I mean that organisations that deny evidence of social
exploitation and environmental damages are subject to criticism as
soon as our research identifies them via descriptive realist social
science investigation. Ideological commitments can then also arise
from scientific understanding, unlike Schumpeter’s claim that they
might disappear as science progresses analytically. The connection
between ecological systems and social-economic systems leads to a
range of insights into social structure and the operation of
institutions. Social ecological economics takes a stand that involves
opposition to various types of economies, institutions, organisations
and their values.
I will start by outlining the foundations in the natural sciences.
After sketching this aspect, I turn to the overarching aims of
economic science and the need to redefine them away from the
orthodox goals of growth and efficiency, and towards social
provisioning. This is followed by outlining four areas where social
ecological economics develops interdisciplinary and heterodox
thought: human behaviour; ethics and value; non-human Nature;
and institutions. I end with a summary of positions that constitute
social ecological economics in terms of ontology, epistemology,
methodology, axiology and ideology.
Issues in connecting economics to the natural
sciences
Distinctions between the various sciences and the reason for a
plurality of sciences to exist is explained in critical realism as an
ordered hierarchy with real (ontological) difference in the strata of
reality, not just a cognitively (epistemologically) convenient division.
So, for example, everything is governed by the law-like structures of

physics and all biological entities are physical but not vice versa, so
biological sciences are embedded within the physical and likewise
the social and economic within the biological and physical. This type
of embeddedness is one of the key messages ecological economists
have been at pains to communicate, that is, the economy is
embedded in the natural environment and subject to the law-like
conditions of conservation of mass and energy. Yet embeddedness
should not be confused with reductionism or determinism. For
example, that elephants are constructed of physical and chemical
components does not mean elephants’ behaviour can be understood
by analysis of or reduction to those material components
(Georgescu-Roegen 2009 [1979]: 109). Properties at higher levels
are dependent upon, covariant with but irreducible to lower ones –
three characteristics of emergence (Morgan 2007). Societies and
their associated economies are also emergent from physical and
biological structures and thus also subject to their law-like
properties. The relevance of different strata, and so the related
disciplines, for a given scientific investigation will depend upon the
research question and object of study. In ecological economics
understanding the operation and reproduction of economic systems
has been strongly related to material and energy flows. Intuitively,
this seems self-evident in the geopolitical struggles and wars over
resources but has been persistently ignored or treated as irrelevant
by most economists.
The classical definition of energy in thermodynamics is the
capacity to do mechanical work.1 All mechanical work is equivalent
to raising a weight against an opposing force, and this constitutes
the measure of energy using joules (Atkins 2010: 16–18). The First
Law of Thermodynamics states that energy is neither created nor
destroyed, so the same quantity remains within an isolated system –
defined as exchanging no matter or energy with another system.
The Second Law of Thermodynamics, or the Entropy Law, in its
classic form, states that energy changes qualitatively from useful
(low entropy) to less useful (high entropy). The essence of the
Second Law is that energy of any type disperses from a high

localisation and spreads out if unconstrained, which means it
becomes unavailable to perform useful work (Mayumi 2017). This is
an ongoing and irreversible process within an isolated system and is
therefore associated with the phrase ‘time’s arrow’.
Economic activity requires useful energy, that is, energy available
for performing work. This has been termed ‘exergy’ to distinguish it
from energy. Exergy, unlike energy, is used up in all transformation
processes (Ayres and Warr 2009). Modern industrial society is
dependent upon stored exergy in ores and fossil fuels (i.e., low-
entropy resources). The Entropy Law has been taken to imply
absolute constraints on economic systems (Daly 1977a; 1977b;
Georgescu-Roegen 2009 [1975]). That is, energy use depletes
stored exergy and dissipates minerals into ‘devil’s dust’, meaning
they are unrecoverable (Marx, cited by Daly 2009 [1968]). Although,
the extent to which materials (i.e., objects with mass and extension)
are dispersed in the same way as energy has been a point of
contention. Creating concentrated forms of matter and energy (i.e.,
low entropy) is possible within closed systems – defined as
exchanging energy but not matter – but only because energy can be
added from another system. That is, in the overall combined system
energy is still degraded and the Entropy Law remains in force. Earth
is an open system – defined as exchanging both matter and energy
– but effectively closed because matter exchange is minimal, while
energy from the Sun is a major input on the basis of which life on
Earth operates.
Georgescu-Roegen’s (1971) major thesis, The Entropy Law and
the Economic Process, basically concludes that economic growth is
infeasible over the long run and orthodox mainstream economic
policy needs reform to take the fundamental physics into account. In
the short to medium term, the implications extend to the ethics of
resource use across generations and the geopolitics of international
relations, because low entropy is the ultimate scarce resource. Under
modern economic structures, ethical and political issues arise over
who gets to use limited concentrated minerals and fossil fuels, and
for what purposes. The ethical dilemma is encapsulated in
recognising that frivolous energy and materials use deprives others,

now and in the future, of essential uses to meet basic needs. The
‘others’ here include non-humans, affecting their ability to survive,
let alone flourish. In addition, energy sources are qualitatively
different, affecting their usefulness (e.g., hay provides energy for a
horse; oil does not) and the qualities of waste products that return
to the environment in equal mass to the resources used.
The concept of social metabolism encapsulates how economies,
as instituted processes of provisioning, require energy and material
throughput in order to maintain a given state. Industrialised growth
economies have been built on fossil fuels, and their extraction and
return to the environment has had devastating impacts from local to
global scales. Traditional economies were solar-based, making use of
energy from plants and trees and employing animal labour with
biological wastes that could generally be assimilated by natural
ecosystems. Waste sinks are just as important as resource sources
and their use creates dependencies that vary between different
types of economies.
In terms of maintaining economic processes, an important
contribution made by Georgescu-Roegen (1971: chapter IX) is the
distinction between a capital stock and a fund. Running down a
stock at a variable rate is not equivalent to using a fund that can
supply and maintain a function at a given rate per period of time, as
ecosystems can do, on the basis of their structure.2 Hence,
economic systems that transform funds into stocks (e.g., clearcutting
forests to create piles of wood), under the guise of creating wealth
via capital accumulation, in fact destroy naturally sustainable
processes supporting humans and non-humans alike. Treating
everything from humans to ecosystems as forms of capital is a major
overgeneralisation and error in economic thinking that ignores the
characteristics of the objects and structures supposedly being
studied (Spash and Hache 2022). Human interaction with fund
resources (their maintenance or destruction), and the sources of and
sinks for energy and materials, create the characteristics of change,
not least its rate and scale. Change is something to be understood in

terms of historical paths and in real time, as opposed to abstractions
from time in formalist models using equilibrium theories.
In evolving systems, concepts of equilibrium are abstractions for
convenience to describe specific states on a path of change.
Managing and attempting to maintain systems in theoretical
equilibrium states can prove disastrous in practice because this
ignores the causal mechanisms at work. For example, attempts in
the USA to prevent small fires in forests to maintain climax
ecosystems have been credited with preventing the natural process
of fire ecology, resulting in large-scale catastrophic fires. Holling
(2009 [1986]), working originally on forest ecosystems, developed a
theory of ecosystems change in terms of cycles of energy and
materials organisation, accumulation, destruction and release. How
humans conduct their economic activities, and the sustainability and
reproducibly of those activities, is dependent upon understanding
such dynamics of ecosystem structure and functioning.
However, mechanistic physics, rather than evolutionary biology,
has been the dominant comparator and methodological influence in
economics since the rise of the neoclassical paradigm in the late
1800s (Mirowski 1989). Orthodox mainstream economic theory is
built upon concepts of stasis, equilibrium, self-correction and
reversibility, and it resists ideas of economic systems as dynamic
evolving structures, something recognised long ago by Veblen
(1898). Historically, both Veblen (1898) and Marshall (1916 [1890])
recognised that economic analysis could be improved by relating
changes in economic institutions and processes to biological
evolution rather than mechanistic physics. Much has been made of
Marshall basing his Principles of Economics on biology (e.g.,
Hodgson 1993a), but in fact he mixes analogies from mechanics and
biology. He argues that the biological analogy is suited to the
business, or firm, and how it changes over time is comparable to a
person growing old – a dynamic and uncertain process. However, the
mechanical balancing of forces is simpler and can be used to gain an
initial understanding of the economy (Marshall 1916 [1890]: 323).
Despite Marshall’s standing among economists, the evolutionary
aspects of his theory of the firm were deliberately suppressed in the

early 1900s by orthodox mainstream economists when developing
their dogmatic paradigm (Foss 2009 [1991]).
Ecological economists’ interaction with ecologists makes them
aware of evolutionary and organicist thinking that challenges a
narrow mechanistic economics and stimulates interest in biological
concepts, metaphors and analogies. Daly (2009 [1968]) provides a
prelude 
to 
this 
(re)awakening 
of 
biological/evolutionary
understanding of economic processes and makes connections across
social and natural sciences (referencing Ruskin, Hobson, Marx and
Lotka). Some go to the extreme of recommending imposition of a
biological/evolutionary approach to replace mechanistic physics in
economics (e.g., Hodgson 2008; Norgaard 1994a). More commonly,
specific concepts have been adopted, including sustainability,
resilience and coevolutionary development (Gowdy 1994; Norgaard
1981; 1987; 1988) and have spread more broadly into the social
sciences. Such use of analogies is addressed in Chapter 7, but I note
here that economics is a science of society that is irreducible to
biology or physics. Neither does employing biological analogies
guarantee a more enlightened economics. Dube (2021: 5)
references Costanza among ecological economists promoting
sociobiology and so Wilson’s call for mainstream orthodox economics
to form the best bridge with the natural sciences. Gowdy (2009
[1987]) explains how economists of the Chicago School – Becker,
Hirshleifer, Tullock – made use of Wilson’s (1975) sociobiology to
effectively revive Social Darwinism. Despite the evolutionary rhetoric,
static equilibrium thinking was maintained, and a political ideology
was given a natural science basis in order to universalise and
naturalise mainstream assumptions about human behaviour.
Clearly, alternative approaches exist in ecology and biology, as
there are in economics – some helpful and others not so. Ecology in
some guises is an optimising and maximising discipline with
deterministic mathematical equilibrium models. In other guises it is a
dynamic questioning discipline that pushes the boundaries of
accepted knowledge. Hodgson (1993b) argues economists should
pay attention to the non-reductionist forms of modern biology, rather

than the atomistic and mechanistic alternatives (e.g., Richard
Dawkins, George Williams and Edward Wilson).
There is also a darker side to historical connections between
economics and biology. In the early 1900s, the rise of Social
Darwinism led to the justification of racism, sexism and elitism as
somehow scientifically ordained. Eugenics was popularly espoused
and implemented as government policy (Levine 2017). It was also
supported by Oxbridge economists (e.g., Keynes, Edgeworth and
Meade) and can be seen as related to establishing a modern
productivist society (Spash 2021a). The concept is forever tainted by
the Nazi use of eugenics to justify the gas chamber for millions and
similar reasoning behind more recent ‘ethnic cleansing’.
Thus, biological metaphors remain highly unpopular in much of
the social sciences due to association with eugenics and sociobiology
(Mokyr 1991: 132). Conversely, some have advocated imposing
economic conceptualisations on ecology in a type of ‘economic
ecology’, where animals foraging become consumers optimising,
predators are like firms and population growth is investment
(Rapport and Turner 1977). More recently, there has been a trend
for converting Nature into capital and ecosystems into services
(Spash 2008e; Spash and Aslaksen 2015; Spash and Hache 2022).
As Pollini (2013) argues, the necessity here is for Nature, culture and
their interactions to be distinctly conceptualised so as to avoid both
the naturalisation of culture and society, as in sociobiology, and the
culturalisation of Nature, as in postmodern literature on hybrid
Nature.
The objectives of economics and economies
An old tradition regards the core of economics as determining the
social and institutional arrangements for providing the needs of a
community (or nation) with the aim of achieving a common good or
the wellbeing of all. What constitutes the good/wellbeing of a group
requires explicit ethical judgement, as does who is included in the

‘all’. Modern times reduced the goal of seeking the ‘common weal’
(i.e., the ability to fare well, prosper and have good fortune) into
accumulating wealth and making money. Economics simply became
the study of capital accumulation using money and market prices
and ultimately leading to the mainstream economists’ claims of
being able to determine optimally efficient public policy via money
metrics.
Orthodox mainstream economics has for some time adopted a
neo-Austrian definition introduced by Robbins (1932), which places
the concepts of resource scarcity and individual choice at the centre.
The economic problem becomes meeting unlimited and competing
wants and the supposed solution efficient resource allocation via ‘the
market’, supplemented by (macro)economic growth. In fact, a single
institutional process, associated with capitalism, is advocated,
namely what Polanyi (1957) termed the price-making market set
within a liberal political economy. Robbins’s neo-Austrian definition
has been merged into Chicago School neoliberalism, where choice in
a market setting, subject to price incentives, becomes the essence of
economics. This has permeated its meaning and stimulated an
imperialistic expansion of economics on the basis that humans make
decisions as individuals and all decision can be treated as economic
choices, for example, equating everything from buying a cup of
coffee to suicide (as infamously proposed by Becker 1976).
Modern economics is obsessed with two goals meant to increase
choice: capital-accumulating growth and efficiency. These define
what economists generally regard as constituting a well-functioning
modern economy, whether State, corporate or some other form of
capitalism. Both goals supply rhetorical support for ideological
positions in public policy. For example, the ideas that controlling
human-induced climate change should improve, not hinder, growth,
and any public policy needs to be efficient, namely produce more
benefits than costs, mean that only policies which promote growth
and net monetary gains are deemed legitimate. The absurdities of
treating potential global catastrophes in this way should be blatantly
obvious, but apparently not so. A specific elite aspire to not only
maintain but actually expand growth globally by arguing that more

consumption compensates for climate catastrophe (GCEC 2014;
Stern 2007), while others treat Nature and society as constituting an
investment portfolio (Dasgupta 2021).
Debunking the goal of economic efficiency
Efficiency can be technical in resource use (i.e., avoiding waste) or
concerned with (Pareto-optimal) allocation of benefits (i.e., who is
made better-off by economic activity). Ecology challenges orthodox
mainstream economics by contributing the realisation of alternative
requirements arising from the non-human world and biophysical
structure outside human control. Thus, concepts such as
sustainability and resilience have appeared as strong, independent
goals not achieved by economic efficiency (Common and Perrings
1992). That efficiency has come to dominate economics as a goal is
interesting in itself and needs to be understood as ideologically
driven (Bromley 1990). The insufficiency of such a goal is often
remarked upon by economists, before they venture into setting
everything else to one side and proceed to make policy
recommendations on the sole basis of some supposed efficiency
analysis.
Technical efficiency is in effect a subgoal of growth, justified as
the means to maximise production of desired outputs, namely goods
and services for consumption, by avoiding resource wastage. It is
defined by Daly and Farley (2011: 474) as the maximum amount of
physical output one can get from a given amount of resource input.
Allocative efficiency also supports growth by implying that economics
should be defined by Pareto’s criterion of efficiency, namely making
some people materially better-off and potentially none worse-off – a
flawed goal both due to its inherent impracticality and inequitable
potential. In actuality, Pareto-efficient allocation justifies increasing
resource allocation to the already materially rich, while ignoring the
materially poor. Such an elitist outcome is hardly surprising given
that Pareto was an Italian fascist during the Mussolini era (Spash
2021b: 94). Yet, as Daly and Farley (2011: 4) note, in neoclassical

economics such ‘efficiency is considered a value-free, objective
criterion of the “good”’.
Daly and Farley (2011: xxvi) replace economic growth with
optimal scale, defined as equating the marginal benefits of growth
with the marginal costs in terms of ecosystem function. This is Daly’s
steady-state equilibrium, where capital growth and accumulation
would be zero. Their other two goals, after optimal scale, are fair
distribution and efficient allocation, in that order. Efficiency is
downgraded from being an end goal and criticised in its orthodox
mainstream conceptualisation. Their own recommendation involves a
variation relating to the efficiency of producing services – as a
psychic flux of satisfaction: ‘welfare, quality of life, utility, or
whatever’ (Daly and Farley 2011: 63); or satisfaction of needs and
wants (Daly and Farley 2011: 283) – from man-made and natural
capital. A problem here is that, in adopting the capital approach,
they fall into the trap of having a practically unmeasurable concept
while assuming Nature can be converted into a commensurable
capital asset (for a deconstruction of capital theory, see Spash and
Hache 2022). The actual concern in their text is for the maintenance
and reproduction of services, and the assumed trade-off between
natural and artificial service provision, but it is conceptualised in
totally orthodox mainstream terms. The overall approach, while
having its own nuances and merits, remains in the realm of orthodox
dissent, because it involves optimisation, equilibrium theory, social
cost-benefit analysis, commensurability, capital theory and efficiency
(both in the first and third goals).
Nature does not appear to be efficient in any of the above senses,
but rather produces excess supply, excess demand and boom-and-
bust cycles in terms of populations and living resources. Natural
ecosystems may be effective in self-reproduction and resilient
against change, but neither necessitates efficiency and often the
exact opposite, that is, overabundance of resources as in production
of fruit to reproduce a tree or sperm a human. Efficiency appears to
be more of an engineering approach to economics, arising from
idealised mathematical optimisation of production functions.

The ideal of market efficiency is also fallacious. In actuality,
human activity in general, and capitalist market economies in
particular, engage in considerable resource waste, for example, food
thrown away to make higher profits, built-in obsolescence, consumer
fashion culture. Even if there were technical efficiency in production,
the question arises: for what purpose? Efficiency in the production of
weapons of mass destruction? Highly efficient car engines to drive
around in endless circles at the highest speeds possible, as in
Formula 1 racing? Efficient jet engines for international tourism and
the jet set? Efficient lighting left on twenty-four hours a day?
Efficient electronic devices left on stand-by? The contradictions
abound.
Debunking the goal of economic growth
Ecological economics emphasises the limits to material and energy
throughput and the problems then posed by the modern economic
obsession with increasing consumption as an end in itself. The idea
of limits is firmly related to the literature arising from
thermodynamics and energy use, with its implications for the
physical functioning of systems (Georgescu-Roegen 1971) and laws
of conservation of mass (Kneese et al. 1970). The psychological
treadmill of material throughput raises concerns over how to address
the scale of growth, which is something ignored in the mainstream
literature (Daly 1991b; 1992a). Signs of the failure of growth to
achieve its stated social aims are clear in the persistence of
distributional inequity, global poverty and the imposition of pollution
and environmental degradation on the poor.
In addition, economic growth is flawed as a means to happiness
even for the rich. Easterlin (1995; 2003) has shown that, within a
country at a given point in time, the richer are on average happier,
but norms shift to establish ever-higher material standards of living
(‘keeping up with the Joneses’) so that increased income over time
fails to increase happiness. Easterlin (1995) offers evidence from the
USA, nine European countries and Japan. He argues that the
expected utility from pecuniary gains is undermined as opposed to

those from nonpecuniary domains – such as friends, family life and
health – where hedonic adaptation and social comparison are less
important.
Once it is recognised that individuals are unaware of some of the forces
shaping their choices, it can be no longer argued that they will successfully
maximize their well-being.
(Easterlin 2003: 11181)
This is a conclusion guaranteed to upset the liberal political
ideologies of mainstream economics with its neo-Austrian economic
rhetoric of the sovereign consumer and minimalist government
(Fellner and Spash 2015). Thus, Easterlin should really be less
surprised by the neglect of the evidence he and others have brought
forth. The critique of consumption connects manipulation of
consumers by corporations (Galbraith 2007 [1967]; Kapp 1978
[1963]: 224–247) to the psychological and social roles material
consumption plays in a modern market economy (Reisch and Ropke
2004; Røpke 1999).
The massive psychological investment many people have made in
a materialist way of life promoted under capitalism and mediated by
technology leads to a denial of Nature (Vetlesen 2015). Technology
has become a force in itself that forecloses any notion of ends that
would challenge what technology itself favours. As a hegemonic
discourse it has real impacts on the world, creating ideas and
motivating practices that eradicate human-independent entities from
the surface of the Earth (Vetlesen 2015: 161–162).
This same logic extends to equating technologically driven
economic growth – capital accumulation – with development, which
is in turn regarded as progress. In the post-World War II era
development 
became 
institutionalised 
as 
a 
strategy 
for
modernisation premised on the beneficial effects of capital, science
and technology (Schmelzer 2015). As Escobar (2014) notes, this was
a path set down which all countries must follow, by force if
necessary. He goes on to make an important point.

It seems a good moment to build more explicit bridges between degrowth
and transition narratives in the North and alternatives to development,
civilizational change, and transitions to postextractivism in the South. In
building these bridges, however, it is important to resist falling into the trap
of thinking that while the North needs to degrow, the South needs
‘development’. There is an important synergy to be gained from discussing
degrowth and alternatives to development in tandem, while respecting their
geopolitical and epistemic specificities.
(Escobar 2014: 31)
Both degrowth advocates and others seem to have already fallen
into the trap (Spash 2021a). As noted in Chapter 2, especially under
ecological macroeconomics, the promotion of development often
appears as if an unquestionable, self-evident, ethically justified
position. That economic growth creates harms, as well as goods, is
heavily 
downplayed 
in 
mainstream 
economics, 
while
incommensurability of values is totally denied (O’Neill 2017; O’Neill
and Spash 2000). This means that where harms occur most
economists assume they are wiped out by ‘goods’, because the
overall system is assumed progressive and net welfare-increasing.
Redefining economics as social provisioning to meet needs
These various insights have direct relevance for how economic
growth is perceived to operate as a means for improving the human
condition and why we require new operational goals. Economics
might, for example, be redefined as achieving sustained human
wellbeing on the basis of the maintained health and functioning of
Earth’s ecosystems. However, what is being sustained here should
not be confused with orthodox mainstream hedonic pleasure or
some co-opted concept of ‘wellbeing’. This has become a quite
explicit proposal under the title of the ‘wellbeing economy’
movement (Fioramonti et al. 2022), which among other things has
directly adopted orthodox mainstream capital theory (e.g., the
approach of Dasgupta 2021).
Easterlin’s self-reported happiness research suggests less material
consumption and a search for alternative hedonic satisfiers.

However, a tension becomes apparent between appealing to better
sources of experiential pleasure (i.e., hedonism) and identifying that
such pleasures are, in fact, not the prime source of a good and
meaningful life of self-fulfilment. Following this line of reasoning,
O’Neill (2006) takes issue with the hedonic account of welfare
because the focus is upon isolation of pleasures for the individual
rather than the pattern of a life and life experiences. There is more
to human existence than being a hedonist, and to be a pure
hedonist is to be led by desires or appetite in denial of other
potentially conflicting human motivations, the harmonisation of
which provide psychological balance. As Holland (1994) notes, there
has long been the recognition that such wanting must be balanced
by other fundamental aspects constitutive of humanity – Plato
highlighted self-respect/honour and reason. Pursuit of pure
hedonism is recognisable as psychologically dysfunctional and to live
in denial of other intrinsic human motivations. For Aristotle, pursuit
of hedonic pleasures – sensual delights – as the aim of human
existence is to choose a bestial life; ‘[i]‌f they will not think as men,
they cannot hope to act as men’ (Barnes 1976: xl). Human potential
and the richness of human relationships are irreducible to defining
the meaning of life as satisfaction of individual pleasures.
O’Neill (2006) contrasts hedonism from Epicurus, seeking better
sources of experiential pleasure, with Aristotle’s eudaimon. The
former holds that happiness is obtainable as a subjective
psychological state, while the latter regards the good life
(eudaimonia) as fulfilment constituted by specific objective factors.
Kraut (1989) notes that eudaimonia is attributed, by Aristotle, only
to human and divine persons. Whoever is eudaimon must be happy
with their life, but the individual would also meet certain objective
standards, including moral activity. He discusses the difficulty of
finding an adequate English expression for eudaimonia. He argues
that the oft-used term ‘“flourishing” is quite inadequate’ (e.g., evil
men may flourish but cannot be eudaimon), and appears more
suited to non-humans.
In Chapter 2, I noted that Victor and Jackson (2020) set down the
goal for ecological macroeconomics as delivering ‘sustainable

prosperity for all’, including non-humans. Their prosperity appeals to
flourishing on the basis of Jackson’s (2017) neo-Aristotelian
definition, which references Sen’s capabilities approach. Sen
converts Aristotelian eudaimonia into an individualistic concept of a
person’s capability for achieving a set of valuable ‘beings and doings’
(e.g., health, friendship). Jackson’s highly abstract, vague and
amorphous concept of flourishing appears more rhetorical than
substantive. Indeed, in keeping with meeting the needs for a
good/meaningful life for all, research in ecological economics might
more usefully be directed towards designing processes and
institutions for achieving Kapp’s (1965; 2011b) social minima, or
implementing Max-Kneef’s (2009 [1992]) needs-based approach.
Economies as systems for achieving wellbeing might attend to the
role of needs and the means to their satisfaction. This changes the
aim from ‘development’ and ‘progress’ that provides objects and
artefacts to perpetuate consumerism, or less-material hedonic
consumerist substitutes – services – under the guise of some new
capitalist economy, to identifying a range of fundamental
requirements for ethically good and meaningful lives. How needs are
met is highly important, which is the aspect Max-Kneef (2009
[1992]) highlights as being satisfiers. There is considerable potential
variety among satisfiers dependent upon social and institutional
structure, but also explicit consideration is required of what is of
value and on what basis we should prioritise values.
The basic critique of modern consumerist capitalism is that it
supplies the wrong answers to both questions. Most fundamentally it
ignores values beyond individual preferences and relationships to
other humans, non-humans and Nature. Modern price-making
market economies misdirect meaning and care via objectifying social
and Nature relations as commodities and reducing value to monetary
exchange. The needs of humans for friendship and love become
things to be satisfied through quantifiable commercial arrangements
that allow somebody to accumulate money. We can recognise that
economies 
structure 
the 
social 
arrangements 
for 
providing
meaningful and caring lives through daily practices of reproduction
and interaction with Nature, but we can also recognise the potential

for alternatives to current economic systems. The reduction of
economics to concepts such as growth, development and progress is
a modernist denigration of longstanding alternative ways of living
and being, for example, African ubuntu (Kelbessa 2022; Konik 2018)
or South American buen vivir (Gudynas 2014; Lang and Mokrani
2013).
A more comprehensive approach is to define economics as the
study of social provisioning to meet human needs within an ethical
framework of care and justice for others, both human and non-
human. This definition is broad enough to cover economies at
different scales and time periods and allow for cultural variation. As
such it can be applied to various social structures and groups, for
example, Robinson Crusoe and Man Friday, family units, hunter-
gatherers, chieftain societies, feudalism or modern capitalism. Social
provisioning is a necessary activity for any social group, whether a
household, village, town, city, region, nation-state or global
collective. It concerns the ways in which people organise as social
groupings to satisfy their needs. Economists from a variety of
schools of thought, for example, feminist (Power 2004), institutional
(Dugger 1996), and ecological (Spash and Guisan 2021; Vogel et al.
2021), have regarded social provisioning as foundational. Lee (2009:
8) advances the concept as core to the research agenda of
heterodox economics and its definition as a science. He elaborates
what this means as follows.
The heterodox explanation involves human agency embedded in a cultural
context and social processes in historical time affecting resources,
consumption patterns, production and reproduction, and the meaning (or
ideology) of market, state and non-market/state activities engaged in social
provisioning. This implies that agency can take place only in an
interdependent social context, which emphasizes the social and de-
emphasizes the isolated nature of individual decision-making; and that the
organization of social provisioning is determined outside of markets,
although the provisioning process itself will, in part, take place through
capitalist markets.
(Lee 2012: 340)

Markets as mechanisms for allocation are merely one form of
arrangement and themselves diverse in structure. Economic analysis
then concerns the variety of institutions for ensuring the satisfaction
of needs and the reproduction of a society. Institutions, as discussed
in Chapter 2, are inclusive of conventions, norms and formally
sanctioned rules and regulations. They provide the structure that
incentivises human behaviour. This immediately opens up economics
for the consideration of alternatives and potentialities rather than the
nihilistic claim that there are no alternatives.
Expanding social ecological understanding
Human behaviour and motivation
Orthodox mainstream economics has a theoretical core that assumes
individuals are self-interested utility-maximisers who make rational
choices based on given a priori preferences that appear
unquestionable and incontestable. Society is nothing more than an
aggregation of totally independent individuals. This methodological
individualism treats humans as passive agents in a static closed
system, a mechanistic ontology constituted of isolated atoms.
Ideologically the position is ‘every individual for themselves’, where
the idealised persona is actually a dehumanised male stereotype –
Homo œconomicus.
Social ecological economists, like those of other heterodox
traditions, accept the transformative power of human agency with
emergent properties arising from a dynamic interconnected process
of multilayered social interactions. Humans are emotional social
beings operating under conditions of uncertainty and trying to
rationalise their actions under conditions of conflicting plural values
while subject to institutional structures. As social animals, humans
engage in other regarding behaviour that undermines the self-
interested model while choices are commonly based on heuristics.
This other regarding behaviour affects the type, form and level of
wants as evident in conspicuous consumption. Psychology can offer

potential insights into behaviour, but only if economists, contra the
mainstream, are prepared to learn from rather than imperialistically
dominate the subject (Earl 2005). For a wide-ranging critical
introduction to behavioural economics, see Earl (2022). Here I will
only very briefly indicate the importance of going beyond
mainstream approaches with reference to social psychology.
Social psychologists have developed models of human behaviour
that include attitudes and norms as motivational concepts and
challenge the basic mainstream economic model that assumes
complete, pre-existing invariant and transitive preferences. Social
psychology focuses on the influence of specific psychological
attributes – specific attitudes, social/subjective norms, beliefs,
perceived behavioural control – on cognitive decision-making
processes (Jones 1998). The focus remains on individual behaviour,
but motives are questionable, preferences endogenous and social
and institutional context become relevant. Thus, social psychology
sees behaviour as the result of the interaction between the individual
and their psychological, social and institutional environments.
Reconciling social versus individual motives to action requires
addressing the role of social norms, other-regarding and ethical
behaviour as enabling the functioning of an economic system. That
an individual’s social feelings of responsibility may override their
personal interests is problematic for the orthodox mainstream
economic approach and its implicit liberal political ideology, where
social relationships exist only as a means to fulfil individual aims. As
Hirsch (1977a: 147) states, ‘some bedrock of overriding social
orientation has been seen to be essential to the fulfillment of
individualistic objectives. This is the nettle that economic liberalism is
so shy to grasp.’
Social norms provide a link between individual and societal
motivators and connect with the role of institutions. Social
organisations can be recognised as involving power, trust and control
which impact how people respond to requests and incentives for
behavioural change. Social structures can promote or deny specific
behaviours affecting how they are normalised and the associated
values that are legitimised. For example, social cost-shifting is

prevalent under competitive institutions in productivist growth
economies, such as capitalism, but despite its normalisation appears
inherently unethical.
Empirical work on environmental valuation shows the additional
relevance of ethical motives that have been neglected by both
economists and social psychologists (Spash 2000a; 2000b; Spash
and Hanley 1995; Spash et al. 2009). This includes the role of trade-
off denying (lexicographic) preferences, which no longer appear as a
strange exception to the rule of gross substitution, but a relatively
normal approach to choice (Earl 1986; Lavoie 2009). Such
preferences may be understood as motivated by non-utilitarian
ethics, strong uncertainty or satisficing behaviour (Spash 1998). At
the same time preference theory can itself be regarded as an
excessively limited means for addressing how humans operate, and
inadequate as an explanation for individual action. That inadequacy
includes why individuals engage in environmental protection, let
alone their responses to being asked their maximum willingness-to-
pay for an environmental improvement or minimum willingness-to-
accept compensation for environmental degradation, ecosystem
damages and species loss (Spash 2008e).
Taking ethics and value seriously
Ethics and morality are taken as synonymous, and as rational means
of guiding action. This refers to right/wrong/permissible behaviour
with regard to basic values and a common concern across ethical
theories for the alleviation of suffering and promotion of wellbeing
(Pojman 1989). In Western philosophy there are three main ethical
theories: utilitarianism, deontology (rights-based) and virtue ethics.
Utilitarianism is a specific form of consequentialism and associated
with Jeremy Bentham’s philosophy of judging what is best on the
basis of achieving the greatest good for the greatest number of
morally considerable individuals. Deontology is derived from the
philosophy of Immanuel Kant and regards an individual undertaking
the right action as good in itself, so that conformity to principles of
right action is intrinsically valuable. Crucially, under deontology,

rights-bearers possess equal standing and rights apply equally. The
classic problem is what to do when conflicts arise between rights.
Virtue ethicists focus on being over doing, and what is of value is
who you are, which character traits you express through your
actions, where the right actions express virtuous character traits – a
moral philosophy tracing back to Aristotle.
Mainstream orthodox economic value theory is utilitarian but
derived from preference theory (i.e., what a person prefers is best
for them) – a move which some economists falsely assume divorces
choice from ethics. In fact, the basic consequentialist ethical
approach remains, but moves from Bentham’s theory of total utility,
where subgroups and individuals are expendable for the greater
good, to an individualistic preference utilitarianism.3 Thus, the
practice of environmental cost-benefit analysis involves an implicit
ethical theory, based upon assuming that the evaluation of
consequences determines what is right. More than this, the only
consequences that count are those that can be measured in money,
as a proxy for utility, based upon individual preferences. While
preference theory and (‘new’) welfare economics claim to be based
only upon ordinal preferences, as a means to avoid interpersonal
comparisons of utility, the way in which money is used in practice, to
aggregate and make decisions, means it is being implicitly converted
into a cardinal measure for interpersonal comparisons of wellbeing.4
Such theoretical issues hardly seem of concern for those
promoting policy formation that employs economic valuation
methods and monetary valuation of environmental damages. The
rise of transferring money numbers across time and space – benefit
transfer – indicates a tendency to choose approaches on the basis of
political convenience (see Spash and Vatn 2006). The danger here is
that numbers become merely artificial means to an end and any
means of justification will suffice. This is a form of the new
environmental pragmatism – discussed further in Chapter 8 – that
has infiltrated environmentalism in recent times (Spash 2009b;
2013b; 2020a). Rather than pursue the more difficult task of
developing theoretically justified alternatives, the tendency among

those wishing to express the importance of environmental values is
to borrow mainstream orthodox economic tools without attention to
methodological validity. This is exactly why both social ecological and
neoclassical 
economists 
have 
given 
little 
credence 
to 
the
theoretically unhinged studies led by non-economists (e.g.,
ecologists, planners, conservationists) claiming to value the world’s
ecosystems, natural capital and all wild Nature (e.g., Balmford et al.
2002; Costanza et al. 1997b).
Ecologists themselves have lost sight of their own expressed
values (summarised by Naess 1973; 1984 as deep ecology), and this
failing is found within the conservation movement with public policy
impacts relating to ecosystems and biodiversity (Spash 2022a; Spash
and Aslaksen 2015). Concern for Nature, and the plural and
incommensurable values that involves (O’Neill 2017), is not
expressible within the context of preference utilitarianism (Spash
2008e). Neoclassical value theory is rejected by social ecological
economists because of its monism – reducing and commensurating
everything, including all ethical and moral issues, to a single
numeraire.
A key area in which such monism controls and distracts policy
discourse is in the treatment of future generations (Spash 1993;
2002b). Economists at the highest levels present justifications for
using a single discount rate (regarded as the price of resource
allocation across time). Within mainstream rhetoric, discount rates
are meant to be observable determinants of how society should treat
the future. Unable to move outside the narrow confines of
mathematical formalism, economists, from Sveriges Riksbank Prize-
winners down, write-off the future on the basis that they are being
empirical and objective (e.g., Arrow et al. 1996). That is, they claim,
how future generations should be treated can be determined by
observing a few factors such as rates of return on capital and
consumption growth. The result is a fruitless waste of time arguing
over the appropriate rates rather than addressing the fundamental
issues, which are fair and just treatment of the unborn, and what
should determine undertaking or denying actions with long-term
impacts (Spash 1993; 2002b).

Unfortunately, the orthodox mainstream economic discourse has
real policy implications due to the use made of their claims in policy
processes, such as climate economics and policy (Spash 2002a;
Spash and Gattringer 2017). The promotion of Nature-based
solutions, net-zero emissions, carbon-trading and biodiversity-
offsetting are merely the latest in a series of moves to expand
markets and financial instruments (Friends of the Earth 2021; Spash
2020a). Side-effects are land-grabbing, displacement of Indigenous
peoples and destruction of the very Nature meant to be the object of
value being saved. Issues arise over legal protection of the innocent
from harm and explicitly considering the moral considerability and
standing of others. Reorienting here means developing appropriate
value-articulating institutions (Vatn 2015) and involves redefining the
role of monetary valuation (Lo and Spash 2013; Spash 2007a;
2008c). Such institutions need to take into account incommensurable
and plural values (O’Neill 2017).
The non-human world: Value and ethics
The ethical position of most economics is that humans are the only
morally considerable entities and as such humans pursue their own
intrinsic good (variously referred to as utility, wellbeing, happiness or
similar). All else, whether living or inanimate, has only instrumental
value for human ends. Here the ‘last person’ mind experiment is an
interesting test of one’s ethical position (Sylvan 2009 [1973]). That
is, does wilfully destroying life on Earth matter if you are the last
human on the planet – is it wrong? Environmental economists, for
example, would be theoretically committed to accepting the last
person’s preferences, and once they are gone there would be no
valuer and so no value left! Such an anthropocentric position
contrasts with an ecocentric or Nature-based orientation. The latter
recognises that non-humans also have their own independent
interests, for example, in terms of surviving, reproducing and
fulfilling their potential. That human beings impact on non-human
interests is blatantly obvious, but what humans should do about this,
if anything, is highly contested.

Arguments have been made for the extension of utilitarian and
rights theories to include, primarily but not exclusively, non-human
animals. These theories are predominantly individualistic accounts of
human moral standing and as such their extension is generally
dependent upon sharing some human attribute(s), such as
sentience, level of communication or ability to show pain/pleasure.
There is a contradiction between attribution of moral considerability
on the basis of possessing human-like qualities and those to whom
they are extended being non-human.
An Aristotelian ethical approach is less common but avoids this
pitfall by recognising that non-humans have their own intrinsic good
and potential to flourish. O’Neill (1992: 129) quotes Wright as
follows: ‘The question “What kinds or species of being have a good?”
is therefore broadly identical with the question “What kinds or
species of being have a life”.’ This argument focuses moral attention
on what is constitutive of the flourishing for a living thing, without
reference to humans, and so recognises the ability to develop
natural characteristics as a member of a species. O’Neill qualifies
Wright by arguing that restriction to being alive excludes the good of
collectives (e.g., colonies, ecosystems) which may be regarded as
not having their own lives while being able to naturally flourish and
have an identifiable and objective own good.
However, recognising what constitutes the good for non-human
entities fails to entail that this good be realised (e.g., the flourishing
of COVID-19). Indeed, much contestation in human society, and
motivation for the environmental movement, is the extent to which
non-human interests can justifiably be curtailed by human actions
(e.g., insecticides, pesticides, land-use change) and subordinated to
human ends. A moral agent may be indifferent to others’ good or
believe there is a moral duty to inhibit their flourishing, for example,
removing invasive species, eradicating a virus.5 So, there remains
the need for establishing the grounds on which humans are morally
required to act even once the existence of others’ good is
recognised. O’Neill (1992) believes an environmental ethic should be
based upon promoting the flourishing of a large number of, although

not all, individual living things and biological collectives as an end in
itself. As an Aristotelian he regards this as constitutive of humans
leading good and meaningful lives (in Aristotle’s terms being
eudaimon).
There is in this the concern for understanding and connecting to
the otherness in Nature (Hailwood 2000). Intervention on behalf of
Nature and the interests of non-humans is an increasingly relevant
topic, as evident in the debate around rewilding (Drenthen 2018). At
the same time, human interventions into Nature have become more
worrisome, such as genetic engineering of crops and animals, along
with the Promethean eco-modernist advocacy of the Anthropocene
(Baskin 2015). This makes understanding what is meant by the
value of Nature and naturalness more important than ever (Deckers
2021). Knudsen (2023) has revealed how political ecologists arguing
for non-human agency fail to respect this in their studies and
repeatedly replace animal with human agency. Vetlesen (2015) has
pointed out how the non-human is repeatedly reduced to human
relations, and so relations of the non-human to non-human are
excluded and ignored. In O’Neill’s terms, little moral consideration is
given to the autonomy of non-human life or biological collectives for
them to achieve their own good and flourish on their own terms.
Utilitarian and rights arguments are typically limited to how
individual deliberating moral agents should treat other morally
considerable individuals in what Benton (1993) calls a liberal-
individualist view. Such a perspective tends to favour the extension
of individual human moral sensibility connected to changes in
personal lifestyles, rather than a more fundamental systemic and
institutional change. What is missing from the individualistic account
is the need for a nurturing community and environment within which
to develop moral considerability of and sympathy for others. This
brings us back to establishing the institutions of a caring society that
recognise the quality of social relationships and interdependencies as
constitutive of a good society. Here there are connections to eco-
feminist and Green ideological positions which highlight care for
others and respect for Nature (Spash and Aslaksen 2015), beyond

the purely instrumental reasons for meeting human ends (McShane
2007a; 2007b).
Taking institutions seriously
Achieving overarching goals in society, and social decision processes,
requires institutions that allow for the expression of different types
of values (i.e., value-articulating institutions). Indeed, the general
hope among the various institutional options that might be
developed is for a more inclusive participatory approach to
deliberative 
governance. 
This 
would 
ideally 
allow 
deeper
environmental values than those prevalent in daily Western life to
come to the fore even when concerned with processes of monetary
valuation (Lo and Spash 2013). In discussions over designing
deliberative institutions there is evident tension between the
volitional action of an individual agent and the institutional structure
within which they operate. Agency-versus-structure conflicts help
understanding of the role of a consumer (agent) within a given
market institution (structure) and expose fallacious claims, such as
consumer sovereignty (Fellner and Spash 2015). Research, as
explanatory critique (see Chapter 5), reveals how markets should be
regulated and some institutions and organisations abolished or
substantively reformed.
Issues of institutional design, public policy and governance have
been placed outside of orthodox mainstream economics in a
deliberate attempt to make economics appear ‘objective’ by
divorcing it from political theory and political economy. Yet the role
of power in society cannot be removed from economic analysis and
merely remains hidden. The analysis becomes highly misleading,
because policies applied in reality play directly to vested-interest
groups who are absent from the analysis. Different forms of power
need to be recognised (Stör 2017). Account must be taken of
government power and how the institutions of governance are
structured. The orthodox approach of assuming State intervention is
minimal, markets perfectly efficient and consumers sovereign with
given preferences produces highly misleading recommendations, or,

worse, attempts to make the world perform like the model. Realising
that markets are socially constructed institutions means taking
responsibility for market design and functioning, rather than
pretending markets are uniform and can be left to themselves as if
self-organising and self-regulating automata acting for the greater
good. Price-making markets are, as Polanyi (1957) explained, merely
one form. Neither are they necessarily the best institutions for social
provisioning to meet needs.
The ways in which organisations and public bodies conduct their
policy discourses is something which affects the direction in which
society heads, because it entails creating ideas that motivate action
and empower specific-interest groups. The ideas of free markets,
economic growth and competitive advantage empower corporations,
science as provider of technological innovation and the industrial–
military complex. The science–policy interface has seen wilful
misconceptualisations 
that 
have 
been 
institutionalised 
and
contributed to repeated public policy failures, from nuclear power to
genetic modification to climate change (see also Oreskes and
Conway 2010). For example, the reduction of strong uncertainty
(ignorance, indeterminacy) to weak uncertainty (probabilities)
changes policy from precaution to risk managment. Hence the rise of
post-normal science in ecological economics (Funtowicz and Ravetz
1994; Strand 2017) was one means by which to rethink the science–
policy interface and engage the technocentric establishment with
wider public values (van der Sluijs et al. 2005) – an approach
constituting strong transdisciplinarity (see Chapter 7). This implies
challenging existing institutions and creating new ones.
Another major issue is the representation of silent voices. How
non-humans get a voice in the human world raises political concerns
over societal decision-making and political representation (O’Neill
2001). This is a problem common to future generations, children,
non-humans and others unable to articulate their interests within
democratic institutions focused on discourse. Recognising and
protecting silent voices via formalised rules and regulations, as in
legal systems, still requires their representation.

The extension of moral standing to ‘others’ by the environmental
movement has involved attributing animals rights, but has more
recently been generalised to ecocide and the rights of Nature. The
latter has seen national legislation giving legal and sometimes
constitutional recognition to Nature as a subject with inalienable
rights. Legal provisions now exist in Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia,
Ecuador, India, Mexico, New Zealand and the USA (Kauffman and
Martin 2018). Making Nature a subject and giving it standing in law
(i.e., protection via legal sanction, not ethical motivation) has been
associated 
with 
the 
decolonising 
struggles 
of 
Indigenous
communities for protection of territory. As such, it may be more of a
practical political tool than a moral struggle to recognise Nature’s
value as found in Indigenous culture (Tanasescu 2015). In Ecuador,
Nature’s rights mixed nationalist feelings, decolonialism, critique of
neoliberalism and aspirations for legal protection among Indigenous
communities (Espinosa 2019). However, Nature’s rights have
paradoxically also been used to promote mega-mining projects in
Ecuador – claiming Nature is protected, will be restored or can be
compensated 
– 
revealing 
their 
limitations 
under 
neoliberal
governance and institutions (Valladares and Boelens 2019). Similarly,
under the Bolsonaro government in Brazil such rights appeared
ineffective in stopping the acceleration of the Amazon’s destruction.
Institutional differences arise in defining the Nature that bears
rights, the rights recognised, who can speak for Nature, whether
anyone is responsible for protecting Nature’s rights and, if so, how.
The vision of social ecological economics
In order to bring various elements of the argument together I list
here, in summary form, some of the key aspects of what forms a
preanalytic vision for social ecological economics informed by a
critical realist philosophy of science. I split this into the ontological,
epistemological and methodological aspects in line with a meta-
theoretic position on how to conduct science in the field given the

object of study and nature of reality. The list is neither
comprehensive nor definitive but introduces what I believe are core
positions of the emerging paradigm. In some areas aspects may
cross over between the categories. For example, uncertainty has
both ontological (e.g., being weak or strong) and epistemological
aspects (e.g., limits to probabilistic knowledge). I include a set of
ideological beliefs because, as explained in Chapter 5, a preanalytic
vision is ideological by definition. The philosophical positions on
values are treated as a separate axiological category, distinct from
philosophy of science.
Ontology
Ontology is reasoning about being and asks questions as to what
exists, and so what are the primary entities of concern in any given
field, and what are their most general features and relationships.
• An objective reality exists independent of human cognition and
operations of the mind (the intransitive realm).
• Depth ontology is accepted in which reality consists of three
domains: the empirical (domain of experiences), the actual
(domain of events and experiences) and the real (domain of
structures and mechanisms, events and experiences).
• There is an ordered hierarchical structure of asymmetrical
dependency between strata moving from the physical to biological
to social and economic; higher strata are neither reducible to the
lower nor determined by them, but emergent.
• Society consists of emergent social relations and phenomena that
are irreducible to individuals.
• The scale of human economic activity – energy and material use,
population expansion – has biophysical limits.
• Resource use results in an equal mass of material and quantity of
energy ultimately going back into the environment.
• Economies are social provisioning systems that are co-emergent
with social structure.
• Ecological, economic and social structures are open systems.

• Open systems are subject to the continuous emergence of
novelty, which is by definition unpredictable.
• Systems are continually subject to change and interaction but
structures are enduring.
• Human activities reproduce and can transform social structure.
Epistemology
Epistemology is reasoning about knowing and concerns the
theoretical basis on which we create understanding of the world,
theories about the origin and limits of knowledge, how we can form
knowledge and what is the meaning of truly knowing something.
• To say that a statement is true is to say that things are as the
statement states (simple truth).
• Theories are validated by their adequacy in providing descriptively
realist explanation of the structure and mechanisms causing and
preventing events and practices (practical adequacy).
• Our scientific knowledge is always subject to strong uncertainty
(i.e., partial ignorance, social indeterminacy).
• Scientific understanding is always fallible (anti-foundationalism),
but not all theories are equally fallible.
• Knowledge consists of concepts that are contextual culturally,
historically and linguistically (epistemic relativity); they are
thought objects (transitive realm) but correspond to reality
(intransitive realm).
• Knowledge comes in different forms and is not the exclusive
domain of the expert.
• Informal (e.g., Indigenous and lay) knowledge may challenge or
complement expert knowledge.
• Knowledge is subject to reasoned critique and theories can be
judged as to their relative validity (judgemental rationality).
• Empirical investigation is limited and a posteriori, which indicates
the importance of understanding structure and its potentiality
(depth ontology).

• Advancing 
knowledge 
requires 
accepting 
and 
rejecting
information and being open to reasoning about and revising
warranted beliefs, that is, maintaining criticality to prevent
dogmatism.
• Knowledge of reality cannot be achieved through reliance on
mathematical 
formalism 
and 
quantification 
(arithmomania);
qualitative conceptualisations are necessary (dialectical concepts).
• Social sciences evaluate their objects of study, including ideas,
which means criticism of organisations holding and perpetrating
false ideas, so there is no ethically free or value-neutral social
science research (explanatory critique).
Methodology
Methodology is reasoning about developing the way of conducting
an investigation.
• Ecological 
economics 
is 
an 
interdisciplinary 
approach 
to
understanding.
• Successful 
interdisciplinarity 
requires 
integration, 
having
understood the ontological and epistemological basis for
cooperation between different bodies of knowledge.
• Interdisciplinarity requires creation of mutually understood
integrative concepts.
• Eclectic, unstructured (methodological) pluralism is the antithesis
of creating knowledge and understanding.
• Structured pluralism requires working across fields of knowledge
facilitated by shared ontology, epistemology and ideology.
• Methodology and methods are chosen as appropriate to the
object of study and research question.
Axiology
Axiology is reasoning about value and is concerned with the study of
the nature of value and what kinds of things have value, and is
strongly related to ethics.

• Both human and non-human inhabitants of Earth are morally
considerable and have their own intrinsic goods.
• What constitutes the good for an entity need not require that
good be realised, which requires a distinct ethical judgement.
• There are more meaningful aspirations for human existence than
hedonism, for example, invoking philosophical concepts such as a
‘worthwhile life’ or the ‘good life’ (eudaimonia), or cultural
variations such as South American buen vivir or African ubuntu.
• Social reality is constituted of plural and incommensurable values.
• There are objective values including basic human needs which
can be met in various ways (satisfiers).
• Explanatory critique can entail a responsibility for academics to
become activists.
Ideology
Ideology is reasoning about ideas and is taken here to concern a set
of ideas, beliefs, opinions and values that provide controlling plans
for public policy and do so with the aim of justifying, contesting or
changing the social and political arrangements and processes of a
political community.
• Action is required to address power relations and different forms
of inequalities (beyond income) within and across social groups
(e.g., 
gender, 
race, 
class, 
religion), 
time 
periods
(intergenerational) and spatial dimensions (interregional).
• Levels of material and energy consumption per capita prevalent in
the industrialised nations are excessive and its social and
environmental consequences unacceptable.
• Alternatives 
are 
required 
to 
capital-accumulating 
growth
economies.
• Alternatives are required to price-making markets in order to
establish social provisioning systems that meet the needs of all.
• We should uphold democratic principles of fairness, justice,
inclusiveness and tolerance as reflected in international human
rights and protection of the innocent from harm.

• Opposition is required to the wanton destruction of war and the
military–industrial complex.
• Ecological economists should act personally and live in ways
consistent with their environmental and social values.
• Ecological economics can contribute to changing the world by
creating better understanding of the structure of the social and
environmental reality in which we live and communicating its
findings to help achieve that change.
Conclusions
What reorienting to social ecological economics involves is a
comprehensive revision of understanding concerning both economics
as a disciplinary field and what constitutes economies as real social
structures. The preanalytic vision offered here covers aspects of
philosophy of science (ontology, epistemology, methodology),
axiology and ideology. This lays a theoretical foundation on which to
build. In terms of how economics as a discipline operates, the
requirement is to relate to its object of study, rather than an
idealised fictional system which relates to a utopian vision of optimal
efficiency and everlasting growth. If economics aspires to
understanding 
real 
economies, 
throughout 
history, 
then
conceptualising them as social provisioning systems to meet needs
appears the most comprehensive approach. A basic first step is
connecting to the natural sciences in terms of their knowledge of
biophysical structure and its implications for social economic
systems. This sets the constraints and limits within which economies
must operate. Energy and material throughput is seen as central to
understanding the economic process and how economies can be
reproduced and sustained. Rejecting both growth and efficiency as
ultimate goals means reorienting to how needs can be met while
taking into account other priorities such as the form of satisfiers and
the institutional arrangements necessary. An ethical framework of
care and justice is brought to the fore. This expansion of economics

highlights its additional connection to a range of other social
sciences. Both natural and social science cross-communication
entails the need for interdisciplinarity. How that might operate is
discussed next.
Notes
 1
The etymology of ‘energy’ is from late-Latin energia, combining en ‘within
or in’ and ergon ‘work’.
 2
Georgescu-Roegen (1971: 233–234) accredits Marx’s concept of labour-po
wer with initially recognising the worker as a fund, but also criticises his lat
er reduction of human beings to a mere stock of energy.
 3
Polanyi (1944: 119) claims that Bentham actually failed to make the link be
tween value and utility.
 4
The problem is how to measure utility. Money as a proxy has the recognise
d flaw that a euro or dollar for one person (e.g., a billionaire) is not the sa
me as for another (e.g., a worker in a billionaire’s factory).
 5
This applies equally to human good, for example, preventing dictators and
murderers from flourishing.

7
Integration of social, ecological and
economic knowledge
Introduction
Instead of ecological economics offering an integrative approach, it
was 
founded 
on 
vague 
and 
unstructured 
appeals 
to
transdisciplinarity, 
interdisciplinarity, 
holism, 
pluralism 
and
eclecticism. The legacy of that start was not generally beneficial. An
underlying tension was the incompatibility between openness to
anything and the original paradigm-shifting aims. An initially popular
approach was simple model-linking, but this ‘ecology and economics’
approach lacked interdisciplinary integration. Calls for a renewed
unity under a rebranding exercise entitled ‘sustainability economics’
(Baumgärtner and Quaas 2010; Söderbaum 2008; 2011) appeared
to offer a superficial change of names that failed to address how to
achieve integration. Indeed, with whom integration might take place
and on what grounds became a bone of contention, to which I will
return in Chapter 8.
More generally, integration of scientific understanding is a central
requirement for identifying the causal mechanisms behind social and
environmental crises and seeking public policy reform for successful
social-ecological transformation of economies. Ecological economics
was established on the basis of recognising a major failure along
these lines, namely the ignorance among economists as to the

physical reality of the world in which any economy is embedded and
upon which it is totally dependent (e.g., Georgescu-Roegen 1971).
This was not a new revelation, as evident from the history of
ecological economic thought (Martinez-Alier 1990; Vianna Franco
and Missemer 2023), but a neglected and forgotten one. Kapp (1971
[1950]; 1978 [1963]) had tried to raise the profile of the
interconnections through the implications of cost-shifting, inherent in
competitive economic structures, and especially as a causal
explanation of environmental degradation (Spash 2021b). He
advocated social minima that involve biophysical constraints as well
as social choices. He concluded that the requirements should be
scientifically informed but generated through participatory processes.
This rejects both a naive objectivist imposition of policy and a
culturally relativist denial of any natural limits. However, its
operationalisation 
requires 
interdisciplinary 
integration. 
The
institutionalised academic silo mentality needs to be overcome.
Kapp was deeply concerned about the compartmentalising
attitude in academia and the increasingly fragmented character of
human understanding leading to contradictions evident both across
and within disciplines. As a foundational thinker on viewing
environmental problems from a social and economic perspective that
links to natural sciences, his work provides a source of interest and
potential guide – a lost trail that needs to be re-explored and opened
up anew. Kapp died before modern ecological economics was
established but had already covered much of the ground that it
would take up. He critically evaluated key issues such as valuation of
the environment, the role of institutions, corporate power, the
consumer society and participatory planning. He had recognised
that, while the intrinsic connection between the inorganic and
biological was being explored with vigour, the connection between
the biological and social sciences was far from being accepted, even
in principle (Kapp 1961: 124). He saw making this connection as a
legitimate and necessary step for the integration of knowledge. As
ecology developed understanding of human impacts, via the
appropriation of chemical element cycles and energy flows, greater
awareness arose of the scale of environmental problems, but the

divorce between the sciences remained. Ecological economics, by
definition, has aimed to fill that gap.
In this chapter, the approaches to integration critically reviewed
by Kapp are discussed and brought into a current social ecological
economic perspective with specific focus on dialectics (from Hegel to
Engels and Marx to Georgescu-Roegen), analogy and metaphor
(which 
are 
distinguished), 
unity 
of 
science 
and 
finally
multi-/trans-/inter-disciplinarity. 
The 
argument 
is 
made 
that
interdisciplinarity is key but requires insight into a process as to how
it might proceed. The role of conceptualisation is highlighted and
Kapp’s proposal for ‘common-denominator’ concepts is explained and
explored. The potential for and barriers to integration are reflected
upon throughout and summarised in the conclusions.
Approaches to integration
In his book Towards a Science of Man in Society, Kapp (1961)
explores the possibilities for integration across the social and natural
sciences and greater coherence across the disciplines constituting
the social sciences. His basic thesis explains the separate qualities of
the physical (inanimate matter), biological (living organism) and
social (human) realities, but also proposes possibilities for linking
knowledge and how integration could be made feasible. He critically
discusses five approaches to integration, which can be summarised
as: interdisciplinarity; historical method; use of analogies; unity of
science; and dialectical materialism. Among these, Kapp dismisses
the historical method as a means of integration because, despite its
breadth, it is time- and place-specific and lacks attention to ‘the
general nature of social causation or with the structure and
functioning of the social process’. History of thought is noted to be
important in aiding understanding of the processes by which
intellectual synthesis has succeeded or failed, but this does not in
itself achieve integration of contemporary knowledge. The other four
avenues seem to offer more potential for aiding integration, and I

will therefore discuss in turn dialectics, metaphor and analogy, unity
of science and interdisciplinarity compared to multidisciplinarity and
transdisciplinarity. In doing so I will explore each broadly and in light
of more recent developments and literature.
Dialectics
So, what is dialectics? The term has been employed in several
distinct ways. The Greek root is hē dialektikē ‘the art of dialogue’
(Timmerman and Schiappa 2010: 17). In ancient Greek philosophy
this relates to a verbal disputation where each party to an argument
attacks and defends given positions. There is an element of
opposition. In Plato’s philosophy it is refined and formalised (as
dialegesthai) to provide the ultimate means of getting to the truth
about perfect ideals (his concept of Forms), for example, justice,
goodness, beauty. Training in dialectical reasoning stands in
opposition to sophistry and anti-logic and is the last stage of
education for his proposed philosopher-rulers in his political
philosophy Republic (Plato 2007: 263–267). Elements of the
disputation over opposites and negating arguments to achieve a
better understanding can be seen in later developments.
The term was later adopted by the idealist philosopher Hegel
(1770–1831), and his formulation was turned into a realist
materialist thesis applied by Marx and generalised by Engels.1 In the
Hegelian tradition there are three main elements: unity of opposites;
quantity and quality; and negation of the negation (Wood 1998).
First, the essence of things involves internal oppositions and
contradictions which are responsible for change and development
through conflicting tendencies. Second, quantitative changes lead to
the emergence of new qualities irreducible to the quantitative
changes. Third, change negates what is changed and the result is a
new development with new qualities, for example, property owned
by labour is negated by capitalist property but leads to communist
property. So, a contradictory tendency, essential to something, could
cause a negation that in turn causes emergence of a qualitatively
different state. Wood (1998) summarises the Marxist-Hegelian

conceptualisation: ‘In general, dialectical thinking tries to explain
change as the outcome of conflicts which emerge from the essence
of something, which are resolved when its essence is transformed
and it attains a new stage of its development.’
In Kapp’s discussion of dialectics the focus is on dialectical
materialism and integration of social knowledge. Dialectical
materialism, or ‘diamat’, was the official name given to Marxist-
Leninist philosophy in the Soviet Union. The term was never used by
Marx or Engels, but builds from their ideas (Wood 1998). In
particular, the approach is exemplified by Marx’s economic theory of
the history of capitalism that places the material productive powers
of society and their tendency to grow at the centre of its
explanation. A specific set of productive powers favour specific
material relations of production (e.g., competition, division of labour)
and so social relations of production determining who controls
production and who gets what from the process. The dialectical
element provides a social theory that highlights important aspects of
change. However, Kapp (1961: 64–69) criticises it for lacking an
explicit theory of human nature and behaviour. More generally he
argues that as a cultural theory it fails to account for physics and
biology on their own terms.
His other concern is an erroneously assumed (on his part)
dichotomous aspect of the dialectic due to an incorrect interpretation
as thesis-antithesis. Fichte (1762–1814) proposed a theory involving
thesis, antithesis and synthesis. While influenced by Fichte, Hegel
did not use these terms, nor is his theory reducible to this account,
which he also criticised. This interpretation arose once Hegel’s
dialectical approach became taught as Being-Nothing-Becoming, so
allowing its conversion into the simplistic thesis-antithesis-synthesis
explanation more easily comprehensible to students. For example, in
logic, this is where a positive concept is introduced (thesis), which
develops into a second concept that negates/opposes the first
(antithesis), which leads to a third unifying concept (synthesis). This
oversimplified neo-Hegelian theory of dialectic became incorporated
as a textbook approach (Maybee 2019). When applied to Marx’s
theory much is lost from his concepts of contradiction (i.e., opposing

forces created in a dynamic tension, one with the other) and
inversion (e.g., transformation of an institution into its opposite) in
the historical process of economic system change. In summary, the
theory of dialectic in Hegel, Marx and Engels is irreducible to thesis-
antithesis-synthesis, while that latter is not the idealist approach of
Hegel, but a materialist approach applied in a social science context
and proposing a social theory of change.
While dialectical materialism does not provide a means of
integration, even for the social sciences, it does raise the role of
dialectical thinking as it relates to epistemology which has
implications for integration. The importance of dialectics in this
regard was something emphasised by Georgescu-Roegen (1966:
chapter 2; 1971: 45–47; 2009 [1979]: 109–112) in his critique of the
‘mathematisation’ of economics. As a trained mathematical
economist, he was highly critical of the inappropriate use being
made of mathematical modelling by economists. As discussed in
Chapter 3, he specifically criticised what he termed ‘arithmomorphic
concepts’ as being inappropriately applied to dialectical concepts and
qualitative aspects of reality. His concern is about what quantification
can and cannot achieve because it assumes phenomena are discrete
and distinct. His core argument is epistemological, that we cannot
know everything by using numbers because not everything has the
form (morph) of a number (arithmetic). His point is made clear in
the following quote.
[M]‌odern economics has ignored even the most fundamental qualitative
aspects of the economic process. Why have standard economists failed, for
example, to perceive the essential difference between ‘fund’ and ‘flow’, a
failure responsible for several important fallacies mentioned in my article.
(Georgescu-Roegen 1981: 190–191)2
Rather than arithmomorphic concepts, being regarded as the normal
concern of science, dialectical concepts are required and essential.
A vast number of concepts belong to this very category; among them are
the most vital concepts for human judgements, like ‘good’, ‘justice’,
‘likelihood’, ‘want’, etc. They have no arithmomorphic boundaries; instead,

they are surrounded by a penumbra within which they overlap with their
opposites.
(Georgescu-Roegen 1966: 23)
He actually uses a rather specific definition of dialectical concepts as
being those that violate the Principle of Contradiction, namely that
they are instances in which B is both A and non-A (Georgescu-
Roegen 1971: 46). For example, grey is both black and non-black,
white and non-white. The usefulness of this dialectic is in legitimising
concepts that are in this sense fuzzy, not distinctly definable and
certainly not mathematically so. However, he accepts that
‘arithmomorphic models are definitely useful as simile of dialectical
reasoning to facilitate communication and to detect possible logical
errors’ (Georgescu-Roegen 1981: 190).
While Georgescu-Roegen’s conceptualisation of dialects is
somewhat specific, and, he claims, different from that of Marx and
Hegel, it does link to ideas of opposites and qualitative versus
quantitative change. Economic systems continuously change
qualitatively with the emergence of novelty that cannot be modelled
quantitatively nor predicted from a deductive arithmomorphic model
(Georgescu-Roegen 2009 [1979]: 109). Thus, Georgescu-Roegen
(1966: 120) argues that:
no science can completely avoid dialectical concepts. The reason, as I have
explained, is that no science can ignore Change forever. The idea that
human propensities, which are the main vehicle of economic Change, are
not arithmomorphic concepts, therefore, is not a fancy of some unscientific
school of thought.
Dialectical reasoning about concepts cannot be exact, but it can be
correct. What it cannot be is reduced to a set of arithmomorphic
concepts, and so mathematical models are not in themselves
meaningful but only provide a means of facilitating reasoning: ‘an
arithmomorphic model has no value unless there is a dialectical
reasoning to be tested’ (Georgescu-Roegen 1966: 124). The link to
the concern for integration arises because of the false claim that
‘science is measurement’ (Georgescu-Roegen 196: 120), which is
exclusionary and prescriptive. On these grounds, it is indeed an

unscientific claim! There is little possibility for integration with those
who deny the relevance of qualitative aspects of phenomena and
exclusively focus on arithmomorphic concepts.
Metaphor and analogy
Since the ‘linguistic turn’ in the social sciences (mentioned in Chapter
3), the use of specific forms of language has been raised in profile
along with hermeneutic analysis. A negative aspect is the claim that
all knowledge can be reduced to language statements so that there
is neither any truth beyond a set of relativist interpretative stories
nor more to science than rhetoric. A positive aspect has been to
identify how concepts are formed and the way in which the sense
we make of the world relates to the references we employ (Sayer
2010: 56–65). That is, the separation of observation (involving
reference) from interpretation (yielding sense) is rejected because
sense and reference are interdependent. Sense-making is a matter
of relations among linguistic expressions that match up to the real
world of practice and experience.
[T]‌he coherence of any system of concepts which attempts to enable
reference to, and action within, the world cannot be judged independently
of its empirical reference and the result of social practice.
(Sayer 2010: 58)
This aspect means our language conveys the relationships between
real objects/phenomena as soon as we make a reference to them,
but the test of our conceptualised relationships is reality.
The role of simile, metaphor and analogy need to be clarified
before we proceed, not least because of the way in which all three
are merged and mixed along with conceptualisation, creating much
confused thinking (e.g., the mix and muddle in Hodgson 2008).
Simile is a figure of speech involving comparison of one thing with
another of a different kind, used to make a description more
emphatic or vivid, associated with the terms ‘as’ or ‘like’ (e.g., ‘as
brave as a lion’). Metaphor is a figure of speech in which a word or
phrase is applied to an object or action to which it is not literally

applicable; it takes a dimension of a thing as representative or
symbolic of something else, especially something abstract (e.g., ‘a
blanket of snow’; ‘time is money’). While simile and metaphor
appear prone to divorce from real qualities of their referents,
analogy works more closely with reality. Analogy is a comparison
between one thing and another thing for the purpose of explanation
or clarification; there is a real correspondence or partial similarity; a
thing is represented as being comparable to something else in
significant respects.
Metaphors and analogies are not unscientific things to be
removed in the process of scientific progress. They are prevalent
aspects of how we conceptualise.
The most advanced no less than the most ancient scientific vocabulary is
loaded with metaphor. In social science, ‘inflation’, ‘co-operative game’, ‘free
rider’, ‘supply chain’, ‘careeral organization’, and the like are no less
metaphorical than Adam Smith’s ‘invisible hand’.
(Sayer 2010: 63)
The move from metaphor to analogy is a move from the figurative to
the literal and a claim of direct correspondence. Drawing analogies
from other areas of knowledge enables reconceptualisation,
rethinking relationships, explaining the unfamiliar by reference to the
familiar. Such use of analogies is particularly important when
developing a new area of research, such as social ecological
economics. Kapp (1961: 57) explains as follows.
Particularly during the formative stages of a new discipline, analogical
comparisons and the exploration of likenesses are often the only procedures
available for deducing tentative conclusions in a new and as yet unexplored
field of research.
Kapp notes that, historically, synthesis of information has resulted in
transferring concepts, methods and modes of thinking across
disciplines. The discussion in Sayer (2010: 62–64) explains how
metaphors and analogies play an important role in the conceptual
development of the social sciences. The displacement of the
concepts 
involved 
can 
create 
new 
meanings 
and 
aid

reconceptualisation. In a new context of reference, the sense of a
concept may over time change from the original and become
divorced from any of its original dimensions of meaning (Sayer talks
of going from a live to a dead metaphor). The presence of metaphor
and analogy is often forgotten as terms become embedded in a new
set of relations.
Despite the potential power and strong attraction of drawing
analogies, Kapp (1961: 57) points out that there are also some
‘serious dangers which have rarely been avoided’ even by those
conscious of the problems. Two issues highlight the problems. First
is the tendency to pay inadequate attention to the object of study
and its characteristics, resulting in assuming fundamental similarity,
if not identity, between qualitatively different phenomena. Thus,
analogies from physics have been used to explain society with
atomistic reductionism, leading to a belief that the social is no more
than a collection of atomistic individuals, and society can therefore
be ignored as a distinct phenomenon with emergent properties.
Second is the selection of specific analogies involving hidden political
and ideological elements. This may involve placing conclusions into
the premises and then proceeding to theories but presenting the
logic in reverse to appear ‘scientific’. Neoclassical economics in
borrowing analogies from mechanics assumes human behaviour is a
timeless reaction to information (e.g., prices) in an equilibrium
setting so that rational economic responses become automatic and
stabilising under conditions of perfect information. The mechanical
analogy blocks the understanding of human behaviour as complex,
fallible and operating under conditions of strong uncertainty.
Analogies are creative generalisations aiming to illustrate or
illuminate borrowing from other understandings in a different field of
knowledge. The danger is to apply analogies without attention to the
distorting effects which arise from lack of context and detail. Thus,
Kapp (1961: 56–60) argues that the greater the complexity and
qualitative differences between objects, the less room there is for
analogies. This implies borrowing from within the same general field
of study is likely to prove less problematic. So, the fact that
biophysical sciences, such as ecology, are qualitatively different from

the social sciences should alert us to the dangers of integration by
analogy.
In ecological economics there has been a tendency to borrow
directly and uncritically from ecology in terms of systems
understanding (e.g., sustainability, resilience, coevolution). For
example, a major analogical transfer has been based upon
understanding of forest ecosystems. This has built itself into a whole
movement around resilience and adaptive management. The original
idea was expressed by Holling (2009 [1986]) and his diagrammatic
exposition included the concept of creative destruction (later
dropped) with a reference to Marx and Schumpeter. Holling (2009
[1986]: 95) boldly put forth a table in which he claimed ‘possible
analogies between ecosystem function and functions or typologies
proposed for other systems’. Those other systems were economics,
technology, institutions and psychology. So, Holling moved his initial
concepts from ecology, created to understand forest ecosystems, to
claim the ability to explain an entire body of human and social
sciences. Since the original article, an organisation called the
‘Resilience Alliance’ has taken on the job of pursuing and promoting
such analogies in ever-expanding realms. That ecosystems have a
natural rhythm of change is used to imply the same cycles are
followed everywhere and so the same phases – exploitation, creative
destruction (now termed release), reorganisation and renewal – are
an explanation for everything from human psychology to society!
Yet, in something of a contradiction to the rather deterministic
prospects for society of this cyclical analogy, humans are expected to
manage and adapt, so implying these natural rhythms are perhaps
not so deterministic for human society after all.
Similarly, there has been a serious attempt to transfer analogies
from evolutionary biology. As noted in Chapter 6, Veblen (1898) and
Marshall (1916 [1890]) argued that economics should relate to
evolutionary and biological science, and Darwinian theory has been
seen as the appropriate analogy for economics. In more recent times
this has appeared in the form of coevolution being used to describe
human development (Goddard et al. 2019; Gowdy 1994; Kallis and
Norgaard 2010; Norgaard 1994a) and promoted as a foundational

idea for ecological economics (Munda 1997). Coevolution arose as a
term explaining the relationship between butterflies and plants
(Ehrlich and Raven 1964). It relates to the fitness of genetic traits
within each species being largely governed by the dominant traits in
the other. The term ‘fitness’ in the biological sciences refers to
surviving and reproducing, and so basically population size. The
biological theory is that ‘fit species’ survive, reproduce and become
more abundant. Norgaard (1984) has used the analogy to explain
the impacts of modern industrial agriculture on the environment and
the resulting lock-in of technology to chemical warfare on Nature
(now shifting to genetic warfare via bioengineering). The descriptive
analysis in this specific context is informative. Coevolution could be
taken as a modern version of Veblen’s cumulative causation,
borrowing from Darwinian theory (Veblen 1898: 378). Gowdy (1999)
has also offered insightful social ecological economic understanding
that uses the approach in a historical and anthropological context.
However, the idea is extended too far by Norgaard (1994a: 41) when
we are told that values and beliefs are merely matters of ‘fitness’
and cultural traits are much like genetic traits! Similarly problematic
is the direct analogical transfer of evolutionary theory as found in
the work of institutional economist Hodgson (2008).
Norgaard (1994a) and Hodgson (2008) spend much time
attacking the mechanistic physics analogy in neoclassical economics
before presenting their preferred biological/evolutionary alternative.
That many of their criticisms of the former, concerning inappropriate
imposition of natural science analysis on economic reality, would
apply equally to the latter seems to pass by their attention.
Underlying this failure appears to be an inconsistent commitment to
epistemology, with strong constructionism applied to economics
while holding naive objectivist positions when appealing to facts
from evolutionary biology. For example, at one point Hodgson (2008:
138) claims economic ‘facts themselves are structured by the
dominant theories’, and argues for a strategic replacement of
language and metaphors to overthrow the economic orthodoxy, not
a re-evaluation of economic concepts for a better correspondence
with social reality. Postmodernism has shown discourses are

important along with the sociology of science, but they do not
remove the social or material reality of economic structures under
study.
As noted earlier, Kapp recognised the need for learning based
upon the connections between the biological and social sciences.
However, it is a mistake to conclude that the integration of social knowledge
can be achieved by viewing man and culture in the perspective of
evolutionary time or by taking account of the findings of biology about the
human organism. What speaks against this simple formula is the fact that
[…] man and human society represent qualitatively different levels of
organisation.
(Kapp 1961: 124)
Critical realists would agree and relate this to the ontology of
hierarchical strata corresponding to different aspects of reality
(physical, chemical, biological, and social and economic). Thus, while
there may be some potential for learning from ecological analogies
when struggling with new conceptualisations, there is also much
danger when the analogies become dominant to the neglect of the
object of study, which is humanity in the economic and social strata.
For instance, the move towards evolutionary analogy runs the risk of
equating human behaviour to some selfish genetic determinism or
seeing human social systems as purely cyclical systems subject to
deterministic biophysical laws and nothing more. Where then is
human agency? Neither physics nor biology nor ecology will provide
an explanation of human society.
The presence in man of elements of consciousness, volition, and purpose,
and the human capacity to select alternative courses of action militate
against any indiscriminate transfer of concepts, propositions, and methods
of thought from the physical and biological disciplines to social analysis.
While such transfer may have succeeded in creating a semblance of
integration of our knowledge in the past, it nevertheless belongs to those
endeavours of reasoning by analogy which sooner or later leads to
‘reductionism’ and are bound to break down because of the manifold
qualitative differences between human society and organic and inorganic
nature.
(Kapp 1961: 124)

While here I have emphasised the problematic transference from
natural to social science, the reverse should also be recognised (see
Chapter 6), in particular the infiltration of ecology and conservation
biology by concepts from mainstream economics that do not match
their objects of study (Spash and Aslaksen 2015).
Unity of science
The unification of science by logic and methodology was promoted
by the left wing of the Vienna Circle in their search for a logical and
empirical approach to understanding the world (see Chapter 3). This
was pursued in two distinct but connected ways. One was an
analytical search for a pure language by which scientific knowledge
could be created free from metaphysics, pursued by Carnap. The
other was Neurath’s idea of a more broadly conceived meta-theory
of science that included history and sociology of science and actively
sought a place for social science in the unified approach (O’Neill and
Uebel 2004: 78–79). Neurath and Carnap edited The Encyclopedia of
Unified Science with Charles Morris. Borrowing from Creath (2011),
their respective positions can be summarised as follows. Carnap’s
call for unity of the language of science is most simply understood as
requiring that the various claims of the separate sciences should be
publicly testable in a common observation language. Neurath’s
position was to avoid a priori methodological divisions between
natural and social sciences, and also to connect the various sciences
so they could be used together to solve complex human and social
problems.
Clearly social ecological economics has a strong sympathy with
Neurath’s position in terms of unifying knowledge to address open
systems and social-ecological problems, and, while Carnap’s
abstractions appear less practically relevant, the aim for public
evidence of confirmability also seems desirable if subject to
limitation (see Chapter 3). Yet the project seems contradictory in
practice because Carnap was trying to reduce to a simple primary
source the logic of testable statements, while Neurath was aiming to
collect all the intricacies of natural and social-scientific language in a

large, multivolume encyclopaedia. In the end the encyclopaedia
became a somewhat loose collection of writings on the philosophy of
science, a diverse mix including work from Vienna Circle exiles
(fleeing Austro-fascism), American Pragmatist John Dewey and
Kuhn’s sociology of science.
In a postmodern era, the proposal for unity of science may seem
archaic. The preference is for inclusion of all perspectives on their
own 
terms 
without 
seeking 
comparability 
or 
coherence.
Inclusiveness, tolerance and pluralism are the watch words around
which a unified field is supposed to gather under a radical relativist
banner. That unity through eclectic pluralism is an oxymoron seems
of little concern to its advocates. Here some consideration should be
taken of the conflict and contradictions facing unifying attempts
among the political left and the degrowth movement. As was
explained in Chapter 4, under the critique of pluralism, the idea of
incommensurable variety goes against unity. Thus, ‘pluriversalism’
faces the contradiction of trying to create some community through
common understanding of social-ecological reality while claiming
incommensurable ontologies without any commonalities. In actual
fact the attempts by degrowth and pluriverse supporters to create
unity appear identical to those of Neurath’s International
Encyclopedia of Unified Science (Neurath 1937 [1983]), the only
difference being that they call their term-defining collections
‘vocabularies’ and ‘dictionaries’ (e.g., D’Alisa et al. 2014; Kothari et
al. 2019). The necessity of unifying communication overrides the
anything-goes rhetoric because in the end a language held in
common, with common conceptualisation and understanding, is
essential.
Interestingly, Kapp (1961: 60–64) criticised the Vienna Circle
project as being an impossibility on the basis of the sheer diversity
of language. He thought unification by logical and semantic analysis
would threaten a domineering super-science, which was not the aim
of the left wing of the Vienna Circle. Kapp also regarded that part of
the project which rejected metaphysics as divisive of knowledge,
despite sympathising with its rationale, namely to avoid building
systems of knowledge based upon speculative conceptualisation and

hidden ideologies. He makes the point that a range of a priori
knowledge is intuitive, while Western scientific knowledge is logical.
He felt that there should be room for both. In discussing these ideas,
he concludes that a form of supplemented and enlarged logical
empiricism could be a way forward, but this point is not explicitly
pursued further. For those unfamiliar with the divisions in logical
empiricism this may seem strange, but it makes more sense in terms
of realising that Kapp was relating his remarks to the left wing of the
Vienna Circle and in direct reference to Neurath and Carnap (see
Chapter 3). So, Kapp can be interpreted as appealing for a
preanalytic vision, an ontological (metaphysical) base, and then
proceeding with analytical reasoning and refining knowledge through
empirical research. That non-scientific/non-Western knowledge
might enter can also be seen as relating to Kapp’s argument for
participatory approaches in setting social minima and his
experiences living in China and India relating to the planning
processes there (Kapp 1959; 1965; 1974a; 1974b). More than this,
he is moving towards understanding scientific theories as
frameworks in which conceptualisation of reality is undertaken and
as such his ideas have something in common with seeking unity of
science.
More specifically, Neurath’s approach to the topic stands in
contrast to those, such as Carnap, promoting the possibility of a
totalising (objective) logical language of science based on their
reading of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus. Kapp seems primarily concerned
with this same position without accounting fully for Neurath’s critique
or variation. Neurath rejected the idea of there being ‘a true system
of statements’ applicable into the future, while maintaining
arguments for unity through physicalism (Neurath 1931 [1983]).
Kapp (1961: 63) was against a unifying science in terms of reducing
social science to either physical or biological sciences, and the
rejection of metaphysics, that Neurath advocated. Yet Kapp equates
Carnap and Neurath rather than differentiating their positions, and
he might have seen some similarities in the latter’s proposal to his
own concerns for communication across disciplines through
conceptual understanding. In criticising Carnap and discussing

protocol sentences, Neurath (1932 [1983]: 98) summarises his
position on unity of science as follows.
The work of the Vienna Circle is concentrating more and more on the task
of presenting unified science (sociology as well as chemistry, biology as well
as mechanics, psychology – preferably called behaviouristics – as well as
optics) in a unified language, and of creating the often neglected ‘cross-
connections’ between the individual sciences so that it is possible to relate
the terms of each science to the terms of every other science without effort.
The word ‘man’, which is connected with ‘making statements’ is to be
defined in the same way as the word ‘man’ that occurs in statements
containing words like ‘economic order’, ‘production’, etc.
As will be explored further below, Kapp’s common denominator
concepts have something of a shared concern and aim with this form
of unity. That is, both focus on the need for enhancing the ability to
communicate across disciplinary understandings using the same
words for the same object of study.
Multi-, trans- and interdisciplinarity
Disciplinarity is sometimes contested as being an unnecessary
barrier to research and understanding, creating imperialistic
tendencies and encouraging calls for a post-disciplinary world (e.g.,
Sayer 2000: 7). However, objects of study are also embedded within
specific ontological strata (e.g., physical, chemical, biological, social)
and a related stratified context (Collier 1994a: chapter 4). This
reality does imply the relevance of disciplinary specialisation.
Unfortunately, overspecialisation and a defensive silo mentality are
encouraged as means of product differentiation and competitive
advantage in a neoliberalised academic structure of fighting for
funding, ‘publish or perish’ and citations as a managerial metric of
performance. In this context, collaboration must be ‘productive’ and
that means measurable, while ideas are to be privatised and
marketed, not shared for the common good.
Claims of interdisciplinarity are common but mostly lack credibility.
Interdisciplinarity is something which requires specific skills and
training to achieve. The common approach to collaboration is to

combine a set of disciplinary representatives to work on a project
who proceed to talk past one another. This is more correctly termed
a multidisciplinary approach. Such multidisciplinarity never accepts
that different disciplines cannot be bound together in a report, and
in the literal sense this is correct, but unfortunately the report just
lacks any meaning beyond its separate disciplinary perspectives,
which may even contradict each other. As there is no real
interaction, there is no real potential for engagement, critical
reflection or indeed conflict, nor much hope of learning something
new. This is the standard approach for large international
environmental research reports such as those produced by the
United Nations on climate change or biodiversity.
In ecological economics a bridging or linking exercise between
ecological 
impact 
studies 
and 
unreconstituted 
neoclassical
environmental economics was promoted from the outset due to the
ease and popularity of linking unreconstituted mathematical models.
As noted earlier, this created a multidisciplinary ‘ecology and
economics’ conjunction, not a new integrated interdisciplinary
endeavour, and was strongly pursued in North America (Spash
1999). While much emphasis from the outset was placed on
ecological economics being transdisciplinarity – included in the
subtitle of the ISEE journal – in fact this has remained more of a
rhetorical and largely unrealised claim. What this actually means has
also been far from clear. Unfortunately, the term transdisciplinary too
often appears as an excuse for not engaging, in any detail, with the
theory or substance of disciplines claimed to be relevant. Thus,
studies that rather rhetorically employ the term should be
designated as, at best, ‘weak transdisciplinarity’. There have been
some attempts to rectify this situation, with varying success.
Max-Neef (2005) argues for a metaphysical philosophical basis for
the term and relates this to a hierarchical structure of disciplinary
knowledge and reality. His key concern is to challenge the
boundaries of knowledge set by modern Western thought and open
up the potential for ‘a logic capable of harmonizing reason with
intuition and feeling’. As noted, Kapp also thought non-Western and
intuitive knowledge had a place in creating understanding. However,

Max-Neef’s abstract reasoning about a metaphysical unity leaves few
straightforward messages in terms of how to reach such an
enlightened position. In contrast, his diagrammatic exposition offers
a complex pyramid of disciplinary interactions with highly
contestable premises. For current purposes of seeking integration, it
does not seem to offer much of any practical use.
The Germanic approach is more applied and combines
interdisciplinarity with lay public participation, as advocated by post-
normal science (Luks and Siebenhuner 2007). On this basis
transdisciplinarity is an extension of interdisciplinarity endeavour
which 
involves 
two-way 
knowledge 
communication 
and
conceptualisation in the context of wider society (beyond the
experts). Such a formulation constitutes what I term strong
transdisciplinarity. An issue arises: when is such an approach
required? For example, post-normal science invokes such an
approach to address strong uncertainty, in the context of science–
policy interactions, to correct perceived inadequacies of normal
science and calls upon a variety of participatory methods (van der
Sluijs 2017).
However, even when relating to this formulation problems can
arise. For example, Baumgärtner et al. (2008: 387) outline the lack
of precision and understanding relating to the term transdisciplinarity
before giving the following definition.
Transdisciplinarity means to reach out beyond science and to include
aspects of practical contexts and values or normative judgements
(sustainability, good practice), as well as to feed back results into practical
actions (politics, management).
This implies a fact–value dichotomy, where some ‘positivist’ science
exists outside of any normative value context. It also seeks an
emancipatory role for science but regards this as something beyond
science. In Chapter 5, such positions were rejected because the
social sciences engage in explanatory critique and the validity of
their knowledge claims requires that they be practically adequate.
The branding of ecological economics as a purely transdisciplinary
science would equate to a blanket requirement for public

engagement regardless of context. Interdisciplinary research with
the option of applying specific methods (such as public
participation), as appropriate to understanding the object of study
and addressing the research question, would appear a more
justifiable and meaningful approach. This would help avoid the loose
and contentious claims falling under transdisciplinarity. Strong
transdisciplinarity requires interdisciplinary knowledge integration,
which is epistemically prior and more foundational.
Thus, we are left with interdisciplinary endeavour as the core
means of integration, regardless of whether the additional move is
made to transdisciplinary participation and engagement with wider
society. Interdisciplinarity requires engaging with different disciplines
at a sufficient level to gain insight and understanding of the potential
interconnections, differing perspectives and potential for synthesis or
transformation of understanding. Under critical realism the
methodology would emphasise the need to identify relevant strata
relating to a specific research question or object of study. This would
signify the necessary disciplinary knowledge required and other
potentially relevant sources of information. The challenge is to
determine where in a group of strata an object belongs (Sayer 2010:
120). Typically, the strata closest to a phenomena will be the most
relevant due to the proximity of the causal mechanisms enabling or
preventing the actualisation of events. However, as social ecological
economics signifies, we may quickly move from the economic to
social to ecological concerns and structures (e.g., an economy’s
social metabolism).
Interdisciplinary research may be undertaken by a group where
disciplinary interactions and explanations on an object of study or
problem lead to a new combined perspective or understanding. At
an individual level this might be simply training in one discipline and
then another, but with the proviso of integrating that combined
knowledge. As Kapp (1961: 51) noted, this can result in clarifying
boundaries and revealing limits to integration and realising the
potential for no connection being possible, e.g., due to different
levels of abstraction in concepts and/or different epistemologies.
Potential for serious revision of former positions and beliefs on

behalf of the researcher must be accepted and openly embraced.
Integration of social inquiry requires adopting an integrative frame of
mind and the impact on individual psychology may relate to some of
what Max-Neef discusses at a more abstract level. The challenge of
serious interdisciplinary research is certainly, and foremost, a
personal one.
Despite describing the potential of interdisciplinarity in positive
terms, Kapp was sceptical of how it would operate in practice.
Actually, there is no real question over the need for an
interdisciplinary approach, but rather the problem is how to make it
effective and operational in achieving integration.
The objective of integration is not the awareness of common problems nor
the accumulation of knowledge from various related disciplines but rather
the establishment of relationships between the different parts of social
knowledge which can be meaningfully and systematically related.
The requirement is for means to aid the process. This is where Kapp
proposed the importance of integration via conceptualisation.
Common-denominator concepts
Kapp’s integrative proposal
Kapp is a realist with sympathies for logical empiricism while
recognising the need for the avoidance of reductionism, the critical
examination of experience and the role of historical analysis. He also
accepts the role of metaphysics, and his book gives an explicit
ontological exposition. In that regard he accepts both ontological
hierarchy and structure in reality. He succinctly summarised his
conclusion.
The central thesis which will finally emerge from the following discussion
can be stated in relatively simple terms: Inorganic matter, living organisms,
and human society, while intrinsically linked with each other, must
nevertheless be regarded as essentially different and special levels of
organization.
(Kapp 1961: 75)

This fits well with social ecological economic understanding of reality,
where the physical is ordered prior to the biological, which is prior to
the social. The economic is co-emergent with the social, where
economics is understood as concerned with social provisioning to
meet needs. Each level or stratum is dependent upon those
preceding it, and this also matches with the stratified ontology of
critical realism. Thus, we cannot have a society or economy without
a functioning biophysical system (a simple fact still absent from all
economics except ecological economics). Each of the three levels of
organisation specified by Kapp are connected and interrelated but,
simultaneously, unique structures due to their complexities and
qualitative differences. He is at pains to make clear, as has been
noted, that social reality exhibits special characteristics making it
distinct and irreducible to the natural sciences (by analogy or
otherwise). The aim of his study is to offer an approach to match the
fundamental interrelatedness of all elements of social reality with an
integrated framework for analysis.
In order to achieve this, he proposes ‘integrating concepts’ to help
develop a common conceptual framework which explains meaningful
and systemic relationships. Scientific knowledge is described as a
system of hypotheses and theories formulated in terms of concepts.
The conceptual framework must be open, flexible and constantly re-
examined in light of new empirical data (Kapp 1961: 139). Concepts
are to have a precise meaning but, rather than being descriptions,
are referred to as representations that symbolise common
characteristics of phenomena grouped as a class (i.e., type or
images of reality). This representative realism was criticised in
Chapter 4, where we saw that it collapses into a correspondence
theory and is replaced by the central requirement that we look to
reality for confirmation of truth, which was linked to practical
adequacy. This actually seems to be what is meant, with Kapp
(1961: 126) stating the following.
The intellectual images we call integrating conceptual constructs are based
upon a critical examination of experience. They are derived from inferences
drawn from experience and critically observed reality.

Examples given from the natural sciences are temperature, matter,
energy and life. Narrower concepts on the same level are to be
expressed in terms of wider concepts and logical frameworks (e.g.,
as hot and cold are combined in temperature). Examples of
fundamental integrative concepts in the social sciences include social
context, social structure, social process, social causality, social law,
social reality, social action, and time and space (Kapp 1961: 208).
These and other aspects for study need to be brought together to
achieve 
integration 
and 
this 
requires 
‘common-denominator
concepts’ in terms of which we can express what might otherwise
appear to be incommensurable concepts of different disciplines,
objects of study and cultures. Kapp appeals to a process (moving
from facts, to interrelationships, to phenomena, to theories, to
comprehensive rules) for the refinement of understanding leading to
a summation of explanation under general laws or regularities.
From a critical realist perspective this approach is of interest but
needs some updating from its logical empiricist epistemology. The
potential for drawing inferences in Kapp (as in the last quote) is
empiricist, relying on induction, and can be expanded to include
deduction and abduction (see Danermark et al. 2019: chapter 5).
Conceptualisation is a central concern but is never neatly divided
from our theoretical understanding. That is why observation is
regarded as theory-laden. However, that does not mean observation
is theory-determined, because otherwise we would be unable to
learn from our empirical and practical experiences. So, the process
of conceptual refinement, adjustment, revision or change is iterative
and not as linear as Kapp suggests. The goal of explanation is also
rather different when informed by critical realism and would neither
aim to find traditional general laws nor focus on (Humean) event
regularities. Instead, depth ontology emphasises the importance of
underlying structure for explanation and the need to identify causal
mechanisms. Rather than general laws, there are only law-like
conditions where mechanisms operate to cause or counter the
occurrence of events. With these adjustments in mind, we can
return to Kapp’s proposal.

For the integration of social inquiry, the common-denominator
concepts need to be general enough to cover several disciplines.
They should also avoid ethnocentricity. The integrating conceptual
framework should cover the structural character of human society
and relate to the dynamic interaction of parts and whole and their
transformative relationships. The central aim is to force thinking in
terms of functional interdependencies. At the same time, openness
to new evidence and new knowledge is emphasised. In addition,
Kapp clearly wishes to avoid ideological bias in referring to the need
for researchers to make clear their values and social philosophy. As
in Schumpeter’s (1994 [1954]: 41–47) preanalytic vision, ideological
bias is inevitable but the hope is that analytical process free from
ideology can be conducted to refine knowledge. In Chapter 5, the
argument was made that ideology is ever-present, acts as a
motivator for scientific research but need not be a ‘bias’, as in the
traditional account, yet should be made explicit.
Unfortunately, disciplines tend to monopolise concepts; economics
deals with wealth, political science with power, anthropology with
culture, sociology with society (Preiswerk and Ullmann 1985: xvii).
Kapp wishes for us to break through these disciplinary barriers and
proposes two overarching conceptual frames. The first he calls ‘man’
with reference to individual human psychology (e.g., motivation,
volition). The term man is used as shorthand for mankind, human,
human nature and so on, but now appears gender-biased; still, this
dated aspect should not distract from the content of his argument.
The second conceptual framework is ‘culture’, to cover the social-
institutional aspects. Kapp was aware of, and warned against, the
danger of reducing this to a dichotomy of the individual and society
(or, say, actor-structure) and emphasised the reality of interaction
and fusion between the two. In recommending research on human
nature and culture, Kapp warns against generalising from
experimental research and prefers contextual study, but also rejects
cultural relativism. He explains in detail the importance of culture in
human development but accepts the ability to generalise as to
human nature, motivation and psychology. The aim here is for

overarching integrative understanding cutting across traditional
disciplines.
Kapp believed the new focus on human nature and sociocultural
frameworks of knowledge would have far-reaching effects on
research in the social sciences. In particular, he explained this in
terms of four aspects: (i) orientation towards social context; (ii)
preoccupation with social structure, social dynamics and cumulative
causation; (iii) acceptance of social indeterminacy and incomplete
predictability; (iv) the importance of real types and substantive
analysis. In discussing these aspects, he raised issues such as non-
linearity, emergent properties, total systems analysis and uncertainty
in knowledge formation. He is against formalism and for empirical
testing and the role of critique. He criticises the focus on the logical
implications of means-ends relationships and rational choice.3
Instead he recommends dealing with actual problems of human
behaviour, human needs and social processes (Kapp 1961: 198).
That is, the focus of our effort should be on the problem of human
interaction with and dependence upon both natural and cultural
structures.
In rejecting a narrow disciplinary approach, the idea of
specialisation is not dismissed. Instead, a problem focus is
recommended in which different specialisation can be brought
together as needed by the specific nature of the problem being
addressed. He regards the most progressive disciplines investigating
social structures and institutional interdependences as being cultural
anthropology, social psychology and perhaps sociology (Kapp 1961:
202). Yet he recommends that the social scientist, who has decided
to specialise in a particular problem area, should ignore all traditional
boundaries and master the ideas and methods that happen to be
most relevant (Kapp 1961: 206). Such an interdisciplinary and
integrative approach clearly requires a change in the training of
individuals and taking specialisation in integrative studies far more
seriously than is evident today. There is also likely to be strong
resistance from traditional disciplines and Kapp (1961) recognised
the potential for ongoing academic imperialism. Bringing such

interdisciplinary work together in a meaningful, and not eclectic, way
also requires some firm philosophical foundations for conducting
science.
Two examples: Incommensurable values and social provisioning
The gap that Kapp identified is part of how to implement and
practise collaborative scientific research. His proposal for common-
denominator concepts holds considerable potential, going beyond his
own approach to seek greater unity of science. How this might work
is briefly exemplified here using two examples from my own
research on environmental values and social provisioning.
When conducting research into environmental values I explored
both theoretical issues and a range of methods. Among the latter
was contingent valuation, which involves interviewing individuals to
obtain stated monetary values typically expressed as a maximum
willingness-to-pay to prevent environmental loss or obtain a gain. I
will not go into the many problems facing such an approach (Spash
2008b), but highlight one aspect. My early work on climate change
damages, ecosystem valuation and biodiversity loss explored refusals
to answer the payment questions as economists expected. This work
revealed that people’s expressed concern for the environment could
not be translated into the mainstream economic framing. The only
theoretical possibility for understanding their responses within that
theory was via lexicographic preferences (Spash 2000a; Spash and
Hanley 1995). Refusals to make trade-offs in mainstream economics
are considered irrational and treated as anomalies.
However, once this behaviour is recognised as rational and
ethically motivated it requires better explanation. Exploring across
different disciplines reveals human rejection of trading and
commensuration of values as a common occurrence. The same
behaviour can be identified across disciplines but expressed as
seemingly alternative concepts. Table 7.1 summarises some of the
terms used by different disciplines. Bringing together these different
ways of trying to understand the same phenomenon exemplifies
what is meant here by unity of science and what is necessary for

interdisciplinary understanding. Kapp’s ideal is that a common-
denominator concept would provide integration. What remains
central is that common denominators relate to the object of study
and aim to provide a descriptively accurate explanation of its
structure and qualities. Neurath was advocating giving common
meaning to an existing term, but here we are looking for a term to
be given to meanings already held in common. Achieving a common
term may prove difficult due to the combined aspect of sense-
making and reference involved, because words are selected in
relation to the disciplinary context of their objects of study. At the
same time the commonalities do need to be recognised and
interdisciplinarity cannot proceed in the absence of common
understanding, and indeed neither can communication.
Table 7.1  Different concepts of refusal to make trade-offs
Concept
Discipline
Lexicographic preferences
Economics
Sacred value
Theology
Deep values
Ecology
Intrinsic value
Philosophy
Protected values
Psychology
Taboos
Anthropology
Inviolable rights
Law
Another example is social provisioning. This concept was
highlighted in Chapter 6 and noted in Chapter 2 to be a potentially
unifying one for heterodox economists (Lee 2009; 2012). Here there
is already a concept with a name held in common. Indeed, it has
appeared across a range of heterodox schools. Gruchy (1987)
defined institutional economics as the science of social provisioning,
and one that studies the changing dynamic economic processes
taking place within a given cultural context (Dugger 1996). Among
feminist economists the approach has been seen as a potential
foundation (Nelson et al. 1993; Power 2004). Social provisioning has
been connected to Post Keynesian public-sector finance (Todorova

2013). Ecological economists have also begun to incorporate it into
their understanding for meeting needs (Spash and Guisan 2021;
Vogel et al. 2021). Among other heterodox economists, Morgan
(2021a) has defined economics as ‘the study of social provisioning or
the different ways in which psychological, social and material well-
being are and can be achieved through an economy’. In this case the
challenge is to achieve a common definition of the term across these
various uses, and one that includes the content across these
economic schools.
Conclusions
This chapter has reviewed several aspects of how integration occurs
or is prevented through epistemological practice. Dialectic, as
understood in the work of Georgescu-Roegen, raises the need to
integrate qualitative understanding and argues that arithmomorphic
models only have meaning as similes and if they are related to
dialectical concepts. The widespread dominance of quantification, or
arithmomania, means excluding any potential for integration of
qualitative knowledge. Reasoning by metaphor and analogy is
prevalent and especially for exploration of new areas of knowledge.
Analogy can aid scientific integration but may lead us astray if the
qualities 
of 
the 
primary 
object 
of 
study 
are 
forgotten.
Interdisciplinarity is an essential requirement for combining
knowledge about different strata and working across disciplines but
requires 
a 
methodology 
for 
it 
to 
be 
put 
into 
practice.
Transdisciplinarity can build on this to bring in knowledge – that may
complement, contrast, or conflict – from lay public and traditional
sources such as Indigenous knowledge and practice.
Both the extremes of naive objectivism with its foundational
empiricist truth and radical relativism with its ineffectual eclecticism
have presented a long-running denial of the potential for
reconciliation of difference between bodies of knowledge – the
extremes of one truth or infinite opinions, neither of which allows for

resolution of inter-theory difference. The central inadequacy across
the two positions, highlighted by Sayer (2010), is to never address
how true integration and progress can be achieved or why it might
fail. Once such denialism is put aside, the possibilities for integration
seem strong and not least because of the neglect it has received. At
the same time, not everything can be integrated or unified and
incompatibilities will clearly exist, and some theories will be
incommensurable.
Disciplines that deny specific phenomena, or their relevance, will
be incompatible with those that accept the existence of the same
phenomena and place them as of central importance. For example,
major divergences between orthodox mainstream economics and
social ecological economics were outlined early on in this book. Their
ontologies and epistemologies diverge to the extent that integration
appears infeasible, and attempts to integrate a diversion from
scientific progress in economic understanding and a basic waste of
time. While even here there may be potential for some conceptual
comparison (e.g., refusals to trade as lexicographic preferences), this
is highly restricted by arithmomorphism. Most fundamentally,
dialectical concepts cannot be made into arithmomorphic concepts,
and neither can qualities. Integration, even at the conceptual level,
has its limits. What should be remembered is that integration is not
an end in itself, but rather serves to create better understanding of
reality. Indeed, this is why social provisioning provides great
potential for unifying heterodox economics in general and ecological
economics in particular.
Notes
 1
Collier (2004: 140) notes that the idea of a universal dialectic, as a feature
of everything, is absent from Marx’s writing but is present in Hegel and intr
oduced into Marxism by Engels and was adopted by the USSR as political p
hilosophical dogma.
 2
On Georgescu-Roegen’s flow-fund model, see Giampietro (2019).

 3
A means-ends framing is something that has been prevalent in economics s
ince Robbins (1932) but also appears in ecological economics (e.g., Daly 19
73; Daly and Farley 2011).

8
Clarifying division and seeking unity
Introduction
If growth in scale is success, then ecological economics appears to
have been successful. The ISEE has spread regional branches
globally. The journal Ecological Economics has a high citations
ranking, around the top 5 per cent in the field of economics, and
over its thirty-year history has moved from publishing nineteen
research papers in the first year (1989), and seventy-six when
moving to twelve issues (1995), to peaking at 387 articles in 2018
and stabilising in recent years at around 300 articles.1 Some of the
founders gained a second life, while others have risen from relative
obscurity to international renown. As noted in Chapter 1, ISEE
member Elinor Ostrom received the Sveriges Riksbank Prize, and
other winners have interacted to varying degrees (e.g., Sen, Solow,
Stiglitz, Arrow). Establishment credibility and expansion has seen
inclusion of all sorts of academics and researchers. So, given this
diversity, what does it mean to be an ecological economist, what
unifies this collective and where does its contribution and purpose
lie?
Some thirty years after its modern incarnation, ecological
economics reached a parallel with the concerns expressed by Arne
Naess for ecology in the early 1970s. Borrowing from Naess, the
position can be stated as follows.

The emergence of ecological economists from their former relative obscurity
marks a turning-point in our scientific communities. However, their message
is twisted and misused.
These are the words of Naess (2009 [1973]: 95) with the
replacement of ‘ecologists’ by ‘ecological economists’. The simple
point here is that a shallow but presently rather powerful collective,
and a deep but less influential collective, compete for our attention.
The depth being alluded to is more than some academic career path
to ‘success’; it involves a personal engagement in the meaning of
life. For Naess (2009 [1973]), deep ecology recognised that being a
field ecologist makes a person aware of various aspects of and
values in Nature.
If we are alert to the autonomous life forms around us, then their
potential for flourishing is evident. Science can make us aware of
independent needs of entities and help identify those mechanisms
that prevent or help achieve their fulfilment. As individuals and social
collectives, humans have volitional powers to remove, limit or enable
mechanisms to allow for needs to be met, humans to lead
meaningful lives and non-humans to flourish. Our ethics guide us as
to the constituency of morally considerable ‘others’ whom we must
then take into account and on what basis we should do so. Scientific
investigation 
that 
identifies 
mechanisms 
preventing 
morally
considerable entities from meeting their ethically legitimate needs
involves a moral commitment for their removal. There is depth here
in both ontology and value commitments.
Faber (2008) describes how taking ecological economics seriously
requires an attentiveness which raises awareness of, and the ability
to understand, key concepts and values. As he states:
we need the ability to experience unfiltered what we see, feel, smell, hear
and taste in nature. […] For only if we are attentive to the dimensions of
real life can we make sure that our choice of scientific lens for observing the
world does not altogether obscure our true problem of caring for nature and
justice.
This is an appeal to our basic understandings of the real world as
both empirical and moral. There is an implicit ethic of Christian

stewardship in Faber’s position. An aspect of Christian ethical belief
is also evident when Daly and Farley (2011: 43) assert the need for
ecological economists to adopt ‘a dogmatic belief in objective value,
an objective hierarchy of ends ordered with reference to some
concept of ultimate end’, invoking God and citing the Christian
apologist C. S. Lewis. Daly’s faith-based positions could prove highly
problematic, as when he misrepresented Darwinism and advocated
creationism (Gowdy 2023; Holland 2002). Kapp (1961) warned of
adopting mythological, religious or secular worldviews a priori as a
means of integration and rationalisation of preconceived unity into
dogma. In fact, Faber’s point can be taken as more general and
independent of any religious belief system, and as involving the idea
of an emancipatory science and rational ethics (not blind faith).
Indeed, despite potential similarities, deep ecological economics is
a rather separate undertaking from deep ecology exactly because of
its independence from mystical and spiritual overtones. We can still
take seriously and address the deep philosophical concerns raised by
Naess. The same concerns about human alienation from and
domination over Nature as built into modern patriarchal society are
raised by eco-feminists and environmental ethicists, among others.
There seems much psychological and philosophical relevance to
arguments in deep ecology (e.g., Fox 1985), which does not
necessitate a spiritual or mystical viewpoint, but does not exclude
one. For example, eco-feminists might share similar concerns over
the human connection to Nature, but on the basis of emphasising
the importance of (non-mystical) relationships and emotions
(McShane 2007a; 2007b). The theory and practice of ethical conduct
can be sought through addressing the content and meaning of
environmental values and human relationships with Nature based on
scientific understanding and rational argument. As discussed in
Chapter 5, scientific research informs, but does not determine,
political and economic action. It provides a means for realising the
implications of (in)action but the need for ethical judgement
remains. This forms an aspect of why social ecological economics is
distinct from other approaches.

Of course, a simplifying temptation is to follow Naess in drawing a
dichotomy between deep and shallow ecological economists.
However, as argued from Chapter 3 onwards, the qualitative
dimensions of reality are essential to its understanding, and this
engages us in dialectical concepts rather than arithmomorphic
dichotomies. Ecological economics has also become a complex
collective populated by a variety of contributors and affiliates. In this
chapter, the aim is to set out the theoretical and ideological
landscape in order to facilitate identification of what constitutes the
broad collective of those who associate themselves by name,
research and publication with being part of ecological economics.
This requires not being afraid of pointing out where substantive
divisions and inconsistencies lie.
In the next section, three main positions on research are
described as constituting ecological economics: new environmental
pragmatism, new resource economics and social ecological
economics. Four crossover positions, between the three main ones,
capture a fuller picture of argumentation about direction and
meaning and will be explored. Their occurrence within the
community is not predetermined and, as in any dialectical
conceptualisation, they may appear more or less empirically
important, but not theoretically so (e.g., the frequency of grey may
be higher than black or white, but they remain relevant to defining
grey!). I then consider the implications of these seven categories for
unity and division within ecological economics.
The theoretical landscape described is based on extensive
personal experience covering forty years’ engagement in reading,
writing and researching on economics and the environment. The
classification offered is descriptive, not prescriptive, but if the
description is accurate, then it has implications for ecological
economics as a scientific practice. It is a work engaging in
conceptualisation of a field of knowledge combining the dynamics of
interaction between sense-making and reference. After some years
of refinement, the map seems accurate enough to navigate the
territory, but I will also address some critiques that have been put
forward. The extent to which that landscape has in the past been

populated in different areas (i.e., the seven positions) is an empirical
question (see, e.g., Spash and Ryan 2012). Its future population is
something that this book hopes to influence!
Seven approaches to research in ecological
economics
In earlier chapters the argument has been made for the rejection of
unstructured and uncritical methodological pluralism and of
mainstream economics. The development of ecological economics
has been shown to be hindered, not encouraged, by the price and
value theory of neoclassical microeconomics, macroeconomic growth
as development, and the orthodoxy’s formalist prescriptive
methodology and arithmomorphism. Some associating themselves
with ecological economics, at least via publication in the journal, are
seemingly content to use orthodox mainstream economics in a
totally uncritical fashion and see no need for the creation of a new
paradigm or school of thought. They may make moderate, or
marginal, changes, and so qualify as orthodox dissenters (see
Chapter 2), but basically adopt the central tenets of mainstream
theory and ideology; this paradigmatically informed grouping create
what I will term ‘new resource economics’. It is new because of the
way it adopts some aspects of critique (especially from physics and
ecology), 
but 
then 
formalises 
these 
within 
neoclassical
arithmomorphic concepts and models that promote optimal resource
allocation via price-making markets. In contrast, those rejecting this
route and calling for a radically new theoretical foundation for
economics I refer to as the paradigmatic collective creating social
ecological economics (Spash 2011). It is not new because the
philosophy and ideology has grown from the roots of ecological
economic thought going back in history (see Chapter 1). A third
group reject what they might term ‘theoretical pretensions’ of either
sort and are happy to take a totally ‘ends justify the means’
approach to ‘solve’ environmental problems. They reject theory as

obstructing practical approaches, and believe appealing to people
requires using the right language and concepts, for example, those
of the mythical ‘decision-makers’. For this looser position I will use
the term ‘new environmental pragmatism’ (Spash 2009b), which is
termed new to disambiguate it from the philosophical school of
American Pragmatism.2 New resource economics and social
ecological 
economics 
are 
conflicting 
paradigmatic 
positions
representing orthodoxy versus heterodoxy respectively. New
environmental pragmatism is a non-paradigmatic position and as
such lacks a core theory and constitutive academic body of thought.
It is more of a political strategy and as such can be expected to be
associated with either of the paradigmatic positions or held
independently of them.
In what follows I will outline key features of each of these
perspectives in terms of their philosophical and ideological
characteristics and offer examples of work and ideas which fall
within each of the categories. Figure 8.1 provides a summary
graphic as a reference guide which builds upon the preceding
chapters of this book. As such, it incorporates and substantially
extends my previous published work on the topic.

Figure 8.1  Seven positions on research in ecological economics

New environmental pragmatism
Let 
us 
start 
with 
the 
non-paradigmatic 
position 
involving
pragmatism. In common usage the word pragmatism refers to
dealing with things in a way that is based upon practical as opposed
to theoretical considerations, as if the two could be separated. It
may emphasise what is most expedient, downplaying process and
dismissing counter-arguments by classifying them as too theoretical,
abstract, idealist, romantic, utopian and so on. In rhetorical terms,
not being pragmatic is regarded as being impractical, which is a
derogatory classification implying that a person or their ideas should
be dismissed, without consideration, as politically unrealistic, bad or
even stupid. Pragmatic action is justified by appealing to the claim
that doing something is potentially practically useful in achieving a
goal within a given context, that is, it is instrumentally useful.
New environmental pragmatism is the term I use to designate the
use of methods and concepts on the basis that they will be an
effective means of communication to achieve given ends regardless
of any scientific consideration or critical reflection. This often
involves means assumed to be convincing for powerful political
players, economic organisations and institutions, but can also relate
to means for persuading other target groups or the general public.
Thus, some ecological economists may use neoclassical models
purely as means of persuasion, that is, rhetorically. As discussed in
Chapter 1, delimiting the discussion of environmentalism has been
part of the orthodox economic approach. This economic imperialism
is now connected with financiers, bankers and corporate interests.
Pragmatism on the economic and finance side means paying little or
no attention to ecological or natural sciences. At the same time
pragmatism from ecologists and conservation biologists has seen
them adopt economic concepts without concern for economic theory.
Strategically, within certain groups of environmentalists and
ecological economists, this has perhaps most commonly involved
recommending monetary valuation and supporting a neoliberal
market 
approach 
to 
environmental 
policy, 
leading 
to 
the
financialisation of Nature (Hache 2020; Spash 2008e; 2015a;

2020a). This may be endorsed with reluctance or motivated by pro-
capitalist ideology, which is especially strong among academics and
environmental activists from North America, even those critical of
capital-accumulating economic growth. The pragmatic justifications
for a price-making market capitalist approach include the claims that
this is necessary to be effective politically, the only realistic
alternative or the way to produce the best outcomes (Smith 2017;
Spash 2008e).
A prime example is the major international initiative to establish a
dominant monetary value discourse under the title of The Economics
of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB), with the central aim of
‘mainstreaming the economics of Nature’ (TEEB 2010). The TEEB
project initially included many ecological economists as contributors
to the foundational report (Kumar 2010).3 Those involved hold
diverse theoretical positions including ones in conflict with the basic
tenets of TEEB, as a political project of neoliberalism. Some appear
more committed than others to the ongoing project, such as the
former ISEE president Peter May, who remains on the advisory
board. The TEEB (2010) project was for long headed by Pavan
Sukhdev, formerly a managing director in the Global Markets division
at Deutsche Bank, who prefaced the first interim report with his
personal arithmomorphic philosophy of ‘you cannot manage what
you cannot measure’ (TEEB 2008: 6). The ongoing project proposes
monetary valuation of all aspects of ecosystems as service providers,
using benefit transfer and reducing intergenerational ethics to a
variable discount rate (TEEB 2008: 33–36). The expressed purpose
of TEEB is to incorporate the values of Nature into decision-making
at all levels using market pricing (TEEB 2010: 3, 14).
Monetisation of ecosystems claims to talk the language of
politicians and show them the benefits of a ‘green’-growth economy:
‘investment in natural capital can create and safeguard jobs and
underpin economic development, as well as secure untapped
economic opportunities from natural processes and genetic
resources’ (TEEB 2010: 10). Sullivan (2012: 9) states the following.

Monetisation here is the process whereby something can be converted into
money, and thus behave as a commodity that can be exchanged for a
monetary payment. A key strategy [in promoting monetisation] is the recent
discursive shift towards the use of language that brings ecology into the
domains of economics and accountancy.
A core pragmatic concern here for ecologists has been ‘getting the
language right’. As ecologist ten Brink (2006: 4), who provided
biophysical 
data 
for 
TEEB, 
states: 
‘While 
economists 
and
policymakers speak the same language, ecological scientists appear
to be in a different world, governed by different rules.’ The first TEEB
synthesis report states the intention of:
creating a common language for policymakers, business and society
that enables the real value of natural capital, and the flows of services it
provides, to become visible and be mainstreamed in decision making.
(TEEB 2010: 24)
Terms like ‘true prices’ and ‘real value’ are commonly invoked in such
literature without any meaning; they are purely rhetorical, not
scientific. Similarly, a major move towards ‘getting the language
right’ was the introduction of ‘ecosystem services’ to replace the
scientifically established ecological concepts of ecosystems structure
and function.
Following the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005), the term
became widespread and increasingly gained influence as a central
policy metaphor, and then became a strong analogical concept. This
framing was used to create a taxonomy, converting Nature into
distinct categories (including cultural and spiritual services) despite
the recognition that such ‘classification is inherently somewhat
arbitrary’ (Brauman et al. 2007: 69). The creation of this ecosystem
services taxonomy prepared the ground for shifting to monetary
valuation. For example, in discussing the research needs of the
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, Carpenter et al. (2006: 258)
claim: ‘Valuation translates ecosystem services into terms that
decision-makers and the general public can readily understand’, and
reference support for this from a report led by neoclassical
environmental economists (Heal et al. 2005).

In the USA the ecosystems services approach had already been
promoted, prior to the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, by
Stanford University ecologists Paul Ehrlich and his student Gretchen
Daily in collaboration with other ecologists (e.g., Folke, Jansson,
Walker) and orthodox mainstream economists such as Arrow, Mäler
and Dasgupta (see Daily et al. 2000, where all authors claim
affiliation with the Beijer Institute). Daily cofounded and codirected
Stanford University’s flagship ‘natural capital’ project with ecologist
Peter Kareiva.4 Another founder was Taylor Ricketts, PhD Stanford
University in biological sciences, who took over the Vermont-based
Gund Institute for Ecological Economics in 2011, replacing Costanza.
What becomes evident is the role of non-economists, especially
ecologists and biologists, associated with ecological economics, who
have promoted theoretically unsound monetary valuation, borrowing
mainstream economic concepts and methods, but basically ignoring
their limits (e.g., Balmford et al. 2002; Costanza et al. 1997b; Daily
1997; Daily and Ellison 2002; Walker and Pearson 2007).
Norton and Noonan (2007) note the failure of ecological
economics to pursue its original promise of seeking new ways to
conceptualise and take into account the impacts of economic and
policy decisions on ecological systems and processes. They
specifically cite the ecosystem valuation publications by Costanza et
al. (1997b) and Daily (1997) and note how measuring economic
impacts ‘by whatever means available’ had become accepted
practice. What the natural-science-trained individuals adopting new
environmental pragmatism actually contribute towards is not
conservation or protection of Nature, but making ecosystems into
capital investments, or financial commodities, with an expected rate
of monetary return.
This is consistent with the ecosystem services approach defining
an entity as having value only insofar as it has a productive, service-
providing, role to play in the economy. The result has been the
adoption of an exclusively instrumental value discourse. The value of
Nature becomes the services it can provide the economy as a
productive employee. For example, the ‘total economic value’ of

agricultural pollination by wild insects is estimated at about €150
billion (Gallai et al. 2009). New environmental pragmatism involves
the belief that such numbers will convince policymakers to protect
species like wild bees, but they should reflect upon the history of
economic ornithology (Kronenberg 2014; Vianna Franco and
Missemer 2023). In a forty-year period (1880–1920), over 1,000
studies calculated the value of services provided by birds, but this
failed to prevent the replacement of their services (and so loss of
reasons to protect birds) due to new human technology, namely
insecticides and pesticides (Kronenberg 2014). Birds valued for their
role in eating insects, weeds and small mammals that might damage
crops were only of instrumental use as long as there was not a
cheaper means of doing the same job. Clearly, valuing the services
of birds or bees is not equivalent to valuing birds and bees
themselves, or recognising the moral implications of their ability to
flourish (see Chapter 6).
Pragmatically 
driven 
supporters 
may 
themselves 
have
considerable doubts about this approach. For example, Sodhi and
Ehrlich (2010: 4) claim that most ecologists have switched to the
‘admittedly risky instrumental arguments for conservation’ and
recognise the dangers of ‘promoting instrumental approaches that
might backfire or be effective in only the short or middle term’.
Indeed, focusing on value instrumental for human utility is a ‘tactical
issue’, not related to its value position as a consequentialist ethical
theory. Those employing such pragmatic arguments may also be
aware that the numbers they are helping to create lack scientific
credibility and meaning, as noted by Norton and Noonan (2007).
However, that is also not the point. If their environmental concerns
get a new voice in the political arena then that is justification
enough. Valuation then becomes a language convention adopted for
its supposed usefulness and applicable whenever the opportunity
arises.
Under conventionalism a collective or group is taken to
authoritatively decide what is best. Knowledge and truth regarded as
matters of convention can be changed at the collective will and
become whatever a group cares to make them. Valuation need have

no scientific validity. The failure of conventionalism is that the
practices a group adopts do have real consequences and are not just
wishful thinking. Hoping that large monetary numbers will save the
birds and the bees from capitalism may be well-meaning but is
totally naive. What was valued in its own right, requiring regulated
protection, becomes instrumental for providing businesses with
profits.
This has become increasingly evident with the spread of new
environmental pragmatism to environmental NGOs. For example, the
recent Dasgupta Review proposes an orthodox mainstream capital
approach and neoclassical monetary valuation of biodiversity
(Dasgupta 2021). Despite being seriously flawed, this was welcomed
by the World Wildlife Fund as promoting ‘large-scale investments in
Nature-based solutions’, which is simply code for offsetting and
trading in biodiversity destruction (Friends of the Earth 2021).
Similarly, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds referred to
Dasgupta’s report as providing an ‘excellent conceptual framework’,
‘ground breaking’ and justifying Nature protection to achieve ‘broad-
based sustainable growth’ (see Spash and Hache 2022).
Thus, new environmental pragmatism plays directly to corporate
interests via ENGOs. Here The Nature Conservancy (TNC), with
revenues of US$1.3 billion, provides a prime example. Its president
and CEO until 2019 was Mark Tercek, previously a managing director
at Goldman Sachs. Tercek worked with TNC vice-president ecologist
Peter Kareiva, mentioned above in relation to Stanford’s natural
capital project. Together they promoted capitalism as natural.
Kareiva advocated widespread use of biodiversity offsets, which he
referred to as ‘development by design, done with the importance of
nature to thriving economies foremost in mind’ (Kareiva et al. 2012).
Traditional conservation became the enemy of the poor: ‘In the
developing world, efforts to constrain growth and protect forests
from agriculture are unfair, if not unethical’ (Kareiva et al. 2012).
Conservation 
biologists 
were 
berated 
for 
not 
allying 
with
corporations. The imperative became that: ‘Instead of scolding
capitalism, conservationists should partner with corporations in a
science-based effort to integrate the value of nature’s benefits into

their operations and cultures’ (Kareiva et al. 2012). Such strong
rhetoric in favour of traditional economic growth via resource
extractivism, under a capital-accumulating corporate imperialism,
firmly places Nature and human labour in the role of resources to be
exploited. The political struggles of the poor to protect Nature
absolutely from colonialism and economic development have no
place here (see Martinez-Alier 2002). In this framing, conservation
should not pursue the protection of biodiversity for its own sake, but
rather as instrumental to providing financial returns.
Rather than seeking scientific explanation, new environmental
pragmatism aims for political impact via academic, media, public and
political attention. Those employing such pragmatism employ
doublespeak because they claim to be operating in ‘the real world’,
while in fact failing to address the complexity and meaning of social
and political reality. The assumption that practice and theory are
separable is fallacious, because any action requires conceptualisation
of the world around us and how it operates. The lack of concern for
understanding the institutions and mechanisms of social reality
leaves a gaping hole in the ability of new environmental pragmatism
to explain why policy recommendations should work and, if they do
work, why. More than this, there is a failure to relate to the actual
role played by monetary valuation, commodification and capital
under a system of corporate and financial institutions. Yet we should
remember there is much more to new environmental pragmatism
than just ecosystem services or natural capital and their valuation.
This will become evident when discussing the intermediate and
crossover positions of Figure 8.1.
New resource economics
Orthodox mainstream economics maintains a strong, if implicit,
ideology, that is, a core faith in market-based systems as the best
means for the delivery of democratic and free societies. This is often
combined with a faith in problem-solving and life-enhancing new
technology, which is expected to be stimulated through market
pricing. Thus ‘getting the prices right’ is the key way forward, rather

than direct regulation of behaviour or structural change in social and
economic systems. A role for government intervention may arise but
preferably it should be minimal (e.g., nudging, not planning or direct
regulation). Within orthodox mainstream economics the nature of
political economy is not regarded as in need of explicit attention, nor
even of any relevance, but simultaneously the implicit faith in market
systems as delivering freedom for individuals to fulfil their
preferences makes for an easy alliance with neoliberal politics. New
resource 
economics 
is 
then 
also 
embedded 
within 
‘free’
(unregulated) market ideology and mainstream price theory.
What is new in the new resource economics position is the priority
given to issues of ecosystems functioning and borrowing from
ecology. Efficiency is no longer enough to achieve a prosperous
future and concepts such as sustainability and resilience have been
identified as needing to be added as independent goals (Common
and Perrings 1992). The focus is on how to include ecosystems
functions in orthodox economic models and use them to derive
insights into the operation of linked ecological-economic systems.
However, the core goals remain cost-efficient and optimal resource
use based on competitive market pricing. The reinvestment of rent
from natural resource extraction and exploitation is the favoured
approach for evaluating the sustainability of economic systems (i.e.,
the so-called Hartwick rule). Theoretical resource modelling is
emphasised over applied valuation and, contrary to environmental
economics, there is deep scepticism concerning work to value the
environment outside of existing market structures. This creates
something of a contradiction, because market prices are recognised
as failing to address social costs and therefore in need of
‘adjustment’.
Scepticism over non-market pricing (i.e., environmental social
cost-benefit analysis) is explained due to a preference for
deductivism. At the same time, new resource economists’ models
support the idea that prices can be efficient resource allocators
reflecting ‘true’ costs. A prime example is the biodiversity report by
Dasgupta (2021), which rhetorically calls for social cost-benefit
analysis on the basis of axiomatic deductive models and without any

concern for the problems preventing their application to calculate the
shadow prices that he advocates. Dasgupta, as former chair of the
board for the Beijer Institute, claims to be an ecological economist,
but is in fact a diehard neoclassical economist pushing mainstream
conformity, which is evident in his report (Spash 2021c; Spash and
Hache 2022) and his work going back to the 1970s (Dasgupta and
Heal 1979).
Consistent with new resource economics is the work by Perrings
(1997; 2006), a former ISEE president and associate of Dasgupta
(see Chapter 1). He accepts market prices as valid indicators of
value while sceptically questioning stated preferences and benefit
transfer and preferring production function analysis. He has an
allegiance to the strong hidden ontological presupposition of
mainstream 
economics 
and 
its 
prescriptive 
mathematical
methodology. For example, he accepts that willingness-to-pay for
species at top trophic levels can be used to infer the value of the
constituent parts (e.g., species) at lower trophic levels, which reveals
a belief in atomistic reductionism. He adopts utility-maximising
models and seeks optimal solutions, despite all the ensuing
contradictions of squeezing and remoulding concepts to make them
fit the method (see his collected works: Perrings 1997; and the
review by Spash 2000d). He regards the main challenge for
achieving sustainability as being to develop predictive models for
evaluating the pay-off from policy choices. Challenges posed by
globalisation and climate change are to be addressed by better
models to significantly improve the capacity of resource managers.
His vision for ecological economics is of a basically naive objectivist,
predictive science with a monist methodology of mathematical
formalism. He has stated (Perrings 2006: 19) the following.
My own view is that ecological economics has an obligation to develop the
science needed to understand, model and predict the dynamics of coupled
ecological-economic systems. Indeed, it is the raison-d’etre of the field.
Clearly, from this perspective, ecological economics is not a
particularly radical departure from orthodox mainstream economics.

Mainstream economic conformists Karl Göran Mäler, Partha
Dasgupta, Kenneth Arrow, Geoffrey Heal and David Starett have
comfortably allied themselves with ecologists Brian Walker, Paul
Erhlich, Gretchen Daily, Simon Levin and engineer/climatologist
Steven Schneider. Their methodology is deductive mathematical
formalism and linking models. Such alliances have been strongly
supported by the Swedish Beijer Institute of Ecological Economics
(see Chapter 1), and the associated Stockholm Resilience Centre
(Carl Folke is director of the former and science director of the
latter), and ecologists and economists from Stanford University,
noted above as also pursuing new environmental pragmatism. These
prominent academics of the Stockholm–Stanford alliance (operating
for approximately thirty years) bind their worldview together with
neoclassical assumptions, and appear happy to support an orthodox
mainstream economic approach, where ‘getting the prices right’ is
the central problem facing humanity (Arrow et al. 2004; Daily et al.
2000; Dasgupta 2021). Similarly, there is no surprise that Beijer
Institute-related academics Turner, Perrings and Folke (1997: 27) ‘do
not see ecological economics as an alternative paradigm’. Indeed,
they regard it as merely offering a different perspective, and one
which is apparently closer to renewable resource economics than
environmental economics because of the emphasis placed on
axiomatic deductive mechanistic models.
New resource economics is often a form of orthodox dissent, and
as such involves varying degrees of conformity to the core tenets of
mainstream theory. Some regard ecological economics as nothing
more than some subfield of neoclassical economics, without which
they feel there is no theoretical foundation. For example, Nijkamp
(2005: 134) has stated: ‘A clear foundation in standard economic
(including neo-classical) principles and models might prevent a loose
orientation. After all, ecological economics is about economics!’
Apparently ecological economics is then meant to be about
mainstream economics and theoretically grounded in neoclassical
theory.
Thus, van den Bergh (2010), board member of both the Beijer
Institute 
and 
the 
journal 
Ecological 
Economics, 
equates

environmental problems and sustainability to simply internalising
externalities, as if markets would then be optimal resource allocators
and externalities were some minor aberration in an otherwise
perfectly functioning system. This fails to recognise that the concept
of ‘externalities’ is ideologically loaded to protect the neoclassical
core, and deliberately misdirects attention as to what constitutes
social cost-shifting practices (Spash, 2021b). What van den Bergh
(2010: 2049) advocates, to analyse spatial sustainability, is an
integration of ‘insights and approaches from economic development
theories, international trade theory, urban/agglomeration economics,
and environmental and resource economics’. He criticises Daly for
wanting to limit growth because, he claims, mainstream economic
approaches (such as emissions trading) already address economic
scale issues. As he states: ‘So traditional (environmental) economics
really does address the physical scale of the economy, and the gap
between mainstream and ecological economics is not as wide
perhaps as some tend to think’ (van den Bergh 2010: 2051).
Despite strong opposition to growth, Daly (2010) maintained a
‘preference for the market over centralised planning’ and faith in
‘ecologically and socially constrained markets’ as the best means for
achieving allocative efficiency. The logic appears to be that market
systems are basically only in need of a few biophysical (read scale of
economic activity) and social (read money income distribution) side
constraints. While humans may need to be nudged in the right
direction, and provided with the right technology to make markets
work for the common good, alternatives to the utopian free-market
system are not on the agenda, and fundamental structural problems
appear irrelevant (Spash 2020c). Standard neoclassically justified
economic policy instruments are deemed adequate and adopted.
Thus, Daly was an advocate for tradeable-permits markets, and even
for the allocation of rights to give birth (Daly 1974). Daly then
appears to be a classic example of orthodox dissent, holding
contradictory positions between heterodoxy and orthodoxy. Some
resource and environmental economists also feel Daly’s position is
close enough to their own to claim him and ecological economics as
a subfield (e.g., see Auffhammer 2009: 259). However, Daly’s

dissent was strong enough for him to resign in disgust from both the
Beijer Institute and the World Bank. He also, as noted in Chapter 5,
came to be an advocate of a paradigm shift in economics, not
mainstream conformity, and regarded ecological economics as the
catalyst to that end.
Social ecological economics
Social ecological economics takes a research position that is distinct
from the existing economic orthodoxy, but is also critical of the
pragmatic willingness to adopt whatever is assumed to achieve a
given end. Ecological economics is placed within the context of
heterodox economic schools of thought (Gowdy and Erickson 2005a;
Spash 2011; Spash and Ryan 2012) and the discontent with the
orthodoxy is consistent with calls for a revolution in economic theory
(Gowdy and Erickson 2005b) or a paradigm shift (Illge and Schwarze
2009) or both (Spash 2020c). As discussed in previous chapters, the
pursuit of a structured pluralism means engaging across like-minded
heterodox economic schools of thought. The approach is inherently
interdisciplinary, linking economics with a range of academic
disciplines such as social psychology, sociology, applied philosophy,
human geography, political science and the natural sciences, as
necessary to address the object of study and research question. As
discussed in Chapter 7, strong transdisciplinarity is an extension of
interdisciplinarity endeavour which involves two-way communication
of knowledge and formation of understanding in the context of wider
society (beyond the experts). What was discussed there as weak
transdisciplinarity is consistent with new environmental pragmatism.
There is a distinct realist element to social ecological economics.
As discussed in Chapter 6, realism here involves relating to the
structure of biophysical systems. This matches a critical realist depth
ontology that accepts the embeddedness of human social and
economic systems in biological, chemical and physical structures that
humans neither create nor control, but within which they must work,
that is, by understanding how their mechanisms operate. The realist
aspect also has bearing on the social and economic realm.

Orthodox mainstream economists are criticised for offering
theories that fail to correspond to actual capitalist economies and
their 
structures 
(e.g., 
private 
property, 
corporations,
commodification). Gowdy and Erickson (2005b) note that work by
Georgescu-Roegen, going back to the 1930s, stressed that consumer
theory should be consistent with actual human behaviour and
production theory should be consistent with biophysical laws.
Resource and environmental economists have long investigated the
market system with an ideological perspective embedded in a
methodology unable to question consumer sovereignty, corporate
structure or power politics, let alone understand human psychology
or how markets actually operate (Kapp 1950). Realism means
rejecting inappropriate atomistic reduction of social wholes to parts.
That is, for example, to accept society is different from a collection
of individuals just as ecosystems are more than a bunch of species
or an animal just genes.
Allowance is made for social construction, but this is limited to
how we conceptualise reality and excludes radical relativism and
conventionalism. Critical realism points out that facts do not speak
for themselves, but rather involve prior conceptualisation, while
observation involves reference to an object that combines reference
with sense-making (i.e., reference involves association between
things). Realism here accepts we can never know for certain what is
true (i.e., it accepts fallibilism and is anti-foundationalist), but it does
not give up on truth-seeking, as in practical adequacy, or choice
between theories, as a contextualised judgement (Sayer 2010).
Realism means also accepting the ever-changing world in which
we live, rather than presuming universal stability and equilibrium.
This is clear for ecosystems from the work by ecologists such as
Holling (2009 [1986]). Knowledge is still attainable from appealing to
structure, but change must be explicitly theorised and considered.
The inherent unpredictability of the future means employing
different approaches (e.g., precaution) and methods (e.g., scenario
analysis), and being humbler than those (e.g., Stern, Dasgupta) who
claim they can develop predictive models and estimate the
probabilities of future world states, or regard themselves as

managing risks of biodiversity loss and climate catastrophe as if
some optimal investment portfolio.
In social ecological economics, the understanding of uncertainty
borrows from a range of sources including post-normal science
(Funtowicz and Ravetz 1994), the sociology of science (Wynne
1992), the concept of ignorance (Loasby 1976) and Keynes’s ideas
on probability (Keynes 1988 [1921]). Partial ignorance and social
indeterminacy are contrasted with risk and probability assessment,
that is, strong versus weak uncertainty (Spash 2002d). Holling et al.
(1995) reference ecological understanding as including episodic, not
gradual, change, non-linearity in spatial scales, absence of equilibria,
destabilising forces, uncertainty and unpredictability. In social and
economic systems such features and their comprehension are highly
relevant to the ecological crisis and the failure of orthodox
mainstream economics (Spash 1999). As discussed in Chapter 6, the
open-systems aspect of reality is key.
Links also exist to coevolutionary thinking and application (Gowdy
1994; Gowdy and McDaniel 1999; Norgaard 2009 [1984]; 2017),
and the field of evolutionary economics (with the caveats in Chapter
7). Veblen (1898) provides a cross-reference to both the latter and
critical institutional economics, which social ecological economists
recognise as central to understanding human organisation (Spash
and Villena 1999; Vatn 2005). This also links to Kapp’s work on
cumulative causation (Berger 2009; Kapp 2011a).
Consistent with this approach, Vatn (2005) explains the objective
elements in the social and economic spheres as being represented
by: (i) the ability to evaluate and discuss collectively created
institutions; and (ii) the independent existence of the social world.
He notes the consistency with critical realism. While we are a part of
that social realm, its independence means social facts can be
observed and studied. That means a role for a historical descriptive
and institutional analysis. Critical institutional analysis is required
along with theoretical understanding of power relationships (Stör
2017). This also links into deliberative participation (Blackstock
2017; Niemeyer and Spash 2001) and deliberative monetary
valuation (Lo and Spash 2013; Spash 2007a; 2008c), as well as

more general issues of political science, governance and democracy.
The role of strong transdisciplinarity arises. Methods that can handle
incommensurability of values, while probing and making explicit
value differences, are also necessary, for example, disaggregated
multi-criteria analysis and multi-criteria mapping (Munda 2004;
Spash et al. 2005; Stirling 1997; Stirling and Mayer 2001; White
2017).
Value pluralism means being aware that the preference
utilitarianism of mainstream economics and instrumentalism of
shallow ecologists are both very specific consequentialist ethical
positions, and that we should expect value conflicts as a standard
occurrence. In social ecological economics there is recognition of
universal human needs which are not subjective, let alone
individualistic choices. Needs are objective values insofar as being
essential requirements for sustaining healthy entities. In ecological
economics such needs might best be summarised in accord with
Max-Neef’s (2009 [1992]) system of needs and satisfiers, where
satisfiers are culturally specific practices (see Rauschmayer and
Omann 2017). Thus, meeting needs allows for social and cultural
variety because the satisfiers are diverse. However, as discussed in
Chapter 6, the existence of an entity’s needs is distinct from the
ethical judgement as to whether they should be met.
The axiological drive is to address issues of ethics, injustice and
social inequity inherent in current environmental problems with a
recognised requirement for fundamental changes in the structure of
economic systems and human behaviour, not merely problem-
solving. A key to that end is seen as changing the ideas and conduct
of economics itself. Emphasis is placed on understanding the variety
of economies and economic structures and their potential, rather
than focusing on ‘the economy’ as a singular entity. Economists have
continued to promote the ‘growth = development’ ideology of
progress even as the consequences (e.g., human-induced climate
change and biodiversity loss) are realised to be increasingly severe
and threatening to all. Some who appear growth-critical persist in
seeing 
growth 
as 
necessary 
before 
moving 
to 
a 
post-
growth/degrowth society (Spash 2021a), and so pragmatically fall

into the development trap identified by Escobar (see Chapter 6).
Decolonialism, post-development and degrowth all challenge what
amounts to mainstreaming ideas of what constitutes a meaningful or
worthwhile life and the traditional ‘stages of development’ model.
Intermediate and crossover positions
Besides the three main positions there are four others that combine
these in different ways. Their potential importance was empirically
investigated 
by 
Spash 
and 
Ryan 
(2012) 
using 
structured
questionnaires at three conferences organised separately by the
ESEE, AHE and the orthodox mainstream European Association of
Environmental and Resource Economists (EAERE) in 2009. This
revealed the expected paradigmatic divergence between orthodoxy
and heterodoxy, and the close association of the ESEE sample with
the latter. However, interestingly, 88 per cent of the orthodox
mainstream EAERE sample selected a research approach that
combined new resource economics with one or both of the other
positions, and 63 per cent combined it with social ecological
economics. A separate social ecological economics position or this
position combined with pragmatism was held by 72 per cent of ESEE
and 86 per cent of AHE samples, but none of the EAERE sample.
The study confirms the distinct differences between the paradigmatic
positions of new resource economics and social ecological
economics, but also the importance of crossover positions in the
mode of dialectical conceptualisation.
What also appears from the study is the direction of influence as
coming from the two paradigmatic positions: new resource
economics is moving into social ecological economics or adopting
pragmatism, while social ecological economics remains independent
or merged with pragmatism. This illustrates the extent to which
orthodox mainstream EAERE members believe they can dominate
and subsume social ecological economics or adopt a pragmatist
approach. Here I will discuss the three main areas of intersection
and address the fourth, covering a combination of all positions, the
‘big tent’, in the next section. A point worth reiterating is that the

categories are qualitative and not arithmomorphic and, as such,
fuzzy, no absolute boundaries are to be expected.
New resource economics and new environmental pragmatism
Pragmatism coming from the ‘economists’ side has increasingly seen
links made to bankers and financiers. This is evident in uses of
valuation to promote public policy that favours corporate interests
and business. In this case simplifying the natural sciences and
ignoring their theoretical substance occurs in order to dominate the
discourse with mainstream economic jargon as the correct language.
Work in this area could cover ecosystem service quantification and
valuation including accounting approaches for estimating cultural
ecosystem services, supporting blue growth, developing biodiversity
offsetting and wetland mitigation banking. Orthodox dissenters are
likely to be prevalent here, including those on the mainstream
conformist end of the spectrum.
Where ideologically driven by a belief in capitalism, the crossover
of new resource economics into new environmental pragmatism may
come close to a form of ecological modernisation,5 that is, a
combination of faith in price-making markets allied with a pragmatic
justification for appealing to corporate social responsibility and self-
regulation. There are also correspondences occurring due to
ideological commitment to growth and across different forms in
which this is promoted by international agencies such as the UNEP
and World Bank, for example, green growth/economy (UNEP 2011),
green accountancy (UNEP 2019) and blue growth/economy (World
Bank and United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
2017), and of course the TEEB project (Kumar 2010).
When considering pragmatism among natural scientists coming
from ecology/biological sciences a strong driver appears to be the
belief that social sciences are merely a means for conveying the
natural scientists’ messages, which are regarded as providing
unmediated factual truth (i.e., naive objectivism). Social and
economic research is only regarded as important, by such

individuals, to the extent that politicians and the press listen, not
because it is an important subject in itself with its own contribution
to make to knowledge and understanding. Where natural scientists
regard economics as a communication tool this can easily lead to
pragmatic alliance with the orthodox mainstream and its tools as
representing the hegemonic form of economic communication.
New resource economics and social ecological economics
The crossover here can be explained in part by the focus on formal
mathematical modelling and the methodology of a linkage approach
between ecological and mainstream economic optimisation models
(Spash 1999). The work of the Stockholm Resilience Centre
employing data-driven statistical socio-ecological modelling, for
example, attempts to convert qualitative conceptual models (e.g.,
Ostrom 2009) into quantitative measurable models (e.g., Rocha et
al. 2020). This is also consistent with arithmomorphism and a naive
objectivist approach to science, where data are treated as
unmediated facts. The attraction for new resource economists of
adopting such an approach to ecological and social phenomena is
that critique and social (dialectical) concepts can be reduced to
terms which avoid conflict with the neoclassical paradigmatic core.
Consistent with this, Lawson (2009) argues that the problem
revealed by the mainstream is due to its insistence on only seriously
considering ideas if they can be placed within the frame of deductive
mathematical formalism. Indeed, he states: ‘The mainstream abuses
formalism by repeatedly using it in situations in which it is
inappropriate to do so, failing to seek to understand its scope and
limitations’ (Lawson 2009). New resource economists and social
ecological economists are at odds, but this conflict is ignored by
socio-ecological modellers.
As we have seen, there are those who happily cooperate with the
orthodox mainstream and have no interest in a more radical revision
of economics or integration with other social sciences. This lack of
engagement with the content of economics and the heterodoxy has

a variety of explanations. There are some who agree with the self-
regulating ‘free’-market ideology and view the world as all about
competition (whether in the marketplace or natural environment).
Some, such as wildlife and population ecologists, find deductive
optimisation and mathematical formalism compatible with their
approach to ecology and so adopt a unity of methodology approach.
Others, as mentioned above, simply ally themselves with hegemonic
power.
Social ecological economics and new environmental pragmatism
Here pragmatism can be expected to temper theoretical rigour,
resulting in a willingness to entertain a range of both scientific and
political compromises. For example, Kallis, Gómez-Baggethun and
Zografos (2013) explicitly recommend what they call ‘radical
pragmatism’. They define pragmatism as being practical, distrusting
abstract ideas and being totally relativist in denying universal claims
over valuation. They then promote monetary valuation if it achieves
a set of conventions, which have nothing to do with whether the
valuation work has any scientific validity. They argue for the
potential acceptance of the ‘usefulness’ of theoretically ungrounded
monetary valuation according to context. Thus, their criticism of
valuing the world’s ecosystems by Costanza et al. (1997b) is purely
based on political impact, not the promotion of vacuous monetary
numbers that lack theoretical justification and meaning. They define
their radicalism as accepting monetary valuation if it conforms to
their goals of environmental protection and egalitarianism and takes
into account positions of social and environmental movements. The
argument confuses valuation with choice of public policy instruments
and the grounds for attributing legal monetary compensation, but
the key point is that they advocate determining whatever approach
is used on the basis of a set of pragmatic conventions not scientific
validity of the methodology and methods or their application. In this
sense their approach is unscientific and appears susceptible to
legitimising pseudoscientific valuation. It also opens the door to

supporting neoliberal conventionalism under the guise of pragmatic
justifications for monetary valuation of Nature.
New environmental pragmatism – overriding elements of theory
and insight to achieve political outcomes – can also be seen as
affecting ecological economic research critical of growth economies.
Consider the fundamental stance against capital-accumulating
economic growth. Victor (2008) argues for a slow-growth economy,
but this would certainly not achieve a post-growth world, which he
also seems to support, nor make room for alternative non–capital-
accumulating economies. Both Victor (2008) and Jackson (2009b)
argue for maintaining the growth society in the majority of the world
(i.e., where there is income poverty) until everyone is income rich
which means justifying the traditional capitalist growth =
development 
model, 
while 
simultaneously 
claiming 
it 
is
fundamentally flawed. The theoretical contradictions here arise
because of a simple pragmatic desire to work within the system
despite their critical theory concluding the need for systems change.
Apparently anti-growth positions can turn into apologetics for growth
(Spash 2021a). A similar issue relates to the approach of Daly in not
rejecting price-making markets and as a result sustaining core
elements of neoclassical theory and support for capital-accumulating
market economies despite his extensive writings criticising growth
(see discussion by Spash 2020c). These cases seem to indicate
reluctance to argue to the logical conclusions of the science on the
basis of making claims compatible with hegemonic forms of capitalist
political structures.
New environmental pragmatism may also be associated with
social ecological economics in other contexts. For example, consider
the work on ecological footprints (Rees 2009 [1990]; Wackernagel
and Rees 1996). This can be seen as having roots going back to the
physical accounting and energy work of ecological utopians which
forms the prehistory of modern ecological economics (Martinez-Alier
1990; Vianna Franco and Missemer 2023). This is a radical socialist
tradition. At the same time the underlying land theory of value being
employed 
poses 
serious 
theoretical 
problems 
including
commensuration and value reductionism. The sacrifice of theory is

accepted because of the perceived advantages of communicating the
basic issues of environmental degradation and resource constraints.
This might be summarised as a strong desire for policy change in the
face of rapidly approaching calamities. The footprint approach can
be seen as possessing elements of both new environmental
pragmatism and social ecological economics.
The fallacies and contradictions of a unifying
‘big tent’
Several authors have advocated the idea of a potential union
between ecological economics and neoclassical resource and
environmental economics. There have been calls for synthesis of
resource and environmental economics with ecological economics
and industrial ecology under the new title ‘natural economics’ (Ruth
2006). Then there are those who tentatively propose that bridges
might be built despite recognition of fundamental differences and
the need for ecological economics to create a paradigm shift (Illge
and Schwarze 2009). Calls for unity and/or union seem highly
pragmatically motivated and rather gloss over the origins of
ecological economics, and the fundamental philosophical and
ideological reasons for the division from orthodox mainstream
economics occurring in the first place (see Chapter 1).
The position is in part related to expanding on the crossover from
new resource economics into social ecological economics. As such it
often appears to be based on the idea that simple link variables can
be constructed so that the output of one model feeds some basic
information across disciplinary divides without any critical reflection,
that is, multidisciplinarity. Much of what has been placed under a
title of big tent ‘ecological economics’, coming from socio-ecological
and economic-ecological modellers, goes along this route. This
position is associated with a highly problematic acceptance of
mainstream orthodoxy under a misguided form of pluralism and
appears imperialistic. For example, in their textbook Harris and

Roach 
(2018) 
claim 
combining 
mainstream 
orthodoxy 
and
heterodoxy constitutes pluralism which they refer to as a ‘big tent’.
While claiming to recognise its distinctiveness, they effectively
reduce ecological economics to green national accounting in the
service of a green economy and subsume it under environmental
and natural resource economics.6
Ecological economics as the maintenance of a ‘big tent’ for all to
enter was advocated by Howarth (2008) as the incoming editor of
Ecological Economics, and can be seen as close to his doctoral
supervisor Norgaard’s (1989) call for unstructured and uncritical
plurality among ‘methodologies’. In Howarth’s opinion, ‘ecological
economics is a transdisciplinary field that is defined by a set of
concrete problems rather than a particular epistemology or
methodology’. While recognising the need for interdisciplinary
research and integration, he wants to avoid creating ‘a narrow
domain characterized by an exclusive or dominant viewpoint’. He
himself claims to be both an environmental and ecological
economist.7
Several members of the board of the journal Ecological Economics
have supported varying degrees of merger with mainstream
economics. For example, Baumgärtner (later co-editor-in-chief)
proposed a ‘sustainability economics’ rebranding exercise to repair
the 
‘unfortunate 
divide 
between 
ecological 
economics 
and
environmental and resource economics in the study of sustainability’
(Baumgärtner and Quaas 2010: 449); Turner (1997) has argued that
ecological economics is in any case close to neoclassical resource
economics; van den Bergh (2010: 2051) sees no real gap between
ecological and mainstream economics; and Norgaard and Kallis
(Goddard et al. 2019; Norgaard 1989) as well as Söderbaum (1990)
criticise but still wish to include neoclassical economics, without
much regard for the implications or the incoherence of their own
arguments. That coherence should even be called for is criticised as
excluding the potential for novelty (Lundgren 2022), as if
incoherence might provide innovation! Why exclusion of mainstream
orthodoxy should prevent novelty and innovation is just as

mysterious as why this is even an issue. However, according to
Lundgren’s interviews of journal board members this is a commonly
held position, as if nothing could ever be excluded to create unity,
and the dogmatism and imperialism of the mainstream are
unproblematic.
My original article (Spash 2013b) explaining the different research
approaches in ecological economics borrowed Howarth’s term to
designate the central position of my Venn diagram as ‘the big tent’
(see Figure 8.1). While my own position, as will be explained, is the
impossibility 
of 
holding 
such 
contradictory 
and 
conflicting
approaches to conduct scientific research, others have advocated
this as either representing what ecological economics should actually
aspire to be (Goddard et al. 2019; Nelson 2009) or the actual state
of play in ecological economics (Buchs et al. 2020). I will address
each of these arguments for the big tent in turn.
Ecological economics should aspire to being a ‘big tent’
In a direct criticism of my work, Goddard et al. (2019) argue in
favour of a ‘methodological pluralism’ that explicitly references the
idea of the big tent, while wanting to avoid ‘the imperialism of
economism’. As discussed in Chapter 4, they misleadingly reduce the
entire debate to being about epistemology and base their position on
rejecting single ‘ways of seeing’ things to argue for what amounts to
a form of conventionalism, where knowledge is equated to and
relativised as group beliefs. In what appears a contradiction of their
concerns for economic imperialism, they claim that ‘neoclassical
models do illuminate aspects of reality, more so since much of
economic reality has been fashioned to their image’ and regard
rejecting the use of its approaches as seeking ‘epistemological
purity’. They claim the benefits are shown by citing macroeconomic
works, which I criticised in Chapter 2 exactly because they exemplify
the problems of using mainstream models and concepts.
Their contention that mainstream economics illuminates aspects
of reality shows a lack of understanding as to the nature of an
axiomatic deductive theory, such as neoclassical economics, that is,

that it builds everything from foundational claims that need bear no
relationship to reality. Their claim that neoclassical economics has
created modern capitalism in its own image appears totally
ahistorical (e.g., see Meiksins Wood 2003) and exaggerates the
ability and role of economic academics in changing social structure.
Their adoption of mainstream economics involves the claim that a
‘market model is likely to explain better how an instituted market
works than say a more realistic view of the economy as a
provisioning system’ (Goddard et al. 2019: 8). Beside the logical
contradiction of preferring an unrealistic over a realistic approach to
explain reality, this contradicts their earlier claim that mainstream
economics creates its own reality (i.e., the actual economy would
have to match the model). In attempting to support their argument
they obliquely appeal to the discredited and false dichotomy
between formal and substantive economies attributed to Polanyi
(Spash 2019), as if these justify both mainstream and heterodox
economics respectively. Besides all of this, they ignore the
comprehensive scientific critique of the heterodoxy, which is not
simply about epistemology but, as we have seen, addresses
ontology and additionally raises axiological and ideology differences.
Nelson (2009) has also argued in favour of the big tent as a
desirable goal. She calls for a unity of understanding in the field of
research on economics and the environment that combines what she
(dichotomously) refers to as hardcore neoclassicals, neoliberals,
free-marketers and economic modellers as opposed to soft socialists,
Marxists and anti-market environmentalists. Actually, rather than
expecting that such ideologically divided social groups might
combine in a big tent and get along with each other, she is arguing
for a more subtle change in epistemology which would make these
groupings in effect no longer exist. That is, if knowledge were seen
neither as purely, say, empiricist nor purely, say, metaphysical, then
a new approach to understanding knowledge would arrive, requiring
the extremists to change. She is calling for the individuals holding
antagonistically opposing positions to change their modus operandi,
indeed their mindsets, and so become different individuals with a
more open and encompassing acceptance of knowledge, which is

seen and described as being more in touch with reality. Indeed, her
reflections upon reality are used to criticise others for not taking a
more unified approach, and elsewhere she has noted the proximity
of her realist approach to that of critical realism (Nelson 2003a).
However, as discussed in Chapter 2, Nelson’s own approach of
advocating mainstream capital theory, in her coauthored textbooks,
fails to live up to this and exemplifies what happens in practice when
appealing to mainstream economics.
Personal and disciplinary transformation, as alluded to by Nelson,
has indeed been associated with what is required for progress –
Arne Naess might have also agreed – but that does not equate to
accepting the current models and methods of orthodox mainstream
economics. Social ecological economics identifies the necessity of
rejecting orthodox and looking to heterodox economics. There are
also good reasons why this should be a break and not an ever-
persisting party of antagonists in the big tent. The arguments for
this, I reiterate, are also based on more than epistemology.
That neoclassical economists’ unrealistic models and ideologically
loaded discourse and prescriptions in favour of price-making markets
have detrimentally influenced environmental policy is actually an
argument for its rejection, not acceptance, contra Goddard et al.
(2019). Neither does pluralism in either education or scientific
understanding require lack of criticality. Economic pluralism in
education needs to ‘contextualise the role and failure of neoclassical
economics and this is different than teaching neoclassical economics
as merely one theory amongst many’ (Morgan 2021b: 21).
Prominent orthodox economists – Dasgupta, Stern, Nordhaus – have
consistently understated the cumulative social and ecological
problems of modern systems of economic activity. They convert
climate crises and mass species extinction into concerns over optimal
warming, discount rates, marginal losses of future GDP, consumer
preferences, capital theory and rates of return on investment. Their
work has been a consistent source of complacency, delay and
undermining of direct regulation. That such work should continue to
be part of ecological economics under the guise of big tent pluralism
is a major failure in the understanding of the role of pluralism in

both science and education. As Morgan (2021b: 20) notes: ‘Theory
is not just diverse it has degrees of justification based on its
assumptions, claims, omissions, and evidence, affecting its
plausibility, persuasiveness, relevance and potential to be both
effective on its own terms and affecting whether it is harmful when
considered beyond those terms.’
There is a basic paradigmatic divide here. A new preanalytic vision
will not be sustained by spending time and energy on a fruitless and
impossible merger of conflicting ontologies or opposing ideological
positions. In addition, there is no way to integrate conceptualisations
with people exclusively concerned with arithmomorphic concepts, as
discussed in Chapter 3. Neither can we ignore the fundamental
ideological divisions here between those committed to maintaining
the hegemonic position of capitalism in its various forms (State,
corporate, market) and those seeking alternative forms of social and
economic organisation that reject its ideas of having over being,
hedonistic values and social cost-shifting. In areas where new
resource economics intersects with others the outcome is to spread
the mainstream neoclassical economic discourse, protect capitalist
economic systems from critique and radical reform and promote the
idea that, rather than facing systemic crises, we merely confront a
set of problems that need some appropriate solutions (a problem-
solution framing strongly associated with a mechanistic philosophy).
Redefining the ‘big tent’ to justify its existence
In an attempt to redefine my analysis, Buchs et al. (2020) argue that
ecological economics as existing in journal publications is actually a
form of the big tent and this actuality should be accepted, not
opposed. At the same time, they call for reinforcing the social
ecological economic tent pole of this metaphorical structure. Their
sympathy lies with this heterodox radical paradigm, but the
conclusion in favour of a pluralism that includes the orthodox
mainstream is contradictory. There are also several problematic
elements in both their analysis and suggested redefinitions of my
work.

They have suggested that my three main groupings be regarded
as Weberian ideal-types. However, the ideal-type for Weber is a
reference point for empirical reflection which never exists in reality.
The ideal-type is neither a hypothesis nor a description of reality, it is
‘ideal’. As Weber (1949: 90) makes clear: ‘In its conceptual purity,
this mental construct (Gedankenbild) cannot be found empirically
anywhere in reality. It is a utopia.’ Buchs et al. (2020) actually then
criticise the positions in my analysis for not unambiguously reflecting
reality and by suggesting some changes they think do so better,
which contradicts their claim that these are ideal-types. Their
concern over ambiguity also seems misplaced because the
categories are not arithmomorphic with the hard, ‘clear-cut
partitions’ which they try to impose. While ideal-types of positions
held by ecological economists might be constructed, this was not the
aim of my work (a fallacious claim, but one repeated by Lundgren
2022: 3). Instead, the qualitative and dialectical categories were
created as empirical approximations of positions real people hold
with a hypothesis that other real people might also actually and
substantively identify themselves with these same positions. Indeed,
exploring this hypothesis was part of the empirical research
conducted by Spash and Ryan (2012).
Near the end of the paper, Buchs et al. (2020: 9) try to create
their own ‘ideal-types’ as three ‘pure’ epistemologically based forms.
Their redefinitions leave social ecological economics as consistent
with my category, if reduced to some minimal epistemic aspects.
They also confirm the distinction between this heterodox camp and
the orthodox new resource economics camp. However, they merge
new resource economics back into the mainstream neoclassical
school of environmental and resource economics, which is unhelpful
because it loses the distinction between the orthodox dissenters of
the former and orthodox mainstream of the latter. Rather than
distinguishing the role of orthodox dissent, they treat it as
nonexistent.
However, their main bone of contention is with the category of
new environmental pragmatism, which they refer to as confusing,
because American Pragmatism already exists! That pragmatism, as a

word, also exists outside of this use should not be confusing to
anyone, and naive pragmatism, as in my usage, is far more
commonly associated with the word than the American philosophical
school. I have also explicitly addressed this distinction (Spash
2013b). Their attempt to redefine this category results in limiting it
to 
researchers 
using 
physical 
metrics, 
problem-solving,
interdisciplinarity and instrumentalism. In this regard it diverges
significantly 
from 
new 
environmental 
pragmatism, 
which 
I
exemplified with, but did not limit to, strategic advocacy of poor-
quality monetary valuation. Again, the reinterpretation also attempts
to impose purely epistemic criteria.
This redefinition was inspired by their failure to empirically identify
the category in their analysis of journal article abstracts covering
water resource issues. At the outset they associate new
environmental pragmatism with being the ‘spearhead of the fast-
increasing interest in the valuation of ecosystem services’ (Buchs et
al. 2020: 2). That their research failed to identify this category would
seem to have more to do with the inadequacy of their methods than
anything else. Their first attempt was to classify articles and the
second to conduct statistical word searches of large datasets in a
bibliometric-type study. The attempted factor analysis based on
words seems to lose meaning rather than obtain insight. For
example, what do occurrences of ‘ecosystem services’ signify? This
chapter uses the phrase ‘ecosystem services’ but does not advocate
them or new environmental pragmatism. The phrase also needs to
be distinguished between valuation (method) and payments (policy
instrument). The frequency of word occurrences is at best a crude
indicator of content.
Despite these drawbacks, an important point that Buchs et al.
(2020: 9) note concerns the intermediate and crossover positions,
which they find to be substantive in their empirical research but
interpret as problematic for my classification. Unfortunately, they
misinterpret my Venn diagram as directly representatively realist in
its dimensions. That is, they infer that because the spaces between
positions appear small, I must be claiming this applies to the size of
actual groups in society. However, the original article detailed and

emphasised these overlaps and their potential roles for explaining
research 
in 
ecological 
economics 
(Spash 
2013b). 
Their
misinterpretation is actually more surprising because they cite my
empirical study that supports the importance of the overlapping
research approaches, and especially among those aligning with new
resource economics (Spash and Ryan 2012). There is also nothing
wrong with a dialectic classification that empirically only identifies
the penumbra, which is what might actually be expected (see
Chapter 7).
They, however, misleadingly claim that: ‘Most of the EE [ecological
economics] community develops arguments situated between these
poles, without adhering strictly to one camp which appears to be
more exceptional’ (Buchs et al. 2020: 9). This again appears to be
more an artefact of their research method (statistical word search of
journal articles) than anything. It is also incorrect to interpret this as
if nobody affiliates with specific camps. This is also contradicted by
my empirical study. When asked to self-identify with the different
positions, including the crossover areas, 41 per cent of the ESEE and
43 per cent of AHE samples selected a social ecological economics
position independent of the others (Spash and Ryan 2012) – if not
‘most’, then two rather significant minorities! Indeed, the authors
argue for strengthening social ecological economics ‘in order to
counter dominant “mainstreaming” tendencies in the field’ of
ecological economics (Buchs et al. 2020: 11), and seem to affiliate
themselves closely with this paradigmatic camp. At the same time, in
contradiction of this concern, they ‘hope that inter-camp ontological,
epistemological and methodological discussion will advance fruitful
and respectful pluralism in the field of ecological economics’, which
as usual raises the basic conflict over undefined pluralism opening
the door to domination by the orthodoxy, which they themselves
oppose.
The nonexistence of a paradigmatic ‘big tent’
The idea of maintaining a big tent that creates paradigmatic unity
between ecological economists and the orthodox mainstream runs

directly into problems of fundamental opposition with heterodox
thought. Orthodox dissent has been argued to create an aspect of
dialectic between the mainstream and heterodox radical dissenters.
However, this has also been argued to prevent a necessary paradigm
shift, create contradiction and open the door to mainstream
imperialism. If a paradigm shift is imagined, then there would be a
divorce from orthodox mainstream economics that included much of
what falls under orthodox dissent. This argument means that in
practice there is no big tent or possibility of unity between social
ecological economists and neoclassically committed new resource
economists 
supporting 
capitalism. 
They 
are 
by 
definition
paradigmatically separate groupings. So, areas in which merger and
links are sought can only be illusionary. Like a mirage, they offer
nothing of real substance and on closer inspection disappear. In this
case, Figure 8.1 would need to be redrawn as Figure 8.2, where
these two paradigmatic camps are divided by being embedded in
heterodox and orthodox-mainstream economic approaches. The only
means of a bridge is provided by new environmental pragmatism,
which, by definition, pays little or no attention to theory and as such
is open to any instrumentally effective alliance. This is only possible
because new environmental pragmatism is a non-paradigmatic
position based largely on strategic political goals.

Figure 8.2  Two opposing paradigms and a connecting strategy

Besides explicitly embedding the economic positions in their
respective heterodox/orthodox affiliations, Figure 8.2 also places the
new environmental pragmatic position within its largely natural
science context. This is not absolute due to the presence of non-
natural scientists advocating this position and the adoption of
various forms of pragmatism by economists. However, as has been
argued, there is a very strong natural science contingency here that
has little or no interest in the content of social sciences in general or
economics in particular. Engineering is explicitly included because of
the element of ‘problem-solution’ rhetoric that is pervasive under
new environmental pragmatism. Figure 8.2 also shows the influence
and interaction between natural scientists and social ecological
economists and how this extends into physics which has informed
the thermodynamic and social metabolism understandings of social
ecological economics. Allowance is also made for a variety of other
mixes that are not explored explicitly here but are hypothetical
interactions, including both the separate domains of new resource
economics and the heterodoxy. Finally, the large explosion symbol
signifies the importance to the heterodoxy and social ecological
economics of integrating and learning from other social sciences, but
that this is irrelevant to those adopting pragmatic or orthodox
mainstream approaches.
An example of how new environmental pragmatism might act as a
bridging connection is the Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare
(ISEW) developed by Daly and Cobb (1989). This is orthodox in
using monetary shadow pricing of environmental damages. Thus,
contrary to the explicitly stated beliefs of Daly and Cobb (2007) in
strong sustainability, their ISEW assumes that natural, man-made
and social factors can substitute for each other, that is, weak
sustainability. The authors now admit this index was never meant to
be taken as a target or an end in itself, but rather to debunk and
show why such accounting measures fail to address the authors’
deep concerns for community (Daly and Cobb 2007). However, their
deep concept of ‘person in community’ is hardly ever mentioned in
the literature, despite this being the main topic of their book in
which the ISEW first appeared as an appendix (Daly and Cobb

1989). Instead, the shallow concept of the ISEW is widely quoted
and employed (Ziegler 2007). So, the pragmatic approach overrides
the deep theoretical concern and ends in providing another shallow
accountancy tool that falls within the remit of new resource
economics. As Ziegler (2007) notes, and Daly and Cobb (2007) have
agreed, a multiple-criteria approach is a more logical conclusion of
their work and their stated strategic aim of debunking GDP with the
ISEW has failed. This highlights the inadequacy of orthodox dissent
and simplistic pragmatism. More generally, all GDP-adjusting
sustainability indicators might appear as attempts to cross the divide
by denying basic incommensurabilties which are a core theoretical
understanding in social ecological economics (O’Neill 2017).
A bridging example that goes in the opposite direction might be
adaptive management. The work by Walters (1986) is close to new
resource economics in the mode of coupling ecology and economic
models. However, Walters and Holling (1990) argue both for
objectifying, reducing and resolving uncertainty and that ‘policy is
politics’, which requires acceptability among scientists, government
and the public of explanations for action regardless of whether
scientific uncertainty is high. Their latter belief is that ‘decisions are
not made because of a well-proofed argument in the tradition of
experimental science, but because of the accumulation of credible
evidence supporting a simple and widely perceived explanation in a
political environment that demands action’ (Walters and Holling
1990: 2067). The message is that if you want policy impact, then
provide simple explanations that have current political credibility,
that is, play to the politics and power players of the moment. This
might come close to some forms of American Pragmatism, such as
advocated by Bromley (2008), in that creating ‘useful’ knowledge
(not truth) is the aim, and such knowledge is regarded as a belief
created by a group about what is useful (i.e., conventionalism). The
correspondence might be further supported by noting that Norton,
an avowed American Pragmatist, has adopted Walters and Holling’s
concept of adaptive management (see Norton and Steinemann
2001). However, his approach engages in community participation
rather than abstract coupling of ecological and economic models,

and so moves from new resource economics (through new
environmental pragmatism) towards a social ecological economic
approach. Adaptive management is then no longer in the
mainstream camp. The point is that there are no substantive
unifying or integrating aspects across the paradigmatic camps in
either of these examples, that is, the big tent does not exist.
Conclusions
I have put forward the characterisation of three main alternative
research positions or approaches. This has been used to illustrate
the ongoing struggle within ecological economics, and more
generally society, over the best way to address the complex of social
and environmental problems in the world. I have suggested how
these positions might be combined, producing further possible
groupings, although I also note the possible contradictions and
conflicts inevitable in holding some such combinations. At the same
time, a simple, if crude, contrast between shallow and deep
positions can be useful for indicating what is wrong with ecological
economics and emphasising the fundamental paradigmatic divisions.
For Arne Naess shallow ecology could be summarised as a fight
against pollution and resource depletion which had a central
objective of health and affluence for the ‘developed countries’. It was
preoccupied with instrumentality and the reduction of everything to
material and energy flow accounting and functional usefulness for
human ends. The shallow ecological economics movement shares
something of this perspective but often adds a preoccupation with
monetary valuation.
The unquestioning use of monetary values and adjusted national
income numbers appear to have formed the flagship of the shallow
ecological economics movement and made it some powerful allies.
Power for ‘the message’ was what ecologists sought and, having
found a means to get attention, why give up now? New
environmental pragmatists have employed cost-benefit tools in ways

violating their validity even within neoclassical environmental
economists’ terms of what is acceptable. This has involved valuing
ecosystems at highly aggregated levels, transferring whatever
numbers come to hand across time and space and implicitly
advocating the spread of pricing and markets to all aspects of
environmental management. These ideas are not neutral and have
fed directly into political neoliberal and corporate projects for the
financialisation of Nature. New environmental pragmatism has in
practice fed into a corporate strategy aimed at controlling
environmentalism and financialising Nature.
Unfortunately, all the approaches and factors currently making
ecological economics a shallow movement have also led to a
muddying of the waters and loss of sight of the original objectives.
Shallow ecological economics as pushed by those employing new
resource economics offers little which has not been on the agenda of
resource and environmental economists working within the current
economic mainstream. It does not provide a useful tension between
alternative viewpoints which is stimulating discussion and leading to
innovation, progress, a new synthesis or a transformation in
thought. Instead, it provides a powerful dominating force which
leads to control, marginalisation and suppression of more radical,
innovative and alternative ideas. Calls for ecological economists to
conform to the doctrines of economic mainstream orthodoxy have
nothing to do with an enlightened discourse or open debate. What
persists is a denial of the very paradigmatic fight which gave birth to
ecological economics in the first place.
Moving away from the orthodox mainstream is necessary to
nurture the social ecological economics agenda, but this also
requires going beyond orthodox dissent and apologetics for
conformity and supposed strategic but unscientific uses of
mainstream theory and methods. The aim of a deep social ecological
economics position is to make consideration of ethical conduct
central and employ scientific investigation to improve social
ecological understanding and facilitate transformation. Deep
ecological economics builds on well-founded knowledge claims, but
also requires challenging both personal and social preconceptions,

while taking a campaigning spirit to the task of changing public
policy and the institutions blocking the necessary social ecological
transformation of modern economies.
Notes
 1
During the first decade issues typically had four research articles. Today ea
ch issue varies wildly, for example, the 2019 January issue had nine article
s, while the March issue had thirty-eight.
 2
There can be proximity to some forms of American Pragmatism, that is, wh
ere prediction (i.e., instrumentalism) is emphasised to the exclusion of caus
al explanation and realist description. There are diverse factions within Am
erican Pragmatism from objective realism to social constructionism. Even th
e founders (Pierce and James) disagreed strongly, and some (such as Dew
ey) changed their positions dramatically over their lifetimes. However, new
environmental pragmatism is a simple everyday form that should generally
be distinguished from the philosophical school of American Pragmatism (se
e discussion in Spash 2013b).
 3
Former ISEE presidents (Robert Costanza, Richard Norgaard, Peter May, Ch
arles Perrings, John Gowdy, Joan Martinez-Alier, Joshua Farley, Roldan Mura
dian), ESEE presidents (Irene Ring, Erik Gómez-Baggethun), an ISEE journ
al editor-in-chief (Richard Howarth) and various other ecological economist
s (Franz Gatzweiler, Pushpam Kumar, Unai Pascual, Stanislav Shmelev, Cle
m Tisdell, Christos Zografos).
 4
The website (https://naturalcapitalproject.stanford.edu, accessed 26 Augus
t 2020) states partnership between the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the
University of Minnesota, the Stockholm Resilience Centre, The Nature Cons
ervancy and the World Wildlife Fund. Daily serves on the boards of The Nat
ure Conservancy and the Stockholm Resilience Centre.
 5
As Dryzek (2005) has noted, there is some variety within ecological modern
isation itself, so not all would be expected to fit here, or in any such catego
ry abstracted from their own preoccupations.
 6
Harris’s approach to ecological macroeconomics was discussed in Chapter
2. He and Roach work at the same institute as Julie Nelson and Neva Good
win, producing orthodox-dissenting textbooks.

 7
As evident in his disciplinary affiliations stated as a board member of the jo
urnal Environmental Values.

9
An alternative economics for alternative
economies
Introduction
Social ecological economists have been present since the creation of
the ISEE and have provided the main approach in the ESEE. They
recognise the importance of power and the role institutions play in
economic systems which makes economics political economy. They
maintain the distinction between Nature and society and study their
interactions through serious interdisciplinary knowledge integration
across social and natural sciences. Nature and society are distinct
but not separate. They realise the need for a radical social ecological
transformation based on their (natural and social) scientific
knowledge. Social ecological economics forms what is for many the
core paradigmatic understanding of ecological economics. Daly,
Farley and Washington declared: ‘We support Spash’s (2012, 2013)
call for socio-ecological economics, which we view as a return to the
core principles of ecological economics’ (Farley and Washington
2018: 448).1
Ecological economics was founded upon the importance of placing
the economy within its biophysical limits, while recognising the need
for the ethical conduct of human society with respect to others, both
present and future, human and non-human. Key concerns include
the failures of economic policy to address environmental impacts,

and the existing economic structure and its institutions to meet
minimal standards of ethical conduct. However, different forces have
shaped how the field of knowledge has combined topics and
addressed (or not) these various issues. In particular, the gradual
but persistent neoliberalisation of society since the 1980s has
pushed an ecologically informed environmental policy discourse into
the language of economics and finance. The result has been a
mainstreaming of environmentalism in general and ecological
economics in particular. Economics has become identified with what
Polanyi (1957) termed ‘formal economics’, where a narrow market-
exchange model dominates, a model that misconstrues the historical
meaning of markets, trade and money, and so is blind to the
potential alternative forms of social integration and organisation.
Many have lost their way due to the supposed necessity of being
pragmatic in terms of adopting formal economic concepts,
converting Nature into capital, ecosystem functions into goods and
services and pollution into a traded commodity. Explicit ethical
judgement is replaced by the dogma of saving money to meet an ill-
defined goal of economic efficiency, as if this had no ethical
implications.
One result of the neoliberalisation of environmentalism, and the
adoption of concepts from formal economics, is the increasing
prevalence of pseudoscience, especially in the form of numbers (i.e.,
arithmomorphism). Preceding chapters have shown how orthodox
economics has remained an invasive and imperialist force in
ecological economics. Pragmatic use of neoclassical and mainstream
orthodox economic theory and approaches is evident whether the
work is by people affiliating themselves with ecological economics,
post-growth or degrowth. This is also evident in natural scientists
adopting whatever aspects of social science appear to them to be
convenient, and the more general transference of environmental
value estimates out of context (Spash and Vatn 2006). Plural values
and complexity are replaced by monistic measures and simple
messages. Perversely, the politically naive use of formal economic
language, concepts and methods by ecologists and conservation
biologists has undercut their own message, disempowered their

policy relevance and damaged the environmental movement in the
process (Spash 2015a; 2020a; Spash and Aslaksen 2015). Rather
than progress in uniting an understanding of the biophysical, social
and economic, what we have seen is the domination of the social
and biophysical by a narrow discourse that reduces everything to
exchange in price-making markets.
Ecological economics lacks a coherent social theory and needs to
strengthen connection with other social scientists working on the
same topics in other fields (e.g., political science, political ecology,
sociology, social psychology, social anthropology, human geography).
Some have felt threatened by the social and have downplayed, if not
derided, its relevance. In the USA the social is quickly connected to
socialism, which since McCarthyism has been associated with
communism and branded as un-American. There have even been
attempts to suppress those following the social ecological economics
agenda within ecological economics itself, while promoting
mainstream economists in their stead (Røpke 2005; Spash 2011).
This suppression failed, not least because social and environmental
problems are inseparable and formal economics is no substitute.
Polanyi (1957) thought formal economics was valid in a restricted
field of knowledge relating to nineteenth- and twentieth-century
market economies. In contrast, I have argued that it fails as either a
description, explanation or predictor of any actual market
economies, and as a result is dangerously misleading as a guide to
social and environmental policy (Spash 2019). Moving away from
such economics is necessary because it fails to address the reality of
current economic systems, and neither can it address the
transformation to alternative economies.
In Chapter 6, some foundational aspects of an emerging
economic paradigm were advanced in terms of ontology,
epistemology, methodology, axiology and ideology. Here the focus is
on outlining the objects of study, substantive topic areas to be
addressed (i.e., the problématique) and a way forward in terms of
the research agenda. There are three aspects to the work ahead:
addressing the structure and mechanisms of currently actualised
economies; transformation of those economies that create social,

ecological and economic crises; and envisioning future economies
that avoid the problems of the present.
First, understanding the real operation of the current system is
necessary and that means descriptive and explanatory realism.
Deductive 
mathematical 
optimisation 
models 
of 
nonexistent
competitive firms are irrelevant. Similarly, the psychology and
sociology of consumption must be realist and not some fantasy of
consumer sovereignty. Individuals must be understood as fallible,
value-conflicted social beings, not self-obsessed, logical choice-
making machines programmed to seek optimal outcomes, that is,
Homo œconomicus.
Second, social ecological transformation of the economy means
alteration of the current institutional and social relations of
production, which entails political struggle and value conflict.
Seriously tackling emissions causing human-induced climate change
faces opposition from all the powerful and vested-interest groups
that benefit from a fossil fuel economy. However, climate change is
just one human-created environmental problem among many (e.g.,
radiation, microplastics, hormone discharges, acidic deposition,
particulates, toxic waste, noise and so on). Environmental problems
are symptomatic of deliberate cost-shifting built into the structure of
competitive economic and social systems. The change ahead is not a
minor price adjustment, but a major transformation in both physical
infrastructure and social structure. This implies going beyond the
growth-theoretic analysis of political economy to theories of more
radical social and institutional change.
Third, there is the need for alternative visions, a set of scientific
utopian views about idealised social, ecological and economic
relations – community, harmony, care, love, cultural diversity,
tolerance, inclusion and a meaningful life for all: allowance for
human–Nature relations, doing good for Nature, not just exploiting it
as ‘services’ and ‘capital’, but also including Nature–Nature relations
and Nature with autonomy from humans. Utopian visions should
exclude those of the current hegemony and its dominant paradigms
– 
everlasting 
economic 
growth, 
materialism, 
ever-advancing
technologies, always having more, whether material wealth or

happiness, always living beyond the limits with dreams of living
forever. The alternative social ecological utopias should be
scientifically based in terms of being realisable, and neither science
fiction nor purely romantic. Scientific, or concrete, utopias act as
inspirational positive visions of the future. They also need to be part
of the research agenda. Social-ecological transformation requires
research on alternative economies and ways of living (not
paradigmatically excluding them) and developing policies that
encourage and create them (not deny their potential because they
have not been actualised).
In this short space I do not propose to offer a comprehensive
coverage of these three agendas but rather use them to frame the
discussion about creating an alternative economics that gives insight
into operationally effective alternative forms of economies. The next
section looks at the rise of modern industrial economies. They are
contrasted with a generalised category of ‘traditional economies’
based on differences in structure, although a richer analysis might
employ a dialectical conceptualisation. I proceed by outlining the
roles of State and corporate actors in promoting technology, how
work has become central to modern lives but without meaning, the
related failures of development and its colonialism, and the
disconnect between Nature and society. This is followed by outlining
the related key problem areas facing social ecological economic
research in the search for viable alternative systems of social
provisioning and means of transformation away from current
destructive and exploitative economic structures.
The social ecological structure of economies
Economic systems move goods and services through a process of
extraction, transportation, transformation and on to ‘final use’ by a
range of social actors. In this process all energy and materials used
eventually return to the wider environment. The complexity of the
system of resource use is misleadingly simplified by reduction to

‘production’ by a ‘firm’. The production sector today is comprised of
many 
international, 
private 
and 
State-owned 
corporations,
monopolies and oligopolies, varieties of small to medium-sized
enterprises, the unpaid reproductive and care work of women, and
small-scale subsistence. Similarly, the range of social actors is
irreducible to ‘consumers’, and involves government at multiple
levels, the military, firms, corporations and social groups, as well as
individuals fulfilling a variety of social and economic roles. This social
complexity requires institutions for co-ordination and social
integration (Vatn 2005). Real institutional arrangements of
conventions, norms, formally sanctioned rules and regulations create
the context and structure of reproductive operations. The institutions
humans employ also create, preserve and destroy values in society,
promoting some and demoting others (e.g., competition versus
cooperation). What is permitted and restricted by the social
structuring of the processes of material and energy use determines
how the economy interacts with the environment.
The need for change requires understanding how past systems
have operated and how the current system is operating in order to
identify potentialities. This requires an economic theory covering
common conceptual aspects such as money, markets, pricing, work
and consumption, but from a realist perspective that includes the
role in economic systems of the non-monetary, non-market,
unpriced and unpaid. At the same time, the contestation between
and over forms of economies as social provisioning systems needs to
be recognised. That is, non-capitalist economies exist, and the
capitalist system is itself dependent upon unpaid non-commodified
care work and non-capitalist social activities for its reproduction. This
is also where concerns over colonisation arise, as emphasised by the
post-development literature, because existing traditional sustainable
economies have been systematically destroyed in the name of
development.
Traditional versus modern economies

The concept of a social metabolism is used in ecological economics,
and industrial ecology, to capture the need of any human society for
materials and energy, in the same way that any biological organism
has a metabolism (Krausmann 2017). Order is created on the basis
of using low entropy (Georgescu-Roegen 1971), and the sources of
low entropy upon which human societies are most dependent are
stocks of concentrated minerals and the solar flow of radiant energy.
Traditional societies relied on direct and indirect means of using the
latter, with minimal use of the former. Industrial society is built upon
massive exploitation of the former. The historical transformation
involved structural change in social-ecological relationships.
Self-sufficiency, kinship, cooperative and non-market exchange
and bioregional economies were the historical norm for most people.
Material flows were largely kept within regional ecosystems and the
primary source of energy was indirect solar used via agriculture,
forestry and fisheries, as well as animal labour. A major energy
transformation began with the industrial revolution and the
increasing use of coal via steam engines leading to the development
of steam trains and ships in the nineteenth century, and an
associated increasing use of iron and steel. Yet most economies and
the majority of people, even in the industrialising world, did not
engage in this revolution but remained within the social metabolism
of the traditional economy, working and living close to food and
resources for local and regional use and employing animals, not
fossil-fuel-driven machines, to supplement human labour.
Vast technological leaps, driven by State investment in the
military, substantively changed the world economic system. Two
world wars accelerated the role of oil, gas and petrochemicals as the
foundation for new modes of processing and transporting resources
and transforming them into new products. Traditional social
organisation of the economic process, which was already being
removed by the drive for capital accumulation aided by the industrial
revolution, now became explicitly targeted for eradication.2 The
biomass- and solar-driven local/regional economy was being
replaced by a petrochemical national/international economy with

increasing dependence upon the use of concentrated minerals and
fossil fuel energy. This was a major shift in the social metabolism of
human systems and their requirements for reproduction.
A simple truth that ecological economists have been at pains to
state and restate is that by definition a given stock is finite. A society
built and dependent upon depletion of a non-renewable resource will
collapse. Only if the resource stock can be replenished or substituted
can this be avoided. Modernity’s stock dependence in terms of
materials and fossil fuel energy therefore leads directly to the drive
for new technologies and innovative ways of substituting resources.
That means an ever-changing society without any stability because
the economic process must continuously seek new ways of doing
things and social practice must change accordingly. The fundamental
requirement is to maintain the exploitation of low entropy at a rate
that renews the economic structure, which has become increasingly
artificial and divorced from natural processes.
The growth of the economy in material and energy results in
always needing more for the reproductive process to continue. In
addition, the fact that energy and matter are never destroyed, but
merely transformed, means all that goes into the economy comes
out in equal mass but a qualitatively different form – high-entropy,
unconcentrated – at the other end. This matter and energy, which
humans call waste, must go into either the land, air or water.
Pollution ‘control’ shifts the waste of the human system from one
medium to another, in search of a way to neutralise the worst
impacts, often with unintended feedbacks for humans and non-
humans alike. Pollution is an inevitable part of the economic process,
not an avoidable externality that disappears if the prices are ‘right’,
and it inevitably increases with economic growth because that
growth remains stubbornly dependent upon material and energy
throughput. In addition, the drive for new innovative products and
substitutes for materials and energy means creating novel artificial
substances that change and destabilise existing structures and their
functions 
with 
unknown 
consequences, 
for 
example,
chlorofluorocarbons changing the atmospheric chemical balance of
the stratosphere and destroying the ozone layer, or pesticides and

insecticides changing the balance of species and the functioning of
agricultural ecosystems. Georgescu-Roegen’s (1971) distinction
between capital stocks that are depleted when providing a resource
flow and funds, such as ecosystems, that can provide an ongoing
service is relevant here because the latter are being replaced by the
former in capital-accumulating economies. Circular economies are
fallaciously promoted, by the likes of Kate Raworth (2018 [2017])
and Ellen MacArthur (2015), to support the idea that growth can be
sustained, ignoring the biophysical reality that these systems merely
delay the basic linear throughput of material and energy, while their
growth increases the scale of resource extraction and waste and
destroys naturally sustainable funds (Giampietro 2019).
The structure of our material and energy throughput economy is
incompatible with maintaining the structure and functioning of
ecological systems, but empirical data is backward-looking and
reveals disasters only after the event, when action is too late.
Scenarios combined with systems analysis were famously used in the
1970s to illustrate how exponential growth on a finite planet hits
limits (Meadows et al. 1972). Precaution means acting in advance
based on understanding the structure and mechanisms of a system
to judge potential outcomes.
The structure of capital-accumulating growth economies reveals a
system in a continuous battle against the instability it creates
through the destruction of that upon which it depends. Marxist
dialectic explains both the ‘contradiction’ within capitalist economic
structure and how it produces structural change (ultimately
negation). Economic growth creates material riches but also
biophysical material destruction, social impacts and value conflicts.
In a system structured to prioritise financial flows, harm and
damages (i.e., social costs) are deliberately shifted onto those who
appear ‘least cost’ in the accounts, for example, the poor,
Indigenous, disenfranchised and non-human.
Structure also creates lock-in. For example, towns and cities were
redesigned in the twentieth century to serve the car, creating
extensive physical infrastructure and a social structural lock-in. Car
use became a normalised behaviour facilitating urban and suburban

sprawl. The daily commute became an unquestioned aspect of
modern life for hundreds of millions of people. More and larger roads
have then been justified by the value of ‘time saved’ for commuters
due to so much time being spent on commuting! Infrastructure
projects now present ever-faster modes of travel as essential needs
(e.g., high-speed trains, flying), while eradication of slow travel is
regarded as progressive. Being ‘economical’ in the use of time and
space is literally built into urban habitat as a material expression of
the values held in a productivist, capital-accumulating, efficient
society. The point is brought home by Collier (1994b: 9), citing
Lewis’s Surprised by Joy.
The truest and most horrible claim for modern transport is that it
‘annihilates space’. It does. It annihilates one of the most glorious gifts we
have been given. It is a vile inflation which lowers the value of distance, so
that a modern boy travels a hundred miles with less sense of liberation and
pilgrimage and adventure than his grandfather got from travelling ten. Of
course if a man hates space and wants it annihilated, that is another matter.
Why not creep into his coffin at once? There is little enough space there.
In a few short weeks the COVID-19 pandemic brought into question
such modern values as the necessity of commuting and eradication
of urban green space as economically efficient regardless of
psychological 
wellbeing. 
Such 
structural 
shocks 
can 
create
opportunities for change (Spash 2021d). However, social structure
resists change, and capitalism is integrated into the modern nation-
state. Indeed, the crises of capitalism have witnessed adaptations
that have reinforced its basic structure (e.g., Mirowski 2013).
Neoliberalism, as actualised, has made the State a support for
corporate, rather than public, interest, while neoliberal rhetoric
denies the role of planned and subsidised infrastructure upon which
corporate capitalism grows and is dependent. The role of the State is
a major issue in social and political economy.
The State, corporations and technology

The State’s role in promoting technology and infrastructure has been
crucial 
in 
modernity 
(e.g., 
transport, 
aerospace 
and
telecommunications), and integrally related to the industrial–military
complex, for example, the progression from rocket technology to
military satellite infrastructure to weapons targeting global
positioning systems that are now common in vehicles and mobile
phones enabling global surveillance and monitoring. Militarisation
and securitisation are literally built into society. Such technologies
also have social impacts and change human expectations and
behaviour in unpredictable ways. Technology is not neutral and far
from inherently beneficial.
The modern State and associated corporations have a vested
interest in promoting all technological developments as inherently
good, underfunding and suppressing research into problems and
overriding public concerns about negative consequences (e.g., from
nanotechnology, biotechnology, genetic modification, nuclear power,
microwave transmitters, radiofrequency electromagnetic fields,
household chemicals, plastics). The COVID-19 crisis offered hi-tech
corporations the opportunity to promote surveillance, home-
schooling, telehealth, smart cities, money-free commerce, driverless
vehicles and 5G super-connectivity (Klein 2020). Innovation and
technology are heavily supported by States as the hope for avoiding
the otherwise inevitable end of the growth economy through finding
substitutes for disappearing energy sources and concentrated
minerals, as well as finding miracle cures for the consequences of
environmental 
pollution 
(from 
bugs 
that 
eat 
waste, 
to
geoengineering the planetary climate, to drugs that control health
impacts such as cancer). There is a continuous cycle of selling
utopian visions of science fiction futures divorced from social and
ecological realities.
An 
interesting 
aspect 
of 
new 
products 
with 
innovative
technologies is how easily they become accepted despite entailing
major changes in social relations. This is in stark contrast to direct
social planning. The fear that coercion might take place is directed at
government intervention, ignoring the most prevalent form of
behavioural 
influence 
in 
modern 
society, 
namely 
corporate

advertising and marketing. This is generally accepted as a legitimate
activity, while government doing exactly the same is termed
propaganda, abuse of power and paternalism, and (outside wartime)
limited to health and safety. Corporate manipulation of people is
pervasive and occurs through social media, creating norms of
computer and phone use, changing language to corporate-speak
(e.g., branding), subliminal placement of products in media and so
on. Getting people to literally buy into and defend consumerism and
unsustainable practices is the great success of the marketing
departments and their expert psychologists, who have targeted self-
image, identity formation and in-group selection, and applied their
‘nudging’ methods at ever-earlier ages (e.g., promoting junk food to
three- to five-year-olds, creating child obesity; see Henry and
Borzekowski 2011).
Regaining social practices from the corporations and their
products is a major task. The internet and mobile phone
technologies have been used to reconceptualise friendship through
social media and redefine social standing as a competition measured
via new metrics (e.g., likes, hits and followers). This capture and
redefinition of social interaction happens almost imperceptibly, as do
technologically driven behavioural changes and psychological
problems, for example, addiction, reduced attention spans,
introversion and isolation. Corporate self-interest and government
commitment to high (not appropriate) technology, innovation and
growth mean the new is always promoted over the old. Positive
social, economic and environmental aspects are always highlighted,
and where negative impacts cannot be concealed or countered by
claiming more convenient ‘lifestyles’, then the ultimate argument is
always the need to protect or create jobs.
Work and meaningful lives
Work defines the mechanisms for social inclusion as a productive
member of modern society. Hoffmann and Paulsen (2020) explain
industrial society as work-centred and work-dependent with work
forming a central social and economic relationship. In the welfare

State having, or having had, an officially paid job determines such
things as access to healthcare, unemployment benefits and
pensions. Government reliance on income- and consumption-related
taxes for its revenues further builds the need for jobs and economic
growth into the economic structure. The topic of work is central to
mainstream economic claims that the growth economy leads to
progress because it will ‘create jobs’. Substantive questions arise
over how work has become both conceptualised in theory (e.g., in
economics) and regarded by society within the context of modernity.
This relates to the conceptualisation of growth as development and
the conflict between job creation and environmental protection.
Since the rise of neoclassical theory in the late 1800s, economists
have generally adopted a negative and instrumental notion of work
as an undesired activity only undertaken to obtain wages to buy
consumer goods.3 An individual is assumed to choose the optimal
balance between the negative utility of work and the positive utility
of consumption. The dichotomy may also be expressed as work
versus leisure. This economic trade-off theory arose after actual
changes occurred under market capitalism that removed or limited
alternative modes of living and working (Fellner 2017).
The differentiation between work and leisure is part of industrial
society and at best arbitrary. Social anthropology shows the
distinction as absent from traditional societies (e.g., Sahlins 1972).
Similarly, the artificial separation between productive/paid and
reproductive/unpaid work appears with the rise of industrial society,
factories, wage labour and capitalist modes of production. Polanyi
refers to labour in the 1800s becoming a fictitious commodity and
connects this to the social and economic structure and mechanisms
of the self-regulating, competitive, market, capitalist system. As he
states:
labour is the technical term used for human beings, insofar as they are not
employers but employed; it follows that henceforth the organization of
labour would change concurrently with the organization of the market
system. But as the organization of labour is only another word for the forms
of life of the common people, this means that the development of the
market system would be accompanied by a change in the organization of

society itself. All along the line, human society had become an accessory of
the economic system.
(Polanyi 1944: 75)
In earlier times organisation by economic units (manor houses,
farms, smallholdings, artisan workshops) united activities for social
provisioning, so that division of production and reproduction was
neither required nor made sense, and tasks were shared out (e.g.,
hierarchical allocation).
The needs of capitalist growth both commodified labour and
separated off the activities of reproduction and care which became
domesticated and naturalised as unpaid women’s household chores
(Komlosy 2018: 18–19). Feminist theory highlights this change. The
labour market is one of gendered commodification as emphasised by
feminist economists (Himmelweit 2018). Eco-feminists connect the
resulting artificially gendered roles to the divorce of males from a
caring, nurturing and reproductive role in society. Male connection to
machinery and technology is indicative of the divorce from and the
drive for domination over Nature in patriarchal industrialised society.
Industrialisation creates mechanised, production-line, factory jobs
that make humans into cogs in the machine, automata, doing
meaningless and repetitive tasks. Work life is regimented, controlled,
timed, monitored, measured and managed. What workers do is
meaningless and undesirable and only of value because of what they
get, that is, consumer goods. The problem is far from new and was
recognised by Morris (1993 [1884]) in his discussion of ‘useful work
versus useless toil’, including the inequitable allocation of work. In
this respect, Sayer (2009) raises the contrast between justice as
distribution of possessions (what we get) and as being able to
contribute to interesting, satisfying work associated with recognition
and esteem (what we do in life). Fellner (2017) offers an account of
how work could relate to meaning, belonging and playfulness in a
person’s life, given institutions free from exploitative relations.
Rethinking in this way is argued to break various dichotomies such
as work–leisure, production–consumption. This relates to how ‘work’

under different institutional and social provisioning structures could
contribute to more meaningful lives.
Poverty, colonialism, post-development and geopolitics
Concern for meaningful lives connects to the criticism of dominant
approaches to poverty (Spash and Smith 2019). The post-
development school documents how equating development with
growth has been an imperialist post-World War II policy promoted
by 
the 
USA 
and 
implemented 
through 
various 
captured
organisations, such as the IMF and the World Bank (Sachs 2015
[1999]). Colonising States have employed development policy, under
the guise of addressing poverty, to remove autonomy, denigrate and
destroy the cultures of non-industrialised communities, and
undermine sustainable rural livelihoods. Sachs differentiates the
materially poor into what can be described as living frugally,
suffering deprivation and living under systems of economic scarcity.
Traditional societies have economic systems of social provisioning
that are structured on frugality and sufficiency. Interventions to
‘develop’ their economic circumstances have typically resulted in
expropriation. Culture is destroyed along with sustainable livelihoods.
Land is grabbed, resources are exploited, agriculture is industrialised
and the environment is polluted. The survivors add to the
exponential growth in urban slum dwellers, more than a billion on
conservative UN estimates some time ago (Davis 2006: 23), a class
of people ready for exploitation as commodified labour due to their
newly created wage dependency and their new lives as those saved
from ‘poverty’ to live in the economy of material scarcity measured
by money.
Under the growth paradigm the rural is derided in favour of the
urban. Urbanisation is a policy of the growth economy that targets
the destruction of rural livelihoods in the drive for mechanised
industrial agriculture and the creation of an urban under-class to
work in the unskilled jobs of factories and to carry out undesirable
reproductive tasks. On a measure of poverty based on a World Bank
dollar metric the process might appear to successfully reduce

poverty, because the metric does not account for anything non-
monetary. There is, for example, a high rate of suicide among
subsistence farmers who lose their livelihoods due to ongoing
‘modernisation’ in India and China because this development
replaces unpaid subsistence work and familial exchange with wage
labour in factories and industrial agriculture. Meaningful lives are
made, quite literally, meaningless.
Resource appropriation means intervening in the lives of others
and removing resources from their use. The productivist growth
economy requires land, minerals, energy and cheap labour on an
ever-increasing scale. These requirements must come from
somewhere and that somewhere is ever more distant from the final
users (aiding ignorance and dismissal of social and environmental
exploitation). Formal economics reduces this relationship to free
trade and comparative advantage. In contrast, land-grabbing, for
example, is one aspect of the ‘development’ project ongoing
internationally and has been a tradition of the Western
‘development’ model enforced via imperialism.
Real resource control is based on military-backed political power
and the use of that power to force allegiances that allow resource
exploitation and trade. For example, the USA has repeatedly
destabilised other countries using ‘intelligence services’, leading to
the overthrow of governments and the establishment of regimes that
will ‘trade’ and support their corporate interests. This has nothing to
do with promoting democracy; for example, consider the overthrow
of the democratic left-wing government of Allende in Chile and its
replacement by a bloody military dictator, Pinochet, who was actively
supported by the USA, or the training of paramilitary groups around
the world, or the willingness to trade with oil-rich, undemocratic,
totalitarian nations. The USA, with the largest military in the world,
is a prime example of such practices to secure resources and
markets, but the strong correlation between GDP and military
expenditures means the problem is common across nation-states
(Spash 2021a).
Industrialised economies did not get rich through fair trade but by
ecologically unequal exchange (Hornborg 2017), and modern

economies persist in the exploitation of others in order to maintain
their populations in an imperial mode of living (Brand and Wissen
2017), or at least enough of the population to keep the lid on social
unrest. The exploitation of labour internationally is legitimised in the
industrially developed nations by saving costs (i.e., economic
efficiency) and ignoring that this is achieved by avoiding domestic
regulation through offshoring production to countries where labour is
cheap due to lower health, safety, environmental and welfare
standards. This international exploitation is seemingly absent from
consumer consciousness beyond occasional media coverage of
sweatshops, child labour, below-subsistence wages and large-scale
factory accidents.
These combined concerns over powerful State and military
intervention to secure resources have more recently been
highlighted under the term decolonialism, as a counter-movement.
This has diverse and often contradictory elements but is primarily
concerned with the suppression of non-Western cultures and
Indigenous communities and ways of living and thinking. Some jump
to calling for rejection of scientific knowledge as if this were
equivalent to removing imperialism.
Science, however, is the structured and systematic production of knowledge
– and by that account, all societies and all groups, everywhere and anytime,
are engaged in scientific endeavors, even if not all of them are
institutionalized to the same degree […] Colonialism, however, erased many
local scientific traditions by declassifying them as primitive and folklore and
substituting what was perceived as Southern superstition with Northern
science. To some authors, the very power of colonialism rested on its ability
to name and categorize the world according to its own heuristic schemata
and 
interest, 
thus 
inventing, 
and 
enforcing, 
such 
binaries 
as
modern/traditional, progressive/backward, and civilized/primitive.
(Reiter 2018: 3)
We do not need to reject the validity of scientific knowledge to reject
cultural imperialism, including technologies and ways of living. The
point of decolonial and related literatures should rather be to
advance validation of Indigenous knowledge and promote alternative
ways of living and being within the structures of reality. This is a

position that is quite consistent with critical realism and a criterion
for validating knowledge as being practically adequate (Sayer 2010).
Anti-scientific rhetoric is both misplaced and unnecessary, and
merely enforces a dichotomy of difference. The bottom line is that
survival depends on getting things approximately right as to how
Nature works, which is what science seeks to understand.
Society and Nature
Soper (1995) describes three ways in which the term ‘Nature’ is
employed: as a philosophical distinction; as an ontological term
referencing structure; and as a common judgement as to the quality
of naturalness. The last is the commonly understood aspect of
naturalness as in a dialectical conceptualisation with the human on
one end and the natural on the other. What constitutes the ‘natural’
is judged by the quality of independence from human control and
determination (Deckers 2021). Nature is commonly regarded as
degraded through human actions, as empirically observed in events
such as the spread of domesticated animals, contamination of soil,
air and water, manipulation of ecosystems and extent of
urbanisation. Philosophically, the term Nature stands in contrast to
human society with its culture and artefacts. As such it directs us to
conceptualise distinctive characteristics that constitute humans and
their activities, but, as noted in Chapter 4, that does not necessitate
Nature–society separation.
Ontologically humans are part of Nature, not least as physical,
chemical and biological entities, and subject to living within natural
structures. A confusion here is to equate advances in human
understanding of the structure and functioning of Nature with the
ability to determine and dominate everything. While humans impact
on the biophysical world, which is why there is an ecological crisis,
they remain subject to the structure, mechanisms and causal powers
of Nature, its law-like conditions and constraints. Science has
enabled humanity to harness Nature’s causal powers, not create
them. Nature, the non-human other, can then be understood as
combining different elements: an object in relation to humanity as

subject which is distinct but not separate; a deep structure beyond
human control that sets a range of limits (which humans ignore at
their peril); and the quality of actualised interactions humans have in
changing – creating, destroying and manipulating – their
surrounding environment and its constituent parts (Spash and Smith
2022).
How humans should relate to Nature is at the heart of conflicts
over the operation of modern (industrial) versus traditional societies.
The differential values of Nature become evident in the distinctions
between three positions (Spash and Smith 2022). The first
emphasises valuing non-human-to-non-human relationships, which
involves respecting and leaving room for autonomous Nature and
flourishing of non-human beings and collectives. This is evident in
advocacy of wilderness protection and rewilding. The second is
where recognising and valuing human-to-non-human relationships is
primary, leading to concerns for living in symbiotic relationships with
natural processes as found in coevolved traditional management
practices. Examples here range from Aboriginal fire ecology to
organic agriculture and permaculture. Third is the realm of
modernity where human-to-human relationships dominate over
Nature via invasive technologies, artificial processes and human
constructions. If held exclusively, both the first and third positions
appear blind, ignoring human society and non-humans respectively.
By definition, social ecological economics seeks to be inclusive of
both humans and non-humans. Developing moral considerability of
and sympathy for ‘others’ was argued in Chapter 6 to be constitutive
of caring societies that recognise the quality of social relationships
and interdependencies that create a good life for all.
An alternative social ecological economic
agenda
Social ecological economics has formulated powerful critiques of the
two dominant economic paradigms: economic growth and price-

making markets (Spash 2020c). The price system fails as an efficient
resource allocator and the economic explanation of markets bears no
relationship to reality. Cost-shifting is recognised as a central
element operative in competitive market economies, and generally
where competition and individual gain are promoted. Actual markets
involve powerful vested interests including corporations, the
industrial–military complex and the financial sector. Once the price-
making market paradigm is seen as a fiction hiding the real
mechanisms of resource allocation, involving political power and
social cost-shifting, then regulated and planned social provisioning
becomes an explicit concern. Similarly, the rejection of the growth
paradigm means addressing an alternative structure for economies
that removes capital accumulation, competition over resources and
institutions of profit-seeking and surplus creation, and reverses the
conversion of commons into private property.
The richness of human relationships and their potentiality is lost
by formal economics and capitalist ideologues. Reciprocity and
redistribution as forms of social integration and co-ordination are far
older than market exchange, which is itself possible in different
forms and not restricted to price-making markets (Polanyi 1957). A
substantive economic understanding of markets as instituted
processes contextualises their functioning within centralised rules,
norms and conventions built around creating trust. Variations on and
alternatives to markets are broadly recognised as necessary, but in
which form and under what circumstances remains under-
researched and contested.
The future must be open to varieties of economic structure –
economies, not ‘the economy’ – and alternative institutional
arrangements. However, clearly not just any economic system will
meet the requirements of just, ethical and equitable social
provisioning while avoiding environmental destruction and harm of
innocent ‘others’. Two major positions on alternatives to the current
form of modern economies go back to the socialist calculation
debate over the feasibility of a planned economy (see O’Neill 2011).4
One overarching form is market socialism, where prices are

determined outside the market power game by administrative
intervention with the mechanisms of market allocation still employed
but not dominant. The other is an economy with social provisioning-
in-kind, such as social housing, national healthcare, free education,
libraries, museums, energy, water, infrastructure and so on.
In-kind provisioning is consistent with the role given to needs and
satisfiers in ecological economics (Rauschmayer and Omann 2017),
and a tradition going back to Neurath (O’Neill 2011; O’Neill and
Uebel 2015). It also connects to Kapp’s call for basing public policy
on social minima. He argued that economists should reform their
subject to focus on ‘an objectification of the content of individual
needs and social welfare in terms of existential social minima’ (Kapp
1965: 67). Research developing needs and satisfiers as a central
aspect of social provisioning is consistent with understanding cultural
diversity in a post-development and decolonial context. Physical
structure is intertwined with social structure to create contextual
satisfiers for basic needs. As physical infrastructure is modernised,
traditional satisfiers are deliberately removed and replaced. Under
capitalism, commercial interests deliberately deride old satisfiers
they wish to substitute with their products in order to make profits,
and then market these new satisfiers to embed them as new norms
of group behaviour that seemingly become ‘essential’ and treated as
‘needs’ (e.g., the earlier discussion of transport).
The structure of economic systems also has implications for future
generations in terms of resource availability, pollution and their
opportunities for meeting basic needs. Economists tend to cover
intergenerational issues under the title of equity and reduce them to
income distribution between generations, as if they were identifiable,
distinct 
and 
separate 
individuals 
with 
utility 
functions.
Intergenerational ethics became encapsulated in the debate over
weak versus strong sustainability. This involved the extent to which
essential resources can be substituted by advances in technology
and harm due to environmental damages can be compensated by
economic growth. Deliberately creating future harm of the innocent
has been justified by claiming maintenance of basic income provision
(i.e., GDP), which fails to recognise that compensation for harm is a

distinct and separate ethical issue (Spash 1993; 1994). The
formalised 
discussion 
of 
sustainability 
focused 
on 
resource
substitution, scarcity and time preferences, and the economists’
preoccupation with discounting. In this way the mainstream placed
intergenerational ethics into the growth and price-making market
paradigms because increased consumption (growth) compensates
future generations and markets determine the interest rates and so
discount rates (intergenerational prices). Engaging with this
approach means that mainstream paradigmatic conformity prevails
and broader understanding of ethics and value is excluded. This is
exemplified by the whole economic discourse on climate change
(Spash 2002b; Spash and Gattringer 2017). Rejecting the hegemonic
paradigms means explicitly accounting for the role of ethics in
economics and opening up to alternative meta-ethical systems (e.g.,
in Western thought rights-based/deontology and virtue ethics).
Another key aspect of social provisioning is the material and
energy flow through the economy and here the work on social
metabolism is of central import (e.g., Gerber and Scheidel 2018;
Krausmann 2017). This links to the historical metaparadigm of
ecological economics (Vianna Franco 2018) and its modern
ontological foundations (Spash 2012). It also relates to the type of
society desired and answering the questions of production of what,
for whom and to what ends. Production today is highly skewed and
inequitably distributed, as are income, wealth and power. Biophysical
reality means confronting limits and rejecting the mythical utopian
promise of the growth paradigm, that is, everyone can be a
materialist at the level of the average or even poverty-level North
American (Spash 2021a). Sufficiency replaces hedonic excess and
promotion of unlimited wants.
Accounting for biophysical reality also requires relating to
temporal changes in ecosystems. The mainstream position either
ignores the importance of ecosystems or claims changes in
ecosystems can be captured via the effect on human wellbeing
expressed as money values. The first is a strategic adoption of
ignorance, while the second is impossible and highly misleading. The
spatial-temporal aspects of change, scale of impacts and their

irreversibility all affect the evaluation of and policy response to
ecosystems change. Future research must be aware of the
paradigmatic distinctions here and re-establish their formerly
recognised implications for policy (e.g., Norton 1995). The problem
is exemplified by biodiversity offsets and banking, where the
assumption is that ecosystem destruction in one time and space can
be treated as equivalent to recreation in another time and space,
given that such identical recreation is even possible (Spash 2015a).
Context and meaning are assumed away, and aesthetic values and
sense of place lost.
Land-use change is a major mechanism affecting ecosystems and
connected to population growth. Population growth itself has been
highlighted as causing a range of problems including encroachment
on non-human Nature, urban sprawl and the increased use of
material and energy resources leading to pollution. However, calls for
population control prove highly controversial, confronting objections
from religious groups and defenders of free choice, among others.
The top-down imposition of birth control has raised concerns over
racism, authoritarianism and patriarchy. From an environmental
perspective, consumption is the issue, not the number of people per
se, that is, one North American consuming ten times that of one
Bangladeshi means one fewer North American and nine more
Bangladeshis improves net material-energy consumption. Yet the net
gain is not the only issue but rather total scale in relation to means
of social provisioning, assimilative capacity of the environment and
existence of non-human Nature. The basic point is that population
control is not ultimately an option but a necessity because the more
humans there are on the planet, and the more the humans
appropriate, the more waste is created and the fewer resources
there are for anyone except humans on the planet.
This is typically turned into a female issue, and individualised into
education, rather than being seen within the context of social and
economic mechanisms that prevent ecological balance. Mies and
Shiva (2014 [1993]: 293–294) argue that, from an eco-feminist
perspective, reproduction should not be treated in isolation, but as
part of gendered division of labour, male–female and sexual

relations, embedded in the economic, political and social context, ‘all
of which, at present, are influenced by patriarchal and capitalist
ideology and practice’. They call for placing reproduction within the
context of economics and political eco-regions ‘to ensure a balanced
ratio of people to the environment, without coercive national or
international intervention’ (Mies and Shiva 2014 [1993]: 295). Such
bioregional economies are envisioned as changing social-ecological
relations of production (Cato 2017).
In the move away from capital-accumulating, productivist,
consumer society, social-ecological transformation will require
changes in work as a concept and practise and its reorganisation.
This is a largely unexplored area which some have termed ‘post-
work’ because it implies dethroning the place of work at the centre
of life in industrialised societies (Hoffmann and Paulsen 2020). To
date the more common approach among the post-growth and
degrowth communities has been to advocate work-time reduction
and job-sharing without addressing the broader aspects of what
work means or how it structures personal identity and social
relations. While picking up on some feminist concerns over work, the
coverage by Kallis and colleagues on degrowth and Jackson on post-
growth can be criticised because: ‘They are largely inconsistent in
their stance towards work, partly criticising, partly embracing it, or
oscillating in between’ (Hoffmann and Paulsen 2020: 6). Clearly the
negative aspects of what forms ‘work’ in industrial society is
dominant, for example, in factories, production lines and exploitative
relations of production. However, work should not merely or simply
be seen, in accord with neoclassical economics, as a negative to be
reduced.
A problem with the post-growth/degrowth literature is its failure
to specify the new – non-capitalist, non-exploitative, non-
productivist, non-individualist – relations of social provisioning
outside of a contemporary context. Rather than a transformed
economic system, what too often appears is a slightly reformed
capitalism, perhaps with basic income and reduced working hours
(Spash 2020c; Spash 2021a). In contrast, work conceptualised in a
social-ecological economy would be a fundamentally different social

relation and the term itself might be replaced by specific practices
and tasks. Under different social relations and institutions current
activities designated as work would be transformed. Thus,
reintegration of art and craft to labour would give back meaning to
daily practices and reconnect to acts of creation, while more
mundane but necessary reproductive tasks would need to be shared.
This implies a sense of community and cooperative organisation. The
current industrial productivist logic, including division of labour,
excludes these potentialities from consideration and prevents their
actualisation.
In the consideration and development of alternative economies
the role of money and unpaid work must be addressed both in their
current forms and in terms of how different types of economies and
economic relations can and do operate. This contrasts with imposing
the price-making market paradigm, where the role of money must
be spread to everything and everything done must be treated as
paid work. Such an approach is the imposition of a singular type of
economy on all else – Polanyi’s (1977) economistic fallacy – along
with its problematic conceptualisation of work and life. That there is
more to economics than money is too commonly overlooked, and
especially because of a preoccupation with capitalism as the only
form of economic system.
Non-monetary life and livelihoods should be researched (e.g.,
Nelson and Timmerman 2011) and form part of social ecological
economics. The variety of social relations should include the role of
gift and reciprocity as explored in social anthropology (Mauss 1990
[1954]; Sahlins 1972). Contra Polanyi, this substantive aspect of the
economy is relevant for all economies, and understanding of their
social structure, not merely pre-capitalist ones (Spash 2019). Social
relations also raise the need for social theory, which is absent from
mainstream economics due to its reliance on methodological
individualism. This would also reinforce the need for addressing and
researching the roles of different forms of political power (e.g., Stör
2017), and their associated institutions.
A major issue here is how participation in societal decisions is
institutionalised and different levels of government operate and

interact (e.g., local, regional, national and international). Public
participation in formal procedures of governance is highly variable,
weak or absent, even in supposed democracies. The concern for the
political legitimacy of government policy is particularly relevant in
societies with low voter turnout or where systems fail to represent
minority parties and lack proportional representation. Both the UK
and the USA have systems of representative democracy that are
recognised as failing on these grounds, resulting in large numbers of
the population lacking any representation. Thus, for example, in the
1989 European election in the UK the Green Party received 15 per
cent of the vote but not a single seat (a system reformed for
European Union, but not English parliamentary, elections and
deleted by Brexit). This general problem takes on specific
significance in the formation of environmental policy and social-
ecological transformation where the directly concerned political
parties are small and lack representation via established institutions.
Failures of representative democracy lead to legitimate roles for civil
protest, civil disobedience and the role of social movements in
speaking for silent voices (e.g., children, future generations, non-
humans) and minorities who are otherwise excluded. The corporate
connections to government, discussed earlier, lead to distrust. At the
same time the hope of many is that the State will be an
environmental protector and enforcer of justice via legal systems.
Distrust of or simply frustration with central government
motivates 
bioregionalism, 
transition 
towns, 
local 
community
initiatives and eco-villages where more direct democracy can
operate. Realising alternative ways of social provisioning outside of
corporate or State capitalism is also not necessarily a small-scale
activity, although undertaken at a local level, and is already
widespread. For example, in Mexico 500,000 people are estimated to
be participating in the local Caracoles in Chiapas, associated with the
Zapatista Army of National Liberation, and Vía Campesina has 200
million members in seventy-three countries (Barkin and Lemus 2016:
276). Barkin and Lemus (2014) refer to there being myriad examples
of similar concrete utopias being put into practice, which they term
‘social and solidarity societies’, that encourage mutually supportive

social relations among the participants, while resisting the
destructive 
social 
and 
environmental 
impacts 
of 
capitalist
organisation of production. That society can be organised in different
ways counters the hegemonic discourse that claims there is only one
system, ‘the economy’, which simply means market capitalism, and
challenges economists to understand how alternative economies
operate. If economics is to be relevant as twenty-first-century
science, then economist had better take up that challenge because
alternative economies are what the future needs.
Conclusions
For over fifty years the systemic and structural problems of the
dominant economic system with respect to the environment and
society have been recognised – increasing inequity, social division,
exclusion and exploitation of ‘others’, loss of biodiversity, mass
species extinction, pollution of land, air and water and resource
wars. The response has been:
the paradigm of the necessary and sufficient role of innovation, growth,
adaptation, evolution, and the centrality of new and emerging sciences and
technologies such as life science and biotechnology. […] the main solutions
have long since been tagged to a paradigm of industrial growth and
competitiveness. This ‘paradigm’, furthermore, is directly linked to a macro-
economic outlook that is now causing havoc across European societies.
(Rommetveit et al. 2013: 76–77)
Yet even within the supposedly more radical degrowth/post-growth
movement and steady-state theory we see contradictory and
conflicted support for the hegemonic paradigm. In ecological
economics, the interventions of new resource economists and
adoption of new environmental pragmatist strategies create blocks
to the emergence of a new paradigm, or at least delay its realisation
and full potential.
Ecological economics consists of long-established ideas that form
a conceptual core that can be specified, along with what is

peripheral and what stands in opposition. That core combines
ecological 
understanding, 
social 
structure 
and 
a 
redefined
economics. Important theoretical insights arise, such as the
dependence of social and economic structures on biophysical reality,
impossibility of equilibrium theories, the role of ethics and plural
values, institutions as social structures and the connection of
economics with politics and power. It creates a theoretical body of
understanding that builds from, but is fundamentally different to,
preceding theories. It connects with other heterodox economic
schools of thought and rejects both the orthodox mainstream and
orthodox dissent in favour of radical dissent.
A paradigm shift requires explicit articulation, identifying what is
different from the past and being clear about what must be left
behind, as well as social commitment on the part of the community.
This is not merely a different story, group belief or alternative
perspective in some popularity competition for the best social
construction, but rather a paradigmatically different theory and
social ontology than exists in orthodox mainstream economics and
one that challenges its continued existence. As Kuhn discovered,
humans can choose to commit to theories for a range of strategic
and social reasons (e.g., careers, power, money, prestige) that bear
no relationship to understanding their objects of study. However, the
scientific validity of a theory is not based on who believes it, as
conventionalists argue, but lies in how it matches up to reality, and
that is why maintaining belief in and pragmatic support for
unrealistic economic theories contributes to ongoing social ecological
crises and helps create new ones. Current economics is practically
inadequate for the task of addressing social, ecological and
economic crises. Humanity can no more afford to continue giving
credence to a redundant economics profession than it can persist
with an environmentally destructive and socially divisive economic
system.
The capital-accumulating growth economies of today are built on
competition and exploitation which is driving humanity towards ever
more serious resource wars and inequity. A meaningful radical and
deep social ecological economics is now required to inform and

reform 
economic 
understanding. 
Radical 
social 
ecological
transformation from the present dominant forms of capital-
accumulating competitive economies requires identification of the
fundamental things and principles that matter, an embedding that is
explicitly social and ethical. It recognises the role of ideological
commitment and open discussion of those commitments. It is also
an emancipatory science.
In terms of what future economies might be like, there are
numerous options, including: planning; government ownership of
the means of production; socialist economies; communitarian and
local community economies; caring economies; solidarity economies;
foundational 
economies; 
soviets 
and 
anarchistic 
communes;
bioregional economies; eco-villages; eco-social enterprises and so
on. Social and economic systems require reproductive processes and
involve unpaid maintenance, gift and reciprocity. However, today all
this is ignored and denied under financial, corporate and neoliberal
domination of actual economies, despite the resulting social and
environmental problems they create. More than ever alternative
economies and forms of social provisioning are necessary that break
the hegemony of growth and the price-making market paradigm.
Needs can be met through in-kind provisioning for people, not profit.
The variety and form of resulting institutions, including the role of
markets and their form, is part of the research agenda.
The attempts by ecological economists to cooperate with,
apologise for and infiltrate into existing hegemonic paradigms have
at best achieved passive revolutions that fail to address structural
problems, and, by playing to existing power groupings, do nothing to
change the substantive operations of actual economies. They have
revalidated, not invalidated, the irrelevant discourses of mainstream
economics and supported marginalisation of radical critique. The
transformation outlined in this book requires creating the necessary
conditions that can sustain new ideas, which means refocusing to
exclude redundant and rejected theories and invalidated knowledge,
rather than supporting and including them under the guise of
eclectic pluralism and pragmatism. There is nothing to be gained and
much to lose from maintaining the misguided belief that there is

some fruitful discussion to be had with those dogmatically
supporting the very system one opposes and aims to totally
transform. Instead, the potentiality is to create a new economic
understanding through common conceptualisations across various
heterodox schools of thought. In doing so, ecological economics
must be critical social science and realist.
Social ecological economics explains how and why the modern
mode of production and consumption is socially unjust and
ecologically unsustainable. The next step is to develop the
theoretical basis for establishing alternative structures, a scientific
utopian vision and a radical social ecological transformation. The
motto of social ecological economics is: ‘There are only alternatives.’
Notes
 1
Note, ‘we’ in their paper is explicitly stated to include Herman Daly: ‘Daly h
as kindly reviewed this article and agrees with our analysis. In the context
of this article, “we” refers to Daly, Farley and Washington’ (Farley and Was
hington 2018: 442).
 2
A process that continues today and in recent times has been most dramatic
ally enforced in the modernisation drives of China and India.
 3
Classical economists regarded work positively as contributing to national w
ealth. For ideologically liberal capitalist apologists (e.g., Nozick) work allows
competitive individual advancement by merit of being more productive than
others, which they believe justifies class structure and capital ownership (i.
e., meritocracy).
 4
In the 1930s, Austrian and neoliberal economists – Ludwig von Mises and F
rederick Hayek – opposed neoclassical socialists – Oskar Lange and Fred Ta
ylor; both Neurath and Kapp also contributed (Spash 2020c: 6–7).

References
Abbey, E. (1975). The Monkey Wrench Gang. New York: Avon Books.
Agarwal, B. (2009). ‘Gender and forest conservation: The impact of women’s
participation in community forest governance’. Ecological Economics, 68 (11):
2785–2799.
Aglietta, M. (2015 [1979]). A Theory of Capitalist Regulation: The US Experience.
London: Verso.
Aguilera Klink, F. (1994). ‘Pigou and Coase reconsidered’. Land Economics, 70 (3):
386–390.
Aldred, J. (2006). ‘Incommensurability and monetary valuation’. Land Economics,
82 (2): 141–161.
Aldred, J. (2013). ‘Justifying precautionary policies: Incommensurability and
uncertainty’. Ecological Economics, 96: 132–140.
Althouse, J., Guarini, G. and Gabriel Porcile, J. (2020). ‘Ecological macroeconomics
in the open economy: Sustainability, unequal exchange and policy coordination
in a center-periphery model’. Ecological Economics, 172: 106628.
Altvater, E. (2007). ‘Marxism and ecological economics: Toward a red and green
political economy’. Monthly Review, 58 (8): 55–64.
Archer, M., Bhaskar, R., Collier, A. et al. (eds). (1998). Critical Realism: Essential
Readings. London: Routledge.
Arrow, K., Dasgupta, P., Goulder, L. et al. (2004). ‘Are we consuming too much?’
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18 (3): 147–172.
Arrow, K. J., Cline, W. R., Mäler, K.-G. et al. (1996). ‘Intertemporal equity,
discounting, and economic efficiency’. In: Bruce, J. P., Hoesung, L. and Haites,
E. F. (eds). Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 125–144.
Asara, V. (2022). ‘Strategising within diversity: The challenge of structuring’. In:
Barlow, N., Regen, L., Cadiou, N., Chertkovskaya, E., Hollweg, M., Plank, C.,
Schulken, M. and Wolf, V. (eds). Degrowth & Strategy: How to Bring about
Social-Ecological Transformation. Milton Keynes: Mayfly Books, 93–109.
Atkins, P. (2010). The Laws of Thermodynamics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Auffhammer, M. (2009). ‘The state of environmental and resource economics: A
google scholar perspective’. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 3
(2): 251–269.
Ayres, R. U. and Warr, B. (2009). ‘Accounting for growth: The role of physical
work’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in the
Environment. Abingdon: Routledge, 427–459.

Backhouse, R. E. (2009). ‘A suggestion for clarifying the study of dissent in
economics’. Journal of the History of Economic Thought, 26 (2): 261–271.
Baer, P. and Spash, C. L. (2008). Is cost-benefit analysis of climate change
defensible: A critique of the Stern Report’. In: Guimarães Pereira, Â. and
Funtowicz, S. (eds). Science for Policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 167–
192.
Bakan, J. (2004). The Corporation: The Pathological Pursuit of Profit and Power.
New York: Free Press, Simon & Schuster Inc.
Balmford, A., Bruner, A., Cooper, P. et al. (2002). ‘Economic reasons for conserving
wild nature’. Science, 297: 950–953.
Barker, D. (2003). ‘Emancipatory for whom? A comment on critical realism’.
Feminist Economics, 9 (1): 103–108.
Barkin, D. and Lemus, B. (2014). ‘Rethinking the social and solidarity society in
light of community practice’. Sustainability, 6 (9): 6432–6445.
Barkin, D. and Lemus, B. (2016). ‘Local solutions for environmental justice’. In: de
Castro, F., Hogenboom, B. and Baud, M. (eds). Environmental Governance in
Latin America. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 257–286.
Barnes, J. (1976). ‘Introduction’. In: Thomson, J. A. K., Tredennick, H. and Barnes,
J. (eds). The Ethics of Aristotle: The Nicomachean Ethics. London: Penguin
Books, 9–43.
Barnes, J. (2000). Aristotle: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Barth, J. and Jacobs, M. (2022), ‘Sustainable prosperity in an uncertain future: A
shared agenda between green growth and degrowth’. Available from: https://e
u.boell.org/en/sustainable-prosperity-uncertain-future, accessed 1 October
2022.
Baskin, J. (2015). ‘Paradigm dressed as epoch: The ideology of the Anthropocene’.
Environmental Values, 24 (1): 9–29.
Bauhardt, C. (2014). ‘Solutions to the crisis? The Green New Deal, degrowth, and
the solidarity economy: Alternatives to the capitalist growth economy from an
ecofeminist economics perspective’. Ecological Economics, 102 (Supplement C):
60–68.
Bauhardt, C. (2019). ‘Nature, care and gender: Feminist dilemmas’. In: Bauhardt,
C. and Harcourt, W. (eds). Feminist Political Ecology and the Economics of
Care: In Search of Economic Alternatives. London: Routledge, 16–35.
Bauhardt, C. and Harcourt, W. (eds). (2019). Feminist Political Ecology and the
Economics of Care: In Search of Economic Alternatives. London: Routledge.
Baumgärtner, S., Becker, C., Frank, K. et al. (2008). ‘Relating the philosophy and
practice of ecological economics: The role of concepts, models, and case
studies in inter- and transdisciplinary sustainability research’. Ecological
Economics, 67 (3): 384–393.
Baumgärtner, S. and Quaas, M. (2010). ‘What is sustainability economics?’
Ecological Economics, 69 (3): 445–450.

Becchio, G. (2020). A History of Feminist and Gender Economics. London:
Routledge.
Becker, C., Faber, M., Hertel, K. et al. (2005). ‘Malthus vs. Wordsworth:
Perspectives on humankind, nature and economy. A contribution to the history
and the foundations of ecological economics’. Ecological Economics, 53: 299–
310.
Becker, G. S. (1976). The Economic Approach to Human Behavior. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Beckerman, W. (1974). In Defence of Economic Growth. London: Jonathan Cape.
Benton, T. (1989). ‘Marxism and natural limits: An ecological critique and
reconstruction’. New Left Review, 178 (November–December): 51–86.
Benton, T. (1993). Natural Relations: Ecology, Animal Rights & Social Justice.
London: Verso.
Benton, T. (1998). ‘Naturalism in social science’. In: Craig, E. (ed). Routledge
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. London: Routledge.
Berger, S. (ed). (2009). The Foundations of Non-Equilibrium Economics: The
Principle of Circular and Cumulative Causation. London: Routledge.
Berger, S. (2017). The Social Costs of Neoliberalism: Essays on the Economics of
K. William Kapp. Nottingham: Spokesman.
Berr, E. (2015). ‘Sustainable development in a post Keynesian perspective: Why
eco-development is relevant to post Keynesian economics’. Journal of Post
Keynesian Economics, 37: 459–480.
Bhaskar, R. (1975 [2008]). A Realist Theory of Science. London: Verso.
Bhaskar, R. (1979). The Possibility of Naturalism. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester
Press.
Bhaskar, R. (2009). Scientific Realism and Human Emancipation. London:
Routledge.
Bird, P. (1982). ‘Neoclassical and post Keynesian environmental economics’.
Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 4 (4): 586–593.
Bishop, R. C. and Heberlein, T. A. (1986). ‘Does contingent valuation work?’ In:
Cummings, R. G., Brookshire, D. S. and Schulze, W. D. (eds). Valuing
Environmental Goods: An Assessment of the Contingent Valuation Method.
Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Allanheld, 123–147.
Blackstock, K. L. (2017). ‘Participation in the context of ecological economics’. In:
Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and
Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 341–350.
Blaug, M. (1980). The Methodology of Economics: Or How Economists Explain.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bohm, P. and Kneese, A. V. (eds). (1971). The Economics of Environment. London:
Macmillan.
Boldizzoni, F. (2011). The Poverty of Clio: Resurrecting Economic History.
Princeton, NJ and Oxford: Princeton University Press.

Bookchin, M. (1982). The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of
Hierarchy. Palo Alto, CA: Cheshire Books.
Bookchin, M. (2014). The Next Revolution: Popular Assemblies and the Promise of
Direct Democracy. London: Verso.
Boulding, K. E. (1966). ‘The economics of the coming Spaceship Earth’. In: Jarrett,
H. (ed). Environmental Quality in a Growing Economy: Essays from the Sixth
RFF Forum. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 3–14.
Bourdeau, M. (2011). ‘Auguste Comte’. In: Zalta, E. N. (ed). The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Available from: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
sum2011/entries/comte/, accessed 27 October 2011.
Brand, U. and Wissen, M. (2017). ‘The imperial mode of living’. In: Spash, C. L.
(ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society.
Abingdon: Routledge, 152–161.
Brand, U. and Wissen, M. (2021). The Imperial Mode of Living: Everyday Life and
the Ecological Crisis of Capitalism. London: Verso.
Brauman, K. A., Daily, G. C., Ka’eo Duarte, T. et al. (2007). ‘The nature and value
of ecosystems services: An overview highlighting hydrological services’. Annual
Review of Environment and Resources, 32: 67–98.
Bromley, D. W. (1990). ‘The ideology of efficiency: Searching for a theory of policy
analysis’. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 19: 86–107.
Bromley, D. W. (2008). ‘Volitional pragmatism’. Ecological Economics, 68 (1–2): 1–
13.
Brown, W. S. and Shaw, D. W. (1983). ‘Neoclassical and Post Keynesian
environmental economics: An addendum’. Journal of Post Keynesian
Economics, 6 (1): 140–142.
Buch-Hansen, H. (2018). ‘The prerequisites for a degrowth paradigm shift:
Insights from critical political economy’. Ecological Economics, 146: 157–163.
Buchs, A., Petit, O. and Roman, P. (2020). ‘Can social ecological economics of
water reinforce the “big tent”?’ Ecological Economics, 169 (March): 1–14.
Burkett, P. (2005). ‘Marx’s vision of sustainable human development’. Monthly
Review, 57 (5): 34–62.
Burkett, P. (2006). Marxism and Ecological Economics: Toward a Red and Green
Political Economy. Boston, MA: Brill.
Caldwell, B. (1980). ‘Positivist philosophy of science and the methodology of
economics’. Journal of Economic Issues, 14 (March): 53–75.
Caldwell, B. J. (1991). ‘Clarifying Popper’. Journal of Economic Literature, 29 (1):
1–33.
Carpenter, S. R., DeFries, R., Dietz, T. et al. (2006). ‘Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment: Research needs’. Science, 314 (5797): 257–258.
Carson, R. (1987 [1962]). Silent Spring. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Cartwright, N. and Cat, J. (1996). ‘Neurath against method’. In: Giere, R. N. and
Richardson, A. W. (eds). Origins of Logical Empiricism. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 80–90.

Cato, M. S. (2017). ‘The bioregional economy: Celebrating the local in production
and consumption’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological
Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 487–496.
Chalmers, A. F. (1999). What Is This Thing Called Science? Buckingham: Open
University Press.
Chester, L. (2018). ‘An exit strategy from capitalism’s ecological crisis’. In: Jo, T.-H.,
Chester, L. and D’Ippoliti, C. (eds). The Routledge Handbook of Heterodox
Economics: Theorizing, Analyzing, and Transforming Capitalism. London:
Routledge, 429–443.
Chester, L. and Jo, T.-H. (eds). (2022). Heterodox Economics: Legacy and
Prospects. Bristol: World Economics Association.
Christensen, P. P. (1989). ‘Historical roots for ecological economics: Biophysical
versus allocative approaches’. Ecological Economics, 1 (February): 17–36.
Ciriacy-Wantrup, S. V. (1938). ‘Soil conservation in European farm management’.
Journal of Farm Economics, 20 (February).
Ciriacy-Wantrup, S. V. (1952a). Resource Conservation: Economics and Policies.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ciriacy-Wantrup, S. V. (1952b). ‘A safe minimum standard as an objective of
conservation policy’. In: Ciriacy-Wantrup, S. V. (ed). Resource Conservation:
Economics and Policies. Berkeley: University of California Press, 251–268.
Ciriacy-Wantrup, S. V. (1959). ‘Philosophy and objectives of watershed
development’. Land Economics, 35 (3): 211–221.
Clawson, M. and Knetsch, J. L. (1966). Economics of Outdoor Recreation.
Baltimore, MD and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Coase, R. H. (1960). ‘The problem of social cost’. Journal of Law & Economics, 3
(October): 1–44.
Coase, R. H. (1991). ‘The institutional structure of production’. Lecture to the
Memory of Alfred Nobel. Stockholm: Nobel Media AB.
Collier, A. (1994a). Critical Realism: An Introduction to Roy Bhaskar’s Philosophy.
London: Verso.
Collier, A. (1994b). ‘Value, rationality and the environment’. Radical Philosophy
(66): 3–9.
Collier, A. (1998). ‘Explanation and emancipation’. In: Archer, M., Bhaskar, R.,
Collier, A., Lawson, T. and Norrie, A. (eds). Critical Realism: Essential Readings.
London: Routledge, 444–472.
Collier, A. (2004). Marx. Oxford: Oneworld Publications.
Common, M. and Perrings, C. (1992). ‘Towards an ecological economics of
sustainability’. Ecological Economics, 6: 7–34.
Common, M. S. and Stagl, S. (2005). Ecological Economics: An Introduction.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Commoner, B. (1976). The Poverty of Power: Energy and the Economic Crisis.
London: Jonathan Cape.

Costanza, R. (1989). ‘What is ecological economics’. Ecological Economics, 1 (1):
1–7.
Costanza, R. (1991). ‘Ecological economics: A research agenda’. Structural Change
and Economic Dynamics, 2 (2): 335–357.
Costanza, R. (1996). ‘The importance of envisioning in motivating change towards
sustainability’. The Ecological Economics Bulletin, 1 (2): 11–13.
Costanza, R., Cumberland, J., Daly, H. et al. (1997a). An Introduction to Ecological
Economics. Boca Raton, FL: St. Lucie Press.
Costanza, R., d’Arge, R., de Groot, R. et al. (1997b). ‘The value of the world’s
ecosystem services and natural capital’. Nature, 387 (6630): 253–260.
Costanza, R., Perrings, C. and Cleveland, C. J. (eds). (1997c). The Development of
Ecological Economics. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Creath, R. (2011). ‘Logical empiricism’. In: Zalta, E. N. (ed). The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Available from: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
sum2011/entries/logical-empiricism, accessed 4 May 2011.
Cronin, B. (2010). ‘The diffusion of heterodox economics’. American Journal of
Economics and Sociology, 69 (5): 1475–1494.
Cumberland, J. H., Hibbs, J. R. and Hoch, I. (eds). (1982). The Economics of
Managing Chlorofluorocarbons: Stratospheric Ozone and Climate Issues.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Cummings, R. G., Brookshire, D. S. and Schulze, W. D. (eds). (1986). Valuing
Environmental Goods: An Assessment of the Contingent Valuation Method.
Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Allanheld.
D’Alisa, G., Demaria, F. and Kallis, G. (eds). (2014). Degrowth: A Vocabulary for a
New Era. Abingdon: Routledge.
d’Arge, R. C. (1975). Economic and Social Measures of Biologic and Climatic
Change. Washington, DC: US Department of Transportation, Climate Impact
Assessment Program, 699.
d’Arge, R. C. (1979). ‘Climate and economic activity’. Proceedings of the World
Climate Conference. Geneva: WMO Report, 652–668.
d’Arge, R. C. and Kogiku, K. C. (1973). ‘Economic growth and the environment’.
Review of Economic Studies, 40: 61–78.
d’Arge, R. C., Schulze, W. D. and Brookshire, D. S. (1982). ‘Carbon dioxide and
intergenerational 
choice’. 
American 
Economic 
Association 
Papers 
and
Proceedings, 72 (2): 251–256.
Daily, G. C. (ed). (1997). Nature’s Services: Societal Dependence on Natural
Ecosystems. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Daily, G. C. and Ellison, K. (2002). The New Economy of Nature: The Quest to
Make Conservation Profitable. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Daily, G. C., Söderqvist, T., Aniyar, S. et al. (2000). ‘The value of nature and the
nature of value’. Science, 289 (5478): 395–396.
Daly, H. E. (1973). Towards a Steady-State Economy. San Francisco, CA: Freeman.

Daly, H. E. (1974). ‘Economics of steady state’. American Economic Review, 64
(2): 15–21.
Daly, H. E. (1977a). Steady-State Economics. San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman.
Daly, H. E. (1977b). ‘Steady state and thermodynamics’. BioScience, 27 (12): 770–
771.
Daly, H. E. (1991a). ‘Elements of environmental macroeconomics’. In: Costanza, R.
(ed). Ecological Economics: The Science and Management of Sustainability.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Daly, H. E. (1991b). ‘Towards an environmental macroeconomics’. Land
Economics, 67 (2): 255–259.
Daly, H. E. (1992a). Steady-State Economics: Second Edition with New Essays.
London: Earthscan.
Daly, H. E. (1992b). ‘The steady-state economy: Alternative to growthmania’. In:
Daly, H. E. (ed). Steady-State Economics: Second Edition with New Essays.
London: Earthscan, 180–194.
Daly, H. E. (1997a). ‘Georgescu-Roegen versus Solow/Stiglitz’. Ecological
Economics, 22: 261–266.
Daly, H. E. (1997b). ‘Reply to Solow/Stiglitz’. Ecological Economics, 22: 271–273.
Daly, H. E. (2009 [1968]). ‘On economics as a life science’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed).
Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in the Environment, 4 Volumes.
London: Routledge.
Daly, H. E. (2010), ‘The operative word here is “somehow”’. Real World Economics
Review, September (54): 103. Available from: www.paecon.net/PAEReview/ iss
ue54/Daly54.pdf, accessed 12 January 2013.
Daly, H. E. and Cobb, J. B. (1989). For the Common Good: Redirecting the
Economy Toward Community, the Environment, and a Sustainable Future.
Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Daly, H. E. and Cobb, J. B. (2007). ‘ISEW the “debunking” interpretation and the
person-in-community paradox: Comment on Rafael Ziegler’. Environmental
Values, 16 (3): 287–288.
Daly, H. E. and Farley, J. (2011). Ecological Economics: Principles and Applications,
2nd edition. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Daly, H. E. and Morgan, J. (2019). ‘The importance of ecological economics: An
interview with Herman Daly’. Real-World Economics Review, 90 (9): 137–154.
Danermark, B., Ekstrom, M. and Karlsson, J. C. (2019). Explaining Society: Critical
Realism in the Social Sciences. London: Routledge.
Dasgupta, P. S. (2021). The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review.
London: HM Treasury, 602.
Dasgupta, P. S. and Heal, G. M. (1979). Economic Theory and Exhaustible
Resources. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davidson, P. (1979). ‘Oil conservation: Theory vs. policy’. Journal of Post
Keynesian Economics, 2 (1): 145–149.

Davidson, P. (1981). ‘Post Keynesian economics: Solving the crisis in economic
theory’. In: Bell, D. and Kristol, I. (eds). The Crisis in Economic Theory. New
York: Basic Books Inc, 151–173.
Davidson, P. (1996). ‘What revolution? The legacy of Keynes’. Journal of Post
Keynesian Economics, 19 (1): 47–60.
Davis, M. (2006). Planet of Slums. London: Verso.
Deckers, J. (2021). ‘On (un)naturalness’. Environmental Values, 30 (3): 297–318.
Dengler, C. (2022). ‘Critical realism, feminisms, and degrowth: A plea for
metatheory-informed pluralism in feminist ecological economics’. International
Journal of Pluralism and Economics Education, 13 (1): 23–42.
Dengler, C. and Lang, M. (2022). ‘Commoning care: Feminist degrowth visions for
a socio-ecological transformation’. Feminist Economics, 28 (1): 1–28.
Dengler, C. and Seebacher, L. M. (2019). ‘What about the Global South?: Towards
a feminist decolonial degrowth approach’. Ecological Economics, 157: 246–252.
Dengler, C. and Strunk, B. (2018). ‘The monetized economy versus care and the
environment: Degrowth perspectives on reconciling an antagonism’. Feminist
Economics, 24 (3): 160–183.
Descartes, R. (2003 [1641]). Meditations and Other Metaphysical Writings.
London: Penguin.
Dobusch, L. and Kapeller, J. (2012). ‘Heterodox United vs. Mainstream City?
Sketching a framework for interested pluralism in economics’. Journal of
Economic Issues, 46 (4): 1035–1058.
Dolfsma, W. and Leydesdorff, L. (2008). ‘Heterodox journals networks and ranking
journals as constituents of scientific discourse: Economics heterodoxy’. On The
Horizon, 16 (4): 214–225.
Douai, A. (2009). ‘Value theory in ecological economics: The contribution of a
political economy of wealth’. Environmental Values, 18 (3): 257–284.
Douai, A. (2017). ‘Ecological Marxism and ecological economics: From
misunderstanding to meaningful dialogue’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge
Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge,
57–66.
Douai, A., Mearman, A. and Negru, I. (2012). ‘Prospects for a heterodox
economics of the environment and sustainability’. Cambridge Journal of
Economics, 36 (5): 1019–1032.
Douai, A. and Montalban, M. (2012). ‘Institutions and the environment: the case
for a political socio-economy of environmental conflicts’. Cambridge Journal of
Economics, 36 (5): 1199–1220.
Dow, S. C. (2007). ‘Variety of methodological approach in economics’. Journal of
Economic Surveys, 21 (3): 447–465.
Dow, S. C. (2014). ‘Animal spirits and organization’. Journal of Post Keynesian
Economics, 37 (2): 211–231.
Drenthen, M. (2018). ‘Editorial: Rewilding in cultural layered landscapes’.
Environmental Values, 27 (4): 325–330.

Dryzek, J. S. (2005). The Politics of the Earth: Environmental Discourses. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Dube, B. (2021). ‘Why cross and mix disciplines and methodologies?: Multiple
meanings of interdisciplinarity and pluralism in ecological economics’. Ecological
Economics, 179: 106827.
Dugger, W. M. (1996). ‘Redefining economics: From market allocation to social
provisioning’. In: Whalen, C. (ed). Political Economy for the 21st Century:
Contemporary Views on the Trends of Economics. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe,
Inc., 31–43.
Earl, P. E. (1986). Lifestyle Economics: Consumer Behaviour in a Turbulent World.
Brighton: Wheatsheaf.
Earl, P. E. (2005). ‘Economics and psychology in the twenty-first century’.
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 29 (6): 909–926.
Earl, P. E. (2022). Principles of Behavioral Economics: Bringing Together Old, New
and Evolutionary Approaches. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Easterlin, R. A. (1995). ‘Will raising the income for all increase the happiness for
all?’ Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 27 (1): 35–47.
Easterlin, R. A. (2003). ‘Explaining happiness’. PNAS, 100 (19): 11176–11183.
Ehrlich, P. R. (1968). The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine Books.
Ehrlich, P. R. (2008). ‘Key issues for attention from ecological economists’.
Environment and Development Economics, 13 (1): 1–20.
Ehrlich, P. R. and Holdren, J. P. (1971). ‘Impact of population growth’. Science, 171
(3977): 1212–1217.
Ehrlich, P. R. and Raven, P. H. (1964). ‘Butterflies and plants: A study in
coevolution’. Evolution, 18 (4): 586–608.
Eichner, A. S. and Kregel, J. A. (1975). ‘An essay on Post Keynesian theory: A new
paradigm in economics’. Journal of Economic Literature, 13 (4): 1293–1314.
Ekeland, A. and Sæther, A. B. (2018). ‘Energy, environment, and the economy’. In:
Jo, T.-H., Chester, L. and D’Ippoliti, C. (eds). The Routledge Handbook of
Heterodox Economics: Theorizing, Analyzing, and Transforming Capitalism.
London: Routledge, 414–426.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey Centre for Business and Environment.
(2015). Growth Within: A Circular Economy Vision for a Competitive Europe.
Cowes: Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 97.
Escobar, A. (2014). ‘Development, critiques of’. In: D’Alisa, G., Demaria, F. and
Kallis, G. (eds). Degrowth: A Vocabulary for a New Era. Abingdon: Routledge,
29–32.
Escobar, A. (2018). Designs for the Pluriverse: Radical Interdependence,
Autonomy, and the Making of Worlds. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Espinosa, C. (2019). ‘Interpretive affinities: The constitutionalization of Rights of
Nature, Pacha Mama, in Ecuador’. Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning,
21 (5): 608–622.

Eversberg, D. and Schmelzer, M. (2018). ‘The degrowth spectrum: Convergence
and divergence within a diverse and conflictual alliance’. Environmental Values,
27 (3): 245–267.
Faber, M. (2008). ‘How to be an ecological economist’. Ecological Economics, 66
(1): 1–7.
Farley, J. and Washington, H. (2018). ‘Circular firing squads: A response to “The
neoclassical Trojan horse of steady-state economics” by Pirgmaier’. Ecological
Economics, 147: 442–449.
Fellner, W. and Spash, C. L. (2015). ‘The role of consumer sovereignty in
sustaining the market economy’. In: Reisch, L. A. and Thørgersen, J. (eds).
Handbook of Research on Sustainable Consumption. Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar, 394–409.
Fellner, W. J. (2017). ‘Work and leisure: Money, identity and playfulness’. In:
Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and
Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 214–223.
Ferber, M. A. and Nelson, J. A. (eds). (1993). Beyond Economic Man: Feminist
Theory and Economics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Fine, B. and Saad-Filho, A. (2010). Marx’s ‘Capital’. London: Pluto Press.
Fine, B. and Saad-Filho, A. (2018). ‘Marxist economics’. In: Fischer, L., Hasell, J.,
Proctor, J. C., Uwakwe, D., Perkins, Z. W. and Watson, C. (eds). Rethinking
Economics: An Introduction to Pluralist Economics. London and New York:
Routledge, 19–32.
Fioramonti, L., Coscieme, L., Costanza, R. et al. (2022). ‘Wellbeing economy: An
effective paradigm to mainstream post-growth policies?’ Ecological Economics,
192: 107261.
Fischer-Kowalski, M. (1998). ‘Society’s metabolism: Part I’. Journal of Industrial
Ecology, 2 (1): 61–78.
Fischer, L., Hasell, J., Proctor, J. C. et al. (eds). (2018). Rethinking Economics: An
Introduction to Pluralist Economics. London and New York: Routledge, Taylor &
Francis.
Fleetwood, S. (ed). (1999). Critical Realism in Economics. London: Routledge.
Fletcher, R. and Rammelt, C. (2017). ‘Decoupling: A key fantasy of the post-2015
sustainable development agenda’. Globalizations, 14 (3): 450–467.
Folbre, N. (1995). ‘“Holding hands at midnight”: The paradox of caring labor’.
Feminist Economics, 1 (1): 73–92.
Folbre, N., Bergmann, B., Agarwal, B. et al. (eds). (1992). Women’s Work in the
World Economy. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Foss, N. J. (2009 [1991]). ‘The suppression of evolutionary approaches in
economics: The case of Marshall and monopolisitc competition’. In: Spash, C.
L. (ed). Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in the Environment, 4 Volumes.
London: Routledge.
Fox, W. (1985). ‘A postscript on deep ecology and intrinsic value’. Trumpeter, 2
(4): 20–23.

Freeden, M. (2003). Ideology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Friedman, M. (1953). ‘The methodology of positive economics’. In: Friedman, M.
(ed). Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
Friends of the Earth. (2021). Nature Based Solutions: A Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing.
Amsterdam: Friends of the Earth International, 16.
Funtowicz, S. O. and Ravetz, J. R. (1994). ‘The worth of a songbird: Ecological
economics as a post-normal science’. Ecological Economics, 10 (3): 197–207.
Galbraith, J. K. (1969 [1958]). The Affluent Society. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Galbraith, J. K. (1970). ‘Economics as a system of belief’. The American Economic
Review, 60 (2): 469–478.
Galbraith, J. K. (1978). ‘On Post Keynesian economics’. Journal of Post Keynesian
Economics, 1 (1): 8–11.
Galbraith, J. K. (2007 [1967]). The New Industrial State. Princeton, NJ and
Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Gallai, N., Salles, J.-M., Settele, J. et al. (2009). ‘Economic valuation of the
vulnerability of world agriculture confronted with pollinator decline’. Ecological
Economics, 68 (3): 810–821.
Gaukroger, S. (2004). ‘Introduction’. In René Descartes, The World and Other
Writings, edited and translated by Gaukroger, S. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, vii–xxix.
GCEC. (2014). ‘Better Growth Better Climate: The New Climate Economy Report;
The Synthesis Report’. In: Calderon, F., Oppenheim, J. and Stern, N. H. (eds).
Washington, DC: The Global Commission on the Economy and Climate, 1–72.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (1954). ‘Choice expectations and measurability’. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 68 (2): 503–534.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (1966). Analytical Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (1971). The Entropy Law and the Economic Process.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (1975). ‘Energy and economic myths’. Southern Economic
Journal, 41 (3): 347–381.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (1977). ‘Inequality, limits and growth from a bio-economic
viewpoint’. Review of Social Economy, 35 (3): 361–375.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (1981). ‘Methods in economic science: A rejoinder’. Journal
of Economic Issues (March): 188–193.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (1995 [1979]). La décroissance. Entropie-Écologie-
Économie. Paris: Sang de la terre.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (2009 [1975]). ‘Energy and economic myths’. In: Spash, C.
L. (ed). Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in the Environment, 4 Volumes.
London: Routledge, 328–373.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (2009 [1979]). ‘Methods in economic science’. In: Spash, C.
L. (ed). Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in the Environment, 4 Volumes.
London: Routledge, 105–115.

Gerber, D. and Brincat, S. (2021). ‘When Öcalan met Bookchin: The Kurdish
freedom movement and the political theory of democratic confederalism’.
Geopolitics, 26 (4): 973–997.
Gerber, J.-F. and Scheidel, A. (2018). ‘In search of substantive economics:
Comparing today’s two major socio-metabolic approaches to the economy –
MEFA and MuSIASEM’. Ecological Economics, 144 (February): 186–194.
Giampietro, M. (2019). ‘On the circular bioeconomy and decoupling: Implications
for sustainable growth’. Ecological Economics, 162 (August): 143–156.
Gills, B. and Morgan, J. (2020). ‘Global climate emergency: After COP24, climate
science, urgency, and the threat to humanity’. Globalizations, 17 (6): 885–902.
Gills, B. K. and Hosseini, S. A. H. (2022). ‘Pluriversality and beyond: Consolidating
radical 
alternatives 
to 
(mal-)development 
as 
a 
Commonist 
project’.
Sustainability Science, 17 (4): 1183–1194.
Goddard, J. J., Kallis, G. and Norgaard, R. B. (2019). ‘Keeping multiple antennae
up: Coevolutionary foundations for methodological pluralism’. Ecological
Economics, 165 (November): 1–9.
Goodwin, N., Harris, J. M., Nelson, J. A. et al. (2015). Principles of Economics in
Context. Abingdon: Routledge.
Goodwin, N., Harris, J. M., Nelson, J. A. et al. (2019). Microeconomics in Context.
Abingdon: Routledge.
Gowdy, J. M. (1991). ‘Bioeconomics and Post Keynesian economics: a search for
common ground’. Ecological Economics, 3 (1): 77–87.
Gowdy, J. M. (1994). Coevolutionary Economics: The Economy, Society and the
Environment. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Gowdy, J. M. (2009 [1987]). ‘Bio-economics: Social economy versus the Chicago
School’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in the
Environment, 4 Volumes. London: Routledge.
Gowdy, J. M. (2023), ‘Comment: Herman Daly’s creationism and ecological
economics’. Real World Economics Review, 102. Available from: https://rwer.wo
rdpress.com/comments-on-rwer-issue-no-102/, accessed 24 March 2023.
Gowdy, J. M. and Erickson, J. D. (2005a). ‘The approach of ecological economics’.
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 29 (2): 207–222.
Gowdy, J. M. and Erickson, J. D. (2005b). ‘Ecological economics at a crossroads’.
Ecological Economics, 53 (1): 17–20.
Gowdy, J. M. and Mayumi, K. (2001). ‘Reformulating the foundation of consumer
choice theory and environmental valuation’. Ecological Economics, 32 (2): 223–
237.
Gowdy, J. M. and McDaniel, C. N. (1999). ‘The physical destruction of Nauru: An
example of weak sustainability’. Land Economics, May 1999 (75): 333–338.
Graeber, D. (2015). ‘Radical alterity is just another way of saying “reality”: A reply
to Eduardo Viveiros de Castro’. Hau: Journal of Ethnographic Theory, 5 (2): 1–
41.

Gramsci, A., Hoare, Q. and Smith, G. N. (1971). Selections from the Prison
Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci. New York: International Publishers.
Griffin, S. (1980). Woman and Nature: The Roaring Inside Her. New York: Harper
& Row.
Grove-White, R. (1997). ‘The environmental valuation controversy: Observations
on its recent history and significance’. In: Foster, J. (ed). Valuing Nature?
Economics, Ethics and Environment. London: Routledge, 21–31.
Gruchy, A. G. (1987). The Reconstruction of Economics: An Analysis of the
Fundamentals of Institutional Economics. New York: Greenwood Press.
Gudynas, E. (2014). ‘Buen vivir’. In: D’Alisa, G., Demaria, F. and Kallis, G. et al.
(eds). Degrowth: A Vocabulary for a New Era. Abingdon: Routledge, 201–204.
Gudynas, E. (2021). Extractivisms: Politics, Economy and Ecology. Rugby: Practical
Action Publishing.
Hache, F. (2020). 50 Shades of Green Part III: Sustainable Finance 2.0 – The
Securitization of Climate and Biodiversity Policies. Brussels: Green Finance
Observatory.
Hafner, S., Anger-Kraavi, A., Monasterolo, I. et al. (2020). ‘Emergence of new
economics energy transition models: A review’. Ecological Economics, 177:
106779.
Hailwood, S. A. (2000). ‘The value of Nature’s otherness’. Environmental Values, 9
(3): 353–372.
Harding, S. (2003). ‘Representing reality: The Critical Realism Project’. Feminist
Economics, 9 (1): 151–159.
Hardt, L. and O’Neill, D. W. (2017). ‘Ecological macroeconomic models: Assessing
current developments’. Ecological Economics, 134: 198–211.
Harris, J. M. (2009). ‘Ecological macroeconomics: Consumption, investment and
climate change’. Real World Economics Review, 50 (1): 34–48.
Harris, J. M. (2013). ‘The macroeconomics of development without throughput
growth’. In: Cohen, M. J., Brown, H. S. and Vergragt, P. J. (eds). Innovations in
Sustainable Consumption: New Economics, Socio-technical Transitions and
Social Practices. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing, 31–47.
Harris, J. M. and Roach, B. (2018). Environmental and Natural Resource
Economics: A Contemporary Approach. New York: Routledge.
Hartley, T., van den Bergh, J. and Kallis, G. (2020). ‘Policies for equality under low
or no growth: A model inspired by Piketty’. Review of Political Economy, 32 (2):
243–258.
Heal, G. M., Barbier, E. E., Boyle, K. J. et al. (2005). Valuing Ecosystems Services:
Toward Better Environmental Decision-Making. Washington, DC: National
Research Council.
Hempel, C. (1988). ‘Provisoes: A problem concerning the inferential function of
scientific theories’. Erkenntnis, 28 (2): 147–164.
Henry, H. K. M. and Borzekowski, D. L. G. (2011). ‘The nag factor’. Journal of
Children and Media, 5 (3): 298–317.

Herber, L. (1962). Our Synthetic Environment. New York: Knopf.
Hickel, J. and Kallis, G. (2020). ‘Is green growth possible?’ New Political Economy,
25 (4): 469–486.
Himmelweit, S. (2018). ‘Feminist economics: Why all economists should be
feminist’. In: Fischer, L., Hasell, J., Proctor, J. C., Uwakwe, D., Perkins, Z. W.
and Watson, C. (eds). Rethinking Economics: An Introduction to Pluralist
Economics. London and New York: Routledge, 60–75.
Hirsch, F. (1977a). ‘The moral re-entry’. In: Hirsch, F. (ed). Social Limits to Growth.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 137–151.
Hirsch, F. (1977b). Social Limits to Growth. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Hodgson, G. M. (1993a). ‘The mecca of Alfred Marshall’. The Economic Journal,
103 (417): 406–415.
Hodgson, G. M. (1993b). ‘Why the problem of reductionism in biology has
implications for economics’. World Futures, 37: 69–90.
Hodgson, G. M. (2008). ‘Metaphor and pluralism’. In: Fullbrook, E. (ed). Pluralist
Economics. London: Zed Books, 128–150.
Hodgson, G. M. (2018). ‘Institutional economics’. In: Fischer, L., Hasell, J., Proctor,
J. C., Uwakwe, D., Perkins, Z. W. and Watson, C. (eds). Rethinking Economics:
An Introduction to Pluralist Economics. London and New York: Routledge, 45–
59.
Hoepner, A. G. F., Kant, B., Scholtens, B. et al. (2012). ‘Environmental and
ecological economics in the 21st century: An age-adjusted citation analysis of
the influential articles, journals, authors and institutions’. Ecological Economics,
77 (0): 193–206.
Hoffmann, M. and Paulsen, R. (2020). ‘Resolving the “jobs-environment-dilemma”?
The case for critiques of work in sustainability research’. Environmental
Sociology, August: 1–12.
Holland, A. (1994). ‘One wants and one wants not to want’. Environmental Values,
3 (1): 1–2.
Holland, A. (2002). ‘Evolution and purpose: A response to Herman Daly’.
Worldviews, 6 (2): 198–206.
Holling, C. S. (2009 [1986]). ‘The resilience of terrestrial ecosystems: Local
surprise and global change’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Ecological Economics.
London: Routledge, 64–103.
Holling, C. S., Schindler, D. W., Walker, B. W. et al. (1995). ‘Biodiversity in the
functioning of ecosystems: An ecological synthesis’. In: Perrings, C., Mäler, K.-
G., Folke, C., Holling, C. S. and Jansson, B.-O. (eds). Biodiversity Loss:
Economics and Ecological Issues. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 44–
83.
Holt, R. P. F., Pressman, S. and Spash, C. L. (eds). (2009). Post Keynesian and
Ecological Economics: Confronting Environmental Issues. Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar.

Holt, R. P. F. and Spash, C. L. (2009). ‘Post Keynesian and ecological economics:
Alternative perspectives on sustainability and environmental economics’. In:
Holt, R. P. F., Pressman, S. and Spash, C. L. (eds). Post Keynesian and
Ecological Economics: Confronting Environmental Issues. Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar, 3–24.
Hornborg, A. (1998). ‘Towards an ecological theory of unequal exchange:
articulating world system theory and ecological economics’. Ecological
Economics, 25 (1): 127–136.
Hornborg, A. (2014). ‘Ecological economics, Marxism, and technological progress:
Some explorations of the conceptual foundations of theories of ecologically
unequal exchange’. Ecological Economics, 105 (0): 11–18.
Hornborg, A. (2017). ‘Political ecology and unequal exchange’. In: Spash, C. L.
(ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society.
Abingdon: Routledge, 39–47.
Hornborg, A. (2023). Money and the Insidious Magic of Technology: The Machine
as a Transformation of Slavery. London: Routledge.
Howard, D. (2000). ‘Two left turns make a right: On the curious political career of
North American philosophy of science midcentury’. In: Hardcastle, G. L. and
Richardson, A. W. (eds). Logical Empiricism in North America. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota, 25–93.
Howard, D. (2009). ‘Better red than dead: Putting an end to the social irrelevance
of postwar philosophy of science’. Science & Education, 18 (2): 199–220.
Howarth, R. B. (2008). ‘Editorial’. Ecological Economics, 64: 469.
Hunt, E. K. and d’Arge, R. C. (1973). ‘On lemmings and other acquisitive animals:
Propositions on consumption’. Journal of Economic Issues, 7 (June): 337–353.
Hutchinson, T. W. (1938). The Significance and Basic Postulates of Economic
Theory. London: Macmillan & Co. Ltd.
Illge, L. and Schwarze, R. (2009). ‘A matter of opinion: How ecological and
neoclassical 
environmental 
economists 
think 
about 
sustainability 
and
economics’. Ecological Economics, 68 (3): 594–604.
Jackson, T. (2009a). Prosperity without Growth: Economics for a Finite Planet.
London: Earthscan.
Jackson, T. (2009b). Prosperity without Growth? The Transition to a Sustainable
Economy. Edinburgh: Sustainable Development Commission.
Jackson, T. (2017). Prosperity without Growth? Foundations for the Economy of
Tomorrow. London: Routledge.
Jackson, T. and Victor, P. A. (2013). Developing an Ecological Macroeconomics.
Waterloo: Centre for International Governance Innovation.
Jackson, T. and Victor, P. A. (2015). ‘Does credit create a “growth imperative”? A
quasi-stationary economy with interest-bearing debt’. Ecological Economics,
120: 32–48.
Jackson, T. and Victor, P. A. (2016). ‘Does slow growth lead to rising inequality?
Some theoretical reflections and numerical simulations’. Ecological Economics,

121 (January): 206–219.
Jackson, T. and Victor, P. A. (2020). ‘The transition to a sustainable prosperity: A
stock-flow-consistent ecological macroeconomic model for Canada’. Ecological
Economics, 177: 106787.
Jacobs, M. (1996). ‘What is socio-ecological economics?’. The Ecological
Economics Bulletin, 1 (2): 14–16.
Jacobs, M. and Mazzucato, M. (eds). (2016). Rethinking Capitalism: Economics
and Policy for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Jakobsen, O. (2018). Ecological Economics and Anarchism. Aldershot: Routledge.
Jennings, A. L. (1993). ‘Public or private? Institutional economics and feminism’.
In: Ferber, M. A. and Nelson, J. A. (eds). Beyond Economic Man: Feminist
Theory and Economics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 111–129.
Jevons, W. S. (1965 [1865]). The Coal Question: An Inquiry Concerning the
Progress of the Nation and the Probable Exhaustion of Our Coal-Mines. New
York: Augustus M. Kelley.
Jo, T.-H., Chester, L. and D’Ippoliti, C. (eds). (2018). The Routledge Handbook of
Heterodox Economics: Theorizing, Analyzing, and Transforming Capitalism.
London: Routledge.
Jones, E. E. (1998). ‘Major developments in five decades of social psychology’. In:
Gilbert, D. T., Fiske, S. T. and Lindzey, G. (eds). The Handbook of Social
Psychology. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill, 3–57.
Kahneman, D. and Knetsch, J. L. (1992a). ‘Contingent valuation and the value of
public-goods: Reply’. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 22
(1): 90–94.
Kahneman, D. and Knetsch, J. L. (1992b). ‘Valuing public goods: The purchase of
moral satisfaction’. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 22
(1): 57–70.
Kaldor, N. (1961). ‘Capital accumulation and economic growth’. In: Lutz, F. and
Hague, D. (eds). The Theory of Capital. London: Macmillan, 177–222.
Kallis, G. (2011). ‘In defence of degrowth’. Ecological Economics, 70 (5): 873–880.
Kallis, G., Gomez-Baggethun, E. and Zografos, C. (2013). ‘To value or not to value?
That is not the question’. Ecological Economics, 94 (October): 97–105.
Kallis, G., Kerschner, C. and Martinez-Alier, J. (2012). ‘The economics of degrowth’.
Ecological Economics, 84 (0): 172–180.
Kallis, G. and Norgaard, R. B. (2010). ‘Coevolutionary ecological economics’.
Ecological Economics, 69 (4): 690–699.
Kant, I., Müller, F. M. and Weigelt, M. (2007 [1787/1781]). Immanuel Kant:
Critique of Pure Reason. London: Penguin Group.
Kapp, K. W. (1950). The Social Costs of Private Enterprise. New York: Schocken.
Kapp, K. W. (1959). ‘River valley projects in India: Their direct effects’. Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 8 (1): 24–47.
Kapp, K. W. (1961). Toward a Science of Man in Society: A Positive Approach to
the Integration of Social Knowledge. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.

Kapp, K. W. (1965). ‘Economic development in a new perspective: Existential
minima and substantive rationality’. Kyklos, 18 (1): 49–79.
Kapp, K. W. (1970a). ‘Environmental disruption and social costs: A challenge to
economics’. Kyklos, 23 (4): 833–848.
Kapp, 
K. 
W. 
(1970b). 
‘Environmental 
disruption: 
General 
issues 
and
methodological problems’. Social Science Information, 9 (4): 15–32.
Kapp, K. W. (1971 [1950]). The Social Costs of Private Enterprise. New York:
Schocken.
Kapp, K. W. (1974a). Environmental Policies and Development Planning in
Contemporary China and Other Essays. The Hague: Mouton & Co.
Kapp, K. W. (1974b). ‘Recycling in contemporary China’. Kyklos, 27 (2): 286–303.
Kapp, K. W. (1976). ‘Nature and significance of institutional economics’. Kyklos, 29
(2): 209–232.
Kapp, K. W. (1978 [1963]). The Social Costs of Business Enterprise. Nottingham:
Spokesman.
Kapp, K. W. (2011a). ‘The central hypothesis of institutional economics: Circular
and cumulative causation’. In: Berger, S. and Steppacher, R. (eds). The
Foundations of Institutional Economics. London: Routledge, 170–179.
Kapp, K. W. (2011b). ‘Towards a theory of human needs and social minima’. In:
Berger, S. and Steppacher, R. (eds). The Foundations of Institutional
Economics. London: Routledge, 85–101.
Kapp, K. W., Berger, S. and Steppacher, R. (2011). The Foundations of Institutional
Economics. London: Routledge.
Kapp, K. W. and Kapp, L. L. (1963). History of Economic Thought: A Book of
Readings. New York: Barnes & Noble.
Kareiva, P., Marvier, M. and Lalasz, R. (2012). Conservation in the Anthropocene:
Beyond Solitude and Fragility. Oakland, CA: The Breakthrough Institute.
Kauffman, C. M. and Martin, P. L. (2018). ‘Constructing rights of nature norms in
the US, Ecuador, and New Zealand’. Global Environmental Politics, 18 (4): 43–
62.
Keen, S. (2021). ‘The appallingly bad neoclassical economics of climate change’.
Globalizations, 18 (7): 1149–1177.
Kelbessa, W. (2022). ‘African worldviews, biodiversity conservation and sustainable
development’. Environmental Values, 31 (5): 575–598.
Keynes, J. M. (1930). ‘Economic possibilities for our grandchildren’. Nation and
Athenaeum, 48 (11 and 18): 36–37, 96–98.
Keynes, J. M. (1978 [1936]). The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money. London: Macmillan.
Keynes, J. M. (1988 [1921]). A Treatise on Probability. London: Macmillan and Co.
Klein, N. (2020). ‘Screen new deal: Under cover of mass death, Andrew Cuomo
calls in the billionaires to build a high-tech dystopia’. The Intercept, 8 May.
Available from: https://theintercept.com/2020/05/08/andrew-cuomo-eric-schmi
dt- coronavirus-tech-shock-doctrine/, accessed 1 September 2023.

Kneese, A. V. (1971). ‘Background for the economic analysis of environmental
pollution’. The Swedish Journal of Economics, 73 (1): 1–24.
Kneese, A. V. (1984). Measuring the Benefits of Clean Air and Water. Washington,
DC: Resources for the Future.
Kneese, A. V., Ayres, R. U. and d’Arge, R. C. (1970). Economics and the
Environment: A Materials Balance Approach. Washington, DC: Resources for
the Future.
Kneese, A. V. and Schulze, W. D. (1985). ‘Ethics and environmental economics’. In:
Kneese, A. V. and Sweeney, J. L. (eds). Handbook of Natural Resource and
Energy Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 191–220.
Knetsch, J. L. (1985). ‘Values, biases and entitlements’. Annals of Regional
Science, 19 (2): 1–9.
Knetsch, J. L. (1989). ‘The endowment effect and evidence of non-reversible
indifference curves’. The American Economic Review, 79 (5): 1277–1284.
Knetsch, J. L. (1994). ‘Environmental valuation: Some problems of wrong
questions and misleading answers’. Environmental Values, 3 (4): 351–368.
Knetsch, J. L. (2005). ‘Gains, losses, and the US EPA economic analyses
guidelines: A hazardous product?’ Environmental & Resource Economics, 32
(1): 91–112.
Knetsch, J. L. and Sinden, J. A. (1984). ‘Willingness to pay and compensation
demanded: Experimental evidence of an unexpected disparity in measures of
value’. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99 (3): 507–521.
Knudsen, S. (2023). ‘Critical realism in political ecology: An argument against flat
ontology’. Journal of Poltical Ecology, 30 (1): 1–21.
Koch, M. (2021). ‘Social policy without growth: Moving towards sustainable
welfare states’. Social Policy and Society, 21 (3): 447–459.
Komlosy, A. (2018). Work: The Last 1000 Years. London and New York: Verso.
Konik, I. (2018). ‘Ubuntu and ecofeminism: Value-building with African and
womanist voices’. Environmental Values, 27 (3): 269–288.
Kothari, A., Salleh, A., Escobar, A. et al. (eds). (2019). Pluriverse: A Post-
Development Dictionary. New Delhi: Tulika Books.
Krausmann, F. (2017). ‘Social metabolism’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge
Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge,
108–118.
Krausmann, F., Schandl, H. and Sieferle, R. P. (2008). ‘Socio-ecological regime
transitions in Austria and the United Kingdom’. Ecological Economics, 65 (1):
187–201.
Kraut, R. (1989). ‘Two conceptions of happiness’. In: Pojman, L.P. (ed). Ethical
Theory: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 136–
146.
Kronenberg, J. (2014). ‘What can the current debate on ecosystem services learn
from the past? Lessons from economic ornithology’. Geoforum, 55: 164–177.

Kronenberg, T. (2010). ‘Finding common ground between ecological economics
and Post Keynesian economics’. Ecological Economics, 69 (7): 1488–1494.
Krutilla, J. V. (1967). ‘Conservation reconsidered’. American Economic Review
(September): 777–786.
Krutilla, J. V. and Fisher, A. C. (1978). The Economics of Natural Environments:
Studies in the Valuation of Commodity and Amenity Resources. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970 [1962]). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions: Second Edition,
Enlarged. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Kumar, P. (ed). (2010). The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Ecological
and Economic Foundations. London and Washington, DC: Earthscan.
Labrousse, A. and Michel, S. (2018). ‘Accumulation regimes’. The Routledge
Handbook of Heterodox Economics: Theorizing, Analyzing, and Transforming
Capitalism. London: Routledge, 54–69.
Lakatos, I. (1970). ‘Falsification and the methodology of scientific research
programmes’. In: Musgrave, A. and Lakatos, I. (eds). Criticism and the Growth
of Knowledge: Proceedings of the International Colloquium in the Philosophy of
Science, London, 1965. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 91–196.
Lang, M. and Mokrani, D. (eds). (2013). Beyond Development: Alternative Visions
from Latin America. Quito: Rosa Luxemburg Foundation.
Lange, O. and Taylor, F. M. (1938). On the Economic Theory of Socialism.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Latour, B. and Woolgar, S. (1986 [1979]). Laboratory Life: The Construction of
Scientific Facts. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lavoie, M. (2004). ‘Post Keynesian consumer theory: Potential synergies with
consumer research and economic psychology’. Journal of Economic Psychology,
25 (5): 639–649.
Lavoie, M. (2009). ‘Post Keynesian consumer choice theory and ecological
economics’. In: Holt, R. P. F., Pressman, S. and Spash, C. L. (eds). Post
Keynesian and Ecological Economics: Confronting Environmental Issues.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 141–157.
Lavoie, M. (2014). Post-Keynesian Economics: New Foundations. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Lavoie, M. (2022). Post-Keynesian Economics: New Foundations, Second Edition.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Lawson, T. (1997). Economics and Reality. London: Routledge.
Lawson, T. (1999). ‘Feminism, realism, and universalism’. Feminist Economics, 5
(2): 25–59.
Lawson, T. (2003a). ‘Ontology and feminist theorizing’. Feminist Economics, 9 (1):
119–150.
Lawson, T. (2003b). ‘Theorizing ontology’. Feminist Economics, 9 (1): 161–169.
Lawson, T. (2006). ‘The nature of heterodox economics’. Cambridge Journal of
Economics, 30 (4): 483–505.

Lawson, T. (2008). ‘Social explanation and Popper’. In: Boylan, T. and O’Gorman,
P. (eds). Popper and Economic Methodology: Contemporary Challenges.
London and New York: Routledge, 87–112.
Lawson, T. (2009). ‘Heterodox economics and pluralism’. In: Fullbook, E. (ed).
Ontology and Economics: Tony Lawson and His Critics. London: Routledge, 93–
129.
Lee, F. S. (2009). A History of Heterodox Economics: Challenging the Mainstream
in the Twentieth Century. London: Routledge.
Lee, F. S. (2012). ‘Heterodox economics and its critics’. Review of Political
Economy, 24 (2): 337–351.
Lee, F. S., Grijalva, T. C. and Nowell, C. (2010). ‘Ranking economics departments
in a contested discipline: A bibliometric approach to quality equality between
theoretically distinct subdisciplines’. American Journal of Economics and
Sociology, 69 (5): 1345–1375.
Levine, P. (2017). Eugenics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Levrel, H. and Martinet, V. (2021). ‘Ecological economists: The good, the bad, and
the ugly?’ Ecological Economics, 179 (January): 106694.
Lo, A. Y. H. and Spash, C. L. (2013). ‘Deliberative monetary valuation: In search of
a democratic and value plural approach to environmental policy’. Journal of
Economic Surveys, 27 (4): 768–789.
Loasby, B. J. (1976). Choice, Complexity and Ignorance: An Inquiry into Economic
Theory and the Practice of Decision-Making. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Locke, J. (2008 [1689]). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Luks, F. and Siebenhuner, B. (2007). ‘Transdisciplinarity for social learning? The
contribution of the German socio-ecological research initiative to sustainability
governance’. Ecological Economics, 63 (2–3): 418–426.
Lundgren, J. (2022). ‘Unity through disunity: Strengths, values, and tensions in
the disciplinary discourse of ecological economics’. Ecological Economics, 191:
107241.
Luxemberg, R. (2003 [1913]). The Accumulation of Capital. London: Routledge.
Mackie, J. L. (1970). ‘Simple truth’. The Philosophical Quaterly, 20 (81): 321–333.
Malm, A. (2016). Fossil Capital: The Rise of Steam Power and the Roots of Global
Warming. London: Verso.
Malm, A. (2019). ‘Against hybridism: Why we need to distinguish between Nature
and society, now more than ever’. Historical Materialism, 27 (2): 156.
Malm, A. (2020). The Progress of This Storm: Nature and Society in a Warming
World. London: Verso.
Malm, A. (2021). How to Blow Up a Pipeline. London: Verso.
Malthus, T. R. (1986 [1798]). An Essay on the Principle of Population. London:
Pickering & Chatto.

Marangos, J. and Williams, C. (2005). ‘The effect of drought on uncertainty and
agricultural investment in Australia’. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 27
(4): 575–594.
Marshall, A. (1916 [1890]). Principles of Economics, 7th Edition. London:
Macmillan.
Martinez-Alier, J. (1990). Ecological Economics: Energy, Environment and Society.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Martinez-Alier, J. (2002). The Environmentalism of the Poor: A Study of Ecological
Conflicts and Valuation. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Martinez-Alier, J. (2009). ‘Ecological economics: Taking Nature into account’. In:
Spash, C. L. (ed). Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in the Environment,
4 Volumes. London: Routledge, 39–61.
Martinez-Alier, J., Munda, G. and O’Neill, J. (1998). ‘Weak comparability of values
as a foundation for ecological economics’. Ecological Economics, 26 (3): 277–
286.
Marx, K. (1974 [1887]). Capital: Volume One. London: Lawrence & Wishart Ltd.
Mauss, M. (1990 [1954]). The Gift. London: Routledge.
Max-Neef, M. A. (2005). ‘Foundations of transdisciplinarity’. Ecological Economics,
53 (1): 5–16.
Max-Neef, M. A. (2009 [1992]). ‘Development and human needs’. In: Spash, C. L.
(ed). Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in the Environment, 4 Volumes.
London: Routledge, 131–149.
Maybee, J. E. (2019). ‘Hegel’s dialectics’. In: Zalta, E. N. (ed). The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Available from: https://plato.stanford.edu/archive
s/win2019/entries/hegel-dialectics/, accessed 15 August 2020.
Mayumi, K. T. (2017). ‘Thermodynamics: Relevance, implications, misuse and
ways forward’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological
Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 89–98.
McCloskey, D. N. (1983). ‘The rhetoric of economics’. Journal of Economic
Literature, 31: 434–461.
McConnell, S. L. B. (2012). ‘Post Keynesian and ecological economics: Confronting
environmental issues’. Review of Political Economy, 24 (1): 174–177.
McShane, K. (2007a). ‘Anthropocentrism vs. nonanthropocentrism: Why should we
care?’ Environmental Values, 16 (2): 169–186.
McShane, K. (2007b). ‘Why environmental ethics shouldn’t give up on intrinsic
value’. Environmental Ethics, 29 (1): 43–61.
McShane, K. (2017). ‘Intrinsic values and economic valuation’. In: Spash, C. L.
(ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society.
Abingdon: Routledge, 237–245.
Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L., Randers, J. et al. (1972). The Limits to Growth.
London: Pan.
Mearman, A. (2005). ‘Why have Post Keynesians had (relatively) little to say on
the economics of the environment?’ International Journal of Environment,

Workplace and Employment, 1 (2): 131–154.
Mearman, A. (2007). ‘Post Keynesian economics and the environment: Waking up
and smelling the coffee burning?’ International Journal of Green Economics, 1
(3–4): 374–380.
Meiksins Wood, E. (2003). The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View. London:
Verso.
Mellor, M. (2005). ‘Ecofeminist political economy: Integrating feminist economics
and ecological economics’. Feminist Economics, 11: 120–126.
Mies, M. and Shiva, V. (2014 [1993]). ‘People or population: Towards a new
ecology of reproduction’. In: Mies, M. and Shiva, V. (eds). Ecofeminism. London
& New York: Zed Books, 277–296.
Mill, J. S. (1848). Principles of Political Economy, with Some of their Applications to
Social Philosophy. London: John W. Parker.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. (2005). Ecosystems and Human Well-Being:
Synthesis. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Mirowski, P. (1989). More Heat than Light: Economics as Social Physics, Physics as
Nature’s Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mirowski, P. (2013). Never Let a Serious Crisis go to Waste: How Neoliberalism
Survived the Financial Meltdown. London: Verso.
Mirowski, P. and Plehwe, D. (eds). (2009). The Road to Mont Pèlerin: Making of
the Neoliberal Thought Collective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mishan, E. J. (1967). The Costs of Economic Growth. London: Staples Press.
Mishan, E. J. (1969). Growth: The Price We Pay. London: Staples Press.
Mishan, E. J. (1971). ‘Pangloss on pollution’. Swedish Journal of Economics, 73
(1): 113–120.
Mokyr, J. (1991). ‘Evolutionary biology, technological change and economic
history’. Bulletin of Economic Research, 43 (2): 127–149.
Morgan, J. (2007). ‘Emergence’. In: Hartwig, M. (ed). Dictionary of Critical
Realism. London and New York: Routledge, 122.
Morgan, J. (2017). ‘Piketty and the growth dilemma revisited in the context of
ecological economics’. Ecological Economics, 136: 169–177.
Morgan, J. (2021a). ‘The future: Thanks for the memories’. Real-World Economics
Review, 96 (22): 2–27.
Morgan, J. (2021b). ‘Learning to treat our natural world realistically through
unlearning mainstream economics? A commentary on the recent work of Peter
Söderbaum’. Economic Thought, 10 (1): 14–31.
Morris, W. (1993 [1884]). ‘Useful work versus useless toil’. In: Wilmer, C. (ed).
News from Nowhere and Other Writings. London: Penguin Books, 285–306.
Morris, W. (1993 [1890]). ‘News from nowhere’. In: Wilmer, C. (ed). News from
Nowhere and Other Writings. London: Penguin Books, 41–228.
Munda, G. (1997). ‘Environmental economics, ecological economics, and the
concept of sustainable development’. Environmental Values, 6 (2): 213–233.

Munda, G. (2004). ‘Social multi-criteria evaluation: methodological foundations
and operational consequences’. European Journal of Operational Research,
158: 662–677.
Mussell, H. (2020). ‘The truth of the matter’. Hypatia, 31 (3): 537–553.
Myrdal, G. (1978). ‘Institutional economics’. Journal of Economic Issues, 12 (4):
771–783.
Naess, A. (1973). ‘Shallow and deep, long-range ecology movement: Summary’.
Inquiry: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy, 16 (1): 95–100.
Naess, A. (1984). ‘A defence of the deep ecology movement’. Environmental
Ethics, 6 (4): 265–270.
Naess, A. (2009 [1973]). ‘Shallow and deep, long-range ecology movement: A
summary’. Originally published in Inquiry 16 (1): 95–100. In: Spash, C. L. (ed).
Ecological Economics. Abingdon: Routledge, 284–289.
Nelson, A. and Timmerman, F. (eds). (2011). Life Without Money: Building Fair
and Sustainable Economies. London: Pluto Press.
Nelson, J. (2003a). ‘Once more, with feeling: Feminist economics and the
ontological question’. Feminist Economics, 9 (1): 109–118.
Nelson, J., Ferber, M. and Nelson, J. (1993). The Study of Choice or the Study of
Provisioning? Gender and the Definition of Economics. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Nelson, J. A. (1993). ‘The study of choice or the study of provisioning? Gender and
the definition of economics’. In: Ferber, M. A. and Nelson, J. A. (eds). Beyond
Economic Man: Feminist Theory and Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 23–36.
Nelson, J. A. (1997). ‘Feminism, ecology and the philosophy of economics’.
Ecological Economics, 20 (2): 155–162.
Nelson, J. A. (2003b). ‘Confronting the science/value split: notes on feminist
economics, institutionalism, pragmatism and process thought’. Cambridge
Journal of Economics, 27 (1): 49–64.
Nelson, J. A. (2008). ‘Economists, value judgments, and climate change: A view
from feminist economics’. Ecological Economics, 65 (3): 441–447.
Nelson, J. A. (2009). ‘Between a rock and a soft place: Ecological and feminist
economics in policy debates’. Ecological Economics, 69 (1): 1–8.
Nelson, J. A. and Morgan, J. (2020). ‘Ecological and feminist economics: An
interview with Julie A. Nelson’. Real-World Economics Review, 19 (16 March):
146–153.
Nelson, J. A. and Power, M. (2018). ‘Ecology, sustainability, and care:
developments in the field’. Feminist Economics, 24 (3): 80–88.
Neurath, O. (1931 [1983]). ‘Sociology in the framework of physicalism’. In: Cohen,
R. S. and Neurath, M. (eds). Otto Neurath Philosophical Papers: 1913–1946.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 58–90.
Neurath, O. (1932 [1983]). ‘Protocol sentences’. In: Cohen, R. S. and Neurath, M.
(eds). Otto Neurath Philosophical Papers: 1913–1946. Dordrecht: D. Reidel

Publishing Company, 91–99.
Neurath, O. (1937 [1983]). ‘Unified science and its encyclopedia’. In: Neurath, O.,
Cohen, R. S. and Neurath, M. (eds). Philosophical Papers 1913–1946.
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 172–182.
Neurath, O. (1973 [1931]). ‘Empirical sociology: The scientific content of history
and political economy’. In: Neurath, M. and Cohen, R. S. (eds). Empiricism and
Sociology. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 319–421.
Neurath, O. (2004 [1910]). ‘On the theory of social science’. In: Uebel, T. E. and
Cohen, R. S. (eds). Otto Neurath Economic Writings: Selections 1904–1945.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 265–291.
Niemeyer, S. and Spash, C. L. (2001). ‘Environmental valuation analysis, public
deliberation and their pragmatic syntheses: A critical appraisal’. Environment &
Planning C: Government & Policy, 19 (4): 567–586.
Nijkamp, P. (2005). ‘Review of “New dimensions in ecological economics:
integrated approaches to people and nature”’. Ecological Economics: 133–134.
Norgaard, R. B. (1981). ‘Sociosystem and ecosystem coevolution in the Amazon’.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 8 (3): 238–254.
Norgaard, R. B. (1984). ‘Coevolutionary agricultural development’. Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 32 (3): 525–546.
Norgaard, R. B. (1987). ‘Economics as mechanics and the demise of biological
diversity’. Ecological Modelling, 38 (1–2): 107–121.
Norgaard, R. B. (1988). ‘Sustainable development: A co-evolutionary view’.
Futures (December): 606–662.
Norgaard, R. B. (1989). ‘The case for methodological pluralism’. Ecological
Economics, 1 (1): 37–57.
Norgaard, R. B. (1994a). Development Betrayed: The End of Progress and a
Coevolutionary Revisioning of the Future. London: Routledge.
Norgaard, R. B. (1994b). ‘The philosophical roots of the betrayal’. In: Norgaard, R.
B. (ed). Development Betrayed: The End of Progress and a Coevolutionary
Revisioning of the Future. London: Routledge, 61–74.
Norgaard, R. B. (2009 [1984]). ‘Coevolutionary development potential’. In: Spash,
C. L. (ed). Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in the Environment, 4
Volumes. London: Routledge, 61–79.
Norgaard, R. B. (2017). ‘Coevolutiornary social ecological economics’. In: Spash, C.
L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society.
Abingdon and New York: Routledge, 129–138.
Norton, B. G. (1995). ‘Evaluating ecosystem states: 2 competing paradigms’.
Ecological Economics, 14 (2): 113–127.
Norton, B. G. and Noonan, D. (2007). ‘Ecology and valuation: Big changes
needed’. Ecological Economics, 63 (4): 664–675.
Norton, B. G. and Steinemann, A. C. (2001). ‘Environmental values and adaptive
management’. Environmental Values, 10 (4): 473–506.

O’Connor, J. (1988). ‘Capitalism, nature, socialism: A theoretical introduction’.
Capitalism Nature Socialism, 1 (1): 11–38.
O’Connor, J. (1991). ‘On the two contradictions of capitalism’. Capitalism Nature
Socialism, 2 (3): 107–109.
O’Connor, M. (ed). (1994). Is Capitalism Sustainable? Political Economy and the
Politics of Ecology. New York: Guilford Press.
O’Hara, S. (2009). ‘Feminist ecological economics in theory and practice’. In:
Salleh, A. (ed). Eco-Sufficiency & Global Justice: Women Write Political
Ecology. London: Pluto Press, 180–198.
O’Neill, J. F. (1992). ‘The varieties of intrinsic value’. The Monist, 75 (2): 119–137.
O’Neill, J. F. (1997). ‘Value, pluralism, incommensurability and institutions’. In:
Foster, J. (ed). Environmental Economics: A Critique of Orthodox Policy.
London: Routledge.
O’Neill, J. F. (2001). ‘Representing people, representing nature, representing the
world’. Environment & Planning C: Government & Policy, 9 (4): 483–500.
O’Neill, J. F. (2003). ‘Unified science as political philosophy: Positivism, pluralism
and liberalism’. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 34A (3): 575–596.
O’Neill, J. F. (2006). ‘Citizenship, well-being and sustainability: Epicurus or
Aristotle?’ Analyse & Kritik, 28 (2): 158–172.
O’Neill, J. F. (2007). Markets, Deliberation and Environment. London: Routledge.
O’Neill, J. F. (2011). ‘Money, markets and ecology’. In: Nelson, A. and Timmerman,
F. (eds). Life Without Money: Building Fair and Sustainable Economies. London:
Pluto Press, 70–93.
O’Neill, J. F. (2017). ‘Pluralism and incommensurability’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed).
Routledge Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon:
Routledge, 227–236.
O’Neill, J. F. and Spash, C. L. (2000). ‘Conceptions of value in environmental
decision-making’. Environmental Values, 9 (4): 521–536.
O’Neill, J. F. and Uebel, T. E. (2004). ‘Horkheimer and Neurath: Restarting a
disrupted debate’. European Journal of Philosophy, 12 (1): 75–105.
O’Neill, J. F. and Uebel, T. E. (2015). ‘Analytical philosophy and ecological
economics’. In: Martínez Alier, J. and Muradian, R. (eds). Handbook of
Ecological Economics. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 48–73.
Oksala, J. (2020). ‘Feminism, capitalism, and ecology’. Hypatia, 33 (2): 216–234.
Oreskes, N. and Conway, E. M. (2010). Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of
Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global
Warming. New York: Bloomsbury Press.
Ostrom, E. (1991). Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for
Collective Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ostrom, E. (2009). ‘A general framework for analyzing sustainability of social-
ecological systems’. Science, 325 (5939): 419–422.
Özkaynak, B., Devine, P. and Rigby, D. (2002). ‘Whither ecological economics?’
International Journal of Environment and Pollution, 18 (4): 317–335.

Paley, W. S. (1952). Resources for Freedom: Report of the President’s Materials
Policy Commission. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.
Parrique, T., Barth, J., Briens, F. et al. (2019). Decoupling Debunked: Evidence and
Arguments Against Green Growth as a Sole Strategy for Sustainability.
Brussels: European Environmental Bureau.
Pasinetti, L. L. (2005). ‘The Cambridge School of Keynesian economics’. Cambridge
Journal of Economics, 29: 837–848.
Perkins, P. E. (1997). ‘Women, ecology and economics: New models and theories’.
Ecological Economics, 20 (2): 105–106.
Perkins, P. E. and Kuiper, E. (2005). ‘Introduction: Exploring feminist ecological
economics’. Feminist Economics, 11 (3): 107–110.
Perrings, C. (1987). Economy and Environment. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Perrings, C. (1997). Economics of Ecological Resources: Selected Essays.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Perrings, C. (2006). ‘Ecological economics after the millenium assessment’.
International Journal of Ecological Economics & Statistics, 6 (Fall): 8–22.
Peter, F. (2003). ‘Critical realism, feminist epistemology, and the emancipatory
potential of science: A comment on Lawson and Harding’. Feminist Economics,
9 (1): 93–101.
Peterson, A. and Merchant, C. (1986). ‘“Peace with the earth”: Women and the
environmental movement in Sweden’. Women’s Studies Int. Forum, 9: 465–
479.
Pheby, J. (1988). Methodology and Economics: A Critical Introduction. London:
Macmillan.
Pirgmaier, E. (2021). ‘The value of value theory for ecological economics’.
Ecological Economics, 179: 106790.
Plato. (2007). The Republic. London: Penguin.
Pojman, L. P. (1989). Ethical Theory: Classical and Contemporary Readings.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Polanyi, K. (1944). The Great Transformation. New York and Toronto: Rinehart &
Company.
Polanyi, K. (1957). ‘The market as instituted process’. In: Polanyi, K., Arensberg, C.
M. and Pearson, H. W. (eds). Trade and Market in the Early Empires. Chicago,
IL: Henry Regnery Company, 243–270.
Polanyi, K. (1977). ‘The economistic fallacy’. In: Pearson, H. W. (ed). The
Livelihood of Man. New York: Academic Press, 5–17.
Pollini, J. (2013). ‘Bruno Latour and the ontological dissolution of nature in the
social sciences: A critical review’. Environmental Values, 22 (1): 25–42.
Porpora, D. V. (1998). ‘Four concepts of social structure’. In: Archer, M., Bhaskar,
R., Collier, A., Lawson, T. and Norrie, A. (eds). Critical Realism: Essential
Readings. London: Routledge, 339–355.

Porto-Gonçalves, C. W. and Leff, E. (2015). ‘Political ecology in Latin America: The
social re-appropriation of Nature, the reinvention of territories and the
construction of an environmental rationality’. Desenvolvimento e Meio
Ambiente, 35 (December): 65–88.
Power, M. (2004). ‘Social provisioning as a starting point for feminist economics’.
Feminist Economics, 10 (3): 3–19.
Preiswerk, R. and Ullmann, J. E. (eds). (1985). The Humanization of the Social
Sciences: K. William Kapp. Boston, MA and London: University Press of
America Inc.
Puller, A. and Smith, T. (2017). ‘A critical and realist approach to ecological
economics’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological
Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 17–26.
Rammelt, C. (2020). ‘The spiralling economy: Connecting Marxian theory with
ecological economics’. Environmental Values, 29 (4): 417–442.
Rapport, D. J. and Turner, J. E. (1977). ‘Economics models in ecology’. Science,
195 (January–March): 367–373.
Rauschmayer, F. and Omann, I. (2017). ‘Needs as a central element of sustainable
development’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological
Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 246–255.
Raworth, K. (2018 [2017]). Doughnut Economics: Seven Ways to Think Like a
21st-Century Economist. London: Random House Business Books.
Rees, W. E. (2009 [1990]). ‘Revisiting carrying capacity: Area-based indicators of
sustainability’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in
the Environment, 4 Volumes. London: Routledge, 43–63.
Reisch, D. A. (2005). How the Cold War Transformed the Philosophy of Science.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Reisch, L. A. and Ropke, I. (2004). The Ecological Economics of Consumption.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Reiter, B. (2018). ‘Introduction’. In: Reiter, B. (ed). Constructing the Pluriverse:
The Geopolitics of Knowledge. Durham. NC: Duke University Press, 1–18.
Robbins, L. (1932). An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science.
London: Macmillan.
Robertson, J. M. (ed). (1905). The Philosophical Works of Francis Bacon. London:
George Routledge and Sons.
Rocha, J., Malmborg, K., Gordon, L. et al. (2020). ‘Mapping social-ecological
systems archetypes’. Environmental Research Letters, 15 (3): 034017.
Roman, P. and Thiry, G. (2017). ‘Sustainability indicators’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed).
Routledge Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon:
Routledge, 382–392.
Rommetveit, K., Strand, R., Fjelland, R. et al. (2013). What Can History Teach Us
about the Prospects of a European Research Area? Luxembourg: European
Commission Joint Research Centre.

Roncaglia, A. (2003). ‘Energy and market power: An alternative approach to the
economics of oil’. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 25 (4): 641–659.
Røpke, I. (1998). ‘Sustainability and structural change’. In: Faucheux, S. et al.
(eds). Sustainable Development: Concepts, Rationalities and Strategies. The
Hague: Kluwer, 141–155.
Røpke, I. (1999). ‘The dynamics of willingness to consume’. Ecological Economics,
28 (3): 399–420.
Røpke, I. (2004). ‘The early history of modern ecological economics’. Ecological
Economics, 50 (3–4): 293–314.
Røpke, I. (2005). ‘Trends in the development of ecological economics from the late
1980s to the early 2000s’. Ecological Economics, 55 (2): 262–290.
Røpke, I. (2013). ‘Ecological macroeconomics: Implications for the roles of
consumer-citizens’. In: Cohen, M. J., Brown, H. S. and Vergragt, P. J. (eds).
Innovations in Sustainable Consumption: New Economics, Socio-technical
Transitions and Social Practices. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 48–64.
Røpke, I. (2021). ‘From value to valuation and appropriation: A comment on
Pirgmaier’s paper “The value of value theory for ecological economics”’.
Ecological Economics, 187: 107102.
Ruskin, J. (1907 [1862]). ‘Unto This Last’: Four Essays on the First Principles of
Political Economy. London: George Routledge & Sons.
Ruth, M. (2006). ‘A quest for the economics of sustainability and the sustainability
of economics’. Ecological Economics, 56: 332–342.
Rutte, H. (1991). ‘The philosopher Otto Neurath’. In: Uebel, T. E. (ed).
Rediscovering the Forgotten Vienna Circle: Austrian Studies on Otto Neurath
and the Vienna Circle. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 81–94.
Sachs, W. (2015 [1999]). Planet Dialectics: Explorations in Environment and
Development. London: Zed Books.
Saes, B. M. and Romeiro, A. R. (2019). ‘Ecological macroeconomics: A
methodological review’. Economia e Sociedade, 28 (2): 365–392.
Sahlins, M. (1972). Stone Age Economics. Chicago, IL: Aldine Atherton Inc.
Salleh, A. (1984). ‘Deeper than deep ecology: The eco-feminist connection’.
Environmental Ethics, 6 (Winter): 339–345.
Salleh, A. (1997). Ecofeminism as Politics: Nature, Marx and the Postmodern.
London: Zed Books.
Salleh, A. (2017). ‘Ecofeminism’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of
Ecological Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 48–56.
Sandelin, B., Trautwein, H.-M. and Wundrak, R. (2008). A Short History of
Economic Thought. London: Routledge.
Sayer, A. (2000). Realism and Social Science. London: Sage.
Sayer, A. (2009). ‘Contributive justice and meaningful work’. Res Publica, 15 (1):
1–16.
Sayer, A. (2010). Method in Social Science: A Realist Approach. London:
Routledge.

Schmelzer, M. (2015). ‘The growth paradigm: History, hegemony, and the
contested making of economic growthmanship’. Ecological Economics, 118
(October): 262–271.
Schulze, W. D. and Brookshire, D. S. (1982). ‘Intergenerational ethics and the
depletion of fossil fuels’. In: Quirk, J., Terasawa, K. and Whipple, D. (eds). Coal
Models and Their Use in Government Planning. New York: Praeger, 159–178.
Schulze, W. D., Brookshire, D. S. and Sandler, T. (1981). ‘The social rate of
discount for nuclear waste storage: Economics or ethics’. Natural Resources
Journal, 21 (4): 811–832.
Schumacher, E. F. (1973). Small is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if People
Mattered. London: Sphere Books.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1994 [1954]). History of Economic Analysis. London:
Routledge.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1949). ‘Science and ideology’. The American Economic Review,
39 (2): 346–359.
Seidl, I. (2017). ‘Safe minimum standards: Addressing strong uncertainty’. In:
Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and
Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 278–287.
Shionoya, Y. (1997). ‘The sociology of science and Schumpeter’s ideology’.
Schumpeter and the Idea of Social Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 54–90.
Shiva, V. (1988). Staying Alive: Women, Ecology and Development. London: Zed
Books.
Shiva, V. (1997). ‘Women in Nature’. The Women, Gender and Development
Reader. London and Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Zed Books, 62–67.
Silva, M. C. E. and Teixeira, A. A. C. (2011). ‘A bibliometric account of the
evolution of EE in the last two decades Is ecological economics (becoming) a
post-normal science?’ Ecological Economics, 70 (5): 849–862.
Simpson, R. E., Shuman, F. G. D., Baratta, E. J. et al. (1981). ‘Projected dose
commitment from fallout contamination in milk resulting from the 1976
Chinese atmospheric nuclear weapons test’. Health Physics, 40: 741–744.
Smith, A. (1982 [1759]). The Theory of Moral Sentiments. Indianapolis, IN: Liberty
Fund.
Smith, G. A. (1980). ‘The teleological view of wealth: A historical perspective’. In:
Daly, H. E. (ed). Economics, Ecology, Ethics: Essays Towards a Steady-State
Economy. New York and San Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman & Co., 215–237.
Smith, T. (2017). ‘The role of numbers in environmental policy: The Economics of
Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB)’. Socio-Economics. Vienna: Vienna
University of Economics and Business.
Smith, T., Boye, E. and Arne Sæther, B. (eds). (2021). Økonomisk tenkning: Bidrag
til mangfold i økonomifaget. Oslo: Solum Bokvennen.
Smith, V. K. (1992). ‘Arbitrary values, good causes, and premature verdicts’.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 22 (1): 71–89.

Söderbaum, P. (1990). ‘Neoclassical and institutional approaches to environmental
economics’. Journal of Economic Issues, 24 (2): 481–492.
Söderbaum, P. (1992). ‘Neoclassical and institutional approaches to development
and the environment’. Ecological Economics, 5 (2): 127–144.
Söderbaum, P. (1999). ‘Values, ideology and politics in ecological economics’.
Ecological Economics, 28 (2): 161–170.
Söderbaum, P. (2000). Ecological Economics. London: Earthscan.
Söderbaum, P. (2007). ‘Towards sustainability economics: Principles and values’.
Journal of Bioeconomics, 9: 205–225.
Söderbaum, P. (2008). Understanding Sustainability Economics: Towards Pluralism
in Economics. London: Earthscan.
Söderbaum, P. (2011). ‘Sustainability economics as a contested concept’.
Ecological Economics, 70: 1019–1020.
Sodhi, N. S. and Ehrlich, P. R. (eds). (2010). Conservation Biology for All. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Solow, R. M. (1997). ‘Reply: Georgescu-Roegen versus Solow/Stiglitz’. Ecological
Economics, 22: 267–268.
Soper, K. (1995). What is Nature?: Culture, Politics and the Non-Human. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Spash, C. L. (1993). ‘Economics, ethics, and long-term environmental damages’.
Environmental Ethics, 15 (2): 117–132.
Spash, C. L. (1994). ‘Double CO2 and beyond: Benefits, costs and compensation’.
Ecological Economics, 10 (1): 27–36.
Spash, C. L. (1998). ‘Investigating individual motives for environmental action:
Lexicographic preferences, beliefs and attitudes’. In: Lemons, J., Westra, L. and
Goodland, R. (eds). Ecological Sustainability and Integrity: Concepts and
Approaches. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 46–62.
Spash, C. L. (1999). ‘The development of environmental thinking in economics’.
Environmental Values, 8 (4): 413–435.
Spash, C. L. (2000a). ‘Ecosystems, contingent valuation and ethics: The case of
wetlands re-creation’. Ecological Economics, 34 (2): 195–215.
Spash, C. L. (2000b). ‘Ethical motives and charitable contributions in contingent
valuation: Empirical evidence from social psychology and economics’.
Environmental Values, 9 (4): 453–479.
Spash, C. L. (2000c). ‘Multiple value expression in contingent valuation: Economics
and ethics’. Environmental Science & Technology, 34 (8): 1433–1438.
Spash, C. L. (2000d). ‘Review of “Economics of Ecological Resources” by Charles
Perrings’. Environmental Values, 10 (1): 125–126.
Spash, C. L. (2002a). ‘Dividing time and discounting the future’. In: Spash, C. L.
(ed). Greenhouse Economics: Value and Ethics. London: Routledge, 201–220.
Spash, C. L. (2002b). Greenhouse Economics: Value and Ethics. London:
Routledge.

Spash, C. L. (2002c). ‘Loading the dice? Values, opinions and ethics’. Greenhouse
Economics: Value and Ethics. London: Routledge, 184–200.
Spash, C. L. (2002d). ‘Strong uncertainty: Ignorance and indeterminacy’. In:
Spash, C. L. (ed). Greenhouse Economics: Value and Ethics. London:
Routledge, 120–152.
Spash, C. L. (2006). ‘Non-economic motivation for contingent values: Rights and
attitudinal beliefs in the willingness to pay for environmental improvements’.
Land Economics, 82 (4): 602–622.
Spash, C. L. (2007a). ‘Deliberative monetary valuation (DMV): Issues in combining
economic and political processes to value environmental change’. Ecological
Economics, 63 (4): 690–699.
Spash, C. L. (2007b). ‘The economics of climate change impacts à la Stern: Novel
and nuanced or rhetorically restricted?’ Ecological Economics, 63 (4): 706–713.
Spash, C. L. (2007c). ‘Problems in economic assessments of climate change with
attention to the USA’. In: Erickson, J. and Gowdy, J. (eds). Frontiers in
Ecological Economic Theory and Applications. Cheltenham and Northampton,
MA: Edward Elgar, 176–192.
Spash, C. L. (2008a). ‘Contingent valuation as a research method: Environmental
values and human behaviour’. In: Lewis, A. (ed). The Cambridge Handbook of
Psychology and Economic Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
429–453.
Spash, C. L. (2008b). ‘Contingent valuation design and data treatment: If you
can’t shoot the messenger, change the message’. Environment & Planning C:
Government & Policy, 26 (1): 34–53.
Spash, C. L. (2008c). ‘Deliberative monetary valuation and the evidence for a new
value theory’. Land Economics, 84 (3): 469–488.
Spash, C. L. (2008d). ‘The economics of avoiding action on climate change’.
Adbusters, 16 (1).
Spash, C. L. (2008e). ‘How much is that ecosystem in the window? The one with
the bio-diverse trail’. Environmental Values, 17 (2): 259–284.
Spash, C. L. (ed). (2009a). Ecological Economics: Critical Concepts in the
Environment. London: Routledge.
Spash, C. L. (2009b). ‘The new environmental pragmatists, pluralism and
sustainability’. Environmental Values, 18 (3): 253–256.
Spash, C. L. (2011). ‘Social ecological economics: Understanding the past to see
the future’. American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 70 (2): 340–375.
Spash, C. L. (2012). ‘New foundations for ecological economics’. Ecological
Economics, 77 (May): 36–47.
Spash, C. L. (2013a). ‘Influencing the perception of what and who is important in
ecological economics’. Ecological Economics, 89 (May): 204–209.
Spash, C. L. (2013b). ‘The shallow or the deep ecological economics movement?’
Ecological Economics, 93 (September): 351–362.

Spash, C. L. (2014). Better Growth, Helping the Paris COP-Out?: Fallacies and
Omissions of the New Climate Economy Report. Vienna: Institute for
Environment and Regional Development.
Spash, C. L. (2015a). ‘Bulldozing biodiversity: The economics of offsets and
trading-in Nature’. Biological Conservation, 192 (December): 541–551.
Spash, C. L. (2015b). ‘The dying planet index: Life, death and man’s domination of
Nature’. Environmental Values, 24 (1): 1–7.
Spash, C. L. (2019). ‘SEE beyond substantive economics: Avoiding false
dichotomies’. Ecological Economics, 165 (November): 1–6.
Spash, C. L. (2020a). ‘The capitalist passive environmental revolution’. Ecological
Citizen, 4 (1): 63–71.
Spash, C. L. (2020b). ‘Days of decision’. Environmental Values, 29 (4): 387–396.
Spash, C. L. (2020c). ‘A tale of three paradigms: Realising the revolutionary
potential of ecological economics’. Ecological Economics, 169 (March): 1–14.
Spash, C. L. (2021a). ‘Apologists for growth: passive revolutionaries in a passive
revolution’. Globalizations, 18 (7): 1123–1148.
Spash, C. L. (2021b). ‘The contested conceptualisation of pollution in economics:
Market failure or cost shifting success?’ Cahiers d’Économie Politique/Political
Economy Papers, 79 (1): 85–122.
Spash, C. L. (2021c). ‘The economics of biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review’.
Biological Conservation, 264 (December): 1–2.
Spash, C. L. (2021d). ‘“The economy” as if people mattered: Revisiting critiques of
economic growth in a time of crisis’. Globalizations, 18 (7): 1087–1104.
Spash, C. L. (2021e). ‘A reply to Levrel and Martinet’. Ecological Economics, 179
(January): 1–2.
Spash, C. L. (2022a). ‘Conservation in conflict: Corporations, capitalism and
sustainable development’. Biological Conservation, 269 (109528): 1–9.
Spash, C. L. (2022b). ‘Three decades of environmental values: Some personal
reflections’. Environmental Values, 31 (1): 1–14.
Spash, C. L. and Asara, V. (2018). ‘Ecological economics’. In: Fischer, L., Hasell, J.,
Proctor, J. C., Uwakwe, D., Perkins, Z. W. and Watson, C. (eds). Rethinking
Economics: An Introduction to Pluralist Economics. London and New York:
Routledge, 120–132.
Spash, C. L. and Aslaksen, I. (2015). ‘Re-establishing an ecological discourse in
the policy debate over how to value ecosystems and biodiversity’. Journal of
Environmental Management, 159 (August): 245–253.
Spash, C. L. and d’Arge, R. C. (1989). ‘The greenhouse effect and
intergenerational transfers’. Energy Policy, 17 (2): 88–95.
Spash, C. L. and Gattringer, C. (2017). ‘The ethical failures of climate economics’.
In: Walsh, A., Hormio, S. and Purves, D. (eds). The Ethical Underpinnings of
Climate Economics. London: Routledge, 162–182.
Spash, C. L. and Guisan, A. (2021). ‘A future social-ecological economics’. Real
World Economics Review, 96 (July): 203–216.

Spash, C. L. and Hache, F. (2022). ‘The Dasgupta Review deconstructed: An
exposé of biodiversity economics’. Globalizations, 19 (5): 653–676.
Spash, C. L. and Hanley, N. (1995). ‘Preferences, information and biodiversity
preservation’. Ecological Economics, 12 (3): 191–208.
Spash, C. L. and Ryan, A. M. (2012). ‘Economic schools of thought on the
environment: Investigating unity and division’. Cambridge Journal of
Economics, 36 (5): 1091–1121.
Spash, C. L. and Schandl, H. (2009). ‘Challenges for Post Keynesian growth
theory: Utopia meets environmental and social reality’. in: Holt, R. P. F.,
Pressman, S. and Spash, C. L. (eds). Post Keynesian and Ecological Economics:
Confronting Environmental Issues. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 47–76.
Spash, C. L. and Smith, T. (2019), ‘Of ecosystems and economies: Re-connecting
economics with reality’. Real-World Economics Review, 87 (March): 212–229.
Available 
from: 
www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue87/SpashSmith87.pdf,
accessed 19 March 2019.
Spash, C. L. and Smith, T. (2022). ‘The values of Nature’. In: Pellizzoni, L.,
Leonardi, E. and Asara, V. (eds). Handbook of Critical Environmental Politics.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 318–332.
Spash, C. L., Stagl, S. and Getzner, M. (2005). ‘Exploring alternatives for
environmental valuation’. In: Getzner, M., Spash, C. L. and Stagl, S. (eds).
Alternatives for Environmental Valuation. London: Routledge.
Spash, C. L., Urama, K., Burton, R. et al. (2009). ‘Motives behind willingness to
pay for improving biodiversity in a water ecosystem: Economics, ethics and
social psychology’. Ecological Economics, 68 (4): 955–964.
Spash, C. L. and Vatn, A. (2006). ‘Transferring environmental value estimates:
Issues and alternatives’. Ecological Economics, 60 (2): 379–388.
Spash, C. L. and Villena, M. (1999). Exploring the Approach of Institutional
Economics to the Environment. Cambridge: Department of Land Economics,
University of Cambridge, 31.
Speckmann, G. and King, Z. (2018), ‘A Christmas with Marx: Elmar Altvater (1938–
2018)’. Available from: www.versobooks.com/blogs/3850-a-christmas-with-mar
x-elmar-altvater-1938-2018, accessed 6 October 2022.
Spencer, P., Perkins, P. E. and Erickson, J. D. (2018). ‘Re-establishing justice as a
pillar of ecological economics through feminist perspectives’. Ecological
Economics, 152: 191–198.
Speth, J. G. (2008). The Bridge at the Edge of the World: Capitalism, the
Environment, and Crossing from Crisis to Sustainability. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Stern, N. H. (2007). The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review:
Cambridge University Press.
Steup, M. (2010). Epistemology. In: Zalta, E. N. (ed). The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy. Available from: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2010/entri
es/epistemology/, accessed 4 May 2011.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1997). ‘Reply: Georgescu-Roegen versus Solow/Stiglitz’. Ecological
Economics, 22: 269–270.
Stirling, A. (1997). ‘Multi-criteria mapping: Mitigating the problems of
environmental valuation?’ In: Foster (ed). Valuing Nature? Economics, Ethics
and Environment. London: Routledge.
Stirling, A. (2017). ‘Precautionary appraisal as a response to risk, uncertainty,
ambiguity and ignorance’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of
Ecological Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 267–277.
Stirling, A. and Mayer, S. (2001). ‘A novel approach to the appraisal of
technological risk: A multi-criteria mapping study of a genetically modified
crop’. Environment & Planning C: Government & Policy, 19 (4): 529–555.
Stockhammer, E. (2018). ‘Post Keynesian economics’. In: Fischer, L., Hasell, J.,
Proctor, J. C., Uwakwe, D., Perkins, Z. W. and Watson, C. (eds). Rethinking
Economics: An Introduction to Pluralist Economics. London and New York:
Routledge, 6–18.
Stör, L. (2017). ‘Theories of power’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of
Ecological Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 141–151.
Strand, R. (2017). ‘Post-normal science’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge
Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge,
288–297.
Sullivan, S. (2012). Financialisation, Biodiversity Conservation and Equity: Some
Currents and Concerns. Penang: Third World Network.
Sylvan, R. (2009 [1973]). ‘Is there a need for a new environmental ethic?’ In:
Spash, C. L. (ed). Ecological Economics. London: Routledge, 264–272.
Tacconi, L. (1998). ‘Scientific methodology for ecological economics’. Ecological
Economics, 27 (1): 91–105.
Tait, M. C. (2019). ‘Should naturalists believe in the anthropocene?’ Environmental
Values, 28 (3): 367–383.
Tanasescu, M. (2015). ‘Nature advocacy and the Indigenous symbol’.
Environmental Values, 24 (1): 105–122.
Tanzer, M. (1974). The Energy Crisis: World Struggle for Power and Wealth. New
York: Monthly Review Press.
TEEB. (2008). The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Mainstreaming the
Economics of Nature: An Interim Report. Brussels: European Comission.
TEEB. (2010). The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Mainstreaming the
Economics of Nature: A Synthesis of the Approach, Conclusions and
Recommendations of TEEB. Bonn: UNEP.
ten Brink, B. (2006). A Long-Term Biodiversity, Ecosystem and Awareness
Research Network. Indicators as Communication Tools: An Evolution towards
Composite Indicators. ALTERNet Ref: WPR2-2006-D3b. Available from: https://
unstats. un.org/unsd/envaccounting/seeaLES/egm/ALTERNet_bk.pdf, accessed
25 September 2023.

Thompson, E.P. (1993). Customs in Common: Studies in Traditional Popular
Culture. New York: The New Press.
Thornton, S. (2013). ‘Karl Popper’. In: Zalta, E. N. (ed). The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy. Available from: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2013/ entri
es/popper, accessed 17 November 2013.
Tietenberg, T. and Lewis, L. (2018). Environmental and Natural Resource
Economics. New York: Routledge.
Timmerman, D. M. and Schiappa, E. (2010). ‘Dialegesthai as a term of art: Plato
and the disciplining of dialectic’. In: Timmerman, D. M. and Schiappa, E. (eds).
Classical Greek Rhetorical Theory and the Disciplining of Discourse. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 17–42.
Todorova, Z. (2013). ‘Connecting social provisioning and functional finance in a
Post Keynesian–institutional analysis of the public sector’. European Journal of
Economics and Economic Policies, 10 (1): 61–75.
Turner, K., Perrings, C. and Folke, C. (1997). ‘Ecological economics: Paradigm or
perspective’. In: van den Bergh, J. C. J. M. and van der Straaten, J. (eds).
Economy and Ecosystems in Change. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 25–49.
Uebel, T. E. (1996). ‘The enlightenment ambition of epistemic utopianism: Otto
Neurath’s theory of science in historical perspective’. In: Giere, R. N. and
Richardson, A. W. (eds). Origins of Logical Empiricism. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 91–112.
Uebel, T. E. (2011). ‘Vienna Circle’. In: Zalta, E. N. (ed). The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy. Available from: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2011/entri
es/ vienna-circle/, accessed 6 June 2011.
UNEP. (2011). Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development
and Poverty Eradication. Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme, 651.
UNEP. (2019). A New Deal for Nature: Account for the True Value of Nature.
Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme.
Urhammer, E. and Røpke, I. (2013). ‘Macroeconomic narratives in a world of
crises: An analysis of stories about solving the system crisis’. Ecological
Economics, 96: 62–70.
Valladares, 
C. 
and 
Boelens, 
R. 
(2019). 
‘Mining 
for 
Mother 
Earth:
Governmentalities, sacred waters and nature’s rights in Ecuador’. Geoforum,
100: 68–79.
van den Bergh, J. C. J. M. (2010). ‘Externality or sustainability economics?’
Ecological Economics, 69: 2047–2052.
van den Bergh, J. C. J. M. (2011). ‘Environment versus growth: A criticism of
“degrowth” and a plea for “a-growth”’. Ecological Economics, 70 (5): 881–890.
van der Sluijs, J. P. (2017). ‘The NUSAP approach to uncertainty appraisal and
communication’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge Handbook of Ecological
Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge, 301–310.
van der Sluijs, J. P., Craye, M., Funtowicz, S. et al. (2005). ‘Combining quantitative
and qualitative measures of uncertainty in model-based environmental

assessment: The NUSAP system’. Risk Analysis, 25 (2): 481–492.
Vatn, A. (2000). ‘The environment as commodity’. Environmental Values, 9 (4):
493–509.
Vatn, A. (2005). Institutions and the Environment. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Vatn, A. (2015). Environmental Governance: Institutions, Polices and Actions.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Vatn, A. (2017). ‘Critical institutional economics’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge
Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge,
29–38.
Vatn, A. (2021). ‘Institusjonell økonomi’. In: Smith, T., Boye, E. and Sæther, B. A.
(eds). Økonomisk tenkning: Bidrag til mangfold i økonomifaget. Oslo: Solum
Bokvennen, 85–107.
Veblen, T. (1915 [1904]). The Theory of Business Enterprise. New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons.
Veblen, T. (1991 [1899]). The Theory of the Leisure Class. Fairfield, NJ: Augustus
M. Kelley.
Veblen, T. B. (1898). ‘Why economics is not an evolutionary science?’ The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 12 (July): 373–397.
Vetlesen, A. J. (2015). The Denial of Nature: Environmental Philosophy in the Era
of Capitalism. Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
Veuthey, S. and Gerber, J.-F. (2010). ‘Logging conflicts in Southern Cameroon: A
feminist ecological economics perspective’. Ecological Economics, 70 (2): 170–
177.
Vianna Franco, M. P. (2018). ‘Searching for a scientific paradigm in ecological
economics: The history of ecological economic thought, 1880s–1930s’.
Ecological Economics, 153: 195–203.
Vianna Franco, M. P. and Missemer, A. (2023). A History of Ecological Economic
Thought. London: Routledge.
Victor, P. A. (2008). Managing Without Growth: Slower by Design Not Disaster.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Victor, P. A. and Jackson, T. (2020). ‘A research agenda for ecological
macroeconomics’. In: Costanza, R., Erickson, J. D., Farley, J. and Kubiszewski,
I. (eds). Sustainable Wellbeing Futures: A Research and Action Agenda for
Ecological Economics. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 357–372.
Vogel, J., Steinberger, J. K., O’Neill, D. W. et al. (2021). ‘Socio-economic conditions
for satisfying human needs at low energy use: An international analysis of
social provisioning’. Global Environmental Change, 69: 102287.
Wackernagel, M. and Rees, W. (1996). Our Ecological Footprint: Reducing Human
Impact on the Earth. Gabriola Island: New Society Publishers.
Walker, B. H. and Pearson, L. (2007). ‘A resilience perspective of the SEEA’.
Ecological Economics, 61 (4): 708–715.
Walters, C. (1986). Adaptive Management of Renewable Resources. London:
Macmillan.

Walters, C. J. and Holling, C. S. (1990). ‘Large-scale management experiments
and learning by doing’. Ecology, 71 (6): 2060–2068.
Waring, M. (1988). If Women Counted: A New Feminist Economics. San Francisco,
CA: Harper & Row.
Warren, K. J. (1990). ‘The power and the promise of ecological feminism’.
Environmental Ethics, 12: 125–146.
Weber, M. (1949). ‘“Objectivity” in social science and social policy’. Max Weber on
Methodology Of The Social Sciences, edited and translated by Shils, E. A. and
Finch, H. A. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, 49–112.
Weiss, M. and Cattaneo, C. (2017). ‘Degrowth: Taking stock and reviewing an
emerging academic paradigm’. Ecological Economics, 137: 220–230.
White, R. (2017). ‘Multiciteria mapping’. In: Spash, C. L. (ed). Routledge
Handbook of Ecological Economics: Nature and Society. Abingdon: Routledge,
321–330.
Wilson, E. O. (1975). Sociobiology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wood, A. W. (1998). ‘Dialectical materialism’. In: Craig, E. (ed). Routledge
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. London: Routledge.
World Bank and United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
(2017). The Potential of the Blue Economy. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Wynne, B. (1992). ‘Uncertainty and environmental learning: Reconceiving science
and policy in the preventive paradigm’. Global Environmental Change, 2 (2):
111–127.
Ziegler, R. (2007). ‘Political perception and ensemble of macro objectives and
measures: The paradox of the index for sustainable economic welfare’.
Environmental Values, 16 (1): 43–60.

Index
Locators in italics refer to figures and those in bold to tables.
adaptive management 193
Agarwal, B. 44
alternative economics 197–200
alternative social ecological economic agenda 211–216
social ecological structure of economies 200–211
Altvater, E. 30
American Pragmatism 45,  167,  189,  193
analogy 146–151
anarchism 29
Anthropocene, the 84,  133
anthropocentrism 33,  84,  132
Aristotelian approach 68, 125–126, 132–133
arithmomorphism 68–69,  145
Association for Heterodox Economics (AHE) 44,  180
axiology 138,  180
Backhouse, R. E. 24,  25,  53
Bacon, F. 60–61, 89–90
Bauhardt, C. 43,  44
Baumgärtner, S. 75,  155,  185
behaviour see human behaviour, and motivation
Beijer Institute 14–15, 175–176
Bentham, J. 129–130
Benton, T. 33, 91–92,  133
biology, and economics 118–120,  149
biophysical reality 21,  76, 197–198,  203,  213
Blaug, M. 69,  70
Bookchin, M. 29
Bromley, D. W. 193

Buchs, A. 188, 189–190
Caldwell, B. 62,  65,  66,  69
capitalism
goals of economics 120–121, 126–127
Marxism 28–30, 32–33
social ecological structure of economies 203–204
see also neoclassical economics
capital stocks 118
Carnap, R. 62,  151, 152–153
Carson, R. 6,  29
Chicago School 35,  119,  121
Christian stewardship 165–166
Ciriacy-Wantrup, S. V. 5–6
climate change
and economic growth 121
environmental values 160
orthodox mainstream perspective 22–23
science and critique 111
social ecological transformation 199
Coase, R. 35
Cobb-Douglas production function 50
Cobb, J. B. 191–193
coevolution 149
Collier, A. 87,  91,  111,  204
colonialism 207–209
common pool resources 37–38
Comte, A. 61–62
consumerist capitalism 126–127
contingent valuation 9–10,  160
Costanza, R. 14–15,  100, 105–106,  119,  171,  183
COVID-19 pandemic 3–4,  132,  204
critical institutional economics 34–39,  179
critical realism
in economics 63–67,  70

and feminism 44–45
Kapp’s integrative proposal 158–159
philosophical basis 70,  83, 87–88,  90, 93–95
as research perspective 168,  178
and science 109–112,  116
Daily, G. C. 171
Daly, H. E. 15,  20,  23,  34,  100,  115,  122,  165, 176–177, 191–
193
Dasgupta, P. S. 15, 172–173,  175
deep ecology 164–166
degrowth
debunking the goal of economic growth 123–125
and development 124,  180
feminist economic perspective 43
as part of ecological economics 48–51
pluriversalism 152
political ecology 29
work and identity 214–215
see also limits to growth
deliberative governance 134
democratic governance 216
Dengler, C. 44–45
deontology 129–130
depth ontology 87–88
Descartes, R. 60–61,  68,  84
development 11–12
debunking the goal of economic growth 123–125
and degrowth 124,  180
macroeconomic modelling 52
post-development 207–209
Dewey, J. 86
dialectics 143–146,  162
disciplinarity, multi-, trans- and interdisciplinarity 153–156
see also ecological economics research

discount rate 131
Douai, A. 27,  30,  32,  34,  39
doxa 78–79
Dube, B. 83,  119
Easterlin, R. A. 123–124,  125
eco-feminism 39–45,  166,  207
ecological economics
analogies 148
definition 4
disciplinary divisions 73
foundations for creating knowledge 92–96
historical foundations 4–12
and Marxism 30–34
philosophical presuppositions 73–74, 82–92
pluralism 74–82
possible merge with mainstream economics 185–192
relationship to heterodox economics 20
rise of 12–16,  164
see also social, ecological and economic knowledge
ecological economics research
fallacies and contradictions of a unifying ‘big tent’ 184–193,  192
intermediate and crossover positions 180–184
main positions on 166–168,  168
new environmental pragmatism 168, 169–174
new resource economics 168, 174–177
social ecological economics 168, 177–180
ecological footprints 184
ecological macroeconomics 45–53,  124,  126
eco-Marxism 28–34
economic efficiency 121–123,  198,  209
economic growth
an alternative social ecological economic agenda 211–213
debunking as goal 123–124
limits to growth 6–8

Marxism 34
social ecological economics 115
social ecological structure of economies 203–204
spaceship Earth 8
economic imperialism 27,  78,  81,  169,  186
economics
and environment 4–12
environmental degradation and capital 3
‘formal economics’ 197–198
issue in connecting to the natural sciences 116–120
logical empiricism in 62, 68–71
objectives of 120–127
Vienna Circle 62, 63–67,  151, 152–153
see also ecological economics; heterodox economics; neoclassical
economics; social, ecological and economic knowledge
Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity, The (TEEB) 169–170
economies, social ecological structure of 200–211
eco-socialism 30–34
ecosystems
in ecological economics 16,  24, 148–149
Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity, The (TEEB) 169–170
equilibrium states 118
monetary valuation 170–174,  183,  194
rise of environmentalism 7,  8
ecosystem services 170–171
efficiency, economic 121–123
Ehrlich, P. 13
employment, in industrial society 205–207,  214
Engels, F. 28, 106–107,  143,  144
the Enlightenment 61–62,  104
entropy 13,  34,  117, 201–202
environmental economics 8–10
see also ecological economics
environmentalism
addressed by heterodox economics 27,  29
emergence of 6–7

limits to growth 6–8
mainstreaming 21–22
orthodox mainstream perspective 10–11, 19–24
environmental macroeconomics 48
environmental NGOs 172–173
environmental pragmatism 130,  167
‘new environmental pragmatism’ 168, 169–174, 181–184, 189–
192
environmental valuation 129, 170–174,  183,  194
the environment, and economics 4–12
epistemic relativity/epistemological relativism 93
epistemology
in economics 59–60, 69–71
feminist economics 45
post-normal 20
vision for social ecological economics 136–137
equilibrium states 118–119
Escobar, A. 94,  124
ethics 129–130, 131–133
stewardship perspective 165–166
eudaimonia 125–126
eugenics 120
European Association of Environmental and Resource Economists
(EAERE) 180–181
European Society for Ecological Economics (ESEE)
14,  15,  180,  190
evolutionary perspective 84, 91–92, 119–120,  149
externalities 11, 12–13
Faber, M. 73,  165
Farley, J. 20,  100,  122,  165
feminist economics 39–45,  207
‘formal economics’ 197–198
fossil fuels 3
ethics of using 117–118

orthodox mainstream perspective 22–23
Post Keynesianism 47
rise of environmentalism 6–7
science and critique 111
Freeden, M. 108–109
Friedman, M. 69
Galbraith, J. K. 6,  37,  46,  70
gender relations
eco-feminism 39–45
employment and unpaid work 206–207
neoliberalism 40–41
reproduction and fertility 214
geopolitics 207–209
Georgescu-Roegen, N. 13,  23,  25,  34,  50, 68–
69,  77,  80,  93,  115,  117,  118, 145–146,  162,  178,  203
Gills, B. 95
Goddard, J. J. 78–80, 88–89,  186,  187
governance
participation in societal decisions 215–216
taking institutions seriously 133–135
Gramsci, A. 106,  108
green economy 23
greenhouse gases 22–23
see also climate change
happiness, relationship to economic growth 123–124
Hardin, G. 37–38
Hardt, L. 51
Harris, J. M. 51–52,  184
hedonism 125
Hegel, G. W. F. 143–144,  145
hegemony 108
Hempel, C. 66
Herber, L. 29

heterodox economics
addressing the environmental crisis 19–21
critical institutional economics 34–39
definition 19
distinguishing radical from orthodox dissent 24–27,  26
eco-Marxists and eco-socialists 28–34
feminist economics and eco-feminism 39–45
heterodoxy versus mainstream and dissenting orthodoxy 21–24,
53–54
Post Keynesian economics and ecological macroeconomics 45–53
relationship to ecological economics 20
Himmelweit, S. 41
Hirsch, F. 129
historic context 3–4
institutional economics 4–12
rise of ecological economics and the roots of conflict 12–16
history of science 59, 60–63
Hodgson, G. M. 38,  120, 149–150
Holland, A. 125
Holling, C. S. 118, 148–149, 178–179,  193
Hornborg, A. 31–32,  33,  34
Hosseini, S. A. H. 95
Howarth, R. B. 185
human agency 150
human behaviour, and motivation 128–129,  178
human evolution 84, 91–92, 119–120,  149
Hume, D. 61
Hutchinson, T. W. 68
ideology
in science 106–109
vision for social ecological economics 138–139
Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare (ISEW) 191–193
Indigenous communities 95,  135,  209
individualism 126, 128–130,  132,  133, 214–215

infrastructure, State’s role in 204–205
institutional economics 34–39,  36
institutions
achieving economic goals 133–135
definition of 38
integration see social, ecological and economic knowledge
interdisciplinarity 141, 153–156,  168
see also ecological economics research
International Association of Feminist Economics (IAFFE) 40
International Society for Ecological Economics (ISEE) 13–14,  17,
 164
ISLM modelling 45–46
Jackson, T. 49–50, 51–52,  126,  183
Jacobs, M. 31
Jakobsen, O. 29
James, W. 86
Jansson, A. 13
Kahneman, D. 10
Kant, I. 61,  130
Kapp, K. W. 5–6,  25,  32, 36–37,  80,  88,  115, 141–143,  144,
147–148,  150, 156–160,  212
Kareiva, P. 173
Keynesian economics 45–46
see also Post Keynesian economics
King, Z. 30
Knetsch, J. L. 10
knowledge creation 74, 76–82, 96–97
see also social, ecological and economic knowledge
Knudsen, S. 133
Koch, M. 32
Kuhn, T. S. 19–20,  35,  62,  90, 100–101,  103, 104–105,  217
labour theory of value 31–33

land use change 213–214
Latour, B. 29,  84
Lavoie, M. 24,  25,  47, 48–49, 52–53
Lawson, T. 45
Lee, F. 15–16,  24,  127
limits to growth 6–8, 51–52
linguistic turn, in the social sciences 92,  146
Locke, J. 61
logical empiricism 62, 68–71, 102–103
Mackie, J. L. 86
macroeconomic modelling 48–53
mainstream economics see orthodox mainstream economics
Mäler, K. G. 15
Malm, A. 29
market demand 10–11,  13
market failure 9–11,  23, 174–177
Marshall, A. 119,  149
Martinez-Alier, J. 23,  34
Marxism
eco-Marxism 30–34
ideology and Schumpeter’s preanalytic vision 106–109
labour and capitalism 28–30, 32–33
Marx, K. 28,  65, 106–107, 143–144
materials balance theory 9
Max-Neef, M. A. 126,  154,  156, 179–180
McCloskey, D. N. 70
metaphor 146–151
metaphysics 63–64, 156–157
methodological approach of economics 69–71
tools of scientific investigation 59–60
vision for social ecological economics 137–138
see also epistemology
methodological naturalism 90–92
methodological pluralism 74–78,  92, 105–106,  167,  186

microeconomics 21
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 171
modern industrial economies 200
monetary valuation of ecosystems 170–174,  183,  194
Montalban, M. 39
morality 129–130
Morgan, J. 50–51,  78,  161,  187
motivation, human behaviour 128–129
multidisciplinarity 153–156,  168
see also ecological economics research
Naess, A. 164,  166,  194
naturalism, methodological 90–92
nature
alternative visions of 199–200
legal protections 135
and society 84,  197, 210–211
and women 41
Nature Conservancy, The (TNC) 173
Nelson, J. A. 41–43,  45, 186–187
neo-Austrian economics 121,  124
neoclassical economics
addressing the environmental crisis 10–12, 19–24
analogies 148
distinguishing radical from orthodox dissent 24–27,  26
heterodoxy versus mainstream and dissenting orthodoxy 21–24,
53–54, 190–192
monetary valuation 131
new resource economics 174–177
pluralism 77–78
possible merge with ecological economics 185–192
price theory 9,  10,  21
rejecting mainstream orthodoxy 78, 79–82
rejection of and the rise of ecological economics 13, 14–15
and science 119–120

neoliberalisation of environmentalism 197–198
neoliberalism: Chicago School 35,  119,  121
Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity, The (TEEB) 169–170
and feminist economics 40–41
price-making 121
privatisation of government 46–47
the State’s role 204–205
Neurath, O. 66–67, 100–101, 103–104,  105,  151, 152–
153,  161,  212
new environmental pragmatism 168, 169–174, 189–192
crossover with other perspectives 181–184
new institutionalism 35,  36
new resource economics 168, 174–177
crossover with other perspectives 181–182
Newton, I. 61,  68
Nordhaus, W. 22,  23
Norgaard, R. B. 74, 76–77,  149,  185
nuclear waste 7–8
O’Connor, J. 30
O’Connor, M. 29
O’Hara, S. 44
oil industry 6–7
O’Neill, D. W. 51
O’Neill, J. F. 125, 132–133
ontological turn 95
ontology
definition 59
feminist economics 45
mainstream economics 81–82
nature and society 210–211
understanding scientific knowledge 16,  59,  199
vision for social ecological economics 136
and Western imperialism 95
orthodox mainstream economics

addressing the environmental crisis 10–12, 19–24
analogies 148
distinguishing radical from orthodox dissent 24–27,  26
heterodoxy versus mainstream and dissenting orthodoxy 21–24,
53–54, 190–192
monetary valuation 131
new resource economics 174–177
pluralism 77–78
possible merge with ecological economics 185–192
price theory 9,  10,  21
rejecting mainstream orthodoxy 78, 79–82
rejection of and the rise of ecological economics 13, 14–15
and science 119–120
Ostrom, E. 37–38,  164
paradigm theory 19–20,  35,  62, 100–101
Pareto efficiency 122
Pearce, D. 14
Perrings, C. 14
philosophical basis of ecological economics
foundations for creating knowledge 92–96
philosophical presuppositions 73–74, 82–92
pluralism 74–82
rejecting mainstream orthodoxy 79–82
philosophy of science 59, 60–63, 103–104
Pigou, A. 35
Piketty, T. 50–51,  80
Plato 125,  143
pluralism 16
contradictory arguments for 74–79
knowledge creation 74, 76–82, 96–97
mainstream and ecological economics 185–192
methodological 74–78,  92, 105–106,  167,  186
nature of reality 94–95
unity of science 151–152

in values 81, 179–180
pluriversalism 94,  152
Polanyi, K. 6,  37,  121, 197–198
political ecology 29,  43
political participation in societal decisions 215–216
Pollini, J. 84,  120
pollution
emergence of environmentalism 6–8
environmental economics 9
limits to growth 7–8
new institutionalism 35
and the orthodox mainstream 11
social ecological structure of economies 202–203
Popper, K. 65,  66,  69,  104
population growth 6, 213–214
positivism 61–62,  67, 68–70
post-development 207–209
post-growth 49,  183,  198, 214–215
see also limits to growth
Post Keynesian economics 45–53
postmodernism 85, 151–152
poverty 207–209
pragmatism, new environmental pragmatism 168, 169–174, 181–
184, 189–192
preanalytic vision 99–101
critical thinking 109–112
logical empiricism 102–103
mainstream and ecological economics 188
revolutionary change in science 101–106
science and ideology 106–109
social ecological economics 115–116, 135–139
precautionary principle 5
preference theory 129,  130
price-making
an alternative social ecological economic agenda 211–213
orthodox mainstream perspective 121

social ecological economics 115
social provisioning 134
price theory 9,  10,  21
pricing, new resource economics 174–175
Puller, A. 110–111
race, eugenics 120
‘radical’ as term 4
radical dissenters 24–27,  26,  191,  217
radical pragmatism 183
radical relativism 63,  75,  93,  96,  162,  178
Rammelt, C. 32
realism 178
see also critical realism
religious beliefs 165–166
representative democracy 216
representative realism 157
research see ecological economics research
resource depletion 10–12
see also new resource economics
Riksbank Prize see Sveriges Riksbank Prize
Robbins, L. 121
Røpke, I. 13,  15,  33,  73
Rutte, H. 66–67,  105
Samuelson, P. 69
Sayer, A. 63, 87–88,  89,  96, 146–147,  162,  207
Schumpeter, J. 99,  100, 101–103, 106–109
science
critical thinking 109–112
foundations for creating knowledge 92–96
history and philosophy of 59, 60–63
and ideology 106–109
issue in connecting economics to 116–120
revolutionary change in 101–106

unity of 151–153
see also social, ecological and economic knowledge
Sen, A. 23,  41,  126
shallow ecology 166,  194
Shiva, V. 41
silent voices, representation of 135
Smith, T. 110–111
social constructionism 76,  77,  84,  178,  217
Social Darwinism 119–120
social, ecological and economic knowledge 141–142, 162–163
approaches to integration 142–143
dialectics 143–146
incommensurable values and social provisioning 160–161
Kapp’s integrative proposal 156–160
metaphor and analogy 146–151
multi-, trans- and interdisciplinarity 141, 153–156
unity of science 151–153
social ecological economics
alternative social ecological economic agenda 211–216
crossover with other perspectives 182–183
economic growth and price-making markets 115
expanding social ecological understanding 128–135
a preanalytic vision 115–116, 135–139
as research perspective 168, 177–180
social ecological structure of economies 200–211
social ecological structure of economies 200–211
social metabolism 30,  118,  191, 201–202,  213
social provisioning 95–96, 125–127, 160–161,  213
social realism 81
society
an alternative social ecological economic agenda 211–216
determinism 149
ethics and values 131, 132–133
human agency 110, 150–151
human behaviour and motivation 128
integration of knowledge 157–159

interdisciplinarity 155–156
and nature 84,  197, 210–211
reductionism 148
role of institutions 133–135
the State, corporations and technology 204–205
traditional versus modern economies 201–204, 207–208
work and meaningful lives 205–207
sociology of science 103–104
Söderbaum, P. 37, 77–78,  111,  185
Soper, K. 210
spaceship Earth 8
specialisation 159–160
Speckmann, G. 30
State’s role, technology and infrastructure 204–205
Stern, N. 22–23,  31
stewardship perspective 165–166
sustainability economics 141,  185
Sveriges Riksbank Prize 21–22,  24,  35, 37–38,  54,  131,  164
Tacconi, L. 76
Tait, M. C. 91–92
TEEB see Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity, The (TEEB)
technology, State’s role in 204–205
thermodynamics 116–117
time preference theory 129
traditional economies 200
transdisciplinarity 153–156,  168,  179
see also ecological economics research
transformative science 99–101
critical thinking 109–112
revolutionary change in science 101–106
science and ideology 106–109
travel cost method 9
uncertainty 178–179,  193

utilitarianism 129–130,  133, 179–180
valuation of the environment 129, 170–174,  183,  194
value
incommensurable values and social provisioning 160–161
the non-human world 131–133
taking ethics and value seriously 129–131
value pluralism 81, 179–180
value theory 9–10
van den Bergh, J. C. 51,  176
Vatn, A. 35,  36, 38–39,  179
Veblen, T. 34–35,  37
Vetlesen, A. J. 84,  133
Victor, P. 49–50, 51–52,  126,  183
Vienna Circle 62, 63–67,  85,  151, 152–153
virtue ethics 129–130
Walters, C. 193
Waring, M. 40
Weber, M. 188–189
wellbeing economy 125
willingness-to-accept 129
willingness-to-pay 10,  129,  175
Wood, A. W. 144
work, in industrial society 205–207,  214
World Wildlife Fund 173

