
Fracking

Recent Titles in the
CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
Series
Military Robots and Drones: A Reference Handbook
Paul J. Springer
Marijuana: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Religious Nationalism: A Reference Handbook
Atalia Omer and Jason A. Springs
The Rising Costs of Higher Education: A Reference Handbook
John R. Thelin
Vaccination Controversies: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
The Animal Experimentation Debate: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Steroids and Doping in Sports: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Internet Censorship: A Reference Handbook
Bernadette H. Schell
School Violence: A Reference Handbook, Second Edition
Laura L. Finley
GMO Food: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Wind Energy: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Proﬁling and Criminal Justice in America: A Reference Handbook,
Second Edition
Jeff Bumgarner

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up to date, and objective. They provide a good
starting point for research by high school and college students,
scholars, and general readers as well as by legislators, business-
people, activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary
source material, a forum of authoritative perspective essays,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
Fracking
A REFERENCE HANDBOOK
David E. Newton

Copyright © 2015 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review,
without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Newton, David E., author.
Fracking : a reference handbook / David E. Newton.
pages cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–1–61069–691–3 (hardback : acid-free paper) —
ISBN 978–1–61069–692–0 (ebook) 1. Hydraulic fracturing—
Environmental aspects. 2. Gas well drilling—Environmental
aspects. 3. Hydraulic fracturing—Government policy—United
States. I. Title.
TD195.G3N49
2015
622'.2—dc23
2014038749
ISBN: 978–1–61069–691–3
EISBN: 978–1–61069–692–0
19 18 17 16 15
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Preface, xv
1
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY, 3
The Genesis of Fossil Fuels, 7
Oil and Gas Resources, 13
Terminology, 18
Exploring for Oil and Gas, 20
Drilling Technology, 23
Petroleum Chemistry, 27
A Brief History of Petroleum Exploration, 30
The Petroleum Century, 34
The Natural Gas Century, 39
Hydraulic Fracturing, 43
The History of Hydraulic Fracturing, 44
Horizontal Drilling, 49
Conclusion, 51
References, 52
vii

2
PROBLEMS, CONTROVERSIES, AND SOLUTIONS, 63
Peak Oil and Gas: Still a Looming Threat or Only a
Distant Fantasy?, 63
The Global State of Affairs, 68
Energy Independence for the United States, 70
Beneﬁts of Fracking, 76
Direct Economic Beneﬁts, 76
Indirect Economic Beneﬁts, 79
Environmental Beneﬁts, 80
Opposition to Fracking, 82
Problems Associated with Hydraulic Fracturing, 84
Water Use, 84
Water Contamination, 87
Air Pollution, 92
Earthquakes, 96
Aesthetic and Related Disturbances, 100
Laws and Regulations, 101
Conclusion, 112
References, 113
3
PERSPECTIVES, 131
Introduction, 131
Separating Fact from Hype: Trudy E. Bell, 131
Why Fracking Is Beneﬁcial: Bruce Everett, 136
The Urgent Need for Global Deﬁnition of Terms in the
Reporting on Fracking and Seismic Activity: Gina
Hagler, 140
viii
Contents

Fracking and the Future of Fresh Water: Michael
Pastorkovich, 145
Fracking by the Numbers: John Rumpler, 149
Exploring Alternative Uses for Fracking Water: Lana
Straub, 154
Fracking Like It’s Your Job: Why Worker Safety in the
Fracking Industry Is So Important: Laura Walter, 158
Feeding the Fracking Workforce: How Worker Nutrition
Supports Health, Safety and Productivity: Christopher
Wanjek, 162
Food as Protection, 162
What Workers Need, and What Workers Get, 163
Return on Investment, 165
References, 166
4
PROFILES, 169
Introduction, 169
American Gas Association, 170
American Petroleum Institute, 172
America’s Natural Gas Alliance, 175
Chesapeake Climate Action Network, 176
Consumer Energy Alliance, 179
H. John Eastman (1905–1985), 181
Terry Engelder, 184
Environment America, 185
Food & Water Watch, 187
Contents
ix

Ground Water Protection Council, 190
Erle P. Halliburton (1892–1957), 192
William Hart (1797–1865), 194
Independent Petroleum Association of America, 196
Anthony R. Ingraffea (1947–), 200
International Energy Agency, 202
Interstate Natural Gas Association of America, 206
Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission, 208
E. W. Marland (1874–1941), 211
Aubrey McClendon (1959–), 213
George Mitchell (1919–2013), 215
The National Association of Royalty Owners, 218
No Fracked Gas in Mass, 220
Edward A. L. Roberts (1829–1881), 223
The Endocrine Disruption Exchange, 226
Tom L. Ward (1959–), 228
Waterkeeper Alliance, 230
5
DATA AND DOCUMENTS, 235
Introduction, 235
Data, 235
Table 5.1 Chemicals Present in 652 Different Products
Used by Hydraulic Fracturing Companies, 236
Table 5.2 Discovered but Unproved Technically
Recoverable Shale Gas and Oil Resources in the
United States: Shale Oil Resources, 237
x
Contents

Table 5.3 Estimated Number of Fracking Wells in
the United States, 238
Table 5.4 Water Used for Fracking, 239
Table 5.5 Estimated Air Pollution Produced from
Early Stages of Fracking (Drilling and Well
Completion) in 2012 (tons), 239
Table 5.6 Estimated Risked Shale Gas and Shale Oil
Resources In-Place and Technically Recoverable in
41 Countries as Assessed in 2013, 240
Table 5.7 U.S. Crude Oil and Natural Gas Proved
Reserves, 242
Documents, 243
Crude Oil Windfall Proﬁt Tax Act of 1980, 243
Hydraulic Fracturing Exclusions, 246
Safe Drinking Water Act, Public Law 113-103,
Section 300h(d)(1), 246
Clean Water Act, Public Law 95-217, Sections
1326, 1342, 247
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), Public Law 94-580, 6921(b), 248
Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA;
also known as the Superfund Act), Public Law
96-510, 9601, 250
Legal Environmental Assistance Foundation vs.
U.S. EPA, 118 F.3d 1467 (1997), 251
Evaluation of Impacts to Underground Sources of
Drinking Water by Hydraulic Fracturing of Coalbed
Methane Reservoirs Study (2004), 252
ES-8 Did EPA Find Any Cases of Contaminated
Drinking Water Wells Caused by Hydraulic
Fracturing in CBM Wells?, 253
Contents
xi

Testimony Submitted to the House Committee on
Natural Resources Subcommittee on Energy and
Mineral Resources Washington, DC, June 18,
2009, Prepared by the Interstate Oil and Gas
Compact Commission on Behalf of the Nation’s Oil
and Gas Producing States, 254
Study of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic
Fracturing on Drinking Water Resources—Progress
Report (2012), 256
Act 13, State of Pennsylvania (2012), 258
Robinson Township, et al. vs. Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, (J-127A-D-2012) (2013), 260
Fracturing Responsibility and Awareness of Chemicals
Act S.1135, 113th Congress, 1st Session (2013), 263
Powder River Basin Resource Council, Wyoming Outdoor
Council, Earthworks, and Center for Effective
Government (Formerly OMB Watch) vs. Wyoming Oil
and Gas Conservation Commission and Halliburton
Energy Services, Inc., 2014 WY 37 (2014), 266
Norse Energy Crop. vs. Town of Dryden, et al.
(2014), 268
Communication from the Commission to the
European Parliament, the Council, the European
Economic and Social Committee and the
Committee of the Regions on the Exploration and
Production of Hydrocarbons (Such as Shale Gas)
Using High Volume Hydraulic Fracturing in the EU
(2014), 270
6
RESOURCES FOR FURTHER RESEARCH, 275
Introduction, 275
Books, 275
Articles, 284
xii
Contents

Reports, 296
Internet, 302
7
CHRONOLOGY, 317
Glossary, 327
Index, 333
About the Author, 339
Contents
xiii


Preface
For more than half a decade, U.S. presidential administrations
have been calling on the nation to become “energy indepen-
dent.” In using these terms, presidents from Richard Nixon to
Barack Obama have pointed out the advantages of having the
United States capable of producing all the energy it needs,
without having to depend on other nations around the world
for its coal, oil, and natural gas. Various presidents have recom-
mended different routes to that objective—through conserva-
tion, increased development of U.S. natural resources, or an
expansion of alternative energy forms such as wind and solar
power—but all have agreed on the desirability of energy
independence.
Until recently, most experts in the ﬁeld have expressed
doubts as to whether the United States could ever achieve that
goal or, if it could, whether it could become energy indepen-
dent within the foreseeable future. The nation was such a vora-
cious consumer of energy, and its energy resources appeared to
be so limited, that a goal of energy independence seemed to be
out of reach to most people who studied the subject (which is
not to mention the number of voices who asked whether
energy independence was even a smart national policy to
pursue).
Sometime after the turn of the new century, however,
the discussion of energy independence took a whole new turn.
Evaluations of the amount of oil and gas, in particular, that
could be extracted from U.S. territories suddenly began to rise.
That does not mean that more oil and gas was being produced
xv

in Earth’s surface under the United States, but it did reﬂect the
fact that new technologies were being developed that were
capable of removing oil and gas that had previously (1) not
been known to exist or (2) had been thought to be too tightly
held underground for commercial extraction with technology
known at the time.
Two major technologies were responsible for this change in
outlook: directional (also known as horizontal) drilling and
hydraulic fracturing (commonly known as fracking). When
used in combination with each other (as they often are), the
two technologies have proved to be successful in squeezing oil
and gas out of deposits that had previously been ignored or
abandoned. After years of decreasing oil and gas production in
the United States, conditions began to change after 2000 at a
rate such that national and international energy agencies were
predicting that the United States would be energy independent
by 2020 or earlier.
As exciting as these predictions were, they tended to ignore
or play down a number of social, political, economic, environ-
mental, health, and other issues associated with the use of frack-
ing and horizontal drilling by the oil and gas industry. For
example, the former process makes use of dozens or even hun-
dreds of different kinds of chemicals to increase the efﬁciency
of the fracking process. Some of these chemicals are known to
have deleterious effect on the health of plants and animals,
including humans. No sooner were reports coming in of huge
ﬂows of oil and gas from newly drilled wells than were those
reports followed by complaints from people living near those
oil and gas ﬁelds about respiratory problems, increased risks
for cancer, psychological problems, disruption of the natural
environment, and other damage to the standard of living.
The responses to these complaints ranged across the board.
Some individuals and companies, especially those involved in
the exploration for and extraction of gas and oil, tended to
downplay the seriousness of these charges, raising questions in
some cases as to how often people were imagining the
xvi
Preface

conditions they reported. Other individuals and agencies sug-
gested that some level of health and environmental “inconven-
ience” might be necessary to gain the full beneﬁt of the new
energy technology that had become available to the world.
Still other individuals and associations argued that the risks
associated with those beneﬁts were too great to expand the use
of fracking and horizontal drilling. In the most extreme of
cases, those individuals and associations have eventually been
successful in getting governmental agencies from the national
level (France and Bulgaria, for example) to the state level, and
especially to the local level of towns, cities, villages, and
counties to ban the use of fracking within their boundaries.
Given the very recent rise in fracking activities in the United
States (and a very few other countries in the world), it is not yet
clear how the world will reach some form of accommodation
between the arguments for and against fracking, or how the
new technology will continue to be used under regulatory con-
trol that will satisfy the majority of the citizens of a city, state,
and nation. Already governmental units at all levels are strug-
gling with a plethora of legislative and administrative remedies
for resolving this issue, and the courts have already become
active in trying to resolve disputes between those who favor
and those who oppose fracking operations.
The purpose of this book is to provide the reader with a
detailed background of the history and development of the oil
and gas industry from the earliest days of human civilization to
the present moment, with special attention on the history and
development of hydraulic fracturing and directional drilling
(Chapter 1). The book also attempts to lay out the primary con-
cerns that have been expressed about the use of fracking in the
exploration for and extraction of oil and gas, focusing on the argu-
ments in support of and opposed to a wider use of the technology
(Chapter 2). The second half of the book provides readers with a
variety of resources designed to assist one in further research on
the topic, such as an annotated bibliography of books, articles,
and Internet resources on the topic, a chronology of important
Preface
xvii

events in the history of fracking, a glossary of common terms used
in the discussion of fracking and horizontal drilling, and proﬁles
of important individuals and institutions active in the ﬁeld of
fracking. One chapter (Chapter 3) also provides selected individ-
uals with an opportunity to express their views on some speciﬁc
aspect of the fracking debate.
xviii
Preface

Fracking


1
Background and History
The problem of peak oil remains. . . . In our opinion, it will
be very difﬁcult to raise the oil production above 95 million
barrels/day
(Desmarest 2010)
This view on the worldwide availability of oil was offered
by Thierry Desmarest, chairman of the board of the Total oil
company at the World Economic Forum held at Davos,
Switzerland, in January 2010. Peak oil is a concept that arose
out of the research of Shell corporation geologist M. King
Hubbert in the mid-1950s. In a series of scholarly papers,
Hubbert suggested that fossil fuel production must inevitably
follow a predictable pattern that later became known as the
Hubbert curve. According to this theory, the production of
coal, oil, and natural gas increases from essentially zero at some
point in history to some maximum point, after which produc-
tion decreases, until it again reaches a very low or near-zero
level. The Hubbert curve has essentially the same shape as the
well-known bell curve (also known as a normal curve or
Gaussian function) that describes the behavior of many natural
phenomena.
3
An oil well in Oklahoma, ca. 1922. (Library of Congress)

Hubbert’s argument was simple in some regards. Scientists
know that fossil fuels were produced over many millions of
years early in Earth history as the result of a combination of
geological processes. At some point in time, those processes
ceased to exist, and the fossil fuels were no longer being pro-
duced. At a much more recent period in history, humans dis-
covered the existence of fossil fuels and their potential value
for driving a number of useful operations. They began to
extract and make use of these fuels during a period in modern
history that has become known as the age of fossil fuels. The
age of fossil fuels dates from about 1800, soon after the start
of the Industrial Revolution, to at least the present day.
During this two-century period, humans have extracted very
large amounts of coal, oil, and natural gas from beneath
Earth’s surface, perhaps as much as half of all the fuels present
under the crust.
At some point, many scientists believe, the amount of coal,
oil, and natural gas that can be extracted from the Earth will
reach a maximum, a level known as peak oil, peak coal, and peak
natural gas. Beyond that point, the available reserves of all three
fossil fuels will continue to decrease, such that humans will be
able to withdraw smaller and smaller amounts of the fuels from
Earth each year.
The consequences of such a pattern are probably self-
evident. For at least 200 years, humans have been building a
civilization based on the ready availability of fossil fuels. We
have transportation systems, heating systems, industrial sys-
tems, military systems, housing systems, and other systems that
operate primarily because coal, oil, and natural gas can be
burned to produce energy. In addition, these fossil fuels have
also become the raw material from which a seemingly endless
list of synthetic products can be made. As our supplies of fossil
fuels begin to diminish, dramatic changes in the ways in which
humans live their lives may be necessary.
The point at which peak oil, peak coal, and peak natural
gas are likely to occur, according to those who believe in this
4
Fracking

argument, differs from fuel to fuel and from nation to nation.
According to one recent study, peak oil may already have
occurred some time ago in countries such as the United States
(1970), Canada (1973), Iran (1974), Romania (1976), and
Indonesia (1977) or more recently in countries such as
Equatorial Guinea (2011), Algeria (2012), Azerbaijan (2013),
India (2015), and Sudan (2015). The same studies place the
date for peak oil worldwide as 2014 (Nashawi, Malallah, and
Al-Bisharah 2010).
Estimating peak coal is considerably more difﬁcult, at least
partly because of the different types of coal being mined (pri-
marily anthracite, bituminous, and lignite). In 2007, however,
the Energy Watch Group attempted to make some estimates
with regard to the year in which coal production would peak
in a number of major coal-producing nations. The group said
that peak anthracite coal had already occurred in the United
States in 1990 and that total coal production would probably
peak sometime between 2020 and 2030. It estimated that total
coal production had peaked in Germany in about 1985,
although anthracite had peaked nearly 30 years earlier. Peak
production in China is very difﬁcult to predict, but may occur
as early as about 20 years into the future, an event that is likely
to mark the date of world peak coal also (Coal: Resources and
Production 2007).
As with oil and coal, experts differ widely on the possibility
and/or timing of a peak natural gas scenario. Some data suggest
that peak gas may have already occurred in some countries.
Romania, for example, has Europe’s longest history of explora-
tion and extraction of natural gas. But the country apparently
reached peak gas in 1976 when it produced 29.8 billion cubic
meters of the product. Today, production has dropped to about
a third of that amount (Viforeanu, Wells, and Hodny 2003).
A similar trend has occurred in the United Kingdom, where
gas production peaked at just less than 4 billion cubic feet in
2000 and has since dropped to about 1.3 billion cubic feet in
2012 (BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2013, 22).
Background and History
5

The term peak energy is sometimes used to assess that year or
period when humans will have extracted the maximum amount
of fossil fuels from Earth’s surface. At that point, we will still be
mining coal and drilling for oil and natural gas, but the total
amount of these fuels obtained will continue to decrease over
time. Civilization will be faced with the question as to how it
will continue to meet its energy needs with an ever-decreasing
supply of fossil fuels. A number of experts have attempted to
estimate the year in which peak energy will occur, with esti-
mated peak energy often estimated as occurring sometime
between 2020 and 2040 (see, for example, Clugston 2014,
Cooke 2014, Mórrígan 2014).
The theory of peak oil, coal, natural gas, and energy, how-
ever, is by no means universally accepted. In fact, many experts
in the ﬁeld of energy resources reject the concept, offering a
range of objections from modest adjustments to the predictions
that have been made to very strong complaints that pro-peakers
just don’t know what they are talking about. For example, the
comment with which this chapter begins was made by
Desmarest in response to an earlier remark by Khalid al Falih,
chairman of Saudi Arabia’s Aramco oil company, the world’s
largest oil corporation. Earlier at the Davos meeting, al Falih
had disparaged the notion of peak oil, stating simply that “we
don’t believe in peak oil.” Oil reserves were sufﬁcient, he said,
for production to continue growing well into the foreseeable
future (Neo 2014).
A very important development has occurred in the last two
decades that plays a critical role in the discussion about peak
energy: the use of hydraulic fracturing as a method for gaining
access to oil and natural gas reserves stored in shale rock in
many parts of the world. Hydraulic fracturing is a form of min-
ing in which a mixture of water and sand, along with various
other chemicals, is injected into rock, causing the rock to break
open and release oil and natural gas stored within it. Hydraulic
fracturing is also widely known by the term fracking. Fracking
was, for all practical purposes, an irrelevant technology in the
6
Fracking

exploration and extraction of oil and gas prior to 2000. In that
year, about 300,000 barrels of oil and about 2 billion cubic feet
of natural gas per day were produced by the fracking process.
Those numbers increased to about 3.25 million barrels of oil
and 32 billion cubic feet of natural gas per day by 2013
(Sieminski 2014, 4). As of 2011, the latest date for which esti-
mates are available, hydraulic fracturing accounted for about
one-third of all the natural gas produced in the United States
(SEAB Shale Gas Production Subcommittee Ninety-Day
Report 2014, 6). Whether hydraulic fracturing can signiﬁcantly
affect the problem of peak energy in the United States and the
rest of the world is a topic of considerable discussion today,
and it is the main theme of this book.
The Genesis of Fossil Fuels
In order to better understand the issues posed by hydraulic frac-
turing, it is worthwhile to review some basic background infor-
mation about the fossil fuels: how they were formed; when and
how humans learned to extract them from the Earth; what chal-
lenges they pose for the economics, politics, social issues, and
other aspects of civilization today; and how fracking relates to
all these issues.
On one level, explaining the origin of coal, oil, and natural
gas is a relatively simple and straightforward process. Before
reviewing that process, however, we should point out that this
“relatively simple and straightforward process” masks a far more
complex set of physical, chemical, geological, and biological
changes that petroleum engineers have only barely begun to
understand. But let’s start with the simpler explanation ﬁrst.
Some types of organisms are capable of converting the energy
of sunlight directly into organic material. For example, plants
use this energy in the process of photosynthesis, by which car-
bon dioxide and water are converted into complex carbohy-
drates. A number of microorganisms are capable of carrying
out the same types of chemical reactions. Organisms able to
Background and History
7

carry out these changes are called primary producers, or simply
producers. (By contrast, organisms that are not able to manufac-
ture their own foods, as do producers, are called consumers.)
When any organism dies, it eventually decomposes and,
under most circumstances, the organic compounds of which it
is made are converted back to the basic substances of which
they were made, primarily carbon dioxide and water. This pro-
cess of decay and decomposition follow this pathway, however,
only in the presence of oxygen. In the absence of oxygen, a dif-
ferent type of decay and decomposition takes place, a process
known as anaerobic decomposition (i.e., decomposition without
oxygen). The products of the anaerobic decay of organic matter
are quite different from those of aerobic (with oxygen) decay.
They include primarily hydrocarbons, organic compounds
made only of carbon and hydrogen, and of pure or nearly
pure carbon. Notice that these decay products do not contain
oxygen because no oxygen was available during the decay
process.
Now imagine what the Earth would have looked like during
its early history, say a few hundred million years ago. The planet
was still relatively young at that point, and its geology and climate
were very different from what they are today. Temperatures
were higher, there was more moisture present, and a variety of
simple life forms were abundant. The landscape was covered with
swamps, bogs, lakes, and other watery environments.
When organisms died in such an environment, they might
very well end up on dry land and decay as most organisms do
today, with their bodies eventually decomposing into carbon
dioxide and water. But there was also a high likelihood that
they might die within a watery environment, sink to the bot-
tom of that body of water, and decompose without access to
oxygen. Scientists believe that high rates of anaerobic decay
were common in this early Earth environment, resulting in a
far greater likelihood that the decay of organisms would result
in the formation of carbon and hydrocarbons than in the
formation of carbon dioxide and water.
8
Fracking

The second important factor contributing to the develop-
ment of fossil fuel reserves was earth movements. Think of
the range of earth movements that take place today: swamps
eventually ﬁll in and become meadows; landslides occur ﬁlling
in lakes and ponds; earthquakes create cracks in the ground
and/or move earth around. Events such as these in Earth’s early
history could easily have resulted in the burial of dead organic
material under a few meters or more of ground. Over time,
more and more layers of earth could have built up on top of
all these dead bodies, increasing both pressure and temperature
on them, accelerating the process by which their organic com-
ponents were converted into carbon and hydrocarbons.
And that is essentially the story of how coal, oil, and natural
gas were formed. In the case of coal, the dead organisms were
usually trees and other plant material that died, fell into
swamps, were covered with layers of earth, and gradually
decomposed to form coal and coal-like products. The coal
found in the Earth today varies from place to place depending
on the conditions under which it was formed. If dead trees were
exposed to very high pressures and temperatures, decomposi-
tion was almost complete; the trees’ organic compounds were
converted almost entirely to pure carbon. Coal formed by this
process is called anthracite (or “hard coal”), a form of the fuel
that consists of more than 90 percent pure carbon, along
with very small amounts of hydrocarbons. Bituminous (or “soft
coal”) formed under less severe conditions, such that some of
the original organic compounds have been only partially
decomposed, to hydrocarbons, and others completely decom-
posed, to pure carbon. Finally, a form of coal called lignite con-
sists of more hydrocarbons and less pure carbon than either
anthracite or bituminous coal.
Scientists believe that the conditions under which dead plant
material decays anaerobically as described in this scenario were
most common during a geological period now known as the
Carboniferous Period, which lasted from about 360 million
years ago to about 300 million years ago. In fact, this geologic
Background and History
9

period got its name from the scenario outlined here, a period of
“coal bearing,” which is what the name means.
The process by which petroleum and natural gas were origi-
nally formed differs from that by which coal was formed in
one regard because of the organisms involved. Instead of dead
trees and plant material, the material from which oil and gas
were formed was microorganisms. A number of experts today
believe that the primary organisms responsible for the forma-
tion of oil and gas were the diatoms, a very large group of
single-cell phytoplankton that live in virtually all types of
watery environments.
Petroleum and natural gas formation begins when vast num-
bers of microorganisms in a lake or other body of water die and
sink to the bottom. There they are covered with sand, clay, and
other sediments, such that they decay without access to oxygen
producing a mixture of liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons
known as kerogen. As pressure and temperature increase in the
microorganism-ﬁlled layer, the kerogen is gradually converted
to petroleum (above 80°C) and natural gas (above 120°C).
While this conversion is under way, geologic changes are
almost certainly occurring as well. The layer consisting of sand,
clay, kerogen, and other materials is probably shifting and fold-
ing in response to earth movements. The surface of the layer
probably consists of upward protrusions and downward depres-
sions (“hills and valleys”). Thus, as oil and natural gas begin to
form, they ﬂow upward (because they are less dense) into the
upward protrusions, forming pockets of liquid and gaseous
fossil fuel. As the lake or other body of water dries out over
millions of years, the oil and gas remain trapped within these
domes that now consist of sandstone, shale, or some other rocky
material. (For excellent animations of the oil- and gas-making
process, see Oil Formation [two ﬁles].)
Many people have the image of an oil and gas reservoir as
being similar to a “lake” of liquid oil lying within a dome, over
which exists an “atmosphere” of natural gas. Such is not the
case, however. Instead, the oil and gas are trapped in the pores
10
Fracking

of rock strata, such as sandstone or limestone. As an analogy,
think of a sponge, the bottom part of which has been soaked
with water, while the upper part remains dry. A petroleum res-
ervoir is like that sponge in that the lower part of a rock layer is
“soaked” with oil, trapped in countless numbers of tiny pores in
the rock, while the upper part of the rock layer holds natural gas
trapped in pores, just as air is trapped in the pores of a dry
sponge. The challenge for oil companies (as discussed later in
this chapter) is to ﬁnd ways of drilling down into a rocky layer
containing oil and gas and forcing those materials upward to
the surface of the Earth.
Another contrast between the formation of coal and the for-
mation of petroleum and natural gas is that, as noted above, the
former appears to have occurred during one rather limited period
in Earth history, the Carboniferous, which lasted only about
60 million years. By contrast, the formation of oil and gas appears
to have continued over a long period of time, throughout a period
now known to scientists as the Phanerozoic Eon. The term phan-
erozoic comes from the Greek expression meaning “visible life.”
It refers to the range of Earth history during which multicellular
organisms ﬁrst appeared and began to evolve. It began about
542 MYA (million years ago) and includes the Paleozoic,
Mesozoic, and Cenozoic Eras.
Scientists now believe that oil and gas were formed sporadi-
cally throughout this period as a result of differing geological,
climatic, and other conditions. For example, the ﬁrst burst of
oil and gas formation appears to have taken place during the
Silurian Period, between about 440 and 400 MYA. Rocks con-
taining kerogen and natural gas dating to this period can be
found today in the Middle East, North Africa, and parts
of the United States. Researchers have estimated that about
9 percent of all the oil and gas currently available on Earth
was produced during this period (A Crude Story 2014;
Sorkhabi 2014).
The most productive periods for oil and gas appear to have
been the Jurassic (about 200 to 140 MYA) and Cretaceous
Background and History
11

(140 to 65 MYA) Periods, during which about 25 percent and
29 percent, respectively, of all oil and gas were produced.
(These periods are perhaps best known as the age of dinosaurs,
which explains the association that is sometimes made with the
death of these reptiles with the formation of fossil fuels when,
in fact, no such connection actually exists.) The Jurassic and
Cretaceous Periods were also characterized by some dramatic
geological and climatic changes. For example, the period was
one
during which the planet’s
original
protocontinent,
Pangaea, began to break up and drift apart, creating the conti-
nents that we know today. Thus, dramatic earth movements
that would contribute to the formation and isolation of oil
and gas deposits were probably fairly common. At the same
time, the Earth’s climate began to warm, producing a hothouse
atmosphere in which plant growth thrived and bodies of water
expanded to play host to unimaginably vast numbers of proto-
zoa from which oil and gas were eventually to develop. Source
rocks from these periods, primarily shale and limestone, are
found today in widespread regions of the Earth, including the
Middle East, the North Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, and western
Siberia. The rocks are rich in kerogen, petroleum, and natural
gas (A Crude Story 2014; Sorkhabi 2014).
The most recent periods during which oil and gas were formed
were the Miocene (about 5 to 23 MYA) and Oligocene (23 to 34
MYA) Epochs. Because these events are so recent in geologic
terms, oil and gas formed during these periods is sometimes called
new oil and gas. (For a summary of oil and gas formed in various
geologic periods, see Emery and Myers 1996, Figure 11.2,
page 240.)
The most familiar type of reservoir is the dome-shaped struc-
ture that contains liquid petroleum above which lies an atmos-
phere of natural gas, but oil and natural gas that occurs within
the Earth today is present in a variety of forms, depending on
the method by which it was produced and changes through
which it has gone.
12
Fracking

Oil and Gas Resources
We will now brieﬂy discuss terminology. The terms crude oil,
petroleum, and oil are often used interchangeably in discussions
about oil and gas. The terms are actually somewhat different.
Crude oil refers to the liquid mixture of hydrocarbons that
occurs in reservoirs beneath the Earth’s surface, the liquid that
has been mentioned earlier in this book as oil. The two terms
describe essentially the same material. Once crude oil is
removed from the Earth and treated so as to make it useful for
a variety of applications, those products are then known as
petroleum products. Finally, the word petroleum itself refers to
crude oil plus the petroleum products made from it. In practical
situations, the words oil and petroleum are often used inter-
changeably, although such a practice is not strictly correct
(Glossary 2014).
The dome-shaped trap described above is more technically
described as a structural trap, any type of geological structure
that allows oil and/or natural gas to collect within a restricted
area. (For an explanation of structural traps, see Petroleum
Traps 2014.) Structural traps may contain liquid hydrocarbons
(oil) only, gaseous hydrocarbons (natural gas) only, or some
combination of the two forms. When the oil and gas are mixed
with each other in solution, the natural gas is often called dis-
solved natural gas. When the two are separate from each other,
the gas is said to be associated natural gas.
Oil and natural gas reserves do not occur uniformly across
the planet’s surface. They are present more abundantly—often
much more abundantly—in some places than in others. Most
people know, for example, that the Middle East contains par-
ticularly rich oil and gas reserves, as do certain parts of the
United States, Mexico, Venezuela, and offshore regions such
as the North Sea and Gulf of Mexico. Any region that has
extensive oil and/or gas reserves spread over an extended area
is called an oil ﬁeld. According to some authorities, there may
be as many as almost a thousand very large oil ﬁelds on the
Background and History
13

planet (where an oil ﬁeld is deﬁned in this case as a region with
at least 500 million barrels of recoverable oil).
The largest oil ﬁeld in the world is said to be the Ghawar
ﬁeld in Saudi Arabia. The ﬁeld ﬁrst started producing oil
and gas in 1951 and is said by some to have reached peak pro-
duction in 2005, although that view has been disputed by some
experts (see, for example, Tech Talk—Current Oil Production
and the Future of Ghawar 2014). Currently, the ﬁeld yields
about 5 million barrels of oil and 2 billion cubic feet of natural
gas per day, accounting for about 7 percent of the world’s output
of oil and gas (Popescu 2014). According to some observers, there
may be as many as 3,000 distinct oil wells in the Ghawar ﬁeld
(How Many Wells in Ghawar? 2014). Other very large oil and
gas ﬁelds around the world are the Burgan ﬁeld in Kuwait
(1.7 million barrels of oil and 550 million cubic feet of gas per
day), Ferdows, Mound, and Zagheh ﬁelds in Iran (output not
known), Sugar Loaf ﬁeld in Brazil (under development), and
Cantarell ﬁeld in Mexico (500,000 barrels of oil; natural gas not
available). (The 10 Largest Oil Deposits in the World 2014).
The top 25 oil and gas ﬁelds in the United States, based on
proved reserves, are shown in Tables 1.1 and 1.2.
Geologists and specialists in related ﬁelds also refer com-
monly to another concept related to fossil fuel reserves, the play.
Although that term has been in use for a long time, it still has
no widely accepted and clearly deﬁned meaning. One possible
deﬁnition that has been proposed is the following:
A play is deﬁned as a set of known or postulated oil and or
gas accumulations sharing similar geologic, geographic,
and temporal properties, such as source rock, migration
pathways, timing, trapping mechanism, and hydrocarbon
type. (Biewick, Gunther, and Skinner 2002)
Plays are often named to reﬂect the geologic period during
which their oil and gas were formed, for example, a Devonian
play, Silurian play, or Mississippian play.
14
Fracking

Table 1.1
Top 25 U.S. Crude Oil Fields as Ranked by Estimated 2009 Proved
Reserves
Rank
Field
State
Proved
Reserves1
Year
Discovered
1
Prudhoe Bay
Alaska
95.9
1967
2
Spraberry Trend
Texas
39.6
1949
3
Mississippi Canyon
Block 807
FG2
66.0
1989
4
Mississippi Canyon
Block 778
FG
73.7
1999
5
Belridge South
California
32.6
1911
6
Kuparuk River
Alaska
38.0
1969
7
Wasson
Texas
22.1
1937
8
Green Canyon Block 743
FG
38.3
1998
9
Midway-Sunset
California
34.1
1901
10
Elk Hills
California
13.4
1919
11
Kern River
California
28.8
1899
12
Green Canyon Block 826
FG
23.6
1998
13
Wattenberg
Colorado
15.6
1970
14
Slaughter
Texas
10.3
1937
15
Cedar Hills
Montana/
North Dakota/
South Dakota
20.8
1951
16
Green Canyon Block 640
FG
22.6
2002
17
Milne Point
Alaska
10.6
1982
18
Salt Creek
Wyoming
3.7
1889
19
Wilmington
California
13.6
1932
20
Levelland
Texas
7.6
1945
21
Seminole
Texas
6.9
1936
22
Monument Butte
Utah
4.6
1964
23
Cymric
California
17.6
1916
24
Goldsmith
Texas
6.0
1935
25
Orion
Alaska
0.0
2002
1Million barrels.
2Federal offshore, Gulf of Mexico.
FG ¼ Federal offshore source, Gulf of Mexico
Source: Top 100 Oil and Gas Fields of 2009, U.S. Energy Information Administration,
Table 1, http://www.eia.gov/pub/oil_gas/natural_gas/data_publications/crude_oil
_natural_gas_reserves/current/pdf/top100ﬁelds.pdf. Accessed on June 7, 2014.

Table 1.2
Top 25 U.S. Natural Gas Fields Ranked by Estimated 2009 Proved
Reserves
Rank
Field
State
Proved
Reserves1
Year
Discovered
1
Newark East
Texas
1794.6
1981
2
San Juan Basin Gas
Area
Colorado/New
Mexico
1295.2
1927
3
Pinedale
Wyoming
487.8
1955
4
Haynesville Shale Unit
Louisiana
203.7
2008
5
B-43 (Fayetteville)
Arkansas
516.8
2004
6
Prudhoe Bay
Alaska
166.7
1967
7
Jonah
Wyoming
391.1
1977
8
Natural Buttes
Utah
224.4
1940
9
Hugoton Gas Area
Kansas/Oklahoma/
Texas
328.1
1922
10
Wattenberg
Colorado
195.3
1970
11
Spraberry Trend Area
Texas
113.8
1949
12
Carthage
Texas
273.0
1936
13
Mamm Creek
Colorado
111.4
1959
14
Fogarty Creek
Wyoming
34.7
1975
15
Antrim
Michigan
125.6
1965
16
Grand Valley
Colorado
191.0
1985
17
PRB Coal Bed
Montana/Wyoming
558.9
1915
18
Big Sandy
Kentucky/Wets
Virginia
70.6
1926
19
Lake Ridge
Wyoming
15.7
1981
20
Oakwood
Virginia
136.7
1990
21
Raton Basin Gas Area
Colorado/New
Mexico
140.4
1998
22
Lower Mobile Bay Area
Alabama/FG2
156.1
1979
23
Madden
Wyoming
88.6
1968
24
Rulison
Colorado
127.2
1958
25
Carthage North
Texas
24.9
1966
1Billion cubic feet.
2Federal offshore, Gulf of Mexico.
FG ¼ Federal offshore source, Gulf of Mexico
Source: Top 100 Oil and Gas Fields of 2009, U. S. Energy Information Administration,
Table 2, http://www.eia.gov/pub/oil_gas/natural_gas/data_publications/crude_oil
_natural_gas_reserves/current/pdf/top100ﬁelds.pdf. Accessed on June 7, 2014.

One of the most commonly mentioned oil and gas plays to-
day is the Marcellus play that lies beneath about 34 million
acres of land in the mostly northeastern United States within
the states of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Kentucky,
Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia, and, to a small extent,
Maryland, Alabama, and Georgia, as well as a portion of Lake
Erie. (For a map of the Marcellus play, see http://www.shale
reporter.com/maps/pdf_911fdc84-67e4-11e1-8dab-0019bb30
f31a.html.) The Marcellus play is believed to contain 500
trillion cubic feet of natural gas, of which about 10 percent,
or 50 trillion cubic feet, is thought to be economically
recoverable (Engelder and Lash 2014). Although there is no
accurate count of the number of wells that have been sunk
into the Marcellus play at this point in time, there are strong
indications that it has been and will continue to be the locus
of high activity among oil and gas exploration companies. For
example, the number of wells drilled into the Marcellus play
in Pennsylvania alone rose from 27 in 2007 to 2,073 in 2011,
only four years later (Marcellus Shale–Appalachian Basin
Natural Gas Play 2014).
Especially with the increased availability of hydraulic fractur-
ing as a way of collecting shale oil and gas, interest in fossil fuel
plays around the world has greatly increased in many countries.
Today, nations such as Mexico, Argentina, Canada, India,
China, and Russia have all discovered very large gas and oil
plays, which hold the promise as very signiﬁcant sources of
these materials in the future. For maps that show the size and
location of some of these plays, see http://pacwestcp.com/
education/regional-maps/.
As an example of some of the extraordinary plays that
have been discovered, consider the Bazhenov play in western
Siberia. The play runs from the Arctic Sea in the north to the
borders of Kazakhstan in the south, covering an area of about
1 million square kilometers (about 400,000 square miles). The
U.S. Geological Survey estimates that the play may contain up
to 1,243 billion barrels of oil, of which 74.6 billion barrels are
Background and History
17

economically recoverable, and 1,920 trillion cubic feet of gas,
of which 285 trillion cubic feet is economically recoverable
(Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources
2013, IX 2). Note that these numbers are four to ﬁve times
the estimates for the Marcellus shale.
Terminology
Petroleum experts and companies usually like to describe the
amount of oil and/or gas that can be recovered from a well,
ﬁeld, or play. They use terms such as technically recoverable, dis-
covered unrecoverable, and risked to describe resources. Such
terms reﬂect one basic fact about oil and gas reserves: It is often
difﬁcult not only to know how much of the product is present
in a resource, but also how much of that product can actually
be extracted from the Earth. It is not uncommon to discover a
new oil and/or gas reserve, which is suspected to contain very
large quantities of the product. But for any number of reasons,
engineers are fairly certain that only a relatively small fraction of
that product can actually be extracted from the resource.
The problem of petroleum terminology is made more com-
plex by the fact that many different agencies use such terms,
and those agencies frequently do not agree with each other.
One article on this issue lists just a few of the agencies for
whom the prediction of oil and gas reserves is essential and
who, therefore, have their own systems for describing the size
of those reserves: the U.S. Geological Survey, American
Association of Petroleum Geologists, Society of Petroleum
Engineers, Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers, World
Petroleum Congress, Securities and Exchange Commission,
Internal Revenue Service, and the United Nations Framework
Classiﬁcation (Oil and Natural Gas ‘Reserves’—Deﬁnitions
Matter 2014). The following list provides deﬁnitions for at least
some of the terms used in discussing the size of reserves in an oil
or gas well, ﬁeld, or play. But remember that for each term,
alternative deﬁnitions are also available.
18
Fracking

Proved (or proven) reserves: The estimated quantities of oil
and/or gas that experts believe with reasonable certainty
to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs
under current economic and operating conditions.
Probable reserves: The estimated amount of oil and/or gas
that experts believe can be recovered from a resource with
something less than high probability. In some cases, the
cutoff point is taken as a 50 percent probability, in which
case the reserves are called P50 reserves.
Possible (or inferred) reserves: The estimated amount of oil
and/or gas that experts believe can be recovered from a re-
source with a relatively low level of probability, often
around 10 to 20 percent likelihood, given current eco-
nomic and operating conditions.
Ultimately recoverable resource: An estimate of the total
amount of oil and/or gas that will ever be extracted from
the Earth.
Technically recoverable resource: An estimate of the amount of
oil and/or gas that can be recovered using the best available
current technology without concern as to the economic
viability of such efforts.
Undiscovered resources: An estimate of the amount of oil and/
or gas that experts guess is likely to be available in a region
where the product has not yet actually been found. A sub-
division of this term is technically recoverable undiscovered
resource, which refers to the amount of that as-yet undis-
covered resource is likely to be recoverable using current
technology.
Contingent resources: Estimates of the amount of oil and/or
gas that can be recovered from a resource that is not yet
being used for any one of a number of economic, legal,
regulatory, environmental, or other reasons.
Prospective resources: An estimate of oil and gas resources that
have not yet been discovered, taking into consideration
Background and History
19

new forms of technology that may make the extraction of
those resources technically and economically possible.
Risked resources: Oil and/or gas reserves are reserves that are
possible or probable, but that have not yet been produced.
Unrisked resources: Oil and/or gas reserves are reserves that
have already been developed. (An important standard
source of most deﬁnitions relating to oil and gas reserves
is Petroleum Resources Management System 2007.)
Exploring for Oil and Gas
Most oil and gas reserves today are buried deep beneath Earth’s
surface. As of late 2014, the deepest oil well in the world is the
Chayvo well, Z-44, off the east coast of Russia’s Sakhalin Island
with a depth of 12,376 meters 40,604 feet. But historically, oil
and gas reserves have been found at virtually any depth, including
just beneath Earth’s surface and even, in some cases, on top of
the ground. A one-time common experience in the search for
oil was immortalized in a 1960s television comedy, The Beverly
Hillbillies, in which a family struck oil simply by driving a post
into the ground and “up came the bubblin’ crude.” Such easy dis-
coveries of shallow reservoirs of oil and gas are, however, long
gone, and scientists use a variety of sophisticated techniques to
ﬁnd reserves buried many thousands of meters underground.
The most common method for searching for oil and gas
reserves today is seismic surveying. In a seismic survey, a shock
wave is created at ground level usually by means of setting off a
small explosion or by vibrating heavy plates carried by large
trucks. The waves travel below the ground and are reﬂected
back to the surface, where they are recorded by means of
specialized devices similar to microphones called geophones.
The data recorded by the geophones are then analyzed to
obtain an image of rock structures underground. These images
allow a geologist to ﬁnd regions where oil and/or gas are likely
to be found. For example, fractures in underground structures
20
Fracking

often provide conduits through which oil and gas are able to
ﬂow and collect with porous layers of rocks. A seismic image
often indicates the presence of such a fracture. Today, three-
dimensional seismic images can be produced that provide even
more detailed and precise images of underground structures and,
hence, more reliable information about the possible location of
petroleum reserves.
Seismic imaging can also be conducted on the water. Ships
drag devices that release bursts of compressed air into the water.
The shock waves produced by the compressed air are transmitted
through the rocky structure under the water and are reﬂected
back to the water’s surface, where they are captured by hydro-
phones, water versions of a geophone. The hydrophone images
can then be analyzed in essentially the same way as with land-
based seismic systems. (For an animated explanation of seismic
imaging, see http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hxJa7EvYoFI or
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=22m27MhzSQs.)
Another technology available for oil and gas exploration
takes advantage of the Earth’s natural gravitational and mag-
netic ﬁelds. As everyone knows, gravity is a force that attracts
objects to Earth’s center. It is a force that is relatively constant
at every point on Earth’s surface. However, very small varia-
tions in the gravitational force exist at different points on
Earth’s surface for a variety of reasons, including differing
underground rock structures and variations in the chemical
composition of rocks. Geologists make use of these facts to look
for regions where oil and gas reservoirs are likely to be found.
They use highly sensitive measuring devices known as gravitom-
eters (or gravimeters) to measure the precise value of the gravita-
tional attraction at various points in a region being explored.
The data received from these measurements are then fed into
a computer system, where programs are available for the con-
version of the data to maps of the underground regions. These
maps provide geologists with a clue as to whether or not the
region is worth exploring in more detail—such as sinking a trial
hole—in the search for petroleum.
Background and History
21

Just so that no one is offended with the terminology used
here:
A geologist is someone who studies the structure of the Earth,
its history, and physical and chemical changes that take
place within the Earth.
A geophysicist focuses on the physical characteristics of the
Earth, such as its gravitational and magnetic ﬁelds, plate
tectonics, earth movements, and the structure of the man-
tle and core.
A petrologist is a geologist who specializes in the study of the
composition, origin, distribution, and structure of rocks.
A petroleum geologist is someone who studies the origin,
occurrence, exploration, and extraction of liquid and gas-
eous hydrocarbons.
(For more information on this topic, see http://www.radford
.edu/content/csat/home/geology/faq.html.)
The principles that underlie the use of gravitational forces in
oil and gas exploration are also used in magnetic surveys. Much
of what has been said about gravitational surveys also applies to
magnetic surveys because Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld varies in very
subtle ways from place to place in the same way its gravitational
ﬁeld varies. (For animations of gravitational and magnetic im-
aging, see http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9P6GEpxFtSY
and http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AZyNIGFHsE4.)
Yet another technology used in oil and gas exploration is
called electromagnetic (EM) surveying. This technology takes
advantage of the fact that various types of rock conduct an elec-
trical current more or less easily. In particular, porous rocks that
are most likely to hold crude oil and natural gas tend to be rel-
atively poor conductors of electricity compared to other types
of rock. EM surveying involves sending an electrical current
into underground strata and then measuring the resistivity of
the rocks through which that current ﬂows. Resistivity is the
22
Fracking

reverse of conductivity and is easier to measure than the ﬂow of
electricity. Detecting devices are able to distinguish very small
changes in the resistivity of rock and, hence, act as predictors
of places where drilling is or is not likely to be successful. EM
surveying is generally used in conjunction with and to conﬁrm
the results of seismic surveys.
A ﬁnal tool used in the exploration for oil and gas is remote
sensing. The term remote sensing refers to the collection of data
about objects on Earth’s surface using aircrafts or satellites trav-
eling high above the Earth. Remote sensing is often used as a
preliminary technology to locate areas where the probability of
ﬁnding oil and/or gas is good based on rock types and forma-
tion, fractures in the Earth’s surface, microseepage of oil at
Earth’s surface, and other surface features. (For a good review
of the use of remote sensing in petroleum exploration, see
Finding Oil and Gas from Space 2014.)
Drilling Technology
Finding reservoirs of crude oil and natural gas is, of course, only
the ﬁrst step in a long process of putting gasoline into the
tank of a car or feeding natural gas into a home heating system.
The next step is ﬁnding a way to remove oil and gas from the
ground. In the most general sense, that process generally
involves drilling into the ground through layers of rock until
one reaches a layer in which crude oil and/or natural gas is
trapped. When that layer is reached, the oil or gas ﬁnally has a
conduit—after many millions of years—by which it can escape
to the Earth’s upper surface. The oil and/or gas then begins to
ﬂow upward, driven by the ﬂuid and gas pressure that has accu-
mulated in the rock layer since its formation. The amount of
that pressure available determines how easily the oil and/or gas
escapes from the well. In many cases, the pressure is so great
that the oil and/or gas come shooting out of the drill hole in
the form of a gusher an explosion of gas and liquid that can
shoot many meters into the air. For well drillers, the appearance
Background and History
23

of a gusher during a drilling operation can be one of the most
exciting experiences of a lifetime.
Preparation for drilling begins weeks or months before work
can actually start in the ﬁeld with the process of purchasing or
leasing the land to be used, obtaining all necessary documents,
clearing the land where drilling is to occur, arranging for living
and working conditions for the drill crew, taking such actions
as may be necessary to protect the surrounding environment
from damage by the drilling process, and making other such
preparatory arrangements. All of these activities plus the drilling
process itself requires a variety of specialized companies, each
with its own speciﬁc task in the preparation and drilling
process.
When the site has been prepared the drilling rig is brought
into position for drilling. Drilling rigs differ widely in height
and other speciﬁcations in order to provide the framework
needed for any particular drilling job. Actual drilling begins
with the creation of a conductor hole or starter hole, which holds
the upper portion of the drilling system. The conductor hole
has a large diameter of up to 20 inches or more and is lined
with pipe. It may extend a few dozen or a few hundred feet into
the ground, although some systems require no conductor sys-
tem at all. When drilling has reached the bottom of the conduc-
tor hole, a second hole of smaller diameter is begun, the surface
hole. Like the conductor hole, the surface hole is line with metal
pipe to provide the sides of the hole from collapsing in on itself.
The surface hole may extend to a depth of as much as 3,500
feet. Beneath the surface hole, yet a third section is added, the
intermediate hole, which extends to a depth of nearly 10,000
feet, after which the ﬁnal section, the production hole is drilled.
Depending on the actual depth of the petroleum reservoir, the
presence and/or dimensions of these sections may differ from
hole to hole.
The “business” part of the drilling system is the drill string,
which consists of three major parts: the bottom hole assembly
(BHA), transition pipes, and drill pipes. The bottom hole
24
Fracking

assembly contains the drill bit, collars that keep parts in place,
and other components, such as those needed to keep mud ﬂow-
ing through the system. The drill pipes are the pipes that run
from the top of the well downward into the well until they
reach the transition pipes, through which they are connected
to the BHA. Drill pipes are thick steel pipes about 10 meters
in length that are added to the well as the drill digs deeper into
the earth. The whole piping system is held in place by pumping
cement into the space between the pipes and the surrounding
rock, where it hardens and forms a permanent grip on the
piping system. Drilling continues until evidence of oil or gas
begins to appear in the efﬂuent from the drilling process.
At this point, the lowest portions of the drill string are removed
and a perforated pipe is attached. The holes in the pipe provide
an outlet through which oil and gas can escape upwards
through the pipes. At that point, a control mechanism called a
Christmas tree is attached at the top of the pipe to direct the
ﬂow of oil and/or gas into storage tanks.
When the reservoir is reached, oil and/or gas begin to ﬂow
upward to the top of the piping system where they are cap-
tured. Historically, the oil produced in a well was by far more
important commercially than was the gas. In fact, the natural
gas obtained from a well was often simply just released to the
atmosphere, or, more commonly, burned in a process known
as ﬂaring. Flaring allowed a company to get rid of a waste prod-
uct in which it was not interested at little or no cost and with
relatively little technical and environmental problems.
Of course, ﬂaring is an enormously waste of what oil compa-
nies now realize is a very valuable product, but the arguments
for ﬂaring have traditionally been—and to some extent still
are—convincing. One reason for ﬂaring has been that the gas
pressure that builds up in the drilling system can pose a safety
threat to the equipment and crew working at the rig. Another
reason is that the amount of natural gas produced by a well
may be too small to justify the construction of a separate system
for collecting and storing the gas. Over the years, oil companies
Background and History
25

have tended to reduce the amount of gas ﬂaring at their wells,
choosing instead to capture, store, use, and sell the captured
natural gas. But ﬂaring is still widely popular in many locations,
with the main justiﬁcation usually being the high cost of build-
ing systems for dealing with the natural gas. That is, it is simply
cheaper to burn off the natural gas than it is to build a system
for capturing and storing the product (Curtis and Ware
2014). As a consequence, recent studies have shown that oil
companies are still venting and ﬂaring very large amounts of
natural gas—140 billion cubic meters in 2011—annually
around the world. The loss of natural gas by venting and ﬂaring
in 2011, for example, was sufﬁcient to supply all the natural gas
used by all of Central and South America in one year (World
Bank Sees Warning Sign in Gas Flaring Increase 2012).
One of the key elements in any drilling operation is the drill-
ing ﬂuid, also known as the drilling mud. Drilling ﬂuid is a com-
plex aqueous (water-based) mixture consisting primarily of
bentonite clay, an aluminum silicate compound with variable
composition, along with other possible components, such as
calcium carbonate (chalk), barium sulfate (barite), iron oxide
(hematite), various types of gums, starch, carboxymethylcellu-
lose, and other substances. The precise composition of drilling
ﬂuid is determined by the speciﬁc needs of each drilling
operation.
Drilling ﬂuid is injected into the well through the middle of
the drill string. It passes out of the bottom of the drill string,
around the rotating drill bit, and then back out of the system
through the space between the inner and outer pipes of the drill
string. In its transport through the drilling system, the drilling
ﬂuid plays a number of roles, the most important of which is
the removal of cuttings produced at the bottom of the hole by
the drill bit. These cuttings become suspended in the drilling
ﬂuid and are carried to the top of the borehole, where they
can be removed. The drilling ﬂuid also acts as a heat exchange
ﬂuid, keeping the drill bit and other moving parts of the system
cool during the drilling operation. The drilling ﬂuid also acts as
26
Fracking

a pressure regulator within the drill pipes, ensuring that
changing pressures on the pipes does not cause their collapse.
(A diagram showing the operation of the drilling ﬂuid system
is available at http://www.kgs.ku.edu/Publications/Oil/primer12
.html.)
The drilling process is a very complicated system, with far
more elements than can be included in this section. For more
detailed descriptions and animations of the drilling process
see http://www.metacafe.com/watch/yt-cHfA4P8MMYc/drilling
_for_oil_in_illinois/,http://www.wikihow.com/Drill-an-Oil-Well,
and
http://science.howstuffworks.com/environmental/energy/oil
-drilling3.htm through http://science.howstuffworks.com/
environmental/energy/oil-drilling5.htm.
Petroleum Chemistry
The material obtained from an oil well consists almost entirely
of hydrocarbons, chemical compounds that contain only car-
bon and hydrogen. Methane is the simplest hydrocarbon.
Its chemical formula, CH4 indicates that a molecule of meth-
ane consists of one carbon atom, to which four hydrogen atoms
are attached. Methane is by far the most common compound
found in natural gas, making up about 95 percent of that prod-
uct. The next heavier hydrocarbons are ethane (C2H6), pro-
pane (C3H8), and butane (C4H10). Butane is an example of a
hydrocarbon that can exist in two forms, or isomers. The two
isomers of butane contain four carbon atoms and ten hydrogen
atoms, but the carbon atoms are arranged in a different pattern
in the two isomers. The more carbon atoms present in a hydro-
carbon, the more isomers are possible. The hydrocarbon
called eicosane (C20H42), for example, had 366,319 isomers.
The possibility of isomers helps explain why the chemical com-
position of oil and gas is so complex.
Another reason for the chemical complexity of petroleum
is that carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon can be arranged in a
variety of ways. Compounds in which the carbon atoms are
Background and History
27

all arranged in a straight line, in a branched arrangement, or in
a ring are called aliphatic hydrocarbons. Aliphatic hydrocarbons
in which the carbon atoms form a ring are also called alicyclic
hydrocarbons. Cyclobutane, for example, consists of four carbon
atoms arranged in a ring, with two hydrogen atoms attached to
each carbon atom. Aliphatic hydrocarbons may also be unsatu-
rated—that is, containing fewer hydrogen atoms than the maxi-
mum possible. For example, the compound known as ethylene
(or ethene) has a chemical formula of C2H4. Comparing this
compound to ethane (C2H6), it is obvious that ethylene has
two fewer hydrogens than the maximum number possible with
two carbon atoms. Therefore, ethylene is said to be unsatu-
rated. Unsaturated compounds like ethylene are also called
alkenes compared to saturated compounds like ethane, which
is an alkane.
Another type of hydrocarbon is called an aromatic hydrocar-
bon. Aromatic hydrocarbons are alike in that they all contain a
very characteristic structure called a benzene ring. Some famil-
iar aromatic hydrocarbons are benzene, toluene, xylene,
biphenyl, phenol, aniline, naphthalene, and anthracene.
The fact that hydrocarbons can exist in so many different
forms explains the fact that crude oil contains so many—
thousands of—different compounds. Faced with this reality,
petroleum chemists spent relatively little time focusing on spe-
ciﬁc compounds present in crude oil, such as benzene or ethyl-
ene, and instead concentrate on segments, or fractions, of crude
oil that consist of a few hundred different compounds with
similar properties. The process of separating crude oil into a
half dozen or so major segments is called fractionating, a process
that takes place in tall towers called fractionating towers or frac-
tionating columns. A fractionating tower is a cylindrical metal
tower that may range anywhere from 6 to about 60 meters in
height. It is divided into about a half dozen “ﬂoors” and con-
tains an outlet pipe at each ﬂoor. The tower is heated at the
bottom so that each ﬂoor in the tower is at a different temper-
ature. Floors near the bottom are very hot because they are
28
Fracking

close to the source of heat, while ﬂoors near the top are much
cooler.
When crude oil is added to the tower, it sinks to the bottom
where it is heated. Almost all of the components of the crude oil
are vaporized by the heat and begin to rise upward in the tower.
Substances with very high boiling points may rise no more than
one ﬂoor, while those with lower boiling points will rise until
they are cool enough to change back to a liquid. Components
with the lowest boiling points, then, may rise to the highest
ﬂoor before they condense and change back to a liquid.
Some constituents of crude oil are dissolved gases (dissolved
natural gas) that evaporate when the crude oil is heated in the
fractionating tower. These so-called reﬁnery gases rise to the
top of the tower and are vented out through a pipe in the top
of the tower. Another group of compounds, called the gasoline
or petrol fraction, have a boiling point of somewhere around
70°C. They are vented from the tower at the level just below
the top. A third group of compounds, called the naphtha frac-
tion, condenses at a boiling point of about 150°C. The next
lower levels capture fractions called kerosene and/or jet fuel
(about 200°C), diesel and fuel oil (about 250°C), and lubricat-
ing oil (about 300°C). The lowest level of the tower holds the
fraction with the highest boiling point, usually more than
400°C, and consists of asphalt, bitumen, tar, waxes, and other
heavy liquids and semisolids. (Note that the classiﬁcation and
naming of fractions in a tower differs from location to location,
company to company, and tower to tower. For an animation of
a fractionating tower, see http://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=GEJyiVq2NMM&index=11&list=PLOzrQUZ99ZqsarkxU_g6
aafHLSkxmTkgb.)
As the preceding discussion suggests, crude oil can be di-
vided into a number of fractions that have a wide variety of
uses, from paving of highways (asphalt) to lubrication of machi-
nery (lubricating oil) to coatings and coverings (wax). But the
most important chemical property of the vast majority of petro-
leum fractions and compounds is combustion. The reﬁnery gas,
Background and History
29

gasoline, jet fuel, and diesel fuel fractions are all burned in auto-
mobiles, trucks, jet airplanes, home heating systems, industrial
plants, and many other locations throughout society. It is these
applications of petroleum that constitute the reason that this
substance is so enormously valuable to modern society. Nearly
half (47 percent) of all crude oil is converted in one way or
another to make gasoline, with another quarter (23 percent)
used for diesel fuel and heating oil, and 10 percent for jet fuel
(Oil: Crude and Petroleum Products 2014). So combustion is
by far the most important end product of crude oil.
An additional use of crude oil, albeit a very small one, is the
production of petrochemicals. The term petrochemical applies
to any substance that can be made from one of the crude oil
fractions. The list of petrochemicals produced today is almost
limitless and includes items such as aspirin, candles, compact
discs, crayons, fertilizers, footballs, garbage bags, heart valve
replacements, perfumes, photographic ﬁlms, safety glass, tooth-
paste, and vitamin capsules. Less than 5 percent of all the crude
oil processed in the United States goes to the production of pet-
rochemicals. But the number of petrochemical products and
their ubiquitous role in society means that crude oil fractions
have greater value than simply powering modern society.
A Brief History of Petroleum Exploration
As suggested by the preceding sections, drilling for oil and natu-
ral gas today is a highly complex, very sophisticated, and
extremely expensive operation. Such has not always been the
case, however. Petroleum reservoirs could once be found rela-
tively close to the surface of the ground—or even on top of
the ground—so it is not surprising that humans have known
about and had access to crude oil and natural gas since the
beginning of civilization.
Evidence for the earliest use of petroleum products dates to
more than 40,000 years ago. Weapons and tools found at
Neanderthal sites in modern-day Syria consisted of stone heads
30
Fracking

attached to shafts with bitumen, a viscous, dark, oily liquid
with an odor similar to that of a freshly paved oil-covered road.
The material was almost certainly obtained from surface pools
of petroleum or seeps, places where oil and natural gas ﬂow from
beneath the ground through cracks to the surface. Probably the
best known example of a petroleum seep today is the La Brea
Tar Pits in Los Angeles, California. The material found in a
seep is called by a variety of names in addition to bitumen, such
as pitch, asphalt, and slime.
Probably the ﬁrst precise description we have of bitumen and
its natural sources comes from the writings of the Greek histo-
rian Herodotus in about 450 BCE who described the use of
bitumen by the Babylonians as early as the second millennium
BCE. He wrote that bitumen was used for a host of purposes,
such as a mortar in the construction of brick walls and sailing
ships, and for the waterprooﬁng of baths and drainage systems
(Ancient History Sourcebook 2014; Asphalt 2014). Other
applications of bitumen included its use as a medicine (for
treating skin disease and wounds and as a laxative), as a pre-
servative in the preparation of mummies, and as a lining for
baskets used to gather crops. In its natural or puriﬁed form,
bitumen was also burned for use in illumination or as a weapon
of war (Connan and Deschesne 1992).
The ﬁrst real oil wells of which we know were those used by
the Chinese in the fourth century CE. The date 347 CE is
often given as the date on which the ﬁrst such machine was
built, although some question remains as to the accuracy of that
year. The Chinese drill consisted of a system of bamboo pools
with a primitive rock drilling bit that was pounded into the
ground by the rocking motion of one of the bamboo poles.
Such a device was apparently adequate for drilling to a depth
of about 600 meters. (Kopey 2007; see an illustration of the
machine in Figure 3 of this article.) The Chinese continued
their development of drilling machines to the point that they
required a somewhat complex system of bamboo pipes to move
the oil recovered to salt water springs, where it was burned to
Background and History
31

evaporate salt water and recover solid salt (Oil and Gas: History
2014).
Possibly the most important region in the world in the his-
tory of the early development of petroleum exploration was
the Baku region in Azerbaijan. Baku is situated on the
Absheron Peninsula that projects eastward into the Caspian
Sea. As early as the seventh century residents of the area were
extracting oil from seepages that occurred throughout the area.
These seepages were apparently so common that they often
caught ﬁre spontaneously producing huge “pillars of ﬁre” that
burned night and day. Historians suggest that the Zoroastrian
religion, based on a worship of ﬁre, had its beginnings in the
region because of this startling natural phenomenon (Aliyev
2014; Oil and Gas: History 2014). Travelers who passed
through the Absheron region over succeeding centuries often
wrote about the huge production of oil and petroleum products
and the uses to which they were put. For example, Marco Polo
described in his writings how he saw oil being extracted on his
visit to Baku in 1273 and his observation of its being used as
a medicine and for illumination (Polo 1936). Other explorers
who visited and wrote about the rich oil treasures of the Baku
region included the Englishmen Thomas Bannister and
Jeffrey Duckett in 1568, the Italian traveler Pietro della Valle
in 1618, the Turkish visitor Evliya Çelebi in 1647, and the Dutch
sailor and explorer Jan Struys in 1666 (History of the World
Petroleum Industry 2014).
It seems almost inevitable, then, that the world’s ﬁrst
modern drilling operations began in the Baku region in the
mid-nineteenth century. Those operations were preceded in
1803 when a pair of wells was drilled by hand about 30 meters
offshore in the Caspian Sea, but the wells lasted only a short
time as they were destroyed by storms. In about 1846–1848
(authorities differ as to the exact date), Russian engineer F. N.
Semyenov supervised the drilling of the ﬁrst oil well on land
using modern technology. By 1861, this well was producing
32
Fracking

90 percent of all the crude oil being collected in the world
(History of Drilling 2014).
Research on petroleum and its extraction were also proceed-
ing in other parts of the world. In 1854, Polish druggist Ignacy
Łukasiewicz became interested in the possibility of using crude
oil as a source of kerosene as a substitute for whale oil in lamps.
He had heard of a method developed by Canadian geologist
Abraham Gesner for distilling crude oil to obtain kerosene,
and saw the potential for a huge proﬁt in introducing the
method to his native Poland. He and his colleagues began dig-
ging wells ﬁrst 50 meters, and later 150 meters, in depth, suc-
cessfully collecting ever and ever purer forms of crude oil. By
1858, Łukasiewicz had constructed one of the world’s ﬁrst dis-
tillation plants to separate the desired kerosene from crude oil
products.
Oil exploration continued apace in other parts of eastern
Europe at about the same time. Drilling efforts were especially
successful in Romania, where the ﬁrst written production
records were collected in 1857, with a reported production of
250 tonnes of crude oil for that year. Ploie¸sti (Ploiesti),
Romania, was also the site of the world’s ﬁrst large oil reﬁnery,
which opened for operation in 1857 (150 Years of Oil in
Romania 2014).
Explorers in North America were also becoming interested in
the search for oil. The ﬁrst discoveries of the fuel were made in
1858 in a region of southern Ontario around the towns of Oil
Springs, Bothwell, and Petrolia (whose names all reﬂect their
association with petroleum). The wells were extraordinarily
productive, apparently having struck a vein of “inexhaustible”
oil, as described by one observer of the time. Within the next
decade, dozens of wells had been constructed, producing any-
where from 150 to 7,500 barrels of oil per day. Only a year
after the Canadian strikes, the ﬁrst successful oil well in the
United States was drilled at Titusville, Pennsylvania, by
“Colonel” Edwin Drake (who chose the sobriquet “colonel”
Background and History
33

to impress potential investors in his wells). Drake’s discovery is
sometimes claimed to be the “ﬁrst well drilled solely and spe-
ciﬁcally for the purpose of ﬁnding oil,” although it is hardly
“the ﬁrst oil well in the world,” as is sometimes claimed. (For
a brief history of the search for oil in the early United States,
see Oil History Timeline 2014.)
For most of the nineteenth century, petroleum was a product
of limited interest. In addition to some of its traditional uses, it
found application primarily in the production of kerosene as a
fuel for lighting systems. From 1861 to 1900, production of oil
grew from 3,246,000 barrels in the decade from 1861 to 1870
to 110,593,000 barrels in the decade from 1891 to 1900. At that
point, growth began to explode, reaching 274,852,000 barrels in
the period from 1901 to 1910 and 610,400,000 barrels from
1911 to 1920. By the end of World War I, production was
increasing by at least 300,000,000 barrels per year, and by the
early 1920s, more than 700,000,000 barrels per year (Mineral
Production 2014).
The Petroleum Century
The twentieth century might well be called the petroleum cen-
tury. It was a 100-year period during which the production and
consumption of crude oil mushroomed, as Tables 1.3 and 1.4
illustrate. Notice from Table 1.3 that the total amount of crude
oil produced in the United States in 1860 was about a thousand
barrels per day. By comparison, the average daily production of
crude oil worldwide was about 1,400 barrels per day. (All
worldwide ﬁgures come from The Economic Impact of Oil
and Gas Extraction in New Mexico 2009, Appendix B, pages
40–41). The United States obviously accounted for a very sig-
niﬁcant fraction—just over 70 percent—of the crude oil being
produced worldwide at the time.
As Table 1.3 also shows, signiﬁcant growth in the petroleum
market did not begin to increase in the United States until after
the turn of the twentieth century. That was not quite the same
34
Fracking

Table 1.3
Petroleum Production in the United States and the World, 1860–2013
(thousand barrels per day)
Year
Petroleum Production in
the United States
Percentage of World
Market
1860
1
71
1865
7
93
1870
14
88
1875
33
92
1880
72
88
1885
60
60
1890
126
60
1895
145
51
1900
174
43
1905
369
63
1910
574
63
1915
770
66
1920
1,210
64
1925
1,700
58
1930
2,460
64
1935
2,723
60
1940
4,107
70
1945
4,695
55
1950
5,407
52
1955
6,807
44
1960
7,035
33
1965
7,804
26
1970
9,637
21
1975
8,375
16
1980
8,597
14
1985
8,971
17
1990
7,355
12
1995
6,560
11
2000
5,822
8
2005
5,181
7
2010
5,471
7
2011
5,652
6
2012
6,486
6
2013
7,443
10
Sources: U.S. Field Production of Crude Oil. U.S. Energy Information Administration,
http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=MCRFPUS2&f=A.
Accessed on June 16, 2014. Column 3 calculated from this source plus World Crude
Oil Production, U.S. Energy Information Administration and “The Economic Impact of
Oil and Gas Extraction in New Mexico,” Arrowhead Center, New Mexico State
University, September 2009, http://arrowheadcenter.nmsu.edu/sites/default/ﬁles/
uploadecd/nm-oil-and-gas-impact-report-1.pdf. Accessed on June 16, 2014.

Table 1.4
Total Petroleum Consumption, United States, 1860–2013, quadril-
lion Btu
Year
Petroleum Consumption
Percentage of World Total1
1860
0.0003
1865
0.010
1870
0.011
1875
0.011
1880
0.096
1885
0.040
1890
0.156
1895
0.168
1900
0.229
1905
0.610
1910
1.007
1915
1.418
1920
2.676
1925
4.280
1930
5.897
1935
5.675
1940
7.760
1945
10.110
1950
13.3
1955
17.3
1960
19.9
1965
23.2
37.7
1970
29.5
32.3
1975
32.7
30.0
1980
34.2
27.8
1985
30.9
31.3
1990
33.6
25.5
1995
34.5
25.2
2000
38.3
25.6
2005
40.4
23.8
2010
36.0
21.8
2011
35.3
21.4
2012
34.6
20.7
2013
35.1
20.9
1Reliable world data not available prior to 1965.
Sources: “Estimated Primary Energy Consumption in the United States, Selected
Years, 1635–1945,” U.S. Energy Information Administration, http://www.eia.gov/
totalenergy/data/annual/showtext.cfm?t=ptb1601. Accessed on June 16, 2014;
“History of Energy Consumption in the United States, 1775–2009,” U.S. Energy
Information Administration, http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=10. Acc-
essed on June 16, 2014; “Primary Energy Consumption Estimates by Source, 1949–
2011,” U.S. Energy Information Administration, http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/
annual/showtext.cfm?t=ptb0103.
Accessed
on
June
16,
2014;
“U.S.
Energy
Consumption in 2012 and 2013, by Energy Source,” Statista, http://www.statista.com/
statistics/203325/us-energy-consumption-by-source/. Accessed on June 16, 2014;
Column 3 calculated from data at “Statistical Review of World Energy 2013,” BP, www
.bp.com. Accessed on June 16, 2014.

worldwide, where growth continued, but at a steadier pace,
from 103,692 thousand barrels in 1895 to 149,137 thousand
barrels in 1900 to 215,091 barrels in 1905 to 327,763 barrels
in 1910. During this period, the U.S. share of the world
petroleum market hovered around 50 percent, with a low of
43 percent of the world market in 1900 to a high of 63 percent
during the decade of the 1910s. Throughout the century, oil
production increased in the United States until about 1970,
when it reached a peak of about 9.6 million barrels per day,
after which it has continued to decline. (There is no evidence
at this point in history as to whether or not U.S. crude oil pro-
duction will again reach the 1970 peak at some time in the
future, however.)
Oil consumption has followed a somewhat different pattern
during the twentieth century and ﬁrst decade of the twenty-
ﬁrst century. As Table 1.4 shows, oil consumption began to
increase rapidly after the turn of the century and again in the
1980s, after which it leveled off at about 35 quadrillion Btu
per year. Since the 1980s, the share of oil consumed by the
United States compared to the rest of the world has very slowly
decreased, partly as a result of accelerating economies in other
nations of the world such as India and China.
A number of factors are responsible for the growth in petro-
leum consumption in the United States (and other developed
nations), such as increased industrial operations and expanded
production of petrochemicals. But no factor has been as impor-
tant as the growth of the motor vehicle industry. In 1895, only
four motor vehicles (all passenger cars) were registered in the
United States. That number rose slowly to 16 in 1896, 90 in
1897, 800 in 1898, and 3,200 in 1899. Motor vehicle sales
began to take off after the ﬁrst decade of the twentieth century
reaching the ﬁrst hundred thousand in 1906 (105,900 passen-
ger cars and 1,100 trucks) and the second hundred thousand
in early 1909. Thereafter sales and registration numbers began
to take off, reaching 619,500 in 1911, 1,194,262 in 1913,
and 2,309,666 in 1915. (Add data from “Motor Vehicle
Background and History
37

Registrations,
1895–1929,”
http://www.railsandtrails.com/
AutoFacts/1930p15-100-8.jpg. Accessed on June 17, 2014).
Table 1.5 shows the rate of increase in motor vehicles and
passenger cars from 1920 onward.
This table makes abundantly clear the essential role that
motor vehicles have played in the growth of petroleum con-
sumption in the United States (and other developed nations)
since the end of World War I. According to the most recent
38
Fracking
Table 1.5
U.S. Motor Vehicle Registrations, 1920–2009
Passenger Cars
Year
Motor Vehicles1
Number2
Rate per 1,000
persons
1920
9,239
8,132
76.4
1925
20,069
17,481
150.9
1930
26,750
23,035
187.2
1935
26,546
22,568
177.4
1940
32,453
27,466
207.4
1945
31,035
25,797
193.3
1950
49,162
40,339
265.6
1955
62,689
52,145
315.9
1960
73,858
61,671
342.7
1965
90,358
75,258
388.9
1970
111,242
89,244
437.5
1975
137,913
106,706
495.2
1980
161,490
121,601
535.2
1985
177,133
127,885
537.5
1990
193,057
133,700
535.6
1995
205,427
128,387
482.2
2000
225,821
133,621
473.6
2005
241,194
136,568
n/a
2009 3
246,283
134,880
n/a
1Thousand.
2Thousand.
3Latest year for which data are available.
Sources: 1920–2000: “Transportation Indicators for Motor Vehicles and Airlines: 1900
to 2001,” Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2003, https://www.census.gov/
statab/hist/HS-41.pdf. Accessed on June 17, 2014; 2000–2009: “State Motor Vehicle
Registrations: 1990 to 2009,” Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2012, http://
www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/12statab/trans.pdf. Accessed on June 17, 2014.

data available at the writing of this book, about 67.7 percent of
all the petroleum consumed in the United States is used for trans-
portation purposes (cars, trucks, trains, ships, and airplanes). That
fraction is two and a half times that of the next greatest area of
consumption, industrial operations (26.8 percent of all petroleum
consumers in February 2014). (“Petroleum Consumption by
Sector,”
http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/pdf/sec3
_18.pdf. Accessed on June 17, 2014.)
The Natural Gas Century
The beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century carried with it a cru-
cial question for the energy industry in the United States and
many other nations of the world. Petroleum consumption con-
tinued to remain high, was inching up, or was moving up rap-
idly in various parts of the world. Yet evidence seemed to
suggest that peak oil had occurred in at least some parts of the
world, and perhaps had passed that point worldwide. The chal-
lenge was, then, how the world would meet its energy demands
in the twenty-ﬁrst century.
A number of answers were offered for that challenge. One
was conservation. Some individuals argued that the best way
to bring production and consumption numbers into conso-
nance with each other was to reduce consumption so that
nations used no more oil than the world was able to produce.
Others suggested a greater emphasis on alternative and renew-
able fuels, such as solar energy, wind power, geothermal energy,
nuclear power, and the energy of waves and tides. A third recom-
mendation with wide appeal was to explore more aggressively for
new sources of petroleum. This idea has been based on the belief
among many experts in the ﬁeld of petroleum research that enor-
mous reserves of oil remain undiscovered beneath Earth’s surface,
and that better searches will uncover the reserves humans need for
many decade, and perhaps centuries, into the future. Finally, a
fourth hope was that a thus-far neglected fossil fuel, natural gas,
might be the key to meeting energy demands in the future.
Background and History
39

(The eventual answer to the world’s energy issues is likely to be
some mix of these four options.)
The search for new petroleum reservoirs often took the form,
of course, of wider and more sophisticated searches for promis-
ing petroleum sites on land. But another approach was to
extend that search to offshore regions. Possibly the earliest of
such offshore explorations for oil was the one mentioned ear-
lier, in the Caspian Sea in 1803. However, most historians sug-
gest that the ﬁrst successful offshore wells were drilled in 1896
by California businessman Henry L. Williams, who owned
the town of Summerland on the coast where the wells were
drilled. Explorations on land in the Summerland area had
already been successful, resulting in a number of productive
oil wells. Williams reasoned that the oil reservoir feeding those
wells might also extend below the ocean ﬂoor adjacent to the
Summerland coast. He built a 300-foot-long pier from the
shore out into the ocean, at the end of which a drilling rig was
positioned. The experiment was so successful that ﬁve years
later 22 companies had built a total of 400 producing wells
on a total of 15 piers. The age of offshore drilling had begun
(Offshore Petroleum History 2014).
The Summerland experience remained something of an
anachronism for more than four decades before the Pure Oil
Company and Superior Oil Company joined forces in 1938
to construct an even more ambitious offshore project. They
hired shrimp boats to haul the parts needed to build a drilling
rig about a mile offshore near Creole, Louisiana. Even at that
distance, the drilling rig stood in only 14 feet of water, just
barely qualifying as being an “offshore” endeavor.
Almost everyone agrees that offshore drilling truly began in
1947 with the construction of a rig called Kermac 16, the ﬁrst
drilling rig to be built out of sight of land. The rig was
built for a consortium of Pure Oil, Superior Oil, and the
Kerr-McGee Oil Industries by the Brown & Root construction
company. The drilling site was still a shallow-water location,
only 20 feet in depth, but it was located 10.5 miles offshore
40
Fracking

from Terrebonne Parish, Louisiana. The rig eventually pro-
duced 1.4 million barrels of oil and 307 million cubic feet of
natural gas during its lifetime (Keefe 2014; Pratt 2014).
Although the general principles of drilling for oil and gas
underwater are much the same on water as they are for sites on
land, offshore drilling obviously poses a whole list of new prob-
lems and challenges, such as the difﬁculties of getting workers
and equipment to and from a rig, keeping a rig in stable position
above a drill hole, stabilizing a rig during extreme weather, and
disposing of drilling wastes. In addition, accidents at offshore sites
pose the same environmental and human safety problems they do
on land, but usually in more challenging circumstances. (For an
excellent discussion of offshore drilling, see Lamb 2014.)
Offshore drilling also includes serious risks to human health and
life as well as damage to the environment that has raised concern
with many individuals and organizations over the years. (For a
description of some offshore accidents, see The World’s Worst
Offshore Oil Rig Disasters 2014.)
In spite of its technical challenges, offshore drilling has
become an important contributor to the oil production pro-
gram in the United States and many other nations. Table 1.6
shows the amount of petroleum produced by two offshore well
sites adjacent to the continental United States since 1981. Note
that offshore wells have recently contributed about a quarter of
all the oil produced by the United States.
A somewhat different pattern holds for parts of the world
other than the United States. Offshore oil production globally
was essentially zero prior to 1945, after which it rose to about
a million barrels per day during the 1950s and early 1960s
before beginning a sharp upward turn in about 1970. After that
point, offshore oil production climbed to about 10 million bar-
rels per day in 1980 and about 23 million barrels per day in
1990. During the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century, how-
ever, offshore production leveled off at about that level, where it
has remained since (Sandrea and Sandrea 2014). Interestingly
enough, offshore output from shallow water wells actually
Background and History
41

42
Fracking
Table 1.6
Oil and Gas Production from Offshore Wells in the United States
Source
Oil1
Natural Gas2
Year
All U.S.
PADD33
PADD54
All
Offshore
All U.S.
All
Offshore
1977
21,097
3,932
1978
21,309
5,111
1979
21,883
5,603
1980
21,870
5,650
1981
8,572
719
54
773
21,587
5,693
1982
8,649
786
78
864
20,272
5,466
1983
8,688
876
84
960
18,659
4,735
1984
8,879
956
83
1,039
20,266
5,220
1985
8,971
941
82
1,023
19,607
4,632
1986
8,680
960
78
1,038
19,131
4,588
1987
8,349
892
85
977
20,140
5,078
1988
8,140
818
85
903
20,999
5,181
1989
7,613
764
91
855
21,074
5,231
1990
7,355
739
82
821
21,523
5,509
1991
7,417
799
86
785
21,750
5,308
1992
7,171
822
116
938
22,132
5,324
1993
6,847
825
139
964
22,726
5,373
1994
6,662
860
158
1,018
23,581
5,701
1995
6,560
943
196
1,139
23,744
5,432
1996
6,465
1,021
176
1,197
24,113
5,844
1997
6,452
1,129
148
1,277
24,213
5,906
1998
6,252
1,228
127
1,355
24,108
5,801
1999
5,881
1,354
109
1,463
23,823
5,689
2000
5,822
1,430
96
1,526
24,174
5,699
2001
5,801
1,536
85
1,621
24,501
5,815
2002
5,744
1,555
88
1,643
23,941
5,312
2003
5,649
1,537
81
1,618
24,119
5,216
2004
5,441
1,462
75
1,536
23,970
4,736
2005
5,181
1,279
73
1,352
23,457
3,890
2006
5,088
1,293
71
1,364
23,535
3,584
2007
5,077
1,282
67
1,349
24,664
3,477
2008
5,000
1,157
66
1,223
25,636
3,029
2009
5,353
1,562
61
1,623
26,057
3,072
2010
5,471
1,544
59
1,603
26,816
2,876
(continued )

began to decrease in 2000, and stability of production ﬁgures
was a result of a signiﬁcant increase from deepwater wells,
which produced essentially no oil before 1990. By 2010, how-
ever, those wells were producing about 5 million barrels of
water per day (Sandrea and Sandrea 2014).
An interesting overall observation for most of the data shown
here is that the production of oil has begun to decrease, as theories
of peak oil would suggest, from all sources with the exception of
deepwater drilling. The question that continues to challenge
those interested in energy issues, then, is what can be done to
replace the reduced levels of oil being obtained from conventional
sources around the world and in the United States?
Hydraulic Fracturing
One promising answer to that question is hydraulic fracturing,
a procedure for “squeezing out” crude oil and natural gas from
Table 1.6
(continued )
Source
Oil1
Natural Gas2
Year
All U.S.
PADD33
PADD54
All
Offshore
All U.S.
All
Offshore
2011
5,652
1,316
54
1,370
28,479
2,417
2012
6,486
1,267
48
1,315
29,542
2,045
2013
7,443
1,253
51
1,304
30,171
n/a
1Thousand barrels per day.
2Billion cubic feet.
3Petroleum Administrative Defense District 3; Gulf of Mexico.
4Petroleum Administrative Defense District 5; West Coast United States.
Sources: “U.S. Field Production of Crude Oil,” Energy Information Administration.,
http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=MCRFPUS2&f=A. Acc-
essed on June 17, 2014; “Federal Offshore–Gulf of Mexico Field Production of Crude
Oil,” Energy Information Administration, http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler
.ashx?n=PET&s=MCRFP3FM2&f=A. Accessed on June 17, 2014; “Federal Offshore
PADD 5 Field Production of Crude Oil,” Energy Information Administration, http://
www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=MCRFP5F2&f=A.
Accessed
on June 17, 2014; “U.S. Natural Gas Gross Withdrawals,” Energy Information Admini-
stration, http://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/hist/n9010us2m.htm. Accessed on June 17, 2014;
“U.S. Natural Gas Gross Withdrawals Offshore,” Energy Information Administration,
http://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/hist/na1090_nus_2a.htm. Accessed on June 17, 2014.

reservoirs that had once thought to be inaccessible to drilling.
Hydraulic fracturing is broadly similar to the use of a “torpedo”
to open up the pockets in an oil or gas reserve. The main differ-
ence is that instead of using an explosive, such as nitroglycerine
to force open these pockets, a powerful stream of liquid—
almost entirely water and sand with a number of other possible
additives—is forced into an existing well. The force of the
stream of water is, hopefully, sufﬁcient to open pores, cracks,
and ﬁssures, allowing oil and/or gas to ﬂow out of the reserve
and into the well.
The History of Hydraulic Fracturing
Many historians trace the origins of hydraulic fracturing to a
chance observation made during the Civil War by Union ofﬁ-
cer Lieutenant Colonel Edward A. L. Roberts. During the
Battle of Fredericksburg in 1862, Roberts noticed that
Confederate gunners were bombarding a narrow opening in a
stream that was obstructing their attack plans. Energy from
the exploding shells tore apart the sides of the stream, increas-
ing the ﬂow of water and removing the obstruction. A few
years later, returned to civilian life, Roberts considered the pos-
sibility of using a procedure similar to the one he had seen at
Fredericksburg to solve a common problem associated with
the operation of oil wells.
During the time that oil is being removed from a reservoir by
drilling, changes take place in the reservoir. Some of the denser,
more viscous components of crude oil, such as bitumen,
asphalt, and waxes, begin to precipitate out of solution and to
clog the pores, fractures, ﬁssures, and other openings through
which oil ﬂows into a well. Over time, this problem becomes
so severe that the ﬂow of oil begins to slow down, and it may
eventually stop entirely. Roberts reasoned that, if he could ﬁnd
a way to open up the blocked spaces, oil would ﬂow more freely
and wells that were no longer producing oil might once again
become productive.
44
Fracking

His solution to the problem was based on his Fredericksburg
observation. He invented a device that he called a torpedo, a
cylindrical metal container containing a small amount of explo-
sive. The torpedo was lowered into a well and detonated. The
shock produced by the explosion pushed open clogged pores,
fractures, and ﬁssures, allowing oil to ﬂow freely once more.
Roberts’s ﬁrst experiments with his petroleum torpedo were
a remarkable success. Some wells on which the fracturing
experiment was tried increased productivity by as much as
1,200 percent within the ﬁrst week following the attempt.
Roberts formed a company to build and sell his torpedoes.
The company became a huge success, providing Roberts with
a reliable income for the rest of his life. The company remains
in operation today under the name of the Otto Cupler
Torpedo Company, although the technology it uses is much
advanced from the one originally developed by Colonel
Roberts. (Shooters—A “Fracking” History 2014; for a video
of the Roberts system of clearing wells, see http://www.you
tube.com/watch?v=OLdzug1C5c8.)
While torpedo-style opening of oil and gas wells remained
popular over the next half century, inventors also explored
other ways of opening clogged pores in such wells. At virtually
the same time that Roberts made his “torpedo method” discov-
ery, chemist Herman Frasch was awarded a patent for the use of
hydrochloric acid to open ﬁssures in an oil reservoir. (Frasch is
probably better known as the inventor of the Frasch process
for mining sulfur.) The principle behind Frasch’s invention
was that an acid could dissolve some of the rock in which oil
and gas are embedded, providing larger pores through which
it could ﬂow into a well. The process worked well enough,
but was bedeviled by the fact that the acid most commonly
used—hydrochloric acid—also attacked the piping and other
equipment used in an oil or gas well. However, inventors
struggled with the challenge of ﬁnding other solutions for this
problem (such as using hydroﬂuoric acid rather than hydro-
chloric acid), and the general principle of using acids as
Background and History
45

“opening agents” remains in use today. The process of adding an
acid to a fracking ﬂuid is known as acidization or acidizing.
(Crowe, Masmonteil, and Thomas 1992, 24; Dow Chemical Co.
vs. Halliburton Oil Well Cementing Co. 2014; for an excellent
general discussion of acidization, see Samuel and Sengul 2003)
Another approach to opening up potential gas wells was
Project Gasbuggy, a joint project of the U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission, U.S. Bureau of Mines, and El Paso Natural Gas
Company. Project Gasbuggy was part of a larger project,
known as Project Plowshare, designed to ﬁnd peacetime appli-
cations for nuclear energy which, prior to that time, had been
devoted exclusively to the construction of nuclear weapons.
Gasbuggy was designed to test the hypothesis that oil- and/or
gas-bearing rock might be made more productive for commer-
cial uses by exploding a nuclear device deep underground.
That explosion, experts believed, would cause fracturing of rock
structures, allowing oil and gas to ﬂow more freely into wells.
Project Gasbuggy was carried out on December 10, 1967,
when a 29-kiloton nuclear device was exploded 4,227 feet
below ground in Rio Arriba County, New Mexico. (For com-
parison, the ﬁssion bomb dropped on Hiroshima had a rating
of 15 kilotons.) The experiment was a success in that studies
later showed that the bomb had produced extensive fracturing
in the rock around the detonation site. But it had no practical
value since the gas produced as a result of the fracturing was
too radioactive to be used for commercial purposes. In addi-
tion, the cost of producing natural gas by this means was much
greater than gas obtained by other processes.
Two other projects were conducted to obtain more informa-
tion about nuclear fracturing of rock, Project Rulison, near
Rulison, Colorado, on September 10, 1969, and Project Rio
Blanco, near Riﬂe, Colorado, on May 17, 1973. By the conclu-
sion of the latter experiment, the Department of Energy
deemed nuclear fracturing to be a commercially unviable tech-
nique for gas recovery, and such experiments were discontinued
(LM Sites 2014).
46
Fracking

The most successful approach to fracturing of rock structures
was based on the notion of simply increasing the pressure on
those rocks, often just by adding large volumes of water to a
well. One of the earliest experiments along this line was con-
ducted in the 1930s by a process that became known as rock
busting or pressure parting. One report on experiments of this
type published in 1935 claimed that the output of the wells
tested was increased by 20 million barrels with the use of the
technique (Grebe and Stosser 1935).
Another approach that was tried was a modiﬁcation of the
Roberts torpedo. In 1939, inventor Ira J. McCullough received
a patent for a device containing steel-covered bullets that could
be shot through the lining of a well into the surrounding rock,
causing fracture of the rock (Downhole Bazooka 2014).
In spite of these many beginning attempts to ﬁnd ways of
fracturing rock, the beginning of the modern age of hydraulic
fracturing is usually traced to a series of experiments conducted
in the 1940s by Riley “Floyd” Farris and his colleague, Robert
Fast, at the Stanolind Oil and Gas Company. During his col-
lege years at the University of Oklahoma, Farris had concen-
trated on the role of cement in the construction of oil wells.
As noted earlier, cement is used to provide stability to the well-
bore and, hence, is an essential part of the drilling operation.
Farris was puzzled by the fact that wells almost always seemed
to require more cement than the amount an engineer could cal-
culate prior to drilling. With Fast, he conducted an experiment
on a trial test well and found that the reason for this discrep-
ancy was that cement had a tendency to diffuse out of the well-
bore and into the adjacent rock. But in so doing, the cement
also had a tendency to break apart the rock and increase the
ﬂow of oil and gas. For Farris, the conclusion to this experiment
was obvious: If ﬂowing cement can cause fracturing in rock,
why not just intentionally add a ﬂuid (maybe cement, but per-
haps another ﬂuid) to produce this fracturing. With that back-
ground, Farris and Fast tried their new “hydraulic fracturing”
technique on an old and worn out well in Texas that was
Background and History
47

producing about a barrel of oil per day. After treatment with a
mixture of water, sand, and soap, the tired old well once again
became active, producing about 50 barrels per day (Cranganu
2014, 60–61; Gold 2014, 71–74).
In 1946, Fast decided to conﬁrm the results of the earlier
fracturing experiment in what is generally regarded as the ﬁrst
hydraulic fracturing experiment ever conducted. Fast con-
ducted his experiment at the Klepper #1 oil well in the
Hugoton gas ﬁeld in Kansas. He injected a mixture of sand
and gasoline thickened with napalm to four different depths
in the well. When the injection ﬂuid was pumped out, the well
began producing oil again—but only at the rate it did before
treatment. The result was a failure and it seemed that, for the
moment at least, the idea of hydraulic fracturing was dead
(Cranganu 2014, 61; Gold 2014, 74–74).
That pessimistic conclusion was soon found to be wrong,
however. Farris and Fast continued to work on their invention
and in 1949, the Halliburton Oil Well Cementing Company
attempted to repeat the Hugoton experiment with two other
wells, one in Stephens County, Oklahoma, and the other in
Archer County, Texas. In both cases, Halliburton used a pro-
cess that had been patented by Stanolind in 1946 called the
Hydrafrac process. That process involved the injection of “jellied
gasoline” (gasoline containing napalm) into a well. In these cases,
the wells began producing more productively, and the efﬁcacy of
the Hydrafrac process had been demonstrated. Evidence of its
success also comes from the growing success of Halliburton itself,
whose revenues increased from $57.2 million in 1949 to
$69.3 million in 1950 to $92.6 million in 1951, almost entirely
as a result of its success with fracking (Halliburton Oil Well
Cementing Company 2014; Montgomery and Smith 2010).
Following these initial successes, hydraulic fracturing gradu-
ally grew in popularity. During the 1950s, oil companies were
using the procedure on as many as 5,000 new wells each month
(Montgomery and Smith 2010, 27). The value of fracking
operations grew from about $2 billion in the United States in
48
Fracking

1999 to twice that amount in 2004 to four times that amount
in 2007 (Montgomery and Smith 2010, 35). At that point,
fracking had become a technology entrenched in the oil and
gas recovery industry.
Horizontal Drilling
A number of factors led to the growing popularity of hydraulic
fracturing. In the ﬁrst place, the technology described earlier
had already proved itself capable of vastly increasing the
amount of oil and gas that could be recovered from reservoirs
that had previously been regarded as exhausted in resource or,
at the very least, no longer capable of producing a fuel economi-
cally. Other factors that contributed to the growth in the use of
fracking can be traced to a single individual and the company
he founded, George Mitchell and Mitchell Energy.
In the 1980s, Mitchell made it his goal to ﬁnd new oil and
gas reservoirs wherever they might be and squeeze out the last
possible barrel of cubic foot of oil or gas from those reserves.
In this search, he began to explore a region that most oil com-
panies had written off as lacking in sufﬁcient quantities of oil
and/or gas that could be recovered economically, the Bakken
play that covers most of the mid-southern part of the United
States. Mitchell felt certain that very large quantities of oil and
gas were available in the Bakken play, although he was uncer-
tain as to how to access those reserves.
One change he made in the fracking process was in the com-
position of the ﬂuid used. Traditionally, fracking ﬂuids had
consisted of relatively thick, viscous liquids that contained gels,
foams, and emulsions, such as the original gasoline and napalm
mixture used in the ﬁrst fracked wells. Mitchell decided to use a
simpler mixture, one that consisted primarily of water (more
than 90 percent of the mixture), sand, and very small amounts
of other proppants. A proppant is a substance added, generally
in very small proportions, that improves the efﬁciency of a
fracking ﬂuid for any speciﬁc application. Many of the
Background and History
49

substances previously used in fracking, those same gels, foams,
gums, and acids, continued to be used in Mitchell’s formations,
except in much smaller proportions. Mitchell soon discovered
that this new form of fracking liquid was far more effective in
producing fractures than was the more viscous types of ﬂuids
used previously (Zuckerman 2014; Zuckerman’s book on
Mitchell’s career is one of the best resources on this part of
the history of hydraulic fracturing; see Zuckerman 2013).
A second major change that Mitchell introduced to the
fracking process was the use of horizontal drilling. All of the dis-
cussions of well drilling in this book thus far have been about
vertical drilling, a technology that involves placing a rig on
Earth’s surface and then drilling straight down through as many
strata as necessary to reach one that contains crude oil or natu-
ral gas. Think of a layer of eight pancakes, only one of which is
soaked with maple syrup. If one wishes to get to that pancake
soaked with syrup, it is necessary to dig down through all the
other pancakes until the syrup-soaked pancake is reached.
And if, for any reason, the pancakes are not lined up exactly,
it might be possible to drill right past the desired syrup-soaked
pancake.
A more logical and efﬁcient way to go about this process
might be to drill into the pancake stack from the side, especially
if one knows which layer contains the correct pancake. And the
same is true in drilling for oil or gas. One can save all the time
and expense of drilling through layers of rock that contain no
oil or gas—largely a waste of time—in order to get to that one
layer that does contain the desired fuel. Probably anyone who
has ever drilled for oil or gas understands this concept, but that
doesn’t mean that it has been practiced for very long.
Interestingly enough, the ﬁrst invention of a non-vertical
drill for oil or gas was patented in 1891 by a dentist, John
Smalley Campbell. Campbell was trying to ﬁnd a way to drill
into teeth to repair cavities in inconvenient locations. His pat-
ent was for a drill with a ﬂexible shaft that could essentially go
around a corner. In his patent application, Campbell noted
50
Fracking

that his invention had many other possible applications, such as
drilling for oil or gas at an angle (Drilling Sideways 1993, 7).
By the 1920s, petroleum engineers had begun to think about
the use of drills like those patented by Campbell for oil and gas
exploration and extraction. The ﬁrst such well was actually
completed in 1929, near the town of Texon, Texas (Drilling
Sideways 1993, 7). This well, like most of its successors, was
not completely horizontal, but angled away from the vertical
direction for part of its length and then extended horizontally
for the last portion of its length. Such wells today are therefore
said to be directionally drilled or slanted drilled, although they
may also be simply called horizontal wells. (To see how direc-
tional drilling is done, see the animation at http://www.oerb
.com/?tabid=242.)
Horizontal drilling was only moderately popular until the
1980s, largely for economic reasons. Experimentation with
the technique was carried out in the United States, China,
and the then-Soviet Union, but in no cases was it a major con-
tributor to the production of crude oil and natural gas until
Mitchell Energy combined the principles of directional drilling
with the use of a new type of drilling ﬂuid in a large under-
explored region in the 1990s. At that point, the combination
of factors worked so well for Mitchell Energy that its owner
became a billionaire largely overnight, and the oil and gas com-
munity could no longer ignore the potential of this approach to
the production of crude oil and natural gas (Zuckerman 2013,
passim).
Conclusion
At the end of the twentieth century, many researchers, engi-
neers, industrialists, politicians, and members of the general
public were concerned about what they saw as the world’s
approaching energy crisis. Much of the existing data suggested
that the demand for energy worldwide was continuing to grow,
especially in developing nations with huge populations such as
Background and History
51

China and India, while the amount of energy being produced
and known energy reservoirs appeared to be decreasing. If these
two trends were to continue, it was difﬁcult to see how the
world’s population over the new century could continue to
meet its demands for energy and, hence, to continue raising
its standard of living.
At just about that time, researchers and engineers were
ﬁnding ways to bring together a number of relatively new
technologies—along with other technologies that had been
known for decades—to create new methods for exploring and
extracting the fossil fuels on which modern human society so
completely depends, especially crude oil and natural gas. By
the beginning of the second decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century,
it had become obvious that hydraulic fracturing and related
technologies had the potential for reversing the apparent
declines in production and reserves of oil and gas and the
human race had, at the very least, been provided with a sub-
stantial amount of time in which to decide how it would deal
with an oncoming energy crisis, but one that was now much
farther into the future.
The problem, however, was that hydraulic fracturing, carried
with it a number of problems and challenges whose solutions
were not always obvious and which were serious enough to
generate acrimonious debates among regulators, legislators,
the legal system, petroleum engineers, environmentalists, and
ordinary citizens everywhere. The nature of those problems,
the choices they offer humans today, and some possible solu-
tions suggested for dealing with these challenges are the topic
of the next chapter.
References
“150 Years of Oil in Romania.” 150 De Ani. http://
www.150deanidepetrol.ro/history.html. Accessed on
June 13, 2014.
52
Fracking

Aliyev, Natig. “The History of Oil in Azerbaijan.” Azerbaijan
International. http://azer.com/aiweb/categories/magazine/
22_folder/22_articles/22_historyofoil.html. Accessed on
June 13, 2014.
“Ancient History Sourcebook: Greek Reports of Babylonia,
Chaldea, and Assyria.” Fordham University. http://www
.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/greek-babylon.asp. Accessed
on June 13, 2014.
“Asphalt.” http://www.ce.memphis.edu/3137/Documents/
Asphalt%20History.pdf. Accessed on June 13, 2014.
Biewick, Laura R. H., Gregory L. Gunther, and Christopher C.
Skinner. “USGS National Oil and Gas Assessment Online
(NOGA Online) using ArcIMS.” U.S. Geological Survey.
[2002]. http://proceedings.esri.com/library/userconf/
proc02/pap0826/p0826.htm#1. Accessed on June 7,
2014.
BP Statistical Review of World Energy, June 2013. http://
www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/pdf/statistical-review/statisti-
cal_review_of_world_energy_2013.pdf. Accessed on June 6,
2014.
Burnett, H. Sterling. “How Fracking Helps Meet America’s
Energy Needs.” National Center for Policy Analysis. http://
www.ncpa.org/pub/ib132. Accessed on June 23, 2014.
Clugston, Chris. “When Is ‘Global Peak Energy’?” The Oil
Drum. http://www.theoildrum.com/node/2960. Accessed
on June 6, 2014.
“Coal: Resources and Future Production.” Energy Watch
Group. March 2007. http://energywatchgroup.org/wp
-content/uploads/2014/02/EWG_Report_Coal
_10-07-2007ms.pdf. Accessed on June 5, 2014.
Connan, Jacques, and Odile Deschesne. 1992. “Archaeological
Bitumen: Indentiﬁcation, Origins and Uses of an Ancient
Near Eastern Material.” MRS Proceedings. 267: 683–720.
Background and History
53

Cooke, Ronald R. “The Cultural Economist.” http://
tceconomist.blogspot.com/2014/05/peak-energy.html.
Accessed on June 6, 2014.
Cranganu, Constantine. “A Short History of Hydraulic
Fracturing.” Petroleum Industrial Review. http://issuu.com/
petroleumreview/docs/petroleum_review-may2014-en?
Name=Value. Accessed on June 19, 2014.
Crowe, Curtis, Jacques Masmonteil, and Ron Thomas. 1992.
“Trends in Matrix Acidizing.” Oilﬁeld Review. 4(4): 24–40.
Also available at http://www.slb.com/~/media/Files/
resources/oilﬁeld_review/ors92/1092/p24_40.pdf. Accessed
on June 18, 2014.
“A Crude Story: Hooray for Decay!” University of Wisconsin.
http://whyﬁles.org/100oil/2a.html. Accessed on June 6,
2014.
Curtis, Trisha, and Tyler Ware. “Restricting North Dakota
Gas-ﬂaring Would Delay Oil Output, Impose Costs.” Oil
and Gas Journal. http://www.ogj.com/articles/print/vol-110/
issue-11/drilling-production/restricting-north-dakota-gas
-ﬂaring-would.html. Accessed on June 13, 2014.
Desmarest, Thierry. 2010. Quoted at ODAC, The Oil
Depletion Analysis Centre. http://www.odac-info.org/
newsletter/2010/01/29. Accessed on June 5, 2014.
Dow Chemical Co. v. Halliburton Oil Well Cementing Co.
Halliburton Oil Well Cementing Co. v. Dow Chemical Co.
https://bulk.resource.org/courts.gov/c/US/324/324.US.
320.50.61.html. Accessed on June 18, 2014.
“Downhole Bazooka.” American Oil & Gas Historical Society.
http://aoghs.org/technology/downhole-bazooka/. Accessed
on June 19, 2014.
“Drilling Sideways—A Review of Horizontal Well Technology
and Its Domestic Application.” April 1993. Energy
Information Administration. http://www.eia.gov/pub/oil
54
Fracking

_gas/natural_gas/analysis_publications/drilling_sideways
_well_technology/pdf/tr0565.pdf. Accessed on June 19, 2014.
“The Economic Impact of Oil and Gas Extraction in New
Mexico.” Arrowhead Center, New Mexico State University.
September 2009. http://arrowheadcenter.nmsu.edu/sites/
default/ﬁles/uploadecd/nm-oil-and-gas-impact-report-1.pdf.
Accessed on June 16, 2014.
Emery, Dominic, and Keith Myers, eds. 1996. Sequence
Stratigraphy. Oxford, UK; Cambridge, MA: Blackwell
Science.
Engelder, Terry, and Gary G. Lash. “Marcellus Shale Play’s
Vast Resource Potential Creating Stir In Appalachia.” The
American Oil and Gas Reporter. http://www.aogr.com/
magazine/cover-story/marcellus-shale-plays-vast-resource
-potential-creating-stir-in-appalachia. Accessed on June 7, 2014.
“Finding Oil and Gas from Space.” Remote Sensing Tutorial.
http://www.fas.org/irp/imint/docs/rst/Sect5/Sect5_5.html.
Accessed on June 12, 2014.
“Glossary.” U.S. Energy Information Administration. http://
www.eia.gov/tools/glossary/. Accessed on June 7, 2014.
Gold, Russell. 2014. The Boom: How Fracking Ignited the
American Energy Revolution and Changed the World.
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Grebe, J. J., and S. M. Stoesser. 1935. “Increasing Crude
Production 20,000,000 Barrels from Established Fields.”
World Petroleum. 6(8): 473–482.
“Haliburton Oil Well Cementing Company.” Harvard
Business School Baker Library. http://www.library.hbs.edu/
hc/lehman/company.html?company=halliburton_oil_well
_cementing_company. Accessed on June 19, 2014.
“History of Drilling.” Rigs International. http://www
.rigsinternational.com/our-offer/history-of-drilling/.
Accessed on June 13, 2014.
Background and History
55

“History of the Increasing Number of Motor Cars/
Automobiles.” carhistory4u. http://www.carhistory4u.com/
the-last-100-years/car-production/the-increasing-number
-of-cars. Accessed on June 14, 2014.
“History of the World Petroleum Industry.” GeoHelp Inc. http://
www.geohelp.net/world.html. Accessed on June 13, 2014.
“How Many Wells in Ghawar?” Satellite O’er the Desert.
http://satelliteoerthedesert.blogspot.com/2008/01/how
-many-wells-in-ghawar.html. Accessed on June 7, 2014.
Keefe, Patricia. “The History of Offshore Energy.” New Wave
Media. http://magazines.marinelink.com/Magazines/
MaritimeReporter/201404/content/history-offshore-energy
-468077. Accessed on June 17, 2014.
Kopey, B. 2007. “Development of Drilling Technics from
Ancient Ages to Modern Times.” 12th IFToMM World
Congress, Besançon (France), June 18–21, 2007. http://
www.iftomm.org/iftomm/proceedings/proceedings_World
Congress/WorldCongress07/articles/sessions/papers/A36
.pdf. Accessed on June 13, 2014.
Lamb, Robert. “How Offshore Drilling Works.” How Things
Work. http://science.howstuffworks.com/environmental/
energy/offshore-drilling2.htm. Accessed on June 17, 2014.
“LM Sites.” Ofﬁce of Legacy Management. U.S. Department
of Energy. http://www.lm.doe.gov/default.aspx?id=120.
Accessed on June 19, 2014.
“Marcellus Shale Appalachian Basin Natural Gas Play.”
Geology.com. http://geology.com/articles/marcellus
shale.shtml. Accessed on June 7, 2014.
“Mineral Production. No. 663. Petroleum: Production,
Exports, and Imports.” Statistical Abstract of the United
States. Fraser. http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/docs/publications/
stat_abstract/pages/46114_1920-1924.pdf. Accessed on
June 14, 2014.
56
Fracking

Montgomery, Carl T., and Michael B. Smith. 2010.
“Hydraulic Fracturing: History of an Enduring
Technology.” JPT, Journal of Petroleum Technology. 62(12):
26–32. Also available online at http://www.ourenergypolicy
.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Hydraulic.pdf. Accessed
on June 19, 2014.
Mórrígan, Tariel. “Peak Energy, Climate Change, and the
Collapse of Global Civilization: the Current Peak Oil
Crisis.” Resilience. Accessed on June 6, 2014. http://www
.resilience.org/stories/2010-12-15/peak-energy-climate
-change-and-collapse-global-civilization-current-peak-oil-cris
Nashawi, Ibrahim Sami, Adel Malallah, and Mohammed
Al-Bisharah. 2010. “Forecasting World Crude Oil
Production Using Multicyclic Hubbert Model.” Energy
Fuels. 24(3): 1788–1800.
Neo, Hui Min. “Aramco Chief Seeks to Ease Oil Production
Worries.” Middle East Online. http://www.middleeast
online.com/english/?id=36890. Accessed on June 6, 2014.
“Offshore Petroleum History.” American Oil and Gas
Historical Society. http://aoghs.org/offshore-petroleum
-history/offshore-oil-history/. Accessed on June 17, 2014.
“Oil: Crude and Petroleum Products.” U.S. Energy
Information Administration. http://www.eia.gov/energy
explained/index.cfm?page=oil_reﬁning. Accessed on
June 14, 2014.
“Oil and Gas: History.” http://grandemotte.wordpress.com/
peak-oil-4-exploration-history/. Accessed on June 13, 2014.
“Oil and Natural Gas ‘Reserves’ — Deﬁnitions Matter.”
Independent Petroleum Association of America. http://
oilindependents.org/oil-and-natural-gas-reserves-deﬁnitions
-matter/. Accessed on June 8, 2014.
“Oil Formation.” http://www.hk-phy.org/energy/power/sour-
ce_phy/ﬂash/formation_e.html. Accessed on June 6, 2014.
Background and History
57

“Oil Formation.” Science Learning. http://www.sciencelearn
.org.nz/Contexts/Future-Fuels/Sci-Media/Animations-and
-Interactives/Oil-formation. Accessed on June 6, 2014.
“Oil History Timeline.” Oil150. http://www.oil150.com/
about-oil/timeline/. Accessed on June 14, 2014.
“Petroleum Resources Management System.” Society of
Petroleum Engineers, American Association of Petroleum
Geologists, World Petroleum Council, and Society of
Petroleum Evaluation Engineers. [2007]. http://www.spe
.org/industry/docs/Petroleum_Resources_Management
_System_2007.pdf. Accessed on June 8, 2014.
Polo, Marco. 1936. The Travels of Marco Polo, the Venetian.
Translated by William Marsden. London, J. M. Dent &
Co.; New York, E. P. Dutton & Co. Available online at
https://archive.org/stream/marcopolo00polouoft/
marcopolo00polouoft_djvu.txt. Accessed on June 13, 2014.
Popescu, Adam. “A Short History of Oil: 1900 to 2010.”
Marketplace. http://www.marketplace.org/topics/business/
maps-tough-oil/short-history-oil-1900-2010. Accessed on
June 7, 2014.
Pratt, Joseph A. 2014. “Offshore at 60: Remembering the
Creole Field.” Offshore. http://digital.offshoremag.com/
offshoremag/201404?pg=52#pg52. Accessed on June 17,
2014.
Samuel, Mathew, and Mahmut Sengul. 2003. “Stimulate the
Flow.” Middle East & Asia Reservoir Review. 4: 42–55. Also
available at http://www.slb.com/~/media/Files/resources/
mearr/num4/stimulate_ﬂow.pdf. Accessed on June 18,
2014.
Sandrea, Rafael, and Ivan Sandrea. “Deepwater Crude Oil
Output: How Large Will the Uptick Be?” Oil & Gas
Journal. http://www.ogj.com/articles/print/volume-108/
issue-41/exploration-development/deepwater-crude-oil
-output-how-large.html. Accessed on June 18, 2014.
58
Fracking

“The SEAB Shale Gas Production Subcommittee Ninety-Day
Report,” August 11, 2011. http://www.shalegas.energy.gov/
resources/081111_90_day_report.pdf. Accessed on June 6,
2014.
“Shooters—A ‘Fracking’ History.” American Oil & Gas
Historical Society. http://aoghs.org/petroleum-technology/
shooters-well-fracking-history/. Accessed on June 18, 2014.
Sieminski, Adam. “Outlook for U.S. Shale Oil and Gas.” Argus
Americas Crude Summit, January 22, 2014. http://www.eia
.gov/pressroom/presentations/sieminski_01222014.pdf.
Accessed on June 6, 2014.
Sorkhabi, Rasoul. “Rich Petroleum Source Rocks.” GeoExPro.
2014. http://www.geoexpro.com/articles/2009/06/rich
-petroleum-source-rocks. Accessed on June 6, 2014.
“Structural Traps.” Petroleum Education. http://www.priweb
.org/ed/pgws/systems/traps/structural/structural.html.
Accessed on June 7, 2014.
“Tech Talk-Current Oil Production and the Future of
Ghawar.” The Oil Drum. Accessed on June 7, 2014.
“Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources:
An Assessment of 137 Shale Formations in 41 Countries
Outside the United States.” U.S. Energy Information
Administration. June 2013. http://www.eia.gov/analysis/
studies/worldshalegas/pdf/fullreport.pdf. Accessed on
June 7, 2014.
“The 10 Largest Oil Deposits In The World.” Business
Insider Australia. http://www.businessinsider.com.au/the-
ten-largest-oil-deposits-in-the-world-2011-9#ferdows-1.
Accessed on June 7, 2014.
Viforeanu, Andrei, Wayne Wells, and Jay W. Hodny. 2003.
“Passive Surface Geochemical Survey Leads to Dry Gas
Discoveries.” World Oil. 224(6). 53–59.
“World Bank Sees Warning Sign in Gas Flaring Increase.” Press
Release, July 3, 2012. http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/
Background and History
59

pressrelease/2012/07/03/world-bank-sees-warning-sign-gas
-ﬂaring-increase. Accessed on June 13, 2014.
“The World’s Worst Offshore Oil Rig Disasters.” Offshore
Technology.com. http://www.offshore-technology.com/
features/featurethe-worlds-deadliest-offshore-oil-rig
-disasters-4149812/. Accessed on June 17, 2014.
Zuckerman, Gregory. “Breakthrough: The Accidental
Discovery That Revolutionized American Energy.” The
Atlantic. http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/
2013/11/breakthrough-the-accidental-discovery-that
-revolutionized-american-energy/281193/. Accessed on
June 19, 2014.
Zuckerman, Gregory. 2013. The Frackers: The Outrageous
Inside Story of the New Billionaire Wildcatters. New York:
Portfolio Penguin.
60
Fracking



2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
Hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling are the exciting
new breakthroughs of the twenty-ﬁrst century in the petroleum
industry. Companies are drilling vast numbers of new wells;
reinvigorating older, supposedly worn-out wells; and making
very signiﬁcant proﬁts as a result of these endeavors. Accor-
ding to one recent study, companies have fracked nearly
82,000 oil and gas wells since 2005, with about a quarter of
those in 2012 (the last year for which data were available) alone
(Ridlington and Rumpler 2013, Table 1, 20; this table is repro-
duced as Table 5.3 in Chapter 5 of this book). But are fracking
and directional drilling really all that important in the greater
scheme of our energy future?
Peak Oil and Gas: Still a Looming Threat or Only
a Distant Fantasy?
American energy analysts have long been concerned about two
major issues. The ﬁrst is a global question: How much coal, oil,
and gas remains beneath the ground that humans can reason-
ably expect to harvest economically? And at what point does
production of these resources begin to fall behind consumer
demand? That is, is there truly such a thing as “peak coal,”
63
Tools used to create fractures in the rock are lowered into a well at an
Encana Corp. well pad near Mead, Colorado. (AP Photo/Brennan Linsley)

“peak oil,” and “peak gas,” and, if so, at what point in history is
each of these events likely to occur? This question is, of course,
one of the most fundamental issues faced by humans because it
raises questions about an enormous transition from the age of
fossil fuels to the age of—what? Wind energy? Solar energy?
Nuclear energy?
Some evidence has begun to accumulate that the develop-
ment of more efﬁcient means of extracting oil and gas—
fracking and directional drilling—has signiﬁcantly increased
the amount of these fuels that can be recovered from previously
known and unknown sources. In the United States, for exam-
ple, the Energy Information Administration (EIA) estimated
that there were 39.0 billion barrels of recoverable oil in the
United States in 1970, the highest estimate the agency had ever
announced. That estimate slowly dropped off over the years,
down to 32.7 billion barrels in 1975, 29.8 billion barrels in
1980, 26.2 billion barrels in 1990, and 22.0 billion barrels in
2000. The 2008 EIA estimate fell to the lowest number
since 1941 when it was announced to be 19.1 billion barrels
(U.S. Crude Oil Proved Reserves 2014).
At that point, the trend in proved reserves changed direction,
and the EIA estimate for 2009 reached 20.7 billion barrels,
and then continued upward to 23.3 billion barrels in 2010,
26.5 billion barrels in 2011, and 30.5 billion barrels in 2012.
The latest of these estimates represented an increase of about
15 percent in a single year, a rather remarkable change in predic-
tions for a single year (U.S. Crude Oil Proved Reserves 2014).
A somewhat similar pattern was observed for natural gas
reserves in the United States. For the greatest part of the period
during which EIA made estimates of natural gas reserves
(1979–2012), those numbers remained relatively constant at
about 200 trillion cubic feet per year. But then in 2005 those
estimates began to climb, reaching 248 trillion cubic feet in
2007, 318 trillion cubic feet in 2010, and 349 trillion cubic
feet in 2011. (The 2012 estimate, the most recent available,
dropped off somewhat to 323 trillion cubic feet. For complete
64
Fracking

data on oil and gas reserves, see Table 5.7 in Chapter 5 of this
book.) (U.S. Natural Gas, Wet after Lease Separation Proved
Reserves 2014)
A number of observers have noted that changes in estimates
of oil and gas reserves in the United States (and elsewhere
in the world) are the result almost entirely of the development
of fracking and directional drilling technologies, which have
revealed and opened up vast new areas for drilling that
were unknown or unappreciated less than a decade ago. As
H. Sterling Burnett, senior fellow at the National Center for
Policy Analysis, has written:
Just 15 years ago, analysts predicted America had only
60 years of natural gas supplies available at then current
rates of use. Today, natural gas consumption is much
higher, and fracking has increased estimated reserves to
100 years or more. (Burnett 2014)
As one might expect, estimates of oil and gas reserves in the
United States and elsewhere are subjects of some disagreement.
Various agencies and companies use different methods and crite-
ria to decide what is and what is not a “proved reserve,” so not
everyone agrees with EIA estimates. The unreliability of such esti-
mates was demonstrated in early 2014 when the EIA decided to
change rather drastically its estimates of resources at one major
U.S. oil and gas ﬁeld, the Monterey Play in central California.
In its 2011 report, “Review of Emerging Resources: U.S. Shale
Gas and Shale Oil Plays,” the agency had estimated that the
Monterey Play contained an estimated 15.4 billion barrels of tight
oil, by far the largest reservoir of such oil in the United States at
the time. Based on that estimate, the Monterey Play was thought
to be responsible for 64 percent of the total oil shale reserves in
the United States (Review of Emerging Resources 2011, 4; for
industry reaction to this news, see Redden 2012).
Only three years later, however, the EIA changed its mind
about this estimate. In reconsidering the data collected for the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
65

agency by INTEK, Inc., the EIA concluded that a more realis-
tic estimate for oil reserves available from Monterey was
600 million barrels, 96 percent less than its original estimate.
A number of observers took note of this reassessment, pointing
out, among other things, how difﬁcult it is to make reliable esti-
mates of fuel reserves and, therefore, how undependable predic-
tions for the nation’s energy future are likely to be. (See, for
example, Murphy and Murphy 2014; the original story on
the EIA reevaluation is at Sahagun 2014.)
Various observers had different reactions to this apparently
devastating news. Industry spokespersons and advocates, for
example, often took a surprisingly moderate view of the news,
suggesting that concerns about the “loss” of oil and gas reserves
were an overreaction to the realities on the ground. Tim
Worstall, a contributor to the business magazine Forbes, for
example, said that the actual amount of oil and gas in the
ground was not really the issue. “After all,” he wrote after the
EIA announcement, “there’s still exactly the same amount of
oil there as there was before the announcement. All we’ve been
told is that it’s going to be more difﬁcult to get it out” (Worstall
2014). Amy Myers Jaffe, executive director of energy and sus-
tainability at the University of California at Davis, suggested
that the EIA announcement did not take into consideration
the inventiveness of oil and gas companies. “The academic
geologists said the same thing about the Barnett Shale,” she
said. “They said it wasn’t recoverable and it wasn’t going to
produce. That didn’t turn out to be right. . . . Some of those
companies are not going to give up. The ﬁrst companies that
went into North Dakota had problems too. It’s very early to
be making a deﬁnitive judgment” (Green 2014).
Advocates of a peak energy position had a very different view
of the EIA report. They saw the reduced estimates of oil and gas
reserves in the Monterey Play as conﬁrmation of their view that
the era of recoverable oil and gas was truly coming to an end.
As one proponent of that position, J. David Hughes, suggested,
“The oil [in the Monterey Play] had always been a statistical
66
Fracking

fantasy. . . . Left out of all the hoopla,” he went on, “was the
fact that the EIA’s estimate was little more than a back-of-the-
envelope calculation” (Monterey Shale Downgraded 2014; also
see Hughes’ report, Drilling California, 2013).
The EIA’s own chief investigator into the Monterey ﬁeld
explained how initial estimates could have been so wildly off
target. “From the information we’ve been able to gather,” he
said, “we’ve not seen evidence that oil extraction in this area is
very productive using techniques like fracking. . . . Our oil pro-
duction estimates combined with a dearth of knowledge about
geological differences among the oil ﬁelds led to erroneous
predictions and estimates” (Sahagun 2014).
In some ways, the most perceptive view of this situation may
be that of specialists like Ryan Carlyle, a hydraulics engineer,
who wrote in a 2013 issue of Forbes magazine that “reserves
statistics . . . are consistently wrong,” although, he went on,
“for complex reasons” (Carlyle 2014). In sum, Carlyle wrote:
Corporate reserve estimates are too low by an unknown
amount, and national reserve estimates are too high by
an unknown amount. And no one knows how much oil
is still undiscovered—in the Gulf of Mexico alone, about
1 billion barrels of new oil have been found each year for
25 years (except very recently due to moratorium slow-
downs). Shale oil fracking outside the US could add enor-
mous resources, and simple technology improvements in
gas-to-liquid conversion technology could create massive
gains in production on top of that (Carlyle 2014)
All of which means that, even under the best of circum-
stances, we need to take energy reserves data with a grain (or
shaker-full) of salt. Perhaps the only thing that oil and gas spe-
cialists from a variety of philosophical positions can agree on is
that fracking and directional drilling are the factors that have
been responsible for the explosion in the growth of oil and gas
reserves and production over the past decade. As Christof
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
67

Rühl, chief economist at BP, has written, the massive increase in
oil and gas production in the 2010s has been the result of these
two new technologies producing “the world’s largest increase in
oil as well as gas production . . . [as well as] the biggest oil produc-
tion increase in the history of the US—a country, mind you,
which has produced oil since 1859” (Rühl 2014).
The Global State of Affairs
Given this word of caution, one might ask what the status of
gas and oil reserves are in countries other than the United
States, and to what extent fracking and directional drilling have
inﬂuenced these estimates. In January 2014, the EIA released a
report summarizing the estimated shale oil and shale gas
reserves for a number of countries worldwide. The report indi-
cated that the nation with the largest shale oil reserves in the
world was Russia, with reserves estimated at 75 billion barrels
(bbl) of shale oil, followed by the United States (58 bbl),
China (32 bbl), and Argentina (27 bbl). The nation with
the largest shale gas reserves according to the EIA was China,
with 1,115 trillion cubic feet (tcf) of reserves, followed by
Argentina (802 tcf), Algeria (707 tcf), and the United States
(665 tcf) (Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources Are Globally
Abundant 2014; for a complete table for these resources, see
Table 5.8 in Chapter 5 of this book).
The striking point about these data, however, is that fracking
has yet to be introduced into almost any nation in the world
other than the United States and Canada. According to the
EIA, 39 percent of the natural gas produced in the United
States in 2012 came from fracked shale reservoirs. The only
other nation in the world that produced signiﬁcant amounts
of shale gas was Canada, where 15 percent of the nation’s total
natural gas production came from fracked wells. China
reported the beginnings of a fracking industry, but less than
1 percent of all the natural gas produced in the country came
from fracked wells (North America Leads the World in
68
Fracking

Production of Shale Gas 2014). A number of other nations
were experimenting with fracking of shale formations, but none
had yet produced commercial quantities of oil or gas by the
process. (For a detailed discussion of the progress in fracking
in 41 countries of the world, see Technically Recoverable
Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An Assessment of 137
Shale Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States
2014. For a graphical representation of the global imbalance
of short-term crude oil supplies available through shale
resources, see BP Energy Outlook 2030 2013, “Tight Oil
Output,” page 34.)
For example, YPF, Argentina’s national oil company, signed
an agreement in September 2012 with Chevron to begin
exploring the use of fracking in its oil- and gas-rich Vaca
Muerta region (Kelly 2014). At about the same time, early
fracking experiments in Australia’s Queensland state led to vio-
lent protests about use of the technology in attempts to recover
abundant oil and gas resources in the region (at just about the
same time that the nearby state of Victoria banned fracking)
(Australia’s Victoria State Bans Coal Seam Gas “Fracking”
2014; Gas Goes Boom 2012). Indeed decisions to ban the use
of fracking in gas and oil recovery appear to be about as common
as decisions to use the technology to begin recovering a nation’s
proved reserves of shale oil and gas. As of late 2014, fracking
had been banned, at least on a temporary basis, in a number
of countries, including Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Romania, and South Africa; many states and
provinces, such as Cantabria (Spain), Fribourg (Switzerland),
Newfoundland (Canada), and Vermont (United States); as well
as a host of town, cities, and other municipalities (9 Countries
or Regions That Ban Fracking 2014; List of Bans Worldwide
2014; for an excellent overview of the possible future of fracking
worldwide, see Shale Gas: A Global Perspective 2011 and Shale
Oil: The Next Revolution 2013).
Global perspectives on the future of shale oil and gas are par-
ticularly interesting because of overall patterns of oil and gas
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
69

production worldwide. In a recent report, the EIA noted that
world production of crude oil, not including U.S. shale oil,
has been dropping off since 2012 and has reached levels not
seen since 2005 (see the graph at Mushalik 2014, Figure 2,
for an illustration of this trend). When production from U.S.
shale reservoirs is included, however, worldwide production of
crude oil is increasing by about 5 percent per year. Although
the world is at an early stage in this trend, it seems likely that
harvesting of shale oil (and shale gas) resources may be the only
way that worldwide oil and gas production will continue to
increase in the near future.
Energy Independence for the United States
The second question for energy analysts who focus primarily on
the United States is the issue of energy independence. Over at
least the past century, Americans have come to depend more
and more heavily on fossil fuel resources from other nations,
primarily but not exclusively Middle East nations such as
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and the United Arab Emirates. But this
dependence has had all manner of economic, political, military,
social, and other ramiﬁcations. For this reason, every president
since Richard Nixon has promoted some form of “energy
independence” for the United States, although each president
has suggested a different route to this goal, such as increased
conservation, greater reliance on America’s own natural re-
sources, and/or more aggressive development of alternative
and renewable resources (Gottesdiener 2014).
Data suggest that these efforts were largely unsuccessful until
very recently. As Table 2.1 shows, the percentage of petroleum
and natural gas imported from outside the United States
steadily rose in actual amounts and in percentage of domestic
consumption from the 1950s until about 2007. After that
point, imports for both products began to drop off dramati-
cally, largely as a result of increased domestic production of
both fuels. In fact, ofﬁcials at the International Energy Agency
70
Fracking

announced in late 2013 that the United States would ﬁnally
surpass both Saudi Arabia and Russia, the world’s two leading
oil producers in that year, by 2017 at the very least, and prob-
ably as early as 2015 (Smith 2014).
Whether the United States is at a point of achieving energy
independence and, if so, what effects that will have on this
country and the rest of the world are still points of serious
debate. On the optimistic side (from one perspective), the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
71
Table 2.1
U.S. Net Import of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Historical Trends
Year
Oil1
Percent3
Natural Gas2
Percent
1950
318
8.4
0
0
1955
880
10.4
11
0.13
1960
1,613
16.5
156
1.30
1965
2,281
19.8
456
2.98
1970
3,161
21.5
821
3.88
1975
5,846
35.8
953
4.88
1980
6,365
37.3
985
4.96
1985
4,286
27.2
950
5.50
1990
7,161
42.0
1,532
8.00
1995
7,886
44.5
2,841
12.79
2000
10,419
52.9
3,782
16.21
2005
12,549
50.3
4,341
19.72
2006
12,391
59.9
4,186
19.29
2007
12,027
58.1
4,608
19.94
2008
11,090
56.9
3,984
17.11
2009
9,654
51.4
3,751
16.37
2010
9,435
49.2
3,741
15.53
2011
8,935
47.3
3,469
14.17
2012
8,527
48.3
3,138
12.29
2013
7,719
40.9
2,883
11.07
1Thousand barrels per day.
2Billion cubic feet per year.
3Percentage import of domestic consumption.
Sources: “Petroleum and Other Liquids Overview, Selected Years, 1949–2011,”
U.S.
Energy
Information
Administration,
http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/
annual/pdf/sec5.pdf. Accessed on June 22, 2014; “Natural Gas Trade by Country,”
U.S.
Energy
Information
Administration,
http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/
monthly/pdf/sec4_4.pdf. Accessed on June 22, 2014; “U.S. Natural Gas Total
Consumption,” U.S. Energy Information Administration, http://www.eia.gov/dnav/
ng/hist/n9140us2a.htm. Accessed on June 22, 2014.

evidence seems clear that the vast shale oil and gas resources
that have been discovered in the United States, not even con-
sidering even greater reserves that may yet to be found, almost
guarantee that the United States will continue to produce a
larger share of the fuels it needs to power our economy. Such
a change could truly be revolutionary on both the domestic
and international level. Energy independence would mean, of
course, that the United States would no longer have to import
most or even any of the oil and gas it needs to run its economy
in the future. That change could have a number of political,
economic, social, and other implications for American society.
For example, some studies suggest that the boom in shale oil
and gas has already resulted in an increase of 2.1 million jobs in
the United States since 2012, and that number could rise by
more than a million by 2020. An improving economy made
possible by growth in the oil and gas industry could also mean
an additional $74 billion income for the federal government
in federal and state revenues along with average savings of
$1,200 per American household because of lower energy prices
(Yergin 2014). Much of the economic beneﬁt to the United
States would come from a dramatic decrease in payments to
oil-producing countries, such as Saudi Arabia and Venezuela,
once energy independence is achieved. In 2013, for example,
the United States spent $300 billion for imported oil, a savings
under energy independence that would result in a 2 percent
annual economic growth for the country (Anderson 2014).
Even if this estimate is too high, it does not detract from the
fact that the United States would no longer be devoting the
largest fraction of its trade balance deﬁcit to importing oil, as
is the case today.
Of course, energy independence would have profound
effects on other nations around the world in addition to its
transformation of U.S. society. The countries most likely to
suffer from U.S. energy independence are those for whom oil
and gas exports constitute a signiﬁcant portion of the nations’
economies. For Ecuador and Colombia, as two examples, oil
72
Fracking

and gas exports to the United States currently account for 8 and
7 percent, respectively, of national income. Loss of U.S. dollars
might well be catastrophic for such nations (Anderson 2014).
Other nations not in the business of exporting oil and gas
would probably also suffer from U.S. energy independence.
As oil and gas become less expensive in the United States
(because they can now be obtained domestically), manufactur-
ing processes are also likely to become less expensive. Such a
trend would probably lead to U.S. companies that had once
ﬂed the United States because of high production costs
returning to their home base. In such a case, many countries
around the world would see a readjustment of their own econo-
mies necessitated by the loss of U.S. multinational corporations
(Anderson 2014; Menenberg 2012).
The possible political consequences of an energy indepen-
dent United States are also profound. For many decades,
United States foreign policy has been dictated to at least some
extent by the necessity of placating nations on which it depends
for a signiﬁcant portion of its oil and gas. The United States
could hardly afford to antagonize Saudi Arabia and other
Middle East nations when so much of its economy depends
on fuels imported from those nations. Energy independence
would mean that it might no longer make any difference one
way or another as to whether OPEC members approved of
U.S. foreign policy decisions because the United States would
no longer be dependent on the natural resources imported from
those countries (see, for example, US “Energy Independence”:
Geopolitical Consequences 2013).
In spite of the apparent appeal of energy independence in the
United States, a number of observers argue that such a condi-
tion is not at hand, and not likely to occur in the foreseeable
future, nor many of them add, should it be allowed to take
place. Perhaps the most comprehensive expression of this view
comes from Robert Bryce, a fellow at the Institute for Energy
Research. In his 2008 book, Gusher of Lies, Bryce starts out by
saying that “energy independence is hogwash” (Bryce 2008, 7).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
73

Bryce then goes on to describe in great detail the reasons that
energy independence is unlikely to occur for technical reasons
(the book was written just before fracking operations became
so widely popular in the United States) and, more importantly,
why such a condition “makes no sense” from an economic,
political, military, or environmental standpoint. “Worse yet,”
he goes on, “the inane obsession with the idea of energy
independence is preventing the U.S. from having an honest
and effective discussion about the energy challenges it now
faces” (Bryce 2008, 7). In a nutshell, Bryce’s argument is based
on the reality that the world today operates less as a group of
individual nations, each with its own economic, political,
social, military, environmental, and other concerns in isolation
from the rest of the world, and more as an interdependent
whole in which decisions made by any one country have far-
reaching effects on many, most, or all other countries on the
planet. Thus, America’s energy future cannot be viewed just
in terms of what is good for the United States, but as to how
it will contribute to a well-functioning world community.
Bryce is by no means the only person to argue against
the inevitability and/or advisability of an energy indepen-
dent United States. In a 2012 article on Salon, for example,
Michael T. Klare, professor of peace and world security studies
at Hampshire College in Amherst, Massachusetts, points out
that energy independence for the United States is likely to
come about only through the use of what he calls “extreme”
technology. Conventional sources of oil and gas continued to
be depleted, he says, so that energy independence will occur
only as energy companies “push the envelope,” using ever more
expensive and complex technologies (such as fracking and
directional drilling) to extract tightly held oil and gas in shale
and other “tight” formations. He suggests the use of these
“extreme measures” will almost inevitably set off a dangerous
chain of events that he describes as “extreme energy ¼ extreme
methods ¼ extreme disasters ¼ extreme opposition.” He con-
cludes that “were such a publicized golden age [of energy
74
Fracking

independence] to come about, we would be burning vast quan-
tities of the dirtiest energy on the planet with truly disastrous
consequences” (Klare 2012).
A particularly interesting analysis of the claims for energy
independence from a business standpoint was offered in a
2013 report by ﬁnancial consultant Deborah Rogers. In the
conclusion to her report, Rogers offered a number of reasons
to be suspicious about claims of energy independence as being
“just around the corner,” such as:
• Wall Street (business investors) have been promoting shale
gas drilling so aggressively that the price of gas has dropped
below production costs, which has produced very large prof-
its for the Street through acquisitions, mergers, and other
non-productive activities.
• Claims for energy independence have been based on esti-
mates of shale oil and gas reserves that are anywhere from
100 percent to 500 percent overestimates.
• The rapid drop-off in production of shale oil and gas appears
to be very similar to that observed in the past for conven-
tional oil and gas resources.
• The oil and gas industry has already begun to pull back from
new investments in exploration for and extraction of shale
oil and gas because of a number of factors, such as the high
cost of production and popular objections to the practice
(Rogers 2013).
Yet another expression of doubt about the triumph of energy
independence in the United States has come from Michael
Levi, David M. Rubenstein senior fellow for energy and the
environment at the Council on Foreign Relations and author
of a recent book on the topic, The Power Surge: Energy,
Opportunity, and the Battle for America’s Future (Levi 2013b).
Levi points out the irony of Americans glorying in the possibil-
ity of energy independence when, for the past several decades,
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
75

policymakers have pursued an initiative to make sure that the
world’s nations would have ever more integrated economies.
The fact that the United States would soon be able to produce
all the oil and gas it needs would not, he says, change that real-
ity. The U.S. economy would still be intimately tied to that of
other nations, and it could not begin to act as if it were an
isolated outpost in the world of petroleum economics (for a
brief summary of Levi’s views see Levi 2013a).
Benefits of Fracking
Anyone who chooses a newspaper or magazine article to read
about fracking, or who searches for the term on the Internet,
is likely to encounter a number of reasons to be concerned
about the technology, reasons to impose severe restrictions
and regulations on fracking or even to ban the procedure out-
right. As noted earlier, a very large number of governmental
units, from national governments to local municipalities, have
already taken this step. Before considering the objections to
fracking, however, it is worthwhile to note that hydraulic frac-
turing has a number of beneﬁts for both society at large and
for individual citizens.
Perhaps the most obvious beneﬁt is one that has already been
mentioned and discussed at length earlier: Fracking has made
possible a very signiﬁcant increase in the amount of oil and
gas produced in the United States and, to a lesser extent,
Canada. It also holds out the promise of producing a similar
effect in a number of countries around the world. But a num-
ber of other beneﬁts can also be identiﬁed.
Direct Economic Beneﬁts
Direct economic beneﬁts are obvious improvements in mea-
sures such as average household income, number of jobs in an
area, increase in tax revenues, or other beneﬁts that arise from
some policy decision or action. For example, when a company
76
Fracking

uses hydraulic fracturing in a county, it produces economic
improvements that everyone can see and that can be easily mea-
sured, such as more jobs that might pay better than the jobs
they replace or that did not exist before the company began
fracking, as well as the additional income earned by businesses
in the region and increased tax revenue to municipalities in
the county.
A number of studies have been done that attempt to assess
the direct economic beneﬁts that accrue to a community and
a region as a result of new drilling and extraction technologies
that were not previously used in the area. For example, a study
reported in 2011 attempted to measure the direct economic
beneﬁts that would come to the state of New York, where
fracking was banned in a number of towns, cities, and counties
at the time, if such bans were lifted. That study found that eco-
nomic output in the state would increase by $10.4 billion,
between 15,000 and 18,000 jobs would be created in the so-
called Southern Tier of New York and in western New York,
an additional 75,000 to 90,000 jobs would be created if the
area cleared for fracking were to be expanded across the state,
and local municipalities would see an increase in taxes
of $1.4 billion (Considine, Watson, and Considine 2011).
(It perhaps goes without saying that almost any study of this
nature is likely to have its critics who ﬁnd fault with methodol-
ogy and/or results, critiques that will not be reviewed here. But
see, as an example, Heinberg 2014.)
The American Gas Association (AGA) has also made its own
estimates as to the direct economic beneﬁts of shale gas extrac-
tion projects. In it 2014 edition of the organization’s Playbook,
AGA estimates that projects for the extraction of shale gas in
the United States will generate 1.4 million new jobs, $197 in
gross domestic proﬁt, and $50 billion in additional tax reve-
nues, just by the year 2015 (Fueling the Future with Natural
Gas: Bringing It Home 2014).
Arguably the gold standard for direct economic beneﬁts from
hydraulic fracturing operations in the United States is the state
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
77

of North Dakota, which has experienced what can only be
called a “boom” in oil and gas production in less than a decade.
A number of studies have been conducted on the economic
impacts of fracking operations on the state with ﬁndings that
include:
• The lowest unemployment rate of any state in the United
States, 2.6 percent in early 2014. The next lowest rate was
South Dakota (3.6 percent), and the national average was
6.7 percent (2013 State Unemployment Rates 2014).
• Independent economists estimated the annual employment
gain in North Dakota would be 1.72 percent, exceeding
the next two states in that category, Florida (1.57 percent)
and Texas (1.56 percent) (Brown 2014).
• Individual income in the state has also increased signiﬁcantly
since fracking operations began in the late 2000s, with many
residents receiving anywhere from $50,000 to $100,000 a
month in leases and royalties for fracking conducted on the
land they own. According to one estimate, the fracking
boom is producing about 2,000 new millionaires every year
in North Dakota (Bailey 2014).
• The state of North Dakota can expect to receive average tax
revenues in the amount of $15,450,151 over the ﬁrst
36 months of operation of each oil well in the state, of which
89 percent goes to the state and the remaining 11 percent
goes to local municipalities. Current estimates are that
48,000 wells will need to be drilled and fracked over the next
two decades to extract all of the oil in the Bakken formation
that underlies the state. If that estimate is correct, the state
should reach about $720 billion over that period in tax
revenues (Beneﬁtting from Unconventional Oil 2012).
An exhaustive report on the potential beneﬁts of shale
oil and gas was prepared under the sponsorship of a consor-
tium of energy-related associations including the American
78
Fracking

Chemistry Council, America’s Natural Gas Alliance, the
American Petroleum Institute, the Fertilizer Institute, the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce Institute for 21st Century Energy, the
National Association of Manufacturers, the Natural Gas Supply
Association, Rio Tinto, and the Society of the Plastics Industry.
The report is entitled “America’s New Energy Future” and
appears in three volumes, “National Economic Contributions”
(http://www.ihs.com/images/Americas-New-Energy-Future
-National-Main.pdf), “State Economic Contributions” (http://
www.ihs.com/images/Americas-New-Energy-Future-State-Main
-Dec-2012.pdf), and “A Manufacturing Renaissance—Main
Report” (http://www.ihs.com/images/Americas-New-Energy-Future
-Mfg-Renaissance-Main-Report-Sept13.pdf, all ﬁles accessed
on June 25, 2014).
Indirect Economic Beneﬁts
Indirect economic beneﬁts are those that occur in some area
other than the primary area of discussion or concern, in the case
of hydraulic fracturing, at some point other than within or
around the operation of fracking itself. Such beneﬁts are some-
times said to occur “upstream” or “downstream” from the main
activity—that is, before the activity (fracking) actually occurs,
or as a result of that activity’s having been carried out. For
example, one indirect economic beneﬁt of fracking is often a
reduction in the price of electricity. As larger quantities of natu-
ral gas are produced as a result of hydraulic fracturing, the price
of the product (gas) has a tendency to fall. The cost of electric-
ity that is produced by the combustion of natural gas, then, is
also likely to fall, and residential, municipal, and industrial con-
sumers are all likely to see reductions in their electrical bills as a
long-term effect of fracturing operations. (For an extended dis-
cussion of such indirect beneﬁts, see Fact Sheet 2014; Hassett
2013.)
One recent study attempted to estimate the total direct,
indirect, and induced effects of developing a shale gas ﬁeld in
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
79

Illinois. In this study, the author added induced effects to his
analysis as those “changes in regional household spending pat-
terns caused by changes in household income generated from
the direct and indirect effects” (Loomis 2012, 11). He found
that the number of new jobs created by fracking operations
under the conditions studied ranged from 602 to 5,422 as a
result of direct effects, 111 to 999 under indirect effects, and
320 to 2,881 under induced effects, all estimates depending
on the number and type of wells that might be drilled in the
New Albany ﬁeld (Loomis 2012, 13). His estimates for direct,
indirect, and induced labor income under a variety of scenarios
ranged from $29.9 million to $269.3 million; $8.7 million to
$78.1 million; and $15.2 million to $137.2 million, respec-
tively (Loomis 2012, 13).
Environmental Beneﬁts
One of the indirect beneﬁts most commonly touted for frack-
ing is the potential bonuses the technology may offer to the
natural environment, especially in the area of global climate
change. Prior to the rise in popularity of fracking, a number
of environmentalists argued that converting U.S. industrial oper-
ations from coal to natural gas would provide a signiﬁcant beneﬁt
to the global environment because the combustion of natural gas
produces about half the carbon dioxide as the combustion of
comparable amounts of coal. As a possible “way station” toward
the elimination of fossil fuels entirely, then, some experts recom-
mended converting coal-ﬁred power plants to natural gas as soon
as possible. In one important study of the replacement of coal by
natural gas, researchers suggested converting the construction of
28 gigawatts of natural gas power plants annually in place of the
same amount of coal-powered power plants over the next half
century, resulting in a savings of one gigaton of carbon emissions
each year (Pacala and Socolow 2004, 17).
This theme—that using natural gas rather than coal for
industrial processes reduces greenhouse gas emissions—has
80
Fracking

been repeated in any number of studies in the past decade. It has,
in fact, become an important talking point by proponents of
fracking who now consistently argue that fracking operations
have become an important factor in the world’s ﬁght against
global climate change. (For a summary of relevant research, with
links to studies supporting this point of view, see Everley 2013b.)
Somewhat ironically, however, a number of environmental-
ists who once supported the use of natural gas as a way of
reducing carbon dioxide emissions, especially prior to the devel-
opment of hydraulic fracturing, have reversed their positions in
the last few years. The reason for this change of heart has been
the recognition that, while natural gas is a cleaner fuel to use for
industrial operations, it still contributes to climate change in a
different context, namely during the process of extraction.
This realization has come about as research shows that the
amount of natural gas leaking from a well is not insigniﬁcant.
In fact, some studies show that anywhere from 3.6 to 7.9 per-
cent of the methane obtained from shale gas wells leaks
into the air, eventually escaping into Earth’s atmosphere
(Howarth, Santoro, and Ingraffea 2011, 679). Although it
remains in the atmosphere for a much shorter time than carbon
dioxide, it has more than 20 times the ability to trap heat as
does carbon dioxide and is, therefore, at least as signiﬁcant as
carbon dioxide in contributing to global climate change
(Overview of Greenhouse Gases 2014).
A somewhat middle ground taken by some observers is that
shale gas certainly has a number of environmental disadvan-
tages (more on this point later), but it still represents a
great step forward in efforts to save the natural environment
and should be supported by anyone who is concerned about
that issue. As one document with this orientation begins,
“Environmentalists who oppose the development of shale gas
and fracking are making a tragic mistake.” Even though shale
gas does pose some environmental issues, the document goes
on, “[t]hese concerns are either largely false or can be addressed
by appropriate regulation” (Muller and Muller 2013).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
81

The debate over the contribution of fracking to global cli-
mate change is by no means over. It goes back and forth with
the “he said, she said” character of many issues related to the
use of hydraulic fracturing, and is likely to do so well into the
future. (For an excellent summary of the most recent informa-
tion available on this topic, as of late 2014, see Brandt et al.
2014 and Golden 2014.)
Opposition to Fracking
As with most controversial social issues, hydraulic fracturing
has been the subject of a number of public opinion polls
attempting to assess individuals’ familiarity with the topic and
their attitudes in favor of or in opposition to the practice. In
one of the most comprehensive of those polls, the Pew
Research Center for the People and the Press found that only
a quarter (26 percent) of respondents had heard “a lot” about
fracking, while a third (37 percent) said they had heard “a little,”
and another third (37 percent), “nothing at all.” Those percent-
ages remained constant across political lines among Democrats,
Independents, and Republicans. Of those who had heard “a lot”
about fracking, just over half (52 percent) favored the practice,
although that percentage varied signiﬁcantly across party afﬁlia-
tions. About three quarters (73 percent) of all Republicans
favored the use of fracking in oil and gas extraction, while only
a third of Democrats (33 percent) and half of Independents
(54 percent) held that position (As Gas Prices Pinch, Support
for Oil and Gas Production Grows 2012).
A number of public opinion polls have focused on speciﬁc
states or regions. For example, researchers at the University of
Michigan queried residents of Michigan and Pennsylvania
about their knowledge of and opinions about fracking in
May 2013. This survey is of special interest because researchers
asked a number of questions about speciﬁc aspects of fracking,
such as its potential risks and beneﬁts. As with the Pew study,
82
Fracking

the Michigan study found that less than half of respondents had
even heard about fracking, with 40 percent in Michigan and
46 percent in Pennsylvania saying that they had “heard
a lot” about the practice, and virtually the same numbers
(42 percent and 40 percent, respectively) having heard “a little.”
(This study is especially interesting because Pennsylvania is one
of the most heavily “fracked” states in the United States, while
Michigan has no more than a handful of such wells.)
When asked their views on fracking, Michigan and
Pennsylvania respondents had roughly similar views about the
practice with 54 percent of Michiganders saying that they
supported fracking “strongly” or “somewhat,” compared to
49 percent of Pennsylvanians who expressed the same view.
In something of a contrast, however, about a third of both
groups (31 percent in both cases) had a negative attitude
toward the term fracking itself, while 45 percent (again the
same in both groups) held negative attitudes about the term.
In responding to more detailed questions about fracking,
both Michigan and Pennsylvania respondents also held very
similar views, with just over half of both groups saying that
they thought fracking was associated with more beneﬁts than
problems both now and in the future (a difference of less
than 3 percent in all forms of the question between states).
And all respondents pointed to two speciﬁc beneﬁts—energy
independence and a source of jobs—as being the major bene-
ﬁts of fracking in their states. The greatest difference between
the two groups was in their perceptions of the most serious
possible disadvantage of fracking, with Pennsylvanians nam-
ing contamination of water supplies as the most troubling
problem (34 percent of respondents) and Michiganders saying
that they didn’t know of any really serious problem (25 per-
cent). These numbers obviously reﬂect to some extent the
experience that residents of the two states have already had
(or not had) with respect to hydraulic fracturing (Brown
et al. 2013).
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
83

Problems Associated with Hydraulic Fracturing
The one thing that a person is probably most likely to think
about when considering the possible problems associated with
hydraulic fracturing is water:
– The 4.4 million gallons of water needed to frack the
average oil or gas well (How Much Water Does It Take
to Frack a Well? 2013);
– The alternative residential, commercial, industrial, and
other uses to which that water could otherwise be put;
– The complications involved in transporting that water
from its source to the fracking site;
– The chemicals that must be added to that water to
maximize its efﬁciency in the process of fracking;
– The disturbance that water creates in rock structures
into which it is injected, disturbance that may result in
earthquakes and other seismic events;
– The production of additional amounts of water originally
stored underground, but released by the fracking process;
– The contamination of the fracking water by the fracking
process itself;
– The ultimate fate of the original fracking water along
with the newly released water, especially upon its return
to the surface; along with the myriad effects on human
health and the natural environment caused by the water
used in the fracking process and all of the other by-
products of that technology. What, then, can be said
about these common problems often associated with
the fracking of oil and gas wells? Here are some of the
most common answers to that question.
Water Use
Critics of fracking often point out that the technology wastes
enormous amounts of water. The primary objection is not that
84
Fracking

fracking uses a lot of water—many industrial operations do
so—but that the water used for that purpose is essentially lost
for other possible uses. A nuclear power plant, for example, uses
very large quantities of water to cool the reactor core. But that
water is stored for a period of time in cooling ponds and then
returned to lakes and rivers, from which it can then be extracted
for other purposes. But water used for fracking can generally
not be recycled in the same way. It may remain buried under-
ground; it may be pumped into empty wells as permanent stor-
age sites; it may be recycled in the fracking of other wells; or it
may be treated in wastewater plants and then returned to rivers
and streams. The water is very unlikely to end up in a drinking
water reservoir, in a farmer’s irrigation ditch, or on its way to an
industrial plant (Easton 2014; Hansen 2014).
A number of studies have attempted to obtain more speciﬁc
information about the fate of water used in fracking operations,
often with only limited success. In one such study of water use
in fracking operations in Pennsylvania and West Virginia, for
example, researchers noted that one challenge they encountered
was that state reporting requirements were such that only very
limited conclusions could be drawn about the way in which
fracking water was used and then disposed of (Hansen,
Mulvaney, and Betcher 2013). These researchers were, none-
theless, able to reach some qualiﬁed conclusions:
• An average of 4.3–5 million gallons of water is used in the
fracking of wells in the region.
• About 80 percent of the water used for fracking is taken
directly from rivers and streams.
• Between 6 and 8 percent of the water used in fracking is
recovered; the balance remains underground, unavailable
for future use of any kind.
• Two-thirds of the ﬂowback water from West Virginia wells
is unaccounted for because state regulations do not require
full reporting of this information.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
85

• More than half of the wastewater from Pennsylvania wells is
treated and returned to the environment, while essentially
none of the West Virginia wastewater goes through this pro-
cess (Hansen, Mulvaney, and Betcher 2013; for detailed dis-
cussions of these points, see sections 4 and 5 of the report,
pages 15–38).
Regardless of the numerous studies that have been con-
ducted, a number of ordinary citizens and the organizations to
which they belong are worried about the massive use of water
for fracking. That concern is only made more serious if and
when drought conditions develop in a region where fracking
is occurring or is planned. In late 2012, for example, citizens
of Carroll County, Ohio, expressed their growing concerns that
the water be withdrawn from the region’s water table would
result in a deﬁciency of water for residential, industrial, com-
mercial, and other applications. Even though some of those
citizens were accepting payment for water being withdrawn
from their own ponds, the consensus view seemed to be that
better controls were needed to make sure that the county did
not run out of water as oil and gas companies continued to
drain the country’s natural sources of water (Hunt 2012).
The oil and gas industry’s primary response to the concern
about water use in the fracking process is that critics should
keep the issue in perspective. Every form of energy generation
requires the use of water—usually very large amounts of
water—and fracking is no exception. The major difference,
they say, is that fracking requires much less water use than do
most other forms of energy generation. In a presentation made
to the Ground Water Protection Council in 2009, for example,
Chesapeake Energy displayed a table showing the amount of
water used for a variety of energy generation technologies, in
gallons of water used per million Btu of energy. The table
showed that the extraction of shale natural gas requires
anywhere from 0.60 to 1.80 gallons per million Btu (gal/
MMBtu), compared to 1 to 3 gal/MMBtu for conventional
86
Fracking

natural gas, 2 to 32 gal/MMBtu for coal (depending on method
of transport), 8 to 14 gal/MMBtu for nuclear power, 8 to
20 gal/MMBtu for conventional oil, 22 to 26 gal/MMBtu for
shale oil, 2,519 to 29,100 gal/MMBtu for ethanol fuel, and
14,000 to 75,000 gal/MMBtu for biodiesel from irrigated soy
(Frac Attack 2010, 20).
Water Contamination
At ﬁrst glance, one might expect the drilling and/or fracking
of an oil or gas well might inevitably result in some contami-
nation of groundwater in the area around the well. A variety
of chemicals is typically added to the drilling ﬂuid used in pro-
ducing the well, and it would seem reasonable for some drill-
ing line to release at least a minimal amount of those
chemicals into groundwater. In fact, such a scenario should
occur very rarely. The reason for this expectation is that the
oil or gas well is drilled many hundreds or (much more com-
monly) thousands of feet into the underground rock, while the
water table that contains essentially all groundwater in an area lies
only a few hundred feet below the surface at the most (Explore
Shale 2011). The loss of chemicals in a drilling ﬂuid into
the water table would, therefore, seem to be a very unlikely
unoccurrence.
Yet complaints for residents in the area around oil and gas
wells have long been common, arising even before the process
of fracking was ﬁrst used on such wells, but having become
much more common since about 2005. These complaints
focus on a number of troubling phenomena, the most dramatic
of which may well be the case of “burning water.” Some resi-
dents have reported that they have been able to set ﬁrst to the
water released from their household taps, presumably because
of the methane present from natural gas trapped in the water.
(To see a demonstration of this phenomenon, see Light Your
Water on Fire from Gas Drilling, Fracking at http://www
.youtube.com/watch?v=4LBjSXWQRV8.)
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
87

Although this complaint about fracking has received sub-
stantial attention and is certainly one of the most dramatic
charges brought against the practice, it is unclear to what extent
burning water and fracking are closely connected. A number of
studies have shown, in fact, that ﬂaming water is anything but
an uncommon event in areas where oil and gas are produced.
The apparent cause for the phenomenon is the presence of
natural gas in shallow layers of earth around oil and gas wells,
whether they have been fracked or not. Thus, while a legitimate
complaint about fracking, it is not clear to what extent ﬂaming
water can be used as a major objection to the practice of frack-
ing (Dunning 2011).
One question that might be asked about the contamination
of water as a result of fracking is precisely what people mean
by the term contamination. According to at least one study,
most people are talking about the presence of methane in the
water supply when they are talking about “contamination,” and
not about the dozens or hundreds of chemicals used in the frack-
ing process (Fracking Caused Hundreds of Complaints about
Contaminated Water in 4 States 2014). But both the systems
by which states keep track of such complaints and the way in
which complainants describe their experiences mask the precise
meaning individuals ascribe to the term.
From a strictly scientiﬁc standpoint, the term contamination
usually refers to the presence in water of substances normally
not present in water and/or having the potential to cause harm
to plants, animals (including humans), and other aspects of the
environment. But reports of contamination by individuals and
organizations often suggest a broader and somewhat more
ambiguous experience. For example, the Pennsylvania Alliance
for Clean Water and Air maintains a website listing speciﬁc
complaints registered by individuals and communities that
claim their water has been contaminated by fracking. As of late
2014, the website listed nearly 7,000 complaints, many of
which came from groups of individuals, rather than single per-
sons. Some of the experiences that complainants registered were
88
Fracking

the following: stomach pain; nausea; rashes on legs while show-
ering; fatigue; mouth ulcers; sick and/or dead goats, dogs, cows,
horses, and other farm animals; difﬁculty in breathing; elevated
heart rate; lightheadedness; spitting up blood; farm and domes-
tic animals refusing food and water; multiple myeloma; human
mortality; air loss; increased sensitivity to chemicals; previously
unidentiﬁed viruses; paralysis of legs; lesions on spinal cord;
stress; shock; mental distress; and “constant fear of developing
cancer” (Pennsylvania Alliance for Clean Water and Air 2014).
Defenders of fracking suggest that complaints such as those
listed here must be assessed carefully. In the ﬁrst place, many
complaints have come from regions where conventional drilling
has been practiced for many years. Any health problems that
occur may be the result of these operations, rather than of
fracking itself. Also, the wide range of problems that have been
reported suggest that at least some individuals may be imagin-
ing or exaggerating health issues that are not really as severe as
they may seem. The constant barrage of criticisms about frack-
ing, supporters of the procedure say, may cause people to fanta-
size ailments that do not exist in reality. Overall, spokespersons
for the oil and gas industry and their supporters sometimes sim-
ply deny that water contamination as a result of fracking even
exists. In testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, for example,
Texas Railroad Commissioner David J. Porter stated cate-
gorically that “[t]hanks to the oil and gas industry’s best prac-
tices and strict regulation and enforcement by the Railroad
Commission, there has never been a conﬁrmed case of ground-
water contamination due to hydraulic fracturing in Texas”
(Porter 2014). Since Texas maintains the most complete data-
base of complaints about water contamination from fracking
in the United States, Porter’s comment is very signiﬁcant
in establishing the legitimacy of at least a vast majority of
those complaints in the state (Begos 2014). Porter’s view is
apparently also born out by statements by representatives of a
number of national and state governmental agencies and
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
89

academic institutions, such as the U.S. Department of Energy,
U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Government Accountability
Ofﬁce, Environmental Protection Administration, Center
for Rural Pennsylvania, Ground Water Protection Council,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Stanford University,
and Texas A&M University (Everley 2013c).
Intimately associated with the issue of water contamination
as a result of fracking is the question as to what chemicals are
used in the process. It is well known, in general, that oil and
gas companies use a variety of different chemicals in order to
increase the efﬁciency of the fracking process. These chemicals
fall into a number of categories, such as acids (to dissolve rock),
breakers (to reduce viscosity of a liquid), biocides (to prevent
the growth of bacteria), buffers (to adjust for acidity of the well
ﬂuid), clay stabilizer (to prevent development of clayey struc-
tures), corrosion inhibitors (to prevent corrosion of metal com-
ponents of the well), friction reducers, iron control (to prevent
disruptive chemical changes caused by the presence of iron),
and surfactants (to reduce ﬂuid surface tension and improve
ﬂow of liquid in the well) (Hydraulic Fracturing 101 2014).
At least 600 different chemicals are commercially available
for achieving one or another of these objectives in the fracking
process. (For one of the most complete lists of chemicals used
in hydraulic fracturing, see Chemicals Used in Hydraulic
Fracturing 2011, Appendix A.) The problem is that oil and
gas companies have historically been reluctant to release to the
general public (or even to regulatory agencies) the precise com-
position of chemicals used in any one ﬁeld. The companies
claim that such information is proprietary and can result in
ﬁnancial loss to the company if it becomes generally known.
Some companies, however, have begun to change their views
and their policies about disclosing the names of the chemicals
used in the fracking of their wells. They have come to realize
that the success of their business depends to at least some extent
on the trust that their consumers and the general public have in
their products. If they can reduce public suspicions about the
90
Fracking

substances they are using in their operations, some companies
believe, they may be able to avoid lawsuits, additional state
and local regulations, and general bad feelings toward the com-
pany. One company that has led the way in providing full dis-
closure about their products is the Baker Hughes company, a
supplier for the oil and gas drilling industry. In 2014, the com-
pany announced that it would make available on its website a
complete listing of all chemicals used in its fracking products
(Hydraulic Fracturing Chemical Disclosure Policy 2014;
Energy Dept. Welcomes Fracking Chemical Disclosure 2014).
Detailed information about the composition of many
fracked wells is now available on a website called FracFocus,
maintained by the Ground Water Protection Council and
Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission. The website is
an interactive resource that allows one to enter information
about a speciﬁc oil and/or gas well (such as the name of the
state and county in which the well is located, the operator,
and the API well number and name) for which information is
desired. FracFocus then provides a complete list of all chemicals
used at that well, along with CAS (Chemical Abstract Service)
numbers for those chemicals. That information allows one to
check detailed information about possible health and environ-
mental hazards associated with each chemical included in the
FracFocus list (see Find a Well 2014).
Once the chemicals used in a fracking operation are
identiﬁed, a person can learn a great deal about the potential
health threats posed by each chemical from a variety of sources.
For example, TOXNET (Toxicology Data Network) is a ser-
vice of the U.S. National Library of Medicine that provides
access to 16 databases of hazardous chemicals. By simply enter-
ing the name of a chemical, one gains access to a host of
information about its chemical and physical properties, along
with its potential carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic, and
other health hazards to humans (TOXNET Databases 2014).
Two other useful sources of information about the health
effects of chemicals are the International Chemical Safety Cards
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
91

(ICSC), produced by the International Labour Organization
(available at http://www.ilo.org/dyn/icsc/showcard.listCards2),
and the NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards,
published by the National Institute for Occupational Safety
and
Health
(available
at
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/
2005-149/pdfs/2005149.pdf).
Air Pollution
Critics of fracking often point to the risks posed to air quality
by the procedure. They say that in some cases contamination
of air can be as bad as, or even worse than, contamination of
water, resulting in its own set of health issues for humans and
other animals. The culprit most commonly named in contami-
nation of the air is methane, the primary constituent of natural
gas. Methane escapes from oil and gas wells at a number of
points in the process of exploration, extraction, processing,
and transportation. By far the greatest source of methane leaks
at oil and gas wells is intentional venting of the gas to the
atmosphere. Recall that oil and gas companies have tradition-
ally allowed natural gas to escape from many wells simply
because it is easier and less expensive to do so than to capture
and store the gas. According to some studies, about 83 percent
of all the methane that escapes from gas and oil production pro-
cesses is released intentionally, with the remaining 17 percent
escaping from leaks and accidental releases (Kiger 2014b).
But how serious is the problem of methane linkage from oil
and gas wells? How much methane in actual amounts escapes
from an oil or gas ﬁeld during extraction? Surprisingly, little
was known about the answer to that question until fairly
recently. For many years, experts relied on a report published
in 1996 by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) esti-
mating that somewhere between 1 and 2 percent of all the
methane produced in the United States escaped into the atmos-
phere (Methane Emissions from the Natural Gas Industry
1996, iv). By the second decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century,
92
Fracking

however, a number of new studies began appearing suggesting
that the EPA estimate was too low, perhaps much too low.
A study of wells in the Denver–Julesburg Basin of the Rocky
Mountains by researchers from the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the University of
Colorado, found that about 4 percent of the methane produced
from oil and gas wells was escaping into the atmosphere, about
twice that of the 1996 EPA report (Pétron et al. 2012;
Tollefson 2012).
In the years following the NOAA–Colorado study, addi-
tional research found even more striking data about the loss
of methane from oil and gas wells. These data showed loss
rates of as high as 14 and 17 percent in some cases, approaching
10 times the 1996 EPA estimates (Report: Methane Emissions
at “High Levels” in Uintah Basin 2013). Then, in late 2013,
researchers at the University of California at San Diego pub-
lished their review of data from a variety of sources about meth-
ane emissions in the United States. They concluded that those
emissions could be anywhere from 2.3 to 7.5 times greater
than the “ofﬁcial” estimates of the highly respected Emi-
ssions Database for Global Atmospheric Research (Miller et al.
2013; also see Brandt et al. 2014).
Data suggesting high levels of methane linkage are not
accepted uncritically by all observers. Representatives of the oil
and gas industry in particular tend to ﬁnd errors in the conduct
of studies leading to these conclusions and/or are able to cite other
research that shows very different trends. For example, a writer for
the Internet site Energy in Depth (created by the Independent
Petroleum Association of America) has called attention to studies
that found methane linkages in the range of 1.5 percent “or less
than that,” comparable to the 1996 EPA study. The writer
concludes his review of the study with the observation that:
The activist fear-mongering about methane emissions has
been exposed as fraudulent by the most comprehensive
research on the subject to date, including data that
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
93

incorporates the ﬁrst-ever direct measurements of meth-
ane emissions from various segments of the production
process. Perhaps now we can all come together, take a
deep breath, and recognize the clear economic and envi-
ronmental beneﬁts of natural gas from shale. (Everley
2013a)
One of the interesting trends in research on air contamina-
tion resulting from fracking operations has been the increasing
evidence of air pollutants other than methane itself as potential
sources of human health problems. In 2012, for example,
researchers at The Endocrine Disruption Exchange in Paonia,
Colorado, reported on their study of compounds known collec-
tively as non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHCs) in the efﬂuent
from fracked oil and gas wells. NMHCs are hydrocarbons that
occur in natural gas at a much lower concentration than does
methane itself: ethane, propane, butane, ethene (ethylene), pro-
pene (propylene), and ethyne (acetylene), for example. Little
attention was paid to the presence, concentration, and health
effects of these compounds until 2012. But they appear to pose
their own signiﬁcant and identiﬁable human health issues. As
just one example, researchers found methylene chloride, which
causes damage to the nervous system, present almost three
quarters of the time in their sampling. They concluded that
NMHCs “should be examined further given that the natural
gas industry is now operating in close proximity to human
residences and public lands” (Colborn et al. 2012; Song 2012).
Many of the chemical compounds found in polluted air in
general are also found in areas where fracking is occurring.
These compounds include sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen,
carbon monoxide, polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), volatile
organic compounds (VOCs), and PM10 and PM2.5 (particu-
late matter less than 10 and 2.5 micrometers in diameter,
respectively). In its annual National Emissions Inventory for
2012, for example, the EPA reported that the oil and gas indus-
try was responsible for the release of more than 1.688 billion
94
Fracking

tons of VOCs during production, more than seven times as
much as the next largest polluter, the storage and transfer
industry, and more than a thousand times that of the rest of
the mining industry (Weinhold 2012, A276). VOCs have been
associated with a wide variety of medical conditions (at least
partly because the category includes so many different organic
compounds), such as eye, nose, and throat irritation; head-
aches; loss of coordination; nausea; damage to liver, kidney,
and central nervous system; conjunctival irritation; nose and
throat discomfort; headache; allergic skin reaction; dyspnea;
declines in serum cholinesterase levels; fatigue; and dizziness.
Some components of VOCs have also been implicated in the
development of cancers in experimental animals.
Finely divided particulate matter (PM) has also been shown
to have a number of health problems. Such pollutants have a
tendency to become lodged in the respiratory system, causing
health concerns such as decreased lung function, in general;
irregular heartbeat; nonfatal heart attacks; premature death in
people with heart or lung disease; and aggravated asthma
(Particulate Matter 2014).
One recent study by the Center for Public Integrity,
InsideClimate News, and The Weather Channel, produced a
number of troubling ﬁndings about air pollution resulting from
fracking in the Eagle Ford Play of Texas. Among those ﬁndings
were the following:
• The state of Texas maintains only ﬁve permanent air moni-
toring systems in the 20,000-square-mile Eagle Ford Play,
a number clearly inadequate to obtain the necessary raw data
about possible air contamination in the region.
• The state allows oil and gas companies to self-monitor their
operations, resulting in the fact that it does not even know
how many fracking operations are being conducted in the
states, where they are located, or what environmental effects
they are having on residents of the region.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
95

• Companies that do violate state regulations are rarely ﬁned,
with only two penalties having been assessed in the 164 doc-
umented violations found by the investigating team in the
period of the study. The largest ﬁne assessed for the viola-
tions was $14,250.
• The Texas legislature reduced the budget for the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) by a third
during its 2014 session.
• The release of toxic air pollutants increased by 100 percent
between 2009 and 2014.
• Air quality monitoring systems are unequally distributed in
Texas with urban areas such as Dallas receiving many more
such systems per resident than areas close to fracking opera-
tions, such as those in the Eagle Ford Play (Morris, Song,
and Hasemyer 2014).
Fracking supporters have questioned the complaints about
air pollution from fracking, just as they have complaints about
water contamination. On its website, for example, the “non-
proﬁt research organization” The Heartland Institute, claims
that concerns about air pollution caused by fracking are “exag-
gerated.” In support of this claim, the organization quotes
Bryan Shaw, chair of the TCEQ, on the subject. “After several
months of operation,” Shaw is quoted as saying, “state-of-the-
art, 24-hour air monitors in the Barnett Shale area are showing
no levels of concern for any chemicals. This reinforces our conclu-
sion that there are no immediate health concerns from air quality
in the area, and that when they are properly managed and main-
tained, oil and gas operations do not cause harmful excess air
emissions” (Smith 2012; for Shaw’s original statement, see A
Commitment to Air Quality in the Barnett Shale 2010).
Earthquakes
The question as to the relationship between the extraction
of gas and oil and seismic events (earthquakes), if any, has
96
Fracking

interested researchers for at least the last half century. During
the 1960s, that question arose in a somewhat different context,
the use of injection wells for the disposal of radioactive wastes.
At the time, scientists were exploring systems for burying or
otherwise disposing of the waste materials produced by research
on atomic weapons and at nuclear power plants. One proposal
was to force those (liquid) wastes into deep wells that had pre-
viously been used for other purposes, such as the collection of
water for human use. Soon after this method of disposal was
begun, the number of seismic events (earthquakes) in the
region surrounding the injection wells begin to increase signiﬁ-
cantly. Researchers came to the conclusion that the liquid
wastes were acting as a lubricant on rocks deep underground,
causing them to slip and fracture, thus producing the earth-
quakes (see, for example, Evans 1966). (The disposal of
radioactive wastes in wells was discontinued shortly after this
study was conducted, but debate continues today as to the
viability of the procedure for the disposal of such wastes.
See Underground Injection Control Program 2013.)
The effect of oil and gas drilling operations on earth move-
ments has also been a matter of some interest to researchers,
although much more so in the past decade than in previous his-
tory. From a simple-minded point of view, one would expect at
least some effects of drilling on seismic events since oil and gas
are often found along unstable rock formations deep under-
ground, and the act of drilling itself might be expected to cause
some shifts in the rock. In fact, research has shown that conven-
tional oil and gas wells appear to have little or no effect on
observable instability of rock formations in surrounding
regions. Some evidence suggests that hydraulic fracturing may
be the cause of some seismic events, but the data for such con-
clusions is typically uncertain and ambiguous. For example,
one study of a series of about 50 earthquakes in Garvin
County, Oklahoma, in January 2011, was investigated by
researchers at the Oklahoma Geological Survey to determine
the involvement, if any, of fracking operations in the area.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
97

Those researchers concluded that “the uncertainties in the data
make it impossible to say with a high degree of certainty
whether or not these earthquakes were triggered by natural
means or by the nearby hydraulic fracturing operation”
(Holland 2011).
Evidence for the involvement of injection wells used during
fracking operations with seismic events is much more compel-
ling. Recall that very large quantities of water are used in frack-
ing operations and that one common method of disposing of
the wastewater produced during fracking is emptying into deep
wells. The issue of the relationship between fracking injection
wells and seismic events is, thus, similar to that of radioactive
waste disposal and seismic events.
For some observers, especially those associated with the oil
and gas industry, the connection between earthquakes and deep
well injection of fracking wastes is unproved or questionable, at
best. In one commentary on this issue, an anonymous writer
points out that there are more than 144,000 injection wells in
the United States that have been used safely by a variety of
industries for decades. The writer quotes the EPA as saying that
injection wells are “a safe and inexpensive option for the dis-
posal of unwanted wastes,” and that the reports of individual
seismic events associated with the use of injection wells by the
oil and gas industry are few and far between. The writer sug-
gests that the issue is not one that people should worry about
because the “minute vibrations” that occur during such events
“may not even be detectable to humans” (Does Fracking
Cause Earthquakes? 2014).
The preponderance of scientiﬁc evidence at this point in
time, however, seems to point to some connection between
the use of injection wells for the disposal of fracking wastewater
and seismic events. This evidence has been coming in from oil
and gas extraction sites across the United States. One of the
most extensively studied series of seismic events has been those
taking place in central Oklahoma beginning in January 2009.
Between that date and the end of 2013, more than 200 seismic
98
Fracking

events of intensity greater than 3.0 on the Richter scale were
recorded, including the largest earthquake ever recorded in the
state, which struck near Prague, Oklahoma, on November 5,
2011. That quake registered 5.6 on the Richter scale. The
increase in seismic events was striking because the state had
experienced an average of fewer than three 3.0 magnitude
earthquakes between 1975 and 2008, a number that rose to
40 per year in the period between 2009 and 2013 (Koontz
2013).
A similar pattern was observed in another state without
a history of earthquakes: Ohio. Between January 2011 and
February 2012, more than 100 seismic events with magnitude
between 0.4 and 3.9 were recorded in the Youngstown area, a
region with no known history of earthquakes. According to a
report by geologist Won-Young Kim, of Columbia University,
the probable explanation for the seismic events was the disposal
of wastewater into injection wells along a fault line underlying
the area (Kim 2013).
As of late 2014, the U.S. Geological Survey was still unwill-
ing to express a deﬁnite determination between the injection
of wastewater from fracking operations into wells and seismic
events. Their position at the time was that, based on evidence
that had been obtained thus far, further research was needed
about this relationship (Induced Earthquakes 2014; see also
Ellsworth 2013)
As of 2014, the potential hazards posed by injection well
disposal of fracking wastewater appear to be increasingly
signiﬁcant. At the annual meeting of the Seismological Society
of America, a number of papers were presented that suggested
that seismic events associated with deep well disposal were
more common, more severe, and more difﬁcult to predict than
researchers had previously thought. Some evidence was also
presented suggesting that the range of such seismic events from
injection wells can be considerably greater than previously
listed (Kiger 2014a; Wastewater Disposal May Trigger
Quakes at a Greater Distance than Previously Thought 2014;
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
99

for a good general discussion of this issue, see Connelly, Barer,
and Skorobogatov 2014; Man-Made Earthquakes Update
2014).
The debate over fracking wastewater disposal and seismic
events is likely to continue, but at least some governmental
agencies have decided to act on the information that is cur-
rently available. For example, the state of Colorado decided in
June 2014 to issue a temporary ban on the disposal of fracking
wastewater at one well near which a number of seismic events
had been recorded (COGCC Halts Activity at Injection Well
2014; a summary on restrictions on the use of injection wells
for the disposal of fracking wastewater as of mid-2014 can be
found at Rushton and Castaneda 2014).
Aesthetic and Related Disturbances
Another large category of objections to fracking operations can
be classiﬁed as nuisance complaints. Legally, the term nuisance
refers to any action that is harmful or annoying to an individual
person or discrete group of individuals (a private nuisance) or to
a larger community of individuals (a public nuisance) (Nuisance
2014). Consider some of the actions that are commonly associ-
ated with a fracking operation at an oil or gas ﬁeld. In many
cases, roads may have to be built to the fracking site. Land
may have to be cleared and private property may have to be
condemned by the state or county to gain rights of drilling
and access to land. In these processes, aesthetically appealing
areas on which people built homes for their solitude, views,
access to nature, or other purposes may be destroyed.
Trafﬁc in a region where fracking is occurring may also
increase signiﬁcantly. Truck trafﬁc may increase in order to
bring in the equipment and material used in fracking and to
remove the wastewater produced by the operation. This truck
trafﬁc may necessitate expensive repairs of city and county
roads, an expense that must usually be paid by residents, not
the fracking company. These harms to the land may cause
100
Fracking

property values to decrease and can increase the difﬁculties in
obtaining normal homeowners insurance and reasonable mort-
gage rates. The presence of fracking operations may also have
an effect on the economy of a region, such as discouraging the
creation of new businesses, driving away customers for existing
businesses, reduce the appeal of recreational opportunities, and
result in deferred maintenance of existing structures in the
region. (Some of the best descriptions of nuisance complaints
because of fracking can be found on the websites of local groups
that have been organized to oppose such operations in their
neighborhoods. See, for example, DeBerry 2013; Gleeson
2011; Woodrum 2014; Woods 2014.)
Laws and Regulations
Many of the most important federal laws were passed to protect
human health and the natural environment from pollution
almost a half century ago. These legacy laws included the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1970, Clean Air Act of
1970, Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, Clean
Water Act of 1972, Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, Federal
Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, and Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of
1980. All of these acts have been updated and amended a num-
ber of times since their original adoption (Environmental Law
2014). None of these laws mentions potential health or envi-
ronmental risks associated with fracking or related oil and gas
operations. That omission is easy to understand, since fracking
did not become a signiﬁcant industrial activity until after the
turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
In fact, the EPA on at least one occasion speciﬁcally
explained, when confronted with the issue, that fracking was
generally regarded as a safe operation that used chemicals that
posed no threat to human health or to the natural environment.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
101

When
asked
by
the
Legal
Environmental
Assistance
Foundation (LEAF) to take action on the regulation of fracking
operations at an Alabama oil site in 1995, EPA administrator
Carol Browner wrote to the organization that “EPA does
not regulate—and does not believe it is legally required to regu-
late—the hydraulic fracturing of methane gas production
wells. . . . There is no evidence that the hydraulic fracturing at
issue has resulted in any contamination or endangerment of
underground sources of drinking water.” (See the original
letter at http://energyindepth.org/docs/pdf/Browner-Letter-Full
-Response.pdf. Accessed on July 3, 2014.)
In fact, the exchange between LEAF and EPA instigated a
landmark legal case about the regulation of fracking when the
former organization appealed Browner’s decision to the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit. That court ruled,
in fact, that EPA was not only authorized to regulate fracking,
but in fact was required to do so (Legal Environmental
Assistance
Foundation,
Inc.,
Petitioner,
vs.
United
States
Environmental Protection Agency, Respondent 1997). The court’s
ruling represented something of a Pyrrhic victory for LEAF
since the rules established by the Alabama State Oil and Gas
Board for fracturing were eventually approved by the EPA even
though LEAF felt that they fell far short of providing the pro-
tection needed for fracking operations.
Not much changed with regard to laws and regulation of
fracking for almost a decade, to a considerable extent because
of a comprehensive study by the EPA that found that fracking
posed no harm to water quality. In a summary of that report,
the EPA stated that
EPA found no conﬁrmed cases that are linked to fractur-
ing ﬂuid injection into CBM [coal-bed methane] wells
or subsequent underground movement of fracturing ﬂu-
ids. Further, although thousands of CBM wells are frac-
tured annually, EPA did not ﬁnd conﬁrmed evidence
that drinking water wells have been contaminated
102
Fracking

by hydraulic fracturing ﬂuid injection into CBM wells.
(Evaluation of Impacts to Underground Sources of
Drinking Water 2004)
The EPA further concluded that, as a result of its study,
“additional or further study is not warranted at this time.”
The methodology and conclusions of the EPA study were
questioned both at the time the study was completed and the
years since. One EPA researcher, Weston Wilson, for example,
wrote at the time that
EPA’s conclusions are unsupportable. EPA has conducted
limited research reaching the unsupported conclusion that
this industry practice needs no further study at this time.
EPA decisions were supported by a Peer Review Panel;
however ﬁve of the seven members of this panel appear
to have conﬂicts-of-interest and may beneﬁt from EPA’s
decision not to conduct further investigation or impose
regulatory conditions. (See Wilson’s original letter at
http://media.trb.com/media/acrobat/2004-10/14647025.
pdf. Accessed on July 3, 2014.)
The ﬁrst opportunity the U.S. Congress had to enact legisla-
tion dealing with fracking operations following the EPA report
came a year later when it considered legislation that was to
become the Energy Policy Act of 2005, a wide-ranging act that,
as the title suggests, dealt with a diverse number of issues
related to the production and consumption of energy in the
United States. One of the 1840 sections of the act dealt
with hydraulic fracturing, a section that essentially excluded
hydraulic fracturing operations from the provisions of the Safe
Drinking Water Act of 1974. The section later became popu-
larly known as the Halliburton loophole because it apparently
gave free-rein to the Halliburton company, one of the largest
providers of fracking operations in the world. At the time, the
nation’s vice president was Richard Cheney, who had spent
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
103

most of his professional life as a high-ranking employee of the
Halliburton corporation. Some critics suggested that Cheney
may have worked to include Section 322 of the Energy Policy
Act to protect an important activity of his former company.
The so-called loophole remains in effect as of late 2014
(Counts 2013; The Halliburton Loophole 2014).
In 2009, U.S. Senator Bob Casey (D-PA), and U.S.
Representatives Diana DeGette (D-CO), Maurice Hinchey
(D-NY), and Jared Polis (D-CO) jointly introduced legislation
in the United States to remove the Halliburton loophole from
the Energy Policy Act of 2005. Their bill, ofﬁcially called the
Fracturing Responsibility and Awareness of Chemicals Act,
became popularly known as the FRAC Act of 2009. The bill
failed to receive consideration in the 111th Congress, but was
reintroduced in the 112th and 113th sessions of the Congress,
where it also died without being considered. Thus, as of late
2014, no federal directive exists for the regulation of fracking
in the United States at the federal level. In fact, the practice is
speciﬁcally excluded from regulation not only in the Energy
Policy Act of 2005, but also in amendments to a variety of
other environmental legislation, including the Safe Drinking
Water Act; the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; the
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act;
the Clean Water Act; the Clean Air Act; the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act;
and the National Environmental Policy Act (Brady and
Crannell 2012, 43–52).
The absence of federal laws and regulation does not mean
that hydraulic fracturing operations are not subject to such
monitoring by other governmental levels. Indeed, a number of
states and local municipalities have now adopted a variety of
laws and regulations relevant to fracking operations. Tracking
these laws and regulations is a challenge because attitudes are
changing so rapidly that the list of states and communities with
hydraulic fracturing laws and regulations changes almost
monthly. The following review is, therefore, at least partially
104
Fracking

obsolete even before it appears in print. The interested reader
should consult a search engine for the most recent list and
description of such legislation.
State and local laws and regulations generally refer to one of
four major steps in the oil and gas extraction process: predril-
ling, groundwater and surface water impact, liquid wastes and
ﬂuids, and solid wastes (Fracking Regulations by State 2014).
For example, the state of Colorado requires that companies test
for and report on a number of site characteristics before drill-
ing, such as pH and alkalinity and the concentration (if any)
of chemicals such as chloride, ﬂuoride, sulfate, and heavy met-
als (such as arsenic, cadmium, and iron). This information pro-
vides a baseline against which later measurements can be
compared to see what changes, if any, fracking has made in
those site characteristics.
Probably the greatest current concern expressed in state laws
is the character of wastewater and the methods by which it is
disposed. Companies may be required to report to state regula-
tory agencies on the presence of potentially hazardous chemi-
cals such as benzene, toluene, xylene, ethylene glycol, phenols,
a great variety of metals, certain anions (such as chloride and
sulfate), and radioactive isotopes such as radium-226 and
radium-228. Some of the chemicals for which acceptable
limits are listed by the state of Colorado, as an example, are
benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes, acenaphthene, anthra-
cene, benzo(A)anthracene, benzo(B)ﬂuoranthene, benzo(K)ﬂuo-
ranthene, benzo(A)pyrene, chrysene, dibenzo(A,H)anthracene,
ﬂuoranthene, ﬂuorene, indeno(1,2,3,C,D)pyrene, napthalene,
pyrene, chlorides, sulfates, arsenic, barium, boron, cadmium,
chromium(III), chromium(VI), copper, lead, mercury, nickel,
selenium, silver, and zinc. (E&P Waste Management 2014;
A complete interactive list of state regulations is available
at FracFocus, http://fracfocus.org/regulations-state. Accessed on
July 3, 2014.)
One trend that seems to be occurring in the adoption of state
fracking laws is a more rigorous stance on the types of testing
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
105

and monitoring that must be done to gain a permit to use
hydraulic fracturing. In contrast to the somewhat more laissez-
faire attitude of the federal government, states appear to have
adopted the position that oil and gas companies should be
much more responsible for the health and environmental con-
sequences of their operations than may have been true in the
past. For example, when the state of Illinois adopted new frack-
ing legislation in 2013, some observers called it the “toughest
fracking law in the nation” because of its requirements that
companies provide a complete description of all chemicals used
in the fracking process and submit detailed before-and-after
reports of environmental conditions around the well (Babwin
2013). All of which was not to say that stakeholders were uni-
versally delighted with the bill. As a member of the group
Southern Illinoisans Against Fracturing Our Environment said
after the bill passed, “[t]his bill was written by industry and par-
ties that have a vested interest. . . . We have no say in our own
water. . . . We are totally helpless” (Lester 2013).
A number of local communities in the United States have
also taken action with regard to fracking operations. These
actions range from the enactment of outright bans on hydraulic
fracturing within the boundaries of the governmental unit to
certain types of regulations and restrictions on fracking to
expressions of support for bans, moratoria, or regulations on
the practice. As of late 2014, the number of governmental enti-
ties in the United States that have taken such actions number
418, according to the Keep Tap Water Safe website. (This
number obviously changes over time. The state with by far
the largest number of governmental entities having adopted
some form of regulation is New York, where more than 200
towns, villages, cities, counties, and other jurisdictions have
enacted some form of action on fracking operations (Keep
Tap Water Safe 2014).
Some examples of the actions taken by local communities
include the following:
106
Fracking

• The city council of Canandaigua, New York, voted in
June 2014 to permanently ban the exploration or drilling
for or transfer, storage, treatment, or disposal of natural gas
within the city boundaries (Ordinance #2014-006 2014).
• In May 2014, Santa Cruz County became the ﬁrst county in
California to ban all exploration for and extraction of oil and
gas within the county (Board of Supervisors Resolution
Amending the Santa Cruz County General Plan Regarding
Prohibition on Oil and Gas Exploration and Development
2014).
• Mora County, New Mexico, one of the smallest (5,000
inhabitants) and poorest counties in the state, became the
ﬁrst county in the United States in April 2013 to ban all
exploration for and extraction of oil and gas in the county
(Ordinance 2013-01 2013).
• The town of Penn Yan, New York, adopted a restricted
action against fracking, declaring that it would not accept
fracking wastes at its local wastewater treatment plant
(Untitled document [Penn Yan, New York] 2014).
• The borough council of West Homestead, Pennsylvania,
approached the fracking question in a somewhat different
way than an outright ban or moratorium, a method used by
a number of other municipalities in the United States.
It adopted a bill of rights for residents of the area that includes
a Right to Water, Rights of Natural Communities, Right to a
Sustainable Energy Future, Right to Self-Government, Rights
as Self-Executing, and a statement of People as Sovereign.
The council then noted that these rights de facto prohibited
the practice of exploration for or extraction of oil and gas
within borough boundaries (Ordinance #659 2011).
• A number of municipalities have taken what is probably the
least aggressive approach to dealing with hydraulic fracturing
issues, namely requesting that their representative or senator
to the U.S. Congress or some other federal body consider or
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
107

take action to prevent fracking operations or deep well injec-
tion disposal from occurring within their governmental
boundaries. See for example the resolution adopted by the
council of Meyers Lake Village, Ohio, requesting the U.S.
Department of Labor to take such actions and the letter
from the Anna (Illinois) city council asking the speaker of
the Illinois House of Representatives to aid in the advance-
ment of an anti-fracking bill in the state senate. (Village
Council Resolution No. 2012-614 2012; High-Volume
Horizontal Hydraulic Fracturing 2012)
The legal maneuvering over hydraulic fracturing has raised a
fundamental question for legislatures and the courts: Who gets
to decide the conditions under which fracking should be
allowed to take place in an oil or gas ﬁeld and who gets to
decide whether or not hydraulic fracturing and deep well injec-
tion disposal should even be permitted? The complex issues
surrounding these questions are just barely getting resolved in
2014 since fracking itself is still in its earliest stages and the
federal government, states governments, tribal councils, and
local municipalities have yet to decide who has the authority
to regulate each aspect of oil and gas exploration, drilling, trans-
portation, waste disposal, and other activities related to the
industry.
Perhaps the earliest legal debate over the right of the state or
local government to regulate oil and gas drilling came in the
early 1990s in the case of La Plata County vs. Bowen/Edwards,
Associates, Inc. The case arose when the board of county com-
missioners for La Plata County passed an ordinance requiring
oil and gas companies to get a special land use permit to con-
duct drilling operations in the county. The Bowen/Edwards
drilling company sued to have that requirement overturned,
arguing
that
the
Colorado
Oil
and
Gas
Conservation
Commission had sole authority to require drilling permits in
the state. After a series of decisions for and against the Bowen/
Edwards position, the Colorado Supreme Court eventually
108
Fracking

ruled in favor of the La Plata County position, stating that
there was no justiﬁcation for the state to interfere in what was
essentially a local question about land use in the county.
The Colorado case set a precedent for similar cases that were
to arise in other states over the next decade or more. One of the
most important of those cases arose in the state of Pennsylvania,
where hydraulic fracturing had become a widespread practice.
Fracking operations had become popular and well received in
a number of communities that saw the potential economic ben-
eﬁts offered by the practice, in spite of any health and environ-
mental concerns that might be associated with the process. But
they had become anathema among a number of cities, towns,
counties, and other municipalities whose judgment was that
those same health and environmental issues were more signiﬁ-
cant than any possible economic gains. By 2013, a number of
municipalities in the latter category had adopted ordinances or
regulations that placed a moratorium on fracking, instituted
speciﬁc regulations about the practice, or simply banned frack-
ing from the city, town, or county.
As in most other states, the legal question arose as to whether
the state as a whole or individual communities had the ultimate
authority to ban fracking or not. The conﬂict was made even
more clear in Pennsylvania in 2012 when the state legislature
passed Act 13, a bill designed to set out state policy on the
use of fracking operations by the oil and gas industry. A major
provision of the act was that local communities were prohibited
from passing bans or other restrictions on fracking operations;
they were, in effect, proscribed from enforcing local zoning laws
that might be used to interfere with fracking operations on
lands within their jurisdiction.
Environmentalists and a number of other interested groups
were outraged at this action, arguing that Act 13 prevented
the citizens of Pennsylvania from “making critical decisions
for themselves . . . from protecting the health, safety, and wel-
fare of their residents in the face of unrelenting corporate
assaults” (PA Legislature Pre-empts Communities on Fracking
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
109

2012). Seven Pennsylvania communities felt so strongly about
the matter that they brought suit against the state in a case
that was to become known as Robinson Township, et al. vs.
Commonwealth of Massachusetts (J-127A-D-2012 2013). In
December 2013, the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania decided
that portions of Act 13 were unconstitutional because they vio-
lated the Environmental Rights Amendment of the state
constitution. The sections that the court invalidated included
restrictions such as:
• The department shall waive the distance restrictions [as to
the safe and appropriate siting of a well for the protection
of the environment] upon submission of a plan identifying
additional measures, facilities or practices to be employed
during well site construction, drilling and operations neces-
sary to protect the waters of this Commonwealth. §3215
(b) (4)
• Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, environ-
mental acts are of Statewide concern and, to the extent that
they regulate oil and gas operations, occupy the entire ﬁeld
of regulation, to the exclusion of all local ordinances. The
Commonwealth by this section, preempts and supersedes
the local regulation of oil and gas operations regulated by
the environmental acts, as provided in this chapter. §3303
• In addition to the restrictions contained in sections 3302
(relating to oil and gas operations regulated pursuant to
Chapter 32) and 3303 (relating to oil and gas operations
regulated by environmental acts), all local ordinances regu-
lating oil and gas operations shall allow for the reasonable
development of oil and gas resources. §3304 (J-127A-D-
2012 2013, 161; for reactions to the court’s decision on this
matter, see Raichel 2013 and related blogs.)
A second important court decision was rendered in
June 2014 by New York state’s highest court, the Court of
110
Fracking

Appeals. The decision involved two appeals in cases that had
been working their way up through the New York court sys-
tems since 2011. In one case, the Norse Energy company had
been acquiring land in the town of Dryden since 2006 with
the intent of eventually drilling for oil and gas and, presumably,
using fracking operations in the process. In the second case, the
Cooperstown Holstein Corporation (CHC) had signed two
leases with landowners for a similar purpose of exploring for
oil and gas on property owned by those landowners. When
both the town of Dryden and the town of Middleﬁeld, where
those leases had been executed, decided in 2011 to pass ordi-
nances banning hydraulic fracturing, Norse and CHC both
ﬁled suit against the respective towns in which their leases were
located.
These cases differed somewhat from the Pennsylvania case
cited earlier because the state of New York had not yet made a
ﬁnal policy decision about fracking. A moratorium had been
in place since 2008 while the state Department of Health con-
ducted a review of possible health effects of fracking. Before
that review could be completed, the Court of Appeals ruled in
favor of the defendants in both cases decided in June 2014.
The court said that local communities had the right to use zon-
ing laws to ban exploration for and/or extraction of oil and
natural gas on lands within their boundaries (Taylor and
Kaplan 2014; for the court’s ruling, see http://www.nycourts.
gov/ctapps/Decisions/2014/Jun14/130-131opn14-Decision.pdf
2013).
The New York ruling is also expected to have more wide-
reaching effects than will the Pennsylvania ruling. In the later
case, hydraulic fracturing had (and has) been widely used
throughout the state where it has provided one of the most
extensive accesses to the rich Marcellus Play. In New York
state, by contrast, little exploration or extraction had yet
occurred because the state itself had not made any decision
about its position on fracking, and more than 200 hundred
towns, villages, cities, and other jurisdictions had already
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
111

decided to ban the practice or, at the very least, to hold off on
giving its approval. As a result, some observers expressed the
view that the June 2014 court decision would essentially
exclude oil and gas activities from the state of New York for
the foreseeable future (Dawson 2014). At least some energy
vowed to ﬁght back in the state legislature against the court rul-
ing, however. Norse Energy’s attorney in the case, for example,
warned that the court’s decision would have a “very chilling
effect” on research and that it would be “very hard for operators
to justify spending hundreds of millions of dollars to come in
and not have regulatory certainty.” An attorney for CHC went
on to ask “We are going to let 932 towns decide the energy pol-
icy of New York state” (Mufson 2014).
Conclusion
The oil and gas process known as hydraulic fracturing has been
known for more than a century. But its widespread use in the
industry is no more than about a decade old. During that time,
fracturing has been responsible for the explosive growth in oil
and gas production from shale and other rock formations,
bringing enormous proﬁts to the industry, a dramatic increase
in jobs in the United States, and the potential for energy
independence for this country. But the process is also respon-
sible for a number of potentially harmful effects on human
health and the natural environment. Concerns about these
effects are serious enough that a number of states, cities, and
other governmental bodies have banned the use of fracking
within their territories or, at the least, imposed signiﬁcant
restrictions on the conditions under which fracking can be
used. But it is still early days for fracking in the oil and gas
industry, and no one can yet say with any certainty how this
technologically important process will contribute to the future
energy equation of the United States, other nations, and,
indeed, the world. Nor is it yet possible to predict the ways in
112
Fracking

which the troubling aspects of hydraulic fracturing will be
handled by American society or by other countries of the world.
References
Anderson, Richard. “How American Energy Independence
Could Change the World,” BBC News Business, http://
www.bbc.com/news/business-23151813. Accessed on
June 24, 2014.
“As Gas Prices Pinch, Support for Oil and Gas Production
Grows.” 2012. Pew Research Center for the People & the
Press, March 19. http://www.people-press.org/2012/03/19/
as-gas-prices-pinch-support-for-oil-and-gas-production
-grows/. Accessed on June 26, 2014.
“Australia’s Victoria State Bans Coal Seam Gas ‘Fracking’.”
Reuters, http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/08/24/us-
australia-csg-victoria-idUSBRE87N06D20120824.
Accessed on June 24, 2014.
Babwin, Don. 2013. “Illinois Gas Drilling Rules: Governor Pat
Quinn Signs New Fracking Regulations into Law,”
Hufﬁngton Post Green, June 17. http://www.hufﬁngton
post.com/2013/06/17/illinois-gas-drilling-rules-fracking
_n_3455668.html. Accessed on July 3, 2014.
Bailey, David. “In North Dakota, Hard to Tell an Oil
Millionaire from Regular Joe,” Reuters, http://www.reuters
.com/article/2012/10/03/us-usa-northdakota-millionaires
-idUSBRE8921AF20121003. Accessed on June 25, 2014.
Begos, Kevin. 2014. “4 States Conﬁrm Water Pollution from
Drilling.” USA Today, January 5, http://www.usatoday
.com/story/money/business/2014/01/05/some-states
-conﬁrm-water-pollution-from-drilling/4328859/. Accessed
on June 28, 2014.
“Beneﬁtting from Unconventional Oil.” 2012. Bill Lane
Center for the American West, Stanford University, April.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
113

http://web.stanford.edu/group/ruralwest/cgi-bin/projects/
headwaters/Bakken-Energy-Report-Headwaters-BLC-120424
.pdf. Accessed on June 25, 2014.
“Board of County Commissioners.” 1992. La Plata County,
Colorado, Petitioner, vs. Bowen/Edwards Associates, Inc.,
Respondent, No. 90sc516. Supreme Court of Colorado,
June , 1992. LexisNexis, http://legisource.net/wp-content/
uploads/2012/09/830_P_2d_1045__1055__Colo__1.pdf.
Accessed on July 4, 2014.
“Board of Supervisors Resolution Amending the Santa Cruz
County General Plan Regarding Prohibition on Oil and Gas
Exploration and Development.” April 30, 2014. http://
documents.foodandwaterwatch.org/doc/Frack_Actions
_SantaCruzCountyCA.pdf#_ga=1.41040033.229352
318.1403631732. Accessed on July 4, 2014.
“BP Energy Outlook 2030.” January 2013. http://www.bp
.com/content/dam/bp/pdf/statistical-review/EnergyOutlook
2030/BP_Energy_Outlook_2030_Booklet_2013.pdf.
Accessed on June 24, 2014.
Brady, William J., and James P. Crannell. 2012. “Hydraulic
Fracturing Regulation in the United States: The Laissez-
Faire Approach of the Federal Government and Varying
State Regulations,” Vermont Journal of Environmental Law
14 (1): 39–70.
Brandt, A. R., et al. 2014. “Methane Leaks from North
American Natural Gas Systems,” Science, 343 (6172):
733–735.
Brown, Erica, et al. 2013. “Public Opinion on Fracking:
Perspectives from Michigan and Pennsylvania,” The Center
for Local, State, and Urban Policy, University of Michigan,
May. http://closup.umich.edu/ﬁles/nsee-fracking-fall-2012
.pdf. Accessed on June 26, 2014.
Brown, Travis H. 2014. “Fracking Fuels and Economic Boom
in North Dakota,” Forbes, January 29. http://www.forbes.com/
114
Fracking

sites/travisbrown/2014/01/29/fracking-fuels-an-economic
-boom-in-north-dakota/. Accessed on June 25, 2014.
Bryce, Robert. 2008. Gusher of Lies: The Dangerous Delusions of
“Energy Independence.” New York: Public Affairs.
Burnett, H. Sterling. “How Fracking Helps Meet America’s
Energy Needs,” National Center for Policy Analysis, http://
www.ncpa.org/pub/ib132. Accessed on June 22, 2014.
Carlyle, Ryan. “How Big Are the Currently Known Oil
Reserves and What Are the Chances of Finding New Ones?”
Forbes, http://www.forbes.com/sites/quora/2013/03/27/how
-big-are-the-currently-known-oil-reserves-and-what-are-the
-chances-of-ﬁnding-new-ones/. Accessed on June 23, 2014.
“Chemicals Used in Hydraulic Fracturing.” 2011. United
States House of Representatives Committee on Energy and
Commerce, April.http://democrats.energycommerce.house
.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/documents/Hydraulic-Fracturing
-Chemicals-2011-4-18.pdf. Accessed on June 28, 2014.
“COGCC Halts Activity at Injection Well: Seeks Additional
Review.” 2014. Oil and Gas Conservation Commission,
June 24. http://dnr.state.co.us/newsapp/press.asp?
pressid=9008. Accessed on July 2, 2014.
Colborn, Theo, et al. 2012. “An Exploratory Study of Air
Quality near Natural Gas Operations.” Human and
Ecological Risk Assessment 20 (1): 86–105.
“A Commitment to Air Quality in the Barnett Shale.” 2010.
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Fall. http://
www.tceq.texas.gov/publications/pd/020/10-04/a-
commitment-to-air-quality-in-the-barnett-shale. Accessed
on June 30, 2014.
Connelly, Kelly, David Barer, and Yana Skorobogatov. 2014.
“How Oil and Gas Disposal Wells Can Cause Earthquakes.”
StateImpact, June 19. http://stateimpact.npr.org/texas/tag/
earthquake/. Accessed on July 2, 2014.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
115

Considine, Timothy J., Robert W. Watson, and Nicholas B.
Considine. 2011. “The Economic Opportunities of Shale
Energy Development,” Manhattan Institute for Policy
Research, http://www.manhattan-institute.org/html/eper
_09.htm. Accessed on June 25, 2014.
Counts, Nicole. 2013. “Should the ‘Halliburton Loophole’ Be
Revoked from the Energy Policy Act of 2005?” Law Street.
October 5. http://lawstreetmedia.com/issues/energy
-and-environment/should-the-halliburton-loophole-be-
revoked-from-the-energy-policy-act-of-2005/. Accessed on
July 3, 2014.
Dawson, Evan. 2014. “Connections: The Future of Fracking in
New York.” WXXI News, July 3. http://wxxinews.org/post/
connections-future-fracking-new-york. Accessed on July 5, 2014.
DeBerry, Candy. 2013. “Drilling, Fracking Not Safe.”
Observer-Reporter.com, January 31. http://www.observer-
reporter.com/article/20130131/OPINION02/1301
39889#.U7RAwﬂdV8E. Accessed on July 2, 2014.
“Does Fracking Cause Earthquakes?” Energy Answered, http://
energyanswered.org/questions/does-fracking-cause
-earthquakes. Accessed on July 1, 2014.
Dunning, Brian. 2011. “All about Fracking.” Skeptoid,
September 13. http://skeptoid.com/episodes/4275. Accessed
on June 27, 2014.
“E&P Waste Management.” State of Colorado, http://cogcc
.state.co.us/RR_Docs_new/rules/900Series.pdf. Accessed
on July 3, 2014.
Easton, Jeff. “Fracking Wastewater Management.”
WaterWorld, http://www.waterworld.com/articles/wwi/print/
volume-28/issue-5/regional-spotlight-us-caribbean/fracking
-wastewater-management.html. Accessed on June 27, 2014.
Ellsworth, William L. 2013. “Injection-Induced Earthquakes,”
Science 341 (6142): 142.
116
Fracking

“Energy Dept. Welcomes Fracking Chemical Disclosure.”
2014. Fuel Fix, April 25. http://fuelﬁx.com/blog/2014/04/
25/energy-dept-welcomes-fracking-chemical-disclosure/.
Accessed on June 28, 2014.
“Environmental Law.” Legal Information Institute, http://
www.law.cornell.edu/wex/environmental_law. Accessed on
July 3, 2014.
“Evaluation of Impacts to Underground Sources of Drinking
Water by Hydraulic Fracturing of Coalbed Methane
Reservoirs; National Study Final Report.” 2004. United
States Environmental Protection Agency, June. http://www
.epa.gov/ogwdw/uic/pdfs/cbmstudy_attach_uic_ﬁnal_fact
_sheet.pdf. Accessed on July 3, 2014.
Evans, David M. 1966. “The Denver Area Earthquakes and the
Rocky Mountain Arsenal Disposal Well,” The Mountain
Geologist 3 (1): 23–36.
Everley, Steve. 2013a. “Bombshell Study Conﬁrms Low
Methane Leakage from Shale Gas.” Energy in Depth,
September 16. http://energyindepth.org/national/bomb
shell-study-conﬁrm-slow-methane-leakage-from-shale-gas/.
Accessed on June 29, 2014.
Everley, Steve. 2013b. “How Anti-Fracking Activities Deny
Science: Air Emissions.” Energy in Depth, August 12.
http://energyindepth.org/national/how-anti-fracking
-activists-deny-science-air-emissions/. Accessed on June 26,
2014.
Everley, Steve. 2013c. “How Anti-Fracking Activities Deny
Science: Water Contamination.” The Energy Collective,
August 17.http://theenergycollective.com/saeverley/
260556/how-anti-fracking-activists-deny-science-water
-contamination. Accessed on June 28, 2014.
“Explore Shale.” 2011. Penn State Public Broadcasting, http://
exploreshale.org/. Accessed on June 27, 2014.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
117

“Fact Sheet: Economic Impacts of High-Volume Hydraulic
Fracturing in New York State.” New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation, http://www.dec.ny.gov/
docs/materials_minerals_pdf/econimpact092011.pdf.
Accessed on June 26, 2014.
“Find a Well.” FracFocus, http://www.fracfocusdata.org/
DisclosureSearch/. Accessed on June 28, 2014.
“Frac Attack: Risks, Hype, and Financial Reality of Hydraulic
Fracturing in the Shale Plays.” 2010. Reservoir Research
Partners and Tudor Pickering Holt and Company, July 8.
http://www.oilandgasbmps.org/docs/GEN231-Frac-Attack
.pdf. Accessed on June 27, 2014.
“Fracking Caused Hundreds of Complaints about
Contaminated Water in 4 States.” 2014. RT, January 6.
http://rt.com/usa/fracking-chemicals-found-well-water-
243/. Accessed on June 28, 2014.
“Fracking Regulations by State.” ALS, http://www.alsglobal.
com/en/Our-Services/Life-Sciences/Environmental/
Capabilities/North-America-Capabilities/USA/Oil-and
-Gasoline-Testing/Oil-and-Gas-Production-and-Midstream
-Support/Fracking-Regulations-by-State. Accessed on July 3,
2014.
“Fueling the Future with Natural Gas: Bringing It Home.”
American Gas Association, http://www.aga.org/our-issues/
playbook/Documents/2014AGA_Playbook_FINAL.pdf.
Accessed on June 25, 2014.
“Gas Goes Boom.” 2012. The Economist, http://www
.economist.com/node/21556291. Accessed on June 24,
2014.
Gleeson, John. 2011. “Fracking Grievances Aired at Eagle
Hill.” Mountain View Gazette, September 13. http://www
.mountainviewgazette.ca/article/20110913/MVG0801/
309139989/0/mvg. Accessed on July 2, 2014.
118
Fracking

Golden, Mark. “America’s Natural Gas System Is Leaky and in
Need of a Fix, New Study Finds.” Stanford News, http://
news.stanford.edu/news/2014/february/methane-leaky
-gas-021314.html. Accessed on June 26, 2014.
Gottesdiener, Ben. “Attempts at Independence.” Washington
University Political Review, http://www.wupr.org/2014/03/
15/attempts-at-independence-2/. Accessed on June 24, 2014.
Green, Mark. “About Monterey Shale . . . Don’t Bet Against
Innovation.” Energy Tomorrow, http://www.energy
tomorrow.org/blog/2014/may/about-monterey-shale-don’t
-bet-against-innovation. Accessed on June 23, 2014.
“The Halliburton Loophole.” Earthworks, http://www.earth
worksaction.org/issues/detail/inadequate_regulation_of_hydraulic
_fracturing#.U7XA-vldV8E. Accessed on July 3, 2014.
Hansen, Evan, Dustin Mulvaney, and Meghan Betcher. 2013.
“Water Resource Reporting and Water Footprint from
Marcellus Shale Development in West Virginia and
Pennsylvania.” Downstream Strategies, October 30. http://
www.downstreamstrategies.com/documents/reports
_publication/marcellus_wv_pa.pdf. Accessed on June 27, 2014.
Hansen, Lee R. “Transport, Storage, and Disposal of Fracking
Waste.” OLR Research Report, http://www.cga.ct.gov/
2014/rpt/2014-R-0016.htm. Accessed on June 27, 2014.
Hassett, Kevin A. 2013. “Beneﬁts of Hydraulic Fracturing.”
American Enterprise Institute, April 4. http://www.aei.org/
article/economics/beneﬁts-of-hydraulic-fracking/. Accessed
on June 26, 2014.
Heinberg, Richard. “Snake Oil: Chapter 5—The Economics of
Fracking. Who Beneﬁts?” Resilience, Accessed on June 25, 2014.
“High-Volume Horizontal Hydraulic Fracturing.” 2012. City
of Anna, October 3. http://documents.foodandwaterwatch
.org/doc/Frack_Actions_AnnaIL.pdf#_ga=1.17517754
.229352318.1403631732. Accessed on July 4, 2014.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
119

Holland, Austin. 2011. “Examination of Possibly Induced
Seismicity from Hydraulic Fracturing in the Eola Field,
Garvin County, Oklahoma.” Oklahoma Geological Survey,
August. http://www.ogs.ou.edu/pubsscanned/openﬁle/
OF1_2011.pdf. Accessed on July 1, 2014.
“How Much Water Does It Take to Frack a Well?” 2013.
Pennsylvania: Energy. Environment. Economy, March 12.
http://stateimpact.npr.org/pennsylvania/2013/03/12/how
-much-water-it-takes-to-frack-a-well/. Accessed on June 27, 2014.
Howarth, Robert W., Renee Santoro, and Anthony Ingraffea.
2011. “Methane and the Greenhouse-Gas Footprint of
Natural Gas from Shale Formations. A Letter.” Climatic
Change 106 (4): 679690.
Hughes, J. David. 2013. “Drilling California: A Reality Check
on the Monterey Shale.” Santa Rosa, CA: Post Carbon
Institute. Available online at http://www.postcarbon.org/
reports/Drilling-California_FINAL.pdf. Accessed on
June 23, 2014.
Hunt, Spencer. 2012. “Is There Enough Water for ‘Fracking’
Boom?” The Columbus Dispatch, November 27. http://
www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2012/11/27/is-
there-enough-water-for-fracking-boom.html. Accessed on
June 27, 2014.
“Hydraulic Fracturing Chemical Disclosure Policy.” Baker
Hughes, http://public.bakerhughes.com/shalegas/disclosure
.html. Accessed on June 28, 2014.
“Hydraulic Fracturing 101.” Earthworks, http://www.earth
worksaction.org/issues/detail/hydraulic_fracturing_101#
.U67z-ﬂdV8E. Accessed on June 28, 2014.
“Induced Earthquakes.” 2014. U.S. Geological Survey,
January 16. http://earthquake.usgs.gov/research/induced/.
Accessed on July 1, 2014.
J-127A-D-2012. [Robinson Township, et al. vs. Common-
wealth of Pennsylvania] December 19, 2013. http://www
120
Fracking

.pacourts.us/assets/opinions/Supreme/out/J-127-AD-2012
oajc.pdf?cb=1. Accessed on July 5, 2014.
“Keep Tap Water Safe.” http://keeptapwatersafe.org/global
-ban-son-fracking/. Accessed on July 4, 2014.
Kelly, Sharon. “Shale Rush Hits Argentina as Oil Majors Spend
Billions on Fracking in Andes Region.” Desmogblog.com,
http://www.desmogblog.com/2014/05/29/shale-drilling
-rush-hits-argentina-oil-majors-spend-billions-fracking
-andes. Accessed on June 24, 2014.
Kiger, Paul J. 2014a. 2014. “Scientists Warn of Quake Risk
from Fracking Operations.” National Geographic Daily
News, May 2. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/
energy/2014/05/140502-scientists-warn-of-quake-risk-from
-fracking-operations/. Accessed on July 2, 2014.
Kiger, Paul J. 2014b. 2014. “Simple Fixes Could Plug Methane
Leaks from Energy Industry, Study Finds.” National
Geographic, March 19. http://energyblog.national
geographic.com/2014/03/19/simple-ﬁxes-could-plug-methane
-leaks-from-energy-industry-study-ﬁnds/. Accessed on
June 29, 2014.
Kim, Won-Young. 2013. “Induced Seismicity Associated with
Fluid Injection into a Deep Well in Youngstown, Ohio,”
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 118 (7):
3506–3518.
Klare, Michael. 2012. “U.S. Energy Independence Is a Pipe
Dream.” Salon, October 4. http://www.salon.com/2012/10/
04/u_s_energy_independence_is_a_pipe_dream/. Accessed
on June 25, 2014.
Koontz, Heidi. 2013. “Earthquake Swarm Continues in
Central Oklahoma.” U.S. Geological Survey, October 22.
http://www.usgs.gov/newsroom/article.asp?ID=3710&
from=rss#.U7NAxPldV8E. Accessed on July 1, 2014.
Legal Environmental Assistance Foundation, Inc., Petitioner, vs.
United States Environmental Protection Agency, Respondent.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
121

118 F.3d 1467 (1997). https://law.resource.org/pub/us/
case/reporter/F3/118/118.F3d.1467.95-6501.html.
Accessed on July 3, 2014.
Lester, Kerry. 2013. “Ill. Passes Nation’s Toughest Fracking
Regulations.” AP, June 1. http://bigstory.ap.org/article/ill
-passes-nations-toughest-fracking-regulations. Accessed on
July 3, 2014.
Levi, Michael. 2013a. “The Emerging Irony of US Energy
Independence.” Megatrends, http://www.cnbc.com/id/
100780504?__source=yahoo%7Cﬁnance%7Cheadline
%7Cheadline%7Cstory&par=yahoo&doc=100780504
%7CThe%20Emerging%20Irony%20of%20US. Accessed
on June 25, 2014.
Levi, Michael. 2013b. The Power Surge: Energy, Opportunity,
and the Battle for America’s Future. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
“List of Bans Worldwide.” Keep Tap Water Safe, http://
keeptapwatersafe.org/global-ban-son-fracking/. Accessed on
June 24, 2014.
Loomis, David G. 2012. “The Potential Economic Impact of
New Albany Gas on the Illinois Economy.” December.
http://news.heartland.org/sites/default/ﬁles/illinois_fracking
_study.pdf. Accessed on June 26, 2014.
“Man-Made Earthquakes Update.” 2014. U.S. Geological
Survey, January 17. http://www.usgs.gov/blogs/features/
usgs_top_story/man-made-earthquakes/. Accessed on July 2,
2014.
Menenberg, Aaron. 2012. “Let’s Get Real: Energy
Independence Is an Unrealistic and Misleading Myth.”
EconoMonitor, September. http://www.economonitor
.com/policiesofscale/2012/09/06/lets-get-real-energy
-independence-is-a-unrealistic-and-misleading-myth/.
Accessed on June 24, 2014.
122
Fracking

“Methane Emissions from the Natural Gas Industry.” 1996.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, June. http://www
.epa.gov/gasstar/documents/emissions_report/2_technical
report.pdf. Accessed on June 29, 2014.
Miller, Scott M., et al. 2013. “Anthropogenic Emissions of
Methane in the United States.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110 (50):
20018–22.
“Monterey Shale Downgraded.” Post Carbon Institute, http://
www.postcarbon.org/press-release/2239062-government-s
lashes-california-oil-forecast. Accessed on June 23, 2014.
Morris, Jim, Lisa Song and David Hasemyer. 2014. “Big Oil,
Bad Air.” The Center for Public Integrity, February 18. http://
eagleford.publicintegrity.org/. Accessed on June 30, 2014.
Mufson, Steven. 2014. “How Two Small New York Towns
Have Shaken up the National Fight over Fracking.” The
Washington Post, July 2. http://www.washingtonpost.com/
business/economy/how-two-small-new-york-towns-have
-shaken-up-the-national-ﬁght-over-fracking/2014/07/02/
fe9c728a-012b-11e4-8fd0-3a663dfa68ac_story.html.
Accessed on July 5, 2014.
Muller, Richard A., and Elizabeth A. Muller. 2013. “Why
Every Serious Environmentalist Should Favour Fracking.”
Centre for Policy Studies, December. http://www.cps.org
.uk/ﬁles/reports/original/131202135150-WhyEverySerious
EnvironmentalistShouldFavourFracking.pdf. Accessed on
June 26, 2014.
Murphy, Dylan, and Jo Murphy. 2014. “Fracking the U.S.—
Monterey Shale’s 96% Downgrade Blows the Scam.”
Ecologist, http://www.theecologist.org/News/news
_analysis/2442482/fracking_the_us_monterey_shales_96
_downgrade_blows_the_scam.html. Accessed on June 22,
2014.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
123

Mushalik, Matt. 2004. “World Crude Production 2013
without Shale Oil Is Back to 2005 Levels.” Resilience,
http://www.resilience.org/stories/2014-03-26/world-crude
-production-2013-without-shale-oil-is-back-to-2005-levels.
Accessed on June 24, 2014.
“9 Countries or Regions That Ban Fracking.” Petro Global
News, http://petroglobalnews.com/2013/10/9-countries-or
-regions-that-ban-fracking/. Accessed on June 24, 2014.
“North America Leads the World in Production of Shale Gas.”
U.S. Energy Information Administration, http://www.eia
.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=13491. Accessed on
June 24, 2014.
“Nuisance.” The Free Dictionary, http://legal-
dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/nuisance. Accessed on
July 2, 2014.
Ordinance #2013-01. State of New Mexico. County of Mora,
http://documents.foodandwaterwatch.org/doc/Frack_Actions
_MoraCountyNM.pdf#_ga=1.106642432.229352318.140
3631732. Accessed on July 4, 2014.
Ordinance #2014-006. City of Canandaigua, http://
documents.foodandwaterwatch.org/doc/Frack_Actions
_CanandaiguaNY.pdf#_ga=1.38032160.229352318.
1403631732. Accessed on July 4, 2014.
Ordinance #659. 2011. Borough of West Homestead, May 10.
http://documents.foodandwaterwatch.org/doc/Frack
_Actions_WestHomesteadPA.pdf#_ga=1.218903450.229
352318.1403631732. Accessed on July 4, 2014.
“Overview of Greenhouse Gases.” U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. http://epa.gov/climatechange/
ghgemissions/gases/ch4.html. Accessed on June 26, 2014.
“PA Legislature Pre-empts Communities on Fracking.” 2012.
Community Environmental Legal Defense Fund, March.
http://www.celdf.org/section.php?id=343. Accessed on
July 5, 2014.
124
Fracking

Pacala, S., and R. Socolow. 2004. “Stabilization Wedges:
Solving the Climate Problem for the next 50 Years with
Current Technologies.” Science 305 (5686): 968–972.
“Particulate Matter.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
http://www.epa.gov/airquality/particulatematter/index.
html. Accessed on June 30, 2014.
“Pennsylvania Alliance for Clean Water and Air.” June 7, 2014.
http://pennsylvaniaallianceforcleanwaterandair.wordpress.
com/the-list/. Accessed on June 28, 2014.
Pétron, Gabrielle, et al. 2012. “Hydrocarbon Emissions
Characterization in the Colorado Front Range: A Pilot
Study.” Journal of Geophysical Research 117 (D4), http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2011JD016360/
abstract. Accessed on June 29, 2014.
Porter, David J. 2014. “U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology: Examining
the Science of EPA Overreach: A Case Study in Texas,”
February 5. http://www.rrc.state.tx.us/media/1012/
epaoverreach.pdf. Accessed on June 28, 2014.
Raichel, Daniel. 2013. “HUGE Victory!: PA Supreme Court
Says State Can’t Force Fracking on Local Communities.”
Natural Resources Defense Council Staff Blog,
December 20. http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/draichel/
huge_victory_in_pennsylvania_p.html. Accessed on July 5,
2014.
Redden, Jim. 2012. “Unlocking the Secrets of the U.S.’ Largest
Onshore Oil Reserves.” World Oil, November: 88–96. Also
available online at http://www.slb.com/~/media/Files/
industry_challenges/unconventional_gas/industry_articles/
20133001_world_oil_monterey.pdf. Accessed on June 22,
2014.
“Report: Methane Emissions at ‘High Levels’ in Uintah
Basin.” 2013. NGI’s Shale Daily. August 6. http://www
.naturalgasintel.com/articles/643-report-methane-emissions
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
125

-at-high-levels-in-uintah-basin. Accessed on June 29,
2014.
“Review of Emerging Resources: U.S. Shale Gas and Shale Oil
Plays.” U.S. Energy Information Administration, http://
www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/usshalegas/pdf/usshaleplays
.pdf. Accessed on June 22, 2014.
Ridlington, Elizabeth, and John Rumpler. 2013. “Fracking by
the Numbers: Key Impacts of Dirty Drilling at the State and
National Level.” October. Boston: Environment America.
Available online at http://www.environmentamerica.org/
sites/environment/ﬁles/reports/EA_FrackingNumbers_scrn
.pdf. Accessed on June 24, 2014.
Rogers, Deborah. 2013. “Shale and Wall Street: Was the
Decline in Natural Gas Prices Orchestrated?” Energy Policy
Forum, February. Available online at http://shalebubble.org/
wp-content/uploads/2013/02/SWS-report-FINAL.pdf.
Accessed on June 25, 2014.
Rühl, Christof. 2013. “Oil Boom 2.0—An American Dream
Updated.” https://www.linkedin.com/today/post/article/
20130730080645-259060403-oil-boom-2-0-an-american
-dream-updated. Accessed on June 23, 2014.
Rushton, Lisa, and Candice Castaneda. 2014. “Drilling Into
Hydraulic Fracturing and the Associated Wastewater
Management Issues.” Paul Hastings. Stay Current, May.
http://www.paulhastings.com/docs/default-source/PDFs/
stay-current-hydraulic-fracturing-wastewater-management.
pdf. Accessed on July 2, 2014.
Sahagun, Louis. 2014. “U.S. Ofﬁcials Cut Estimate of
Recoverable Monterey Shale Oil by 96%.” Los Angeles
Times, http://www.latimes.com/business/la-ﬁ-oil-
20140521-story.html. Accessed on June 22, 2014.
“Shale Gas: A Global Perspective.” 2011. KPMG Global
Energy Institute, December. http://www.kpmg.com/
Global/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/
126
Fracking

Documents/shale-gas-global-perspective.pdf. Accessed on
June 24, 2014.
“Shale Oil: The Next Revolution.” 2013. Shale Oil, February.
http://www.pwc.com/en_GR/gr/surveys/assets/shale
-oil.pdf. Accessed on June 24, 2014.
“Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources Are Globally Abundant.”
U.S. Energy Information Administration, http://www.eia
.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=14431. Accessed on
June 24, 2014.
Smith, Grant. 2013. “U.S. to Be Top Oil Producer by 2015 on
Shale, EIA Says.” Bloomberg News, http://www.bloomberg
.com/news/2013-11-12/u-s-nears-energy-independence
-by-2035-on-shale-boom-iea-says.html. Accessed on June 22,
2014.
Smith, Taylor. 2012. “Research & Commentary: Hydraulic
Fracturing and Air Quality.” The Heartland Institute,
September 10.http://heartland.org/policy-documents/
research-commentary-hydraulic-fracturing-and-air-quality.
Accessed on June 30, 2014.
Song, Lisa. 2012. “First Study of Its Kind Detects 44
Hazardous Air Pollutants at Gas Drilling Sites.” Inside
Climate News, December 3. http://insideclimatenews.org/
news/20121203/natural-gas-drilling-air-pollution-fracking
-colorado-methane-benzene-endocrine-health-NMHC
-epa-toxic-chemicals. Accessed on June 30, 2014.
Taylor, Kate, and Thomas Kaplan. 2014. “New York Towns
Can Prohibit Fracking, State’s Top Court Rules.” New York
Times, June 30. http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/01/
nyregion/towns-may-ban-fracking-new-york-state
-high-court-rules.html. Accessed on July 5, 2014.
“Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources:
An Assessment of 137 Shale Formations in 41 Countries
Outside the United States.” 2013. U.S. Energy Information
Administration, June. http://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
127

worldshalegas/pdf/fullreport.pdf. Accessed on June 24,
2014.
Tollefson, Jeff. 2012. “Air Sampling Reveals High Emissions
from Gas Field: Methane Leaks during Production May
Offset Climate Beneﬁts of Natural Gas.” Nature News &
Comment. February 7. http://www.nature.com/news/air
-sampling-reveals-high-emissions-from-gas-ﬁeld-1.9982.
Accessed on June 29, 2014.
“TOXNET Databases.” U.S. National Library of Medicine.
http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/. Accessed on June 28, 2014.
“2013 State Unemployment Rates.” National Conference of
State Legislatures, http://www.ncsl.org/research/laboran
demployment/2013-state-unemployment-rates.aspx.
Accessed on June 25, 2014.
“Underground Injection Control Program.” 2013. U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency, November 19. http://water.epa
.gov/type/groundwater/uic/. Accessed on July 1, 2014.
[Untitled document]. Town of Penn Yan, New York. http://
documents.foodandwaterwatch.org/doc/Frack_Actions
_PennYanNY.pdf#_ga=1.10170422.229352318.140363
1732. Accessed on July 4, 2014.
“U.S. Crude Oil Proved Reserves.” U.S. Energy Information
Administration, http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/Leaf
Handler.ashx?n=PET&s=RCRR01NUS_1&f=A. Accessed
on June 22, 2014.
“U.S. Natural Gas, Wet after Lease Separation Proved
Reserves.” U.S. Energy Information Administration, http://
www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/hist/rngr21nus_1a.htm. Accessed on
June 22, 2014.
“US ‘Energy Independence’: Geopolitical Consequences.”
2013. Business Monitor News & Views, February. http://
www.businessmonitor.com/news-and-views/us-energy
-independence-geopolitical-consequences. Accessed on
June 24, 2014.
128
Fracking

“Village Council Resolution No. 2012-614.” 2012. Meyers
Lake Village, April 9. http://documents.foodandwaterwatch.
org/doc/Frack_Actions_MeyersLakeOH.pdf#_ga=1.11765
9018.229352318.1403631732. Accessed on July 4, 2014.
“Wastewater Disposal May Trigger Quakes at a Greater
Distance than Previously Thought.” 2014. Seismological
Society of America, May 1. http://www.seismosoc.org/
society/press_releases/SSA_2014_Induced_Seismicity
_Press_Release.pdf. Accessed on July 2, 2014.
Weinhold, Bob. 2012. “The Future of Fracking.” Environmental
Health Perspectives 120 (7): A272–A279. Also available online
at http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/120/7/ehp.
120-a272.pdf. Accessed on June 30, 2014.
Woodrum, Amanda. 2014. “Fracking in Carroll County,
Ohio.” Policy Matters Ohio, April. http://www.policy
mattersohio.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/Shale
_Apr2014.pdf. Accessed on July 2, 2014.
Woods, Josh. 2012. “Truck Dust, Noise and Fumes Still a
Concern in Sandy.” http://www.theprogressnews.com/
default.asp?read=30940. Accessed on July 2, 2014.
Worstall, Tim. 2014. “If We Judged the Monterey Shale by
Green Energy Standards Then the 96% Cut in Recoverable
Oil Is Great News.” Forbes, May 22. http://www.forbes
.com/sites/timworstall/2014/05/22/if-we-judged-the
-monterey-shale-by-green-energy-standards-then-the-96
-cut-in-rcoverable-oil-is-great-news/. Accessed on June 23,
2014.
Yergin, Daniel. 2013. “Congratulations, America. You’re
(Almost) Energy Independent. Now What?” Politico
Magazine, http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2013/
11/congratulations-america-youre-almost-energy
-independent-now-what-98985.html#.U6n2LPldV8E.
Accessed on June 24, 2014.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
129


3
Perspectives
Introduction
Fracking is a complex and controversial issue. Many technical,
political, social, economic, environmental, and other questions
are involved in decisions as to where, when, and how drilling
for oil and gas is to be conducted. This chapter provides inter-
ested observers with an opportunity to express their views on
this range of topics related to hydraulic fracturing.
Separating Fact from Hype: Trudy E. Bell
Whenever fortunes and political reputations stand to be made
by a new technology, but votes and political support are needed
from John and Jane Q. Citizen for permits and permissions
before it can proceed, take heed: Before any town meetings,
do some serious homework to bone up on actual facts and
to ask essential questions. Informed independent thinking is
131
Workers move a section of well casing into place at a Chesapeake Energy
natural gas well site near Burlington, Pennsylvania, in Bradford County.
So vast is the wealth of natural gas locked into dense rock deep beneath
Pennsylvania, New York, West Virginia and Ohio that some geologists esti-
mate it’s enough to supply the entire East Coast for 50 years. (AP Photo/
Ralph Wilson)

especially crucial if the technology is surrounded by a swirl of
controversial claims and counterclaims. How can a regular per-
son begin to ﬁgure out what’s the truth and whose claims to
trust?
Examine all sides of all claims, asking whether the claims are
complete and accurate. Seek to determine who is making the
claims, the constituencies those individuals or organizations re-
present, and who is ﬁnancing them. Such a deep dive into who-
says-what-and-why is essential when controversies become
heated, because opposing groups often hire public relations
experts to present their viewpoints in the most favorable light.
Some PR folk may even be “spin doctors,” slang for experts in
spinning a network of half-truths, often using tactics that
appeal to emotions rather than to intellect and reason. Thus,
you also need to satisfy yourself whether adversaries are ﬁghting
fair—that is, bolstering their cases based on objective, veriﬁable
facts and peer-reviewed scientiﬁc data, or whether they are
ﬁghting dirty—that is, relying on swaying public opinion
through name-calling or casting doubt on the competence or
assertions of the opposition.
Four fundamental sets of cost-beneﬁt questions can get you
started. Note: Even though the examples below are tailored to
horizontal drilling for petroleum products, such cost-beneﬁt
questions are relevant for exploring the pros and cons of any
large-scale engineering project, so ﬁle them away for future
reference. In general, it is wise to remain skeptical and do dili-
gent research rather than rush forward uninformed. Large-
scale engineering projects have many unexpected complexities
and take years to complete—and once started, rarely is it pos-
sible to turn back the clock and return to pre-project status.
1. What are the claimed beneﬁts? For whom? How are the
beneﬁts measured? Who else might beneﬁt, even if they
are not publicly claimed to be beneﬁciaries?
Many claims are made in favor of fracking—and claims
may vary around the country. In the Utica and Marcellus
132
Fracking

shale regions of Ohio and Pennsylvania, where horizontal
drilling is primarily for natural gas (methane), for example,
petroleum companies emphasize that methane is a lower-
carbon fuel than coal and oil and its combustion emits less
of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO2), and thus con-
verting from coal or oil to natural gas can help reduce harm-
ful CO2 emissions that drive climate change.
That is true—but only part of the story. In the Bakken
shale region of North Dakota, the horizontal drilling is pri-
marily for oil. Indeed, the methane that naturally bubbles
up with the oil is either vented or ﬂared (burned off) at the
well site, because natural gas sells for so much less on the
world market than oil that petroleum companies choose not
to invest in building infrastructure and pipelines for capturing
the methane for sale. The amount of natural gas thus wasted
is signiﬁcant: nearly a third of North Dakota’s annual pro-
duction, and enough to heat every U.S. household for three
days. Moreover, the methane vented into the air is a green-
house gas some 25 times more potent than CO2.
Advertising by the petroleum companies often emphasizes
how horizontal drilling for oil is helping to free the country
from dependence on foreign oil—even making the United
States a net exporter of oil. Also emphasized is the possibility
of the technology creating new jobs at home for the drilling as
well as for a host of supporting industries (trucking, road
building, housing for workers, restaurants, etc.). Less publi-
cized—excepting in programs covering business news—is
the proﬁtability to the petroleum companies, making their
owners and stockholders the biggest beneﬁciaries of horizon-
tal drilling.
The ultimate temptation held out to local homeowners is
the potential of personally growing rich if oil or gas is found
under your property and you sell or lease your mineral
rights to drillers in exchange for being paid royalties
(a percentage of the proﬁts). To be sure, some individual
homeowners have become rich through leasing or selling their
Perspectives
133

mineral rights. Others, however, have discovered that their
ownership of their land does not include the mineral rights,
yet they are compelled to allow drillers access to their property
(a legal situation known as a split estate). Others may not want
to sell or lease their mineral rights, but are nonetheless com-
pelled to do so if most of their neighbors do (a legal situation
known as forced pooling).
2. What are the claimed risks or dangers? Do the beneﬁciaries
share the risks? Do the risk takers share the beneﬁts? What
are the sources of information?
Residents in a number of states have complained that
methane gas or oily substances or other chemicals have
appeared in drinking water pumped from local wells near
the sites of horizontal drilling, causing headaches or other
symptoms, and have ﬁled lawsuits to stop local drilling and
redress such alleged pollution. Petroleum companies—whose
owners, stockholders, or employees may live hundreds of
miles away from the drilling sites—have strongly contested
assertions that the process of hydraulic fracturing a horizontal
well can cause chemicals or petroleum products to enter
groundwater aquifers, although they have acknowledged that
defective seals around the upper part of wells could allow
some leakage. It has been difﬁcult for teams of scientists, envi-
ronmental organizations, or legal experts to determine the
objective facts because in many cases baseline measurements
of water quality were not made before drilling started; more-
over, once drilling started, some companies have prohibited
sufﬁcient access to drilling sites for taking ongoing measure-
ments. Some states concerned about their water supplies are
considering or have passed new regulations mandating that
chemical composition of drinking water aquifers be tested
regularly before, during, and after drilling.
Signiﬁcant earthquakes in the Midwest and Great Plains,
regions not seismically active, have been widely documented
from shale gas activities by geologists writing in peer-reviewed
134
Fracking

journals. The culprit is not the horizontal drilling or hydraulic
fracturing itself, but the high-pressure disposal of the waste-
water that ﬂows back out of the well after it is hydraulically
fractured. Because the wastewater is far saltier than seawater
and also contains naturally occurring radioactive materials, it
cannot be puriﬁed for reuse by regular municipal water treat-
ment plants, nor discharged into local lakes or rivers. So it is
discarded by being injected under high pressure miles deep
underground into Class II injection wells. This high-
pressure wastewater, however, can “lubricate” dormant earth-
quake faults deep underground, causing slippage and trigger-
ing earthquakes: one in Oklahoma was measured to be a
damaging 5.7 on the moment magnitude scale (which has
replaced the Richter scale). That has raised particular concern
among residents of seismically active California, where petro-
leum companies seek to drill the Monterey shale.
3. Is any part of the controversy framed in terms of false dichot-
omies? Are there other methods of achieving the claimed ben-
eﬁts? If so, what are the pros and cons of the proposed
technology compared to other competing methods?
Sometimes a controversy gets framed in such a way that
it appears that technology proponents are pro jobs whereas
technology opponents care only about trees or animals
instead of people. In such cases, dig deeper to ascertain the
actual concerns. People living near drilling sites need clean
water to drink and clean air to breathe, and so do the cattle
and other livestock they may be raising. Moreover, farmers’
and ranchers’ livelihoods depend on their crops and livestock
not being exposed to environmental toxins that either cause
illness or introduce chemicals into the food chain. Last, in
certain parts of the country, wind energy or solar energy
may be economically competitive as well as cleaner (zero
CO2 emissions) and the source of new high-tech jobs.
4. Where beneﬁts or risks are quantiﬁed primarily in terms
of money, is money everything? What else might be
Perspectives
135

important, especially for the long term (your children and
grandchildren)?
Many states are blessed with natural wonders or natural
resources—including trophy hunting in forests and wet-
lands, trout ﬁshing in pristine rivers, breathtaking scenery,
and natural peace and quiet—that draw tourism from
around the world, accounting for a signiﬁcant part of the
state economy. Yet, permits for horizontal drilling—with
its concomitant roads, truck trafﬁc, 24/7 stadium lighting
while drilling, and chemicals—have been sought under
national parklands (including the Grand Canyon). That
has caused some far-sighted state legislators and other stew-
ards of natural resources to reﬂect on the potential impact
of the technology for decades to come, long after the drillers
have departed, and ask: What unanticipated surprises
might we inherit? Far beyond the next quarter’s proﬁts,
what choices are wisest for the long term?
Trudy E. Bell, M.A., a former editor for Scientiﬁc American and
IEEE Spectrum magazines, has written, coauthored, or edited a
dozen books and several hundred articles. She is a senior writer
for
the
University
of
California
High-Performance
Astro-
Computing Center (UC-HiPACC) and has edited seven reports
for the Union of Concerned Scientists.
Why Fracking Is Beneficial: Bruce Everett
The term fracking generally refers to the production of natural gas
by the hydraulic fracturing of source rocks deep underground.
This technology has revolutionized the American energy market
in the last few years. Before we discuss the speciﬁcs of this tech-
nology and its pros and cons, let’s start with some context.
The development of humanity, and in particular the creation
of modern industrial society, is based largely on the substitution
of chemical and mechanical energy for human and animal
labor. The discovery and widespread use of fossil fuels (coal,
136
Fracking

oil, and natural gas) in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
transformed the United States and Europe from a collection of
largely poor, rural communities into mobile, industrial nations
whose citizens enjoy unprecedented wealth, mobility, freedom,
and knowledge.
Although energy brings us enormous beneﬁts, every form of
energy has its drawbacks. Coal, for example, contains many
impurities, like sulfur and heavy metals, which pollute the air
when it is burned. Nuclear energy produces virtually no pollu-
tion in normal operation but presents serious challenges in pro-
ducing, handling, and disposing of the highly radioactive
materials which power atomic reactors. Oil, our only viable
transportation fuel, is concentrated in unstable countries, creat-
ing difﬁcult national security problems.
In recent decades, many people have placed their hope in
renewable energy, mainly solar and wind, to meet our energy
needs
without
suffering
the
drawbacks
of
fossil
fuels.
Although wind and solar energy are clean and abundant, these
technologies remain way too expensive for widespread use and
perform poorly. In particular, unlike fossil fuels, nature gives us
wind and solar energy when it wants to, not when we need it.
Through all our energy debates of the last 40 years, natural
gas has sat quietly in the background. We have long recognized
the advantages of natural gas, in particular its cleanliness and
convenience for use in homes and power plants, but the
United States was thought to have only modest natural gas re-
sources, and its high price limited its ability to compete with
coal in power generation.
In the last few years, natural gas has taken a more prominent
place in our energy supply because of hydraulic fracturing.
In conventional natural gas reservoirs, a source rock, like sand-
stone, contains natural gas trapped in the rock thousands of feet
underground. When a drill penetrates the rock, the natural gas
ﬂows through the permeable structure of the rock and up the
well to the surface. The United States, however, also has enor-
mous amounts of natural gas trapped in tight rock structures
Perspectives
137

which do not permit the gas to ﬂow easily. Fracking these
tight reservoirs involves drilling horizontally through the rock
structure, rather than just vertically. High-pressure water is
then pumped into the well, which cracks the rock allowing
channels for the gas to ﬂow into the open well. Sand and small
amounts of chemicals are also pumped into the well to keep the
cracks open.
This new technology has opened up large new natural gas re-
sources which are inexpensive to produce, and located not only
in traditional oil and gas states, like Texas, but in areas like
Pennsylvania, which are much closer to the big natural gas mar-
kets of the Northeast.
Because of its availability and low cost, fracking has brought
a dramatic reduction in the price of natural gas. In May 2008,
the price of natural gas at the Henry Hub market in Louisiana
reached nearly $11.50 per thousand cubic feet (MCF) of natu-
ral gas (Natural Gas Spot and Futures Prices 2014). By July of
2014, the price had fallen to about $4.25/MCF—a drop of
nearly two-thirds (Natural Gas and Spot and Futures Prices
2014). Imagine, for example, the price of gasoline falling from
its current level of $3.70 per gallon to $1.35.
The enhanced availability of low-priced natural gas has
brought many economic and environmental beneﬁts. Despite
continued growth in power demand, electricity prices in the
United States remain stable and are only about half the price
paid by household consumers in Europe or Japan (Electricity
Prices for Households of Selected Countries 2014).
Lower energy costs also enhance U.S. competitiveness and
are likely to support a growth in job opportunities in the
United States. A recent report by PriceWaterhouseCoopers
concluded that fracking could increase U.S. manufacturing emp-
loyment by one million jobs and save companies $11.6 billion in
costs by 2025 (Shale Gas: Reshaping the US Chemicals Industry
2012).
Moreover, low-cost natural gas has allowed us to build fewer
coal-ﬁred power plants and even to close some existing coal
138
Fracking

plants without increasing the cost to consumers. As a result, our
air is cleaner without any increase in cost.
As with every other source of energy, fracking raises issues.
The process requires a great deal of water, which is circulated
through the well and back up to the surface. This water must
be dealt with by water treatment, by storage and evaporation,
or by reinjection underground. The use of chemicals in the
water has raised fears of contamination of local water supplies.
In reality, however, sensible government regulation is all that
is required to ensure safe water management in fracking opera-
tions. Techniques for handling the water are well known, easily
applied, and relatively inexpensive.
Some opponents have noted with alarm an increase in earth-
quake activity around water reinjection operations in states
such as Oklahoma. These earthquakes are so small, however,
that most cannot even be detected except with the most sensi-
tive instruments, and none has been shown to cause any dam-
age, injury, or disruption.
People in the energy-producing states of the Gulf Coast and
Midwest, particularly Texas, Louisiana, and Oklahoma, are
used to the impacts of drilling and related activities. For people
in Pennsylvania and New York, however, these new industries
bring some disruptions, including heavy trucking, noise, and
an inﬂux of new people in previously quiet rural towns.
Pennsylvania has settled most of these issues through regula-
tion, recognizing that the jobs, royalty payments, and tax
revenue from natural gas production far outweigh the prob-
lems. In New York, however, the state retains a ban on fracking
activities as people argue about the pluses and minuses.
The question to be asked is not whether fracking has its
drawbacks—it does. The question is what’s the best way to
meet our large and growing energy needs, particularly for ever
more electricity. Natural gas has major economic and environ-
mental advantages while its downside is quite small. We need
to decide how the cost-beneﬁt balance of hydraulic fracturing
of natural gas compares with that of other forms of power
Perspectives
139

production, including coal, nuclear, wind, and solar. On bal-
ance, fracking looks pretty good.
References
“Electricity Prices for Households of Selected Countries.” U.S.
Energy Information Administration. http://www.eia.gov/
countries/prices/electricity_households.cfm. Accessed on
July 14, 2004.
“Natural Gas Spot and Futures Prices.” U.S. Energy
Information Administration. http://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/
ng_pri_fut_s1_d.htm. Accessed on July 14, 2014.
“Shale Gas: Reshaping the US Chemicals Industry.” PWC.
October 2012. http://www.pwc.com/en_US/us/industrial
-products/publications/assets/pwc-shale-gas-chemicals
-industry-potential.pdf. Accessed on July 14, 2014.
Bruce Everett is an adjunct associate professor of international busi-
ness at the Fletcher School at Tufts University. Before joining the
Fletcher faculty in 2003, he held a series of management positions
at ExxonMobil Corporation from 1980 to 2002 and served in the
United States Department of Energy from 1974 to 1980. He grew
up in the Boston area and holds an AB degree from Princeton
University and a PhD from the Fletcher School.
The Urgent Need for Global Definition of Terms
in the Reporting on Fracking and Seismic Activity:
Gina Hagler
Hydraulic fracking is one of the more recent instances of
technology potentially run amok. Detractors attribute fouled
groundwater and increased seismic activity, to name a few, to
this practice of releasing the natural gas inside shale by drilling
and then forcing liquid into the ground at high pressure.
Advocates of the method contend that fracking has been in
140
Fracking

practice for more than 60 years, during which the associated
environmental impact has been negligible.
For those who are intimately involved in fracking, the debate
is shaded with nuance: Which sites are being used as examples?
How old are the sites? What safeguards were in use at the start?
Have the sites been active since inception? Each question
engenders others—ever more meaningful to the participants,
while ever more confusing to the casual observer. Yet even the
most remote of the casual observers ultimately has a stake in
the outcome.
One could argue that fouled water can be treated before con-
sumption and low natural gas prices beneﬁt us all. It is difﬁcult
to argue that we can ignore signiﬁcant seismic activity due to
fracking, if that is indeed the case. Even if we don’t have per-
sonal experience with this byproduct of fracking, we can’t sit pas-
sively on the sidelines as the earthquakes-due-to-fracking debate
heats up. Legislation related to fracking requires a vote by our
representatives (Gesing 2014). These representatives want their
votes to reﬂect the wishes of their constituency. Before we can tell
them our wishes, we have to know what they are. Before we can
decide upon them, we must understand the issues and determine
the validity of the data used to support both sides of the argument
since—of course—detractors and supporters do not agree on the
role of fracking in seismic activity.
To help us with this task of deciding, we could turn to
those involved in the debate. We would quickly discover that
the experts of one group adamantly refute the assertions of the
other. We may sense that the two groups are not arguing over
the same precise point, but that nuance is often nearly impos-
sible to trace to an actual fact. Even if we can trace it back, we
stand with a trophy of dubious value accompanied by the ques-
tion of where this new knowledge leaves us. As a result, most
of us turn to news coverage, seeking the answer to a simple
question: Do we need to be concerned about the role hydraulic
fracking may cause in earthquakes?
Perspectives
141

A recap of recent news stories from sources ranging from sci-
ence news sites and journals to general news sites reveals that
seismic activity and fracking are currently beneﬁtting from
active coverage, all of which identiﬁes hydraulic fracking as
the cause of seismic activity to one extent or another. From
Mother Jones (Sheppard, Lee, and Brownell 2014) to NBC
(Are Oklahoma Earthquakes Tied to Fracking? 2014) to NPR
(Phillips 2014), seismic activity is attributed to fracking.
National Geographic reports that part of the problem is that
there is no way to accurately predict which locations will expe-
rience tremors (Kiger 2014). All agree the cause of any tremors
is not the fracking itself, but the pressurized return of the waste-
water to the deep water, underground wells. A review of
industry sites reveals their assertions that this return can be
done safely.
The back and forth. The slightly different meaning of terms
used. The feeling that not quite everyone is showing his or her
full hand (U.S. Geological Survey 2014). It is all vaguely remi-
niscent of environmental issue debates and reporting on such
issues as global climate change or the effect of drilling in pro-
tected waters. One could argue that this time the outcome of
the debate is particularly urgent. This is not a debate about
something that can be cleaned up later. There is either seismic
activity that leads to an earthquake that causes signiﬁcant dam-
age, perhaps with loss of life, or there is not. The damage done
cannot be undone simply, if at all.
The same vaguely familiar unease can be attributed to a con-
cern that the concerns voiced are overstated: that increased and
more sophisticated monitoring has led to the recognition of
more events, not because there are truly more, but because
they’re now on our radar, so to speak (The Facts About
Hydraulic Fracturing and Seismic Activity 2014). Even the
recent news report that seismic activity worldwide is up leaves
one with a lingering doubt as to the role fracking plays—new
doubts to accompany the old concern that some of this
142
Fracking

reporting is more anecdotal than causal (Earthquake Facts and
Statistics 2014).
Few things grab public attention as fully as the possibility
that the ground beneath our feet will shift and destroy our
homes. The role of fracking in seismic activity must be
addressed without hype and hysteria (Aho 2014). The media
must ﬁnd a way to assess the true dangers associated with this
practice. We must have accurate and responsible coverage by
the media—yet how can they deliver that when the involved
parties contest the very terms and sites used to deﬁne the
debate? Without agreement upon the type of site, the age of
the site, and the deﬁnitions of the process and problem, how
can meaningful and transparent reporting occur?
A shared vocabulary and datasets must be put in place.
Perhaps major news organizations could advocate for this in
their coverage. Perhaps it is the job of our representatives.
Most likely it is up to us as individuals to insist on this, since
it would ultimately allow a full and unambiguous investigation
and understanding of the role of fracking in seismic activity.
References
Aho, Karen. “Earthquakes Are Rising in Oklahoma, and
Insurance Is Booming.” Bloomberg Businessweek. July 23,
2014. http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-07-23/
oklahomas-increasing-earthquakes-are-a-boon-for-insurers.
Accessed July 25, 2014.
“Are Oklahoma Earthquakes Tied to Fracking?” NBC Nightly
News. June 27, 2014. http://www.nbcnews.com/video/
nightly-news/55527767#55527767. Accessed June 30,
2014.
“Earthquake Facts and Statistics.” U.S. Geological Survey.
March 10, 2014. http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/
eqarchives/year/eqstats.php. Accessed July 25, 2014.
Perspectives
143

“The Facts about Hydraulic Fracturing and Seismic Activity.”
American Petroleum Institute. January 1, 2014. http://www
.api.org/policy-and-issues/policy-items/hf/facts-about
-hydraulic-fracturing-and-seismic-activity.aspx. Accessed on
August 6, 2014.
Gesing, Lars. “The Midterm Politics of Fracking.” NBC News.
June 23, 2014. http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/ﬁrst-read/
midterm-politics-fracking-n138681. Accessed June 24,
2014.
Kiger, Patrick J. “Scientists Warn of Quake Risk from Fracking
Operations: Tremors Induced by Wastewater Disposal Are
Larger and Harder to Predict than Previously Thought.”
National Geographic. May 2, 2014. http://news.national
geographic.com/news/energy/2014/05/140502-scientists
-warn-of-quake-risk-from-fracking-operations/. Accessed
June 10, 2014.
Phillips, Susan. “Congressional Watch-Dog Warns Fracking
Waste Could Threaten Drinking Water.” State Impact:
NPR. July 28, 2014. http://stateimpact.npr.org/pennsylvania/
2014/07/28/congressional-watch-dog-warns-fracking-waste
-could-threaten-drinking-water/. Accessed July 30, 2014.
Sheppard, Kate, Jaeah Lee, and Brett Brownell. “Conﬁrmed:
Fracking Triggers Quakes and Seismic Chaos.” Mother
Jones. July 11, 2013. http://www.motherjones.com/blue
-marble/2013/07/earthquakes-triggered-more-earthquakes
-near-us-fracking-sites. Accessed July 10, 2014.
U.S. Geological Survey. “Science or Soundbite? Shale Gas,
Hydraulic Fracturing, and Induced Earthquakes.” YouTube.
July 1, 2012. http://youtu.be/vb-BNDx2iIQ. Accessed
June 28, 2014.
Gina Hagler is a freelance writer and published author. Her book
about ﬂuid dynamic principles in action was published by Springer
Verlag in 2013. A member of the NASW and ASJA, she blogs
144
Fracking

about science, technology, and health at http://www.ginahagler
.com.
Fracking and the Future of Fresh Water: Michael
Pastorkovich
Life on Earth began in the oceans. All life on Earth requires
water in order to survive, prosper, and reproduce. Life deprived
of water becomes death. It is absolutely crucial to keep this in
mind when discussing the role of water on our planet.
About 71 percent of our planet’s surface is covered with water.
However, 96.5 percent of all the water on Earth is contained in
the highly saline oceans, which is ﬁne for the marine creatures
that live in or near the seas and which comprise about half the
species in the world. (All data on water are from U.S. Geological
Survey 2014). But salt water is poison to the other half, including
our own human species, and most of the plants and animals
(excepting seafood) we consume for our nourishment. These spe-
cies, including ours, require fresh water in order to survive.
As fresh water is used up, it is replenished by a delicate natural
process called the hydrologic cycle. The heat of the sun evaporates
mostly ocean water (leaving the salt behind), which travels
through Earth’s atmosphere as water vapor until it condenses over
land masses in the form of rain, snow, or ice. Heavy, soaking rains
seep into the soil and replace water in depleted aquifers.
On the basis of these facts alone, it would seem reasonable to
conclude that water conservation ought to be one of human-
kind’s top priorities. But two factors have emerged over the past
100 years which promise to morph into a global water catastro-
phe by this century’s end unless immediate steps are taken to
avert the worst of an impending disaster. These two factors
are the exponential growth of the human population over the
twentieth century and the reality of global warming.
Humanity did not reach the one billion mark until around
the year 1800. By 1900 the world’s population was still under
Perspectives
145

two billion. Today, the human race stands at seven billion and
is rapidly heading towards eight billion. And each of these
human beings needs lots of fresh water to stay alive and well
and so do most of the plants and animals which each consumes.
But even worse for the world’s fresh water supply is the real-
ity of global warming. And let there be no mistake about it:
Global warming is real and the principal cause of global warm-
ing is the massive infusion of the greenhouse gases carbon diox-
ide and methane into Earth’s atmosphere as a result of human
beings’ burning fossil fuels like coal, petroleum, and natural gas.
This is afﬁrmed by 97 percent of all climate scientists, according
to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the
National Academy of Sciences (Global Climate Change 2014).
And according to the World Meteorological Association, the ﬁrst
decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century was the hottest on record (Past
Decade Hottest on Record 2014).
In the face of all this, the most sensible course of action would
seem to be to do everything within our power to stabilize the
human population (without violating human rights), combat
global warming, and conserve every drop of fresh water that we
possibly can. However, in the United States today, at least as far
as the last two items above go, just the opposite is taking place.
The United States is in the midst of a “shale gas boom.”
Shale gas is natural gas (mostly methane) that has been locked
underground in shale deposits for billions of years. This gas is
extracted from the earth by a process called hydraulic fracturing
or, in popular parlance, fracking. Fracking involves drilling a
well shaft into a shale deposit, which usually lies a mile or so
beneath the surface of the earth, and then injecting a brew
called fracking ﬂuid, consisting of huge amounts of fresh
water mixed with sand and many chemicals, some toxic, at a
very high pressure to crack the shale open and release the gas.
The gas is then pumped to the surface.
Fracking has been around for over 60 years but only became
economically feasible on a large scale with the perfection of a
technique called horizontal drilling, which involves the ability
146
Fracking

to tilt the drill at a 90 degree angle and bore through the shale
for up to a mile in any direction from a single well pad.
Previously, conventional vertical drilling required constructing
multiple well pads for a single ﬁeld, which was expensive.
Sometimes shale gas deposits lie beneath aquifers, in which
case pipelines are passed through these underground fresh water
lakes, presenting the very real possibility of contamination from
chemical leakage during the high-pressure fracking procedure.
But more outrageous is the fact that each fracking procedure
requires more than a million gallons of fresh water (Marcellus
Shale 2014). A full 80 percent of that water remains under-
ground, while another 20 percent returns to the surface as a
waste product containing not only the dangerous chemicals
used in the fracking ﬂuid but also poisonous substances, includ-
ing heavy metals and radioactive elements, brought up as dis-
solved rock from Earth’s interior itself (Fracking 2014).
Some of this wastewater is stored in on-site open pit holding
ponds, which can and do develop leaks or overﬂow in heavy
rains, polluting soil and nearby sources of fresh water. But more
often this waste is disposed of by the deep injection of this pois-
oned water into subsurface reservoirs such as abandoned gas
wells. This method has been shown to cause earth tremors
and earthquakes, relatively minor so far (Roach 2014).
Furthermore, wastewater disposed of in this way, like the
80 percent that remains underground in the ﬁrst place, is
removed from the evaporation phase of the hydrologic cycle.
The crux is that at least 90 percent of the water used for frack-
ing is ruined forever and rendered unﬁt for human and animal
consumption and for agricultural purposes.
The drilling industry–friendly website EnergyFromShale esti-
mates that at least one million wells have been fracked since the
late 1940s (What Is Fracking? 2014). Assuming an average of
ﬁve million gallons of water per fracking procedure means that
90 percent of ﬁve trillion gallons of fresh water have been
destroyed and permanently removed from the hyrdrologic cycle.
And millions of gallons more are being destroyed every day.
Perspectives
147

And to what end?
Millions of gallons of fresh water are being destroyed every
day in order to extract from the earth fossil fuels, mainly natural
gas and crude oil, which, when burned, will add to the plethora
of greenhouse gases raising the temperature of our planet
and damaging our climate. And, yes, although natural gas
burns cleaner than either coal or petroleum, it is a fossil fuel
and, hence, does contribute overall to global warming. In fact,
according to a study conducted by Stanford University, MIT,
and the U.S. Department of Energy, and as reported in The
New York Times, “the drilling and production of natural gas
can lead to leaks of methane, a greenhouse gas 30 times more
potent than carbon dioxide” and “those methane leaks negate
the climate change beneﬁts of using natural gas as a transporta-
tion fuel” (Davenport 2014).
Many parts of the world, including places in the U.S. West
are in the midst of a several-years-long drought. Farmers pray
for rain and watch their land turn to dust and blow away while
watching caravans of trucks go down the highways carrying
millions of gallons of water for the frackers to turn into toxic
waste. Meanwhile, the Pentagon is preparing for wars and civil
conﬂicts over water around the globe.
There are many reasons to advocate not merely a morato-
rium but an outright ban on fracking. But the wanton destruc-
tion of so much fresh water is the most compelling.
We can live without coal, oil, and natural gas. But we cannot
live without water.
References
Davenport, Cora. “Study Finds Methane Leaks Negate
Beneﬁts of Natural Gas as a Fuel for Vehicles.” The New
York Times. February 13, 2014. http://www.nytimes.com/
2014/02/14/us/study-ﬁnds-methane-leaks-negate-climate
-beneﬁts-of-natural-gas.html?_r=0. Accessed on July 18,
2014.
148
Fracking

“Fracking.” Greenpeace USA. http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/
en/campaigns/global-warming-and-energy/The-Problem/
fracking/. Accessed on July 18, 2014.
“Global Climate Change.” National Aeronautics and Space Admin-
istration. http://climate.nasa.gov/. Accessed on July 18, 2014.
“Marcellus Shale.” Department of Environmental Conservation.
http://www.dec.ny.gov/energy/46288.html. Accessed on
July 18, 2014.
“Past Decade Hottest on Record, Marked by Extremes: UN.”
Fox News. http://www.foxnews.com/world/2013/07/03/
past-decade-hottest-on-record-marked-by-extremes-un/.
Accessed on July 18, 2014.
Roach, John. “Fracking and Energy Exploration Connected to
Earthquakes, Say Studies.” NCB News. http://www.nbcnews
.com/science/environment/fracking-energy-exploration
-connected-earthquakes-say-studies-f6C10604071. Accessed
on July 18, 2014.
U.S. Geological Survey. “The USGS Water Science School.”
http://water.usgs.gov/edu/. Accessed on July 18, 2014.
“What Is Fracking?” EnergyFromShale.com. http://www
.energyfromshale.org/hydraulic-fracturing/what-is-fracking.
Accessed on July 18, 2014.
Michael Pastorkovich has a degree in philosophy and spent the
majority of his working life in the telecommunications industry.
He is a long-time member of the Sierra Club and is active in the
environmental movement along with other social causes.
Fracking by the Numbers: John Rumpler
In July 2014, a faulty valve atop a railcar owned by FrackMax
leaked hydrochloric acid vapors into the air just blocks from
downtown Brownsﬁeld, Texas (Hazardous Situation 2014).
And two weeks before that, ﬂood-damaged storage tanks spilled
7,500 gallons of crude oil into the Cache la Poudre River, the
Perspectives
149

only river from Colorado listed in the National Wild and
Scenic Rivers System (Oil Spill Cleanup Underway in
Windsor 2014). And in Ohio, a house with a leaking gas well
on the property exploded, killing a 27-year-old woman living
there (Investigation Continues at Site of House Explosion
2014).
These are just a few recent examples of the fallout from
fracking. Yet alarmingly, this dirty drilling remains exempt
from key provisions of our nation’s environmental and public
health laws.
So as state and federal ofﬁcials decide whether to allow the oil
and gas industry to expand fracking—even to areas that provide
drinking water to millions of Americans—it’s time to measure
the damage done to our environment and health by dirty
drilling.
In 2013, we published our ﬁndings in a report called
“Fracking by the Numbers” (Fracking by the Numbers 2013).
We looked at key measures of fracking risks to our water, air,
land, and climate.
Contamination of drinking water is one of the key threats
posed by fracking. In reviewing state records, we found more
than 1,000 documented cases where dirty drilling has contami-
nated groundwater or other drinking water sources. While such
contamination can happen at several points in the fracking pro-
cess—spills of fracking ﬂuid, well blowouts, leaks around the
well bore—perhaps the greatest threat to our water comes from
the toxic waste that fracking generates.
Often laced with cancer-causing and even radioactive
material, this fracking waste has leaked from waste pits into
groundwater, has been dumped into rivers and streams, and
has spread onto roadways.
So how much of this fracking waste are we talking about?
Using state- and industry-submitted data, we calculated that
fracking generated 280 billion gallons of toxic wastewater in
2012 alone. That’s enough fracking waste to ﬂood all of
Washington, D.C., in a 22-foot-deep toxic lagoon.
150
Fracking

And yet, this toxic fracking waste is exempt from our
nation’s hazardous waste laws.
We also looked at how much water is used by fracking—a
crucial question especially in arid Western states in the midst
of the fracking frenzy. Again, using data submitted by fracking
operators, we calculated that fracking has used 250 billion gal-
lons of fresh water since 2005. And unlike other water uses,
to the extent that fracking converts this water into toxic waste
that is injected deep down into the ground, water used for
fracking is gone for good.
The numbers on fracking look equally appalling with respect
to our health, our natural heritage, and the planet.
With a growing number of residents experiencing illness
with the onset of nearby fracking operations, we found that
fracking operations produced 450,000 tons of air pollution in
one year.
To give you a sense of what these air pollution numbers can
mean, look at what Pam Judy, a woman whose house in
Carmichael, Pennsylvania, is just 780 feet from a compressor
station, had to say:
Shortly after operations began, we started to experience
extreme headaches, runny noses, sore/scratchy throats,
muscle aches and a constant feeling of fatigue. Both of
our children are experiencing nose bleeds and I’ve had diz-
ziness, vomiting and vertigo to the point that I couldn’t
stand and was taken to an emergency room. (Personal
Account from the Marcellus Shale 2014)
When she ﬁnally persuaded state ofﬁcials to test the air around
her house, they found the following chemicals: benzene,
styrene, toluene, xylene, hexane, heptane, acetone, acrolein,
propene, carbon tetrachloride, and chloromethane. Other resi-
dents living on the frontlines of fracking are experiencing simi-
lar illnesses, as documented in Shaleﬁeld Stories and other
publications, as well as reviews by medical doctors.
Perspectives
151

Fracking is also putting our natural heritage at risk. As pris-
tine landscapes have been covered with well pads, compressor
stations, access roads, and other drilling infrastructure, we esti-
mate that fracking has directly degraded 360,000 acres of land
since 2005.
And ﬁnally, as fracking boosters have sought to win over the
green-minded, we calculated that well completions alone—not
counting the rest of fracking operations—have produced
100 million metric tons of global warming pollution since
2005. Looking at the full life-cycle of production and use, the
global warming impact of dirty gas could well rival that of coal.
Our calculations understate the true toll of fracking.
Fracking also inﬂicts other damage we did not quantify in our
report—ranging from contamination of residential wells to
ruined roads to earthquakes near disposal sites.
Viewed in their totality, the numbers on fracking add up to
an environmental nightmare. Given the number and severity
of threats posed by fracking, constructing a regulatory regime
sufﬁcient to protect our water and our health—much less
enforcing it at more than 80,000 wells, plus processing and
waste disposal sites across the country—seems implausible at
best. At the end of the day, protecting our environment and
public health will require a ban on fracking.
Thus it is no surprise that a growing number of communities
across the country—from Dryden, New York, to Dallas, Texas—
are taking action to stop dirty drilling within their borders.
And while the power of the oil and gas industry bars such
decisive action at the federal level, there are two things
President Obama can do right now to at least limit the damage
from fracking. First, as the Bureau of Land Management mulls
weak rules for fracking on public lands, the president should
insist on following a key recommendation of his own adminis-
tration’s advisory panel: to keep “unique and/or sensitive
areas . . . off limits to drilling.” At a minimum, that means
quashing the oil and gas industry’s bid to frack inside our
national forests, on the doorsteps of our national parks, or in
152
Fracking

places that provide drinking water for millions of Americans.
Second, the president should call for an end to the loopholes
that make fracking exempt from key provisions of our nation’s
environmental laws.
To the dire fracking numbers presented in our research, we
should add a more hopeful one: In August 2013, Americans
submitted more than one million comments urging the
Obama administration to take much stronger action to protect
our environment and health from fracking.
References
“Fracking by the Numbers.” Environment America Research
& Policy Center. October 3, 2013. http://www.environment
americacenter.org/reports/amc/fracking-numbers. Accessed on
July 19, 2014.
“Hazardous Situation.” Brownﬁeld News. July 11, 2014.
http://www.brownﬁeldonline.com/Content/Default/
Homepage-Rotating-Articles/Article/Hazardous-Situation/
-3/19/2158. Accessed on July 19, 2014.
“Investigation Continues at Site of House Explosion.” Fox 8
Cleveland. http://fox8.com/2014/07/17/investigation-to
-continue-at-site-of-house-explosion/. Accessed on July 19,
2014.
“Oil Spill Cleanup Underway in Windsor.” CBS Denver.
June 21, 2014. http://denver.cbslocal.com/2014/06/21/
oil-spill-cleanup-underway-in-windsor/. Accessed on
July 19, 2014.
“Personal Account from the Marcellus Shale: Pam Judy.”
Marcellus-Shale.us. September 8, 2012. http://www.marcellus
-shale.us/Pam-Judy.htm. Accessed on July 18, 2014.
John Rumpler is a senior attorney with Environment America, a
federation of state-based, citizen-supported environmental advo-
cacy
organizations
in
29
states
(www.environmentamerica
Perspectives
153

.org). Since 2003, John has coordinated the organization’s work on
fracking and clean water—including state-level campaigns from
California to New York. He has coauthored numerous research
reports, most recently Fracking by the Numbers: Key Impacts of
Dirty Drilling at the State and National Level (http://tinyurl.
com/n3fsrbp).
He
has
also
testiﬁed
before
Congress
(the House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure)
regarding enforcement of the nation’s clean water laws. Prior to
his position at Environment America, John practiced public
interest
and
environmental
law,
representing
community
organizations in land use, zoning, and permitting matters. He
earned his law degree at Northeastern University School of Law
(1996), and studied history and philosophy at Tufts University
(B.A., 1988).
Exploring Alternative Uses for Fracking Water:
Lana Straub
As the boom of the oil ﬁeld has increased in the early part of the
twenty-ﬁrst century, so has the use of water for drilling and
fracking purposes. Quite a lot of the water used for oil ﬁeld
activities comes from nonrenewable sources of freshwater
such as groundwater, particularly in the arid southwest.
Nevertheless, all parts of the United States have felt the pull
of water from the oil ﬁeld. In the Marcellus Shale Play alone,
the volume of wastewater produced from drilling activities
increased signiﬁcantly between 2008 and 2011, “climbing from
about 365,000 m3 in 2008 to 1,682,000 m3 in late 2011,” the
increase in water usage and wastewater production correspond-
ing directly to the upward trend in oil production (Rahm et al.
2013). Depending on the geology of the formation, “frequently
millions of gallons of fracking solution are used per well”
(Thornton 2014).
Concerns about proper disposal of the wastewater generated
from drilling, completion, and hydrofracking processes has
become an issue for local citizens as well as a national feeling
154
Fracking

of unease. “In many areas limited resources exist to properly
process it. As a result, ﬂowback solution may be improperly dis-
posed of and potentially contaminate soil and water supplies”
(Thornton 2014). To answer the concerns of tremendous water
use and proper wastewater disposal, several companies are
forming and research groups are completing studies to attempt
to ﬁnd new ways to reduce, reuse, and recycle fracking ﬂow-
back water and produced water. The extraction of oil and gas
can produce quite a bit of non-potable water on its own.
As the deep aquifers are penetrated during the extraction pro-
cess, on average, producers recover three barrels of saline-rich
produce water per one barrel of oil. In some locations in
Texas, the rate can be as high as 12:1 (Downey 2009).
Parts of California were hit hard by the drought conditions
from 2011 to 2014. Lauren Sommer of the public radio station
KQED Science desk reported in her story about Chevron pro-
viding recycled produce water to thirsty agriculture areas that
claimed to have drained aquifers due to drought and oil pro-
duction in the area. “In the only project of its kind in the state,”
reports Sommer, “Chevron’s water travels several miles through
a 40-inch pipe, until it arrives in a reservoir used by the Cawelo
Water District.” Chevron provides 26,000-acre feet and “the
district mixes Chevron’s water with an equal amount of fresh-
water, until it reaches a quality that works for local orchards”
(Sommer 2014).
Moreover, Chevron is not alone. The Colorado School of
Mines developed the Advanced Water Technology Center
(AQWATEC) in 2006. AQWATEC’s mission is “to advance
the science of emerging water treatment processes and hybrid sys-
tems, enabling sustainable and energy efﬁcient utilization of
impaired water sources for potable and non-potable water sup-
plies” (AQWATEC 2013). AQWATEC focuses on water issues
in Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming.
The group has studied potential beneﬁcial use options of pro-
duced coal-bed methane water in these areas and found
many potential use including livestock watering, agricultural
Perspectives
155

irrigation, mining, ﬁshing, wildlife maintenance enhancement,
and constructed wetlands, in addition to domestic, commercial,
and municipal uses.
To assist in the study of beneﬁcial uses, AQWATEC devel-
oped a screening tool that “was used to determine treatment
technology alternatives and costs, potential beneﬁcial uses,
and overall project costs for these uses. The Screening Tool also
predicts treated water quality for the recommended treatment
train” (Plumlee et al. 2014). Treatment trains are the types of
additives or ﬁltering systems that might need to be added
to the water in order for it to provide the beneﬁcial use.
Examples of treatment trains are chemical disinfection, media
ﬁlter, and tight nanoﬁltration (Plumlee et al. 2014).
Scientists are beginning to study how these options can
be viable for fracking ﬂowback water as well. In a study in
Bear Creek, Louisiana, scientists from the Colorado School of
Mines used forward osmosis (FO) as a method of reclaiming
water for beneﬁcial use. Their ﬁndings were signiﬁcant.
“For each well, more than 80 percent of the drilling waste can
be treated, providing more than 20 percent of the water
required for hydraulic fracturing of new wells.” The scientists
found that not only did the use of forward osmosis reduce
water use, it actually made the water useful for more drilling,
which reduced the need for other potable water sources.
“Overall, it was demonstrated that FO is an effective technol-
ogy for concentration of drilling wastewater, facilitating water
reuse for fracturing operation and reducing the need for an
additional water source” (Hickenbottom 2013).
One of the drawbacks to promoting beneﬁcial use of frack-
ing water has been the mysterious “proprietary” ingredients in
the frack ﬂuid cocktail that frighten everyday consumers.
Scientists are continually conducting studies on the potential
hazards of fracking ﬂuid, which are yet to be completed; there
have not been many citable examples of beneﬁcial uses of
156
Fracking

fracking ﬂuid besides the Chevron work in California.
However, some companies are actively and successfully treating
and recycling frack ﬂowback water for reuse in the oil ﬁeld,
which reduces the oil ﬁeld use of nonrenewable water sources.
Aqua-Pure Ventures has applied the practice in several shale
plays. According to company marketing literature, “[t]he
Company has now recycled more than 700 million gallons of
Devon Energy’s ﬂowback and produced water in the Barnett.
The treated water, which would otherwise have been injected
into disposal wells and permanently removed from the hydro-
logical cycle, is instead re-used in Devon’s drilling operations”
(Aqua-Pure Ventures 2014).
As long as unconventional drilling continues to ﬂourish nation-
ally as well as internationally, ﬂowback frack water will be an issue
of discussion. New studies are ongoing on the subject of ﬂowback
ﬂuid from hydraulic fracturing operations to determine its hazards
and possible beneﬁts to society now and in the future.
References
Aqua-Pure Ventures. “Service & Operations: Barnett Shale.”
http://www.aqua-pure.com/operations/shale/barnett/
barnett.html. Accessed on July 31, 2014.
AQWATEC. AQWATEC Produced Water Treatment and
Beneﬁcial Use Information Center. January 1, 2013. http://
aqwatec.mines.edu/produced_water/about/index.htm.
Accessed on July 31, 2014.
Downey, Morgan. 2009. Oil 101. New York: Wooden Table Press.
Hickenbottom, Kerri L. 2013. “Forward Osmosis Treatment
of Drilling Mud and Fracturing Wastewater from Oil and
Gas Operations.” Desalination. 312(3): 60–66. http://linking
hub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0011916412003086. Accessed
on August 1, 2014.
Perspectives
157

Plumlee, Megan H. et al. 2014. “Coalbed Methane Produced
Water Screening Tool for Treatment Technology and
Beneﬁcial Use.” Journal of Unconventional Oil and Gas
Resources. 5(3): 22–34. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S2213397613000372. Accessed on August 1, 2014.
Rahm, Brian G. et al. 2013. “Wastewater Management and
Marcellus Shale Gas Development: Trends, Drivers, and
Planning Implications.” Journal of Environmental
Management. 120: 105–113. doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.
2013.02.029. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
23507249. Accessed on August 1, 2014.
Sommer, Lauren. “California Farmers Look to Oil Industry for
Water.” KQED Science. April 7, 2014. http://blogs.kqed.
org/science/audio/california-farmers-look-to-oil-industry-
for-water/. Accessed on July 31, 2014.
Thornton, S. L. 2014. “Fracking Solution.” Encyclopedia of
Toxicology, Volume 2. http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/B978-
0-12-386454-3.01229-X. Accessed on August 1, 2014.
Lana Straub is a freelance journalist and radio producer from West
Texas and a regular contributor to the Water Well Journal
Magazine and KXWT-West Texas Public Radio. She is a 2014
IJNR fellow and produces her own multimedia blog, WaterTells.
Fracking Like It’s Your Job: Why Worker Safety in the
Fracking Industry Is So Important: Laura Walter
Let’s face it. Fracking is controversial, and that controversy can
get ugly. But no matter how strongly one might oppose the
process of fracking and its potential environmental impact,
there is one population that always deserves to be protected:
the workers in the ﬁeld.
Work is an integral part of one’s life. Whether the job is full-
time or part-time, professional or blue collar, salaried or hourly,
158
Fracking

temporary or long-term, each and every employee has the right
to a workplace that will not negatively impact his or her safety,
health, and well-being. This applies to all workplaces, whether
it is an ofﬁce, where the biggest risk might be a paper cut, or a
job in a more inherently dangerous line of work, such as con-
struction, electrical work, or oil and gas excavation—including
fracking.
Thanks to the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970
(OSH Act), American workers are protected under federal law
from workplace health and safety hazards. Sometimes, this pro-
tection translates to safety equipment such as hard hats, fall
protection, high-visibility clothing, or respiratory protection.
Every safety expert worth his or her salt, however, knows that
the true key to safety is not merely combating existing safety
concerns with additional equipment, but rather taking those
hazards out of the equation entirely. Furthermore, training
employees adequately and fostering a positive workplace safety
culture will do more to ensure safety than simply issuing a list
of rules. The bottom line is that everyone who goes to work
should be able to expect to return home healthy and safe by
the end of that shift—and it is the employer’s responsibility to
make sure that happens.
It is true that workplace safety in the United States has
improved in leaps and bounds in the decades since the OSH
Act was signed. But there is still a long way to go. Thousands
of employees continue to die preventable deaths on the job
every year in this country. Those fatalities are represented in
deﬁnable incidents, such as falls from height, trafﬁc accidents,
contact with machinery, and chemical exposure. What is often
more difﬁcult to quantify are the thousands of additional deaths
each year from occupational illness. Breathe in some dust or gas
on the job one year and then come down with a fatal lung dis-
ease a few years later, all linked to that on-the-job exposure—
this type of occupational hazard can be tricky to track or mon-
itor, but it happens to American workers all the time. And it
Perspectives
159

appears it may be happening right now within the fracking
industry.
One of the biggest risks fracking workers face is potential
exposure to respirable crystalline silica. According to the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), the
federal agency tasked with protecting American worker safety,
the mineral silica makes up the sand used in the hydraulic frac-
turing process (Silica Exposure during Hydraulic Fracturing
2014). If workers inhale this microscopic airborne dust, they
are at risk of serious or fatal diseases including lung cancer or
silicosis, a possibly fatal lung disease, to name just two such
conditions. Both OSHA and the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) note that “large
quantities of silica sand are used during hydraulic fracturing,”
with multiple sources of silica dust exposure inherent in the
fracking process (Worker Exposure to Crystalline Silica during
Hydraulic Fracturing 2012). This means that workers in the
fracking industry are vulnerable to a highly dangerous airborne
dust that could lead to debilitating or even fatal illnesses.
In an ideal world, all employees would be adequately pro-
tected from exposure to threats such as respirable silica.
Unfortunately, we don’t live and work in an ideal world.
While OSHA has set permissible exposure limits for silica,
NIOSH sampled the air around 116 fracking sites in 2012
and found that nearly half indicated silica exposure greater than
OSHA’s limits, with 9 percent indicating exposure levels at
least 10 times the limit. NIOSH therefore concluded that at
these fracking sites, “an inhalation health hazard existed for
workers exposed to crystalline silica” (Worker Exposure to
Crystalline Silica during Hydraulic Fracturing 2012).
For its part, OSHA initiated a long-awaited proposed rule for
silica in late 2013. OSHA claims the ruling, if implemented,
“could save nearly 700 lives and prevent 1,600 new cases of
silicosis per year” (OSHA Crystalline Silica Rulemaking 2014).
But this is just the beginning. In general, new federal safety regu-
lations face long periods of scrutiny along with criticism from
160
Fracking

industry interests who might view the new rules as an impedi-
ment to economic growth, speed of operations, and proﬁts.
Business versus safety is an age-old battle, and time will tell how
and when OSHA’s proposed silica rule can make a difference
within the fracking industry and beyond.
Silica isn’t the only danger that fracking employees face. The
oil and gas industry is considered one of the riskier trades for
workers, with hazards including toxic chemical spills, explo-
sions, contact with heavy machinery, transportation accidents,
falls, and more. Recently, NIOSH investigated four fracking
worker fatalities caused by chemical exposure. NIOSH pointed
out that chemicals involved in fracking ﬂowback operations
are dangerous and “can affect the eyes, breathing, and the nerv-
ous system” (Reports of Worker Fatalities during Flowback
Operations 2013).
Clearly, fracking is rife with potential risks to its employees.
Just as communities need access to clean water and air, workers
need access to jobs that will not endanger their health and safety.
Fracking might be a controversial practice, but that does not
change the fact that workers in the industry deserve adequate pro-
tection from chemical exposure, silicosis, and any other workplace
hazard. After all, the importance of keeping workers safe goes
deep—deeper than any fracking operation ever could.
References
“OSHA Crystalline Silica Rulemaking.” Occupational Safety
and Health Administration. https://www.osha.gov/silica/.
Accessed on July 15, 2014.
“Reports of Worker Fatalities during Flowback Operations.”
NIOSH Science Blog. May 19, 2013. http://blogs.cdc.gov/
niosh-science-blog/2014/05/19/ﬂowback/. Accessed on
July 15, 2014.
“Silica Exposure during Hydraulic Fracturing.” OSHA
Infosheet. https://www.osha.gov/dts/infosheets/silica
_hydraulicfracturing.html. Accessed on July 15, 2014.
Perspectives
161

“Worker Exposure to Crystalline Silica during Hydraulic
Fracturing.” NIOSH Science Blog. May 23, 2012. https://
www.osha.gov/dts/hazardalerts/hydraulic_frac_hazard_alert.
html. Accessed on July 15, 2014.
Laura Maylene Walter is a writer and editor living in Cleveland. As
the past senior editor of EHS Today, she has written many articles
about occupational and environmental safety, with a special interest
in workplace culture, health, and productivity. She is the author of
the award-winning short story collection Living Arrangements, and
her writing has appeared in publications including The Sun, Poets
& Writers, Cat Fancy, and various literary journals.
Feeding the Fracking Workforce: How Worker
Nutrition Supports Health, Safety, and Productivity:
Christopher Wanjek
Remote and temporary work sites prevalent in fracking opera-
tions present a challenge for housing and feeding workers.
The nearest town and accommodations might be hours away
by car; often such work sites are ﬂy-in operations. Hostile envi-
ronments—extreme cold or heat—and inadequate roads and
other infrastructure limitations compound the problem of pro-
viding adequate food and shelter. Inadequate accommodations
can leave workers vulnerable to poor nutrition, sickness, inad-
equate rest and sleep, long-term health problems, low morale,
and general apathy about the work at hand. This, in turn, can
lead to lower productivity and increased risk of accidents.
This article examines factors that affect worker health, safety,
and productivity at fracking sites and provides the rationale of
how better feeding and relaxation programs can increase pro-
ductivity and lower accident rates.
Food as Protection
Accidents are a fracking operation’s worst nightmare. One
wrong switch, one loose bolt, one missed safety check, and
162
Fracking

the entire system can blow. Workers’ lives are at stake. And,
depending on the severity of the accident, the life of the entire
community is threatened, too, as well as the very life of the
company and the broader business climate for years to come.
Years of a carefully cultivated corporate social responsibility
practice can evaporate overnight.
Approximately 90 percent of workplace accidents are caused
by human error (Feyer and Williamson 1998), and the number
one cause of worker-initiated accidents is fatigue in its various
forms, such as exhaustion, weakness, or sleepiness (Chan
2009). Workers need to understand not only how to operate
equipment but to make quick yet prudent decisions, when nec-
essary. Yet no amount of training can prepare a sleepy, fatigued,
or otherwise unfocused or unmotivated worker from making a
poor decision or a wrong move.
Companies that complement worker safety and training pro-
grams with adequate feeding and relaxation programs report
lower accident rates and higher productivity and morale
(Wanjek 2005). Food and rest are, in essence, protective equip-
ment, and they serve to lower the risk of serious workplace acci-
dents. As such, food and rest should be viewed as essential to
worker safety and health as goggles, ear protection, or the sun-
dry protective elements found at any industrial site.
What Workers Need, and What Workers Get
In many parts of the world, remote industrial sites are synony-
mous with poor worker accommodations and vast environmen-
tal degradation. Think mining operation and shantytowns.
Such sites can belittle an international company’s global reputa-
tion. Worker accommodations in the fracking industry are far
better in North America and other economically developed
regions, but they still are far from ideal (Wanjek 2005). In
many remote-site operations, when the call for work goes out,
workers must scramble for housing (Dragseth 2011). Many
workers pile up in local motels, if available, with the word local
Perspectives
163

meaning anywhere within a two-hour drive from the work site.
Other workers tow trailer homes close to the work site, and
these are usually ill suited for long-term use or for extreme heat
or cold.
Securing food daily quickly becomes a problem. Even if
these workers have access to a stove and know how to cook,
they will have difﬁculty obtaining fresh foods, and their meals
will likely be basic and nutritionally inadequate for optimal
health. Those living in motels often are forced to eat at the
same diner or fast-food restaurant for the duration of their con-
tract, which could be months. Imagine such an existence, all
the while working 12-hour days.
Workers at remote and temporary fracking sites are a diverse
crew. They might be college-educated engineers. They might
be high-school-educated blue-collar workers. They are mostly
men (although women are increasing their numbers). But they
often have one thing in common: They likely are leaving their
family and the comforts of home for hard work and long hours.
For most workers at remote sites, anything the company can do
to relieve the stress of long hours and great distances will be a
plus for worker health and morale and, by extension, for com-
pany safety and productivity.
Successful food and housing programs at remote work sites
—where successful means high morale, high productivity, low
absenteeism, low turnover, and few, if any, serious accidents
—have just a few key ingredients: CEOs or upper management
that truly care about worker safety and health; thoughtful
catering that takes into consideration the nutritional needs of
the workforce; opportunities to relax with coworkers; and the
feeling of a home away from home, as opposed to a bunker
away from home (Wanjek 2005).
Successful meal programs cater to the unique nutritional
needs of a heavy laborer at a fracking site. Most workers will
burn more than 300 kcal/hour. A carbohydrate gruel leaves
workers tired after just a few hours; fast foods leave workers
chronically tired after just a few days. In general, the body in
164
Fracking

manual labor requires 1.2–1.7 grams of protein per kilogram
body weight (Lemon 1998). The B-complex vitamins, found
in meats and whole grains, are needed for tissue repair and
energy conversion. Vitamins A and C, found in vegetables, are
needed for immunity. Vitamin D, found in fatty ﬁsh (and sun-
shine, if available), is needed for calcium absorption. The nutri-
tional needs are well known and, indeed, employed by
professional sports teams (Borden 2014).
Return on Investment
Investments in feeding and wellness programs routinely yield
proﬁts in terms of higher productivity, fewer accidents, and
absenteeism and turnover (Wanjek 2005). Husky Injection
Molding Systems, Ltd., in Bolton, Ontario, has reported a US
$6.8 million yearly saving from a US$2.5 million investment
in wellness. Coors Brewing Company has reported a $6.15 pro-
ductivity gain for every $1 invested in food and ﬁtness.
Similarly, Travelers reports a $3.40 gain for $1 invested in
nutrition and recreation; DuPont reports a $2.05 gain for $1
invested in nutrition and recreation; and the Canadian
government estimates that wellness, in the form of better feed-
ing, health promotion, and relaxation programs, amounts to a
CAN$2 to $6 return on investment (Wanjek 2005).
And food and housing is just that: an investment. No com-
pany is required to provide healthy food and comfortable
accommodations. Yet it is little coincidence that the best com-
panies to work for, as ranked by Fortune magazine, routinely
have superior cafeterias and various recreational comforts.
Remote-site food and housing accommodations, if planned
well, can have numerous positive effects on proﬁt and productiv-
ity. Tangible and immediate beneﬁts can include well-rested and
well-nourished workers with high morale and productivity levels
and lower risk for serious accidents. Long-term beneﬁts for
the fracking industry from such an investment can include
community support and a positive corporate image.
Perspectives
165

References
Borden, Sam. 2014. “A Squad as Intense as Its Enchiladas.”
The New York Times. June 28, 2014, SP7.
Chan, M. 2009. Accident Risk Management in Oil and Gas
Construction Projects in Mainland China. Sydney: University
of Sydney.
Dragseth, D. “Help Wanted: The North Dakota Boom.” New
Geography, October 26, 2011. http://www.newgeography.
com/content/002501-help-wanted-the-north-dakota-boom.
Accessed on July 14, 2014.
Feyer, A. M. and A. M. Williamson. 1998. “Human Factors in
Accident Modelling.” In: J. M. Stellman, ed. Encyclopaedia
of Occupational Health and Safety, 4th ed. Geneva:
International Labour Organization.
Lemon, P. W. R. 1998. “Effects of Exercise on Dietary Protein
Requirements.” International Journal of Sport Nutrition. 8
(4):426–447.
Wanjek, Christopher. “Food at Work: Workplace Solutions for
Malnutrition, Obesity and Chronic Diseases.” Geneva:
International Labour Organization. 2005. http://www.ilo.
org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@dgreports/@dcomm/@publ/
documents/publication/wcms_publ_9221170152_en.pdf.
Accessed on July 14, 2014.
Christopher Wanjek is a health writer based in Washington, D.C.
He is the author of Food At Work: Workplace Solutions for
Malnutrition, Obesity and Chronic Diseases, written for the
United Nations’ International Labor Organization. The book
documents how poor nutrition in the workforce is a health,
safety, and productivity concern. Published in 2005, the book
has inspired laws enhancing workers’ nutrition globally.
166
Fracking



4
Profiles
Introduction
One avenue toward a better understanding of the history and
nature of hydraulic fracturing comes through learning about
individuals and organizations who have made signiﬁcant con-
tributions in the ﬁeld. It is impossible to mention every person
and organization who has made such a contribution in a book
of this length. However, the biographies and reviews provided
here provide a taste of the way that individuals, agencies, corpo-
rations, and other institutions have made the ﬁeld of hydraulic
fracturing what it is today.
Many of the organizations working for and against hydraulic
fracturing are large corporations, such as multinational oil and
gas companies or other corporate associations, or national or
international nongovernmental or other nonproﬁt associations.
Examples of such groups on both sides of the fracking debate
are listed here. But, as with many environmental issues, many
of the groups that oppose fracking are relatively small, generally
underfunded and understaffed, local groups organized to deal
with speciﬁc problems associated with fracking, rather than
169
Dr. Terry Engelder, Professor of Geology at Penn State University, left, is
assisted by Susan Oliver while showing former Pennsylvania Governor Tom
Ridge a chart explaining the Marcellus shale formation while touring outcrop-
pings near Williamsport, Pennsylvania on June 16, 2011. (AP Photo/Ralph
Wilson)

the greater debate over fracking nationwide or worldwide. It is
impossible to list many such local organizations, so one has
been selected to give a ﬂavor of the type and characteristics of
such action, the No Fracked Gas in Mass group.
American Gas Association
400 North Capitol St., NW
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: (202) 824-7000
URL: http://www.aga.org/
Email: none provided
The American Gas Association (AGA) was formed on June 6,
1918, with the merger of two preexisting organizations, the
American Gas Institute (AGI) and the National Commercial
Gas Association (NCGA). The former organization was inter-
ested primarily in technical issues, while the NCGA focused on
problems of marketing natural gas. The newly formed AGA com-
bined the mission and activities of its two predecessors.
At the time, the vast majority of gas used was called manufac-
tured gas, a product made synthetically by a variety of means.
There was little or no market at the time for natural gas. That
situation began to change during the 1920s, however, as natu-
ral gas found a greater variety of uses than in lighting, which
had been the primary application of manufactured gas.
Reﬂecting this change in emphasis, the AGA merged with the
Natural Gas Association of America (NGAA) in 1927, provid-
ing the basic institution that exists today as the American Gas
Association. Today the organization claims to represent more
than 200 local energy companies with more than 68 million
customers in the United States. Its primary objectives are to:
• Serve as an advocate for issues related to natural gas use that
are of primary concern to member companies;
170
Fracking

• Promote the efﬁcient use of natural gas;
• Assist members in achieving excellence in the safe, secure,
efﬁcient, reliable, and environmentally sensitive delivery of
their product;
• Assist member companies in responding to customer needs;
• Collect, analyze, and disseminate information about natural
gas issues of relevance to member companies; and
• Encourage the “identiﬁcation, development, commercializa-
tion, demonstration and regulatory acceptance” of technolo-
gies that will allow natural gas companies to compete
successfully in the marketplace.
Much of the AGA’s work is carried out through more than
50 committees formed to deal with topics of special interest to
the association. Examples of those are committees on building
energy codes and standards, climate change, corrosion control,
distribution and transmission engineering, environmental mat-
ters, environmental regulatory action, government relations
policy, labor relations, natural gas security, plastic materials,
safety and occupational health, state affairs, sustainable growth,
and underground storage.
The current list of issues in which AGA is most interested
tends to reﬂect the list of committees with major topics being
subjects such as climate and energy policy, energy efﬁciency,
environment, ﬁscal responsibility, natural gas vehicles, the
promise of natural gas, rates and regulatory issues, responsible
natural gas development, safety, security, supply, and taxes.
Somewhat interestingly, the AGA appears to have no special
committee or issue that focuses on issues related to hydraulic
fracturing, although information on the technology is available
in various places on the organization’s website. As one might
expect, its position tends to be generally supportive of fracking
as a clean and responsible method for extracting natural gas
from reservoirs.
Profiles
171

American Petroleum Institute
1220 L St., NW
Washington, DC 20005-4070
Phone: (202) 682-8000
URL: http://www.api.org/
Email: http://www.api.org/contactus.cfm
The American Petroleum Institute (API) is a trade advocacy
association consisting of more than 400 companies involved
in the production, reﬁning, and distribution of petroleum, as
well as support functions for the industry. The association was
founded on March 20, 1919, after the end of World War I.
During the war, a number of independent petroleum compa-
nies had worked together and with the federal government to
produce and supply the petroleum products needed to win
the war. When the war was over, the petroleum companies rec-
ognized the beneﬁts of having a single trade organization that
could represent their interests before the government and the
general public. Such an association also had the potential for
establishing, promulgating, and enforcing industry-wide stan-
dards for the production and distribution of petroleum and
petroleum products. The ﬁrst of those standards was annou-
nced in 1925. Today, the API administers a complex and com-
prehensive set of more than 500 such standards covering all
aspects of the petroleum and natural gas industry. The API cur-
rently has State Petroleum Councils in 33 states, all of which
are located east of the Rocky Mountains.
API’s activities can be broadly classiﬁed into one of four ﬁelds:
standards, education and certiﬁcation, statistics, and public advo-
cacy and lobbying. Consistent with its early focus, the organiza-
tion produces new and revised standards on a regular basis,
covering virtually every conceivable aspect of petroleum and natu-
ral gas production and distribution. These standards cover topics
such as the quality and uses of motor oil; dimensions of rings,
plugs, threads, and other devices used in the industry; design
172
Fracking

and manufacture of vessels; measuring instruments and methods
of calibration; safety and ﬁre regulations; and inspection standards
and procedures for reﬁning operations. Certain API standards are
well known both in and outside the industry as, for example, the
“API gravity” number, which identiﬁes the density of a petroleum
product, and the “API number,” which is a unique identiﬁer for
every well and exploration site in the United States.
The core of the API’s training and certiﬁcation effort
includes programs such as: the API Monogram Program, which
allows companies to apply for certiﬁcation for the equipment
they produce; APIQR, which allows companies to have their
products certiﬁed as approved for use in the industry by the
API; Individual Certiﬁcation Program (ICP), which provides
individuals with training in and certiﬁcation for certain types
of speciﬁc skills used in the industry; Witnessing Programs,
which trains individuals in the skills required to observe and
approve a variety of procedures used in the industry; and
Energy Risk Management, in which individuals are trained to
assess and deal with the variety of risks that arise during the
exploration for and production and distribution of petroleum
and petroleum products. In addition to the training of workers
in the ﬁeld of petroleum and natural gas, API produces a variety
of materials for the education of the general public. One of
the best known of these resources is a website called Class-
room Energy (http://www.classroom-energy.org/), at which
the organization presents its own view on a number of energy-
related issues, such as climate change, environmental protec-
tion, and oil spills. Critics have noted that these presentations
are somewhat biased toward the view of the industry, which is
hardly surprising or unreasonable given that advocacy is a
legitimate function of the organization and its materials.
The API is particularly and justiﬁably proud of its work in
producing statistics about every aspect of the petroleum and
natural gas industries. It began this activity very early in its his-
tory, releasing weekly data on the production of crude oil as
Profiles
173

early as 1920. Among the core data sets produced by the
organization are the Weekly Statistical Bulletin, Monthly
Statistical
Report,
Quarterly
Well
Completion
Report,
Imports and Exports of Crude Oil and Petroleum Products,
Joint Association Survey on Drilling Costs, and Inventories of
Natural Gas Liquids and Liqueﬁed Reﬁnery Gases.
Finally, the API is a strong advocate for certain industry-
favorable positions on a variety of energy, environment, politi-
cal, and other issues. It exercises this function in a variety of
ways, such as television advertising and news releases to the
media. It also expresses its views through a number of lobbyists
(16 in 2009) that attempt to inﬂuence legislation on issues
related to petroleum and natural gas. In 2009, its budget for
public advocacy was reported to be $3.6 million. Some of its
positions on important national issues include support for addi-
tional oil and gas drilling as a way to increase the number of
jobs available for Americans and improve the overall economy,
for an extension of tax beneﬁts to the oil and gas industry as a
way of encouraging further exploration and improving the
industry’s efﬁciency, and for voluntary industry regulation as a
way of dealing with environmental issues related to oil and gas
production and distribution.
As do most trade organization, the API sponsors and partic-
ipates in a number of meetings, conferences, workshops, and
other sessions in which new information can be disseminated
and participants can interact with each other. Some of the
topics of such meetings are exploration, production, distribu-
tion, offshore wells, storage tanks, oil and gas tankers, facility
security, regulations, standards, and training and certiﬁcation.
The API also sponsors a prodigious publication program, pro-
ducing more than 200,000 publications each year. Its online
publications catalog includes sections on exploration and
production, health and environmental issues, marine issues,
marketing, reﬁning, safety and ﬁre issues, storage tanks, and
petroleum measurement standards.
174
Fracking

America’s Natural Gas Alliance
701 8th Street NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: (202) 789-2642
URL: http://anga.us/
Email: info@anga.us
America’s Natural Gas Alliance (ANGA) provides relatively lit-
tle information about its own history. But outside sources
report that the organization was formed in March 2009 pri-
marily for the purpose of lobbying the U.S. Congress as it
considered legislation for dealing with global climate change.
A consortium of some of the nation’s and world’s largest natu-
ral gas producing companies, ANGA has lobbied for the pre-
sumption that natural gas should and can be considered a fuel
of the future because of its relatively low input to climate
change, compared to other fossil fuels. The organization cur-
rently has 21 members, including Apache, Cabot Oil and Gas
Corporation, Chesapeake Energy, Energen, Laredo Petro-
leum, Pioneer Natural Resources, Southwestern Energy, and
Xto Energy. President and CEO of the organization is Marty
Durbin, nephew of the senior senator from Illinois, Dick
Durbin, and formerly vice president of the American Petro-
leum Institute.
ANGA’s declared mission is “to promote growing demand
for and use of our nation’s vast domestic natural gas resources
for a cleaner and more secure energy future” (Statement at
Quadrennial Energy Review Public Meeting; http://www
.anga.us/media/press/27734331-5056-9F69-D4B0095359F59
9FC/ﬁles/4.11.2014%20ANGA%20QER%20Written%20
Statement.pdf. Accessed on July 14, 2014). The organization has
identiﬁed ﬁve major areas of interest to which it devotes its
attention and energies: power generation, transportation, save
and responsible development, liquid natural gas (LNG) exports,
and testimony and ﬁlings. With regard to the issue of power
Profiles
175

generation, for example, ANGA expresses interest in topics such
as the role natural gas can play in the nation’s energy equation,
the
infrastructure
needed
for
delivering
natural
gas
to
consumers, problems and issues relating to the cost of natural
gas for ratepayers, and the beneﬁts of using natural gas as a
source of clean energy. The issue of save and responsible
development includes an extended discussion of hydraulic
fracturing and directional drilling. The web page on this issue
provides a general introduction to the practice of fracking and
reviews some of the questions that have been raised about the
practice. It concludes with the observation that “[h]ydraulic
fracturing is routinely and safely used in communities across the
country.”
This statement, perhaps somewhat oversimpliﬁed, reﬂects
the fact that ANGA is, quite naturally, an enthusiastic sup-
porter of hydraulic fracturing in the exploration for and
extraction of natural gas. It is, however, somewhat difﬁcult
to ﬁnd information about the topic of the ANGA website.
The Media Room of the website does contain a number of
news stories and opinion pieces from the organization and from
other sources, although they can be found by only speciﬁc
searches for the term fracking and related terms.
The ANGA website also includes a blog where interested par-
ties can exchange ideas on important issues related to natural gas.
The authors of the blog, other than ANGA itself, do not appear
to be identiﬁed, and the blogs rarely, if ever, actually contain
any exchange of ideas or opinions. Some of the blog topics are
natural gas vehicles, preservation of the Gulf of Mexico habitat
during resource extraction, national policies on LNG permitting,
and natural gas exploration and extraction in speciﬁc localities in
Arkansas, Colorado, Pennsylvania, and other states.
Chesapeake Climate Action Network
6930 Carroll Ave, Suite 720
Takoma Park, MD 20912
176
Fracking

P.O. Box 11138
Takoma Park, MD 20913
Phone: (240) 396-1981
Fax: (888) 428-3554
Virginia Ofﬁce & Mailing Address
1108 E. Main St., Suite 603
Richmond, VA 23219
URL: http://chesapeakeclimate.org/
Email: http://chesapeakeclimate.org/contact-us/
Chesapeake Climate Action Network (CCAN) was founded in
2002 by Mike Tidwell, author of a number of books about
environmental issues including Bayou Farewell: The Rich Life
and Tragic Death of Louisiana’s Cajun Coast (Vintage, 2007),
The Ponds of Kalambayi: A Peace Corps Memoir (Lyons Press,
2011), Amazon Stranger: A Rainforest Chief Battles Big Oil
(Lyons Press, 1996), In the Mountains of Heaven: True Tales
of Adventure on Six Continents (Lyons Press, 2003), and The
Ravaging Tide: Strange Weather, Future Katrinas, and the
Coming Death of America’s Coastal Cities (Free Press, 2006).
By the early 2000s, Tidwell had become interested in issues of
global climate change and had converted his own home in
Maryland to a nearly entirely non-fossil-fuel operating system.
In 2001, he convinced the Rockefeller Brothers Fund to make
a grant for the support of a new organization focusing on
climate change issues in the Maryland/Virginia/Washington
DC area, an organization that was to become CCAN.
The organization’s mission is to build and mobilize a grass-
roots movement in the region around the nation’s capital that
will begin to respond to the threats posed by global warming
by developing policies and practices, which will lead to climate
stability. It carries out its mission through a number of speciﬁc
campaigns centered in each of its three geographical areas:
Maryland, Virginia, and the District of Columbia. Examples
of its Maryland campaigns include the Stop Cove Point:
No Fracked Gas Exports; Double Maryland’s Clean Power:
Profiles
177

40% by 2025; Protect Marylanders from Fracking; Accelerate
Maryland’s Climate Action Plan; and Fight Dirty Coal and
Incineration. Its Virginia campaigns include Safe Coast
Virginia; Climate Solutions, Not More Pollution; and No
Offshore Drilling for Virginia. The DC and federal campaigns
focus on the District’s renewable energy law, the proposed
Keystone XL pipeline, coal exports, and cap and dividend
approaches to the control of climate change. CCAN also spon-
sors comparable types of campaigns at college campuses in
Maryland and Virginia.
CCAN promotes its ties with a large number of organiza-
tions in the Maryland/Virginia/DC region with similar inter-
ests, such as the Center for Health, Environment, and Justice;
Green America; the Hip Hop Caucus; Physicians for Social
Responsibility;
Environment
Maryland;
Food
&
Water
Watch; Waterkeeper Alliance; Southern Appalachian Mounta-
in Stewards; Southern Environmental Law Center; and DC
Environmental Network.
CCAN has taken a particularly active stance in opposition to
fracking because of its concerns about the release of the green-
house gas methane at a number of points in the fracking
process. One of its most recent campaigns has been aimed
at plans to build a large pipeline from the oil ﬁelds of
Pennsylvania to a shipping terminal at Cove Point, Maryland,
that was originally build to receive imported natural gas.
Current plans call for converting that terminal for the expor-
tation of LNG, primarily to Asia. Critics such as CCAN have
argued that the new terminal would cause a number of environ-
mental and other problems, such as compromising the ecology
of Chesapeake Bay, increasing the accidental release of methane
to the atmosphere, increasing the cost of natural gas in the
United States, and forcing property owners to give up a portion
of their land over which the proposed pipeline is to run. CCAN
also operates a second campaign focusing on what it sees as
the risk that Maryland will become the next step to allow
178
Fracking

hydraulic fracturing, given the number of gas basins that under-
lie the state.
Consumer Energy Alliance
2211 Norfolk, Suite 410
Houston, TX 77098
Phone: (713) 337-8800
URL: http://consumerenergyalliance.org/
Email: info@consumerenergyalliance.org
The Consumer Energy Alliance (CEA) calls itself “the voice of
the energy consumer.” The organization was founded in 2005
with the expressed purpose of “build[ing] a dialogue between
energy providers (oil, gas, wind, solar, nuclear, etc.) and energy
consumers (industry users, like chemical companies, agriculture
& transportation, as well as average citizens).” (“Maximizing
Your Energy Dollar,” Coveritlive, http://www.coveritlive.com/
index2.php/option=com_altcaster/task=viewaltcast/template
=/altcast_code=c19f518d2a/ipod=y. Accessed on July 15,
2014.) The extent to which CEA is actually a grassroots
consumer organization, as it claims to be, has been
questioned by some individuals and organizations. A review
of the organization’s activities on Salon.com, for example,
suggests that CEA is a “front” organization for Big Oil and
Big Gas, supported primarily by multinational petroleum
companies such BP, Chevron, ExxonMobil, Marathon,
Shell, and Statoil. A representative of the Natural Resources
Defense Council has called CEA a “front group that
represents the interests of the oil industry” (“Big Oil and
Canada Thwarted U.S. Carbon Standards,” Salon, http://
www.salon.com/2011/12/15/big_oil_and_canada_thwarted_u
_s_carbon_standards/. Accessed on July 15, 2014).
CEA characterizes itself in a very different way, calling itself
“the voice of the energy consumer.” It says that its main
Profiles
179

purpose is to “provide consumers with sound, unbiased infor-
mation on U.S. and global energy issues.” More detailed infor-
mation about the CEA and its activities is available on the
organization’s website and, in particular, in its annual reports,
which are also available on the website.
CEA claims a very large membership of more than 230
organizations from the ﬁelds of academia (6 members); con-
sumers, business, agriculture, and industry (144 members);
and energy providers and suppliers (86 members). As an exam-
ple, the range of members includes the American Bus
Association,
Beaver
County
(Pennsylvania)
Chamber
of
Commerce, Colorado Farm Bureau, Elite Parking Services of
America, Florida Chamber of Commerce, Marine Engineers
Beneﬁcial Association, National Association of Home Buil-
ders, Southeastern Fisheries Association, Houston Museum of
Natural Science, University of Texas Center for Energy
Economics, Alaska Miners Association, BP, Entergy, Ohio
Oil & Gas Association, Shell Oil, Shell Wind Energy, and the
U.S. Department of Energy Gulf Coast Clean Energy
Application Center.
The organization works with and through 6 regional
chapters that cover 20 states, CEA-Alaska, CEA-Florida,
CEA-Texas, CEA-mid-Atlantic, CEA-Midwest, and CEA-
Southeast. The CEA website provides news and information
about events that are occurring within and as a result of the
work in each of these regional chapters.
Activities of the CEA fall within three general categories,
which the organization calls Educate, Advocate, and Act. The
ﬁrst category refers to the educational efforts of the organization
to provide consumers with information about a variety of
energy options, such as coal, nuclear, and wind. The descrip-
tion section of the organization’s website provides links to addi-
tional sources of information and home websites for groups
interested in each of these areas. The Advocate arm of CEA’s
efforts focuses on efforts made by the organization to put for-
ward certain positions on a variety of energy issues, such as
180
Fracking

construction of the Keystone XL pipeline, trucking safety, and
fracking operations in oil and gas operations. A particular fea-
ture of this segment of CEA activities is a program called
Energy Voices, in which individuals and companies describe
their experiences with speciﬁc issues of interest to CEA and its
followers. The Act arm of the CEA program invites consumers
to express their own views on a variety of issues of interest to
them and to CEA, focusing on the opportunity for consumers
to send letters to legislators and other policymakers about topics
such as the Keystone pipeline and fracking operations.
One of the most useful sections of the CEA website is the
Latest News page, which provides interesting and valuable links
to a host of stories about current events in the ﬁeld of various
ﬁelds of energy.
H. John Eastman (1905–1985)
Eastman was associated with oil and gas drilling for most of his
adult life. He is best known today for his discovery of a method
for determining the direction in which a well was being drilled.
When that direction was entirely vertical, such a technology
was largely unnecessary. But as petroleum engineers began to
consider the possibility of drilling in some direction other than
true vertical—so-called directional drilling—it became essential
to know precisely where a drill hole was headed in order for it
to reach the predetermined oil or gas reservoir for which it
was intended.
Historically, a rather crude technology called the acid-bottle
test was used for this purpose. In this test, a glass bottle contain-
ing strong acid was lowered into a drill hole. When the bottle
was left in position for a period of time, it began to etch the
glass. The etching pattern showed the angle at which the sur-
face of the acid was lying in the bottle. This angle could then
be used to calculate the angle of the drill hole to true vertical.
The test was reasonably accurate, but it took a fair amount of
Profiles
181

time, and the acid bottle had to be lowered and raised each time
a reading was needed.
Eastman invented a much simpler and more efﬁcient
method for taking such measurements. In 1929, Eastman
invented a device consisting of a long metal tube with the diam-
eter of a milk bottle in which were suspended a small camera, a
plumb bob, and a compass. The camera allowed a person on
the surface to take pictures of the compass and the plumb bob
to determine the orientation of the drill hole as it was being
drilled. With this information, an operator could adjust the
direction of a drilling operation as he or she wished, making
possible for the ﬁrst time a technique now known as directional
drilling, of which the widely popular horizontal drilling is one
current example.
Eastman also took his research one step further when he
invented a system for changing the direction of a drill bit as it
traveled through a drill hole. The key element in Eastman’s sys-
tem was a device known as a whipstock, a piece of metal pipe
that changed the direction of the drill in the process of burrow-
ing into rock. With his camera system and whipstock, Eastman
was able to both follow the path of the drilling and to control
the direction in which he wanted the drill to move. In com-
menting on Eastman’s inventions, a May 1934 article in
Popular Science Monthly magazine observed that “only a hand-
ful of men in the world have the strange power to make a bit,
rotating a mile below ground at the end of a steel drill pipe,
snake its way in a curve or around a dog-leg angle, to reach a
desired objective.” For these accomplishments, Eastman is
often referred to as the father of directional drilling.
H. (Harlan) John Eastman was born in Cedar Rapids, Iowa,
on July 29, 1894. At the age of seven, he moved with his family
to Oklahoma City, where his father had been appointed post-
master
under
the
administration
of
President
William
Howard Taft. After graduating from high school, Eastman
matriculated at Oklahoma A&M College, now Oklahoma
State University, but he did not graduate from the school.
182
Fracking

Instead, he decided to look for work in the petroleum industry
and was hired by the Magnolia Petroleum Company as its
ﬁrst employee. After a series of mergers and consolidations,
Magnolia emerged as the Mobil Oil Company, which contin-
ues to retain Magnolia’s “ﬂying red horse” symbol.
After a short stay with Magnolia, Eastman decided to seek
his fortune in California, which was undergoing an “oil boom”
in the early twentieth century. There he became particularly
interested in questions as to determining the direction in which
a drill line was headed during drill and how that drill line might
be altered for one reason or another. In working on these ques-
tions, he developed both his camera/plumb bob/compass direc-
tional system (later called a single shot drilling system) and his
whipstock aiming device. He often signed on with an oil com-
pany to test and reﬁne these devices in exchange for whatever
services he could provide to the company’s drilling operations.
Most historians mention 1929 as the year in which Eastman
formally introduced the use of directional drilling to extract
crude oil at a facility in Huntington Beach, California.
Eastman achieved his greatest fame in 1933 when a huge
ﬁre broke out in the Conroe, Texas, oil ﬁeld that threatened
to destroy the ﬁeld’s petroleum assets. The ﬁeld’s owners
invited Eastman and his colleague George Failing, of Enid,
Oklahoma, to ﬁnd a way of bringing the ﬁre under control.
They did so by drilling at angles into the gas and oil reservoirs
at Conroe to drain away the fuels that were feeding the giant
conﬂagration. Their success in the operation made their fame
and allowed Eastman to establish his own company, Eastman
Whipstock, which by 1973 had become the world’s largest
directional drilling company. The company merged with
Norton Christensen in 1986 to form Eastman Christensen,
which was sold to Baker Hughes in 1990. It continues to exist
today as one of the world’s largest drilling companies, Hughes
Christensen, with primary ofﬁce in Houston, Texas.
Eastman died at his home in Los Angeles on February 24,
1985.
Profiles
183

Terry Engelder
Engelder is professor of geosciences at Pennsylvania State
University (Penn State), where his special areas of interest are
the fracture toughness of rocks and the microfabric of crystal-
line rocks. In previous years, he has also conducted research
on the mechanical properties of rocks under strain, the ﬂuid
transport properties of permeable rocks, and the geochemistry
of rock–water interactions. As well known and successful as
Engelder has been in his own ﬁeld, he has achieved even greater
fame and, perhaps, notoriety, for his views of hydraulic fractur-
ing and the beneﬁts and risks it poses for modern society. He
has spoken and written widely on the potential value of
hydraulic fracturing as a technology essential for the recovery
of natural gas resources and for his outspoken positions has
earned the opprobrium of many professional colleagues as well
as opponents of fracking technology. He has even acknowl-
edged that many of his critics think of him as “the Doctor
Strangelove of the fracking debate,” comparing him to a some-
what demonic character in the 1964 Stanley Kubrick–directed
ﬁlm Dr. Strangelove, Or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and
Love the Bomb.
Professionally, Engelder is perhaps best known for a paper he
and colleague Gary G. Lash wrote in 2008 suggesting an esti-
mate for the amount of natural gas available in the Marcellus
Play in the northeastern United States. The paper, probably
for the ﬁrst time, alerted the petroleum industry and the general
public as to the extraordinarily large quantity of the fuel avail-
able under very large parts of a half dozen states. With that
announcement, the battle over the use of hydraulic fracturing
in the recovery of that resource was underway in earnest.
Engelder has since acknowledge that the use of fracking in gas
recovery carries with it a number of very real risks to the natural
environment and human health, but that the beneﬁts that
accrue from fracking far exceed these potential hazards.
184
Fracking

Engelder has earned his BS, MS, and PhD in geology from
Penn State, Yale University, and Texas A&M University, respec-
tively, in 1968, 1972, and 1973. He was also employed in the gas
and oil industry during his years of study, ﬁrst as a geologist for
the Bradley Producing Company, in 1965; then as a hydrologist
for the U.S. Geological Survey from 1966 to 1967; as a geologist
with Texaco, in 1968; and as a research assistant at the Center for
Tectonophysics at Texas A&M from 1970 to 1973. Upon gradu-
ation, Engelder accepted an appointment at Columbia Univer-
sity, in New York City, where he served as a research scientist,
research associate, senior research scientist, and senior research
associate at the Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and
lecturer at Columbia from 1973 to 1985. In 1985 he accepted
an appointment at Penn State, where he has served as an associate
professor of geosciences (1985–1990) and professor of geosci-
ences (1990–present). Engelder has also served as Fulbright
Senior Fellow at Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
(1984); French–American Foundation Fellow in France (2001–
2002); guest professor at the Erherzog Johann Technical
University, Graz, Austria (1999) and Università di Perugia,
Perugia, Italy (2004); and visiting scholar at TotalFinaElf,
CSTJF Pau, France (2001–2002).
Engelder has authored and coauthored more than 90
scholarly papers, written and cowritten about 30 book chapters,
and authored one book, Stress Regimes in the Lithosphere. He
has been honored with membership in the Phi Eta Sigma
Honor Society and the Phi Kappa Phil Honor Society, election
as a fellow in the Geological Society of America, awarded the
Wilson Distinguished Teaching Award of Penn State, and
named John and Cynthia Oualline Lecturer in Geological
Sciences at the University of Texas.
Environment America
294 Washington St, Suite 500
Boston, MA 02108
Profiles
185

Phone (617) 747-4449
URL: http://www.environmentamerica.org/
Email: http://www.environmentamerica.org/contact
Environment America was formed in November 2007 when
the Public Interest Research Groups (PIRGs) decided to split
off their environmental activities into a new and separate
organization, Environment America. The new organization
consisted of 23 state environmental organizations that had
themselves separated from PIRGs earlier in that same year. As
a result of the split, the PIRGs continue to purse their work
in the ﬁeld of consumer and social justice, while all of the
organization’s original environmental activities were moved
to the new Environment America. A sister organization,
Environment America Research & Policy Center, are respec-
tively 501(c)(4) and 501(c)(3) nonproﬁt organizations. As of
2014, Environment America maintains relationships with state
chapters in 29 states.
Environment America is largely an organization with a two-
pronged approach: research and education. It carries out studies
of important environmental issues facing the American people
and then informs legislators, opinion-makers, and the general
public of the results of its studies. For example, the 2013 study
“Fracking by the Numbers: Key Impacts of Dirty Drilling at
the State and National Level” collected data and statistics on
the health and environmental impact of hydraulic fracturing
deep-well injection of wastewater throughout the United
States. The study brings together information about these
effects that is generally not easily available from other sources.
Information obtained from research is then distributed by
Environment America through a variety of means, such as
interviews with newspaper, radio, and television reporters; news
conferences on speciﬁc topics; op-ed pieces; letters to editors;
communications with legislators and legislative staffs; and other
mechanisms (such as the article by John Rumpler in Chapter 3
186
Fracking

of this book). As of 2014, Environment America had selected
eight major topics on which to focus their attention: Wind
Power for America; Stop Fracking Our Future; Repower
America; Protect America’s Waters; Let’s Get Off Oil; Global
Warming Solutions; Conservation America; and Clean Air,
Healthy Families. As an example, the fracking program was being
carried out in cooperation with 18 state afﬁliates from California
to Rhode Island and Minnesota to Florida. Each state develops
its own program in cooperation with the national organization
to bring to the people of the state information about fracking
and the actions that individuals can take to deal with the problem.
One of the important functions played by the national
organization is the collection, assembly, and distribution of cur-
rent news about a particular issue. A recent Environment
America website, for example, contained stories about legisla-
tive efforts to adopt a fracking moratorium in Massachusetts,
a letter campaign among members informing President Barack
Obama about the need for an end to fracking, a new EPA rule
concerning the use of diesel oil in fracking operations, a collec-
tion of personal stories about the effects of fracking on people’s
lives, and the Pennsylvania supreme court’s ruling on local zon-
ing laws on fracking operations.
Food & Water Watch
1616 P Street NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 683-2500
Fax: (202) 683-2501
State ofﬁces in California, Colorado, Florida, Illinois, Iowa,
Maine, Maryland, Michigan, New Jersey, New Mexico, New
York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, and the
European Union (Brussels)
URL: http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/
Email: http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/about/contactus/
Profiles
187

Food & Water Watch was established in 2005 when 12 mem-
bers of the Energy and Environment Program of the nonproﬁt
organization Public Citizen decided to form their own associa-
tion to focus speciﬁcally on food and water issues. The current
executive director of Food & Water Watch, Wenonah Hauter,
was previously director of the Energy and Environment
Program at Public Citizen. The current Food & Water Watch
staff is divided into groups responsible for operations, commu-
nications, food, water, common resources, international, organ-
izing, legal advocacy, development, ﬁnance and human
resources, and information technology.
The issues on which Food & Water Watch is currently
working are divided into three major categories: food, water,
and food and water justice. Some of the speciﬁc issues in the
area of food include antibiotics, consumer labels, factory farms,
food safety, genetically modiﬁed foods, irradiation, nanotech-
nology, and radiation impacts. In the general area of water,
the organization’s speciﬁc campaigns focus on bottled water,
desalination, fracking, radiation impacts, water privatization,
world water, and a speciﬁc program called Renew America’s
Water.
Food & Water Watch’s campaign on fracking is based on
the assumption that the operation is a water-intensive activity
that not only depletes a valuable resource—water—but also
releases into the environment a variety of chemicals known to
harm human health. The organization argues that efforts to
ﬁnd appropriate ways of regulating fracking are misguided and
that efforts should focus instead on outright bans of fracking.
The organization maintains a web page that lists more than
400 local communities that have taken action in some form
or another to ban fracking from within their borders (http://
www.foodandwaterwatch.org/water/fracking/fracking-action
-center/local-action-documents/).
Food & Water Watch provides a host of resources to support
the case in opposition to fracking, including a number of fact
sheets, reports, and online web pages dealing with speciﬁc
188
Fracking

aspects of the topic. Fact sheets are available on subjects such
as how the proposed Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership will affect
local communities, the involvement of college and university
researchers in promoting fracking, and problems with natural
gas pipelines. Some reports on fracking that are available deal
with the social costs of fracking, efforts to ban fracking in the
state of Maryland, why fracking and natural gas will not lead
to energy independence in the United States, and New York
state policies on fracking and their effect on employment
opportunities in the state.
Some of the resources available on the Food & Water Watch
website deal with topics such as the relationship between free
trade agreements and the expansion of fracking, the relation-
ship of fracking and global climate change, the effects of frack-
ing operations on food production, and the ways in which
fracking contributes to the global water crisis.
The Food & Water Watch website also provides a variety of
multimedia presentations that focus on speciﬁc topics of inter-
est, such as a video on the Global Grocer (where foods come
from), the Meatrix (factory farming), and a number of ﬁlms
to rent that includes two classic movies on fracking, Gasland
and Gasland Part II. The organization also conducts research
on a number of topics related to its ﬁelds of interest. Reports
on this research are available at no charge through the organiza-
tion’s website. Some examples are the industrialization of frack-
ing sand, threats posed by wastewater from fracking for the
Great Lakes, illusory beneﬁts of fracking in the state of
Colorado, the potential threats of fracking on New York state
agriculture, the dangers posed by fracking on New York City’s
water system, and false promises of jobs offered by the fracking
industry.
The Food & Water Watch website is also a valuable research
for news and opinion on current developments in the ﬁeld. In
addition to a news and blog page, the website offers new ﬁlms
and videos, press releases, and a list of forthcoming events
throughout the United States and Europe.
Profiles
189

Ground Water Protection Council
13308 N. MacArthur
Oklahoma City, OK 73142
Phone: (405) 516-4972
URL: http://www.gwpc.org
Email: http://www.gwpc.org/contact-us
The Ground Water Protection Council (GWPC) was incorpo-
rated as a 501(c)(6) nonproﬁt corporation in the state of
Oklahoma in 1983. It was originally founded by represen-
tatives from ﬁve states with the objective of dealing with under-
ground injection control issues as well as general ground water
protection questions. The organization now includes high level
ground water ofﬁcials from all 50 states. The organization is
run by a board of directors of 20 senior state water ofﬁcials
who are elected by the general membership from each of the 10
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency districts in the United
States. The board itself is divided into a number of committees
that deal with speciﬁc issues, such as carbon dioxide geoseques-
tration, source water, technical issues, and administration.
GWPC activities are organized primarily into three major
“division”: water and energy, water availability and sustainabil-
ity, and water quality. Each division is chaired by a member of
the board of directors and is designed to give members an
opportunity to present ideas, discuss issues, and develop
responses to critical issues within each division. In turn, each
division selects speciﬁc topics on which to work in more detail.
The water and energy division, for example, subdivides its work
into working groups on hydraulic fracturing, energy-related
injection, water usage, and abandoned mines. Perhaps its most
important accomplishment thus far with regard to the fracking
issue has been the development of a web page called FracFocus.
That web page provides an interactive that allows a person to
access information about any one of more than 77,000 individ-
ual oil and gas wells in the United States. By listing the
190
Fracking

identifying characteristics of a well, a person can ﬁnd out which
chemicals are used in the drilling and injection processes at that
well. Registration on FracFocus is required in some states, and
relevant information about wells is also provided voluntarily
by a number of petroleum companies.
FracFocus also provides information about other aspects
of the fracking process, such as the technology involved in the
process, chemicals used in fracking, effects of fracking on
ground water supplies, and state regulations on fracking.
Additional information about fracking is available from the
energy injection working group, which studies the effects of
wastewater injection from fracking processes on ground water
resources.
GWPC produces a number of publications containing very
useful information on a variety of topics related to ground
water protection, especially in the area of hydraulic fracturing.
Examples of those publications include a general introduction
on shale gas; a brochure on injection wells, their use, operation,
and regulation; a comprehensive and extensive report on the
status of ground water resources in the United States,
“Ground Water Report to the Nation . . . A Call to Action”; a
white paper on the relationship between injection wells and
seismicity; and papers in its Spotlight Series on topics related
to fracking and its effects on ground water, such as injection
wells and seismicity.
In addition to such publication, GWPC produces a monthly
newsletter, “Groundwater Communiqué”; reports on the
organization’s conferences, forums, and other meetings; webi-
nars on topics such as funding available from the Clean Water
Act and stormwater management and source water protection;
and links to dozens of governmental, nongovernmental, indus-
try, and environmental organizations in the United States and
around the world. Of special interest to both professionals in
the ﬁeld and the average system is the GWPA web page on
News and Updates, which includes articles on a large number
of speciﬁc topics, such as hydraulic fracturing, injection wells,
Profiles
191

well owners, drilling and operation regulations, and legislative
actions on ground water issues.
Erle P. Halliburton (1892–1957)
Halliburton was the founder of the energy company that now
carries his name and that is probably one of the most famous
multinational companies in the world. It is not only an enor-
mously successful and proﬁtable corporation but also the
subject of extensive criticism by some individuals and organiza-
tions for its business practices. The company has 13 major
product lines that include drill bits and services, wireline
and perforating, completion tools, cementing, testing and
subsea, production enhancement, and consulting and project
managements. In 1947, Halliburton performed the ﬁrst trial
fracking experiment for the Stanolind Oil Company in Kansas.
In 2014, the company reported having about 80,000 employ-
ees of 140 different nationalities in 80 countries.
Erle Palmer Halliburton was born on a farm near Henning,
Tennessee, on September 22, 1892. He attended school in
nearby Ripley and had originally planned to matriculate at a
college after graduation from high school. He father’s death
when Erle was 14 years old changed those plans, however,
and he instead left school to begin work with railroad construc-
tion companies. At the age of 16 he had already learned the
skills needed to operate steam cranes on the Mississippi River,
a job at which he worked for two years. In 1910, he enlisted
in the U.S. Navy where he was assigned to work on the
Navy’s ﬁrst motor barge.
After being discharged from the Navy at the age of 23
in 1915, Halliburton found work with the Dominuiz
Corporation in California, where he was appointed superinten-
dent of water distribution. Very shortly thereafter he took a
position with the Perkins Oil Well Cementing Corporation, a
company that, as its name suggests, performed cementing oper-
ations in the installation of oil drilling rigs. He did not last long
192
Fracking

with the company primarily because of his habit of criticizing
existing procedures and suggesting more efﬁcient ways of doing
things. After only about a year with Perkins, Halliburton was
ﬁred for annoying his supervisors with his ideas. He later told
a biographer that the two greatest things that happened in his
life were to have been hired and ﬁred by Perkins.
Although he left the Perkins company, Halliburton did not
abandon his interest in oil well cementing. He continued to
work on his own to develop and improve cementing tech-
niques, even as he had little or no money or resources with
which to try out his ideas. (The story is told that he was so poor
during this period that he washed out the cement bags he had
used and sold them back to the cement company to make a
few pennies extra.) Finally in 1920, Halliburton had his oppor-
tunity. He was hired by the Skelly Oil Company to bring
under control a new well that was spewing crude oil into the
air. He was able to put into practice many of the ideas about
well cementing that he had been trying out, and Skelly was suf-
ﬁciently impressed to offer him a full-time job. Halliburton
remained with Skelly for four years until he founded his own
business, the Halliburton Oil Well Cementing Company,
in 1924.
Halliburton’s new business grew slowly but surely. When it
began operations, its only asset was one mule-drawn wagon,
but three decades later, Halliburton had bought up all of his
competitors and had cemented more than 100,000 oil wells in
the U.S. west. He had improved his own ﬁnancial standing
from a point at which he was earning only $260 a month as
the founder of his new company to estimated assets of about
$100 million at his death in 1957. Halliburton continued his
research on cementing and related drilling techniques through
much of his life, eventually receiving at total of 38 patents for
various oil well tools and technologies as well as unrelated
topics. For example, he designed and built a line of metal suit-
cases that is still being made and sold by the Zero Halliburton
company. In addition to his interests in petroleum exploration
Profiles
193

and extraction, he followed other lines of business that included
a gold mine and a hydroelectric plant in Honduras, as well as
farming and ranching activities in the United States. Late in
his life be became interested in supporting a wide variety of
charitable activities and organizations. He died in Los Angeles
on October 13, 1957. After his death, Halliburton was
inducted in the Oklahoma Hall of Fame, the Permian Basin
Petroleum Museum Hall of Fame, and the Oklahoma
Aviation Hall of Fame. The last of these honors recognized
Halliburton’s founding and operation of the Southwest Air
Fast Express airline (also known as Safeway Airlines) in 1928,
a company that eventually merged with American Airlines.
During its brief period of operating as an independent airline,
Southwest Air Fast Express offered service between St. Louis
and Dallas and, later, between those cities and New York City
and Los Angeles.
William Hart (1797–1865)
Historians often date the origin of the natural gas industry
in the United States to the discovery of oil at Titusville,
Pennsylvania, by “Colonel” Edwin Drake in 1859. While it is
true that Drake’s well produced gas as well as oil, this attribu-
tion is not correct. Indeed, natural gas had been discovered
and put to use more than three decades earlier in an area not
so distant from Titusville: Fredonia, New York. The person
responsible for that accomplishment was a tinsmith by the
name of William Hart.
William Aaron Hart was born in the town of Bark Hasted,
Connecticut, in 1797. Essentially nothing is known about his
early life, except that he moved to Fredonia in 1819, reputedly
bringing with him nothing other than his riﬂe and a pack of
clothing. Again, little is known about his time in Fredonia until
about 1825, except that he apparently pursued his craft as a tin-
smith in the town. At some point, he became interested in the
possibility of capturing and putting to use a seep of natural
194
Fracking

gas present adjacent to Canadaway Creek running through the
center of town. His approach was to dig a hole (using shovels!)
that eventually reached a depth of 27 feet to gain improved
access to the natural gas. He then trapped the gas in a “gasom-
eter,” originally his wife’s laundry tube with a hole cut into the
bottom. The gasometer provided not only a reservoir for the gas,
but also a means by which it could be measured (hence the term
gasometer). Gas from the well was then transported to nearby
homes through a series of hollow wooden pipes whose junctions
were sealed with pitch. By August of 1825, Hart’s natural gas sys-
tem was being used to heat two stores, two shops, and one mill in
the vicinity of the well. Three months later, 36 gas lamps had
been installed in the town. Hart’s project had more than utilitar-
ian value as residents and visitors to the town, who came from
“far and wide,” were astounded at the spectacularly beautiful, as
well as useful, scene produced by the combustion of pure natural
gas from the ground.
Hart soon expanded his efforts, extending the original well to
a depth of 50 feet in 1850. At that point, he was producing
enough gas to light 200 lamps in the area. Realizing the poten-
tial commercial value of Hart’s operation, a group of Fredonia
residents incorporated the Fredonia Gas Light Company in
1828, the ﬁrst commercial natural gas company (and now the
oldest) in the United States. The company continued to expand
and improve its natural gas system in 1858 by digging a second
well to a depth of more than 200 feet. By this time, the method
of delivering natural gas to customers had also been vastly
improved. The original wood-and-pitch system was, as one
might guess, woefully inadequate because of the ease with
which gas escaped from the pipes. The system was eventually
replaced by a new method of delivery consisting of lead pipes
that carried gas from the well to a store, shop, mill, or other
location. The gas was then distributed throughout the site by
means of ﬁner pipes made of tin (of course, Hart’s specialty),
which delivered a very small ﬂow of gas to a room equivalent
in brightness to about two normal candles. Turning a gas lamp
Profiles
195

on and off was the simplest of operations. During the day, a
plug was placed in the end of a tin pipe, and at night it was
removed and the gas lighted.
The rest of William Hart’s life is nearly as much of a mystery
as it earlier years. He established a home at 50 Forest Place in
Fredonia, where he abandoned his work with natural gas and
became a nursery operator, best known for the roses he grew.
He also operated an amusement park that included a hot-
water spa that, some historians believe, may have been heated
by the combustion of natural gas. At some point, Hart and
his family moved to Buffalo, where census records later listed
his occupation as “merchant,” and that of his adult son as “gas
furnisher.” Hart died in Buffalo on August 9, 1865, leaving
behind his wife, son, and one daughter.
An interesting addendum to the story of William Hart
and the Fredonia Gas Light Company relates to the geological
formation in which Hart originally found natural gas. That for-
mation is known as the Marcellus Shale Play and extends thou-
sands of square miles underground from mid-New York State
into mid-Tennessee and from mid-Ohio to the Pennsylvania–
Maryland border. Geologists believe that the formation may
hold trillions of cubic feet of natural gas, enough to supply a
signiﬁcant fraction of the United States’ energy needs for deca-
des into the future. The most likely method for recovering that
resource, however, is hydraulic fracturing, or “hydrofracking,” a
technology about which environmentalists and residents of the
area have signiﬁcant concerns. Whether the risks posed by
hydrofracking are with the beneﬁts provided by the huge sup-
plies of natural gas is a question still being debated in the early
twenty-ﬁrst century.
Independent Petroleum Association of America
1201 15th Street NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 857-4722
196
Fracking

Fax: (202) 857-4799
URL: http://www.ipaa.org/
Email: no address provided
The Independent Petroleum Association of America (IPAA)
was founded in 1929 at a time of considerable uncertainty
about domestic oil production in the United States. Some
experts in the ﬁeld of petroleum suspected that the United
States had only a relatively limited supply of crude oil, and they
were pushing the federal government to conserve the resources
that were available and to promote in importation of petroleum
from other parts of the world. American petroleum companies
began to worry that these concerns would lead to the federal
government’s imposing limitations on the amount of crude oil
that could be drilled in the United States, producing a devastat-
ing effect on their own businesses. It was within this climate,
then, that a leader of the U.S. petroleum industry, Wirt
Franklin, spoke out at a federally sponsored Oil Conservation
Conference in Colorado Springs in June 1929. He warned that
the drift toward importation of oil and conservation at home
“would mean the annihilation and destruction of the small
producer of crude oil” if it were allowed to come to pass.
He suggested creating a new organization to protect and pro-
mote the development of domestic oil resources in the United
States. That organization came to be called the Independent
Petroleum Association of America.
It formally came into being on June 11, 1929, at a meeting
that included about two dozen leaders of the U.S. petroleum
industry, including not only a number of independent
specialists in the ﬁeld, but also representatives of major ﬁrms
such as the Marine Oil Company, the Jennings-Heywood
Oil Syndicate, the Simpson-Fell Oil Company, the Okmulgee
Producers
and
Manufacturing
Gas
Company,
and
the
Stanolind Oil and Gas Company, as well as media represen-
tatives of the Tulsa World and National Petroleum News
publications.
Profiles
197

Today, the IPAA claims to be responsible for the develop-
ment of 95 percent of all domestic oil and gas wells and for
the production of 54 percent of all domestic oil and 85 percent
of all domestic gas. From the name of the organization,
one might assume that IPAA members are primarily smaller
companies who operate on the fringes of the primary major
oil-producing system in the United States. It is not possible
to conﬁrm that impression, however, as IPAA apparently
does not release its membership list to the general public.
According to one outside study of the organization, 86 of the
100 top oil producers in the United States are ofﬁcially desig-
nated as “independent” companies. Fifty six of those companies
have market capitalizations of more than $1 billion, and the
median market capitalization for the 86 independent compa-
nies is more than $2 billion. The top ﬁve independent oil com-
panies in the United States are Apache, Anadarko, Devon,
EOG and Talisman, with a total market value of more than
$178 billion (Oil Change International; http://priceofoil.org/
content/uploads/2012/03/FIN.OCI-Fact-Sheet-US-Subsidy
-Removal-2012.pdf. Accessed on July 15, 2014).
In addition to its members, IPAA maintains close working
relationships with about four dozen “cooperating associations”
that includes a number of state and regional oil and gas associ-
ations, regional royalty owners associations, energy groups,
and equipment suppliers. According to its mission statement,
IPAA is “dedicated to ensuring a strong, viable domestic oil
and natural gas industry, recognizing that an adequate and
secure supply of energy is essential to the national economy.”
One of the most important functions of the IPAA is one that
carries over from its founding 85 years ago, namely working for
the interests of the oil and gas industry in the United States,
attempting to shape federal policy in such a way as to increase the
exploration for and extraction of domestic oil and gas products.
The organization carries out a number of activities in pursuit of
this objective, including testimony before committees of the U.S.
198
Fracking

Congress and a variety of federal agencies, providing comments to
regulatory agencies on proposed rule-making and changes, and the
development and distribution of fact sheets for policymakers and
the general public on important national energy issues. Copies of
some of these materials are available on the IPAA website.
A second important function of IPAA involves the collec-
tion, analysis, and distribution of data about oil and gas pro-
duction in the United States. Some of its most important
reports are the annual “Oil & Gas Producing Industry in
Your States,” which provides detailed statistics about the petro-
leum industry in each state; an important 2011 report on the
contribution of independent onshore oil and gas producers to
the U.S. economy; occasional proﬁles of independent oil and
gas producers in the United States (the most recent of which
dates to 2012–2013); an extremely useful collection of statistics
on virtually every aspect of oil and gas production in the United
States; and links to a number of international organizations and
sources of information about worldwide statistics and the status
of oil and gas production around the world.
IPAA also cooperates with the Petroleum Equipment
Suppliers Association (PESA) in the support and operation of
the Energy Education Center (EEC), founded in 2006 to intro-
duce students to the ﬁelds of study needed to go forward with a
career in the ﬁeld of oil and gas recovery. The EEC currently
operates geoscience, engineering, and leadership programs at
ﬁve high schools in Houston and Fort Worth. The program’s
goal is to develop young people with the skills needed to move
into a growing industry with an aging workforce.
A major news outlet for IPAA is its weekly newsletter “Issues
and Insight,” which focuses on important regulatory and
related issues, Congressional and other federal and state legisla-
tive activities, and IPAA events. The organization also provides
daily updates of important IPAA mentions nationwide and
press releases on items and issues of interest to members of
the organization and other observers.
Profiles
199

Anthony R. Ingraffea (1947–)
The issue of hydraulic fracturing is frequently characterized to-
day by vigorous debates between proponents and opponents of
the practice, debates that often become acrimonious and even
offensive. Yet, the fact is that well qualiﬁed experts in the ﬁeld
of petroleum engineering themselves often have very different
views as to the safety, efﬁciency, necessity, and desirability of
using fracking to retrieve fossil fuel resources from the Earth.
Discussions and debates between experts on both sides of the
issue are common and can be useful if participants are able to
reserve their comments to the facts at hand. One of the most
common academic spokespersons to speak in opposition to
fracking is Cornell University professor Anthony R. Ingraffea.
Ingraffea has written and spoken widely about the hazards that
accompany the use of fracking to recover oil and natural gas
supplies, but he is perhaps best known as lead author of an
important 2011 study on the greenhouse gas footprint of meth-
ane gas, the primary component of natural gas. Ingraffea and
his colleagues found that methane is a more dangerous green-
house gas than either conventional gas or oil over any measured
time period, and as much as 20 percent more harmful than coal
in the short term and up to twice as harmful as coal over a 20
year period. These results are of considerable interest because
proponents of natural gas often use its purported lesser effect
on global climate change than other fuels.
Ingraffea has published well over 200 articles in refereed and
specialized publications on hydraulic fracturing and a variety of
other topics and has been the author or coauthor of more than
60 research reports on similar topics. He has been principal
investigator or participant in more than 80 funded research
projects in the ﬁelds of structural engineering, geotechnical
engineering, engineering education, and cooperative research.
Ingraffea is in great demand as a speaker on topics related to
fracking, often as a participant in discussions and debates on
the risks and beneﬁts of the technology.
200
Fracking

Anthony Richard Ingraffea was born on April 4, 1947, in
Easton, Pennsylvania. After graduating from high school,
Ingraffea enrolled at Notre Dame University with plans to
become an astronaut. As the ﬁrst step in that journey, he
was awarded his BS in aerospace engineering from Notre
Dame in 1969. He then took a job at Grumman Aerospace
Corporation, still with plans to begin his astronaut training
before long. After two years at Grumman, however, “things
happened,” as he later told interviewer Ellen Cantarow in a
piece for EcoWatch. Among those “things” were the Vietnam
War and the growing energy crisis in the United States. For a
variety of reasons, then, he shifted his priorities and served,
instead of in space travel, in the Peace Corps. From 1971 to
1973 he worked in Bejuma, Venezuela, as a county engineer
responsible for all technical services in the jurisdiction.
Upon his return to the United States, Ingraffea enrolled at
the University of Colorado at Boulder to pursue his doctorate
in civil engineering, a degree he earned in 1976. Ingraffea’s ﬁeld
of interest at Colorado was crack propagation in rock, a topic
that was to become basic to the later development of fracking
technology by the petroleum industry. After spending an addi-
tional year at Colorado as an instructor, Ingraffea accepted an
appointment as assistant professor in the department of struc-
tural engineering at Cornell University, where he has remained
to the present day. He worked his way up the academic ladder
as associate and full professor, ﬁnally being named Dwight C.
Baum Professor of Engineering in 1993, a post he continues
to hold. During the academic year 1983–1984, Ingraffea took
a sabbatical leave to work at the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, where he studied rock fracture stimulation. Since
2004, Ingraffea has also been visiting scientist at the Wright
Patterson Air Force Base working in the ﬁeld of structural
sciences.
Ingraffea has said that he became interested in fracking as a
political and social issue in about 2009 when he came across a
number of newspaper articles, television advertisements, and
Profiles
201

other public pronouncements by the petroleum industry
which, he told Cantarow, were “astoundingly inaccurate.” He
said that he felt some responsibility for setting the record
straight on the potential risks of hydraulic fracturing and found
that he was soon in wide demand to speak about the technol-
ogy. In recognition of his contributions both in the ﬁeld of aca-
demia and as a spokesperson about fracking issues, Ingraffea has
been awarded a number of honors, including the Cornell
School of Civil Engineering Professor of the Year award for
1977–1978, National Research Council/U.S. National Com-
mittee for Rock Mechanics 1978 Award for Outstanding
Research in Rock Mechanics at the Doctoral Level, Cornell
College of Engineering Professor of the Year award for 1978–
79 and for 1981–1982, Dean’s Prize for Innovation in
Teaching, Cornell College of Engineering, National Research
Council/U.S. National Committee for Rock Mechanics 1991
Award for Applied Research, Honor Award, University of
Notre Dame, College of Engineering, for Signiﬁcant Contri-
butions to the Advancement of Engineering, George R. Irwin
Medal, American Society for Testing and Materials, and
Fellow, International Congress on Fracture.
International Energy Agency
9, rue de la Fédération
75739 Paris Cedex 15
France
Phone: (33-1) 40 57 65 54
Fax: (33-1) 40 57 65 59
URL: http://www.iea.org/
Email: info@iea.org
The International Energy Agency (IEA) was founded in 1974
in response to the world crisis in energy supplies resulting from
the oil embargo announced by the Organization of Arab
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC). The embargo had
202
Fracking

been established as a way by which Arab states could object to
support of the state of Israel by the United States and other
Western nations. Confronted with the sudden and drastic loss
of its most important energy source, petroleum, a number of
nations banded together to form the International Energy
Agency. IEA’s initial goals were to develop more sophisticated
and accurate statistics on known and estimate petroleum
reserves and oil production and consumption and to investigate
ways of ameliorating the effects of the dramatic loss in petro-
leum supplies for developing nations. Since 1974, IEA’s mis-
sion has expanded somewhat and now includes four major
themes.
The ﬁrst of these themes is Energy Security, which involves
the promotion of diversity and ﬂexibility of energy supplies in
order to avoid the worst consequences of fuel crises like that
of the 1974 oil embargo. The second theme is Environmental
Protection, which recognizes the deleterious effects of extensive
fossil fuel use. A recent feature of this theme is a greater empha-
sis on the possible global climate effects resulting from the com-
bustion of coal, oil, and natural gas. The third theme is
Economic Growth, which emphasizes the importance of devel-
oping energy policies that ensure the continued economic
development of all nations, whether developed or developing.
The fourth theme is Engagement Worldwide, which is a spe-
ciﬁc acknowledgment that the energy and environmental poli-
cies facing nations of the world transcend national borders
and can only be solved by international cooperation.
Only member states of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) are permitted to
belong to the IEA. Current members are Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia,
South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United
Kingdom, and the United States. Although prohibited from
inviting non-OECD nations to join the agency, the IEA has a
Profiles
203

well-developed program for working with such nations through
its Directorate of Global Energy Dialogue (GED). Established
in 1993, the GED attempts to better understand the status of
energy systems in non-OECD nations and to share with those
nations some of the knowledge and expertise developed through
IEA programs. The agency currently has bilateral and regional
agreements with a number of non-OECD nations and regions
to achieve these goals, including Brazil, Caspian and Central
Asia, Central and Eastern Europe, China, India, Mexico, the
Middle East, Russia, Southeast Asia, Ukraine, and Venezuela.
The primary decision-making body of the IEA is the
Governing Board, which consists of the energy ministers of
all
member
states,
or
their
designated
representatives.
Decisions made by the Governing Board are carried out by
the Secretariat, which consists of researchers and other scholars.
The Secretariat’s work involves the collection of data on energy
supplies, production, and consumption; sponsorship of confer-
ences and other meetings on energy issues; assessment of energy
conditions in member states; development of projections for
global energy futures; and proposals for national energy policies
in member states.
The work of the Secretariat is organized around a number of
speciﬁc topics, for which a variety of reports and publications
are generally available. The current topics of interest to the
IEA include coal, carbon dioxide capture and storage, cleaner
fossil fuels, climate change, electricity, energy efﬁciency, energy
indicators, energy policy, energy predictions, energy statistics,
fusion power, greenhouse gases, natural gas, oil, renewable
energy, sustainable development, and technology. For the gen-
eral public and experts in the ﬁeld, IEA’s most important con-
tributions may well be their regular reports on a variety of
important energy-related issues. In the area of statistics, the
agency publishes a host of reports on a monthly, quarterly,
and annual basis. Perhaps best known of these is its annual
Key World Energy Statistics, published regularly for the last
204
Fracking

10 years. Other statistical publications deal with energy prices
and taxes, energy statistics for OECD and non-OECD states,
oil information, natural gas information, renewable informa-
tion, and carbon dioxide emissions from fuel combustion.
The agency also publishes a quarterly publication, Oil, Gas,
Coal, and Electricity.
Other ﬁelds for which publications are available are Global
Energy Dialogue, which includes publications on energy issues
in non-OECD nations; Energy and Environment, which deals
with topics such as the environmental and climate effects of
fossil fuel combustion; Renewable Energy, which considers tech-
nical, social, economic, and political aspects of the development
of renewable energy sources; Energy Efﬁciency, which discusses
ways in which conservation can extend the lifetime of existing fos-
sil fuel resources; Energy Technology Network, which reports on
agreements made among member states to improve their energy
production and consumption patterns; Policy Analysis and
Cooperation, which reviews energy policies, practices, and projec-
tions for speciﬁc member states; and Energy Technology, which
reviews proposed and in-place changes in technology to make
more efﬁcient use of existing and proposed energy sources. An
especially interesting feature of the agency’s website is its “Fast
Facts” section, which lists tidbits of information about many
aspects of energy. Each item is cited from an IEA publication,
to which a link is provided in each case.
In addition to its print publications, the IEA sponsors a
number of conferences and other meetings, provides speakers
for a variety of professional and community events, and testiﬁes
before governmental agencies in member nations. In 2014, for
example, the agency sponsored, cosponsored, or participated in
meetings on bioenergy opportunities in southern Africa, in
Durban, South Africa; the future of nuclear technology, in
Paris; a forum on unconventional gas, in Calgary, Canada;
international standards on renewable energy and energy efﬁ-
ciency, in Paris; hydrogen technology futures, in Bethesda,
Profiles
205

Maryland; and policies for mitigating climate change, in
Warsaw.
Interstate Natural Gas Association of America
20 F Street, NW, Suite 450
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: (202) 216-5900
URL: http://www.ingaa.org/
Email: http://www.ingaa.org/Contact.aspx
The Interstate Natural Gas Association of America (INGAA)
was founded in 1944 as the professional association of compa-
nies that build and operate pipelines that carry natural gas from
the source of production to consumers, exporting sites, and
other locations at which the natural gas is put to use. INGAA
currently consists of 25 members who are responsible for the
vast majority of natural gas pipelines in the United States and
Canada. Those pipelines extend a combined distance of more
than 200,000 miles in the two nations. Some of the INGAA
members are Alliance Pipeline, Carolina Gas Transmission
Corporation, Iroquois Pipeline Operating Company, Paciﬁc
Gas and Electric, Piedmont Natural Gas, and Sempra US Gas
& Power.
The INGAA Foundation is a sister organization created in
1990 to promote the use of natural gas by the consuming pub-
lic in an environmentally safe manner. The foundation has
more than 120 members that include a variety of pipeline-
related businesses, including gas pipeline companies, con-
struction companies, engineering ﬁrms, pipe and compressor
manufacturers, accounting ﬁrms, companies providing infor-
mation technology services, and other suppliers of goods and
services to the pipeline industry. The foundation funds studies
and reports and sponsors forums on technical and economic
issues that are of interest to its members.
206
Fracking

An important part of INGAA’s work is educating the general
public and others about pipelines and their impact on the natu-
ral environment and human health. The Pipelines 101 section
of the association’s website provides such an introduction, with
sections on basics of natural gas, landowner leases and commit-
ments, pipeline construction, pipeline operations, pipeline
regulation, pipeline safety, and pipeline “fun facts.”
The issues surrounding pipeline construction and operation
have become entangled in the debate over hydraulic fracturing
in recent years because of plans to ship a signiﬁcant portion of
the natural gas produced by fracking to foreign nations, espe-
cially those in Asia. That process involves moving natural gas
hundreds of miles from the point of production to treatment
facilities, usually located on the eastern, western, or Gulf of
Mexico coasts of the United States. At the treatment facilities,
the gaseous product is converted to a liquid, LNG, which can
then be transported by ship to consumers overseas.
The growing demand for LNG for export in the past decade
has meant that companies are having to build hundreds of
miles of new pipeline. In many cases, that pipeline has to run
through private property that can be leased or purchased for
that purpose only by negotiations with a landowner or by
means of eminent domain. Such negotiations have often
resulted in acrimonious disputes between pipeline companies
and landowners involved in such transactions, adding one more
layer of controversy over the expanding use of fracking for the
recovery of natural gas.
One of the primary objectives of INGAA is providing infor-
mation about safety issues relating to the use of natural gas
pipelines. The organization’s website contains a useful section
that deals with speciﬁc issues such as ﬁrst responses to pipeline
accidents by pipeline companies, instructions about what to do
in case of an emergency, pipeline markers (markers that identify
the characteristics of any given pipeline), regulation of pipe-
lines, and speciﬁc safety activities provided by the pipeline
Profiles
207

industry and individual companies. INGAA also offers safety
workshops for member organizations on speciﬁc safety prac-
tices related to pipeline operation.
Both INGAA and the INGAA Foundation also produce a
large number of technical and general reports on a host of
topics relating to pipeline construction and operation. All of
these reports are available for download at no charge at the
INGAA website, http://www.ingaa.org/11885/Reports.aspx.
Some of the topics included in the report series are The Role
of Pipeline Age in Pipeline Safety, North America Midstream
Infrastructure through 2035: Capitalizing on Our Energy
Abundance, Planning Guidelines for Pipeline Construction
during Frozen Conditions, Building Interstate Natural Gas
Transmission Pipelines: A Primer, and Validation of Direct
Natural Gas Use to Reduce CO2 Emissions.
INGAA also publishes a series of position papers entitled
INGAA on the Issues dealing with topics of special interest
and, usually, controversy. The association’s paper on LNG
exports is of special interest to those concerned with the move-
ment of fracked natural gas across the continent (http://www
.ingaa.org/issues/18035.aspx).
Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission
900 NE 23rd St.
Oklahoma City, OK 73105
P.O. Box 53127
Oklahoma City, OK 73152
Phone: (405) 525-3556
Fax: (405) 525-3592
URL: http://iogcc.publishpath.com/
Email: iogcc@iogcc.state.ok.us
The Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission (IOGCC)
was created in 1935 by the governors of six states who
were concerned about the lack of regulation over petroleum
208
Fracking

production and the consequent surplus of product this condi-
tion had engendered. Earlier efforts by individual states to work
together on this issue were discouraged largely by the petro-
leum industry itself, which preferred the somewhat laissez-
faire approach of the federal government to its operations.
Finally in 1935, however, E. W. Marland, then governor of
Oklahoma and former U.S. representative from the state, was
able to use federal authority to allow individual states to band
together to form a compact agreement through which they
could work together on common problems. The organization’s
original charter was signed on February 16, 1935, in Dallas, by
representatives of the six states, Colorado, Illinois, Kansas, New
Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas. The IOGCC currently consists
of 30 member states; 8 associate member states; and 12
international
afﬁliates
in
Canada,
Egypt,
Georgia,
and
Venezuela. The organization also has associate relationships
with the U.S. Department of the Interior, Department of
Energy, Environmental Protection Agency, Federal Energy
Regulatory
Commission,
and
National
Association
of
Regulatory Utility Commissioners.
The primary function of the IOGCC is to assist states in
developing regulatory policies and practices that ensure the
sound development of oil and gas resources while also ensuring
the health and safety of citizens as well as the quality of the
national environment. The organization works through a vari-
ety of committees and working groups that consist of state gov-
ernors, state oil and gas regulators, and representatives of
industrial and environmental groups to identify and make use
of best practices in the ﬁeld to achieve these objectives.
Identifying and disseminating information on best practices is
accomplished by surveying practices currently in use in speciﬁc
states; cataloging and publishing this information in the form
of reports, briefs, and other types of printed and electronic
media; and exchanging this information with states in a variety
of ways, such as biannual meetings of stakeholders interested in
the regulation of oil and gas operations. An important feature of
Profiles
209

the organization’s work is an annual conference that provides
an opportunity for the sharing and dissemination of informa-
tion on new and promising practices and policies. The 2014
and 2015 conferences were planned for Columbus, Ohio, and
Oklahoma City, respectively. IOGCC also offers a number of
midyear meetings of various types, such as the 2011 Marcellus
Summit in State College, Pennsylvania; 2012 Midyear
Meeting in Vancouver, British Columbia; and 2013 Midyear
Issues Summit in Point Clear, Alabama.
Eight speciﬁc issues currently dominate the activities of the
IOGCC: states’ rights, national energy policy, hydraulic frac-
turing, environmental stewardship, model statutes, carbon
sequestration, produced water, and manpower shortages. The
IOGCC website provides detail about the background of each
of these issues and describes the activities being undertaken by
the organization in an effort to deal with the issues. In the area
of hydraulic fracturing, for example, the IOGCC website pro-
vides a brief background on the technology, information on
state and congressional actions, a summary of IOGCC state-
ments and resolutions, and a link to FracFocus, a website
cosponsored with the Ground Water Protection Council on
the chemicals used in the fracking process.
IOGCC currently has about a dozen publications available
in both print and electronic format on a number of issues
related to the regulation of oil and gas operations. These reports
deal with topics such as marginal wells, legal and regulatory
issues related to carbon dioxide storage, reducing the environ-
mental footprint of oil and gas extraction, adverse impact
reduction, Rocky Mountain crude oil market dynamics, and
current manpower status and issues in the petroleum industry.
The organization also published other products such as press
releases, a media kit on relevant issues, and a regular newsletter
available at no charge electronically on the IOCGG website
(http://iogcc.publishpath.com/newsletter).
210
Fracking

E. W. Marland (1874–1941)
Marland was the primary force behind the creation in 1935 of
the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission (IOGCC),
established to develop a method of controlling the production
of crude oil in the United States. The early 1930s were a difﬁ-
cult time for the petroleum industry. An approaching economic
depression resulted in a vastly decreased demand for crude oil
with the result that the price of a barrel of oil dropped to its
lowest point in history, in the range of 10 cents per barrel. At
the time the federal government left oil production policy
largely in the hands of petroleum companies, each of whom
had its own expectations and plans for production. Concerned
by the lack of any central authority for the management of oil
production, distribution, and sales in the United States,
Marland called a meeting of governors from six states (includ-
ing his own of Oklahoma) at his home in Ponca City,
Oklahoma, to set up a commission to deal with this problem.
The solution to the problem faced by the governors was pro-
vided by congressional authority that allowed states to band
together in compacts through which they could work jointly to
solve common problems. At the conclusion of the Ponca City
meeting, the governors agreed to form the Interstate Oil and
Gas Compact Commission (IOGCC) with the mission of cre-
ating an administrative mechanism for the control of crude oil
production in the United States. That commission remains in
existence today, continuing in its long history of monitoring
petroleum production in the United States.
Ernest
Whitworth
Marland
was
born
in
Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, on May 8, 1874, the youngest child of eight
and the only boy born to Alfred and Sara Marland. He attended
Park Institute in Pittsburgh and then enrolled at the University
of Michigan, where he studied the law. He graduated with his
LLB degree from Michigan in 1893 at the age of 19 and
returned to Pittsburgh to begin his practice of the law. The late
Profiles
211

nineteenth century was a time of change and challenge in
Pennsylvania with the nation’s ﬁrst commercial oil well having
been drilled in Titusville only two decades earlier. As with
many new industries, great opportunities were available for
adventurers who were willing to take their chances on a new
technology. Marland was such a person, and he had made his
fortune in oil speculation by the time he was 30 years old.
As is also the case with many technologies, however, Marland
also lost his fortune nearly as quickly as he earned it, largely as
the result of the great ﬁnancial panic of 1907.
Undiscouraged by his misfortunes, Marland simply bor-
rowed money and moved to Oklahoma, where the promise of
new oil ﬁnds had just been announced. He settled in Ponca
City and soon was on his way to a second fortune. After form-
ing a series of companies to explore for oil, he consolidated
them all in 1921 under the name of the Marland Oil
Company. His success was short-lived, however, as he gradually
lost control of his own company to the banks from which he
had borrowed so much money. By the early 1930s, Marland
Oil no longer existed and had been replaced by a new corpora-
tion, the Continental Oil Company, forerunner of today’s
ConocoPhillips, one of the largest oil producers and reﬁners
in the world.
As he was gradually displaced from his role in Marland/
Conoco, Marland became more interested in politics and
decided to run for the U.S. House of Representatives from
Oklahoma’s Eight Congressional District (which no longer
exists). As a liberal Democrat, Marland supported Franklin D.
Roosevelt’s progressive program for the nation and was swept
into ofﬁce with him in the 1932 elections. Marland served only
one term in the House of Representatives, however, as he chose
to run for governor of Oklahoma instead in 1934. He won that
election and served only a single term, after which he attempted
to revive the Marland Oil Company, an effort in which he was
unsuccessful. In 1940, he chose to run again for the U.S.
House of Representatives, but he lost that election and returned
212
Fracking

to his home in Ponca City. He survived this latest loss by only a
year, however, as he died on October 3, 1941.
In 2012, the Weinstein Company announced plans to make
a ﬁlm about the somewhat notorious relationship between
Marland and his adopted daughter, Lydie, that some people
have said led to the downfall of the Marland Oil empire.
(As of late 2014, the ﬁlm had not yet been made.)
Aubrey McClendon (1959–)
McClendon was cofounder, with Tom L. Ford, of Chesapeake
Energy, currently the second largest producer of natural gas in
the United States. McClendon and Ford founded Chesapeake
in 1989 with $50,000 in cash, eight employees, and no oil or
gas leases during an economy in which oil and gas prices were
hovering around their lowest prices. The company focused on
the newly developed technology of horizontal drilling in
unconventional sites and soon experienced a successful run
of strikes that brought economic security to the company.
Between 1994 and 1996, Chesapeake reported the highest
growth rate of any company among 8,000 oil and gas corpora-
tions in the United States. Efforts to extend their practice into
parts of Texas and Louisiana in the late 1990s proved to be
unsuccessful, however, and the company returned to its roots
in Oklahoma, where it decided to focus on exploration for
and extraction of natural gas, primarily with its horizontal drill-
ing technology. The company also vastly extended its land
holdings with the aim of making it the nation’s largest producer
of natural gas, a goal they have almost achieved. In 2008,
McClendon was the highest paid CEO in the S&P top 500
companies with a total income of $112 million. He has also
been named to Forbes magazine’s CEO 20–20 Club for having
produced at least 20 percent in proﬁts over 20 years or more of
service.
Aubrey Kerr McClendon was born on July 14, 1959, in
Oklahoma City. His middle name provides a clue to the
Profiles
213

illustrious family into which he was born. He was a grand-
nephew of Robert S. Kerr, former governor of Oklahoma and
United States senator from the state from 1949 to 1963. Kerr
was also cofounder of Kerr-McGee Oil Industries, one of the
largest petroleum companies in the world during its heyday.
McClendon’s father, Joe, worked for Kerr-McGee for 35 years
in what biographer Gregory Zuckerman has called “the dull
and dreary side of the business,” at a desk job in the reﬁning
and marketing division of the company. With that background,
young Aubrey grew up with no particular passion for the petro-
leum industry and decided to major in history when he
matriculated at Duke University in 1977.
Ignoring his college major, McClendon accepted a job at the
accounting ﬁrm of Arthur Andersen in Oklahoma City after
graduation. He never actually started work at the company,
however, as he had a better offer from an uncle, Aubrey Kerr,
Jr., for a similar job at better wages in a petroleum company,
Jaytex Oil & Gas, owned by Kerr. McClendon worked in the
Jaytex accounting department for only nine months, however,
before he decided that he wanted more exciting work than that
provided in the accounting department. In actuality, he was
looking not only for more interesting work but also for an
opportunity to make his fortune. As a step in that direction,
he moved to the ﬁrm’s land department where he took a job
as a landman. A landman is a person in the petroleum industry
who has a wide range of responsibilities relating to the identiﬁ-
cation of lands that might be productive for drilling operations,
ﬁnding out who owns those lands, and negotiating for mineral
rights, rental, or purchase of the land for the company’s use.
A talented landman can be of enormous value to a petroleum
company because he or she (and it’s usually “he”) is the key to
ﬁnding locations where the company can drill and presumably
start making a great deal of money on land that it owns, rents,
or at the very least, on which it pays royalties for mineral rights.
While he was traveling around the region in his work as a
landman, McClendon came to know Tom Ford, who was also
214
Fracking

just beginning a career in the petroleum industry. The better
the two men got to know each other, the more they realized
that they could be a successful team, and in 1983 they decided
to join efforts and form their own company. They decided to
name the company after McClendon’s favorite vacation spot,
Chesapeake Bay. McClendon and Ford proved to be an efﬁ-
cient team with skills that nicely complemented each other.
Over the next three decades, Chesapeake experienced its ups
and downs, but ultimately became the premiere natural gas
producing company in the United States.
In 2012, shareholders of Chesapeake Energy launched what
one business writer, David Benoit, has called a “historic revolt”
against McClendon’s leadership. The major complaint seemed
to be that McClendon was still running the company as his
own personal ﬁefdom, as he had done before the company went
public in 1993. McClendon was allowed to keep his title as
chief executive ofﬁcer, while relinquishing the title of chairman.
He gave up even that title a year later when he left Chesapeake
completely, forming his own new company, American Energy
Partners.
Throughout most of his career, McClendon has been a
forceful and articulate spokesperson for natural gas. He has
touted the economic and environmental advantages of the fuel,
especially in comparison to those of coal and oil. As part of this
effort, he was one of the founding members of America’s
Natural Gas Alliance in 2009. In addition to his work in the
petroleum industry, McClendon is an avid sports fan and is
currently an owner of the Oklahoma City Thunder profes-
sional basketball team.
George Mitchell (1919–2013)
Mitchell has been described as “the father of fracking.” That
term is almost certainly overgenerous as he did not invent the
process, and fracking had been widely used in petroleum explo-
ration for years before he appeared on the scene. Mitchell is
Profiles
215

given such high credit, instead, for his other contributions to the
ﬁeld of hydraulic fracturing. One of those contributions was his
perseverance in searching for natural gas in regions where other
companies had long before given up or had decided the search
was not even worthwhile. For example, Mitchell’s greatest break-
through may well have been his decision to drill into a layer of
shale in the vast Barnett Play in the 1990s even though a number
of other companies had decided such a venture was doomed to
failure. Mitchell also took the revolutionary notion of using a very
different type of drilling ﬂuid that other companies had used in
the past, substituting a mixture of primarily water and sand (with
some added chemicals) in place of the traditional water mixed
with gels and foams that had been used almost universally. In
any case, his decision to keep trying to ﬁnd natural gas in places
where few others had ever looked (or had given up looking) with
technologies that had seldom before been tried were eventually
hugely successful. He is credited with having developed more
than 10,000 successful wells during his lifetime, bringing enor-
mous success to his company, Mitchell Energy, which he eventu-
ally sold to Devon Energy in 2002 for $3.5 billion.
George Phydias Mitchell was born on May 21, 1919, in
Galveston, Texas, to Savvas Paraskevopoulos, a native of the
village of Nestani, Greece, and Katina Eleftheriou, also from a
rural Greek town, Argos. Mitchell’s father had been a sheep-
herder in Nestani before deciding to pursue a more promising
future by immigrating to the United States at the age of 20.
His story of walking across Greece to board a ship that was to
take him to New York, where he set out to make his fortune
hardly knowing the English language, is an inspiring story of
perseverance and success that has been retold a number of
times. (See, for example, How Mitchell Energy and Develop-
ment Corp. Got Its Start and How It Grew, Universal
Publishers, 2001, 363–366.) At one of his ﬁrst jobs working
on the railroad, the paymaster found Paraskevopoulos’s name
too difﬁcult to spell, so assigned him a new name, the same as
the paymaster’s, of Mitchell.
216
Fracking

George Mitchell grew up in Galveston, attending elementary
and secondary schools there. He was a bright student and
skipped a couple of classes in elementary school, resulting in
his graduating from Galveston’s Ball High School at the age
of 16. He originally planned to attend Rice University to major
in medicine (his mother’s dream as much as his own), but he
changed his mind during a one-year post-graduate program he
pursued after leaving Ball. He especially enjoyed a math class
he took, and a discussion about his college plans with his
brother Johnny helped to change his mind. In the fall, he
enrolled at Texas A&M, rather than Rice, and began a major
in geology. He graduated four years later with a degree in petro-
leum engineering and a concentration in geology, a program
that normally required ﬁve years to complete.
After receiving his degree, Mitchell worked for a short time
for the Amoco company in Louisiana on a drilling rig before
enlisting in the U.S. Army when World War II broke out.
During the war he served in the Corps of Engineers at its base
in Houston throughout the war. After the war ended,
Mitchell founded his own business as an oil and gas consultant
in Houston, where one of his ﬁrst customers was a small drill-
ing company called Roxoil Drilling. Within a relatively short
period of time, he bought the company for $9,000 and
changed its name to Oil Drilling. Oil Drilling was the business
venture through which Mitchell was to carry out his many and
varied activities over the next half century. In 1971, the com-
pany was renamed the Mitchell Energy and Development
Corporation. Mitchell’s success in the oil and gas business was
largely a result of his unwillingness to give up on ideas in which
he had conﬁdence, even if they had been unsuccessful for
others. In looking back on his career, the newspaper Economist
observed in 2012 that Mitchell
saw the potential for improving a known technology,
fracking, to get at the gas. Big oil and gas companies
were interested in shale gas but could not make the
Profiles
217

breakthrough in fracking to get the gas to ﬂow. [He suc-
ceeded in spite of the fact that] Everyone . . . told him he
was just wasting his time and money. (“Gas Works.”
The Economist. July 14, 2002. http://www.economist
.com/node/21558459. Accessed on June 10, 2014.)
Mitchell is probably as well known today as an environmen-
talist and philanthropist as an oil and gas magnate. In the mid-
1970s, Mitchell became concerned about the way in which
human development was despoiling the natural environment
and decided to explore the possibility of building a new com-
munity that would exist in consonance with the environment.
In 1974, he initiated just a community, The Woodlands, built
on 44 square miles of land 28 miles north of Houston. Mitchell
envisioned an environmentally friendly mix of homes, schools,
retail malls, ofﬁce parks, distribution centers, golf courses and
other recreational facilities, and a large conference center for a
mixed population ranging from wealthy to low-income resi-
dents. Although disparaged by some business-savvy observers
at its birth, the community continues to thrive today with an
estimated 2013 population of 107,769. Mitchell and his wife,
Cynthia, also contributed to a wide variety of educational envi-
ronmental, and science-related institutions and activities, hav-
ing spent an estimated $400 million to date on such activities.
Mitchell died at his home in Galveston on July 26, 2013, at
the age of 94.
The National Association of Royalty Owners
15 W. 6th St., Suite 2626
Tulsa, OK 74119
Phone: (918) 794-1660
Toll-free: (800) 558-0557
Fax: (918) 794-1662
URL: http://www.naro-us.org/
Email: NARO@NARO-us.org
218
Fracking

The National Association of Royalty Owners (NARO) was
founded in Oklahoma City in June 1980 by a group of about
500 landowners from 10 states. The group had come together
in response to the recent adoption by the U.S. Congress of a
windfall proﬁts tax designed originally to increase the tax on
large petroleum companies that were making enormous proﬁts
at the time. A somewhat unexpected consequence of the act
was that landowners who had leased a portion (or all) of their
property to such companies were also ensnared in the provi-
sions of the law, and many saw their royalties from leases drop
dramatically, in some cases by as much as 70 percent. Since
these landowners had originally negotiated their leases in good
faith with petroleum corporations, they had expected to be able
to live off the income from royalties in the future. When they
learned that such was likely not to be the case as a result of
the windfall proﬁts tax, they revolted, ending up with the for-
mation of NARO as a mechanism through which they could
more effectively express their concerns about the issue. The
leader of the landowner rebellion was James L. Stafford, execu-
tive vice president of the public relations ﬁrm ICPR at the time
the tax act was passed. Stafford was elected the ﬁrst president of
NARO, a position he held until 2000. Stafford had become
involved in the landowner rebellion because he himself was a
landowner and a recipient of oil and gas royalties.
Today, NARO calls itself “the ONLY national organization
representing, solely and without compromise, oil and gas royalty
owners interests.” The organization attempts to represent the
interest of an estimated 8.5 million royalty owners. It describes
the average such individual as a 60-year-old widow who receives
less than $500 a month from her lease agreement. NARO is
run by a board of directors consisting of the president, vice
president,
corporate
secretary,
treasurer,
immediate
past
president, ﬁve at-large members, and the presidents of the 10
“state” chapters (Appalachia, Arkansas, California, Louisiana,
New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rockies,
and Texas). Each of the state/regional chapters is relatively
Profiles
219

independent, often with its own statement of mission, and with
its own slate of ofﬁcers, schedule of events, section on news from
its own district, and speciﬁc set of issues with which it is con-
cerned. The NARO-New York web page on the NARO website,
for example, provides its mission statement; list of coming events;
information on natural gas, royalties, and leasing; and its own
videos and news section.
NARO offers various levels of membership, beginning with a
basic membership at the cost of $150 per year. A business, cor-
porate, and institutional membership is available at the rate of
$550 per year, and a family trust membership valid for up to
four members can be had for $300 per year. A Golden Eagle
membership in the NARO Foundation Eagles is $1,500 per
year. Information about the NARO Foundation, a 501(c)(3)
charitable corporation, is not readily available.
One of the most useful parts of the NARO website is a col-
lection of links to associations, agencies, and organizations of
interest to the landowner or leaseholder, including entities such
as the federal government, nearly all state governments, gas and
oil companies and associations, and a number of media outlets.
The organization’s event calendar carries listings not only of its
own national conventions, conferences, and other meetings but
also those of the state and regional divisions of NARO.
No Fracked Gas in Mass
Berkshire Environmental Action Team
27 Highland Ave.
Pittsﬁeld, MA
Phone: (413) 230-7321
URL: http://www.nofrackedgasinmass.org/
Email: nofrackedgasinmass@gmail.com
As noted in the introduction to this chapter, No Fracked Gas
in Mass is typical of the dozens of state and local groups that
have been organized to protest fracking or some related activity
220
Fracking

within their speciﬁc geographic range. Other groups that fall
into this category are Cook Inletkeeper (Alaska), Arkansas
Fracking.org, Whittier Hills Oil Watch (California), Erie
Rising (Colorado), Idaho Residents against Gas Extraction,
Frack Free Illinois, Don’t Frack Michigan, Frack Free
Nevada, Rochester Defense against Fracking (New York), SW
Ohio No Frack Forum, Stop Fracking around Chattanooga
(Tennessee), and Powder River Basin Resource Council
(Wyoming).
No Fracked Gas in Mass is a project of the Berkshire
Environmental Action Team (BEAT), which organized in
2002 when a small group of citizens in the Berkshire area real-
ized that existing laws and regulations were being ignored in
efforts to protect a body of water in their area. The organization
has grown over time to extend its efforts to a wide variety of
environmental issues affecting western Massachusetts and adja-
cent areas. No Fracked Gas in Mass is one of those current
projects. The campaign was started in response to an announce-
ment by the Tennessee Gas Pipeline Company (a subsidiary of
the Kinder Morgan company) that it planned to build a pipe-
line running from Richmond, in Berkshire County, across
Massachusetts to a shipping terminal to be built at Dracut,
north of Boston. The campaign has also adopted a broader mis-
sion “to stop the expansion of fossil fuel infrastructure in
Massachusetts and to promote expanded efﬁciency and sustain-
able, renewable sources of energy and local, permanent jobs in a
clean energy economy.”
The proposed pipeline is one of the ancillary projects being
developed in connection with the rapidly growing effort to
extract natural gas from shale formations in various parts of
the nation. Companies plan to mine natural gas not only to
meet domestic needs for clean fuels of the future, but also to
export to nations around the world, especially those in Asia,
with energy needs they cannot meet with their own resources.
In the case of natural gas, the fuel is typically shipped from
the extraction site, almost always at a considerable distance
Profiles
221

from the coast, to an ocean port, where it is then converted
to LNG, a form in which it can be shipped by tankers.
Companies have been aggressive in obtaining the rights of
way they need to build such pipelines, often causing disruption
of local communities and individual properties. Residents of
affected area worry not only about the possibility of leaks and
possible explosions from the pipelines, but also a general dis-
turbance of their personal and community lives.
No Fracked Gas in Mass encourages members and other
concerned citizens to take action against the proposed pipeline
(and against the process of fracking itself) on a number of levels,
including federal, state, and local. It provides information on
existing and proposed laws and regulations dealing with natural
gas in an effort to inform people as to the options they have in
responding to the perceived threats the pipeline poses to the
Massachusetts community. It provides similar information
about state existing and pending laws and regulations, as well
as corporations operating within the state with a stake in the
pipeline and fracking in general. No Fracked Gas in Mass also
works speciﬁcally at the local level, where community laws
and regulations are sometimes the best ﬁrst line of action
against environmentally insensitive projects. The organization
provides links to local ofﬁcials in areas likely to be impacted
by the pipeline and by fracking.
One of the most useful services provided by No Fracked Gas
in Mass is a page on its website summarizing news about activ-
ities in the six counties in Massachusetts and four counties in
New York most severely affected by the proposed pipeline.
For each of the 10 counties, an individual page provides links
to all of the cities and towns in which actions have occurred
or are being planned in response to the pipeline.
A particularly useful page on the organization’s website is
entitled The Score. It summarizes the achievements thus far
racked up by the organization in its efforts to prevent the pipe-
line from being built. It includes the number of signatures that
have been obtained on a petition to the state Ofﬁce of Energy
222
Fracking

and Environmental Affairs, the Massachusetts State House, the
Massachusetts State Senate, and Governor Deval Patrick, as
well as copy of the petition itself for those who wish to sign it;
the number of petitions adopted by towns against the pipeline,
along with copies of those petitions; statements from ofﬁce
holders and individual citizens about the issue; a list of state
legislators who support the work of the organization; and state-
ments and petitions of support from other environmental
groups.
A section of the No Fracked Gas in Mass website also
provides a collection of “Latest News and Thoughts,” which
appears to make available almost everything that has been said
or written about the projected pipeline and the subject of frack-
ing in western Massachusetts and eastern New York. The page
is a superb introduction to the history of the dispute over this
project and an overview of the arguments that can and have
been made against both natural gas pipelines and the operation
of fracking itself. In a broader sense, the No Fracked Gas in
Mass website also provides links to a number of other projects
and organizations, both national and regional, concerned with
pipeline and fracking issues and so is a good guide to learning
about other projects of similar design and focus.
Edward A. L. Roberts (1829–1881)
Hydraulic fracturing is generally regarded as a largely twenty-
ﬁrst-century development. But the basic concept underlying
fracking has been known for at least 150 years, with some of
the earliest experiments on this technology dating to the Civil
War era. One of the earliest proponents of the concept was
Colonel Edward A. L. Roberts, who fought for the Union side
in that war (until he was cashiered in 1863). In fact, Roberts
got his idea for hydraulic fracturing (although it was not called
by that name at the time) during the Battle of Fredericksburg in
1862. He saw members of the Confederate Army ﬁre a cannon
into a narrow canal that stood in the way of the troops’
Profiles
223

advance. The action blew away materials causing an obstruc-
tion in the canal, allowing water to ﬂow freely through the
new opening.
Roberts put this observation to work three years later in deal-
ing with a problem common to oil wells. Over time, solid and
semisolid materials present in petroleum tend to clog the pores
through which oil ﬂows into a well. The most common of these
materials is parafﬁn, a waxy material present in small amounts
in all crude oil. The parafﬁn effect is sometimes referred to as
the scourge of oil drilling because it can dramatically reduce
the ﬂow of oil even when a reservoir still contains large amounts
of crude oil and natural gas.
It occurred to Roberts (as it had to some of his predecessors
in the petroleum industry) that it might be possible to use a
small charge of explosives to produce the force needed to open
up the pores in oil-bearing rock and allow the product to begin
ﬂowing again. He tested his idea with a device he called a tor-
pedo on a well called Ladies Well on Watson’s Flats south of
Titusville, Pennsylvania on January 21, 1865. Roberts torpedo
consisted of an iron case holding 15 to 20 pounds of explosive
that could be lowered into a well to the point at which clogging
was thought to exist. The torpedo was surrounded in the well
hole by water, which buffered and concentrated the force of
the blast. The explosive was then detonated by means of a cap
at the top of the torpedo. The explosive used in the torpedo
was either black powder or nitroglycerin. According to reports
at the time, Roberts’s device increased the ﬂow of oil and gas
into the well by up to 1,200 percent within the ﬁrst week
following the blast. He charged a fee of $100 to $200 plus 1/
15th of the value of the increased ﬂow of oil.
Edward A. L. Roberts was born in Moreau, Saratoga County,
New York, on April 13, 1829. He enlisted in the U.S. Army in
1846 at the age of 17 and served in the Mexican War with dis-
tinction. After the war, according to one biographical sketch, he
returned to Moreau and “entered an academy and passed several
years acquiring a higher education.” He then took a position in
224
Fracking

the dental ofﬁce of his brother in Poughkeepsie, New York. The
brothers later moved to New York City where they opened a
business for the manufacture of dental equipment. One of the
fruits of this collaboration was a series of patents for a variety of
inventions in the ﬁeld of dentistry, for which Edward Roberts
was awarded a number of gold medals by the American
Institute of the City of New York.
With the outbreak of the Civil War, Roberts returned to
active duty and was commissioned as lieutenant colonel of the
28th New Jersey Volunteer Infantry on September 15, 1862.
Shortly thereafter he made something of a name for himself at
the Battle of Fredericksburg, where he ﬁrst observed the use
of explosives for clearing a waterway. A year later, he offered
his resignation from the army, but instead was cashiered for
“resigning in the face of the enemy.” Returning to New York,
Roberts and his brother began to think about the potential of
the growing ﬁeld of petroleum exploration and develop-
ment and decided to move to the focus of that action, near
Titusville, Pennsylvania. It was during this period that
Roberts began to think about the use of explosives for the clear-
ing of well holes and conducted his ﬁrst experiment with the
device that was to become known as the Roberts Torpedo.
He received a patent for his invention in 1866 and formed
the Roberts Petroleum Torpedo Company which, according
to reports of the time, experienced “enormous success.” In fact,
its success was so great that the company soon became
embroiled in a series of endless law suits attempting to protect
their patent and business activities. Many of the disputes with
which the company had to deal was the efforts of freelancing
men who used their own versions of the torpedo to clear wells
in the middle of the night—at much cheaper fees than
Roberts charged—to avoid detection. The practice is said to
have led to the now popular expression called moonlighting,
during which individuals carry out illegal activities by the light
of the moon. The Roberts sold their company in 1903 to
Adam Cupler, Jr., who renamed it the Cupler Torpedo
Profiles
225

Company. In 1937, the Cupler Torpedo Company was pur-
chased by the Otto Torpedo Company, forming a company that
remains in business today, the Otto Cupler Torpedo Company.
In any case, Roberts’s invention led to both fame and fortune
for him and his family. He is said to have built the Brunswick
Hotel in Titusville, where his family resided for many years.
He died on March 25, 1881 in Titusville.
The Endocrine Disruption Exchange
P.O. Box 1407
Paonia, CO 81428
Phone: (970) 527-4082
Fax: (970) 527-4082
URL: http://endocrinedisruption.org/
Email: http://endocrinedisruption.org/contactus
The Endocrine Disruption Exchange (TEDX) was founded in
2003 by Theo Colborn, who was then professor of zoology at
the University of Florida at Gainesville. Colborn continues to
serve as president of TEDX and as emerita professor at the
University of Florida. TEDX grew out of Colborn’s long-
standing interest in the effects of chemicals—primarily syn-
thetic substances—on the human endocrine system. Such
substances can interrupt the normal function of the endocrine
system at very long concentrations, sometimes at levels of less
than one part per trillion. Although the topic of endocrine
disruptors has been studied by a number of researchers,
TEDX is reputedly the only organization in the world that
focuses exclusively on the topic. (An important introductory
document on the concept of endocrine disruptors is Colborn,
Theo, Frederick S. vom Saal, and Ana M. Soto. 1993.
“Developmental Effects of Endocrine-Disrupting Chemicals
in Wildlife and Humans.” Environmental Health Perspectives
101(5): 378–384.)
226
Fracking

TEDX has adopted three principles as the basis of its activ-
ities. First, it relies absolutely and entirely on scientiﬁc evidence
in collecting and analyzing information on endocrine disrup-
tors. Second, it uses that information as the basis for educa-
tional programs for the general public, policymakers, and
other stakeholders on the effects of chemicals on endocrine
function. Third, it acts as an advocate before policy-making
bodies in an attempt to develop legislation, regulation, and
other actions that will reﬂect the best information available
about endocrine disruption by chemicals.
TEDX is run by a board of directors of nine members from
the ﬁelds of biology, environmental health, medicine, environ-
mental law, public health, and related ﬁelds. Its staff consists of
Colborn, Executive Director Carol Kwiatkowski, and a small
number of other researchers.
TEDX divides its research into four major categories: the
nature of endocrine disruption by external inﬂuences, prenatal
origins of endocrine disruption, chemicals used in fossil fuel
extraction, and pesticides. The organization’s research on fossil
fuel extraction, as an example, focuses on subcategories such as
the relationship of chemicals and human health, the nature and
characteristics of so-called pit chemicals (chemicals found in the
various types of storage pits found at oil and gas well sites),
drilling chemicals, air pollution, and public health issues associ-
ated with drilling operations (which includes fracking). As an
example, TEDX researchers have published data on the num-
ber and types of pit chemicals found at drilling sites in New
Mexico and Wyoming, along with human health issues that
may be associated with each such chemical. (See, e.g., http://
endocrinedisruption.org/assets/media/documents/Crosby25-3well
summary4-20-09Final.pdf.) A summary of TEDX’s study of
chemical uses in the fracking process with potential effects on
human health can be found in the organization’s report at
http://endocrinedisruption.org/assets/media/documents/Multistates
ummary1-27-11Final.pdf.
Profiles
227

The TEDX website provides a number of very useful tools
for learning more about endocrine disruptors and for teaching
about the topic to college students and others. For example, it
provides an interactive list of potential endocrine disruptors
classiﬁed under such general categories as household products,
personal care products, plastics and rubber products, pesticides,
industrial additives, and solvents. In addition, a complete list of
all possible endocrine disruptors identiﬁed by TEDX is avail-
able at http://endocrinedisruption.org/endocrine-disruption/
tedx-list-of-potential-endocrine-disruptors/chemicalsearch?
action=search&sall=1. Another useful interactive resource
is the TEDX Critical Windows of Development tool, which
outlines in detail the steps that occur in the developing fetus
and embryo and the types of chemicals that may interfere with
normal development at each stage of growth. (See http://
endocrinedisruption.org/prenatal-origins-of-endocrine-disruption/
critical-windows-of-development/timeline-test/.)
Tom L. Ward (1959–)
Ward is one of a pair of the most famous oil and gas men working
in the United States in the last quarter of the twentieth
century and the ﬁrst two decades of the twenty-ﬁrst century. In
1989, he cofounded the Chesapeake Energy company with fellow
Oklahoman Aubrey McClendon. The company specialized in
the purchase and leasing of land for the purpose of drilling for
oil and gas in the 1980s and 1990s and eventually reached the
pinnacle of their business with the company becoming the largest
or second largest producer of natural gas by the early 2000s.
Tom L. Ward was born on July 11, 1959, just three days
before his partner-to-be McClendon, in Shattuck, Oklahoma.
He later moved with his family to nearby Seiling, where he
attended elementary and high schools. His family life was not
a particularly easy one as his father had a tendency to drink
too heavily and died at the age of 48. Although he was not par-
ticularly interested in academics, Ward decided to continue his
228
Fracking

education at the University of Oklahoma, where he majored in
petroleum land management. He graduated with a bachelor of
business administration in that ﬁeld in 1981. After earning his
degree, Ward joined a land brokerage ﬁrm owned by his uncle as
a landman. A landman in the petroleum industry is a person who
arranges for the purchase or leasing of land, or of mineral rights
under a person’s land, for the purpose of drilling for oil and/or gas.
At the time, Aubrey McClendon was a competitor of Ward’s
in this regard, a landman who was knocking on the same doors
as was Ward to ﬁnd land that could be used for petroleum
exploration. As the two men got to know each other better,
they decided to join forces and create a new ﬁrm. Undecided
as to exactly what to call the ﬁrm, they eventually settled
on Chesapeake Energy, after McClendon’s favorite vacation
region. At ﬁrst the company was underfunded and under-
staffed, but it did not lack in enthusiasm and a willingness to
try new technologies to look for oil and gas in regions that other
companies had ignored or abandoned as holding little promise.
Over a period of 20 years, Chesapeake prospered to an extent
that no one could have predicted in 1989 and eventually
became one of the two leading producers of natural gas in the
United States.
In 2006, Ward decided to leave Chesapeake and strike out
on his own. He paid $500 million for a controlling interest in
Riata Energy, changed the company’s name to SandRidge
Energy, and became chairman and CEO of the company.
In 2013, a dispute arose over Ward’s right to proﬁt from pri-
vate land deals with possible conﬂicts with SandRidge interests,
and he was dismissed from his post as chairman and CEO.
He was later found innocent of any wrong dealing with regard
to this issue but, by then, had moved on to form a new com-
pany, Tapstone Energy, where he is currently the CEO.
In 2000, Ward and his son Trent founded a home for
neglected and abused boys in Piedmont, Oklahoma, called
White Fields. The home provides a living situation and educa-
tional experience for boys until they reach high school
Profiles
229

graduation age. The White Fields program emphasizes experi-
ences that will help boys recover from the traumatic experiences
in their lives by providing training in communication skills, cri-
sis management skills, and behavior management skills. Ward
is also on the boards of Anderson University in Anderson,
Indiana, and The First Tee, an educational program that aims
to teach young boys and girls essential life skills through the
game of golf. He is also a member of the Economic Advisory
Council of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and the
Board of Visitors for the Oklahoma University Health
Sciences Center Department of Medicine. Until early 2014,
Ward was also a co-owner of the Oklahoma City Thunder of
the National Professional Basketball League.
Waterkeeper Alliance
17 Battery Pl., Suite 1329
New York, NY 10004
Phone: (212) 747-0622
Fax: (212) 747-0611
URL: http://waterkeeper.org/
Email: info@waterkeeper.org
The origins of the Waterkeeper Alliance date to the mid-1960s
when a former writer for Sports Illustrated magazine, Robert
Boyle, became concerned about the health of the Hudson
River near Garrison, New York, where he and many fellow
ﬁshermen and ﬁsherwomen spent many happy hours. He
decided to take action against businesses, communities, and
individuals who had decided that they could use the river as
their own private dumping ground. He and a number of his
fellow ﬁshing hobbyists formed an organization called the
Hudson River Fisherman’s Association (HRFA) to get govern-
mental bodies to enforce antipollution laws that had been on
the books for years, but had not been rigorously enforced, as
well as to lobby for additional laws and regulations designed
230
Fracking

to protect the river. Before long, ﬁshing advocates along other
parts of the Hudson formed similar associations in places such
as Yonkers, Manhattan, and New Jersey.
HRFA won its ﬁrst environmental battle in 1968 when it
sued Penn Central Pipe under two nineteenth century laws,
the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1888 and the Refuse Act of
1899. It won a judgment of $2,000 against Penn Central Pipe
but, more importantly, it was conﬁrmed in its philosophy
that the best way to ﬁght for the river was to sue polluters.
Before long, HRFA had won judgments against much larger
ﬁrms, such as American Cyanamid, Anaconda Wire and
Copper, Ciba-Geigy pharmaceuticals, Standard Brands, and
Westchester (New York) County. With the money earned from
these judgments, the association purchased a small boat for use
in patrolling the river, looking for violations of law and regula-
tions regarding pollution of the river. In so doing, HRFA estab-
lished a model by which it has continued to function to the
present day, as well as one that forms the basis of the work car-
ried out in many other types of waterways by the Waterkeeper
Alliance. By 1983, HRFA was also able to hire its ﬁrst full-
time riverkeeper, John Cronin, whose job was to patrol the
river on the association’s boat.
As word of HRFA’s success spread, similar organizations
began to spring up across the United States and around the
world. These organizations focused not only on rivers, but also
on bays, bayous, canals, channels, coasts, creeks, deltas, gulfs,
lakes, sounds, and other bodies of water. By 1999, there was
enough interest in the concept of a waterkeeper that a number
of local organizations banded together to form the Water-
keeper Alliance. That organization today claims to be the fastest
growing environmental organization in the world with more
than 200 separate organizations monitoring virtually every
conceivable type of waterway worldwide. Examples of the
organizations that are members of the Waterkeeper Alliance
are
the
Detroit
Riverkeeper,
St.
Clair
Channelkeeper,
California Coastkeeper Alliance, Puget Soundkeeper Alliance,
Profiles
231

Ogeechee Riverkeeper, Savannah Riverkeeper, Hann (Senegal)
Baykeeper, Himalayan Glacier Waterkeeper, Upper Yellow
River Waterkeeper, and Punta Abreojos (Mexico) Coastkeeper.
Waterkeeper Alliance is run by a board of directors of 14
representatives from local waterkeeper group and afﬁliated
organizations, chaired by Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., currently
president of the association. In addition to local waterkeeper
groups, the organization is afﬁliated with a number of like-
minded organizations and associations, such as Toyota, Levi
Strauss, Fonseca, Paul Mitchell, Teva, Patagonia, and Omega.
Board members also represent a number of associated business,
such as AbTech Industries, Coolglobes, Cedar Green Homes,
and Seventh Generation. The organization publishes a bian-
nual magazine, Waterkeeper, which is available online at
http://waterkeeper.org/waterkeeper-magazine/.
Waterkeeper Alliance organizes its activities around three
major themes: clean water defense; pure farms, pure waters;
and clean and safe energy. The ﬁrst theme follows in the long
tradition of waterkeepers, the effort to make sure that rivers,
lakes, and other waterways are kept clean of pollution caused
by industrial, municipal, and other sources. In general, laws
are now generally in place to prevent such pollution, so that
the waterkeeper’s job is to ﬁnd instance of violation of those
laws and then to instigate actions to correct that problem.
The pure farms, pure waters initiative is aimed speciﬁcally at
the types of pollution produced by modern agricultural, hus-
bandry, and dairy practices, in which very large quantities of
plant and animal waste, as well as a host of synthetic chemicals,
are released into the natural environment, with potential harm
to waterways. The third theme is concerned with the potential
for damage to waterways from a variety of mining and other
extraction technologies designed to produce coal, oil, and
natural gas. In this regard, waterkeepers have taken a stand
against fracking because of the serious pollution problems they
232
Fracking

believe that practice causes to natural water supplies. The
Waterkeeper Alliance policy on fracking is that the organization
will oppose shale gas extraction by hydrofracking “unless, and
until, the industry proves it can be done safely to protect
human health and the environment.”
Profiles
233


5
Data and Documents
Introduction
One means of gaining an insight into the history, current sta-
tus, and controversies associated with hydraulic fracturing is
to read through some of the laws, regulations, court cases,
speeches, reports, and other documents that have been pro-
duced on these topics. A review of relevant data and statistics
also provides information on these subjects. This chapter pro-
vides excerpts from some of the most important documents
dealing with fracking issues as well as basic data and statistics
and the use and effects of the procedure.
Data
One of the most important reports about hydraulic fracturing
is one ordered by the U.S. Congress in its FY2010 Appro-
priations Committee Conference Report. That report required
the EPA to “study the relationship between hydraulic fracturing
and drinking water, using the best available science, indepen-
dent sources of information, and to conduct the study in con-
sultation with others using a transparent, peer-reviewed
235
Environmental group members opposing oil drilling show support inside
the Capitol rotunda in an effort to pressure lawmakers for a two-year mora-
torium on fracking, at the Illinois State Capitol in Springﬁeld. (AP Photo/
Seth Perlman)

process.” In 2014, the EPA issued a Progress Report that
included data that had been collected thus far. Table 5.1
summarizes data on potentially hazardous chemicals present
236
Fracking
Table 5.1
Chemicals Present in 652 Different Products Used by Hydraulic
Fracturing Companies
Chemical
Category1
Number of
Products
Methanol
HAP
342
Ethylene glycol
HAP
119
Naphthalene
HPA
44
Xylene
SCWA
44
Hydrochloric acid
HAP
42
Toluene
SCWA, HAP
29
Ethylbenzene
SDWA, HAP
28
Diethanolamine
HAP
14
Formaldehyde
Carcinogen, HAP
12
Thiourea
Carcinogen
9
Benzyl chloride
Carcinogen, HAP
8
Cumene
HPA
6
Nitrilotriacetic acid
Carcinogen
6
Dimethylformamide
HAP
5
Phenol
HAP
5
Benzene
Carcinogen, HAP
3
Di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate
Carcinogen, SDWA, HAP
3
Acrylamide
Carcinogen, SDWA, HAP
2
Hydroﬂuoric acid
HAP
2
Phthalic anhydride
HAP
2
Acetaldehyde
Carcinogen, HAP
1
Acetophenone
HAP
1
Copper
SCWA
1
Ethylene oxide
Carcinogen, HAP
1
Lead
Carcinogen, SDWA, HAP
1
Propylene oxide
Carcinogen, HAP
1
p-xylene
HAP
1
1HAP ¼ Hazardous air pollutant.
SDWA ¼ Regulated under the Safe Drinking Water Act.
Source: “Study of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing on Drinking Water
Resources. Progress Report,” Washington, DC: U. S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Ofﬁce of Research and Development. December 2012. EPA/601/R-12/
011, Table 11, page 29. Available online at http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/
ﬁles/documents/hf-report20121214.pdf#page=209. Accessed on May 26, 2014.

in fracking products used by 11 companies who provided that
service.
In 2011, the U.S. Energy Information Administration con-
ducted a study trying to determine the amount of shale gas
and shale oil reserves available in the United States. Table 5.2
provides a summary of the ﬁndings of that survey.
Data and Documents
237
Table 5.2
Discovered but Unproved Technically Recoverable Shale Gas and
Oil Resources in the United States: Shale Oil Resources
Play
Estimated
Resource1
Area2
Expected
Ultimate
Recovery3
Leased
Unleased
Total Northeast
472.05
101,655
128,272
0.74
Marcellus
410.34
10,622
84,271
1.18
Big Sandy
7.40
8,675
1,994
0.33
Low Thermal Maturity
13.53
45,844
0.30
Greater Siltstone
8.46
22,914
0.19
New Albany
10.95
1,600
41,900
1.10
Antrim
19.93
12,000
0.28
Cincinnati Arch
1.44
Not Assessed
Gulf Coast
99.99
7,093
5,426
2.99
Haynesville
74.71
3,574
5,426
3.57
Eagle Ford
20.81
1,090
5.00
FloydNeal & Conasauga
4.37
2,429
0.90
Mid-Continent
59.88
14,388
2.45
Fayetteville
31.96
9,000
2.07
Woodford
22.21
4,70
2.98
Cana Woodford
5.72
688
5.20
Southwest
75.52
6,766
2,383
1.85
Barnett
43.38
4,075
2,383
1.42
Barnett Woodford
32.15
2,691
3.07
Rocky Mountain
43.03
30,511
0.69
Hilliard-Baxter-Mancos
3.77
16,416
0.18
Lewis
11.63
7,506
1.30
Williston-Shallow
Niobraran
6.61
Not Assessed
0.45
Mancos
21.02
6,589
1.00
Total Lower 48 States
750.38
160,413
136,081
1.02
1Trillion cubic feet.
(continued)
2Square miles.
3Billion cubic feet per well.

For a map showing the location of each of the plays listed in
Table 5.3, see the reference listed above, Figure 1, page 6.
Table 5.2
(continued)
Play
Estimated
Resource1
Area2
Expected
Ultimate
Recovery3
Leased
Unleased
Eagle Ford (Gulf Coast)
3.35
3,323
300
Avalon & Bone Springs
(Southwest)
1.58
1,313
300
Bakken (Rocky Mountains)
3.59
6,522
550
Monterey/Santos (West
Coast)
15.42
1,752
550
Total Lower 48 States
23.94
12,910
460
1Billions of barrels.
2Square miles.
3Thousands of barrels per well.
Source: “Review of Emerging Resources: U.S. Shale Gas and Shale Oil Plays,” U.S.
Energy Information Administration. July 2011. http://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/
usshalegas/pdf/usshaleplays.pdf. Accessed on May 27, 2014.
Table 5.3
Estimated Number of Fracking Wells in the United States
State
Fracking Wells
since 2005
Fracking Wells
Drilled in 2012
Arkansas
4,910
719
Colorado
18,168
1,896
Kansas
407
236
Louisiana
2,327
139
Mississippi
9
Not Available
Montana
264
174
New Mexico
1,353
482
North Dakota
5,166
1,713
Ohio
334
234
Oklahoma
2,694
Not Available
Pennsylvania
6,651
1,349
Tennessee
30
Not Available
Texas
33,753
13,540
Utah
1,336
765
Virginia
95
1
West Virginia1
3,275
610
Wyoming
1,126
468
Total
81,898
22,326
1Data for West Virginia is for permitted fracking wells, not wells that have been
drilled. Data were not available on drilled wells.
Source: Ridlington, Elizabeth, and John Rumpler. 2013. “Fracking by the Numbers: Key
Impacts of Dirty Drilling at the State and National Level,” Boston: Environment America,
Table 1, page 20. Available online at http://www.environmentamerica.org/sites/
environment/ﬁles/reports/EA_FrackingNumbers_scrn.pdf. Accessed on May 26, 2014.

In October 2013, the organization Environment America
released a report on the impact of hydraulic fracturing on the
natural environment and human health. The report contains
some of the most useful statistical information about the effects
of fracking currently available. These Tables 5.4 and 5.5 repro-
duce some of those data and statistics.
Data and Documents
239
Table 5.4
Water Used for Fracking
State
Water Used for Fracking since 20051
Arkansas
26,000
Colorado
26,000
Kansas
670
Louisiana
12,000
Mississippi
64
Montana
450
New Mexico
1,300
North Dakota
12,000
Ohio
1,400
Oklahoma
10,000
Pennsylvania
30,000
Tennessee
130
Texas
110,000
Utah
590
Virginia
15
West Virginia
17,000
Wyoming
1,200
Total
250,000
1Millions of gallons.
Source: Ridlington, Elizabeth, and John Rumpler. 2013. “Fracking by the Numbers: Key
Impacts of Dirty Drilling at the State and National Level,” Boston: Environment America,
Table 3, page 23. Available online at http://www.environmentamerica.org/sites/
environment/ﬁles/reports/EA_FrackingNumbers_scrn.pdf. Accessed on May 26, 2014.
Table 5.5
Estimated Air Pollution Produced from Early Stages of Fracking
(Drilling and Well Completion) in 2012 (tons)
State
Particulate
Matter
Nitrogen
Oxides
Carbon
Monoxide
VOCs1
Sulfur
Dioxide
Arkansas
400
5,300
8,100
700
20
Colorado
1,100
14,000
21,000
2,000
50
(continued )

The U.S. Energy Information Administration periodically
studies shale oil and gas reserves available in a number of
nations around the world. The most recent study was reported
in 2013, and its general results are summarized in Table 5.6.
240
Fracking
Table 5.5
(continued )
State
Particulate
Matter
Nitrogen
Oxides
Carbon
Monoxide
VOCs1
Sulfur
Dioxide
Kansas
100
1,700
2,700
200
6
Louisiana
80
1,000
1,600
100
3
Mississippi
Data Unavailable
Montana
100
1,300
2,000
200
4
New Mexico
300
3,600
5,400
500
10
North Dakota
1,000
13,000
19,000
2,000
40
Ohio
100
1,700
2,600
200
6
Oklahoma
Data Unavailable
Pennsylvania
800
10,000
15,000
1,000
30
Tennessee
Data Unavailable
Texas
7,800
100,000
153,000
14,000
300
Utah
400
5,700
9,000
1,000
20
Virginia
1
7
11
1
0
West Virginia
400
4,500
6,900
600
20
Wyoming
270
3,500
5,300
500
12
Total
13,000
170,000
250,000
23,000
600
1Volatile organic compounds.
Source: Ridlington, Elizabeth, and John Rumpler. 2013. “Fracking by the Numbers:
Key Impacts of Dirty Drilling at the State and National Level,” Boston: Environment
America, Table 4, page 23. Available online at http://www.environmentamerica
.org/sites/environment/ﬁles/reports/EA_FrackingNumbers_scrn.pdf. Accessed on
May 26, 2014.
Table 5.6
Estimated Risked Shale Gas and Shale Oil Resources In-Place and
Technically Recoverable in 41 Countries as Assessed in 2013
Country/Area
Risked Gas
in Place
(Tcf)1
Technically
Recoverable
Gas (Tcf)1
Risked Oil
in Place
(billion bbl)2
Technically
Recoverable
Oil (billion bbl)2
United States3
4,644
1,161
954
47.7
Canada
2,413
573
162
8.8
Mexico
2,233
545
275
13.1
(continued )

Data and Documents
241
Table 5.6
(continued )
Country/Area
Risked Gas
in Place
(Tcf)1
Technically
Recoverable
Gas (Tcf)1
Risked Oil
in Place
(billion bbl)2
Technically
Recoverable
Oil (billion bbl)2
North America4
4,647
1,118
437
21.9
Australia
2,046
437
403
17.5
Colombia
308
55
120
6.8
Venezuela
815
167
269
13.4
Argentina
3,244
802
480
27.0
Brazil
1,279
245
134
5.3
Bolivia
154
36
11
0.6
Chile
228
48
47
2.3
Paraguay
350
75
77
3.7
Uruguay
13
2
14
0.6
South America
6,390
1,431
1,152
59.7
Poland
763
148
65
3.3
Lithuania
4
0
5
0.3
Kaliningrad
20
2
24
1.2
Russia
1,921
285
1,243
74.6
Bulgaria
66
17
4
0.2
Romania
233
51
6
0.3
Ukraine
572
128
23
1.1
United Kingdom
134
26
17
0.7
Spain
42
8
3
0.1
France
727
137
118
4.7
Germany
80
17
14
0.7
Netherlands
151
26
59
2.9
Denmark
159
32
0
0.0
Sweden
49
10
0
0.0
Europe
4,895
883
1,551
88.6
Morocco
95
20
5
0.2
Algeria
3,419
707
121
5.7
Tunisia
114
23
29
1.5
Libya
942
122
613
26.1
Egypt
535
100
114
4.6
South Africa
1,559
390
0
0.0
Africa
6,664
1,361
882
38.1
China
4,746
1,115
644
32.2
Mongolia
55
4
85
3.4
Thailand
22
5
0
0.0
Indonesia
303
46
234
7.9
(continued )

Table 5.7 presents a summary of crude oil and natural gas
petroleum reserves in the United States from 1900 to the
present day, as determined by the U.S. Energy Information
Administration.
242
Fracking
Table 5.6
(continued )
Country/Area
Risked Gas
in Place
(Tcf)1
Technically
Recoverable
Gas (Tcf)1
Risked Oil
in Place
(billion bbl)2
Technically
Recoverable
Oil (billion bbl)2
India
584
96
87
3.8
Pakistan
586
105
227
9.1
Jordan
35
7
4
0.1
Turkey
163
24
94
4.7
Asia
6,495
1,403
1,375
61.1
World
31,138
6,634
5,799
286.9
1Trillion cubic feet.
2Billion barrels.
3For purposes of comparison only.
4Excluding the United States.
Source: “Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An
Assessment of 137 Shale Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States,”
U.S. Energy Information Administration. June 2013. http://www.eia.gov/analysis/
studies/worldshalegas/pdf/fullreport.pdf. Accessed on May 31, 2014.
Table 5.7
U.S. Crude Oil and Natural Gas Proved Reserves1
Year
Crude Oil
Natural Gas2
1900
2,900
1910
4,500
1920
7,200
1930
13,600
1940
19,025
1950
25,268
1960
31,613
1970
39,001
1980
29,805
206,259
1990
26,254
177,756
2000
22,045
186,510
2005
21,757
213,308
2006
20,972
220,416
(continued )

Documents
Crude Oil Windfall Proﬁt Tax Act of 1980
One of the earliest efforts by the federal government to encourage
the development of alternative sources of energy was the Crude
Oil Windfall Proﬁt Tax Act of 1980, which provided tax incen-
tives for a number of such energy sources. The section excerpted here
deals with natural gas and oil extracted from Devonian shale, a
technology later greatly aided and developed by the use of hydraulic
fracturing.
PART III—PRODUCTION OF FUEL FROM
NONCONVENTIONAL SOURCES; ALCOHOL FUELS
SEC. 231. PRODUCTION TAX CREDIT.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A
of chapter 1 (relating to credits against tax) is amended
by inserting after section 44C the following new
section:
Data and Documents
243
Table 5.7
(continued )
Year
Crude Oil
Natural Gas2
2007
21,317
247,789
2008
19,121
255,035
2009
20,682
283,879
2010
23,267
317,647
2011
26,544
348,809
2012
30,529
322,670
1Million barrels of oil and billion cubic feet of gas.
2Data not available prior to 1979.
Source: “U.S. Crude Oil Proved Reserves,” U.S. Energy Information Administration.
April 10, 2014. http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=RC
RR01NUS_1&f=A. Accessed on July 7, 2014; “U.S. Natural Gas, Wet after Lease
Separation Proved Reserves.” U.S. Energy Information Administration. April 10,
2014. http://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/hist/rngr21nus_1a.htm. Accessed on July 7, 2014.

“SEC. 44D. CREDIT FOR PRODUCING FUEL FROM A
NONCONVENTIONAL SOURCE.
“(a) ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT.—There shall be
allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this
chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to—
“(1) $3, multiplied by
“(2) the barrel-of-oil equivalent of qualiﬁed fuels—
“(A) sold by the taxpayer to an unrelated person
during the taxable year,
and
“(B) the production of which is attributable to
the taxpayer.
. . .
“(c) DEFINITION OF QUALIFIED FUELS—For pur-
poses of this section—
“(1) IN GENERAL.—The term ‘qualiﬁed fuels’
means—
“(A) oil produced from shale and tar sands,
“(B) gas produced from—
“(i) geopressured brine, Devonian shale,
coal seams, or
a tight formation, or
“(ii) biomass,
“(C) liquid, gaseous, or solid synthetic fuels pro-
duced from coal (including lignite), includ-
ing such fuels when used as feedstocks,
“(D) qualifying processed wood fuels, and
“(E) steam produced from solid agricultural
byproducts (not including timber by-
products).
“(2) GAS FROM GEOPRESSURED BRINE, ETC.—
“(A) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in
subparagraph (B), the determination of
whether any gas is produced from geopres-
sured brine, Devonian shale, coal seams,
or a tight formation shall be made in
244
Fracking

accordance with section 503 of the Natural
Gas Policy Act of 1978.
“(B) SPECIAL RULES FOR GAS FROM
TIGHT
FORMATIONS.—The
term
‘gas produced from a tight formation’ shall
only include—
“(i) gas the price of which is regulated by
the United States, and
“(ii) gas for which the maximum lawful
price applicable under the Natural
Gas Policy Act of 1978 is at least
150 percent of the then applicable
price under section 103 of such Act.
. . .
(4) SPECIAL RULES APPUCABLE TO GAS
FROM GEOPRESSURED BRINE, DEVO-
NIAN
SHALE,
COAL
SEAMS,
OR
A
TIGHT FORMATION.—
“(A) CREDIT ALLOWED ONLY FOR NEW
PRODUCTION.—The amount of the
credit allowable under subsection (a) shall
be determined without regard to any pro-
duction attributable to a property from
which gas from Devonian shale, coal seams,
geopressured brine, or a tight formation
was produced in marketable quantities
before January 1, 1980.
“(B) REFERENCE PRICE AND APPUCATION
OF
PHASEOUT
FOR
DEVONIAN
SHALE.—
“(i)
REFERENCE
PRICE
FOR
DEVONIAN
SHALE—For
pur-
poses of this section, the term ‘refer-
ence price’ for gas from Devonian
shale
sold
during
calendar
years
1980, 1981, and 1982 shall be the
Data and Documents
245

average wellhead price per thousand
cubic feet for such year of high cost
natural gas (as deﬁned in section 107
(c) (2), (3), and (4) of the Natural
Gas Policy Act of 1978 and deter-
mined under section 503 of that act)
as estimated by the Secretary after
consultation with the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission.
“(ii) DIFFERENT
PHASEOUT
TO
APPLY FOR 1980, 1981, AND
1982.—For
purposes
of
applying
paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection
(b) with respect to sales during calendar
years 1980, 1981, and 1982 of gas
from Devonian shale, ‘$4.05’ shall be
substituted for ‘$23.50’ and ‘$1.03’
shall be substituted for ‘$6.00’.
Source: Public Law 96-223—April 2, 1980. http://www.gpo
.gov/fdsys/pkg/STATUTE-94/pdf/STATUTE-94-Pg229.pdf.
Accessed on May 27, 2014.
Hydraulic Fracturing Exclusions
The process of hydraulic fracturing has been speciﬁcally excluded
from provisions of a number of federal laws originally written to
protect the natural environment and human health. Examples of
some of these exceptions provided to the fracking process are pro-
vided here.
Safe Drinking Water Act, Public Law 113-103,
Section 300h(d)(1)
(d) “Underground injection” deﬁned; underground injection
endangerment of drinking water sources
246
Fracking

For purposes of this part:
(1)
Underground
injection.—The
term
“underground
injection”—
(A) means the subsurface emplacement of ﬂuids by well
injection; and
(B) excludes—
(i) the underground injection of natural gas for pur-
poses of storage; and
(ii) the underground injection of ﬂuids or propping
agents (other than diesel fuels) pursuant to
hydraulic fracturing operations related to oil,
gas, or geothermal production activities.
(2) Underground injection endangers drinking water sources
if such injection may result in the presence in under-
ground water which supplies or can reasonably be
expected to supply any public water system of any con-
taminant, and if the presence of such contaminant may
result in such system’s not complying with any national
primary drinking water regulation or may otherwise
adversely affect the health of persons.
Source: U.S. Code, Title 42, Section 300h(d)(1). http://
uscode.house.gov/download/download.shtml.
Accessed
on
May 28, 2014.
Clean Water Act, Public Law 95-217, Sections 1326, 1342
(2) Stormwater runoff from oil, gas, and mining operations
The Administrator shall not require a permit under this section,
nor shall the Administrator directly or indirectly require any
State to require a permit, for discharges of stormwater runoff
from mining operations or oil and gas exploration, production,
processing, or treatment operations or transmission facilities,
composed entirely of ﬂows which are from conveyances or sys-
tems of conveyances (including but not limited to pipes,
Data and Documents
247

conduits, ditches, and channels) used for collecting and convey-
ing precipitation runoff and which are not contaminated by con-
tact with, or do not come into contact with, any overburden, raw
material, intermediate products, ﬁnished product, byproduct, or
waste products located on the site of such operations.
. . .
(6) The term “pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste,
incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt
and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged
into water. This term does not mean (A) “sewage from vessels
or a discharge incidental to the normal operation of a vessel of
the Armed Forces” within the meaning of section 1322 of this
title; or (B) water, gas, or other material which is injected into
a well to facilitate production of oil or gas, or water derived in
association with oil or gas production and disposed of in a well,
if the well used either to facilitate production or for disposal
purposes is approved by authority of the State in which the well
is located, and if such State determines that such injection or
disposal will not result in the degradation of ground or surface
water resources.
Source: U.S. Code, Title 33, Sections 1326(24) and 1342(l)(2).
http://uscode.house.gov/download/download.shtml. Accessed on
May 28, 2014.
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), Public
Law 94-580, 6921(b)
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsec-
tion, drilling ﬂuids, produced waters, and other wastes associ-
ated with the exploration, development, or production of
crude oil or natural gas or geothermal energy shall be subject
only to existing State or Federal regulatory programs in lieu of
this subchapter until at least 24 months after October 21,
248
Fracking

1980, and after promulgation of the regulations in accordance
with subparagraphs (B) and (C) of this paragraph.
Source: U.S. Code, Title 42, Section 6921. http://uscode.
house.gov/download/download.shtml. Accessed on May 28,
2014.
This law was later clariﬁed by two EPA regulations posted in the
Federal Register, the ﬁrst of which listed nearly three pages of mate-
rials exempted from provisions of the RCRA, including, as
examples:
—Produced water; Drilling ﬂuids; Drill cuttings; Rigwash;
Drilling ﬂuids and cuttings from offshore operations disposed
of onshore; Well completion, treatment, and stimulation ﬂuids;
Basic sediment and water and other tank bottoms from storage
facilities that hold product and exempt waste; Accumulated
materials such as hydrocarbons, solids, sand, and emulsion
from production separators, ﬂuid treating vessels, and produc-
tion impoundments; Pit sludges and contaminated bottoms
from storage or disposal of exempt wastes; Packing ﬂuids;
Produced sand; Pipe scale, hydrocarbon solids, hydrates, and
other deposits removed from piping and equipment prior to
transportation; Hydrocarbon-bearing soil; Wastes from subsur-
face gas storage and retrieval, except for the nonexempt wastes
listed below; Constituents removed from produced water
before it is injected or otherwise disposed of; Liquid hydrocar-
bons removed from the production stream but not from oil
reﬁning; Gases from the production stream, such as hydrogen
sulﬁde and carbon dioxide, and volatilized hydrocarbons;
Materials ejected from a producing well during the process
known as blowdown; Waste crude oil from primary ﬁeld oper-
ations and production; Light organics volatilized from exempt
wastes in reserve pits or impoundments or production equip-
ment; Unused fracturing ﬂuids or acids; Painting wastes; Oil
and gas service company wastes, such as empty drums, drum
rinsate, vacuum truck rinsate, sandblast media, painting wastes,
Data and Documents
249

spent solvents, spilled chemicals, and waste acids; Used equip-
ment lubrication oils; Used hydraulic ﬂuids; Waste solvents.
Source: Regulatory Determination for Oil and Gas and
Geothermal Exploration, Development and Production Wastes.
53 Fed. Reg. 25,447. http://www.epa.gov/osw/nonhaz/industrial/
special/oil/og88wp.pdf. Accessed on May 28, 2014. See also
Clariﬁcation of the Regulatory Determination for Wastes from
the Exploration, Development, and Production of Crude Oil,
Natural Gas and Geothermal Energy. 58 Fed. Reg. 15,284.
http://www.epa.gov/osw/nonhaz/industrial/special/oil/og93wp.pdf.
Accessed on May 28, 2014.
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
and Liability Act (CERCLA; also known as the Superfund
Act), Public Law 96-510, 9601
The so-called Superfund Act contains a number of sections
that exempt oil and gas industries from provisions of the act. One
such section involves the deﬁnition of hazardous substances under
the act.
(14) The term “hazardous substance” means . . .
(F) any imminently hazardous chemical substance or mixture
with respect to which the Administrator has taken action pur-
suant to section 7 of the Toxic Substances Control Act [15
U.S.C. 2606]. The term does not include petroleum, including
crude oil or any fraction thereof which is not otherwise speciﬁ-
cally listed or designated as a hazardous substance under sub-
paragraphs (A) through (F) of this paragraph, and the term
does not include natural gas, natural gas liquids, liqueﬁed natu-
ral gas, or synthetic gas usable for fuel (or mixtures of natural
gas and such synthetic gas).
. . .
(33) The term “pollutant or contaminant” shall include, but
not be limited to, any element, substance, compound, or
250
Fracking

mixture, including disease-causing agents, which after release
into the environment and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation,
or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the envi-
ronment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will or
may reasonably be anticipated to cause death, disease, behav-
ioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutation, physiological
malfunctions (including malfunctions in reproduction) or
physical deformations, in such organisms or their offspring;
except that the term “pollutant or contaminant” shall not
include petroleum, including crude oil or any fraction thereof
which is not otherwise speciﬁcally listed or designated as a haz-
ardous substance under subparagraphs (A) through (F) of para-
graph (14) and shall not include natural gas, liqueﬁed natural
gas, or synthetic gas of pipeline quality (or mixtures of natural
gas and such synthetic gas).
Source: U.S. Code, Title 42, Section 9601. http://uscode
.house.gov/download/download.shtml. Accessed on May 28,
2014.
Legal Environmental Assistance Foundation vs. U.S. EPA,
118 F.3d 1467 (1997)
The question as to whether or not the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) could or must regulate hydraulic fractur-
ing has a long history, beginning with an appeal by the Legal
Environmental Assistance Foundation (LEAF) to the EPA in
1994 that they begin doing just that. When the EPA declined to
do so, LEAF ﬁled suit, which eventually reached the 11th Circuit
Court of Appeals. That court’s ruling in this matter was as follows.
(Ellipses indicate the deletion of references and/or citations.)
Contrary to EPA, “[w]e do not start from the premise that [the
statutory] language is imprecise. Instead, we assume that in
drafting legislation, Congress said what it meant.” . . . It is only
after we have determined that words used by Congress are
Data and Documents
251

ambiguous, or that Congress left a gap in the statutory language,
that we turn to the agency’s interpretation of these words to ascer-
tain whether it deserves any deference. . . . “Giving the words
used their ordinary meaning,” . . . we readily ﬁnd that the word
“injection” means the act of “forc[ing] (a ﬂuid) into a passage,
cavity, or tissue.“ . . . Sensibly, therefore, “underground injection”
means the subsurface emplacement of ﬂuids by forcing them into
cavities and passages in the ground through a well. . . . The pro-
cess of hydraulic fracturing obviously falls within this deﬁnition,
as it involves the subsurface emplacement . . . of ﬂuids by forcing
them into cracks in the ground through a well. Nothing in the
statutory deﬁnition suggests that EPA has the authority to exclude
from the reach of the regulations an activity (i.e., hydraulic frac-
turing) which unquestionably falls within the plain meaning of
the deﬁnition, on the basis that the well that is used to achieve
that activity is also used—even primarily used for another activity
(i.e., methane gas production) that does not constitute under-
ground injection. EPA’s argument that a methane gas production
well is not an “injection well” because it is used primarily for gas
extraction is spurious. Congress directed EPA to regulate “under-
ground injection” activities, not “injection wells.” In view of clear
statutory language requiring the regulation of all such activities,
they must be regulated, regardless of the other uses of the well
in which these activities occur. . . .
Source: Legal Environmental Assistance Foundation vs. U.S.
EPA, 118 F.3d 1467. https://law.resource.org/pub/us/case/
reporter/F3/118/118.F3d.1467.95-6501.html.
Accessed
on
May 25, 2014.
Evaluation of Impacts to Underground Sources of Drinking
Water by Hydraulic Fracturing of Coalbed Methane
Reservoirs Study (2004)
In 2002, the EPA initiated a study on the possible effects of
hydraulic fracturing operations on the quality of drinking water
252
Fracking

in regions where such operations were being conducted. The agency
released its ﬁnal report on this topic in June 2004. The study found
that fracking has no signiﬁcant effects on drinking water quality, a
ﬁnding that was soon to be challenged by other individuals and
agencies. One complaint raised by these critics was that the EPA
had been too strongly inﬂuenced by the pro-industry bent of
President George W. Bush and his vice president (and former ofﬁ-
cial at the Halliburton Company), Richard Cheney. The report’s
major conclusion in this regard was as follows:
[From the executive summary of the report:]
Based on the information collected and reviewed, EPA has
concluded that the injection of hydraulic fracturing ﬂuids into
CBM wells poses little or no threat to USDWs and does not
justify additional study at this time.
[From a more detailed discussion of this point later in the report:]
ES-8 Did EPA Find Any Cases of Contaminated Drinking
Water Wells Caused by Hydraulic Fracturing in CBM
Wells?
EPA did not ﬁnd conﬁrmed evidence that drinking water wells
have been contaminated by hydraulic fracturing ﬂuid injection
into CBM wells. EPA reviewed studies and follow-up investiga-
tions conducted by state agencies in response to citizen reports
that CBM production resulted in water quality and quantity
incidents. In addition, EPA received reports from concerned
citizens in each area with signiﬁcant CBM development.
These complaints pertained to the following basins:
• San Juan Basin (Colorado and New Mexico);
• Powder River Basin (Wyoming and Montana);
• Black Warrior Basin (Alabama); and
• Central Appalachian Basin (Virginia and West Virginia).
Data and Documents
253

Examples of concerns and claims raised by citizens include:
• Drinking water with strong, unpleasant taste and odor.
• Impacts on ﬁsh, and surrounding vegetation and wildlife
• Loss of water in wells and aquifers, and discharged water cre-
ating artiﬁcial ponds and swamps not indigenous to region.
Water quantity complaints were the most predominant cause for
complaint by private well owners. After reviewing data and incident
reports provided by states, EPA sees no conclusive evidence that
water quality degradation in USDWs is a direct result of injection
of hydraulic fracturing ﬂuids into CBM wells and subsequent
underground movement of these ﬂuids. Several other factors may
contribute to groundwater problems, such as various aspects of re-
source development, naturally occurring conditions, population
growth, and historical well-completion or abandonment practices.
Many of the incidents that were reported (such as water loss
and impacts on nearby ﬂora and fauna from discharge of pro-
duced water) are beyond the authorities of EPA under SDWA
and the scope of Phase I of this study.
Source: Executive
Summary, Evaluation
of Impacts to
Underground Sources of Drinking Water by Hydraulic
Fracturing of Coalbed Methane Reservoirs Study. http://www.
epa.gov/ogwdw/uic/pdfs/cbmstudy_attach_uic_exec_summ.pdf.
Accessed on May 30, 2014.
Testimony Submitted to the House Committee on Natural
Resources Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources
Washington, DC, June 18, 2009, Prepared by the Interstate
Oil and Gas Compact Commission on Behalf of the
Nation’s Oil and Gas Producing States
In this presentation, the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission
(IOGCC) argues that fracking is a common and safe practice in the
extraction of oil and gas in the United States. The presentation is of
254
Fracking

value to the general reader largely because of the ﬁve attachments
offered as support for the IOGCC’s argument that studies have shown
that fracking causes no harm to drinking water with documents from
the federal law, relevant court cases, reports from state oil and gas
commissions, resolutions from state legislative bodies, and previous tes-
timony from an IOGCC representative. The case made in the presen-
tation is summarized in the initial portion of the document, as
follows:
Summary:
Hydraulic fracturing has been used safely to stimulate oil and
gas production in the United States for more than 60 years
and is thoroughly regulated by the oil and gas regulatory agen-
cies of the member states of the Interstate Oil and Gas
Compact Commission (IOGCC).
Additional study is unnecessary, and in fact, would be a
wasteful use of taxpayers’ dollars. However, all future studies
involving the regulation of oil and natural gas exploration and
production must involve leadership by those ofﬁcials who know
it best—state regulators.
Claims that hydraulic fracturing has been linked directly to
the contamination of underground sources of drinking water
are untrue. If factual information exists to the contrary, the
public, media and policymakers are urged to contact the appro-
priate state ofﬁcials for further investigation.
Legislators and regulators did not intend to regulate the
short-term process of well stimulation by hydraulic fracturing
under the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s require-
ments for long-term disposal of substances (underground injec-
tion control (UIC) program).
Hydraulic fracturing plays a critical role in the development
of virtually all unconventional oil and natural gas resources.
The technology has signiﬁcantly increased domestic reserves,
especially clean-burning natural gas. Further regulatory bur-
dens are unnecessary, and in fact, would delay the development
Data and Documents
255

of vital domestic natural gas resources and increase energy costs
to the consumer with no resulting environmental beneﬁt.
Source: Testimony Submitted to the House Committee on
Natural Resources Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources. Washington, DC, June 18, 2009. Prepared by the
Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission on Behalf of the
Nation’s Oil and Gas Producing States. https://iogcc.publishpath
.com/Websites/iogcc/Images/Additional-IOGCC-Testimony-June
2009.pdf. Accessed on July 11, 2014.
Study of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing on
Drinking Water Resources—Progress Report (2012)
In 2010, the U.S. Congress directed the EPA to conduct a compre-
hensive study of the effects of hydraulic fracturing on drinking
water. Following that directive, the EPA began a long-range study
on the topic, producing a progress report a few years after the study
began. The executive summary of that report describes the type of
work the EPA had planned to do to fulﬁll this mission.
Executive Summary
Natural gas plays a key role in our nation’s clean energy
future. The United States has vast reserves of natural gas that
are commercially viable as a result of advances in horizontal
drilling and hydraulic fracturing technologies, which enable
greater access to gas in rock formations deep underground.
These advances have spurred a signiﬁcant increase in the pro-
duction of both natural gas and oil across the country.
Responsible development of America’s oil and gas resources
offers important economic, energy security, and environmental
beneﬁts. However, as the use of hydraulic fracturing has
increased, so have concerns about its potential human health
and environmental impacts, especially for drinking water. In
response to public concern, the US House of Representatives
requested that the US Environmental Protection Agency
256
Fracking

(EPA) conduct scientiﬁc research to examine the relationship
between hydraulic fracturing and drinking water resources
(citation omitted ).
In 2011, the EPA began research under its Plan to Study the
Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing on Drinking Water
Resources. The purpose of the study is to assess the potential
impacts of hydraulic fracturing on drinking water resources, if
any, and to identify the driving factors that may affect the
severity and frequency of such impacts. Scientists are focusing
primarily on hydraulic fracturing of shale formations to extract
natural gas, with some study of other oil- and gas-producing
formations, including tight sands, and coalbeds. The EPA has
designed the scope of the research around ﬁve stages of the
hydraulic fracturing water cycle. Each stage of the cycle is asso-
ciated with a primary research question:
• Water acquisition: What are the possible impacts of large
volume water withdrawals from ground and surface waters
on drinking water resources?
• Chemical mixing: What are the possible impacts of
hydraulic fracturing ﬂuid surface spills on or near well pads
on drinking water resources?
• Well injection: What are the possible impacts of the injec-
tion and fracturing process on drinking water resources?
• Flowback and produced water: What are the possible
impacts of ﬂowback and produced water (collectively
referred to as “hydraulic fracturing wastewater”) surface
spills on or near well pads on drinking water resources?
• Wastewater treatment and waste disposal: What are the pos-
sible impacts of inadequate treatment of hydraulic fracturing
wastewater on drinking water resources?
This report describes 18 research projects underway to
answer these research questions and presents the progress made
as of September 2012 for each of the projects. Information
Data and Documents
257

presented as part of this report cannot be used to draw conclu-
sions about potential impacts to drinking water resources from
hydraulic fracturing. The research projects are organized
according to ﬁve different types of research activities: analysis
of existing data, scenario evaluations, laboratory studies, toxic-
ity assessments, and case studies.
Source: Study of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing
on Drinking Water Resources. Progress Report. Washington,
DC: US Environmental Protection Agency, Ofﬁce of Resea-
rch and Development. December 2012, EPA/601/R-12/011.
Available online at http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/ﬁles/
documents/hf-report20121214.pdf. Accessed on May 27, 2014.
Act 13, State of Pennsylvania (2012)
In 2012, the Pennsylvania state legislature passed a bill called Act
13 that dealt with a number of issues related to the extraction of oil
and gas in the state, with special attention to unconventional sour-
ces of the fuels, such as hydraulic fracturing. Probably the most con-
tentious feature of that act was the restriction placed by the
legislature on the control that local communities were to be allowed
to have over fracking operations within their boundaries. The most
important provisions of the act in that regard are the following.
[The controversial portion of section 3215 is section (b) (4).]
§ 3303. Oil and gas operations regulated by environmental acts.
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, environmen-
tal acts are of Statewide concern and, to the extent that they
regulate oil and gas operations, occupy the entire ﬁeld of regu-
lation, to the exclusion of all local ordinances. The Common-
wealth by this section, preempts and supersedes the local
regulation of oil and gas operations regulated by the environ-
mental acts, as provided in this chapter.
§ 3304. Uniformity of local ordinances.
(a) General rule.—In addition to the restrictions contained in
sections 3302 (relating to oil and gas operations regulated
258
Fracking

pursuant to Chapter 32) and 3303 (relating to oil and gas oper-
ations regulated by environmental acts), all local ordinances
regulating oil and gas operations shall allow for the reasonable
development of oil and gas resources.
(b) Reasonable development of oil and gas resources.—
In order to allow for the reasonable development of oil and
gas resources, a local ordinance:
(1) Shall allow well and pipeline location assessment opera-
tions, including seismic operations and related activities con-
ducted in accordance with all applicable Federal and State
laws and regulations relating to the storage and use of explosives
throughout every local government.
(2) May not impose conditions, requirements or limitations
on the construction of oil and gas operations that are more
stringent than conditions, requirements or limitations imposed
on construction activities for other industrial uses within the
geographic boundaries of the local government.
(3) May not impose conditions, requirements or limitations
on the heights of structures, screening and fencing, lighting or
noise relating to permanent oil and gas operations that are more
stringent than the conditions, requirements or limitations
imposed on other industrial uses or other land development
within the particular zoning district where the oil and gas oper-
ations are situated within the local government.
(4) Shall have a review period for permitted uses that does
not exceed 30 days for complete submissions or that does not
exceed 120 days for conditional uses.
(5) Shall authorize oil and gas operations, other than activities
at impoundment areas, compressor stations and processing
plants, as a permitted use in all zoning districts.
. . .
(b) Limitation.—
(1) No well site may be prepared or well drilled within 100
feet or, in the case of an unconventional well, 300 feet from
the vertical well bore or 100 feet from the edge of the well site,
whichever is greater, measured horizontally from any solid blue
Data and Documents
259

lined stream, spring or body of water as identiﬁed on the most
current 7 1/2 minute topographic quadrangle map of the
United States Geological Survey.
(2) The edge of the disturbed area associated with any uncon-
ventional well site must maintain a 100-foot setback from the
edge of any solid blue lined stream, spring or body of water as
identiﬁed on the most current 7 1/2 minute topographic quad-
rangle map of the United States Geological Survey.
(3) No unconventional well may be drilled within 300 feet of
any wetlands greater than one acre in size, and the edge of the
disturbed area of any well site must maintain a 100-foot setback
from the boundary of the wetlands.
(4) The department shall waive the distance restrictions upon
submission of a plan identifying additional measures, facilities
or practices to be employed during well site construction,
drilling and operations necessary to protect the waters of this
Commonwealth.
Source: Oil and Gas (58 PA.C.S.)—Omnibus Amendments.
Act of Feb. 14, 2012, P.L. 87, No. 13 Cl. 58. http://www
.legis.state.pa.us/WU01/LI/LI/US/HTM/2012/0/0013.HTM.
Accessed on July 7, 2014.
Robinson Township, et al. vs. Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, (J-127A-D-2012) (2013)
Act 13 (cited earlier) met with a good deal of resistance from indi-
viduals, organizations, and communities who argued that the state
legislature was infringing on their personal, environmental, and
zoning rights. Eventually a case bringing together seven commun-
ities with this view of the act reached the Pennsylvania Supreme
Court under the title of Robinson Township, et al., vs.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the “et al.” being the other six
communities involved in the case.
On December 19, 2013, the court announced its decision, hold-
ing partly in support of the state and, probably most importantly,
260
Fracking

partly in favor of the plaintiffs. Critical portions of the court’s deci-
sion are reprinted here.
Reviewing the amended Act, few could seriously dispute how
remarkable a revolution is worked by this legislation upon the
existing zoning regimen in Pennsylvania, including residential
zones. In short, local government is required to authorize oil
and gas operations, impoundment areas, and location assess-
ment operations (including seismic testing and the use of explo-
sives) as permitted uses in all zoning districts throughout a
locality. Local government is also required to authorize natural
gas compressor stations as permitted uses in agricultural and
industrial districts, and as conditional uses in all other zoning
districts. Local governments are also commanded to authorize
natural gas processing plants as permitted uses in industrial dis-
tricts and as conditional uses in agricultural districts. Moreover,
Section 3304 limits local government to imposing conditions:
on construction of oil and gas operations only as stringent as those
on construction activities for industrial uses; and on heights of
structures, screening and fencing, lighting and noise only as strin-
gent as those imposed on other land development within the
same zoning district. Local government is also simply prohibited
from limiting subterranean operations and hours of operation
for assembly and disassembly of drilling rigs, and for operation
of oil and gas wells, compressor stations, or processing plants.
Localities also may not increase setbacks from uses related to the
oil and gas industry beyond those articulated by Act 13. In addi-
tion, the dictated approach to setbacks focuses only on “existing
buildings,” offering residents and property owners no setback
protections should they desire to develop further their own prop-
erties. That local government’s zoning role is reduced to pro
forma accommodation is conﬁrmed by the fact that review under
local ordinances of proposed oil and gas-related uses must be
completed in 30 days for permitted uses, and in 120 days for con-
ditional uses. The displacement of prior planning, and derivative
expectations, regarding land use, zoning, and enjoyment of prop-
erty is unprecedented.
Data and Documents
261

. . .
We have explained that, among other ﬁduciary duties under
Article I, Section 27, the General Assembly has the obligation
to prevent degradation, diminution, and depletion of our pub-
lic natural resources, which it may satisfy by enacting legislation
that adequately restrains actions of private parties likely to cause
harm to protected aspects of our environment. We are con-
strained to hold that Section 3304 falls considerably short of
meeting this obligation for two reasons.
First, a new regulatory regime permitting industrial uses as a
matter of right in every type of pre-existing zoning district is
incapable of conserving or maintaining the constitutionally-
protected aspects of the public environment and of a certain
quality of life. In Pennsylvania, terrain and natural conditions
frequently differ throughout a municipality, and from munici-
pality to municipality. As a result, the impact on the quality,
quantity, and well-being of our natural resources cannot rea-
sonably be assessed on the basis of a statewide average.
Protection of environmental values, in this respect, is a quintes-
sential local issue that must be tailored to local conditions. [cita-
tion omitted] Moreover, the Commonwealth is now over three
centuries old, and its citizens settled the territory and built
homes and communities long before the exploitation of natural
gas in the Marcellus Shale Formation became economically fea-
sible. Oil and gas operations do not function autonomously of
their immediate surroundings. Act 13 emerged upon this com-
plex background of settled habitability and ownership interests
and expectations.
Despite this variety in the existing environmental and legisla-
tive landscape, Act 13 simply displaces development guidelines,
guidelines which offer strict limitations on industrial uses in
sensitive zoning districts; instead, Act 13 permits industrial oil
and gas operations as a use “of right” in every zoning district
throughout the Commonwealth, including in residential, com-
mercial, and agricultural districts
. . .
262
Fracking

A second difﬁculty arising from Section 3304’s requirement
that local government permit industrial uses in all zoning dis-
tricts is that some properties and communities will carry much
heavier environmental and habitability burdens than others.
[citation omitted] This disparate effect is irreconcilable with
the express command that the trustee will manage the corpus
of the trust for the beneﬁt of “all the people.” [citation omitted]
. . .
[In conclusion:]
C. Sections 3215(b)(4), 3215(d), 3303, and 3304 violate
the Environmental Rights Amendment. We do not reach other
constitutional issues raised by the parties with respect to these
provisions. As a result, the Commonwealth Court’s decision is
afﬁrmed with respect to Sections 3215(b)(4) and 3304 (on differ-
ent grounds), and reversed with respect to Sections 3215(d) and
3303. Accordingly, application and enforcement of Sections
3215(b)(4), 3215(d), 3303, and 3304 is hereby enjoined.
Source: Oil and Gas (58 PA.C.S.)—Omnibus Amendments.
Act of Feb. 14, 2012, P.L. 87, No. 13. http://www.legis.state.
pa.us/WU01/LI/LI/US/HTM/2012/0/0013..HTM. Accessed
on June 2, 2014. Robinson Township vs. Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, (J-127A-D-2012). http://www.pacourts.us/assets/
opinions/Supreme/out/J-127A-D-2012oajc.pdf?cb=1. Accessed
on June 2, 2014.
Fracturing Responsibility and Awareness of Chemicals Act
S.1135, 113th Congress, 1st Session (2013)
Beginning in the 111th Congress (2009), a group of legislators has
introduced a bill to deﬁne hydraulic fracturing as a federally regu-
lated activity under terms of the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974.
The bill has never made much progress through the Congress, not
even having been heard in committee. It appears likely, however,
Data and Documents
263

that efforts by some members of Congress will continue to obtain
greater federal regulation of the fracking process. Ellipses (. . .) indi-
cate the omission of unrelated information or sources.
SEC. 2. REGULATION OF HYDRAULIC FRACTURING.
(a) Underground Injection—Section 1421(d) of the Safe
Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300h(d)) is amended
by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following:
‘(1) UNDERGROUND INJECTION—
(A) IN GENERAL—The term ‘underground
injection’ means the subsurface emplacement
of ﬂuids by well injection.
‘(B) INCLUSION—The term ‘underground injec-
tion’ includes the underground injection of ﬂu-
ids or propping agents pursuant to hydraulic
fracturing operations relating to oil or natural
gas production activities.
‘(C) EXCLUSION—The term ‘underground injec-
tion’ does not include the underground injec-
tion of natural gas for the purpose of storage.’
(b) State Primary Enforcement Relating to Hydraulic
Fracturing Operations—Section 1422 of the Safe
Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300h-1) is amended
by adding at the end the following:
‘(f) Hydraulic Fracturing Operations—
‘(1) IN GENERAL—Consistent with such regula-
tions as the Administrator may prescribe, a State
may seek primary enforcement responsibility for
hydraulic fracturing operations for oil and natural
gas without seeking to assume primary enforce-
ment responsibility for other types of under-
ground
injection
control
wells,
including
underground injection control wells that inject
brine or other ﬂuids that are brought to the sur-
face in connection with oil and natural gas pro-
duction or any underground injection for the
264
Fracking

secondary or tertiary recovery of oil or natural
gas.
. . .
(c) Disclosure—Section 1421(b) of the Safe Drinking
Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300h(b)) is amended by adding
at the end the following:
‘(4) DISCLOSURES OF CHEMICAL
CONSTITUENTS—
‘(A)
IN
GENERAL—A
person
conducting
hydraulic fracturing operations shall dis-
close to the State (or to the Administrator,
in any case in which the Administrator has
primary enforcement responsibility in a
State), by not later than such deadlines as
shall be established by the State (or the
Administrator)—
‘(i) before the commencement of any
hydraulic fracturing operations at any
lease area or a portion of a lease area,
a list of chemicals and proppants
intended for use in any underground
injection
during
the
operations
(including identiﬁcation of the chemi-
cal constituents of mixtures, Chemical
Abstracts Service numbers for each
chemical and constituent, material
safety data sheets if available, and the
anticipated amount of each chemical
to be used); and
‘‘(ii) after the completion of hydraulic frac-
turing operations described in clause
(i), the list of chemicals and proppants
used in each underground injection
during the operations (including identi-
ﬁcation of the chemical constituents of
mixtures, Chemical Abstracts Service
Data and Documents
265

numbers for each chemical and con-
stituent, material safety data sheets if
available, and the amount of each
chemical used).
Source: Bill Text, 113th Congress (2013–2014), S.1135.IS.
http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c113:S.1135:. Accessed
on May 25, 2014.
Powder River Basin Resource Council, Wyoming Outdoor
Council, Earthworks, and Center for Effective Government
(Formerly OMB Watch) vs. Wyoming Oil and Gas Con-
servation Commission and Halliburton Energy Services, Inc.,
2014 WY 37 (2014)
Wyoming was the ﬁrst state to require that companies using
hydraulic fracking in their operations disclose to the public the
chemicals used in that practice. In an early test of the law, the state
Oil
and
Gas
Conservation
Commission
agreed
with
the
Halliburton Company that it was not bound by that law and that
it was not required to disclose the chemicals it used in its fracking
operations. The case reached the Wyoming Supreme Court in
October 2013 and was decided in March 2014. The court
returned the case to a lower court for a rehearing based on a techni-
cal problem with the earlier decision but also commented on the
commission’s decision not to enforce the state law.
[The court frames the question before it:]
Appellants present a single issue on appeal:
Whether the Supervisor of the Wyoming Oil and Gas
Conservation Commission acted arbitrarily and unlawfully in
denying Appellants’ request for public records documenting
the identities of chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing opera-
tions in the state.
Although varying in tone and tint, the Commission and
Halliburton Energy Services, Inc. (Halliburton) restate essen-
tially the same issue, asking us to apply the APA [Wyoming
266
Fracking

Administrative Procedure Act]. However, the denial of
Appellants’ WPRA request does not fall under the APA. We
therefore restate the issue to be determined as follows:
Did the district court err in determining that the informa-
tion sought in Appellants’ public records request concern-
ing the identity of certain chemicals used in hydraulic
fracturing ﬂuids are exempt from public disclosure as
trade
secrets
under
the
WPRA
[Wyoming
Public
Records Act]
[With respect to the substantive issue involved, the court said that
the state had simply not provided the courts with sufﬁcient infor-
mation to justify withholding information about the fracking
chemicals:]
The wisdom of the legislature’s approach is apparent in this
case. The record consists of information quite omnifarious,
from irrelevant communications with various members of the
public to trade secret protection requests from companies,
the truth of which cannot be tested in a meaningful way. The
record does not tell us what speciﬁc information the
Supervisor relied upon, or why he did so, and therefore neither
this Court nor the district court has a sufﬁcient basis to deter-
mine whether he acted properly or not. On the other hand, as
the WPRA and cases cited above point out, the district court
is in a position to resolve issues of credibility, decide in the ﬁrst
instance whether the documents in question should be public
or not, and create a meaningful record for appellate review by
using the show-cause procedure in the WPRA.
[The court then remanded the case back to the district court with
instructions as to how it was to proceed in deciding the case:]
Because
the
district
court
reviewed
the
Commission
Supervisor’s decision under the APA, we must reverse and
remand. The district court is directed to determine whether it
will permit Appellants to amend their existing pleadings to
request and issue an order to the Supervisor to show cause as
Data and Documents
267

to why the documents requested should not be produced, or
dismiss the case, which will permit Appellants to ﬁle a new
action. In either event, the district court is required to deter-
mine as a matter of fact on evidence presented to it whether
the information sought is a trade secret, and not whether the
Supervisor acted arbitrarily or capriciously under the deferential
administrative standards applied in the original proceedings.
The district court will have to review the disputed information
on a case-by-case, record-by-record, or perhaps even on an
operator-by-operator basis, applying the deﬁnition of trade
secrets set forth in this opinion and making particularized ﬁnd-
ings which independently explain the basis of its rulings in
each.
Source: In the Supreme Court, State of Wyoming, 2014 WY
37. http://www.courts.state.wy.us/Opinions/2014WY37.pdf.
Accessed on May 25, 2014.
Norse Energy Crop. vs. Town of Dryden et al. (2014)
One of the fundamental issues surrounding the use of fracking in
the extraction of oil and gas is the question as to who has authority
over land-use decisions in such operations. Many local authorities
believe that they have such authority based on their historic rights
of establishing zoning regulations in their municipalities. In many
cases, state governments have rejected that notion and suggested
that the production of gas and oil is of such importance to the state
economy that licensing of gas and oil operations and related matters
belongs in the realm of state authority and that that authority
trumps local zoning ordinances and other attempts by cities, towns,
counties, and other entities to regulate or restrict zoning. An impor-
tant legal decision on this matter was issued in June 2014 when the
highest court in the state of New York, the Court of Appeals, ruled
in favor of two local municipalities, the towns of Dryden and
Middleﬁeld, against oil and gas companies and associated corpora-
tions. The crux of the court’s decision is reprinted here.
268
Fracking

Norse and CHC do not dispute that, absent a state legislative
directive to the contrary, municipalities would ordinarily pos-
sess the home rule authority to restrict the use of land for oil
and gas activities in furtherance of local interests. They claim,
however, that the State Legislature has clearly expressed its
intent to preempt zoning laws of local governments through
the OGSML’s “supersession clause,” which reads:
“The provisions of this article [i.e., the OGSML] shall
supersede all local laws or ordinances relating to the regu-
lation of the oil, gas and solution mining industries; but
shall not supersede local government jurisdiction over
local roads or the rights of local governments under the
real property tax law” (ECL 23-0303 [2] [emphasis
added]).
According to Norse and CHC, this provision should be inter-
preted broadly to reach zoning laws that restrict, or as presented
here, prohibit oil and gas activities, including hydrofracking,
within municipal boundaries.
. . .
[In a previous case, the Frew Run dispute], we held that this
question may be answered by considering three factors: (1) the
plain language of the supersession clause; (2) the statutory
scheme as a whole; and (3) the relevant legislative history.
. . .
Nothing in the legislative history undermines our view that
the supersession clause does not interfere with local zoning laws
regulating the permissible and prohibited uses of municipal
land. Indeed, the pertinent passages make no mention of zon-
ing at all, much less evince an intent to take away local land
use powers. Rather, the history of the OGSML and its prede-
cessor makes clear that the State Legislature’s primary concern
was with preventing wasteful oil and gas practices and ensuring
that the Department had the means to regulate the technical
operations of the industry.
Data and Documents
269

. . .
In sum, application of the three Frew Run factors—the plain
language, statutory scheme and legislative history—to these
appeals leads us to conclude that the Towns appropriately acted
within their home rule authority in adopting the challenged
zoning laws. We can ﬁnd no legislative intent, much less a
requisite “clear expression,” requiring the preemption of local
land use regulations.
. . .
Manifestly, Dryden and Middleﬁeld engaged in a reasonable
exercise of their zoning authority as contemplated in Gernatt
when they adopted local laws clarifying that oil and gas extrac-
tion and production were not permissible uses in any zoning
districts. The Towns both studied the issue and acted within
their home rule powers in determining that gas drilling would
permanently
alter
and adversely
affect
the
deliberately-
cultivated, small-town character of their communities. And
contrary to the dissent’s posture, there is no meaningful distinc-
tion between the zoning ordinance we upheld in Gernatt,
which “eliminate[d] mining as a permitted use” in Sardinia
(id. at 683), and the zoning laws here classifying oil and gas
drilling as prohibited land uses in Dryden and Middleﬁeld.
Hence, Norse’s and CHC’s position that the town-wide nature
of the hydrofracking bans rendered them unlawful is without
merit, as are their remaining contentions.
Source: In the Matter of Mark S. Wallach . . . [New York
Court
of
Appeals].
http://www.nycourts.gov/ctapps/
Decisions/2014/Jun14/130-131opn14-Decision.pdf. Accessed
on July 11, 2014.
Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and
Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on
the Exploration and Production of Hydrocarbons (Such as
270
Fracking

Shale Gas) Using High Volume Hydraulic Fracturing in the
EU (2014)
As of late 2014, there were no commercial fracking operations of
shale oil or gas in the European Union. As this document indicates,
a few pilot projects have been initiated and commercial production
“could start in 2015–2017 in the most advanced member states.
In anticipation of such an event, the European Commission has
discussed possible political, social, economic, environmental, legal,
and other issues that may arise as a result of fracking operations.
They published the results of their studies as a set of Commission
Recommendations on January 22, 2014, in the Ofﬁcial Journal
of the European Union. In a common practice, they also released
a Communication explaining their recommendations in a some-
what condensed and simpler form. The core of those recommenda-
tions is as follows:
In particular, the Recommendation invites Member States,
when applying or adapting their legislation applicable to hydro-
carbons involving high volume hydraulic fracturing, to ensure
that:
a strategic environmental assessment is carried out prior to
granting licenses for hydrocarbon exploration and/or production
which are expected to lead to operations involving high-volume
hydraulic fracturing in order to analyse and plan how to prevent,
manage and mitigate cumulative impacts, possible conﬂicts with
other uses of natural resources or the underground;
a site speciﬁc risk characterisation and assessment is carried
out, related to both the underground and the surface, to deter-
mine whether an area is suitable for safe and secure exploration
or
production
of
hydrocarbons
involving
high
volume
hydraulic fracturing. It would inter alia identify risks of under-
ground exposure pathways such as induced fractures, existing
faults or abandoned wells;
baseline reporting (e.g. of water, air, seismicity) takes place,
in order to provide a reference for subsequent monitoring or
in case of an incident;
Data and Documents
271

the public is informed of the composition of the ﬂuid used
for hydraulic fracturing on a well by well basis as well as on
waste water composition, baseline data and monitoring results.
This is needed to ensure that the authorities and the general
public have factual information on potential risks and their
sources. Improved transparency should also facilitate public
acceptance;
the well is properly insulated from the surrounding geological
formations, in particular to avoid contamination of groundwater;
venting (release of gases into the atmosphere) is limited to
most exceptional operational safety cases, ﬂaring (controlled
burning of gases) is minimised, and gas is captured for its sub-
sequent use (e.g. on-site or through pipelines). This is needed
to mitigate negative effects of emissions on the climate, as well
as on local air quality.
Source: “Communication from the Commission to the
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and
Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the
exploration and production of hydrocarbons (such as shale gas)
using high volume hydraulic fracturing in the EU.” March
17, 2014. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/
?uri=CELEX:52014DC0023R(01)&from=EN.
Accessed
on
July 10, 2014. The Commission Recommendations are available
online at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?
uri=CELEX:32014H0070&from=EN. Accessed on July 10,
2014.
272
Fracking



6
Resources for Further
Research
Introduction
Fracking has become a topic of some interest and controversy
in the last few decades, even though the procedure has been
known for some time. Because of recent events, an increasingly
large number of books, articles, Internet posts, and reports have
been produced dealing with one or another phase of this topic.
This chapter offers an annotated bibliography of a sample of
these publications. In the relatively limited space provided, this
collection can be no more than suggestive of the wide range of
books and articles available, ranging from broad introductions
intended for the general public to very speciﬁc publications of
greater technical sophistication. Some publications are available
in both print and electronic form and are so indicated in the
listing.
Books
Bamberger, Michelle, and Robert Oswald. 2014. The Real Cost
of Fracking: How America’s Shale-Gas Boom Is Threatening Our
Families, Pets, and Food. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
275
An operator walks by the main oil line on offshore oil drilling platform ‘Gail’
operated by Venoco, Inc. off the coast of Santa Barbara, California. (AP
Photo/Chris Carlson)

The authors of this book are a pharmacologist and a vet-
erinarian. They purport to explain how the fracking pro-
cess is damaging the natural environment and posing a
threat to the health of humans and animals who live in
the area of fracking operations.
Brasch, Walter M. 2013. Fracking Pennsylvania: Flirting with
Disaster. Carmichael, CA: Greeley & Stone.
This book is divided into three major sections: an intro-
duction to historical, political, and economic issues sur-
rounding fracking; health and environmental issues; and
a selection of social issues. As the title suggests, the author
centers much of his story about the procedure in the state
of Pennsylvania, exploring the development of fracking
technology there and the effects that technology has had
on the state’s economic, political, and social character.
Bryce, Robert. 2008. Gusher of Lies: The Dangerous Delusions of
“Energy Independence.” New York: Public Affairs.
The author provides a superb review of the recent history
of oil and gas exploration and the excitement caused in the
industry and in the U.S. government by the apparent pos-
sibility of achieving energy independence. He goes on to
explain why he thinks such a line of thinking is pure fan-
tasy and that neither is energy independence likely to
occur nor would it be a good thing for the United States
and the rest of the world were it to do so.
Committee on Induced Seismicity et al., National Research
Council.
2013.
Induced
Seismicity
Potential
in
Energy
Technologies. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
This publication was prepared by a committee of special-
ists in the area of induced seismic events. Its purpose is
to review and evaluate existing information on the rela-
tionship between extraction of ﬂuid fuels from the earth
and seismic events. The book also takes note of existing
276
Fracking

gaps in knowledge about such events and areas in which
there is need for further research.
Del Percio, Stephen, and J. Cullen Howe. 2014. “The Legal
and Regulatory Landscape of Hydraulic Fracturing.” New
Providence, NJ: LexisNexis.
This publication is divided into ﬁve sections that cover a
general background to fracking technology, federal legisla-
tion and regulations, state legislation and regulations,
important litigation involving fracking, and special recom-
mendations for landowners regarding the leasing and/or
sale of their land for fracking operations.
Donaldson, Erle C., Waqi Alam, and Nasrin Begum. 2013.
Hydraulic Fracturing Explained: Evaluation, Implementation,
and Challenges. Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing Company.
This book provides an excellent general introduction to
some of the technical aspects of the fracking process, with
chapters on the evaluation of gas shale formations, mechan-
ics of rock fracturing, ﬂuids used in the fracking process, and
environmental impacts of hydraulic fracturing.
Ferguson, Spencer, and Matthew T. Gilbert, eds. 2012.
Hydraulic Fracturing and Shale Gas Production: Issues, Proposals
and Recommendations. New York: Nova Science.
This book provides a review of current and proposed laws
and regulations dealing with the disclosure of chemicals
used in hydraulic fracturing at both the federal and state
levels.
Gold, Russell. 2014. The Boom: How Fracking Ignited the
American Energy Revolution and Changed the World. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
The author provides an excellent historical review of the
development of hydraulic fracturing, along with factors
that have caused it to become a controversial practice in
the United States and other parts of the world.
Resources for Further Research
277

Graves, John H. 2012. Fracking: America’s Alternative Energy
Revolution. Ventura, CA: Safe Harbor International Publishing.
The author reviews energy issues facing the United States
and the rest of the world and points out the approaching
era that will be characterized by the end of fossil fuels and
the development of new forms of alternative energy. He dis-
cusses the critical role that hydraulic fracturing is now play-
ing and will continue to play during this period of transition.
Hayden, Tom. 2013. Fracked in the Barnett Shale: Drilling for
the Right Balance, 2nd ed. Charleston, SC: T.L. Hayden.
The author says that the purpose of this book is to provide
“a broad spectrum of the challenges that must be
addressed” by individuals and communities who are faced
with the prospect of dealing with fracking operations in
their vicinity.
Heinberg, Richard. 2013. Snake Oil: How Fracking’s False
Promise of Plenty Imperils Our Future. Santa Rosa, CA: Post
Carbon Institute.
Heinberg is a well-known spokesman for and proliﬁc
writer about peak energy and the purported coming end
of the age of fossil fuels. In this book, he examines the
claims made for extending that period of human history
through the means of hydraulic fracturing and explains
why those claims are of limited validity.
Hillstrom, Kevin. 2013. Fracking. Detroit, MI: Lucent Books.
This book is part of the company’s “Hot Topics” series of
important current issues. It provides a general background
to the topic of fracking and then offers arguments pro and
con for its use as a recovery technology.
Holloway, Michael D., and Oliver Rudd. 2013. Fracking: The
Operations and Environmental Consequences of Hydraulic
Fracturing. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; Salem,
MA: Scrivener Publishing.
278
Fracking

This book provides a very thorough introduction to the
history and technology of hydraulic fracturing before
turning to a consideration of the arguments pro and con
that have been offered with regard to use of the process
in the extraction of fossil fuels.
Kolb, Robert W. 2013. The Natural Gas Revolution: At the
Pivot of the World’s Energy Future. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Pearson Education.
The author refers to the discovery of shale gas and meth-
ods for extraction as the “revolution” of the title of this
work. He begins with a detailed and comprehensive analy-
sis of natural gas resources available in the United States,
along with a review of the technologies involved in
extracting, transporting, and storing natural gas. He also
reviews the status of natural gas resources in other parts
of the world.
Lane, C. Alexia. 2013. On Fracking. Victoria, BC: Rocky
Mountain Books.
This book provides a general introduction to the topic of
fracking, with special attention to its future role in dealing
with the world’s energy problems.
Levant, Ezra. 2014. Groundswell: The Case for Fracking.
Toronto: McClelland & Stewart.
Levant explains why fracking is such a critical technology
for dealing with the world’s current energy problems and
discusses and attempts to refute objections raised by oppo-
nents of the technology. He says that, in any case, the
advantages provided by fracking far outweigh any disad-
vantages they may have.
Levi, Michael. 2013. The Power Surge: Energy, Opportunity, and the
Battle for America’s Future. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
The author points out that the dispute over fracking often
involves parties with very strong feelings about the subject
Resources for Further Research
279

that are sometimes inclined to offer arguments with some-
what questionable validity. He discusses the signiﬁcance
of the fracking process to America’s and the world’s cur-
rent energy crisis, and tries to sort out the arguments that
are most relevant and accurate in this ongoing debate.
Lustgarten, Abrahm. 2011. Hydrofracked?: One Man’s Mystery
Leads to a Backlash against Natural Gas Drilling. New York:
ProPublica. Available at no cost from Amazon Digital Services.
This book tells the story of the actions taken by a
Wyoming rancher after he discovered that the water on
his land had begun to change color and produce a strange
and unattractive odor, a change that he eventually attrib-
uted to hydrofacturing operations that were taking place
near to his property.
Manning, Paddy. 2013. What the Frack?: Everything You Need
to Know about Coal Seam Gas. Sydney, NSW: NewSouth
Publishing.
This book focuses on the history and current status of
hydraulic fracturing in Australia. The process was intro-
duced with the promise of an important new energy re-
sources with many environmental beneﬁts. But, the
author suggests, the reality of the experience has been
somewhat different from that rosy promise.
McBroom, Matthew W. 2014. The Effects of Induced Hydraulic
Fracturing on the Environment: Commercial Demands vs. Water,
Wildlife, and Human Ecosystems. Toronto: Apple Academic
Press.
This book is divided into three sections, the ﬁrst of which
deals with the effects of fracking on water systems; the sec-
ond, on the effects on wildlife and the ecosystem; and the
third, on human health.
Murphy, Adam R., ed. 2013. Hydraulic Fracturing: Legal Issues
and Relevant Laws. New York: Nova Publishers.
280
Fracking

The ﬁve chapters in this book deal with fracking opera-
tions vis-à-vis the Safe Drinking Water Act and Clean
Water Act, as well as chemical disclosure issues and other
selected legal issues.
Musialski, Cécile et al., eds. 2013. Shale Gas in Europe: A
Multidisciplinary Analysis with a Focus on European Speciﬁcities.
Deventer; Leuven: Claeys & Casteels Publishers.
This book consists of a number of papers that assess the
status of shale gas extraction and development in the
European Union. Comparisons of the progress of the
technology in the EU are made with that in the United
States, with lessons that can be learned from both sides.
Nabelhout, Ryan. 2014. Fracking. New York: Gareth Stevens
Publishing.
This book is intended for a youth audience. It provides a
general and simpliﬁed introduction to the technology
and practice of fracking, along with a review of the issues
associated with that technology.
Powers, Erica Levine, and Beth Kinne, eds. 2013. Beyond the
Fracking Wars: A Guide for Lawyers, Public Ofﬁcials, Planners,
and Citizens. Chicago: American Bar Association. Section of
State and Local Government Law.
Publishers of this book claim that it “avoids ‘pro’ and ‘con’
positions on the issue of fracking and provides basic infor-
mation that allows individuals at all levels to learn more
about the topic and make informed decisions about issues
arising out of its use.”
Prud’homme, Alex. 2013. Hydrofracking: What Everyone Needs
to Know. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
This book consists of three parts, the ﬁrst of which pro-
vides a comprehensive review of fossil fuels and the nature
of the hydraulic fracturing process. Part 2 discusses the
elements of the controversy surrounding fracking, while
Resources for Further Research
281

Part 3 focuses on the probable future of fracking in the
United States and elsewhere.
Rao, Vikram. 2012. Shale Gas: The Promise and the Peril.
Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI Press.
This book deals with the more general subject of shale gas,
a resource for which hydrofracturing has become a critical
method of recovery. The book is intended for a general
audience and presents a good review of the environmental
and human health issues involved in the exploration for
and extraction of natural gas by fracking and other means.
Schultz, Aarik. 2012. Hydraulic Fracturing and Natural Gas
Drilling: Questions and Concerns. New York: Nova Science
Publishers.
After an introductory section on the mechanics of frack-
ing, this book focuses on some political, social, economic,
and other issues related to the use of the process in natural
gas extraction, issues dealing with risks to the environ-
ment and human health, as well as problems associated
with the Safe Clean Drinking Water Act.
Smith, Michael Berry, and Carl T. Montgomery. 2015.
Hydraulic Fracturing. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
The authors say that this book “busts the myths associated
with hydraulic fracturing.” They propose to outline a
technology that will provide a safe, efﬁcient, and effective
process for removing maximum amounts of oil and gas
from underground formations.
Spellman, Frank R. 2013. Environmental Impacts of Hydraulic
Fracturing. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
This book provides a very complete description of the
fracking process and of its potential environmental conse-
quences. It contains chapters on topics such as the nature
of shale gas and its reservoirs, shale gas plays and other
sources, the process of hydraulic fracturing and chemicals
282
Fracking

used in the process, possible environmental effects of
fracking, and current laws and regulations dealing with
the process.
Squire, Ann. 2013. Hydrofracking: The Process That Has
Changed America’s Energy Needs. New York: Children’s Press.
This book is intended for young adults. It provides a gen-
eral introduction to the topic of hydraulic fracturing and
some of the issues involved with its use.
Thompson, Tamara. 2013. Fracking. Detroit, MI: Greenhaven
Press.
This book is aimed at young adults as part of the com-
pany’s “At Issue” series. It provides a general background
to the subject with arguments both pro and con for the
use of fracking in the extraction of fossil fuels.
Tootill, Alan. 2013. Fracking the UK. Charleston, SC:
CreateSpace.
The author begins his book with a review of the fracking
experience in the United States, before turning to the his-
tory and current status of the process in the United
Kingdom
Wilber, Tom. 2012. Under the Surface: Fracking, Fortunes and
the Fate of the Marcellus Shale. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
This book focuses on an area in the eastern United States
that is especially rich in the fossil fuel products that can be
obtained from hydraulic fracturing. It discusses the history
and natural assets of the area along with the issues that
have arisen as fracking in the area has become a major
activity in a region that can beneﬁt from the economic
advantages provided by the technology.
Zuckerman, Gregory. 2013. The Frackers: The Outrageous
Inside Story of the New Billionaire Wildcatters. New York:
Portfolio Penguin.
Resources for Further Research
283

This book tells the story of the development of hydraulic
fracturing through biographical sketches of some of the
most important individuals involved in the discovery,
development, and implementation of the technology.
Articles
Adushkin, Vitaly V. et al. 2000, Summer. “Seismicity in the
Oil Field.” Oilﬁeld Review. 12(Part 2): 2–17, http://www
.earthworksaction.org/ﬁles/publications/FACTSHEET-Fracking
Earthquakes.pdf. Accessed on July 10, 2014.
This article is a technical analysis of seismic events that
may have been associated with oil and gas drilling activ-
ities in various parts of the former Soviet Union. Authors
are members of the Institute of Dynamics of Geospheres
of the Russian Academy of Sciences and the Ministry of
Fuel and Energy of the Russian Federation.
Bligh, Shawna, and Chris Wendelbo. 2013. “Hydraulic
Fracturing: Drilling Into the Issue.” Natural Resources and
Environment 27(3): 7–12.
This article explores federal and state laws and regulations
relating to the process of hydraulic fracturing.
Boudet, Hilary et al. 2014. “ ‘Fracking’ Controversy and
Communication: Using National Survey Data to Understand
Public Perceptions of Hydraulic Fracturing.” Energy Policy 65:
57–67.
The authors discover that the majority of Americans have
heard little or nothing about the fracking controversy and
do not know if they support or oppose the practice. Among
those who have formed an opinion, about half support and
half oppose hydraulic fracturing in the United States.
Chen, Jiangang et al. 2014. “Hydraulic Fracturing: Paving the
Way for a Sustainable Future?” Journal of Environmental and
Public Health, 1–10.
284
Fracking

The authors note that fracking has made the United States
the world’s largest producer of natural gas, and that the
process holds great potential for solving many of the
world’s energy challenges in the near future. They point
out, however, that prospects for the process would be
greatly improved if companies were more transparent
about the chemicals used in the fracking process. They call
for greater regulations requiring transparency in this
regard by federal and state governments and by the indus-
try itself. They also call for the removal of some of the
exceptions granted fracking companies from laws such as
the Clean Water Act and the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act.
Coulter,
Gerald
R.
1973.
“Hydraulic
Fracturing—New
Developments.” Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
Transactions 23: 47–53.
This article is primarily of historical interest, providing a
relatively easy-to-read description of the process of frack-
ing during its earliest stages of use in the United States.
Cournil, Christel. 2013. “Adoption of Legislation on Shale Gas
in France: Hesitation and/or Progress?” European Energy and
Environmental Law Review 22(4): 141–151.
The author provides a review of the development of legis-
lation on fracking in France that ends with the adoption
of a law preventing the use of fracking for petroleum and
gas exploration and extraction. She explains why she
thinks the law was “designed hastily and has failed to sat-
isfy any of the stakeholders involved.”
Davies, Richard et al. 2013. “Induced Seismicity and Hydraulic
Fracturing for the Recovery of Hydrocarbons.” Marine and
Petroleum Geology 45(4): 171–185.
The authors review data on 198 earthquakes of 1.0 or
greater intensity since 1929 to discover their causes.
They ﬁnd that hydraulic fracturing is “not an important
Resources for Further Research
285

mechanism” for such events, but that is likely to become
more important in the future.
de Rijke, Kim. 2013. “Hydraulically Fractured: Unconventional
Gas and Anthropology.” Anthropology Today 29(2): 13–17.
The author takes a somewhat unusual approach to dealing
with the social issues related to the development of frac-
turing processes, focusing on topics such as politics, dis-
courses, risk, and knowledge.
Dobb, Edwin. 2013. “The New Oil Landscape.” National
Geographic 223(3): 28–59.
A spectacular overview of the process of hydraulic fractur-
ing is presented in this article with the usual collection of
vivid photographs typical of this magazine to illustrate
the main features of the story.
Duggan-Haas, Don, Robert M. Ross, and Warren D. Allmon.
2013. The Science beneath the Surface: A Very Short Guide to
the Marcellus Shale. Ithaca, NY: Paleontological Research
Institution.
This book was developed for the purpose of providing
consumers, especially those in New York state, with a
background about the science involved in the Marcellus
Shale Play, with special attention to issues that arise out
of the hydraulic fracking that has occurred and may occur
in the future for the purpose of extracting natural oil and
gas in the region.
Esswein, Eric J. et al. 2013. “Occupational Exposures to
Respirable Crystalline Silica during Hydraulic Fracturing.”
Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene 10(7):
347–356.
The article reports on a study of 11 sites in ﬁve states where
fracking processes were being used to determine the risk
posed by frac sand to workers at the sites. Frac sand is a spe-
cialized form of quartz often used as a proppant in fracking
286
Fracking

operations. Researchers found the workers at all sites were
being exposed to levels of frac sand greater than limits set
by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH), sometimes by as much as 10 times the
recommended limit.
Fryzek, Jon et al. 2013. “Childhood Cancer Incidence in
Pennsylvania Counties in Relation to Living in Counties with
Hydraulic Fracturing Sites.” Journal of Occupational and
Environmental Medicine 55(7): 796–801.
Researchers explored the number of cancer cases among
children living in two regions of Pennsylvania, some in
counties where fracking was being conducted, and some
in counties where there was no fracking. They found no
signiﬁcant differences in cancer rates between the two
groups; results, they said, that “offer comfort concerning
health effects of HF on childhood cancers.”
Goldstein, Bernard D. et al. 2014. “The Role of Toxicological
Science in Meeting the Challenges and Opportunities of
Hydraulic Fracturing.” Toxicological Sciences 139(2): 271–283.
Many of the substances used in fracking may have toxic
effects on humans at every stage of the process, including
transport of the materials to the fracking site, processes
conducted at the site during the fracking process, and
during the process of removing waste materials and other
substances from the fracking location. This article pro-
vides an overview of what some of the toxicological issues
might be at all stages of this process.
Gordalla, Birgit C., Ulrich Ewers, and Fritz H. Frimmel. 2013.
“Hydraulic Fracturing: A Toxicological Threat for Groundwater
and Drinking Water?” Environmental Earth Sciences 70(8):
3875–3893.
The authors report on their ﬁndings with regard to the
degree of contamination of groundwater at three sites in
Germany where fracking is being conducted. They
Resources for Further Research
287

recommend some possible approaches to regulation that
will ensure the quality of backﬂow water from such wells.
Gross, Sherilyn A. et al. 2013. “Analysis of BTEX Ground-
water Concentrations from Surface Spills Associated with
Hydraulic Fracturing Operations.” Journal of the Air & Waste
Management Association 63(4): 424–432.
Researchers analyzed surface spills of chemicals used in
hydraulic fracturing operations to determine the concen-
tration of four hazardous chemicals, benzene, toluene,
ethylbenzene, and xylene (BTEX) contaminating ground-
water in the area of operations. They found some con-
tamination in all areas studied with concentrations of
BTEX chemicals ranging from 8 to 90 percent greater
than National Drinking Water recommended concentra-
tions. They also noted that directed efforts at dealing with
this problem by well operators universally resulted in
reduced levels of contaminant at the well sites.
Haapaniemi, Peter. 2013. “Feature Beyond the Headlines:
While Coverage of Hydraulic Fracturing Has Focused on the
Energy, There Are Side Beneﬁts to Consider, among Them
Jobs and Resurgent Manufacturing.” American Gas 95(3): 28–31.
The author of this article discusses a number of potential
beneﬁts from the development and expansion of hydraulic
fracturing operations for the recovery of natural gas.
Heikkila, Tanya et al. 2014. “Understanding a Period of Policy
Change: The Case of Hydraulic Fracturing Disclosure Policy in
Colorado.” Review of Policy Research 31(2): 65–87.
This article reports on a research studied conducted in
Colorado after the state had adopted regulations requiring
companies to disclose the names of chemical they use in
the fracking process. Researchers explored the ways in
which individuals and groups on differing sides of the
fracking debate viewed the new regulations and the factors
that inﬂuenced these views.
288
Fracking

Heuer, Mark A., and Zui Chuh Lee. 2014. “Marcellus Shale
Development and the Susquehanna River: An Exploratory
Analysis of Cross-Sector Attitudes on Natural Gas Hydraulic
Fracturing.” Organization & Environment 27(1): 25–42.
The authors report on a public opinion survey among
stakeholders in fracking operations in the region described
in the title on four issues: economic opportunity, protec-
tion of health and safety, preserving communities, and
achieving energy security. They suggest that their data
provide a baseline for future studies of a similar nature
that can identify trends in public attitudes about fracking.
Holland,
Austin
A.
2013.
“Earthquakes
Triggered
by
Hydraulic Fracturing in South-Central Oklahoma.” Bulletin of
the Seismological Society of America 103(3): 1784–1792.
The author reports on a series of earthquakes that struck in
south-central Oklahoma in January 2011 in an area where
hydraulic fracturing was being conducted. A total of 116
quakes was identiﬁed with magnitude of 0.6 to 2.9.
“An In-Depth Look at Hydraulic Fracturing.” 2013. Canadian
Mining Journal 134(4): 40–41.
This article not only reviews fundamental information
about fracking, but also provides background as to the his-
tory and current status of hydraulic fracturing in Canada.
Johnson, Corey, and Tim Boersma. 2013. “Energy (In)security
in Poland the Case of Shale Gas.” Energy Policy 53: 389–399.
The authors discuss the debate over hydraulic fracturing
on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean and then consider
the special case of fracking in Poland, a nation whose
policymakers have been “among the most fervent” about
fracking of any nation in Europe.
Kassotis, Christopher D. et al. 2014. “Estrogen and Androgen
Receptor Activities of Hydraulic Fracturing Chemicals and
Resources for Further Research
289

Surface and Ground Water in a Drilling-Dense Region.”
Endocrinology 155(3): 897–907.
The authors hypothesized that a number of chemicals
used in hydraulic fracturing might have endocrine dis-
rupting effects. In samples taken from four regions of
Garﬁeld County, Colorado, they found that 89 percent,
41 percent, 12 percent, and 46 percent of the chemicals
identiﬁed could be so categorized.
Kiviat, Erik. 2013. “Risks to Biodiversity from Hydraulic
Fracturing for Natural Gas in the Marcellus and Utica
Shales.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1286(1):
1–14.
The author argues that concerns about the effects of frack-
ing on human health have been discussed at some length,
but little attention has been paid to comparable risks to
other organisms, such as brook trout, freshwater mussels,
forest orchids, and salamanders. He suggests that these
threats may place at least some of these species at risk for
extinction.
Korfmacher, Katrina Smith et al. 2013. “Public Health and
High Volume Hydraulic Fracturing.” New Solutions 23(1):
13–31.
The authors note the increase in high-pressure hydraulic
fracturing and point out that public health problems in a
number of areas are likely to result from this procedure,
including deterioration of surface and ground water qual-
ity, air quality, quality of life, worker health, sand mining
and transport, and climate change.
Kotzé, Petro. 2013. “Hydraulic Fracturing: Adding to the
Debate.” The Water Wheel 12: 11–15.
This article provides an introduction to plans for extend-
ing the use of fracking in South Africa, with a review of
known issues associated with the technology, especially
with regard to its use in the nation.
290
Fracking

Liroff, Richard A. 2012. “R&D Grand Challenges: A Roadmap
for Addressing Environmental and Social Issues Associated with
Horizontal Drilling and Hydraulic Fracturing.” Journal of
Petroleum Technology 64(7): 60–63.
The author notes that fracking holds enormous potential
for the petroleum industry as well as to society at large in
coming year, but the potential contribution of the process
is restricted to some extent by a number of environ-
mental and social issues, for which he has some possible
solutions.
Malin, Stephanie. 2014. “There’s No Real Choice but to Sign:
Neoliberalization and Normalization of Hydraulic Fracturing
on Pennsylvania Farmland.” Journal of Environmental Studies
and Sciences 4(1): 17–27.
The author reports on interviews with farmers in Bradford
and Washington counties, Pennsylvania, and explains
how these individuals incorporate environmental and
liberal concerns about fracking into the decision-making
process that almost inevitably results in their signing leases
for use of their land for fracking operations.
Manning, Richard, and Danny Wilcox Frazier. 2013. “Bakken
Business: The Price of North Dakota’s Fracking Boom.”
Harper’s 1954: 29–37.
This article explores the advantages and disadvantages that
have accrued to the state of North Dakota as a conse-
quence of the explosive growth of fracking in the state
over the past few decades.
Maule, Alexis L. et al. 2013. “Disclosure of Hydraulic Fracturing
Fluid Chemical Additives: Analysis of Regulations.” New
Solutions 23(1): 167–187.
The authors explore state and federal regulations concern-
ing hydraulic fracturing regulations and review the variety
of exceptions granted to companies from many environ-
mental regulations that would otherwise seem to apply.
Resources for Further Research
291

Mohan, Murali et al. 2013. “Microbial Community Changes
in Hydraulic Fracturing Fluids and Produced Water from
Shale Gas Extraction.” Environmental Science & Technology 47
(22): 13141–13150.
The authors report on a study of the composition of bac-
terial communities in water used in fracking operations
before and after they have passed through the fracking sys-
tem. They found a signiﬁcant difference in the bacterial
ecology in pre- and posttreatment water, along with sig-
niﬁcant increases in mineral and radioactive content of
released water, changes which may have “signiﬁcant
implications for disinfection as well as reuse of produced
water in future fracturing operations.”
Nicholson, Barclay R., and Stephen C. Dillard. 2013. “Analysis
of Litigation Involving Shale and Hydraulic Fracturing.”
International Energy Law Review 2: 50–66; 3: 90–106. Also see
http://www.nortonrosefulbright.com/ﬁles/us/images/publications/
20130228WhitePaperShaleandHydraulicFracturing.pdf. Accessed
on May 30, 2014.
The authors review and comment on a large number of
cases regarding the use of hydraulic fracturing in locations
around the world.
Nicot, John-Philippe et al. 2014. “Source and Fate of Hydraulic
Fracturing Water in the Barnett Shale: A Historical Pers-
pective.” Environmental Science & Technology 48(4): 2464–2471.
This article focuses on the statistical characteristics of
water involved in the hydraulic fracturing process in one
widely used play, the Barnett Shale. Researchers tracked
the source, use, and disposal of water over the years from
1981 to 2012 and reported on trends on various aspects
of water use and disposal.
Nolen-Hoeksema, Richard. 2013. “Elements of Hydraulic
Fracturing.” Oilﬁeld Review 25(2): 51–52.
292
Fracking

This short article provides a very complete and well writ-
ten explanation of the basic principles of hydraulic fractur-
ing for the layperson. Also available online at http://www
.slb.com/~/media/Files/resources/oilﬁeld_review/ors13/
sum13/deﬁning_hydraulics.pdf. Accessed on May 26,
2014.
Penningroth, Stephen M. et al. 2013. “Community-Based Risk
Assessment
of
Water
Contamination
from
High-Volume
Horizontal Hydraulic Fracturing.” New Solutions 23(1): 137–166.
This article describes efforts to collect baseline informa-
tion on waterways in regions where fracking operations
are being or may in the future be carried out to determine
the level of contaminants present as a result of the frack-
ing. It also describes an interactive database that is being
developed for this use.
Popkin, Jennifer H. et al. 2013. “Social Costs from Proximity to
Hydraulic Fracturing in New York State.” Energy Policy 62: 62–69.
The authors report on a study designed to ﬁnd out how
economic costs for residents in counties where fracking is
taking place differ from those for residents in counties
where such activities are not being conducted. They
found out that electricity produced from fracking opera-
tions is much more expensive than electricity from con-
ventional sources.
Rutqvist, Jonny et al. 2013. “Modeling of Fault Reactivation
and Induced Seismicity during Hydraulic Fracturing of Shale-
Gas Reservoirs.” Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering
107: 31–44.
Some concern has been expressed about the possibility
that hydraulic fracturing operations may tend to increase
the frequency and severity of earthquakes in adjacent
regions. This study is one of a number of such research
efforts attempting to quantify that risk. These authors
Resources for Further Research
293

claim that fracking is likely to give rise to only a small
number of microquake events.
Saba, Tarek. 2013. “Evaluating Claims of Groundwater
Contamination from Hydraulic Fracturing.” Oil and Gas
Journal 111(7): 80–89.
The author describes chemical and physical tests that
should be conducted in determining whether ground-
water has been contaminated by the presence of fracked
wells in a region.
Schick, Robert M. et al. 2013. “Litigation Environment for
Drilling
and Hydraulic
Fracturing.” Environmental
Law
Reporter 43(3): 10221–10231.
Although most legal articles have dealt with laws and regula-
tions relating to hydraulic fracturing, a lot of activity is cur-
rently under way in the ﬁeld of litigation. This article
summarizes the results of a discussion held in January 2013
among a variety of stakeholders involved with both plaintiffs
and defendants in legal cases relating to fracking.
Selley, Richard C. 2012. “UK Shale Gas: The Story So Far.”
Marine and Petroleum Geology 31: 100–109.
This article provides a very nice overview of the develop-
ment of shale gas fracking in the United Kingdom since
the ﬁrst experimental well was drilled in 1875.
Simon, John A. 2014. “Editor’s Perspective—An Update on
the
Hydraulic
Fracturing
Groundwater
Contamination
Debate.” Remediation 24(2): 1–9.
The author notes how intense the debate over hydraulic
fracturing has become and explores some of the factors
that may have resulted in this situation.
Stringfellow, William T. et al. 2014. “Physical, Chemical, and
Biological Characteristics of Compounds Used in Hydraulic
Fracturing.” Journal of Hazardous Materials 275(30): 37–54.
294
Fracking

The authors describe the properties of 81 chemicals used
in the fracking process, for which toxicity data are not
available for 30.
Tallent, Joshua M. 2013. “The Empire Fracks Back: The Case
for Hydraulic Fracturing Strict Liability in New York.”
Environmental Claims Journal 25(1): 43–49.
The author suggests that fracking is going to become an
increasingly popular procedure in New York State, result-
ing in an ever increasing number of lawsuits based on sup-
posed environmental damage. He suggests that courts
apply the most stringent interpretations of the law in such
cases in order to encourage companies to routinely make
environmental considerations an integral part of their
planning for fracking operations.
Tollefson, Jeff. 2013. “China Slow to Tap Shale-Gas Bonanza.”
Nature 494(7437): 294.
The author explores some of the reasons that China has
been slow to introduce fracking as a way of recovering its
huge supplies of natural gas. He suggests that challenging
geological problems and lack of infrastructure may be
important contributing factors.
Walter, Laura. 2013. “What the Frack? Safety Concerns
Surface in Hydraulic Fracturing.” EHS Today 6(1): 31–34.
This article provides a nice overview of the nature of
hydraulic fracturing and some of the environmental and
health concerns associated with the technology.
Walton, John, and Arturo Woocay. 2013. “Environmental
Issues Related to Enhanced Production of Natural Gas by
Hydraulic Fracturing.” Journal of Green Building 8(1): 62–71.
The authors list and describe a number of environmental
issues that may develop in an area as the result of the use
of fracking technology in well drilling.
Resources for Further Research
295

Weinstein, Mark. 2013. “Hydraulic Fracturing in the United
States and the European Union: Rethinking Regulation to
Ensure
the
Protection
of
Water
Resources.”
Wisconsin
International Law Journal 30(4): 881–911.
The author begins with a long section explaining how
fracking poses a serious threat to water resources. He then
explores laws and regulations directed at fracking in both
the United States and Europe, concluding with explana-
tions of how each area can learn from the other in the
development of adequate fracking regulation.
Weltman-Fahs, Maya, and Jason M. Taylor. 2013. “Hydraulic
Fracturing and Brook Trout Habitat in the Marcellus Shale
Region: Potential Impacts and Research Needs.” Fisheries 38
(1): 4–15.
Fracking operations in the Marcellus Shale Play have been
shown to pose a potential threat for a variety of plant and
animal species. In this paper, the authors describe the
types of threats faced by brook trout from hydrological,
physical, and chemical factors.
Willie, Matt. 2011. “Hydraulic Fracturing and ‘Spotty’
Regulation: Why the Federal Government Should Let States
Control Unconventional Onshore Drilling.” Brigham Young
University Law Review 5: 1743–1781.
The author points out the importance of fracking in the
nation’s future energy equation and suggests that federal
regulations place an undue burden on companies that
make use of the process. He claims that states are better
equipped to devise and enforce the regulations needed
for hydraulic fracking.
Reports
“The Arithmetic of Shale Gas,” Yale Graduates in Energy
Study Group, http://newsmanager.commpartners.com/cipammr/
296
Fracking

downloads/Yale%20HF%20Economic%20Study.pdf. Accessed
on July 10, 2014.
This study describes an effort to determine the relative
economic beneﬁts and costs of fracking, without regard
to other issues, such as human health and environmental
effects. The study concludes that “[e]conomic beneﬁts,
as estimated in as limited methodology as is reasonable,
exceed costs to the community by 400-to-1.”
Armendariz, Al. “Emissions from Natural Gas Production in
the Barnett Shale Area and Opportunities for Cost-Effective
Improvements,” Environmental Defense Fund, January 26,
2009. http://www.edf.org/sites/default/ﬁles/9235_Barnett_Shale
_Report.pdf. Accessed on July 19, 2014.
This report is one of the more technical studies of the
effects of fracking on air and water contamination with
an extensive review of the types of consequences the pro-
cedure may have for human health and the environment.
An extended concluding section describes some methods
by which these consequences can be ameliorated.
“Evaluation of Impacts to Underground Sources of Drinking
Water by Hydraulic Fracturing of Coalbed Methane Reservoirs,”
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, June 2004. Accessed as a
zip ﬁle through http://water.epa.gov/type/groundwater/uic/class2/
hydraulicfracturing/wells_coalbedmethanestudy.cfm. Accessed on
July 9, 2014.
This report is one of the most famous documents in the
history of the debate over fracking in that it concluded
that the EPA had found no evidence in the study reported
here that fracking has any harmful effects on drinking
water quality. A number of questions were raised about
the quality of the report, and the U.S. Congress later
ordered the EPA to repeat the study.
“The Future of Natural Gas,” An Interdisciplinary MIT Study,
June 6, 2011. http://mitei.mit.edu/system/ﬁles/NaturalGas
_Report.pdf. Accessed on July 9, 2014.
Resources for Further Research
297

This report is one in the MIT series of “The Future of . . .”
studies. It provides a superb review of the nature of natu-
ral gas, its probable future as a source of energy world-
wide, and the technical and environmental aspects of its
extraction, with heavy emphasis on the processes of
hydraulic fracturing and directional drilling.
Goldman, Gretchen et al. “Towards An Evidence-Based
Fracking Debate: Science, Democracy, and the Community
Right to Know in Unconventional Oil and Gas Development,”
Union of Concerned Scientists, October 2013. http://www
.ucsusa.org/assets/documents/center-for-science-and-democracy/
fracking-report-full.pdf. Accessed on August 2, 2014.
After an introductory chapter on the status of fracking in
the United States, this report reviews the scientiﬁc infor-
mation currently available about fracking and related
activities, discusses federal and state laws relating to frack-
ing, advances arguments for the importance of the general
public’s knowledge about and understanding the nature of
fracking and its consequences, and recommends policies
and practices that are likely to lead to better decisions
about the use of fracking by the petroleum industry.
Ground Water Protection Council and ALL Consulting. “Modern
Shale Gas Development in the United States: A Primer.”
April 2009. http://energy.gov/sites/prod/ﬁles/2013/03/f0/ShaleGas
Primer_Online_4-2009.pdf. Accessed on July 9, 2014.
As the title of this report suggests, it is designed to provide
an introduction to the topic of shale gas exploration and
extraction with special attention on the role of hydraulic
fracturing in those processes. The main sections of the
report deal with the importance of shale gas, shale gas
development in the United States, regulatory framework,
and environmental considerations.
Hammer, Rebecca, Jeanne VanBriesen, and Larry Levine. “In
Fracking’s Wake: New Rules are Needed to Protect Our
298
Fracking

Health and Environment from Contaminated Wastewater,”
National Resources Defense Council, May 2012. http://www.
nrdc.org/energy/ﬁles/fracking-wastewater-fullreport.pdf.
Accessed on July 8, 2014.
This report provides one of the most complete reports
available on the character and potential effects of fracking
wastewater and the new legislation and regulation that
may be necessary to deal with the harmful effects of this
waste material.
Hazen & Sawyer. “Impact Assessment of Natural Gas
Production in the New York City Water Supply Watershed,”
New York City Department of Environmental Protection,
December
2009.
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/pdf/natural
_gas_drilling/12_23_2009_ﬁnal_assessment_report.pdf. Acc-
essed on July 9, 2014.
This study was conducted to determine potential hazards
posed to New York City’s water supply system as a result
of the growth of fracking operations in the Marcellus
Play. The report consists of four major parts, the ﬁrst of
which deals with general issues about drinking water regu-
lations and natural gas exploration and extraction. The
three remaining sections focus on geology of the
Marcellus shale area, growth characteristics of natural gas
extraction in the area, and potential impacts of the tech-
nology on the city’s drinking water.
Mall, Amy, Sharon Buccino, and Jeremy Nichols. “Drilling
Down. Protecting Western Communities from the Health and
Environmental Effects of Oil and Gas Production,” Natural
Resources Defense Council, October 2007. http://www.nrdc.
org/land/use/down/down.pdf. Accessed on July 9, 2014.
This report starts with the premise that “oil and gas pro-
duction is a dirty process” and proceeds to focus on the
chemicals used in fracking that may pose a risk to human
health and the environment and the air, water, and land
Resources for Further Research
299

pollution caused by fracking operations. The ﬁnal chapter
presents some simple and safe alternatives to the use of
fracking.
Ridlington, Elizabeth, and John Rumpler. 2013. “Fracking by
the Numbers: Key Impacts of Dirty Drilling at the State and
National Level,” Boston: Environment America. Available online
at
http://www.environmentamerica.org/sites/environment/ﬁles/
reports/EA_FrackingNumbers_scrn.pdf. Accessed on May 26,
2014.
This report takes the position that hydraulic fracturing is a
“highly polluting effort to unlock oil and gas” from sour-
ces in the United States. It describes the research con-
ducted by the authors of this report from the Frontier
Group and the Environment America Research & Policy
Center, respectively in the areas of toxic wastewater, water
use, chemical use, air pollution, land damage, and global
warming emissions.
“Shale Gas: A Global Perspective,” KPMG International,
http://www.kpmg.com/Global/en/IssuesAndInsights/Articles
Publications/Documents/shale-gas-global-perspective.pdf. Accessed
on July 8, 2014.
The multinational oil and gas company KPMG provides
this report on the availability, production, consumption,
and related information on shale gas resources worldwide.
An excellent overview of the topic.
“Study of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing on
Drinking Water Resources. Progress Report,” Washington, DC:
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Ofﬁce of Research and
Development, December 2012. EPA/601/R-12/011, Table 11,
page 29. Available online at http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/
ﬁles/documents/hf-report20121214.pdf#page=209. Accessed on
May 26, 2014.
In 2010, the U.S. Congress directed the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) to conduct a study on the
300
Fracking

relationship between hydraulic fracturing and the safety of
drinking water in regions where the procedure was being
used. In 2014, the EPA released a preliminary report
describing the activities in which it was engaged to respond
to this charge and the results it had obtained thus far. This
262-page report describes the EPA’s work on this topic.
“Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources:
An Assessment of 137 Shale Formations in 41 Countries
Outside the United States,” U.S. Energy Information Admin-
istration, June 2013. http://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/worlds
halegas/pdf/fullreport.pdf. Accessed on May 31, 2014.
This report attempts to estimate the amount of risked re-
sources (resources that are probably or possible sources of
oil or gas) in 41 nations around the world and outside
the United States. The ﬁve leading nations for risked gas
resources are the United States, China, Argentina,
Algeria, and Canada, and for risked oil resources, Russia,
China, the United States, Argentina, and Libya.
“Testimony Submitted to the House Committee on Natural
Resources, Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources,
Washington, D.C.,” June 18, 2009. https://iogcc.publishpath
.com/Websites/iogcc/Images/Additional-IOGCC-Testimony
June2009.pdf. Accessed on July 9, 2014.
This report was prepared by the Interstate Oil and Gas
Compact Commission (IOGCC) for presentation to the
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources in its
review of the effects of fracking on groundwater and other
issues related to the practice. The report contains a review
of the legal history surrounding the development of frack-
ing, a survey of states’ experience with fracking, state regu-
latory practices with regard to fracking, an IOGCC
resolution on fracking and a collection of similar state res-
olutions on the practice, and a reprint of previous IOGCC
testimony on fracking.
Resources for Further Research
301

Internet
Behar,
Michael.
“Fracking’s
Latest
Scandal?
Earthquake
Swarms,” Mother Jones, April/May 2013. http://www.mother
jones.com/environment/2013/03/does-fracking-cause-earthquakes
-wastewater-dewatering?page=1. Accessed on July 10, 2014.
This highly respected muckraking magazine focuses on
some of the most dramatic examples of seismic events that
may have been caused by gas and oil extraction operations.
Biello, David. “Can Fracking Clean China’s Air and Slow
Climate Change?” Scientiﬁc American, January 27, 2014.
http://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article/can-fracking-clean
-chinas-air-and-slow-climate-change/. Accessed on July 11,
2014.
China is the “sleeping giant” in shale gas recovery in the
world, with its enormous natural reserves largely unex-
ploited to date. This article analyzes the possibility that
fracking in China may help the nation produce a much
larger quantity of relatively clean burning natural gas,
which may help with both the nation’s air pollution prob-
lems and global climate change.
“Chemicals in Natural Gas Operations,” The Endocrine
Disruption Exchange, http://endocrinedisruption.org/chemicals
-in-natural-gas-operations/introduction. Accessed on July 10,
2014.
This web page reports on a study of the chemicals used in
fracking and other drilling operations with regard to
potential threat to the human endocrine system. It is part
of a larger project on the general effect of low-dose and/or
ambient exposure to chemicals that may interfere with the
normal functioning of the human endocrine system.
Clauson, Doug. “Hydraulic Fracturing,” ASTM International,
http://www.astm.org/sn/features/hydraulic-fracturing-nd12.html.
Accessed on May 30, 2014.
302
Fracking

This article describes efforts by ASTM International (for-
merly the American Society for Testing and Materials) to
develop new standards for fracking procedures deﬁne best
practices in the industry for dealing with this relatively
new technology.
Dahlen, Elizabeth. “Hydraulic Fracturing—Managing the Risk
of Produced Water,” Journal of Environmental Hydrology 21.
http://www.hydroweb.com/protect/pubs/jeh/jeh2013/dahlen
.pdf. Accessed on May 30, 2014.
This paper is written for water managers and asks how the
process of hydraulic fracturing raises new problems about
dealing with the water used in and produced by fracking
processes.
Dearden, Lizzie. “Allow Fracking in National Parks, Says
Outgoing Environment Agency Chief,” The Independent,
June 28, 2014. http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/
allow-fracking-in-national-parks-says-outgoing-environment
-agency-chief-9569919.html. Accessed on July 10, 2014.
The retiring chair of Great Britain’s Environment Agency
says that fracking is safe enough to use even in pristine
natural environments like the nation’s national parks. He
claims that fears about the technology are “deﬁnitely exag-
gerated” if fracking is done properly.
Deutsch, Nicholas, and P. Randall Crump. “The Power Struggle
over the Regulation of Hydraulic Fracturing,” Industry Pulse,
http://www.shb.com/newsevents/2014/ThePowerStruggleOver
theRegulationofHydraulicFracturing.pdf. Access on May 28,
2014.
The authors point out that regulation of activities such as
fracturing has traditionally been the purview of state gov-
ernments. But increasing attention to the possible envi-
ronmental impacts of the process have caused more local
governments to become involved in monitoring and
Resources for Further Research
303

controlling fracking in their areas. The authors analyze the
elements involved in this controversy.
“DOE’s Unconventional Gas Research Programs: 1976–
1995,” http://www.netl.doe.gov/kmd/cds/disk7/disk2/Final%
20Report.pdf. Accessed on May 24, 2014.
Over a two decade period, the U.S. Department of Energy
supported a number of research projects designed to test
the viability of various types of technology designed to
increase the production of natural gas from “unconven-
tional” sources. Hydraulic fracturing was one of the tech-
nologies studied in some of these projects. This report
provides an overview of the studies and their major results.
“Directional Drilling Technology,” Environmental Protection
Agency, http://www.epa.gov/cmop/docs/dir-drilling.pdf. Accessed
on May 24, 2014.
This paper describes the technology of horizontal drilling,
along with reports on the current status of the technology
(as of about 2000) and research on the procedure.
“Earthquakes and Hydraulic Fracturing,” Earthworks Fact
Sheet, January 13, 2014. http://www.earthworksaction.org/
ﬁles/publications/FACTSHEET-FrackingEarthquakes.pdf.
Accessed on July 10, 2014.
This brief pamphlet provides basic information on the
association—to the extent that there is any—between
hydraulic fracturing and seismic events.
Fairley, Peter. “Desperate U.K. Turns to Shale Gas,” MIT
Technology Review, September 10, 2013. http://www.technology
review.com/news/518936/desperate-uk-turns-to-shale-gas/. Acc-
essed on July 10, 2014.
The author explains why the United Kingdom is now
thinking so seriously about the use of fracking to take ad-
vantage of its natural gas resources. The web page is of
considerable interest not only because of the article itself
304
Fracking

but also because of the number of cogent comments it
inspired.
“Frac Sand,” Geology.com. http://geology.com/articles/frac-
sand/. Accessed on May 30, 2014.
Frac sand is a special form of highly puriﬁed quartz crys-
tals widely used in fracking operations. This article pro-
vides detail about its properties and uses in the process.
“FracFocus,” http://fracfocus.org/welcome. Accessed on May 24,
2014.
This interactive website was created by the Ground Water
Protection Council and Interstate Oil and Gas Compact
Commission to provide consumers with reliable informa-
tion about the chemicals used in fracking operations in
wells in their neighborhood.
“FracNews,” http://www.frackusa.com/. Accessed on May 23,
2014.
This website has apparently been developed as an adjunct
to John Graves’s book on the topic, Fracking: America’s
Alternative Energy Revolution (see Books earlier). It focuses
on what the author argues are the four key elements of
fracking development and the controversy over the tech-
nology, namely the economy, the environment, jobs,
and politics. The website also includes a blog that provides
news about fracking along with commentaries about each
of the four elements laid out by the author.
“Fracking: Gas Drilling’s Environmental Threat,” ProPublica.
http://www.propublica.org/series/fracking. Accessed on July 10,
2014.
ProPublica is one of the most outspoken critics of the use
of fracking for oil and gas extraction. This website con-
tains six major sections on topics such as “The Story So
Far,” “Natural Gas Politics,” and “Natural Gas Drilling:
What We Don’t Know.” In addition, the site contains
Resources for Further Research
305

more than 160 additional articles on speciﬁc aspects of
fracking, such as how best to measure health threats,
“Chesapeake Energy’s $5 Billion Shufﬂe,” how gas and
oil companies avoid paying royalties, EPA’s retreat on pre-
vious fracking studies, and the threat posed by fracking in
the Marcellus Play to Pennsylvania drinking water.
Hoffman, Joe. “Potential Health and Environmental Effects of
Hydrofracking in the Williston Basin, Montana,” Geology and
Human Health, http://serc.carleton.edu/NAGTWorkshops/
health/case_studies/hydrofracking_w.html. Accessed on July
10, 2014.
This excellent student presentation focuses on potential
health issues resulting from fracking operations in a lim-
ited region of the Bakken gas and oil play in the upper
Midwestern states.
“Hydraulic Fracturing,” U.S. Geological Survey, http://energy.
usgs.gov/OilGas/UnconventionalOilGas/HydraulicFracturing.
aspx#3892235-overview. Accessed on May 26, 2014.
This website provides a comprehensive collection of infor-
mation about hydraulic fracturing with a very nice collec-
tion of multimedia sources dealing with the topic, links to
related Internet sites on fracking, and reference to a num-
ber of U.S. Geological Survey publications on the topic.
“Hydraulic Fracturing 101,” Earthworks, http://www.earth
worksaction.org/issues/detail/hydraulic_fracturing_101#.U67z
-ﬂdV8E. Accessed on June 28, 2014.
This website provides a superb general introduction to the
subject of hydraulic fracturing along with an even-handed
review of issues related to the practice. Some sections of
special interest include those on groundwater contamina-
tion, air pollution, waste disposal, chemical disclosure,
best practices in the ﬁeld, and tips for landowners.
306
Fracking

“Hydraulic Fracturing 101,” Halliburton, http://www.halliburton
.com/public/projects/pubsdata/Hydraulic_Fracturing/fracturing
_101.html#. Accessed on May 24, 2014.
This web page provides a brief, but useful, introduction to
fracking technology, with an excellent video showing the
stages involved in the process. The page also has links to
a number of other related sources of information.
“Is Fracking a Good Idea?” Debate Club. US News & World
Report, http://www.usnews.com/debate-club/is-fracking-a-good
-idea. Accessed on July 10, 2014.
The Debate Club provides an opportunity for the “sharp-
est minds” to exchange ideas on “the day’s most important
topics.” This debate over fracking includes comments
from a member of the U.S. House of Representatives, an
associate professor of petroleum and geosystems engineer-
ing at the University of Texas at Austin, a member of the
Marcellus Shale Protest group, and president of the
Manhattan Borough in New York City. Each contributor
writes a well-developed essay that usually includes useful
links and references.
Global Frackdown. http://www.globalfrackdown.org/. Accessed
on July 11, 2014.
Global Frackdown is an international conference ﬁrst held
in September 2012 with representatives from more than
20 countries who came together to protest the use of
hydraulic fracturing for the extraction of oil and gas. The
organization’s most recent conference was held on
October 11, 2014, at a number of sites around the world.
This website provides a historical record of those meet-
ings, a mission statement for the organization, a list of
accomplishments in disrupting the use of fracking world-
wide, guidance on carrying out protests against fracking,
and information about natural gas drilling and fracking.
Resources for Further Research
307

Kass, Stephen L. “Worldwide: Countries Approach Fracking
with Interest and Caution,” Mondaq, January 6, 2014. http://
www.mondaq.com/unitedstates/x/284506/Climate+Change/
Countries+Approach+Fracking+With+Interest+and+Caution.
Accessed on July 11, 2014.
This article provides an excellent overview of the status of
hydraulic fracturing in a number of countries around the
world, with some thoughts on the possibility of growth
of the practice in each country.
Linnitt, Carol. “Fracking the Future: How Unconventional Gas
Threatens Our Water, Health and Climate,” DeSmogBlog
Society of British Columbia, 2010. http://www.desmogblog
.com/fracking-the-future/desmog-fracking-the-future.pdf. Acce-
ssed on July 10, 2014.
This strongly worded booklet argues that the concept of
natural gas as “clean energy” is a dangerous myth, that
gas drilling poses a number of risks to human health and
to the natural environment, that “Big Oil” has taken over
the natural gas industry, and that companies involved in
the extraction of gas use irresponsible and immoral politi-
cal tactics. The booklet concludes with a number of rec-
ommendations for government and industry.
Luken, Christopher. “U.S. Surpasses Russia and Saudi Arabia
as World’s Leading Producer of Oil,” North America’s Shale
Blog, July 10, 2014. http://www.northamericashaleblog.com/
2014/07/10/u-s-surpasses-russia-and-saudi-arabia-as-worlds
-leading-producer-of-oil/. Accessed on July 11, 2014.
This article describes the elements involved in the United
States’ achieving number one status among the world’s oil
producer, an accomplishment due primarily to the exten-
sive use of fracking in oil and gas extraction operations.
McFeeley, Matthew. “State Hydraulic Fracturing Disclosure
Rules and Enforcement: A Comparison,” Natural Resources
308
Fracking

Defense Council, http://www.nrdc.org/energy/ﬁles/Fracking-
Disclosure-IB.pdf. Accessed on May 24, 2014.
Rules for the disclosure of chemicals used in hydraulic
fracturing procedures vary widely from state to state in
the United States. This document provides a comprehen-
sive review of those differences, with a discussion of the
types of regulations that are in force.
McMahon, Jeff. “Six Reasons Fracking Has Flopped Overseas.”
Forbes. April 7, 2013. http://www.forbes.com/sites/jeffmcmahon/
2013/04/07/six-reasons-fracking-has-ﬂopped-overseas/.
Accessed
on July 11, 2014.
McMahon attributes a failure to extend fracking to most
countries other than the United States to price of the
product, lack of an appropriate framework for the prac-
tice, poorly developed systems for dealing with property
and mineral rights, insufﬁcient infrastructure to support
fracking, questions about water contamination and over-
use, and lack of expertise in the ﬁeld.
Morgan, James H. “Horizontal Drilling Applications of
Petroleum
Technologies
for
Environmental
Purposes,”
Groundwater Monitoring & Remediation, http://info.ngwa.
org/gwol/pdf/921856387.PDF. Accessed on May 24, 2014.
This journal article provides a brief history of horizontal
drilling technology, along with its uses in protecting the
environment during drilling operations.
Morgan, Rachel. “Fracking Wastewater Can Be Highly
Radioactive,” RSN, January 28, 2013. http://readersupported
news.org/news-section2/312-16/15754-fracking-wastewater-can
-be-highly-radioactive. Accessed on July 10, 2014.
This article is the ﬁrst of four in a series of radioactivity in
fracking wastewater. A paid subscription is required for
reading the ﬁnal three articles in the series.
Resources for Further Research
309

“Oil and Natural Gas Air Pollution Standards,” Environmental
Protection
Agency,
July
2,
2014.
http://www.epa.gov/
airquality/oilandgas/. Accessed on July 10, 2014.
In addition to recent regulatory actions by the EPA about
air pollution resulting from hydraulic fracturing and
related oil and gas activities, this website provides basic
information about emissions caused by the oil and natural
gas industry, technical information about the air toxics
standards under review, public meetings held in connec-
tion with the rule-making process, and EPAʼs Natural
Gas Star Program.
“Out of Control: Nova Scotia’s Experience with Fracking for
Shale Gas,” Nova Scotia Fracking Resource and Action
Coalition, April 2013. http://nofrac.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2013/
04/out-of-control-full-report.pdf. Accessed on May 31, 2014.
Although only four fracked wells have been drilled in
Nova Scotia, a number of environmental and other prob-
lems have persisted in the province. This report describes
the history of fracking in Nova Scotia and the lessons that
residents have learned about the procedure there.
“Overview of Petroleum Exploration & Production,” http://
www.mining.eng.chula.ac.th/CU_ETM/OverviewE&P.pdf.
Accessed on July 8, 2014.
This book chapter provides one of the best general
descriptions of the origin, exploration, and extraction of
oil and gas available on the Internet. It is available from a
number of different sources, this one being perhaps the
most accessible for the reader.
“The Process of Shale Extraction,” Energy from Shale, http://
www.energyfromshale.org/hydraulic-fracturing.
Accessed
on
July 10, 2014.
Energy from Shale is a production of the American
Petroleum Institute, and so represents a particular view-
point about shale gas and hydraulic fracturing. This
310
Fracking

website does contain some interesting written and visual
information on various aspects of the fracking process
and some social, economic, environmental, and other
beneﬁts offered by the procedure.
Rogers, S. Marvin. “History of Litigation Concerning Hydra-
ulic Fracturing to Produce Coalbed Methane,” http://iogcc
.ok.gov/Websites/iogcc/Images/Marvin%20Rogers%20Paper
%20of%20History%20of%20LEAF%20Case%20Jan.%20
2009.pdf. Accessed on May 24, 2014.
This paper reviews some of the most important legal
actions taken between 1994 and 2009 related to the use
of hydraulic fracturing for the extraction of natural gas
from underground sources.
“Should the US Use Hydraulic Fracturing (Fracking) to Extract
Natural Gas?” Alternative Energy Pros and Cons. ProCon.org,
April 23, 2012. http://alternativeenergy.procon.org/view.answers
.php?questionID=001732. Accessed on July 10, 2014.
The ProCon.org website provides essays and quotations in
favor of and opposed to a variety of important current
social issues. This page has statements from organizations
such as the U.S. Department of Energy, the Wall Street
Journal, the Ground Water Protection Council, and
Earthworks, along with a number of individuals who write
both for and against the use of fracking in oil and gas
exploration and extraction.
State of Colorado Oil & Gas Commission. [untitled docu-
ment], http://cogcc.state.co.us/library/GASLAND%20DOC.
pdf. Accessed on May 24, 2014.
This document was prepared in response to the ﬁlm
Gasland about the purported effects of fracking on the
natural environment and human health. The document
is an effort, its authors say, “to correct several errors in
the ﬁlm’s portrayal of the . . . incidents [that took place
in Colorado].”
Resources for Further Research
311

Strong, L. et al. “Biodegradation in Waters from Hydraulic
Fracturing:
Chemistry,
Microbiology,
and
Engineering,”
Journal of Environmental Engineering volume 140, Special
Issue: Environmental Impacts of Shale Gas Development,
http://ascelibrary.org/doi/abs/10.1061/(ASCE)EE.1943-7870.
0000792. Accessed on May 28, 2014.
The authors review the types of chemicals used in the
fracking process, the potential environmental and human
health impacts of these chemicals, and the potential for
the use of biodegradation techniques for the removal of
such chemicals.
Trembath, Alex et al. “Where the Shale Gas Revolution Came
From: Government’s Role in the Development of Hydraulic
Fracturing in Shale,” Breakthrough Institute Energy & Climate
Program, http://thebreakthrough.org/blog/Where_the_Shale_Gas
_Revolution_Came_From.pdf. Accessed on May 24, 2014.
This report provides a brief review of the history of the
development of fracking operations in the United States,
with special attention paid to the role of governmental
agencies in the technology.
Truong, Alice. “The Pros and Cons of Shale Gas,” How Stuff
Works, http://science.howstuffworks.com/environmental/energy/
pros-cons-shale-gas.htm. Accessed on July 10, 2014.
This ﬁve part series provides basic information about
fracking along with discussions on some speciﬁc issues of
importance, such as how fracking takes land from prop-
erty owners, how deep fracking operations are conducted,
and how gas is extracted from shale.
“US Surpasses
Russia as World’s Largest Natural Gas
Producer,” World Oil News Center, January 13, 2010. http://
www.worldoil.com/US-surpasses-Russia-as-worlds-largest-natural
-gas-producer.html. Accessed on July 11, 2014.
This news article discusses the attainment by the United
States of the position of world’s largest producer of natural
312
Fracking

gas, largely as a result of the use of fracking operations in
gas extraction.
Uth, Hans-Joachim. “Technical Risks and Best Available
Technology (BAT) of Hydraulic Fracturing in Unconventional
Natural Gas Resources,” Environmental Earth Sciences, http://
link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs12665-014-3126-8. Acc-
essed on May 29, 2014.
The author reviews some of the risks associated with
hydraulic fracking and lists some recommendations for
practices that will reduce those risks. In general, he sug-
gests that companies follow standard recommendations
for the best available technology in fracking operations,
whether they are required by law and regulations or not.
Vengosh, Avner et al. “A Critical Review of the Risks to Water
Resources from Unconventional Shale Gas Development and
Hydraulic Fracturing in the United States” Environmental
Science & Technology, http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/
es405118y. Accessed on May 29, 2014.
The authors discuss four major sources of pollution to
water resources from hydraulic fracturing: (1) the con-
tamination of shallow aquifers with stray hydrocarbon
gases; (2) the contamination of surface water and shallow
groundwater from spills, leaks, and/or the disposal of
inadequately treated shale gas wastewater; (3) the accumu-
lation of toxic and radioactive elements in soil or stream
sediments near disposal or spill sites; and (4) the overex-
traction of water resources for high-volume hydraulic frac-
turing that could result in water shortages or conﬂicts with
other water users, especially in water-scarce areas.
“Water and Hydraulic Fracturing,” American Water Works
Association, http://www.awwa.org/Portals/0/ﬁles/legreg/documents/
AWWAFrackingReport.pdf. Accessed on May 30, 2014.
This excellent white paper sets out the American Water
Works Association’s (AWWA) position on issues of water
Resources for Further Research
313

use in fracking operations. The publication provides an
excellent general introduction to the general topic of
hydraulic fracturing and outlines the issues related to
water use associated with the procedure.
“Worker Exposure to Silica during Hydraulic Fracturing,”
Hazard Alert. OSHA-NIOSH, June 2012. https://www.osha.
gov/dts/hazardalerts/hydraulic_frac_hazard_alert.pdf. Accessed
on July 10, 2014.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH) has identiﬁed exposure to airborne silica
during the process of hydraulic fracturing as a health haz-
ard to workers. This publication reviews the studies that
led to this determination by the agency and discusses
potential health hazards posed by silica in the air.
314
Fracking



7
Chronology
Introduction
Hydraulic fracturing itself is a relatively new method for ext-
racting fossil fuels from the Earth. However, the search for fos-
sil fuel reserves and the variety of methods developed for their
collection and transportation has gone on for many centuries.
This chronology highlights some of the important events that
have taken place over this period of time.
ca. 420 MYA (million years ago)
Formation of Earth’s
petroleum and natural gas deposits began with the decay of
microscopic plants and animals. This process continued inter-
mittently over the next 400 million years.
1803
A resident of Baku named Gasimbey Mansurbeyov is
credited with having dug the world’s ﬁrst oil in the Bibi-Heybat
Bay, 18 and 30 meters of the coastline. He used only picks and
shovels and no specialized equipment. The wells lasted only a
short time as they were destroyed by inclement weather on the
coast.
1821
The ﬁrst natural gas well is drilled into Devonian shale
near the city of Fredonia, New York. The gas is piped into the
city, where it is used primarily for lighting.
317
Steve Lipsky demonstrates how his well water ignites when he puts a ﬂame
to the ﬂowing well spigot outside his family’s home in rural Parker
County near Weatherford, Texas. (AP Photo/David J. Phillip)

1846
The ﬁrst oil well to be drilled by mechanical means was
sunk in the Bibi-Heybat suburb of Baku under the direction of
Russian engineer F. N. Semyenov.
1857
An operation known as fracture stimulation is ﬁrst used
in Romania as a means of improving the porosity of oil- and
gas-containing rock structures and, therefore, the efﬁciency of
oil wells drilled in the region.
1858
Polish pharmacist Jan Józef Ignacy Łukasiewicz con-
structs the world’s ﬁrst reﬁnery for the purpose of extracting
kerosene from crude oil.
The ﬁrst oil wells in North America are drilled under the
supervision of Canadian entrepreneur James Miller Williams
in southwestern Ontario. The wells were originally drilled to
obtain drinking water but accidentally produced crude oil also.
1859
The ﬁrst oil well in the United States (but not the ﬁrst
in the world nor the ﬁrst in North America) is drilled near
Titusville, Pennsylvania, by Colonel Edwin Drake. The well
was, however, the ﬁrst one drilled in North America with the
purpose of extracting oil. The well was about 21 meters (69 feet)
deep and produced up to 20 barrels of oil a day.
1865
Colonel Edward A. L. Roberts, a veteran of the Civil
War, receives a patent for an “exploding torpedo” that can be
used for increasing the ﬂow of oil and gas from low-producing
or played-out wells.
1875
Hydraulic fracturing was used for the ﬁrst time in the
United Kingdom to drill an experimental well near Battle, in
East Sussex. The initial well reached a depth of about 300 meters
before work was suspended. A second well was drilled to a depth
of more than 600 meters before an explosion brought the work to
a conclusion.
1891
The ﬁrst patent for a horizontal drilling system is
granted to John Smalley Campbell. Although Campbell’s
invention is designed for dental work, he pointed out ways in
which the concept could be upgraded for use with oil wells also.
318
Fracking

1896
California businessman Henry L. Williams oversees the
drilling of the ﬁrst commercially successful offshore petroleum
wells near the town of Summerland, California.
1929
The ﬁrst use of horizontal drilling for the extraction of oil
is carried out at Texon, Texas. The technology was used as a way
of draining oil out of a ﬁeld, thus increasing its overall output.
The ﬁrst patent for a multilateral well is issued to Texas petro-
leum engineer Leo Ranney. A multilateral well is one in which
two or more horizontal wells are drilled from a single bore hole.
1939
American inventor Ira J. McCullough receives a patent
for a method by which bullets can be ﬁred through the lining in
a bore hole to cause fracturing of rock surrounding a well, thus
increasing the ﬂow of oil and gas.
1947
The ﬁrst modern, large-scale offshore drilling project is
initiated about 10 miles offshore from Terrebonne Parish,
Louisiana.
The ﬁrst experimental hydraulic fracturing treatment in the
United States was conducted in the Hugoton gas ﬁeld in
Grant County, Kansas.
1949
The ﬁrst commercial fracturing procedures are carried
out by the Halliburton company in Stephens County,
Oklahoma, and Archer County, Texas.
1951
The Ghawar oil ﬁeld in Saudi Arabia begins production
of crude oil. The ﬁeld is generally thought to be the largest oil
producing site in the world.
1956
American geophysicist M. King Hubbert publishes a
paper entitled “Nuclear Energy and the Fossil Fuels” that, for
the ﬁrst time, outlines the principles of peak oil, originating a
“peak energy” movement that remains very inﬂuential in petro-
leum policy discussions to the present day.
1967
As part of its Project Plowshare program, designed to
ﬁnd peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission (AEC) carries out Project Gasbuggy, designed to
test the ability of nuclear weapons to increase the ﬂow of oil
Chronology
319

and gas from underground wells. Gasbuggy is later followed by
two comparable projects, Project Rulison, in 1969, and Project
Rio Blanco, in 1973.
1968
The Pan American Petroleum Company makes use of
so-called massive hydraulic fracturing (or high-volume hydraulic
fracturing) to recover natural gas from a well in Stephens
County, Oklahoma. The process involves the use of a half million
pounds of proppant pumped into the formation.
1969
The AEC carries out Project Rulison (see 1967) near
Rulison, Colorado.
1970
This year marks the beginning of a decade in which the
U.S. Congress passes a series of bills designed to protect human
health and the natural environment from contamination by
human activity, acts such as the National Environmental Policy
Act of 1970, Clean Air Act of 1970, Occupational Safety and
Health Act of 1970, Clean Water Act of 1972, Safe Drinking
Water Act of 1974, Federal Land Policy and Management Act
of 1976, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976,
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, and
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act of 1980.
1974
The AEC carries out Project Rio Blanco (see 1967)
near Riﬂe, Colorado.
The U.S. Congress passes and President Gerald R. Ford
signs the Safe Drinking Water Act. Possible contamination as
a result of fracking is not mentioned in the act.
1976
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) initiates the
Eastern Gas Shales Project, a joint research project of federal
and state agencies and private companies to explore the pos-
sibility of increasing the amount of gas obtained from uncon-
ventional sources, such as hydraulic fracturing.
1980
The U.S. Congress passes the Windfall Proﬁts Tax Act of
1980, which includes a section (the so-called Section 29) provid-
ing tax incentives for energy production from “unconventional”
320
Fracking

sources, such as fracking for natural gas. This provision remains in
effect until 2002, when it is repealed.
1986
The Safe Drinking Water Act is updated and amended,
but fracking is still excluded from any mention in the act.
DOE sponsors the drilling of a hole to extract natural gas
from Devonian shales in Wayne County, West Virginia.
1989
The ﬁrst use of horizontal drilling for the extraction of
natural gas is conducted in the Barnett shale ﬁeld near the
Oklahoma–Texas border.
1992
The Supreme Court of Colorado rules on two issues
related to hydraulic fracturing, in one of which they conﬁrm a
county’s right to require special permits for the use of fracking
operations in the county (LaPlata County vs. Bowen/Edwards
Association) and in the other of which they reject the right of a
city or town to totally ban the use of fracking within municipal-
ity limits (Voss vs. Lundvall Brothers, Inc.).
1994
The Legal Environmental Assistance Foundation (LEAF)
petitions the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to with-
draw its approval of the Alabama Underground Injection
Control (UIC) program because it had not taken into considera-
tion the effects of hydraulic fracturing on groundwater, as pro-
vided by the Safe Drinking Water Act. The EPA denies the
LEAF petition in 1995. LEAF then ﬁles suit to force EPA to take
its requested action. The court case continues until 2001 (q.v.).
1995
The EPA announces that it does not regulate, nor does
it believe it has the authority to regulate, fracking of oil and gas
wells.
1996
The Safe Drinking Water Act is amended again, still
without any mention of the role of fracking in maintaining
clean water sources.
The EPA issues a report suggesting that the natural gas indus-
try in the United States is responsible for the release of about
2 percent of all methane that escapes into the atmosphere. The
report remains the “gold standard” for this information for more
Chronology
321

than a decade and then is superceded by new reports that provide
very different data on the topic.
1997
In the case of Legal Environmental Assistance Foun-
dation vs. U.S. EPA, 118 F.3d 1467 (11th Cir. 1997), the
11th Circuit Court of Appeals rules that the injection of ﬂuids
for the purpose of conducting fracking must be regulated by
the EPA under the Safe Drinking Water Act.
2001
In the case of LEAF vs. EPA, State Oil and Gas Board of
Alabama, 276 F.3d 1253 (11th Cir. 2001), the 11th Circuit
Court of Appeals rules that the state of Alabama UIC’s program
for regulating hydraulic fracturing meets the requirements of
that act. The ruling brings to a close a series of court cases and
disputes dating to 1994 (q.v.).
2003
The Range Resources company begins drilling an explor-
atory well in the Marcellus Shale region of Pennsylvania, the ﬁrst
such well in that formation. The Marcellus Shale has become one
of the most heavily explored regions using fracturing in the
United States.
2004
The EPA publishes an extensive study of the effects of
hydraulic fracturing on the safety of drinking water. The agency
concludes that hydraulic fracturing has “little or no effect” to
underground sources of drinking water.
2005
The U.S. Congress passes the Energy Policy Act, which
provides a speciﬁc and special exemption for hydraulic fractur-
ing from meeting standards of the Safe Water Drinking Act.
The exemption becomes known as the Halliburton Loophole
after the company that apparently gains the most in its own
fracking practices from the exemption.
2009
The
Fracturing
Responsibility
and
Awareness
of
Chemicals Act (FRAC Act) is introduced into the U.S. Congress
by representatives Diana DeGette (D-CO), Maurice Hinchey
(D-NY), and Jared Polis, (D-CO) in the House and by Bob
Casey (D-PA) and Chuck Schumer (D-NY) in the Senate. The
purpose of the act is to deﬁne hydraulic fracturing as a federally
322
Fracking

regulated activity under the Safe Drinking Water Act. It would
require companies to disclose the chemicals that they use in the
fracturing process.
2010
Wyoming becomes the ﬁrst state to pass a law requiring
companies to disclose the chemicals they use in fracking.
The ﬁlm Gasland premiers. The ﬁlm purports to describe the
effect on the environment and human health in local commun-
ities where horizontal drilling and fracking are being practiced.
A sequel to the ﬁlm, Gasland 2, is released in 2013.
The United States becomes the world’s largest producer of
natural gas, an achievement that can be credited primarily to
the expansion of hydraulic fracturing operations in the country.
2011
The French government adopts a law prohibiting the
use of hydraulic fracturing for the exploration or extraction of
petroleum products from shale formations. The law is the ﬁrst
of its kind in the world.
The U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) annou-
nces that the newly discovered Monterey Oil and Gas Play in
California may contain as much as 15.4 billion gallons of tight
oil. (But see 2014.)
The EPA releases a study indicating that pollution of water
wells near the town of Pavillion, Wyoming, have been contami-
nated by products from fracking operations taking place in the
area. (But see 2013.)
2012
Argentina signs an agreement with Chevron to permit
exploration for and extraction of oil and gas in the vast reserves
estimated for that country’s petroleum assets. The agreement is
one of the ﬁrst such actions between national governments out-
side the United States and major multinational petroleum
ﬁrms.
Bulgaria becomes the second country in Europe (after
France) to ban fracking.
South Africa places a moratorium on fracking in its arid
Karoo region and then decides to lift the moratorium and
Chronology
323

resume all drilling. The Department of Mineral Resources says
that it is convinced by the arguments made by a number of
energy companies that the operation is safe for human health
and the natural environment.
Researchers at the Endocrine Disruption Exchange in
Paonia, Colorado, call attention to a new class of compounds
known collectively as non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHCs) in
the efﬂuent from fracked oil and gas wells with possible harmful
effects on human health.
The Pennsylvania state legislature passes Act 13 which,
among other provisions, prohibits cities, towns, counties, and
other municipalities from regulating fracking operations within
their jurisdiction. (But also see 2013 on this point.)
2013
The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania rules that portions
of Act 13 are unconstitutional under the state constitution
because they violate the Environmental Rights Amendment of
the state constitution.
In the period between 2009 and 2013, the number of earth-
quakes of magnitude 3.0 or greater averages about 40 per year,
compared to fewer than three per year in the preceding three
decades.
Filmmakers Phelim McAleer and Ann McElhinney release a
motion picture, Frack Nation, which they claim presents a very
different view about fracking than that offered by the earlier
ﬁlm, Gasland. (See 2010.)
Studies begin to appear suggesting that the amount of meth-
ane released during fracking operations may be many times
higher than those ﬁrst announced by the EPA in 1996 (q.v.)
The EPA reverses itself on a 2011 decision (q.v.) that frack-
ing was responsible for contamination of freshwater wells near
Pavillion, Wyoming. The agency announces that it would
withdraw from further studies of that area and hand the project
over to the state of Wyoming and the EnCana Corporation,
324
Fracking

which had been conducting drilling operations on the wells in
question.
2014
The United States becomes the world’s largest producer
of oil, surpassing the former leader, Saudi Arabia. This achieve-
ment is credited largely to the increased use of hydraulic fractur-
ing in the extraction of oil from shale.
The New York Court of Appeals, highest court in the state,
rules that four towns in the state have the right to ban and/or
regulate hydraulic fracturing as part of their zoning rights under
the state constitution. Observers suggest that this could be a
“death blow” for fracking in the state.
The Wyoming Supreme Court rules that a district court
incorrectly granted exemptions to the Halliburton company
from a state law requiring that it reveal the chemical it used in
hydraulic fracturing procedures in the state. (Also see 2010.)
The EIA revises its estimates of the amount of oil that may
be extracted from the Monterey Play (see 2011) to 600 million
barrels, 96 percent less than its original estimate.
The Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission orders
High Sierra Water Services to stop disposing wastewater into
one of its Weld County injection wells because of concerns about
possible seismic events that may be associated with the practice.
Chronology
325


Glossary
As with most technical subjects, hydraulic fracturing is a ﬁeld
that makes use of a number of technical terms. The legal, eco-
nomic, social, and political aspects of the subject also make
use of terms with specialized meaning in the ﬁeld. This chapter
lists a number of the most common terms used when discussing
fracking, although the list provided here is somewhat limited
because of space. For more extensive glossaries on the terminol-
ogy of hydraulic fracturing, also see the “Oil and Gas Well
Drilling and Servicing Tool” (U.S. Department of Labor:
https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/etools/oilandgas/glossary_of_terms/
glossary_of_terms_s.html) and “Study of the Potential Impacts of
Hydraulic Fracturing on Drinking Water Resources” (U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Glossary: http://www2.epa
.gov/sites/production/ﬁles/documents/hf-report20121214.pdf#
page=209).
Acidize
The process of adding an acid (usually hydrochloric
acid) to fracturing ﬂuid in order to increase the viscosity of
the extracted ﬂuid.
Additive
Any substance that is combined with a base ﬂuid
(usually water) and proppant (usually sand) to create a fractur-
ing ﬂuid, which is then pumped into a rock formation.
Annulus
The space between the casing and the borehole in a
well.
API Well Number
A unique number assigned to each indi-
vidual well in the United States. An API Number consists of
327

four parts, the state code, county code, well code, and wellbore
code. API is an acronym for the American Petroleum Institute,
which established the system.
Aquifer
A water-bearing stratum of permeable rock, sand, or
gravel.
Backﬂow
The movement of liquids out of a well as the result
of pressure in the wellbore. Backﬂow may consist of liquid
hydrocarbons from the well, fracking ﬂuids, produced water
from the well, and other materials. Also referred to as ﬂow back
water or ﬂow back ﬂuid.
Base ﬂuid
A liquid or foam substance that is mixed with a
proppant and to which additives are mixed or added to com-
prise a fracturing ﬂuid. The most common base ﬂuid is water.
Also referred to as a carrier ﬂuid.
Biocide
A chemical that kills or disables microorganisms,
such as bacteria. Using in fracking operations to eliminate the
bacteria that are responsible for corrosion of piping and other
equipment.
Borehole
A hole drilled into the ground for the purpose of
exploring for oil or natural gas or to extract those materials from
the earth. Also see wellbore.
Breaker
A chemical additive that reduces the viscosity of a
ﬂuid by breaking long-chain molecules into shorter segments.
Carrier ﬂuid.
See base ﬂuid.
CAS
An acronym for Chemical Abstract Service, a division of
the American Chemical Society that ﬁnds, collects, organizes,
and makes available all publicly disclosed information about
chemical substances.
Cased hole
A section of the wellbore in which casing and
cement is installed.
Casing
A pipe placed in a well for one of three purposes: (1)
to prevent the wall of the hole from caving in, (2) to prevent
movement of ﬂuids from one geologic formation to another,
328
Glossary

or (3) to provide a means of maintaining control of formation
ﬂuids and pressure as the well is drilled.
Crosslinker
A chemical that is added to a fracturing ﬂuid to
increase the viscosity of the ﬂuid by catalyzing the combination
of smaller molecules to make larger molecules.
Drainage radius
The roughly circular area around a wellbore
from which hydrocarbon ﬂow into the wellbore.
Flowback water
See back ﬂow.
Fluid rate
The velocity at which a gas or liquid ﬂows into or
out of a well. The units used are in volume per time period,
commonly barrels per minute (BPM).
Frac sand
A special form of high-purity quartz widely used as
an additive in the hydraulic fracturing process.
Fracturing ﬂuid
A mixture used in hydraulic fracturing that
consists of the base ﬂuid (usually water), the proppant (usually
sand), and one or more additives.
Gelling agent
An additive that increases the viscosity of a
ﬂuid without affecting its other properties.
Groundwater
Water that exists underground, usually in
pores and crevices in the rock.
Hydraulic horsepower (HHP)
A measure of pumping
power in a fracking operated that is based on the pumping rate
and pressure.
Methane
An organic compound, a hydrocarbon, with the
chemical formula CH4.
Natural gas
A gaseous fossil fuel that consists primarily of
methane, often with smaller amounts of other substances, such
as ethane, propane, butane, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and
hydrogen sulﬁde.
Non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHCs)
A class of com-
pounds found in the efﬂuent from fracked oil and gas wells that
may have harmful effects on human health. The class includes
Glossary
329

compounds such as ethane, propane, butane, ethene, and
ethyne.
Perforations
Holes drilled into the steel casing inserted into
a wellbore that allow fracturing ﬂuids to ﬂow into the forma-
tion and later act as conduits through which hydrocarbons ﬂow
into the wellbore.
Play
As in “petroleum play” or “natural gas play,” a group of
wells, oil ﬁelds, or prospective drilling sites characterized by a
common geological description.
Produced water
Water (usually salty) that originates from
underground formations that escapes from a well in conjunc-
tion with oil or natural gas.
Proppant
A ﬁnely divided solid material, such as sand or alu-
minum oxide, that is mixed with a fracturing ﬂuid, usually
water, to bring about the fracture of a rocky source of natural
gas or oil.
Proppant concentration
The amount of proppant per vol-
ume of fracking ﬂuid. The most commonly used unit is pounds
of proppant added per gallon of fracturing ﬂuid (ppa).
Risked resources
Oil and gas reserves are possible or prob-
able sources of the resource that have not yet been developed.
For contrast, see unrisked resources.
Shale
A soft, ﬁnely stratiﬁed sedimentary rock formed from
consolidated mud or clay. It can generally be split easily into
fragile slabs.
Slurry
A mixture of cement and water that is pumped into a
wellbore to hold the casing in place and to provide a seal for the
casing.
Surface injection pressure (SIP)
The pressure at the surface
of a well at which a fracturing ﬂuid is being injected into a well.
The most commonly used unit is pounds per square inch (psi).
Tight sands
A sand or sandstone formation with low
permeability.
330
Glossary

Unrisked resources
Sources of oil and gas that have been
developed and from which the resource has already been
produced.
Wellbore
A hole drilled into a rock formation for the pur-
pose of exploring for or extracting oil or natural gas. Also see
borehole.
Glossary
331


Index
Acidization, 46
Acidize, 327
Act 13 (Pennsylvania),
109–110, 258–60, 324
Additive, 327
Air Pollution from fracking,
statistics, 239–40
Al Falih, Khalid, 6
America’s Natural Gas
Alliance, 175–76
American Gas Association,
170–71
American Petroleum
Institute, 172–74
Annulus, 327
API well number, 327
Aquifer, 328
Associated natural gas, 13
Backﬂow, 328
Bakken play, 49
Baku oil region, 32–33
Bannister, Thomas, 32
Base ﬂuid, 328
Bazhenov Play, 17–18
Bell, Trudy E., 131–36
Berkshire Environmental
Action Team, 220–23
Biocide, 328
Bitumen, 29, 31
Borehole, 328
Breaker, 328
Browner, Carol, 102
Bryce, Robert, 73–74
Burnett, H. Sterling, 65
Campbell, John Smalley,
50–51, 318
Carlyle, Ryan, 67
Cased hole, 328
Casey, Bob, 104
Casing, 328
Çelebi, Evliya, 32
Chayvo oil well, 20
Chemicals used in fracking, 236
Cheney, Richard, 103–4
Chesapeake Climate Action
Network, 176–79
Christmas tree (petroleum
drilling), 25
Coal, 3–6
genesis, 7–12
333

Communication from the
Commission to the
European Parliament, the
Council, the European
Economic and Social
Committee and the
Committee of the Regions
on the Exploration and
Production of
Hydrocarbons (Such as
270 Fracking Shale Gas)
Using High Volume
Hydraulic Fracturing in
the EU, 270–72
Conductor hole, 24
Consumer Energy Alliance,
179–81
Crosslinker, 329
Crude oil, 13
Crude Oil Windfall Proﬁt
Tax Act of 1980, 243–46,
320–21
DeGette, Diana, 104
Della Valle, Pietro, 32
Desmarest, Thierry, 3
Directional drilling.
See Horizontal
drilling
Discovered unrecoverable
petroleum reserves, 18
Dissolved natural gas, 13
Drainage radius, 329
Drake, Edwin, 33–34, 318
Drill string, 24–25
Drilling ﬂuid, 26
Drilling mud. See Drilling ﬂuid
Duckett, Jeffrey, 32
Eastern Gas Shales Project, 320
Eastman, H. John, 181–83
The Endocrine Disruption
Exchange, 94, 226–28
Energy independence, xiv,
70–76
Energy Watch Group, 5
Engelder, Terry, 169, 184–85
Environment America,
185–87
Evaluation of Impacts to
Underground Sources of
Drinking Water by
Hydraulic Fracturing of
Coalbed Methane
Reservoirs Study, 252–54
Everett, Bruce, 136–40
Farris, Riley “Floyd,” 47–48
Fast, Robert, 47–48
Flaring, 25
Fluid rate, 329
Food & Water Watch,
187–90
Ford, Gerald R., 320
Fossil fuels, 3–4
genesis, 7–12. See also Coal;
Natural gas; Oil;
Petroleum
FRAC Act of 2009. See
Fracturing Responsibility
and Awareness of
Chemicals Act
334
Index

Frack Nation (ﬁlm), 324
Frac sand, 329
Fracking, xiv, 6–7
aesthetic issues, 100–101
air pollution, 92–96
direct economic beneﬁts,
76–79
environmental beneﬁts,
80–82
indirect economic beneﬁts,
79–80
laws and regulations, 101
public opinion, 82–83
risks, 84
seismic events, 96
water contamination,
87–92
water use, 84–87
Fracking, number of
wells in the United
States, 238
Fractionating column. See
Fractionating tower
Fractionating tower, 28
Fractionation (petroleum),
28–29
Fracture stimulation, 318
Fracturing ﬂuid, 329
Fracturing Responsibility and
Awareness of Chemicals
Act, 104, 263–66, 322–23
Frasch, Herman, 45–46
Gasland (ﬁlm), 323
Gasland 2 (ﬁlm), 323
Gelling agent, 329
Geophones, 20
Gesner, Abraham, 33
Ghawar Oil Field, 14, 319
Gravitometers, 21
Ground Water Protection
Council, 190–92
Groundwater, 329
Gusher, 23
Hagler, Gina, 140–45
Halliburton, Erle P., 192–94
Halliburton loophole, 103–4,
322
Halliburton Oil Well
Cementing Company, 48,
266, 319
Hart, William, 194–97
Herodotus, 31
Hinchey, Maurice, 104
History of natural gas
exploration, 39–43
History of petroleum
exploration, 30–34
Horizontal drilling, xiv,
49–51
Hubbert, M. King, 3–4, 319
Hubbert curve, 3–5
Hughes, J. David, 66–67
Hydraulic fracturing, xiv, 6, 43
history, 44–49. See also
Fracking
Hydraulic Fracturing
Exclusions, 246–51
Hydraulic horsepower
(HHP), 329
Hydrophones, 21
Index
335

Independent Petroleum
Association of America,
197–99
Ingraffea, Anthony R.,
200–202
Intermediate hole, 24
International Energy Agency,
202–6
Interstate Natural Gas
Association of America,
206–8
Interstate Oil and Gas
Compact Commission,
208–10
Jaffe, Amy Myers, 66
Kermac 16, 40
Kerr McGee Oil
Industries, 40
Kim, Won-Young, 99
Klare, Michael T., 74–75
La Plata County vs. Bowen/
Edwards, Associates, Inc.,
108–9, 321
LEAF vs. EPA, State Oil and
Gas Board of Alabama, 322
Legal Environmental
Assistance Foundation
(LEAF), 102, 321
Legal Environmental Assistance
Foundation vs. U.S. EPA,
251–53, 322
Levi, Michael, 75–76
Łukasiewicz, Ignacy, 33, 318
Mansurbeyov, Gasimbey, 317
Marcellus Play, 17, 196, 322
Marland, E. W., 211–13
McAleer, Phelim, 324
McClendon, Aubrey, 213–15
McCullough, Ira J., 47, 319
McElhinney, Ann, 324
Methane, 329
Mitchell, George, 49–50,
215–18
Mitchell Energy, 49, 51
Monterey Play, 65–66
National Association of Royalty
Owners, The, 218–20
Natural gas, 329
associated, 13
dissolved, 13
drilling technology, 23–26
exploration, 20–23, 39–43
imports (statistics), 70
reserves, 242–43
terminology, 13–19. See also
Peak natural gas; Peak oil
Nixon, Richard, xiii
No Fracked Gas in Mass,
220–23
Non-methane hydrocarbons
(NMHCs), 324, 329
Norse Energy Crop. vs. Town of
Dryden et al., 268–70
Obama, Barack, xiii
Offshore oil/gas drilling,
history, 32, 40–43
statistics, 42–43
336
Index

Oil, terminology, 13–19
Oil ﬁeld, 13–14
statistics, 14–16
Otto Cupler Torpedo
Company, 45
Pastorkovich, Michael,
145–49
Peak coal, 4–5
Peak energy, 6
Peak natural gas. See Peak
energy; Peak oil
Peak oil, 3, 63–68
Perforations, 330
Petroleum, 13
consumption, 36, 37–39
drilling technology, 23–26
exploration, 20–23, 30
import statistics, 70
production statistics,
34–35, 68–70
reserves, 68–70, 242–43
terminology, 18–20
Petroleum chemistry, 27–30
Play (oil and/or natural gas),
14, 330
Polis, Jared, 104
Porter, David J., 89
Powder River Basin Resource
Council, Wyoming
Outdoor Council,
Earthworks, and Center for
Effective Government
(Formerly OMB Watch) vs.
Wyoming Oil and Gas
Conservation Commission
and Halliburton Energy
Services, Inc., 266–68
Pressure parting, 47
Produced water, 330
Production hole, 24
Project Gasbuggy, 46, 319
Project Plowshare, 46, 319
Project Rio Blanco, 46, 320
Project Rulison, 46, 319
Proppant, 49, 330
Proppant concentration, 330
Pure Oil Company, 40
Ranney, Leo, 319
Remote sensing, 23
Risked petroleum reserves,
18, 240–42, 330
Roberts, Edward A. L.,
44–45, 223–26, 318
Roberts’ torpedo, 45
Robinson Township, et al. vs.
Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, 110,
260–63
Rock busting, 47
Rogers, Deborah, 75
Rühl, Christof, 67–68
Rumpler, John, 149–54
Safe Drinking Water Act,
101, 103, 236, 246,
263–64, 321, 322, 324
Semyenov, F. N., 32, 318
Shale, 330
Shale gas, 10–12
reserves, 68–72, 237–42
Index
337

Shale oil, 10–12
reserves, 68–72, 237–42
Slanted drilling. See
Horizontal drilling
Slurry, 330
Stanolind Oil and Gas
Company, 47–48, 192,
197
Starter hole. See Conductor
hole
Straub, Lana, 154–58
Structural trap, 13
Struys, Jan, 32
Study of the Potential Impacts
of Hydraulic Fracturing
on Drinking Water
Resources—Progress
Report, 256–58
Superior Oil Company, 40
Surface injection pressure
(SIP), 330
Technically recoverable
petroleum reserve, 18,
240–42
Testimony Submitted to the
House Committee on
Natural Resources
Subcommittee on Energy
and Mineral Resources
Washington, DC, June
18, 2009, Prepared by the
Interstate Oil and Gas
Compact Commission on
Behalf of the Nation’s Oil
and Gas Producing States,
254–56
Tight sands, 330
TOXNET, 91
Unrisked resources, 331
Voss vs. Lundvall Brothers,
Inc., 321
Walter, Laura, 158–62
Wanjek, Christopher, 162–66
Ward, Tom L., 228–30
Water use in fracking,
statistics, 239
Waterkeeper Alliance,
230–33
Wellbore, 331
Williams, Henry L.,
40, 319
Williams, James Miller, 318
Wilson, Weston, 103
Worstall, Tim, 66
338
Index

About the Author
David E. Newton holds an associate’s degree in science from
Grand Rapids (Michigan) Junior College, a BA in chemistry
(with high distinction) and an MA in education from the
University of Michigan, and an EdD in science education from
Harvard University. He is the author of more than 400 text-
books, encyclopedias, resource books, research manuals, labora-
tory manuals, trade books, and other educational materials. He
taught mathematics, chemistry, and physical science in Grand
Rapids, Michigan, for 13 years; was professor of chemistry and
physics at Salem State College in Massachusetts for 15 years;
and was adjunct professor in the College of Professional Studies
at the University of San Francisco for 10 years.
Previous books for ABC-CLIO include Global Warming
(1993), Gay and Lesbian Rights—A Resource Handbook
(1994, 2009), The Ozone Dilemma (1995), Violence and the
Mass Media (1996), Environmental Justice (1996, 2009),
Encyclopedia of Cryptology (1997), Social Issues in Science and
Technology: An Encyclopedia (1999), DNA Technology (2009),
and Sexual Health (2010). Other recent books include Physics:
Oryx Frontiers of Science Series (2000), Sick! (4 volumes;
2000), Science, Technology, and Society: The Impact of Science
in the 19th Century (2 volumes; 2001), Encyclopedia of Fire
(2002), Molecular Nanotechnology: Oryx Frontiers of Science
Series (2002), Encyclopedia of Water (2003), Encyclopedia of
Air (2004), The New Chemistry (6 volumes; 2007), Nuclear
Power (2005), Stem Cell Research (2006), Latinos in the
Sciences, Math, and Professions (2007), and DNA Evidence and

Forensic Science (2008). He has also been an updating and con-
sulting editor on a number of books and reference works,
including Chemical Compounds (2005), Chemical Elements
(2006), Encyclopedia of Endangered Species (2006), World of
Mathematics (2006), World of Chemistry (2006), World of
Health (2006), UXL Encyclopedia of Science (2007), Alternative
Medicine (2008), Grzimek’s Animal Life Encyclopedia (2009),
Community Health (2009), Genetic Medicine (2009), The Gale
Encyclopedia of Medicine (2010–2011), The Gale Encyclopedia
of Alternative Medicine (2013), Discoveries in Modern Science:
Exploration, Invention, and Technology (2013–2014), and
Cengage Science in Context (2013–2014).
340
About the Author



