

A First Course in 
Abstract Algebra 
Eighth Edition 
John B. Fraleigh 
University of Rhode Island 
Neal Brand 
University of North Texas 
Historical Notes by Victor Katz 
University of District of Columbia 
@Pearson 

Copyright © 2021, 2003, 1994 by Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates, 221 River Street, Hoboken, 
NJ 07030. All Rights Reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. This publication is 
protected by copyright, and permission should be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited 
reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise. For information regarding permissions, request 
forms, and the appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education Global Rights and Permissions 
department, please visit www.pearsoned.com/permissions/. 
Acknowledgments of third-party content appear on the appropriate page within the text. 
Cover image credit: Edmund Sumner/AGE Fotostock 
PEARSON, ALWAYS LEARNING, and MYLAB are exclusive trademarks owned by Pearson 
Education, Inc. or its affiliates in the U.S. and/or other countries. 
Unless otherwise indicated herein, any third-party trademarks, logos, or icons that may appear in this 
work are the property of their respective owners, and any references to third-party trademarks, logos, 
icons, or other trade dress are for demonstrative or descriptive purposes only. Such references are not 
intended to imply any sponsorship, endorsement, authorization, or promotion of Pearson's products by 
the owners of such marks, or any relationship between the owner and Pearson Education, Inc., or its 
affiliates, authors, licensees, or distributors. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Names: Fraleigh, John B., author. I Katz, Victor J., writer of added 
commentary. 
Title: A first course in abstract algebra I John B. Fraleigh ; historical 
notes by Victor Katz. 
Description: Eighth edition. I [Hoboken, New Jersey]: Pearson, (202 11 1 
Series: World student series I Includes bibliographical references and 
index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2019038536 I ISBN 9780135758 168 (paperback) I ISBN 
9780321390363 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Algebra, Abstract. 
Classification: LCC QA162 .F7 2020 I DOC 5 12/.02-<lc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019038536 
ScoutAutomatedPrintCode 
@Pearson 
Rental 
ISBN-10: 
0-13-673 162-7 
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-673 162-7 
Loose Leaf Version 
ISBN-10: 
0-13-5758 16-5 
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-575816-8 

Contents 
Instructor's Preface vii 
Dependence Chart x11 
Student's Preface xv 
0 
Sets and Relations 
I 
GROUPS AND SUBGROUPS 
1 
Binary Operations 
11 
2 
Groups 
19 
3 
Abelian Examples 32 
4 
Nonabelian Examples 39 
5 
Subgroups 52 
6 
Cyclic Groups 61 
7 
Generating Sets and Cayley Digraphs 70 
II 
STRUCTURE OF GROUPS 
8 
Groups of Permutations 77 
9 
Finitely Generated Abelian Groups 88 
10 
Cosets and the Theorem of Lagrange 97 
tu 
Plane Isometries 
105 
III 
HOMOMORPHISMS AND FACTOR GROUPS 
12 
Factor Groups 
113 
13 
Factor-Group Computations and Simple Groups 
121 
11 
77 
113 
iii 

iv 
Contents 
*14 
Group Action on a Set 
132 
t 15 
Applications of G-Sets to Counting 
140 
IV 
ADVANCED GROUP THEORY 
16 
Isomorphism Theorems 
145 
17 
Sylow Theorems 
149 
18 
Series of Groups 
157 
19 
Free Abelian Groups 
166 
20 
Free Groups 
172 
21 
Group Presentations 
177 
v 
RINGS AND FIELDS 
22 
Rings and Fields 
185 
23 
Integral Domains 
194 
24 
Fermat's and Euler's Theorems 
200 
25 
Encryption 
205 
VI 
CONSTRUCTING RINGS AND FIELDS 
26 
The Field of Quotients of an Integral Domain 
211 
27 
Rings of Polynomials 
218 
28 
Factorization of Polynomials over a Field 
228 
t29 
Algebraic Coding Theory 237 
30 
Homomorphisms and Factor Rings 
243 
31 
Prime and Maximal Ideals 
250 
t32 
Noncomrnutative Examples 
258 
VII 
COMMUTATIVE ALGEBRA 
33 
Vector Spaces 
267 
34 
Unique Factorization Domains 
275 
35 
Euclidean Domains 
286 
36 
Number Theory 292 
t37 
Algebraic Geometry 
297 
t38 
Grobner Bases for Ideals 
303 
VIII 
EXTENSION FIELDS 
39 
Introduction to Extension Fields 
311 
40 
Algebraic Extensions 319 
t 41 
Geometric Constructions 
328 
42 
Finite Fields 
335 
145 
185 
211 
267 
311 

IX 
GALOIS THEORY 
43 
Introduction to Galois Theory 341 
44 
Splitting Fields 349 
45 
Separable Extensions 357 
46 
Galois Theory 364 
47 
Illustrations of Galois Theory 372 
48 
Cyclotomic Extensions 378 
49 
Insolvability of the Quintic 384 
Appendix: Matrix Algebra 391 
Bibliography 395 
Notations 397 
Contents 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises Not Asking for Definitions or Proofs 401 
Index 419 
t Not required for the remainder of the text. 
+ This section is a prerequisite for Sections 17 and 36 only. 
v 
341 

This page is intentionally left blank 

Instructor's Preface 
This is an introduction to abstract algebra. It is anticipated that the students have studied 
calculus and probably linear algebra. However, these are primarily mathematical ma-
turity prerequisites; subject matter from calculus and linear algebra appears mostly in 
illustrative examples and exercises. 
As in previous editions of the text, our aim remains to teach students as much about 
groups, rings, and fields as we can in a first course. For many students, abstract algebra 
is their first extended exposure to an axiomatic treatment of mathematics. Recognizing 
this, we have included extensive explanations concerning what we are trying to accom-
plish, how we are trying to do it, and why we choose these methods. Mastery of this 
text constitutes a firm foundation for more specialized work in algebra and also provides 
valuable experience for any further axiomatic study of mathematics. 
New to This Edition 
[Editor's Note: You may have noticed something new on the cover of the book. Another 
author! I am thrilled that Neal Brand agreed to update this classic text. He has done so 
carefully and thoughtfully, staying true to the spirit in which it was written. Neal's years 
of experience teaching the course with this text at the University of North Texas have 
helped him produce a meaningful and worthwhile update to John Fraleigh's work.] 
Updates for the eText 
A focus of this revision was transforming it from a primarily print-based learning tool to 
a digital learning tool. The eText is therefore filled with content and tools that will help 
bring the content of the course to life for students in new ways and help you improve 
instruction. Specifically, 
Mini lectures. These brief author-created videos for each section of the text give 
an overview to the section but not every example or proof. Some sections will have 
two videos. I have used these videos effectively with my students, who were 
assigned to watch them ahead of the lecture on that topic. Students came to class 
with a basic overview of the topic of the day, which had the effect of reducing 
lecture time and increasing the class time used for discussion and student 
vii 

viii 
Instructor's Preface 
presentations. Students reported that the videos were helpful in giving an overview 
of the topics and a better understanding of the concepts and proofs. Students were 
also encouraged to view the videos after the topic was covered in class to reinforce 
what they learned. Many students also used the videos to review topics while 
preparing for exams. Although I have not attempted to flip the classroom, my 
intention was to provide sufficient resources in the eText to make it feasible 
without requiring other resources. 
Key idea quizzes. A database of definitions and named theorems will allow 
students to quiz themselves on these key ideas. The database can be used in the 
way that flash cards were traditionally used. 
Self-assessments. Occasional questions interspersed in the narrative allow 
students to check their understanding of new ideas. 
Interactive figures and utilities. I have added a number of opportunities for 
students to interact with content in a dynamic manner in order to build or enhance 
understanding. Interactive figures allow students to explore concepts geometrically 
or computationally in ways that are not possible without technology. 
Notes, Labels, and Highlights. Notes allow instructors to add their personal 
teaching style to important topics, call out need-to-know information, or clarify 
difficult concepts. Students can make their eText their own by creating highlights 
with meaningful labels and notes, helping them focus on what they need to study. 
The customizable Notebook allows students to filter, arrange, and group their notes 
in a way that makes sense to them. 
Dashboard. Instructors can create reading assignments and see the time spent in 
the eText so that they can plan more effective instruction. 
Portability. Portable access lets students read their eText whenever they have a 
moment in their day, on Android and iOS mobile phones and tablets. Even without 
an Internet connection, offtine reading ensures students never miss a chance to 
learn. 
Ease-of-Use. Straightforward setup makes it easy for instructors to get their class 
up and reading quickly on the first day of class. In addition, Learning Management 
System (LMS) integration provides institutions, instructors, and students with 
single sign-on access to the eText via many popular LMSs. 
Exercises 
Many exercises in the text have been updated, and many are new. In order to prevent 
students from using solutions from the previous edition, I purposefully replaced or re-
worded some exercises. 
I created an Instructor Solutions Manual, which is available online at www.pearson.com 
to instructors only. Solutions to exercises involving proofs are often sketches or hints, 
which would not be in the proper form to turn in. 
Text Organization Modifications 
For each part of the text, I provide an overview of the changes followed by significant 
changes to sections. In cases where changes to parts or sections were minor, I have not 
included a list of changes. 
Part I: Groups and Subgroups 
Overview of changes: My main goals were to define groups and to introduce the 
symmetric and dihedral groups as early as possible. The early introduction of these 

Instructor's Preface 
ix 
groups provides students with examples of finite groups that are consistently used 
throughout the book. 
Section 1 (Binary Operations). Former Section 2. Added definition of an identity 
for a binary operation. 
Section 2 (Groups). Former Section 4. Included the formal definition of a group 
isomorphism. 
Section 3 (Abelian Examples). Former Section 1. Included definition of circle 
group, Ra, and Z11 • Used circle group to show associativity of Z11 and Ra. 
Section 4 (Nonabelian Examples). Based on parts of former Sections 5, 8, and 9. 
Defined dihedral group and symmetric group. Gave a standardized notation for the 
dihedral group that is used consistently throughout the book. Introduced both 
two-row and cycle notation for the symmetric group 
Section 5 (Subgroups). Former Section 5. Included statement of two other 
conditions that imply a subset is a subgroup and kept the proofs in the exercise 
section. Made minor modifications using examples from new Section 4. 
Section 6 (Cyclic Groups). Former Section 6. Added examples using dihedral 
group and symmetric group. 
Section 7 (Generating Sets and Cayley Digraphs). Minor modification of former 
Section 7. 
Part II: Structure of Groups 
Overview of changes: The main goal was to give the formal definition of 
homomorphism earlier in order to simplify the proofs of Cayley's and Lagrange's 
theorems. 
Section 8 (Groups of Permutations). Included formal definition of homomorphism. 
Based on parts of former Sections 8, 9, and I 3. Used two-row permutation 
notation to motivate Cayley's theorem before proof. Deleted first part of section 13 
(covered in Section 4). Omitted determinant proof of even/odd permutations since 
definition of determinant usually uses sign of a permutation. Kept orbit counting 
proof. Put determinant proof and inversion counting proof in exercises. 
Section 9 (Finitely Generated Abelian Groups). Former Section 11. Added the 
invariant factor version of the theorem. Showed how to go back and forth between 
the two versions of the fundamental theorem. 
Section 10 (Cosets and the Theorem of Lagrange). Former Section 10. Changed 
the order by putting Lagrange's Theorem first, motivating G / H later in the section. 
Section 11 (Plane Isometries). Minor modification of former Section 12. 
Part III: Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
Overview of changes: My main goal was to include a few more examples to 
motivate the theory and give an introduction to using group actions to prove 
properties of groups. 
Sections I 2-I 5 are based on former Sections I 4-I 7, respectively. 
Section 12 (Factor Groups). Started section with Z/ nZ example to motivate 
general construction. Defined factor groups from normal subgroups first instead of 
from homomorphisms. After developing factor groups, showed how they are 
formed from homomorphisms. 
Section 13 (Factor-Group Computations and Simple Groups). Added a few more 
examples of computing factor groups. Explicitly used the fundamental 
homomorphism theorem in computation examples. 

x 
Instructor's Preface 
Section 14 (Group Action on a Set). Expanded examples of the general linear 
group and the dihedral group acting on sets. Added some applications of group 
actions to finite groups in anticipation of the Sy low Theorems, including Cauchy's 
Theorem and that fact that p-groups have a nontrivial center. 
Section 15 (Applications of G-sets to Counting). Minor modifications. 
Part IV: Advanced Group Theory 
Overview of changes: I moved this part to be closer to the rest of the group theory 
sections. More examples were included to help clarify the concepts. 
Section 16 (Isomorphism Theorems). Former Section 3. Added two examples and 
rewrote proofs of two theorems. 
Section 17 (Sylow Theorems). Former Sections 36 and 37. Since Cauchy's 
Theorem and a few other theorems leading to the Sylow Theorems were covered in 
new Section 14, this material was removed and the old Sections 36 and 37 were 
combined. A few examples and exercises were added and a proof was rewritten. 
Section 18 (Series of Groups). Former Section 35. The proof of the Zassenhaus 
Lemma was placed after the theorem instead of making the argument before 
stating the theorem. One example added. 
Sections 19 (Free Abelian Groups), 20 (Free Groups), and 21 (Group 
Presentations). Minor modifications of former Sections 38-40. 
Part V: Rings and Fields 
Overview of changes: The previous Part IV was split into two parts, one giving an 
introduction and the second giving methods of constructing rings and fields. 
Section 22 (Rings and Fields). Minor modification of former Section 18. 
Section 23 (Integral Domains). Former Section 19. Changed former Theorem 19.3 
to classify all elements in Z11 • Added corollary that Zp is a field, anticipating the 
theorem that all finite integral domains are fields. 
Section 24 (Fermat's and Euler's Theorems). Former Section 20. Simplified proof 
of Euler's generalization using classification of elements in Z11 • 
Section 25 (Encryption). New section outlining how RSA encryption works. This 
provides a nice application of the material in Section 24. 
Part VI: Constructing Rings and Fields 
Overview of changes: Part VI includes sections from the previous Parts IV and V. 
The change emphasizes construction techniques used to form rings and fields. 
Section 26 (The Field of Quotients of an Integral Domain). Former Section 21. 
Rewrote the introduction to include two examples of integral domains and their 
field of quotients to motivate the general construction. 
Section 27 (Rings of Polynomials). Minor modification of former Section 22. 
Section 28 (Factorization of Polynomials over a Field). Former Section 23. 
Rewrote former Theorem 23 .1 by making a lemma showing how to reduce degree 
of polynomials in set S. Included proof of former 23.11 in the exercises. 
Section 29 (Algebraic Coding Theory). New section introducing coding theory, 
focusing on polynomial codes. This gives an application of polynomial 
computation over a finite field. 
Section 30 (Homomorphisms and Factor Rings). Former Section 26. Motivated 
why you need the usual conditions for an ideal by starting the section with the 
example of Z/ nZ. Rearranged the order by showing that I an ideal of R gives rise 

Instructor's Preface 
xi 
to the factor ring R/ I, then included the material on homomorphisms and factor 
rings from the kernel. Expanded the statement of former Theorem 26.3 to make it 
easier to read and more approachable. 
Section 31 (Prime and Maximal Ideals). Minor modification of former Section 27. 
Section 32 (Noncommutative Examples). Minor modification of former Section 24. 
Part VII: Commutative Algebra 
Overview of changes: This part includes sections that fit under the general heading 
of commutative algebra. 
Section 33 (Vector Spaces). Former Section 30. Added two examples and a brief 
introduction to R-modules over a ring motivated by vector spaces and abelian 
groups. Moved Former Theorem 30.23 to Section 45 on field extensions. 
Section 34 (Unique Factorization Domains). Former Section 45. Included 
definition of a Noetherian ring and made other minor changes. 
Section 35 (Euclidean Domains) and Section 36 (Number Theory) are minor 
modifications of Sections 46 and 47, respectively. 
Section 37 (Algebraic Geometry). Based on the first half of former Section 28. 
Added a proof of the Hilbert Basis Theorem. 
Section 38 (Grobner Bases for Ideals). Based on the second half of former Section 
28. Added two applications of Grobner Bases: deriving the formulas for conic 
sections and determining if a graph can be colored with k colors. 
Part VIII: Extension Fields 
Overview of changes: Part VIII consists of minor changes from former Part VI. 
Section 39 (Introduction to Extension Fields). Former Section 29. Divided former 
Theorem 29 .13 into a theorem and a corollary. Rewrote former Theorem 29 .18 and 
its proof to make it easier to follow. Included example moved from former 
Section 30. 
Section 40 (Algebraic Extensions), Section 41 (Geometric Constructions), and 
Section 42 (Finite Fields) are minor modifications of former Sections 31- 33, 
respectively. 
Part IX: Galois Theory 
Overview of changes: The previous Part X was rewritten to form Part IX. The goal 
was to improve the readability of the material while maintaining a rigorous 
development of the theory. 
Section 43 (Introduction to Galois Theory). New section. Uses the field extension 
Q( ./2, .J3) throughout to motivate and illustrate basic definitions and theorems 
including field automorphism, field fixed by an automorphism, group of 
automorphisms fixing a subfield, conjugates, and the conjugate isomorphism 
theorem. By using an easy-to-understand example consistently throughout, the 
concepts become more concrete. 
Section 44 (Splitting Fields). Includes the contents of former Sections 49 and 50, 
but it is completely rewritten. Less emphasis is given to the algebraic closure of a 
field and more emphasis is given to subfields of splitting fields. 
Section 45 (Separable Extensions). Contents include most of former Section 51 
and a little from former Section 53, but material has been rewritten. The notation 
{E:F} was omitted and definition of separable was given in terms of multiplicity of 
zeros. Emphasized subfields of the complex numbers. 

xii 
Instructor's Preface 
Former Section 52 on totally inseparable extensions was omitted since it was not 
used elsewhere and it detracts from the flow of the rest of Part IX. 
Section 46 (Galois Theory). Former Section 53. Separated the parts of Galois 
Theory into separate theorems. Continued the same example throughout the 
section to motivate and illustrate the theorems. By the end of the section, the 
continued example illustrates how Galois Theory can be used. 
Section 47 (Illustrations of Galois Theory). Minor modification of former Section 
54. 
Section 48 (Cyclotomic Extensions). Former Section 55. In order to make the text 
more readable, restricted the field extensions to subfields of the complex numbers 
over the rational numbers since this is the only case that is used in the book. 
Section 49 (Insolvability of the Quintic). Former Section 56. Replaced 
construction of a polynomial that is not solvable by radicals with a specific 
concrete polynomial. The previous construction of a nonsolvable polynomial was 
moved to the exercises. 
Part X: Groups in Topology (Online at bit.ly/2VBCiej) 
Sections 50-53 are minor modifications of former sections 41-44. 
Some Features Retained 
I continue to break down most exercise sets into parts consisting of computations, con-
cepts, and theory. Answers to most odd-numbered exercises not requesting a proof again 
appear at the back of the text. I am supplying the answers to parts a, c, e, g, and i only 
of our 10-part true-false exercises. The excellent historical notes by Victor Katz are, of 
course, retained. 
Suggestions for New Instructors of Algebra 
Those who have taught algebra several times have discovered the difficulties and devel-
oped their own solutions. The comments we make here are not for them. 
This course is an abrupt change from the typical undergraduate calculus for the stu-
dents. A graduate-style lecture presentation, writing out definitions and proofs on the 
board for most of the class time, will not work with most students. We have found it 
best to spend at least the first half of each class period answering questions on home-
work, trying to get a volunteer to give a proof requested in an exercise, and generally 
checking to see if they seem to understand the material assigned for that class. Typi-
cally, we spent only about the last 20 minutes of our 50-minute time talking about new 
ideas for the next class, and giving at least one proof. The videos for each section can 
effectively be used to supplement or replace lectures. From a practical point of view, it 
is a waste of time to try to write on the board all the definitions and proofs. They are in 
the text. 
We suggest that at least half of the assigned exercises consist of the computational 
ones. Students are used to doing computations in calculus. Although there are many 
exercises asking for proofs that we would love to assign, we recommend that you assign 
at most two or three such exercises and try to get someone to explain how each proof 
is performed in the next class. We do think students should be asked to do at least one 
proof in each assignment. 
Students face a barrage of definitions and theorems, something they have never 
encountered before. They are not used to mastering this type of material. Grades on 
tests that seem reasonable to us, requesting a few definitions and proofs, are apt to be 
low and depressing for most students and instructors. To encourage students to keep up 

Instructor's Preface 
xiii 
0-10 
12-13 
I 
I 
I 
16 
14 
20 
19 
15 
22-24 
I 
I 
21 
50-53 
17 
25 
26 
27-28 
18 h 
30-31 
33 d 
34 
35-36 
37- 38 
39-40 
I 
41 
43-47 42 
~ 
48 
49 
Dependence Chart 
with the basic material, I give approximately ten pop quizzes per semester that typically 
involve stating a definition, giving an example, or stating a major theorem. 
At the University of North Texas, abstract algebra is a two-semester sequence. The 
first semester is required of all math majors and the second semester is optional. Because 
most students opt not to continue with the second semester, it is not offered every year. 
When I teach either class, I give three 50-minute in-class exams. With exam reviews 
and going over completed exams, this leaves approximately 36 class periods for new 
material. 
In the first-semester class, the base material I always cover includes Sections 0-6, 
8, 9, 12, 13, and 22-25. I average approximately two class periods per section, so I can 
usually cover a few more sections. Options I have used for the remaining time include 

xiv 
Instructor's Preface 
Sections 14 and 15, Sections 26-28, Section 17, or Sections 30 and 31. One semester 
I attempted to cover enough field extension material in order to cover Section 41. This 
required me to carefully select material in Sections 27, 28, 39, and 40 in order to prepare 
the students for Section 41. 
For the second semester, I usually have as goals proving the impossibility of bi-
secting an angle using compass and straightedge and the insolvability of quintic poly-
nomials. Assuming that students have seen the basic material in the first semester as 
described above, these goals require covering material from Sections 16, 18, 27, 28, 30, 
31, 33, 34, and 39-49. This turns out to be an ambitious undertaking, but the purpose of 
rewriting Part IX was to make the material more accessible to students, and therefore 
make the goal of covering Galois Theory in a second-semester class more feasible. 
Acknowledgments 
I am very grateful to those who have reviewed the text or who have sent suggestions 
and corrections. Below is a list of faculty who contributed their thoughts on improving 
the text. 
Deb Bergstrand, Swarthmore College 
Anthony E. Clement, Brooklyn College 
Richard M. Green, University of Colorado 
Cheryl Grood, Swarthmore College 
Gary Gordon, Lafayette College 
John Harding, New Mexico State University 
Timothy Kohl, Boston University 
Cristian Lenart, University at Albany, SUNY 
Mariana Montiel, Georgia Southern University 
Anne Shiu, Texas A&M University 
Mark Stankus, California Polytechnic State University 
Janet Vassilev, University of New Mexico 
Cassie L. Williams, James Madison University 
T. E. Williamson, Montclair State University 
Michael Zuker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
I also wish to express appreciation to Jeff Weidenaar, Tara Corpuz, and Jon Krebs 
at Pearson for their help with this project. 
Neal Brand 
University of North Texas 

Student's Preface 
This course may well require a different approach than those you used in previous math-
ematics courses. You may have become accustomed to working a homework problem 
by turning back in the text to find a similar problem, and then just changing some num-
bers. That may work with a few problems in this text, but it will not work for most of 
them. This is a subject in which understanding is all-important, and where problems 
should not be tackled without first studying the text. 
Let us make some suggestions on studying the text. Notice that the text bristles 
with definitions, theorems, corollaries, and examples. The definitions are crucial. We 
must agree on terminology to make any progress. Sometimes a definition is followed by 
an example that illustrates the concept. Examples are probably the most important aids 
in studying the text. Pay attention to the examples. 
Before reading a section, it may be helpful to watch the video associated with the 
section. I have two general pieces of advice for watching a video or reading the text. 
First, minimize your distractions. It takes a good deal of concentration for most of us to 
learn new technical information. Second, have paper and pen (or the electronic equiva-
lent) at hand to take notes and to occasionally work out computations on your own. 
I suggest you skip the proofs of the theorems on your first reading of a section, 
unless you are really "gung-ho" on proofs. You should read the statement of the theorem 
and try to understand just what it means. Often, a theorem is followed or preceded by an 
example that illustrates it, which is a great aid in really understanding what the theorem 
says. Pay particular attention to the summary at the end of each video to get an overview 
of the topics covered. 
In summary, on your first viewing and reading of a section, I suggest you concen-
trate on what information the section gives and on gaining a real understanding of it. 
If you do not understand what the statement of a theorem means, it will probably be 
meaningless for you to read the proof. 
Proofs are basic to mathematics. After you feel you understand the information 
given in a section, you should read and try to understand at least some of the proofs. In 
the videos you will find a few proofs. Watching the videos a second time after you have 
a better understanding of the definitions and the statements of the theorems will help 
to clarify these proofs. Proofs of corollaries are usually the easiest ones, for they often 
follow directly from the theorem. Many of the exercises under the "Theory" heading 
xv 

xvi 
Student's Preface 
ask for a proof. Try not to be discouraged at the outset. It takes a bit of practice and 
experience. Proofs in algebra can be more difficult than proofs in geometry and calculus, 
for there are usually no suggestive pictures that you can draw. Often, a proof falls out 
easily if you happen to look at just the right expression. Of course, it is hopeless to 
devise a proof if you do not really understand what it is that you are trying to prove. For 
example, if an exercise asks you to show that a given thing is a member of a certain set, 
you must know the defining criterion for a thing to be a member of that set, and then 
show that your given thing satisfies that criterion. 
There are several aids for your study at the back of the text. Of course, you will 
discover the answers to odd-numbered problems that do not involve a proof. If you run 
into a notation such as Z,, that you do not understand, look in the list of notations that 
appears after the bibliography. If you run into terminology like inner automorphism that 
you do not understand, look in the index for the first page where the term occurs. 
In summary, although an understanding of the subject is important in every mathe-
matics course, it is crucial to your performance in this course. May you find it a reward-
ing experience. 

SECTION 0 
SETS AND RELATIONS 
On Definitions, and the Notion of a Set 
Many students do not realize the great importance of definitions to mathematics. This 
importance stems from the need for mathematicians to communicate with each other. 
If two people are trying to communicate about some subject, they must have the same 
understanding of its technical terms. However, there is an important structural weakness. 
It is impossible to define every concept. 
Suppose, for example, we define the term set as "A set is a well-defined collection of 
objects." One naturally asks what is meant by a collection. We could define it as "A 
collection is an aggregate of things." What, then, is an aggregate? Now our language is 
finite, so after some time we will run out of new words to use and have to repeat some 
words already examined. The definition is then circular and obviously worthless. Math-
ematicians realize that there must be some undefined or primitive concept with which 
to start. At the moment, they have agreed that set shall be such a primitive concept. We 
shall not define set, but shall just hope that when such expressions as "the set of all real 
numbers" or "the set of all members of the United States Senate" are used, people's 
various ideas of what is meant are sufficiently similar to make communication feasible. 
We summarize briefly some of the things we shall simply assume about sets. 
1. A set S is made up of elements, and if a is one of these elements, we shall 
denote this fact by a E S. 
2. There is exactly one set with no elements. It is the empty set and is denoted 
by 0. 
3. We may describe a set either by giving a characterizing property of the 
elements, such as "the set of all members of the United States Senate," or by 
listing the elements. The standard way to describe a set by listing elements is 
to enclose the designations of the elements, separated by commas, in braces, 
for example, { 1, 2, 15}. If a set is described by a characterizing property P(x) 
of its elements x, the brace notation {x I P(x)} is also often used, and is read 
"the set of all x such that the statement P(x) about x is true." Thus 
{2, 4, 6, 8} = {x Ix is an even whole positive number ::::: 8) 
= {2x lx= 1,2,3,4). 
The notation {x I P(x)) is often called "set-builder notation." 
4. A set is well defined, meaning that if S is a set and a is some object, then 
either a is definitely in S, denoted by a E S, or a is definitely not in S, denoted 
by a f/:. S. Thus, we should never say, "Consider the set S of some positive 
numbers," for it is not definite whether 2 E Sor 2 f/:. S. On the other hand, we 
can consider the set T of all prime positive integers. Every positive integer is 
definitely either prime or not prime. Thus 5 E T and 14 f/:. T. It may be hard to 
actually determine whether an object is in a set. For example, as this book 
goes to press it is probably unknown whether 2<2•') + 1 is in T. However, 
2<2•') + 1 is certainly either prime or not prime. 
1 

2 
Section 0 
Sets and Relations 
It is not feasible for this text to push the definition of everything we use all the way 
back to the concept of a set. For example, we will never define the number re in terms 
of a set. 
Every definition is an if and only if type of statement. 
With this understanding, definitions are often stated with the only if suppressed, but 
it is always to be understood as part of the definition. Thus we may define an isosceles 
triangle as follows: "A triangle is isosceles if it has two congruent sides" when we really 
mean that a triangle is isosceles if and only if it has two congruent sides. 
In our text, we have to define many terms. We use specifically labeled and num-
bered definitions for the main algebraic concepts with which we are concerned. To avoid 
an overwhelming quantity of such labels and numberings, we define many terms within 
the body of the text and exercises using boldface type. 
Boldface Convention 
A term printed in boldface in a sentence is being defined by that sentence. 
Do not feel that you have to memorize a definition word for word. The important 
thing is to understand the concept, so that you can define precisely the same concept 
in your own words. Thus the definition "An isosceles triangle is one having two sides 
of equal length" is perfectly correct. Of course, we had to delay stating our boldface 
convention until we had finished using boldface in the preceding discussion of sets, 
because we do not define a set! 
In this section, we do define some familiar concepts as sets, both for illustration 
and for review of the concepts. First we give a few definitions and some notation. 
0.1 Definition 
A set B is a subset of a set A, denoted by B ~ A or A 2 B, if every element of B is in 
A. The notations B c A or A :i B will be used for B ~A but B =/=A. 
• 
Note that according to this definition, for any set A, A itself and 0 are both subsets of A. 
0.2 Definition 
If A is any set, then A is the improper subset of A. Any other subset of A is a proper 
subset of A. 
• 
0.3 Example 
Let S = (1 , 2,3}. This set S has a total of eight subsets, namely 0, {I}, {2}, {3}, 
(1, 2}, (1, 3}, (2, 3}, and (1, 2, 3}. 
.&. 
0.4 Definition 
LetA and B be sets. The set A x B = {(a, b) I a EA and b E B} is the Cartesian product 
~A and B. 
• 
0.5 Example 
If A= (1, 2, 3) and B = (3,4), then we have 
Ax B = ((1,3),(1,4),(2,3),(2, 4), (3,3),(3,4)}. 
Throughout this text, much work will be done involving familiar sets of numbers. 
Let us take care of notation for these sets once and for all. 
Z is the set of all integers (that is, whole numbers: positive, negative, and zero). 
Q is the set of all rational numbers (that is, numbers that can be expressed as quo-
tients m/ n of integers, where n =/= 0). 

Sets and Relations 
JR. is the set of all real numbers. 
z+, Q+, and JR.+ are the sets of positive members of Z, Q, and JR., respectively. 
C is the set of all complex numbers. 
3 
Z*, Q*, JR.*, and ([* are the sets of nonzero members of Z, Q, JR., and C, respectively. 
0.6 Example 
The set JR. x JR. is the familiar Euclidean plane that we use in first-semester calculus to 
draw graphs of functions. 
.&. 
Relations Between Sets 
We introduce the notion of an element a of set A being related to an element b of set B, 
which we might denote by a ~ 
b. The notation a ..98 b exhibits the elements a and b 
in left-to-right order, just as the notation (a, b) for an element in A x B. This leads us to 
the following definition of a relation ~ 
as a set. 
0.7 Definition 
A relation between sets A and B is a subset ..98 of A x B. We read (a, b) E ..98 as "a is 
related to b" and write a ..98 b. 
• 
0.8 Example 
Let S be any set. We can define an Equality Relation = between S and itself as the 
subset { (x, x) Ix E S}. Of course, this is nothing new. It is simply the usual idea of what 
it means for two "things" to be equal. So if x,y E Sare different elements, then they are 
not related by the equality relation and we write x f= y, but if x and y are the same then 
we write x = y. 
.&. 
We will refer to any relation between a set S and itself, as in the preceding example, 
as a relation on S. 
0.9 Example 
The graph of the function! where f(x) = .x3 for all x E JR., is the subset {(x,.x3) I x E JR.} 
oflR x JR. Thus it is a relation on JR. The function is completely determined by its graph . 
.&. 
The preceding example suggests that rather than define a "function" y = f(x) to be 
a "rule" that assigns to each x E JR. exactly one y E JR., we can easily describe it as a 
certain type of subset of JR. x JR., that is, as a type of relation. We free ourselves from JR. 
and deal with any sets X and Y. 
0.10 Definition 
A function </> mapping X into Y is a relation between X and Y with the property that 
each x EX appears as the first member of exactly one ordered pair (x,y) in </J. Such a 
function is also called a map or mapping of X into Y. We write</> : X --+ Y and express 
(x, y) E </> by </J(x) = y. The domain of </> is the set X and the set Y is the codomain of 
</>.The range of</> is </J[X] = {</J(x) Ix EX}. 
• 
0.11 Example 
We can view the addition of real numbers as a function + : (JR. x JR.) --+ JR., that is, as a 
mapping of JR. x JR. into JR. For example, the action of + on (2, 3) E JR. x JR. is given in 
function notation by +((2, 3)) = 5. In set notation we write ((2, 3), 5) E +. Of course, 
our familiar notation is 2 + 3 = 5. 
.&. 
Cardinality 
The number of elements in a set X is the cardinality of X and is often denoted by 
IXI. For example, we have I {2, 5, 7) I = 3. It will be important for us to know whether 
two sets have the same cardinality. If both sets are finite, there is no problem; we can 
simply count the elements in each set. But do Z, Q, and JR. have the same cardinality? 

4 
Section 0 
Sets and Relations 
To convince ourselves that two sets X and Y have the same cardinality, we try to exhibit 
a pairing of each x in X with only one y in Yin such a way that each element of Y is also 
used only once in this pairing. For the sets X = (2, 5, 7) and Y = {?, !, #},the pairing 
2++?, 
5++#, 
7++! 
shows they have the same cardinality. Notice that we could also exhibit this pairing as 
((2, ?), (5, #), (7, !)} which, as a subset of X x Y, is a relation between X and Y. The 
pamng 
l 
t 
0 
2 
t 
-1 
3 
t 
1 
4 
t 
-2 
5 
t 
2 
6 
t 
-3 
7 
t 
3 
8 
t 
-4 
9 
t 
4 
10 
t 
-5 
shows that the sets Z and z+ have the same cardinality. Such a pairing, showing that 
sets X and Y have the same cardinality, is a special type of relation ++ between X and 
Y called a one-to-one correspondence. Since each element x of X appears precisely 
once in this relation, we can regard this one-to-one correspondence as a function with 
domain X. The range of the function is Y because each y in Y also appears in some 
pairing x ++ y. We formalize this discussion in a definition. 
0.12 Definition 
*A function </J : X -+ Y is one-to-one or injective if </J(x1) = </J(x2 ) only when x1 = x2 . 
The function </J is onto or surjective if the range of </J is Y. If </J is both injective and 
surjective, </J is said to be bijective. 
• 
If a subset of X x Y is a one-to-one function </J mapping X onto Y, then each x E X 
appears as the first member of exactly one ordered pair in </J and also each y E Y appears 
as the second member of exactly one ordered pair in </J. Thus if we interchange the first 
and second members of all ordered pairs (x, y) in </J to obtain a set of ordered pairs (y, x), 
we get a subset of Y x X , which gives a one-to-one function mapping Y onto X. This 
function is called the inverse function of </J, and is denoted by </J- 1. Summarizing, if 
</J maps X one-to-one onto Y and </J(x) = y, then </J-1 maps Y one-to-one onto X, and 
</J-l(y) = x. 
0.13 Definition 
Two sets X and Y have the same cardinality if there exists a one-to-one function map-
ping X onto Y, that is, if there exists a one-to-one correspondence between X and Y . • 
0.14 Example 
The function f : lR -+ lR where f(x) = x2 is not one-to-one because f (2) = f(-2) = 4 
but 2 ~ -2. Also, it is not onto lR because the range is the proper subset of all nonneg-
ative numbers in JR. However, g : lR -+ lR defined by g(x) = .x3 is both one-to-one and 
onto R 
.&. 
We showed that Z and z+ have the same cardinality. We denote this cardinal num-
ber by ~o , so that IZI = 1z+1 = ~o- It is fascinating that a proper subset of an infinite set 
may have the same number of elements as the whole set; an infinite set can be defined 
as a set having this property. 
We naturally wonder whether all infinite sets have the same cardinality as the set Z. 
A set has cardinality ~o if and only if all of its elements could be listed in an infinite row, 
so that we could "number them" using z+. Figure 0.15 indicates that this is possible for 
the set IQ. The square array of fractions extends infinitely to the right and infinitely 
* We should mention another terminology, used by the disciples of N. Bourbaki, in case you encounter it 
elsewhere. In Bourbaki 's terminology, a one-to-one map is an injection, an onto map is a surjection, and a 
map that is both one-to-one and onto is a bijection. 

Sets and Relations 
5 
4 
3 
0.15 Figure 
downward, and contains all members of IQ>. We have shown a string winding its way 
through this array. Imagine the fractions to be glued to this string. Taking the beginning 
of the string and pulling to the left in the direction of the arrow, the string straightens 
out and all elements of IQ> appear on it in an infinite row as 0, 1, -1, I , -1 , ~, · · · . Thus 
llQ>I = ~o also. 
If the set S = (x E lR I 0 < x < 1} has cardinality ~0 , all its elements could be listed 
as unending decimals in a column extending infinitely downward, perhaps as 
0.3659663426 .. . 
0.7103958453 .. . 
0.0358493553 .. . 
0.9968452214 .. . 
We now argue that any such array must omit some number in S. Surely S contains 
a number r having as its nth digit after the decimal point a number different from 0, 
from 9, and from the nth digit of the nth number in this list. For example, r might start 
.5637· · · . The 5 rather than 3 after the decimal point shows r cannot be the first number 
in S listed in the array shown. The 6 rather than 1 in the second digit shows r cannot be 
the second number listed, and so on. Because we could make this argument with any 
list, we see that S has too many elements to be paired with those in z+. Exercise 15 
indicates that lR has the same number of elements as S. We just denote the cardinality of 
lR by llRI. Exercise 19 indicates that there are infinitely many different cardinal numbers 
even greater than llRI. 
Partitions and Equivalence Relations 
Sets are disjoint if no two of them share a common element. In Example 0.17 we break 
up the integers into subsets. Eventually we will see how to define an algebraic structure 
on these subsets of Z. That is, we will be able to "add" two of these subsets to get another 
subset. We will find that breaking a set into subsets is a valuable tool in a number of 
settings, so we conclude this section with a brief study of partitions of sets. 
0.16 Definition 
A partition of a set S is a collection of nonempty subsets of S such that every element 
of S is in exactly one of the subsets. The subsets are the cells of the partition. 
• 

6 
Section 0 
Sets and Relations 
When discussing a partition of a set S, we denote by x the cell containing the ele-
ment x of S. 
0.17 Example 
Splitting Z into the subset of even integers and the subset of odd integers, we obtain a 
partition of Z into the two cells listed below. 
0 = { ... , -8, -6, -4, -2, 0, 2, 4, ... } 
T = { ... , -7, -5, -3, -1, 1, 3, 5, . .. l 
We can think of 0 as being the integers that are divisible by 2 and T as the integers 
that when divided by 2 yield a remainder of 1. This idea can be used for positive integers 
other than 2. For example, we can partition Z into three cells: 
0 = {x E Z Ix is a multiple of 3), 
T = {x E Z I the remainder of x divided by 3 is 1), and 
2 = {x E Z I the remainder of x divided by 3 is 2). 
Note that when dividing a negative number by 3, we still obtain a non-negative 
remainder. For example, -5-:- 3 is -2 with remainder 1, which says that -5 = T. 
__ generalizing, for each n E z+, we obtain a partition of Z consisting of n cells, 
0, 1, 2, ... , n - 1. For each 0 ::::: r ::::: n - 1, an integer x is in the cell r exactly when the 
remainder of x-:- n is r. These cells are the residue classes modulo n in Z and n is called 
the modulus. We define the set Z/nZ as the set containing the cells in this partition. So, 
for example, Z/3Z = {0, T, 2). As we can see, Z/nZ = (0, T, 2, ... , n - 1) has exactly 
n elements. 
• 
Each partition of a set S yields a relation ..n on S in a natural way: namely, for 
x, y E S, let x ..n y if and only if x and y are in the same cell of the partition. In set 
notation, we would write x ..96 y as (x,y) E ..96 (see Definition 0.7). A bit of thought 
shows that this relation ..n on S satisfies the three properties of an equivalence relation 
in the following definition. 
0.18 Definition 
An equivalence relation ..96 on a set S is one that satisfies these three properties for all 
x,y,z ES. 
1. (Reflexive) x ..n x. 
2. (Symmetric) If x ..98 y, then y ..98 x. 
3. (Transitive) If x ..96 y and y ..96 z then x ..n z. 
• 
To illustrate why the relation ..n corresponding to a partition of S satisfies the sym-
metric condition in the definition, we need only observe that if y is in the same cell as x 
(that is, if x ..96 y), then x is in the same cell as y (that is, y ..n x). We leave the similar 
observations to verify the reflexive and transitive properties to Exercise 28. 
0.19 Example 
For any nonempty set S, the equality relation = defined by the subset { (x, x) Ix E S} of 
S x S is an equivalence relation. 
• 
0.20 Example 
(Congruence Modulo n) Let n E z+. The equivalence relation on Z corresponding 
to the partition of Z into residue classes modulo n, discussed in Example 0.17, is con-
gruence modulo n. It is sometimes denoted by =,,. Rather than write a =,,b, we usu-
ally write a= b (mod n), read, "a is congruent to b modulo n." For example, we have 
15 = 27 (mod 4) because both 15 and 27 have remainder 3 when divided by 4. 
• 

Exercises 
7 
0.21 Example 
Let a relation 5B on the set Z be defined by n ..n m if and only if nm '.:: 0, and let us 
determine whether ..n is an equivalence relation. 
Reflexive a 5B a, because a2 ::=: 0 for all a E Z . 
Symmetric If a 5B b, then ab '.:: 0, so ba '.:: 0 and b ..n a. 
Transitive If a ..n b and b ..n c, then ab ::=: 0 and be ::=: 0. Thus ab2c = acb2 ::=: 0. 
If we knew b2 > 0, we could deduce ac ::=: 0 whence a 5B c. We have to examine 
the case b = 0 separately. A moment of thought shows that -3 5B 0 and 0 ..n 5, but 
we do not have -3 5B 5. Thus the relation ..n is not transitive, and hence is not an 
equivalence relation. 
.A 
We observed above that a partition yields a natural equivalence relation. We now 
show that an equivalence relation on a set yields a natural partition of the set. The 
theorem that follows states both results for reference. 
0.22 Theorem 
(Equivalence Relations and Partitions) Let S be a nonempty set and let ~ be an 
equivalence relation on S. Then ~ yields a partition of S, where 
a= {x Es Ix~ a}. 
Also, each partition of S gives rise to an equivalence relation ~ on S where a ~ b if and 
only if a and b are in the same cell of the partition. 
Proof 
We must show that the different cells a = {x E S I x ~ a} for a E S do give a partition of 
S, so that every element of S is in some cell and so that if a E b, then a = b. Let a E S. 
Then a Ea by the reflexive _condition(!), so a is in at lea_!t one cell. 
Suppose now that a E b. We need to show that ii = b as sets; this will show that a 
cannot be in more than one cell. There is a standard way to show that two sets are the 
same: 
Show that each set is a subset of the other. 
-
-
We show that a ~ b. Let x E ~-Then x ~ q. But a E b, so a ~ b._Then, by the tr~nsitive 
condition (3), x_ ~ b, so x E b. Thus ii ~ b. Now we show that b ~ ii. Let y E b. Then 
y ~b. But a E b, so a ~ band, by symmetry (2), b ~a . Then by transitivity (3), y ~a, 
so y E ii. Hence b ~ a also, so b = a and our proof is complete. 
+ 
Each cell in the partition arising from an equivalence relation is an equivalence 
class. 
• EXERCISES 0 
In Exercises 1 through 4, describe the set by listing its elements. 
1. {xE 1Rl x2 =3} 
2. {mE Z lm2 +m=6} 
3. {m E Z I mn = 60 for some n E Z} 
4. {x E Z I x2 - lOx + 16 :'.';'. 0) 
In Exercises 5 through I 0, decide whether the object described is indeed a set (is well defined). Give an alternate 
description of each set. 
5. {n E z+ I n is a large number} 
6. {n E z I n2 < OJ 
7. {n E Z 139 < n3 < 57) 
8. {r E QI When r is multiplied by a sufficiently large power of 2, one obtains a whole number.} 
9. {x E z+ Ix is an easy number to factor} 
10. {x E QI x may be written with positive denominator less than 4) 
11. List the elements in {a, b, c) x { 1, 2, c}. 

8 
Section 0 
Sets and Relations 
/ 
/ 
c 
/ 
A 
/ 
/ 
/ 
p 
/ ... 
/ 
', 
/ 
' 
/ 
' 
x 
0.23 Figure 
B 
' ' ' ' ' ' ', D 
12. Let A = {l,2,3) and B = (2, 4, 6). For each relation between A and B given as a subset of A x B, decide 
whether it is a function mapping A into B. If it is a function, decide whether it is one-to-one and whether it is 
onto B. 
a. {{ l , 2},(2, 6), (3, 4}} 
c. {(!, 6), (I , 2), (I , 4)) 
e. {(l, 6), (2, 6), (3, 6)) 
b. [[1,3) and [5,7)) 
d. ((2, 2), (3, 6), (1 , 6)) 
f. {{l,2), (2, 6)} 
13. Illustrate geometrically that two line segments AB and CD of different lengths have the same number of points 
by indicating in Fig. 0.23 what point y of CD might be paired with point x of AB. 
14. Recall that for a, b E JR and a < b, the closed interval [a, b] in JR is defined by [a, b] = {x E JR I a_::: x _::: 
b). Show that the given intervals have the same cardinality by giving a formula for a one-to-one function 
f mapping the first interval onto the second. 
a. [0, l) and [0, 2) 
b. [l, 3) and [5, 7) 
c. [a,b] and[c,d] 
15. Show that S = {x E JR I 0 < x < l} has the same cardinality as JR. [Hint: Find an elementary function of cal-
culus that maps an interval one-to-one onto JR, and then translate and scale appropriately to make the domain 
the set S.] 
For any set A, we denote by £7' (A) the collection of all subsets of A. For example, if A = {a, b, c, d), then {a, b, d) E 
£7' (A). The set £7' (A) is the power set of A. Exercises 16 through 19 deal with the notion of the power set of a 
set A. 
16. List the elements of the power set of the given set and give the cardinality of the power set. 
a. 0 
b. {a } 
c. {a,b ) 
d. {a,b,c) 
17. Let A be a finite set, and let IAI = s. Based on the preceding exercise, make a conjecture about the value of 
1£7' (A)I. Then try to prove your conjecture. 
18. For any set A, finite or infinite, let BA be the set of all functions mapping A into the set B = { 0, l}. Show that 
the cardinality of BA is the same as the cardinality of the set £7' (A). [H int: Each element of BA determines a 
subset of A in a natural way.) 
19. Show that the power set of a set A, finite or infinite, has too many elements to be able to be put in a one-to-one 
correspondence with A. Explain why this intuitively means that there are an infinite number of infinite cardinal 
numbers. [Hint: Imagine a one-to-one function </> mapping A into £7' (A) to be given. Show that </> cannot be 
onto £7' (A) by considering, for each x E A, whether x E <f>(x) and using this idea to define a subset S of A that 
is not in the range of</>.] Is the set of everything a logically acceptable concept? Why or why not? 
20. LetA = (1, 2) and letB = (3,4, 5). 
a. Illustrate, using A and B, why we consider that 2 + 3 = 5. Use similar reasoning with sets of your own 
choice to decide what you would consider to be the value of 
i. 3 + ~0 , 
ii. ~O + ~O · 
b. Illustrate why we consider that 2 · 3 = 6 by plotting the points of A x B in the plane JR x JR. Use similar 
reasoning with a figure in the text to decide what you would consider to be the value of ~o · ~o-
21. How many numbers in the interval 0 _::: x _::: 1 can be expressed in the form .##, where each # is a digit 
0, l, 2, 3, · · · , 9? How many are there of the form .#####? Following this idea, and Exercise 15, decide what 
you would consider to be the value of 10t{o. How about 12t{o and 2t{o? 

Exercises 
9 
22. Continuing the idea in the preceding exercise and using Exercises 18 and 19, use exponential notation to fill 
in the three blanks to give a list of five cardinal numbers, each of which is greater than the preceding one. 
t{o, l ~ I. -· -· - · 
In Exercises 23 through 27, find the number of different partitions of a set having the given number of elements. 
23. 1 element 
24. 2 elements 
25. 3 elements 
26. 4 elements 
27. 5 elements 
28. Consider a partition of a set S. The paragraph following Definition 0. 18 explained why the relation 
x ..n y if and only if x and y are in the same cell 
satisfies the symmetric condition for an equivalence relation. Write similar explanations of why the reflexive 
and transitive properties are also satisifed. 
In Exercises 29 through 34, determine whether the given relation is an equivalence relation on the set. Describe 
the partition arising from each equivalence relation. 
29. n ._nm in Z if nm > 0 
30. x ..n y in ~ if x ;:: y 
31. x ._n y in z+ if the greatest common divisor of x and y is greater than 1 
32. (x1,y1) ..n (x2,y2) in ~ x ~ if xf + YT = ~ + y~ 
33. n ..n m in z+ if n and m have the same number of digits in the usual base ten notation 
34. n ..n m in z+ if n and m have the same final digit in the usual base ten notation 
35. Using set notation of the form { ... , #, #, #, · · · }, write the residue classes modulo n in Z as discussed in 
Example 0.17 for the indicated values of n. 
L 3 
~4 
~
5 
36. Write each set by listing its elements. 
a. Z/ 3Z 
b. Z/4Z 
c. Z/SZ 
37. When discussing residue classes, I is not well defined until the modulus n is given. Explain. 
38. Let n E z+ and let ~ be defined on Z by r ~ s if and only if r - s is divisible by n, that is, if and only if 
r - s = nq for some q E Z. 
a. Show that ~ is an equivalence relation on Z . 
b. Show that this ~ is the equivalence relation, congruence modulo n, of Example 0.20. 
39. Let n E z+. Using the relation from Exercise 38, show that if a1 ~ a2 and b1 ~ b2, then (a1 + b1) 
~ (a2 + b2). 
40. Let n E z+. Using the relation from Exercise 38, show that if a1 ~ a2 and bi ~ b2, then (a1 bi) ~ (a2b2). 
41. Students often misunderstand the concept of a one-to-one function (mapping). I think I know the reason. You 
see, a mapping </J : A -+ B has a direction associated with it, from A to B. It seems reasonable to expect a 
one-to-one mapping simply to be a mapping that carries one point of A into one point of B, in the direction 
indicated by the arrow. But of course, every mapping of A into B does this, and Definition 0.12 did not say 
that at all. With this unfortunate situation in mind, make as good a pedagogical case as you can for calling the 
functions described in Definition 0.12 two-to-two fanctions instead. (Unfortunately, it is almost impossible to 
get widely used terminology changed.) 

This page is intentionally left blank 

Groups and Subgroups 
PART 
I 
Section 1 
Binary Operations 
Section 2 
Groups 
Section 3 
Abelian Examples 
Section 4 
Nonabelian Examples 
Section 5 
Subgroups 
Section 6 
Cyclic Groups 
Section 7 
Generating Sets and Cayley Digraphs 
SECTION 1 BINARY OPERATIONS 
The transition from elementary school arithmetic to high school algebra involves using 
letters to represent unknown numbers and studying the basic properties of equations and 
expressions. The two main binary operations used in high school algebra are addition 
and multiplication. Abstract algebra takes the next step in abstraction. Not only are 
the variables unknown, but the actual operations involved may be unknown! We will 
study sets that have binary operations with properties similar to those of addition and 
multiplication of numbers. In Part I, our goal will be to develop some of the basic 
properties of a group. In this section we start our investigation of groups by defining 
binary operations, naming properties possessed by some binary operations, and giving 
examples. 
Definitions and Examples 
The first step in our journey to understand groups is to give a precise mathematical 
definition of a binary operation that generalizes the familiar addition and multiplication 
of numbers. Recall that for any set S, Definition 0.4 defines the set S x S to contain all 
ordered pairs (a, b) with a, b E S. 
1.1 Definition 
A binary operation * on a set S is a function mapping S x S into S. For each (a, b) E 
S x S, we will denote the element *((a, b)) of S by a* b. 
• 
Intuitively, we may regard a binary operation * on S as assigning, to each ordered 
pair (a, b) of elements of S, an element a * b of S. 
Binary refers to the fact that we are mapping pairs of elements from S into S. We 
could also define a ternary operation as a function mapping triples of elements of S to S, 
but we will have no need for this type of operation. Throughout this book we will often 
drop the term binary and use the term operation to mean binary operation. 
1.2 Example 
Our usual addition + is an operation on the set R Our usual multiplication 
is a 
different operation on R In this example, we could replace lR by any of the sets C, Z, 
JR+, or z+. 
... 
11 

12 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
Note that we require an operation on a set S to be defined for every ordered pair 
(a, b) of elements from S. 
1.3 Example 
Let M(IR) be the set of all matricest with real entries. The usual matrix addition+ is 
not an operation on this set since A + B is not defined for an ordered pair (A, B) of 
matrices having different numbers of rows or of columns. 
• 
Sometimes an operation on S provides an operation on a subset H of S also. We 
make a formal definition. 
1.4 Definition 
Let * be an operation on S and let H be a subset of S. The subset H is closed under 
* if for all a, b E H we also have a * b E H. In this case, the operation on H given by 
restricting* to His the induced operation of* on H . 
• 
By our very definition of an operation * on S, the set S is closed under *· but a 
subset may not be, as the following example shows. 
1.5 Example 
Our usual addition + on the set lR of real numbers does not induce an operation on the 
set IR* of nonzero real numbers because 2 E IR* and -2 E IR*, but 2 + (-2) = 0 and 
0 rj; IR*. Thus IR* is not closed under *· 
• 
In our text, we will often have occasion to decide whether a subset H of S is closed 
under a binary operation * on S. To arrive at a correct conclusion, we have to know what 
it means for an element to be in H , and to use this fact. Students often have trouble here. 
Be sure you understand the next example. 
1.6 Example 
Let + and · be the usual operations of addition and multiplication on the set Z, 
and let H = {n21n E z +j. Determine whether H is closed under (a) addition and 
(b) multiplication. 
For part (a), we need only observe that 12 = 1 and 22 = 4 are in H, but that 
1 + 4 = 5 and 5 rf; H. Thus His not closed under addition. 
For part (b), suppose that r EH and s EH. Using what it means for rand s to be 
in H , we see that there must be integers n and m in z + such that r = n2 and s = m2 . 
Consequently, rs = n2m2 = (nm)2 . By the characterization of elements in Hand the fact 
that nm E z +, this means that rs E H, so His closed under multiplication. 
• 
1.7 Example 
Let F be the set of all real-valued functions/ having as domain the set lR of real numbers. 
We are familiar from calculus with the operations+,-,-, and o on F. Namely, for each 
ordered pair (j, g) of functions in F, we define for each x E lR 
f + g by (f + g)(x) = f(x) + g(x) 
f - g by (f - g)(x) = f(x) - g(x) 
f · g by (f · g)(x) = f(x)g(x) 
fog by (f o g)(x) = f(g(x)) 
addition, 
subtraction, 
multiplication, and 
composition. 
All four of these functions are again real valued with domain IR, so Fis closed under all 
four operations+,-,-, and o. 
• 
The operations described in the examples above are very familiar to you. In this 
text, we want to abstract basic structural concepts from our familiar algebra. To empha-
t Most students of abstract algebra have studied linear algebra and are familiar with matrices and matrix 
operations. For the benefit of those students, examples involving matrices are often given. The reader who is 
not familiar with matrices can either skip all references to them or turn to the Appendix at the back of the text, 
where there is a short summary. 

Section 1 
Binary Operations 
13 
size this concept of abstraction from the familiar, we should illustrate these structural 
concepts with unfamiliar examples. 
The most important method of describing a particular binary operation * on a given 
set is to characterize the element a* b assigned to each pair (a, b) by some property 
defined in terms of a and b. 
1.8 Example 
On z+, we define an operation * by a* b equals the smaller of a and b, or the common 
value if a = b. Thus 2 * 11 = 2; 15 * 10 = 10; and 3 * 3 = 3. 
.A 
1.9 Example 
On z+, we define an operation*' by a*' b =a. Thus 2 *' 3 = 2; 25 *' 10 = 25; and 
5 *' 5 = 5. 
... 
1.10 Example 
On z+, we define an operation*" by a*" b = (a* b) + 2, where* is defined in Exam-
ple 1.8. Thus 4 *" 7 = 6; 25 *" 9 = 11; and 6 *" 6 = 8. 
.A 
It may seem that these examples are of no importance, but in fact they are used mil-
lions of times each day. For example, consider the GPS navigational system installed 
in most cars and cell phones. It searches alternative driving routes, computes the travel 
time, and determines which route takes less time. The operation in Example 1.8 is pro-
grammed into modern GPS systems and it plays an essential role. 
Examples 1.8 and 1.9 were chosen to demonstrate that an operation may or may 
not depend on the order of the given pair. Thus in Example 1.8, a * b = b * a for all 
a, b E z+, and in Example 1.9 this is not the case, for 5 *' 7 = 5 but 7 *' 5 = 7. 
1.11 Definition 
An operation * on a set S is commutative if (and only if) a * b = b *a for all 
a,b ES. 
• 
As was pointed out in Section 0, it is customary in mathematics to omit the words 
and only if from a definition. Definitions are always understood to be if and only if 
statements. Theorems are not always if and only if statements, and no such convention 
is ever used for theorems. 
Now suppose we wish to consider an expression of the form a * b * c. A bi-
nary operation * enables us to combine only two elements, and here we have three. 
The obvious attempts to combine the three elements are to form either (a* b) * c or 
a* (b * c). With * defined as in Example 1.8, (2 * 5) * 9 is computed by 2 * 5 = 2 
and then 2 * 9 = 2. Likewise, 2 * (5 * 9) is computed by 5 * 9 = 5 and then 2 * 5 = 2. 
Hence (2 * 5) * 9 = 2 * (5 * 9), and it is not hard to see that for this *, 
so there is no ambiguity in writing a* b *c. But for*" of Example 1.10, 
(2 *" 5) *" 9 = 4 *" 9 = 6, 
while 
2 *" (5 *" 9) = 2 *" 7 = 4. 
Thus (a*" b) *" c need not equal a*" (b *" c), and the expression a*" b *" c is 
ambiguous. 
1.12 Definition 
An operation on a set Sis associative if (a* b) * c = a* (b * c) for all a, b, c E S. 
• 
It can be shown that if * is associative, then longer expressions such as a * b * 
c * d are not ambiguous. Parentheses may be inserted in any fashion for purposes of 
computation; the final results of two such computations will be the same. 

14 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
Composition of functions mapping IR into IR was reviewed in Example 1.7. For any 
set S and any functions f and g mapping S into S, we similarly define the composition 
fog of g followed by fas the function mapping S into S such that (f o g)(x) = f(g(x)) 
for all x E S. Some of the most important binary operations we consider are defined 
using composition of functions. It is important to know that function composition is 
always associative whenever it is defined. 
1.13 Theorem 
(Associativity of Composition) Let S be a set and Jet/, g, and h be functions mapping 
S into S. Then/ o (go h) = (fog) oh. 
Proof 
To show these two functions are equal, we must show that they give the same assignment 
to each x E S. Computing we find that 
(f o (go h))(x) = f((g o h)(x)) = f(g(h(x))) 
and 
((fog) o h)(x) = (f o g)(h(x)) = f(g(h(x))), 
so the same elementf(g(h(x))) of Sis indeed obtained. 
• 
As an example of using Theorem 1.13 to save work, recall that it is a fairly painful 
exercise in summation notation to show that multiplication of n x n matrices is an asso-
ciative operation. If, in a linear algebra course, we first show that there is a one-to-one 
correspondence between matrices and linear transformations and that multiplication of 
matrices corresponds to the composition of the linear transformations (functions), we 
obtain this associativity at once from Theorem 1.13. 
There is another property that an operation on a set may have that is of particular 
importance in algebra. The numbers 0 and 1 play special roles as real numbers because 
for any real number a, a + 0 = a and a x I = a. Because of these properties, 0 is called 
the additive identity in IR and l is called the multiplicative identity in R In general we 
have the following definition of an identity. 
1.14 Definition 
Let S be a set with binary operation *· If e E S has the property that for all a E S, 
a * e = e *a = a, then e is called an identity element for *· 
• 
We included both conditions a * e = a and e * a = a in the definition of an identity 
because we are not assuming that the operation on S is commutative. Of course, if the 
operation is commutative, such as + and x on the real numbers, then we would only 
have to check one of the conditions and the other follows from commutativity. 
1.15 Theorem 
(Uniqueness of Identity) A set with binary operation * has at most one identity 
element. 
Proof 
We need to show that there cannot be two different identity elements. To do this, we 
assume that both e and e' are identities and show that e = e'. Consider the element 
e * e'. Since e is an identity, e * e' = e'. But e* e' = e because e' is also an identity. 
Therefore e = e'. 
+ 
1.16 Example 
Continuing with Example 1.7, Jet F be the set of all functions mapping the real numbers 
to the real numbers. We verify that the function defined by 1(x) = x is the identity for the 
operation function composition. Let/ E F. Then/ o t(x) = f(t(x)) = f(x) and Lo f(x) = 
t(f(x)) = f(x). 
The function m(x) = l is the identity for the operation function multiplication, 
a(x) = 0 is the identity for function addition, but function subtraction has no identity 
element. 
.&. 

Section 1 
Binary Operations 
15 
The last property that we consider in this section is the existance of inverse ele-
ments. For addition, the inverse of a real number a is -a. Using multiplication, the 
inverse of a nonzero real number a is ~ . We now give the formal definition of an inverse 
for an element x. 
1.17 Definition 
If* is an operation on the set Sand S has an identity e, then for any x ES, the inverse 
of x is an element x' such that x * x' = x' * x = e. 
• 
1.18 Example 
Continuing Example 1.16, let F be the set of functions mapping the real numbers to 
the real numbers with operation function composition. We have two definitions for the 
inverse of a function f E F, the usual definition of an inverse function and Definition 
1.17. The two definitions match since both say that an inverse for f is a function f' 
such that f of' = f ' of = t. So f E F has an inverse if and only if f is one-to-one and 
00~. 
• 
Tables 
For a finite set, a binary operation on the set can be defined by means of a table in which 
the elements of the set are listed across the top as heads of columns and at the left side 
as heads of rows. We always require that the elements of the set be listed as heads across 
the top in the same order as heads down the left side. The next example illustrates the 
use of a table to define a binary operation. 
1.19 Example 
Table 1.20 defines the binary operation* on S = {a, b, c) by the following rule: 
(ith entry on the left) * (jth entry on the top) 
1.20 Table 
=(entry in the ith row andjth column of the table body). 
* 
a 
b 
c 
a 
b 
b 
c 
a 
c 
c 
b 
c 
b 
b 
a 
Thus a * b = c and b * a = a, so * is not commutative. 
We can easily see that a binary operation defined by a table is commutative 
if and only if the entries in the table are symmetric with respect to the diagonal 
that starts at the upper left corner of the table and terminates at the lower right 
corner. 
1.21 Example 
Complete Table 1.22 so that* is a commutative operation on the set S = {a, b, c, d). 
Solution 
From Table 1.22, we see that b *a = d. For * to be commutative, we must have a * 
b = d also. Thus we place d in the appropriate square defining a * b, which is located 
symmetrically across the diagonal in Table 1.23 from the square defining b *a. We 
obtain the rest of Table 1.23 in this fashion to give our solution. 
• 
1.22 Table 
1.23 Table 
* 
a 
b 
c 
d 
a 
b 
b 
d 
a 
c 
a 
c 
d 
d 
a 
b 
b 
c 

16 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
1.24 Example 
When an operation has an identity element, it is customary to put the identity first in the 
list of heads. This makes the first row and the first column match the head row and head 
column as seen in Table 1.25. 
.A. 
1.25 Table 
* 
e 
a 
b 
c 
e 
a 
b 
e 
a 
b 
a 
c 
c 
b 
a 
e 
c 
e 
a 
c 
c 
a 
c 
b 
Some Words of Warning 
Classroom experience shows the chaos that may result if a student is given a set and 
asked to define some binary operation on it. Remember that in an attempt to define a 
binary operation * on a set S we must be sure that 
1. exactly one element is assigned to each possible ordered pair of elements of S, 
2. for each ordered pair of elements of S, the element assigned to it is again in S. 
Regarding Condition 1, a student will often make an attempt that assigns an element 
of S to "most" ordered pairs, but for a few pairs, determines no element. In this event, 
* is not everywhere defined on S. It may also happen that for some pairs, the at-
tempt could assign any of several elements of S, that is, there is ambiguity. In any case 
of ambiguity, * is not well defined. If Condition 2 is violated, then S is not closed 
under *· 
1.26 Example 
On which of the sets Q, Q*, and z+ does the formula a * b = a/ b define an operation? 
Note that this formula does not make sense in the case that b = 0. So for example, 
2 * 0 = 2/0 is not defined, which means Condition l is not satisfied. So * is not an 
operation on Q. 
If we throw out 0, we do have an operation on Q* since both Conditions I and 2 
are satisfied. That is, for any a, b E Q*, a * b = a/ b is a non zero rational number. 
The set z+ does not include 0, but there is another issue. For example, 1 * 2 = 
1/2 <le z+, which means that Condition 2 is violated and* is not an operation on z+ . .& 
Following are several illustrations of attempts to define operations on sets. Some 
of them need some work! The symbol * is used for the attempted operation in all these 
examples. 
1.27 Example 
Let F be the set of all real-valued functions with domain lR as in Example 1.7. Suppose 
we "define" * to give the usual quotient off by g, that is, f * g = h, where h(x) = 
f(x)/ g(x). Here Condition 2 is violated, for the functions in F are defined for all real 
numbers, and for some g E F, g(x) will be zero for some values of x in lR and h(x) 
would not be defined at those numbers in R For example, if f (x) = cos x and g(x) = x?, 
then h(O) is undefined, so h f:. F. 
.A. 
1.28 Example 
Let F be as in Example 1.27 and letf * g = h, where his the function greater than both 
f and g. This "definition" is extremely vague. In the first place, we have not defined 
what it means for one function to be greater than another. Even if we had, any sensible 
definition would result in there being many functions greater than both f and g, and* 
would still be not well defined. 
.A. 
1.29 Example 
Let S be a set consisting of 20 people, no two of whom are of the same height. Define 
* by a * b = c, where c is the tallest person among the 20 in S. This is a perfectly good 
binary operation on the set, although not a particularly interesting one. 
.A. 
1.30 Example 
Let S be as in Example 1.29 and let a * b = c, where c is the shortest person in S who 
is taller than both a and b. This * is not everywhere defined, since if either a orb is the 
tallest person in the set, a * b is not determined. 
.A. 

Section 1 
Exercises 
17 
• EXERCISES 1 
Computations 
Exercises l through 4 concern the binary operation * defined on S = {a, b, c, d, e} by means of Table 1.31. 
1. Computeb*d,c*c,and[(a*C)*e]*a. 
2. Compute (a* b) * c and a* (b *c).Can you say on the basis of this computation whether * is associative? 
3. Compute (b * d) * c and b * (d * c). Can you say on the basis of this computation whether* is associative? 
4. Is * commutative? Why? 
5. Complete Table 1.32 so as to define a commutative binary operation* on S = {a, b, c, d). 
6. Table 1.33 can be completed to define an associative binary operation * on S = {a, b, c, d). Assume this is 
possible and compute the missing entries. Does S have an identity element? 
1.31 Table 
1.32 Table 
1.33 Table 
* 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e 
* 
a 
b 
c 
d 
* 
a 
b 
c 
d 
a 
a 
b 
c 
b 
d 
a 
a 
b 
c 
a 
a 
b 
c 
d 
b 
b 
c 
a 
e 
c 
b 
b 
d 
c 
b 
b 
a 
c 
d 
c 
c 
a 
b 
b 
a 
c 
c 
a 
d 
b 
c 
c 
d 
c 
d 
d 
b 
e 
b 
e 
d 
d 
d 
a 
d 
e 
d 
b 
a 
d 
c 
In Exercises 7 through 11, determine whether the operation * is associative, whether the operation is commutative, 
and whether the set has an identity element. 
7. *defined on .Z by Jetting a* b =a - b 
8. * defined on Q by Jetting a* b = 2ab + 3 
9. * defined on .Z by letting a * b = ab + a + b 
10. * defined on .z+ by letting a * b = 2 ab 
11. * defined on .z+ by Jetting a * b = ab 
12. Let S be a set having exactly one element. How many different binary operations can be defined on S? Answer 
the question if S has exactly 2 elements; exactly 3 elements; exactly n elements. 
13. How many different commutative binary operations can be defined on a set of 2 elements? on a set of 3 
elements? on a set of n elements? 
14. How many different binary operations on a set S with n elements have the property that for all x E S, x * x = x? 
15. How many different binary operations on a set S with n elements have an identity element? 
Concepts 
In Exercises 16 through 19, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction 
is needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
16. A binary operation * is commutative if and only if a* b = b *a. 
17. A binary operation * on a set S is associative if and only if, for all a,b,c ES, we have 
(b * c) *a = b * (c *a). 
18. A subset Hof a set Sis closed under a binary operation* on S if and only if (a* b) E H for all a, b E S. 
19. An identity in the set S with operation * is an element e E S such that a * e = e *a = a. 
20. Is there an example of a set S, a binary operation on S, and two different elements e 1, e2 E S such that for all 
a E S, e1 *a= a and a* e2 =a? If so, give an example and if not, prove there is not one. 

18 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
In Exercises 21 through 26, determine whether the definition of* does give a binary operation on the set. In the 
event that* is not a binary operation, state whether Condition I, Condition 2, or both conditions regarding defining 
binary operations are violated. 
21. On z+, define a* b = b0 . 
22. On JR+ , define * by letting a * b = 2a - b. 
23. On JR+, define * by a * b to be the minimum of a and b - 1 if they are different and their common value if 
they are the same. 
24. On IR, define a * b to be the number c so that cb = a. 
25. On z+, define* by letting a* b = c, where c is at least 5 more than a+ b. 
26. On z+, define* by letting a* b = c, where c is the largest integer less than the product of a and b. 
27. Let H be the subset of M1(1R) consisting of all matrices of the form [~ -:J 
for a, b E JR. Is H closed under 
a. matrix addition? 
b. matrix multiplication? 
28. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. If* is any binary operation on any set S, then a* a = a for all a E S. 
b. If* is any commutative binary operation on any set S, then a* (b * c) = (b * c) *a for all a, b, c E S. 
c. If* is any associative binary operation on any set S, then a* (b * c) = (b * c) *a for all a, b, c E S. 
d. The only binary operations of any importance are those defined on sets of numbers. 
e. A binary operation * on a set Sis commutative if there exist a, b E S such that a* b = b *a. 
f. Every binary operation defined on a set having exactly one element is both commutative and associative. 
g. A binary operation on a set S assigns at least one element of S to each ordered pair of elements of S. 
h. A binary operation on a set S assigns at most one element of S to each ordered pair of elements of S. 
i. A binary operation on a set S assigns exactly one element of S to each ordered pair of elements of S. 
j. A binary operation on a set Smay assign more than one element of S to some ordered pair of 
elements of S. 
k. For any binary operation * on the set S, if a, b, c E Sand a* b = a * c, then b = c. 
I. For any binary operation * on the set S, there is an element e E S such that for all x E S, x * e = x. 
m. There is an operation on the set S = {e1, e1, a) so that for all x E S, e1 * x = e1 * x = x. 
n. Identity elements are always called e. 
29. Give a set different from any of those described in the examples of the text and not a set of numbers. Define 
two different binary operations * and *' on this set. Be sure that your set is well defined. 
Theory 
30. Prove that if* is an associative and commutative binary operation on a set S, then 
for all a, b, c, d E S. Assume the associative law only for triples as in the definition, that is, assume only 
(x * y) * z = x * (y * z) 
for all x, y, z E S. 
In Exercises 31 and 32, either prove the statement or give a counterexample. 
31. Every binary operation on a set consisting of a single element is both commutative and associative. 
32. Every commutative binary operation on a set having just two elements is associative. 
Let F be the set of all real-valued functions having as domain the set lR of all real numbers. Example 1.7 defined 
the binary operations +, - , ., and o on F. In Exercises 33 through 41, either prove the given statement or give a 
counterexample. 
33. Function addition + on F is associative. 
34. Function subtraction - on F is commutative. 

Section 2 
Groups 
19 
35. Function subtraction - on F is associative. 
36. Under function subtraction - F has an identity. 
37. Under function multiplication· F has an identity. 
38. Function multiplication · on Fis commutative. 
39. Function multiplication · on F is associative. 
40. Function composition o on Fis commutative. 
41. If * and *' are any two binary operations on a set S, then 
a* (b *' c) =(a* b) *' (a* c) 
forall a, b, cES. 
42. Suppose that * is an associative binary operation on a set S. Let H = {a E SI a* x = x *a for all x E S}. 
Show that H is closed under *· (We think of H as consisting of all elements of S that commute with every 
element in S.) 
43. Suppose that* is an associative and commutative binary operation on a set S. Show that H = {a E SI a* a= 
a} is closed under *· (The elements of Hare idempotents of the binary operation*·) 
44. Let S be a set and let * be a binary operation on S satisfying the two laws 
• x * x = x for all s E S, and 
• (x * y) * z = (y * z) * x for all x,y, z ES. 
Show that * is associative and commutative. (This is problem B-1 on the 1971 Putnam Competition.) 
SECTION 2 
GROUPS 
In high school algebra, one of the key objectives is to learn how to solve equations. 
Even before learning algebra, students in elementary school are given problems like 
5 + D = 2 or 2 x D = 3, which become 5 + x = 2 and 2x = 3 in high school algebra. 
Let us closely examine the steps we use to solve these equations: 
5 +x = 2, 
given, 
-5 + (5 + x) = -5 + 2, 
(-5+ 5) +x = -5+2, 
o+x= -5 +2, 
x = -5 +2, 
X= -3, 
adding - 5, 
associative law, 
computing - 5 + 5, 
property of 0, 
computing - 5 + 2. 
Strictly speaking, we have not shown here that -3 is a solution, but rather that it is 
the only possibility for a solution. To show that -3 is a solution, one merely computes 
5 + (-3). A similar analysis could be made for the equation 2x = 3 in the rational 
numbers with the operation of multiplication: 
2x = 3, 
1C2x) = 1C3), 
C1·2)x = p, 
1 ·X -
.!_3 
-
2 , 
x = 13, 
_
3 
X- 2• 
given, 
multiplying by 1, 
associative law, 
computing !2, 
property of 1, 
computing p. 
Now suppose that we have a set with a binary operation *· What properties does 
the operation need to have in order to solve an equation of the form a * x = b where a 
and b are fixed elements of S? Both equations 5 + x = 2 and 2x = 3 have this form; the 

20 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
first uses the operation+, and the second uses the operation x . By examining the steps 
used we can see what properties of the operation * are required as summarized in the 
table below. 
Property 
Associative Property 
Identity Element 
Inverse Element 
+ 
- 5 + (5 +x) = (- 5 + 5) +x 
0: o +x = x 
- 5: - 5 + 5 = 0 
x 
2(2x) = (2 · 2)x 
l:l· x = x 
! . !. 2 -1 
2 · 2 
-
If S is a set with an operation * satisfying these three properties, then an equation 
of the form a* x = b could be solved for x using exactly the same steps used to solve 
5 + x = 2 or 2x = 3. These three essential properties are all that is required in order to 
have a group. We are now ready to present the precise definition. 
Definition and Examples 
2.1 Definition 
A group (G, *) is a set G, closed under a binary operation *, such that the following 
axioms are satisfied: 
$1: For all a, b, c E G, we have 
(a* b) * c = a* (b * c). 
associativity of * 
~: There is an element e in G such that for all x E G, 
e * x = x * e = x. identity element e for * 
~ :Corresponding to each a E G, there is an element a' in G such that 
a* a' = a' * a = e. inverse a' of a 
• 
2.2 Example 
(JR., +) is a group with identity element 0 and the inverse of any real number a is -a. 
However, (JR.,·) is not a group since 0 has no multiplicative inverse. We were still able 
to solve 2x = 3 in the example above because (JR.*, ·) is a group since multiplication 
of real numbers is associative, 1 is an identity, and every real number except 0 has an 
inverse. 
"' 
It is often convenient to say that G is a group under the operation * rather than 
write (G, *) is a group. At times, there is only one obvious operation that makes (G, *) 
a group. In this case, we may abuse notation and say that G is a group. For example, if 
we say that JR. is a group, we mean that JR. is a group under addition. 
2.3 Definition 
A group G is abelian if its binary operation is commutative. 
• 
Let us give some examples of some sets with binary operations that give groups 
and also of some that do not give groups. 
2.4 Example 
The set z+ under addition is not a group. There is no identity element for+ in z+. 
.... 
2.5 Example 
The set of all nonnegative integers (including 0) under addition is still not a group. There 
is an identity element 0, but no inverse for 2. 
"' 

• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
here are three historical roots of the develop-
ment of abstract group theory evident in the 
mathematical literature of the nineteenth century: 
the theory of algebraic equations, number theory, 
and geometry. All three of these areas used group-
theoretic methods of reasoning, although the meth-
ods were considerably more explicit in the first 
area than in the other two. 
One of the central themes of geometry in the 
nineteenth century was the search for invariants 
under various types of geometric transformations. 
Gradually attention became focused on the trans-
formations themselves, which in many cases can 
be thought of as elements of groups. 
In number theory, already in the eighteenth 
century Leonhard Euler had considered the re-
mainders on division of powers a" by a fixed prime 
p. These remainders have "group" properties. 
Section 2 
Groups 
21 
Similarly, Carl F. Gauss, in his Disquisitiones 
Arithmeticae (1800), 
dealt extensively 
with 
quadratic forms ax2 + 2bxy + cy2 , and in particu-
lar showed that equivalence classes of these forms 
under composition possessed what amounted to 
group properties. 
Finally, the theory of algebraic equations pro-
vided the most explicit prefiguring of the group 
concept. Joseph-Louis Lagrange (1736-1813) in 
fact initiated the study of permutations of the roots 
of an equation as a tool for solving it. These per-
mutations, of course, were ultimately considered as 
elements of a group. 
It was Walther von Dyck (1856- 1934) and 
Heinrich Weber (1842-1913) who in 1882 were 
able independently to combine the three historical 
roots and give clear definitions of the notion of an 
abstract group. 
2.6 Example 
The familiar additive properties of integers and of rational, real, and complex numbers 
show that Z, Ql, IR, and <C under addition are abelian groups. 
.& 
2.7 Example 
The set z+ under multiplication is not a group. There is an identity 1, but no inverse 
~3. 
... 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
C
ommutative groups are called abelian in 
honor of the Norwegian mathematician Niels 
Henrik Abel (1802-1829). Abel was interested in 
the question of solvability of polynomial equa-
tions. In a paper written in 1828, he proved that if 
all the roots of such an equation can be expressed 
as rational functions f, g, ... , h of one of them, say 
x, and if for any two of these roots, f(x) and g(x), 
the relation f(g(x)) = gif(x)) always holds, then 
the equation is solvable by radicals. Abel showed 
that each of these functions in fact permutes the 
roots of the equation; hence, these functions are el-
ements of the group of permutations of the roots. It 
was this property of commutativity in these permu-
tation groups associated with solvable equations 
that led Camille Jordan in his 1870 treatise on al-
gebra to name such groups abelian; the name since 
then has been applied to commutative groups in 
general. 
Abel was attracted to mathematics as a 
teenager and soon surpassed all his teachers in Nor-
way. He finally received a government travel grant 
to study elsewhere in 1825 and proceeded to Berlin, 
where he befriended August Crelle, the founder of 
the most influential German mathematical journal. 
Abel contributed numerous papers to Crelle's Jour-
nal during the next several years, including many 
in the field of elliptic functions, whose theory he 
created virtually single-handedly. Abel returned to 
Norway in 1827 with no position and an abundance 
of debts. He nevertheless continued to write bril-
liant papers, but died of tuberculosis at the age of 
26, two days before Crelle succeeded in finding a 
university position for him in Berlin. 

22 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
2.8 Example 
The familiar multiplicative properties of rational, real, and complex numbers show that 
the sets Q+ and JR+ of positive numbers and the sets «:))*, JR*, and C* of nonzero numbers 
under multiplication are abelian groups. 
.A. 
2.9 Example 
The set of all real-valued functions with domain lR under function addition is a group. 
This group is abelian. 
.A. 
2.10 Example 
(Linear Algebra) Those who have studied vector spaces should note that the axioms 
for a vector space V pertaining just to vector addition can be summarized by asserting 
that V under vector addition is an abelian group. 
.A. 
2.11 Example 
The set M111x 11(JR) of all m x n matrices under matrix addition is a group. The m x n 
matrix with all entries 0 is the identity matrix. This group is abelian. 
.A. 
2.12 Example 
The set M,,(JR) of all n x n matrices under matrix multiplication is not a group. The 
n x n matrix with all entries 0 has no inverse. 
.A. 
Each of the groups we have seen in the above examples is an abelian group. There 
are many examples of groups which are not abelian, two of which we now present. 
2.13 Example 
Here we give an example of a group that is not abelian. We let T be the set of all 
isometries of the plane. An isometry of the plane is a function mapping the plane to 
the plane which preserves distance. So if <P is an isometry of the plane and P, Q are 
points in the plane, then the distance between P and Q is the same as the distance 
between </J(P) and </J(Q). Isometries of the plane map the plane one-to-one and onto 
itself. Examples of isometries include translations and rotations of the plane. The set T 
under the operation of composition forms a group. To verify this we first must check that 
function composition is an operation. Certainly, the composition of two isometries is an 
isometry since each preserves distance. So function composition gives an operation on 
T. Theorem 1.13 states that function composition is associative, so ~ is satisfied. The 
identity function L that maps each point Pin the plane to itself gives an identity element 
in T, which means that ~ is satisfied. Finally, for any isometry </J, the inverse function 
<P- ' is also an isometry and it serves as an inverse as defined in ~ -Therefore Tisa 
group under function composition. 
To show that T is not abelian, we only need to find two isometries <P and 8 such 
that </Jo 8 f= 8 o </J. The functions </J(x, y) = (-x,y) (reflection across the y-axis) and 
8(x, y) = (-y,x) (rotation by n /2 about the origin) foot the bill. Note that <Po 8(1, 0) = 
<jJ(8(1, 0)) = <jJ(O, I) = (0, I) and 8 o </J(I , 0) = 8(</J(I, 0)) = 8(-1, 0) = (0, - I), which 
implies that </J o 8 f= 8 o </J and T is not an abelian group under function composition . ... 
2.14 Example 
Show that the subset S of M,,(JR) consisting of all invertible n x n matrices under matrix 
multiplication is a group. 
Solution 
We start by showing that S is closed under matrix multiplication. Let A and B be in S, 
so that both A - l and s- 1 exist and AA - l = BB- 1 = I,.. Then 
(AB)(B-'A- 1) = A(BB-1)A-' = AI,,A- 1 =In, 
so that AB is invertible and consequently is also in S. 
Since matrix multiplication is associative and In acts as the identity element, and 
since each element of S has an inverse by definition of S, we see that Sis indeed a group. 
This group is not commutative. 
.A. 
The group of invertible n x n matrices described in the preceding example is of 
fundamental importance in linear algebra. It is the general linear group of degree n, 

Section 2 
Groups 
23 
and is usually denoted by GL(n, R). Those of you who have studied linear algebra know 
that a matrix A in GL(n, R) gives rise to an invertible linear transformation T : Rn --+ 
Rn, defined by T(x) =Ax, and that conversely, every invertible linear transformation 
of R
11 into itself is defined in this fashion by some matrix in GL(n, R). Also, matrix 
multiplication corresponds to composition of linear transformations. Thus all invertible 
linear transformations of Rn into itself form a group under function composition; this 
group is usually denoted by GL(Rn). Since the sets GL(Rn) and GL(n, R) and their 
operations are essentially the same, we say that the two groups are isomorphic. We give 
a formal definition later in this section. 
We conclude our list of examples of groups with one that may seem a bit contrived. 
We include it to show that there are many ways to define groups and to illustrate the 
steps needed to verify that a given set with an operation is a group. 
2.15 Example 
Let * be defined on Q+ by a * b = ab / 2. Then 
and likewise 
ab 
abc 
(a* b) *C = 2 *C = 4' 
be 
abc 
a*(b*c) = a*- = -
. 
2 
4 
Thus * is associative. Computation shows that 
2*a = a*2 = a 
for all a E Q+, so 2 is an identity element for *· Finally, 
4 
4 
a* - = - *a = 2, 
a 
a 
so a' = 4/a is an inverse for a. Hence Q+ with the operation* is a group. 
Elementary Properties of Groups 
As we proceed to prove our first theorem about groups, we must use Definition 2.1, 
which is the only thing we know about groups at the moment. The proof of a second 
theorem can employ both Definition 2.1 and the first theorem; the proof of a third theo-
rem can use the definition and the first two theorems, and so on. 
Our first theorem will establish cancellation laws. In real number arithmetic, we 
know that 2a = 2b implies that a = b. We need only divide both sides of the equation 
2a = 2b by 2, or equivalently, multiply both sides by !· which is the multiplicative 
inverse of 2. We parrot this proof to establish cancellation laws for any group. Note that 
we will also use the associative law. 
2.16 Theorem If G is a group with binary operation *· then the left and right cancellation laws 
hold in G, that is, a* b = a* c implies b = c, and b *a = c *a implies b = c for all 
a,b,cEG. 
Proof 
Suppose a * b = a* c. Then by~. there exists a', and 
a' *(a* b) = a' * (a* c). 
By the associative law, 
(a' *a)* b = (a'* a)* c. 
By the definition of a' in ~.a' *a = e, so 
e * b = e *c. 

24 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
By the definition of e in ~ , 
b =c. 
Similarly, from b *a = c *a one can deduce that b = c upon multiplication on the right 
by a' and use of the axioms for a group. 
+ 
Our next proof can make use of Theorem 2.16. We show that a "linear equation" in 
a group has a unique solution. Recall that we chose our group properties to allow us to 
find solutions of such equations. 
2.17 Theorem 
If G is a group with binary operation *, and if a and bare any elements of G, then the 
linear equations a * x = b and y * a = b have unique solutions x and y in G. 
Proof First we show the existence of at least one solution by just computing that a' * b is a 
solution of a* x = b. Note that 
a* (a'* b) = (a* a')* b, 
= e*b, 
=b, 
associative law, 
definition of a', 
property of e. 
Thus x = a' * b is a solution of a * x = b. In a similar fashion, y = b * a' is a solution 
ofy *a = b. 
To show uniqueness of y, we use the standard method of assuming that we have 
two solutions, YI and y2, so that YI *a= band Y2 *a = b. Then YI *a = Y2 *a, and by 
Theorem 2.16, YI = y2 . The uniqueness of x follows similarly. 
+ 
Of course, to prove the uniqueness in the last theorem, we could have followed the 
procedure we used in motivating the definition of a group, showing that if a * x = b, 
then x = a' * b. However, we chose to illustrate the standard way to prove an object is 
unique; namely, suppose you have two such objects, and then prove they must be the 
same. Note that the solutions x = a' * b and y = b * a' need not be the same unless * is 
commutative. 
Because a group has a binary operation, we know from Theorem 1.15 that the 
identity e in a group is unique. We state this again as part of the next theorem for easy 
reference. 
2.18 Theorem 
In a group G with binary operation *, there is only one element e in G such that 
for all x E G. Likewise for each a E G, there is only one element a' in G such that 
a' *a = a* a' = e. 
In summary, the identity element and inverse of each element are unique in a group. 
Proof Theorem 1.15 shows that an identity element for any binary operation is unique. No use 
of the other group axioms was required to show this. 
Turning to the uniqueness of an inverse, suppose that a E G has inverses a' and a" 
so that a' * a = a * a' = e and a" * a = a * a" = e. Then 
a*a" = a*a' = e 
and, by Theorem 2.16, 
a
11 == a' , 
so the inverse of a in a group is unique. 
• 

Section 2 
Groups 
25 
Note that in a group G, we have 
(a* b) * (b' *a') = a* (b * b') *a' = (a* e) *a' = a* a' =e. 
This equation and Theorem 2.18 show that b' *a' is the unique inverse of a* b. 
That is, (a* b)' = b' *a'. We state this as a corollary. 
2.19 Corollary 
Let G be a group. For all a, b E G, we have (a* b)' = b' *a'. 
• 
2.20 Table 
x 
- I 
- 1 
- 1 
- 1 
1 
For your information, we remark that binary algebraic structures with weaker ax-
ioms than those for a group have also been studied quite extensively. Of these weaker 
structures, the semigroup, a set with an associative binary operation, has perhaps had 
the most attention. A monoid is a semigroup that has an identity element for the binary 
operation. Note that every group is both a semigroup and a monoid. 
Finally, it is possible to give axioms for a group (G, *) that seem at first glance to 
be weaker, namely: 
1. The binary operation * on G is associative. 
2. There exists a left identity element e in G such that e * x = x for all x E G. 
3. For each a E G, there exists a left inverse a' in G such that a'* a = e. 
From this one-sided definition, one can prove that the left identity element is also a 
right identity element, and a left inverse is also a right inverse for the same element. 
Thus these axioms should not be called weaker, since they result in exactly the same 
structures being called groups. It is conceivable that it might be easier in some cases to 
check these left axioms than to check our two-sided axioms. Of course, by symmetry it 
is clear that there are also right axioms for a group. 
Group Isomorphisms 
All our examples have been of infinite groups, that is, groups where the set G has an in-
finite number of elements. We turn to finite groups, starting with the smallest finite sets. 
Since a group has to have at least one element, namely, the identity, a minimal 
set that might give rise to a group is a one-element set {e}. The only possible binary 
operation * on {e} is defined bye* e =e. The three group axioms hold. The identity 
element is always its own inverse in every group. 
There is a group with only two elements, namely G = { 1, -1} with operation the 
usual multiplication. It is clear that G is closed under multiplication and we know that 
multiplication is associative. Furthermore, 1 is the identity, the inverse of 1 is 1, and the 
inverse of - 1 is - 1. Table 2.20 is the group table for G. 
Is this the only group with exactly two elements? To see, let us try to put a group 
structure on a set with two elements. Since one of the elements must be the identity, we 
will label the identity element e and we will label the other element a. Following tradi-
tion, we place the identity first both on the top and to the left as in the following table. 
Since e is to be the identity, 

26 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
for all x E { e, a}. We are forced to fill in the table as follows, if* is to give a group: 
Also, a must have an inverse a' such that 
a* a' = a' * a = e. 
2.21 Table 
In our case, a' must be either e or a. Since a' = e obviously does not work, we must 
have a' = a, so we have to complete the table as shown in Table 2.21. 
* 
e 
a 
e 
e 
a 
a 
a 
e 
All the group axioms are now satisfied, except possibly associativity. But if we 
relabel l as e and -1 as a in Table 2.20 we obtain Table 2.21. Therefore, the table 
we constructed for {e,a) must also satisfy Wi, the associative property. The table also 
shows clearly that properties~ 
and ~ are satisfied, so ({e, a), *) is a group. The groups 
(1, -1) and {e, a) are not the same, but they are essentially the same since by relabeling 
elements of one with the names of the other, the operations match. When the elements 
of one group can be matched with another in such a way that the operations are the 
same, we say that the groups are isomorphic and the matching is called a group 
isomorphism. We showed that any group with two elements is isomorphic with { 1, -1} 
under multiplication. The notation used to indicate isomorphism is ::::::, so we could write 
( { 1, - 1}, x) :::::: ( { e, a}, *). Of course the matching is a one-to-one function from one 
group onto the other. If we were only interested in groups whose tables are easy to 
compute, then we would not need a more precise definition for isomorphism. We would 
simply see if we can relabel one group table to make it look like the other. However, 
in the case of infinite groups or even groups with more than a few elements, we need a 
better way to verify that groups are isomorphic. We now give a more precise definition 
of a group isomorphism. 
2.22 Definition 
Let (G1, *i) and (G2, *z) be groups and f: G1 --+ G2 . We say that f is a group 
isomorphism if the following two conditions are satisfied. 
1. The function! is one-to-one and maps onto G2 . 
2. For all a, b E G1 ,f(a *1 b) = f(a) *zf(b). 
• 
Note that Condition 1 simply gives a way to relabel the elements of G1 with elements in 
G2. Condition 2, which we will refer to as the homomorphism property, says that with 
this relabeling, the operations *i on G1 and *z on G2 match. If we are in the context of 
groups, we will often use the term isomorphism to mean group isomorphism. If there 
is an isomorphism from a group G1 to G2, we say that G1 is isomorphic with (or to) 
G2. In Exercise 44, you are asked to show that ifj : G1 --+ G2 is an isomorphism, then 
1- 1 : G2 --+ G 1, the inverse function, is also an isomorphism. So if G 1 is isomorphic 
with G2 , then G2 is isomorphic with G1. If you wish to verify that two groups, G1 and 
G2, are isomorphic, you can either construct an isomorphism mapping G1 to G2 or one 
mapping G2 to G1 . 
2.23 Example 
In Exercise 10 you will be asked to show that 2Z, the even integers, forms a group under 
addition. Here we show Z and 2Z are isomorphic groups. In this case, the operations 
on the groups are both addition. We need a function! : Z --+ 2Z that is both one-to-one 
and onto 2Z. Letf : Z --+ 2Z be given by f (m) = 2m. We need to verify Condition 1 for 
an isomorphism, which says that f is one-to-one and onto. Suppose that a, b E Z and 
f(a) = f(b). Then 2a = 2b, which implies that a = b, sof is one-to-one. We now show f 

2.24 Table 
* 
e 
a 
e 
e 
a 
a 
a 
b 
b 
2.25 Table 
* 
e 
e 
e 
a 
a 
b 
b 
b 
b 
a 
b 
a 
b 
b 
e 
e 
a 
Section 2 
Groups 
27 
is onto. Let y E 2.Z. Since y is even, y = 2c for some c E Z. Therefore, y = 2c = f(c), so 
f maps onto 2.Z. We now tum our attention to the homomorphism property and consider 
arbitrary a, b E Z. Then 
f(a + b) = 2(a + b) = 2a + 2b =f(a) + f(b), 
which verifies Condition 2. Therefore f is a group isomorphism and Z and 2.Z are iso-
morphic groups. 
As noted above, we could have defined an isomorphism by using the inverse 
functionf- 1 : 2.Z-+ Z, which is defined by f- 1(x) = x/2. 
..A. 
Properties of Group Tables 
With Table 2.21 as background, we should be able to list some necessary conditions that 
a table giving a binary operation on a finite set must satisfy for the operation to give a 
group structure on the set. There must be one element of the set, which we may as well 
denote by e, that acts as the identity element. The condition e * x = x means that the row 
of the table opposite e at the extreme left must contain exactly the elements appearing 
across the very top of the table in the same order. Similarly, the condition x * e = x 
means that the column of the table under e at the very top must contain exactly the 
elements appearing at the extreme left in the same order. The fact that every element a 
has a right and a left inverse means that in the row having a at the extreme left, the 
element e must appear, and in the column under a at the very top, the e must appear. 
Thus e must appear in each row and in each column. We can do even better than this, 
however. By Theorem 2.17, not only do the equations a* x = e and y * a = e have 
unique solutions, but also the equations a* x = band y* a = b. By a similar argument, 
this means that each element b of the group must appear once and only once in each 
row and each column of the table. 
Suppose conversely that a table for a binary operation on a finite set is such that 
there is an element acting as identity and that in each row and each column, each element 
of the set appears exactly once. Then it can be seen that the structure is a group structure 
if and only if the associative law holds. If a binary operation * is given by a table, 
the associative law is usually messy to check. If the operation * is defined by some 
characterizing property of a * b, the associative law is often easy to check. Fortunately, 
this second case turns out to be the one usually encountered. 
We saw that there was essentially only one group of two elements in the sense that if 
the elements are denoted bye and a with the identity element e appearing first, the table 
must be as shown in Table 2.21. Suppose that a set has three elements. As before, we 
may as well let the set be {e, a, b).For e to be an identity element, a binary operation * on 
this set has to have a table of the form shown in Table 2.24. This leaves four places to be 
filled in. You can quickly see that Table 2.24 must be completed as shown in Table 2.25 
if each row and each column are to contain each element exactly once. We find a group 
whose table is the same as Table 2.25. The elements of the group are the three matrices 
e = [ ~ ~ l a = [ 1 
~ r J 
and b = [ ~ ~ ~ l 
We let G = { e, a, b}. In Exercise 
18 you will show that G is a group under matrix multiplication. By computing matix 
products it is easy to check that the group table for G is identical with Table 2.25. 
Therefore Table 2.25 gives a group. 
Now suppose that G' is any other group of three elements and imagine a table for G' 
with identity element appearing first. Since our filling out of the table for G = { e, a, b} 
could be done in only one way, we see that if we take the table for G' and rename the 
identity e, the next element listed a, and the last element b, the resulting table for G' 
must be the same as the one we had for G. As explained above, this renaming gives an 
isomorphism of the group G' with the group G. Thus our work above can be summarized 

28 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
by saying that all groups with a single element are isomorphic, all groups with just two 
elements are isomorphic, and all groups with just three elements are isomorphic. We use 
the phrase up to isomorphism to express this identification. Thus we may say, "There is 
only one group of three elements, up to isomorphism." 
An interesting problem in group theory is to determine up to isomorphism all the 
groups with a given number of elements n. In Exercise 20, you will be asked to show 
that there are up to isomorphism exactly two groups of order 4. It is beyond the scope of 
this book to give a thorough investigation of this problem, but we will solve the problem 
for some other special values of n in later sections. 
• EXERCISES 2 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 9, determine whether the binary operation * gives a group structure on the given set. If no 
group results, give the first axiom in the order :.?;], g;z, ,'?J3 from Definition 2.1 that does not hold. 
1. Let * be defined on IZ by letting a* b = ab. 
2. Let* be defined on 2/Z = {2n In E /Z} by letting a * b = a+ b. 
3. Let * be defined on JR+ by letting a * b = ,Jab. 
4. Let* be defined on Q by letting a* b = ab. 
5. Let * be defined on the set JR* of nonzero real numbers by letting a * b = a/ b. 
6. Let * be defined on C by letting a* b = labl. 
7. Let * be defined on the set {a, b) by Table 2.26. 
8. Let * be defined on the set {a, b) by Table 2.27. 
9. Let * be defined on the set {e, a, b) by Table 2.28. 
2.28 Table 
2.26 Table 
2.27 Table 
* 
e 
a 
b 
* 
a 
b 
* 
a 
b 
e 
e 
a 
b 
a 
a 
b 
a 
a 
b 
a 
a 
e 
b 
b 
b 
b 
b 
a 
b 
b 
b 
b 
e 
10. Let n be a positive integer and Jet nil = {nm Im E /Z}. 
a. Show that (n/Z, + ) is a group. 
b. Show that (n/Z, +) :::::: (/Z, + ). 
In Exercises 11 through 18, determine whether the given set of matrices under the specified operation, matrix 
addition or multiplication, is a group. Recall that a diagonal matrix is a square matrix whose only nonzero entries 
lie on the main diagonal, from the upper left to the lower right corner. An upper-triangular matrix is a square 
matrix with only zero entries below the main diagonal. Associated with each n x n matrix A is a number called 
the determinant of A, denoted by det(A). If A and B are both n x n matrices, then det(AB) = det(A) det(B). Also, 
det(/11 ) = 1 and A is invertible if and only if det(A) =P 0. 
11. All n x n diagonal matrices under matrix addition. 
12. All n x n diagonal matrices under matrix multiplication. 
13. All n x n diagonal matrices with no zero diagonal entry under matrix multiplication. 
14. All n x n diagonal matrices with all diagonal entries 1 or - 1 under matrix multiplication. 
15. All n x n upper-triangular matrices under matrix multiplication. 
16. All n x n upper-triangular matrices under matrix addition. 
17. All n x n upper-triangular matrices with determinant 1 under matrix multiplication. 

Section 2 
Exercises 
29 
[10] 
[_.!__"3] 
[ -.!_ "3] 
18.The set of2x2 matricesG={e,a,b}wheree= Ol ,a= 
1
- ~ ,andb= 
- f}.~ under 
matrix multiplication. 
19. Let S be the set of all real numbers except -1. Define * on S by 
a* b = a+ b + ab. 
a. Show that * gives a binary operation on S. 
b. Show that (S, *) is a group. 
c. Find the solution of the equation 2 * x * 3 = 7 in S. 
20. This exercise shows that there are two nonisomorphic group structures on a set of 4 elements. 
Let the set be {e, a, b, c), with e the identity element for the group operation. A group table would then have 
to start in the manner shown in Table 2.29. The square indicated by the question mark cannot be filled in with 
a. It must be filled in either with the identity element e or with an element different from both e and a. In this 
latter case, it is no loss of generality to assume that this element is b. If this square is filled in with e, the table 
can then be completed in two ways to give a group. Find these two tables. (You need not check the associative 
law.) If this square is filled in with b, then the table can only be completed in one way to give a group. Find this 
table. (Again, you need not check the associative law.) Of the three tables you now have, two give isomorphic 
groups. Determine which two tables these are, and give the one-to-one onto relabeling function which is an 
isomorphism. 
a. Are all groups of 4 elements commutative? 
b. Find a way to relabel the four matrices 
so the matrix multiplication table is identical to one you constructed. This shows that the table you con-
structed defines an associative operation and therefore gives a group. 
c. Show that for a particular value of n, the group elements given in Exercise 14 can be relabeled so their 
group table is identical to one you constructed. This implies the operation in the table is also associative. 
21. According to Exercise 12 of Section 1, there are 16 possible binary operations on a set of 2 elements. How 
many of these give a structure of a group? How many of the 19,683 possible binary operations on a set of 
3 elements give a group structure? 
Concepts 
22. Consider our axioms ~ . ;?;2, and ~ for a group. We gave them in the order ~ 
;?;2~. Conceivable other 
orders to state the axioms are ~ 
~;?;2. ;?;2~ ~. ;?;2~~, ~~ 
;?;2, and ~;?;2~ . Of these six possible 
orders, exactly three are acceptable for a definition. Which orders are not acceptable, and why? (Remember 
this. Most instructors ask the student to define a group on at least one test.) 
2.29 Table 
* 
e 
a 
b 
c 
e 
e 
a 
b 
c 
a 
a 
? 
b 
b 
c 
c 
23. The following "definitions" of a group are taken verbatim, including spelling and punctuation, from papers of 
students who wrote a bit too quickly and carelessly. Criticize them. 
a. A group G is a set of elements together with a binary operation * such that the following conditions are 
satisfied 

30 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
* is associative 
There exists e E G such that 
e * x = x * e = x = identity. 
For every a E G there exists an a' (inverse) such that 
b. A group is a set G such that 
The operation on G is associative. 
there is an identity element (e) in G. 
a·a'=a' ·a= e 
for every a E G, there is an a' (inverse for each element) 
c. A group is a set with a binary operation such 
the binary operation is defined 
an inverse exists 
an identity element exists 
d. A set G is called a group over the binery operation * such that for all a, b E G 
Binary operation * is associative under addition 
there exist an element {e} such that 
Fore every element a there exists an element a' such that 
a*a'=a'*a=e 
24. Give a table defining an operation satisfying axioms 3}2 and ~ in the definition of a group, but not satisfying 
axiom ~ for the set 
a. {e,a,b) 
b. {e,a,b,c) 
25. Mark each of the following true or false. 
a. A group may have more than one identity element. 
b. Any two groups of three elements are isomorphic. 
___ c. In a group, each linear equation has a solution. 
d. The proper attitude toward a definition is to memorize it so that you can reproduce it word for 
word as in the text. 
e. Any definition a person gives for a group is correct provided that everything that is a group by that 
person's definition is also a group by the definition in the text. 
___ f. Any definition a person gives for a group is correct provided he or she can show that everything 
that satisfies the definition satisfies the one in the text and conversely. 
___ g. Every finite group of at most three elements is abelian. 
___ h. An equation of the form a * x * b = c always has a unique solution in a group. 
___ i. The empty set can be considered a group. 
___ j. Every group is a binary algebraic structure. 
Proof synopsis 
We give an example of a proof synopsis. Here is a one-sentence synopsis of the proof that the inverse of an element 
a in a group (G, *) is unique. 
Assuming that a* a'= e and a* a"= e, apply the left cancellation law to the equation a* a'= a* a". 
Note that we said "the left cancellation law" and not "Theorem 2.16." We always suppose that our synopsis was 
given as an explanation given during a conversation at lunch, with no reference to text numbering and as little 
notation as is practical. 

Section 2 
Exercises 
31 
26. Give a one-sentence synopsis of the proof of the left cancellation law in Theorem 2.16. 
27. Give at most a two-sentence synopsis of the proof in Theorem 2.17 that an equation ax = b has a unique 
solution in a group. 
Theory 
28. An element a ::j: e in a group is said to have order 2 if a * a= e. Prove that if G is a group and a E G has order 
2, then for any b E G, b' *a* b also has order 2. 
29. Show that if G is a finite group with identity e and with an even number of elements, then there is a ::j: e in G 
such that a* a = e. 
30. Let JR* be the set of all real numbers except 0. Define * on JR* by letting a * b = lalb. 
a. Show that * gives an associative binary operation on JR*. 
b. Show that there is a left identity for * and a right inverse for each element in JR*. 
c. Is JR* with this binary operation a group? 
d. Explain the significance of this exercise. 
31. If * is a binary operation on a set S, an element x of S is an idempotent for * if x * x = x. Prove that a group 
has exactly one idempotent element. (You may use any theorems proved so far in the text.) 
32. Show that every group G with identity e and such that x * x = e for all x E G is abelian. [Hint: Consider 
(a* b) *(a* b).] 
33. Let G be an abelian group and let c" = c * c * · · · * c for n factors c, where c E G and n E ;z;+. Give a mathe-
matical induction proof that (a* b)" =(a")* (b") for all a, b E G. 
34. Suppose that G is a group and a, b E G satisfy a* b = b *a' where as usual, a' is the inverse for a. Prove that 
b *a = a' * b. 
35. Suppose that G is a group and a and b are elements of G that satisfy a * b = b * a3. Rewrite the element 
(a * b)2 in the form bkar. (See Exercise 33 for power notation.) 
36. Let G be a group with a finite number of elements. Show that for any a E G, there exists an n E ;z;+ such that 
a" = e. See Exercise 33 for the meaning of a". [Hint: Consider e, a, a2 , a3, .. . , a
111
, where m is the number of 
elements in G, and use the cancellation laws.] 
37. Show that if (a* b)2 = a2 * b2 for a and bin a group G, then a* b = b *a. See Exercise 33 for the meaning 
of a2 . 
38. Let G be a group and let a, b E G. Show that (a* b)' = a' * b' if and only if a* b = b *a. 
39. Let G be a group and suppose that a* b * c = e for a, b, c E G. Show that b * c *a = e also. 
40. Prove that a set G, together with a binary operation * on G satisfying the left axioms 1, 2, and 3 given after 
Corollary 2.19, is a group. 
41. Prove that a nonempty set G, together with an associative binary operation * on G such that 
a* x = band y * a = b have solutions in G for all a, b E G, 
is a group. [Hint: Use Exercise 40.] 
42. Let G be a group. Prove that (a')' = a. 
43. Let <f> : 11!:.2 --+ 11!:.2 be an isometry of the plane. 
a. Prove that <f> is a one-to-one function. 
b. Prove that <f> maps onto 11!:.2. 
44. Prove that if f : G 1 --+ G2 is a group isomorphism from the group ( G 1, * 1) to the group ( G2, *2), then 
1- 1 : G2 --+ G1 is also a group isomorphism. 
45. Suppose that G is a group with n elements and A <;:: G has more than ~ elements. Prove that for every g E G, 
there exists a, b E A such that a* b =g. (This was Problem B-2 on the 1968 Putnam exam.) 

32 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
SECTION 3 
ABELIAN EXAMPLES 
In this section we introduce two families of abelian groups and one special abelian 
group. These groups will be very useful in our study of groups in that they provide 
examples we can use to help understand concepts and test conjectures. Furthermore, we 
will see that some of them arise frequently in the study of groups. 
We start by defining the set Z 11 = (0, 1, 2, 3, ... , n -
1}, the first n -
1 positive in-
tegers together with 0, which makes a total of n elements. To define an operation +,, on 
Z,,, we let a, b E Z 11 • Then 
b-{ a+b 
if a+b< n 
a +,, -
a + b - n if a + b ='.'.: n · 
Note that for any a, b E Z11 , 0 :::: a+ b :::: 2n - 2, so 0 :::: a +11 b :::: n - 1 is an op-
eration which we call addition modulo n. Addition modulo n is clearly commutative: 
a +,, b = b +,, a for any a, b E Z,,. The number 0 is an identity, the inverse of a E Z,, is 
n - a for a "I 0, and the inverse of 0 is 0. To show that (Z,,, +11 ) is an abelian group, it 
only remains to show that +11 is associative. Although it is not difficult to show directly 
that +11 is associative, it is a little tedious, so we defer the proof until we develop the 
circle group and then use properties of that group to conclude that (Z,,, +,,) is an abelian 
group. 
3.1 Example 
For n = 1, Z 1 = {O}, which is the trivial group with just one element. For n = 2, Z2 = 
(0, l}, which as we saw in Section 2 is isomorphic with (1,-1} under multiplication. 
It is important to note that completely different operations on sets can still define iso-
morphic groups. We also saw in Section 2 that any group with exactly three elements 
is isomorphic with any other group with exactly three elements. Therefore Z3 under 
addition modulo 3 is isomorphic with the group consisting of the three matrices 
3.2 Example 
{[l OJ [_1 _v'3] [-l v'3 ]} 
0 1 , 1 -~ , -1 ~~ 
under matrix multiplication. Again we see that two groups can be isomorphic, but have 
completely different sets and operations. 
.&. 
Let us look more closely at the group table for Z4 , Table 3.3. We see that the 
inverse for 0 is 0, the inverse for 1 is 4 - 1 = 3, and the inverse for 2 is 4 - 2 = 2. 
In Exercise 20 in Section 2, you were asked to show that there are two groups with 
exactly four elements. The other group is the Klein 4-group denoted V, which stands 
for Vier, German for "four." The group table for V is displayed as Table 3.4. How can 
we tell that the two groups Z4 and V are not isomorphic? We could try all possible one-
to-one functions from Z4 onto K4 to see if any of them make the table for Z4 look like 
the table for K4. This is tedious, so instead we look for a sneaky method. Notice that 
the diagonal entries of the table for K4 are all the identity. No matter how we relabel 
3.3 Table 
3.4 Table 
Z4: 
+4 
0 
2 
3 
V: 
* 
e 
a 
b 
c 
0 
0 
2 
3 
e 
e 
a 
b 
c 
1 
1 
2 
3 
0 
a 
a 
e 
c 
b 
2 
2 
3 
0 
1 
b 
b 
c 
e 
a 
3 
3 
0 
1 
2 
c 
c 
b 
a 
e 

Section 3 
Abelian Examples 
33 
the entries in the table for Z4, only two entries along the diagonal will be the same. 
Therefore Z4 and K4 are not isomorphic. 
..&. 
Looking back at the definition of + 11 there is no reason we had to restrict our set 
to integers a with 0 :::: a < n. In fact, the same formula defines an operation on all real 
numbers a with 0 :::: a < n. In general, let c be any positive real number and a, b E [0, c). 
We define +c by 
b _ { a + b 
if a + b < c 
a +c -
a + b - c if a + b 2: c · 
This operation is called addition modulo c. It is easy to see that addition modulo c 
is an operation on [O, c), it is commutative, 0 is an identity, the inverse of 0 is 0, and 
the inverse of any a E (0, c) is c - a. Instead of writing [0, c) we will denote this set 
as !Re. In order to show that (IR0 + c) is an abelian group, it remains to show that +c is 
associative. Again, we defer the proof until after we develop the circle group. 
3.5 Example 
Let c = 2rc. Then ~re +zrr ~re = ~re and ~re +zrr ~re = ~re . The inverse of I is 2rc -
1 =ire. 
"' 
In the group (IR2rr, + 2rr), we are essentially equating 0 with 2rc in the sense that 
if a and b add to give 2rc, we know that a + zrr b = 0. Intuitively, we can think of this 
geometrically as taking a string of length 2rc and attaching the ends together to form a 
circle of radius 1. Our next goal is to make this idea more precise by defining a group 
on the unit circle in the plane and showing that this group is isomorphic with IR2rr . To 
do this, we first review some facts about complex numbers. 
yi 
4i 
3i 
2i bi 
a+ bi 
- _________ , 
I 
I 'a 
- 4 -3 -2 - I 
0 
2 
3 
4 
-i 
-2i 
3.6 Figure 
Complex Numbers 
A real number can be visualized geometrically as a point on a line that we often regard 
as an x-axis. A complex number can be regarded as a point in the Euclidean plane, as 
shown in Fig. 3.6. Note that we label the vertical axis as the yi-axis rather than just the 
y-axis, and label the point one unit above the origin with i rather than 1. The point with 
Cartesian coordinates (a, b) is labeled a+ bi in Fig. 3.6. The set C of complex numbers 
is defined by 
C ={a+bi la,bEIR). 
We consider IR to be a subset of the complex numbers by identifying a real number r 
with the complex number r + Oi. For example, we write 3 + Oi as 3 and -re + Oi as -re 
and 0 + Oi as 0. Similarly, we write 0 + l i as i and 0 + si as si. 

34 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
Complex numbers were developed after the development of real numbers. The 
complex number i was invented to provide a solution to the quadratic equation x2 = -1, 
so we require that 
i2 = -1. 
(1) 
Unfortunately, i has been called an imaginary number, and this terminology has led 
generations of students to view the complex numbers with more skepticism than the 
real numbers. Actually, all numbers, such as I, 3, rr, -J3, and i are inventions of our 
minds. There is no physical entity that is the number 1. If there were, it would surely 
be in a place of honor in some great scientific museum, and past it would file a steady 
stream of mathematicians, gazing at 1 in wonder and awe. A basic goal of this text is to 
show how we can invent solutions of polynomial equations when the coefficients of the 
polynomial may not even be real numbers! 
Multiplication of Complex Numbers 
The product (a+ bi)(c + di) is defined in the way it must be if we are to enjoy the 
familiar properties of real arithmetic and require that i2 = -1, in accord with Eq. (1). 
Namely, we see that we want to have 
(a+ bi)(c +di) = ac + adi + bci + bdi2 
= ac + adi + bci + bd(-1) 
= (ac - bd) +(ad+ bc)i. 
Consequently, we define multiplication of z1 = a + bi and z2 = c +di as 
z1z2 = (a+ bi)(c +di)= (ac - bd) +(ad+ bc)i, 
(2) 
which is of the form r + si with r = ac - bd and s =ad+ be. It is routine to check 
that the usual properties z1z2 = z2z1(commutative), z1(z2z3) = (z1z2)z3 (associative), 
and z1(z2 + Z3) = z1z2 + Z1Z3 (distributive) all hold for all z1, z2,Z3 EC. 
3.7 Example 
Compute (2 - 5i)(8 + 3i). 
Solution 
We don't memorize Eq. (2), but rather we compute the product as we did to motivate 
that equation. We have 
(2 - 5i)(8 + 3i) = 16 + 6i - 40i + 15 = 31 - 34i. 
To establish the geometric meaning of complex multiplication, we first define the abso-
lute value la + bil of a + bi by 
la + bil = J a2 + b2. 
(3) 
This absolute value is a nonnegative real number and is the distance from a + bi to the 
origin in Fig. 3.6. We can now describe a complex number z in the polar-coordinate form 
z = lzl(cos e + i sine), 
(4) 
where e is the angle measured counterclockwise from the positive x-axis to the vector 
from 0 to z, as shown in Fig. 3.8. A famous formula due to Leonard Euler states that 
e;e = cose + isine. 
Euler's Formula 

Section 3 
Abelian Examples 
35 
yi 
0 
lzl cos I) 
3.8 Figure 
We ask you to derive Euler's formula formally from the power series expansions for 
e8 ,cos8, and sin 8 in Exercise 43. Using this formula, we can express z in Eq. (4) as 
z = lzle;e. Let us set 
and 
and compute their product in this form, assuming that the usual laws of exponentiation 
hold with complex number exponents. We obtain 
z1z2 = lz1 le;e, lz2le;e, = lz1 llz2lei(e,+eil 
(5) 
Note that Eq. 5 concludes in the polar form of Eq. 4 where lz1z2I = lz1 llz2I and the 
polar angle 8 for z1z2 is the sum 8 = 81 + 82 . Thus, geometrically, we multiply com-
plex numbers by multiplying their absolute values and adding their polar angles, as 
shown in Fig. 3.9. Exercise 41 indicates how this can be derived via trigonomet-
ric identities without recourse to Euler's formula and assumptions about complex 
exponentiation. 
yi 
3i 
yi 
Zz 
2i 
ZJ 
7T/2 
--'+--'--
-'---.... x 
- 2 
- 1 
0 
2 
0 
3.9 Figure 
3.10 Figure 
Note that i has polar angle rr / 2 and absolute value 1, as shown in Fig. 3.10. Thus i2 
has polar angle 2(rr / 2) = rr and 11 · 11 = 1, so that i2 = - 1. 
3.11 Example 
Find all solutions in C of the equation z2 = i. 
Solution 
Writing the equation z2 = i in polar form and using Eq. (5), we obtain 
lzl2(cos W + i sin 28) = 1(0 + i). 
Thus lzl2 = 1, so lzl = 1. The angle 8 for z must satisfy cos W = 0 and sin W = 1. 
Consequently, W = (rr/2) + n(2rr), so 8 = (rr/ 4) + nrr for an integer n. The values of 

36 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
n yielding values 8 where 0 :::: 8 < 2n are 0 and I, yielding 8 = n /4 or 8 = Sn / 4. Our 
solutions are 
and 
( 
Sn 
Sn) 
z2 = 1 cos 4 + i sin 4 
or 
1 
Z1 = .J2(1 + i) 
and 
- 1 
z2 = .J2(1 + i). 
3.12 Example 
Find all solutions of z4 = -16. 
Solution 
As in Example 3.11 we write the equation in polar form, obtaining 
lzl4(cos 48 + i sin 48) = 16(-1 + Oi). 
Consequently, lzl4 = 16, so lzl = 2 while cos 48 = - 1 and sin 48 = 0. We find that 
48 = n + n(2n), so 8 = (n/ 4) + n(n/ 2) for integers n. The different values of 8 
obtained where 0 ::=: 8 < 2n are n /4, 3n / 4, Sn / 4, and 7n / 4. Thus one solution of 
z4 = - 16 is 
In a similar way, we find three more solutions, 
.J2(-1 + i), 
.J2(-1 - i), 
and 
.J2(1 - i) . 
The last two examples illustrate that we can find solutions of an equation z" = 
a + bi by writing the equation in polar form. There will always be n solutions, provided 
that a+ bi f=. 0. Exercises 16 through 21 ask you to solve equations of this type. 
We will not use addition or division of complex numbers, but we probably should 
mention that addition is given by 
(a + bi)+ (e +di) = (a+ e) + (b + d)i. 
(6) 
and division of a+ bi by nonzero e +di can be performed using only division of real 
numbers as follows: 
a+ bi 
a +bi e - di 
(ae + bd) + (be - ad)i 
e + di 
e + di 
e - di 
e2 + d2 
ae + bd 
be - ad . 
= ---+---l. 
e2+d2 
e2+d2 
(7) 
yi 
3.13 Figure 

Section 3 
Abelian Examples 
37 
Algebra on the Unit Circle 
Let u = {z E re I lzl = l }, so that u is the circle in the Euclidean plane with center at 
the origin and radius l , as shown in Fig. 3.13. 
3.14 Theorem 
(U, ·)is an abelian group. 
Proof 
We first check that U is closed under multiplication. Let z1, z2 E U. Then lzil = lz2 I = l, 
which implies that lz1z1 I = l , showing z1z2 E U. 
Since multiplication of complex numbers is associative and commutative in gen-
eral, multiplication in U is also associative and commutative, which verifies ~ and the 
condition for abelian. 
The number l E U is the identity, verifying condition $2. 
Foreacha+bi EU, 
(a + bi)(a - bi) = a2 - (bi)2 = a2 + b2 = la + bil2 = 1. 
So the inverse of a+ bi is a - bi, which verifies condition ~. Thus U is an abelian 
group under multiplication. 
+ 
Figure 3.13 gives us a way of relabeling points in U as points in R2rr . We simply 
relabel z as e where 0 :S e < 2TC. Let f : U --+ R2rr be given by f (z) = e according 
to this relabeling. Then for z1, z2 E U,f(z1z2) = /(z1) + 2rr /(z2) since multiplying in U 
simply adds the corresponding angles: 
if Z1 *+ gl 
and 
Z2 *+ e2, 
then 
Z1 · Z2 *+ (e1 +irr e2). 
(8) 
Recall that all that remains to show that R2rr is a group is to show that +zrr is associative. 
Since the operations of multiplication in U and addition modulo 2TC in R2rr are the same 
using the above relabeling and multiplication in U is associative, addition modulo 2TC is 
also associative. This completes the proof that (Rirr, + zrr) is a group. Furthermore, the 
relabeling (8) shows that the two groups ( U, ·) and (R2rr, +2rr) are isomorphic. In Exer-
cise 45, you will be asked to prove that for any b > 0 and c > 0, (Rb, +b) is an abelian 
group and (Rb,+b) '.::'. (Rc, + c). Since (R2rr,+2rr) is isomorphic with (U, ·), for every 
c > 0, (Re, +c) is also isomorphic with (U, ·),meaning they have the same algebraic 
properties. 
3.15 Example 
The equation z · z · z · z = l in U has exactly four solutions, namely, I, i, - 1, and -i. 
Now 1 E U and 0 E R1rr correspond, and the equation x +1rr x +zrr x +zrr x = 0 in R2rr 
has exactly four solutions, namely, 0, TC /2, TC, and 3TC / 2, which, of course, correspond 
to 1, i, - 1, and - i, respectively. 
.& 
Roots of Unity 
The elements of the set Un = {z E re It' = I} are called the nth roots of unity. In 
Exercise 46 you are asked to prove that U11 is a group under multiplication. Using the 
techniques from Examples 3.11 and 3.12, we see that the elements of this set are the 
numbers eC
111';!-)i = cos ( m 2:) + i sin ( m 2:
) 
form= 0, 1, 2, ... , n -
1. 
They all have absolute value 1, so U11 c U. If we let ~ = cos 2rr + i sin 2rr, then these 
ll 
" 
nth roots of unity can be written as 
(9) 
Because~" = l , these n powers of~ are closed under multiplication. For example, with 
n = 10, we have 

38 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
Thus we see that we can compute titj by computing i +,J, viewing i andj as elements 
ofZn. 
By relabeling an element t'n E Un tom E Zn we can see that addition modulo n in 
Zn is also associative, which completes the proof that (Zn, +n) is an abelian group. 
3.16 Example 
We solve the equation x + s x + s x = 1 in Zs using trial and error. We note that nei-
ther 0, 1, nor 2 is a solution simply by substitution. However, substituting x = 3 gives 
3 + s 3 + s 3 = 6 + s 3 = 1, which shows x = 3 is a solution. We can also check by 
substituting that neither 4, 5, 6, nor 7 are solutions. So the only solution is x = 3. 
Because Zs is isomorphic with Us by the correspondence k E Zs corresponds with 
t k, the corresponding equation in Us is z · z · z = t = / F Without further calcula-
tions we know that there is only one solution to z · z · z = t in Us and that solution 
. 
3 
3"'; 
(6 / 8) 
.. (6 / 8) 
../2 
../2. . 
hi . 
h 
1s z = t = e ' =cos n 
+ism n 
= - 2 + 2
1 smce t s 1s t e corre-
sponding solution in Zs. 
There are three solutions to z3 = t in U. We leave it to the reader to find the solu-
tions and check that only one of them, t 3, is in Us. 
"'-
We summarize the results of this section. 
1. For any n E z+, Zn is an abelian group under addition modulo n. 
2. For any n E z+, Zn is isomorphic with Un, an abelian group under complex 
number multiplication. 
3. For any c > 0, Re under addition modulo c is a group. 
4. U under multiplication is a group. 
5. 
For any c E JR+, lRc under addition modulo c is isomorphic with U under 
multiplication. 
• EXERCISES 3 
In Exercises I through 9 compute the given arithmetic expression and give the answer in the form a+ bi for 
a,b E JR:.. 
2. i4 
3. i26 
4. (-i)39 
6. (8 + 2i)(3 - i) 
7. (2 - 3i)(4 + i) + (6 - Si) 
5. (3 - 2i)(6 + i) 
8. (I + i)3 
9. (I - i)5 (Use the binomial theorem.) 
10. Find IS - 12il. 
11. Find In+ eil. 
In Exercises 12 through lS write the given complex number z in the polar form lzl(p +qi) where IP+ qil = 1. 
12. 3 - 4i 
13. -1 - i 
14. 12 +Si 
15. -3 +Si 
In Exercises 16 through 21, find all solutions in C of the given equation. 
16. z4 = 1 
17. z4 = -1 
18. z3 = -12S 
19. z3 = -27i 
20. z6 = l 
21. z6 = -64 
In Exercises 22 through 27, compute the given expression using the indicated modular addition. 
22. 10 +11 16 
23. 14 +99 92 
24. 3.141+42.718 
25 
I 
7 
26 3rr 
3rr 
r;::; 
r;::; 
· 2 +1 8 
· 4 + 2rr T 
27. 2-v2+v!J2 3-v2 
28. Explain why the expression S +6 8 in JR:.6 makes no sense. 

Section 4 
Nonabelian Examples 
39 
In Exercises 29 through 34, find all solutions x of the given equation. 
29. x + 10 7 = 3 in Z 10 
31. x +1 x = 3 in Z1 
33. x + 12 x = 2 in Z12 
30. x +21r lT = ~ in IR2rr 
32. x + 13 x + 13 x = 5 in Z 13 
34. x +s x +s x +s x = 4 in Zs 
35. Prove or give a counterexample to the statement that for any n E z+ and a E Z,,, the equation x +,, x =a has 
at most two solutions in Z,,. 
36. Prove or give a counterexample to the statement that for any n E z+ and a E Z,,, if n is not a multiple of 3, 
then the equation x +,, x +,, x =a has exactly one solution in Z,,. 
37. There is an isomorphism of Us with Zs in which ( = ei(rr/ 4) ++ 5 and ( 2 ++ 2. Find the element of Zs that 
corresponds to each of the remaining six elements (
111 in Us for m = 0, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. 
38. There is an isomorphism of U1 with Z7 in which ( = ei(2rr/?) ++ 4. Find the element in Z7 to which ('" must 
correspond for m = 0, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
39. Why can there be no isomorphism of U6 with Z6 in which ( = ei(rr/ 3l corresponds to 4? 
40. Derive the formulas 
sin(a + b) = sin acosb + cosasinb 
and 
cos(a + b) = cosacosb - sinasin b 
by using Euler's formula and computing eiaeih. 
41. Let z1 = Jzil(cos 81 + i sin 81) and z2 = Jz2J(cos 82 + i sin 82). Use the trigonometric identities in Exercise 40 
toderivez1z2 = Jzil lz2J[cos(81 +82)+isin(81 +82)). 
42. a. Derive a formula for cos 38 in terms of sin 8 and cos 8 using Euler's formula. 
b. Derive the formula cos 38 = 4 cos3 8 - 3 cos 8 from part (a) and the identity sin2 8 + cos2 8 = 1. (We will 
have use for this identity in Section 4 1.) 
43. Recall the power series expansions 
x2 
x3 
x4 
x" 
ex= 1 +x+ -
+ -
+ -
+ · · · + -
+ · · · 
2! 
3! 
4! 
n! 
' 
x3 
x5 
x? 
x2n- I 
sinx=x - -+- - -
+ · · · + (- 1)
11
- 1 
+·· ·
and 
3! 
5! 
7! 
(2n - l)! 
' 
x2 
x4 
x6 
x2" 
COSX = 1 - -
+ -
- -
+ · · · + (- 1 )
11 -- + · · · 
2! 
4! 
6! 
(2n)! 
from calculus. Derive Euler's formula e;e = cos 8 + i sin 8 formally from these three series expansions. 
44. Prove that for any n E z+, (Z,,, +,,) is associative without using the fact that U,, is associative. 
45. Let b, c E JR+. Find a one-to-one and onto function!: !Rb --+ !Re that has the homomorphism property. Con-
clude that !Re is an abelian group that is isomorphic with U. 
46. Prove that for any n ~ 1, U11 is a group. 
SECTION 4 N ONABELIAN EXAMPLES 
Notation and Terminology 
It is time to explain some conventional notation and terminology used in group theory. 
Algebraists as a rule do not use a special symbol * to denote a binary operation different 
from the usual addition and multiplication. They stick with the conventional additive or 
multiplicative notation and even call the operation addition or multiplication, depending 

40 
4.1 Table 
1 
a 
1 
1 
a 
a 
a 
b 
b 
b 
1 
4.2 Table 
+ 
0 
a 
0 
0 
a 
a 
a 
b 
b 
b 
0 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
b 
b 
1 
a 
b 
b 
0 
a 
on the symbol used. The symbol for addition is, of course, +, and usually multiplication 
is denoted by juxtaposition without a dot, if no confusion results. Thus in place of the 
notation a * b, we shall be using either a + b to be read "the sum of a and b," or ab 
to be read "the product of a and b." There is a sort of unwritten agreement that the 
symbol + should be used only to designate commutative operations. Algebraists feel 
very uncomfortable when they see a + b f= b + a. For this reason, when developing 
our theory in a general situation where the operation may or may not be commutative, 
we shall always use multiplicative notation. 
Algebraists frequently use the symbol 0 to denote an additive identity element and 
the symbol 1 to denote a multiplicative identity element, even though they may not be 
actually denoting the integers 0 and I. Of course, if they are also talking about numbers 
at the same time, so that confusion would result, symbols such as e or u are used as 
identity elements. Thus a table for a group of three elements might be one like Table 4.1 
or, since such a group is commutative, the table might look like Table 4.2. In general 
situations we shall continue to use e to denote the identity element of a group. 
It is customary to denote the inverse of an element a in a group by a- 1 in mul-
tiplicative notation and by -a in additive notation. From now on, we shall use these 
notations in place of the symbol a'. 
Let n be a positive integer. If a is an element of a group G, written multiplicatively, 
we denote the product aaa ... a for n factors a by a". We let a0 be the identity element 
e, and denote the product a- 1 a- 1 a- 1 ••• a- 1 for n factors by a- ". It is easy to see that 
our usual law of exponents, a
111a" = a
111+
11 form, n E Z, holds. Form, n E z+, it is clear. 
We illustrate another type of case by an example: 
a-2a5 = a- 1a- 1aaaaa = a- 1(a- 1a)aaaa = a- 1eaaaa = a- 1(ea)aaa 
= a- 'aaaa = (a- 1a)aaa = eaaa = (ea)aa = aaa = a3• 
In additive notation, we denote a+ a + a+ · · · + a for n summands by na, denote 
(-a)+ (-a)+ (-a)+ · · · +(-a) for n summands by -na, and let Oa be the identity 
element. Be careful: In the notation na, the number n is in Z, not in G. One reason 
we prefer to present group theory using multiplicative notation, even if G is abelian, 
is the confusion caused by regarding n as being in G in this notation na. No one ever 
misinterprets then when it appears in an exponent. 
The following table summarizes basic notations and facts using both additive and 
multiplicative notation. We assume that a is an element of a group, n, m are integers, 
and k is a positive integer. 
*Notation 
+Notation 
· Notation 
May or may not be abelian 
Abelian 
May or may not be abelian 
e 
0 
1 
a' 
-a 
a-' 
a*b 
a+b 
ab 
a * a*· .. *a 
ka 
ak 
'-...,---' 
k 
(p' * a' *v .. . * a') 
-ka 
a ·K 
k 
Oa =0 
au= 1 
(n + m)a = na + ma 
a n+m = anam 
n(ma) = (nm)a 
(an)m =am" 
Typically when stating a theorem we will use multiplicative notation, but the theo-
rem also applies when using additive notation by using the above table to translate. 

Section 4 
Nonabelian Examples 
41 
We often refer to the number of elements in a group, so we have a term for this 
number. 
4.3 Definition 
If G is a group, then the order of G is the number of elements or cardinality of G. The 
order of G is denoted IGI. 
• 
Permutations 
We have seen examples of groups of numbers, like the groups Z, Q, and lR under addi-
tion. We have also introduced groups of matrices, like the group GL(2, JR). Each element 
A of GL(2, JR) yields a transformation of the plane JR2 into itself; namely, if we regard 
x as a 2-component column vector, then Ax is also a 2-component column vector. The 
group GL(2, JR) is typical of many of the most useful groups in that its elements act 
on things to transform them. Often, an action produced by a group element can be re-
garded as a function, and the binary operation of the group can be regarded as function 
composition. In this section, we construct some finite groups whose elements, called 
permutations, act on finite sets. These groups will provide us with examples of finite 
nonabelian groups. 
You may be familiar with the notion of a permutation of a set as a rearrangement of 
the elements of the set. Thus for the set { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5), a rearrangement of the elements 
could be given schematically as in Fig. 4.4, resulting in the new arrangement (4, 2, 5, 
3, l}. Let us think of this schematic diagram in Fig. 4.4 as a function mapping each 
element listed in the left column into a single (not necessarily different) element from 
the same set listed at the right. Thus 1 is carried into 4, 2 is mapped into 2, and so 
on. Furthermore, to be a permutation of the set, this mapping must be such that each 
element appears in the right column once and only once. For example, the diagram in 
Fig. 4.5 does not give a permutation, for 3 appears twice while 1 does not appear at all 
in the right column. We now define a permutation to be such a mapping. 
5-> l 
4.4 Figure 
1->3 
5->3 
4.5 Figure 
4.6 Definition 
A permutation of a set A is a function cp : A --+ A that is both one-to-one and onto . • 
Permutation Groups 
We now show that function composition o is a binary operation on the collection of all 
permutations of a set A. We call this operation permutation multiplication. Let A be a 
set, and let a and r be permutations of A so that a and r are both one-to-one functions 
mapping A onto A. The composite function a o r defined schematically by 
gives a mapping of A into A. Rather than keep the symbol o for permutation multipli-
cation, we will denote a o r by the juxtaposition a r. Now a r will be a permutation 
if it is one-to-one and onto A. Remember that the action of ar on A must be read in 
right-to-left order: first apply r and then a. Let us show that a r is one-to-one. If 

42 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
then 
and since a is given to be one-to-one, we know that r(a 1) = r(a2). But then, since r 
is one-to-one, this gives a 1 = a2 . Hence ar is one-to-one. To show that ar is onto A, 
let a EA. Since a is onto A, there exists a' EA such that a(a') = a. Since r is onto A, 
there exists a" EA such that r(a") = a'. Thus 
a= a(a') = a(r(a")) = (ar)(a"), 
soar is onto A. 
4.7 Example 
Suppose that 
A= {l ,2,3,4,5) 
and that a is the permutation given by Fig. 4.4. We write a in a more standard notation, 
changing the columns to rows in parentheses and omitting the arrows, as 
a -(1 
2 
3 4 i), 
-
4 2 
5 
3 
so that a(!) = 4, a(2) = 2, and so on. Let 
r - (1 
2 
3 4 ;) . 
-
3 5 4 2 
Then 
ar - (1 
2 3 4 ;)G 
2 
3 4 ;) = G 
2 
3 4 
~). 
-
4 
2 5 
3 
5 4 
2 
I 
3 2 
For example, multiplying in right-to-left order, 
(ar)(l) = a(r(l)) = a (3) = 5. 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
O
ne of the earliest recorded studies of per-
mutations occurs in the Sefer Yetsirah, or 
Book of Creation, written by an unknown Jew-
ish author sometime before the eighth century. 
The author was interested in counting the var-
ious ways in which the letters of the He-
brew alphabet can be arranged. The question 
was in some sense a mystical one. It was 
believed that the letters had magical powers; 
therefore, suitable arrangements could subjugate 
the forces of nature. The actual text of the 
Sefer Yetsirah is very sparse: "Two letters build two 
words, three build six words, four build 24 words, 
five build 120, six build 720, seven build 5040." 
Interestingly enough, the idea of counting the ar-
rangements of the letters of the alphabet also oc-
curred in Islamic mathematics in the eighth and 
ninth centuries. By the thirteenth century, in both 
the Islamic and Hebrew cultures, the abstract idea 
of a permutation had taken root so that both Abu-
!-' Abbas ibn al-Banna (1256-1321), a mathemati-
cian from Marrakech in what is now Morocco, and 
Levi ben Gerson, a French rabbi, philosopher, and 
mathematician, were able to give rigorous proofs 
that the number of permutations of any set of n el-
ements is n!, as well as prove various results about 
counting combinations. 
Levi and his predecessors, however, were con-
cerned with permutations as simply arrangements 
of a given finite set. It was the search for solutions 
of polynomial equations that led Lagrange and oth-
ers in the late eighteenth century to think of permu-
tations as functions from a finite set to itself, the set 
being that of the roots of a given equation. And it 
was Augustin-Louis Cauchy (1789- 1857) who de-
veloped in detail the basic theorems of permutation 
theory and who introduced the standard notation 
used in this text. 

Section 4 
Nonabelian Examples 
43 
We now show that the collection of all permutations of a nonempty set A forms a 
group under this permutation multiplication. 
4.8 Theorem 
Let A be a nonempty set, and let SA be the collection of all permutations of A. Then SA 
is a group under permutation multiplication. 
Proof 
We have shown that composition of two permutations of A yields a permutation of A, 
so SA is closed under permutation multiplication. 
Now permutation multiplication is defined as function composition, and in 
Section 1, we showed that.function composition is associative. Hence ~ is satisfied. 
The permutation t such that i(a) = a, for all a E A acts as identity. Therefore ~ is 
satisfied. 
For a permutation a, the inverse function, a - 1, is the permutation that reverses the 
direction of the mapping a, that is, a- 1(a) is the element a' of A such that a= a(a'). 
The existence of exactly one such element a' is a consequence of the fact that, as a 
function, a is both one-to-one and onto. For each a E A we have 
t(a) =a= a(a') = a(a - 1(a)) = (aa- 1)(a) 
and also 
t(a') =a' = a- 1(a) = a-1(a(a')) = (a- 1a)(a'), 
so that a- 1a and aa- 1 are both the permutation t. Thus ~ is satisfied. 
• 
Warning: Some texts compute a product aµ, of permutations in left-to-right order, so 
that (a µ,)(a) = µ,(a(a)). Thus the permutation they get for aµ, is the one we would get 
by computing µ,a. Exercise 34 asks us to check in two ways that we still get a group. 
If you refer to another text on this material, be sure to check its order for permutation 
multiplication. 
There was nothing in our definition of a permutation to require that the set A be 
finite. However, most of our examples of permutation groups will be concerned with 
permutations of finite sets. Note that the structure of the group SA is concerned only 
with the number of elements in the set A, and not what the elements in A are. If sets A 
and B have the same cardinality, then SA '.::::'. S8 . To define an isomorphism fjJ: SA --+ S8 , 
we let/: A --+ B be a one-to-one function mapping A onto B, which establishes that A 
and B have the same cardinality. For a E SA, we Jet f/J(a) be the permutation a E S8 such 
that a(f(a)) = f(a(a)) for all a EA. To illustrate this for A = { 1, 2, 3} and B = {#, $, % } 
and the function!: A --+ B defined as 
fjJ maps 
f(l) = #, f(2) = $, f(3) = %, 
2 
2 3) . (# 
1 
mto 
% 
$ 
$ %) 
# 
. 
We simply rename the elements of A in our two-row notation by elements in B using 
the renaming function f, thus renaming elements of SA to be those of S8 . We can take 
{ 1, 2, 3, · · ·, n} to be a prototype for a finite set A of n elements. 
4.9 Definition 
Let A be the finite set { 1, 2, · · · , n}. The group of all permutations of A is the symmetric 
group on n letters, and is denoted by Sn. 
• 
Note that Sn has n! elements, where 
n! = n(n - l )(n - 2) · · · (3)(2)(1). 

44 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
( 123) 
(123) 
Let <I = 
2 1 3 
and r = 
1 3 2 . Then 
<Ir(l) = <I(l) = 2 
and 
rn(l) = 3 
which says that <I r op r <I. Therefore S3 is not abelian. We have seen that any group with 
at most four elements is abelian. Furthermore we will see later that up to isomorphism, 
the abelian group Z5 is the only group of order 5. Thus S3 is the smallest group which 
is not abelian. 
4.10 Example 
Suppose that <I = ( ~; ~ ~ ~ ~). We find the inverse <I- 1. We saw in the proof of 
Theorem 4.8 that the inverse function of a permutation is the group inverse. So it is easy 
to find inverses for permutations, we simply tum the tables! That is, we switch the top 
and bottom rows and sort the columns so the top row is in order: 
- '=(123456) 
(J 
421563. 
Disjoint Cycles 
There is a more efficient way of specifying the action of a permutation. In the two-
row notation that we have been using, we list each number 1 through n twice, once 
in the top row and once in the bottom row. Disjoint cycle notation allows us to write 
the permutation using each number only once. We illustrate with an example. Let <I = 
( 
I 2 3 4 5 6) ..,.. 
. . d. . . 
l 
. 
b 
.. 
3 4 6 2 5 1 . 10 wnte m ISJOmt eye e notation we start y wntmg 
(I 
We see that <I(l) = 3, so we place 3 just to the right of 1: 
(1,3 
Now we see that <I maps 3 to 6, so we write: 
(1, 3, 6 
Our permutation maps 6 to 1, but there is no reason to write 1 again, so we just place a 
parenthesis after the 6 to indicate that 6 maps back to the first element listed: 
(1,3,6) 
This is called a cycle because when we apply <I repeatedly, we cycle through the 
numbers 1, 3, and 6. A cycle containing exactly k numbers is called a k-cycle. So the 
cycle ( 1, 3, 6) is a 3-cycle. This is not the end of the story for <I because we have not 
indicated that 2 maps to 4. So we start another cycle and write 
(I, 3, 6)(2, 4 
to indicate that <I maps 2 to 4. Since 4 maps back to 2, we obtain a 2-cycle: 
(1, 3, 6)(2, 4) 
We still have not indicated what <I does to 5. We can write (1, 3, 6)(2, 4)(5) to indicate 
that 5 maps to itself, but usually we will simply leave out I-cycles with the understand-
ing that any number not listed maps to itself. So in disjoint cycle notation 
(J = (1, 3, 6)(2, 4). 

Section 4 
Nonabelian Examples 
45 
We see that CJ is a product of a 3-cycle and a 2-cycle. Sometimes we refer to a 
2-cycle as a transposition. 
A collection of cycles is said to be disjoint if no entry is in more than one cycle. 
Note that CJ could also be written as (3, 6, 1)(4, 2), (2, 4)(1, 3, 6), or in a number of other 
ways. In general it doesn't matter which order we write the disjoint cycles, and inside 
each cycle we can start with any number as long as we keep the cyclic order the same. 
It is clear that any permutation in Sil can be written in disjoint cycle notation and that 
the representation is unique up to the order the cycles are written and the cyclic order 
within each cycle. 
4.11 Example 
In disjoint cycle notation, CJ E S9 is written as (1, 5, 2, 7)(3, 4, 9). Let us rewrite CJ in two-
row notation. Reading off the disjoint cycle notation we see that CJ(l) = 5, CJ(5) = 2, 
CJ(2) = 7, CJ(7) = 1, CJ(3) = 4, CJ(4) = 9, and CJ(9) = 3. Since 6 and 8 do not appear in 
either cycle, we know that CJ(6) = 6 and CJ(8) = 8. Therefore, 
(
1234567 89) 
CJ= 574926183 
The operation that makes Sil a group is composition of functions. Keeping this in mind, 
we can see how to multiply permutations written in disjoint cycle notation. 
4.12 Example 
Let CJ = (1, 5, 3, 2, 6) and r = (1, 2, 4, 3, 6) in S6. Let us find CJr in disjoint cycle nota-
tion without resorting to using two-row notation. So 
CJ! =(I , 5, 3, 2, 6)(1, 2, 4, 3, 6). 
We need to rewrite this product in disjoint cycles. So we ask where 1 is mapped. Since 
the operation is function composition, we see that the cycle r on the right sends 1 to 
2 and then the cycle on the left sends 2 to 6. So CJr(l) = 6 and we start our cycle by 
writing 
(1, 6 
Now we see that r maps 6 to 1 and CJ maps 1 to 5, so we write 
(1, 6, 5 
We note that 5 is not in the cycle (I , 2, 4, 3, 6), so r(5) = 5 and CJr(5) = CJ(5) = 3. So 
we write 
(1,6,5,3 
Continuing in the same manner, we see that 3 maps to 1 and we complete the first cycle: 
(1,6,5,3) 
We are now ready to start the second cycle. We note that we have still not seen where 2 
maps, so we start the next cycle with 2 and we write 
CJ!= (l,5,3,2,6)(1,2,4,3,6) = (1,6,5,3)(2, 4) 
using the same method we used for the first cycle. We know we are through since we 
have used every number 1 through 6. 
.A 
Example 4.12 illustrates the process of multiplying permutations in general. We move 
from right to left between the cycles, and within the cycles we move from left to right. 
4.13 Example 
We compute the product of the permutations 
CJ= (l,5)(2,4)(1,4, 3)(2,5)(4,2, 1) 
using disjoint cycle notation. 

46 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
We start by seeing where 1 is mapped. The first cycle on the right maps 1 to 4. 
We are using function composition, so we next check what (2, 5) does to 4, which is 
nothing. So we move to the cycle (1, 4, 3) and note that 4 is mapped to 3. Next, 3 is not 
in the cycle (2, 4) and so (2, 4) does not move 3 . Finally, (1, 5) also does not move 3 
and we conclude that u(l) = 3. We next need to determine where 3 is mapped by u and 
continue until we arrive at 
CT = (1,3,5,4)(2) = (1, 3,5,4). 
It is interesting to note that in Example 4.13 the group was never specified. The same 
calculation is valid whether the group is S5, S6, or S11 for any n ~ 5. 
4.14 Example 
We compute the inverse of u = (1, 5, 7)(3, 8, 2, 4, 6). We first note that in general for a 
group (ab)- 1 = b- 1a- 1, so 
The inverse of a cycle is simply the cycle written backward: 
CT - I = (6,4,2,8, 3)(7,5, 1). 
This is a perfectly good way of writing u - 1, but since disjoint cycles commute and we 
can start each cycle with any entry in the cycle, we could write 
CT-I = (1, 7,5)(2,8, 3,6,4). 
With a little practice, computing products of permutations in disjoint cycle notation 
becomes routine. We give the table for S3. 
4.15 Table 
S3 
0 
(1, 2, 3) 
(1, 3, 2) 
(I, 2) 
(I , 3) 
(2,3) 
(I , 2, 3) 
(1, 3,2) 
(1, 2) 
( I, 3) 
(2,3) 
(1, 2,3) 
(I , 2, 3) 
(1, 3, 2) 
(I , 3) 
(2, 3) 
(I, 2) 
(1, 3, 2) 
(1,3, 2) 
(1, 2, 3) 
(2,3) 
(1, 2) 
(I , 3) 
(1, 2) 
(1, 2) 
(2, 3) 
(1 , 3) 
(1 , 3,2) 
(1, 2, 3) 
(1, 3) 
(1 , 3) 
(1 ,2) 
(2, 3) 
(1,2,3) 
(1, 3, 2) 
(2,3) 
(2, 3) 
(I, 3) 
(I , 2) 
(I, 3, 2) 
(I, 2, 3) 
Again we can see that S3 is not abelian since the table is not symmetric about the main 
diagonal. We also notice that although disjoint cycles commute, the same cannot be 
said for cycles that are not disjoint. For example we see in Table 4.15 that (I , 2)(2, 3) = 
(1, 2, 3) =I= (1, 3, 2) = (2, 3)(1, 2). 
The Dihedral Group 
We next define a collection of finite groups based on the symmetries of regular n-gons. 
To be specific, we use as our standard regular n-gon the one whose points are U11 • Recall 
that U11 includes the point ( 1, 0) and the other points are spaced uniformly around the 
unit circle to form the vertices of a regular n-gon, which we denote by P11 • We label the 
points starting at (1, 0) with 0 and continue labeling them 1, 2, 3, ... , n -
1 around the 
circle counterclockwise. Note that this is the same labeling as the isomorphism between 
U11 and Z,, that we saw in Section 3. When we refer to a vertex we will reference it by 
its label. So vertex 0 is the point (1, 0). Note that the edges of P,, consist of the line 
segments between vertices k and k +,, 1 for 0 ::: k ::: n - 1. 

Section 4 
Nonabelian Examples 
47 
4.16 Definition 
Let n :=: 3. Then D11 is the set of all one-to-one functions cp : Z 11 --+ Z 11 that map onto Z 11 
with the property that the line segment between vertices i and j is an edge in P11 if and 
only if the line segment between cp(i) and cp(j) is an edge of P,,. The n1h dihedral group 
is the set D,, with binary operation function composition. 
• 
0 
2 
0 
2 
3 
We justify calling (D 11,o) a group with Theorem 4.17. 
4.17 Theorem 
For any n '.:: 3, (D11 , o) is a group. 
Proof 
We first show that function composition is an operation on D,,. Let cp, e E D,, and sup-
pose that the line between vertices i and j is an edge in P11 • Since e E D,,, the line 
between e(i) and e(j) is an edge of P11 • Because cp E D11 , and the line between e(i) and 
e(j) is an edge, the line between cp(e(i)) = cp o 8(i) and cp(8(j)) = cp o 8(j) is an edge of 
P,,. 
We leave it to the reader to check that ifthe line segment between cp(8(i)) =cl> o 8(i) 
and cp(8(j)) = cp o 8(j) is an edge of P,,, then the line segment between i andj is an edge 
of P 11 . 
We also know that the composition of one-to-one and onto functions is one-to-one 
and onto, so cp o e E D11 • Therefore, function composition is an operation on D11 • 
The operation of composition of functions is associative, so ~ is satisfied. The 
function L : Z,, --+ Z,, defined by i(k) = k is an identity in D,,, so ~ is satisfied. Finally, 
if cl> ED,,, then cp- 1 ED,,; the inverse function for facts as the inverse in the group 
sense, so ~ is satisfied. Therefore, (D 11 , o) is a group. 
+ 
Following tradition, we will use multiplicative notation in the dihedral groups instead 
of using o. If the operation on D,, were abelian, we could use additive notation, but in 
Example 4.18 we find that D,, is not abelian. 
4.18 Example 
Let n '.:: 3 and p : Z,, --+ Z,, be given by rotating the n-gon P11 by 2,7, which just rotates 
each vertex to the next one. That is, 
4.19 Figure 
I 
rS> 
4 
p(k) = k +11 1 
for each k E Z,,, as can be visualized in Figure 4.19. The function p matches edges to 
edges and it is one-to-one and onto. Sop E D11 • 
A second element in D,, is reflection about the x-axis, which we callµ,. By glancing 
at Figure 4.20 we see that in D5, µ,(0) = 0, µ,(l) = 4, µ,(2) = 3, µ,(3) = 2, and µ,(4) = 1. 
For any n '.:: 3 in general, if k E Z,,, then 
µ,(k) = - k. 
(Recall that in Z,,, -k is the additive inverse of k, which is n - k fork > 0 and -0 = 0.) 

48 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
4.20 Figure 
I 
Let us check if µ,p = pµ,. We start by checking what each function does to 0. 
·+e' 
µ,(p(O)) = µ,( l ) 
=n-l 
p(µ,(0)) = p(O) 
= 1 
4 
Since n :=:: 3, n -
1 i= I , which implies that µ,p i= pµ,. Thus for all n :=:: 3, D11 is not 
abelian. 
.&. 
4.21 Theorem 
Let n :=:: 3. The order of the dihedral group D 11 is 2n and 
D" = {t, p, p2, p3, ... , p"-1, µ,, µ,p , µ,p2, µ,p3, ... , µ,p"-1 }. 
Proof 
We first show there can be at most 2n elements of D,,. If we map the vertices Z,, to the 
vertices Z,,, vertex 0 has n possible images. Let y be the image of vertex 0. Since y is 
connected by an edge to just two vertices, 1 must map to one of these two vertices. So 
after the image of vertex 0 is determined, there are only two choices for the image of 1. 
After the images of vertices 0 and 1 are determined, the rest are fixed. This means that 
there are at most 2n elements of D,,. 
To show that ID,, I = 2n we only need to show that no two of the functions t = 
po, p, p2, p3, ... , p"-1, µ,, µ,p, µ,p2 , µ,p3, ... , µ,p
11
- 1 are the same. We first suppose that 
p k = p r for some integers 0 _:::: k _:::: n -
1 and 0 _:::: r _:::: n -
I. Then: 
pk(O) = pr(O) 
k +,, 0 = r +,, 0 
k=r 
This shows that no two oft= p 0, p, p2, p3, .. . , p
11
- 1 are the same. 
We next show that no two ofµ, = µ,p0 , µ,p, µ,p2, µ,p3, . .. , µ,p
11
- 1 are the same. As 
before we assume that µ,pk = µ,pr where 0 _:::: k _:::: n - 1 and 0 _:::: r _:::: n - 1 are integers. 
By cancellation, we have pk = pr. But then k = r as shown above. Therefore no two of 
µ, = µ,p0 , µ,p, µ,p2, µ,p3, . .. , µ,p"- 1 are the same. 
It now only remains to show that there are no values fork and r with pk = µ,pr. 
Note that traversing the n-gon in the order 
pk(O), pk(l), pk(2), .. . , pk(n -
1) 
progresses in a counterclockwise manner regardless of which k we use. On the other 
hand, 
traverses the n-gon in a clockwise manner. This shows that there are no values of k and 
r for which pk = µ,pr. Therefore, D,, has at least 2n elements. Combining this with the 
fact that D11 has at most 2n elements shows that ID,, I = 2n and 
D" = {t,p,p2,p3, . .. ,p"-1,µ,,µ,p , µ,p2, µ,p3, · ·· ,µ,pn-1}. 
• 
Theorem 4.21 says that if <P E D11 , then there is an integer 0 _:::: k _:::: n - 1 such that either 
<P = pk or else <P = µ,pk. We refer to this representation of <P as the standard form. 
We notice that each application ofµ, reverses the direction traversed by the images of 
0, I, 2, 3, ... , n. We use this fact in the following example. 
4.22 Example 
Let n :=:: 3. We know pµ, i= µ,p from Example 4.18, so let us determine pµ, E D11 in 
standard form. Each time we apply µ, we reverse the clock direction of the images of 
0, 1, 2, 3, ... , n -
1. This means that µ,pµ, reverses direction twice, so the rotation is 

Section 4 
Nonabelian Examples 
49 
back to counterclockwise. Thus µ,pµ = pk for some k. We determine the value of k by 
determining where 0 is sent: 
k = pk(O) = µpµ(O) = µp(O) = µ.,( l) = n - l 
Therefore, 
µ p µ = p"-1. 
Multiplying both sides on the left by µ., yields: 
µµpµ = µp"- 1 
Since µµ = t, we conclude that 
pµ = µp"- 1. 
When computing products in D,, we normally want our answer in standard form. This 
is not difficult if we keep in mind a few basic facts about the group D,,. We have shown 
some of the properties listed below, and the rest you will be asked to verify in the 
exercises. 
1. p" = t (Rotation by 2n is the identity map.) 
2. (pk)- 1 = p"- k 
3. µ 2 = t, which implies µ.,- 1 =µ.,(Reflect across a line twice is the identity map.) 
4. pk µ., = µp"- k (Example 4.22 fork = 1 and Exercise 30 for any k.) 
4.23 Example 
In the group D5 compute (µp2)(µp ). We see that 
(µp2)(µp) = µp2 µp 
= µ(p2µ )p 
= µ(µp5-2)p 
= µ2p4 
= p4 
4.24 Example 
In the dihedral group D,, compute (µpk)-1. 
(µpk)-1 = (pk)-1 µ-I 
= p"-kµ 
= µp11- (11-k) 
= µpk 
In Example 4.24 we determined that the inverse of µpk is itself, which suggests that 
µpk could be reflection across a line of symmetry. In Exercise 37, you will be asked 
to show this is the case. Geometrically, we can see that each of the elements of the 
form µpk is reflection across a line. Placing one mirror along the line of reflection for 
µ., and another mirror along the line of reflection for µp is the basis for designing a 
kaleidoscope. Any element in D,, can be written as a product using only the elements 
µ.,and µp since we can write p = µµp. In a kaleidoscope successive reflections across 
the mirrors correspond to taking products involvingµ., and µp. So the image you see in 
the kaleidoscope has all the symmetries in D,,. That is, you can rotate the image by 3600 
or reflect it across any one of the lines of reflection for the elements µpk. Figure 4.25
11
is 
a typical image from a kaleidoscope with dihedral group D 16 symmetries. 

50 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
4.25 Figure 
• EXERCISES 4 
Computation 
In Exercises l through 5, compute the indicated product involving the following permutations in S6: 
a = (
3
1 2 3 4 
5 6) 
4 
5 6 2 , 
1. ra 
(
l 
2 
r = 
2 
4 
3 4 5 
l 
3 
6 
3. µ,a 2 
(
l 
2 3 4 
5 
µ,= 5 
2 4 
3 
l 
In Exercises 6 through 9, compute the expressions shown for the permutations a, r, and µ, defined prior to Exer-
cise l. 
6. a 6 
7. µ,2 
8. alOO 
9. µ, 100 
10. Convert the permutations a, r, and µ, defined prior to Exercise l to disjoint cycle notation. 
11. Convert the following permutations in Sg from disjoint cycle notation to two-row notation. 
a. (1, 4, 5)(2, 3) 
b. (1, 8, 5)(2, 6, 7, 3, 4) 
c. (1 , 2, 3)(4, 5)(6, 7, 8) 
12. Compute the permutation products. 
a. (1, 5,2,4)(1,5, 2,3) 
b. (1,5,3)(1,2,3,4,5,6)(1,5,3)- 1 
c. ((1,6, 7,2)2(4,5,2,6r 10 , 7, 3W 1 
d. (1,6)(1,5)(1,4)(1,3)(1,2) 
13. Compute the following elements of D 12. Write your answer in standard form. 
a. µ,p2 µ,ps 
b. µ,plOµ,p- 1 
c. pµ,p-1 
d. (µ,p3 µ,- 1 p-1 )-1 

Section 4 
Exercises 
51 
14. Write the group table for D3. Compare the group tables for D3 and S3. Are the groups isomorphic? 
Let A be a set and let Cf E SA. For a fixed a E A, the set 
Ga.a = {C!"(a) In E Z } 
is the orbit of a under Cf. In Exercises 15 through 17, find the orbit of 1 under the permutation defined prior 
to Exercise 1. 
15. (f 
16. r 
17. µ, 
18. Verify that H = { i, µ,, p2, µ,p2} s; D4 is a group using the operation function composition. 
19. a. Verify that the six matrices 
[l 0 OJ [O 
0 
l 
0 ' 0 
0 0 
1 
l ~ ~] · [~ ~ ~] ·[~ ~ ~] ·[~ ~ ~] · [~ ~ ~i 
00 
010 
010 
100 
001 
form a group under matrix multiplication. [Hint: Don't try to compute all products of these matrices. In-
"'"'· th;ok h= th' oolomo "~tot [ n ;, 
"'"''°="' by moJt;pJy;og ;, 00 th' ldt by "'h of th' m•nfo~.1 
b. What group discussed in this section is isomorphic to this group of six matrices? 
20. After working Exercise 18, write down eight matrices that form a group under matrix multiplication that is 
isomorphic to D4. 
Concepts 
In Exercises 21 through 23, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction 
is needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
21. The dihedral group D,, is the set of all functions</> : Z,, ~ Z,, such that the line segment between vertex i and 
vertex j of U,, is an edge of P,, if and only if the line segment between vertices </>(i) and </>(j) in U,, is an edge 
of P,,. 
22. A permutation of a set Sis a one-to-one map from S to S. 
23. The order of a group is the number of elements in the group. 
In Exercises 24 through 28, determine whether the given function is a permutation of R 
24. !1 : IR ~ IR defined by f1 (x) = x + l 
25. h : IR ~ IR defined by f2(x) = x2 
26. f3 : IR ~ IR defined by f3(x) = -x3 
27. f4 : IR ~ IR defined by f4(x) = rr 
28. fs : IR ~ IR defined by fs(x) = x3 - x2 - 2x 
29. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every permutation is a one-to-one function. 
b. Every function is a permutation if and only if it is one-to-one. 
c. Every function from a finite set onto itself must be one-to-one. 
d. Every subset of an abelian group G that is also a group using the same operation as G is abelian. 
e. The symmetric group S10 has 10 elements. 
f. If</> E D,,, then</> is a permutation on the set Z,,. 
g. The group D,, has exactly n elements. 
h. DJ is a subset of D4. 
Theory 
30. Let n 2: 3 and k E Z,,. Prove that in D,,, pk µ, = µ,p 11-k. 
31. Show that S,, is a nonabelian group for n 2: 3. 

52 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
32. Strengthening Exercise 31, show that if n 2: 3, then the only element of a of Sn satisfying a y = ya for all 
y E S11 is a = L, the identity permutation. 
33. Orbits were defined before Exercise 15. Let a, b EA and a E SA. Show that if Oa,a and O b,a have an element 
in common, then Oa,a = Ob,a· 
34. (See the warning following Theorem 4.8.) Let G be a group with binary operation *· Let G' be the same set as 
G, and define a binary operation *' on G' by x *' y = y * x for all x, y E G'. 
a. (Intuitive argument that G' under *' is a group.) Suppose the front wall of your classroom were made 
of transparent glass, and that all possible products a* b = c and all possible instances a* (b * c) = 
(a* b) * c of the associative property for G under* were written on the wall with a magic marker. What 
would a person see when looking at the other side of the wall from the next room in front of yours? 
b. Show from the mathematical definition of*' that G' is a group under*'· 
35. Give a careful proof using the definition of isomorphism that if G and G' are both groups with G abelian and 
G' not abelian, then G and G' are not isomorphic. 
36. Prove that for any integer n 2: 2, there are at least two nonisomorphic groups with exactly 2n elements. 
37. Let n 2: 3 and 0 ::; k ::; n -
1. Prove that the map µpk E D11 is reflection about the line through the origin that 
makes an angle of -
~.k with the x-axis. 
38. Let n 2: 3 and k, r E 2 11 • Based on Exercise 37, determine the element of D 11 that corresponds to first reflecting 
across the line through the origin at an angle of -
2~k and then reflection across the line through the origin 
making an angle of -
2~'. Prove your answer. 
SECTION 5 
S UBGROUPS 
Subsets and Subgroups 
You may have noticed that we sometimes have had groups contained within larger 
groups. For example, the group Z under addition is contained within the group IQ under 
addition, which in turn is contained in the group JR. under addition. When we view the 
group (Z, +) as contained in the group (JR., + ), it is very important to notice that the op-
eration + on integers n and mas elements of (Z, +) produces the same element n + m 
as would result if you were to think of n and m as elements in (JR., +). Thus we should 
not regard the group (IQ+, ·) as contained in (JR., +), even though IQ+ is contained in JR. as 
a set. In this instance, 2 · 3 = 6 in (IQ+, ·), while 2 + 3 = 5 in (JR., + ). We are requiring 
not only that the set of one group be a subset of the set of the other, but also that the 
group operation on the subset be the induced operation that assigns the same element 
to each ordered pair from this subset as is assigned by the group operation on the whole 
set. 
5.1 Definition 
If a subset H of a group G is closed under the binary operation of G and if H with the 
induced operation from G is itself a group, then H is a subgroup of G. We shall let 
H ::; G or G 2: H denote that H is a subgroup of G, and H < G or G > H shall mean 
H ::; G but H ::/= G. 
• 
Thus (Z, +) < (JR.,+) but (IQ+, ·) is not a subgroup of (JR., +), even though as sets, 
IQ+ c R Every group G has as subgroups G itself and {e}, where e is the identity 
element of G. 
5.2 Definition 
If G is a group, then the subgroup consisting of G itself is the improper subgroup of G. 
All other subgroups are proper subgroups. The subgroup {e} is the trivial subgroup 
of G. All other subgroups are nontrivial. 
• 
We tum to some illustrations. 

Section 5 
Subgroups 
53 
5.3 Example 
Let JR:" be the additive group of all n-component row vectors with real number entries. 
The subset consisting of all of these vectors having 0 as entry in the first component is 
a subgroup of JR:". 
"' 
5.4 Example 
Q+ under multiplication is a proper subgroup of JR:+ under multiplication. 
5.5 Example 
The n1h roots of unity in C, U11 , form a subgroup of U, the complex numbers whose 
absolute value is 1, which in turn is a subgroup of C*, the nonzero complex numbers 
under multiplication. 
"' 
5.6 Example 
Recall that Sz,, is the set of all one-to-one functions mapping IJ',11 onto IJ',11 and D 11 is the 
set of all one-to-one functions <P mapping Z,, onto IJ',11 with the further property that the 
line segment between i and j is an edge of the regular n-gon ? 11 if and only if the line 
segment between <P(i) and </J(j) is an edge. D,, ~ Sz,,. Since both D11 and Sz,, are groups 
under composition of functions, D,, ::; Sz,,. 
"' 
5.7 Example 
There are two different types of group structures of order 4 (see Exercise 20 of 
Section 2). We describe them by their group tables (Tables 5.8 and 5.9). The group 
V is the Klein 4-group. 
The only nontrivial proper subgroup of Z4 is (0, 2). Note that (0, 3) is not a sub-
group of Z4 , since (0, 3) is not closed under+. For example, 3 + 3 = 2, and 2 </:. (0, 3). 
However, the group V has three nontrivial proper subgroups, {e,a ), {e,b), and {e,c}. 
Here {e, a, b) is not a subgroup, since {e,a,b) is not closed under the operation of V 
because ab = c, and c </:. {e, a, b). 
"' 
5.8 Table 
5.9 Table 
+ 
0 
1 
2 
3 
V: 
e 
a 
b 
c 
0 
0 
I 
2 
3 
e 
e 
a 
b 
c 
1 
1 
2 
3 
0 
a 
a 
e 
c 
b 
2 
2 
3 
0 
1 
b 
b 
c 
e 
a 
3 
3 
0 
1 
2 
c 
c 
b 
a 
e 
It is often useful to draw a subgroup diagram of the subgroups of a group. In such 
a diagram, a line running downward from a group G to a group H means that H is a 
subgroup of G. Thus the larger group is placed nearer the top of the diagram. Figure 5 .10 
contains the subgroup diagrams for the groups Z4 and V of Example 5.7. 
2.4 
I 
{O, 2} 
I 
{O} 
(a) 
(b) 
5.10 Figure 
(a) Subgroup diagram for Z4. (b) Subgroup diagram for Y. 
Note that if H ::; G and a E H , then by Theorem 2.17, the equation ax = a must 
have a unique solution, namely the identity element of H. But this equation can also 

54 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
be viewed as one in G, and we see that this unique solution must also be the identity 
element e of G. A similar argument then applied to the equation ax = e, viewed in both 
Hand G, shows that the inverse a- 1 of a in G is also the inverse of a in the subgroup H. 
5.11 Example 
Let F be the group of all real-valued functions with domain IR under addition. The subset 
of F consisting of those functions that are continuous is a subgroup of F, for the sum of 
continuous functions is continuous, the function! where f (x) = 0 for all x is continuous 
and is the additive identity element, and iff is continuous, then -f is continuous. 
.&. 
It is convenient to have routine steps for determining whether a subset of a group 
G is a subgroup of G. Example 5.11 indicates such a routine, and in the next theorem, 
we demonstrate carefully its validity. 
5.12 Theorem 
A subset H of a group G is a subgroup of G if and only if 
1. His closed under the binary operation of G, 
2. the identity element e of Gisin H, and 
3. for all a EH, a- 1 EH also. 
Proof The fact that if H ::::: G then Conditions 1, 2, and 3 must hold follows at once from the 
definition of a subgroup and from the remarks preceding Example 5.11. 
Conversely, suppose H is a subset of a group G such that Conditions 1, 2, and 3 
hold. By 2 we have at once that ~ is satisfied. Also ~ is satisfied by 3. It remains 
to check the associative axiom, ~ . But surely for all a, b, c E H it is true that (ab)c = 
a(bc) in H, for we may actually view this as an equation in G, where the associative law 
holds. Hence H ::::: G. 
• 
5.13 Example 
Let F be as in Example 5.1 1. The subset of F consisting of those functions that are 
differentiable is a subgroup of F, for the sum of differentiable functions is differentiable, 
the constant function 0 is differentiable, and if f is differentiable, then -f is differen-
tiable. 
.&. 
5.14 Example 
Recall from linear algebra that every square matrix A has associated with it a number 
det(A) called its determinant, and that A is invertible if and only if det(A) -:/= 0. If A and B 
are square matrices of the same size, then it can be shown that det(AB) = det(A) · det(B). 
Let G be the multiplicative group of all invertible n x n matrices with entries in (['. and 
let T be the subset of G consisting of those matrices with determinant 1. The equation 
det(AB) = det(A) · det(B) shows that T is closed under matrix multiplication. Recall 
that the identity matrix /,, has determinant 1. From the equation det(A) · det(A - 1) = 
det(AA - I) = det(/11) = 1, we see that if det(A) = 1, then det(A - I) = 1. Theorem 5 .12 
then shows that T is a subgroup of G. 
.&. 
Theorem 5.15 provides an alternate way of checking that a subset of a group is a 
subgroup. 
5.15 Theorem 
A nonempty subset Hof the group G is a subgroup of G if and only if for all a, b E G, 
ab- 1 E G. 
Proof 
We leave the proof as Exercise 51. 
• 
On the surface Theorem 5.15 may seem simpler than Theorem 5.12 since we only need 
to show that H is not empty and one other condition. In practice, it is usually just as 
efficient to use Theorem 5 .12. On the other hand, Theorem 5 .16 can often be used 
efficiently. 

Section 5 
Subgroups 
55 
5.16 Theorem 
Let H be a finite nonempty subset of the group G. Then H is a subgroup of G if and 
only if His closed under the operation of G. 
Proof 
We leave the proof as Exercise 57. 
• 
5.17 Example 
Recall that Un= {z E C It' = l}. We could use Theorem 5.16 to verify that Un is a 
subgroup of C* by noting that Un has exactly n elements, so Un is a finite nonempty 
subset of C* and if z1, z2 E Un , then (z1z2)n = 1, which implies that Un is closed under 
multiplication. 
.&. 
5.18 Example 
We verify that the subset H = {t = p0 , p, p2, . . . , pn-I} C Dn is a subgroup of Dn. By 
Theorem 5.16, we only need to check that His closed under the operation of Dn. Let 
k, r E Zn. Then pk p' = pk+.r E H. Therefore H :S: Dn. 
.&. 
Cyclic Subgroups 
Let us see how large a subgroup Hof Z 12 would have to be if it contains 3. It would 
have to contain the identity element 0 and 3 + 3, which is 6. Then it has to contain 6 + 3, 
which is 9. Note that the inverse of 3 is 9 and the inverse of 6 is 6. It is easily checked 
that H = (0, 3, 6, 9} is a subgroup of Z 12, and it is the smallest subgroup containing 3. 
Let us imitate this reasoning in a general situation. As we remarked before, for 
a general argument we always use multiplicative notation. Let G be a group and let 
a E G. A subgroup of G containing a must, by Theorem 5.12, contain an, the result 
of computing products of a and itself for n factors for every positive integer n. These 
positive integral powers of a do give a set closed under multiplication. It is possible, 
however, that the inverse of a is not in this set. Of course, a subgroup containing a must 
also contain a- 1, and, in general, it must contain a-
111 for all m E z+. It must contain the 
identity element e = a0. Summarizing, a subgroup of G containing the element a must 
contain all elements an (or na for additive groups) for all n E Z. That is, a subgroup 
containing a must contain {anln E Z}. Observe that these powers an of a need not be 
distinct. For example, in the group V of Example 5.7, 
a2 = e, 
a3 = a, 
a4 = e, 
a-' = a, 
and so on. 
We have almost proved the next theorem. 
5.19 Theorem 
Let G be a group and let a E G. Then 
H ={an In E Z} 
is a subgroup of G and is the smallestt subgroup of G that contains a, that is, every 
subgroup containing a contains H. 
Proof We check the three conditions given in Theorem 5.12 for a subset of a group to give a 
subgroup. Since a' a
5 = ar+s for r, s E Z, we see that the product in G of two elements 
of H is again in H. Thus H is closed under the group operation of G. Also a0 = e, so 
e E H, and for a' E H, a-r E H and a-r a' = e. Hence all the conditions are satisfied, 
and H :::: G. 
t We may find occasion to distinguish between the terms minimal and smallest as applied to subsets of a set S 
that have some property. A subset H of S is minimal with respect to the property if H has the property, and 
no subset K C H , K f' H , has the property. If H has the property and H c:; K for every subset K with the 
property, then H is the smallest subset with the property. There may be many minimal subsets, but there can 
be only one smallest subset. To illustrate, {e, a), {e, b), and {e, c} are all minimal nontrivial subgroups of the 
group V. (See Fig. 5.10.) However, V contains no smallest nontrivial subgroup. 

56 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
Our arguments prior to the statement of the theorem showed that any subgroup of 
G containing a must contain H, so His the smallest subgroup of G containing a. 
+ 
5.20 Definition 
Let G be a group and let a E G. Then the subgroup {d' In E Z } of G, characterized 
in Theorem 5.19, is called the cyclic subgroup of G generated by a, and denoted 
by (a). 
• 
5.21 Example 
Let us find two of the cyclic subgroups to D1o. We first consider (µ,pk) for k E Z 1o. 
Since (µ,pk)2 = l and (µ,pk) - 1 = µ,pk, for any integer r, (µ,pk y is either µ,pk or l. Thus 
(µ,pk ) = {t, µ,lJ. 
Since p-1 = p9, every negative power of p is also a positive power of p and p 10 = t, 
(p) = [l, p, p2, .. . 'p9). 
5.22 Definition 
An element a of a group G generates G and is a generator for G if (a ) =G. A group 
G is cyclic if there is some element a in G that generates G. 
• 
5.23 Example 
Let Z4 and V be the groups of Example 5.7. Then Z4 is cyclic and both 1 and 3 are 
generators, that is, 
(1) = (3) = 1:4. 
However, Vis not cyclic, for (a), (b), and (c) are proper subgroups of two elements. Of 
course, (e) is the trivial subgroup of one element. 
.&. 
5.24 Example 
The group Z under addition is a cyclic group. Both 1 and -1 are generators for this 
group, and they are the only generators. Also, for n E z+, the group Zn under addition 
modulo n is cyclic. If n > I, then both I and n -
I are generators, but there may be 
othen. 
.&. 
5.25 Exam ple 
Consider the group Z under addition. Let us find (3). Here the notation is additive, and 
(3) must contain 
3, 
3 + 3 = 6, 
3 + 3 + 3 = 9, 
and so on, 
0, 
- 3, 
- 3 + -3 = -6, 
- 3 + -3 + -3 = -9, 
and so on. 
In other words, the cyclic subgroup generated by 3 consists of all multiples of 3, posi-
tive, negative, and zero. We denote this subgroup by 3Z as well as (3). In a similar way, 
we shall let nZ be the cyclic subgroup (n) of Z. Note that 6Z < 3Z. 
.&. 
5.26 Example 
For each positive integer n, Un is the multiplicative group of the nth roots of unity in 
C. These elements of Un can be represented geometrically by equally spaced points on 
a circle about the origin, as illustrated in Fig. 5.27. The point labeled represents the 
number 
2JT 
. . 2JT 
; = cos -
+ 1 sm -
. 
n 
n 
The geometric interpretation of multiplication of complex numbers, explained in 
Section 3, shows at once that as ; is raised to powers, it works its way counterclockwise 
around the circle, landing on each of the elements of Un in tum. Thus Un under mul-
tiplication is a cyclic group, and ; is a generator. The group Un is the cyclic subgroup 
(;) of the group U of all complex numbers z, where lzl = 1, under multiplication. 
.&. 

Section 5 
Exercises 
57 
yi 
5.27 Figure 
• EXERCISES 5 
Computations 
In Exercises l through 6, determine whether the given subset of the complex numbers is a subgroup of the group 
IC of complex numbers under addition. 
1. lR 
3. n 
4. The set ilR of pure imaginary numbers including 0 
5. The set n lQ of rational multiples of n 
6. The set {n" In E Z} 
7. Which of the sets in Exercises I through 6 are subgroups of the group IC* of nonzero complex numbers under 
multiplication? 
In Exercises 8 through 13, determine whether the given set of invertible n x n matrices with real number entries is 
a subgroup of GL(n, JR). 
8. Then x n matrices with determinant greater than or equal to I 
9. The diagonal n x n matrices with no zeros on the diagonal 
10. The n x n matrices with determinant 2k for some integer k 
11. The n x n matrices with determinant -1 
12. Then x n matrices with determinant -1 or l 
13. The set of all n x n matrices A such that (A T)A = / 11 • (These matrices are called orthogonal. Recall that A~ 
the transpose of A, is the matrix whose jth column is the jth row of A for l ::: j ::: n, and that the transpose 
operation has the property (AB)T = (BT)(A T).] 
Let F be the set of all real-valued functions with domain lR and let F be the subset of F consisting of those functions 
that have a nonzero value at every point in R In Exercises 14 through 19, determine whether the given subset of 
F with the induced operation is (a) a subgroup of the group Funder addition, (b) a subgroup of the group F under 
multiplication. 
14. The subset F 
15. The subset of all / E F such thatf( l ) = 0 
16. The subset of all f E F such that/ (I) = I 
17. The subset of all f E F such that f (0) = I 
18. The subset of all/ E F such thatf(O) = -1 
19. The subset of all constant functions in F. 

58 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
20. Nine groups are given below. Give a complete list of all subgroup relations, of the form G; :'.": Gj. that exist 
between these given groups G1, G1, · · · , G9. 
G1 = IZ under addition 
G1 = 12/Z under addition 
GJ = Q+ under multiplication 
G4 = JR. under addition 
Gs = JR.+ under multiplication 
G6 = {n" In E /Z} under multiplication 
G-J = 3/Z under addition 
Gs = the set of all integral multiples of 6 under addition 
G9 = {6" I n E /Z} under multiplication 
21. Write at least 5 elements of each of the following cyclic groups. 
a. 25/Z under addition 
b. {(~)"In E /Z} under multiplication 
c. {n" I n E /Z} under multiplication 
d. (p3) in the group Dis 
e. ((l, 2, 3)(5, 6)) in the group s6 
In Exercises 22 through 25, describe all the elements in the cyclic subgroup of GL(2, JR.) generated by the given 
2 x 2 matrix. 
22. [ 0 -]J 
- 1 
0 
23. [6 
~] 
24. [~ ~] 
[ 0 -2] 
25. -2 
0 
26. Which of the following groups are cyclic? For each cyclic group, list all the generators of the group. 
G1 = (IZ, + ) G1 = (<Ql, + ) 
GJ = (<Ql+,.) 
G4 = (6/Z,+) 
Gs = (6" In E /Z} under multiplication 
G6 = {a+ bh I a, b E /Z} under addition 
In Exercises 27 through 35, find the order of the cyclic subgroup of the given group generated by the indicated 
element. 
27. The subgroup of /Z4 generated by 3 
28. The subgroup of V generated by c (see Table 5.9) 
29. The subgroup of U6 generated by cos 2f + i sin 2f 
30. The subgroup of Z10 generated by 8 
31. The subgroup of Z16 generated by 12 
32. The subgroup of the symmetric group Ss generated by (2, 4, 6, 9)(3, 5, 7) 
33. The subgroup of the symmetric group S10 generated by (l, I 0)(2, 9)(3, 8)( 4, 7)(5, 6) 
34. The subgroup of the multiplicative group G of invertible 4 x 4 matrices generated by 
[! ~ ~ ~] 
35. The subgroup of the multiplicative group G of invertible 4 x 4 matrices generated by 
[! ~ ! 
~] 
36. a. Complete Table 5.28 to give the group Z6 of 6 elements. 
b. Compute the subgroups (0), (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) of the group /Z6 given in part (a). 

Section 5 
Exercises 
59 
c. Which elements are generators for the group Z.6 of part (a)? 
d. Give the subgroup diagram for the part (b) subgroups of Z.6. (We will see later that these are all the sub-
groups of Z.6.) 
5.28 Table 
+ 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
0 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
0 
2 
2 
3 
3 
4 
4 
5 
5 
Concepts 
In Exercises 37 and 38, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
37. A subgroup of a group G is a subset H of G that contains the identity element e of G and also contains the 
inverse of each of its elements. 
38. A group G is cyclic if and only if there exists a E G such that G = {a" In E Z.}. 
39. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. The associative law holds in every group. 
b. There may be a group in which the cancellation law fails. 
c. Every group is a subgroup of itself. 
d. Every group has exactly two improper subgroups. 
e. In every cyclic group, every element is a generator. 
f. A cyclic group has a unique generator. 
g. Every set of numbers that is a group under addition is also a group under multiplication. 
h. A subgroup may be defined as a subset of a group. 
i. Z.4 is a cyclic group. 
j . Every subset of every group is a subgroup under the induced operation. 
k. For any n ~ 3, the dihedral group D 11 has at least n + 2 cyclic subgroups. 
40. Show by means of an example that it is possible for the quadratic equation x2 = e to have more than two 
solutions in some group G with identity e. 
In Exercises 41 through 44 let B be a subset of A, and let b be a particular element of B. Determine whether the 
given set is a subgroup of the symmetric group SA under the induced operation. Here a [B] = {a(x) Ix E B). 
41. {a E SA I a(b) = b) 
42. {a E SA I a(b) E B) 
43. {a E SA I a[B] ~ B) 
44. {a E SA I a[B] = B) 
Theory 
In Exercises 45 and 46, let</>: G--+ G' be an isomorphism of a group (G, *) with a group (G', *'). Write out a 
proof to convince a skeptic of the intuitively clear statement. 

60 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
4S. If H is a subgroup of G, then cp[H] = {cp(h) I h E H} is a subgroup of G'. That is, an isomorphism carries 
subgroups into subgroups. 
46. If there is an a E G such that (a) = G, then G' is cyclic. 
47. Show that if H and K are subgroups of an abelian group G, then 
{hk I h E H and k E K} 
is a subgroup of G. 
48. Find an example of a group G and two subgroups H and K such that the set in Exercise 47 is not a subgroup 
of G. 
49. Prove that for any integer n 2: 3, S11 has a subgroup isomorphic with D,,. 
SO. Find the flaw in the following argument: "Condition 2 of Theorem 5.12 is redundant, since it can be derived 
from l and 3, for let a E H. Then a- 1 E H by 3, and by 1, aa- 1 = e is an element of H, proving 2." 
Sl. Prove Theorem 5.15. 
S2. Prove that if G is a cyclic group and IGI ::: 3, then G has at least 2 generators. 
S3. Prove that if G is an abelian group, written multiplicatively, with identity element e, then all elements x of G 
satisfying the equation X2 = e form a subgroup H of G. 
S4. Repeat Exercise 53 for the general situation of the set H of all solutions x of the equation x" = e for a fixed 
integer n 2: 1 in an abelian group G with identity e. 
SS. Find a counterexample to Exercise 53 if the assumption of abelian is dropped. 
S6. Show that if a E G, where G is a finite group with identity e, then there exists n E tz::+ such that a" = e. 
S7. Prove Theorem 5.16. 
S8. Let G be a group and let a be one fixed element of G. Show that 
Ha = {x E G I xa = ax} 
is a subgroup of G. 
S9. Generalizing Exercise 58, let S be any subset of a group G. 
a. Show that Hs = {x E G I xs = sx for all s E S} is a subgroup of G. 
b. In reference to part (a), the subgroup He is the center of G. Show that He is an abelian group. 
60. Let H be a subgroup of a group G. For a, b E G, let a ~ b if and only if ab- 1 E H. Show that ~ is an equiva-
lence relation on G. 
61. For sets H and K, we define the intersection H n K by 
H n K = {x Ix E H and x E K}. 
Show that if H :::: G and K :::: G, then H n K :::: G. (Remember::::: denotes "is a subgroup of," not "is a subset 
of.") 
62. Prove that every cyclic group is abelian. 
63. Let G be a group and let G11 = {g" I g E G}. Under what hypothesis about G can we show that G11 is a subgroup 
ofG? 
64. Show that a group with no proper nontrivial subgroups is cyclic. 
6S. Cracker Barrel Restaurants place a puzzle called "Jump All But One Game" at each table. The puzzle starts 
with golf tees arranged in a triangle as in Figure 5.29a where the presence of a tee is noted with a solid dot 
and the absence is noted with a hollow dot. A move can be made if a tee can jump over one adjacent tee and 
land on an empty space. When a move is made, the tee that is jumped over is removed. A possible first move 
is shown in Figure 5.29b. The goal is to have just one remaining tee. Use the Klein 4-group to show that no 
matter what sequence of (legal) moves you make, the last remaining tee cannot be in a bottom comer position. 

SECTION 6 
Section 6 
Cyclic Groups 
61 
0 
• 
• • 
0 • 
• • • 
0 • • 
• • • • 
• • • • 
• • • • • • • • • • 
(a) 
(b) 
5.29 Figure 
CYCLIC GROUPS 
Recall the following facts and notations from Section 5. If G is a group and a E G, then 
H ={an I n E Z } 
is a subgroup of G (Theorem 5.19). This group is the cyclic subgroup (a) of G gener-
ated by a. Also, given a group G and an element a in G, if 
G = (a" I n E Z }, 
then a is a generator of G and the group G = (a) is cyclic. We introduce one new bit of 
terminology. Let a be an element of a group G. If the cyclic subgroup (a) of G is finite, 
then the order of a is the order I (a) I of this cyclic subgroup. Otherwise, we say that a 
is of infinite order. We will see in this section that if a E G is of finite order m, then m 
is the smallest positive integer such that a
111 = e. 
The first goal of this section is to describe all cyclic groups and all subgroups of 
cyclic groups. This is not an idle exercise. We will see later that cyclic groups serve 
as building blocks for a significant class of abelian groups, in particular, for all finite 
abelian groups. Cyclic groups are fundamental to the understanding of groups. 
Elementary Properties of Cyclic Groups 
We start with a demonstration that cyclic groups are abelian. 
6.1 Theorem 
Every cyclic group is abelian. 
Proof Let G be a cyclic group and let a be a generator of G so that 
G = (a) = {an I n E Z}. 
If g 1 and g2 are any two elements of G, there exist integers rand s such that g 1 = a' and 
g2 = as. Then 
so G is abelian. 
• 
We shall continue to use multiplicative notation for our general work on cyclic 
groups, even though they are abelian. 
The division algorithm that follows is well known and seems pretty simple. In fact, 
this algorithm is taught in elementary school. If you divide an integer n by a positive 
integer m, you get an integer quotient q with a remainder r where 0 _::: r < m. You might 
write this as n -;- m = q R r, which of course means {;; = q + ~. Multiplying both sides 
by m gives the form of the division algorithm that is a fundamental tool for the study of 
cyclic groups. 

62 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
6.2 Division Algorithm for Z If m is a positive integer and n is any integer, then there exist unique integers q 
and r such that 
n=mq+r 
and 
0 ::; r < m. 
Proof 
We give an intuitive diagrammatic explanation, using Fig. 6.3. On the number line, mark 
off the multiples of m and the position of n. Now n falls either on a multiple qm of m 
and r can be taken as 0, or n falls between two multiples of m. If the latter is the case, 
let qm be the first multiple of m to the left of n. Then r is as shown in Fig. 6.3. Note that 
0 ::; r < m. Uniqueness of q and r follows since if n is not a multiple of m so that we 
can take r = 0, then there is a unique multiple qm of m to the left of n and at distance 
less than m from n, as illustrated in Fig. 6.3. 
+ 
n 2: 0, q 2: 0 -t----t---1f---t-
r.( n 
-m 
0 
m 
2m 
qm 
(q + l )m 
n < O, q < 0 
~r. n 
qm (q+ l)m 
- m 
0 
m 
2m 
6.3 Figure 
In the notation of the division algorithm, we regard q as the quotient and r as the 
nonnegative remainder when n is divided by m. 
6.4 Example 
Find the quotient q and remainder r when 38 is divided by 7 according to the division 
algorithm. 
Solution 
The positive multiples of7 are 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, · · · . Choosing the multiple to leave 
a nonnegative remainder less than 7, we write 
38 = 35 + 3 = 7(5) + 3 
so the quotient is q = 5 and the remainder is r = 3. 
6.5 Example 
Find the quotient q and remainder r when -38 is divided by 7 according to the division 
algorithm. 
Solution 
The negative multiples of 7 are - 7, - 14, -21, -28, -35, -42, · · · . Choosing the mul-
tiple to leave a nonnegative remainder less than 7, we write 
-38 = -42 +4 = 7(-6) + 4 
so the quotient is q = -6 and the remainder is r = 4. 
We will use the division algorithm to show that a subgroup H of a cyclic group G is 
also cyclic. Think for a moment what we will have to do to prove this. We will have to 
use the definition of a cyclic group since we have proved little about cyclic groups yet. 
That is, we will have to use the fact that G has a generating element a. We must then 
exhibit, in terms of this generator a, some generator c = a
111 for H in order to show that 
H is cyclic. There is really only one natural choice for the power m of a to try. Can you 
guess what it is before you read the proof of the theorem? 

Section 6 
Cyclic Groups 
63 
6.6 Theorem 
A subgroup of a cyclic group is cyclic. 
Proof Let G be a cyclic group generated by a and let H be a subgroup of G. If H = {e}, 
then H = (e) is cyclic. If Hi= {e}, then a" EH for some n E z+. Let m be the smallest 
integer in z+ such that a
111 E H. 
We claim that c = a
111 generates H; that is, 
H = (a
111
) = (c). 
We must show that every b EH is a power of c. Since b E H and H:::: G, we have 
b = a" for some n. Find q and r such that 
n=mq+r 
for 
0 :::: r < m 
in accord with the division algorithm. Then 
so 
Now since a" E H, a
111 E H , and H is a group, both (a
111)-q and a" are in H. Thus 
that is, 
a' E H. 
Since m was the smallest positive integer such that a
111 E H and 0 :::: r < m, we must have 
r = 0. Thus n = mq and 
b = a" = (a
111)q = cq, 
so b is a power of c. 
• 
As noted in Examples 5.24 and 5.25, Z under addition is cyclic and for a positive 
integer n, the set nZ of all multiples of n is a subgroup of Z under addition, the cyclic 
subgroup generated by n. Theorem 6.6 shows that these cyclic subgroups are the only 
subgroups of Z under addition. We state this as a corollary. 
6.7 Corollary 
The subgroups of Z under addition are precisely the groups nZ under addition for n E Z . • 
This corollary gives us an elegant way to define the greatest common divisor of two 
positive integers rand s. Exercise 54 shows that H = {nr +ms I n, m E Z} is a subgroup 
of the group Z under addition. Thus H must be cyclic and have a generator d, which we 
may choose to be positive. 
6.8 Definition 
Let r be a positive integer and s be a non-negative integer. The positive generator d of 
the cyclic group 
H = {nr+ms l n, m E Z } 
under addition is the greatest common divisor (abbreviated gcd) of rand s. We write 
d = gcd(r, s). 
• 
Note that dZ = H , r = lr + Os E H , and s = Or + ls E H. This implies that r, s E 
dZ , which says that dis a divisor of both rand s. Since d E H , we can write 
d=nr+ms 
for some integers n and m. We see that every integer dividing both r and s divides the 
right-hand side of the equation, and hence must be a divisor of d also. Thus d must 

64 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
be the largest number dividing both r and s; this accounts for the name given to d in 
Definition 6.8. 
The fact that the greatest common divisor d of r and s can be written in the form 
d = nr + ms for some integers n and m is called Bezout's identity. Bezout's identity is 
very useful in number theory, as we will see in studying cyclic groups. 
6.9 Example 
Find the gcd of 42 and 72. 
Solution 
The positive divisors of 42 are 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 14, 21, and 42. The positive divisors of 72 
are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 12, 18, 24, 36, and 72. The greatest common divisor is 6. Note 
that 6 = (3)(72) + (-5)(42). There is an algorithm for expressing the greatest common 
divisor d of rand sin the form d = nr +ms, but we will not need to make use of it here. 
The interested reader can find the algorithm by searching the Internet for the Euclidean 
algorithm and Bezout's identity. 
.&. 
Two positive integers are relatively prime if their gcd is 1. For example, 12 and 25 
are relatively prime. Note that they have no prime factors in common. In our discussion 
of subgroups of cyclic groups, we will need to know the following: 
If rand s are relatively prime and if r divides sm, then r must divide m. 
(1) 
Let's prove this. If rand s are relatively prime, then we may write 
1 = ar + bs 
for some 
a,b E Z. 
Multiplying by m, we obtain 
m = arm+bsm. 
Now r divides both arm and bsm since r divides sm. Thus r is a divisor of the right-hand 
side of this equation, so r must divide m. 
The Structure of Cyclic Groups 
We can now describe all cyclic groups, up to an isomorphism. 
6.10 Theorem 
Let G be a cyclic group with generator a. If the order of G is infinite, then G is isomor-
phic to (Z, +). If G has finite order n, then G is isomorphic to (Z,,, + ,,). 
Proof 
Case I 
For all positive integers m, a"' =F e. In this case we claim that no two 
distinct exponents hand k can give equal elements ah and ak of G. 
Suppose that a" = ak and say h > k. Then 
contrary to our Case I assumption. Hence every element of G can be 
expressed as a"' for a unique m E Z. The map <P : G --+ Z given by 
<P(a;) = i is thus well defined, one-to-one, and onto Z. Also, 
so the homomorphism property is satisfied and <P is an isomorphism. 

Section 6 
Cyclic Groups 
65 
Case II a"' = e for some positive integer m. Let n be the smallest positive 
integer such that a
11 = e. If s E Z and s = nq + r for 0 ::: r < n, then 
as = a
11q+r = (a
11)qar = eqar = a'. As in Case 1, if 0 :S k < h < n and 
a" = ak, then ah- k = e and O < h - k < n, contradicting our choice of 
n. Thus the elements 
a0 = e,a,a2,a3, · · • ,a
11
- 1 
are all distinct and comprise all elements of G. The map if; : G ~ Z11 
given by if;(a;) = i for i = 0, I, 2, · · · , n -
I is thus well defined, 
one-to-one, and onto Z11 • Because a
11 = e, we see that aid = ak where 
k = i +,if Thus 
so the homomorphism property is satisfied and if; is an isomorphism . 
a3 
3 
a2 
2 
a' 
a0 =e 
0 
a" - I 
n - 1 
6.11 Figure 
6.12 Figure 
• 
6.13 Example 
Motivated by our work with U11 , it is nice to visualize the elements e = a0 , a 1, a2, · · · , 
a
11
- 1 of a cyclic group of order n as being distributed evenly on a circle (see Fig. 6.11). 
The element a" is located h of these equal units counterclockwise along the circle, mea-
sured from the right where e = a0 is located. To multiply a" and ak diagrammatically, 
we start from a" and go k additional units around counterclockwise. To see arithmeti-
cally where we end up, find q and r such that 
h + k= nq+ r 
for 
0 ::: r < n. 
The nq takes us all the way around the circle q times, and we then wind up at a'. 
.A 
Figure 6.12 is essentially the same as Fig. 6.11 but with the points labeled with the 
exponents on the generator. The operation on these exponents is addition modulo n. 
This is simply the isomorphism between (a) and Z11 • Of course this is the same 
isomorphism we saw when we defined Z11 from U11 , but using a instead of s. 
As promised at the beginning of this section, we can see now that the order of an 
element a in a group G is simply the smallest positive number n such that a
11 = e. 
6.14 Example 
Let us find the order of the k-cycle, a = (a 1, a2, a3, .•. , ak), in the symmetric group. 
The order of a is the smallest postive power of a that is t. Note that applying a just 
maps each number to the next one in the cyclic order. So after k applications of a , each 
number maps back to itself, but not before k applications of a. Therefore, the order of a 
k-cycle is k. 
.A 

66 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
Subgroups of Finite Cyclic Groups 
We have completed our description of cyclic groups and tum to their subgroups. Corol-
lary 6.7 gives us complete information about subgroups of infinite cyclic groups. Let us 
give the basic theorem regarding generators of subgroups for the finite cyclic groups. 
6.15 Theorem 
Let G be a cyclic group with n elements and generated by a. Let b E G and let b = a·~ 
Then b generates a cyclic subgroup H of G containing n/ d elements, where d is the 
greatest common divisor of n and s. Also, (as) = (a') if and only if gcd(s, n) = gcd(t, n). 
Proof 
That b generates a cyclic subgroup Hof G is known from Theorem 5.19. We need show 
only that H has n/ d elements. Following the argument of Case II of Theorem 6.10, we 
see that H has as many elements as the smallest positive power m of b that gives the 
identity. Now b = a', and b"' = e if and only if (as)"' = e, or if and only if n divides ms. 
What is the smallest positive integer m such that n divides ms? Let d be the gcd of n and 
s. Then there exist integers u and v such that 
d = un+ vs. 
Since d divides both n and s, we may write 
1 = u(n/ d) + v(s/ d) 
where both n/d and s/d are integers. This last equation shows that n/ d and s/ d are 
relatively prime, for any integer dividing both of them must also divide 1. We wish to 
find the smallest positive m such that 
ms 
m(s/ d). 
. 
-
= --- 1s an mteger. 
n 
(n/ d) 
From the division property (I) following Example 6.9, we conclude that n/ d must divide 
m, so the smallest such m is n/ d. Thus the order of His n/ d. 
Taking for the moment Z11 as a model for a cyclic group of order n, we see that if d 
is a divisor of n, then the cyclic subgroup (d) of Z 11 has n/ d elements, and contains all 
the positive integers m less than n such that gcd(m, n) = d. Thus there is only one sub-
group of Z 11 of order n/ d. Taken with the preceding paragraph, this shows at once that if 
a is a generator of the cyclic group G, then (as) = (a') if and only if gcd(s, n) = 
gcd(t,n). 
+ 
6.16 Example 
For an example using additive notation, consider Z 12, with the generator a= 1. Since 
the greatest common divisor of 3 and 12 is 3, 3 = 3 · 1 generates a subgroup of 1f = 4 
elements, namely 
(3) = {0,3,6,9). 
Since the gcd of 8 and 12 is 4, 8 generates a subgroup of 1j = 3 elements, namely, 
(8) = {0,4,8). 
Since the gcd of 12 and 5 is 1, 5 generates a subgroup of 1f = 12 elements; that is, 5 is 
a generator of the whole group Z 12. 
.A. 
The following corollary follows immediately from Theorem 6.15. 
6.17 Corollary 
If a is a generator of a finite cyclic group G of order n, then the other generators of G 
are the elements of the form ar, where r is relatively prime to n. 

Section 6 
Cyclic Groups 
67 
6.18 Example 
Let us find all subgroups of Z 18 and give their subgroup diagram. All subgroups are 
cyclic. By Corollary 6.17, the elements 1, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 17 are all generators of Z 18. 
Starting with 2, 
(2) = {0,2,4,6,8, 10, 12, 14, 16). 
is of order 9 and has as generators elements of the form h2, where h is relatively prime 
to 9, namely, h = 1, 2,4, 5, 7, and 8, so h2 = 2, 4, 8, 10, 14, and 16. The element 6 of (2) 
generates {O, 6, 12), and 12 also is a generator of this subgroup. 
We have thus far found all subgroups generated by 0, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 
13, 14, 16, and 17. This leaves just 3, 9, and 15 to consider. 
(3) = {O, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15), 
and 15 also generates this group of order 6, since 15 = 5 · 3, and the gcd of 5 and 6 is 
1. Finally, 
(9) = {O, 9). 
The subgroup diagram for these subgroups of Z 1s is given in Fig. 6.19. 
6.19 Figure 
Subgroup diagram for Z t8· 
This example is straightforward; we are afraid we wrote it out in such detail that it 
may look complicated. The exercises give some practice along these lines. 
.A 
6.20 Corollary 
Let G be a finite cyclic group and H :S G. Then IHI divides IGI. That is, IGI is a multiple 
of IHI. 
Proof 
Let g be a generator for G and let n = IGI. By Theorem 6.6, H is cyclic, so there is 
an element in h EH such that h generates H. Since h EH::: G, h = g5 for some s. 
Theorem 6.15 states that 
which is a divisor of n. 
n 
IH l = --
gcd(n, s) 
• 
6.21 Example 
We find all orders of the subgroups of Z28. Factoring gives 28 = 22 · 7, so the possible 
orders of subgroups of the cyclic group Z28 are 1, 2, 4, 7, 14, and 28. We note that 
1(0) 1=1, 1(14)1=2, 1(7)1 =4, 1(4)1=7, 1(2)1=14, l(l)I = IZ2sl = 28. So there are 
subgroups of order 1, 2, 4, 7, 14, and 28. 
.A 
Actually, Corollary 6.20 can be strengthened considerably. The assumption that G 
is cyclic is completely unnecessary. As we will see in Section 10, Lagrange's Theorem 
states that for any finite group, the order of a subgroup divides the order of the group. 

68 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
• EXERCISES 6 
Computations 
In Exercises I through 4, find the quotient and remainder, according to the division algorithm, when n is divided 
bym. 
1. n = 42, m = 9 
3. n = -37, m = 8 
2. n = - 42, m = 9 
4. n = 37, m = 8 
In Exercises 5 through 7, find the greatest common divisor of the two integers. 
5. 32 and 24 
6. 48 and 88 
7. 360 and 420 
In Exercises 8 through 11, find the number of generators of a cyclic group having the given order. 
8. 5 
9. 8 
10. 24 
11. 84 
An isomorphism of a group with itself is an automorphism of the group. In Exercises 12 through 16, find the 
number of automorphisms of the given group. 
[Hint: You may use Exercise 53. What must be the image of a generator under an automorphism?] 
14. Zs 
15. z 
16. Zs4 
In Exercises 17 through 23, find the number of elements in the indicated cyclic group. 
17. The cyclic subgroup of Z30 generated by 25 
18. The cyclic subgroup of Z42 generated by 30 
19. The cyclic subgroup (i) of the group IC* of nonzero complex numbers under multiplication 
20. The cyclic subgroup of the group IC* of Exercise 19 generated by (l + i)/ ../2 
21. The cyclic subgroup of the group IC* of Exercise 19 generated by l + i 
22. The cyclic subgroup (p 10) of D z4 
23. The cyclic subgoup (p35) of D 375 
24. Consider the group S10 
a. What is the order of the cycle (2, 4, 6, 7)? 
b. What is the order of (1, 4)(2, 3, 5)? Of (1, 3)(2, 4, 6, 7, 8)? 
c. What is the order of (1, 5, 9)(2, 6, 7)? Of (l, 3)(2, 5, 6, 8)? 
d. What is the order of (1, 2)(3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8)? Of (1, 2, 3)(4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9)? 
e. State a theorem suggested by parts (c) and (d). [Hint: The important words you are looking for are least 
common multiple.] 
In Exercises 25 through 30, find the maximum possibe order for an element of S,, for a given value of n. 
25. n = 5 
28. n = 8 
26. n = 6 
29. n = 10 
27. n = 7 
30. n = 15 
In Exercises 31 through 33, find all subgroups of the given group, and draw the subgroup diagram for the sub-
groups. 
33. Zs 
In Exercises 34 through 38, find all orders of subgroups of the given group. 
35. Zs 
37. Z20 
38. Z11 
Concepts 
In Exercises 39 and 40, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
39. An element a of a group G has order n E z+ if and only if a" = e. 
40. The greatest common divisor of two positive integers is the largest positive integer that divides both of them. 

Section 6 
Exercises 
69 
41. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every cyclic group is abelian. 
b. Every abelian group is cyclic. 
c. Q under addition is a cyclic group. 
d. Every element of every cyclic group generates the group. 
e. There is at least one abelian group of every finite order > 0. 
f. Every group of order ~4 is cyclic. 
g. All generators of Z20 are prime numbers. 
h. If G and G' are groups, then G n G' is a group. 
i. If H and K are subgroups of a group G, then H n K is a group. 
j . Every cyclic group of order > 2 has at least two distinct generators. 
In Exercises 42 through 46, either give an example of a group with the property described, or explain why no 
example exists. 
42. A finite abelian group that is not cyclic 
43. An infinite group that is not cyclic 
44. A cyclic group having only one generator 
4S. An infinite cyclic group having four generators 
46. A finite cyclic group having four generators 
The generators of the cyclic multiplicative group U11 of all nth roots of unity in <C are the primitive nth roots of 
unity. In Exercises 47 through 50, find the primitive nth roots of unity for the given value of n. 
47. n = 4 
48. n = 6 
49. n = 8 
SO. n = 12 
Proof Synopsis 
Sl. Give a one-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 6.1 . 
S2. Give at most a three-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 6.6. 
Theory 
S3. Let G be a cyclic group with generator a, and let G' be a group isomorphic to G. If</> : G -+ G' is an isomor-
phism, show that, for every x E G, <f>(x) is completely determined by the value </>(a). That is, if</> : G -+ G' 
and 1fr : G-+ G' are two isomophisms such that </>(a)= lfr(a), then </>(x) = 1/r(x) for all x E G. 
S4. Let rand s be integers. Show that {nr +ms I n, m E Z} is a subgroup of Z. 
SS. Prove that if G is a finite cyclic group, Hand K are subgroups of G, and H =f. K , then IHI =f. IKI. 
S6. Let a and b be elements of a group G. Show that if ab has finite order n, then ba also has order n. 
S7. Let rand s be positive integers. 
a. Define the least common multiple of rand s as a generator of a certain cyclic group. 
b. Under what condition is the least common multiple of rand s their product, rs? 
c. Generalizing part (b), show that the product of the greatest common divisor and of the least common 
multiple of rand sis rs. 

70 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
58. Show that a group that has only a finite number of subgroups must be a finite group. 
59. Show by a counterexample that the following "converse" of Theorem 6.6 is not a theorem: "If a group G is 
such that every proper subgroup is cyclic, then G is cyclic." 
60. Let G be a group and suppose a E G generates a cyclic subgroup of order 2 and is the unique such element. 
Show that ax = xa for all x E G. [Hint: Consider (xax- 1 )2.] 
61. Prove that if G is a cyclic group with an odd number of generators, then G has two elements. 
62. Let p and q be distinct prime numbers. Find the number of generators of the cyclic group Zpq· 
63. Let p be a prime number. Find the number of generators of the cyclic group z11,, where r is an integer =:: I. 
64. Show that in a finite cyclic group G of order n, written multiplicatively, the equation x" = e has exactly m 
solutions x in G for each positive integer m that divides n. 
65. With reference to Exercise 64, what is the situation if 1 < m < n and m does not divide n? 
66. Show that Z11 has no proper nontrivial subgroups if p is a prime number. 
67. Let G be an abelian group and let Hand K be finite cyclic subgroups with IHI =rand IKI = s. 
a. Show that if rand s are relatively prime, then G contains a cyclic subgroup of order rs. 
b. Generalizing part (a), show that G contains a cyclic subgroup of order the least common multiple of rand s. 
SECTION 7 
GENERATING SETS AND CAYLEY D IGRAPHS 
Let G be a group, and let a E G. We have described the cyclic subgroup (a} of G, which 
is the smallest subgroup of G that contains the element a. Suppose we want to find as 
small a subgroup as possible that contains both a and b for another element b in G. By 
Theorem 5.19, we see that any subgroup containing a and b must contain a" and b"' for 
all m, n E Z, and consequently must contain all finite products of such powers of a and b. 
For example, such an expression might be a2b4a-3b2a5. Note that we cannot "simplify" 
this expression by writing first all powers of a followed by the powers of b, since G may 
not be abelian. However, products of such expressions are again expressions of the same 
type. Furthermore, e = a0 and the inverse of such an expression is again of the same 
type. For example, the inverse of a2b4a-3b2a5 is a-5b-2a3b-4a-2 . By Theorem 5.12, 
this shows that all such products of integral powers of a and b form a subgroup of G, 
which surely must be the smallest subgroup containing both a and b. We call a and b 
generators of this subgroup. If this subgroup should be all of G, then we say that {a, b) 
generates G. Of course, there is nothing sacred about taking just two elements a, b E G. 
We could have made similar arguments for three, four, or any number of elements of G, 
as long as we take only finite products of their integral powers. 
7.1 Example 
As we have seen, the dihedral group is generated by {J.L, p} since every element in D,, 
can be written in the form pk or J.lPk for 0 .:::: k < n. Also, {J.L, J.lP} generates D,, since 
p = J.L(J.lP ), so any element in the dihedral group can also be written as a product of 
copies of J.l and J.lP· It is interesting to note that both J.l and J.lP have order 2, while in 
the generating set (J.L, p} one element has order 2, but the other has order n. 
.A. 
7.2 Example 
The Klein 4-group V = {e, a, b, c) of Example 5.7 is generated by {a, b) since ab = c. 
It is also generated by (a, c), (b, c), and (a, b, c).If a group G is generated by a subset S, 
then every subset of G containing S generates G. 
.A. 
7.3 Example 
The group Z6 is generated by (1) and (5). It is also generated by (2, 3) since 2 + 3 = 5, 
so that any subgroup containing 2 and 3 must contain 5 and must therefore be Z6. It is 
also generated by {3, 4), {2, 3, 4), {l , 3), and {3, 5), but it is not generated by (2, 4) 
since (2} = {O, 2, 4} contains 2 and 4. 
.A. 

Section 7 
Generating Sets and Cayley Digraphs 
71 
We have given an intuitive explanation of the subgroup of a group G generated by 
a subset of G. What follows is a detailed exposition of the same idea approached in 
another way, namely via intersections of subgroups. After we get an intuitive grasp of 
a concept, it is nice to try to write it up as neatly as possible. We give a set-theoretic 
definition and generalize a theorem that was in Exercise 61 of Section 5. 
7.4 Definition 
Let {S; Ii E /}be a collection of sets. Here I may be any set of indices. The intersection 
n;E1S; of the sets S; is the set of all elements that are in all the sets S;; that is, 
n S; = {x I x E S; for all i E /}. 
iE/ 
If I is finite, I = { 1, 2, ... , n}, we may denote n;E1S; by 
S 1 n S2 n · · · n S". 
• 
7.5 Theorem 
For any group G and any nonempty collection of subgroups {H; :::: G Ii E /),the inter-
section of all the subgroups H;, n;E1H;, is also a subgroup of G. 
Proof Let us show closure. Let a E n;E1H; and b E n;E1H;, so that a EH; for all i EI and 
b E H ; for all i E /.Then ab EH; for all i E /,since H; is a group. Thus ab E n;E1H;. 
Since H; is a subgroup for all i E / , we have e E H; for all i E / , and hence 
e E niE/H;. 
Finally, for a E n;E1H;, we have a E H; for all i E /,so a- 1 E H; for all i E /,which 
implies that a -I E n;E1H;. 
+ 
Let G be a group and let a; E G for i E / . There is at least one subgroup of G 
containing all the elements a; for i E /,namely G is itself. Theorem 7.5 assures us that 
if we take the intersection of all subgroups of G containing all a; for i E / , we will obtain 
a subgroup Hof G. This subgroup His the smallest subgroup of G containing all the a; 
for i E /. 
7.6 Definition 
Let G be a group and let a; E G for i E /.The smallest subgroup of G containing {a; Ii E 
I) is the subgroup generated by {a; Ii E /}. If this subgroup is all of G, then {a; Ii E 
I) generates G and the a; are generators of G. If there is a finite set {a; Ii E I) that 
generates G, then G is finitely generated. 
• 
Note that this definition is consistent with our previous definition of a generator for 
a cyclic group. Note also that the statement a is a generator of G may mean either that 
G = (a) or that a is a member of a subset of G that generates G. The context in which 
the statement is made should indicate which is intended. Our next theorem gives the 
structural insight into the subgroup of G generated by {a; Ii E I) that we discussed for 
two generators before Example 7 .1. 
7.7 Theorem If G is a group and a; E G for i E I =j:. </>, then the subgroup Hof G generated by {a; Ii E 
I) has as elements precisely those elements of G that are finite products of integral 
powers of the a;, where powers of a fixed a; may occur several times in the product. 
Proof Let K denote the set of all finite products of integral powers of the a;. Then K ~ H. 
We need only observe that K is a subgroup and then, since H is the smallest subgroup 
containing a; for i E / , we will be done. Observe that a product of elements in K is 
again in K. Since (a;)0 = e, we have e E K. For every element kin K, if we form from 
the product giving k a new product with the order of the a; reversed and the opposite 
sign on all exponents, we have k- 1, which is thus in K. For example, 
[(a1)3(a2)\a1)-1r 1 = (a1)\a2)-2(a1)-3, 
which is again in K. 
• 

72 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
7 .8 Example 
Recall that the dihedral group D,, consists of permutations of :iZ11 that map edges to edges 
in the regular n-gon P,,. In disjoint cycle notation, p = (0, 1, 2, 3, ... , n -
1) and µ., = 
( 1, n -
1 )(2, n - 2) · · · ( "; 1 , "i 1 ) if n is odd, and µ., = ( 1, n -
1 )(2, n - 2) · · · ( ";2 , "i2) 
if n is even. Since µ., 2 = t and p" = t any product of integer powers of µ., and p can be 
rewritten to only have powers of 0 or 1 forµ., and powers of 0, 1, 2, 3, ... n -
1 for p . 
Furthermore, the relation pµ, = µ,p"- ' allows us to move all the powers ofµ., to the left 
and all the powers of p to the right, being careful to replace p with p
11- 1 each time we 
move aµ., past a p. So in the case of n = 6, 
ps µ,9 = p2 µ., = pµ,ps = µ,ps ps = µ,p4. 
Thus the subgroup of Sz. generated by µ., and p is the set 
{t, p, p2, ... , pn- l, µ.,, µ,p , µ,p2, . .. , µ,pn- l} 
which is the dihedral group. 
Cayley Digraphs 
For each generating set Sofa finite group G, there is a directed graph representing the 
group in terms of the generators in S. The term directed graph is usually abbreviated as 
digraph. These visual representations of groups were devised by Cayley, and are also 
referred to as Cayley diagrams in the literature. 
Intuitively, a digraph consists of a finite number of points, called vertices of the di-
graph, and some arcs (each with a direction denoted by an arrowhead) joining vertices. 
In a digraph for a group G using a generating set S we have one vertex, represented by 
a dot, for each element of G. Each generator in Sis denoted by one type of arc. We 
could use different colors for different arc types in pencil and paperwork. Since differ-
ent colors are not available in our text, we use different style arcs, like solid, dashed, 
and dotted, to denote different generators. Thus if S = {a, b, c) we might denote 
a by--.--
b by ----
---, 
and 
c by.······>-· 
With this notation, an occurrence of x 
y in a Cayley digraph means that 
xa = y. That is, traveling an arc in the direction of the arrow indicates that multiplication 
of the group element at the start of the arc on the right by the generator corresponding 
to that type of arc yields the group element at the end of the arc. Of course, since 
we are in a group, we know immediately that ya- 1 = x. Thus traveling an arc in the 
direction opposite to the arrow corresponds to multiplication on the right by the inverse 
of the corresponding generator. If a generator in S is its own inverse, it is customary to 
denote this by omitting the arrowhead from the arc, rather than using a double arrow. 
For example, if b2 = e, we might denote b by _______ .. 
7 .9 Example 
Both of the digraphs shown in Fig. 7 .10 represent the group Z 6 with generating set 
S = { 1}. Neither the length and shape of an arc nor the angle between arcs has any 
significance. 
.&. 
7.12 Example 
Both of the digraphs shown in Fig. 7.11 represent the group Z6 with generating set S = 
{2, 3). Since 3 is its own inverse, there is no arrowhead on the dashed arcs representing 3. 
Notice how different these Cayley diagrams look from those in Fig. 7.10 for the same 
group. The difference is due to the different choice for the set of generators. 
.&. 
Every digraph for a group must satisfy these four properties for the reasons 
indicated. 

Section 7 
Generating Sets and Cayley Digraphs 
73 
0 501 
4 
2 
3 
(a) 
0 
2 
3 
C;=! 
5 
(b) 
7.10 Figure 
Two digraphs for Z6 with S = { 1} using----
0 
0 
3 
4 
(a) 
(b} 
7.11 Figure 
Two digraphs for Z6 with S = {2, 3) using-~---
2 
and __ _ ____ .. 
3 
(a) 
7.13 Figure 
Property 
1. The digraph is connected, that is, 
we can get from any vertex g to 
any vertex h by traveling along 
consecutive arcs, starting at g and 
ending at h. 
2. At most one arc goes from a vertex 
g to a vertex h. 
3. Each vertex g has exactly one arc 
of each type starting at g, and one 
of each type ending at g. 
4. If two different sequences of arc 
types starting from vertex g lead 
to the same vertex h, then those 
same sequences of arc types starting 
from any vertex u will lead to 
the same vertex v. 
e 
a 
(b) 
Reason 
Every equation gx = h has a solution 
in a group. 
The solution of gx = h is unique. 
For g E G and each generator b we 
can compute gb, and (gb- 1)b =g. 
If gq = hand gr = h, then uq = 
ug- 1h = ur. 

74 
Part I 
Groups and Subgroups 
It can be shown that, conversely, every digraph satisfying these four properties is a 
Cayley digraph for some group. Due to the symmetry of such a digraph, we can choose 
labels like a, b, c for the various arc types, name any vertex e to represent the identity, 
and name each other vertex by a product of arc labels and their inverses that we can 
travel to attain that vertex starting from the one that we named e. Some finite groups 
were first constructed (found) using digraphs. 
7.14 Example 
A digraph satisfying the four properties given above is shown in Fig. 7.13 (a). To obtain 
Fig. 7 .13 (b ), we selected the labels 
---- and ________ , 
a 
b 
named a vertex e, and then named the other vertices as shown. We have a group 
{e,a,a2,a3, b,ba, ba2, ba3} 
of eight elements. From the diagram we could compute any product. For example, to 
compute ba2 ba3 we start at the vertex labeled ba2, follow a dotted edge, and then follow 
three solid edges to arrive at a. Note that the way we labeled the vertices is not unique. 
For example, the vertex labeled ba3 could have been labeled ab simply by going along a 
different path starting at e. This says that ab = ba3. We also see that a4 = e and b2 = e. 
We hope that this example is starting to look familiar. In fact, Figure 7.13 is a Cayley 
digraph of the dihedral group D4 . We simply relabel a with p and b withµ! 
.&. 
• EXERCISES 7 
Computations 
In Exercises l through 8, list the elements of the subgroup generated by the given subset. 
1. The subset {2, 3) of Z12 
2. The subset {4, 6) of Z12 
3. The subset {4, 6) in Z2s 
4. The subset { 12, 30) of ll36 
S. The subset { 12, 42) of ll 
6. The subset { 18, 24, 39) of ll 
7. The subset {µ, µp2 ) in Ds 
8. Thesubset{p8, p 10} inD1s 
9. Use the Cayley digraph in Figure 7 .15 to compute these products. Note that the solid edges represent the 
generator a and the dashed lines represent b. 
b. (ba)(ba3) 
c. b(a2b) 
e 
a 
d 
7.15 Figure 

Section 7 
Exercises 
75 
In Exercises JO through 12, give the table for the group having the indicated digraph. In each digraph, take e as 
identity element. List the identity e first in your table, and list the remaining elements alphabetically, so that your 
answers will be easy to check. 
10. The digraph in Fig. 7 .16(a) 
11. The digraph in Fig. 7 .16(b) 
12. The digraph in Fig. 7.16(c) 
e.----a 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I b----c 
e 
a 
~ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
'\ ___ ) ' 
d 
! 
(a) 
(b) 
7.16 Figure 
Concepts 
e 
I 
I 
I 
/ ;lfi{ 
c 
/ 
(c) 
13. How can we tell from a Cayley digraph whether or not the corresponding group is commutative? 
' ' 
a 
14. Using the condition found in Exercise 13, show that the group corresponding to the Cayley digraph in Figure 
7.13 is not commutative. 
15. Is it obvious from a Cayley digraph of a group whether or not the group is cyclic? [Hint: Look at Fig. 7.9(b).] 
16. The large outside triangle in Fig. 7 .11 (b) exhibits the cyclic subgroup (0, 2, 4} of Z6. Does the smaller inside 
triangle similarly exhibit a cyclic subgroup of Z6? Why or why not? 
17. The generating set S = { 1, 2} for Z6 contains more generators than necessary, since 1 is a generator for the 
group. Nevertheless, we can draw a Cayley digraph for Z6 with this generating set S. Draw such a Cayley 
digraph. 
18. Draw a Cayley digraph for Zs with generating set S = (2, 5). 
19. A relation on a set S of generators of a group G is an equation that equates some product of generators and 
their inverses to the identity e of G. For example, if S = {a, b) and G is commutative so that ab = ba, then one 
relation is aba- 1 b- 1 =e. If, moreover, bis its own inverse, then another relation is b2 =e. 
a. Explain how we can find some relations on S from a Cayley digraph of G. 
b. Find three relations on the set S ={a, b) of generators for the group described by Fig. 7.13(b). 
20. Draw digraphs of the two possible structurally different groups of order 4, taking as small a generating set as 
possible in each case. You need not label vertices. 
Theory 
21. Use Cayley digraphs to show that for n :::: 3, there exists a nonabelian group with 2n elements that is generated 
by two elements of order 2. 
22. Prove that there are at least three different abelian groups of order 8. [Hint: Find a Cayley digraph for a group 
of order 8 having one generator of order 4 and another of order 2. Find a second Cayley digraph for a group of 
order 8 having three generators each with order 2.] 

This page is intentionally left blank 

Structure of Groups 
PART 
II 
Section 8 
Groups of Permutations 
Section 9 
Finitely Generated Abelian Groups 
Section 10 
Cosets and the Theorem of Lagrange 
Section 11 
Plane lsometries 
SECTION 8 
GROUPS OF P ERMUTATIONS 
Let </J : G ~ G' be a function mapping the group G to G'. Recall that the homomor-
phism property of an isomorphism states that for all a, b E G, </J(ab) = </J(a)</J(b). When-
ever a function has this property whether or not the function is one-to-one or onto, we 
say that </J is a group homomorphism. Of course any group isomorphism is a group 
homomorphism, but the reverse is not necessarily true. 
8.1 Definition 
Let G and G' be groups with </J : G ~ G'. The map </J is a homomorphism if the 
homomorphism property 
</J(ab) = </J(a)</J(b) 
holds for all a, b E G. 
8.2 Example 
Let </J : lR ~ U (the circle group) be defined by the formula 
</J(x) = cos(2nx) + isin(2nx) = e2" ix . 
Then 
</J(a + b) = cos(2n(a + b)) + isin(2n(a + b)) = e2"i(a+bl. 
• 
Using either the usual properties of the exponential function or the formulas from 
trigonometry involving the sum of two angles, we see that 
</J(a + b) = (cos(2na) + isin(2na))(cos(2nb) + isin(2nb)) = e2"
0 ie2"bi, 
so 
</J(a + b) = </J(a)</J(b), 
which says that </J is a group homomorphism. Although </J maps onto U, it is not one-to-
one, so </J is not an isomorphism. 
The identity 0 E lR maps to I, the identity in U. Furthermore, for any x ER 
</J(-x) = e-2rrix = _ I_. = (</J(x))-' . 
e2rrtx 
• 
77 

78 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
8.3 Example 
Recall that U,, = {z E <C I z" = 1). Let <P: U28 --+ U4 be given by <P(z) = z1. To check 
that <P is well defined, we see that if z E U28, then z28 = 1. Therefore, (z7)4 = 1, which 
implies that z7 E U4 . We check that <P is a homomorphism. 
<P(z1z2) = (z1z2)7 = zizi = <P(z1)<P(z2). 
As in the previous example, <P maps the identity in U28, in this case 1, to the identity 1 
in U4 . Furthermore, 
8.4 Definition 
Let <P : X--+ Y and suppose that A <;; X and B <;; Y. The set </J[AJ = {</)(a) I a EA} is 
called the image of A in Y under the mapping</). The set <P-' [BJ = {a EA I </)(a) E B} 
is called the inverse image of B under the mapping</). 
• 
The four properties of a homomorphism given in the theorem that follows are obvious 
in the case of an isomorphism since we think of an isomorphism as simply relabeling 
the elements of a group. However, it is not obvious that these properties hold for all 
homomorphisms whether or not they are one-to-one or onto maps. Consequently, we 
give careful proofs of all four properties. 
8.5 Theorem 
Let <P be a homomorphism of a group G into a group G'. 
1. If e is the identity element in G, then </J(e) is the identity element e' in G'. 
2. If a E G, then <{J(a-1) = </)(a)-I. 
3. If His a subgroup of G, then </)[HJ is a subgroup of G'. 
4. If K' is a subgroup of G', then <P-' [K'J is a subgroup of G. 
Loosely speaking, <P preserves the identity element, inverses, and subgroups. 
Proof 
Let <P be a homomorphism of G into G'. Then 
<P(e) = <P(ee) = <{J(e)<{J(e). 
Multiplying on the left by <{J(e)- 1, we see that e' = <{J(e). Thus <{J(e) must be the identity 
element e' in G'. The equation 
e' = <{J(e) = <{J(aa- 1) = <{J(a)<{J(a- 1) 
shows that <{J(a- 1) = <{J(a)- 1 for all a E G. 
Turning to Statement (3), let H be a subgroup of G, and let </)(a) and <P(b) be any 
two elements in </J[H]. Then <{J(a)<{J(b) = <{J(ab), so we see that <{J(a)<{J(b) E </)[HJ; thus, 
</)[HJ is closed under the operation of G'. The fact that e' = <{J(e) and <{J(a- 1) = <{J(a)- 1 
completes the proof that </)[HJ is a subgroup of G'. 
Going the other way for Statement (4), let K' be a subgroup of G'. Suppose a 
and bare in <P- 1 [K']. Then <{J(a)<{J(b) E K' since K' is a subgroup. The equation <{J(ab) = 
<{J(a)<{J(b) shows that ab E <P-1 [K']. Thus <P-' [K'J is closed under the binary operation in 
G. Also, K' must contain the identity element e' = <{J(e), so e E <P- 1 [K']. If a E <P- 1 [K'], 
then </)(a) EK', so <{J(a)-1 EK'. But <{J(a)-1 = <{J(a-1), so we must have a-1 E <P-' [K'J. 
Hence <P- ' [K'J is a subgroup of G. 
+ 
Let <P : G --+ G' be a homomorphism and let e' be the identity element of G'. Now 
{e' ) is a subgroup of G', so <P-' [{e')J is a subgroup Hof G by Statement (4) in Theorem 
8.5. This subgroup is critical to the study of homomorphisms. 
8.6 Definition 
Let <P : G--+ G' be a homomorphism of groups. The subgroup <P-' [{e')J = 
{x E G I <{J(x) = e') is the kernel of</), denoted by Ker(</)). 
• 

Section 8 
Groups of Permutations 
79 
We will use the kernel of a homomorphism when we define the alternating group 
later in this section. 
Another extreme is to let H = G in Statement (3) of Theorem 8.5. In this case, 
the theorem says that </>[G] is a subgroup of G'. We use this in the proof of Cayley's 
Theorem. 
8.7 Example 
In Example 8.2, the homomorphism 4> : lR ~ U is defined by </>(x) = cos(2rrx) + 
i sin(2JT x) = e2"ix _ The kernel of 4> is the set of integers since cos(2rrx) + i sin(2JT x) = 1 
if and only if x is an integer. 
Let n be a positive integer. Then ( ~) is a subgroup of lR and 
= {cos(2rrm/ n + isin(2rrm/n)) Im E Z} 
=Un. 
8.8 Example 
Let 4> : Z,, ~ D,, be given by </>(k) = pk. We check that 4> is a homomorphism. Let 
a, b E Z,,. If a+ b < n, then a +n b =a+ b, so </>(a+,, b) =</>(a+ b) = pa+b = p
0 pb 
= </>(a)</>(b). If a+ b :::: n, then </>(a+,, b) = </>(a+ b - n) = pa+b-
11 = pa pb p-
11 = 
pa pb = </>(a)</>(b). The image </>[Z,,] is (p). 
A 
Cayley's Theorem 
Each of the groups we have seen so far is isomorphic to a subgroup of permutations on 
some set. For example, Zn is isomorphic with the cyclic group ((l, 2, 3, . .. , n)) :'.SS,,. 
The dihedral group D,, is defined to be the permutations in Sz,, with the property that 
the line segment between vertices i andj is an edge in P,,, a regular n-gon, if and only 
if the line segment between the images of i and j is also an edge. The infinite group 
GL(n, JR) can be thought of as invertible linear transformations of JR". Each element of 
GL(n, JR) permutes the vectors in lR", which makes GL(n, JR) isomorphic with a permu-
tation group on vectors in lR". We refer to a subgroup of a permutation group as a group 
of permutations. Cayley's Theorem states that any group is isomorphic with a group 
of permutations. 
At first Cayley's Theorem seems like a remarkable result that could be used to 
understand all groups. In fact, this is a nice and intriguing classic result. Unfortunately, 
approaching group theory by trying to determine all possible permutation groups is not 
feasible. On the other hand, Cayley's theorem does show the strength and generality of 
permutation groups and it deserves a special place in group theory for that reason. For 
example, if we wish to find a counterexample to a conjecture about groups, provided 
that there is one, it will occur in a permutation group. 
It may seem a mystery how we could start with an arbitrary group and come up with 
a permutation group that is isomorphic with the given group. The key is to think about 
the group table. Each row contains each element of the group exactly once. So each row 
defines a permutation of the elements of the group by placing the table head as the top 
row in the two-row representation of a permutation and placing the row corresponding 
to an element a in the group as the bottom row. Table 8.9 is the group table for D3. Note 
that the permutation obtained using the row J.LP is 

80 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
8.9 Table 
D3 
p 
p2 
µ, 
µ,p 
µ,p2 
p 
p 
µ, 
µ,p 
µ,p 
p 
p 
p2 
µ,p2 
µ, 
µ,p 
p2 
p2 
p 
µ,p 
µ,p2 
µ, 
µ, 
µ, 
µ,p 
µ,p2 
L 
p 
p2 
µ,p 
µ,p 
µ,p2 
µ, 
p2 
L 
p 
µ,p2 
µ,p2 
µ, 
µ,p 
p 
p2 
All that remains to prove Cayley's Theorem, at least when the group is finite, is to 
check that the permutations obtained from the group table form a group isomorphism 
with the original group. Let Ax be the permutation of the elements of G given by the 
x row of the table for G. Then for any g E G, Ax(g) is the entry in the x row and g 
column of the group table. In other words, Ax(g) = xg, which is perfectly valid in the 
case of an infinite as well as a finite group. We formalize this connection between G and 
permutations on G in Definition 8.10. 
8.10 Definition 
Let G be a group. The function c/> : G ~ SG given by cp(x) = Ax where Ax(g) = xg for 
all g E G is called the left regular representation of G. 
• 
In order to be sure that Ax is a permutation, it should be verified that Ax is both one-to-one 
and onto. We see that Ax is one-to-one since if Ax(a) = Ax(b), xa = xb and cancellation 
gives a= b. Also, Ax maps onto G because for any b E G, Ax(X- 1b)) =b. We are now 
ready to prove Cayley's Theorem. 
8.11 Theorem 
(Cayley's Theorem) Every group is isomorphic to a group of permutations. 
Proof 
Let G be a group. The left regular representation provides a map cp : G ~ SG defined 
by cp(x) = Ax. We must verify that cp is a group homomorphism and that cp is one-to-one. 
Then cp[G] is a subgroup of SG by Theorem 8.5 and cp : G ~ cp[G] is an isomorphism. 
We first show that cp is one-to-one. Suppose that a, b E G and cp(a) = cp(b). Then 
the permutations Aa and AJJ are the same, so Aa(e) = Ab(e). Thus ae =be and a = b. So 
cp is one-to-one. 
We now need to show that cp is a group homomorphism. Let a, b E G. Then cp(ab) = 
Aab and c/>ac/>b = AaAb. We must show that the two permutations Aab and AaAb are the 
same. Let g E G. 
Thus Aab = AaAb, which implies that cp(ab) = cp(a)cp(b). So c/> is a one-to-one homomor-
phism, which completes the proof. 
+ 
8.12 Example 
The proof of Cayley's Theorem shows that any group G is isomorphic with a subgroup 
of SG, but this is typically not the smallest symmetric group that has a subgroup isomor-
phic with G. For example, D11 is isomorphic with a subgroup of Sz,, while the proof of 
Cayley's Theorem gives a subgroup of So,, and D 11 has 2n elements while Z 11 has only n 
elements. On the surface, it may seem that Z6 cannot be isomorphic with a subgroup of 
S11 for n < 6, but (1, 2, 3)(4, 5) E S5 generates a subgroup isomorphic with Z6. 
• 
We defined the left regular representation in Definition 8.10. We now define the right 
regular representation. Instead of Ax representing the row for x in the group table, we 
use <Ix to represent the column with head x. Instead of using cp for the function that sends 
x to Ax, we use r , which sends x to <Ix-' . 

Section 8 
Groups of Permutations 
81 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
A
rthur Cayley (1821-1895) gave an abstract-
sounding definition of a group in a paper of 
1854: "A set of symbols, 1, a , {3, · · ·, all of them 
different and such that the product of any two of 
them (no matter in what order) or the product of 
any one of them into itself, belongs to the set, 
is said to be a group." He then proceeded to de-
fine a group table and note that every line and 
column of the table "will contain all the symbols 
1, a, {3, · · · . " Cayley's symbols, however, always 
represented operations on sets; it does not seem 
that he was aware of any other kind of group. He 
noted, for instance, that the four matrix operations 
1, a= inversion, f3 = transposition, and y = af3, 
form, abstractly, the non-cyclic group of four ele-
ments. In any case, his definition went unnoticed 
for a quarter of a century. 
This paper of 1854 was one of about 300 writ-
ten during the 14 years Cayley was practicing law, 
being unable to find a suitable teaching post. In 
1863, he finally became a professor at Cambridge. 
In 1878, he returned to the theory of groups by 
publishing four papers, in one of which he stated 
Theorem 8.11 of this text; his "proof' was simply 
to notice from the group table that multiplication by 
any group element permuted the group elements. 
However, he wrote, "this does not in any wise show 
that the best or the easiest mode of treating the gen-
eral problem [of finding all groups of a given order] 
is thus to regard it as a problem of [permutations]. 
It seems clear that the better course is to consider 
the general problem in itself." 
The papers of 1878, unlike the earlier one, 
found a receptive audience; in fact, they were an 
important influence on Walther von Dyck's 1882 
axiomatic definition of an abstract group, the defi-
nition that led to the development of abstract group 
theory. 
8.13 Definition 
Let G be a group. The map r : G ~ Sc given by r(x) = crx-1 where crx(g) = gx is called 
the right regular representation of G. 
• 
We could have used the right regular representation to prove Cayley's Theorem instead 
of the left regular representation. Exercise 54 asks for the details of the proof. 
Even and Odd Permutations 
It seems reasonable that every reordering of the sequence 1, 2, ... , n can be achieved 
by repeated interchange of positions of pairs of numbers. We discuss this a bit more 
formally. 
8.14 Definition 
A cycle of length 2 is a transposition. 
• 
Thus a transposition leaves all elements but two fixed, and maps each of these onto 
the other. A computation shows that 
(a1,a2, · · · ,an) = (a1 , an)(a1,a,,_1) · · · (a1,a3)(a1,a2). 
Therefore any cycle of length n can be written as a product of n - 1 transpositions. 
Since any permutation of a finite set can be written as a product of cycles, we have the 
following. 
8.15 Theorem 
Any permutation of a finite set containing at least two elements is a product of 
transpositions. 
+ 
Naively, this theorem just states that any rearrangement of n objects can be achieved 
by successively interchanging pairs of them. 
8.16 Example 
Following the remarks prior to the theorem, we see that (1, 6) (2, 5, 3) is the product 
(1, 6) (2, 3) (2, 5) of transpositions. 
.& 

82 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
8.17 Example 
In S11 for n:::: 2, the identity permutation is the product (1, 2) (I, 2) of transpositions . ... 
We have seen that every permutation of a finite set with at least two elements is a 
product of transpositions. The transpositions may not be disjoint, and a representation 
of the permutation in this way is not unique. For example, we can always insert at the 
beginning the transposition (I, 2) twice, because (I, 2) (I, 2) is the identity permutation. 
What is true is that the number of transpositions used to represent a given permutation 
must either always be even or always be odd. This is an important fact. The proof 
involves counting orbits and was suggested by David M. Bloom. 
Let CJ E SA and a EA. We let the orbit of a be the set {CJk(a) I k E Z }. In the case 
of CJ E S,,, a simple way to think of the orbit of a is to think of the elements in the cycle 
containing a in the disjoint cycle representation of CJ. 
8.18 Example 
Let CJ = (1, 2, 6)(3, 5) E S6. Then the orbit of 1 is the set { 1, 2, 6), which is also the orbit 
of 2 and the orbit of 6. The set (3, 5) is the orbit of 3 and the orbit of 5. What about the 
orbit of 4? Recall that if we include I-cycles, CJ = (1, 2, 6)(3, 5)( 4), which says the orbit 
of 4 is (4). 
.._ 
8.19 Theorem 
No permutation in S11 can be expressed both as a product of an even number of transpo-
sitions and as a product of an odd number of transpositions. 
Proof 
Let CJ E S11 and let r = (i,j) be a transposition in S11 • We claim that the number of orbits 
of CJ and of r CJ differ by 1. 
Case I 
Suppose i and j are in different orbits of CJ . Write CJ as a product of 
disjoint cycles, the first of which contains j and the second of which 
contains i, symbolized by the two circles in Fig. 8.20. We may write the 
product of these two cycles symbolically as 
(b,j, x , x, x)(a, i, x, x) 
where the symbols x denote possible other elements in these orbits. 
8.20 Figure 
Computing the product of the first three cycles in TCJ = (i,j)CJ, we obtain 
(i,j)(b,j , x , x , x)(a,i, x , x) = (a,j, x, x, x,b,i, x, x ). 
The original 2 orbits have been joined to form just one in TCJ as 
symbolized in Fig. 8.20. Exercise 42 asks us to repeat the computation 
to show that the same thing happens if either one or both of i and j 
should be the only element of their orbit in CJ. 
Case II Suppose i andj are in the same orbit of CJ. We can then write CJ as a 
product of disjoint cycles with the first cycle of the form 
(a, i, x, x, x,b,j, x, x) 

8.21 Figure 
Section 8 
Groups of Permutations 
83 
shown symbolically by the circle in Fig. 8.20. Computing the product of 
the first two cycles in r<Y = (i,j)<Y, we obtain 
(i,j)(a,i, x, x, x,b,j, x, x) = (a,j, x, x)(b,i, x , x, x). 
The original single orbit has been split into two as symbolized in 
Fig. 8.21. 
We have shown that the number of orbits of T<Y differs from the number of 
orbits of <Y by 1. The identity permutation t has n orbits, because each element is 
the only member of its orbit. Now the number of orbits of a given permutation 
<Y E S,, differs from n by either an even or an odd number, but not both. Thus it is 
impossible to write 
<Y = r1 r 2r3 · · · r111t 
where the Tk are transpositions in two ways, once with m even and once with m 
odd. 
+ 
8.22 Definition 
A permutation of a finite set is even or odd according to whether it can be expressed 
as a product of an even number of transpositions or the product of an odd number of 
transpositions, respectively. 
• 
8.23 Example 
The identity permutation t in S,, is an even permutation since we have t = (1, 2)(1, 2). If 
n = 1 so that we cannot form this product, we define t to be even. On the other hand, 
the permutation (1, 4, 5, 6) (2, 1, 5) in S6 can be written as 
( 1, 4, 5, 6)(2, 1, 5) = (1, 6)(1, 5)(1, 4)(2, 5)(2, 1) 
which has five transpositions, so this is an odd permutation. 
The Alternating Groups 
We claim that for n '.'.: 2, the number of even permutations in S,, is the same as the 
number of odd permutations; that is, S,, is split equally and both numbers are (n!)/ 2. 
To show this, let A,, be the set of even permutations in S,, and let B,, be the set of odd 
permutations for n '.'.: 2. We proceed to define a one-to-one function from A,, onto B,,. 
This is exactly what is needed to show that A,, and B,, have the same number of elements. 
Let r be any fixed transposition in S,,; it exists since n '.'.: 2. We may as well suppose 
that r = (1, 2). We define a function 
by 
that is, <Y EA,, is mapped into (1, 2)<Y by Ar- Observe that since <Y is even, the per-
mutation (1, 2)<Y can be expressed as a product of a (1 + even number), or odd num-
ber, of transpositions, so (1, 2)<Y is indeed in B,,. If for <Y and µ, in A,, it is true that 
Ar(<Y) = Ar(µ,), then 
(1, 2)<Y = (1, 2)µ,, 
and since S,, is a group, we have <Y = µ,. Thus Ar is a one-to-one function. Finally, 
r = (1,2) = r- 1, 
so if p E B,,, then 
r- 1 p EA,,, 

84 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
and 
Thus A< maps onto B11 • Hence the number of elements in A11 is the same as the number 
in B11 since there is a one-to-one correspondence between the elements of the sets. 
Note that the product of two even permutations is again even. Also since n ;:::: 2, S11 
has the transposition (1, 2) and i = (1, 2)(1, 2) is an even permutation. Finally, note that 
if rr is expressed as a product of transpositions, the product of the same transpositions 
taken in just the opposite order is rr- 1• Thus if rr is an even permutation, rr - 1 must 
also be even. Referring to Theorem 5.12, we see that we have proved the following 
statement. 
8.24 Theorem If n ;:::: 2, then the collection of all even permutations of { 1, 2, 3, · · · , n) forms a sub-
group of order n!/ 2 of the symmetric group S11 • 
We can define a function called the sign of a permutation, sgn : S11 --+ { 1, - I } by 
the formula 
( ) _ { 
1 if rr is even 
sgn rr -
-1 if rr is odd. 
Thinking of (1, -1} as a group under multiplication, it is easy to see that sgn is a ho-
momorphism. Since I is the identity in the group {I , -1}, Ker(sgn) = sgn- 1 [ { 1}] is a 
subgroup of S11 consisting of all the even permutations. The homomorphism sgn is used 
in the standard way of defining the determinant of a square matrix. Exercise 52 asks you 
to prove some of the standard facts about determinants using this definition. 
8.25 Definition 
The subgroup of S11 consisting of the even permutations of n letters is the alternating 
group A11 on n letters. 
• 
Both S11 and A 11 are very important groups. Cayley's theorem shows that every finite 
group G is structurally identical to some subgroup of S11 for n = IGI. It can be shown 
that there are no formulas involving just radicals for solution of polynomial equations 
of degree n for n ;:::: 5. This fact is actually due to the structure of A 11 , surprising as that 
may seem! 
• EXERCISES 8 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 10 determine whether the given map is a group homomorphism. [Hint: To verify that a map 
is a homomorphism, you must check the homomorphism property. To check that a map is not a homomorphism 
you could either find a and b such that </J(ab) =f. </J(a)</J(b), or else you could determine that any of the properties in 
Theorem 8.5 fail.] 
1. Let <P : Z 10 --+ Z2 be given by </J(x) =the remainder when x is divided by 2. 
2. Let </J : 2:9 --+ Z2 be given by </J(x) = the remainder when x is divided by 2. 
3. Let </J : <Qi* --+ <Qi* be given by </J(x) = lxl. 
4. Let </J : lR --+ JR+ be given by </J(x) = Y 
5. Let </J : D4 --+ 2:4 be given by </J(pi) = </J(µpi) = i for 0 :S i :S 3. 

Section 8 
Exercises 
85 
6. Let F be the additive group of all functions mapping ~ to ~. Let <P : F --+ F be given by <Plf) = g where 
g(x) = f (x) + x. 
7. Let F be as in Exercise 6 and <P : F --+ F be defined by <Plf) =Sf. 
8. Let F be the additive group of all continuous functions mapping ~ 
to ~ . Let <P : F --+ ~ be defined by </J(g) = 
fa' g(x)dx. 
9. Let Mn be the additive group of n x n matrices with real entries. Let <P : M11 --+ ~ be given by </J(A) = det(A), 
the determinant of A. 
10. Let M,, be as in Exercise 9 and <P : M,, --+ ~ be defined by </J(A) = tr(A) where tr(A) is the trace of A, which is 
the sum of the entries on the diagonal. 
In Exercises 11 through 16, compute the kernel for the given homomorphism </J. 
11. <P : Z --+ Zs such that </J( I) = 6. 
12. <P : Z --+ Z such that </J(l) = 12. 
13. <P : Z x Z --+ Z where </J(l ,0) = 3 and </J(O, 1) = -5. 
14. <P : Z x Z --+ Z where </J(l , 0) = 6 and </J(O, 1) = 9. 
15. <P: Z x Z --+ Z x Z where </J( l , 0) = (2, 5) and </J(O, 1) = (- 3, 2). 
16. Let D be the additive group of all differentiable functions mapping ~ to ~ and F the additive group of all 
functions from ~ 
to ~ . <P : D--+ Fis given by </J(j) = f ' , the derivative off . 
In Exercises 17 through 22, find all orbits of the given permutation. 
nG~~
: ~~ 
~a 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8) 
6 2 4 8 3 1 7 
(2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
78) 
19· 
3 5 
4 6 8 
20. a : Z --+ Z where a(n) = n + 1 
21. a : Z --+ Z where a(n) = n + 2 
22. a : Z --+ Z where a(n) = n - 3 
In Exercises 23 through 25, express the permutation of (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8) as a product of disjoint cycles, and 
then as a product of transpositions. 
G 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 n 
24. G 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
~) 
23. 
2 
6 
3 
7 
4 
5 
6 
4 
8 
2 
5 
25. G 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 n 
3 
2 
8 4 
7 
6 
26. Figure 8.26 shows a Cayley digraph for the alternating group A4 using the generating set S = ((1, 2, 3), 
(1, 2)(3, 4)). Continue labeling the other nine vertices with the elements of A4, expressed as a product of 
disjoint cycles. 
Concepts 
In Exercises 27 through 29, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction 
is needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
27. For a permutation a of a set A, an orbit of a is a nonempty minimal subset of A that is mapped onto itself 
by a . 
28. The left regular representation of a group G is the map of G into Sc whose value at g E G is the permutation 
of G that carries each x E G into gx. 
29. The alternating group is the group of all even permutations. 

86 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
(I) 
(1, 2,3) 
'V ' 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
// ~
I 
\, 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
/ 
// 
', 
\ 
\l
, / 'Y\ 
( I, 2)(3, 4) 
-----------------
8.26 Figure 
30. Before the proof of Cayley's Theorem, it is shown that Ax is one-to-one. In the proof, one-to-one is shown 
again. Is it necessary to show one-to-one twice? Explain. 
31. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every permutation is a cycle. 
b. Every cycle is a permutation. 
c. The definition of even and odd permutations could have been given equally well before Theorem 8.19. 
d. Every nontrivial subgroup H of S9 containing some odd permutation contains a transposition. 
e. As has 120 elements. 
f. S11 is not cyclic for any n ~ l. 
g. A3 is a commutative group. 
h. S7 is isomorphic to the subgroup of all those elements of Ss that leave the number 8 fixed. 
i. S7 is isomorphic to the subgroup of all those elements of Ss that leave the number 5 fixed. 
j. The odd permutations in Ss form a subgroup of Sg. 
k. Every group G is isomorphic with a subgroup of Sc. 
32. The dihedral group is defined to be permutations with certain properties. Use the usual notation involvingµ 
and p for elements in D11. 
a. Identify which elements in D3 are even. Do the even elements form a cyclic group? 
b. Identify which of elements of D4 are even. Do the even elements form a cyclic group? 
c. For which values of n do the even permutations of D 11 form a cyclic group? 
Proof Synopsis 
33. Give a two-sentence synopsis of the proof of Cayley's Theorem. 
34. Give a two-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 8.19. 
Theory 
35. Suppose that</>: G--+ G' is a group homomorphism and a E Ker</>. Show that for any g E G, gag- 1 E Ker</>. 
36. Prove that a homomorphism</> : G--+ G' is one-to-one if and only if Ker(</>) is the trivial subgroup of G. 
37. Let </> : G--+ G' be a group homomorphism. Show that </>(a)= </>(b) if and only if a- 1 b E Ker</>. 
38. Use Exercise 37 to prove that if </> : G --+ G' is a group homomorphism mapping onto G' and G is a finite 
group, then for anyb,c E G', l</>- 1[{b}]I = l</>- 1[{c}]I. Conclude that if lGI is a prime number, then either </> is 
an isomorphism or else G' is the trivial group. 

Section 8 
Exercises 
87 
39. Show that if <P : G ---+ G' and y : G' ---+ G" are group homomorphisms, then y o <P : G ---+ G" is also a group 
homomorphism. 
40. Let <P : G---+ G' be a group homomorphism. Show that </J[G] is abelian if and only if xyx- 1 y- 1 E Ker(</J) for 
all x,y E G. 
41. Prove the following about S,, if n ~ 3. 
a. Every permutation in S,, can be written as a product of at most n -
1 transpositions. 
b. Every permutation in S,, that is not a cycle can be written as a product of at most n - 2 transpositions. 
c. Every odd permutation in S,, can be written as a product of2n + 3 transpositions, and every even permuta-
tion as a product of 2n + 8 transpositions. 
42. a. Draw a figure like Fig. 8.20 to illustrate that if i and j are in different orbits of a and a(i) = i, then the 
number of orbits of (i,j)a is one less than the number of orbits of a. 
b. Repeat part (a) if a(j) = j also. 
43. Show that for every subgroup H of S,, for n ~ 2, either all the permutations in H are even or exactly half of 
them are even. 
44. Let a be a permutation of a set A. We shall say "a moves a E A" if a(a) f. a. If A is a finite set, how many 
elements are moved by a cycle a E SA of length n? 
4S. Let A be an infinite set. Let H be the set of all a E SA such that the number of elements moved by a (see 
Exercise 44) is finite. Show that His a subgroup of SA. 
46. Let A be an infinite set. Let K be the set of all a E SA that move (see Exercise 44) at most 50 elements of A. Is 
Ka subgroup of SA? Why? 
47. Consider S,, for a fixed n ~ 2 and let a be a fixed odd permutation. Show that every odd permutation in S,, is 
a product of a and some permutation in A,, . 
48. Show that if a is a cycle of odd length, then a 2 is a cycle. 
49. Following the line of thought opened by Exercise 48, complete the following with a condition involving n and 
r so that the resulting statement is a theorem: 
If a is a cycle of length n, then a' is also a cycle if and only if ... 
SO. Show that S,, is generated by ((1,2),(1,2,3,. · · , n)}. [Hint: Show that as r varies, (1, 2, 3,. · · ,nY(1,2) 
(I , 2, 3,. · · , n)"- r gives all the transpositions (I , 2), (2, 3), (3, 4), · · · , (n - 1, n), (n, 1 ). Then show that any 
transposition is a product of some of these transpositions and use Theorem 8.15.] 
Sl. Let a E S,, and define a relation on {l, 2, 3, . . . , n} by i ~ j if and only if j = ak (i) for some k E /Z. 
1. Prove that ~ is an equivalence relation. 
2. Prove that for any l .:::: i .:::: n, the equivalence class of i is the orbit of i. 
S2. The usual definition for the determinant of an n x n matrix A = (a;J) is 
det(A) = L sgn(a)a1,a(l)G2,a(2)G3,a(3) · · · Gn,0(11) 
a eSri 
where sgn(a) is the sign of a. Using this definition, prove the following properties of determinants. 
a. If a row of matrix A has all zero entries, then det(A) = 0. 
b. If two different rows of A are switched to obtain B, then det(B) = - det(A). 
c. If r times one row of A is added to another row of A to obtain a matrix B, then det(A) = det(B) 
d. If a row of A is multiplied by r to obtain the matrix B, then det(B) = rdet(A). 
S3. Prove that any finite group G is isomorphic with a subgroup of GL(n, IR) for some n. [Hint: For each a E S,,, 
find a matrix in GL(n, IR) that sends each basis vector e; to ea(i)- Use this to show that S,, is isomorphic with a 
subgroup of GL(n, IR).] 
S4. Prove Cayley's Theorem using the right regular representation rather than the left regular representation. 
SS. Let a E S,,. An inversion is a pair (i, )) such that i < j and a(i) > a(j). Prove Theorem 8.19 by showing that 
multiplying a permutation by a transposition changes the number of inversions by an odd number. 

88 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
56. The sixteen puzzle consists of 15 tiles numbered 1 through 15 arranged in a four-by-four grid with one 
position left blank. A move is sliding a tile adjacent to the blank position into the blank position. The goal is to 
arrange the numbers in order by a sequence of moves. Is it possible to start with the configuration pictured in 
Figure 8.27(a) and solve the puzzle as indicated in Figure 8.27(b)? Prove your answer by finding a sequence 
of moves to solve the puzzle or by proving that it is impossible to solve. 
I 
2 
3 
4 
I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
II 
12 
9 
10 
I I 
12 
13 
15 
14 
13 
14 
15 
a. 
b. 
8.27 Figure 
SECTION 9 
FINITELY GENERATED ABELIAN GROUPS 
Direct Products 
Let us take a moment to review our present stockpile of groups. Starting with finite 
groups, we have the cyclic group Z 11 , the symmetric group S 11 , and the alternating group 
A 11 for each positive integer n. We also have the dihedral groups D11 and the Klein 
4-group V. Of course we know that subgroups of these groups exist. Turning to infi-
nite groups, we have groups consisting of sets of numbers under the usual addition or 
multiplication, as, for example, Z, JR, and tC under addition, and their nonzero elements 
under multiplication. We have the group U of complex numbers of magnitude 1 under 
multiplication, which is isomorphic to each of the groups lRc under addition modulo c, 
where c E JR+. We also have the group SA of all permutations of an infinite set A, as well 
as various groups formed from matrices such as GL(n, JR). 
One purpose of this section is to show a way to use known groups as building 
blocks to form more groups. The Klein 4-group will be recovered in this way from the 
cyclic groups. Employing this procedure with the cyclic groups gives us a large class 
of abelian groups that can be shown to include all possible structure types for a finite 
abelian group. We start by generalizing Definition 0.4. 
9.1 Definition 
The Cartesian product of sets B 1, B2 , · · · , B11 is the set of all ordered n-tuples 
(b1, b2 , · · · , b11 ), where b; E B; for i = 1, 2, · · · , n. The Cartesian product is denoted 
by either 
or by 
II 
flB;. 
i= I 
• 
We could also define the Cartesian product of an infinite number of sets, but the 
definition is considerably more sophisticated and we shall not need it. 
Now let G1, G2, · · · , G,, be groups, and let us use multiplicative notation for all 
the group operations. Regarding the G; as sets, we can form fl:~ , G;. Let us show that 
we can make TI;~ , G; into a group by means of a binary operation of multiplication by 
components. Note again that we are being sloppy when we use the same notation for a 
group as for the set of elements of the group. 

Section 9 
Finitely Generated Abelian Groups 
89 
9.2Theorem 
Let G1,G2,··· ,Gn be groups. For (a1,a2, · ·· ,a11) and (bi,b2,· · · ,bn) in fT'=i G;, 
define (ai, a2, · · · ,a,,)(b1,b2, · · · ,b11) to be the element (a1b1,a2b2, · · · ,a,,b,i). Then 
n;'= I G; is a group, the direct product of the groups G;, under this binary operation. 
Proof 
Note that since a; E G;, b; E G;, and G; is a group, we have a;b; E G;. Thus the definition 
of the binary operation on n;'=1 
G; given in the statement of the theorem makes sense; 
that is, n;'=I G; is closed under the binary operation. 
The associative law in n;'=I G; is thrown back onto the associative law in each 
component as follows: 
(a1, a2, · · · , a11)[(b1, b2, · · · , b11)(c1, c2, · · · , c11)] 
= (a1,a2, · · · ,an)(b1c1,b2c2, · · · ,bnC11) 
= (a1(b1c1),a2(b2c2), · · · ,a11(b11c11)) 
= ((a1 b1 )c1 , (a2b2)c2, · · · , (a11b11)c,,) 
= (a1b1,a2b2, · · · ,a11bn)(c1,C2, · · · ,c") 
= [(a1, a2, · · · , a11)(b1, b2, · · · , b11)](c1 , c2, · · · , c"). 
If e; is the identity element in G;, then clearly, with multiplication by components, 
(e1, e2, .. . , ell) is an identity in n;'=I G;. Finally, an inverse of (a1, Gz, . . . , a,,) is 
(a;-1,a21, . .. ,a;;-1); compute the product by components. Hence n;'=I G; is a group . • 
In the event that the operation of each G; is commutative, we sometimes use addi-
tive notation in n;'=I G; and refer to n;'=I G; as the direct sum of the groups G;. The 
notation EBj~
1 G; is sometimes used in this case in place of n:'=i G;, especially with 
abelian groups with operation+. The direct sum of abelian groups G1, G2, · · · , G11 may 
be written G 1 EB G2 EB · · · EB G11. We leave to Exercise 46 the proof that a direct product 
of abelian groups is again abelian. 
It is quickly seen that if B; has r; elements for i = 1, · · · , n, then n;'=1 
B; has 
r1 r2 · · · rn elements, for in an n-tuple, there are r1 choices for the first component from 
B1, and for each of these there are r2 choices for the next component from B2, and so on. 
9.3 Example 
Consider the group Z2 x Z3, which has 2 · 3 = 6 elements, namely (0, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), 
(I , 0), (I , I), and (I, 2). We claim that Z2 x Z3 is cyclic. It is only necessary to find a 
generator. Let us try (1, 1). Here the operations in Z2 and Z3 are written additively, so 
we do the same in the direct product Z2 x Z3 . 
(1, 1) = (1, 1) 
2(1, I) = (I , I) + (I, I) = (0, 2) 
3(1, 1) = (1, 1) + (1, 1) + (1, 1) = (1,0) 
4(1, 1) = 3(1, 1) + (1, 1) = (1,0) + (1, 1) = (0, 1) 
5(1, 1) = 4(1, I)+ (1, 1) = (0, 1) + (1, I)= (I, 2) 
6(1, 1) = 5(1, 1) + (1, 1) = (1,2) + (1, 1) = (0, 0) 
Thus (1, 1) generates all of Z2 x Z3 . Since there is, up to isomorphism, only one cyclic 
group structure of a given order, we see that Z2 x Z3 is isomorphic to Z6. 
.A. 
9.4 Example 
Consider Z3 x Z3. This is a group of nine elements. We claim that Z3 x Z3 is not cyclic. 
Since the addition is by components, and since in Z 3 every element added to itself three 
times gives the identity, the same is true in Z 3 x Z3. Thus no element can generate the 
group, for a generator added to itself successively could only give the identity after nine 

90 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
summands. We have found another group structure of order 9. A similar argument shows 
that Z2 x Z2 is not cyclic. Thus Z2 x Z2 must be isomorphic to the Klein 4-group. 
.._ 
The preceding examples illustrate the following theorem: 
9.5 Theorem 
The group Z 111 x Z11 is cyclic and is isomorphic to Z,,111 if and only if m and n are rela-
tively prime, that is, the gcd of m and n is 1. 
Proof Consider the cyclic subgroup of Z 111 x Z11 generated by (1, 1) as described by Theorem 
5.19. As our previous work has shown, the order of this cyclic subgroup is the smallest 
power of (1, 1) that gives the identity (0, 0). Here taking a power of (1, 1) in our additive 
notation will involve adding (1, 1) to itself repeatedly. Under addition by components, 
the first component 1 E Z 111 yields 0 only after m summands, 2m summands, and so on, 
and the second component 1 E Z11 yields 0 only after n summands, 2n summands, and 
so on. For them to yield 0 simultaneously, the number of summands must be a multiple 
of both m and n. The smallest number that is a multiple of both m and n will be mn 
if and only if the gcd of m and n is 1; in this case, (1, 1) generates a cyclic subgroup of 
order mn, which is the order of the whole group. This shows that Z 111 x Z11 is cyclic of 
order mn, and hence isomorphic to Z,,111 if m and n are relatively prime. 
For the converse, suppose that the gcd of m and n is d > 1. Then mn/ d is divisible 
by both m and n. Consequently, for any (r, s) in Zm x Z 11 , we have 
(r, s) + (r,s) + · · · + (r, s) = (0,0). 
mn/d summands 
Hence no element (r, s) in Z111 x Z11 can generate the entire group, so Z111 x Z11 is 
not cyclic and therefore not isomorphic to Z,,111 • 
+ 
This theorem can be extended to a product of more than two factors by similar 
arguments. We state this as a corollary without going through the details of the proof. 
9.6 Corollary 
The group fl;~ 1 Z 111, is cyclic and isomorphic to Z11111112 ... 111 .. if and only if the numbers m ; 
for i = 1, · · · , n are such that the gcd of any two of them is 1. 
9.7 Example 
The preceding corollary shows that if n is written as a product of powers of distinct 
prime numbers, as in 
then Z11 is isomorphic to 
z(p, )"' x Zr.p»"' x . . . x z<P»"'. 
In particular, Z72 is isomorphic to Z8 x Z9 . 
We remark that changing the order of the factors in a direct product yields a group 
isomorphic to the original one. The names of elements have simply been changed via a 
permutation of the components in the n-tuples. 
Exercise 57 of Section 6 asked you to define the least common multiple of two 
positive integers r and s as a generator of a certain cyclic group. It is straightforward to 
prove that the subset of Z consisting of all integers that are multiples of both r and s is 
a subgroup of Z, and hence is a cyclic group. Likewise, the set of all common multiples 
of n positive integers r 1, r2 , · · · , r11 is a subgroup of Z, and hence is cyclic. 
9.8 Definition 
Let r 1, r2 , · · · , r11 be positive integers. Their least common multiple (abbreviated lcm) 
is the positive generator of the cyclic group of all common multiples of the r;, that is, 
the cyclic group of all integers divisible by each r; for i = 1, 2, · · · , n . 
• 

Section 9 
Finitely Generated Abelian Groups 
91 
From Definition 9.8 and our work on cyclic groups, we see that the lcm of 
r 1, r2, · · · , rll is the smallest positive integer that is a multiple of each r; for i = 
1, 2, · · · , n, hence the name least common multiple. 
9.9 Theorem 
Let (a1,a2, · · · ,all) En;~, G;. If a; is of finite order r; in G;, then the order of 
(a1, a1, · · · , a11) inn;~ , G; is equal to the least common multiple of all the r;. 
Proof 
This follows by a repetition of the argument used in the proof of Theorem 9.5. For a 
power of (a1, a2, · · · , all) to give (e 1, e2, · · · , ell), the power must simultaneously be a 
multiple of r1 so that this power of the first component a 1 will yield e 1, a multiple of r2 , 
so that this power of the second component a2 will yield e2 , and so on. 
+ 
9.10 Example 
Find the order of (8, 4, 10) in the group Z 12 x Z6o x Z24. 
Solution 
Since the gcd of 8 and 12 is 4, we see that 8 is of order q. = 3 in Z 12. (See 
Theorem 6.15.) Similarly, we find that 4 is of order 15 in Z60 and 10 is of order 
12 in Z24. The lcm of 3, 15, and 12 is 3 · 5 · 4 = 60, so (8, 4, 10) is of order 60 in the 
group Z12 x Z60 x Z24. 
.A 
9.11 Example 
The group Z x Z2 is generated by the elements (1, 0) and (0, 1). More generally, the 
direct product of n cyclic groups, each of which is either Z or Z 111 for some positive 
integer m, is generated by then n-tuples 
(l, 0, 0,··· ,0), 
(0, 1,0,··· ,0), 
(0,0, 1, ··· ,0), 
(0, 0, 0, ... , 1). 
Such a direct product might also be generated by fewer elements. For example, Z3 x 
Z4 x Z 35 is generated by the single element (1, 1, 1). 
.A 
Note that if n;~, G; is the direct product of groups G;, then the subset 
that is, the set of all n-tuples with the identity elements in all places but the ith, is a 
subgroup of n:~, G;. It is also clear that this subgroup G; is naturally isomorphic to G;; 
just rename 
(e1, e1, · · · , e;-1, a;, e;+1, · · · , ell) by a;. 
The group G; is mirrored in the ith component of the elements of G;, and the ej in 
the other components just ride along. We consider n;~ , G; to be the internal direct 
product of these subgroups G;. The direct product given by Theorem 9.2 is called the 
external direct product of the groups G;. The terms internal and external, as applied to a 
direct product of groups, just reflect whether or not (respectively) we are regarding the 
component groups as subgroups of the product group. We shall usually omit the words 
external and internal and just say direct product. Which term we mean will be clear 
from the context. 
The Structure of Finitely Generated Abelian Groups 
Some theorems of abstract algebra are easy to understand and use, although their proofs 
may be quite technical and time-consuming to present. This is one section in the text 
where we explain the meaning and significance of a theorem but omit its proof. The 

92 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
•
H ISTORICAL NOTE 
I
n his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, Carl Gauss 
demonstrated various results in what is today the 
theory of abelian groups in the context of num-
ber theory. Not only did he deal extensively with 
equivalence classes of quadratic forms, but he also 
considered residue classes modulo a given integer. 
Although he noted that results in these two areas 
were similar, he did not attempt to develop an ab-
stract theory of abelian groups. 
In the 1840s, Ernst Kummer in dealing with 
ideal complex numbers noted that his results were 
in many respects analogous to those of Gauss. 
(See the Historical Note in Section 30.) But it 
was Kummer's student Leopold Kronecker (see the 
Historical Note in Section 39) who finally realized 
that an abstract theory could be developed out of 
the analogies. As he wrote in 1870, "these princi-
ples [from the work of Gauss and Kummer] be-
long to a more general, abstract realm of ideas. 
It is therefore appropriate to free their develop-
ment from all unimportant restrictions, so that one 
can spare oneself from the necessity of repeat-
ing the same argument in different cases. This 
advantage already appears in the development it-
self, and the presentation gains in simplicity, if 
it is given in the most general admissible man-
ner, since the most important features stand out 
with clarity." Kronecker then proceeded to de-
velop the basic principles of the theory of finite 
abelian groups and was able to state and prove 
a version of Theorem 9.12 restricted to finite 
groups. 
meaning of any theorem whose proof we omit is well within our understanding, and 
we feel we should be acquainted with it. It would be impossible for us to meet some of 
these fascinating facts in a one-semester course if we were to insist on wading through 
complete proofs of all theorems. The theorem that we now state gives us complete 
structural information about many abelian groups, in particular, about all finite abelian 
groups. 
9.12 Theorem 
(Primary Factor Version of the Fundamental Theorem of Finitely Generated 
Abelian Groups) Every finitely generated abelian group G is isomorphic to a direct 
product of cyclic groups in the form 
z(p,y• x z (p,Y' x ... x z(p,.)'" x z x z x ... x z, 
where the p; are primes, not necessarily distinct, and the r; are positive integers. 
The direct product is unique except for possible rearrangement of the factors; that is, 
the number (Betti number of G) of factors Z is unique and the prime powers (p;Y' are 
unique. 
Proof The proof is omitted here. 
• 
9.13 Example 
Find all abelian groups, up to isomorphism, of order 360. The phrase up to isomorphism 
signifies that any abelian group of order 360 should be structurally identical (isomor-
phic) to one of the groups of order 360 exhibited. 
Solution 
We make use of Theorem 9 .12. Since our groups are to be of the finite order 360, no 
factors Z will appear in the direct product shown in the statement of the theorem. 
First we express 360 as a product of prime powers 23325. Then using Theorem 9.12, 
we get as possibilities 
1. Z2 x Z2 x Z2 x Z3 x Z3 x Zs 
2. Z2 x Z2 x Z2 x Z9 x Zs 
3. Z2 x Z4 x Z3 x Z3 x Zs 

Section 9 
Finitely Generated Abelian Groups 
93 
4. Z2 x Z4 x Z9 x Zs 
5. Z8 x Z3 x Z3 x Z5 
6. 
Z8 x Z9 x Z5 
Thus there are six different abelian groups (up to isomorphism) of order 360. 
... 
There is another version of the Fundamental Theorem of Finitely Generated Abelian 
Groups. Each version can be proven from the other, so technically, if one version is 
used to prove something, the other version could also be used. However, it is sometimes 
more convenient to use one version rather than the other for a particular problem. 
9.14 Theorem 
(Invariant Factor Version of the Fundamental Theorem of Finitely Generated 
Abelian Groups) Every finitely generated abelian group is isomorphic to a direct 
product of cyclic groups of the form 
zd, x zd, x zd, x ... x zd, x z x z x ... x z, 
where each of the d; :::-: 2 is an integer and d; divides d;+1for1 :::; i:::; k -
1. Furthermore, 
the representation is unique. 
+ 
The Betti number of a group is the number of factors of Z in both Theorem 9.12 
and 9.14. The numbers d; are called the invariant factors or the torsion coefficients. 
Theorem 9.12 implies Theorem 9.14 and the other way around. Here we show with an 
example how to start with a finite group that is in the form specified in Theorem 9.12 
and find its representation in the form of Theorem 9.14. 
9.15 Example 
Let us find the invariant factor form of the abelian group G = Z2 x Z2 x Z4 x Zs x 
Z 3 x Z9 x Z7, which is in primary factor form. We make a table, one row for each 
prime number involved in G: 2, 3, and 7. We list the powers of each prime in the primary 
factor form starting with the highest power to the lowest power, filling the ends of the 
short rows with 1 = p0. Table 9.16 is the table for G. The group G is the direct product 
of cyclic groups of the orders listed in the table. The products of the entries in the 
columns give the invariant factors. For G, the invariant factors are d4 = 8 · 9 · 7 = 504, 
d3 = 4 · 3 · 1 = 12, d2 = 2 · 1 · 1 = 2, and d1 = 2 · 1 · 1 = 2. The construction of the 
table insures that d1 divides d2, d2 divides d3, d3 divides d4, and G is isomorphic with 
zd, x zd, x zd, x zd. = Z2 x Z2 x Z12 x &::504. 
... 
9.16 Table 
8 
9 
7 
4 
2 
3 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
Example 9.15 shows how to create a table from a finitely generated abelian group that is 
in primary factor form. From the table we can find the invariant form of the group. This 
process can easily be reversed by factoring the invariants to find the primary factors. 
Applications 
Because of Theorems 9.12 and 9.14, there is a plethora of theorems regarding finitely 
generated abelian groups that are fairly easily proven. We present a few examples. 
9.17 Definition 
A group G is decomposable if it is isomorphic to a direct product of two proper non-
trivial subgroups. Otherwise G is indecomposable. 
• 
9.18 Theorem 
The finite indecomposable abelian groups are exactly the cyclic groups with order a 
power of a prime. 
Proof Let G be a finite indecomposable abelian group. Then by Theorem 9 .12, G is isomorphic 
to a direct product of cyclic groups of prime power order. Since G is indecomposable, 
this direct product must consist of just one cyclic group whose order is a power of a 
prime number. 

94 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
Conversely, Jet p be a prime. Then Zp' is indecomposable, for if Zp' were isomor-
phic to z", x Z"j' where i + j = r, then every element would have an order at most 
pmax(i,j) < p r. 
+ 
9.19 Theorem If m divides the order of a finite abelian group G, then G has a subgroup of order m. 
Proof 
By Theorem 9.12, we can think of Gas being 
where not all primes p; need be distinct. Since (p 1Y' (p2Y' · · · (p,,Y" is the order of G, 
then m must be of the form (p 1 ) 5 ' (p2) 52 • • • (p,,)5'', where 0 ::; s; ::; r;. By Theorem 6.15, 
(p;y,-s, generates a cyclic subgroup of Z(p;)'• of order equal to the quotient of (p;Y' by 
the gcd of (p;Y' and (p;y,-s,. But the gcd of (p;Y' and (p;y,-s, is (p;y;-s, . Thus (p;y,-s, 
generates a cyclic subgroup of Z(p,)'• of order 
[(p;Y']/ [(p;Y'- s'] = (p;)s'. 
Recalling that (a) denotes the cyclic subgroup generated by a, we see that 
((p1r'-s') x ((p2)"2- 52 ) x · · · x ((p,,Y"- "") 
is the required subgroup of order m. 
• 
9.20 Theorem If m is a square-free integer, that is, m is not divisible by the square of any integer n ::: 2 
then every abelian group of order m is cyclic. 
Proof 
Let G be a finite abelian group of square-free order m. Then by Theorem 9.14, G is 
isomorphic to 
zd, x zd2 x ... x zdk' 
where each d; ::: 2 divides d;+ 1 for I ::; i::; k - I. The order of G ism = d 1 • d2 • • • dk. 
If k ::: 2, then d~ divides m, which is a contradiction. Thus k = l and G is cyclic. 
+ 
• EXERCISES 9 
Computations 
1. List the elements of Z2 x /Z4. Find the order of each of the elements. Is this group cyclic? 
2. Repeat Exercise l for the group Z3 x /Z4. 
In Exercises 3 through 7, find the order of the given element of the direct product. 
3. (2, 6) in ;z4 x ;z12 
4. (3,4) in Z21 x Z12 
5. (40, 12) in /Z45 x Z1s 
6. (3, 10, 9) in /Z4 x Z 12 x Z1s 
7. (3, 6, 12, 16) in /Z4 x Z12 x Z20 x Z24 
8. What is the largest order among the orders of all the cyclic subgroups of Z6 x Zs? of Z12 x Z15? 
9. Find all proper nontrivial subgroups of Z2 x Z2. 
10. Find all proper nontrivial subgroups of Z2 x Z2 x Z2. 
11. Find all subgroups of Z2 x /Z4 of order 4. 
12. Find all subgroups of Z2 x Z2 x /Z4 that are isomorphic to the Klein 4-group. 
13. Disregarding the order of the factors, write direct products of two or more groups of the form Z,, so that the 
resulting product is isomorphic to Z60 in as many ways as possible. 
14. Fill in the blanks. 
a. The cyclic subgroup of Z24 generated by 18 has order_. 
b. Z3 x /Z4 is of order_. 

Section 9 
Exercises 
95 
c. The element (4, 2) of Z12 x Zg has order_
. 
d. The Klein 4-group is isomorphic to z_ x z_. 
e. Z2 x Z x Z4 has_ elements of finite order. 
15. Find the maximum possible order for some element of Z4 x Z6. 
16. Are the groups Z2 x Z12 and Z4 x Z6 isomorphic? Why or why not? 
17. Find the maximum possible order for some element of Zs x Z23 x Z24. 
18. Are the groups Zg x Z 10 x Z24 and Z4 x Z 12 x Z40 isomorphic? Why or why not? 
19. Find the maximum possible order for some element of Z4 x Z1s x Z 15. 
20. Are the groups Z4 x Z1s x Z 15 and Z3 x Z36 x Z10 isomorphic? Why or why not? 
In Exercises 21 through 25, proceed as in Example 9.13 to find all abelian groups, up to isomorphism, of the 
given order. For each group, find the invariant factors and find an isomorphic group of the form indicated in 
Theorem 9.14. 
21. Order 8 
24. Order 720 
22. Order 16 
25. Order 1089 
23. Order 32 
26. How many abelian groups (up to isomorphism) are there of order 24? of order 25? of order (24)(25)? 
27. Following the idea suggested in Exercise 26, let m and n be relatively prime positive integers. Show that if 
there are (up to isomorphism) r abelian groups of order m and s of order n, then there are (up to isomorphism) 
rs abelian groups of order mn. 
28. Use Exercise 27 to determine the number of abelian groups (up to isomorphism) of order (10)5. 
29. a. Let p be a prime number. Fill in the second row of the table to give the number of abelian groups of order pn, 
up to isomorphism. 
number of group: I 
2 
I 
3 
I 
4 
I 
5 
I 
6 
I 
7 
I 
8 
I 
b. Let p, q, and r be distinct prime numbers. Use the table you created to find the number of abelian groups, 
up to isomorphism, of the given order. 
i. 
p3q4r7 
ii. (qr)? 
iii. q5r4q3 
30. Indicate schematically a Cayley digraph for Z,,, x Z,, for the generating set S = {(l, 0), (0, 1)). 
31. Consider Cayley digraphs with two arc types, a solid one with an arrow and a dashed one with no arrow, and 
consisting of two regular n-gons, for n :=::: 3, with solid arc sides, one inside the other, with dashed arcs joining 
the vertices of the outer n-gon to the inner one. Figure 7.ll(b) shows such a Cayley digraph with n = 3, 
and Figure 7. l 3(b) shows one with n = 4. The arrows on the outer n-gon may have the same (clockwise or 
counterclockwise) direction as those on the inner n-gon, or they may have the opposite direction. Let G be a 
group with such a Cayley digraph. 
a. Under what circumstances will G be abelian? 
b. If G is abelian, to what familiar group is it isomorphic? 
c. If G is abelian, under what circumstances is it cyclic? 
d. If G is not abelian, to what group we have discussed is it isomorphic? 
Concepts 
32. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. If G1 and G2 are any groups, then G1 x G2 is always isomorphic to G2 x G1. 
b. Computation in an external direct product of groups is easy if you know how to compute in each component 
group. 
c. Groups of finite order must be used to form an external direct product. 
d. A group of prime order could not be the internal direct product of two proper nontrivial subgroups. 

96 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
e. Z2 x Z4 is isomorphic to Zs. 
f. Z2 x Z4 is isomorphic to Ss. 
g. Z3 x Zs is isomorphic to S4. 
h. Every element in Z4 x Zs has order 8. 
i. The order of Z 12 x Z 1s is 60. 
j. Z 111 x Zn has mn elements whether m and n are relatively prime or not. 
33. Give an example illustrating that not every non trivial abelian group is the internal direct product of two proper 
nontrivial subgroups. 
34. a. How many subgroups of Zs x Z6 are isomorphic to Zs x Z6? 
b. How many subgroups of Z x Z are isomorphic to Z x Z? 
35. Give an example of a nontrivial group that is not of prime order and is not the internal direct product of two 
nontrivial subgroups. 
36. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every abelian group of prime order is cyclic. 
b. Every abelian group of prime power order is cyclic. 
c. Zs is generated by (4, 6). 
d. Zs is generated by (4, 5, 6). 
e. All finite abelian groups are classified up to isomorphism by Theorem 9 .12. 
f. Any two finitely generated abelian groups with the same Betti number are isomorphic. 
g. Every abelian group of order divisible by 5 contains a cyclic subgroup of order 5. 
h. Every abelian group of order divisible by 4 contains a cyclic subgroup of order 4. 
i. Every abelian group of order divisible by 6 contains a cyclic subgroup of order 6. 
j. Every finite abelian group has a Betti number of 0. 
37. Let p and q be distinct prime numbers. How does the number (up to isomorphism) of abelian groups of order p' 
compare with the number (up to isomorphism) of abelian groups of order q' ? 
38. Let G be an abelian group of order 72. 
a. Can you say how many subgroups of order 8 G has? Why, or why not? 
b. Can you say how many subgroups of order 4 G has? Why, or why not? 
39. Let G be an abelian group. Show that the elements of finite order in G form a subgroup. This subgroup is 
called the torsion subgroup of G. 
Exercises 40 through 43 deal with the concept of the torsion subgroup just defined. 
40. Find the order of the torsion subgroup of Z4 x Z x Z3; of Z 12 x Z x Z 12. 
41. Find the torsion subgroup of the multiplicative group ~* of nonzero real numbers. 
42. Find the torsion subgroup T of the multiplicative group ([* of nonzero complex numbers. 
43. An abelian group is torsion free if e is the only element of finite order. Use Theorem 9.12 to show that every 
finitely generated abelian group is the internal direct product of its torsion subgroup and of a torsion-free 
subgroup. (Note that {e} may be the torsion subgroup, and is also torsion free.) 
44. Find the torsion coefficients for each of the following groups. 
a.Z2x Z3 x Z4 
c. Zs x Z2 x Z49 x Z1 
b. Z2 x Z4 x Zs x Z3 x Z21 
d. Z2 x Z4 x Z2 x Z3 x Z3 x Z9 x Zs 
Proof Synopsis 
45. Give a two-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 9.5. 

Section 10 
Cosets and the Theorem of Lagrange 
97 
Theory 
46. Prove that a direct product of abelian groups is abelian. 
47. Let G be an abelian group. Let H be the subset of G consisting of the identity e together with all elements of 
G of order 2. Show that H is a subgroup of G. 
48. Following up the idea of Exercise 47 determine whether H will always be a subgroup for every abelian group 
G if H consists of the identity e together with all elements of G of order 3; of order 4. For what positive 
integers n will H always be a subgroup for every abelian group G, if H consists of the identity e together with 
all elements of G of order n? Compare with Exercise 54 of Section 5. 
49. Find a counterexample of Exercise 47 with the hypothesis that G is abelian omitted. 
Let H and K be subgroups of a group G. Exercises 50 and 51 ask you to establish necessary and sufficient criteria 
for G to appear as the internal direct product of H and K. 
50. Let H and K be groups and let G = H x K. Recall that both H and K appear as subgroups of G in a natural 
way. Show that these subgroups H (actually H x {e}) and K (actually {e} x K) have the following properties. 
a. Every element of G is of the form hk for some h E H and k E K . 
b. hk = kh for all h E H and k EK. 
c. H n K = {e}. 
51. Let H and K be subgroups of a group G satisfying the three properties listed in the preceding exercise. Show 
that for each g E G, the expression g = hk for h E H and k E K is unique. Then let each g be renamed (h, k). 
Show that, under this renaming, G becomes structurally identical (isomorphic) to H x K. 
52. Show that a finite abelian group is not cyclic if and only if it contains a subgroup isomorphic to Zp x Zp for 
some prime p. 
53. Prove that if a finite abelian group has order a power of a prime p, then the order of every element in the group 
is a power of p. 
54. Let G, H , and K be finitely generated abelian groups. Show that if G x K is isomorphic to H x K, then G '.:::'.H. 
55. Using the notation of Theorem 9.14, prove that for any finite abelian group G, every cyclic subgroup of G has 
order no more than dk> the largest invariant factor for G. 
SECTION 10 COSETS AND THE THEOREM OF LAGRANGE 
You may have noticed that the order of a subgroup H of a finite group G seems always 
to be a divisor of the order of G. This is the theorem of Lagrange. We shall prove it by 
exhibiting a partition of G into cells, all having the same size as H. Thus if there are r 
such cells, we will have 
r( order of H) = (order of G) 
from which the theorem follows immediately. The cells in the partition will be called 
cosets of H , and they are important in their own right. In Section 12, we will see that if 
H satisfies a certain property, then each coset can be regarded as an element of a group 
in a very natural way. We give some indication of such coset groups in this section to 
help you develop a feel for the topic. 
Co sets 
Let H be a subgroup of a group G, which may be of finite or infinite order. We exhibit a 
partition a G by defining an equivalence relation, ~Lon G. 
10.1 Theorem 
Let H be a subgroup of G. Let the relation ~L be defined on G by 
a~Lb 
if and only if 
a- 1bEH. 
Then ~L
i s an equivalence relation on G. 

98 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
Proof When reading the proof, notice how we must constantly make use of the fact that H is a 
subgroup of G. 
Reflexive 
Let a E G. Then a- 1 a = e and e E H since His a subgroup. Thus 
a ~La . 
Symmetric 
Suppose a ~Lb . Then a- 1 b E H. Since His a subgroup, (a- 1 b)- 1 
is in Hand (a- 1b)- 1 = b- 1a, so b- 1a is in Hand b ~La. 
Transitive 
Let a ~ 
L b and b ~ 
L c. Then a- 1 b E Hand b- 1 c E H. Since H is 
a subgroup, (a- 1b)(b- 1c) = a- 1c is in H , so a ~L c. 
+ 
The equivalence relation ~ 
L in Theorem 10.1 defines a partition of G, as described 
in Theorem 0.22. Let's see what the cells in this partition look like. Suppose a E G. The 
cell containing a consists of all x E G such that a ~L x, which means all x E G such 
that a- 1x E H. Now a- 1x EH if and only if a- 1x = h for some h EH, or equivalently, 
if and only if x = ah for some h E H. Therefore the cell containing a is {ah I h E H}, 
which we denote by aH. 
10.2 Definition 
Let H be a subgroup of a group G. The subset aH = {ah I h EH) of G is the left coset 
of H containing a. 
• 
10.3 Example 
Exhibit the left coset of the subgroup 3Z of Z. 
Solution 
Our notation here is additive, so the left coset of 3Z containing m is m + 3Z. Taking 
m = 0, we see that 
3Z = {· · · , -9, -6, -3,0,3,6, 9, · · ·} 
is itself one of its left cosets, the coset containing 0. To find another left coset, we select 
an element of Z not in 3Z, say 1, and find the left coset containing it. We have 
1+3Z = {· · ·, -8, -5, -2, 1,4, 7, 10, · · · }. 
These two left cosets, 3Z and I + 3Z, do not yet exhaust Z. For example, 2 is in neither 
of them. The left coset containing 2 is 
2 + 3Z = {· · ·, -7, -4, - 1,2, 5, 8, 11, · · · }. 
It is clear that these three left cosets we have found do exhaust Z, so they constitute the 
partition of Z into left cosets of 3Z. 
.&. 
10.4 Example 
We find the partition of Z 12 into left cosets of H = (3). One coset is always the subgroup 
itself, so 0 + H = {O, 3, 6, 9). We next find I + H = {I , 4, 7, 10). We are still not done 
since we have not included every element of Z 12 in the two cosets we listed so far. 
Finally, 2 + H = {2, 5, 8, 11) and we have computed all the left cosets of Hin Z12 . 
.&. 
10.5 Example 
We now list the left cosets of the subgroup H = (µ,) = {t, µ,) of the nonabelian group 
n4 = {t, p, p2, p3, µ,, µ,p , µ,p2, µ,p3). 
l{l, µ,) 
p{t, µ,) 
p2{t ,µ, ) 
p3{l , µ,) 
{l, µ,) 
{p, µ,p3) 
{p2, µ,p2) 
{p3,µ,p) 
We know this is a complete list of the left cosets since every element of D4 appears in 
exactly one of the listed sets. 
.&. 

Section 10 
Cosets and the Theorem of Lagrange 
99 
The Theorem of Lagrange 
In Example 10.4 each left coset of (3) ::: :Z.12 has four elements. In Example 10.5, each 
left coset has two elements. From the computation of the left cosets, it is no surprise that 
all left cosets of a subgroup have the same number of elements. Theorem 10.6 confirms 
this is what happens in general. 
10.6 Theorem 
Let H be a subgroup of G. Then for any a E G, the coset aH has the same cardinality 
as H. 
Proof Let f : H ~ aH be defined by the formula f(h) = ah. To show f is one-to-one, we 
suppose that b, c EH andf(b) = f(c). Then ab = ac and left cancellation gives b =c. 
So f is one-to-one. Now suppose that y E aH. Then there is an h E H such that y = ah 
by definition of the left coset aH. Thus y = f(h) and f is surjective. Since there is a 
one-to-one function mapping H onto aH, Hand aH have the same cardinality. 
+ 
In the case of a finite subgroup H, Theorem 10.6 says that H and aH have the same 
number of elements for any a in the group G. This is precisely what we were seeking in 
order to prove Lagrange's Theorem. 
10.7 Theorem 
(Theorem of Lagrange) Let H be a subgroup of a finite group G. Then the order of 
His a divisor of the order of G. 
Proof Let n be the order of G, and let H have order m. Theorem 10.6 shows that every coset of 
H also has m elements. Let r be the number of cells in the partition of G into left cosets 
of H. Then n = rm, so m is indeed a divisor of n. 
+ 
Note that this elegant and important theorem comes from the simple counting of 
cosets and the number of elements in each coset. We continue to derive consequences 
of Theorem 10.7, which should be regarded as a counting theorem. 
10.8 Corollary 
Every group of prime order is cyclic. 
Proof Let G be of prime order p, and let a be an element of G different from the identity. Then 
the cyclic subgroup (a) of G generated by a has at least two elements, a and e. But 
by Theorem 10.7, the order m '.'.: 2 of (a) must divide the prime p. Thus we must have 
m = p and (a) = G, so G is cyclic. 
+ 
Since every cyclic group of order p is isomorphic to :Z.1" we see that there is only 
one group structure, up to isomorphism, of a given prime order p. Now doesn't this 
elegant result follow easily from the theorem of Lagrange, a counting theorem? Never 
underestimate a theorem that counts something. Proving the preceding corollary is a 
favorite examination question. 
10.9 Theorem 
The order of an element of a finite group divides the order of the group. 
Proof Remembering that the order of an element is the same as the order of the cyclic subgroup 
generated by the element, we see that this theorem follows directly from Lagrange's 
Theorem. 
+ 
10.10 Definition 
Let H be a subgroup of a group G. The number of left cosets of H in G is the index 
(G : H) of Hin G. 
• 
The index ( G: H) just defined may be finite or infinite. If G is finite, then obviously 
(G : H) is finite and (G : H) = IGl/ IH I, since every coset of H contains IH I elements. 
We state a basic theorem concerning indices of subgroups, and leave the proof to the 
exercises (see Exercise 40). 

100 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
10.11 Theorem 
Suppose Hand K are subgroups of a group G such that K :S H :S G, and suppose (H: K ) 
and (G: H) are both finite. Then (G: K) is finite, and (G: K) = (G: H)(H: K). 
Lagrange's Theorem says that for any subgroup H of a finite group G, the order 
of H divides the order of G. But if d is a divisor of the order of G, does G necessarily 
have a subgroup with exactly d elements? We will show in Section 13 that the answer is 
no for some groups. This suggests a new question: Under what conditions does G have 
a subgroup of every order d that is a divisor of G? We saw in Section 9 that for every 
divisor of the order of an abelian group, there is a subgroup of that order. The complete 
answer to this question is beyond the scope of this book, but we will come back to the 
question later. 
Cosets Left and Right! 
It is possible to do everything we have done in this section using right cosets instead of 
left cosets. All it takes is some minor and straightforward modifications to the defini-
tions and proofs. We briefly give the corresponding definitions that lead to right cosets 
and point out some of their properties. 
Let H be a subgroup of G. To start with, instead of ~L we could have used ~R 
defined by 
a ~Rb if and only if 
ab- 1 E H. 
With this definition, ~R is an equivalence relation and the equivalence classes are the 
right cosets. The right coset of H containing the element a E G is 
Ha= {ha f h EH}. 
Just like left cosets, each right coset of a subgroup H has the same cardinality as H. So 
left cosets and right cosets have the same cardinality. In abelian groups, the right and 
left cosets are the same, but there is no reason to think they would be the same in general 
for nonabelian groups. If the right and left cosets are the same, we can drop left or right 
and just refer to cosets. 
10.12 Example 
In Example 10.5 we computed the left cosets of the subgroup H = (µ,) = {i, µ,}of the 
group D4 = { i , p, p2, p 3, µ , µp, µp2, µp3}. We now compute the right cosets. 
{t, µ}l 
{t, µ}p 
{t, µ} p2 
{t, µ}p3 
{i, µ} 
{p ,µp } 
{p2, µp2} 
{p3' µp3} 
The right cosets and the left cosets are not the same. For example, pH = {p, µp 3} while 
Hp = {p,µp}. 
.&. 
If this were the whole story of left and right cosets, there would be no reason to even 
mention right cosets. We could just use left coset, prove Lagrange's Theorem, and call 
it a day. However, as we shall see in Part III, a curious thjng happens when the left and 
right cosets are the same. We illustrate with an example. 
10.13 Example 
The group &::6 is abelian. Find the partition of &::6 into cosets of the subgroup H = (0, 3}. 
Solution 
One coset is { 0, 3} itself. The coset containing 1 is 1 + (0, 3} = { 1, 4}. The coset con-
taining 2 is 2 + {O, 3} = {2, 5}. Since {O, 3}, {l, 4}, and {2, 5} exhaust all of &::6, these 
are all the cosets. 
.&. 

Section 10 
Cosets and the Theorem of Lagrange 
101 
We point out a fascinating thing that we will develop in detail in Section 12. Re-
ferring back to Example 10.13, Table 10.14 gives the binary operation for Z6 but with 
elements listed in the order they appear in the cosets (0, 3), { 1, 4), (2, 5). We shaded the 
table according to these cosets. 
10.14 Table 
10.15 Table 
+6 
0 
3 
1 
4 
2 
5 
0 
0 
3 
I 
4 
2 
5 
LT 
MD 
DK 
3 
3 
0 
4 
1 
5 
2 
LT 
LT 
MD 
DK 
1 
1 
4 
2 
5 
3 
0 
4 
4 
1 
5 
2 
0 
3 
MD 
MD 
DK 
LT 
12 
2 
5 
3 
0 
4 
1 
15 
5 
2 
0 
3 
1 
4 
DK 
DK 
LT 
MD 
Suppose we denote these cosets by LT(light), MD(medium), and DK(dark) ac-
cording to their shading. Table 10.14 then defines a binary operation on these shadings, 
as shown in Table 10.15. Note that if we replace LT by 0, MD by 1, and DK by 2 in 
Table 10.15, we obtain the table for Z 3. Thus the table of shadings forms a group! 
We will see in Section 12 that when left cosets and right cosets are the same, then 
the cosets form a group as in Example 10.13. If right and left cosets are different, the 
construction fails. 
10.16 Example 
Let H = {t, µ,) '.'S D3 . The group table for D3 is given below with the elements arranged 
so that left cosets are together. The double lines divide the cosets. 
The situation here is much different from the situation in Example 10.13. In Table 10.14 
the two-by-two blocks in the table each contain only elements of a left coset. In the 
present example, most blocks do not contain elements from only one left coset. Further-
more, even if we tried to use the two-by-two blocks of elements to form a three-by-three 
group table, the second row of blocks contains two blocks, both having the same ele-
ments, {p 2, µ,p , µ,, t). So the table of blocks would have a row with the same element 
listed twice. In this case, there is no natural way of making the left cosets a group. 
.A 
If G is an abelian group, then the left and right cosets are the same. Theorem 10.17 
gives another condition when left and right cosets are the same. Recall that if if> : G --+ 
G' is a group homomorphism, then Ker(ef>) = ef>- 1 [{e}] '.'S G is the kernel of if>. 
10.17 Theorem 
Let if> : G--+ G' be a group homomorphism. Then the left and right cosets of Ker(ef>) 
are identical. Furthermore, a, b E G are in the same coset of Ker(ef>) if and only if 
ef>(a) = ef>(b). 

102 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
Proof 
We first assume that a and bare in the same left cosets of Ker(<f>) and show they are also 
in the same right cosets. Then a- 1b E Ker(<f>). So <f>(a- 1b) = e, the identity element. 
Because <t> is a homomorphism, <f>(a)-1</>(b) = e, which implies that <f>(a) = <f>(b). 
Therefore, <f>(ab- 1) = <f>(a)<f>(b)- 1 = <f>(a)<f>(a)- 1 = e. Thus ab- 1 E Ker(<f>), which says 
that a and b are in the same right coset. Note that in the process we showed that if a and 
bare in the same left coset of Ker(<f> ), then <f>(a) = <f>(b). 
Now suppose that <f>(a) = <f>(b). Then <f>(b- 1a) = <f>(b)- 1<f>(a) =e. Thus b-1a E 
Ker( <t> ), which implies that a and b are in the same left coset. 
To complete the proof, we need to show that if a and b are in the same right coset, 
then they are also in the same left coset. The proof is essentially the same as above, so 
we leave this detail to the reader. 
+ 
10.18 Example 
Consider the determinant map det : GL(2, JR) --+ JR*. In linear algebra you learn that 
det(AB) = det(A) det(B), so the determinant is a group homomorphism. The kernel of 
det is the set of all 2 x 2 matrices with determinant L Two matrices A, B E GL(2, JR) 
are in the same left coset of Ker(det) if and only if they are in the same right coset of 
Ker(det) if and only if det(A) = det(B). In particular, the two matrices 
[ ~ ~ J and [ ~ ; J 
each have determinant 2, so they are in the same left (and right) cosets of Ker(det). 
.A. 
10.19 Corollary 
A homomorphism <t> : G--+ G' is one-to-one if and only if Ker(</>) is the trivial subgroup 
of G. 
Proof 
We first assume that Ker( <t>) = { e}. Every coset of Ker( <t>) has only one element. Suppose 
that <f>(a) = <f>(b ). Then a and b are in the same coset of Ker( <f>) by Theorem 10.17. Thus 
a= b. 
Now suppose that <t> is one-to-one. Then only the identity e is mapped to the identity 
in G'. So Ker(</>)= {e}. 
+ 
Corollary 10.19 says that to check if a homomorphism <t> : G --+ G' is one-to-one 
one merely needs to check that Ker(</>) is the trivial subgroup. In other words, show 
that the only solution to <f>(x) = e' is e, where e and e' are the identities in G and G', 
respectively. 
10.20 Example 
Let <f> : lR--+ JR+ be defined by <f>(x) = 2x_ Since <f> is a homomorphism, we can check 
that <t> is one-to-one by solving <f>(x) = 1. The equation 2x = <f>(x) = 1 has only the 
solution 0 since for x > 0, 2x > 1 and for x < 0, 2x < 1. Thus <f> is one-to-one. 
.A. 
• EXERCISES 10 
Computations 
1. Find all cosets of the subgroup 41:: of Z. 
2. Find all cosets of the subgroup 41:: of 21::. 
3. Find all cosets of the subgroup (3) in Z is-
4. Find all cosets of the subgroup (6) in Z 1s-
S. Find all cosets of the subgroup ( 18) of 1::36· 
6. Find all left cosets of (µp) in D4-
7. Repeat the preceding exercise, but find the right cosets this time. Are they the same as the left cosets? 

Section 10 
Exercises 
103 
8. Are the left and right cosets the same for the subgroup { t, p4, µ.,, µ.,p4} of Ds? If so, display the cosets. If not, 
find a left coset that is not the same as any right coset. 
9. Find all the left cosets of (p2 ) :::= D4. 
10. Repeat the previous exercise, but find the right cosets. Are the left and right cosets the same? If so, make the 
group table for D4, ordering the elements so that the cosets are in blocks, see if the blocks form a group with 
four elements, and determine what group of order 4 the blocks form. 
11. Find the index of (p2) in the group D6. 
12. Find the index of (3) in the group Z24. 
13. Find the index of l 2Z in Z. 
14. Find the index of 12Z in 3Z. 
15. Let a = (1, 2, 5, 4)(2, 3) in S5. Find the index of (a ) in S5. 
16. Letµ., = (I, 2, 4, 5)(3, 6) in 56. Find the index of (µ.,) in 56. 
Concepts 
In Exercises 17 through 19, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction 
is needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
17. Let G be a group and let H ~ G. The left coset of H containing a is aH ={ah I h EH}. 
18. Let G be a group and let H :::= G. The index of H in G is the number of right cosets of Hin G. 
19. Let 4>: G--+ G'. Then the kernel of 4> is Ker(</>)= {g E G I ef>(g) = e). 
20. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every subgroup of every group has left cosets. 
b. The number of left cosets of a subgroup of a finite group divides the order of the group. 
c. Every group of prime order is abelian. 
d. One cannot have left cosets of a finite subgroup of an infinite group. 
e. A subgroup of a group is a left coset of itself. 
f. Only subgroups of finite groups can have left cosets. 
g. A11 is of index 2 in S11 for n > 1. 
h. The theorem of Lagrange is a nice result. 
i. Every finite group contains an element of every order that divides the order of the group. 
j. Every finite cyclic group contains an element of every order that divides the order of the group. 
k. The kernel of a homomorphism is a subgroup of the range of the homomorphism. 
I. Left cosets and right cosets of the kernel of a homomorphism are the same. 
In Exercises 21 through 26, give an example of the desired subgroup and group if possible. If impossible, say why 
it is impossible. 
21. A subgroup H :::= G with G infinite and H having only a finite number of left cosets in G 
22. A subgroup of an abelian group G whose left cosets and right cosets give different partitions of G 
23. A subgroup of a group G whose left cosets give a partition of G into just one cell 
24. A subgroup of a group of order 6 whose left cosets give a partition of the group into 6 cells 
25. A subgroup of a group of order 6 whose left cosets give a partition of the group into 12 cells 
26. A subgroup of a group of order 6 whose left cosets give a partition of the group into 4 cells 
Proof Synopsis 
27. Give a one-sentence synopsis of the proof of the Theorem of Lagrange. 

104 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
Theory 
28. Prove that the relation ~R that is used to define right cosets is an equivalence relation. 
29. Let H be a subgroup of a group G and let g E G. Define a one-to-one map of H onto Hg. Prove that your map 
is one-to-one and is onto Hg. 
30. Let H be a subgroup of a group G such that g- 1 hg E H for all g E G and all h E H. Show that every left coset 
gH is the same as the right coset Hg. 
31. Let H be a subgroup of a group G. Prove that if the partition of G into left cosets of H is the same as the 
partition into right cosets of H, then g- 1 hg E H for all g E G and all h E H. (Note that this is the converse of 
Exercise 30.) 
Let H be a subgroup of a group G and let a, b E G. In Exercises 32 through 35 prove the statement or give a 
counterexample. 
32. If aH = bH, then Ha = Hb. 
33. If Ha = Hb, then b E Ha. 
34. If aH = bH, then Ha- 1 = Hb- 1• 
35. If aH = bH , then a2H = b2H. 
36. Let G be a group of order pq, where p and q are prime numbers. Show that every proper subgroup of G is 
cyclic. 
37. Show that there are the same number of left as right cosets of a subgroup H of a group G; that is, exhibit 
a one-to-one map of the collection of left cosets onto the collection of right cosets. (Note that this result is 
obvious by counting for finite groups. Your proof must hold for any group.) 
38. Exercise 29 of Section 2 showed that every finite group of even order 2n contains an element of order 2. 
Using the theorem of Lagrange, show that if n is odd, then an abelian group of order 2n contains precisely one 
element of order 2. 
39. Show that a group with at least two elements but with no proper nontrivial subgroups must be finite and of 
prime order. 
40. Prove Theorem 10.11 [Hint: Let {a;H Ii = 1, · · · , r ) be the collection of distinct left cosets of H in G and 
{ bj K I j = 1, · · · , s} be the collection of distinct left cosets of K in H . Show that 
{(a;bj)K fi= 1,- ·· ,r;j= 1,- ·· ,s) 
is the collection of distinct left cosets of K in G.] 
41. Show that if His a subgroup of index 2 in a finite group G, then every left coset of His also a right coset of H. 
42. Show that if a group G with identity e has finite order n, then an = e for all a E G. 
43. Show that every left coset of the subgroup Z of the additive group of real numbers contains exactly one element 
x such that 0 :'.": x < 1. 
44. Show that the function sine assigns the same value to each element of any fixed left coset of the subgroup (2rr) 
of the additive group lR of real numbers. (Thus sine induces a well-defined function on the set of cosets; the 
value of the function on a coset is obtained when we choose an element x of the coset and compute sin x.) 
45. Let H and K be subgroups of a group G. Define ~ on G by a ~ b if and only if a = hbk for some h E H and 
some k E K. 
a. Prove that ~ is an equivalence relation on G. 
b. Describe the elements in the equivalence class containing a E G. (These equivalence classes are called 
double cosets.) 
46. Let SA be the group of all permutations of the set A, and let c be one particular element of A. 
a. Show that {a E SA I a(c) = c} is a subgroup Sc,c of SA . 
b. Let d =I- c be another particular element of A. Is Sc,d = {a E SA I a(c) = d ) a subgroup of SA? Why or why 
not? 
c. Characterize the set Sc,d of part (b) in terms of the subgroup Sc,c of part (a). 

Section 11 
Plane Isometries 
105 
47. Show that a finite cyclic group of order n has exactly one subgroup of each order d dividing n, and that these 
are all the subgroups it has. 
48. The Euler phi-function is defined for positive integers n by rp(n) = s, where s is the number of positive 
integers less than or equal ton that are relatively prime ton. Use Exercise 47 to show that 
n = I: rp<d). 
d in 
the sum being taken over all positive integers d dividing n. [Hint: Note that the number of generators of Zd is 
rp(d) by Corollary 6.17.] 
49. Let G be a finite group. Show that if for each positive integer m the number of solutions x of the equation 
x" = e in G is at most m, then G is cyclic. [Hint: Use Theorem 10.9 and Exercise 48 to show that G must 
contain an element of order n = IGI.] 
50. Show that a finite group cannot be written as the union of two of its proper subgroups. Does the statement 
remain true if "two" is replaced by "three"? (This was problem B-2 on the 1969 Putnam Exam.) 
SECTION 11 
t pLANE ISOMETRIES 
Consider the Euclidean plane IR2 . An isometry of IR2 is a permutation </J : IR2 ---+ IR2 
that preserves distance, so that the distance between points P and Q is the same as 
the distance between the points </J(P) and </J(Q) for all points P and Q in IR2 . If 1/1 is 
also an isometry of IR2 , then the distance between 1/1(</J(P)) and 1/1(</J(Q)) must be the 
same as the distance between </J(P) and </J(Q), which in tum is the distance between P 
and Q, showing that the composition of two isometries is again an isometry. Since the 
identity map is an isometry and the inverse of an isometry is an isometry, we see that 
the isometries of IR2 form a subgroup of the group of all permutations of IR2 . 
Given any subset S of IR2, the isometries of IR2 that carry S onto itself form a 
subgroup of the group of isometries. This subgroup is the group of symmetries of Sin 
IR2 . Although we defined the dihedral group D 11 as one-to-one maps from the vertices 
of a regular n-gon onto itself that preserves edges, we can extend each map in D11 to an 
isometry of the whole plane; µ, is reflection across the x-axis and p is rotation about the 
origin by Zrr. So we can think of D11 as the group of isometries of a regular n-gon in IR2 . 
11 
Everything we have defined in the two preceding paragraphs could equally well 
have been done for n-dimensional Euclidean space IR", but we will concern ourselves 
chiefly with plane isometries here. 
It can be proved that every isometry of the plane is one of just four types (see Artin 
[5]). We will list the types and show, for each type, a labeled figure that can be carried 
into itself by an isometry of that type. In each of Figs. 11.1, 11.3, and 11.4, consider the 
line with spikes shown to be extended infinitely to the left and to the right. We also give 
an example of each type in terms of coordinates. 
translation r: Slide every point the same distance in the same direction. See 
Fig. 11.1. (Example: r(x,y) = (x,y) + (2, -3) = (x + 2,y - 3).) 
rotation p: 
Rotate the plane about a point P through an angle e. See Fig. 11.2. 
(Example: p(x,y) = (-y,x) is a rotation through 90° counterclockwise about the 
origin (0, 0).) 
reflection µ,: 
Map each point into its mirror image (µ, for mirror) across a line 
L, each point of which is left fixed by µ. See Fig. 11.3. The line L is the axis of 
reflection. (Example: µ,(x,y) = (y,x) is a reflection across the line y = x.) 
t This section is not used in the remainder of the text. 

106 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
glide reflection y: The product of a translation and a reflection across a line 
mapped into itself by the translation. See Fig. 11.4. (Example: y(x, y) = (x + 4, - y) 
is a glide reflection along the x-axis.) 
Notice the little curved arrow that is carried into another curved arrow in each of 
Figs. 11.1 through 11.4. For the translation and rotation, the counterclockwise directions 
of the curved arrows remain the same, but for the reflection and glide reflection, the 
counterclockwise arrow is mapped into a clockwise arrow. We say that translations and 
rotations preserve orientation, while the reflection and glide reflection reverse orien-
tation. We do not classify the identity isometry as any definite one of the four types 
listed; it could equally well be considered to be a translation by the zero vector or a 
rotation about any point through an angle of 0°. We always consider a glide reflection to 
be the product of a reflection and a translation that is different from the identity isometry . 
p 
-r(P) 
Q 
-r(Q) 
11.1 Figure 
Translation r . 
p 
µ,(Q) 
R 
s 
---~--1-~~~--+~~-1-~ L 
µ,(S) 
u 
µ,(P) 
Q 
µ,(R) 
11.3 Figure 
Reflection µ . 
. 
,~~. 
p-l(Q) 
p 
11.2 Figure 
Rotation p . 
y-l(P) 
y(P) 
u/ Q I 
\ 
0 
\
y(Q) 
\ 
p 
11.4 Figure 
Glide reflection y. 
The theorem that follows describes the possible structures of finite subgroups of 
the full isometry group. 
11.5 Theorem 
Every finite group G of isometries of the plane is isomorphic to either the Klein 4-group, 
Z11 for n '.'.: 1, or D11 for some n '.'.: 3. 
Proof (Outline) First we show that there is a point in the plane that is fixed by every element 
of G. We let G = {</>1 , </Ji, </>J, . . . , </>111 ) and (x;, y;) = </>;(O, 0). Then the point 
P = (:X,y) = ( X 1 +x2 +x: + · · · +xm, YI+ YI + Y: + · · · + Ym ) 
is the center of mass of the set S = {(x;,y;) 11 ~ i ~ m) where each point is weighted 
by the number of</>; that map (0, 0) to that point It is easy to see that the isometries in G 
permute the points in S since for each i andj, </>; o </>j = </>k for some k. Thus </>;(xj ,yj ) = 
(xk>yk)- This implies the center of mass of </>(S) is the same as the center of mass of S. 
It can be shown that given the distances from the center of mass to the points of the set 
S, the center of mass is the only point having these distances from the points of S. This 
says that (:X,y) is fixed by every isometry in G. 

Section 11 
Plane Isometries 
107 
The orientation preserving isometries of G form a subgroup Hof G which is either 
all of G or else of order m/2. You are asked to prove this in Exercise 22. Of course H 
consists of the identity and possibly rotations about the point (:X, y). If H has only one 
element, then G has one or two elements and is therefore isomorphic with Z 1 or Z2. If 
H has two elements, then G has two or four elements and is therefore isomorphic with 
either the Klein 4-group, Z4 , or Z2 . So we can assume that H has at least three elements. 
If we choose a rotation p in H that rotates through the smallest positive angle e 
among all the elements of H , p generates H. The proof of this fact is similar to the proof 
that a subgroup of a cyclic group is cyclic and you are asked to provide the details of 
the proof in Exercise 23. If G = H , then G is isomorphic with Z 111 • So we now assume 
that G contains a reflection, say µ. Then the coset µH contains only isometries of G 
that reverse orientation. Each coset H and µH contains half the elements of G, so 
G = H UµH. 
Consider now a regular n-gon (recall that we are assuming that n :::: 3) with center 
the point (x,y) and having a vertex v0 on the line fixed byµ . Each element of G per-
mutes the vertices of the n-gon and preserves edges. Furthermore, no two elements of 
G permute the vertices in the same way. Thus G is isomorphic with a subgroup of the 
dihedral group D 11 • Since IGI = ID11I, G is isomorphic with D 11 • 
+ 
In Theorem 11.5 the Klein 4-group, V, seems like an exception. However, V fits 
into the family of dihedral groups since V has two elements of order 2, a and b, with the 
property that ab = ba- 1• Sometimes V is denoted D2 and considered a dihedral group. 
The isometries of the plane that map a line segment to itself are isomorphic with V. 
The preceding theorem gives the complete story about finite plane isometry groups. 
We turn now to some infinite groups of plane isometries that arise naturally in decorating 
and art. Among these are the discrete frieze groups. A discrete frieze consists of a pattern 
of finite width and height that is repeated endlessly in both directions along its baseline 
to form a strip of infinite length but finite height; think of it as a decorative border strip 
that goes around a room next to the ceiling on wallpaper. We consider those isometries 
that carry each basic pattern onto itself or onto another instance of the pattern in the 
frieze. The set of all such isometries is called the ''frieze group." All discrete frieze 
groups are infinite and have a subgroup isomorphic to Z generated by the translation 
that slides the frieze lengthwise until the basic pattern is superimposed on the position 
of its next neighbor pattern in that direction. As a simple example of a discrete frieze, 
consider integral signs spaced equal distances apart and continuing infinitely to the left 
and right, indicated schematically like this. 
···fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff ·· 
Let us consider the integral signs to be one unit apart. The symmetry group of this frieze 
is generated by a translation r sliding the plane one unit to the right, and by a rotation p 
of 180° about a point in the center of some integral sign. There are no horizontal or 
vertical reflections, and no glide reflections. This frieze group is nonabelian; we can 
check that rp = pr- 1• This relation between rand p looks very familiar. The dihedral 
group D11 is also generated by two elements p andµ that satisfy the relation pµ = µp- 1• 
If r and p in the frieze group are replaced by p and µ, respectively, we have the same 
relation. In D,,, µ has order 2, as does p in the frieze group, but the element p in D 11 
has order n while r has infinite order. Thus it is natural to use the notation D00 for this 
nonabelian frieze group. 
As another example, consider the frieze given by an infinite string of D's. 
···DDDDDDDDDDD··· 

108 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
Its group is generated by a translation r one step to the right and by a vertical reflection 
µ, across a horizontal line cutting through the middle of all the D's. We can check that 
these group generators commute this time, that is, r µ, = µ, r , so this frieze group is 
abelian and is isomorphic to Z x Z2 . 
It can be shown that if we classify such discrete friezes only by whether or not their 
groups contain a 
rotation 
horizontal axis reflection 
vertical axis reflection 
nontrivial glide reflection 
then there are a total of seven possibilities. A nontrivial glide reflection in a symmetry 
group is one that is not equal to a product of a translation in that group and a reflection 
in that group. The group for the string of D's above contains glide reflections across 
the horizontal line through the centers of the D's, but the translation component of each 
glide reflection is also in the group so they are all considered trivial glide reflections in 
that group. The frieze group for 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
contains a nontrivial glide reflection whose translation component is not an element of 
the group. The exercises exhibit the seven possible cases, and ask you to tell, for each 
case, which of the four types of isometries displayed above appear in the symmetry 
group. We do not obtain seven different group structures. Each of the groups obtained 
can be shown to be isomorphic to one of 
Equally interesting is the study of symmetries when a pattern in the shape of a 
square, parallelogram, rhombus, or hexagon is repeated by translations along two non-
parallel vector directions to fill the entire plane, like patterns that appear on wallpaper. 
These groups are called the wallpaper groups or the plane crystallographic groups. 
While a frieze could not be carried into itself by a rotation through a positive angle less 
than 180°, it is possible to have rotations of 60°, 90°, 120°, and 180° for some of these 
plane-filling patterns. Figure 11.6 provides an illustration where the pattern consists of 
a square. We are interested in the group of plane isometries that carry this square onto 
itself or onto another square. Generators for this group are given by two translations 
(one sliding a square to the next neighbor to the right and one to the next above), by a 
rotation through 90° about the center of a square, and by a reflection in a vertical (or 
horizontal) line along the edges of the square. The one reflection is all that is needed to 
"turn the plane over"; a diagonal reflection can also be used. After being turned over, 
the translations and rotations can be used again. The isometry group for this periodic 
pattern in the plane surely contains a subgroup isomorphic to Z x Z generated by the 
unit translations to the right and upward, and a subgroup isomorphic to D4 generated by 
those isometries that carry one square (it can be any square) into itself. 
If we consider the plane to be filled with parallelograms as in Fig. 11.7, we do not 
get all the types of isometries that we did for Fig. 11.6. The symmetry group this time is 
generated by the translations indicated by the arrows and a rotation through 180° about 
any vertex of a parallelogram. 
It can be shown that there are 17 different types of wallpaper patterns when they are 
classified according to the types of rotations, reflections, and nontrivial glide reflections 
that they admit. We refer you to Gallian [8] for pictures of these 17 possibilities and 
a chart to help you identify them. The exercises illustrate a few of them. The situation 

Section 11 
Exercises 
109 
11.6 Figure 
11.7 Figure 
in space is more complicated; it can be shown that there are 230 three-dimensional 
crystallographic groups. The final exercise we give involves rotations in space. 
M. C. Escher (1898- 1973) was an artist whose work included plane-filling patterns. 
In the exercises you are asked to analyze two of his works of this type. 
• EXERCISES 11 
1. This exercise shows that the group of symmetries of a certain type of geometric figure may depend on the 
dimension of the space in which we consider the figure to lie. 
a. Describe all symmetries of a point in the real line lR; that is, describe all isometries of IR that leave one point 
fixed. 
b. Describe all symmetries (translations, reflections, etc.) of a point in the plane JR2. 
c. Describe all symmetries of a line segment in JR. 
d. Describe all symmetries of a line segment in JR2. 
e. Describe some symmetries of a line segment in JR3. 
2. Let P stand for an orientation preserving plane isometry and R for an orientation reversing one. Fill in the table 
with P or R to denote the orientation preserving or reversing property of a product. 

110 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
3. Fill in the table to give all possible types of plane isometries given by a product of two types as indicated in 
Tables 11 .1 through 11 .4. For example, a product of two rotations may be a rotation, or it may be another type. 
Fill in the box corresponding to pp with both letters. Use your answer to Exercise 2 to eliminate some types. 
Eliminate the identity from consideration. 
T 
p 
µ, 
y 
T 
p 
µ, 
y 
4. Draw a plane figure that has a one-element group as its group of symmetries in JR2 . 
5. Draw a plane figure that has a two-element group as its group of symmetries in JR2. 
6. Draw a plane figure that has a three-element group as its group of symmetries in JR2 . 
7. Draw a plane figure that has a four-element group isomorphic to Z4 as its group of symmetries in IR2 . 
8. Draw a plane figure that has a four-element group isomorphic to the Klein 4-group V as its group of symmetries 
in IR2 . 
9. For each of the four types of plane isometries (other than the identity), give the possibilities for the order of an 
isometry of that type in the group of plane isometries. 
10. A plane isometry cf> has a fixed point if there exists a point Pin the plane such that cf>(P) = P. Which of the four 
types of plane isometries (other than the identity) can have a fixed point? 
11. Referring to Exercise 10, which types of plane isometries, if any, have exactly one fixed point? 
12. Referring to Exercise I 0, which types of plane isometries, if any, have exactly two fixed points? 
13. Referring to Exercise 10, which types of plane isometries, if any, have an infinite number of fixed points? 
14. Argue geometrically that a plane isometry that leaves three noncolinear points fixed must be the identity map. 
15. Using Exercise 14, show algebraically that if two plane isometries cf> and 1/t agree on three noncolinear points, 
that is, if cf>(P;) = 1/t(P;) for noncolinear points P1 , P2, and P3, then cf> and 1/t are the same map. 
16. Do the rotations, together with the identity map, form a subgroup of the group of plane isometries? Why or 
why not? 
17. Do the translations, together with the identity map, form a subgroup of the group of plane isometries? Why or 
why not? 
18. Do the rotations about one particular point P, together with the identity map, form a subgroup of the group of 
plane isometries? Why or why not? 
19. Does the reflection across one particular line L, together with the identity map, form a subgroup of the group 
of plane isometries? Why or why not? 
20. Do the glide reflections, together with the identity map, form a subgroup of the group of plane isometries? 
Why or why not? 
21. Which of the four types of plane isometries can be elements of a finite subgroup of the group of plane isome-
tries? 
22. Completing a detail of the proof of Theorem 11.5, let G be a finite group of plane isometries. Show that 
the rotations in G, together with the identity isometry, form a subgroup H of G, and that either H = G or 
IGI = 21HI. [Hint: Use the same method that we used to show that IS,,! = 21Anl·l 

Section 11 
Exercises 
111 
23. Completing a detail in the proof of Theorem 11.5, let G be a finite group consisting of the identity isometry 
and rotations about one point P in the plane. Show that G is cyclic, generated by the rotation in G that turns 
the plane counterclockwise about P through the smallest angle e > 0. [Hint: Follow the idea of the proof that 
a subgroup of a cyclic group is cyclic.] 
Exercises 24 through 30 illustrate the seven different types of friezes when they are classified according to their 
symmetries. Imagine the figure shown to be continued infinitely to the right and left. The symmetry group of a 
frieze always contains translations. For each of these exercises answer these questions about the symmetry group 
of the frieze. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
a. Does the group contain a rotation? 
b. Does the group contain a reflection across a horizontal line? 
c. Does the group contain a reflection across a vertical line? 
d. Does the group contain a nontrivial glide reflection? 
e. To which of the possible groups Z, D00 , Z x Z 2 , or D00 x Z 2 do you think the symmetry group of the 
frieze is isomorphic? 
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFF 
TTTTTTTTTT 
EEEEEEEEEEEE 
zzzzzzzzzzzz 
HHHHHHHHHH 
J 
J 
J 
J 
J 
l 
l 
l 
l 
30. n u 
l 
n u n 
n 
u 
u 
Exercises 31 through 37 describe a pattern to be used to fill the plane by translation in the two directions given by 
the specified vectors. Answer these questions in each case. 
a . Does the symmetry group contain any rotations? If so, through what possible angles e where 0 < e ::: 
180°? 
b. Does the symmetry group contain any reflections? 
c. Does the symmetry group contain any nontrivial glide reflections? 
31. A square with horizontal and vertical edges using translation directions given by vectors (1, 0) and (0, 1). 
32. A square as in Exercise 31 using translation directions given by vectors (1, 1/ 2) and (0, 1). 
33. A square as in Exercise 31 with the letter Lat its center using translation directions given by vectors (I, 0) and 
(0, 1). 
34. A square as in Exercise 31 with the letter Eat its center using translation directions given by vectors ( 1, 0) and 
(0, 1). 
35. A square as in Exercise 31 with the letter Hat its center using translation directions given by vectors (1, 0) 
and (0, 1 ). 
36. A regular hexagon with a vertex at the top using translation directions given by vectors (1, 0) and (1, .J3). 
37. A regular hexagon with a vertex at the top containing an equilateral triangle with vertex at the top and centroid 
at the center of the hexagon, using translation directions given by vectors (1, 0) and (1, .J3). 
Exercises 38 and 39 are concerned with art works ofM. C. Escher. Find images of the indicated art by searching on 
the internet. Neglect the shading and colors in the figures and assume the markings in each human figure, reptile, 

112 
Part II 
Structure of Groups 
or horseman are the same, even though they may be invisible due to shading. Answer the same questions (a), (b), 
and (c) that were asked for Exercises 31 through 36, and also answer this part (d). 
d. Assuming horizontal and vertical coordinate axes with equal scales as usual, give vectors in the two 
nonparallel directions of vectors that generate the translation subgroup. Do not concern yourself with 
the length of these vectors. 
38. The Study of Regular Division of the Plane with Horsemen. 
39. The Study of Regular Division of the Plane with Reptiles. 
40. Let</> : ~ --+ Ube given by </>(8) = cos((J) + i sin((J) and S = </>[Z]. 
a. Show that any rotation mapping S to S is a rotation by an angle n E Z where angles are measured in radians. 
b. Show that reflection across the x-axis maps S to S. 
c. What is the group of symmetries of S? 
41. Show that the rotations of a cube in space form a group isomorphic to S4. [Hint: A rotation of the cube permutes 
the diagonals through the center of the cube.] 

PART 
Ill 
Homomorphisms and 
Factor Groups 
Section 12 
Factor Groups 
Section 13 
Factor-Group Computations and Simple Groups 
Section 14 
Group Action on a Set 
Section 1 S 
Applications of G-Sets to Counting 
SECTION 12 
F ACTOR G ROUPS 
Recall from Section 10 that for some group tables we can arrange the head on top and on 
the left so that the elements are grouped into left cosets of a subgroup in such a way that 
the coset blocks form a group table. We start this section by looking more closely at why 
the cosets of (0, 3) ::: Z 6 form a group and why the cosets of the subgroup {t, µ,) ::: D3 
do not. Table 12.1 is the group table for Z6 with the heads at the top and left sorted by 
cosets of (0, 3). 
12.1 Table 
+6 
0 
3 
1 
4 
2 
5 
0 
0 
3 
1 
4 
2 
5 
3 
3 
0 
4 
1 
5 
2 
I 
I 
4 
2 
5 
3 
0 
4 
4 
1 
5 
2 
0 
3 
2 
2 
5 
3 
0 
4 
1 
5 
5 
2 
0 
3 
1 
4 
According to Table 12.1 the coset (1,4) plus the coset (2,5) is the coset (0,3). This 
means that if we add either I or 4 to either 2 or 5 in Z6, we should get either 0 or 3. This 
is easily checked by adding the four possibilities. 
1 +62 = 3 
1+65 = 0 
4+6 2 = 0 
4+6 5 = 3 
We observe that if we wish to break up a group into its left cosets so the group table 
shows an operation on the left cosets, we need to be sure that if a 1, a2 are in the same 
113 

114 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
left coset and b1,b2 are in the same left coset, then a 1b 1 and a2b2 are in the same left 
coset. If this condition is satisfied for a subgroup H ::: G, we say that the operation on 
the left cosets of H is induced by the operation of G or that the operation of G induces 
an operation on the left cosets of H. In this case for any a, b E G we write 
(aH)(bH) = (ab)H 
to mean that the product of any element in aH multiplied by any element in bH must be 
in the left coset (ab)H. 
12.2 Example 
We show that the operation + in the group Z induces an operation on the cosets of 
SZ ::: Z. We first list the left cosets. 
sz = {· .. - 10, -S,O,S, 10, . .. } 
1 + sz = {· .. - 9, -4, 1, 6, 11, . . . } 
2 + sz = {· .. - 8, -3, 2, 7, 12, . . . } 
3+SZ = {·· · -7,-2,3,8,13, ... ) 
4 + sz = {· .. - 6, -1,4, 9, 14, ... } 
Let a 1 and a2 be in the same left coset of SZ. Then a2 = a 1 +Sr for some r E Z. We 
also let b 1, b2 be in the same left coset of SZ. Then b2 = b1 + Ss for some s E Z. We 
compute a1 + b2. 
a1 + b2 = (a1 +Sr)+ (b1 + Ss) 
= a 1 + Sr+ b1 + Ss 
= a 1 + b 1 +Sr+ Ss 
= (a1 + b1) + S(r + s) 
E (a1 + b1) + SZ 
(1) 
(2) 
So a2 + b2 is in the same coset as a 1 + b1, which says that addition in Z induces an 
operation on the five left cosets SZ, 1 + SZ, 2 + SZ, 3 + SZ, 4 + SZ. Looking back at 
the calculations, we see that only properties shared by all groups were used in each step 
except in line (I) where we used the fact that Z is abelian. Furthermore, line (2) is not 
necessary since SZ is a subgroup of Z so we know that SZ is closed under addition. 
From this example, it appears that as long as G is an abelian group, the operation of G 
induces an operation on the left cosets of any subgroup of G. 
.A. 
In Equation (1) of Example 12.2 we used the fact that Sr+ b1 = b1 +Sr. If we were 
doing the same computation in multiplicative notation and using any group G and 
subgroup Hof G, this would correspond to hb 1 = b1h. If the group G is not abelian, 
then this computation fails. However, we can weaken the abelian condition slightly and 
still get an induced operation on the left cosets. All we really need is that hbi = b 1h' 
for some h' E H. This happens when the left coset b 1H is the same set as the right coset 
Hb,. 
12.3 Definition 
Let H be a subgroup of G. We say that His a normal subgroup of G if for all g E G, 
gH =Hg. If His a normal subgroup of G, we write H ~G . 
• 
Recall that Theorem 10.17 states that if <P : G --+ G' is a group homomorphism and 
e' is the identity element in G', then Ker(</J) = {g E G I </J(g) = e') has the property that 
left and right cosets of Ker(</J) are the same. So the kernel of any homomorphism is a 
normal subgroup. 
12.4 Example 
The subgroup of even permutations An ::: Sn is normal since An is the kernel of the 
homomorphism sgn: Sn--+ (1, - 1). 
.A. 

Section 12 
Factor Groups 
115 
12.5 Example If H .:::; G and G is an abelian group, then H is a normal subgroup of G. 
12.6 Example 
Let H = {A E GL(n, JR) I det(A) = 1}. The determinant map satisfies det(AB) = 
det(A) det(B), which means that the determinant map is a homomorphism, det : 
GL(n, JR) --+ JR*. Thus H =Ker(det), which says that H ~ GL(n, JR). This subgroup 
H is called the special linear group and it is denoted by SL(n, JR). 
.&. 
12.7 Theorem 
Let H be a subgroup of a group G. Then left coset multiplication is well defined by the 
equation 
(aH)(bH) = (ab)H 
if and only if H is a normal subgroup of G. 
Proof 
Suppose first that (aH)(bH) = (ab)H does give a well-defined binary operation on left 
cosets. Let a E G. We want to show that aH and Ha are the same set. We use the standard 
technique of showing that each is a subset of the other. 
Let x E aH. Choosing representatives x E aH and a- 1 E a- 1H , we have 
(xH)(a- 1H) = (xa- 1)H. On the other hand, choosing representatives a E aH and 
a- 1 E a - 1 H , we see that (aH)(a- 1 H) = eH =H. Using our assumption that left coset 
multiplication by representatives is well defined, we must have xa- 1 = h E H. Then 
x = ha, so x E Ha and aH <; Ha. We leave the symmetric proof that Ha <; aH to 
Exercise 26. 
We turn now to the converse: If H is a normal subgroup, then left coset multiplica-
tion by representatives is well-defined. Due to our hypothesis, we can simply say cosets, 
omitting left and right. Suppose we wish to compute (aH)(bH). Choosing a E aH and 
b E bH, we obtain the coset (ab)H. Choosing different representatives ah 1 E aH and 
bh2 E bH, we obtain the coset ah1bh2H. We must show that these are the same cosets. 
Now h1b E Hb = bH, so h1b = bh3 for some h3 E H. Thus 
and (ab)(h3h2) E (ab)H. Therefore, ah 1bh2 is in (ab)H. 
• 
Theorem 12.7 shows that we have an operation on the left cosets of H :S G induced 
by the operation on G if and only if H is a normal subgroup of G. We next verify that 
this operation makes G/ H, the cosets of Hin G, a group. 
12.8 Corollary 
Let H be a normal subgroup of G. Then the cosets of H form a group G / H under the 
binary operation (aH)(bH) = (ab)H. 
.&. 
Proof Computing, (aH)[(bH )(cH)] = (aH)[(bc)H] = [a(bc)]H, and similarly, we have 
[(aH)(bH)](cH) = [(ab)c]H , so associativity in G/ H follows from associativity in 
G. Because (aH)(eH) = (ae)H = aH = (ea)H = (eH )(aH), we see that eH = H is 
the identity element in G/ H . Finally, (a- 1H)(aH) = (a- 1a)H = eH = (aa- 1)H = 
(aH)(a- 1 H) shows that a- 1 H = (aH)- 1. 
+ 
12.9 Definition 
The group G / H in the preceding corollary is the factor group (or quotient group) of 
GbyH. 
• 
12.10 Example 
Since Z is an abelian group, nZ is a normal subgroup. Corollary 12.8 allows us to 
construct the factor group Z/nZ . For any integer m, the division algorithm says that 
m = nq + r for some 0 :S r < n. Therefore, m E r + nZ. So Z/nZ = {k + nZ I 0 :S k < 
n). Thus (1 + nZ ) = Z/nZ, which implies that Z/nZ is cyclic and isomorphic with Z,, . 
.&. 

116 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
12.11 Example 
Consider the abelian group IR under addition, and let c E JR+. The cyclic subgroup (c) 
of IR contains as elements 
· · · - 3c, -2c, -c, 0, c, 2c, 3c, · · · . 
Every coset of (c) contains just one element x such that 0 ::::: x < c. If we choose these 
elements as representatives of the cosets when computing in IR/ (c), we find that we are 
computing their sum modulo c as discussed for the computation in !Re in Section 3. 
For example, if c = 5.37, then the sum of the cosets 4.65 + (5.37) and 3.42 + (5.37) 
is the coset 8.07 + (5.37), which contains 8.07 - 5.37 = 2.7, which is 4.65 +537 3.42. 
Working with these coset elements x where 0 ::::: x < c, we thus see that the group !Re 
of Section 3 is isomorphic to IR/ (c) under an isomorphism 1/f where 1/f (x) = x + (c) for 
all x E !Re. Of course, IR/ (c) is then also isomorphic to the circle group U of complex 
numbers of magnitude l under multiplication. 
.&. 
We have seen that the group Z/ (n) is isomorphic to the group Z 11 , and as a set, 
Z 11 = (0, l, 3, 4, · · · , n - l}, the set of nonnegative integers less than n. Example 12.l l 
shows that the group IR/ (c) is isomorphic to the group !Re. In Section 3, we choose the 
notation !Re rather than the conventional [0, c) for the half-open interval of nonnegative 
real numbers less than c. We did that to bring out now the comparison of these factor 
groups of Z with these factor groups of R 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
We learned that the kernel of any homomorphism </J : G ---+ G' is a normal subgroup of 
G. Do all normal subgroups arise in this way? That is, for any normal subgroup H '.Sl G, 
is there a group homomorphism </J : G ---+ G' for some group G' such that H is the kernel 
of G? The answer to the question is yes as we see in Theorem 12.12. 
12.12 Theorem 
Let H be a normal subgroup of G. Then y : G---+ G/ H given by y(x) = xH is a 
homomorphism with kernel H. 
Proof Letx,y E G. Then 
y(xy) = (xy)H = (xH)(yH) = y(x)y(y), 
soy is a homomorphism. Since xH = H if and only if x EH, we see that the kernel of 
y is indeed H. 
+ 
Since the kernel of any homomorphism </J : G ---+ G' is a normal subgroup, it is 
natural to ask how the factor group G/ Ker(</J) is related to G'. Theorem 12.12 and the 
next example illustrate that there is a very strong connection. 
12.13 Example 
(Reduction Modulo n) Let </J : Z---+ Z 11 be defined by letting </J(m) be the remainder 
when m is divided by n. We check that </J is a group homomorphism. Let m 1, m2 E Z 
and suppose that the division algorithm gives us 
m1 = nq1 + r1 
and 
m2 = nq2 + r2. 
Then m1 + m2 = n(q1 + q2) + r1 + r2. If r1 + r2 < n, then 
</J(m1 + m2) = r1 + r2 = </J(m1) +11 </J(m2). 
On the other hand, if r1 + r2 ::'.'.: n, then m1 + m2 = n(q1 + q2 + 1) + (r1 + r2 - n) and 
0 :S r1 + r2 - n < n, which implies 

Section 12 
Factor Groups 
117 
The kernel of </J is the set of all the multiples of n, nZ . So Z/Ker(</J) = Z/nZ, which 
is isomorphic to Z,,. 
..A. 
The previous example is a special case of the Fundamental Homomorphism 
Theorem. 
12.14 Theorem 
(The Fundamental Homomorphism Theorem) Let </J : G --+ G' be a group ho-
momorphism with kernel H. Then </J[G] is a group, and µ..: G/ H--+ </J[G] given by 
µ..(gH) = </J(g) is an isomorphism. If y : G--+ G/ H is the homomorphism given by 
y(g) = gH, then </J(g) = µ..oy(g) for each g E G. 
Proof 
Theorem 8.5 says that </J[G] is a subgroup of G'. Theorem 10.17 shows that the map 
µ.. : G / H --+ </J [ G] is well defined. We show µ.. is a homomorphism. Let aH, bH E G / H. 
Then µ..((aH)(bH)) = µ..((ab)H) = </J(ab) = </J(a)</J(b) = µ..(aH)µ..(bH). Since </J maps G 
onto </J[G], µ.. maps G/ H onto </J[G]. To show thatµ.. is one-to-one, we compute the 
kernel ofµ... Since µ..(aH) = </J(a), the kernel ofµ.. is {aH I </J(a) = e'}. But </J(a) = e' if 
and only if a E Ker(</J) =H. So Ker(µ..) = {H} which is the trivial subgroup of G / H . By 
Corollary 10.19 µ..is one-to-one, which completes the proof thatµ.. is an isomorphism. 
We next turn to the final statement of the theorem. Let g E G. Then 
</J(g) = µ..(gH) = µ..(y(g)) = µ..oy(g). 
• 
The Fundamental Homomorphism Theorem is sometimes called the First Isomor-
phism Theorem. As the name suggests, there are other related theorems. In fact we 
will prove two others, the Second Isomorphism Theorem and the Third Isomorphism 
Theorem, in Section 16. 
Theorem 12.14 states that </J(g) = µ..oy(g). This can be visualized in Figure 12.15. 
If we start with an element g E G, and map it to </J(g), we get the same result as first 
mapping g to y(g) and then mapping y(g) to µ..oy(g). When we have a situation like 
this, we say that the map </J can be factored as </J = µ..oy. 
The isomorphism µ.. in Theorem I 2. I 4 is referred to as a natural or canonical iso-
morphism, and the same adjectives are used to describe the homomorphism y. There 
may be other isomorphisms and homomorphisms for these same groups, but the maps 
µ..and y have a special status with </J and are uniquely determined by Theorem 12.14. 
In summary, every homomorphism with domain G gives rise to a factor group G/ H , 
and every factor group G/ H gives rise to a homomorphism mapping G into G/ H. Ho-
momorphisms and factor groups are closely related. We give an example indicating how 
useful this relationship can be. 
G ----------------+-
-If c/>[G] 
/ 
/ 
/ 
,/ 
GIK 
12.15 Figure 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
///µ(isomorphism) 
/ 

118 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
12.16 Example 
Classify the group (:Z.4 x :Z.2)/((0} x Z2) according to the fundamental theorem of 
finitely generated abelian groups (Theorem 9.12). 
Solution 
The projection map rr1 : Z4 x Z2 ---+ Z4 given by rr1 (x, y) = x is a homomorphism of 
Z4 x Z2 onto Z4 with kernel {O} x Z2 . By Theorem 12.14, we know that the given 
factor group is isomorphic to Z4 . 
• 
Normal Subgroups and Inner Automorphisms 
We derive some alternative characterizations of normal subgroups, which often provide 
us with an easier way to check normality than finding both the left and the right coset 
decompositions. 
Suppose that H is a subgroup of G such that ghg- 1 E H for all g E G and all h E H. 
Then gHg- 1 = (ghg- 1 I h EH} <; H for all g E G. We claim that actually gHg- 1 =H. 
We must show that H <; gHg- 1 for all g E G. Leth EH. Replacing g by g- 1 in the re-
lation ghg- 1 EH, we obtain g- 1h(g- 1r 1 = g- 1hg = h1 where h1 EH. Consequently, 
h = gh1g- 1 E gHg- 1, and we are done. 
Suppose that gH =Hg for all g E G. Then gh = h 1g, so ghg- 1 EH for all g E G 
and all h EH. By the preceding paragraph, this means that gHg- 1 = H for all g E G. 
Conversely, if gHg- 1 = H for all g E G, then ghg- 1 = h1 so gh = h1g E Hg, and 
gH <; Hg. But also, r
1 Hg = H giving g- 1 hg = hz, so that hg = gh2 and Hg <; 
gH. 
The comments after Definition 12.3 show that the kernel of any homomorphism is 
a normal subgroup of the domain. Also, Theorem 12.12 says that any normal subgroup 
is the kernel of some homomorphism. 
We summarize our work as a theorem. 
12.17 Theorem 
The following are four equivalent conditions for a subgroup H of a group G to be a 
normal subgroup of G. 
1. 
ghg- l E H for all g E G and h E H. 
2. 
gHg- 1 = H for all g E G. 
3. There is a group homomorphism</>: G---+ G' such that Ker(</>)= H. 
4. 
gH = Hg for all g E G. 
Condition (2) of Theorem 12.17 is often taken as the definition of a normal subgroup 
Hof a group G. 
+ 
12.18 Example 
Every subgroup H of an abelian group G is normal. We need only note that gh = hg for 
all h EH and all g E G, so, of course, ghg- 1 = h EH for all g E G and all h E H. 
• 
If G is a group and g E G, then the map i8 : G ---+ G defined by i8(x) = gxg- 1 is 
a group homomorphism since i8(xy) = gxyg- 1 = gxg- 1 gyg- 1 = i8(x)i8(x). We see that 
gag- 1 = gbg- 1 if and only if a = b, so i8 is one-to-one. Since g(g- 1 yg)g- 1 = y, we see 
that i8 is onto G, so it is an isomorphism of G with itself. 
12.19 Definition 
An isomorphism </> : G ---+ G of a group G with itself is an automorphism of G. The 
automorphism i8 : G---+ G, where i8(x) = gxg- 1 for all x E G, is the inner automor-
phism of G by g. Performing i8 on x is called conjugation of x by g. 
• 
The equivalence of conditions ( 1) and (2) in Theorem 12.17 shows that gH = Hg 
for all g E G if and only if i8 [H ] = H for all g E G, that is, if and only if His invariant 
under all inner automorphisms of G. It is important to realize that i8 [H] = H is an 

Section 12 
Exercises 
119 
equation in sets; we need not have i8(h) = h for all h E H. That is i8 may perform a 
nontrivial permutation of the set H. We see that the normal subgroups of a group G are 
precisely those that are invariant under all inner automorphisms. A subgroup K of G is 
a conjugate subgroup of H if K = i8 [H] = gHg- 1 for some g E G. 
• EXERCISES 12 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 8, find the order of the given factor group. 
1. ?.6/(3) 
3. (?.4 x Z2)/ ((2, 1)) 
s. (?.3x?.6)/((1,1)) 
7. (?.26 x ?.15)/ ((1, 1)) 
2. (?.4 x Z 12)/((2) x (2)) 
4. (?.3 x ?-5)/({0} x ?.5) 
6. (?.50 x ?.15)/ ((15, 15)) 
8. (Zs x S3)/((2, (l,2,3))) 
In Exercises 9 through 15, give the order of the element in the factor group. 
9. 5 + (4) in Z 12/(4) 
11. (2, 1) + ((1, 1)) in (?.3x?.6)/((1, 1)) 
13. (2, 3) + ((0, 3)) in (Z 10 x ?.4)/ ((0, 3)) 
15. (2,0) + ((4,4)) in (?.6 x Zs)/((4,4)) 
10. 26 + (12) in Z6o/(12) 
12. (3, 1) + ((1, 1)) in (?.4 x?-4)/(( l , 1)) 
14. (2,5) + ((1,2)) in (?.3 x ?.6)/((1,2)) 
16. Compute ip [H] for the subgroup H = {i, µ,)of the dihedral group DJ . 
Concepts 
In Exercises 17 through 19, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction 
is needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
17. A normal subgroup Hof G is one satisfying hG = Gh for all h E H. 
18. A normal subgroup Hof G is one satisfying g- 1 hg E H for all h E H and all g E G. 
19. An automorphism of a group G is a homomorphism mapping G into G. 
20. What is the importance of a normal subgroup of a group G? 
Students often write nonsense when first proving theorems about factor groups. The next two exercises are designed 
to call attention to one basic type of error. 
21. A student is asked to show that if H is a normal subgroup of an abelian group G, then G / H is abelian. The 
student's proof starts as follows: 
We must show that G / H is abelian. Let a and b be two elements of G / H. 
a. Why does the instructor reading this proof expect to find nonsense from here on in the student's paper? 
b. What should the student have written? 
c. Complete the proof. 
22. A torsion group is a group all of whose elements have finite order. A group is torsion free if the identity is 
the only element of finite order. A student is asked to prove that if G is a torsion group, then so is G/ H for 
every normal subgroup Hof G. The student writes 
We must show that each element of G / H is of finite order. Let x E G / H. 
Answer the same questions as in Exercise 21. 
23. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. It makes sense to speak of the factor group G / N if and only if N is a normal subgroup of the 
group G. 
b. Every subgroup of an abelian group G is a normal subgroup of G. 
c. The only automorphism of an abelian group is the identity map. 

120 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
d. Every factor group of a finite group is again of finite order. 
e. Every factor group of a torsion group is a torsion group. (See Exercise 22.) 
f. Every factor group of a torsion-free group is torsion free. (See Exercise 22.) 
g. Every factor group of an abelian group is abelian. 
h. Every factor group of a nonabelian group is nonabelian. 
i. Z/n'Z is cyclic of order n. 
j . IR/n!R is cyclic of order n, where n!R = {nr I r E IR} and IR is under addition. 
Theory 
24. Let G1 and G1 be groups and n 1 : G1 x G1 ---+ G1 be the function defined by n 1 (a, b) =a. Prove that n 1 is a 
homomorphism, find Ker(n 1 ), and prove (G1 x G1)/Ker(n1) is isomorphic to G1 . 
25. Let G1 and Gz be groups and <t> : G1 x G1 ---+ G1 x G1 be the function defined by <j>(a, b) = (a, e1) where e1 is 
the identity in G1. Prove that <t> is a homomorphism, find Ker(<j>), and prove (G1 x G1)/ Ker(<j>) is isomorphic 
to G1. 
26. Complete the proof of Theorem 12.7 by showing that if H is a subgroup of a group G and if left coset 
multiplication (aH)(bH) = (ab)H is well defined, then Ha ~ aH. 
27. Prove that the torsion subgroup T of an abelian group G is a normal subgroup of G, and that G/ T is torsion 
free. (See Exercise 22.) 
28. A subgroup H is conjugate to a subgroup K of a group G if there exists an inner automorphism ig of G such 
that ig [H] = K . Show that conjugacy is an equivalence relation on the collection of subgroups of G. 
29. Characterize the normal subgroups of a group G in terms of the cells where they appear in the partition given 
by the conjugacy relation in the preceding exercise. 
30. Find all subgroups of D3 that are conjugate to H = (1, µ.).(See Exercise 28.) 
31. (Evaluation Homomorphism) Let F be the set of all functions mapping the real numbers to the real num-
bers and let c E JR. The sum of two functions!+ g is the function defined by (f + g)(x) = f(x) + g(x). Func-
tion addition makes Fa group. Let <Pc : F---+ IR be defined by <Pelf) = f(c). 
a. Show that <Pc is a group homomorphism. 
b. Find Ker(<t>c). 
c. Identify the coset of Ker(<t>c) that contains the constant functionf(x) = I. 
d. Find a well-known group that is isomorphic with F / Ker(<j>c). Use the Fundamental Homomorphism Theo-
rem to prove your answer. 
32. Let H be a normal subgroup of a group G, and let m = (G : H ). Show that am E H for every a E G. 
33. Show that an intersection of normal subgroups of a group G is again a normal subgroup of G. 
34. Given any subset S of a group G, show that it makes sense to speak of the smallest normal subgroup that 
contains S. [Hint: Use Exercise 33.] 
35. Let G be a group. An element of G that can be expressed in the form aba- lb- l for some a,b E G is a 
commutator in G. The preceding exercise shows that there is a smallest normal subgroup C of a group G 
containing all commutators in G; the subgroup C is the commutator subgroup of G. Show that G/ C is an 
abelian group. 
36. Show that if a finite group G has exactly one subgroup H of a given order, then His a normal subgroup of G. 
37. Show that if H and N are subgroups of a group G, and N is normal in G, then H n N is normal in H . Show by 
an example that H n N need not be normal in G. 
38. Let G be a group containing at least one subgroup of a fixed finite order s. Show that the intersection of all 
subgroups of G of order s is a normal subgroup of G. [Hint: Use the fact that if H has order s, then so does 
x-1 Hx for all x E G.] 

Section 13 
Factor-Group Computations and Simple Groups 
121 
39. a. Show that all automorphisms of a group G form a group under function composition. 
b. Show that the inner automorphisms of a group G form a normal subgroup of the group of all automorphisms 
of G under function composition. [Warning: Be sure to show that the inner automorphisms do form a 
subgroup.] 
40. Show that the set of all g E G such that ig : G -+ G is the identity inner automorphism ie is a normal subgroup 
of a group G. 
41. Let G and G' be groups, and let H and H' be normal subgroups of G and G', respectively. Let </> be a homo-
morphism of G into G'. Show that</> induces a natural homomorphism</>* : (G/ H) -+ (G' / H ' ) if <f>[H] ~ H' . 
(This fact is used constantly in algebraic topology.) 
42. Use the properties det(AB) = det(A) · det(B) and det(J11 ) = l for n x n matrices to show the n x n matrices 
with determinant± l form a normal subgroup of GL(n, ~). 
43. Let G be a group, and let 9 (G) be the set of all subsets of G. For any A, B E 9 (G), let us define the product 
subsetAB = {ab I a E A,b E B}. 
a. Show that this multiplication of subsets is associative and has an identity element, but that 9 (G) is not a 
group under this operation. 
b. Show that if N is a normal subgroup of G, then the set of cosets of N is closed under the above operation 
on 9 (G), and that this operation agrees with the multiplication given by the formula in Corollary 12.8. 
c. Show (without using Corollary 12.8) that the cosets of Nin G form a group under the above operation. Is 
its identity element the same as the identity element of 9 (G)? 
SECTION 13 
FACTOR-GROUP COMPUTATIONS AND SIMPLE GROUPS 
Factor groups can be a tough topic for students to grasp. There is nothing like a bit 
of computation to strengthen understanding in mathematics. We start by attempting to 
improve our intuition concerning factor groups. Since we will be dealing with normal 
subgroups throughout this section, we often denote a subgroup of a group G by N rather 
than by H. 
Let N be a normal subgroup of G. In the factor group G/ N , the subgroup N acts 
as identity element. We may regard N as being collapsed to a single element, either to 
0 in additive notation or to e in multiplicative notation. This collapsing of N together 
with the algebraic structure of G require that other subsets of G, namely, the cosets of 
N, also each collapse into a single element in the factor group. A visualization of this 
collapsing is provided by Fig. 13.1. Recall from Theorem 12.12 that y : G-+ G/ N 
defined by y(a) = aN for a E G is a homomorphism of G onto G/ N. We can view 
the "line" G / N at the bottom of Figure 13 .1 as obtained by collapsing to a point each 
coset of Nin a copy of G. Each point of G/ N thus corresponds to a whole vertical line 
e 
G 
b 
a 
cb 
ab 
c 
'Y 
GIN 
aN N bN (cN )(bN) (ab)N 
cN 
= (cb)N = (aN)(bN) 
13.1 Figure 

122 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
segment in the shaded portion, representing a coset of N in G. It is crucial to remember 
that multiplication of cosets in G/ N can be computed by multiplying in G, using any 
representative elements of the cosets as shown in the figure. 
Additively, two elements of G will collapse into the same element of G/ N if they 
differ by an element of N. Multiplicatively, a and b collapse together if ab- 1 is in N. 
The degree of collapsing can vary from nonexistent to catastrophic. We illustrate the 
two extreme cases by examples. 
13.2 Example 
The trivial subgroup N = {O} of Z is, of course, a normal subgroup. Compute Z/{O}. 
Solution 
Since N = {O} has only one element, every coset of N has only one element. That is, the 
cosets are of the form {m} form E Z. There is no collapsing at all, and consequently, 
Z/{O}:::::: Z. Each m E Z is simply renamed {m} in Z/{O}. 
.A. 
13.3 Example 
Let n be a positive integer. The set nR = {nr I r E R} is a subgroup of R under addition, 
and it is normal since R is abelian. Compute R/nR 
Solution 
A bit of thought shows that actually nR = R, because each x E R is of the form n(x/n) 
and x/ n E R Thus R/nR has only one element, the subgroup nR The factor group is a 
trivial group consisting only of the identity element. 
.A. 
As illustrated in Examples 13.2 and 13.3 for any group G, we have G/ {e} :::::: G 
and G/ G:::::: {e}, where {e} is the trivial group consisting only of the identity element e. 
These two extremes of factor groups are of little importance. We would like knowledge 
of a factor group G/ N to give some information about the structure of G. If N = {e}, 
the factor group has the same structure as G and we might as well have tried to study 
G directly. If N = G, the factor group has no significant structure to supply information 
about G. If G is a finite group and N ofa {e} is a normal subgroup of G, then G/N is a 
smaller group than G, and consequently may have a more simple structure than G. The 
multiplication of cosets in G / N reflects the multiplication in G, since products of cosets 
can be computed by multiplying in G representative elements of the cosets. 
We give two examples showing that even when G / N has order 2, we may be able 
to deduce some useful results. If G is a finite group and G / N has just two elements, then 
we must have [G[ = 2[N[. Note that every subgroup H containing just half the elements 
of a finite group G must be a normal subgroup, since for each element a in G but not in 
H , both the left coset aH and the right coset Ha must consist of all elements in G that are 
not in H. Thus the left and right cosets of H coincide and His a normal subgroup of G. 
13.4 Example 
Because [Sill= 2[All[, we see that All is a normal subgroup of Sil, and Sil/All has order 
2. Let a be an odd permutation in Sil, so that Sil/All = {All, a All}. Renaming the element 
All "even" and the element a All "odd," the multiplication in Sll/A11 shown in Table 13.5 
becomes 
13.5 Table 
(even)(even) = even 
(even)(odd) = odd 
(odd)(even) = odd 
(odd)(odd) = even. 
An 
A,, 
An 
aAn 
aAn 
An 
Thus the factor group reflects these multiplicative properties for all the permutations in 
~. 
.... 
Example 13.4 illustrates that while knowing the product of two cosets in G/ N does 
not tell us what the product of two elements of G is, it may tell us that the product in G 
of two types of elements is itself of a certain type. 

Section 13 
Factor-Group Computations and Simple Groups 
123 
13.6 Example 
(The Converse of the Theorem of Lagrange is False) Recall that the Theorem of 
Lagrange states that the order of a subgroup of a finite group G must divide the order of 
G. We are now in a position to demonstrate that although the group A4 has 12 elements 
and 6 divides 12, A4 has no subgroup of order 6. 
Suppose that H were a subgroup of A4 having order 6. As observed before in Ex-
ample 13.4, it would follow that H would be a normal subgroup of A4 . Then A4 /H 
would have only two elements, H and a-H for some a- E A 4 not in H. Since in a group 
of order 2, the square of each element is the identity, we would have HH = H and 
(o-H)(o-H) =H. Now computation in a factor group can be achieved by computing 
with representatives in the original group. Thus, computing in A4 , we find that for each 
a EH we must have a 2 EH and for each f3 E o-H we must have {32 EH. That is, the 
square of every element in A4 must be in H . But in A4, we have 
(1, 2, 3) = (1, 3, 2)2 
and 
(1, 3, 2) = (1, 2, 3)2 
so (1, 2, 3) and (1, 3, 2) are in H. A similar computation shows that (1, 2, 4), (1, 4, 2), 
(1, 3, 4), (1, 4, 3), (2, 3, 4), and (2, 4, 3) are all in H. This shows that there must be at 
least 8 elements in H , contradicting the fact that H was supposed to have order 6. 
..A. 
We now turn to several examples that compute factor groups. If the group we start 
with is finitely generated and abelian, then its factor group will be also. Computing such 
a factor group means classifying it according to the fundamental theorem (Theorem 9.12 
or Theorem 9.14). 
13.7 Example 
Let us compute the factor group (Z4 x Z6)/((0, 1)). Here ((0, 1)) is the cyclic subgroup 
Hof Z4 x Z6 generated by (0, 1). Thus 
H = {(O, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (0, 3), (0, 4), (0, 5)). 
Since Z4 x Z6 has 24 elements and H has 6 elements, all cosets of H must have 
6 elements, and (Z4 x Z6)/ H must have order 4. Since Z4 x Z6 is abelian, so is 
(Z4 x Z6)/H (remember, we compute in a factor group by means of representatives 
from the original group). In additive notation, the cosets are 
H = (0,0)+H, 
(l,O)+H, 
(2,0) + H , 
(3,0)+ H. 
Since we can compute by choosing the representatives (0, 0), (1, 0), (2, 0), and (3, 0), it 
is clear that (Z4 x Z6)/ His isomorphic to Z4. Note that this is what we would expect, 
since in a factor group modulo H, everything in H becomes the identity element; that is, 
we are essentially setting everything in H equal to zero. Thus the whole second factor 
Z6 of Z4 x Z6 is collapsed, leaving just the first factor Z4. 
..a. 
Example 13.7 is a special case of a general theorem that we now state and prove. 
We should acquire an intuitive feeling for this theorem in terms of collapsing one of the 
factors to the identity element. 
13.8 Theorem 
Let G = H x K be the direct product of groups H and K. Then Fi= {(h, e) I h EH} 
is a normal subgroup of G. Also G/H is isomorphic to Kin a natural way. Similarly, 
G / K :::::: H in a natural way. 
Proof 
Consider the homomorphism rr2 : H x K ~ K, where rr2(h, k) = k. Because Ker(rr2 ) = 
Fi, we see that Fi is a normal subgroup of H x K. Because rr2 is onto K, Theorem 12.14 
tells us that (H x K)/ H :::::: K. 
+ 
We continue with additional computations of abelian factor groups. To illustrate 
how easy it is to compute in a factor group if we can compute in the whole group, we 
prove the following theorem. 

124 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
13.9 Theorem 
If G is a cyclic group and N is a subgroup of G, then G/ N is cyclic. 
Proof Let G be a cyclic group, so (a ) = G for some a E G. Let N be any subgroup of G. Since 
G is abelian, N is a normal subgroup of G. We compute the cyclic subgroup of G/ N 
generated by aN. 
(aN) = {(aN)" In E Z } = (a"N In E Z} 
Since {a" In E Z} = G, 
(a"Nln E Z } = {gNlg E G). 
So (aN) contains every coset of G and we see that G/N is cyclic with generator (aN ) . • 
13.10 Example 
Let us compute the factor group (2.4 x Z.6)/((0, 2)). Now (0, 2) generates the subgroup 
H = ((0, 0), (0, 2), (0, 4)) 
of 2.4 x 2.6 of order 3. Here the first factor 2.4 of 2.4 x 2.6 is left alone. The 2.6 factor, 
on the other hand, is essentially collapsed by a subgroup of order 3, giving a factor group 
in the second factor of order 2 that must be isomorphic to Z2. Thus (2.4 x 2.6) / ( (0, 2)) 
is isomorphic to 2.4 x Z2. 
We can verify that (Z4 x Z6)/ ((0, 2)) is isomorphic to Z4 x Z2 by using Theo-
rem 12. 14. We need a homomorphism ifJ : Z4 x Z6 --* Z4 x Z2 that is onto, with kernel 
((0, 2)). Defining cp by cp(a, b) = (0, r) where r is the remainder when bis divided by 2 
does the trick. 
.A. 
13.11 Example 
Let us compute the factor group (Z4 x 2.6)/((2, 3)). Be careful! There is a great temp-
tation to say that we are setting the 2 of 2.4 and the 3 of Z6 both equal to zero, so that 
2.4 is collapsed to a factor group isomorphic to Z2 and Z6 to one isomorphic to 2.3, 
giving a total factor group isomorphic to Z2 x Z3. This is wrong! Note that 
H = ((2,3)) = ((0, 0), (2,3)) 
is of order 2, so (Z4 x Z6)/ ((2, 3)) has order 12, not 6. Setting (2, 3) equal to zero does 
not make (2, 0) and (0, 3) equal to zero individually, so the factors do not collapse 
separately. 
The possible abelian groups of order 12 are Z4 x Z3 and Z2 x Z2 x Z3, and we 
must decide to which one our factor group is isomorphic. These two groups are most 
easily distinguished in that Z4 x Z3 has an element of order 4, and Z2 x Z2 x Z3 does 
not. We claim that the coset ( 1, 0) + H is of order 4 in the factor group (Z4 x Z6) / H. 
To find the smallest power of a coset giving the identity in a factor group modulo H , we 
must, by choosing representatives, find the smallest power of a representative that is in 
the subgroup H. Now, 
4(1, 0) = (1, 0) + (1, 0) + (1, 0) + (1, 0) = (0, 0) 
is the first time that (1, 0) added to itself gives an element of H. Thus (Z4 x Z6)/ ((2, 3)) 
has an element of order 4 and is isomorphic to Z4 x Z3 or 2.12. 
We can use Theorem 12.14 to verify that (Z4 x 2.6)/((2, 3)) is isomorphic to 2.12, 
although it is a little challenging to see what the homomorphism cp : Z4 x Z6 --* 2.12 
should be. We define ifJ: 2.4 x Z6--* Z12 by setting cp(a,b) = 3a + 12 (12 - 2b). Here 
we interpret 3a and 2b as integer multiplication, so 0 .::: 3a < 12 and 0 .::: 2b < 12. 
The map ifJ is a homomorphism, but this takes some checking, which we leave to 
the reader. Also, Ker(c/J) = {(a, b) E Z4 x Z6 I 3a = 2b) = ((0, 0), (2, 3)) = ((2, 3)). We 
also see that ifJ(l, 1) = 1, which implies that cp maps onto 2.12. By the Fundamental 
Homomorphism Theorem, (Z4 x Z6)/ ((2, 3)) is isomorphic to 2.12. 
.A. 

Section 13 
Factor-Group Computations and Simple Groups 
125 
13.12 Example 
Let us compute (that is, classify as in Theorem 9.12) the group (Z x Z)/((l, 1)). We may 
visualize Z x Z as the points in the plane with both coordinates integers, as indicated 
by the dots in Fig. 13.13. The subgroup ((1, 1)) consists of those points that lie on the 
45° line through the origin, indicated in the figure. The coset (1, 0) + ((1, 1)) consists of 
those dots on the 45° line through the point (1, 0), also shown in the figure. Continuing, 
we see that each coset consists of those dots lying on one of the 45° lines in the figure. 
We may choose the representatives 
... , (-3, 0), (-2, 0), (-1, 0), (0, 0), (1, 0), (2, 0), (3, 0), ... 
of these cosets to compute in the factor group. Since these representatives correspond 
precisely to the points of Z on the x-axis, we see that the factor group (Z x Z)/ ((1, 1)) 
is isomorphic to Z. 
Again, we can use the Fundamental Homomorphism Theorem as another method 
of computing this group. We let </J : Z x Z --+ Z be defined by </J(n, m) = n - m. 
It is easy to verify that </J is a homomorphism, </J maps onto Z, and Ker(</J) = 
{(n, m) E Z x Z In= m) = ((1, 1)). So by the Fundamental Homomorphism Theo-
rem, (Z x Z)/((l, 1)) is isomorphic to Z. Furthermore, an isomorphism is given by 
µ,( (n, m) + ( (1, 1))) = n-m. This is the same isomorphism that we saw above. 
.A 
y 
13.13 Figure 
13.14 Example 
We now compute (Z x Z)/((2, 4)). This is similar to Example 13.12, but there is a little 
twist to this one. In this example, we know that the factor group has an element with or-
der 2, since (1, 2) !j ((2, 4)), but (1, 2) + (1 , 2) E ((2, 4)). Furthermore, (Z x Z)/ ((2, 4)) 
has an element ( 1, 0) + ( (2, 4)) with infinite order since (n, 0) !j ( (2, 4)) for any n E z+. 
Figure 13.15 illustrates the situation. Along the line y = 2x only every other lattice point 
is in ( (2, 4)). These points are filled dots in the figure. Each line with slope two contains 

126 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
two cosets, one indicated with solid dots and one with hollow dots. Adding (1, 2) moves 
the solid dot cosets to the hollow dot cosets and the hollow dot cosets to the solid dot 
cosets while staying on the same line. Adding (0, 1) moves a coset from one line to the 
next. We may choose coset representatives 
. . . ' (0, -3), (0, -2), (0, -1), (0, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (0, 3), ... 
for the solid dot cosets and 
. . . ' (1, -3), ( 1, -2), ( 1, -1 ), ( 1, 0), (1, 1 ), (1, 2), ( 1, 3), ... 
for the hollow dot cosets. So it seems that we have two copies of the integers, one with 
a zero in the first coordinate and one with a one in the first coordinate. This leads us to 
guess that (Z x Z)/ ((2, 4)) is isomorphic with Z2 x Z. 
To verify that our guess is correct, we seek a homomorphism <P : Z x Z ~ Z2 x Z 
that maps onto Z2 x Z and whose kernel is ((2, 4)). We let </J(a, b) = (r, 2a -
b) where 
r is the remainder when a is divided by 2. It is easy to check that <P is a homomorphism. 
Furthermore, </J(O, -1) = (0, 1) and </J(l, 2) = (1, 0), which implies that <P maps onto 
Z x Z2. It remains to compute Ker(</J ). 
Ker(</J) = {(a, b) I b = 2a and a is even}= {(2n, 4n) In E Z} = ((2,4)). 
Thus (Z x Z) / ( (2, 4)) is isomorphic to Z x Z2 by the Fundamental Homomorphism 
Theorem. Furthermore, an isomorphism µ, : (Z x Z)/ ((2, 4)) ~ Z2 x Z is defined by 
the formula µ,((a, b) + ((2, 4))) = (r, 2a -
b) where r is the remainder when a is divided 
~2. 
~ 
• : 9: , : 9 : , :9fe 
:9: ' :~: , :9: ' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
' t/ 9 /,' ~ /,' (jJ // ' /,'? ,'; I // 9' /,' ' 
/J Cl I/ " 
// 9 I,' ~ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
f 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
• I,' p I,' • /,' i> ,/ • I,' p ,'~ I I,' p I,' • ' I/ p I,' " /,' p /,' ,• 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
J 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
If 
'I ,' r;< ,' • ' ,' n{ ,'. 
,' rf ~ I ,' n{ / ' I ,' n( ,'. 
,' " 
/
. 
,' 
1"f-' 
I 
I 
Y 
f 
J 
,' 
; 
,'I 
I 
Y 
I 
I 
)-'
I 
/ 
I/ 
J 
f 
,' / 
,' I,' ,' ,'I I/ I,' I ,' ,' ,' I,' I,' /I I,' ,' I/ I,' I/ I,' ,' ,' ,' 
• ,' ~ ,' ,. ,' ~ ,' ,. ,' 9 ,'2 
,' 0 ,' ,. ,' <;Z> ,' '
/ 9 / ,. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
J 
I 
J 
J 
I 
f 
,' 
,' ,' ,' ,' ,' 
I 
,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' 
,' 
I 
,' I 
I 
f 
,' 
• ,' i;z.> ,' , 
,' ,0 ,' • ,' ~ ,'1 
,' ~ ,' tt ,' ~ ,' " / ,0 ,' !' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
I 
,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' 
I 
,' 
I 
,' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
f 
1 
I 
f 
I 
I 
. 1 
/,' // ,'/-,f ,'-,? 
,'l ~f 1,' ~) 
1
/ 
~I 
1
/ 
} ' 
1
/ 
~,' ,' 
1,' ,' /' ,' 
1
/ 
,' 
1</ 
t / cp/,9 / ~ / · /9>_/1 
/ P/ ' /,0 / ,e / O/ e 
,' / / ,' / 
/ ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' / ,/ ,' ,' 
t / <;d / ~ ,/ 9 ,/ •' /
1 o' ....!; ' / o' / 4'' / o / • ,' ~ / • 
,/ ,' ,/ ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,/ ,' ,' / ,/ ,' ,/ ,/ ,/ ,/ ,' / 
,' ,/ 
' '6 I 
I 
I 
I 
I/ I 
I 
I 
I 
I r;(, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
If 
I / , ,' • /O,' .
/f:) .!_ 
/...p,' 9 /0,' 9 ,'0/ e 
,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' / ,' ,' 3,' ,' ,' ,' ,/ ,' ,/ ,' ,' ,' ,' / 
,' 
f 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' / 0 / 41 / o / ,. /
tJ _!4 
/ O/ • /o/ • / o / • 
,/ ,/ ,/ ,/ ,/ ,/ ,/ ,' ,'' ,/ ,/ ,/ ,/ ,/ ,' ,/ ,' ,/ ,' ,/ ,/ ,/ ,/ ,/ 
t ,' 0 ,' .. ,' 0 ,' • ,' 0 -/5 
,' d ,' • ,' (j ,' • 
,' 0 ,' • 
,' 
,' ,' ,' 
/ 
,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' 
I 
,' ,' ,' 
,' ,' 
,' ,' 
,' ,' 
,' ,' 
/ 
~ ,' r: ,' •' ,' r'\I ,'
. 
,' r:. - .6 
I /rt.. / .. / r:. /. / r:. 
,' A 
13.15 Figure 
Simp le Groups 
As we mentioned in the preceding section, one feature of a factor group is that it gives 
crude information about the structure of the whole group. Of course, sometimes there 
may be no nontrivial proper normal subgroup. For example, Lagrange's Theorem shows 
that a group of prime order can have no nontrivial proper subgroup of any sort. 

Section 13 
Factor-Group Computations and Simple Groups 
127 
13.16 Definition 
A group is simple if it is nontrivial and has no proper nontrivial normal subgroup. 
• 
13.17 Theorem 
The alternating group A 11 is simple for n :=: 5. 
Proof 
See Exercise 41. 
• 
There are many simple groups other than those given above. For example, A5 is of 
order 60 and A6 is of order 360, and there is a simple group of nonprime order, namely 
168, between these orders. 
The complete determination and classification of all finite simple groups is one 
of the mathematical triumphs of the twentieth century. Hundreds of mathematicians 
worked on this task from 1950 to 1980. It can be shown that a finite group has a sort of 
factorization into simple groups, where the factors are unique up to order. The situation 
is similar to the factorization of positive integers into primes. The knowledge of all 
finite simple groups can be used to solve some problems of finite group theory and 
combinatorics. 
We have seen in this text that a finite simple abelian group is isomorphic to Zp 
for some prime p. In 1963, Thompson and Feit [21] published their proof of a long-
standing conjecture of Burnside, showing that every finite nonabelian simple group is 
of even order. Further great strides toward the complete classification were made by 
Aschbacher in the 1970s. Early in 1980, Griess announced that he had constructed a 
predicted "monster" simple group of order 
808,017,424,794,512,875,886,459,904,961,710,757,005,754,368, 
OOO, OOO, OOO. 
Aschbacher added the final details of the classification in August 1980. The research 
papers contributing to the entire classification fill roughly 5000 journal pages. 
We tum to the characterization of those normal subgroups N of a group G for which 
G/N is a simple group. First we state an addendum to Theorem 8.5 on properties of a 
group homomorphism. The proof is left to Exercises 37 and 38. 
13.18 Theorem 
Let <P : G-+ G' be a group homomorphism. If N is a normal subgroup of G, then </J[N] 
is a normal subgroup of </J[G]. Also, if N' is a normal subgroup of </J[G], then </J- 1 [N' ] is 
a normal subgroup of G. 
+ 
Theorem 13.18 should be viewed as saying that a homomorphism <P : G-+ G' pre-
serves normal subgroups between G and </J[G]. It is important to note that </J[N] may 
not be normal in G', even though N is normal in G. For example, <P : Z2 -+ S3, where 
</J(O) =land </J(l) = (1, 2) is a homomorphism, and Z2 is a normal subgroup of itself, 
but {i, (1, 2)) is not a normal subgroup of S3. 
We can now characterize when G / N is a simple group. 
13.19 Definition 
A maximal normal subgroup of a group G is a normal subgroup M not equal to G 
such that there is no proper normal subgroup N of G properly containing M . 
• 
13.20 Theorem 
M is a maximal normal subgroup of G if and only if G / M is simple. 
Proof Let M be a maximal normal subgroup of G. Consider the canonical homomorphism 
y : G -+ G/ M given by Theorem 12.12. Now y - 1 of any nontrivial proper normal sub-
group of G/M is a proper normal subgroup of G properly containing M. But Mis max-
imal, so this cannot happen. Thus G/ M is simple. 
Conversely, Theorem 13.18 shows that if N is a normal subgroup of G properly 
containing M , then y [N ] is normal in G/ M. If also N f=. G, then 
y [N] f=. G/M 
and 
y [N] f=. {M). 

128 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
Thus, if G / M is simple so that no such y [N] can exist, no such N can exist, and M is 
maximal. 
+ 
The Center and Commutator Subgroups 
Every nonabelian group G has two important normal subgroups, the center Z(G) of 
G and the commutator subgroup C of G. (The letter Z comes from the German word 
zentrum, meaning center.) The center Z(G) is defined by 
Z(G) = {z E G I zg = gz for all g E G}. 
Exercise 59 of Section 5 shows that Z( G) is an abelian subgroup of G. Since for each g E 
G and z E Z(G) we have gzg- 1 = zgg- 1 = ze = z, we see at once that Z(G) is a normal 
subgroup of G. If G is abelian, then Z(G) = G; in this case, the center is not useful. 
13.21 Example 
The center of a group G always contains the identity element e. It may be that Z(G) = 
{e}, in which case we say that the center of G is trivial. For example, examination of 
Table 4.15 for the group S3 shows us that Z(S3) = {t}, so the center of S3 is trivial. (This 
is a special case of Exercise 40, which shows that the center of every nonabelian group 
of order pq for primes p and q is trivial.) Consequently, the center of S3 x Z5 must be 
{t} x Z5, which is isomorphic to Z5. 
• 
Turning to the commutator subgroup, recall that in forming a factor group of G 
modulo a normal subgroup N, we are essentially putting every element in G that is in 
N equal to e, for N forms our new identity in the factor group. This indicates another 
use for factor groups. Suppose, for example, that we are studying the structure of a non-
abelian group G. Since Theorem 9.12 gives complete information about the structure 
of all finitely generated abelian groups, it might be of interest to try to form an abelian 
group as much like Gas possible, an abelianized version of G, by starting with G and 
then requiring that ab = ba for all a and b in our new group structure. To require that 
ab = ba is to say that aba- 1 b- 1 = e in our new group. An element aba- 1 b-1 in a group 
is a commutator of the group. Thus we wish to attempt to form an abelianized ver-
sion of G by replacing every commutator of G by e. By the first observation of this 
paragraph, we should then attempt to form the factor group of G modulo the smallest 
normal subgroup we can find that contains all commutators of G. 
13.22 Theorem 
Let G be a group. The set of all commutators aba- 1b-1 for a,b E G generates a sub-
group C (the commutator subgroup) of G. This subgroup C is a normal subgroup of G. 
Furthermore, if N is a normal subgroup of G, then G/ N is abelian if and only if C :S N. 
Proof The commutators certainly generate a subgroup C; we must show that it is normal in 
G. Note that the inverse (aba- 1 b- 1)- 1 of a commutator is again a commutator, namely, 
bab- 1a- 1• Also e = eee- 1e- 1 is a commutator. Theorem 7.7 then shows that C consists 
precisely of all finite products of commutators. For x E C, we must show that g- 1 xg E C 
for all g E G, or that if x is a product of commutators, so is g- 1xg for all g E G. By 
inserting e = gg- 1 between each product of commutators occurring in x, we see that it 
is sufficient to show for each commutator cdc 1 d- 1 that g- 1 (cdc- 1d- 1 )g is in C. But 
g- 1(cdc- 1d- 1)g = (g- 1cdc- 1)(e)(r 1g) 
= (g- 1cdc- 1)(gr 1dg- 1)(r
1g) 
= [(g- 1c)d(g- 1c)- 1d- 1][dg- 1r
1g], 
which is in C. Thus C is normal in G. 

Section 13 
Exercises 
129 
The rest of the theorem is obvious if we have acquired the proper feeling for factor 
groups. One doesn't visualize in this way, but writing out that G/ C is abelian follows 
from 
(aC)(bC) = abC = ab(b- 1a- 1ba)C 
= (abb- 1a- 1)baC = baC = (bC)(aC). 
Furthermore, if N is a normal subgroup of G and G/ N is abelian, then (a- 1 N)(b- 1 N) = 
(b- 1 N)(a- 1 N); that is, aba- 1 b- 1 N = N , so aba- 1b- 1 EN, and C _:::: N. Finally, if C _:::: 
N, then 
(aN)(bN) = abN = ab(b- 1a- 1ba)N 
= (abb- 1a- 1)baN = baN = (bN)(aN). 
• 
13.23 Example 
Using cycle notation in the symmetric group S3, one commutator is 
(I , 2, 3)(2, 3)(1, 2, 3)- 1 (2, 3)- 1 = (I , 2, 3)(2, 3)(1 , 3, 2)(2, 3) = (I, 3, 2). 
So the commutator subgroup C contains ((1, 3, 2)) = A3 , the alternating group. Since 
S3/A3 is abelian (isomorphic with Z2), Theorem 13.22 says that C _:::: A3. Therefore, A3 
is the commutator subgroup. 
A 
• EXERCISES 13 
Computations 
In Exercises I through 14, classify the given group according to the fundamental theorem of finitely generated 
abelian groups. 
1. (Z2 x Z4)/ ((0, 1)) 
3. (Z2 x Z4)/((l,2)) 
S. (Z4 x Z4 x Zs)/ ((1, 2, 4)) 
7. (Z x Z)/((0, 2)) 
9. (Z x Z x Z4)/((3,0,0)) 
11. (Z x Z)/((2, 2)) 
13. (ZxZ)/((2,6)) 
2. (Z2 x Z4)/ ((0, 2)) 
4. (Z4 x Zs)/((1,2)) 
6. (Z x Z)/ ((0, 1)) 
8. (Z x Z x Z)/ ((1, 1, 1)) 
10. (Z x Z x Zs)/ ((0, 4, 0)) 
12. (Z x Z x Z)/((3, 3,3)) 
14. (Z x Z x Z2)/((I , 1, I)) 
15. Find both the center and the commutator subgroup of D4-
16. Find both the center and the commutator subgroup of Z3 x S3. 
17. Find both the center and the commutator subgroup of S3 x D4. 
18. Describe all subgroups of order _:::: 4 of Z4 x Z4, and in each case classify the factor group of Z4 x Z4 modulo 
the subgroup by Theorem 9.12. That is, describe the subgroup and say that the factor group of Z4 x Z4 modulo 
the subgroup is isomorphic to Z2 x Z4, or whatever the case may be. [Hint: Z4 x Z4 has six different cyclic 
subgroups of order 4. Describe them by giving a generator, such as the subgroup ((1, 0)). There is one subgroup 
of order 4 that is isomorphic to the Klein 4-group. There are three subgroups of order 2.] 
Concepts 
In Exercises 19 and 20, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
19. The center of a group G contains all elements of G that commute with every element of G. 
20. The commutator subgroup ofa group G is {a- 1b- 1ab I a,b E G}. 

130 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
21. Determine whether each of following is true or false. 
a. Every factor group of a cyclic group is cyclic. 
b. A factor group of a noncyclic group is again noncyclic. 
c. IR/Z under addition has no element of order 3. 
d. IR/Q under addition has no element of order 2. 
e. IR/Z under addition has an infinite number of elements of order 4. 
f. If the commutator subgroup C of a group G is {e}, then G is abelian. 
g. If G / H is abelian, then the commutator subgroup C of G contains H. 
h. The commutator subgroup of a simple group G must be G itself. 
i. The commutator subgroup of a nonabelian simple group G must be G itself. 
j. All nontrivial finite simple groups have prime order. 
In Exercises 22 through 25, let F be the additive group of all functions mapping IR into IR, and let F* be the 
multiplicative group of all elements of F that do not assume the value 0 at any point of JR. 
22. Let K be the subgroup of F consisting of the constant functions. Find a subgroup of F to which F / K is 
isomorphic. 
23. Let K* be the subgroup of F* consisting of the nonzero constant functions. Find a subgroup of F* to which 
F* / K* is isomorphic. 
24. Let K be the subgroup of continuous functions in F. Can you find an element of F / K having order 2? Why or 
why not? 
25. Let K* be the subgroup of F* consisting of the continuous functions in F*. Can you find an element of F* / K* 
having order 2? Why or why not? 
In Exercises 26 through 28, let Ube the multiplicative group {z E IC I lzl = 1 }. 
26. Let zo E U. Show that zoU = {zoz I z E U} is a subgroup of U, and compute U /zoU. 
27. To what group we have mentioned in the text is U / (- 1) isomorphic? 
28. Let ~,, = cos(2n /n) + i sin(2n / n) where n E z+. To what group we have mentioned is U / (~11) isomorphic? 
29. To what group mentioned in the text is the additive group IR/Z isomorphic? 
30. Give an example of a group G having no elements of finite order greater than I and a normal subgroup H :9 G, 
H f= G, so that in G/ H every element has finite order. 
31. Let H and K be normal subgroups of a group G. Give an example showing that we may have H :::::: K while 
G/ His not isomorphic to G/ K. 
32. Describe the center of every simple 
a. abelian group 
b. nonabelian group. 
33. Describe the commutator subgroup of every simple 
a. abelian group 
b. nonabelian group. 
Proof Synopsis 
34. Give a one-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 13.9. 
35. Give at most a two-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 13.20. 
Theory 
36. Show that if a finite group G contains a nontrivial subgroup of index 2 in G, then G is not simple. 
37. Let <P : G --+ G' be a group homomorphism, and let N be a normal subgroup of G. Show that </J[N] is a normal 
subgroup of </J[G]. 

Section 13 
Exercises 
131 
38. Let </J : G--+ G' be a group homomorphism, and let N' be a normal subgroup of G'. Show that </J- I [N' ] is a 
normal subgroup of G. 
39. Show that if G is nonabelian, then the factor group G/ Z(G) is not cyclic. [Hint: Show the equivalent contra-
positive, namely, that if G/ Z(G) is cyclic then G is abelian (and hence Z(G) = G).] 
40. Using Exercise 39, show that a nonabelian group G of order pq where p and q are primes has a trivial center. 
41. Prove that A,, is simple for n 2: 5, following the steps and hints given. 
a. Show A,, contains every 3-cycle if n ::: 3. 
b. Show A,, is generated by the 3-cycles for n 2: 3. [Hint: Note that (a, b)(c, d) = (a, c, b)(a, c, d) and 
(a, c)(a, b) = (a, b, c).] 
c. Let rand s be fixed elements of { 1, 2, · · · , n) for n ::: 3. Show that A,, is generated by then "special" 3-
cycles of the form (r, s, i) for 1 :5 i :5 n [Hint: Show every 3-cycle is the product of "special" 3-cycles by 
computing 
(r, s, i)2, 
(r, s,j)(r, s, i)2, 
(r, s,j)2(r, s, i), 
and 
(r, s, i)2(r, s, k)(r, s,j)2(r, s, i). 
Observe that these products give all possible types of 3-cycles.] 
d. Let N be a normal subgroup of A,, for n::: 3. Show that if N contains a 3-cycle, then N =A,,. [Hint: Show 
that (r, s, i) EN implies that (r, s,j) EN for j = 1, 2, · · · , n by computing 
((r, s)(i,j))(r, s, i)2((r, s)(i,j W 1 .] 
e. Let N be a nontrivial normal subgroup of A,, for n 2: 5. Show that one of the following cases must hold, 
and conclude in each case that N =A,,. 
Case I 
N contains a 3-cycle. 
Case II N contains a product of disjoint cycles, at least one of which has length greater than 3. [Hint: Sup-
pose N contains the disjoint product a = µ(a1, a2, · · · , a, ). Show a - 1 (a1 , a2, a3)a(a1, a2, a3)-1 is 
in N, and compute it.] 
Case III N contains a disjoint product of the form a = µ(a4, a5, a6)(a1, a2, a3). [Hint: Show a-1 (a1 , a2, a4) 
a(a1,a2,a4)- 1 is in N, and compute it.] 
Case IV 
N contains a disjoint product of the form a = µ(a 1, a2, a3) whereµ is a product of disjoint 2-
cycles. [Hint: Show a 2 E N and compute it.] 
Case V 
N contains a disjoint product a of the form a = µ(a3, a4)(a1, a2), whereµ is a product of an even 
number of disjoint 2-cycles. [Hint: Show that a- 1 (a1, a2, a3)a(a1 , a2, a3)- 1 is in N , and compute 
it to deduce that a= (a2, a4)(a1, a3) is inN. Using n 2: 5 forthe first time, find i =f. a 1, a2, a3, a4 in 
{I, 2, · · · , n). Let ,B = (a1, a3, i).Show that ,B- 1a,Ba E N , and compute it.] 
42. Let N be a normal subgroup of G and let H be any subgroup of G. Let HN = {hn I h E H, n E N}. Show that 
HN is a subgroup of G, and is the smallest subgroup containing both N and H. 
43. With reference to the preceding exercise, let M also be a normal subgroup of G. Show that NM is again a 
normal subgroup of G. 
44. Show that if Hand K are normal subgroups of a group G such that H n K = {e}, then hk = kh for all h E H 
and k E K. [Hint: Consider the commutator hkh- 1k- 1 = (hkh- 1 )k- 1 = h(kh- 1 k- 1) .) 
45. With reference to the three preceding exercises, let H and K be normal subgroups of a group G such that 
HK= G and H n K = {e}. Prove that G is isomorphic with H x G. 

132 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
SECTION 14 t GROUP ACTION ON A SET 
We have seen examples of how groups may act on things, like the group of symmetries 
of a triangle or of a square, the group of rotations of a cube, the general linear group 
acting on R", and so on. In this section we give the general notion of group action and 
apply it to learn more about finite groups. The next section will give applications to 
counting. 
The Notion of a Group Action 
Definition 1.1 defines a binary operation * on a set S to be a function mapping S x S into 
S. The function * gives us a rule for "multiplying" an element s 1 in Sand an element s2 
in S to yield an element s 1 * s2 in S. 
More generally, for any sets A, B, and C, we can view a map * : A x B --+ C as 
defining a "multiplication," where any element a of A times any element b of B has as 
value some element c of C. Of course, we write a* b = c, or simply ab = c. In this 
section, we will be concerned with the case where X is a set, G is a group, and we have 
a map* : G x X--+ X. We shall write *(g,x) as g * x or gx. 
14.1 Example 
Let G = GL(n, R) and X the set of all column vectors in R". Then for any matrix A E G 
and vector v E X, Av is a vector in X. So multiplying is an operation * : G x X --+ X. 
From linear algebra, we know that if Bis also a matrix in G, then (AB)v = A(Bv). Fur-
thermore, for the identity matrix/, Iv= v. 
.& 
14.2 Example 
Let G be the dihedral group D,,. Then elements of D,, permute the set Z,, = 
{O, 1, 2, 3, ... , n - l }. For example, p(k) = k +,, 1. Thus we have an operation * : 
D,, x Z,, --+ Z 11 • Furthermore, if a , y ED,, and k E Z,,, then (ay)(k) = a (y(k)) and 
t(k) = k. 
... 
The two previous examples share the same properties, which we formalize in 
Definition 14.3. 
14.3 Definition 
Let X be a set and Ga group. An action of G on X is a map * : G x X --+ X such that 
1. 
ex = x for all x E X, 
2. 
(g1g2)(x) = g,(g2x) for all x EX and all g 1, g2 E G. 
Under these conditions, X is a G-set. 
• 
14.4 Example 
Let X be any set, and let H be a subgroup of the group Sx of all permutations of X. 
Then X is an H-set, where the action of a EH on X is its action as an element of 
Sx, so that ax = a(x) for all x EX. Condition 2 is a consequence of the definition of 
permutation multiplication as function composition, and Condition l is immediate from 
the definition of the identity permutation as the identity function. Note that, in particular, 
{l, 2, 3, · · · , n) is an S,,-set. 
.& 
Our next theorem will show that for every G-set X and each g E G, the map 
a8 : X --+ X defined by a8(x) = gx is a permutation of X, and that there is a homo-
morphism </> : G --+ Sx such that the action of G on X is essentially the Example 14.4 
action of the image subgroup H = </>[G] of Sx on X. So actions of subgroups of Sx 
on X describe all possible group actions on X. When studying the set X , actions using 
subgroups of Sx suffice. However, sometimes a set X is used to study G via a group 
action of G on X. Thus we need the more general concept given by Definition 14.3. 
t This section is a prerequisite only for Sections 15 and 17. 

Section 14 
Group Action on a Set 
133 
14.5 Theorem 
Let X be a G-set. For each g E G, the function CJ8 : X--+ X defined by CJ8(x) = gx for 
x EX is a permutation of X. Also, the map if> : G --+ Sx defined by if>(g) = CJ8 is a ho-
momorphism with the property that if>(g)(x) = gx. 
Proof To show that CJ8 is a permutation of X, we must show that CJ8 is a one-to-one map 
of X onto itself. Suppose that CJ8(x1) = CJ8(x2) for x1, x2 EX. Then gx1 = gx2. Con-
sequently, g-1(gx1) = r 1(gx2). Using Condition 2 in Definition 14.3, we see that 
(g- 1g)x1 = (g- 1g)x2, so ex1 = ex2. Condition I of the definition then yields x1 = x2, 
so CJ8 is one-to-one. The two conditions of the definition show that for x E X , we have 
Clg(g-1x) = g(g- 1)x = (gg- 1)x =ex= x, so CJg maps X onto X. Thus CJ8 is indeed a 
permutation. 
To show that if> : G--+ Sx defined by if>(g) = CJ8 is a homomorphism, we must 
show that if>(g1g2) = if>(g1)if>(g2) for all g 1,g2 E G. We show the equality of these two 
permutations in Sx by showing they both carry an x E X into the same element. Using 
the two conditions in Definition 14.3 and the rule for function composition, we obtain 
if>(g1g2)(x) = CJ8 ,8,(x) = (g1g2)x = g1(g2x) = g1CJ82(x) = CJ81(CJ82(x)) 
= (CJ8 , o CJ82)(x) = (CJ8 , CJ82 )(x) = (if>(g1)if>(g2))(x). 
Thus if> is a homomorphism. The stated property of if> follows at once since by our 
definitions, we have if>(g)(x) = CJ8(x) = gx. 
+ 
It follows from the preceding theorem and Theorem 12.17 that if X is a G-set, then 
the subset of G leaving every element of X fixed is a normal subgroup N of G, and we 
can regard X as a G / N-set where the action of a coset gN on X is given by (gN)x = gx 
for each x EX. If N = {e}, then the identity element of G is the only element that leaves 
every x E X fixed; we then say that G acts faithfully on X. A group G is transitive on 
a G-set X if for each x1, x2 E X, there exists g E G such that gx1 = x2. 
We continue with more examples of G-sets. 
14.6 Example 
Every group G is itself a G-set, where the action on g2 E G by g 1 E G is given by left 
multiplication. That is, *(g 1, g2) = g 1 g2. If H is a subgroup of G, we can also regard G 
as an H-set, where *(h, g) = hg. 
..&. 
14.7 Example 
Let H be a subgroup of G. Then G is an H-set under conjugation where *(h, g) = hgh-1 
for g E G and h E H. Condition 1 is obvious, and for Condition 2 note that 
*(h1h2,g) = (h1h2)g(h1h2)-1 = h1(h2gh2_
1 )h~
1 = *(h1,*(h2,g)). 
We always write this action of Hon G by conjugation as hgh-1. The abbreviation hg 
described before the definition would cause terrible confusion with the group operation 
~a 
.._ 
14.8 Example 
Let H be a subgroup of G, and let LH be the set of all left cosets of H. Then LH is 
a G-set, where the action of g E G on the left coset xH is given by g(xH) = (gx)H. 
Observe that this action is well defined: if yH = xH , then y = xh for some h EH, and 
g(yH) = (gy)H = (gxh)H = (gx)(hH) = (gx)H = g(xH). A series of exercises shows 
that every G-set is isomorphic to one that may be formed using these left coset G-sets 
as building blocks. (See Exercises 22 through 25.) 
..&. 
14.9 Example 
Let us look closer at the the dihedral group D4, which permutes the vertices of the square 
as labeled in Figure 14.10. As indicated in the figure, we label the vertices 0, 1,2,3 
as usual; the sides so, s 1, s2, s3; the midpoints of the sides Po, P 1, P2 , P 3; the diagonals 
d 1, d2 ; the lines joining opposite side midpoints m 1, m2 ; and we label the intersection of 
the lines d1,d2,m1,m2 with C. 

134 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
s, 
3 
14.10 Figure 
We can think of the set 
as a D4-set in a natural way. Table 14.11 shows the action of D4 on X. Recall that t is the 
identity, p k is rotation by kn / 2, and µ is reflection across the line d2. We can see from 
the table that µp is reflection across the line m1, µp2 is reflection across the line d1, and 
µp3 is reflection across the line m2. It is worthwhile to spend a little time to understand 
how Table 14.11 was constructed before continuing. 
.&. 
14.11 Table 
0 
2 
3 
so 
SJ 
s2 
s3 
m 1 
m2 
d 1 
d2 
c 
Po 
P 1 
P2 
P3 
0 
1 
2 
3 
so 
Sj 
s2 
s3 
m 1 
m2 
d1 
d2 c 
Po 
P 1 
P2 
P3 
p 
2 
3 
0 
SJ 
s2 
s3 
so 
m2 
m 1 
d2 
d1 
c 
P1 
P2 
P3 
Po 
p2 
2 
3 
0 
s2 
S3 
so 
s1 
m 1 
m2 
d1 
d2 c 
P2 
P3 
Po 
P 1 
p3 
3 
0 
2 
s3 
so 
Sj 
s2 
m2 
m1 
d2 
d1 c 
P3 
Po 
P1 
P2 
J.l 
0 
3 
2 
1 
s3 
s2 
Sj 
so 
m2 
m 1 
d1 
d2 c 
P3 
P2 
P1 
Po 
J.lP 
3 
2 
1 
0 
s2 
Sj 
so 
s3 
m 1 
m2 
d2 
d 1 c 
P2 
P 1 
Po 
P3 
J.lP2 
2 
I 
0 
3 
s1 
so 
s3 
s2 
m2 
m1 
d1 
d2 c 
P1 
Po 
P3 
P2 
J.lP3 
0 
3 
2 
so 
s3 
s2 
Sj 
m1 
m2 
d2 
d1 c 
Po 
P3 
P2 
P1 
Isotropy Subgroups 
Let X be a G-set. Let x E X and g E G. It will be important to know when gx = x . We 
let 
Xg = {x EX I gx = x} 
and 
Gx = (g E G I gx = x} . 
14.12 Example 
For the D4-set X in Example 14.9, we have 
Xp = {C}, 
Also, using the same D4 action on X , 
Go= {t,µ}, 
We leave the computations of the other sets of the form Xa and Gx to Exercises 1 
and 2. 
.&. 
Note that the subsets Gx given in the preceding example were, in each case, sub-
groups of G. This is true in general. 

Section 14 
Group Action on a Set 
135 
14.13 Theorem 
Let X be a 0-set. Then Ox is a subgroup of 0 for each x E X. 
Proof 
Let x EX and let g1,g2 E Ox. Then g1x = x and gzx = x. Consequently, (g 1g2)x = 
g1(g2x) = g1x = x, so g1g2 E Ox, and Ox is closed under the induced operation of 0. 
Of course, ex= x, so e E Ox. If g E O.n then gx = x, so x =ex = (g- 1 g)x = g-1(gx) = 
g-1x, and consequently g-1 E Ox. Thus Ox is a subgroup of 0. 
+ 
14.14 Definition 
Let X be a 0-set and let x E X. The subgroup Ox is the isotropy subgroup of x. 
• 
Orbits 
For the D4-set X of Example 14.9 with action table in Table 14.11, the elements in the 
subset {O, 1, 2, 3) are carried into elements of this same subset under action by D4 . 
Furthermore, each of the elements 0, 1, 2, and 3 is carried into all the other elements of 
the subset by the various elements of D4 . We proceed to show that every 0-set X can be 
partitioned into subsets of this type. 
14.15 Theorem 
Let X be a 0-set. For x1, x2 E X, let x1 ~ x2 if and only if there exists g E 0 such that 
gx1 = x2. Then~ is an equivalence relation on X. 
Proof 
For each x E X, we have ex = x, so x ~ x and ~ is reflexive. 
Suppose x1 ~x2 , so gx1 =x2 for some gEO. Then g- 1x2=g-1(gx1)= 
(g-1 g)x1 = ex1 = x1, so x2 ~ x1, and ~ is symmetric. 
Finally, if x1 ~ x2 and x2 ~ x3, then g1x1 = x2 and gzx2 = x3 for some g1, gz E 0. 
Then (g2g1 )x1 = gz(g1x1) = gzx2 = x3, so x1 ~ x3 and~ is transitive. 
+ 
14.16 Definition 
Let X be a 0-set. Each cell in the partition of the equivalence relation described in 
Theorem 14.15 is an orbit in X under 0. If x EX, the cell containing x is the orbit 
of x. We let this cell be Ox. 
• 
The relationship between the orbits in X and the group structure of 0 lies at the 
heart of many applications. The following theorem gives this relationship. Recall that 
for a set X, we use IXI for the number of elements in X, and (0: H) is the index of a 
subgroup H in a group 0. 
14.17 Theorem 
Let X be a 0-set and let x E X. Then IOxl = (0: Ox). If 101 is finite, then IOxl is a 
divisor of 101. 
Proof 
We define a one-to-one map 1/f from Ox onto the collection of left cosets of Ox in 0. 
Let x1 E Ox. Then there exists g1 E 0 such that g1x = x1. We define 1/f(x1) to be the left 
coset g1 Ox of Ox. We must show that this map 1/f is well defined, independent of the 
choice of g1 E 0 such that g1x = x1. Suppose also that g1 'x = x1. Then, g1x = g1 'x, so 
g!1(g1x) = g!1(g1'x), from which we deduce x = (g!1g1')x. Therefore g!1g 1' E Ox, so 
g1' E g1 Ox, and g1 Ox = g1'0 x. Thus the map 1/f is well defined. 
To show the map 1/f is one-to-one, suppose x1, x2 E Ox, and 1/f(x1) = 1/f (x2). Then 
there exist g1, gz E 0 such that x1 = g1x, x2 = gzx, and gz E g1 Ox. Then gz = gig for 
some g E On so x2 = g2x = g1 (gx) = g1x = x1. Thus 1/f is one-to-one. 
Finally, we show that each left coset of Ox in 0 is of the form 1/f(x1) for some 
x1 E Ox. Let g1 Ox be a left coset. Then if g1x = x1, we have g1 Ox = 1/f (x1 ). Thus 1/f 
maps Ox one-to-one onto the collection of left cosets so IOxl = (0 : Ox). 
If 101 is finite, then the equation 10 1 = IOxl(O: Ox) shows that IOxl = (0: Ox) is 
a divisor of 101. 
+ 

136 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
14.18 Example 
Let X be the D4-set in Example 14.9, with action table given by Table 14.11. With 
G = D4 , we have Go = {l, µ,).Since IGI = 8, we have IGOI = (G: Go)= 4. From Table 
14.11, we see that GO= (0, 1, 2, 3), which indeed has four elements. 
.A. 
We should remember not only the cardinality equation in Theorem 14.17 but also 
that the elements of G carrying x into g 1x are precisely the elements of the left coset 
g 1 Gx. Namely, if g E Gx, then (gig)x = g 1 (gx) = gix. On the other hand, if g2x = g 1x, 
then g! 1(g2x) = x so (g! 1 g2)x = x. Thus g! 1 g2 E Gx so g2 E g1 Gx. 
Applications of G-Sets to Finite Groups 
Theorem 14.17 is a very useful theorem in the study of finite groups. Suppose that X is 
a G-set for a finite group G and we pick out one element from each orbit of X to make 
the set S = {x1,x2 , .. . ,xr) where we indexed the elements of X so that if i ~j, then 
IGx;I :=:: IGxjl· That is, we arrange by orbit size, largest first and smallest last. Every 
element in X is in precisely one orbit, so 
IXI = L
IGx;I. 
(1) 
i=l 
We let Xc = {x EX I gx = x for all g E G}. That is, Xc is the set of all elements of X 
whose orbit size is 1. So by equation (1), 
IXI = IXcl + L IGx;I 
(2) 
i= l 
where we simply place all the orbits with one element into Xc and we are left with s 
orbits each containing at least two elements. Although Equation (2) is simply saying 
that if you add up the sizes of all the orbits you account for all the elements of X, when 
coupled with Theorem 14.17, it gives some very interesting results. We give a few in 
the remainder of this section. In Section 17 we will use Equation 2 extensively to prove 
the Sylow Theorems. 
For the remainder of this section, we assume that p is a prime number. 
14.19 Theorem 
Let G be a group with p" elements. If X is a G-set, then IXI = IXcl mod p. 
Proof Using Equation 2, 
IXI = IXcl + L IGx;I. 
i= l 
Since for each i ~ s, IGx;I :'.:: 2 and IGx;I = (G: Gx) is a divisor of IGI = p", by Theo-
s 
rem 14.17 p divides each term in the sum L IGx;I. Thus IXI = IXcl mod p. 
+ 
i=l 
Knowing that k divides the order of a group is not sufficient information to assume that 
the group has a subgroup of order k. For example, we saw that A4 has no subgroup of 
order 6 and that in general, A,, has no subgroup of index 2 if n :=:: 4. On the positive side, 
in Exercise 29 in Section 2, you were asked to show that if a group has an even number 
of elements, then it has an element of order two. Theorem 14.20 generalizes this result 
to show that if a prime number p divides the order of a group, then the group has an 
element of order p. The proof of this theorem relies on Theorem 14.19. 
14.20 Theorem 
(Cauchy's Theorem) Let G be a group such that p divides the order of G. Then G has 
an element of order p and therefore a subgroup of order p. 

Section 14 
Group Action on a Set 
137 
Proof 
We let 
X = {(go, g1, g1, ... , gp- 1) I go,g1, .. . , gp- 1 E G and gog1 g2 .. . g,,- 1 = e). 
That is, X is the set of all p-tuples with entries in G so that when the entries are mul-
tiplied together (in order) their product is the identity e. Since the product is e, g0 = 
(g1g2 ... g,,- 1 )- 1 and given any gi, g1, ... , g,,-1 E G, by picking go = (g 1g2 ... g,,-1 )- 1 
we have an element in X. Thus IXI = IGl"- 1 and in particular, p divides the order of X 
since p divides the order of G. 
Suppose that (go, g 1, g1, ... , gp- 1) E X. Since go = (g1g2 ... g,,- 1 )- 1, it follows that 
(g1, g1, ... g,,-1, go) is in X. Repeating this process, noting that g 1 = (g2g3 ... g,,-1 go)-1 
we conclude that (g2, gJ, g4, · · · , g,,_ 1, go, g 1) E X. Continuing in this manner we have 
that for any k E z,,, 
(gk> gk+" 1, gk+p2' · · · , gk+p(p- J)) E X. 
We check that this gives a group action of z,, onX. Letk E Zp and (go, g1, g2, ... ,g,,_1) E 
X. Then 
Since 
k(l(go,g1,g2, ... ,gp- 1)) = k(g1,g1+"1,g1+"2, ... ,g1+p(p- I)) 
= (gk+pl' gk+pl+p ), . . . , gk+pl+p(p-J)) 
= (k +,, l)(go,g1,g2, ... ,g,,_ 1) 
this is indeed a group action. 
By Theorem 14.19, 0 = IXI = IX:;>) 
modp. The p-tuple (e,e,e, .. . ,e) is in Xz" 
because rearranging the entries does not change the p-tuple. Since Xz" contains at least 
one element and p divides IXz" I, Xz" must contain at least one element other than 
(e, e, e, ... , e).That element must have the form (a, a, a, .. . , a) with a op e and aP = e. 
So a has order p and the subgroup it generates is a subgroup of G with order p. 
+ 
14.21 Definition 
A p-group is a group such that each element in the group has order a power of p. A 
p-subgroup of a group is a subgroup that is a p-group. 
• 
14.22 Example 
The group D 16 is a 2-group since the order of any element of D 16 divides ID161 = 32 . 
... 
14.23 Example 
Using the Fundamental Theorem of Finitely Generated Abelian Groups, a finite abelian 
group is a p-group if and only if it is isomorphic to 
This is because if there were a factor of the form Z,1 where q opp is a prime number 
and s :::: 1, then there would be an element in G with order qs which is not a power of p. 
In Exercise 30, you are asked to show that for G a finite group, G is a p-group if 
and only if the order of G is a power of p. 
The next theorem assures us that any finite p-group has a nontrivial normal sub-
group, namely the center of the group. 
.A 
14.24 Theorem 
Let G be a finite p-group. Then the center of G, Z(G), is not the trivial group. 
Proof 
We let X = G and we make X into a G-set using conjugation. That is, * (g, a) = gag- 1. 
Equation 2 states that 0 = IXI = IXGI mod p. For all g E G, geg- 1 = e. So X G has at 

138 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
least one element, namely e. Since the number of elements in Xc must be at least p, 
there is an element a EX such that a .:p e and gag- 1 =a for all g E G. Thus ga = ag 
for all g E G, which says that a E Z(G). So Z(G) is not the trivial subgroup. 
+ 
When studying p-groups, the fact that the center is nontrivial is often very helpful. We 
conclude this section with a theorem that illustrates the utility of Theorem 14.24. 
14.25 Theorem 
Every group of order p2 is abelian. 
Proof 
Let G be a group of order p 2 with center Z(G). By Theorem 14.24, Z(G) is not the 
trivial group so it is either all of G or else it has order p. We wish to show that Z(G) = G 
using proof by contradiction. So we assume that Z(G) hasp elements. Since Z(G) is a 
normal subgroup of G, we can form G/ Z(G). The group G/ Z(G) also hasp elements 
and so both Z(G) and G/Z(G) are cyclic. Let (a) = Z(G) and (bZ(G)) = G/Z(G). Let 
x, y E G. Then x = b;ai and y = b' as for some integers i,j, r, s since the cosets of Z( G) 
partition G. Then 
since (a) is the center of G. So 
xy = bi+r aj+s = b'biasaj = b' a5biaj = yx. 
Since every element in G commutes with every other element, Z(G) = G, which con-
tradicts our assumption that the center has only p elements. So the center of G must be 
G, which means that G is abelian. 
+ 
14.26 Example 
Since every group of order p2 is abelian, the Fundamental Homomorphism Theorem 
says that every group with p2 elements is isomorphic to either Z P2 or Zp x Z/1. The two 
groups of order 4 are Z4 and the Klein 4-group. The two groups of order 9 are Z9 and 
~x~. 
~ 
• EXERCISES 14 
Computations 
In Exercises l through 3, let 
be the D4-set of Example 14.9. Find the following, where G = D4. 
1. The fixed sets X0 for each a E D4. 
2. The isotropy subgroups Gx for each x E X, that is, Go, G1 , · · · , Gp2 , Gp3 • 
3. The orbits in X under D4. 
4. Theorem 14.24 states that every p-group has nontrivial center. Find the center of Dg. 
5. Find the center of D7. 
6. Let G = X = S3 and make X a G-set using conjugation. That is, *(a, r) = ara- 1. Find all the orbits of X 
using this action. (Write permutations in disjoint cycle notation.) 
7. Let G = D4 and X be the set of all subgroups of D4 with order two. The set X is a G-set using conjugation, 
*(a, H) =a Ha- 1• Find all the orbits of this group action. 
8. Let G = U = {z E C I lzl = 1} be the circle group. Then X = C, the set of complex numbers, is a G-set with 
group action given by complex number multiplication. That is, if z E U and w E C, *(Z, w) = zw. Find all the 
orbits of this action. Also, find Xc . 

Section 14 
Exercises 
139 
9. Let G be a group of order 3 and suppose that IXI = 6. For each possible action of G on X, give a list of the 
orbit sizes. List the orbit sizes from largest to smallest. (Recall that the orbits partition the set X.) 
10. Let G be a group of order 9 and suppose that IXI = 10. For each possible action of G on X, give a list of the 
orbit sizes. List the orbit sizes from largest to smallest. 
11. Let G be a group of order 8 and suppose that IXI = 10. For each possible way to make X a G-set the orbits 
partition X. For each possible action of G on X, give a list of the orbit sizes. List the orbit sizes from largest to 
smallest. 
Concepts 
In Exercises 12 and 13, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
12. A group G acts faithfully on X if and only if 8X = x implies that 8 = e. 
13. A group G is transitive on a G-set X if and only if, for some 8 E G, 8X can be every other x. 
14. Let X be a G-set and let S ~ X. If Gs ~ S for all s E S, then S is a sub-G-set. Characterize a sub-G-set of a 
G-set X in terms of orbits in X under G. 
15. Characterize a transitive G-set in terms of its orbits. 
16. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every G-set is also a group. 
b. Each element of a G-set is fixed by the identity of G. 
c. If every element of a G-set is fixed by the same element 8 of G, then 8 must be the identity e. 
d. Let X be a G-set with x1 ,x2 E X and 8 E G. If 8Xl = 8X2, then x1 = x2. 
e. Let X be a G-set with x EX and 81, 82 E G. If 81X = 82X, then 81 = 82· 
f. Each orbit of a G-set X is a transitive sub-G-set. (See Exercise 14.) 
g. Let X be a G-set and let H :::: G. Then X can be regarded in a natural way as an H-set. 
h. With reference to (g), the orbits in X under Hare the same as the orbits in X under G. 
i. If X is a G-set, then each element of G acts as a permutation of X. 
j. Let X be a G-set and let x EX. If G is finite, then IGI = IGxl · IGxl· 
17. Let X and Y be G-sets with the same group G. An isomorphism between G-sets X and Y is a map</>: X--+ Y 
that is one-to-one, onto Y, and satisfies 8</>(x) = </>(8x) for all x E X and 8 E G. Two G-sets are isomorphic if 
such an isomorphism between them exists. Let X be the D4-set of Example 14.9. 
a. Find two distinct orbits of X that are isomorphic sub-D4-sets. (See Exercise 14.) 
b. Show that the orbits (0, 1, 2, 3} and {so,s1,s2,s3} are not isomorphic sub-D4-sets. [Hint: Find an element 
of G that acts in an essentially different fashion on the two orbits.] 
c. Are the orbits you gave for your answer to part (a) the only two different isomorphic sub-D4-sets of X? 
18. Let X be the D4-set in Example 14.9. 
a. Does D4 act faithfully on X? 
b. Find all orbits in X on which D4 acts faithfully as a sub-D4-set. (See Exercise 14.) 
Theory 
19. Let X be a G-set. Show that G acts faithfully on X if and only if no two distinct elements of G have the same 
action on each element of X. 
20. Let X be a G-set and let Y ~ X. Let Gy = (8 E G I 8Y = y for ally E Y}. Show Gr is a subgroup of G, gener-
alizing Theorem 14.13. 
21. Let G be the additive group of real numbers. Let the action of e E G on the real plane JH:.2 be given by rotating 
the plane counterclockwise about the origin through e radians. Let P be a point other than the origin in the 
plane. 
a. Show JH:.2 is a G-set. 
b. Describe geometrically the orbit containing P. 
c. Find the group Gp. 

140 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
Exercises 22 through 25 show how all possible G-sets, up to isomorphism (see Exercise 17), can be formed from 
the group G. 
22. Let {X; I i E /} be a disjoint collection of sets, so X; n Xj = 0 for i f= j. Let each X; be a G-set for the same 
group G. 
a. Show that LJ;E1X; can be viewed in a natural way as a G-set, the union of the G-sets X;. 
b. Show that every G-set X is the union of its orbits. 
23. Let X be a transitive G-set, and let xo E X. Show that X is isomorphic (see Exercise 17) to the G-set L of all 
left cosets of Gx0 , described in Example 14.8. [Hint: For x EX, suppose x = gxo, and define</> : X--+ L by 
<f>(x) = gGxo· Be sure to show</> is well defined!] 
24. Let X; for i E I be G-sets for the same group G, and suppose the sets X; are not necessarily disjoint. Let 
x; = {(x, i) Ix EX;} for each i E /.Then the sets x; are disjoint, and each can still be regarded as a G-set in 
an obvious way. (The elements of X; have simply been tagged by i to distinguish them from the elements of 
Xj for if= j .) The G-set LJ;E1X! is the disjoint union of the G-sets X;. Using Exercises 22 and 23, show that 
every G-set is isomorphic to a disjoint union of left coset G-sets, as described in Example 14.12. 
25. The preceding exercises show that every G-set X is isomorphic to a disjoint union of left coset G-sets. The 
question then arises whether left coset G-sets of distinct subgroups H and K of G can themselves be isomor-
phic. Note that the map defined in the hint of Exercise 23 depends on the choice of xo as "base point." If xo is 
replaced by goxo and if Gx0 f= Gg0x0 , then the collections LH of left cosets of H = Gx0 and L K of left cosets of 
K = Ggoxo form distinct G-sets that must be isomorphic, since both LH and LK are isomorphic to X. 
a. Let X be a transitive G-set and let xo EX and go E G. If H = Gx0 , describe K = G80x0 in terms of H 
and go. 
b. Based on part (a), conjecture conditions on subgroups H and K of G such that the left coset G-sets of H 
and K are isomorphic. 
c. Prove your conjecture in part (b). 
26. Up to isomorphism, how many transitive Z4-sets X are there? (Use the preceding exercises.) Give an example 
of each isomorphism type, listing an action table of each as in Table 14.11 . Take lowercase names a, b, c, and 
so on for the elements in the set X. 
27. Repeat Exercise 26 for the group Z6. 
28. Repeat Exercise 26 for the group S3. List the elements of S3 in the order L, (1, 2, 3), (1, 3, 2), (2, 3), (1 , 3), 
(1, 2). 
29. Prove that if G is a group of order p3, where p is a prime number, then IZ(G)I is either p or p3. Give an example 
where IZ(G)I = p and an example where IZ(G)I = p3. 
30. Let p be a prime number. Prove that a finite group G is a p-group if and only if IGI = p" for some integer 
n ~ 0. 
31. Let G be a group that acts on X = {H I H .::: G} by conjugation. That is, g * H = gHg- 1• State and prove an 
equivalent condition for a subgroup H .::: G to be a normal subgroup of G in terms of 
a. GH, the isotropy subgroup of H. 
b. GH, the orbit of H. 
SECTION 15 t APPLICATIONS OF G -SETS TO COUNTING 
This section presents an application of our work with G-sets to counting. Suppose, for 
example, we wish to count how many distinguishable ways the six faces of a cube can 
be marked with from one to six dots to form a die. The standard die is marked so that 
when placed on a table with the 1 on the bottom and the 2 toward the front, the 6 is on 
top, the 3 on the left, the 4 on the right, and the 5 on the back. Of course, other ways of 
marking the cube to give a distinguishably different die are possible. 
t This section is not used in the remainder of the text. 

Section 15 
Applications of G-Sets to Counting 
141 
Let us distinguish between the faces of the cube for the moment and call them the 
bottom, top, left, right, front, and back. Then the bottom can have any one of six marks 
from one dot to six dots, the top any one of the five remaining marks, and so on. There 
are 6! = 720 ways the cube faces can be marked in all. Some markings yield the same 
die as others, in the sense that one marking can be carried into another by a rotation 
of the marked cube. For example, if the standard die described above is rotated 90° 
counterclockwise as we look down on it, then 3 will be on the front face rather than 2, 
but it is the same die. 
There are 24 possible positions of a cube on a table, for any one of six faces can be 
placed down, and then any one of four to the front, giving 6 · 4 = 24 possible positions. 
Any position can be achieved from any other by a rotation of the die. These rotations 
form a group G, which is isomorphic to a subgroup of Ss. We let X be the 720 possible 
ways of marking the cube and let G act on X by rotation of the cube. We consider 
two markings to give the same die if one can be carried into the other under action by 
an element of G, that is, by rotating the cube. In other words, we consider each orbit 
in X under G to correspond to a single die, and different orbits to give different dice. 
The determination of the number of distinguishable dice thus leads to the question of 
determining the number of orbits under G in a G-set X. 
The following theorem gives a tool for determining the number of orbits in a G-set 
X under G. Recall that for each g E G we let Xg be the set of elements of X fixed by g, so 
that Xg = {x EX I gx = x ). Recall also that for each x EX, we let Gx = (g E G I gx = 
x ), and Gx is the orbit of x under G. 
15.1 Theorem 
(Burnside's Formula) Let G be a finite group and X a finite G-set. If r is the number 
of orbits in X under G, 
r· IGI = L
IXgl· 
(1) 
gEG 
Proof 
We consider all pairs (g,x) where gx = x, and let N be the number of such pairs. For 
each g E G there are IXg I pairs having g as first member. Thus, 
(2) 
On the other hand, for each x EX there are IGxl pairs having x as second member. Thus 
we also have 
N = L
IGxl· 
xeX 
By Theorem 14.17 we have IGxl = (G: Gx). But we know that (G: Gx) = IGl/ IGxl, so 
we obtain IGxl = IGl/IG4 Then 
N = L _lg_ = 101(I:-
1 
) · 
xeX IGxl 
xeX IGxl 
(3) 
Now l / IGxl has the same value for all x in the same orbit, and if we let 0 be any orbit, 
then 
1 
1 
L IGxl = L TOI = I. 
xeO 
xeO 
Substituting (4) in (3), we obtain 
N = IGI (number of orbits in X under G) = IGI · r. 
Comparison of Eq. 2 and Eq. 5 gives Eq. 1. 
(4) 
(5) 
• 

142 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
15.2 Corollary 
If G is a finite group and X is a finite G-set, then 
1 
(number of orbits in X under G) = -
· L IX8 1. 
IGI geG 
Proof The proof of this corollary follows immediately from the preceding theorem. 
+ 
Let us continue our computation of the number of distinguishable dice as our first 
example. 
15.3 Example 
We let X be the set of 720 different markings of faces of a cube using from one to six 
dots. Let G be the group of 24 rotations of the cube as discussed above. We saw that 
the number of distinguishable dice is the number of orbits in X under G. Now IGI = 24. 
For g E G where g # e, we have IX8 1 = 0, because any rotation other than the identity 
element changes any one of the 720 markings into a different one. However, IX, I = 720 
since the identity element leaves all 720 markings fixed. Then by Corollary 15.2, 
1 
(number of orbits) = 24 · 720 = 30, 
so there are 30 distinguishable dice. 
Of course, the number of distinguishable dice could be counted without using the 
machinery of the preceding corollary, but by using elementary combinatorics as often 
taught in a freshman finite math course. In marking a cube to make a die, we can, 
by rotation if necessary, assume the face marked 1 is down. There are five choices 
for the top (opposite) face. By rotating the die as we look down on it, any one of the 
remaining four faces could be brought to the front position, so there are no different 
choices involved for the front face. But with respect to the number on the front face, 
there are 3 · 2 · 1 possibilities for the remaining three side faces. Thus there are 5 · 3 · 
2 · 1 = 30 possibilities in all. 
The next two examples appear in some finite math texts and are easy to solve by 
elementary means. We use Corollary 15.2 so that we have more practice thinking in 
terms of orbits. 
15.4 Example 
How many distinguishable ways can seven people be seated at a round table, where 
there is no distinguishable "head" to the table? Of course there are 7! ways to assign 
people to the different chairs. We take X to be the 7 ! possible assignments. A rotation of 
people achieved by asking each person to move one place to the right results in the same 
arrangement. Such a rotation generates a cyclic group G of order 7, which we consider 
to act on X in the obvious way. Again, only the identity e leaves any arrangement fixed, 
and it leaves all 7! arrangements fixed. By Corollary 15.2 
1 
(number of orbits)= - · 7! = 6! = 720. 
7 
15.5 Example 
How many distinguishable necklaces (with no clasp) can be made using seven different-
colored beads of the same size? Unlike the table in Example 15.4, the necklace can be 
turned over as well as rotated. Thus we consider the full dihedral group D7 of order 
2 · 7 = 14 as acting on the set X of 7 ! possibilities. Then the number of distinguishable 
necklaces is 
1 
(number of orbits) = 14 · 7! = 360. 
In using Corollary 15.2, we have to compute IGI and IX8
1 for each g E G. In the 
examples and the exercises, IGI will pose no real problem. Let us give an example 

Section 15 
Applications of G-Sets to Counting 
143 
where IXgl is not as trivial to compute as in the preceding examples. We will continue 
to assume knowledge of very elementary combinatorics. 
15.6 Example 
Let us find the number of distinguishable ways the edges of an equilateral triangle can 
be painted if four different colors of paint are available, assuming only one color is used 
on each edge, and the same color may be used on different edges. 
Of course there are 43 = 64 ways of painting the edges in all, since each of the three 
edges may be any one of four colors. We consider X to be the set of these 64 possible 
painted triangles. The group G acting on X is the group of symmetries of the triangle, 
which is isomorphic to S3 and which we consider to be S3. We need to compute IXgl for 
each of the six elements g in S3. 
1x,1 =64 
IX(l .2,3) I = 4 
IX(l ,3,2) I = 4 
IX(l,2)1 = 16 
Then 
Thus 
Every painted triangle is fixed by i. 
To be invariant under (1,2,3) all edges must be the 
same color, and there are 4 possible colors. 
Same reason as for (l,2,3). 
The edges that are interchanged must be the same 
color (4 possibilities) and the other edge may 
also be any of the colors (times 4 possibilities). 
Same reason as for (1,2). 
L IXgl = 64 + 4 + 4 + 16 + 16 + 16 = 120. 
g ES3 
1 
(number oforbits) = 6 · 120 = 20, 
and there are 20 distinguishable painted triangles. 
15.7 Example 
We repeat Example 15.6 with the assumption that a different color is used on each edge. 
The number of possible ways of painting the edges is then 4 · 3 · 2 = 24, and we Jet X be 
the set of 24 possible painted triangles. Again, the group acting on X can be considered 
to be S3. Since all edges are a different col or, we see IX, I = 24 while IX8 I = 0 for g -=j:. L. 
Thus 
. 
l 
(number of orbits) = 6 · 24 = 4, 
so there are four distinguishable triangles. 
We will use group actions in Section 17 to develop the Sylow Theorems, which 
give a tremendous amount of information about finite groups. In this section, we barely 
scratch the surface of how to count using Burnside's Formula. To explore this fascinat-
ing topic further, search the Internet using key words such as "cycle index" and "Polya's 
Enumeration Theorem." Given a group action on a set, the cycle index is a polynomial 
that can be computed by hand for small groups and by computer for larger groups. 
Polya's Enumeration Theorem then says that the number of different ways to color an 
object can be computed by simply substituting certain values into the polynomial. It is 
remarkable that counting the number of different colorings of geometric objects can be 
elegantly reduced to algebra! 

144 
Part III 
Homomorphisms and Factor Groups 
• EXERCISES 15 
Computations 
In each of the following exercises use Corollary 15.2, even though the answer might be obtained by more elemen-
tary methods. 
1. Find the number of orbits in {I , 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8} under the cyclic subgroup ((1, 3, 5, 6)) of Ss. 
2. Find the number oforbits in { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8} under the subgroup of Ss generated by (I, 3) and (2, 4, 7). 
3. Find the number of distinguishable tetrahedral dice that can be made using one, two, three, and four dots on the 
faces of a regular tetrahedron, rather than a cube. 
4. Wooden cubes of the same size are to be painted a different color on each face to make children's blocks. How 
many distinguishable blocks can be made if eight colors of paint are available? 
5. Answer Exercise 4 if colors may be repeated on different faces at will. [Hint: The 24 rotations of a cube consist 
of the identity, 9 that leave a pair of opposite faces invariant, 8 that leave a pair of opposite vertices invariant, 
and 6 leaving a pair of opposite edges invariant.] 
6. Each of the eight corners of a cube is to be tipped with one of four colors, each of which may be used on from 
one to all eight corners. Find the number of distinguishable markings possible. (See the hint in Exercise 5.) 
7. Find the number of distinguishable ways the edges of a square of cardboard can be painted if six colors of paint 
are available and 
a. no color is used more than once. 
b. the same color can be used on any number of edges. 
8. Consider six straight wires of equal lengths with ends soldered together to form edges of a regular tetrahedron. 
Either a 50-ohm or 100-ohm resistor is to be inserted in the middle of each wire. Assume there are at least six 
of each type of resistor available. How many essentially different wirings are possible? 
9. A rectangular prism 2 ft long with I-ft square ends is to have each of its six faces painted with one of six 
possible colors. How many distinguishable painted prisms are possible if 
a. no color is to be repeated on different faces, 
b. each color may be used on any number of faces? 

PART 
IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
Section 16 
Isomorphism Theorems 
Section 17 
Sylow Theorems 
Section 18 
Series of Groups 
Section 19 
Free Abelian Groups 
Section 20 
Free Groups 
Section 21 
Group Presentations 
SECTION 16 I SOMORPHISM T HEOREMS 
There are several theorems concerning isomorphic factor groups that are known as the 
isomorphism theorems of group theory. The first of these is Theorem 12.14, which we 
restate for easy reference. The theorem is diagrammed in Fig. 16.1. 
G ---------------~,,</>[CJ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
,/ 
GIK 
16.1 Figure 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/// 
µ, (isomorphism) 
/ 
16.2 Theorem 
(First Isomorphism Theorem) Let <P : G--+ G' be a homomorphism with kernel K , 
and let YK : G --+ G / K be the canonical homomorphism. There is a unique isomorphism 
µ, : G/ K --+ </J[G] such that </J(x) = µ,(yK(x)) for each x E G. 
+ 
16.3 Lemma 
Proof 
The lemma that follows will be of great aid in our proof and intuitive understanding 
of the other two isomorphism theorems. 
Let N be a normal subgroup of a group G and let y : G--+ G/ N be the canonical ho-
momorphism. Then the map <P from the set of normal subgroups of G containing N to 
the set of normal subgroups of G / N given by </J(L) = y [L] is one-to-one and onto. 
Theorem 13.18 shows that if L is a normal subgroup of G containing N, then </J(L) = 
y [ L] is a normal subgroup of G / N. Because N ::: L, for each x E L the entire coset xN 
in G is contained in L. Thus by Theorem 10.17, y - 1 [</J(L)] = L. Consequently, if L 
and M are normal subgroups of G, both containing N, and if </J(L) = </J(M) = H , then 
L = y - 1 [H] = M. Therefore </J is one-to-one. 
145 

146 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
If His a normal subgroup of G/ N, then y-1[H] is a normal subgroup of G by 
Theorem 13.18. Because NE Hand y - 1[{N}] = N , we see that N ~ y - 1[H]. Then 
</>(y- 1[H]) = y[y- 1[H]] =H. This shows that <P is onto the set of normal subgroups 
ofG/ N. 
+ 
If H and N are subgroups of a group G, then we let 
H N = {hn I h E H, n EN}. 
We define the join H v N of H and N as the intersection of all subgroups of G that 
contain H N; thus H v N is the smallest subgroup of G containing H N. Of course H v N 
is also the smallest subgroup of G containing both H and N, since any such subgroup 
must contain H N . In general, H N need not be a subgroup of G. However, we have the 
following lemma. 
16.4 Lemma 
If N is a normal subgroup of G, and if H is any subgroup of G, then H v N = H N = 
NH. Furthermore, if His also normal in G, then H N is normal in G. 
Proof 
We show that H N is a subgroup of G, from which H v N = H N follows at once. Let 
h 1, h2 E H and n 1, n2 E N. Since N is a normal subgroup, we have n 1 h2 = h2n3 for some 
n3 E N . Then (h1n1 )(h2n2) = h1 (n1h2)n2 = h1 (h2n3)n2 = (h1 h2)(n3n2) E H N, so H N is 
closed under the induced operation in G. Clearly e = ee is in H N. For h E Hand n E N, 
we have (hn)-1 = n-1h-1 = h-1n4 for some n4 EN, since N is a normal subgroup. 
Thus (hn)-1 EHN, so H N :::: G. A similar argument shows that NH is a subgroup, so 
NH=H V N=HN. 
Now suppose that H is also normal in G, and let h E H , n E N , and g E G. Then 
ghng-1 = (ghg- 1)(gng- 1) EHN, so H N is indeed normal in G. 
+ 
We are now ready for the second isomorphism theorem. 
16.5 Theorem 
(Second Isomorphism Theorem) Let H be a subgroup of G and let N be a normal 
subgroup of G. Then (H N)/ N:::::: H / (H n N). 
Proof 
Since N :::: H N :::: G and N is a normal subgroup of G, N is a normal subgroup of 
H N, which allows us to form the group H N / N. We define a map <P: H--+ H N /N by 
</>(h) = hN. The map <P is a homomorphism since for any h1, h2 E H , 
The map <P maps onto H N / N since any element of H N / N can be written as hnN for 
some h E H and n EN and hnN = hN =</>(h).We now compute the kernel of</>. 
Ker(</>)= {h EH I hN = N) = {h EH I h EN}= H n N 
By the First Isomorphism Theorem, Theorem 16.2, the mapµ, : H / (H n N) --+ H N / N 
defined by µ,(h(H n N)) = hN is an isomorphism. 
+ 
16.6 Example 
Let G = Z x Z x Z ,H = Z x Z x (0), and N = (0) x Z x Z. Then clearly H N = 
Z x Z x Z and H nN = (0) x Z x (0). We have (H N)/N '.:::'. Zand we also have 
H/ (H n N):::::: Z. 
.A. 
16.7 Example 
Let G = Z, N = (n), and H = (h) where n and hare positive. The group Z is abelian, 
so N is a normal subgroup of Z. Since Z is an additive group, we write N + H instead 
of NH to avoid confusion. The group N + H = (gcd(n, h)) since anything in N + H 
is a multiple of gcd(n, h) and gcd(n, h) = xn + yh E N + H for some integers x and 
y. Also, N n H = (lcm(n, h)) since a E N n H if and only if a is a multiple of both 
n and h. The Second Isomorphism Theorem states that (N + H)/ N = (gcd(n, h)) / (n) 

Section 16 
Isomorphism Theorems 
147 
is isomorphic with H/ (N n H) = (h)/(lcm(n,h)). In Exercise 10, you will be asked to 
prove that if a, b E z+ and a divides b, then l(a)/(b)I = b/a. Since (gcd(n,h))/(n) '.::'. 
(h)/(lcm(n, h)), we have 
n 
gcd(n,h) 
Jcm(n, h) 
h 
nh = gcd(n, h)lcm(n, h), 
which provides a complicated way of proving a basic number theory fact! We conclude 
that 
(gcd(n,h))/(n) '.::'. (h) / (lcm(n,h)) '.::'. z_,_, 
gcd(n.h) 
since a factor group of a cyclic group is cyclic. 
If H and K are two normal subgroups of G and K ::: H, then H / K is a normal 
subgroup of G/ K. The third isomorphism theorem concerns these groups. 
16.8 Theorem 
(Third Isomorphism Theorem) Let Hand K be normal subgroups of a group G with 
K ::: H. Then G/ H '.::'. (G/ K)/ (H/ K). 
Proof 
Since K is a subgroup of H, for any g E G, gK ~ gH. That is, each left coset of K is 
completely contained in one coset of H. We define </J: G/ K --+ G/H by </J(gK) = gH. 
That is, we map a coset of K to the coset of H that contains it. Again, our strategy is 
to use the First Isomorphism Theorem. The map </J is a homomorphism since for any 
g1, g2 E G, 
</J((g1K)(g2K)) = </J((g1g2)K) = (g1g2)H 
= (g1H)(g2H) 
= </J(g, K)</J(g2K). 
The map </J maps onto G/ H since for any coset gH E G/ H, </J(gK) = gH. We now com-
pute the kernel of </J. 
Ker(</J) = (gK E G/ K I gH = H} 
= (gK E G/ Klg EH} 
=H/ K. 
By the First Isomorphism Theorem (G/ K)/ (H/ K) is isomorphic with G/ H and a for-
mula for an isomorphismµ,: (G/ K)/ (H/ K) --+ G/ H is µ,((gK)H/ K) = gH. 
+ 
The formula for the isomorphism in the previous proof says that if we collapse the 
subgroup K in G to form G / K and then collapse all the K cosets inside of H we have 
the same group as collapsing the subgroup H. Figure 16.9 illustrates the situation. Think 
of the large ellipse as being the group G. The cosets of H are the sets bounded by the 
thick solid lines. The cosets of K are the smaller sets inside the cosets of H. The set G / H 
consists of the cosets of H , which are represented by the four larger areas, each of which 
is one point in G /H. On the other hand, G / K is represented by the twelve smaller sets 
each collapsed to a point. Then ( G / K) / (H / K) collapses each of the three small areas 
in the same H coset to their common H coset. Either way, we end up collapsing each 
H coset to a point. 
It is sometimes difficult to think about what groups look like when they contain 
more than one factor group in their definition. For example, what does an element of 
(G / K)/ (H / K) really look like? Keep in mind that a factor group has cosets of the sub-
group as elements. Example 16.10 is intended to clarify what the group (G/ K)/ (H/ K) 
looks like and to explicitly show what the isomorphism of Theorem 16.8 looks like. 

148 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
16.9 Figure 
16.10 Example 
Let G = Z8, H = (2) = (0, 2, 4, 6) < G, and K = (4) = (0, 4) < H. We list the ele-
ments of each of the factor groups used in Theorem 16.8. 
G/ K = ((0,4), (1, 5), (2,6), {3, 7)) 
G/H = {(0, 2,4, 6), (1, 3, 5, 7)) 
H/K = {{0,4), {2, 6)) 
Before listing the elements of ( G / K ) / (H / K) we note that any element of this group 
would be a coset of the subgroup H / K < G / K. So each element is a set whose elements 
are sets. 
(G/K)/(H/ K) = (((0, 4), {2, 6)), {{1,5), {3, 7))) 
Comparing G/H and (G/K)/ (H/K), we see that each element in G/H is the union 
of two cosets of K in G / K. Also, the isomorphism in Theorem 16.8 is the map </> : 
(G/ K)/ (H/K)--+ G/H defined by 
</>({{O, 4), (2, 6))) = (0, 4, 2, 6) 
and 
</>({{1 , 5), {3, 7))) = {l,5,3, 7). 
So as illustrated in Figure 16.9, collapsing H to form G / H can be accomplished by first 
collapsing K and then collapsing H / K. 
.A. 
• EXERCISES 16 
Computations 
In using the three isomorphism theorems, it is often necessary to know the actual correspondence given by the 
isomorphism and not just the fact that the groups are isomorphic. The first six exercises give us training for this. 
1. Let </> : Z 12 --+ :f'.:3 be the homomorphism such that <f>(I) = 2. 
a. Find the kernel K of</>. 
b. List the cosets in Z12/K, showing the elements in each coset. 
c. Give the correspondence between Z 12/ Kand :£'.:3 given by the mapµ described in Theorem 16.2. 
2. Let</> : Z 1s --+ Z 12 be the homomorphism where </>(l) = 10. 
a. Find the kernel K of</>. 
b. List the cosets in Z 1s/K, showing the elements in each coset. 
c. Find the group </>[Z1s]. 
d. Give the correspondence between Z1s/K and </>[Z 1sl given by the mapµ described in Theorem 16.2. 

Section 17 
Sylow Theorems 
149 
3. In the group Z 24, let H = (4) and N = (6). 
a. List the elements in H N (which we might write H + N for these additive groups) and in H n N. 
b. List the cosets in H N /N , showing the elements in each coset. 
c. List the cosets in H / (H n N), showing the elements in each coset. 
d. Give the correspondence between H /(H n N) and H N / N described in the proof of Theorem 16.5. 
4. Repeat Exercise 3 for the dihedral group D6 with N = {i, µ , p2, µp2, p4, µp4 ) and H = (p). 
5. In the group G = Z 24, let H = (4) and K = (8). 
a. List the cosets in G/ H, showing the elements in each coset. 
b. List the cosets in G/ K , showing the elements in each coset. 
c. List the cosets in H / K, showing the elements in each coset. 
d. List the cosets in ( G / K) / (H / K), showing the elements in each coset. 
e. Give the correspondence between (G/ K)/ (H / K) and G/ H described in the proofof Theorem 16.8. 
6. Repeat Exercise 5 for the dihedral group G = Dg, H = (p 2) = {i, p2 , p4, p6), and K = (p4 ) = {i, p4 ). 
Theory 
7. Show directly from the definition of a normal subgroup that if Hand N are subgroups of a group G, and N is 
normal in G, then H n N is normal in H. 
8. Let H, K, and L be normal subgroups of G with H < K < L. Let A = G/ H , B = K / H, and C = L/ H. 
a. Show that B and C are normal subgroups of A, and B < C. 
b. To what factor group of G is (A/ B)/ ( C/ B) isomorphic? 
9. Let Kand L be normal subgroups of G with K v L = G, and Kn L = {e}. Show that G/ K '.:::'.Land G/ L '.:::'. K. 
10. Use one of the Isomorphism Theorems to prove that if a, b E z+ and a divides b, then laZ/ bZI = b/ a. 
11. Let G be a group with subgroups H * .'.": H .'.": G and K * .'.": K .'.": G. Prove that the sets H *(H n K *) n (H n K ) 
and (H* n K)(H n K *) are equal. 
SECTION 17 
SYLOW THEOREMS 
The Fundamental Theorem for Finitely Generated Abelian Groups (Theorems 9.12 and 
9.14) give us complete information about all finite abelian groups. The study of finite 
nonabelian groups is much more complicated. The Sylow theorems give us some im-
portant information about them. 
The Theorem of Lagrange says that if H is a subgroup of a finite group G, then the 
order of H divides the order of G. The Fundamental Theorem for Finitely Generated 
Abelian Groups implies that if k divides the order of a finite abelian group G, then G has 
a subgroup of order k. The situation is different for nonabelian groups. Example 13.6 
shows that although A4 has 12 elements, it has no subgroup of order 6. Furthermore, 
for n ~ 5, A 11 can have no subgroup of index 2 since A 11 is simple and any subgroup of 
index 2 is a normal subgroup. On the positive side, Cauchy's theorem (14.20) says that 
if the prime number p divides the order of a group G, then G has a subgroup of order p. 
The Sy low theorems generalize Cauchy's theorem to show that if p" divides the order of 
G, then G has a subgroup of order p" as long asp is a prime number. Furthermore, Sy-
low's theorems gives us information about relationships between these subgroups of G. 
As we shall see, this information is very useful in the study of finite nonabelian groups. 
Proofs of the Sy low theorems give us another application of action of a group on a 
set described in Section 14. This time, the set itself is formed from the group; in some 
instances the set is the group itself, sometimes it is a collection of cosets of a subgroup, 
and sometimes it is a collection of subgroups. 

150 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
The Sylow Theorems 
Let G be a group, and let 7 be the collection of all subgroups of G. We make .Y 
into a G-set by letting G act on 7 by conjugation. That is, if H E 7 so H :S G and 
g E G, then g acting on H yields the conjugate subgroup gHg- 1• (To avoid confusion, 
we will never write this action as gH.) By Theorem 14.13 GH = {g E G I gHg- 1 = H) 
is a subgroup of G, which is called an isotropy subgroup. In Exercise 14 you will be 
asked to show directly that GH is a subgroup of G. Since GH consists of all elements of 
G that leave H invariant under conjugation, GH is the largest subgroup of G having H 
as a normal subgroup. 
17.1 Definition 
The subgroup GH just discussed is the normalizer of H in G and will be denoted N[H] 
from now on. 
• 
In the proof of the lemma that follows, we will use the fact that if H is a finite 
subgroup of a group G, then g E N[H] if ghg- 1 EH for all h E H. To see this, note that 
if gh 1g- 1 = gh2g- 1, then h1 = h2 by cancellation in the group G. Thus the conjugation 
map ig : H--+ H given by ig(h) = ghg- 1 is one-to-one. Because IHI is finite, ig must 
then map H onto H , so gHg- 1 =Hand g E N[H]. 
17.2 Lemma 
Let H be a p-subgroup of a finite group G. Then 
(N[H] : H) = (G : H) (modp). 
Proof 
Let .2'5 be the set of left cosets of H in G, and let H act on .2'5 by left translation, so that 
h(xH) = (hx)H. Then .2'5 becomes an H-set. Note that 12'5 I = (G : H). 
Let us determine .2'5H, that is, those left cosets that are fixed under action by all el-
ements of H. Now xH = h(xH) if and only if H = x- 1 hxH, or if and only if x-1 hx E H. 
Thus xH = h(xH) for all h EH if and only if X- 1 hx = X- 1 h(X- 1 )- 1 EH for all h EH, 
or if and only if X- 1 E N[H] (see the comment before the lemma), or if and only if 
x E N [H]. Thus the left cosets in .2'5H are those contained in N[H]. The number of such 
cosets is (N[H] : H), so 12'lHI = (N[H] : H). 
Since H is a p-group, it has order a power of p. Theorem 14.9 then tells us that 
12'5 I = 12'lHI (mod p), that is, that (G: H ) = (N[H] : H) (mod p). 
+ 
17.3 Corollary 
Let H be a p-subgroup of a finite group G. If p divides (G: H), then N[H] ~H. 
Proof 
It follows from Lemma 17.2 that p divides (N[H]: H), which must then be different 
from 1. Thus H ~ N[H]. 
+ 
•
H ISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he Sylow theorems are due to the Norwegian 
mathematician Peter Ludvig Mejdell Sylow 
(1832-1918), who published them in a brief pa-
per in 1872. Sylow stated the theorems in terms of 
permutation groups (since the abstract definition of 
a group had not yet been given). Georg Frobenius 
re-proved the theorems for abstract groups in 1887, 
even though he noted that in fact every group 
can be considered as a permutation group (Cay-
Iey's theorem [Theorem 8. I l]). Sy low himself 
immediately applied the theorems to the question 
of solving algebraic equations and showed that any 
equation whose Galois group has order a power of 
a prime p is solvable by radicals. 
Sylow spent most of his professional life as a 
high school teacher in Raiden, Norway, and was 
only appointed to a position at Christiana Univer-
sity in 1898. He devoted eight years of his life to 
the project of editing the mathematical works of his 
countryman Niels Henrik Abel. 

Section 17 
Sylow Theorems 
151 
We are now ready for the first of the Sylow theorems, which asserts the existence 
of prime-power subgroups of G for any prime power dividing IGI. 
17.4 Theorem 
(First Sylow Theorem) Let G be a finite group and let IGI = p"m where n ::: 1 and 
where p does not divide m. Then 
1. G contains a subgroup of order pi for each i where 1 :::: i :::: n, 
2. Every subgroup H of G of order pi is a normal subgroup of a subgroup of 
order pi+ 1 for 1 :::: i < n. 
Proof 
1. We know G contains a subgroup of order p by Cauchy's theorem 
(Theorem 14.20). We use an induction argument and show that the existence 
of a subgroup of order pi for i < n implies the existence of a subgroup of 
order pi+1• Let H be a subgroup of order pi. Since i < n, we seep divides 
(G: H).By Lemma 17.2, we then know p divides (N [H ] : H).Since His a 
normal subgroup of N[H], we can form N [H] / H , and we see that p divides 
IN[H]/ H I. By Cauchy's theorem, the factor group N[H]/ H has a subgroup K, 
which is of order p. If y : N[H] -+ N[H]/ H is the canonical homomorphism, 
then y - 1 [K] = {x E N[H] I y(x) E K} is a subgroup of N[H] and hence of G. 
This subgroup contains Hand is of order pi+I . 
2. We repeat the construction in part 1 and note that H < y- 1 [K] :::: N[H] where 
ly- 1 [K] I = pi+ I. Since His normal in N[H], it is of course normal in the 
possibly smaller group y - 1 [K]. 
+ 
17.5 Definition 
A Sylow p-subgroup P of a group G is a maximalp-subgroup of G, that is, ap-subgroup 
contained in no larger p-subgroup. 
• 
Let G be a finite group, where IGI = p"m as in Theorem 17.4. The theorem shows 
that the Sy low p-subgroups of G are precisely those subgroups of order p". If P is a 
Sylow p-subgroup, every conjugate gPg- 1 of P is also a Sylow p-subgroup. The sec-
ond Sylow theorem states that every Sylow p-subgroup can be obtained from P in this 
fashion; that is, any two Sylow p-subgroups are conjugate. 
17.6 Theorem 
(Second Sylow Theorem) Let P 1 and P2 be Sylow p-subgroups of a finite group G. 
Then P 1 and P2 are conjugate subgroups of G. 
Proof 
Here we will let one of the subgroups act on left cosets of the other, and use The-
orem 14.19. Let $ 
be the collection of left cosets of P 1, and let P2 act on $ 
by 
y(xP1) = (yx)P1 for y EP2. Then $ 
is a P2-set. By Theorem 14.19, 1$ P, I = 1$
1 
(mod p ), and 1$
1 = (G : P1) is not divisible by p, so 1$ P, I -:/:- 0. Let xP1 E $ p2 • Then 
yxP1 = xP 1 for all y E P2, so x- 1yxP1 = P 1 for all y E P2. Thus x- 1yx E P1 for all 
y E P2, so x- 1 P2x:::: P 1. Since IP1 I = IP2I, we must have P 1 = x- 1 P2x, so P 1 and P2 
are indeed conjugate subgroups. 
+ 
The final Sylow theorem gives information on the number of Sylow p-subgroups. 
17.7 Theorem 
(Third Sylow Theorem) If G is a finite group and p divides IGI, then the number of 
Sylow p-subgroups is congruent to 1 modulo p and divides IGI. 
Proof 
Let P be one Sylow p-subgroup of G. Let 7 be the set of all Sylow p-subgroups and let 
P act on .Y" by conjugation, so that x E P carries T E 7 intoxTx- 1. By Theorem 14.19, 
171 = l.9Jil (mod p). Let us find ,9Ji. If T E ,9Ji, then xTX- 1 = T for all x E P. Thus 
P :::: N[n. Of course, T :::: N [T] also. Since P and Tare both Sylow p-subgroups of G, 

152 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
they are also Sylow p-subgroups of N[n. But then they are conjugate in N[T] by The-
orem 17 .6. Since T is a normal subgroup of N[T], it is its only conjugate in N[T]. Thus 
T = P. Then YI = {P}. Since 1.9"1 = l.Yfol = 1 (mod p), we see the number of Sylow 
p-subgroups is congruent to 1 modulo p. 
Now let G act on .9" by conjugation. Since all Sylow p-subgroups are conjugate, 
there is only one orbit in .51" under G. If PE .9", then 1.9"1 = I orbit of PI = (G : Gp) by 
Theorem 14.17. (Gp is, in fact, the normalizer of P.) But (G : Gp) is a divisor of IGI, so 
the number of Sylow p-subgroups divides IGI. 
+ 
Theorem 17.7 is really a bit better than it sounds. Let IGI = p"m where the 
prime number p does not divide m and suppose that G contains k Sylow p-subgroups. 
Then Theorem 17.7 says that k is equivalent to 1 modulo p and k divides IGI. Since 
gcd(k,p) = 1, k must divide m. 
Applications of the Sylow Theorems 
17.8 Example 
The Sylow 2-subgroups of D3 have order 2. Three Sylow 2-subgroups are 
{t,µ,}, 
{t, µ,p), 
{t, µ,p2 ) 
Notice that Theorem 17.7 says that the number k of Sylow 2-subgroups must be odd 
and k must divide 6. However, by the observation above, k must divide 3. So in fact, the 
three subgroups listed are all three of the subgroups of D3 having order 2. 
.&. 
17.9 Lemma 
Let G be a group containing normal subgroups H and K such that H n K = {e} and 
H v K =G. Then G is isomorphic to H x K. 
+ 
Proof 
We start by showing that hk = kh for k E K and h EH. Consider the commutator 
hkh-lk- 1 = (hkh- 1)k- 1 = h(kh- 1k- 1). Since H and K are normal subgroups of G, 
the two groupings with parentheses show that hkh- 1 k-1 is in both K and H. Since 
K n H = {e}, we see that hkh- 1 k- 1 = e, so hk = kh. 
Let <P : H x K ~ G be defined by <f>(h, k) = hk. Then 
</>((h,k)(h',k')) = </>(hh',kk') = hh'kk' 
= hkh' k' = </>(h, k )</>(h', k'), 
so <P is a homomorphism. 
If <f>(h, k) = e, then hk = e, so h = k- 1, and both hand k are in H n K. Thus h = 
k = e, so Ker(</>) = {(e, e)) and <P is one-to-one. 
By Lemma 16.4, we know that HK= H v K , and H v K = G by hypothesis. Thus 
<P is onto G, and H x K :::::: G. 
+ 
We tum now to a discussion of whether there exist simple groups of certain orders. We 
have seen that every group of prime order is simple. We also asserted that A 11 is simple 
for n '.:::: 5 and that A5 is the smallest simple group that is not of prime order. There was 
a famous conjecture of Burnside that every finite simple group of nonprime order must 
be of even order. It was a triumph when this was proved by Thompson and Feit [21). 
17.10 Theorem If p and q are distinct primes with p < q, then every group G of order pq has a single 
subgroup of order q and this subgroup is normal in G. Hence G is not simple. If q is not 
congruent to 1 modulo p, then G is abelian and cyclic. 
Proof Theorems 17.4 and 17.7 tell us that G has a Sylow q-subgroup and that the number 
of such subgroups is congruent to 1 modulo q and divides pq, and therefore must 
divide p. Since p < q, the only possibility is the number 1. Thus there is only one Sylow 

Section 17 
Sylow Theorems 
153 
q-subgroup Q of G. This group Q must be normal in G, for under an inner automorphism 
it would be carried into a group of the same order, hence itself. Thus G is not simple. 
Likewise, there is a Sylow p-subgroup P of G, and the number of these divides pq 
and is congruent to 1 modulo p. This number must be either 1 or q. If q is not congruent 
to 1 modulo p, then the number must be 1 and P is normal in G. Let us assume that 
q ¥= 1 (mod p ). Since every element in Q other than e is of order q and every element in 
Pother thane is of order p, we have Q n P = {e}. Also Q v P must be a subgroup of G 
properly containing Q and of order dividing pq. Hence Q v P = G and by Lemma 17.9 
is isomorphic to Q x P or 7lq x 7lP. Thus G is abelian and cyclic. 
+ 
17.11 Example 
Recall that if p is a prime number, then up to isomorphism there is only one group of 
order p and it is cyclic. Theorem 17 .10 shows that there are many non prime numbers 
n such that every group of order n is cyclic. Since 5 is not equivalent to 1 modulo 3, 
by Theorem 17.10, every group of order 15 is cyclic. Exercise 33 shows that 15 is the 
smallest composite number with this property. 
.& 
We need another lemma for some of the counting arguments that follow. 
17.12 Lemma If Hand K are finite subgroups of a group G, then 
IHKI = (IHl)(IKI). 
IHnKI 
Proof 
Let 
h, (H n K), h1(H n K), h3(H n K), ... , hr(H n K) 
be the left cosets of H n K in H with each coset listed exactly once. We let 
which includes exactly one element from each left coset of H n Kin H. So 
IHI 
ISI = IHnKI . 
Let f : S x K--+ HK be defined by f(h;, k) = h;k. We show that f is one-to-one and 
onto. 
Suppose that hk E HK. Then h E His in some left coset of H n K, so h E h;(H n K) 
for some h; E S. We have that h = h;x for some x E H n K. Let k 1 = xk. Then (h;, k 1) E 
S x Kand 
f(h;, k 1) = h;k1 = h;xk = hk. 
Thus f is onto. 
We now show that/ is one-to-one. Suppose thatf(h;, k) = f(hj, k 1). So h;k = hjk1. 
Then hj1h; = k,k- 1 EH n K. But this implies that h; and hj are in the same left coset 
of H n K, so h; = hj. By cancellation, k = k 1 and/ is one-to-one. 
Since there is a one-to-one and onto function/ : S x K--+ HK, we have 
IHKI = ISI IKI 
IH I 
= IH n KI · IKI 
CIH l)(IKI) 
IH nKI 
• 

154 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
Lemma 17 .12 is another result that counts something, so do not underestimate it. 
The lemma will be used in the following way: A finite group G cannot have subgroups 
Hand K that are too large with intersections that are too small, or the order of HK would 
have to exceed the order of G, which is impossible. For example, a group of order 24 
cannot have two subgroups of orders 12 and 8 with an intersection of order 2. 
The remainder of this section consists of several examples illustrating techniques of 
proving that all groups of certain orders are abelian or that they have nontrivial proper 
normal subgroups, that is, that they are not simple. We recall that a subgroup H of 
index 2 in a finite group G is a normal subgroup. This is because the two left cosets of 
Hin G are Hand the set of all elements in G that are not in H. But these are also the 
right cosets, which says that His a normal subgroup of G. 
17.13 Example 
No group of order pr for r > 1 is simple, where p is a prime. For by Theorem 17.4 such 
a group G contains a subgroup of order pr- I normal in a subgroup of order pr, which 
must be all of G. Thus a group of order 16 is not simple; it has a normal subgroup of 
order 8. 
.A. 
17.14 Example 
No group of order 20 is simple, for such a group G contains Sylow 5-subgroups in num-
ber congruent to 1 modulo 5 and a divisor of 4, hence only 1. This Sylow 5-subgroup is 
then normal, since all conjugates of it must be itself. 
.A. 
17.15 Example 
No group of order 30 is simple. We have seen that ifthere is only one Sylow p-subgroup 
for some prime p dividing 30, we are done. By Theorem 17.7 the possibilities for the 
number of Sylow 5-subgroups are 1 or 6, and those for Sylow 3-subgroups are 1 or 10. 
But if G has six Sylow 5-subgroups, then the intersection of any two is a subgroup of 
each of order dividing 5, and hence just {e}. Thus each contains 4 elements of order 5 
that are in none of the others. Hence G must contain 24 elements of order 5. Similarly, 
if G has I 0 Sy low 3-subgroups, it has at least 20 elements of order 3. The two types 
of Sylow subgroups together would require at least 44 elements in G. Thus there is a 
normal subgroup either of order 5 or of order 3. 
.A. 
17.16 Example 
No group of order 48 is simple. Indeed, we shall show that a group G of order 48 has 
a normal subgroup of either order 16 or order 8. By Theorem 17.7 G has either one or 
three Sylow 2-subgroups of order 16. If there is only one subgroup of order 16, it is 
normal in G, by now a familiar argument. 
Suppose that there are three subgroups of order 16, and let Hand K be two of them. 
Then H n K must be of order 8, for if H n K were of order :=: 4, then by Lemma 17 .12 
HK would have at least (16)(16)/ 4 = 64 elements, contradicting the fact that G has 
only 48 elements. Therefore, H n K is normal in both Hand K (being of index 2, or by 
Theorem 17.4). Hence the normalizer of H n K contains both Hand Kand must have 
order a multiple > 1 of 16 and a divisor of 48, therefore 48. Thus H n K must be normal 
~a 
• 
17.17 Example 
No group of order 36 is simple. Such a group G has either one or four subgroups of 
order 9. If there is only one such subgroup, it is normal in G. If there are four such 
subgroups, let H and K be two of them. As in Example 17 .16, H n K must have at 
least 3 elements, or HK would have to have 81 elements, which is impossible. Thus the 
normalizer of H n K has as order a multiple of > 1 of 9 and a divisor of 36; hence the 
order must be either 18 or 36. If the order is 18, the normalizer is then of index 2 and 
therefore is normal in G. If the order is 36, then H n K is normal in G. 
.A. 
17.18 Example 
We show every group of order 255 = (3)(5)(17) is abelian (hence cyclic by the Funda-
mental Theorem 9.12 and not simple, since 255 is not a prime). By Theorem 17.7 such 
a group G has only one subgroup H of order 17. Then G / H has order 15 and is abelian 

Section 17 
Exercises 
155 
by Theorem 17 .10. By Theorem 13.22, we see that the commutator subgroup C of G 
is contained in H . Thus as a subgroup of H , Chas either order 1or17. Theorem 17.7 
also shows that G has either 1 or 85 subgroups of order 3 and either 1 or 51 subgroups 
of order 5. However, 85 subgroups of order 3 would require 170 elements of order 3, 
and 51 subgroups of order 5 would require 204 elements of order 5 in G; both together 
would then require 375 elements in G, which is impossible. Hence there is a subgroup 
K having either order 3 or order 5 and normal in G. Then G / K has either order (5)( 17) 
or order (3)(17), and in either case Theorem 17 .10 shows that G / K is abelian. Thus 
C :::: Kand has order either 3, 5, or 1. Since C :::: H showed that Chas order 17 or 1, we 
conclude that Chas order 1. Hence C = {e), and G/ C:::::: G is abelian. The Fundamental 
Theorem 9.12 then shows that G is cyclic. 
.A 
• EXERCISES 17 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 4, determine the values of n; that make each statement true. 
1. A Sylow 3-subgroup of a group of order 12 has order n1. 
2. A Sylow 3-subgroup of a group of order 54 has order n1. 
3. A group of order 24 must have either n1 or n2 Sylow 2-subgroups. (Use only the information given in 
Theorem 17.7.) 
4. A group of order 255 = (3)(5)( 17) must have either n 1 or nz Sy low 3-subgroups and n3 or n4 Sy low 
5-subgroups. (Use only the information given in Theorem 17.7.) 
5. Find all Sylow 3-subgroups of S4 and demonstrate that they are all conjugate. 
6. Find two Sylow 2-subgroups of S4 and show that they are conjugate. 
7. Determine for which n :::: 20 any group of order n is abelian. 
8. Determine for which n _:::: 20 any group of order n is cyclic. 
Concepts 
In Exercises 9 through 11, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
9. Let p be a prime. A p-group is a group with the property that every element has order p. 
10. The normalizer N[H] of a subgroup H of a group G is the set of all inner automorphisms that carry H onto 
itself. 
11. Let G be a group whose order is divisible by a prime p. The Sy/ow p-subgroup of a group is the largest 
subgroup P of G with the property that P has some power of p as its order. 
12. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Any two Sy low p-subgroups of a finite group are conjugate. 
b. Theorem 17 .7 shows that a group of order 15 has only one Sy low 5-subgroup. 
c. Every Sylow p-subgroup of a finite group has order a power of p. 
d. Every p-subgroup of every finite group is a Sylow p-subgroup. 
e. Every finite abelian group has exactly one Sylow p-subgroup for each prime p dividing the order of G. 
f. The normalizer in G of a subgroup Hof G is always a normal subgroup of G. 
g. If His a subgroup of G, then His always a normal subgroup of N[H]. 
h. A Sy low p-subgroup of a finite group G is normal in G if and only if it is the only Sy low p-subgroup of G. 
i. If G is an abelian group and His a subgroup of G, then N[H] =H. 
j. A group of prime-power order p" has no Sylow p-subgroup. 

156 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
13. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every group of order 159 is cyclic. 
b. Every group of order 102 has a nontrivial proper normal subgroup. 
c. Every group of order p3 is abelian, assuming that p is a prime number. 
d. There is a simple group of order 1128. 
e. It would be quite tedious to show that no group of nonprime order between 60 and 168 is simple by the 
methods illustrated in the text. 
f. No group of order 21 is simple. 
g. Every group of 125 elements has at least 5 elements that commute with every element in the group. 
h. Every group of order 42 has a normal subgroup of order 7. 
i. Every group of order 42 has a normal subgroup of order 3. 
j . The only simple groups are the groups Zp and A,,, where p is a prime and n > 4. 
Theory 
14. Let H be a subgroup of a group G. Show that GH = (g E G I gHg- 1 = H} is a subgroup of G without using 
Theorem 14.13. 
15. Let G be a finite group and let primes p and q f. p divide IGI. Prove that if G has precisely one proper Sylow 
p-subgroup, it is a normal subgroup, so G is not simple. 
16. Show that every group of order 45 has a normal subgroup of order 9. 
17. Let G be a finite group and let p be a prime dividing IGI. Let P be a Sylow p-subgroup of G. Show that 
N [N[P]] = N[P]. [Hint: Argue that P is the only Sylow p-subgroup of N[N[P]] , and use Theorem 17.6.) 
18. Let G be a finite group and let a prime p divide IGI. Let P be a Sylow p-subgroup of G and let H be any 
p-subgroup of G. Show there exists g E G such that gHg-1 _:::: P. 
19. Show that every group of order (35)3 has a normal subgroup of order 125. 
20. Show that there are no simple groups of order 255 = (3)(5)(17). 
21. Show that there are no simple groups of order p' m, where p is a prime, r is a positive integer, and m < p. 
22. Prove that all simple groups of order at most 20 are cyclic. 
23. Let p be a prime. Show that a finite group of order p" contains normal subgroups H; for 0 _:::: i _:::: n such that 
IH;I =pi and H; < H;+ 1 for 0 _:::: i < n. [Hint: See Theorem 14.24.] 
24. Let G be a finite group and let P be a normal p-subgroup of G. Show that P is contained in every Sylow 
p-subgroup of G. 
25. Prove that if p :=::: 3 is a prime number and k :=::: 1, then any group G of order 2pk is not simple. 
26. Prove that every group of order (5)(7)(47) is abelian and cyclic. 
27. Prove that no group of order 96 is simple. 
28. Show that every group of order 30 contains a subgroup of order 15. [Hint: Use the last sentence in Exam-
ple 17 .15 and go to the factor group.] 
29. Prove that no group of order 160 is simple. 
30. Let G be a finite group and suppose that for each k that divides IGI, G has at most one subgroup of order k. 
Prove that G is cyclic. 
31. Let G be a finite group. Use the group action of G on G given by conjugation, g * x = gxg- 1, to prove the 
formula IGI = IZ(G)I + n1 + n1 + · · · + nk, where Z(G) is the center of G and n 1, n2, ... , nk are the orbit sizes 
for the orbits containing at least two elements. This formula is called the class equation. 
32. By arguments similar to those used in the examples of this section, convince yourself that the only simple 
groups of order less than 60 are cyclic. You need not write out all the details. 
33. Show that for every positive integer n < 15, if every group of order n is cyclic, then n is prime. 

Section 18 
Series of Groups 
157 
SECTION 18 SERIES OF GROUPS 
Subnormal and Normal Series 
This section is concerned with the notion of a series of a group G, which gives insight 
into the structure of G. The results hold for both abelian and nonabelian groups. They 
are not too important for finitely generated abelian groups because of the Fundamental 
Theorem of Finitely Generated Abelian Groups. Many of our illustrations will be taken 
from abelian groups, however, for ease of computation. 
18.1 Definition 
A subnormal (or subinvariant) series of a group G is a finite sequence H0,H1, • • • , H11 
of subgroups of G such that H; < H;+ 1 and H; is a normal subgroup of H;+1 with 
Ho = {eJ and H11 = G. A normal (or invariant) series of G is a finite sequence 
Ho, H 1, • • • , H11 of normal subgroups of G such that H; < H;+ 1, Ho = { e}, and H11 = G . • 
Note that for abelian groups the notions of subnormal and normal series coincide, 
since every subgroup is normal. A normal series is always subnormal, but the converse 
need not be true. We defined a subnormal series before a normal series, since the concept 
of a subnormal series is more important for our work. 
18.2 Example 
Two examples of normal series of Z under addition are 
{OJ < 8Z < 4Z < Z 
and 
{OJ < 9Z < Z. 
18.3 Example 
We let G = D4 , the dihedral group. The series 
{iJ < {i,µ,J < {i , µ, , p2 , µ,p 2J < D4 
is a subnormal series since each subgroup is normal in the one to its right. The subgroup 
{i, µ,J is not a normal subgroup of D4 since pµ,p- 1 = µ,p 2 rj. {i, µ,J. So this series is a 
subnormal series, but not a normal series. 
A 
18.4 Definition 
A subnormal (normal) series {Kj J is a refinement of a subnormal (normal) series {H; J 
of a group G if {H; J ~ {Kj }, that is, if each H; is one of the Kj . 
• 
18.5 Example 
The series 
{OJ < 72Z < 24Z < 8Z < 4Z < Z 
is a refinement of the series 
{OJ < 72Z < 8Z < Z. 
Two new terms, 4Z and 24Z, have been inserted. 
Of interest in studying the structure of G are the factor groups H;+1 / H;. These are 
defined for both normal and subnormal series, since H; is normal in H;+ 1 in either case. 
18.6 Definition 
Two subnormal (normal) series {H;J and (KjJ of the same group G are isomorphic if 
there is a one-to-one correspondence between the collections of factor groups { H;+ 1 / H; J 
and (Kj+ 1/ Kj J such that corresponding factor groups are isomorphic. 
• 

158 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
Clearly, two isomorphic subnormal (normal) series must have the same number of 
groups. 
18.7 Example 
The two series of Z15, 
{O} < (5) < Z 1s 
and 
{0} < (3) < Z 1s, 
are isomorphic. Both Z15/(5) and (3)/(0} are isomorphic to Z5, and Z 15/(3) is isomor-
phic to (5)/(0), or to Z 3 . 
.&. 
The Schreier Theorem 
We proceed to prove that two subnormal series of a group G have isomorphic refine-
ments. This is a fundamental result in the theory of series. Although the proof is a little 
technical, it is broken up into smaller pieces that make it easier to follow. Before starting 
the proof, we give an example to illustrate the goal of our investigation. 
18.8 Example 
Let us try to find isomorphic refinements of the series 
{0} < 8Z < 4Z < Z 
and 
(0) < 9Z < Z 
given in Example 18.2. Consider the refinement 
{O} < 72Z < 8Z < 4Z < Z 
of {O} < 8Z < 4Z < Z and the refinement 
{0} < 72Z < 18Z < 9Z < Z 
of {O} < 9Z < Z. In both cases the refinements have four factor groups isomorphic to 
Z4 , Z2 , Z9, and 72Z or Z. The order in which the factor groups occur is different to be 
sure. 
.&. 
We start with a rather technical lemma developed by Zassenhaus. This lemma is 
sometimes called the butterfly lemma, since Fig. 18.9, which accompanies the lemma, 
has a butterfly shape. 
18.10 Lemma 
(Zassenhaus Lemma) Let H , K :S G be subgroups and H* :::i H, K* :::i K be normal 
subgroups of Hand K, respectively. Then 
1. 
H*(H n K*) is a normal subgroup of H*(H n K), 
2. K*(H* n K) is a normal subgroup of K*(H n K), and 
3. The factor groups H*(H n K)/ H*(H n K*), K*(H n K)/ K*(H* n K), and 
(H n K)/ [(H* n K)(H n K*)] are all isomorphic. 
Proof 
It may be helpful to follow along with Figure 18.9 to visualize the subgroups that we 
refer to in the proof. Before beginning the proof of normality, we need to verify that 
the sets involved are in fact subgroups of G. All three sets H*, H n K*, and H n K 
are subgroups of H. Furthermore, H * is a normal subgroup of H , so by Lemma 16.4, 
H*(H n K*) and H*(H n K) are subgroups of H. Thus H*(H n K*) and H*(H n K) are 
also subgroups of G. Clearly, H *(H n K*) is a subgroup of H *(H n K). 

Section 18 
Series of Groups 
159 
H 
K 
H*(H n K) 
K*(H n K) 
HnK 
H* 
K* 
H* n K 
H n K* 
18.9 Figure 
We now show that H*(H n K*) is a normal subgroup of H*(H n K). We let 
w E H*(H n K*) and y E H*(H n K). We need to verify that ywy- 1 E H*(H n K*). 
By definition, w = h1x and y E h2g for some h1,h2 EH*, x EH n K*, and g EH n K. 
We write 
-I 
h h 
-lh- 1 
ywy 
= 2g 1xg 
2 
= h1(gh1g- 1)gxg- 1h21 
= h1h3gxg- 1hz1 
for some h3 E H* since H* is a normal subgroup of H. We note that h:Z 1 and h2h3 
are both elements of H* ::::: H*(H n K*). Furthermore gxg-1 EK* since g E K and K* 
is a normal subgroup of K. Also gxg-1 EH since both g and x are elements of H. 
Thus, gxg-1 EH n K* ::S K*(H n K*). So,ywy- 1 is the product of elements in the group 
H*(H n K*), which implies that ywy- 1 E H*(H n K*). Thus we have shown Part I of 
the Theorem. 
We use the Second Isomorphism Theorem (16.5) to prove the third part of the 
Lemma. Let N' = H*(H n K*) and H' = H n K. So N' is a normal subgroup of 
H*(H n K) and H' is a subgroup of H*(H U K). By Lemma 16.4 N'H' is a group and 
N'H' = H*(H n K*)(H n K) 
= H*(Hn K). 
The Second Isomorphism Theorem says that N' H' / N' ~ H' /(H' n N'). We have 
N'H'/N' = H*(H n K)/ H*(H n K*) 
and 
H' /(H' n N') = (H n K)/ (H*(H n K*) n (H n K)). 
Exercise 11 in Section 16 shows that 
H*(H n K*) n (H n K) = (H* n K)(H n K*). 
Thus 
H*(H n K)/ (H*(H n K*)) ~ (H n K)/ ((H* n K)(H n K*)). 

160 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
By reversing the roles of H and K (as well as H* and K*), the proof given above 
proves Part 2 as well as the other half of Part 3 of the Zassenhaus Lemma. 
+ 
18.11 Theorem 
(Schreier Theorem) Two subnormal (normal) series of a group G have isomorphic 
refinements. 
Proof 
Let G be a group and let 
{e} =Ho < H1 < H2 < · · · < H" = G 
(1) 
and 
{e} = Ko < Kl < K2 < · · · < K111 = G 
(2) 
be two subnormal series for G. For i where 0 _::: i _::: n - 1, form the chain of groups 
H; = H;(H;+1 n Ko) :S H;(H;+1 n K1) :S · · · :S H;(H;+1 n K111) = H;+1· 
This inserts m -
1 not necessarily distinct groups between H; and H;+1. If we do this 
for each i where 0 _::: i _::: n -
1 and let H;J = H;(H;+1 n Kj), then we obtain the chain of 
groups 
{e} = Ho.o ::: Ho.1 ::: Ho.2 ::: · · · ::: Ho,111- 1 ::: H1 .o 
:S H1 ,1 :S H 1,2 :S · · · :S H1 ,111- 1 :S H2,o 
:S H2,1 :S H2,2 :S · · · :S H2,111-1 :S H3,o 
< ... 
:S H,,-1 ,1 :S H11-1,2 :S · · · :S H11- 1,111-1 :S H11- 1,111 
=G. 
(3) 
This chain (3) contains nm + 1 not necessarily distinct groups, and H;,o = H; for each i. 
By the Zassenhaus Lemma, chain (3) is a subnormal chain, that is, each group is normal 
in the following group. This chain refines the series (1). 
In a symmetric fashion, we set Kj,; = Kj(Kj+1 n H;) for 0 _::: j _::: m - 1 and 
0 _::: i _::: n. This gives a subnormal chain 
{e} = Ko.o ::: Ko.1 ::: Ko.2 ::: · · ·::: Ko,11-1 ::: Kl ,O 
:S Kl,1 :S Kl,2 :S · · · :S Kl,11- 1 :S K2,0 
:S K2,1 :S K2,2 :S · · · :S K2,11- 1 :S K3,o 
< . . . 
:S Km-1,1 :S Km-1,2 :S · · · :S Km-1,11-1 :S Km-1,11 
=G. 
(4) 
This chain (4) contains mn + 1 not necessarily distinct groups, and Kj,O = Kj for eachj. 
This chain refines the series (2). 
By the Zassenhaus Lemma 18.10, we have 
or 
(5) 
for 0 _::: i _::: n - 1 and 0 _::: j _::: m -
1. The isomorphisms of relation (5) give a one-to-
one correspondence of isomorphic factor groups between the subnormal chains (3) and 
(4). To verify this correspondence, note that H;,o = H; and H;,111 = H;+1, while Kj,O = f0 
and Kj,11 = Kj+l ·Each chain in (3) and (4) contains a rectangular array of mn symbols_:::. 
Each _::: gives rise to a factor group. The factor groups arising from the rth row of _:::'s 

Section 18 
Series of Groups 
161 
in chain (3) correspond to the factor groups arising from the rth column of _:s's in chain 
(4). Deleting repeated groups from the chains in (3) and (4), we obtain subnormal series 
of distinct groups that are isomorphic refinements of chains (I) and (2). This establishes 
the theorem for subnormal series. 
For normal series, where all H; and Kj are normal in G, we merely observe that 
all the groups H;J and Kj,; formed above are also normal in G, so the same proof 
applies. This normality of H;J and Kj,; follows at once from the second assertion in 
Lemma 16.4 and from the fact that intersections of normal subgroups of a group yield 
normal subgroups. 
+ 
The Jordan-Holder Theorem 
We now come to the real meat of the theory. 
18.12 Definition 
A subnormal series {H;} of a group G is a composition series if all the factor groups 
H;+1/ H; are simple. A normal series {H;} of G is a principal or chief series if all the 
factor groups H;+ 1/ H; are simple. 
• 
Note that for abelian groups the concepts of composition and principal series coin-
cide. Also, since every normal series is subnormal, every principal series is a composi-
tion series for any group, abelian or not. 
18.13 Example 
We claim that '1l, has no composition (and also no principal) series. For if 
(0) =Ho < H1 < · · · < H11-1 < H11 = Z 
is a subnormal series, H 1 must be of the form rZ for some r E z+. But then H1/ H0 
is isomorphic to rZ, which is infinite cyclic with many nontrivial proper normal sub-
groups, for example, 2rZ. Thus '1l, has no composition (and also no principal) series . 
... 
18.14 Example 
The series 
{e} < All < Sn 
for n :'.': 5 is a composition series (and also a principal series) of Sil, because All/ {e) is 
isomorphic to All, which is simple for n :'.': 5, and Sil/All is isomorphic to Z2, which is 
simple. Likewise, the two series given in Example 18.7 are composition series (and also 
principal series) of Z 1s. They are isomorphic, as shown in that example. This illustrates 
our main theorem, which will be stated shortly. 
.& 
Observe that by Theorem 13.20, H;+1/H; is simple if and only if H; is a maximal 
normal subgroup of H;+ 1- Thus for a composition series, each H; must be a maximal 
normal subgroup of H;+ 1- To form a composition series of a group G, we just hunt for 
a maximal normal subgroup Hll- I of G, then for a maximal normal subgroup Hll- 2 
of H 11_1 , and so on. If this process terminates in a finite number of steps, we have a 
composition series. Note that by Theorem 13.20, a composition series cannot have any 
further refinement. To form a principal series, we have to hunt for a maximal normal 
subgroup H11_1 of G, then for a maximal normal subgroup H11_2 of Hll-1 that is also 
normal in G, and so on. The main theorem is as follows. 
18.15 Theorem 
(Jordan-Holder Theorem) Any two composition (principal) series of a group G are 
isomorphic. 
Proof 
Let {H;} and {K;} be two composition (principal) series of G. By Theorem 18.11, 
they have isomorphic refinements. But since all factor groups are already simple, 

162 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
Theorem 13.20 shows that neither series has any further refinement. Thus {H;} and {K;} 
must already be isomorphic. 
+ 
For a finite group, we should regard a composition series as a type of factoriza-
tion of the group into simple factor groups, analogous to the factorization of a positive 
integer into primes. In both cases, the factorization is unique, up to the order of the 
factors. 
18.16 Example 
We illustrate the analogy between factoring integers and composition series with an 
example. Let n E z+. We factor n into its prime factors n = p1pzp3 ... Pk> where the 
prime factors may be repeated and they are in any order. The series 
is a composition series since the factor groups are isomorphic with Zp,, Zp,_,, Zp,_2 , ••• , 
Zp,, which are all simple. For each choice of ordering the prime numbers p 1 ,p2, . .. ,pk 
we get a different composition series, but they are all isomorphic since the factor groups 
are Z1,, , Zp,, ... , z,,, in some order. 
.A. 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
his first appearance of what became the 
Jordan- Holder theorem occurred in 1869 in 
a commentary on the work of Galois by the 
brilliant French algebraist Camille Jordan (1838-
1922). The context of its appearance is the 
study of permutation groups associated with the 
roots of polynomial equations. Jordan asserted 
that even though the sequence of normal sub-
groups G, I , J, · · ·of the group of the equation 
is not necessarily unique, nevertheless the se-
quence of indices of this composition series is 
unique. Jordan gave a proof in his monumen-
tal 1870 Treatise on Substitutions and Algebraic 
Equations. This latter work, though restricted to 
what we now call permutation groups, remained 
the standard treatise on group theory for many 
years. 
The Holder part of the theorem, that the se-
quence of factor groups in a composition series is 
unique up to order, was due to Otto Holder (1859-
1937), who played a very important role in the 
development of group theory once the completely 
abstract definition of a group had been given. 
Among his other contributions, he gave the first ab-
stract definition of a "factor group" and determined 
the structure of all finite groups of square-free 
order. 
18.17 Theorem 
If G has a composition (principal) series, and if N is a proper normal subgroup of G, 
then there exists a composition (principal) series containing N . 
Proof The series 
{e} < N < G 
is both a subnormal and a normal series. Since G has a composition series {H;}, then by 
Theorem 18.11 there is a refinement of {e} < N < G to a subnormal series isomorphic 
to a refinement of { H;}. But as a composition series, {H;} can have no further refinement. 
Thus {e} < N < G can be refined to a subnormal series all of whose factor groups are 
simple, that is, to a composition series. A similar argument holds if we start with a 
principal series {Rj} of G. 
+ 
18.18 Example 
A composition (and also a principal) series of Z4 x Z9 containing ((0, 1)) is 
((0, 0)} < ((0,3)) < ((0, I))< (2) x (1) < (1 ) x (1 ) = 1:4 x Z9. 

Section 18 
Series of Groups 
163 
The next definition is basic to the characterization of those polynomial equations 
whose solutions can be expressed in terms of radicals. 
18.19 Definition 
A group G is solvable if it has a composition series {H;} such that all factor groups 
H;+1/ H; are abelian. 
• 
By the Jordan-Holder theorem, we see that for a solvable group, every composition 
series {H;} must have abelian factor groups H;+1 / H;. 
18.20 Example 
The group S3 is solvable, because the composition series 
has factor groups isomorphic to Z3 and Z2, which are abelian. The group Ss is not 
solvable, for since As is simple, the series 
{e} < As < Ss 
is a composition series, andAs/ {e}, which is isomorphic to As, is not abelian. This group 
As of order 60 can be shown to be the smallest group that is not solvable. This fact is 
closely connected with the fact that a polynomial equation of degree 5 is not in general 
solvable by radicals, but a polynomial equation of degree :::: 4 is. 
..&. 
The Ascending Central Series 
We mention one subnormal series for a group G that can be formed using centers of 
groups. Recall from Section 13 that the center Z(G) of a group G is defined by 
Z(G) = {z E G I zg = gz for all g E G}, 
and that Z(G) is a normal subgroup of G. If we have the table for a finite group G, it is 
easy to find the center. An element a is in the center of G if and only if the row with 
header a and the column with header a list the elements of G in the same order. 
Now let G be a group, and let Z(G) be the center of G. Since Z(G) is normal in G, 
we can form the factor group G/ Z(G) and find the center Z(G/ Z(G)) of this factor group. 
Since Z(G/ Z(G)) is normal in G/ Z(G), if y : G--+ G/ Z(G) is the canonical map, then 
by Theorem 13.18, y- 1 [Z(G/ Z(G))] is a normal subgroup 2 1 (G) of G. We can then form 
the factor group G/ Z1 (G) and find its center, take (y1 )-1 of it to get Z2(G), and so on. 
18.21 Definition 
The series 
described in the preceding discussion is the ascending central series of the group G . • 
18.22 Example 
For n ::=:: 3, the center of S,, is just the identity t. Thus the ascending central series 
of S,, is 
{l} :::: {l} :::: {l} :::: .... 
The center of the dihedral group D4 is (1, p2}. The factor group D4 / (1, p 2 } has order 4, 
and each element has order 1or 2, so D4/ {i, p 2 } is isomorphic with the Klein 4-group, 
which is abelian. Therefore the center of D4/ {t, p2} is the whole group, and the central 
series for D4 is 

164 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
• EXERCISES 18 
Computations 
In Exercises I through 5, give isomorphic refinements of the two series. 
1. {OJ < 10/Z < /Z and {OJ < 25/Z < /Z 
2. {OJ < 60/Z < 20/Z < /Z and {OJ < 245/Z < 49/Z < /Z 
3. {OJ < (9) < /Z54 and {OJ < (2) < /Z54 
4. {OJ < (9) < (3) < Zn and {OJ < (36) < (12) < Zn 
5. {(0,0)J < (60/Z) x /Z < (10/Z) x /Z < /Z x /Zand {(0,0)J < /Z x (80/Z) < /Z x (20/Z) < /Z x /Z 
6. Find all composition series of IZ90 and show that they are isomorphic. 
7. Find all composition series of /Z4g and show that they are isomorphic. 
8. Find all composition series of Zs x Zs. 
9. Find all composition series of S3 x /Zz. 
10. Find all composition series of Z2 x Zs x IZ1 . 
11. Find the center of S3 x /Z4. 
12. Find the center of S3 x D4. 
13. Find the ascending central series of S3 x /Z4. 
14. Find the ascending central series of S3 x D4. 
Concepts 
In Exercises 15 and 16, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
15. A composition series of a group G is a finite sequence 
{eJ =Ho< Hi < Hz < ··· < H11- l < H11 = G 
of subgroups of G such that H; is a maximal normal subgroup of H;+i for i = 0, I, 2, · · · , n - I. 
16. A solvable group is one that has a composition series of abelian groups. 
17. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every normal series is also subnormal. 
b. Every subnormal series is also normal. 
c. Every principal series is a composition series. 
d. Every composition series is a principal series. 
e. Every abelian group has exactly one composition series. 
f. Every finite group has a composition series. 
g. A group is solvable if and only if it has a composition series with simple factor groups. 
h. S1 is a solvable group. 
i. The Jordan-Holder theorem has some similarity with the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, which states 
that every positive integer greater than 1 can be factored into a product of primes uniquely up to order. 
j. Every finite group of prime order is solvable. 
18. Find a composition series of S3 x S3. Is S3 x S3 solvable? 
19. Is the dihedral group D4 solvable? 
20. Let G be /Z36. Refer to the proof of Theorem 18.11. Let the subnormal series (I) be 
{OJ < (12) < (3) < IZ36 
and let the subnormal series (2) be 
{OJ < (18) < /Z36. 

Section 18 
Exercises 
165 
Find chains (3) and (4) and exhibit the isomorphic factor groups as described in the proof. Write chains (3) 
and (4) in the rectangular array shown in the text. 
21. Repeat Exercise 20 for the group £:24 with the subnormal series (1) 
{O} < (12) < (4) < Z24 
and (2) 
{O} < (6) < (3) < £:24. 
Theory 
22. Let H*, H, and K be subgroups of G with H* normal in H. Show that H* n K is normal in H n K. 
23. Show that if 
Ho= {e} < Hi < H2 < · · · < H,, = G 
is a subnormal (normal) series for a group G, and if H;+i / H; is of finite order s;+i. then G is of finite order 
sis2 · · · s,,. 
24. Show that an infinite abelian group can have no composition series. [Hint: Use Exercise 23, together with the 
fact that an infinite abelian group always has a proper nontrivial subgroup.] 
25. Show that a finite direct product of solvable groups is solvable. 
26. Show that if H :9 G is a normal subgroup, His solvable, and G/ His solvable, then G is solvable. 
27. Show that for n ::O: 3, D,, is solvable. 
28. Show that a subgroup Kofa solvable group G is solvable. [Hint: Let Ho= {e} < Hi < · · · < H,, = G be a 
composition series for G. Show that the distinct groups among K n H; for i = 0, · · · , n form a composition 
series for K. Observe that 
(K n H;)/(K n H;-1):::::: [H;- 1 (K n H;)]/ [H;- 1 ], 
by Theorem 16.5, with H =Kn H; and N = H;-1 , and that H;-1(K n H;) ~ H;.] 
29. Let Ho= {e} < H1 < · · · < H,, = G be a composition series for a group G. Let N be a normal subgroup of 
G, and suppose that N is a simple group. Show that the distinct groups among Ho, H;N for i = 0, · · · , n also 
form a composition series for G. [Hint: H;N is a group by Lemma 16.4. Show that H;-1N is normal in H;N. 
By Theorem 16.5 
(H;N)/ (H;-iN):::::: H;/[H; n (H;-iN)], 
and the latter group is isomorphic to 
[H;/ H;- tl/ [(H; n (H;-iN))/H;- i], 
by Theorem 16.8. But H;/ H;- i is simple.] 
30. Let G be a group, and let Ho= {e} < Hi < · · · < H,, = G be a composition series for G. Let N be a normal 
subgroup of G, and let y : G--+ G/ N be the canonical map. Show that the distinct groups among y[H;] for 
i = 0, · · · ,n, form a composition series for G/ N. [Hint: Observe that the map 
1/1 : H;N--+ y[H;]/y[H;_t] 
defined by 
1/f(h;n) = y(h;n)y [H;-1] 
is a homomorphism with kernel H;- 1N. By Theorem 16.2. 
y[H;]/y[H;_i]:::::: (H;N)/(H;- 1N). 
Proceed via Theorem 16.5, as shown in the hint for Exercise 29.] 
31. Prove that a homomorphic image of a solvable group is solvable. [Hint: Apply Exercise 30 to get a composition 
series for the homomorphic image. The hints for Exercises 29 and 30 then show how the factor groups of this 
composition series in the image look.] 
32. Prove that a finite p-group is solvable. 
33. Prove that a group G with 2
11pk elements is solvable if p > 2
11 is a prime. 

166 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
SECTION 19 FREE ABELIAN GROUPS 
In this section we introduce the concept of free abelian groups and prove some re-
sults concerning them. The section concludes with a demonstration of the Fundamental 
Theorem of Finitely Generated Abelian Groups (Theorem 9.12). 
Free Abelian Groups 
We should review the notions of a generating set for a group G and a finitely generated 
group, as given in Section 7. In this section we shall deal exclusively with abelian groups 
and use the standard additive notations as follows: 
0 for the identity, + for the operation, 
na=~ 
) 
n summands 
for n E z+ and a E G. 
-na =(-a)+ (-a)+ ···+ (-a) 
n summands 
Oa = 0 for the first 0 in Z and the second in G. 
We shall continue to use the symbol x for direct product of groups rather than change 
to direct sum notation. 
Notice that {(I , 0), (0, I)} is a generating set for the group Z x Z since 
(n, m) = n( 1, 0) + m(O, 1) for any (n, m) in Z x Z. This generating set has the property 
that each element of Z x Z can be uniquely expressed in the form n(l, 0) + m(O, 1). 
That is, the coefficients n and m in Z are unique. 
19.1 Theorem 
Let X be a subset of a nonzero abelian group G. The following conditions on X are 
equivalent. 
1. Each nonzero element a in G can be expressed uniquely (up to order of 
summands) in the form a= n1x1 + nzx2 + · · · + nrXr for n; f 0 in Z and 
distinct x; in X. 
2. X generates G, and n 1x1 + nzx2 + · · · + nrXr = 0 for n; E Z and distinct 
x; E X if and only if n1 = nz = · · · = nr = 0. 
Proof 
Suppose Condition 1 is true. Since G f {O), we have X f {O). It follows from 1 that 
0 rj; X, for if x; = 0 and Xj f 0, then Xj = x; + Xj, which would contradict the uniqueness 
of the expression for Xj. From Condition 1, X generates G, and n1x1 + n2x2 + · · · + 
nrXr = 0 if n1 = nz = · · · = nr = 0. Suppose that n1x1 + nzx2 + · · · + nrXr = 0 with 
some n; f O; by dropping terms with zero coefficients and renumbering, we can assume 
all n; f 0. Then 
X1 = X1 + (n1x1 + nzx2 + · · · + nrXr) 
= (n1 + l )x1 + n1X2 + · · · + nrXr, 
which gives two ways of writing x1 f 0, contradicting the uniqueness assumption in 
Condition I. Thus Condition 1 implies Condition 2. 
We now show that Condition 2 implies Condition l . Let a E G. Since X generates 
G, we see a can be written in the form a = n1x1 + n2x2 + · · · + nrXr. Suppose a has 
another such expression in terms of elements of X. By using some zero coefficients 
in the two expressions, we can assume they involve the same elements in X and are 
of the form 

Section 19 
Free Abelian Groups 
167 
a = n1X1 + n1X2 + · · · nrXr 
a = m1X1 + m2x2 + · · · mrXr. 
Subtracting, we obtain 
so 11; -
m; = 0 by Condition 2, and 11; = m; for i = 1, 2, · · · , r. Thus the coefficients are 
unique. 
+ 
19.2 Definition 
An abelian group having a generating set X satisfying the conditions described in 
Theorem 19.1 is a free abelian group, and X is a basis for the group. 
• 
19.3 Example 
The group Z x Z is free abelian and ((1, 0), (0, 1)) is a basis. Similarly, a basis for the 
free abelian group Z x Z x Z is ((1, 0, 0), (0, I , 0), (0, 0, 1)), and so on. Thus finite 
direct products of the group Z with itself are free abelian groups. 
.&. 
19.4 Example 
The group Z 11 is not free abelian, for nx = 0 for every x E Z 11 , and n op 0, which would 
contradict Condition 2. 
.&. 
From Example 19.4 it seems reasonable that if G is an abelian group with a nonzero 
element of finite order, then G is not a free abelian group. Exercise 10 asks you to 
provide a proof of this fact. However, there are other obstacles that prevent an abelian 
group from being free. For example, no rational number other than 0 has finite order, 
but Exercise 13 asks for a proof that IQ is not a free abelian group. 
Suppose a free abelian group G has a finite basis X = {x1, x2, · · · , Xr}. If a E G and 
a op 0, then a has a unique expression of the form 
(Note that in the preceding expression for a, we included all elements x; of our finite 
basis X, as opposed to the expression for a in Condition 1 of Theorem 19.1 where 
the basis may be infinite. Thus in the preceding expression for a we must allow the 
possibility that some of the coefficients n; are zero, whereas in Condition 1 of Theorem 
19.1, we specified that each 11; op 0.) 
We define 
<jJ:G--+ZxZx·· · xZ 
r factors 
by </J(a) = (n1, nz, · · · , nr) and </J(O) = (0, 0, · · · , 0). It is straightforward to check that 
<P is an isomorphism. We leave the details to the exercises (see Exercise 9) and state the 
result as a theorem. 
19.5 Theorem 
If G is a nonzero free abelian group with a basis of r elements, then G is isomorphic to 
Z x Z x · · · x Z for r factors. 
It is a fact that any two bases of a free abelian group G contain the same number of 
elements. We shall prove this only if G has a finite basis, although it is also true if every 
basis of G is infinite. The proof is really lovely; it gives an easy characterization of the 
number of elements in a basis in terms of the size of a factor group. 
19.6 Theorem 
Let G op (0) be a free abelian group with a finite basis. Then every basis of G is finite, 
and all bases of G have the same number of elements. 

168 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
Proof 
Let G have a basis {x1 ,x2, · · · ,xr). Then G is isomorphic to Z x Z x · · · x Z for r 
factors. Let 2G = (2g I g E G}. It is readily checked that 2G is a subgroup of G. Since 
G :::::: Z x Z x · · · x Z for r factors, we have 
G/2G:::::: (Z x Z x · · · x Z)/(2Z x 2Z x · · · x 2Z) 
:::::Z2xZ2X ··· XZ2 
for r factors. Thus IG/ 2GI = 2r, so the number of elements in any finite basis X is 
log2 IG / 2GI. Thus any two finite bases have the same number of elements. 
It remains to show that G cannot also have an infinite basis. Let Y be any basis for G, 
and let {yi,y2, · · • ,y5 ) be distinct elements in Y. Let H be the subgroup of G generated 
by {y1, y2 , · · · , Ys }, and let K be the subgroup of G generated by the remaining elements 
of Y. It is readily checked that G :::::: H x K , so 
G/2G :::::: (H x K)/ (2H x 2K):::::: (H/ 2H) x (K/ 2K). 
Since IH / 2HI = 2
5
, we see IG/ 2GI :'.': 2"'. Since we have IG/2GI = 2r, we see thats :S r. 
Then Y cannot be an infinite set, for we could takes > r. 
+ 
19.7 Definition 
If G is a free abelian group, the rank of G is the number of elements in a basis for G. 
(All bases have the same number of elements.) 
• 
Proof of the Fundamental Theorem 
We shall prove the Invariant Factor version of the Fundamental Theorem (Theorem 
9.14) by showing that any finitely generated abelian group is isomorphic to a factor 
group of the form 
(Z x Z x · · · x Z)/ (d1 Z x dzZ x · · · x dsZ x (0) x · · · x (0)), 
where both "numerator" and "denominator" have n factors, and d1 divides d2, which 
divides d3 · · · , which divides d5 • The Prime Factor version, Theorem 9.12, will then 
follow. 
To show that G is isomorphic to such a factor group, we will show that there is a 
homomorphism of Z x Z x · · · x Z onto G with kernel of the form d1 Z x d2Z x · · · x 
dsZ x (0) x · · · x (0). The result will then follow by Theorem 12.14. The theorems that 
follow give the details of the argument. Our purpose in these introductory paragraphs is 
to let us see where we are going as we read what follows. 
19.8 Theorem 
Let G be a finitely generated abelian group with generating set {a1,a2, ··· ,a,, ). Let 
<jJ:ZxZx···XZ--+G 
n factors 
be defined by </J(h1, h2 , · · · , h,,) = h1a 1 + h2a2 + · · · + h,,a,,. Then </J is a homomor-
phism onto G. 
Proof 
From the meaning of h;a; for h; E Zand a; E G, we see at once that 
</J[(h1, . .. ,h,,) + (k1, .. . ,k,,)] = </J(h1 + k1, ... ,h,, + k,,) 
= (h1 + k1)a1 + · · · + (h,, + k,,)a,, 
= (h1a1 + k1a1) + · · · + (h,,a,, + kna,,) 
= (h1a1 + · · · + hnan) + (k1a 1 + · · · + k,,a,,) 
=</J(k1,··· ,k,,)+</J(h1,· ·· ,h,,). 
Since {a 1, ···,a,,) generates G, clearly the homomorphism </J is onto G. 
• 

Section 19 
Free Abelian Groups 
169 
We now prove a "replacement property" that makes it possible for us to adjust a 
basis. 
19.9 Theorem 
If X = {x1, · · · , Xr} is a basis for a free abelian group G and t E Z, then for i i=- j, the set 
is also a basis for G. 
Proof 
Since Xj = (-t)x; + (l)(xj + tx;), we see that Xj can be recovered from Y, which thus 
also generates G. Suppose 
n1X1 + · · · + nj- IXj-1 + nj(Xj + tx;) + nj+1Xj+1 + · · · + nrXr = 0. 
Then 
n1X1 + · · · + (n; + njl)X; + · · · + njXj + · · · + nrXr = 0. 
and since X is a basis, n1 = · · · = n; + njl = · · · = nj = · · · = nr = 0. From nj = 0 and 
n; + njl = 0, it follows that n; = 0 also, so n1 = · · · = n; = · · · = nj = · · · = nr = 0, 
and Condition 2 of Theorem I 9. I is satisfied. Thus Y is a basis. 
+ 
19.10 Example 
A basis for Z x Z is ((1, 0), (0, 1)). Another basis is {(l, 0), (4, 1)) for (4, 1) = 4(1, 0) + 
(0, 1). However, {(3, 0), (0, 1)) is not a basis. For example, we cannot express (2, 0) in 
the form n1(3,0) + n1(0, 1), for n, n1 E Z . Here (3, 0) = (1, 0) + 2(1, 0), and a multiple 
of a basis element was added to itself, rather than to a different basis element. 
A 
A free abelian group G of finite rank may have many bases. We show that if K :::; G, 
then K is also free abelian with rank not exceeding that of G. Equally important, there 
exist bases of G and Knicely related to each other. 
19.11 Theorem 
Let G be a non zero free abelian group of finite rank n, and Jet K be a nonzero subgroup of 
G. Then K is free abelian ofrank s :::; n. Furthermore, there exists a basis {x1, x2 , · · · , x11 } 
for G and positive integers, d1,d2, · · · ,d5 where d; divides d;+i for i = 1, · · · ,s - 1, 
such that {d1x1, d1x2, · · · , dsxs ) is a basis for K. 
Proof 
We show that K has a basis of the described form, which will show that K is free abelian 
of rank at most n. Suppose Y = {y1, · · · , y11 } is a basis for G. All nonzero elements in K 
can be expressed in the form 
k1Y1 + · · · + k"y,,, 
where some lk;I is nonzero. Among all bases Y for G, select one Y1 that yields the 
minimal such nonzero value lk;I as all nonzero elements of K are written in terms of the 
basis elements in Y1. By renumbering the elements of Y1 if necessary, we can assume 
there is w1 E K such that 
W1 = d1Y1 + k1Y2 + ... + k11Y11 
where d1 > 0 and d1 is the minimal attainable coefficient as just described. Using the 
division algorithm, we write kj = d1qj + rj where 0 :::; rj < d1 for j = 2, · · · , n. Then 
wi =di (y1 + q1y2 + · · · + q,,y,i) + r1y2 + · · · + r11Y11· 
(1) 
Now let x1 = Yi + q1y2 + · · · + q"y,,. By Theorem 19.9 {x1,y2, · · · ,y,, ) is also a ba-
sis for G. From Eq. (1) and our choice of Y1 for minimal coefficient d1, we see that 
r1 = · · · = r,, = 0. Thusd1x1 EK. 
We now consider bases for G of the form {x 1,y2, • • • ,y11 ). Each element of K can 
be expressed in the form 

170 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
Since d1x1 E K , we can subtract a suitable multiple of d 1x1 and then using the mini-
mality of d 1 to see that h1 is a multiple of d1, we see we actually have k2y2 + · · · + k11y11 
in K. Among all such bases {x1, y2 , · · · , y,,}, we choose one Y2 that leads to some k; f=. 0 
of minimal magnitude. (It is possible all k; are always zero. In this case, K is generated 
by d 1x 1 and we are done.) By renumbering the elements of Y2 we can assume that there 
is w2 E K such that 
W2 = d1Y2 + ... + k,,yll 
where d2 > 0 and d2 is minimal as just described. Exactly as in the preceding paragraph, 
we can modify our basis from Y2 = {x1,y2, · · · , y,, J to a basis {x 1,x2,y3, · · · ,y,,J for G 
where d1x1 EK and d1x2 EK. Writing d1 = d 1q + r for 0 :::; r < d 1, we see that {x1 + 
qx2,x2,y3, · · · ,y,,J is a basis for G, and d1x1 + d1x2 = d 1(x1 + qx2) + rx2 is in K. By 
our minimal choice of d 1, we seer= 0, so d 1 divides d2 . 
We now consider all bases of the form {x1,x2,y3, • • · , y,,J for G and examine el-
ements of K of the form k3Y3 + · · · + k11y11 • The pattern is clear. The process contin-
ues until we obtain a basis {x1, x2, · · · , x,, Ys+l • · · · , y,, J where the only element of K 
of the form ks+IYs+l + · · · + k,,y,, is zero, that is, all k; are zero. We then let Xs+ I = 
Ys+i , · · · , x,, = y,, and obtain a basis for G of the form described in the statement of 
Theorem 19 .11. 
+ 
We now prove the Invariant Factor version of the Fundamental Theorem, Theorem 
9.11. We restate it here for easy reference. 
19.12 Theorem 
Every finitely generated abelian group is isomorphic to a group of the form 
Zm, x Zm, x ... x Zm, x z x z x ... x Z, 
where m; divides m;+i for i = 1, · · · , r -
1. 
Furthermore, this representation is unique up to order of the factors. 
Proof 
For the purposes of this proof, it will be convenient to use as notations Z/l Z = Z/Z::::: 
Z 1 = (OJ. Let G be finitely generated by n elements. Let F = Z x Z x · · · x Z for n 
factors. Consider the homomorphism </J : F---+ G of Theorem 19.8, and let K be the 
kernel of this homomorphism. Then there is a basis for F of the form {x1, • • • , x,, }, where 
{d 1x 1, • • • ,d5xsJ is a basis for K and d; divides d;+1 for i = 1, · · · ,s - 1. By Theorem 
12. 14, G is isomorphic to F / K. But 
F / K ::::: (Z x Z x · · · x Z)/(d1 Z x d2Z x · · · x dsZ x (OJ x · · · x (0)) 
::::: zd, x zd, x ... x zd, x z x . . . x z. 
It is possible that d 1 = 1, in which case Zd, = (OJ and can be dropped (up to 
isomorphism) from this product. Similarly, d2 may be 1, and so on. We let m1 be the 
first d; > 1, m2 be the next d;, and so on, and our theorem follows at once. 
We have demonstrated the toughest part of the Fundamental Theorem. Of course, 
a prime-power decomposition exists since we can break the groups Z111; into prime-
power factors. The only remaining part of Theorem 9.12 concerns the uniqueness of the 
Betti number, of the torsion coefficients, and of the prime powers. The Betti number 
appears as the rank of the free abelian group G/ T, where T is the torsion subgroup of 
G. This rank is invariant by Theorem 19.6, which shows the uniqueness of the Betti 
number. The uniqueness of the torsion coefficients and of prime powers is a bit more 
difficult to show. We give some exercises that indicate their uniqueness (see Exercises 14 
through 22). 
+ 

Section 19 
Exercises 
171 
• EXERCISES 19 
Computations 
1. Find a basis {(a1, a2, aJ), (b1, b2, b3), (c1, c2, c3)} for Z x Z x Z with all a; f= 0, all b; f= 0, and all c; f= 0. 
(Many answers are possible.) 
2. Is { (2, 1 ), (3, 1)} a basis for Z x Z? Prove your assertion. 
3. Is { (2, 1 ), ( 4, 1)} a basis for Z x Z? Prove your assertion. 
4. Find conditions on a, b, c, d E Z for {(a, b), (c, d)} to be a basis for Z x Z. [Hint: Solve x(a, b) + y(c, d) = (e,f) 
in JR., and see when the x and y lie in Z .] 
Concepts 
In Exercises 5 and 6, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
S. The rank of a free abelian group G is the number of elements in a generating set for G. 
6. A basis for a nonzero abelian group G is a generating set X ~ G such that n1x1 + n2x2 + · · · + n111x111 = 0 for 
distinctx; EX and n; E Z only if n1 = n2 = · · · = n111 = 0. 
7. Show by example that it is possible for a proper subgroup of a free abelian group of finite rank r also to have 
rank r. 
8. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every free abelian group is torsion free. 
b. Every finitely generated torsion-free abelian group is a free abelian group. 
c. There exists a free abelian group of every positive integer rank. 
d. A finitely generated abelian group is free abelian if its Betti number equals the number of elements in some 
generating set. 
e. If X generates a free abelian group G and X ~ Y ~ G, then Y generates G. 
f. If X is a basis for a free abelian group G and X ~ Y ~ G, then Y is a basis for G. 
g. Every nonzero free abelian group has an infinite number of bases. 
h. Every free abelian group of rank at least 2 has an infinite number of bases. 
i. If K is a nonzero subgroup of a finitely generated free abelian group, then K is free abelian. 
j. If K is a nonzero subgroup of a finitely generated free abelian group, then G / K is free abelian. 
Theory 
9. Complete the proof of Theorem 19.5 (See the two sentences preceding the theorem). 
10. Show that a free abelian group contains no nonzero elements of finite order. 
11. Show that if G and G' are free abelian groups, then G x G' is free abelian. 
12. Show that free abelian groups of finite rank are precisely the finitely generated abelian groups containing no 
nonzero elements of finite order. 
13. Show that Q under addition is not a free abelian group. 
Exercises 14 through 19 deal with showing the uniqueness of the prime powers appearing in the prime-power 
decomposition of the torsion subgroup T of a finitely generated abelian group. 
14. Let p be a fixed prime. Show that the elements of T having as order some power of p, together with zero, form 
a subgroup Tp of T. 
15. Show that in any prime-power decomposition of T, the subgroup Tp in the preceding exercise is isomorphic to 
the direct product of those cyclic factors of order some power of the prime p. [This reduces our problem 
to showing that the group Tp cannot have essentially different decompositions into products of cyclic 
groups.] 
16. Let G be any abelian group and let n be any positive integer. Show that G[n] = {x E G I nx =OJ is a subgroup 
of G. (In multiplicative notation, G[n] = {x E G Ix'= e}.) 

172 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
17. Referring to Exercise 16, show that Zpr[p] ::::: Zp for any r 2: 1 and prime p. 
18. Using Exercise 17, show that 
(Zp'I x Zp'2 x ... x Zprm )[p] '.:::: Zp x Zp x ... x Zp 
m factors 
provided each r; 2: 1. 
19. Let G be a finitely generated abelian group and Tp the subgroup defined in Exercise 14. Suppose Tp::::: Zp'1 x 
Z p'2 x · · · x Zp'"' ::::: Z p"1 x Zp'2 x · · · x Zp"" , where 1 :5 r1 :5 rz :5 · · · :5 r,,, and 1 :5 s1 :5 s2 :5 · · · :5 Sn. 
We need to show that m = n and r; = s; for i = 1, · · · , n to complete the demonstration of uniqueness of the 
prime-power decomposition. 
a. Use Exercise 18 to show that n = m. 
b. Show r1 = s1. Suppose r; = s; for all i < j. Show rj = Sj, which will complete the proof. [Hint: Suppose 
rj < Sj· Consider the subgroup pri TP = [prix Ix E Tp), and show that this subgroup would then have two 
prime-power decompositions involving different numbers of nonzero factors. Then argue that this is im-
possible by part (a) of this exercise.] 
Let T be the torsion subgroup of a finitely generated abelian group. Suppose T ::::: &::1111 x &::1112 x · · · x &::111, ::::: &::111 x 
&::112 x · · · x &::11, , where m; divides m;+ 1 for i = 1, · · · , r -
1, and nj divides nj+ 1 for n = I, · · · , s - 1, and m 1 > 1 
and n1 > I. We wish to show that r =sand mk = nk fork= 1, · · · , r , demonstrating the uniqueness of the torsion 
coefficients. This is done in Exercises 20 through 22. 
20. Indicate how a prime-power decomposition can be obtained from a torsion-coefficient decomposition. (Ob-
serve that the preceding exercises show the prime powers obtained are unique.) 
21. Argue from Exercise 20 that mr and ns can both be characterized as follows. Let PI , ··· ,p1 be the distinct 
primes dividing ITI, and let pt
1
, • • • ,p/' be the highest powers of these primes appearing in the (unique) 
· 
d 
· · 
Th 
h1 h2 
h, 
pnme-power ecompos1t10n. 
en mr = n,. = p 1 p2 · · · P1 · 
22. Characterize mr- l and ns- l, showing that they are equal, and continue to show mr-i = ns- l for i = I,· · · , 
r - 1, and then r = s. 
SECTION 20 FREE GROUPS 
For any group with elements a and b we have certain relations that a and b must satisfy 
simply because they are elements of a group. For example, a11a111 = an+m and (ab)-1 = 
b- 1a- 1. For most of the groups we have studied so far there are relations among the 
elements other than the relations that all groups possess. For example, the elements µ 
and p in the dihedral group D 11 satisfy relations pµ = µp- 1 and µ 2 = p" = l. In this 
section, we construct free groups that have only the relations that are required in the 
definition of a group. These groups and their factor groups as described in Section 21 
are of great interest in the study of algebra and topology. 
Words and Reduced Words 
Let A -=fa !ii be any (not necessarily finite) set of elements a; for i E /. We think of A as 
an alphabet and of the a; as letters in the alphabet. Any symbol of the form a;'' with 
n E Z is a syllable and a finite string w of syllables written in juxtaposition is a word. 
We also introduce the empty word 1, which has no syllables. 
20.1 Example 
LetA = {a 1,a2,a3). Then 
-4 2 
3 -I 
2 
- 7 
d 
2 
a 1a3 a2 a 3, 
a2 a 2 a3a 1 a 1 
, 
an 
a3 
are all words, if we follow the convention of understanding that a ;1 is the same as a; . ... 

Section 20 
Free Groups 
173 
There are two natural types of modifications of certain words, the elementary con-
tractions. The first type consists of replacing an occurrence of a;'"a;'' in a word by 
a;'
11+
11
• The second type consists of replacing an occurrence of a;0 in a word by 1, that 
is, dropping it out of the word. By means of a finite number of elementary contractions, 
every word can be changed to a reduced word, one for which no more elementary con-
tractions are possible. Note that these elementary contractions formally amount to the 
usual manipulations of integer exponents and would have to be satisfied if we wish for 
the letters to be elements of a group. 
20.2 Example 
The reduced form of the word a2
3a2- 1 a3a1
2a1 - 7 of Example 20.1 is a2
2a3a 1 -s. 
... 
It should be said here once and for all that we are going to gloss over several points 
that some books spend pages proving, usually by complicated induction arguments 
broken down into many cases. For example, suppose we are given a word and wish 
to find its reduced form. There may be a variety of elementary contractions that could 
be performed first. How do we know that the reduced word we end up with is the 
same no matter in what order we perform the elementary contractions? The student will 
probably say this is obvious. Some authors spend considerable effort proving this. The 
authors agree here with the student. Proofs of this sort we regard as tedious, and they 
have never made us more comfortable about the situation. However, the authors are the 
first to acknowledge that we are not great mathematicians. In deference to the fact that 
many mathematicians feel that these things do need considerable discussion, we shall 
mark an occasion when we just state such facts by the phrase, "It would seem obvious 
that," keeping the quotation marks. 
Free Groups 
Let the set of all reduced words formed from our alphabet A be F[A]. We now make 
F [A] into a group in a natural way. For w1 and w2 in F[A], define w1 • w2 to be the 
reduced form of the word obtained by the juxtaposition w1 w2 of the two words. 
20.3 Example 
If 
and 
"It would seem obvious that" this operation of multiplication on F[A] is well de-
fined and associative. The empty word 1 acts as an identity element. "It would seem 
obvious that" given a reduced word w E F[A], if we form the word obtained by first 
writing the syllables of w in the opposite order and second by replacing each a;'' by 
a;-", then the resulting word w- 1 is a reduced word also, and 
w · w- 1 = w- 1 • w = 1. 
20.4 Definition 
The group F[A] just described is the free group generated by A. 
• 
Look back at Theorem 7.7 and the definition preceding it to see that the present use 
of the term generated is consistent with the earlier use. 
Starting with a group G and a generating set {a; Ii E /},which we will abbreviate by 
{a;}, we might ask if G is free on {a;}, that is, if G is essentially the free group generated 
by {a;}. We define precisely what this is to mean. 

174 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
20.5 Definition 
If G is a group with a set A= {a;) of generators, and if G is isomorphic to F[A] under 
a map fjJ : G --+ F[A] such that fjJ(a;) =a;, then G is free on A, and the a; are free 
generators of G. A group is free if it is free on some nonempty set A. 
• 
20.6 Example 
The only example of a free group that has occurred before is Z, which is free on one 
generator. Note that every free group is infinite, for it contains a subgroup isomorphic 
with Z. 
~ 
Refer to the literature for proofs of the next three theorems. We will not use these 
results. They are stated simply to inform us of these interesting facts. 
20.7 Theorem If a group G is free on A and also on B, then the sets A and B have the same number 
of elements; that is, any two sets of free generators of a free group have the same 
cardinality. 
20.8 Definition 
If G is free on A, the number of elements in A is the rank of the free group G. 
• 
Actually, the next theorem is quite evident from Theorem 20.7. 
20.9 Theorem 
Two free groups are isomorphic if and only if they have the same rank. 
20.10 Theorem 
A nontrivial subgroup of a free group is free. 
20.11 Example 
Let F[{x,y)] be the free group on {x,y). Let 
Yk = /yx-k 
fork 2':: 0. The Yk fork 2':: 0 are free generators for the subgroup of F[{x,y)] that they 
generate. This illustrates the bizarre fact that although a subgroup of a free group is free, 
the rank of the subgroup may be much greater than the rank of the whole group! 
~ 
Homomorphisms of Free Groups 
Our work in this section will be concerned primarily with homomorphisms defined on 
a free group. The results here are simple and elegant. 
20.12 Theorem 
Let G be generated by A = {a; Ii E /} and let G' be any group. If a;' for i E I are 
any elements in G', not necessarily distinct, then there is at most one homomorphism 
fjJ : G--+ G' such that qy(a;) =a;'. If G is free on A, then there is exactly one such 
homomorphism. 
Proof Let fjJ be a homomorphism from G into G' such that qy(a;) =a;'. Now by Theorem 7.7, 
for any x E G we have 
for some finite product of the generators a;, where the a;; appearing in the product need 
not be distinct. Then since fjJ is a homomorphism, we must have 
f/J(x) =TI f/J(a;/;) =TI (a;/yi;. 
j 
Thus a homomorphism is completely determined by its values on elements of a gener-
ating set. This shows that there is at most one homomorphism such that f/J(a;) =a;'. 

Section 20 
Free Groups 
175 
Now suppose G is free on A; that is, G = F[A]. For 
in G, define 1/1 : G --+ G' by 
The map is well defined, since F[A] consists precisely of reduced words; no two dif-
ferent formal products in F[A] are equal. Since the rules for computation involving 
exponents in G' are formally the same as those involving exponents in G, it is clear that 
1/!(xy) = 1/!(x)l/!(y) for any elements x and y in G, so 1/1 is indeed a homomorphism. + 
Perhaps we should have proved the first part of Theorem 20.12 earlier, rather than 
having relegated it to the exercises. Note that the theorem states that a homomorphism of 
a group is completely determined if we know its value on each element of a generating 
set. In particular, a homomorphism of a cyclic group is completely determined by its 
value on any single generator of the group. 
20.13 Theorem 
Every group G' is a homomorphic image of a free group G. 
Proof Let G' = {a/ Ii E /}, and let A = {a; Ii E /} be a set with the same number of elements 
as G'. Let G = F[A]. Then by Theorem 20.12 there exists a homomorphism 1/1 mapping 
G into G' such that 1/!(a;) = a;'. Clearly the image of G under 1/1 is all of G'. 
+ 
Another Look at Free Abelian Groups 
It is important that we do not confuse the notion of a free group with the notion of 
a free abelian group. A free group on more than one generator is not abelian. In the 
preceding section, we defined a free abelian group as an abelian group that has a basis, 
that is, a generating set satisfying properties described in Theorem 19 .1. There is another 
approach, via free groups, to free abelian groups. We now describe this approach. 
Let F[A] be the free group on the generating set A. We shall write Fin place of F[A] 
for the moment. Note that F is not abelian if A contains more than one element. Let C 
be the commutator subgroup of F. Then F / C is an abelian group, and it is not hard to 
show that F / C is free abelian with basis { aC I a E A}. If aC is renamed a, we can view 
F / Cas a free abelian group with basis A. This indicates how a free abelian group having 
a given set as basis can be constructed. Every free abelian group can be constructed in 
this fashion, up to isomorphism. That is, if G is free abelian with basis X, form the free 
group F[X], form the factor group of F[X] modulo its commutator subgroup, and we 
have a group isomorphic to G. 
Theorems 20.7, 20.9, and 20.10 hold for free abelian groups as well as for free 
groups. In fact, the abelian version of Theorem 20.10 was proved for the finite rank 
case in Theorem 19.11. In contrast to Example 20.11 for free groups, it is true that 
for a free abelian group the rank of a subgroup is at most the rank of the entire group. 
Theorem 19 .11 also showed this for the finite rank case. 

176 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
• EXERCISES 20 
Computations 
1. Find the reduced form and the inverse of the reduced form of each of the following words. 
a. a2b- 1 b3a3c
1c4b- 2 
b. a2a- 3b3a4c4c2a- 1 
2. Compute the products given in parts (a) and (b) of Exercise l in the case that {a, b, c} is a set of generators 
forming a basis for a free abelian group. Find the inverse of these products. 
3. How many different homomorphisms are there of a free group of rank 2 into 
a. '.l.4? 
b. Z6? 
4. How many different homomorphisms are there of a free group of rank 2 onto 
a. '.l.4? 
b. Z6? 
5. How many different homomorphisms are there of a free abelian group of rank 2 into 
a. '.l.4? 
b. Z6? 
c. S3? 
6. How many different homomorphisms are there of a free abelian group of rank 2 onto 
a. '.l.4? 
b. Z6? 
c. S3? 
Concepts 
In Exercises 7 and 8, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
7. A reduced word is one in which there are no appearances in juxtaposition of two syllables having the same 
letter and also no appearances of a syllable with exponent 0. 
8. The rank of a free group is the number of elements in a set of generators for the group. 
9. Take one of the instances in this section in which the phrase "It would seem obvious that" was used and discuss 
your reaction in that instance. 
10. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every proper subgroup of a free group is a free group. 
b. Every proper subgroup of every free abelian group is a free group. 
c. A homomorphic image of a free group is a free group. 
d. Every free abelian group has a basis. 
e. The free abelian groups of finite rank are precisely the finitely generated abelian groups. 
f. No free group is free. 
g. No free abelian group is free. 
h. No free abelian group of rank > l is free. 
i. Any two free groups are isomorphic. 
j. Any two free abelian groups of the same rank are isomorphic. 
Theory 
11. Let G be a finitely generated abelian group with identity 0. A finite set {b1, · · · , b11 }, where b; E G, is a basis 
for G if {b1, · · · , b11 ) generates G and I:;~, m;b; = 0 if and only if each m;b; = 0, where m; E Z. 
a. Show that {2, 3} is not a basis for '.l.4. Find a basis for '.l.4. 
b. Show that both {l} and {2, 3} are bases for Z6. (This shows that for a finitely generated abelian group 
G with torsion, the number of elements in a basis may vary; that is, it need not be an invariant of the 
group G.) 
c. Is a basis for a free abelian group as we defined it in Section 19 a basis in the sense in which it is used in 
this exercise? 
d. Show that every finite abelian group has a basis {b1 , · · · , b11 ), where the order of b; divides the order of 
b;+l· 

Section 21 
Group Presentations 
177 
In present-day expositions of algebra, a frequently used technique (particularly by the disciples of N. Bourbaki) 
for introducing a new algebraic entity is the following: 
1. Describe algebraic properties that this algebraic entity is to possess. 
2. 
Prove that any two algebraic entities with these properties are isomorphic, that is, that these 
properties characterize the entity. 
3. Show that at least one such entity exists. 
The next three exercises illustrate this technique for three algebraic entities, each of which we have met before. 
So that we do not give away their identities, we use fictitious names for them in the first two exercises. The last 
part of these first two exercises asks us to give the usual name for the entity. 
12. Let G be any group. An abelian group G* is a blip group of G if there exists a fixed homomorphism if> of G 
onto G* such that each homomorphism 1/1 of G into an abelian group G' can be factored as 1/1 = Be/>, where e 
is a homomorphism of G* into G' (see Fig. 20.14). 
a. Show that any two blip groups of G are isomorphic. [Hint: Let G1 * and G2* be two blip groups of G. 
Then each of the fixed homomorphisms 1>1 : G--+ G1 * and 1>2 : G--+ G2* can be factored via the other 
blip group according to the definition of a blip group; that is, c/>1 = 811>2 and c/>2 = 82if>1. Show that 81 is an 
isomorphism of G2* onto G1 * by showing that both 8182 and 8281 are identity maps.] 
b. Show for every group G that a blip group G* of G exists. 
c. What concept that we have introduced before corresponds to this idea of a blip group of G? 
20.14 Figure 
20.15 Figure 
13. Let S be any set. A group G together with a fixed function g : S --+ G constitutes a blop group on S if for each 
group G' and map f : S --+ G' there exists a unique homomorphism if>J of G into G' such that f = if>Jg (see 
Fig. 20.15). 
a. Let S be a fixed set. Show that if both G1, together with g1 : S--+ G1 , and G2, together with g2 : S--+ G2, 
are blop groups on S, then G1 and G2 are isomorphic. [Hint: Show that g1 and g2 are one-to-one maps and 
that g1S and g2S generate G1 and G2, respectively. Then proceed in a way analogous to that given by the 
hint for Exercise 12.] 
b. Let S be a set. Show that a blop group on Sexists. You may use any theorems of the text. 
c. What concept that we have introduced before corresponds to this idea of a blop group on S? 
14. Characterize a free abelian group by properties in a fashion similar to that used in Exercise 13. 
SECTION 21 
GROUP PRESENTATIONS 
Definition 
Following most of the literature on group presentations, in this section we let 1 be the 
identity of a group. The idea of a group presentation is to form a group by giving a set of 
generators for the group and certain equations or relations that we want the generators 
to satisfy. We want the group to be as free as it possibly can be on the generators, subject 
to these relations. 

178 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
21.1 Example 
Suppose G is free with generation x and y except for the relation .xy = yx, which we may 
express as xyx- 1y- 1 = 1. Note that the condition .xy = yx is exactly what is needed to 
make G abelian, even though xyx- 1y- 1 is just one of the many possible commutators of 
F [{x,y}]. Thus G is free abelian on two generators and is isomorphic to F[{x, y}] modulo 
its commutator subgroup. This commutator subgroup of F[{x, y}] is the smallest normal 
subgroup containing xyx- 1y- 1, since any normal subgroup containing xyx- 1y- 1 gives 
rise to a factor group that is abelian and thus contains the commutator subgroup by 
Theorem 13.22. 
.A. 
The preceding example illustrates the general situation. Let F[A] be a free group 
and suppose that we want to form a new group as much like F[A] as it can be, subject to 
certain equations that we want satisfied. Any equation can be written in a form in which 
the right-hand side is 1. Thus we can consider the equations to be r ; = 1 for i E / , where 
r; E F[A]. If we require that r ; = 1, then we will have to have 
x(r;'' )x- 1 = 1 
for any x E F[A] and n E Z. Also any product of elements equal to 1 will again have to 
equal I . Thus any finite product of the form 
TI ( 11·) - I 
Xj r ;;' xj 
, 
j 
where the r;; need not be distinct, will have to equal 1 in the new group. It is readily 
checked that the set of all these finite products is a normal subgroup R of F[A]. Thus any 
group looking as much as possible like F[A], subject to the requirements r ; = 1, also has 
r = 1 for every r ER. But F[A]/ R looks like F[A] (remember that we multiply cosets 
by choosing representatives), except that R has been collapsed to form the identity 1. 
Hence the group we are after is (at least isomorphic to) F[A]/ R. We can view this group 
as described by the generating set A and the set {r; Ii E /},which we will abbreviate {r;}. 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he idea of a group presentation already ap-
pears in Arthur Cayley's 1859 paper, "On 
the Theory of Groups as Depending on the Sym-
bolic Equation 8
11 = 1. Third Part." In this arti-
cle, Cayley gives a complete enumeration of the 
five groups of order 8, both by listing all the el-
ements of each and by giving for each a presen-
tation. For example, his third example is what is 
here called the dihedral group D4; Cayley notes 
that this group is generated by the two elements 
a,{3 with the relations a 4 = l,{32 = l ,af3 = f3a 3. 
He also shows more generally that a group of order 
mn is generated by a, f3 with the relations a"' = 1, 
{3
11 = 1, af3 = f3a 5 if and only if s"= 1 (mod m) 
(see Exercise 13). 
In 1878, Cayley returned to the theory of 
groups and noted that a central problem in that 
theory is the determination of all groups of a given 
order n. In the early 1890s, Otto Holder published 
several papers attempting to solve Cayley's prob-
lem. Using techniques similar to those discussed in 
Sections 17 and 21 , Holder determined all simple 
groups of order up to 200 and characterized all the 
groups of orders p 3,pq2,pqr, and p4 , where p, q, r 
are distinct prime numbers. Furthermore, he devel-
oped techniques for determining the possible struc-
tures of a group G, if one is given the structure of a 
normal subgroup H and the structure of the factor 
group G / H. Interestingly, since the notion of an ab-
stract group was still fairly new at this time, Holder 
typically began his papers with the definition of a 
group and also emphasized that isomorphic groups 
are essentially one and the same object. 
21.2 Definition 
Let A be a set and let {r;} 5,; F[A]. Let R be the least normal subgroup of F[A] contain-
ing the r;. An isomorphism</> of F[A] / R onto a group G is a presentation of G. The 

Section 21 
Group Presentations 
179 
sets A and { r;} give a group presentation. The set A is the set of generators for the 
presentation and each r; is a relator. Each r ER is a consequence of {r;}. An equation 
r; = 1 is a relation. A finite presentation is one in which both A and {r;} are finite 
sets. 
• 
This definition may seem complicated, but it really is not. In Example 21.1, {x,y} 
is our set of generators and xyx- 1y- 1 is the only relator. The equation xyx- 1y- 1 = 1, or 
xy = yx, is a relation. This was an example of a finite presentation. 
If a group presentation has generators Xj and relators r;, we shall use the notations 
or 
(Xj : r; = 1) 
to denote the group presentation. We may refer to F[ {xj} ]/ Ras the group with presenta-
tion (xj : r;). 
Isomorphic Presentations 
21.3 Example 
Consider the group presentation with 
A= {a} 
and 
that is, the presentation 
(a: a6 = I ). 
This group defined by one generator a, with the relation a6 = 1, is isomorphic to Z6 . 
Now consider the group defined by two generators a and b, with a2 = 1, b3 = 1, 
and ab = ba, that is, the group with presentation 
(a,b: a2,b3,aba-1b-1). 
The condition a2 = I gives a- 1 =a. Also b3 = I gives b- 1 = b2 . Thus every element 
in this group can be written as a product of nonnegative powers of a and b. The relation 
aba- 1 b- 1 = 1, that is, ab = ba, allows us to write first all the factors involving a and 
then the factors involving b. Hence every element of the group is equal to some a
111 b". 
But then a2 = 1 and b3 = 1 show that there are just six distinct elements, 
I, b, b2 , a, ab, ab2 . 
The subgroup (ab) contains the elements 1, ab, and the powers of ab: 
(ab)2 = a2b2 = b2 
(ab)3 = abb2 =a 
(ab)4 = a(ab) = b 
(ab)5 = (ab)b = ab2 . 
So this group is also a cyclic group of order 6 isomorphic with Z6. 
21.4 Example 
The dihedral group has presentation 
D,, 
(a,bla" ,b2,abab) 
since if we let a = µ, and b = p the three relations are exactly the defining relations for 
D,,. (The last relation abab = 1 is equivalent to ab = ba- 1 .) The element abab is in R 
if and only if b(abab)b- 1 is in R since Risa normal subgroup. We have b(abab)b-' = 
baba. So in any presentation with generators a and b and a relator abab, we can replace 
abab with baba and get the same subgroup R and therefore the same factor group. Hence 
the dihedral group also has presentation 
Dn 
(a,b: a" ,b2,baba). 

180 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
Setting the relators to 1 gives the equivalent presentation 
(a,b : a"= 1,b2 = l,ba = a- 1b- 1) 
which can also be rewritten as 
(a,b : a"= l, b2 = l ,ba = a"- 1b). 
The preceding examples illustrate that different presentations may give isomor-
phic groups. When this happens, we have isomorphic presentations. To determine 
whether two presentations are isomorphic may be very hard. It has been shown (see 
Rabin [22]) that a number of such problems connected with this theory are not gener-
ally solvable; that is, there is no routine and well-defined way of discovering a solution 
in all cases. These unsolvable problems include the problem of deciding whether two 
presentations are isomorphic, whether a group given by a presentation is finite, free, 
abelian, or trivial, and the famous word problem of determining whether a given word 
w is a consequence of a given set of relations {r;}. 
The importance of this material is indicated by our Theorem 20.13, which guaran-
tees that every group has a presentation. 
21.5 Example 
Let us show that 
(x,y: y2x = y,yx2y = x) 
is a presentation of the trivial group of one element. We need only show that x and y 
are consequences of the relators y2xy- 1 and yx2yx- 1, or that x = 1 and y = 1 can be 
deduced from y2 x = y and yx2y = x. We illustrate both techniques. 
As a consequence ofy2xy- 1, we getyx upon conjugation by y- 1• From yx we deduce 
x- 1y- 1, and then (X- 1y- 1)(yx2yx- 1) gives xyx- 1• Conjugating xyX- 1 by X- 1, we get y. 
From y we get y- 1, and y- 1 (yx) is x. 
Working with relations instead of relators, from y2x = y we deduce yx = 1 upon 
multiplication by y- 1 on the left. Then substituting yx = l into yx2y = x, that is, 
(yx)(xy) = x, we get xy = x. Then multiplying by x- 1 on the left, we have y = I. 
Substituting this in yx = 1, we get x = I. 
Both techniques amount to the same work, but it somehow seems more natural to 
most of us to work with relations. 
.A. 
Applications 
We conclude this chapter with two applications. 
21.6 Example 
Let us determine all groups of order 10 up to isomorphism. We know from the Funda-
mental Theorem 9.12 that every abelian group of order 10 is isomorphic to Z 1o. Suppose 
that G is nonabelian of order 10. By Sylow theory, G contains a normal subgroup Hof 
order 5, and H must be cyclic. Let a be a generator of H. Then G/ H is of order 2 and 
thus isomorphic to 22 . If b E G and b rf. H, we must then have b2 EH. Since every ele-
ment of H except I has order 5, if b2 were not equal to 1, then b2 would have order 5, 
so b would have order 10. This would mean that G would be cyclic, contradicting our 
assumption that G is not abelian. Thus b2 = I. Finally, since H is a normal subgroup of 
G, bHb- 1 = H, so in particular, bab- 1 EH. Since conjugation by bis an automorphism 
of H,bab- 1 must be another element of Hof order 5, hence bab- 1 equals a,a2,a3 , or 
a4 • But bab- 1 =a would give ba = ab, and then G would be abelian, since a and b 
generate G. Thus the possibilities for presentations of G are: 
1. (a,b: a5 = l ,b2 = l ,ba = a2b), 
2. (a,b: a5 = l ,b2 = l ,ba = a3b), 
3. (a,b: a5 = l,b2 = l ,ba = a4b). 

Section 21 
Group Presentations 
181 
Note that all three of these presentations can give groups of order at most 10, since 
the last relation ba = a; b enables us to express every product of a's and b's in G in the 
form as b'. Then as = 1 and b2 = 1 show that the set 
S = {aobo,a' bo, azbo, a3bo, a4bo, aob', a' b' , a2b', a3b', a4b' } 
includes all elements of G. 
It is not yet clear that all these elements in S are distinct, so that we have in all three 
cases a group of order 10. For example, the group presentation 
(a,b : as = l ,b2 = l ,ba = a2b) 
gives a group in which, using the associative law, we have 
a= b2a = (bb)a = b(ba) = b(a2b) = (ba)(ab) 
= (a2b)(ab) = a2(ba)b = a2(a2b)b = a4b2 = a4 
Thus in this group, a = a 4, so a3 = 1, which, together with as = I, yields a2 = I. But 
a2 = 1, together with a3 = 1, means that a= 1. Hence every element in the group with 
presentation 
(a,b: as= 1,b2 = l ,ba = a2b) 
is equal to either 1 orb; that is, this group is isomorphic to Z2 . A similar study of 
(bb)a = b(ba) 
for 
(a,b : as= l ,b2 = l ,ba = a3b) 
shows that a = a4 again, so this also yields a group isomorphic to Z2. 
This leaves just 
(a,b: as= l ,b2 = l,ba = a4b) 
as a candidate for a nonabelian group of order 10. As in Example 21.4 this is a presen-
tation of the dihedral group D5 . 
If we were unaware of the dihedral group, how would we show that the presentation 
gives a group with 10 elements? One attack is as follows. Let us try to make S into a 
group by defining (a5b1)(a"b") to be axbY, where x is the remainder of s + u(4') when 
divided by 5, and y is the remainder of t + v when divided by 2, in the sense of the 
division algorithm (Theorem 6.2). The formulas+ u(4)' is counting what the power 
of a should be after moving u copies of a by t copies of b. In other words, we use 
the relation ba = a4b as a guide in defining the product (a5b
1)(a"b") of two elements 
of S. We see that a0b0 acts as identity, and that given a"b", we can determine t and s 
successively by letting 
t = -v (mod 2) 
and then 
s = -u(4') (mod 5), 
giving a5 b', which is a left inverse for a" b". We will then have a group structure on S if 
and only ifthe associative law holds. Exercise 13 asks us to carry out the straightforward 
computation for the associative law and to discover a condition for S to be a group under 
such a definition of multiplication. The criterion of the exercise in this case amounts to 
the valid congruence 
42 = 1 (mod 5). 
Thus we do get a group of order 10. Note that 
22 ¥= 1 (mod 5) 

182 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
and 
32 
=/=- 1 (mod 5), 
so Exercise 13 also shows that 
(a,b: as= l ,b2 = l,ba = a2b) 
and 
(a,b: as= l ,b2 = l ,ba = a3b) 
do not give groups of order 10. 
21.7 Example 
Let us determine all groups of order 8 up to isomorphism. We know the three abelian 
ones: 
Using generators and relations, we shall give presentations of the nonabelian groups. 
Let G be nonabelian of order 8. Since G is nonabelian, it has no elements of order 8, 
so each element but the identity is of order either 2 or 4. If every element were of order 
2, then for a, b E G, we would have (ab)2 = 1, that is, abab = 1. Then since a2 = 1 and 
b2 = 1 also, we would have 
ba = a2bab2 = a(ab)2b = ab, 
contrary to our assumption that G is not abelian. Thus G must have an element of 
order 4. 
Let (a) be a subgroup of G of order 4. If b f/. (a), the cosets (a) and b(a) exhaust all 
of G. Hence a and bare generators for G and a4 = 1. Since (a) is normal in G (by Sylow 
theory, or because it is of index 2), G /(a) is isomorphic to Z 2 and we have b2 E (a). If 
b2 = a or b2 = a3, then b would be of order 8. Hence b2 = 1 or b2 = a2 . Finally, since 
(a) is normal, we have bab- 1 E (a), and since b(a)b- 1 is a subgroup conjugate to (a) 
and hence isomorphic to (a), we see that bab-1 must be an element of order 4. Thus 
bab- 1 =a or bab- 1 = a3• If bab- 1 were equal to a, then ba would equal ab, which 
would make G abelian. Hence bab- 1 = a3, so ba = a3 b. Thus we have two possibilities 
for G, namely, 
G1 : (a, b: a4 = l ,b2 = I,ba = a3b) 
and 
G2: (a,b: a4 = 1,b2 = a2,ba = a3b). 
Note that a- 1 = a3, and that b- 1 is b in G1 and b3 in G2 • These facts, along with 
the relation ba = a3 b, enable us to express every element in G; in the form a
111 b", as 
in Examples 21.3 and 21.6. Since a4 = 1 and either b2 = 1 or b2 = a2 , the possible 
elements in each group are 
1, 
a, 
a2 , 
a3 , 
b, 
ab, 
a2b, 
a3b. 
Thus G 1 and G2 each have order at most 8. The first group G 1 is sometimes called the 
octic group, but as we saw in Example 21.4 it is isomorphic with our old friend D4 , the 
dihedral group. For the second we can make S into a group by defining (aibi)(arfT') to be 
ax bY where y is j + s modulo 2 and if j + s < 2, then x is the remainder of i + r(2j + 1) 
when divided by 4 and if j + s = 2, then x is the remainder when i + 2 + r(2j + 1) is 
divided by 4. We leave it as an exercise to show that this operation makes S a group, 
which shows that G2 is a presentation of a group of order 8. 
Since ba = a3b ~ ab, we see that both G1 and G2 are nonabelian. That the two 
groups are not isomorphic follows from the fact that a computation shows that G1 has 
only two elements of order 4, namely, a and a3 . On the other hand, in G2 all elements 
but 1 and a2 are of order 4. We leave the computations of the tables for these groups 

Section 21 
Exercises 
183 
to Exercise 3. To illustrate suppose we wish to compute (a2b)(a3b). Using ba = a3b 
repeatedly, we get 
(a2b)(a3b) = a2(ba)a2b = a5(ba)ab = a8(ba)b = a 11b2 . 
Then for G 1, we have 
a 11b2 = a1 1 = a3, 
but if we are in G2, we get 
The group G2 is called the quaternion group. We shall encounter the quaternion 
group again in Section 32. 
.A 
• EXERCISES 21 
Computations 
1. Give a presentation of ;l4 involving one generator; involving two generators; involving three generators. 
2. Give a presentation of S3 involving three generators. 
3. Give the tables for both the octic group 
(a,b: a4 = 1,b2 = 1,ba = a3b) 
and the quaternion group 
(a,b: a4 = l,b2 = a2,ba = a3b). 
In both cases, write the elements in the order 1,a, a2,a3,b,ab,a2b,a3b. (Note that we do not have to com-
pute every product. We know that these presentations give groups of order 8, and once we have computed 
enough products the rest are forced so that each row and each column of the table has each element exactly 
once.) 
4. Determine all groups of order 14 up to isomorphism. [Hint: Follow the outline of Example 21.6 and use 
Exercise 13, part (b).] 
5. Determine all groups of order 21 up to isomorphism. [Hint: Follow the outline of Example 21.6 and use 
Exercise 13, part (b). It may seem that there are two presentations giving nonabelian groups. Show that they 
are isomorphic.] 
Concepts 
In Exercises 6 and 7, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
6. A consequence of the set of relators is any finite product of relators raised to powers. 
7. Two group presentations are isomorphic if and only if there is a one-to-one correspondence of the generators 
of the first presentation with the generators of the second that yields, by renaming generators, a one-to-one 
correspondence of the relators of the first presentation with those of the second. 
8. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every group has a presentation. 
b. Every group has many different presentations. 
c. Every group has two presentations that are not isomorphic. 
d. Every group has a finite presentation. 
e. Every group with a finite presentation is of finite order. 
f. Every cyclic group has a presentation with just one generator. 
g. Every conjugate of a relator is a consequence of the relator. 

184 
Part IV 
Advanced Group Theory 
h. Two presentations with the same number of generators are always isomorphic. 
i. In a presentation of an abelian group, the set of consequences of the relators contains the commutator 
subgroup of the free group on the generators. 
j. Every presentation of a free group has 1 as the only relator. 
Theory 
9. Use the methods of this section and Exercise 13, part (b), to show that there are no nonabelian groups of 
order 15. 
10. Show, using Exercise 13, that 
(a,b: a3 = 1,b2 = 1,ba = a2b) 
gives a group of order 6. Show that it is nonabelian. 
11. Show that the presentation 
(a,b: a3 = 1, b2 = 1,ba = a2b) 
of Exercise 10 gives (up to isomorphism) the only nonabelian group of order 6, and hence gives a group 
isomorphic to S3. 
12. We showed in Example 13.6 that A4 has no subgroup of order 6. The preceding exercise shows that such 
a subgroup of A4 would have to be isomorphic to either Z6 or S3. Show again that this is impossible by 
considering orders of elements. 
13. Let 
S = {a; tf I 0 :=: i < m, 0 :=: j < n}, 
that is, S consists of all formal products a; bi starting with a0b0 and ending with a
111- 1 bn- I. Let r be a positive 
integer, and define multiplication on S by 
(asb1)(a"bv) = cffJY, 
where x is the remainder of s + u(r 1) when divided by m, and y is the remainder oft + v when divided by n, in 
the sense of the division algorithm (Theorem 6.2). 
a. Show that a necessary and sufficient condition for the associative law to hold and for S to be a group under 
this multiplication is that r" = 1 (mod m). 
b. Deduce from part (a) that the group presentation 
(a,b: a
111 = l , b" = l, ba = a' b) 
gives a group of order mn if and only if r' = l (mod m). (See the Historical Note in this section.) 
14. Without using Exercise 13, prove that (a, b : a5 = 1, b2 = 1, ba = a3b) is a presentation for the group Z2. 
15. Is the group obtained from the group presentation with the letters a through z as generators and the words in a 
standard English dictionary as relators the trivial group? Prove your answer. 

Rings and Fields 
PART v 
Section 22 
Rings and Fields 
Section 23 
Integral Domains 
Section 24 
Fermat's and Euler's Theorems 
Section 2S 
Encryption 
SECTION 22 RINGS AND FIELDS 
All our work thus far has been concerned with sets on which a single binary operation 
has been defined. Our years of work with the integers and real numbers show that a study 
of sets on which two binary operations have been defined should be of great importance. 
Algebraic structures of this type are introduced in this section. In one sense, this section 
seems more intuitive than those that precede it, for the structures studied are closely 
related to those we have worked with for many years. However, we will be continuing 
with our axiomatic approach. So, from another viewpoint this study is more complicated 
than group theory, for we now have two binary operations and more axioms to deal with. 
Definitions and Basic Properties 
The most general algebraic structure with two binary operations that we shall study is 
called a ring. As Example 22.2 following Definition 22.1 indicates, we have all worked 
with rings since elementary school. 
22.1 Definition 
A ring (R, +, ·} is a set R together with two binary operations +and ·, which we call 
addition and multiplication, defined on R such that the following axioms are satisfied: 
~ 1 • (R, +} is an abelian group . 
.3-B2. Multiplication is associative. 
~3 . For all a, b, c E R, the left distributive law, a· (b + c) = (a· b) +(a · c) and 
the right distributive law (a+ b) · c = (a· c) + (b · c) hold. 
• 
22.2 Example 
We are well aware that axioms ~ 1 ,~2 , and ._n3 for a ring hold in any subset of the 
complex numbers that is a group under addition and that is closed under multiplication. 
For example, (Z, +, ·}, (Q, +,·),(JR.,+,·}, and (C, +, ·}are rings. 
.A. 
185 

186 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he theory of rings grew out of the study of two 
particular classes of rings, polynomial rings in 
n variables over the real or complex numbers (Sec-
tion 27) and the "integers" of an algebraic number 
field. It was David Hilbert (1862-1943) who first 
introduced the term ring, in connection with the 
latter example, but it was not until the second 
decade of the twentieth century that a fully ab-
stract definition appeared. The theory of commu-
tative rings was given a firm axiomatic foundation 
by Emmy Noether (1882-1935) in her monumen-
tal paper "Ideal Theory in Rings," which appeared 
in 1921. A major concept of this paper is the as-
cending chain condition for ideals. Noether proved 
that in any ring in which every ascending chain 
of ideals has a maximal element, every ideal is 
finitely generated. 
Emmy Noether received her doctorate from 
the University of Erlangen, Germany, in 1907. 
Hilbert invited her to Gottingen in 1915, but his ef-
forts to secure her a paid position were blocked be-
cause of her sex. Hilbert complained, "I do not see 
that the sex of the candidate is an argument against 
her admission [to the faculty] . After all, we are a 
university, not a bathing establishment." Noether 
was, however, able to lecture under Hilbert's name. 
Ultimately, after the political changes accompa-
nying the end of the First World War reached 
Gottingen, she was given in 1923 a paid position 
at the University. For the next decade, she was very 
influential in the development of the basic concepts 
of modern algebra. Along with other Jewish fac-
ulty members, however, she was forced to leave 
Gottingen in 1933. She spent the final two years of 
her life at Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia. 
It is customary to denote multiplication in a ring by juxtaposition, using ab in place 
of a · b. We shall also observe the usual convention that multiplication is performed 
before addition in the absence of parentheses, so the left distributive law, for example, 
becomes 
a(b + c) = ab + ac, 
without the parentheses on the right side of the equation. Also, as a convenience analo-
gous to our notation in group theory, we shall somewhat incorrectly refer to a ring R in 
place of a ring (R, + , ·), provided that no confusion will result. In particular, from now 
on Z will always be (Z, +, ·), and Ql, R and C will also be the rings in Example 22.2. 
We may on occasion refer to (R, +)as the additive group of the ring R. 
22.3 Example 
Let R be any ring and let M 11(R) be the collection of all n x n matrices having ele-
ments of R as entries. The operations of addition and multiplication in R allow us to add 
and multiply matrices in the usual fashion, explained in the appendix. We can quickly 
check that (M11(R), + ) is an abelian group. The associativity of matrix multiplication 
and the two distributive laws in M 11(R) are more tedious to demonstrate, but straight-
forward calculations indicate that they follow from the same properties in R. We will 
assume from now on that we know that M 11(R) is a ring. In particular, we have the rings 
M 11(Z ), M,,(Ql), M,,(IR), and M 11(C). Note that multiplication is not a commutative opera-
tion in any of these rings for n ~ 2. 
• 
22.4 Example 
Let F be the set of all functions f : lR --+ R We know that (F, +) is an abelian group 
under the usual function addition, 
if+ g)(x) = f(x) + g(x). 
We define multiplication on F by 
lfg)(x) = f(x)g(x). 
That is, Jg is the function whose value at x is f(x)g(x). It is readily checked that F 
is a ring; we leave the demonstration to Exercise 36. We have used this juxtaposition 

Section 22 
Rings and Fields 
187 
notation CJµ, for the composite function CJ(µ,(x)) when discussing permutation multipli-
cation. Ifwe were to use both function multiplication and function composition in F, we 
would use the notation fog for the composite function. However, we will use compo-
sition of functions almost exclusively with homomorphisms, which we will denote by 
Greek letters, and the usual product defined in this example chiefly when multiplying 
polynomial function'sf(x)g(x), so no confusion should result. 
.&. 
22.S Example 
Recall that in group theory, nZ is the cyclic subgroup of Z under addition consisting of 
all integer multiples of the integer n. Since (nr)(ns) = n(nrs), we see that nZ is closed 
under multiplication. The associative and distributive laws that hold in Z then assure us 
that (nZ, +, ·) is a ring. From now on in the text, we will consider nZ to be this ring. 
.&. 
22.6 Example 
Consider the cyclic group (Zn, + ). If we define for a, b E Zn the product ab as the 
remainder of the usual product of integers when divided by n, it can be shown that 
(Zn, +,-) is a ring. We shall feel free to use this fact. For example, in Z 1o we have 
(3)(7) = L This operation on Zn is multiplication modulo n. We do not check the ring 
axioms here, for they will follow in Section 30 from some of the theory we develop 
there. From now on, Zn will always be the ring (Zn, +, ·). 
.&. 
22.7Example 
If R 1,R2,· ··,Rn are rings, we can form the set R1 x R2 x · ·· x Rn of all ordered 
n-tuples (r1, r2 , · · · , rn), where r; E R;. Defining addition and multiplication of n-tuples 
by components Uust as for groups), we see at once from the ring axioms in each com-
ponent that the set of all these n-tuples forms a ring under addition and multiplication 
by components. The ring R1 x R2 x · · · x Rn is the direct product of the rings R;. 
.&. 
Continuing matters of notation, we shall always let 0 be the additive identity of a 
ring. The additive inverse of an element a of a ring is - a. We shall frequently have 
occasion to refer to a sum 
a+a+···+a 
having n summands. We shall let this sum be n · a, always using the dot. However, n · a 
is not to be interpreted as a multiplication of n and a in the ring, for the integer n may 
not be in the ring at all. If n < 0, we let 
n · a= (-a)+ (-a)+···+ (-a) 
for fnl summands. Finally, we define 
0- a = 0 
for 0 E Z on the left side of the equations and 0 E R on the right side. Actually, the 
equation Oa = 0 holds also for 0 E R on both sides. The following theorem proves this 
and various other elementary but important facts. Note the strong use of the distributive 
laws in the proof of this theorem. Axiom ~ 1 for a ring concerns only addition, and 
axiom ~2 concerns only multiplication. This shows that in order to prove anything that 
gives a relationship between these two operations, we are going to have to use axiom 
~3 . For example, the first thing that we will show in Theorem 22.8 is that Oa = 0 for 
any element a in a ring R. Now this relation involves both addition and multiplication. 
The multiplication Oa stares us in the face, and 0 is an additive concept. Thus we will 
have to come up with an argument that uses a distributive law to prove this. 
22.8 Theorem 
If R is a ring with additive identity 0, then for any a, b E R we have 
1. Oa = aO = 0, 
2. a(- b) = (- a)b = -(ab), 
3. (-a)(-b) = ab. 

188 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
Proof For Property 1, note that by axioms ,jig1 and .30i, 
aO + aO = a(O + 0) = aO = 0 + aO. 
Then by the cancellation law for the additive group (R, +), we have aO = 0. Likewise, 
Oa + Oa = (0 + O)a = Oa = 0 + Oa 
implies that Oa = 0. This proves Property 1. 
In order to understand the proof of Property 2, we must remember that, by 
definition, -(ab) is the element that when added to ab gives 0. Thus to show that 
a(-b) = -(ab), we must show precisely that a(-b) + ab = 0. By the left distributive 
law, 
a(-b) + ab = a(-b + b) = aO = 0, 
since aO = 0 by Property 1. Likewise, 
(-a)b + ab =(-a+ a)b = Ob = 0. 
For Property 3, note that 
(-a)(-b) = -(a(-b)) 
by Property 2. Again by Property 2, 
-(a(-b)) = -(-(ab)), 
and -(-(ab)) is the element that when added to -(ab) gives 0. This is ab by definition 
of -(ab) and by the uniqueness of an inverse in a group. Thus, (-a)(-b) = ab. 
+ 
Based on high school algebra it seems natural to begin a proof of Property 2 in 
Theorem 22.8 by writing (-a)b = ((- l )a)b. In Exercise 30 you will be asked to find 
an error in a "proof' of this sort. 
It is important that you understand the preceding proof. The theorem allows us to 
use our usual rules for signs. 
Homomorphisms and Isomorphisms 
From our work in group theory, it is quite clear how a structure-relating map of a ring R 
into a ring R' should be defined. 
22.9 Definition 
For rings Rand R' , a map cp : R -+ R' is a homomorphism if the following two condi-
tions are satisfied for all a, b E R: 
1. 
cp(a + b) = cp(a) + cp(b), 
2. 
cp(ab) = cp(a)cp(b). 
• 
In the preceding definition, Condition 1 is the statement that cp is a group homo-
morphism mapping the abelian group (R, +) into (R', +). Condition 2 requires that cp 
relate the multiplicative structures of the rings Rand R' in the same way. Since cp is also 
a group homomorphism, all the results concerning group homomorphisms are valid for 
the additive structure of the rings. In particular, cp is one-to-one if and only if its kernel 
Ker(cp) = {a E R I cf>(a) = O') is just the subset (0) of R. The homomorphism cp of the 
group (R, + ) gives rise to a factor group. We expect that a ring homomorphism will give 
rise to a factor ring. This is indeed the case. We delay discussion of this to Section 30, 
where the treatment will parallel our treatment of factor groups in Section 12. 

Section 22 
Rings and Fields 
189 
22.10 Example 
Let F be the ring of all functions mapping lR'. into lR'. defined in Example 22.4. For each 
a E IR'., we have the evaluation homomorphism </>a : F--+ R where <l>aif) = f(a) for 
f E F. We will work a great deal with this homomorphism in the rest of this text, for 
finding a real solution of a polynomial equation p(x) = 0 amounts precisely to finding 
a E lR'. such that </>a(p) = 0. Much of the remainder of this text deals with solving poly-
nomial equations. We leave the demonstration of the homomorphism properties for </>a 
to Exercise 37. 
..&. 
22.11 Example 
The map</> : 2--+ 2 11 where </>(a) is the remainder of a modulo n is a ring homomor-
phism for each positive integer n. We know </>(a+ b) =</>(a)+ </>(b) by group theory. 
To show the multiplicative property, write a= q1n + r 1 and b = q2n + r2 according 
to the division algorithm. Then ab = n(q 1q2n + r 1q2 + q1r2) + r 1r2. Thus </>(ab) is the 
remainder of r 1r2 when divided by n. Since </>(a)= r 1 and </>(b) = r2, Example 22.6 
indicates that </>(a)</>(b) is also this same remainder, so </>(ab) = </>(a)</>(b). From group 
theory, we anticipate that the ring 2 ,, might be isomorphic to a factor ring 2/n2 . This 
is indeed the case; factor rings will be discussed in Section 30. 
..&. 
We realize that in the study of any sort of mathematical structure, an idea of basic 
importance is the concept of two systems being structurally identical, that is, one being 
just like the other except for names. In algebra this concept is always called isomor-
phism. The concept of two things being just alike except for names of elements leads 
us, just as it did for groups, to the following definition. 
22.12 Definition 
An isomorphism </> : R --+ R' from a ring R to a ring R' is a homomorphism that is 
one-to-one and onto R'. The rings R and R' are then isomorphic. 
• 
From our work in group theory, we expect that isomorphism gives an equivalence 
relation on any collection of rings. We need to check that the multiplicative property of 
an isomorphism is satisfied for the inverse map </>- 1 : R' --+ R (to complete the symme-
try argument). Similarly, we check that ifµ : R' --+ R" is also a ring isomorphism, then 
the multiplicative requirement holds for the composite map µ</> : R --+ R" (to complete 
the transitivity argument). We ask you to do this in Exercise 38. 
22.13 Example 
As abelian groups, (2, + ) and (22 , + ) are isomorphic under the map </> : 2 --+ 22, 
with </>(x) = 2x for x E 2 . Here </> is not a ring isomorphism, for </>(xy) = 2xy, while 
</>(x)</>(y) = 2x2y = 4.xy. 
..&. 
Multiplicative Questions: Fields 
Many of the rings we have mentioned, such as 2 , Q, and R have a multiplicative identity 
element 1. However, 22 does not have an identity element for multiplication. Note also 
that multiplication is not commutative in the matrix rings described in Example 22.3. 
It is evident that (0), with 0 + 0 = 0 and (0)(0) = 0, gives a ring, the zero ring. 
Here 0 acts as multiplicative as well as additive identity element. By Theorem 22.8, 
this is the only case in which 0 could act as a multiplicative identity element, for from 
Oa = 0, we can then deduce that a = 0. Theorem 1.15 shows that if a ring has a multi-
plicative identity element, it is unique. We denote a multiplicative identity element in a 
ring by 1. 
22.14 Definition 
A ring in which the multiplication is commutative is a commutative ring. A ring with a 
multiplicative identity element is a ring with unity; the multiplicative identity element 
l is called "unity." 
• 

190 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
In a ring with unity 1 the distributive Jaws show that 
(1 + 1 + ... + 1) (1+1 + . .. + 1) = (1 + 1 + . . . + 1), 
n summands 
m summands 
nm summands 
that is, (n · 1 )(m · 1) = (nm) · 1. The next example gives an application of this observation. 
22.15 Example 
We claim that for integers rand s where gcd(r,s) = 1, the rings Zrs and Zr x Zs are 
isomorphic. Additively, they are both cyclic abelian groups of order rs with generators 
1 and (1, 1) respectively. Thus if> : Zrs --+ Zr x Zs defined by if>(n · 1) = n · (1, 1) is an 
additive group isomorphism. To check the multiplicative Condition 2 of Definition 22.9, 
we use the observation preceding this example for the unity (1, 1) in the ring Zr x Z 5 , 
and compute. 
if>(nm) =(nm)· (1, 1) = [n · (1, l)][m · (1, l)] = if>(n)if>(m). 
.&. 
Note that a direct product R = R1 x R2 x · · · x R,, of rings is commutative if and 
and only if each ring R; is commutative. Furthermore, R has a unity if and only if each 
R; has a unity. 
The set R* of nonzero real numbers forms a group under multiplication. However, 
the nonzero integers do not form a group under multiplication since only the integers I 
and -1 have multiplicative inverses in Z. In general, a multiplicative inverse of an ele-
ment a in a ring R with unity l ¥: 0 is an element a- 1 ER such that aa- 1 = a-' a = 1. 
Precisely as for groups, a multiplicative inverse for an element a in R is unique, if it 
exists at all (see Exercise 45). Theorem 22.8 shows that it would be hopeless to have 
a multiplicative inverse for 0 except for the ring (0), where 0 + 0 = 0 and (0)(0) = 0, 
with 0 as both additive and multiplicative identity element. We are thus Jed to discuss 
the existence of multiplicative inverses for nonzero elements in a ring with nonzero 
unity. There is unavoidably a lot of terminology to be defined in this introductory 
section on rings. We are almost done. 
22.16 Definition 
Let R be a ring with unity I ¥: 0. An element u in Risa unit of R if it has a multiplicative 
inverse in R. If every nonzero element of R is a unit, then Risa division ring (or skew 
field). A field is a commutative division ring. A noncommutative division ring is called 
a "strictly skew field." 
• 
22.17 Example 
Let us find the units in Z 14• Of course, 1 and - 1 = 13 are units. Since (3)(5) = 1 we 
see that 3 and 5 are units; therefore -3 = 11 and -5 = 9 are also units. None of the 
remaining elements of Z 14 can be units, since no multiple of 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, or I 0 can be 
one more than a multiple of 14; they all have a common factor, either 2 or 7, with 
14. Section 24 will show that the units in Z,, are precisely those m E Z,, such that 
gcd (m, n) = 1. 
.&. 
22.18 Example 
Z is not a field, because 2, for example, has no multiplicative inverse, so 2 is not a unit 
in Z. The only units in Z are 1 and -1. However, Ql and R are fields. An example of a 
strictly skew field is given in Section 32. 
.&. 
We have the natural concepts of a subring of a ring and a subfield of a field. A 
subring of a ring is a subset of the ring that is a ring under induced operations from the 
whole ring; a subfield is defined similarly for a subset of a field. In fact, Jet us say here 
once and for all that if we have a set, together with a certain specified type of algebraic 
structure (group, ring, field, integral domain, vector space, and so on), then any subset 
of this set, together with a natural induced algebraic structure that yields an algebraic 
structure of the same type, is a substructure. If K and Lare both structures, we shall let 
K ::::: L denote that K is a substructure of L and K < L denote that K ::::: L but K ¥: L. 
Exercise 50 gives criteria for a subset Sofa ring R to form a subring of R. 

• HISTORICAL NOTE 
A
lthough fields were implict in the early work 
on the solvability of equations by Abel 
and Galois, it was Leopold Kronecker (1823-
1891) who in connection with his own work 
on this subject first published in 1881 a defi-
nition of what he called a "domain of rational-
ity'': "The domain of rationality (R', R", R"', · · ·) 
contains · · · 
every one of those quantities 
which are rational functions of the quanti-
ties R', R", R"', · · · 
with integral coefficients." 
Kronecker, however, who insisted that any math-
ematical subject must be constructible in finitely 
many steps, did not view the domain of ratio-
nality as a complete entity, but merely as a re-
gion in which took place various operations on its 
elements. 
Richard Dedekind (1831-1916), the inventor 
of the Dedekind cut definition of a real number, 
Section 22 
Exercises 
191 
considered a field as a completed entity. In 1871, 
he published the following definition in his sup-
plement to the second edition of Dirichlet's text on 
number theory: "By a field we mean any system of 
infinitely many real or complex numbers, which in 
itself is so closed and complete, that the addition, 
subtraction, multiplication, and division of any two 
numbers always produces a number of the same 
system." Both Kronecker and Dedekind had, how-
ever, dealt with their varying ideas of this notion as 
early as the 1850s in their university lectures. 
A more abstract definition of a field, similar to 
the one in the text, was given by Heinrich Weber 
(1842-1913) in a paper of 1893. Weber's defini-
tion, unlike that of Dedekind, specifically included 
fields with finitely many elements as well as other 
fields, such as function fields, which were not sub-
fields of the field of complex numbers. 
Finally, be careful not to confuse our use of the words unit and unity. Unity is 
the multiplicative identity element, while a unit is any element having a multiplicative 
inverse. Thus the multiplicative identity element or unity is a unit, but not every unit is 
unity. For example, -1 is a unit in Z, but -1 is not unity, that is, -1 ~ 1. 
• EXERCISES 22 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 6, compute the product in the given ring. 
1. (12)(16) in Z24 
3. (1 1)(-4) in Z1s 
5. (2,3)(3,5) in Zs x Z9 
2. (16)(3) in Z32 
4. (20)( -8) in Z26 
6. (-3,5)(2,-4) in Z4 x Z11 
In Exercises 7 through 13, decide whether the indicated operations of addition and multiplication are defined 
(closed) on the set, and give a ring structure. If a ring is not formed, tell why this is the case. If a ring is formed, 
state whether the ring is commutative, whether it has unity, and whether it is a field. 
7. nZ with the usual addition and multiplication 
8. z+ with the usual addition and multiplication 
9. Z x Z with addition and multiplication by components 
10. 2Z x Z with addition and multiplication by components 
11. {a + b../21 a, b E Z} with the usual addition and multiplication 
12. {a+ b../21 a, b E Q ) with the usual addition and multiplication 
13. The set of all pure imaginary complex numbers ri for r E lR with the usual addition and multiplication 

192 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
In Exercises 14 through 19, describe all units in the given ring 
14. z 
17. Q 
15. z x z 
18. z x Q x z 
20. Consider the matrix ring M1(Z2). 
a. Find the order of the ring, that is, the number of elements in it. 
b. List all units in the ring. 
21. If possible, give an example of a homomorphism <P : R --+ R' where R and R' are rings with unity 1 f 0 and 
l' f O' , and where </J(l) f O' and </J(l) f l' . 
22. (Linear algebra) Consider the map det of M11(1R) into lR where det(A) is the determinant of the matrix A for 
A E M11(1R). Is det a ring homomorphism? Why or why not? 
23. Describe all ring homomorphisms of Z into Z. 
24. Describe all ring homomorphisms of Z into Z x Z . 
25. Describe all ring homomorphisms of Z x Z into Z. 
26. How many homomorphisms are there of Z x Z x Z into Z? 
27. Consider this solution of the equation X2 = 13 in the ring M3(JR). 
X2 = /3 implies X2 - /J = 0, the zero matrix, so factoring, we have (X - /3)(X + /j) = 0 
whence either X = /3 or X = - /3. 
Is this reasoning correct? If not, point out the error, and if possible, give a counterexample to the conclusion. 
28. Find all solutions of the equation x2 + x - 6 = 0 in the ring Z 14 by factoring the quadratic polynomial. Com-
pare with Exercise 27. 
29. Find all solutions to the equations x2 + x - 6 = 0 in the ring Z13 by factoring the quadratic polynomial. Why 
are there not the same number of solutions in Exercise 28? 
30. What is wrong with the following attempt at a proof of Property 2 in Theorem 22.8? 
(- a)b = ((- l)a)b = (- l)(ab) = - (ab). 
Concepts 
In Exercises 31 and 32, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
31. A field Fis a ring with nonzero unity such that the set of nonzero elements of Fis a group under multiplication. 
32. A unit in a ring is an element of magnitude 1. 
33. Give an example of a ring having two elements a and b such that ab = 0 but neither a nor b is zero. 
34. Give an example of a ring with unity I f 0 that has a subring with nonzero unity I' f I. [Hint: Consider a 
direct product, or a subring of Z6-l 
35. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every field is also a ring. 
b. Every ring has a multiplicative identity. 
c. Every ring with unity has at least two units. 
d. Every ring with unity has at most two units. 
e. It is possible for a subset of some field to be a ring but not a subfield, under the induced operations. 
f. The distributive laws for a ring are not very important. 
g. Multiplication in a field is commutative. 
h. The nonzero elements of a field form a group under the multiplication in the field. 
i. Addition in every ring is commutative. 
j . Every element in a ring has an additive inverse. 

Section 22 
Exercises 
193 
Theory 
36. Show that the multiplication defined on the set F of functions in Example 22.4 satisfies axioms .9'6i and ~3 
for a ring. 
37. Show that the evaluation map <Pa of Example 22.10 is a ring homomorphism. 
38. Complete the argument outlined after Definitions 22.12 to show that isomorphism gives an equivalence relation 
on a collection of rings. 
39. Show that if U is the collection of all units in a ring (R, +, ·) with unity, then (U, ·) is a group. [Warning: Be 
sure to show that U is closed under multiplication.] 
40. Show that a2 - b2 =(a + b)(a - b) for all a and b in a ring R if and only if R is commutative. 
41. Let (R, +) be an abelian group. Show that (R, +,·) is a ring if we define ab = 0 for all a, b E R. 
42. Show that the rings 2Z and 3Z are not isomorphic. Show that the fields lR and IC are not isomorphic. 
43. (Freshman exponentiation) Let p be a prime. Show that in the ring Zp we have (a+ bY' = aP + fJP for all 
a, b E Zp. [Hint: Observe that the usual binomial expansion for (a+ b)n is valid in a commutative ring.] 
44. Show that the unity element in a subfield of a field must be the unity of the whole field, in contrast to Exer-
cise 34 for rings. 
4S. Show that the multiplicative inverse of a unit in a ring with unity is unique. 
46. An element a of a ring R is idempotent if a2 = a. 
a. Show that the set of all idempotent elements of a commutative ring is closed under multiplication. 
b. Find all idempotents in the ring Z 6 x Z 12. 
47. (Linear algebra) Recall that for an m x n matrix A, the transpose AT of A is the matrix whose jth column 
is the jth row of A. Show that if A is an m x n matrix such that ATA is invertible, then the projection matrix 
P = A(ATA)- 1 AT is an idempotent in the ring of n x n matrices. 
48. An element a of a ring R is nilpotent if a" = 0 for some n E z+. Show that if a and b are nilpotent elements 
of a commutative ring, then a+ b is also nilpotent. 
49. Show that a ring R has no nonzero nilpotent element if and only if 0 is the only solution of x2 = 0 in R. 
SO. Show that a subset Sofa ring R gives a subring of R if and only if the following hold: 
0 ES; 
(a - b) E S for all a, b E S; 
ab E S for all a, b E S. 
Sl. a. Show that an intersection of subrings of a ring R is again a subring of R. 
b. Show that an intersection of subfields of a field Fis again a subfield of F. 
S2. Let R be a ring, and let a be a fixed element of R. Let la = {x E R I ax = 0). Show that la is a subring of R. 
S3. Let R be a ring, and let a be a fixed element of R. Let Ra be the subring of R that is the intersection of all 
subrings of R containing a (see Exercise 51 ). The ring Ra is the subring of R generated by a. Show that the 
abelian group (Ra,+) is generated (in the sense of Section 7) by {a" In E z+j. 
S4. (Chinese Remainder Theorem for two congruences) Let rand s be positive integers such that gcd(r, s) = I. 
Use the isomorphism in Example 22. 15 to show that for m, n E Z, there exists an integer x such that x = m 
(mod r) and x = n (mod s). 
SS. a. State and prove the generalization of Example 22.15 for a direct product with n factors. 
b. Prove the Chinese Remainder Theorem: Let a;, b; E z+ for i = 1, 2, · · · , n and let gcd(b;, bj) = 1 for i =f. j . 
Then there exists x E z+ such that x =a; (mod b;) for i = 1, 2, · · · , n. 
S6. Consider (S, + , -), where S is a set and+ and · are binary operations on S such that 
(S, + ) is a group, 
(S*, ·) is a group where S* consists of all elements of S except the additive identity element, 
a(b + c) = (ab) + (ac) and (a + b)c = (ac) + (be) for all a, b, c E S. 

194 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
Show that (S, + , ·) is a division ring. [Hint: Apply the distributive laws to (I + I )(a+ b) to prove the commu-
tativity of addition.] 
57. A ring R is a Boolean ring if a2 = a for all a E R, so that every element is idempotent. Show that every 
Boolean ring is commutative. 
58. (For students having some knowledge of the laws of set theory) For a set S, let 9 (S) be the collection of all 
subsets of S. Let binary operations + and · on 9 (S) be defined by 
A+ B = (AU B) - (An B) = {x Ix EA or x E B but x ~ (An B)} 
and 
A·B=AnB 
for A, B E 9 (S). 
a. Give the tables for+ and· for 9 (S), where S = {a, b). [Hint: 9 (S) has four elements.] 
b. Show that for any set S, (9 (S), +,·) is a Boolean ring (see Exercise 57). 
SECTION 23 
INTEGRAL DOMAINS 
While a careful treatment of polynomials is not given until Section 27, for purposes of 
motivation we shall make intuitive use of them in this section. 
Divisors of Zero and Cancellation 
One of the most important algebraic properties of our usual number system is that a 
product of two numbers can be 0 only if at least one of the factors is 0. We have used 
this fact many times in solving equations, perhaps without realizing that we were using 
it. Suppose, for example, we are asked to solve the equation 
x2 - 5x+ 6 = 0. 
The first thing we do is factor the left side: 
x2 - 5x + 6 = (x - 2)(x - 3). 
Then we conclude that the only possible values for x are 2 and 3. Why? The reason is 
that if x is replaced by any number a, the product (a - 2)(a - 3) of the resulting numbers 
is 0 if and only if either a - 2 = 0 or a - 3 = 0. 
23.1 Example 
Solve the equation x2 - 5x + 6 = 0 in Z 12. 
Solution 
The factorization x2 - 5x + 6 = (x - 2)(x - 3) is still valid if we think of x as standing 
for any number in Z 12 . But in Z 12 , not only is Oa = aO = 0 for all a E Z 12 , but also 
(2)(6) = (6)(2) = (3)(4) = (4)(3) = (3)(8) = (8)(3) 
= (4)(6) = (6)(4) = (4)(9) = (9)(4) = (6)(6) = (6)(8) 
= (8)(6) = (6)(10) = (10)(6) = (8)(9) = (9)(8) = 0. 
We find, in fact, that our equation has not only 2 and 3 as solutions, but also 6 and 11, 
for (6 - 2)(6 - 3) = (4)(3) = 0 and (11 - 2)(11 - 3) = (9)(8) = 0 in Z 12. 
.._ 
These ideas are of such importance that we formalize them in a definition. 
23.2 Definition 
If a and b are two nonzero elements of a ring R such that ab = 0, then a and b are 
divisors of 0 (or 0 divisors). 
• 

Section 23 
Integral Domains 
195 
Example 23.1 shows that in 2 12 the elements 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, and 10 are divisors of 
0. Note that these are exactly the numbers in 2 12 that are not relatively prime to 12, that 
is, whose gcd with 12 is not 1. 
If R is a ring with unity and a is a unit in R, then a is not a divisor of 0. To see this, 
note that if ab = 0, then a- 1ab = 0, sob= 0. Similarly, if ba = 0, then baa- 1 = 0, so 
b = 0. Theorem 23.3 shows that in the ring Z 11 every element is either 0, a unit, or a 0 
divisor. 
23.3 Theorem 
Let m E Z 11 • Either m = 0, m is relatively prime ton, in which case m is a unit in Z 11 , or 
m is not relatively prime ton, in which case m is a 0 divisor in Z11 • 
Proof 
We first suppose that m f= 0 and gcd(m, n) = d f= 1. Then, using integer multiplication 
is a multiple of n, so in Z,,, 
Neither m nor n/ d is 0 in Z11 • Thus m is a divisor of 0. 
Now suppose that gcd(m, n) = 1. Then there are integers a and b such that 
an+ bm = 1. By the division algorithm, there are integers q and r such that 0 '.'S 
r '.'S n - 1 and b = nq + r. We can write 
rm = (b - nq)m = bm - nqm = (1 - an) - nqm = 1 - n(a + qm). 
So in Z 11 , rm = mr = I and m is a unit. 
• 
23.4 Example 
Classify each nonzero element of Z20 as a unit or a 0 divisor. 
Solution 
The greatest common divisor of m and 20 is l if m = 1, 3, 7, 9, 11, 13, 17, 19, so these 
are all units. Form = 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, gcd(m, 20) > 1, so these are all 
0 divisors. We see that 
l · l = 3 · 7 = 9 · 9 = 11 · 11 = 13 · 17 = 19 · 19 = l E Z 20 
which verifies that each is a unit. We also see that 
2 · 10 = 4 · 5 = 6 · 10 = 8 · 15 = 12 · 5 = 14 · 10 = 16 · 5 = 18 · 10 = 0 E Z20 
which verifies that each of these is a 0 divisor in Z20. 
23.5 Corollary If p is a prime number, then every nonzero element of Zp is a unit, which means that Zp 
is a field and it has no divisors of 0. 
Proof 
For any 0 < m '.'S p - I, gcd(m,p) = I. Som is a unit in Zp by Theorem 23.3. 
+ 
The preceding corollary shows that when we consider the ring M11(Zp), we are talk-
ing about a ring of matrices over a field. In the typical undergraduate linear algebra 
course, only the field properties of the real or complex numbers are used in much of the 
work. Such notions as matrix reduction to solve linear systems, determinants, Cramer's 
rule, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, and similarity transformations to try to diagonalize a 
matrix are valid using matrices over any field; they depend only on the arithmetic prop-
erties of a field. Considerations of linear algebra involving notions of magnitude, such 

196 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
as least-squares approximate solutions or orthonormal bases, make sense only when 
using fields where we have an idea of magnitude. The relation 
p·l=l+l+·· · + l=O 
p summands 
indicates that there can be no very natural notion of magnitude in the field 'llp. 
Another indication of the importance of the concept of 0 divisors is shown in the 
following theorem. Let R be a ring, and let a, b, c E R. The cancellation laws hold in 
R if ab = ac with a 'I 0 implies b = c, and ba = ea with a 'I 0 implies b = c. These 
are multiplicative cancellation laws. Of course, the additive cancellation laws hold in R, 
since (R, +) is a group. 
23.6 Theorem 
The cancellation laws hold in a ring R if and only if R has no divisors of 0. 
Proof Let R be a ring in which the cancellation laws hold, and suppose ab = 0 for some 
a, b E R. We must show that either a orb is 0. If a 'I 0, then ab = aO implies that b = 0 
by cancellation laws. Therefore, either a = 0 or b = 0. 
Conversely, suppose that R has no divisors of 0, and suppose that ab = ac with 
a 'I 0. Then 
ab - ac = a(b - c) = 0. 
Since a 'I 0, and since R has no divisors of 0, we must have b - c = 0, so b =c. 
A similar argument shows that ba = ea with a 'I 0 implies b = c. 
+ 
Suppose that R is a ring with no divisors ofO. Then an equation ax = b, with a 'I 0, 
in R can have at most one solution x in R, for if ax1 = b and ax2 = b, then ax1 = ax2 , 
and by Theorem 23.6 x1 = x2 , since R has no divisors of 0. If R has unity 1 'I 0 and a is 
a unit in R with multiplicative inverse a- 1, then the solution x of ax = b is a- 1 b. In the 
case that R is commutative, in particular if R is a field, it is customary to denote a- 1 b 
and ba- 1 (they are equal by commutativity) by the formal quotient b/ a. This quotient 
notation must not be used in the event that R is not commutative, for then we do not 
know whether b/a denotes a- 1 b or ba- 1• In particular, the multiplicative inverse a - 1 of 
a nonzero element a of a field may be written l/ a. 
Integral Domains 
The integers are really our most familiar number system. In terms of the algebraic prop-
erties we are discussing, 'll is a commutative ring with unity and no divisors of 0. Surely 
this is responsible for the name that the next definition gives to such a structure. 
23.7 Definition 
An integral domain Dis a commutative ring with unity 1 'I 0 that contains no divisors 
~Q 
• 
Thus, if the coefficients of a polynomial are from an integral domain, one can solve 
a polynomial equation in which the polynomial can be factored into linear factors in 
the usual fashion by setting each factor equal to 0. 
In our hierarchy of algebraic structures, an integral domain belongs between a com-
mutative ring with unity and a field, as we shall show. Theorem 23.6 shows that the 
cancellation laws for multiplication hold in an integral domain. 
23.8 Example 
We have seen that 'll and 'llp for any prime p are integral domains, but 'lln is not an 
integral domain if n is not prime. A moment of thought shows that the direct product 
R x S of two nonzero rings R and S is not an integral domain. Just observe that for r E R 
and s E S both nonzero, we have (r, 0)(0, s) = (0, 0). 
.A. 

Section 23 
Integral Domains 
197 
23.9 Example 
Show that although Z2 is an integral domain, the matrix ring M2(Z2) has divisors of 
zero. 
Solution 
We need only observe that 
In a field, every nonzero element is a unit. We saw that units cannot be divisors of 
0, so in a field there are no divisors of 0. Since multiplication in a field is commutative, 
every field is an integral domain. 
Figure 23.10 gives a Venn diagram view of containment for the algebraic structures 
having two binary operations with which we will be chiefly concerned. In Exercise 26 
we ask you to redraw this figure to include strictly skew fields as well. 
We have seen that Ql, IR, C, and z,, for p a prime number are all fields. Theorem 
23.3 implies that if Z11 is an integral domain, then Z11 is a field. In fact, the next theorem 
says that any finite integral domain is a field. The proof of this theorem is a personal 
favorite of both authors. It is done by counting, one of the most powerful techniques in 
mathematics. 
Commutative 
rings 
Rings 
with 
unity 
23.10 Figure 
A collection of rings. 
23.11 Theorem 
Every finite integral domain is a field. 
Proof Let R be a finite integral domain and a a nonzero element of R. We wish to show there 
is an element b E R such that ab = 1. To this end, we define a function! : R --+ R by 
f(x) = ax. 
We first show thatf is a one-to-one function. Suppose thatf(x1) = f(x2), then 
Xt =X2 
since a f=. 0 and cancellation holds in an integral domain. Thus f is one-to-one. Since 
R is finite and f : R --+ R is one-to-one, f must also map onto R. Therefore, there is a 
b E R such that 
l=f(a) =ab=ba 
which verifies that a is a unit. 
• 

198 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
The finite condition in Theorem 23.11 is necessary since Z is an infinite integral 
domain, which is not a field. The counting argument fails in the case where the integral 
domain is infinite since there are one-to-one functions from an infinite set to itself that 
are not onto. For example, multiplication by 2 is a one-to-one function mapping Z to Z, 
but 1 is not in the range of the function. 
In Section 39 we will see that other than Zp there are many finite integral domains 
and therefore fields. 
The Characteristic of a Ring 
Let R be any ring. We might ask whether there is a positive integer n such that n · a = 0 
for all a E R, where n · a means a + a + · · · + a for n summands, as explained in Sec-
tion 22. For example, the integer m has this property for the ring Z111 • 
23.12 Definition If for a ring R a positive integer n exists such that n · a = 0 for all a E R, then the least 
such positive integer is the characteristic of the ring R. If no such positive integer 
exists, then R is of characteristic 0. 
• 
We shall use the concept of a characteristic chiefly for fields. Exercise 35 asks us 
to show that the characteristic of an integral domain is either 0 or a prime p. 
23.13 Example 
The ring Zn is of characteristic n, while Z, Q, JR., and C all have characteristic 0. 
.A. 
At first glance, determination of the characteristic of a ring seems to be a tough job, 
unless the ring is obviously of characteristic 0. Do we have to examine every element a 
of the ring in accordance with Definition 23.12? Our final theorem of this section shows 
that if the ring has unity, it suffices to examine only a = 1. 
23.14 Theorem 
Let R be a ring with unity. If n · 1 f= 0 for all n E z+, then R has characteristic 0. If 
n · 1 = 0 for some n E z+, then the smallest such integer n is the characteristic of R. 
Proof If n · 1 f= 0 for all n E z+, then surely we cannot have n · a = 0 for all a E R for some 
positive integer n, so by Definition 23.12, R has characteristic 0. 
Suppose that n is a positive integer such that n · 1 = 0. Then for any a E R, we have 
n · a = a+ a+ · · · +a = a( I + 1 + · · · + 1) = a(n · 1) = aO = 0. 
Our theorem follows directly. 
• EXERCISES 23 
Computations 
1. Find all solutions of the equation x3 - 2x2 - 3x = 0 in Z 12-
2. Solve the equation 3x = 2 in the field /Z7; in the field Z23 . 
3. Find all solutions of the equation x2 + 2x + 2 = 0 in Z6. 
4. Find all solutions of x2 + 2x + 4 = 0 in Z6. 
In Exercises 5 through 10, find the characteristic of the given ring. 
7. /Z3 x 3/Z 
10. Z6 x Z 1s 
• 

Section 23 
Exercises 
199 
In Exercises 11 through 16, classify each nonzero element of the ring as a unit, a divisor of 0, or neither. 
13. Zts 
16. Z4 x Zs 
17. Let R be a commutative ring with unity of characteristic 4. Compute and simplify (a+ b)4 for a, b E R. 
18. Let R be a commutative ring with unity of characteristic 3. Compute and simplify (a+ b)9 for a, b E R. 
19. Let R be a commutative ring with unity of characteristic 3. Compute and simplify (a+ b)6 for a, b E R. 
20. Show that the matrix [~ ;J is a divisor of zero in M2(Z). 
Concepts 
In Exercises 21 and 22, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
21. If ab = 0, then a and bare divisors of zero. 
22. If n ·a = 0 for all elements a in a ring R, then n is the characteristic of R. 
23. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. nZ has zero divisors if n is not prime. 
b. Every field is an integral domain. 
c. The characteristic of nZ is n. 
d. As a ring, Z is isomorphic to nZ for all n ~ 1. 
e. The cancellation law holds in any ring that is isomorphic to an integral domain. 
f. Every integral domain of characteristic 0 is infinite. 
g. The direct product of two integral domains is again an integral domain. 
h. A divisor of zero in a commutative ring with unity can have no multiplicative inverse. 
i. nZ is a subdomain of Z. 
j . Z is a subfield of Q. 
24. Each of the six numbered regions in Fig. 23.10 corresponds to a certain type of a ring. Give an example of a 
ring in each of the six cells. For example, a ring in the region numbered 3 must be commutative (it is inside 
the commutative circle), have unity, but not be an integral domain. 
25. (For students who have had a semester of linear algebra) Let F be a field. Give five different characterizations 
of the elements A of M,,(F) that are divisors of 0. 
26. Redraw Fig. 23.10 to include a subset corresponding to strictly skew fields. 
Proof Synopsis 
27. Give a one-sentence synopsis of the proof of the "if" part of Theorem 23.6. 
28. Give a two-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 23.11. 
Theory 
29. An element a of a ring R is idempotent if a2 = a. Show that a division ring contains exactly two idempotent 
elements. 
30. Show that an intersection of subdomains of an integral domain Dis again a subdomain of D. 
31. Show that a finite ring R with unity 1 f= 0 and no divisors of 0 is a division ring. (It is actually a field, 
although commutativity is not easy to prove. See Theorem 32.10.) [Note: In your proof, to show that a f= 0 
is a unit, you must show that a "left multiplicative inverse" of a f= 0 in R is also a "right multiplicative 
inverse."] 

200 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
32. Let R be a ring that contains at least two elements. Suppose for each nonzero a E R, there exists a unique 
b E R such that aba = a. 
a. Show that R has no divisors of 0. 
b. Show that bab = b. 
c. Show that R has unity. 
d. Show that R is a division ring. 
33. Show that the characteristic of a subdomain of an integral domain D is equal to the characteristic of D. 
34. Show that if D is an integral domain, then {n · I In E Z) is a subdomain of D contained in every subdomain 
of D. 
35. Show that the characteristic of an integral domain D must be either 0 or a prime p. [Hint: If the characteristic 
of Dis mn, consider (m · l)(n · 1) in D.] 
36. This exercise shows that every ring R can be enlarged (if necessary) to a ring S with unity, having the same 
characteristic as R. Let S = R x Z if R has characteristic 0, and R x Z n if R has characteristic n. Let addition 
in S be the usual addition by components, and let multiplication be defined by 
(r1 , n1)(r2, n2) = (r1r2 + n1 · r2 + n2 · r1,n1n2) 
where n · r has the meaning explained in Section 22. 
a. Show that S is a ring. 
b. Show that S has unity. 
c. Show that S and R have the same characteristic. 
d. Show that the map</> : R --+ S given by </>(r) = (r, 0) for r E R maps R isomorphically onto a subring of S. 
SECTION 24 F ERMAT'S AND E ULER 'S THEOREMS 
Fermat's Th eorem 
We know that as additive groups, Z n and Z/nZ are naturally isomorphic, with the coset 
a+ nZ corresponding to a for each a E Z n. Furthermore, addition of cosets in Z/nZ 
may be performed by choosing any representatives, adding them in Z, and finding the 
coset of nZ containing their sum. It is easy to see that Z/nZ can be made into a ring by 
multiplying cosets in the same fashion, that is, by multiplying any chosen representa-
tives. While we will be showing this later in a more general situation, we do this special 
case now. We need only show that such coset multiplication is well defined, because the 
associativity of multiplication and the distributive laws will follow immediately from 
those properties of the chosen representatives in Z. To this end, choose representatives 
a + rn and b + sn, rather than a and b, from the cosets a + nZ and b + nZ. Then 
(a+ rn)(b + sn) = ab +(as+ rb + rsn)n, 
which is also an element of ab + nZ . Thus the multiplication is well-defined, and our 
cosets form a ring isomorphic to the ring Z 11 • 
Exercise 39 in Section 22 asks us to show that the units in a ring form a group 
under the multiplication operation of the ring. This is a very useful fact that we will use 
to provide simple proofs for both Fermat's Little Theorem and Euler's generalization. 
We start with Fermat's Theorem. 
24.1 Theorem 
(Little Theorem of Fermat) If a E Z and p is a prime not dividing a, then p divides 
ar-1 -
1, that is, ar- 1 = 1 (mod p) for a¥= 0 (mod p). 
Proof 
The ring Zr is a field, which implies that all the nonzero elements are units. Thus (Z;, ·) 
is a group with p -
1 elements. Any bin the group z; has order a divisor of 1z;1 = 
p -
1. Therefore 

Section 24 
Fermat's and Euler's Theorems 
201 
bp-I = 1 E Zp. 
The rings Zp and Z/pZ are isomorphic where the element b E Zr corresponds to 
the coset b + pZ. For any integer a that is not a multiple of p, a + pZ = b + pZ for 
some 0 :::: b :::: p -
1. Thus 
(a+ pZY- 1 = (b + pZY- 1 = 1 + pZ E Z/pZ. 
In other words, 
ap- I = 1 (mod p). 
24.2 Corollary If a E Z, then a''= a (mod p) for any prime p. 
• 
Proof 
The corollary follows from Theorem 24. I if a ~ 0 (mod p ). If a = 0 (mod p ), then both 
sides reduce to 0 modulo p. 
+ 
24.3 Example 
Let us compute the remainder of 8103 when divided by 13. Using Fermat's theorem, we 
have 
3103 = (812)8(87) = (18)(87) = 37 = (-5)7 
= (25)3(-5) = (-1)3(-5) = 5 (mod 13). 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he statement of Theorem 24.1 occurs in a 
Jetter from Pierre de Fermat (1601-1665) 
to Bernard Frenicle de Bessy, dated I 8 October 
1640. Fermat's version of the theorem was that 
for any prime p and any geometric progression 
a, a2, · · · , a', · · · , there is a least number aT of the 
progression such that p divides aT -
1. Further-
more, T divides p - I and p also divides all num-
bers of the form aKT -
1. (It is curious that Fermat 
failed to note the condition that p not divide a; per-
haps he felt that it was obvious that the result fails 
in that case.) 
Fermat did not in the letter or elsewhere indi-
cate a proof of the result and, in fact, never men-
tioned it again. But we can infer from other parts 
of this correspondence that Fermat's interest in this 
result came from his study of perfect numbers. 
(A perfect number is a positive integer m that is 
the sum of all of its divisors less than m; for ex-
ample, 6 = 1 + 2 + 3 is a perfect number.) Euclid 
had shown that 2
11 - 1 (2" - 1) is perfect if 2" - 1 
is prime. The question then was to find methods 
for determining whether 2" - 1 was prime. Fermat 
noted that 2" - 1 was composite if n is composite, 
and then derived from his theorem the result that if 
n is prime, the only possible divisors of 2" - 1 are 
those of the form 2kn + 1. From this result he was 
able quickly to show, for example, that 237 - 1 was 
divisible by 223 = 2 · 3 · 37 + I. 
24.4 Example 
Show that 211·213 - 1 is not divisible by 11. 
Solution 
By Fermat's theorem, 210 = 1(mod11), so 
211 ,213 - 1 = [(210)1,121 . 23) - 1 = [11,121 
23) - 1 
= 23 - 1 = 8 - 1 = 7 (mod 11). 
Thus the remainder of 211 ·213 - 1 when divided by 11 is 7, not 0. (The number 11,213 
is prime, and it has been shown that 211·213 - 1 is a prime number. Primes of the form 
2P - I where p is prime are known as Mersenne primes.) 
.A 

202 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
24.5 Example 
Show that for every integer n, the number n33 - n is divisible by 15. 
Solution 
This seems like an incredible result. It means that 15 divides 233 - 2, 333 - 3, 433 - 4, 
etc. 
Now 15 = 3 · 5, and we shall use Fermat's theorem to show that n33 - n is divisible 
by both 3 and 5 for every n. Note that n33 - n = n(n32 -
1). 
If 3 divides n, then surely 3 divides n(n32 -
1). If 3 does not divide n, then by 
Fermat's theorem, n2 = 1 (mod 3) so 
n32 -
1 = (n2) 16 -
1 = 116 -
1 = 0 (mod 3), 
and hence 3 divides n32 -
1. 
If n = 0 (mod 5), then n33 - n = 0 (mod 5). If n ~ 0 (mod 5), then by Fermat's 
theorem, n4 = 1 (mod 5), so 
n32 -
1 = (n4)8 -
1 = 18 -
1 = 0 (mod 5). 
Thus n33 -
n = 0 (mod 5) for every n also. 
Euler's Generalization 
Theorem 23.3 classifies all the elements in Zn into three categories. An element k in Z,, 
is either 0, a unit if the gcd(n, k) = 1, or else a divisor of 0 if gcd(n, k) > 1. Exercise 39 
in Section 22 shows that the units in a ring form a group under multiplication. Therefore, 
the set of nonzero elements in Z,,, which are relatively prime ton, form a multiplicative 
group. Euler's generalization of Fermat's theorem is based on the number of units in Z,,. 
Let n be a positive integer. Let rp(n) be defined as the number of positive integers 
less than or equal ton and relatively prime ton. Note that rp(l) = 1. 
24.6 Example 
Let n = 12. The positive integers less than or equal to 12 and relatively prime to 12 are 
1, 5, 7, and 11, so rp(l2) = 4. 
.&. 
By Theorem 23.3, rp(n) is the number of nonzero elements of Z,, that are not 
divisors of 0. This function rp : z+ --+ z+ is the Euler phi-function. We can now de-
scribe Euler's generalization of Fermat's theorem. 
24.7 Theorem 
(Euler's Theorem) If a is an integer relatively prime to n, then a <fJ(n) -
1 is divisible 
by n, that is, a'P<11l = 1 (mod n). 
Proof If a is relatively prime ton, then the coset a + nZ of nZ containing a contains an integer 
b < n and relatively prime to n. Using the fact that multiplication of these cosets by 
multiplication modulo n of representatives is well-defined, we have 
a <p(n) = b <fJ(ll) (mod n). 
But by Theorem 23.3, b can be viewed as an element of the multiplicative group G, of 
order rp(n) consisting of the rp(n) elements of Z,, relatively prime ton. Thus 
b <fJ(ll) = 1 (mod n), 
and our theorem follows. 
• 
24.8 Example 
Let n = 12. We saw in Example 24.6 that rp(l2) = 4. Thus if we take any integer a 
relatively prime to 12, then a4 = 1 (mod 12). For example, with a= 7, we have 74 = 
(49)2 = 2, 401 = 12(200) + 1, so 74 = 1(mod12). Of course, the easy way to compute 
74 (mod 12), without using Euler's theorem, is to compute it in Z 12 . In Z 12, we have 
7 = -5 so 
72 = (- 5)2 = (5)2 = 1 
and 
74 = 12 = 1. 

Section 24 
Fermat's and Euler's Theorems 
203 
Application to ax = b (mod m) 
We can find all solutions of a linear congruence ax = b (mod m). We prefer to work 
with an equation in Z111 and interpret the results for congruences. 
24.9 Theorem 
Let m be a positive integer and let a E Z111 be relatively prime to m. For each b E Z111 , 
the equation ax = b has a unique solution in Zm. 
Proof 
By Theorem 23.3, a is a unit in Zm and s = a- 'b is certainly a solution of the equation. 
Multiplying both sides of ax = b on the left by a- 1, we see this is the only solution . • 
Interpreting this theorem for congruences, we obtain at once the following 
corollary. 
24.10 Corollary 
If a and m are relatively prime integers, then for any integer b, the congruence ax = 
b (mod m) has as solutions all integers in precisely one residue class modulo m. 
+ 
Theorem 24.9 serves as a lemma for the general case. 
24.11 Theorem 
Let m be a positive integer and let a, b E Zm. Let d be the gcd of a and m. The equation 
ax = b has a solution in Z111 if and only if d divides b. When d divides b, the equation 
has exactly d solutions in Zm. 
Proof 
First we show there is no solution of ax = b in Zm unless d divides b. Suppose s E Zm 
is a solution. Then as - b = qm in Z, so b = as - qm. Since d divides both a and m, we 
see that d divides the right-hand side of the equation b = as - qm, and hence divides b. 
Thus a solution s can exist only if d divides b. 
Suppose now that d does divide b. Let 
a= a 1d, 
b = b1d, 
and 
m = m 1d. 
Then the equation as - b = qm in Z can be rewritten as d(a 1 s - b1) = dqm1• We see 
that as - bis a multiple of m if and only if a1s - b1 is a multiple of m1• Thus the solu-
tions s of ax = b in Z111 are precisely the elements that, read modulo m 1, yield solutions 
of a 1x = b1 in Z 1111 • Now lets E Zm, be the unique solution of a 1x = b1 in Zm, given by 
Theorem 24.9. The numbers in Zm that reduce to s modulo m1 are precisely those that 
can be computed in Zm as 
s,s+m1,s+2m1,s+3m1,.·· ,s+(d- l)m1• 
Thus there are exactly d solutions of the equation in Z111 • 
• 
Theorem 24.11 gives us at once this classical result on the solutions of a linear 
congruence. 
24.12 Corollary 
Let d be the gcd of positive integers a and m. The congruence ax = b (mod m) has a 
solution if and only if d divides b. When this is the case, the solutions are the integers 
in exactly d distinct residue classes modulo m. 
+ 
Actually, our proof of Theorem 24.11 shows a bit more about the solutions of 
ax = b (mod m) than we stated in this corollary; namely, it shows that if any solu-
tion s is found, then the solutions are precisely all elements of the residue classes 
(s + km1) + (mZ) where m1 = m/ d and k runs through the integers from 0 to d - I. 
It also tells us that we can find such ans by finding a 1 = a/d and b1 = b/ d, and solving 
a 1x = b1 (mod m1). To solve this congruence, we may consider a 1 and b1 to be replaced 
by their remainders modulo m1 and solve the equation a1x = b1 in Zm,. 

204 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
24.13 Example 
Find all solutions of the congruence 12.x = 27 (mod 18). 
Solution 
The gcd of 12 and 18 is 6, and 6 is not a divisor of 27. Thus by the preceding corollary, 
there are no solutions. 
"' 
24.14 Example 
Find all solutions of the congruence I 5x = 27 (mod 18). 
Solution 
The gcd of 15 and 18 is 3, and 3 does divide 27. Proceeding as explained before Ex-
ample 24.13, we divide everything by 3 and consider the congruence 5x = 9 (mod 6), 
which amounts to solving the equation 5x = 3 in Z6 . Now the units in Z6 are 1 and 
5, and 5 is clearly its own inverse in this group of units. Thus the solution in Z6 is 
x = (5- 1 )(3) = (5)(3) = 3. Consequently, the solutions of I 5x = 27 (mod 18) are the 
integers in the three residue classes 
3 + 18Z = {· · · , -33, -15,3,21,39, · · ·}, 
9 + 18Z = {· · ·, -27, -9, 9, 27, 45, · · · }. 
15 + 18Z = {· · · , -21, -3, 15, 33, 51, · · ·}, 
illustrating Corollary 24.12. Note the d = 3 solutions 3, 9, and 15 in Z 1s. All the 
solutions in the three displayed residue classes modulo 18 can be collected in the 
one residue class 3 + 6Z modulo 6, for they came from the solution x = 3 of 5x = 3 
in Z6. 
"' 
• EXERCISES 24 
Computations 
We will see later that the multiplicative group of nonzero elements of a finite field is cyclic. Illustrate this by finding 
a generator for this group for the given finite field. 
1. Z1 
2. Z 11 
3. Z11 
4. Using Fermat's theorem, find the remainder of 347 when it is divided by 23. 
5. Use Fermat's theorem to find the remainder of 3749 when it is divided by 7. 
6. Compute the remainder of 2<
2 11l + 1 when divided by 19. [Hint: You will need to compute the remainder of 
2 17 modulo 18.] 
7. Make a table of values of cp(n) for n _::: 30. 
8. Compute cp(p2) where p is a prime. 
9. Compute cp(pq) where both p and q are primes. 
10. Use Euler's generalization of Fermat's theorem to find the remainder of 71000 when divided by 24. 
In Exercises 11 through 18, describe all solutions of the given congruence, as we did in Examples 24.13 and 24.14. 
11. 2x = 6 (mod 4) 
13. 36x = 15 (mod 24) 
15. 39x = 125 (mod 9) 
17. 155x = 75 (mod 65) 
12. 22x = 5 (mod 15) 
14. 45x = 15 (mod 24) 
16. 4lx = 125 (mod 9) 
18. 39x = 52 (mod 130) 
19. Let p be a prime ~3 . Use Exercise 28 below to find the remainder of (p - 2) ! modulo p. 
20. Using Exercise 28 below, find the remainder of 34! modulo 37. 
21. Using Exercise 28 below, find the remainder of 49! modulo 53. 
22. Using Exercise 28 below, find the remainder of 24! modulo 29. 

Section 25 
Encryption 
205 
Concepts 
23. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. ap- l = 1 (mod p) for all integers a and primes p. 
b. aP-l = I (mod p) for all integers a such that a¥:- 0 (mod p) for a prime p. 
C. cp(n):::: n for all n E z+. 
d. cp(n) :::: n - 1 for all n E z+. 
e. The units in Zn are the positive integers less than n and relatively prime ton. 
f. The product of two units in Z,, is always a unit. 
g. The product of two non units in Z,, may be a unit. 
h. The product of a unit and a nonunit in Z,, is never a unit. 
i. Every congruence ax = b (mod p), where p is a prime, has a solution. 
j. Let d be the gcd of positive integers a and m. If d divides b, then the congruence ax = b (mod m) has 
exactly d incongruent solutions. 
24. Give the group multiplication table for the multiplicative group of units in Z 12. To which group of order 4 is it 
isomorphic? 
Proof Synopsis 
25. Give a one-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 24.1. 
26. Give a one-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 24. 7. 
Theory 
27. Show that 1 and p - 1 are the only elements of the field Zp that are their own multiplicative inverse. [Hint: 
Consider the equation x2 - 1 = 0.] 
28. Using Exercise 27, deduce the half of Wilson 's theorem that states that if p is a prime, then (p- l)! = -1 
(mod p). [The other half states that if n is an integer > 1 such that (n -
l)! = -1 (mod n), then n is a prime. 
Just think what the remainder of (n -
l)! would be modulo n if n is not a prime.] 
29. Use Fermat's theorem to show that for any positive integer n, the integer n37 -
n is divisible by 383838. [Hint: 
383838 = (37)(19)( 13)(7)(3)(2).] 
30. Referring to Exercise 29, find a number larger than 383838 that divides n37 -
n for all positive integers n. 
SECTION 25 ENCRYPTION 
An encryption scheme is a method to disguise a message so that it is extremely difficult 
for anyone other than the intended receiver to read. The sender encrypts the message 
and the receiver decrypts the message. One method, called cypher encryption, requires 
the sender to use a permutation of the letters in the alphabet to replace each letter with a 
different letter. The receiver then uses the inverse of the permutation to recover the orig-
inal message. This method has two major weaknesses. First, both the sender and the 
receiver need to know the permutation, but no one else should know the permutation or 
else the message is not secure. It would be difficult to implement a cypher for a trans-
action when a company wishes to receive many orders each day, each using a different 
permutation that only the customer and the company know. Furthermore, cyphers are 
generally not difficult to crack. In fact, some newspapers carry a daily puzzle, which is 
essentially decrypting an encrypted message. 
Researchers in the second half of the twentieth century sought a method that allows 
the receiver to publish public information that any sender could use to encrypt a mes-
sage, yet only the receiver could decrypt it. This means that knowing how a message 
was encrypted is little help in decryption. This method relies on a function that is easy 
for computers to compute, but whose inverse is virtually impossible to compute without 

206 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
more information. Functions of this type are called trap door functions. Most commer-
cial online transactions are communicated with trap door functions. This allows anyone 
to make a secure credit card purchase with little risk of a third party gaining private 
information. 
RSA Public and Private Keys 
Euler's generalization of Fermat's Theorem is the basis of a very common trap door 
encryption scheme referred to as RSA encryption. RSA comes from the names of the 
three inventors of the system, Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman. The trap 
door function relies on the fact that it is easy to multiply two large prime numbers, but 
if you are only given their product, it is very difficult to factor the number to recover 
the two prime numbers. The following theorem is the key to this encryption scheme. 
25.1 Theorem 
Let n = pq where p and q are distinct prime numbers. If a E Z with gcd(a,pq) = 1 and 
w = 1 (mod (p - l)(q -
1)), then aw = a (mod n). 
Proof Since w = 1 (mod (p - l)(q -
1)), we can write 
w=k(p-l)(q-1)+ I 
for some integer k. Recall that the Euler phi-function <f>(n) counts the number of positive 
integers less than or equal to n that are relatively prime to n. Since n = pq, we can 
compute <f>(pq) by subtracting the number of integers less than n that are divisible by 
either p or q from n -
1. There are p -
1 multiples of q and q -
1 multiples of p that 
are less than pq. Furthermore, the least common multiple of p and q is pq since p and q 
are distinct primes. Thus 
<f>(pq) = (pq -
I) -
(p -
1) - (q -
I) 
=pq-p-q+ 1 
= (p -
l)(q -
1). 
By Euler's Theorem (Theorem 24.7), 
aw = ak(p-I)(q- l)+l 
=a (a(p-l )(q- l))k 
=a (a<f>(n)/ 
= a(l k) 
=a (mod n). 
• 
The RSA encryption scheme requires two sets of positive integers called the private 
key and the public key. The private key is known only by the person who will receive 
the message, and the public key is available to anyone who wishes to send a message to 
the receiver. 
The private key consists of 
• Two prime numbers p and q with p f= q. 
• The product n = pq. 
• An integer 1 < r < (p -
l)(q -
1) -
1 that is relatively prime to (p -
l)(q -
1). 
We know that r has an inverse in z(p- I)(q- 1) since r is relatively prime to 
(p -
l)(q -
1). 

Section 25 
Encryption 
207 
The public key consists of 
• The integers where 1 < s < (p - l)(q - 1) and s is the inverse of r in Z (p - l)(q- IJ-
• The product n = pq. 
The public key does not include p, q, r, or (p - l)(q - 1). Knowing any of these 
numbers and the numbers in the public key would make it relatively easy to decrypt any 
encrypted message. 
We can now give the encryption and decryption algorithms. The sender wishes 
to send a message to the receiver. We will assume the message is simply a number 
between 2 and n - 1. To send a text message, the sender would use a standard way of 
representing the text as a number, such as the ASCII code. A long text would be broken 
up into smaller texts so that each would be coded as a number in the allowable range 
2 to n - 1 and each would be sent separately. Let 2 :S m :S n - 1 be the message to be 
sent. 
Encryption 
Using the public key, the sender encrypts the message as a number 0 :S y :S n - 1 to be 
sent to the receiver where 
y = ms (mod n). 
That is, the sender computes y to be the remainder when ms is divided by n and sends y 
to the receiver. 
Decryption 
Using the private key, the receiver decrypts y, the message received from the sender, by 
computing 
yr (mod n), 
the remainder when yr is divided by n. Since rs = 1 (mod(p - l)(q - 1)), Theorem 25.1 
says, 
yr = (ms)' = mrs = m (mod n). 
Thus the receiver reconstructs the original message m. 
Of course, in practice the prime numbers p and q are very large. As of the writ-
ing of this book it is thought that prime numbers requiring 4096 bits or approximately 
1200 digits are sufficient to make the RSA scheme secure. To illustrate how the process 
works, we will use small primes. 
25.2 Example 
Let p = 17 and q = 11. The private key consists of 
• p=l7,q=l l, 
• n = pq = 187 and 
• a number r relatively prime to (p - l)(q - 1) = 160. For this example we take 
r = 23. 
The public key consists of 
• n = 187 and 
• s = 7. A little calculation shows that 23 · 7 = 161 = 160 + 1 = 1 (mod 160), 
which implies that s = 7. Since the public key consists of only n and s, 
(p - l )(q - 1) is unknown to all but the receiver. Without knowing (p - l)(q - 1), 
the value of r cannot be determined from the value of s. 
Suppose the sender wishes to send the message m = 2 to the the receiver. The 
message is encrypted by computing 
y = 27 = 128 (mod 187). 

208 
Part V 
Rings and Fields 
The receiver recovers the original message by computing 
12823 = 2 (mod 187). 
In Example 25.2 some of the computations would be long and tedious without the use 
of a computer. For large primes p and q, it is essential to have an efficient algorithm 
to compute m 5 (mod n) and yr (mod n). This can be accomplished by using base 2. We 
illustrate with the following example. 
25.3 Example 
In Example 25.2 we needed to compute 12823 (mod 187). We can compute this value 
by expressing 23 in base 2, 23 = 16 + 4 + 2 + 1, and then computing the following: 
Thus 
1281 = 128 
1282 = 1638 = 115 (mod 187) 
1284 = (1282)2 = 1152 = 135 (mod 187) 
1288 = (1284)2 = 1352 = 86 (mod 187) 
12816 = (1288)2 = 862 = 103 (mod 187), 
12823 = 12816+4+2+1 
= (128161284)(1282 1281) 
= (103. 135)(115. 128) 
= 67. 134 
= 2 (mod 187). 
As illustrated in the above example, this method gives a more efficient computation 
of ak (mod n). 
The Euclidean algorithm is a simple and efficient way to compute the inverse of a 
unit in Z(p- l)(q- IJ- It involves the repeated use of the division algorithm. However, we 
will not discuss the Euclidean algorithm here. 
The reader may have noticed a potential flaw in the RSA encryption scheme. It is 
possible that m is a multiple of either p or q. In that case, m <P-IJ(q-I) 'f=. I (mod n), which 
means that mrs may not be equivalent to m modulo n. In this case RSA encryption fails. 
However, when using large prime numbers the probability that the message is a multiple 
of p or q is extremely low. If one is concerned about this issue, the algorithm could be 
modified slightly to be sure that the message is smaller than both p and q. 
How are the large prime numbers p and q in RSA encryption found? Basically, 
the process is to guess a value and check that it is prime. Unfortunately, there is no 
known fast method to test for primality, but it is possible to do a fast probabilistic test. 
One simple probabilistic test uses Fermat's Theorem (Theorem 24.1). The idea is to 
generate a random positive integer less than p and check if a r- 1 = 1 (modp). If p is 
prime, then ar- 1 = 1 (mod p), so if ar- 1 'f=. 1 (mod p), then p is not a prime number 
and the number p is rejected. On the other hand, if ar-1 = 1 (mod p), then p passes the 
test and p could be a prime. If p passes the test, we repeat the process for a different 
random value of a. The probability that a composite number p is picked given that p 
passes the test several times is low enough to safely assume that p is prime. 

Section 25 
Exercises 
209 
• EXERCISES 25 
In Exercises 1 through 8, the notation is consistent with the notation used in the text for RSA encryption. It may 
be helpful to use a calculator or computer. 
1. Let p = 3 and q = 5. Find n, and all possible pairs (r, s). 
2. Let p = 3 and q = 7. Find n and all possible pairs (r, s). 
3. Let p = 3 and q = 11. Find n and all possible pairs (r, s). 
4. Let p = 5 and q = 7. Find n and all possible pairs (r, s). 
5. Let p = 13, q = 17, and r = 5. Find the value of s. 
6. For RSA encryption it is assumed that the message m is at least 2. Why should m not be 1? 
7. The public key is n = 143 and s = 37. 
a. Compute the value of y if the message ism = 25. 
b. Find r. (Computer Algebra Systems have built-in functions to compute in 1'.:111.) 
c. Use your answers to parts a) and b) to decrypt y. 
8. The public key is n = 1457 and s = 239. 
a. Compute the value of y if the message is m = 999. 
b. Find r. (Computer Algebra Systems have built-in functions to compute in 1'.:111.) 
c. Use your answers to parts a) and b) to decrypt y. 
9. For p = 257, q = 359, and r = 1493 identify the private and public keys. 

This page is intentionally left blank 

PART 
VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
Section 26 
The Field of Quotients of an Integral Domain 
Section 27 
Rings of Polynomials 
Section 28 
Factorization of Polynomials over a Field 
Section 29 
Algebraic Coding Theory 
Section 30 
Homomorphisms and Factor Rings 
Section 31 
Prime and Maximal Ideals 
Section 32 
Noncommutative Examples 
SECTION 26 THE FIELD OF QUOTIENTS OF AN INTEGRAL DOMAIN 
Let L be a field and D a subring of L that contains the unity. The ring D is an integral 
domain since it has no zero divisors. Also F, the set of all quotients of the form ~ with 
a and b f= 0 both in D, forms a subfield of L. The field Fis called afield of quotients of 
the integral domain D. 
26.1 Example 
Let L = R If D = Z, then 
F = { ~ I a, b E Z, b f= 0} = Q 
which is a field. 
If D = {x + y.J2 [ x, y E Z}, then 
F = { ~ I a, b E D, b f= 0} = { : : ~~ I x, y, z, w E Z, z + wh f= 0} . 
By rationalizing the denominator we see that 
F = { r + s./2 [ r, s E Q} 
which is a field by Exercise 12 in Section 22. 
In this section, we start with an integral domain D and construct a field F. We then 
show that D is isomorphic with a subring D' of F and that F consists of all quotients ~ 
with a, b E D' , b f= 0. Thus we can think of any integral domain as being a subring of a 
field and every element of the field is the quotient of elements from the integral domain. 
The Construction 
Let D be an integral domain that we desire to enlarge to a field of quotients F . A coarse 
outline of the steps we take is as follows: 
1. Define what the elements of F are to be. 
2. Define the binary operations of addition and multiplication on F. 
211 

212 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
3. Check all the field axioms to show that F is a field under these operations. 
4. Show that F can be viewed as containing D as an integral subdomain. 
Steps 1, 2, and 4 are very interesting, and Step 3 is largely a mechanical chore. We 
proceed with the construction. 
Step 1 Let D be a given integral domain, and form the Cartesian product 
D x D = {(a, b) I a, b ED} 
We are going to think of an ordered pair (a, b) as representing a formal quotient a/ b, 
that is, if D = Z, the pair (2, 3) will eventually represent the number ~ for us. The pair 
(2, 0) represents no element of Q and suggests that we cut the set D x D down a bit. 
Let S be the subset of D x D given by 
S = {(a,b) la,b E D,b op 0}. 
Now Sis still not going to be our field as is indicated by the fact that, with D = Z, 
different pairs of integers such as (2, 3) and (4, 6) can represent the same rational 
number. We next define when two elements of S will eventually represent the same 
element of F, or, as we shall say, when two elements of Sare equivalent. 
26.2 Definition 
Two elements (a, b) and (c, d) in Sare equivalent, denoted by (a, b) - (c, d), if and only 
~~=k 
• 
Observe that this definition is reasonable, since the criterion for (a, b) - (c, d) is an 
equation ad = be involving elements in D and concerning the known multiplication in 
D. Note also that for D = Z, the criterion gives us our usual definition of equality of); 
with ~· for example, ~ = ~ since (2)(6) = (3)(4). The rational number that we usually 
denote by ~ can be thought of as the collection of all quotients of integers that reduce 
to, or are equivalent to, ~. 
26.3 Lemma 
The relation - between elements of the set Sas just described is an equivalence relation. 
Proof 
We must check the three properties of an equivalence relation. 
Reflexive (a, b) - (a, b) since ab = ba, for multiplication in Dis commutative. 
Symmetric If (a, b) - (c, d), then ad = be. Since multiplication in Dis commuta-
tive, we deduce that cb = da, and consequently (c, d) - (a, b). 
Transitive If (a, b) - (c, d) and (c, d) - (r, s), then ad= be and cs = dr. Using 
these relations and the fact that multiplication in D is commutative, we have 
asd = sad = sbc = bes = bdr = brd. 
Now d op 0, and D is an integral domain, so cancellation is valid; this is a cru-
cial step in the argument. Hence from asd = brd we obtain as = br, so that 
~~-~~· 
. 
We now know, in view of Theorem 0.22, that - gives a partition of S into equiva-
lence classes. To avoid long bars over extended expressions, we shall let [(a, b)], rather 
than (a, b), be the equivalence class of (a, b) in S under the relation -. We now finish 
Step 1 by defining F to be the set of all equivalence classes [(a, b)] for (a, b) ES. 
Step 2 The next lemma serves to define addition and multiplication in F. 
Observe that if D = Zand [(a, b)] is viewed as (a/b) E Q, these definitions applied to 
Q give the usual operations. 

Section 26 
The Field of Quotients of an Integral Domain 
213 
26.4 Lemma 
For [(a, b)] and [(e, d)] in F , the equations 
[(a, b)] + [(e, d)] = [(ad+ be, bd)] 
and 
[(a, b)][(e, d)] = [(ae, bd)] 
give well-defined operations of addition and multiplication on F. 
Proof 
Observe first that if [(a, b)] and [(e, d)] are in F, then (a, b) and (e, d) are in S, sob '=I 0 
and d '=I 0. Because Dis an integral domain, bd '=I 0, so both (ad + be, bd) and (ae, bd) 
are in S. (Note the crucial use here of the fact that D has no divisors of 0.) This shows 
that the right-hand sides of the defining equations are at least in F. 
It remains for us to show that these operations of addition and multiplication are 
well defined. That is, they were defined by means of representatives in S of elements of 
F, so we must show that if different representatives in S are chosen, the same element 
of F will result. To this end, suppose that (a 1,b1) E [(a,b)] and (e1,d1) E [(e,d)]. We 
must show that 
and 
(a1e1,b1d1) E [(ae,bd)]. 
Now (a1, b 1) E [(a, b)] means that (a 1, b 1) ~ (a, b); that is, 
Similarly, (ei, d1) E [(e, d)] implies that 
e1d = d1e. 
To get a "common denominator" (common second member) for the four pairs (a, b), 
(a1, b1 ), (e, d), and (e1 , d1 ), we multiply the first equation by did and the second equation 
by b 1b. Adding the resulting equations, we obtain the following equation in D: 
Using various axioms for an integral domain, we see that 
so 
(a1d1 + b1e1,b1d1) ~(ad+ be, bd), 
giving (a1d 1 + bie1, b1d 1) E [(ad+ be,bd)]. This takes care of addition in F. For mul-
tiplication in F, on multiplying the equations a1b = bia and e1d = d 1e, we obtain 
a1be1d = b1ad1e, 
so, using axioms of D, we get 
which implies that 
(a1e1,b1d1) ~ (ae,bd). 
Thus (a1 e1, bid1) E [(ae, bd)], which completes the proof. 
• 
It is important to understand the meaning of the last lemma and the necessity for 
proving it. This completes our Step 2. 

214 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
Step 3 Step 3 is routine, but it is good for us to work through a few of these 
details. The reason for this is that we cannot work through them unless we understand 
what we have done. Thus working through them will contribute to our understanding 
of this construction. We list the things that must be proved and prove a couple of them. 
The rest are left to the exercises. 
1. Addition in F is commutative. 
Proof 
Now [(a, b)] + [(c, d)] is by definition [(ad+ be, bd)]. Also [(c, d)] +[(a, b)] is by defi-
nition [(cb + da, db)]. We need to show that (ad+ be, bd) ~ (cb + da, db). This is true, 
since ad+ be = cb + da and bd = db, by the axioms of D. 
+ 
2. Addition is associative. 
3. 
[(O, 1)) is an identity element for addition in F. 
4. 
[(-a, b)] is an additive inverse for [(a, b)] in F. 
5. Multiplication in F is associative. 
6. 
Multiplication in F is commutative. 
7. The distributive laws hold in F. 
8. 
[(!, 1)) is a multiplicative identity element in F. 
9. If [(a, b)] E Fis not the additive identity element, then a =f. 0 in D and [(b, a)] 
is a multiplicative inverse for [(a, b)]. 
Proof 
Let [(a, b)] E F. If a= 0, then 
a l = bO = 0, 
so 
(a,b) ~ (0, I), 
that is, [(a, b)] = [(0, 1)). But [(0, l)] is the additive identity by Part 3. Thus if [(a, b)] is 
not the additive identity in F, we have a =f. 0, so it makes sense to talk about [(b, a)] in 
F. Now [(a, b)][(b, a)] = [(ab, ba)]. But in D we have ab = ba, so (ab) I = (ba) 1, and 
(ab,ba) ~ (1, 1). 
Thus 
[(a, b)][(b,a)] = [(!, l)], 
and [(l , 1)) is the multiplicative identity by Part 8. 
• 
This completes Step 3. 
Step 4 It remains for us to show that F can be regarded as containing D. To do 
this, we show that there is an isomorphism i of D with a subdomain of F . Then if we 
rename the image of D under i using the names of the elements of D , we will be done. 
The next lemma gives us this isomorphism. We use the letter i for this isomorphism to 
suggest injection; we will inject D into F. 
26.5 Lemma 
The map i: D---+ F given by i(a) = [(a, l)] is an isomorphism of D with a subring D' 
of F. 
Proof 
For a and b in D, we have 
i(a + b) = [(a+ b, l)]. 
Also, 
i(a) + i(b) =[(a, 1)) + [(b, 1)) = [(al + lb, 1)) =[(a+ b, 1)) 

Section 26 
The Field of Quotients of an Integral Domain 
215 
so i(a + b) = i(a) + i(b). Furthermore, 
i(ab) = [(ab, l )], 
while 
i(a)i(b) = [(a, l)][(b, 1)] = [(ab, l)], 
so i(ab) = i(a)i(b). 
It remains for us to show only that i is one-to-one. If i(a) = i(b), then 
[(a, l)] = [(b, l)], 
so (a, 1) ~ (b, 1) giving al = lb; that is, 
a= b. 
Thus i is an isomorphism of D with i[D] = D' , and, of course, D' is then a subdomain 
clF 
+ 
Since [(a, b)] = [(a, l)][(l, b)] = [(a, 1)]/[(b, l)] = i(a)/ i(b) clearly holds in F, we 
have now proved the following theorem. 
26.6 Theorem 
Any integral domain D can be enlarged to (or embedded in) a field F such that every 
element of F can be expressed as a quotient of two elements of D. (Such a field F is a 
field of quotients of D.) 
Uniqueness 
The field F can be regarded as a minimal field containing D. This is intuitively evident, 
since every field containing D must contain all elements a/ b for every a, b ED with 
b i= 0. The next theorem will show that every field containing D contains a subfield that 
is a field of quotients of D, and that any two fields of quotients of D are isomorphic. 
26.7 Theorem 
Let F be a field of quotients of D and Jet L be any field containing D. Then there exists a 
map 1/f : F--+ L that gives an isomorphism of F with a subfield of L such that l/f(a) = a 
fora ED. 
Proof 
The subring and mapping diagram in Fig. 26.8 may help you to visualize the situation 
for this theorem. 
An element of F is of the form a /F b where /F denotes the quotient of a E D by 
b E D regarded as elements of F. We of course want to map a /F b onto a /L b where /L 
denotes the quotient of elements in L. The main job will be to show that such a map is 
well defined. 
We must define 1/f : F --+ L, and we start by defining 
l/f (a) =a 
for 
a ED. 
L 
. / 
F ----------+- if![F] 
~fin/ 
D 
26.8 Figure 

216 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
Every x E F is a quotient a /F b of some two elements a and b, b op 0, of D. Let us 
attempt to define 1/1 by 
1/f(a /F b) = 1/f(a) /L 1/f(b). 
We must first show that this map 1/1 is sensible and well-defined. Since 1/1 is the identity 
on D, for b op 0 we have 1/f(b) op 0, so our definition of 1/f (a /F b) as 1/f(a) /L 1/f (b) makes 
sense. If a fF b = e fF d in F, then ad= be in D, so 1/f(ad) = 1/f (be). But since 1/1 is the 
identity on D, 
1/f (ad) = 1/f (a)1/f (d) 
and 
1/l(be) = 1/l(b)l/l(e). 
Thus 
1/f(a) /L 1/f(b) = 1/f(e) /L 1/f(d) 
in L, so 1/1 is well-defined. 
The equations 
1/f (xy) = 1/f (x)1/f (y) 
and 
1/f(x + y) = 1/f (x) + 1/f(y) 
follow easily from the definition of 1/1 on F and from the fact that 1/1 is the identity on D. 
If 1/f (a fF b) = 1/f(e fF d), we have 
1/f(a) /L 1/f(b) = 1/f(e) /L 1/f(d) 
so 
1/f (a)l/l(d) = 1/f(b)l/l(e). 
Since 1/1 is the identity on D, we then deduce that ad = be, so a /F b = e /F d. Thus 1/1 
is one-to-one. 
By definition, 1/f(a) =a for a E D. 
• 
26.9 Corollary 
Every field L containing an integral domain D contains a field of quotients of D. 
Proof 
In the proof of Theorem 26.7 every element of the subfield 1/f[F] of Lis a quotient in L 
of elements of D. 
+ 
26.10 Corollary 
Any two fields of quotients of an integral domain D are isomorphic. 
Proof Suppose in Theorem 26.7 that Lis a field of quotients of D, so that every element x of 
L can be expressed in the form a/Lb for a, b E D. Then Lis the field 1/f [F] of the proof 
of Theorem 26.7 and is thus isomorphic to F. 
+ 
• EXERCISES 26 
Computations 
1. Describe the field F of quotients of the integral subdomain 
D = {n + miln,m E Z } 
of C. "Describe" means give the elements of C that make up the field of quotients of D in C. (The elements of 
Dare the Gaussian integers.) 
2. Describe (in the sense of Exercise 1) the field F of quotients of the integral subdomain D = {n + m../31 n, m E Z} 
of JR.. 

Section 26 
Exercises 
217 
Concepts 
3. Correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is needed, so that it is in 
a form acceptable for publication. 
Afield of quotients of an integral domain D is a field Fin which D can be embedded so that every nonzero 
element of Dis a unit in F . 
4. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Q is a field of quotients of Z. 
b. JR is a field of quotients of Z. 
c. JR is a field of quotients of JR. 
d. C is a field of quotients of JR. 
e. If D is a field, then any field of quotients of Dis isomorphic to D. 
f. The fact that D has no divisors of 0 was used strongly several times in the construction of a field F of 
quotients of the integral domain D. 
g. Every element of an integral domain D is a unit in a field F of quotients of D. 
h. Every nonzero element of an integral domain Dis a unit in a field F of quotients of D. 
i. A field of quotients F' of a subdomain D' of an integral domain D can be regarded as a subfield of some 
field of quotients of D. 
j. Every field of quotients of Z is isomorphic to Q. 
5. Show by an example that a field F' of quotients of a proper subdomain D' of an integral domain D may also 
be a field of quotients for D. 
Theory 
6. Prove Part 2 of Step 3. You may assume any preceding part of Step 3. 
7. Prove Part 3 of Step 3. You may assume any preceding part of Step 3. 
8. Prove Part 4 of Step 3. You may assume any preceding part of Step 3. 
9. Prove Part 5 of Step 3. You may assume any preceding part of Step 3. 
10. Prove Part 6 of Step 3. You may assume any preceding part of Step 3. 
11. Prove Part 7 of Step 3. You may assume any preceding part of Step 3. 
12. Let R be a nonzero commutative ring, and let T be a nonempty subset of R closed under multiplication and 
containing neither 0 nor divisors of 0. Starting with R x T and otherwise exactly following the construction 
in this section, we can show that the ring R can be enlarged to a partial ring of quotients Q(R, T). Think about 
this for 15 minutes or so; look back over the construction and see why things still work. In particular, show 
the following: 
a. Q(R, T) has unity even if R does not. 
b. In Q(R, T), every nonzero element of T is a unit. 
13. Prove from Exercise 12 that every nonzero commutative ring containing an element a that is not a divisor of 
0 can be enlarged to a commutative ring with unity. Compare with Exercise 36 of Section 23. 
14. With reference to Exercise 12, how many elements are there in the ring Q(:l.4, {I, 3 })? 
15. With reference to Exercise 12, describe the ring Q(Z, {2" I /1 E z+}), by describing a subring of JR to which it 
is isomorphic. 
16. With reference to Exercise 12, describe the ring Q(3Z, { 6
11 I /1 E z+}) by describing a subring of JR to which it 
is isomorphic. 
17. With reference to Exercise 12, suppose we drop the condition that T have no divisors of zero and just require 
that nonempty T not containing 0 be closed under multiplication. The attempt to enlarge R to a commutative 
ring with unity in which every nonzero element of T is a unit must fail if T contains an element a that is a 
divisor of 0, for a divisor of 0 cannot also be a unit. Try to discover where a construction parallel to that in the 
text but starting with R x T first runs into trouble. In particular, for R = 2 6 and T = {l, 2, 4), illustrate the 
first difficulty encountered. [Hint: It is in Step l.] 

218 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
SECTION 27 
RINGS OF POLYNOMIALS 
Polynomials in an Indeterminate 
We all have a pretty workable idea of what constitutes a polynomial in x with coefficients 
in a ring R. We can guess how to add and multiply such polynomials and know what 
is meant by the degree of a polynomial. We expect that the set R[x] of all polynomials 
with coefficients in the ring R is itself a ring with the usual operations of polynomial 
addition and multiplication, and that Risa subring of R[x]. However, we will be working 
with polynomials from a slightly different viewpoint than the approach in high school 
algebra or calculus, and there are a few things that we want to say. 
In the first place, we will call x an indeterminate rather than a variable. Suppose, 
for example that our ring of coefficients is Z. One of the polynomials in the ring Z [x] 
is Ix, which we shall write simply as x. Now x is not 1 or 2 or any of the other elements 
of Z [x]. Thus from now on we will never write such things as "x = 1" or "x = 2," as 
we have done in other courses. We call x an indeterminate rather than a variable to 
emphasize this change. Also, we will never write an expression such as "x2 - 4 = O," 
simply because x 2 - 4 is not the zero polynomial in our ring Z [x]. We are accustomed 
to speaking of "solving a polynomial equation," and will be spending a lot of time in 
the remainder of our text discussing this, but we will always refer to it as "finding a 
zero of a polynomial." In summary, we try to be careful in our discussion of algebraic 
structures not to say in one context that things are equal and in another context that they 
are not equal. 
If a person knows nothing about polynomials, it is not an easy task to describe 
precisely the nature of a polynomial in x with coefficients in a ring R. If we just define 
such a polynomial to be a finite formal sum 
II 
L
a;x; = ao + a 1x + · · · + a11x", 
i=O 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he use of x and other letters near the end of 
the alphabet to represent an "indeterminate" 
is due to Rene Descartes (1596-1650). Earlier, 
Franc;ois Viete (1540-1603) had used vowels for 
indeterminates and consonants for known quan-
tities. Descartes is also responsible for the first 
publication of the factor theorem (Corollary 28.4) 
in his work The Geometry, which appeared as 
an appendix to his Discourse on Method (1637). 
This work also contained the first publication of 
the basic concepts of analytic geometry; Descartes 
showed how geometric curves can be described al-
gebraically. 
Descartes was born to a wealthy family in 
La Haye, France; since he was always of deli-
cate health, he formed the habit of spending his 
mornings in bed. It was at these times that he ac-
complished his most productive work. The Dis-
course on Method was Descartes' attempt to show 
the proper procedures for "searching for truth in 
the sciences." The first step in this process was 
to reject as absolutely false everything of which 
he had the least doubt; but, since it was neces-
sary that he who was thinking was "something," 
he conceived his first principle of philosophy: 
"I think, therefore I am." The most enlightening 
parts of the Discourse on Method, however, are 
the three appendices: The Optics, The Geometry, 
and The Meteorology. It was here that Descartes 
provided examples of how he actually applied his 
method. Among the important ideas Descartes dis-
covered and published in these works were the sine 
Jaw of refraction of light, the basics of the theory of 
equations, and a geometric explanation of the rain-
bow. 
In 1649, Descartes was invited by Queen 
Christina of Sweden to come to Stockholm to tutor 
her. Unfortunately, the Queen required him, cont-
rary to his long-established habits, to rise at an 
early hour. He soon contracted a lung disease and 
died in 1650. 

Section 27 
Rings of Polynomials 
219 
where a; ER, we get ourselves into a bit of trouble. For surely 0 + a1x and 0 + a1x + 
Ox2 are different as formal sums, but we want to regard them as the same polynomial. A 
practical solution to this problem is to define a polynomial as an infinite formal sum 
00 L a;x; = ao + a1x + · · · + a11x
11 + · · · , 
i=O 
where a; = 0 for all but a finite number of values of i. Now there is no problem of 
having more than one finite formal sum represent what we wish to consider a single 
polynomial. 
27.1 Definition 
Let R be a ring. A polynomialf(x) with coefficients in R is an infinite formal sum 
00 L a;x; = ao + a1x + · · · + a11x 11 + · · · , 
i=O 
where a; E Rand for all but a finite number of values of i, a; = 0. The a; are coefficients 
ofj(x). If for some i 2::. 0 it is true that a; :fa 0, the largest such value of i is the degree 
ofj(x). If all a;= 0, then the degree ofj(x) is undefined.t 
• 
To simplify working with polynomials, let us agree that ifj(x) = a0 + a 1x + · · · + 
a11x'
1 + · · · has a; = 0 for i > n, then we may denote f(x) by ao + a1x + · · · + a11x'
1
• 
Also, if R has unity 1 :fa 0, we will write a term LI in such a sum as x1'. For example, 
in Z [x], we will write the polynomial 2 + Ix as 2 + x. Finally, we shall agree that we 
may omit altogether from the formal sum any term Ox;, or a0 if a0 = 0 but not all a; = 0. 
Thus 0, 2, x, and 2 + x2 are polynomials with coefficients in Z. An element of R is a 
constant polynomial. 
Addition and multiplication of polynomials with coefficients in a ring R are defined 
in a way familiar to us. If 
f(x) = ao + a1x + · · · + a11x
11 + · · · 
and 
g(x) = bo +b1x+ · · · +b11x 11 + · · ·, 
then for polynomial addition, we have 
J(x) + g(x) = co+ C1X + · · · + c11x'' + · · · where c11 = a11 + b11, 
and for polynomial multiplication, we have 
ll 
L:.:ll 
f(x)g(x) = do + d1x + · · · + dnx + · · · where dn = 
a;bn-i 
i=O 
Observe that both c; and d; are 0 for all but a finite number of values of i, so these 
definitions make sense. Note that I::~o a;b11_; need not equal I:;~0 b;a11_; if R is not 
commutative. With these definitions of addition and multiplication, we have the follow-
ing theorem. 
27.2 Theorem 
The set R[x] of all polynomials in an indeterminate x with coefficients in a ring R is a 
ring under polynomial addition and multiplication. If R is commutative, then so is R[x], 
and if R has unity 1 :fa 0, then 1 is also unity for R[x]. 
Proof 
That (R[x], +) is an abelian group is apparent. The associative Jaw for multiplication 
and the distributive laws are straightforward, but slightly cumbersome, computations. 
We illustrate by proving the associative law. 
t The degree of the zero polynomial is sometimes defined to be - 1, which is the first integer less than 0, or 
defined to be - oo so that the degree of f (x)g(x ) will be the sum of the degrees of f (x) and g(x) if one of them 
is zero. 

220 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
Applying ring axioms to a;, bj, ck E R, we obtain 
[ ( f a;xi) ( I)j xj) ] ( I>kxk) = [ f ( ta;bn-i)x"] ( f ckxk) 
1= 0 
1=0 
k=O 
n=O 
1=0 
k=O 
= f [ t ( 
t 
a;bn-i) cs- n]x 
s=O 
n=O 
1=0 
Whew! In this computation, the fourth expression, having just two summation 
signs, should be viewed as the value of the triple product f (x)g(x)h(x) of these poly-
nomials under this associative multiplication. (In a similar fashion, we view f(g(h(x))) 
as the value of the associative composition (jog o h)(x) of three functionsf, g, and h.) 
The distributive laws are similarly proved. (See Exercise 26.) 
The comments prior to the statement of the theorem show that R[x] is a commuta-
tive ring if R is commutative, and a unity 1 f=- 0 in R is also unity for R[x], in view of 
the definition of multiplication in R[x]. 
+ 
Thus Z [x] is the ring of polynomials in the indeterminate x with integral coeffi-
cients, Q [x] the ring of polynomials in x with rational coefficients, and so on. 
27.3 Example 
In Z2[x], we have 
(x + 1)2 = (x + l)(x + 1) = x2 + (1 + l)x + 1 = x2 + 1. 
Still working in Z 2[x], we obtain 
(x + 1) + (x + 1) = (1 + l)x + (1 + 1) =Ox+ 0 = 0. 
If Risa ring and x and y are two indeterminates, then we can form the ring (R[x])[y], 
that is, the ring of polynomials in y with coefficients that are polynomials in x. Every 
polynomial in y with coefficients that are polynomials in x can be rewritten in a natu-
ral way as a polynomial in x with coefficients that are polynomials in y as illustrated 
by Exercise 20. This indicates that (R[x])[y] is naturally isomorphic to (R[y])[x], al-
though a careful proof is tedious. We shall identify these rings by means of this natural 
isomorphism, and shall consider this ring R[x, y] the ring of polynomials in two inde-
terminates x and y with coefficients in R. The ring R[x 1, • • • , x11 ] of polynomials in 
the n indeterminates x; with coefficients in R is similarly defined. 
We leave as Exercise 24 the proof that if D is an integral domain, then so is D[x]. In 
particular, if F is a field, then F[x] is an integral domain. Note that F[x] is not a field, for 
x is not a unit in F[x]. That is, there is no polynomialf(x) E F[x] such that xf(x) = 1. 
By Theorem 26.6, one can construct the field of quotients F(x) of F[x]. Any element 
in F(x) can be represented as a quotient f(x)/ g(x) of two polynomials in F[x] with 

Section 27 
Rings of Polynomials 
221 
g(x) i= 0. We similarly define F(x1, · · · , Xn) to be the field of quotients of F[x1, · · · , x,,]. 
This field F(x1, · · · , x,,) is the field of rational functions in n indeterminates over F. 
These fields play a very important role in algebraic geometry. 
The Evaluation Homomorphisms 
We are now ready to proceed to show how homomorphisms can be used to study what 
we have always referred to as "solving a polynomial equation." Let E and F be fields, 
with Fa subfield of E, that is, F :S E. The next theorem asserts the existence of very im-
portant homomorphisms of F[x] into E. These homomorphisms will be the fundamental 
tools for much of the rest of our work. 
27.4 Theorem 
(The Evaluation Homomorphisms for Field Theory) Let F be a subfield of a field 
E, let a be any element of E, and let x be an indeterminate. The map <Pet : F[x] ---+ E 
defined by 
<Pet (ao + a1x + · · · + a,,x") = ao + a1a + · · · + a,,a" 
for (a0 + a1x + · · · + a11x
11 ) E F[x] is a homomorphism of F [x] into E. Also, <Pet(x) =a, 
and <Pet maps F isomorphically by the identity map; that is, <Pet(a) =a for a E F. The 
homomorphism <Pet is evaluation at a. 
Proof 
The subfield and mapping diagram in Fig. 27.5 may help us to visualize this situation. 
The dashed lines indicate an element of the set. The theorem is really an immediate 
consequence of our definitions of addition and multiplication in F[x]. The map <Pet is 
well defined, that is, independent of our representation ofj(x) E F [x] as a finite sum 
ao + a1x + · · · + anx", 
since such a finite sum representing! (x) can be changed only by insertion or deletion of 
terms Ox;, which does not affect the value of <Pet(J(x)). 
If f(x) = ao + a1x + ... + anx', g(x) = bo + b1x + ... + bmx", and h(x) = f(x) + 
g(x) = co+ c1x + · · · + c,x', then 
<Pet(J(x) + g(x)) = <Pet(h(x)) = co+ c1a + · · · + c,a', 
while 
<Pet(J(x)) + <Pet(g(x)) = (ao + a1a + · · · + ana") + (bo + b1a + · · · + bma'"). 
Since by definition of polynomial addition we have c; = a;+ b;, we see that 
<Pet(J(x) + g(x)) = <Petif(x)) + <Pet(g(x)). 
E 
F[x) 
<Pa 
<Pa[F[x]] 
' 
' 
' 
' 'a = <Pa(X) 
x 
Identity map 
F, 
F, 
' 
' ' a 
' a = <faa(a) 
27.5 Figure 

222 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
Turning to multiplication, we see that if 
f(x)g(x) = do+ d,x + · · · + dsx', 
then 
</>er(f(x)g(x)) =do+ di a + · · · + d5a5, 
while 
[</>er(f(x))][<f>er(g(x))] = (ao + a1ct + · · · + a,,a")(bo + b1ct + · · · + b111a
111
) . 
Since by definition of polynomial multiplication dj = L{=0 a;bj- i· we see that 
</>er<J(x)g(x)) = [</>er<J(x))][<f>er(g(x))] . 
Thus </>er is a homomorphism. 
The very definition of </>er applied to a constant polynomial a E F[x], where a E F, 
gives </>er(a) = a, so </>er maps F isomorphically by the identity map. Again by definition 
of </>er, we have </>er(x) = </>er(lx) = la =a. 
+ 
We point out that this theorem is valid with the identical proof if F and E are 
merely commutative rings with unity rather than fields. However, we shall be interested 
primarily in the case in which they are fields. 
It is hard to overemphasize the importance of this simple theorem for us. It is the 
very foundation for all of our further work in field theory. It is so simple that it could jus-
tifiably be called an observation rather than a theorem. It was perhaps a little misleading 
to write out the proof because the polynomial notation makes it look so complicated that 
you may be fooled into thinking it is a difficult theorem. 
27.6 Example 
Let F be IQ! and Ebe lR in Theorem 27.4, and consider the evaluation homomorphism 
</>o : IQl[x] ---+ R Here 
</>o(ao + a1x + · · · + a,,x") = ao + a10 + · · · + anO" = ao. 
Thus every polynomial is mapped onto its constant term. 
27.7 Example 
Let F be IQ! and Ebe lR in Theorem 27.4 and consider the evaluation homomorphism 
</>2 : IQl[x] ---+ R Here 
</>2(ao + a,x + · · · + a,,x'') = ao + a,2 + · · · + a,,2". 
Note that 
</>2(x2 + x - 6) = 22 + 2 - 6 = 0. 
Thus x2 + x - 6 is in the kernel N of <f>i. Of course, 
x2 + x - 6 = (x - 2)(x + 3), 
and the reason that <f>2(x2 + x - 6) = 0 is that <f>2(x - 2) = 2 - 2 = 0. 
27.8 Example 
Let F be IQ! and Ebe C in Theorem 27.4 and consider the evaluation homomorphism 
</>; : IQl[x] ---+ C. Here 
,/, ( 
x'') 
• 
•II 
..,,; ao + a1x +···+a,, 
= ao + a 11 + -· -+ a,,1 
and </>;(x) = i. Note that 
</>;(x2 + 1) = i2 + 1 = 0, 
so x2 + 1 is in the kernel N of</>;. 

Section 27 
Rings of Polynomials 
223 
27.9 Example 
Let F be Q and let Ebe lR in Theorem 27.4 and consider the evaluation homomorphism 
</J:rr : Q[x] ---+ JR. Here 
<P:rr(ao + a,x + · · · + a11x") = ao + a,n + · · · + a11n". 
It can be proved thata0 + a1n + · · · + a,,n" = 0 if and only if a; = 0 for i = 0, 1, · · · , n. 
Thus the kernel of </J:rr is {O}, and </J:rr is a one-to-one map. This shows that all formal 
polynomials inn with rational coefficients form a ring isomorphic to Q[x] in a natural 
way with </J:rr(x) = n. 
..&. 
The New Approach 
We now complete the connection between our new ideas and the classical concept of 
solving a polynomial equation. Rather than speak of solving a polynomial equation, we 
shall refer to finding a zero of a polynomial. 
27.10 Definition 
Let F be a subfield of a field E, and let a be an element of E. Let f(x) = a0 + 
a 1x + · · · + a11x
11 be in F[x], and let <Pa : F[x] ---+ Ebe the evaluation homomorphism of 
Theorem 27.4. Letf(a) denote 
<Palf(x)) = ao + a,a + · · · + a,,a". 
Iff(a) = 0, then a is a zero off(x). 
• 
In terms of this definition, we can rephrase the classical problem of finding all real 
numbers r such that r2 + r - 6 = 0 by letting F = Q and E = lR and finding all a E lR 
such that 
</Ja(X2 + X - 6) = 0, 
that is, finding all zeros of x2 + x - 6 in JR. Both problems have the same answer, since 
{a E lR I </Ja(x2 + x - 6) = 0} = {r E lR I r2 + r - 6 = O} = (2, -3}. 
It may seem that we have merely succeeded in making a simple problem seem 
quite complicated. In fact, what we have done is to phrase the problem in the language 
of mappings, and we can now use all the mapping machinery that we have developed 
and will continue to develop for its solution. 
Our Basic Goal 
We continue to attempt to put our future work in perspective. Sections 30 and 31 are 
concerned with topics in ring theory that are analogous to the material on factor groups 
and homomorphisms for group theory. However, our aim in developing these analogous 
concepts for rings will be quite different from our aims in group theory. In group the-
ory we used the concepts of factor groups and homomorphisms to study the structure 
of a given group and to determine the types of group structures of certain orders that 
could exist. We will be talking about homomorphisms and factor rings in Section 30 
with an eye to finding zeros of polynomials, which is one of the oldest and most funda-
mental problems in algebra. Let us take a moment to talk about this aim in the light of 
mathematical history, using the language of "solving polynomial equations" to which 
we are accustomed. 
We start with the Pythagorean school of mathematics of about 525 B.C. The 
Pythagoreans worked with the assumption that all distances are commensurable; that 
is, given distances a and b, there should exist a unit of distance u and integers n and m 
such that a = (n)(u) and b = (m)(u). In terms of numbers, then, thinking of u as being 

224 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
one unit of distance, they maintained that all numbers are integers. This idea of com-
mensurability can be rephrased according to our ideas as an assertion that all numbers 
are rational, for if a and b are rational numbers, then each is an integral multiple of the 
reciprocal of the least common multiple of their denominators. For example, if a = f7. 
and b = *' then a= (35)(ta) and b = (76)(fo). 
The Pythagoreans knew, of course, what is now called the Pythagorean theorem; 
that is, for a right triangle with legs of lengths a and b and a hypotenuse of length c, 
a 2 + bz = c 2. 
They also had to grant the existence of a hypotenuse of a right triangle having two 
legs of equal length, say one unit each. The hypotenuse of such a right triangle would, 
as we know, have to have a length of ./2. Imagine then their consternation and dis-
may when one of their society-according to some stories it was Pythagoras himself-
came up with the embarrassing fact that is stated in our terminology in the following 
theorem. 
27.11 Theorem 
The polynomial x2 - 2 has no zeros in the rational numbers. Thus ./2 is not a rational 
number. 
Proof Suppose that m/ n form, n E Z is a rational number such that (m/n)2 = 2. We assume 
that we have canceled any factors common to m and n, so that the fraction m/n is in 
lowest terms with gcd(m, n) = I. Then 
m2 = 2n2, 
where both m2 and 2n2 are integers. Since m2 and 2n2 are the same integer, and since 
2 is a factor of 2n2, we see that 2 must be one of the factors of m2 . But as a square, 
m2 has as factors the factors of m repeated twice. Thus m2 must have two factors 2. 
Then 2n2 must have two factors 2, so n2 must have 2 as a factor, and consequently n has 
2 as a factor. We have deduced from m2 = 2n2 that both m and n must be divisible by 2, 
contradicting the fact that the fraction m/n is in lowest terms. Thus we have 2 =F (m/n)2 
for any m, n E Z. 
+ 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he solution of polynomial equations has 
been a goal of mathematics for nearly 4000 
years. The Babylonians developed versions of the 
quadratic formula to solve quadratic equations. 
For example, to solve x2 - x = 870, the Baby-
lonian scribe instructed his students to take half 
of 1 (~) , square it (~), and add that to 870. 
The square root of 870~, namely 29~, is then 
added to ~ to give 30 as the answer. What the 
scribes did not discuss, however, was what to do 
if the square root in this process was not a ra-
tional number. Chinese mathematicians, however, 
from about 200 B.C., discovered a method simi-
lar to what is now called Homer's method to solve 
quadratic equations numerically; since they used 
a decimal system, they were able in principle to 
carry out the computation to as many places as 
necessary and could therefore ignore the distinc-
tion between rational and irrational solutions. The 
Chinese, in fact, extended their numerical tech-
niques to polynomial equations of higher degree. 
In the Arab world, the Persian poet-mathematician 
Omar Khayyam (1048- 1131) developed methods 
for solving cubic equations geometrically by find-
ing the point(s) of intersection of appropriately 
chosen conic sections, while Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 
(died 1213) used, in effect, techniques of calcu-
lus to determine whether or not a cubic equa-
tion had a real positive root. It was the Italian 
Girolamo Cardano (1501- 1576) who first pub-
lished a procedure for solving cubic equations 
algebraically. 

Section 27 
Exercises 
225 
Thus the Pythagoreans ran right into the question of a solution of a polynomial 
equation, x2 - 2 = 0. We refer the student to Shanks [36, Chapter 3], for a lively and 
totally delightful account of this Pythagorean dilemma and its significance in mathe-
matics. 
In our motivation of the definition of a group, we commented on the necessity of 
having negative numbers, so that equations such as x + 2 = 0 might have solutions. 
The introduction of negative numbers caused a certain amount of consternation in some 
philosophical circles. We can visualize I apple, 2 apples, and even ft apples, but how 
can we point to anything and say that it is -17 apples? Finally, consideration of the 
equation x2 + 1 = 0 led to the introduction of the number i. The very name of an 
"imaginary number" given to i shows how this number was regarded. Even today, many 
students are led by this name to regard i with some degree of suspicion. The negative 
numbers were introduced to us at such an early stage in our mathematical development 
that we accepted them without question. 
We first met polynomials in high school freshman algebra. The first problem there 
was to learn how to add, multiply, and factor polynomials. Then, in both freshman 
algebra and in the second course in algebra in high school, considerable emphasis was 
placed on solving polynomial equations. These topics are exactly those with which we 
shall be concerned. The difference is that while in high school, only polynomials with 
real number coefficients were considered, we shall be doing our work for polynomials 
with coefficients from any field. 
Once we have developed the machinery of homomorphisms and factor rings in 
Section 30, we will proceed with our basic goal: to show that given any polynomial of 
degree 2: I, where the coefficients of the polynomial may be from any field, we can find 
a zero of this polynomial in some field containing the given field. After the machinery 
is developed in Sections 30 and 31, the achievement of this goal will be very easy, and 
is really a very elegant piece of mathematics. 
All this fuss may seem ridiculous, but just think back in history. This is the culmi-
nation of more than 2000 years of mathematical endeavor in working with polynomial 
equations. After achieving our basic goal, we shall spend the rest of our time studying 
the nature of these solutions of polynomial equations. We need have no fear in approach-
ing this material. We shall be dealing with familiar topics of high school algebra. This 
work should seem much more natural than group theory. 
In conclusion, we remark that the machinery of factor rings and ring homomor-
phisms is not really necessary in order for us to achieve our basic goal. For a direct 
demonstration, see Artin [27, p. 29]. However, factor rings and ring homomorphisms 
are fundamental ideas that we should grasp, and our basic goal will follow very easily 
once we have mastered them. 
• EXER CISES 27 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 4, find the sum and the product of the given polynomials in the given polynomial ring. 
1. f(x) = 4x - 5,g(x) = 2x2 - 4x + 2 in Zs[x]. 
2. f(x) = x + l ,g(x) = x + 1 in Z2[x]. 
3. f(x) = 2x2 + 3x + 4,g(x) = 3x2 + 2x + 3 in Z6[x]. 
4. f(x) = 2x3 + 4x2 + 3x + 2,g(x) = 3x4 + 2x + 4 in Zs[x]. 
5. How many polynomials are there of degree_:::: 3 in Z2[x]? (Include 0.) 
6. How many polynomials are there of degree _:::: 2 in Zs[x]? (Include 0.) 

226 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
In Exercises 7 and 8, F = E = C in Theorem 27.4. Compute for the indicated evaluation homomorphism. 
7. </>2(x2 + 3) 
8. </>;(2x3 - x2 + 3x + 2) 
In Exercises 9 through 11, F = E = '£-7 in Theorem 27.4. Compute for the indicated evaluation homomorphism. 
9. <f>3[(x4 + 2x)(x3 - 3x2 + 3)) 
10. </>s[(x3 + 2)(4x2 + 3)(x7 + 3x2 + I)) 
11. <f>4(3x106 + 5x99 + 2x53) 
[Hint: Use Fermat's theorem.] 
In Exercises 12 through 15, find all zeros in the indicated finite field of the given polynomial with coefficients in 
that field. [Hint: One way is simply to try all candidates!] 
12. x2 + l in Z2 
13. x3 + 2x + 2 in '£-7 
14. x5 + 3x3 +x2 + 2x in Zs 
15. f(x)g(x) wheref(x) = x3 + 2x2 + 5 and g(x) = 3x2 + 2x in '£-7 
16. Let </>a : Zs[x] --+ Zs be an evaluation homomorphism as in Theorem 27.4. Use Fermat's theorem to evaluate 
</>3(x23I + 3x117 _ 2x53 + l ). 
17. Use Fermat's theorem to find all zeros in z5 of2x219 + 3x74 + 2x57 + 3x44. 
Concepts 
In Exercises 18 and 19, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
18. A polynomial with coefficients in a ring R is an infinite formal sum 
00 L a;x; = ao + a 1 x + azx2 + · · · + a,,x" + · · · 
i=O 
where a; E R for i = 0, 1, 2, · · · . 
19. Let F be a field and letf(x) E F[x]. A zero of f(x) is an a E F such that <l>aif(x)) = 0, where </>a : F(x)--+ F is 
the evaluation homomorphism mapping x into a. 
20. Consider the element 
f(x, y) = (3x3 + 2x)y3 + (x2 - 6x + I )y2 + (x4 - 2x)y + (x4 - 3x2 + 2) 
of (Q[x))(y]. Writef(x,y) as it would appear if viewed as an element of (Q(y))[x]. 
21. Consider the evaluation homomorphism </>s : Q [x] --+ JR. Find six elements m the kernel of the 
homomorphism <f>s. 
22. Find a polynomial of degree > 0 in Z4(x] that is a unit. 
23. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. The polynomial (a11x" + · · · + a1x + ao) E R[x] is 0 if and only if a;= 0, for i = 0, 1, · · · , n. 
b. If R is a commutative ring, then R[x] is commutative. 
c. If D is an integral domain, then D[x] is an integral domain. 
d. If R is a ring containing divisors of 0, then R[x] has divisors of 0. 
e. If R is a ring and f(x) and g(x) in R[x] are of degrees 3 and 4, respectively, then f(x)g(x) may be of 
degree 8 in R[x]. 
f. If R is any ring and f(x) and g(x) in R[x] are of degrees 3 and 4, respectively, then f(x)g(x) is always 
of degree 7. 
g. If F is a subfield of E and a E E is a zero of f(x) E F[x], then a is a zero of h(x) = f(x)g(x) for all 
g(x) E F[x]. 
h. If Fis a field, then the units in F[x] are precisely the units in F. 
i. If Risa ring with unity, then x is never a divisor of 0 in R[x]. 
j. If R is a ring, then the zero divisors in R[x] are precisely the zero divisors in R. 

Section 27 
Exercises 
227 
Theory 
24. Prove that if D is an integral domain, then D[x] is an integral domain. 
25. Let D be an integral domain and x an indeterminate. 
a. Describe the units in D[x] . 
b. Find the units in /Z[x]. 
c. Find the units in IZ1[x]. 
26. Prove the left distributive law for R[x], where Risa ring and x is an indeterminate. 
27. Let F be a field of characteristic zero and let D be the formal polynomial differentiation map, so that 
D(ao + a1x + a2x2 + · · · + anx'') =a,+ 2 · azx+ · · · +n · anx''-1. 
a. Show that D: F[x] --+ F[x] is a group homomorphism of (F[x], +) into itself. Is Daring homomorphism? 
b. Find the kernel of D. 
c. Find the image of F [x] under D. 
28. Let F be a subfield of a field E. 
a. Define an evaluation homomorphism 
</>a1,. •• ,a,,: F[x1, · · · ,x11]-+ E 
for 
a; E £, 
stating the analog of Theorem 27.4. 
b. With E = F = Q, compute </>-J,2(x1 2x23 + 3x1 4xz). 
c. Define the concept of a zero of a polynomial f(x1, · · · ,x11) E F[x1, · · · ,x11] in a way analogous to the 
definition in the text of a zero ofj(x). 
29. Let R be a ring, and Jet RR be the set of all functions mapping R into R. For</>, if; E RR, define the sum</>+ if; 
by 
(</> + if;)(r) = </>(r) + if;(r) 
and the product </> · if; by 
(</> · 1{! )(r) = </>(r)1{!(r) 
for r E R. Note that· is not function composition. Show that (RR,+, ·) is a ring. 
30. Referring to Exercise 29, let F be a field. An element </> of FF is a polynomial function on F, if there exists 
f(x) E F [x] such that </>(a)= f(a) for all a E F. 
a. Show that the set PF of all polynomial functions on F forms a subring of FF. 
b. Show that the ring PF is not necessarily isomorphic to F [x]. [Hint: Show that if F is a finite field, PF and 
F[x] don't even have the same number of elements.] 
31. Refer to Exercises 29 and 30 for the following questions. 
a. How many elements are there in z2Z2? in IE.3 Z3 ? 
b. Classify (/Z2z2, +)and (/Z3Z3, +) by Theorem 9.12, the Fundamental Theorem of finitely generated abelian 
groups. 
c. Show that if Fis a finite field, then FF = PF. [Hint: Of course, PF <; FF. Let F have as elements a ,,· · · , a11 • 
Note that if 
f;(x) = c(x - a1) · · · (x- a;- 1)(x - a;+1) · · · (x - a11), 
thenf;(a1) = 0 for j =f. i, and the valuef;(a;) can be controlled by the choice of c E F. Use this to show that 
every function on Fis a polynomial function.] 
32. Let </> : R1 --+ Rz be a ring homomorphism. Show that there is a unique ring homomorphism 1{! : R1 [x] --+ 
Rz[x] such that 1/f (a)= </>(a) for any a E R1 and 1/f(x) = x. 

228 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
SECTION 28 FACTORIZATION OF POLYNOMIALS OVER A FIELD 
Recall that we are concerned with finding zeros of polynomials. Let E and F be 
fields, with F ::; E. Suppose thatf(x) E F [x] factors in F[x], so thatf(x) = g(x)h(x) for 
g(x), h(x) E F [x] and let a E E. Now for the evaluation homomorphism </Ja, we have 
f(a) = <Paif(x)) = </Ja(g(x)h(x)) = </Ja(g(x))</Ja(h(x)) = g(a)h(a). 
Thus if a E £ , thenf(a) = 0 if and only if either g(a) = 0 or h(a) = 0. The attempt to 
find a zero of f (x) is reduced to the problem of finding a zero of a factor of f(x). This is 
one reason why it is useful to study factorization of polynomials. 
The Division Algorithm in F[x] 
The following theorem is the basic tool for our work in this section. Note the similarity 
with the division algorithm for Z given in Theorem 6.2, the importance of which has 
been amply demonstrated. 
We prove the following lemma, which is used in our proof of the division algorithm. 
28.1 Lemma 
Let F be a field and f (x), g(x), s(x) E F [x] with g(x) f. 0. If 
deg(f(x) - g(x)s(x)) '.:: deg(g(x)), 
then there is a polynomial s1 (x) E F[x] such that either 
deg(f(x) - g(x)s1 (x)) < deg(f(x) - g(x)s(x)) 
or 
f(x) - g(x)s1 (x) = 0. 
Proof Let n = deg(f(x) - g(x)s(x)). We can write (f(x) - g(x)s(x)) = a11x'
1 + r(x) where a11 f. 
0 and either r(x) = 0 or deg(r(x)) < n. Similarly, since g(x) f. 0, we can write g(x) = 
bkx!' + g1 (x) where bk f. 0 and either g1 (x) = 0 or deg(g1 (x)) < k. 
We let s1(x) = s(x) + ~x''-k. Then 
a11 
k 
f(x)- g(x)s1(x) =f(x) - g(x)s(x)- g(x)-x'-
bk 
_ 
x'' + ( ) b ka11 x'1-k 
( )anx'1-k 
- a,, 
r x -
kX bk 
- g, x bk 
a11 .J1-k 
= r(x)-g 1(x)-x 
. 
bk 
Each polynomial r(x) and g 1 (x)~x''-k is either 0 or has degree less than n. Thus 
r (x) -
g 1 (x)~x'i-k = 0 or deg(r(x)- g 1 (x)~x''-k) < n = deg(f(x)- g(x)s(x)), which 
completes the proof. 
+ 
28.2 Theorem 
(Division Algorithm for F[x]) Let 
f(x) = anx" + a11- iX'- ' + · · · + ao 
and 
g(x) = bmx" + bm_,x"- 1 +···+ho 
be two elements of F[x], with a11 and b111 both nonzero elements of F and m > 0. Then 
there are unique polynomials q(x) and r(x) in F[x] such that f(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x), 
where either r (x) = 0 or the degree of r(x) is less than the degree m of g(x). 

Section 28 
Factorization of Polynomials over a Field 
229 
Proof 
Consider the set S = {f(x) - g(x)s(x) I s(x) E F[x]}. If 0 ES then there exists an s(x) 
such that f(x) - g(x)s(x) = 0, so f(x) = g(x)s(x). Taking q(x) = s(x) and r(x) = 0, we 
are done. Otherwise, let r(x) be an element of minimal degree in S. Then 
f(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x) 
for some q(x) E F[x]. By Lemma 28.1, the degree of r(x) is less than the degree of g(x) 
since if the degree of r(x) were at least as large as the degree of g(x), then r(x) would 
not have minimal degree in S. 
For uniqueness, if 
f(x) = g(x)qi (x) + ri (x) 
and 
f(x) = g(x)qz(x) + rz(x), 
then subtracting we have 
g(x)[qi (x) - qz(x)] = rz(x) - ri (x). 
Because either r2(x) - ri (x) = 0 or the degree of r2(x) - ri (x) is less than the degree of 
g(x), this can hold only if qi (x) - q2(x) = 0 so qi (x) = q2(x). Then we must also have 
r2(x) -
r i (x) = 0 so ri (x) = rz(x). 
+ 
We can compute the polynomials q(x) and r(x) of Theorem 28.2 by long division 
just as we divided polynomials in JR[x] in high school. 
28.3 Example 
Let us work with polynomials in Z 5[x] and divide 
f(x) = x4 -
3x3 + 2x2 + 4x -
1 
by g(x) = x2 - 2x + 3 to find q(x) and r(x) of Theorem 28.2. The long division should 
be easy to follow, but remember that we are in Zs[x], so, for example, 4x - (-3x) = 2x. 
Thus 
x2 -x- 3 
x2 -
2x + 31 x4 -
3x3 + 2x2 + 4x -
1 
x4 -
2x3 + 3x2 
- x3 -
x2 + 4x 
- x3 + 2x2 -
3x 
-
3x2 + 2x -
1 
-
3x2 + x - 4 
x+3 
q(x) = x2 - x - 3, 
and 
r(x) = x + 3. 
We give three important corollaries of Theorem 28.2. The first one appears in high 
school algebra for the special case F[x] = JR[x]. We phrase our proof in terms of the 
mapping (homomorphism) approach described in Section 27. 
28.4 Corollary 
(Factor Theorem) An element a E Fis a zero ofj(x) E F[x] if and only if x - a is a 
factor off(x) in F[x]. 
Proof 
Suppose that for a E F we have f(a) = 0. By Theorem 28.2, there exist q(x), 
r(x) E F[x] such that 
f(x) = (x - a)q(x) + r(x), 

230 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
where either r(x) = 0 or the degree of r(x) is less than 1. Thus we must have r(x) = c 
for c E F, so 
f(x) = (x - a)q(x) +c. 
Applying our evaluation homomorphism, <Pa: F[x]--+ F of Theorem 27.4, we find 
0 = f(a) = Oq(a) + c, 
so it must be that c = 0. Then f(x) = (x - a)q(x), so x - a is a factor ofj(x). 
Conversely, if x - a is a factor of f(x) in F[x], where a E F, then applying our 
evaluation homomorphism <Pa tof(x) = (x - a)q(x), we havef(a) = Oq(a) = 0. 
+ 
28.S Example 
Working again in Z5[x], note that 1 is a zero of 
(x4 + 3.x3 + 2x + 4) E Zs[x]. 
Thus by Corollary 28.4, we should be able to factor x4 + 3x3 + 2x + 4 into (x -
l)q(x) 
in Z5[x]. Let us find the factorization by long division. 
x3 + 4x2 + 4x + 1 
~ 
x
4 + 3x
3 + 
x4 -
x3 
2x + 4 
4.x3 
4x3 - 4x2 
4x2 + 2x 
4x2 -
4x 
x+ 4 
x -
1 
0 
Thus x4 + 3.x3 + 2x + 4 = (x -
l)(x3 + 4x2 + 4x + 1) in Z5[x]. Since 1 is seen to be a 
zero of x3 + 4x2 + 4x + 1 also, we can divide this polynomial by x -
1 and get 
x2 +4 
~ 
x3 + 4x2 + 4x + 1 
x3 -
x2 
0 + 4x + 1 
4x - 4 
0 
Since x2 + 4 still has 1 as a zero, we can divide again by x - 1 and get 
x +I 
~ 
x2 - x 
x+4 
x -
1 
0 
Thus x4 + 3x3 + 2x + 4 = (x -
1)3(x + 1) in Z5[x]. 
The next corollary should also look familiar. 

Section 28 
Factorization of Polynomials over a Field 
231 
28.6 Corollary 
A nonzero polynomialf(x) E F[x] of degree n can have at most n zeros in a field F. 
Proof The preceding corollary shows that if a 1 E Fis a zero off(x), then 
where, of course, the degree of q1 (x) is n -
1. A zero a2 E F of q 1 (x) then results in a 
factorization 
f(x) = (x - a1 )(x - a2)q2(x). 
Continuing this process, we arrive at 
f(x) = (x - a1) · · · (x - ar)qr(x), 
where qr(x) has no further zeros in F. Since the degree of f(x) is n, at most n factors 
(x - a;) can appear on the right-hand side of the preceding equation, so r::; n. Also, if 
b ofa a; for i = 1, · · · , rand b E F, then 
f(b) = (b - a1) · · · (b - ar)qr(b) ofa 0, 
since F has no divisors of 0 and none of b - a; or qr(b) are 0 by construction. Hence the 
a; for i = 1, · · · , r ::; n are all the zeros in F off(x). 
+ 
Our final corollary is concerned with the structure of the multiplicative group F* of 
nonzero elements of a field F, rather than with factorization in F[x]. It may at first seem 
surprising that such a result follows from the division algorithm in F[x], but recall that 
the result that a subgroup of a cyclic group is cyclic follows from the division algorithm 
in Z. 
28.7 Corollary If G is a finite subgroup of the multiplicative group (F*, ·) of a field F, then G is cyclic. 
In particular, the multiplicative group of all nonzero elements of a finite field is cyclic. 
Proof 
By Theorem 9.12 as a finite abelian group, G is isomorphic to a direct product Zt1, x 
Zt1, x · · · x Zt1,, where each d; is a power of a prime. Let us think of each of the Zt1; as a 
cyclic group of order d; in multiplicative notation. Let m be the least common multiple 
of all the d; for i = 1, 2, · · · , r; note that m :S d 1d2 · · · dr. If a; E Zt1,, then a/; = 1, so 
a;'" = 1 since d; divides m. Thus for all a E G, we have a"' = 1, so every element of 
G is zero of x" - I. But G has d1d2 · · · dr elements, while x" - 1 can have at most m 
zeros in the field F by Corollary 28.6, so m:::: d 1d2 · · · dr. Hence m = d 1d2 · · · dr, so 
the primes involved in the prime powers d 1, d2, · · · , dr are distinct, and the group G is 
isomorphic to the cyclic group Z111 • 
+ 
Exercises 5 through 8 ask us to find all generators of the cyclic groups of units for 
some finite fields. The fact that the multiplicative group of units of a finite field is cyclic 
has been applied in algebraic coding and combinatorial designs. 
Irreducible Polynomials 
Our next definition singles out a type of polynomial in F[x] that will be of utmost 
importance to us. The concept is probably already familiar. We really are doing high 
school algebra in a more general setting. 
28.8 Definition 
A nonconstant polynomial f(x) E F[x] is irreducible over F or is an irreducible 
polynomial in F[x] if f(x) cannot be expressed as a product g(x)h(x) of two polyno-
mials g(x) and h(x) in F[x] both of lower degree than the degree of f(x). If f(x) E F [x] 
is a nonconstant polynomial that is not irreducible over F, then f(x) is reducible 
over F. 
• 

232 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
Note that the preceding definition concerns the concept irreducible over F and not 
just the concept irreducible. A polynomialf(x) may be irreducible over F, but may not 
be irreducible if viewed over a larger field E containing F. We illustrate this. 
28.9 Example 
Theorem 27.11 shows that x2 - 2 viewed in <Ql[x] has no zeros in <Ql. This shows that 
x2 - 2 is irreducible over <Ql, for a factorization x2 - 2 = (ax + b)(cx + d) for a, b, c, 
d E <Ql would give rise to zeros of x2 - 2 in <Ql. However, x2 - 2 viewed in IR[x] is not 
irreducible over IR, because x2 - 2 factors in IR[x] into (x - .J2)(x + .J2). 
A 
It is worthwhile to remember that the units in F[x] are precisely the nonzero ele-
ments of F. Thus we could have defined an irreducible polynomialf(x) as a nonconstant 
polynomial such that in any factorizationf(x) = g(x)h(x) in F[x], either g(x) or h(x) is a 
unit. 
28.10 Example 
Let us show thatf(x) = x3 + 3x + 2 viewed in Z5[x] is irreducible over Z5 . If x 3 + 3x + 
2 factored in Z5[x] into polynomials of lower degree then there would exist at least one 
linear factor of f(x) of the form x - a for some a E Z5. But thenf(a) would be 0, by 
Corollary 28.4. However,f(O) = 2,f(l) = l,f(- 1) = -2,f(2) = 1, andf(-2) = -2, 
showing that f(x) has no zeros in Z5 . Thus f(x) is irreducible over Z5 . This test for 
irreducibility by finding zeros works nicely for quadratic and cubic polynomials over a 
finite field with a small number of elements. 
A 
Irreducible polynomials will play a very important role in our work from now on. 
The problem of determining whether a givenf(x) E F[x ] is irreducible over F may be 
difficult. We now give some criteria for irreducibility that are useful in certain cases. 
One technique for determining irreducibility of quadratic and cubic polynomials was 
illustrated in Examples 28.9 and 28.10. We formalize it in a theorem. 
28.11 Theorem 
Letf(x) E F[x], and letf (x) be of degree 2 or 3. Thenf(x) is reducible over F if and 
only if it has a zero in F. 
Proof If f(x) is reducible so thatf(x) = g(x)h(x), where the degree of g(x) and the degree of 
h(x) are both less than the degree off (x), then since f(x) is either quadratic or cubic, 
either g(x) or h(x) is of degree 1. If, say, g(x) is of degree 1, then except for a possible 
factor in F, g(x) is of the form x - a. Then g(a) = 0, which implies that f(a) = 0, so 
f(x) has a zero in F. 
Conversely, Corollary 28.4 shows that if f(a) = 0 for a E F, then x - a is a factor 
off (x), so f(x) is reducible. 
+ 
We turn to some conditions for irreducibility over <Ql of polynomials in <Ql[x]. The 
most important condition that we shall give is contained in the next theorem. The proof 
is to be worked out in Exercises 38-40. 
28.12 Theorem 
If f(x) E Z[x], then f(x) factors into a product of two polynomials of lower degrees r 
and s in <Ql[x] if and only if it has such a factorization with polynomials of the same 
degrees rand sin Z [x]. 
+ 
28.13 Corollary 
Iff(x) = x!' + a 11_ 1x'1- 1 + · · · + ao is in Z [x] with a0 "I 0, and iff(x) has a zero in <Ql, 
then it has a zero m in Z, and m must divide ao. 
Proof Iff(x) has a zero a in <Ql, thenf(x) has a linear factor x - a in <Ql[x] by Corollary 28.4. 
But then by Theorem 28.12,f(x) has a factorization with a linear factor in Z [x ], so for 
some m E Z we must have 
f(x) = (x - m)(x''- 1 + · · · - ao/ m). 
Thus ao/ m is in Z, so m divides ao. 
• 

Section 28 
Factorization of Polynomials over a Field 
233 
28.14 Example 
Corollary 28.13 gives us another proof of the irreducibility of x2 - 2 over Q, for x2 - 2 
factors nontrivially in Q [x] if and only if it has a zero in Q by Theorem 28.11. By 
Corollary 28.13, it has a zero in Q if and only if it has a zero in Z, and moreover the 
only possibilities are the divisors ± 1 and ±2 of 2. A quick check shows that none of 
these numbers is a zero of x2 -
2. 
°"' 
28.15 Example 
Let us use Theorem 28.12 to show that 
f(x) = x4 - 2x2 + 8x + 1 
viewed in Q [x] is irreducible over Q. If f(x) has a linear factor in Q[x], then it has a 
zero in Z, and by Corollary 28.13, this zero would have to be a divisor in Z of 1, that is, 
either ±1. Butf(I ) = 8, andf(-1) = -8, so such a factorization is impossible. 
If f(x) factors into two quadratic factors in Q[x], then by Theorem 28.12, it has a 
factorization. 
(x2 + ax + b)(x2 +ex+ cl) 
in Z[x]. Equating coefficients of powers of x, we find that we must have 
bd = 1, 
ad+ be= 8, 
ac + b + d = -2, 
and a+ c = 0 
for integers a, b, c, d E Z. From bd = 1, we see that either b = d = 1 orb= d = -1. 
In any case, b = d and from ad+ be= 8, we deduce that d(a + c) = 8. But this is 
impossible since a + c = 0. Thus a factorization into two quadratic polynomials is also 
impossible andf(x) is irreducible over Q . 
• 
We conclude our irreducibility criteria with the famous Eisenstein criterion for 
irreducibility. An additional very useful criterion is given in Exercise 37. 
28.16 Theorem 
(Eisenstein Criterion) Let p E Z be a prime. Suppose thatf(x) = allx" + · · · + a0 is 
in Z [x], and a11 =/= 0 (mod p), but a; = 0 (mod p) for all i < n, with a0 =/= 0 (mod p2 ). 
Thenf(x) is irreducible over Q . 
Proof 
By Theorem 28.12 we need only show thatf(x) does not factor into polynomials of 
lower degree in Z [x]. If 
f(x) = (b,x' + · · · + bo)(csx' + ···+ co) 
is a factorization in Z[x], with b, f=. 0, Cs f=. 0 and r, s < n, then a0 =/= 0 (mod p2 ) implies 
that b0 and c0 are not both congruent to 0 modulo p. Suppose that b0 =/= 0 (mod p) and 
co= 0 (mod p). Now all =/= 0 (mod p) implies that b,, Cs =/= 0 (mod p), since all = b,cs. 
Let m be the smallest value of k such that ck =/= 0 (mod p ). Then 
Gm= bocm + b 1cm- I + · · · + 
. 
{
bmco if r :'.:'.: m, 
b,C111-r If r < m. 
The fact that neither bo nor c111 are congruent to 0 modulo p while Cm_ 1, · · · , co are all 
congruent to 0 modulo p implies that a111 =/= 0 modulo p, so m = n. Consequently, s = n, 
contradicting our assumption that s < n; that is, that our factorization was nontrivial. • 
Note that if we take p = 2, the Eisenstein criterion gives us still another proof of 
the irreducibility of x2 - 2 over Q. 
28.17 Example 
Taking p = 3, we see by Theorem 28.16 that 
25X' - 9x4 - 3x2 - 12 
is irreducible over Q. 

234 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
28.18 Corollary 
The polynomial 
x" - 1 
<Pp(x) = -- = x"- ' + x"-2 + · · · + x + I 
x- 1 
is irreducible over IQ for any prime p. 
Proof Again by Theorem 28.12, we need only consider factorizations in Z[x]. We remarked 
following Theorem 27.4 that its proof actually shows that evaluation homomorphisms 
can be used for commutative rings. Here we want to use the evaluation homomor-
phism <l>x+l : IQ[x] ---+ IQ[x]. It is natural for us to denote <l>x+l (j(x)) by f(x + 1) for 
f(x) E IQ[x]. Let 
(x+ l)"- 1 
g(x) = <Pp(x + 1) = -(x-+-1)---1 
x" + (~) x"-' + · · · + px 
x 
The coefficient of xp- r for 0 < r < p is the binomial coefficient p!/[r!(p - r)!], which 
is divisible by p because p divides p! but does not divide either r! or (p - r)! when 
0 < r < p. Thus 
g(x) = x"-' + (~) x"-2 + ... + p 
satisfies the Eisenstein criterion for the prime p and is thus irreducible over IQ. But if 
<Pp(x) = h(x)r(x) were a nontrivial factorization of <Pp(x) in Z [x], then 
<Pp(x + 1) = g(x) = h(x + l)r(x + 1) 
would give a nontrivial factorization of g(x) in Z[x]. Thus <Pp(x) must also be irreducible 
over IQ. 
+ 
The polynomial <1>1,(x) in Corollary 28.18 is the p 1h cyclotomic polynomial. 
Uniqueness of Factorization in F[x] 
Polynomials in F[x] can be factored into a product of irreducible polynomials in F[x] 
in an essentially unique way. For f(x), g(x) E F[x] we say that g(x) divides/(x) in F[x] 
if there exists q(x) E F[x] such that/(x) = g(x)q(x). Note the similarity of the theorem 
that follows with Property (1) for Z following Example 6.9. 
28.19 Theorem 
Let p(x) be an irreducible polynomial in F[x]. If p(x) divides r(x)s(x) for r(x), s(x) E 
F[x], then either p(x) divides r(x) or p(x) divides s(x). 
Proof We delay the proof of this theorem to Section 31. (See Theorem 31.27.) 
• 
28.20 Corollary If p(x) is irreducible in F[x] and p(x) divides the product r 1 (x) · · · r 11(x) for r;(x) E F[x], 
then p(x) divides r;(x) for at least one i. 
Proof Using mathematical induction, we find that this is immediate from Theorem 28.19. 
+ 
28.21 Theorem If Fis a field, then every nonconstant polynomial/(x) E F[x] can be factored in F[x] into 
a product of irreducible polynomials, the irreducible polynomials being unique except 
for order and for unit (that is, nonzero constant) factors in F. 
Proof Let /(x) E F [x] be a nonconstant polynomial. If /(x) is not irreducible, then /(x) = 
g(x)h(x), with the degree of g(x) and the degree of h(x) both less than the degree of/(x). 

Section 28 
Exercises 
235 
If g(x) and h(x) are both irreducible, we stop here. If not, at least one of them factors 
into polynomials of lower degree. Continuing this process, we arrive at a factorization 
f (x) =PI (x)p2(x) · · · Pr(x), 
where p;(x) is irreducible for i = 1, 2, · · · , r. 
It remains for us to show uniqueness. Suppose that 
f(x) =PI (x)p2(x) · · · Pr(x) =qi (x)q2(x) · · · qs(x) 
are two factorizations of f(x) into irreducible polynomials. Then by Corollary 28.20, 
p 1 (x) divides some qj(x), let us assume q1 (x). Since q1 (x) is irreducible, 
q i (x) = U1P1 (x), 
where u1 =/= 0, but u1 is in F and thus is a unit. Then substituting u1p 1 (x) for q1 (x) and 
canceling, we get 
P2(x) · · · Pr(x) = ui q2(x) · · · qs(x). 
By a similar argument, say q2(x) = u2p2(x), so 
p3(x) · · · Pr(x) = u i u2q3(x) · · · qs(x). 
Continuing in this manner, we eventually arrive at 
1 = U1 u2 · · · urqr+ I (x) · · · qs(x). 
This is only possible if s = r , so that this equation is actually 1 = u1 u2 · · · ur. Thus 
the irreducible factors p ;(x) and qj(x) were the same except possibly for order and unit 
factors. 
+ 
28.22 Example 
Example 28.5 shows a factorization of x4 + 3x3 + 2x + 4 in Z 5[x] is (x - l)\x +I). 
These irreducible factors in Z5[x] are only unique up to units in Z5[x], that is, nonzero 
constants in 2 5. For example, (x -
1)3(x + 1) = (x -
1)2(2x - 2)(3x + 3). 
..&. 
• EXERCISES 28 
Computations 
In Exercises l through 4, find q(x) and r(x) as described by the division algorithm so thatf(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x) 
with r(x) = 0 or of degree less than the degree of g(x). 
1. f(x) = x6 + 3x5 + 4x2 - 3x + 2 and g(x) = x2 + 2x - 3 in /l7(x]. 
2. f(x) = x6 + 3x5 + 4x2 - 3x + 2 and g(x) = 3x2 + 2x - 3 in /l7(x]. 
3. f(x) = x5 - 2x4 + 3x - 5 and g(x) = 2x + l in Z 11 [x]. 
4. f(x) = x4 + 5x3 -
3x2 and g(x) = sx2 - x + 2 in Z1 I [x]. 
In Exercises 5 through 8, find all generators of the cyclic multiplicative group of units of the given finite field. 
(Review Corollary 6.17.) 
5. :;z5 
6. /l7 
7. /l17 
8. Z23 
9. The polynomial x4 + 4 can be factored into linear factors in Zs[x]. Find this factorization. 
10. The polynomial x3 + 2x2 + 2x + l can be factored into linear factors in /l7(x]. Find this factorization. 
11. The polynomial 2x3 + 3x2 - 7x - 5 can be factored into linear factors in Z 11 [x]. Find this factorization. 
12. Is x3 + 2x + 3 an irreducible polynomial of Zs[x]? Why? Express it as a product of irreducible polynomials 
of Zs[x]. 

236 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
13. Is 2.x3 + x2 + 2x + 2 an irreducible polynomial in Zs[x]? Why? Express it as a product of irreducible 
polynomials in Zs[x]. 
14. Show thatf(x) = x2 + 8x - 2 is irreducible over Q. Isf(x) irreducible over JR? Over C? 
15. Repeat Exercise 14 with g(x) = x2 + 6x + 12 in place ofj(x). 
16. Demonstrate that x3 + 3x2 - 8 is irreducible over Q. 
17. Demonstrate that x4 - 22.x2 + 1 is irreducible over Q. 
In Exercises 18 through 21, determine whether the polynomial in Z[x] satisfies an Eisenstein criterion for irre-
ducibility over Q. 
18. x2 - 12 
19. 8x3 + 6x2 - 9x + 24 
20. 4x10 - 9x3 + 24x -
18 
21. 2x10 - 25x3 + IOx2 - 30 
22. Find all zeros of 6x4 + l 7x3 + 7x2 + x -
JO in Q. (This is a tedious high school algebra problem. You might 
use a bit of analytic geometry and calculus and make a graph, or use Newton's method to see which are the 
best candidates for zeros.) 
Concepts 
In Exercises 23 and 24, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
23. A polynomial f(x) E F[x] is irreducible over the field F if and only if f(x) ,P g(x)h(x) for any polynomials 
g(x), h(x) E F[x]. 
24. A nonconstant polynomialf(x) E F[x] is irreducible over the field F if and only if in any factorization of it in 
F[x], one of the factors is in F. 
25. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. x - 2 is irreducible over Q. 
b. 3x - 6 is irreducible over Q. 
c. x2 - 3 is irreducible over Q. 
d. x2 + 3 is irreducible over ::z'..7. 
e. If Fis a field, the units of F [x ] are precisely the nonzero elements of F. 
f. If Fis a field, the units of F(x) are precisely the nonzero elements of F. 
g. A polynomialf(x) of degree n with coefficients in a field F can have at most n zeros in F. 
h. A polynomial f(x) of degree n with coefficients in a field F can have at most n zeros in any given field E 
such that F _::: E. 
i. Every polynomial of degree 1 in F[x] has at least one zero in the field F. 
j. Each polynomial in F[x] can have at most a finite number of zeros in the field F. 
26. Find all prime numbers p such that x + 2 is a factor of x4 + x3 + x2 - x + I in Zp [x]. 
In Exercises 27 through 30, find all irreducible polynomials of the indicated degree in the given ring. 
27. Degree 2 in Z2[x] 
28. Degree 3 in Z2[x] 
29. Degree 2 in Z3[x] 
30. Degree 3 in Z3[x] 
31. Find the number of irreducible quadratic polynomials in Zp[x], where p is a prime. [Hint: Find the number 
of reducible polynomials of the form x2 + ax + b, then the number of reducible quadratics, and subtract this 
from the total number of quadratics.] 
Proof Synopsis 
32. Give a synopsis of the proof of Corollary 28.6. 
33. Give a synopsis of the proof of Corollary 28.7. 

Section 29 
Algebraic Coding Theory 
237 
Theory 
34. Show that for pa prime, the polynomial xP +a in Zp[x] is not irreducible for any a E Zp. 
35. If Fis a field and a =f. 0 is a zero of f(x) = ao + a1x + · · · + anx'' in F[x], show that l / a is a zero of an+ 
a,,- 1x + · · · + aox''. 
36. (Remainder Theorem) Letf(x) E F[x] where Fis a field, and let a E F. Show that the remainder r(x) when 
f(x) is divided by x - a, in accordance with the division algorithm, isf(a). 
37. Let a111 : Z --+ Z111 be the natural homomorphism given by a 111(a) = (the remainder of a when divided by m) 
for a E Z. 
a. Show that a111 : Z[x] --+ Z 111[x] given by 
am(ao + a1x + · · · + a,,x'') = a,,,(ao) + a,,,(a1)x + · · · + a111(a,,)~ 
is a homomorphism of Z[x] onto Z 111[x]. 
b. Show that if f(x) E Z[x] and a111lf(x)) both have degree n and a,,,(f(x)) does not factor in Zm[x] into two 
polynomials of degree less than n, thenf(x) is irreducible in IQl[x]. 
c. Use part (b) to show that x3 + l 7x + 36 is irreducible in IQl[x]. [Hint: Try a prime value of m that simplifies 
the coefficients.] 
The goal of Exercises 38 through 40 is to prove Theorem 28.12. 
38. Letf(x) E Z[x]. We say thatf(x) = a,,~+ a11_ 1.x'
1
- 1 + · · · + ao is primitive if the greatest common divisor 
of the coefficients ao, a 1, ... , a,, is I. Prove the product of two primitive polynomials is primitive. 
39. Let f(x) E Z[x]. The content of f(x) = a,,x'' + a,,_1~- I + · · · + ao is defined to be the greatest common 
divisor of ao, a1, .. . , a,, and it is denoted cont(f(x)). Prove that cont(f(x)g(x)) = cont(f(x)) · cont(g(x)) for any 
f(x), g(x) E Z[x]. (Hint: Use Exercise 38.) 
40. Prove Theorem 28.12. (Hint: Use Exercise 39.) 
SECTION 29 t ALGEBRAIC CODING THEORY 
Suppose you wish to send a message, but occasionally the transmission line makes an 
error. When an error occurs, it would be nice if the receiver could detect that there is 
an error and ask you to resend the message. In other situations, such as a space probe 
transmitting images back to earth, it may be impossible to resend the data. In this case, 
it would be desirable if the receiving earthling could not only detect, but also correct a 
transmission error. 
We will think of a message as an element in Z~ = Z2 x Z2 x · · · x Z 2 . Each mes-
sage consists of a string of zeros and ones of length k . Each of the Z2 entries will be 
referred to as a bit. Coding theory in general allows transmitted messages to be in F" 
for any finite field F, but for our introduction to the subject we will restrict our attention 
toF = Z2. 
29.1 Example 
A common way to detect a single-bit error is to use a parity check bit. Instead of trans-
mitting a byte consisting of eight bits, that is, an element in Z~ , nine bits are transmitted 
with the last bit being the sum in Z2 of the first eight bits. The message 
(1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1) 
would be transmitted as 
(1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1). 
Regardless of whether the 8-bit message has an even or odd number of ones, the trans-
mitted string of 9 bits has an even number of ones. If the sum of the nine bits of the 
received message is not zero, then a transmission error must have occurred. 
• 
t This section is not used in the remainder of the text. 

238 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
29.2 Example 
An inefficient, but possible method of correcting transmission errors is to send a mes-
sage three times. If two of the received messages agree, then that common message is 
accepted as the most likely correct message. In this case, if there is only one error, the 
original message will be retrieved. 
.&. 
29.3 Definition 
A code is a subset C ~ z2. An element of C is a code word. The length of a code word 
in c ~ z2 is n. 
• 
In practice, when a message is to be sent, it is broken into shorter pieces consisting 
of k bits. A predetermined one-to-one functionf: z; -+ C mapping all possible k bit 
messages to code words is then applied to the message pieces and transmitted. The 
receiver then checks that each received message piece is in the range off. If so, the 
sent code word is most likely the received code word and the message corresponding to 
the received code word can be computed since f is one-to-one. If the received message 
is not a code word, then a transmission error occurred. We will not concern ourselves 
with the function f. Instead, we will investigate certain types of codes. We restrict our 
attention to linear codes as defined below. 
29.4 Definition 
A linear code is a subgroup C of z2. Since C is a subgroup of Z2, the order of C is 
2k for some integer k. The information rate or rate of the linear code is the ratio ~ . 
A linear code is cyclic if for any code word (ao, a 1, ... , an-I), (a11 _ 1, ao, a1, ... , a 11_2) is 
also a code word. That is, a linear code is cyclic if a cyclic shift of any code word is a 
code word. 
• 
An information rate of ~ means that in order to transmit a message of length k, n bits are 
required. It is clearly desirable to make the information rate as large as possible subject 
to the desired number of bit errors that can be detected or corrected. 
29.5 Example 
Let C ~ Zi be the set of all strings of length 9 such that the sum of the bits is 0 modulo 
2 as in Example 29.1. Note that C is the kernel of the group homomorphism 
<P: Zi-+ Z2 
given by 
</J(ao,a1, ... ,ag) = ao + a1 + · · · + ag 
(mod 2). 
Thus C is a subgroup of Zi and therefore C is a linear code. In this example, n = 9 and 
k = 8 since C is a subgroup of Zi with index 2. Thus Chas an information rate of~­
Furthermore, the code is cyclic since any cyclic shift of a code word does not change 
the number of ones. 
.&. 
If two code words differ in only one position, then it would not be possible to detect 
every error that occurs in just one bit. If any pair of code words differ in two or more 
positions, then any error of just one bit could be detected, that is, it could be determined 
that there is an error, but it may not be possible to reconstruct the original code word. 
Furthermore, if any pair of code words differ at three or more positions, then an error 
of just one bit could not only be detected, but it could be corrected since only one code 
word would differ from the erroneous word at one position. 
29.6 Definition 
The Hamming weight or weight of a string in Z2 is the number of ones in the string. 
The Hamming distance or distance between two strings in Z2 is the number of bits 
where the two strings differ. 
• 
29.7 Example 
The Hamming weight of the string (I, 0, 0, 1, I, 0, I, I) is 5. The Hamming distance 
between the code words (1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1) and (1, 1, 0, I, 0, 0, 0, 1) is 4. 
.&. 

Section 29 
Algebraic Coding Theory 
239 
29.8 Theorem 
For a linear code C, the minimum weight among the nonzero code words of C is the 
same as the minimum distance between two different code words. 
Proof 
For any two code words w, u E Z2, the distance between wand u is the number of bits 
where the words differ. That is, the weight of w - u is the distance between w and u. 
Since C is a subgroup of Z2, w - u E C. Thus the minimum weight of nonzero code 
words is less than or equal to the minimum distance between two different code words. 
We also notice that 0 E Z2 is a code word, so the weight of a code word w is the distance 
between 0 and w, which implies that the minimum distance between two different code 
words is less than or equal to the minimum weight among the nonzero code words. 
+ 
If the Hamming distance between any two different code words in a code C is at 
least d, then we say that C detects d - 1 bit errors since any change to a code word 
in at most d - 1 bits is not a code word. If C is a code in Z2 and for any string v E z:;, 
there is at most one code word whose Hamming distance from v is d or less, then we 
say that C corrects d bit errors. The idea is that if a string is received that is not a 
code word, then the best guess for the sent code word is the code word that is closest to 
the received string. For a code that corrects d bit errors, by taking the closest code to a 
received string we reconstruct the sent code word as long as the number of errors is at 
most d. 
29.9 Example 
Let C = ((0, 0, 0, 0), (1, 0, 1, 0), (1, 1, 0, 1), (0, 1, 1, 1)) ~ Zi. It is not difficult to check 
that C is a subgroup of Zi, so C is a linear code. The code word ( 1, 0, 1, 0) has weight 
2 and the other two nonzero code words have weight 3. By Theorem 29.8, the mini-
mum distance between any two code words is 2. Thus C detects one-bit errors, but it 
cannot correct a one-bit error. A received message of m = (I , 0, 0, 0) differs from both 
(0, 0, 0, 0) and (1, 0, 1, 0) by only one bit, so even if we know m is only incorrect in one 
position, we would not know if the sent code word was (0, 0, 0, 0) or (1, 0, 1, 0). 
..&. 
There are many schemes to generate codes having various properties, but we will 
focus on just one method. We can think of an element (a0,a1,a2 , •• . ,a 11_ 1) E Z2 as 
corresponding to the coefficients of the polynomial a0 + a 1x + a2x2 + · · · + a11 _ 1x'
1
- 1 E 
Z2[x]. In this way, instead of thinking of code words as strings of zeros and ones of 
length n, we can think of them as polynomials in Z2[x] of degree at most n -
1. We 
note that this correspondence is a group isomorphism <P mapping Z2 onto the additive 
group of polynomials in Z2[x] of degree at most n - 1. 
29.10 Example 
Let n = 5 and g(x) = x 2 + x + I. We define C to be all the multiples of x2 + x + 1, 
including 0, whose degree is less than 5. 
C = {f(x)g(x) lf(x) E Z2[x] and either deg(f(x)) .'.S 2 or f(x) = 0) 
= (0 · g(x), 1 · g(x), x · g(x), (x + 1) · g(x), 
x2 · g(x), (x2 + 1) · g(x), (x2 + x) · g(x), (x2 + x + 1) · g(x)) 
= (0, x2 +x+ 1, x3 +x2 +x, x3 + 1, 
x4 +x3 +x2, x4 +x3 +x+ 1, x4 +x, x4 +x2 + 1). 
By reading off the coefficients of these polynomials we determine the code words to be 
(0,0,0,0,0) (0,0, 1, 1, 1) (0, 1, 1, 1, 0) (0,1,0,0, 1) 
(1, 1, 1, 0, 0) (1, 1, 0, 1, 1) (1, 0, 0, 1, 0) (1, 0, 1, 0, 1). 
It is not difficult to check that this collection of elements in Z~ is a subgroup of Z~ and 
therefore gives a linear code. The code is not cyclic since (0, 1, 0, 0, 1) is a code word, 

240 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
but (1, 0, 1, 0, 0) is not a code word. We see that the minimum weight among all the 
nonzero code words is 2. By Theorem 29.8, the minimum Hamming distance between 
any two code words is also 2, which implies that the code detects a one-bit error, but it 
does not correct a one-bit error. 
• 
In Example 29.10, we simply read off the coefficients of the polynomials in C 
to construct a linear code. For the rest of this section we will abuse notation slightly 
by referring to a set C of polynomials in ~dxl as a linear code if C is a subgroup of 
Z2[x] containing no polynomial of degree nor larger. The fact that <P mapping Z~ to 
the polynomials of degree at most n -
1 is a group isomorphism assures us that any 
subgroup C :S Z2[x] having no polynomial of degree nor larger provides a linear code 
by simply reading off the coefficients of the polynomials in C. 
29.11 Theorem 
Let g(x) be a polynomial in Z2[x] of degree less than n. Then C = {f(x)g(x) lf(x) E 
Z2[x] and either f(x) = 0 or deg(f(x)) < n - deg(g(x))} is a linear code. Furthermore, 
if the polynomial g(x) is a factor of .x'' + 1 in Z2[x], then C is a cyclic code. 
Proof 
We first show that C is closed under addition. Letf(x), h(x) E Z2[x] so that each either 
has degree less than n - deg(g(x)) or is the 0 polynomial. Thenf(x) + h(x) is either the 
zero polynomial or else its degree is less than n - deg(g(x)). Therefore 
f(x)g(x) + h(x)g(x) = (f(x) + h(x))g(x), 
which implies that C is closed under addition. Also C contains the 0 polynomial and 
if f(x)g(x) E C, then -(f(x)g(x)) = f(x)g(c) E C. Thus C is a subgroup of the additive 
group G = {w(x) E Z2[x] I w(x) = 0 or deg(w(x)) < n}, which means that C is a linear 
code. 
Now we assume that g(x) is a factor of .x'' + I in Z 2 [x], that is, there is a polynomial 
h(x) E Z2[x] with 
h(x)g(x) = .i' + I. 
Apparently, 
deg(h(x)) = n - deg(g(x)). 
Letf(x)g(x) E C. If 
deg(f(x)g(x)) < n - 1, 
then 
(xf(x))g(x) E C 
and xf(x)g(x) simply increases by one the degree of each term in the polynomial 
f(x)g(x). This implies that xf(x)g(x) E C is a cyclic shift of f(x)g(x). On the other hand, 
if 
deg(f(x)g(x)) = n - 1, 
then a cyclic shift of the code wordf(x)g(x) is 
We have 
p(x) = xf(x)g(x) + (.i' + 1). 
xf(x)g(x) + (.x" + 1) = xf(x)g(x) + h(x)g(x) 
= (xf(x) + h(x))g(x) 

Section 29 
Algebraic Coding Theory 
241 
Since xf(x) and h(x) each have degree n - deg(g(x)), the coefficient of x•-<leg(g(x)) in 
their sum is 0. So either xf(x) + h(x) = 0 or deg(xf(x) + h(x)) < n - deg(g(x)). In either 
case, the cyclic shift xf(x)g(x) + (x'' + 1) is a code word in C. Therefore, C is a cyclic 
code. 
+ 
29.12 Definition 
The code C in Theorem 29.11 is called the polynomial code of length n generated by 
~ -
. 
29.13 Example 
Find the code words for C, the polynomial code oflength 7 generated by the polynomial 
g(x) = x3 + x 2 + 1. What is the information rate for C? Determine if C detects a one-
bit error and if so, can C correct a one-bit error? What about detecting and correcting 
two-bit errors? 
Solution 
As in Example 29.10, one method of finding all the code words is to multiply every 
polynomial of degree 3 or less by g(x), but there is a much simpler method if the code 
is cyclic. The polynomial x7 + 1 can be seen to factor in Z2[x] as 
x7 + 1 = (x3 +x2 + l)(x4 +x3 +x2 + 1) 
simply by using long division of polynomials. Therefore C is a cyclic code by Theorem 
29.11. Since 1 · g(x) = g(x) E C and C contains all cyclic shifts of g(x), we have all the 
polynomials in the first column of Figure 29 .14 as code words in C. Since C is a group, 
(x3 + x2 + 1) + (x4 + x3 + x) = x4 + x2 + x + 1 E C. The fact that C is cyclic implies 
the second column of Figure 29.14 is contained in C. There are 24 = 16 polynomials 
of degree less than 4 (including the zero polynomial) with coefficients in Z2 . Thus C 
contains 16 elements. Since C is a subgroup, the zero polynomial is in C, leaving only 
one more polynomial to complete the list. This polynomial must remain the same when 
a cyclic shift is applied. Other than the polynomial 0, the only polynomial that remains 
the same when a cyclic shift is applied is 
x6 + .x5 + x4 + x3 + x2 + x + 1. 
Thus Figure 29.14 gives the code C as polynomials. Figure 29.15 gives the code as 
elements in Zi. 
Since ICI = 24 and the code word length is 7, the information rate is ~-
It is easy to see that the minimum weight among all the nonzero code words is 3. 
By Theorem 29.8, the minimum distance between code words is 3. So not only can a 
single-bit error be detected, it can be corrected. Since the distance between any two code 
words is at least 3, the code detects two-bit errors. However, the code does not correct 
two-bit errors since a two-bit error could produce a word with Hamming distance of 
one from another code word. For example, (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1) differs from the code word 
(0, 0, 0, 1, l, 0, 1) in two bits, but it differs from the code word (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) in only 
one bit. 
.A 
x3 +x2 + 1 
x4 + x3 +x 
xs +x4 +x2 
x6 +.x5 +x3 
x6 +x4 + 1 
x5 +x+ l 
x6 +x2 +x 
x4 +x2+x+ 1 
x5 +x3 + x2 +x 
x6 +x4 + x3 +x2 
.x5 +x4 +x3 + l 
x6 + .x5 + x4 + x 
x6 +.x5 +x2 + l 
x6 +x3 + x+ l 
29.14 Figure 

242 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
(0,0,0, 1, 1,0, 1) 
(0,0, 1, 1,0, 1,0) 
(0, 1, 1,0, 1,0,0) 
(1, 1,0, 1,0,0,0) 
( 1,0, 1,0,0,0, 1) 
(0, 1,0,0,0, 1, 1) 
( 1,0,0,0, 1, 1,0) 
(0,0,1,0, 1,1, 1) 
(0, 1,0, 1, 1,1,0) 
(1,0,1,1, 1,0,0) 
(0, I, I, 1,0,0, 1) 
(1, 1, 1,0,0, 1,0) 
(1, 1,0,0, 1,0, 1) 
(1,0,0, 1,0,1, 1) 
(0,0,0,0,0,0,0) 
(l ,1,1,l,l,l ,l ) 
29.15 Figure 
Examples 29.2 and 29.13 each provide a code that can correct a one-bit error. Ex-
ample 29.2 requires sending 24 bits to transmit a message of length 8. That is, the 
information rate is ~. In Example 29.13, in order to transmit a message of length 8, 14 
bits are required and the information rate is~ - Clearly the code in Example 29.13 is a 
much more efficient way of coding data for transmission. 
• EXERCISES 29 
1. If a code has word length 10 and transmission rate of ~ , how many code words are in the code? 
2. If a linear code contains exactly 16 code words and the transmission rate is ~, find the length of code words. 
3. Find the smallest cyclic linear code C that contains (I, 0, 0, 0, 0). 
4. Find all cyclic linear codes C in Zi that have a transmission rate of ~ . 
5. Find all cyclic linear codes of length n for 
a. n = 2 
b. n = 3 
c. n =4 
6. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. A code is a subset of Z2 for some positive integer n. 
b. The length of a code word in Z2 is n. 
c. Every code is a linear code. 
d. If the Hamming distance between any two different code words is at least 4, then the code corrects two-bit 
errors. 
e. If C is a linear code in Z2, then the information rate is the number of elements in C divided by the number 
of elements in z2. 
f. Every linear code contains the code word consisting of all zeros. 
g. If the Hamming distance between two code words in a linear code is d, then there is a code word with 
Hamming weight d. 
h. The set {f(x)g(x) I f(x) E Z2[x]} is the polynomial code of length n generated by g(x) if g(x) E Z2[x] and 
g(x) has degree n. 
i. Not every polynomial code is cyclic. 
j . Every cyclic linear code contains at most two code words that remain the same when a cyclic shift is 
applied. 
7. Let g(x) = x3 + x + l E Z2[x]. 
a. Verify that g(x) is a factor of x7 + I in Z2[x]. 
b. Find all the code words in the polynomial code C of length 7 generated by g(x). 
c. Determine if C detects single-bit errors and if so, determine if it corrects single-bit errors. 
d . Determine if C detects two-bit errors and if so, determine if it corrects two-bit errors. 

Section 30 
Homomorphisms and Factor Rings 
243 
8. The transmission of a code word from the previous exercise produced the polynomial p(x) = x6 + x5 + x4 + 
x3. Was there a transmission error? If so, find the closest code word from C as measured by the Hamming 
distance. 
9. Let g(x) = x6 + x3 + 1 E Z2[x]. 
a. Verify that g(x) is a factor of x9 + 1 in Z2[x]. 
b. Find all the code words in the polynomial code C of length 9 generated by g(x). 
c. Determine if C detects single-bit errors and if so, determine if it corrects single-bit errors. 
d. Determine if C detects two-bit errors and if so, determine if it corrects two-bit errors. 
10. Let g(x) = x4 + x3 + x + l E Z2[x] and let C be the code generated by g(x) with code word length 7. 
a. Is C cyclic? 
b. Find all the code words in the polynomial code C of length 7 generated by g(x). 
c. Can C detect one-bit errors and if so, can C correct one-bit errors? 
d. Can C detect two-bit errors and if so, can C correct two-bit errors? 
11. Find six polynomials g(x) E Z2[x] so that the code generated by g(x) with code words of length 9 is a cyclic 
code. 
12. If the minimal weight among all nonzero code words in a cyclic linear code C ~ Z2 is 1, prove that C = z2. 
13. Let g(x) be a polynomial in ~ [x] . Prove that if the polynomial code C generated by g(x) with length n is 
cyclic, then g(x) is a factor of x' + l in Z2[x]. 
14. Let C ~ Z2 be a linear code with d the minimal weight among the nonzero code words. Determine necessary 
and sufficient conditions on d for C to correct k-bit errors. 
15. Let C ~ Z2 be a linear code. Show that as a group, C is isomorphic with Z~ for some k. 
16. Is there a polynomial g(x) E Z2[x] such that the code generated by g(x) of length 9 is the same code as in 
Example 29.5? Prove your answer. 
SECTION 30 H OMOMORPHISMS AND FACTOR R INGS 
Factor Rings 
In Section 12 we investigated which subgroups of a given groups could be used to form 
a factor group. In this section we wish to do an analogous construction on a ring to form 
a factor ring. We start with an example. 
30.1 Example 
For any n E Z, nZ is a subring of Z. Thinking of Z as an abelian group, we know that nZ 
is a normal subgroup of Z. As we have seen, Z/nZ = {a+ nZ I a E Z} forms a group 
using addition defined by adding coset representatives. Furthermore, Z/nZ is a ring 
where multiplication is defined by 
(a + nZ)(b + nZ) = ab + nZ. 
We check that this multiplication is well defined. Let a' E a + nZ and b' E b + nZ . Then 
a' = a + nk and b' = b + nr for some integers k and r. Thus 
a' b' = (a + nk)(b + nr) 
= ab + n(kb + knr) + anr 
= ab + n(kb + knr + ar) 
E ab + nZ. 
From this calculation we see that regardless of which representatives from a + nZ and 
b + nZ we pick, our product is in the coset ab + nZ . So we have a well-defined multi-
plication on the cosets of nZ . 
..&. 

244 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
Looking at the second line of the above computation, we can see that what was needed to 
verify a' b' E ab + nZ is that n(kb + knr) + anr E nZ. The key to make this computation 
work is that when an element of Z is multiplied by an element of nZ, the product is in 
nZ. This observation is the reason for the following definition. 
30.2 Definition 
An additive subgroup N of the ring R is an ideal if 
aN = {an I n E N} S:::: N 
and 
Na = {na I n E N} S:::: N 
for all a E R. 
• 
30.3 Example 
We see that nZ is an ideal in the ring Z since we know it is a subring, and s(nm) = 
(nm)s = n(ms) E nZ for alls E Z. 
.._ 
30.4 Example 
Let F be the ring of all functions mapping IR into IR, and let C be the subring of F 
consisting of all the constant functions in F. Is Can ideal in F? Why? 
Solution 
It is not true that the product of a constant function with every function is again a 
constant function. For example, the product of sin x and 2 is the function 2 sin x. Thus 
C is not an ideal of F. 
.._ 
• H ISTORICAL NOTE 
I
t was Ernst Eduard Kummer (1810-1893) who 
introduced the concept of an "ideal complex 
number" in 1847 in order to preserve the notion 
of unique factorization in certain rings of alge-
braic integers. In particular, Kummer wanted to 
be able to factor into primes numbers of the form 
ao + a 1a + aza 2 + · · · + ap_ 1aP- 1, where a is a 
complex root of xP = I (p prime) and the a ; are or-
dinary integers. Kummer had noticed that the naive 
definition of primes as "unfactorable numbers" 
does not lead to the expected results; the product 
of two such "unfactorable" numbers may well be 
divisible by other "unfactorable" numbers. Kum-
mer defined "ideal prime factors" and "ideal num-
bers" in terms of certain congruence relationships; 
these "ideal factors" were then used as the divisors 
necessary to preserve unique factorization. By use 
of these, Kummer was in fact able to prove cer-
tain cases of Fermat's Last Theorem, which states 
that x' + y" = z" has no solutions x, y, Z E z+ if 
n > 2. 
It turned out that an "ideal number," which was 
in general not a "number" at all, was uniquely de-
termined by the set of integers it "divided." Richard 
Dedekind took advantage of this fact to identify the 
ideal factor with this set; he therefore called the set 
itself an ideal, and proceeded to show that it satis-
fied the definition given in the text. Dedekind was 
then able to define the notions of prime ideal and 
product of two ideals and show that any ideal in the 
ring of integers of any algebraic number field could 
be written uniquely as a product of prime ideals. 
30.5 Example 
Let F be as in the preceding example, and let N be the subring of all functions f such 
thatf(2) = 0. Is Nan ideal in F? Why or why not? 
Solution 
Letf EN and let g E F. Then (jg)(2) = f(2)g(2) = Og(2) = 0, sofg EN. Similarly, we 
find that gf EN. Therefore N is an ideal of F. 
.._ 
30.6 Theorem 
(Analogue of Theorem 12.7) Let H be an additive subgroup of the ring R. Multipli-
cation of additive cosets of H is well defined by the equation 
(a + H)(b + H) = ab + H 
if and only if His an ideal in R. 

Section 30 
Homomorphisms and Factor Rings 
245 
Proof 
Suppose first that H is an ideal in R. Let a, b E R, a' E a+ H, and b' E b + H. There 
are elements h1, h2 E H with a' =a+ h1 and b' = b + h2 . We have 
a'b' = (a+ h1)(b + hz) 
= ab + ah2 + h1b + h1h2 
E ab+ H 
since H is an ideal. 
We now suppose that (a + H)(b + H) = ab + H defines a binary operation on cosets of 
Hin R. We let a E R and h E H with the goal of showing that aH ~ H and Ha~ H. 
Since h + H = 0 + H, 
This shows ha E H, which implies Ha~ H. Similarly, 
This shows ah E H and therefore aH ~ H. Thus His an ideal in R. 
• 
Once we know that multiplication by choosing representatives is well defined on 
additive cosets of a subring N of R, the associative law for multiplication and the dis-
tributive laws for these cosets follow immediately from the same properties in R. We 
have at once this corollary of Theorem 30.6. 
30.7 Corollary 
(Analogue of Corollary 12.8) Let N be an ideal of a ring R. Then the additive cosets 
of N form a ring R/ N with the binary operations defined by 
(a+ N) + (b + N) = (a+ b) + N 
and 
(a + N)(b + N) = ab + N. 
• 
30.8 Definition 
The ring R / N in the preceding corollary is the factor ring (or quotient ring) of R 
~ ~ 
. 
If we use the term quotient ring, be sure not to confuse it with the notion of the field 
of quotients of an integral domain, discussed in Section 26. 
Homomorphisms 
We defined the concepts of homomorphism and isomorphism for rings in Section 22, 
since we wished to talk about evaluation homomorphisms for polynomials and about 
isomorphic rings. We repeat some definitions here for easy reference. Recall that a ho-
momorphism is a structure-relating map. A homomorphism for rings must relate both 
their additive structure and their multiplicative structure. 
30.9 Definition 
A map <P of a ring R into a ring R' is a homomorphism if 
</J(a + b) = </J(a) + </J(b) 
and 
</J(ab) = </J(a)</J(b) 
for all elements a and bin R. 
• 
In Example 22.10 we defined evaluation homomorphisms, and Example 22. 11 
showed that the map <P : Z ~ Z 11 , where </J(m) is the remainder of m when divided 

246 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
by n, is a homomorphism. We give another simple but very fundamental example of a 
homomorphism. 
30.10 Example 
(Projection Homomorphisms) Let R1, R2, · · · , R11 be rings. For each i, the map TC; : 
R1 x R2 x · · · x R11 --+ R; defined by TC;(r1, r2, · · · , r 11) = r; is a homomorphism, pro-
jection onto the ith component. The two required properties of a homomorphism hold 
for TC; since both addition and multiplication in the direct product are computed by 
addition and multiplication in each individual component. 
.&. 
Properties of Homomorphisms 
We continue to parallel our development of ring homomorphisms and factor rings with 
the analogous material for group homomorphisms and factor groups. 
30.11 Theorem 
Let <jJ : R --+ R' be a ring homomorphism. 
1. If 0 is the additive identity in R, then <jJ(O) = O' is the additive identity in R' . 
2. If a E R, then <jJ(-a) = -<jJ(a). 
3. If Sis a subring of R, then <jJ[S] is a subring of R'. 
4. If S' is a subring of R', then <jJ-1 [S'] is a subring of R. 
5. If R has unity 1, then <jJ(l) is unity for <jJ[R]. 
6. If N is an ideal in R, then <jJ[N] is an ideal in <jJ[R]. 
7. If N' is an ideal in either R' or <jJ[R], then <jJ- 1 [N'] is an ideal in R. 
Proof 
Let <jJ be a homomorphism of a ring R into a ring R' . Since, in particular, <jJ can be viewed 
as a group homomorphism of (R, + ) into (R', + ' ), Theorem 8.5 tells us that <jJ(O) = O' 
is the additive identity element of R' and that <jJ(-a) = -<jJ(a). 
Theorem 8.5 also tells us that if S is a subring of R, then, considering the additive 
group (S, + ), the set (<jJ[S], + ' ) gives a subgroup of (R', + '). If <jJ(s 1) and <jJ(s2) are two 
elements of <jJ[S], then 
<jJ(s1)</J(s2) = <jJ(s1s2) 
and <jJ(s1s2) E <jJ[S]. Thus <jJ(s1)<jJ(s2) E <jJ[S], so <jJ[S] is closed under multiplication. 
Consequently, <jJ[S] is a subring of R'. 
Going the other way, Theorem 8.5 also shows that if S' is a subring of R', then 
(<jJ- 1 [S'], + ) is a subgroup of (R, +).Let a, b E <jJ- 1 [S'], so that <jJ(a) ES' and <jJ(b) ES'. 
Then 
<jJ(ab) = <jJ(a)<jJ(b). 
Since <jJ(a)<jJ(b) E S', we see that ab E <jJ- 1 [S'], so <jJ- 1 [S'] is closed under multiplication 
and thus is a subring of R. 
If R has unity 1, then for all r E R, 
<jJ(r) = <jJ(lr) = <jJ(rl) = <jJ(l )<jJ(r) = <jJ(r)<jJ(l), 
so <jJ(l) is unity for <jJ[R]. 
The proof of the remainder of the theorem is Exercise 22. 
• 
Note in Theorem 30.11 that </JC 1) is unity for <jJ[R], but not necessarily for R' as we 
ask you to illustrate in Exercise 9. Furthermore, although <jJ[N] is an ideal in <jJ[R], it 
may not be an ideal in R' as verified in Exercise 22. 

Section 30 
Homomorphisms and Factor Rings 
247 
30.12 Definition 
Let a map </J : R ~ R' be a homomorphism of rings. The subring 
r
1[0'] = {r E R l </J(r) = 0' ) 
is the kernel of </J, denoted by Ker(</J ). 
• 
If we forget about the multiplicative part of a ring, we see that the kernel of a ring 
homomorphism is the same as the kernel of the underlying group homomorphism. Any 
property of a group homomorphism must also hold for a ring homomorphism. 
30.13 Theorem 
Analogue of Theorem 10.17 Let </J: R1 ~ R2 be a ring homomorphism. The 
elements a, b E R1 are in the same additive coset of Ker(</J) if and only if </J(a) = </J(b)+ 
30.14 Theorem 
Analogue of Corollary 10.19 A ring homomorphism </J : R 1 ~ R2 is one-to-one if 
and only ifKer(</J) = {O}. 
+ 
The kernel of a group homomorphism </J : G 1 ~ G2 is a normal subgroup of G1 and 
normality is what is needed in order to construct a factor group from a subgroup. The 
situation is similar in rings. We need a subring to be an ideal in order to construct a 
factor ring. The following theorem states that in fact the kernel of a ring homomorphism 
is an ideal. 
30.15 Theorem 
Let </J : R1 ~ R2 be a ring homomorphism. Then Ker(</J) is an ideal in R1• 
Proof Since {0} c R2 is an ideal in R2, Ker(</J) = </J- 1 [{0}] is an ideal in R1 by Property 7 of 
Theorem 30.11. 
+ 
Fundamental Homomorphism Theorem 
To complete our analogy with groups, we give the analogues of Theorems 12.12 and 
12.14. 
30.16 Theorem 
(Analogue of Theorem 12.12) Let N be an ideal of a ring R. Then y : R ~ R/ N given 
by y(x) = x + N is a ring homomorphism with kernel N. 
Proof The additive part is done in Theorem 12.12. Turning to the multiplicative question, we 
see that 
y(.xy) = (.xy) + N = (x + N)(y + N) = y (x)y(y). 
• 
30.17 Theorem 
(Fundamental Homomorphism Theorem; Analogue of Theorem 12.14) Let </J : 
R ~ R' be a ring homomorphism with kernel N. Then </J[R] is a ring, and the map 
µ, : R/ N ~ </J[R] given by µ,(x + N) = </J(x) is an isomorphism. If y : R ~ R/ N is the 
homomorphism given by y(x) = x + N, then for each x E R, we have </J(x) = µ, o y(x). 
R 
<f:>[R] 
y 
RIN 
30.18 Figure 

248 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
Proof 
This follows at once from Theorems 30.15 and 30.16. Figure 30.18 is the analogue of 
Fig. 12.15. 
+ 
30.19 Example 
Example 30.3 shows that nZ is an ideal of Z, so we can form the factor ring Z/nZ . 
Example 22.11 shows that </J : Z --+ Z 11 where </J(m) is the remainder of m modulo n is a 
homomorphism, and we see that Ker(</J) = nZ . Theorem 30.17 then shows that the map 
µ : Z / nZ --+ Z,, where µ(m + nZ) is the remainder of m modulo n is well defined and 
is an isomorphism. 
A. 
30.20 Example 
Continuing Example 30.5, let F be the ring of all functions mapping lR into lR and let 
N be the subset of F consisting of all functions f with f(2) = 0. The set N is an ideal 
in F, so F / N is a ring. Furthermore, N is the kernel of the evaluation homomorphism 
</J2 : F --+ lR defined by <jJ2(f) = f (2). Since </J2 maps onto lR, F /N is isomorphic with lR 
by Theorem 30.17. The functionµ : F / N --+ lR given by µif) = f(2) is an isomorphism . ... 
In summary, every ring homomorphism with domain R gives rise to a factor ring 
R/ N, and every factor ring R/ N gives rise to a homomorphism mapping R into R/ N . An 
ideal in ring theory is analogous to a normal subgroup in the group theory. Both are the 
type of substructure needed to form a factor structure. 
• EXERCISES 30 
Computations 
1. Describe all ring homomorphisms of Z x Z into Z x Z. [Hint: Note that if <P is such a homomorphism, then 
</>(( 1, 0)) = </>(( 1, 0))</J(( I, 0)) and </>((0, I)) = </J((O, 1 ))</>((0, 1) ). Consider also </>(( I, 0)(0, I)).] 
2. Find all positive integers n such that Z11 contains a subring isomorphic to Z2. 
3. Find all ideals N of Z12. In each case compute Z 12/ N; that is, find a known ring to which the quotient ring is 
isomorphic. 
4. Give addition and multiplication tables for 2Z/8Z. Are 2Z/8Z and Z4 isomorphic rings? 
Concepts 
In Exercises 5 through 7, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
S. An isomorphism of a ring R with a ring R' is a homomorphism <P : R --+ R' such that Ker(</>) = {0}. 
6. An ideal N of a ring R is an additive subgroup of (R, + ) such that for all r E R and all n EN, we have rn EN 
and nr EN. 
7. The kernel of a homomorphism <P mapping a ring R into a ring R' is {</J(r) = O' I r E R}. 
8. Let F be the ring of all functions mapping lR into lR and having derivatives of all orders. Differentiation gives a 
map 8 : F--+ F where o(f(x)) = f '(x). Is 8 a homomorphism? Why? Give the connection between this exercise 
and Example 30.4. 
9. Give an example of a ring homomorphism <P: R--+ R' where R has unity I and </J(l ) =f. O' , but <P(I ) is not unity 
for R' . 
10. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. The concept of a ring homomorphism is closely connected with the idea of a factor ring. 
b. A ring homomorphism <P : R --+ R' carries ideals of R into ideals of R'. 
c. A ring homomorphism is one-to-one if and only if the kernel is {0}. 
d. Q is an ideal in JR. 

Section 30 
Exercises 
249 
e. Every ideal in a ring is a subring of the ring. 
f. Every subring of every ring is an ideal of the ring. 
g. Every quotient ring of every commutative ring is again a commutative ring. 
h. The rings Z/4Z and Z4 are isomorphic. 
i. An ideal Nin a ring R with unity 1 is all of R if and only if 1 EN. 
j . The concept of an ideal is to the concept of a ring as the concept of a normal subgroup is to the concept of 
a group. 
11. Let R be a ring. Observe that {O} and Rare both ideals of R. Are the factor rings R/ Rand R/ {O} of real interest? 
Why? 
12. Give an example to show that a factor ring of an integral domain may be a field. 
13. Give an example to show that a factor ring of an integral domain may have divisors of 0. 
14. Give an example to show that a factor ring of a ring with divisors of 0 may be an integral domain. 
15. Find a subring of the ring Z x Z that is not an ideal of Z x Z. 
16. A student is asked to prove that a quotient ring of a ring R modulo an ideal N is commutative if and only if 
(rs - sr) E N for all r, s E R. The student starts out: 
Assume R/ N is commutative. Then rs = sr for all r, s E R/ N. 
a. Why does the instructor reading this expect an incorrect proof? 
b. What should the student have written? 
c. Prove the assertion. (Note the "if and only if.") 
Theory 
17. Let R ={a+ bv'2 I a, b E Z} and let R' consist of all 2 x 2 matrices of the form [~ 2:J 
for a, b E Z. Show 
that Risa subring of lR and that R' is a subring of Mz(Z). Then show that</> : R--+ R' , where <f>(a + b,,/2) = 
[a 2b] . . 
hi 
b 
a 1s an 1somorp sm. 
18. Show that each homomorphism from a field to a ring is either one-to-one or maps everything onto 0. 
19. Show that if R, R', and R" are rings, and if </> : R --+ R' and if! : R' --+ R" are homomorphisms, then the 
composite function if!</> : R --+ R" is a homomorphism. (See Exercise 39 of Section 8.) 
20. Let R be a commutative ring with unity of prime characteristic p. Show that the map </>p : R --+ R given by 
</>p(a) = al' is a homomorphism (the Frobenius homomorphism). 
21. Let Rand R' be rings and let</> : R--+ R' be a ring homomorphism such that <f>[R] =/= {O'}. Show that if R has 
unity 1 and R' has no 0 divisors, then </>( 1) is unity for R'. 
22. Let</> : R --+ R' be a ring homomorphism and let N be an ideal of R. 
a. Show that <f>[N] is an ideal of <f>[R]. 
b. Give an example to show that <f>[N] need not be an ideal of R'. 
c. Let N' be an ideal either of <f>[R] or of R' . Show that </>- I [N' ] is an ideal of R. 
23. Let F be a field, and let S be any subset of F x F x · · · x F for n factors. Show that the set Ns of all 
f(x1,··· ,xn) E F[x1,··· ,x11 ] that have every element (a1,··· ,a11 ) of Sas a zero (see Exercise 28 of 
Section 27) is an ideal in F[x1, · · · , x,,]. This is of importance in algebraic geometry. 
24. Show that a factor ring of a field is either the trivial (zero) ring of one element or is isomorphic to the field. 
25. Show that if R is a ring with unity and N is an ideal of R such that N =/= R, then R/ N is a ring with unity. 
26. Let R be a commutative ring and let a E R. Show that la = {x E R I ax = 0) is an ideal of R. 
27. Show that an intersection of ideals of a ring R is again an ideal of R. 
28. Let Rand R' be rings and let N and N' be ideals of Rand R' , respectively. Let</> be a homomorphism of R 
into R'. Show that</> induces a natural homomorphism </>* : R/ N --+ R' / N' if <f>[N] <; N' . (Use Exercise 41 of 
Section 12.) 

250 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
29. Let </> be a homomorphism of a ring R with unity onto a nonzero ring R'. Let u be a unit in R. Show that <f>(u) 
is a unit in R'. 
30. An element a of a ring R is nilpotent if a" = 0 for some n E z+. Show that the collection of all nilpotent 
elements in a commutative ring R is an ideal, the nilradical of R. 
31. Referring to the definition given in Exercise 30, find the nilradical of the ring Z12 and observe that it is one of 
the ideals of Z 12 found in Exercise 3. What is the nilradical of Z? of £::32? 
32. Referring to Exercise 30, show that if N is the nilradical of a commutative ring R, then R/N has as nilradical 
the trivial ideal {O + N). 
33. Let R be a commutative ring and N an ideal of R. Referring to Exercise 30, show that if every element of N is 
nilpotent and the nilradical of R/ N is R/ N, then the nilradical of R is R. 
34. Let R be a commutative ring and Nan ideal of R. Show that the set ,.JN of all a E R, such that a" E N for some 
n E z+, is an ideal of R, the radical of N . 
35. Referring to Exercise 34, show by examples that for proper ideals N of a commutative ring R, 
a. ,.JN need not equal N 
b. ,.JN may equal N. 
36. What is the relationship of the ideal ,.JN of Exercise 34 to the nilradical of R/ N (see Exercise 30)? Word your 
answer carefully. 
37. Show that </> : C --+ M2(1R) given by 
<f>(a + bi) = (-~ : ) 
for a, b E IR gives an isomorphism of C with the subring </>[CJ of M2(1R). 
SECTION 31 
PRIME AND MAXIMAL IDEALS 
Exercises 12 through 14 of the preceding section asked us to provide examples of factor 
rings R/ N where R and R/ N have very different structural properties. We start with some 
examples of this situation, and in the process, provide solutions to those exercises. 
31.1 Example 
As was shown in Corollary 23.5, the ring 21,, which is isomorphic to Z/pZ, is a field 
for p a prime. Thus a factor ring of an integral domain may be a field. 
.A. 
31.2 Example 
The ring Z x Z is not an integral domain, for 
(0, 1)(1, 0) = (0, 0), 
showing that (0, 1) and (1, 0) are 0 divisors. Let N = ((0, n) I n E Z}. Now N is an ideal 
of Z x Z, and (Z x Z) / N is isomorphic to Z under the correspondence [ (m, 0) + N ] ++ 
m, where m E Z. Thus a factor ring of a ring may be an integral domain, even though 
the original ring is not. 
.A. 
31.3 Example 
The subset N = (0, 3) of Z 6 is easily seen to be an ideal of Z6, and Z6/N has three 
elements, 0 + N , 1 + N, and 2 + N. These add and multiply in such a fashion as to 
show that Z6/ N :::: Z 3 under the correspondence 
(0 + N) ++ 0, 
(1 +N)++ 1, 
(2 + N) ++ 2. 
This example shows that if R is not even an integral domain, that is, if R has zero 
divisors, it is still possible for R/ N to be a field. 
.A. 
31.4 Example 
Note that Z is an integral domain, but Z/6Z :::: Z6 is not. The preceding examples 
showed that a factor ring may have a structure that seems better than the original ring. 

Section 31 
Prime and Maximal Ideals 
251 
This example indicates that the structure of a factor ring may seem worse than that of 
the original ring. 
..&. 
Every nonzero ring R has at least two ideals, the improper ideal R and the trivial 
ideal {O}. For these ideals, the factor rings are R/ R, which has only one element, and 
R/ {0}, which is isomorphic to R. These are uninteresting cases. Just as for a subgroup 
of a group, a proper nontrivial ideal of a ring R is an ideal N of R such that N f= R and 
N f= {O}. 
While factor rings of rings and integral domains may be of great interest, as the 
above examples indicate, Corollary 31.6, which follows our next theorem, shows that a 
factor ring of a field is really not useful to us. 
31.5 Theorem 
If Risa ring with unity, and N is an ideal of R containing a unit, then N = R. 
Proof Let N be an ideal of R, and suppose that u E N for some unit u in R. Then the condition 
rN ~ N for all r E R implies, if we taker= u- 1 and u E N , that I = u- 1 u is in N. But 
then rN ~ N for all r E R implies that rl = r is in N for all r E R, so N = R. 
+ 
31.6 Corollary 
A field contains no proper nontrivial ideals. 
Proof 
Since every nonzero element of a field is a unit, it follows at once from Theorem 31.5 
that an ideal of a field Fis either {O} or all of F . 
+ 
Maximal and Prime Ideals 
We now consider the questions of when a factor ring is a field and when it is an inte-
gral domain. In our analogy between groups and rings, we noticed that ideals in rings 
correspond to normal subgroups. Corollary 31.6 states that a field contains no proper 
nontrivial ideals. In group theory, this corresponds to a group having no proper nontriv-
ial normal subgroups, that is, a simple group. Theorem 13.20 states that a factor group 
G/H is simple if and only if H is a maximal normal subgroup of G. The following 
definition is analogous to maximal normal subgroups. 
31.7 Definition 
A maximal ideal of a ring R is an ideal M different from R such that there is no proper 
ideal N of R properly containing M. 
• 
31.8 Example 
Let p be a prime positive integer. We know that Z/p'll, is isomorphic to Zp. Forgetting 
about multiplication for the moment and regarding Z/pZ and Zp as additive groups, 
we know that Z" is a simple group, and consequently p'll, must be a maximal normal 
subgroup of '1l, by Theorem 13.20. Since '1l, is an abelian group and every subgroup is 
a normal subgroup, we see that p'll, is a maximal proper subgroup of Z. Since p'll, is an 
ideal of the ring Z, it follows that p'll, is a maximal ideal of Z. We know that Z/p'll, is 
isomorphic to the ring '1l.1,, and that Zp is actually a field. Thus Z/pZ is a field. This 
illustrates the next theorem. 
..&. 
31.9 Theorem 
(Analogue of Theorem 13.20) Let R be a commutative ring with unity. Then M is a 
maximal ideal of R if and only if R/ M is a field. 
Proof 
We first assume that M is a maximal ideal in R. Since R is a commutative ring with 
unity, so is R/ M. Furthermore, since M f= R, 0 + M f= I+ Mand R/ M is a nonzero 
ring. Let (a+ M) E R/ M, with a'/:. M, so that a+ M is not the additive identity el-
ement of R/ M. Suppose a+ M has no multiplicative inverse in R/ M. Then the set 
(R/ M) (a + M) = { (r + M)(a + M) I (r + M) E R/ M) does not contain 1 + M. We eas-
ily see that (R/ M)(a + M) is an ideal of R/ M. It is nontrivial because a '/:. M, and it is a 

252 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
proper ideal because it does not contain l + M. By Theorem 30.11, if y : R ~ R/ M is 
the canonical homomorphism, then y- 1 [(R/ M)(a + M)] is a proper ideal of R properly 
containing M. But this contradicts our assumption that Mis a maximal ideal, so a+ M 
must have a multiplicative inverse in R/ M. 
Conversely, suppose that R/ M is a field. By Theorem 30.11, if N is any ideal of 
R such that M c N c R and y is the canonical homomorphism of R onto R/ M, then 
y[N] is an ideal of R/M with ((0 + M)} c y[N] c R/ M. But this is contrary to Corol-
lary 31.6, which states that the field R / M contains no proper nontrivial ideals. Hence if 
R/ M is a field, then M is maximal. 
+ 
31.10 Example 
Since Z/nZ is isomorphic to 'l!,11 and 'l!,11 is a field if and only if n is a prime, we see that 
the maximal ideals of '11, are precisely the ideals p'l!, for prime positive integers p. 
• 
31.11 Corollary 
A commutative ring with unity is a field if and only if it has no proper nontrivial ideals. 
Proof 
Corollary 31.6 shows that a field has no proper nontrivial ideals. 
Conversely, if a commutative ring R with unity has no proper nontrivial ideals, then 
{0} is a maximal ideal and R/ {0}, which is isomorphic to R, is a field by Theorem 31.9 . • 
We now turn to the question of characterizing, for a commutative ring R with unity, 
the ideals N ofa R such that R/ N is an integral domain. The answer here is rather obvi-
ous. The factor ring R/ N will be an integral domain if and only if (a + N)(b + N) = N 
implies that either 
or 
b+N=N. 
This is exactly the statement that R/N has no divisors of 0, since the coset N plays 
the role of 0 in R/ N. Looking at representatives, we see that this condition amounts to 
saying that ab EN implies that either a EN orb EN. 
31.12 Example 
All ideals of '11, are of the form nZ. For n = 0, we have nZ = {O}, and Z/ {O} ::::::: Z, which 
is an integral domain. For n > 0, we have Z/nZ::::::: 'l!,11 and 'l!,11 is an integral domain 
if and only if n is a prime. Thus the nonzero ideals nZ such that Z/nZ is an integral 
domain are of the form pZ, where p is a prime. Of course, Z/p'l!, is actually a field, so 
that p'l!, is a maximal ideal of Z. Note that for a product rs of integers to be in pZ, the 
prime p must divide either r ors. The role of prime integers in this example makes the 
use of the word prime in the next definition more reasonable. 
• 
31.13 Definition 
An ideal N ofa R in a commutative ring R is a prime ideal if ab E N implies that either 
a E N orb E N for a, b E R. 
• 
Note that (OJ is a prime ideal in Z, and indeed, in any integral domain. 
31.14 Example 
Note that '11, x (OJ is a prime ideal of '11, x Z, for if (a, b)(c, d) E '11, x (OJ, then we must 
have bd = 0 in Z. This implies that either b = 0 so (a, b) E '11, x (OJ or d = 0 so (c, d) E 
'11, x (OJ. Note that ('11, x Z)/ (Z x {OJ) is isomorphic to Z, which is an integral domain . • 
Our remarks preceding Example 31.12 constitute a proof of the following theorem, 
which is illustrated by Example 31.14. 
31.15 Theorem 
Let R be a commutative ring with unity, and let N ofa R be an ideal in R. Then R/ N is an 
integral domain if and only if N is a prime ideal in R. 

Section 31 
Prime and Maximal Ideals 
253 
31.16 Corollary 
Every maximal ideal in a commutative ring R with unity is a prime ideal. 
Proof If M is maximal in R, then R/ M is a field, hence an integral domain, and therefore M is 
a prime ideal by Theorem 31.15. 
+ 
The material that has just been presented regarding maximal and prime ideals is 
very important and we shall be using it quite a lot. We should keep the main ideas well 
in mind. We must know and understand the definitions of maximal and prime ideals and 
must remember the following facts that we have demonstrated. 
For a commutative ring R with unity: 
1. 
An ideal M of R is maximal if and only if R/ M is a field. 
2. 
An ideal N of R is prime if and only if R/ N is an integral domain. 
3. 
Every maximal ideal of R is a prime ideal. 
Prime Fields 
We now proceed to show that the rings Z and Z,, form foundations upon which all rings 
with unity rest, and that «;)> and Z p perform a similar service for all fields. Let R be any 
ring with unity 1. Recall that by n · 1 we mean 1 + 1 + · · · + 1 for n summands for 
n > 0, and (-1) + (-1) + · · · + (- 1) for lnl summands for n < 0, while n · 1 = 0 for 
n = 0. 
31.17 Theorem If Risa ring with unity 1, then the map <P : Z --+ R given by 
<f>(n) = n · 1 
for n E Z is a homomorphism of Z into R. 
Proof 
Observe that 
<f>(n + m) = (n + m) · 1 = (n · 1) + (m · 1) = <f>(n) + <f>(m). 
The distributive laws in R show that 
(1 + 1 + ... + 1) (1 + 1 + ... + 1) = (1 + 1 + ... + 1). 
n summands 
m summands 
nm summands 
Thus (n · l )(m · 1) = (nm) · 1 for n, m > 0. Similar arguments with the distributive 
laws show that for all n, m E Z, we have 
(n · l)(m · 1) = (nm) · 1. 
Thus 
</>(nm) = (nm) · 1 = (n · l)(m · 1) = <f>(n)<f>(m). 
• 
31.18 Corollary 
Let R be a ring with unity. If R has characteristic n > 1, then R contains a subring 
isomorphic to Z,,. If R has characteristic 0, then R contains a subring isomorphic to Z. 
Proof 
The map <P : Z --+ R given by <f>(m) = m · 1 for m E Z is a homomorphism by Theo-
rem 31. 17. The kernel must be an ideal in Z . All ideals in Z are of the form sZ for some 
s E Z. By Theorem 23.14 we see that if R has characteristic n > 0, then the kernel of</> 
is nZ. Then the image </>[Z] .::: R is isomorphic to Z/nZ '.:::'. Z,,. If the characteristic of R 
is 0, then m · 1 ~ 0 for all m ~ 0, so the kernel of <P is (0). Thus, the image </>[Z] _::: R 
is isomorphic to Z. 
+ 

254 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
31.19 Theorem 
A field F is either of prime characteristic p and contains a subfield isomorphic to Zp or 
of characteristic 0 and contains a subfield isomorphic to IQ. 
Proof If the characteristic of F is not 0, the above corollary shows that F contains a subring 
isomorphic to Z 11 • Then n must be a prime p, or F would have 0 divisors. If F is of 
characteristic 0, then F must contain a subring isomorphic to Z. In this case Corollaries 
26.9 and 26.10 show that F must contain a field of quotients of this subring and that this 
field of quotients must be isomorphic to IQ. 
+ 
Thus every field contains either a subfield isomorphic to '!l,P for some prime p or a 
subfield isomorphic to IQ. These fields '!l,P and IQ are the fundamental building blocks on 
which all fields rest. 
31.20 Definition 
The fields Zp and IQ are prime fields. 
• 
Ideal Structure in F[x] 
Throughout the rest of this section, we assume that F is a field. We give the next defi-
nition for a general commutative ring R with unity, although we are only interested in 
the case R = F [x]. Note that for a commutative ring R with unity and a E R, the set 
{ra I r E R) is an ideal in R that contains the element a. 
31.21 Definition 
If R is a commutative ring with unity and a E R, the ideal {ra I r E R) of all multiples 
of a is the principal ideal generated by a and is denoted by (a). An ideal N of R is a 
principal ideal if N = (a) for some a E R. 
• 
31.22 Example 
Every ideal of the ring '!l, is of the form nZ, which is generated by n, so every ideal of '!l, 
is a principal ideal. 
.&. 
31.23 Example 
The principal ideal (x) in F[x] consists of all polynomials in F[x] having zero constant 
wrm. 
.&. 
The next theorem is another simple but very important application of the divi-
sion algorithm for F [x]. (See Theorem 28.2.) The proof of this theorem is to the di-
vision algorithm in F[x] as the proof that a subgroup of a cyclic group is cyclic is to the 
division algorithm in Z. 
31.24 Theorem If Fis a field, every ideal in F[x] is principal. 
Proof 
Let N be an ideal of F [x]. If N = {O}, then N = (0). Suppose that N f=- (0), and let g(x) 
be a nonzero element of N of minimal degree. If the degree of g(x) is 0, then g(x) E F 
and is a unit, so N = F [x] = (1) by Theorem 31.5, so N is principal. If the degree of 
g(x) is :O:: l , letf(x) be any element of N . Then by Theorem 28.2,f(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x), 
where r(x) = 0 or (degree r(x)) < (degree g(x)). Now f(x) E N and g(x) E N imply that 
f(x) - g(x)q(x) = r(x) is in N by definition of an ideal. Since g(x) is a nonzero element 
of minimal degree in N, we must have r(x) = 0. Thusf(x) = g(x)q(x) and N = (g(x)) . • 
We can now characterize the maximal ideals of F[x]. This is a crucial step in achiev-
ing our basic goal: to show that any nonconstant polynomialf (x) in F[x] has a zero in 
some field E containing F. 
31.25 Theorem 
An ideal (p(x)) f=- {O) of F [x] is maximal if and only if p(x) is irreducible over F. 

Section 31 
Prime and Maximal Ideals 
255 
Proof 
Suppose that (p(x)) i= {O} is a maximal ideal of F [x]. Then (p(x)) i= F[x], so p(x) ~F . 
Letp(x) = f(x)g(x) be a factorization of p(x) in F[x] . Since (p(x)) is a maximal ideal and 
hence also a prime ideal, (j(x)g(x)) E (p(x)) implies thatf(x) E (p(x)) or g(x) E (p(x)); 
that is, either f(x) or g(x) has p(x) as a factor. But then we can't have the degrees of both 
f(x) and g(x) less than the degree of p(x). This shows that p(x) is irreducible over F. 
Conversely, if p(x) is irreducible over F, suppose that N is an ideal such that 
(p(x)) s; N s; F [x]. Now N is a principal ideal by Theorem 31.24, so N = (g(x)) for 
some g(x) EN. Then p(x) EN implies that p(x) = g(x)q(x) for some q(x) E F[x]. But 
p(x) is irreducible, which implies that either g(x) or q(x) is of degree 0. If g(x) is of de-
gree 0, that is, a nonzero constant in F, then g(x) is a unit in F[x], so (g(x)) = N = F [x]. 
If q(x) is of degree 0, then q(x) = c, where c E F, and g(x) =(I / c)p(x) is in (p(x)), so 
N = (p(x) ). Thus (p(x)) c N c F[x] is impossible, so (p(x)) is maximal. 
+ 
31.26 Example 
Example 28.10 shows that x3 + 3x + 2 is irreducible in Z5[x], so Z5[x] / (x3 + 3x + 2) 
is a field. Similarly, Theorem 27.11 shows that x2 - 2 is irreducible in Q [x], so Q [x] / 
(x2 -
2) is a field. We shall examine such fields in more detail later. 
.A 
Application to Unique Factorization in F[x] 
In Section 28, we stated without proof Theorem 31.27, which follows. (See Theo-
rem 28.19.) Assuming this theorem, we proved in Section 28 that factorization of poly-
nomials in F [x] into irreducible polynomials is unique, except for order of factors and 
units in F. We delayed the proof of Theorem 31.27 until now since the machinery we 
have developed enables us to give such a simple proof. This proof fills the gap in our 
proof of unique factorization in F[x]. 
31.27 Theorem 
Let p(x) be an irreducible polynomial in F[x]. If p(x) divides r(x)s(x) for r(x), s(x) E 
F[x], then either p(x) divides r(x) or p(x) divides s(x). 
Proof 
Suppose p(x) divides r(x)s(x). Then r(x)s(x) E (p(x)), which is maximal by Theo-
rem 31.25. Therefore, (p(x)) is a prime ideal by Corollary 31.16. Hence r(x)s(x) E (p(x)) 
implies that either r(x) E (p(x)), giving p(x) divides r(x), or that s(x) E (p(x)), giving 
p(x) divides s(x). 
+ 
A Preview of Our Basic Goal 
We close this section with an outline of the demonstration in Section 39 of our basic 
goal. We have all the ideas for the proof at hand now; perhaps you can fill in the details 
from this outline. 
Basic goal: Let F be a field and letf(x) be a nonconstant polynomial in F[x]. Show 
that there exists a field E containing F and containing a zero a ofj(x). 
Outline of the Proof 
1. Let p(x) be an irreducible factor ofj(x) in F[x]. 
2. Let Ebe the.field F[x]/ (p(x)). (See Theorems 31.25 and 31.9.) 
3. Show that no two different elements of Fare in the same coset of F[x]/ (p(x)), 
and deduce that we may consider F to be (isomorphic to) a subfield of E. 
4. Let a be the coset x + (p(x)) in E. Show that for the evaluation 
homomorphism <Pa : F[x] --+ E, we have <Palf(x)) = 0. That is, a is a zero of 
f(x) in E. 

256 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
An example of a field constructed according to this outline is given in Section 39. 
There, we give addition and multiplication tables for the field Z2 [x] / (.x2 + x + 1}. We 
show there that this field has just four elements, the cosets 
0 + (x2 +x + 1), 
1 + (x2 + x + 1}, 
x + (x2 + x + l }, 
and 
(x + 1) + (x2 + x + 1). 
We rename these four cosets 0, 1, a, and a+ 1 respectively, and obtain Tables 39.21 
and 39.22 for addition and multiplication in this 4-element field. To see how these tables 
are constructed, remember that we are in a field of characteristic 2, so that a + a = 
a( l + 1) = aO = 0. Remember also that a is a zero of .x2 +x + 1, so that a 2 +a+ 1 = 
0 and consequently a 2 = -a - 1 =a + 1. 
• EXERCISES 31 
Computations 
1. Find all prime ideals and all maximal ideals of Z6 . 
2. Find all prime ideals and all maximal ideals of Z 12. 
3. Find all prime ideals and all maximal ideals of Z2 x Z 2. 
4. Find all prime ideals and all maximal ideals of Z2 x :l.4. 
5. Find all c E :l.3 such that :l.3 [x]/ (.x2 + c) is a field. 
6. Find all c E :l.3 such that :l.3 [x] / (x3 + .x2 + c) is a field. 
7. Find all c E :l.3 such that :l.3 [x]/ (x3 + cx2 + 1) is a field. 
8. Find all c E Zs such that Zs [x] / (x2 + x + c) is a field. 
9. Find all c E Zs such that Zs [x] / (x2 + ex+ 1} is a field. 
Concepts 
In Exercises 10 through 13, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction 
is needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
10. A maximal ideal of a ring R is an ideal that is not contained in any other ideal of R. 
11. A prime ideal of a commutative ring R is an ideal of the form pR = {pr I r E R) for some prime p. 
12. A prime field is a field that has no proper subfields. 
13. A principal ideal of a commutative ring with unity is an ideal N with the property that there exists a E N such 
that N is the smallest ideal that contains a. 
14. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every prime ideal of every commutative ring with unity is a maximal ideal. 
b. Every maximal ideal of every commutative ring with unity is a prime ideal. 
c. Q is its own prime subfield. 
d. The prime subfield of <C is JR. 
e. Every field contains a subfield isomorphic to a prime field. 
f. A ring with zero divisors may contain one of the prime fields as a subring. 
g. Every field of characteristic zero contains a subfield isomorphic to Q. 
h. Let F be a field. Since F[x] has no divisors of 0, every ideal of F[x] is a prime ideal. 
i. Let F be a field. Every ideal of F[x] is a principal ideal. 
j. Let F be a field. Every principal ideal of F[x] is a maximal ideal. 
15. Find a maximal ideal of Z x Z. 

Section 31 
Exercises 
257 
16. Find a prime ideal of IZ x IZ that is not maximal. 
17. Find a nontrivial proper ideal of IZ x IZ that is not prime. 
18. Is Q[x]/(x2 - Sx + 6) a field? Why? 
19. Is Q[x]/ (x2 - 6x + 6) a field? Why? 
Proof Synopsis 
20. Give a one- or two-sentence synopsis of "only if" part of Theorem 31.9. 
21. Give a one- or two-sentence synopsis of "if" part of Theorem 31.9. 
22. Give a one- or two-sentence synopsis of Theorem 31.24. 
23. Give a one- or two-sentence synopsis of the "only if" part of Theorem 31.25. 
Theory 
24. Give an example of an ideal in Q [x, y] that is not a principal ideal. Conclude that if R is an integral domain with 
the property that every ideal in R is principal, it does not follow that every ideal in R[x] is a principal ideal. 
25. Prove that if R is a commutative ring with unity and a E R, then (a) = {ra I r E R} is an ideal in R. 
26. Let R be a finite commutative ring with unity. Show that every prime ideal in R is a maximal ideal. 
27. Corollary 31.18 tells us that every ring with unity contains a subring isomorphic to either IZ or some IZ11 • Is it 
possible that a ring with unity may simultaneously contain two subrings isomorphic to IZ11 and Z111 for n i= m? 
If it is possible, give an example. If it is impossible, prove it. 
28. Continuing Exercise 27, is it possible that a ring with unity may simultaneously contain two subrings isomor-
phic to the fields IZp and Zq for two different primes p and q? Give an example or prove it is impossible. 
29. Following the idea of Exercise 28, is it possible for an integral domain to contain two subrings isomorphic to 
IZp and Zq for p i= q and p and q both prime? Give reasons or an illustration. 
30. Prove directly from the definitions of maximal and prime ideals that every maximal ideal of a commutative ring 
R with unity is a prime ideal. [Hint: Suppose Mis maximal in R, ab EM, and a rt. M. Argue that the smallest 
ideal {ra + m I r E R, m E M} containing a and M must contain 1. Express 1 as ra + m and multiply by b.] 
31. Show that N is a maximal ideal in a ring R if and only if R/ N is a simple ring, that is, it is nontrivial and has 
no proper nontrivial ideals. (Compare with Theorem 13.20.) 
32. Prove that if Fis a field, every proper nontrivial prime ideal of F[x] is maximal. 
33. Let F be a field andf(x), g(x) E F[x]. Show thatf(x) divides g(x) if and only if g(x) E lf(x)). 
34. Let F be a field and letf(x), g(x) E F[x]. Show that 
N = {r(x)f(x) + s(x)g(x) I r(x), s(x) E F[x]) 
is an ideal of F[x]. Show that if f(x) and g(x) have different degrees and N i= F[x], thenf(x) and g(x) cannot 
both be irreducible over F. 
35. Use Theorem 31.24 to prove the equivalence of these two theorems: 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra: Every nonconstant polynomial in C [x] has a zero in C. 
Nullstellensatz for C[x]: Letf1 (x), · · · Jr(x) E C[x] and suppose that every a EC that is a zero of all r of 
these polynomials is also a zero of a polynomial g(x) in C[x]. Then some power of g(x) is in the smallest ideal 
of C[x] that contains the r polynomials f 1 (x), · · · ,f,(x). 
There is a sort of arithmetic of ideals in a ring. The next three exercises define sum, product, and quotient of ideals. 
36. If A and B are ideals of a ring R, the sum A + B of A and B is defined by 
A+ B ={a+ b I a E A,b E BJ. 
a. Show that A + B is an ideal. 
b. Show that A <:; A +Band B <:; A +B. 

258 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
37. Let A and B be ideals of a ring R. The product AB of A and B is defined by 
AB = { t a;b; I a; E A, b; E B, n E z+}. 
1=1 
a. Show that AB is an ideal in R. 
b. Show that AB ~ (An B). 
38. Let A and B be ideals of a commutative ring R. The quotient A : B of A by Bis defined by 
A : B = {r ER I rb EA for all b E B). 
Show that A: Bis an ideal of R. 
39. Show that for a field F, the set S of all matrices of the form 
for a, b E F is a right ideal but not a left ideal of M2(F). That is, show that S is a subring closed under 
multiplication on the right by any element of M2(F), but is not closed under left multiplication. 
40. Show that the matrix ring M2(Z2) is a simple ring; that is, M2(Z2) has no proper nontrivial ideals. 
SECTION 32 
t NONCOMMUTATIVE EXAMPLES 
Thus far, the only example we have presented of a ring that is not commutative is the ring 
M 11(F) of all n x n matrices with entries in a field F. We shall do almost nothing with 
noncommutative rings and strictly skew fields. To show that there are other important 
noncommutative rings occurring very naturally in algebra, we give several examples of 
such rings. 
Rings of Endomorphisms 
Let A be any abelian group. A homomorphism of A into itself is an endomorphism of 
A. Let the set of all endomorphisms of A be End(A). Since the composition of two ho-
momorphisms of A into itself is again such a homomorphism, we define multiplication 
on End(A) by function composition, and thus multiplication is associative. 
To define addition, for</>, 1/1 E End(A), we have to describe the value of (</>+ 1/1) on 
each a EA. Define 
Since 
(</> + 1/1 )(a) = </>(a)+ 1/J(a). 
(</> + 1/J)(a + b) =</>(a+ b) + 1/J(a + b) 
= [</>(a)+ </>(b)] + [ 1/J(a) + 1/l(b)] 
= [</>(a)+ 1/J(a)] + [</>(b) + 1/l(b)] 
= (</> + 1/l)(a) + (</> + 1/l)(b) 
we see that </>+ 1/1 is again in End(A). 
Since A is commutative, we have 
(</> + 1/l)(a) =</>(a)+ 1/J(a) = 1/J(a) +</>(a)= (1/1 +</>)(a) 
t This section is not used in the remainder of the text. 

Section 32 
Noncommutative Examples 
259 
for all a EA, so <P + 1/1 = 1/1 + <P and addition in End(A) is commutative. The associa-
tivity of addition follows from 
[</J + (1/1+8)](a) = </J(a) + [(1/1+8)(a)] 
= </J(a) + [ 1/f(a) + 8(a)] 
= [</J(a) + 1/f(a)] + 8(a) 
= (</J + 1/l)(a) + 8(a) 
= [(</J + 1/1) + 8](a). 
If e is the additive identity of A, then the homomorphism 0 defined by 
O(a) = e 
for a E A is an additive identity in End(A). Finally, for 
</J E End(A), 
-<P defined by 
(-</J)(a) = -</J(a) 
is in End(A), since 
(-</J )(a + b) = -</J(a + b) = -[</J(a) + </J(b)] 
= -</J(a) - </J(b) = (-</J)(a) + (-</J)(b), 
and <P + ( -</J) = 0. Thus (End(A ), +) is an abelian group. 
Note that we have not yet used the fact that our functions are homomorphisms 
except to show that </J + 1/1 and -<P are again homomorphisms. Thus the set AA of all 
functions from A into A is an abelian group under exactly the same definition of addition, 
and, of course, function composition again gives a nice associative multiplication in AA. 
However, we do need the fact that these functions in End(A) are homomorphisms now to 
prove the left distributive law in End(A). Except for this left distributive law, (AA,+,·) 
satisfies all the axioms for a ring. Let </J, 1/f, and 8 be in End(A), and let a E A. Then 
(8(</J + 1/f ))(a)= 8((</J + 1/f )(a))= 8(</J(a) + 1/f(a)). 
Since 8 is a homomorphism, 
8(</J(a) + 1/f(a)) = 8(</J(a)) + 8(1/f(a)) 
= (8</J )(a)+ (81/f )(a) 
= (8</J + 81/f )(a). 
Thus 8 (</J + 1/1) = 8</J + 81/f. The right distributive law causes no trouble, even in AA, 
and follows from 
((1/f + 8)</J)(a) = (1/1+8)(</J(a)) = 1/1(</J(a)) + 8(</J(a)) 
= (1/1</J)(a) + (8</J)(a) = (1/1</J + 8</J)(a). 
Thus we have proved the following theorem. 
32.1 Theorem 
The set End(A) of all endomorphisms of an abelian group A forms a ring under homo-
morphism addition and homomorphism multiplication (function composition). 
Again, to show relevance to this section, we should give an example showing that 
End(A) need not be commutative. Since function composition is in general not commu-
tative, this seems reasonable to expect. However, End(A) may be commutative in some 
cases. Indeed, Exercise 15 asks us to show that End( (Z, + )) is commutative. 

260 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
32.2 Example 
Consider the abelian group (Z x Z, +) discussed in Section 9. It is straightforward to 
verify that two elements of End( (Z x Z, + )) are </> and i/J defined by 
</>((m, n)) = (m + n, 0) 
and 
i/l((m, n)) = (0, n). 
Note that </> maps everything onto the first factor of Z x Z, and i/J collapses the first 
factor. Thus 
(i/l</>)(m,n) = i/J(m+n,0) = (0,0) 
while 
(</>i/l)(m,n) = </>(O,n) = (n,O). 
Hence </>i/l f=. i/J</>. 
32.3 Example 
Let F be a field of characteristic zero, and let (F[x], +)be the additive group of the ring 
F[x] of polynomials with coefficients in F. For this example, let us denote this additive 
group by F[x], to simplify this notation. We can consider End(F[x]). One element of 
End(F[x]) acts on each polynomial in F[x] by multiplying it by x. Let this endomor-
phism be X, so 
X(ao + a1x + a1x2 + · · · + anx'') = aox + a1x2 + a1x3 + · · · + a11.x'
1+1• 
Another element of End(F[x]) is formal differentiation with respect to x. (The familiar 
formula "the derivation of a sum is the sum of the derivatives" guarantees that differen-
tiation is an endomorphism of F[x].) Let Y be this endomorphism, so 
Y(ao + a1x + a1x2 + · · · + anx'') = a1 + 2a2x + · · · + na11.x'
1
- 1. 
Exercise 17 asks us to show that YX - XY = 1, where 1 is unity (the identity map) in 
End(F[x]). Thus XY f=. YX. Multiplication of polynomials in F[x] by any element of F 
also gives an element of End (F[x]). The subring of End(F[x]) generated by X and Y 
and multiplications by elements of F is the Weyl algebra and is important in quantum 
mechanics. 
.A. 
Group Rings and Group Algebras 
Let G = {g; I i E I) be any group written multiplicatively and let R be any commutative 
ring with nonzero unity. Let RG be the set of all formal sums. 
for a; ER and g; E G, where all but a.finite number of the a; are 0. Define the sum of 
two elements of RG by 
( L a;g;) + ( L b;g;) = L(a; + b;)g;. 
1E/ 
1E/ 
1E/ 
Observe that (a;+ b;) = 0 except for a finite number of indices i, so ~;e1 (a; + b;)g; is 
again in RG. It is immediate that (RG, +) is an abelian group with additive identity 
~ie10g; . 
Multiplication of two elements of RG is defined by the use of the multiplications in 
G and R as follows: 
Naively, we formally distribute the sum ~;e1a;g; over the sum ~;e1 b;g; and rename a 
term ajgjbkgk by ajbkg; where gjgk = g; in G. Since a; and b; are 0 for all but a finite 

Section 32 
Noncommutative Examples 
261 
number of i, the sum "Eg;g,=g;ajbk contains only a finite number of nonzero summands 
ajbk E R and may thus be viewed as an element of R. Again, at most a finite number of 
such sums '£8;8•=g;ajbk are nonzero. Thus multiplication is closed on RG. 
The distributive laws follow at once from the definition of addition and the 
formal way we used distributivity to define multiplication. For the associativity of 
multiplication 
= [ L ( ~ a,,bj)g;] ( L c;g;) 
tEI 
8JiSj-gi 
tEI 
= [ ( L a;g;)( L b;g;) ]( l: c;g} 
1E / 
1E/ 
1E/ 
Thus we have proved the following theorem. 
32.4 Theorem 
If G is any group written multiplicatively and R is a commutative ring with nonzero 
unity, then (RG, +,·) is a ring. 
Corresponding to each g E G, we have an element lg in RG. Ifwe identify (rename) 
lg with g, we see that (RG, ·)can be considered to contain G naturally as a multiplicative 
subsystem. Thus, if G is not abelian, RG is not a commutative ring. 
32.5 Definition 
The ring RG defined above is the group ring of G over R. If F is a field, then FG is the 
group algebra of G over F. 
• 
32.6 Example 
Let us give the addition and multiplication tables for the group algebra Z2G, where 
G = {e, a) is cyclic of order 2. The elements of ZiG are 
Oe + Oa, 
Oe + la, 
le+ Oa, 
and 
le+ la. 
If we denote these elements in the obvious, natural way by 
0, 
a, 
e, 
and 
e +a, 
32.7 Table 
32.8 Table 
+ 
0 
a 
e 
e+a 
0 
a 
e 
e+a 
0 
0 
a 
e 
e+a 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
a 
a 
0 
e+a 
e 
a 
0 
e 
a 
e+a 
e 
e 
e+a 
0 
a 
e 
0 
a 
e 
e+a 
e+a 
e+a 
e 
a 
0 
e+a 
0 
e+ a 
e+a 
0 
respectively, we get Tables 32.7 and 32.8. For example, to see that (e + a)(e +a)= 0, 
we have 
(le+ la)(le + la) = (1 + l)e + (1 + l )a = Oe + Oa. 
This example shows that a group algebra may have 0 divisors. Indeed, this is usually 
the case. 
"' 

262 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
The Quaternions 
We have not yet given an example of a noncommutative division ring. The quaternions 
of Hamilton are the standard example of a strictly skew field; let us describe them. 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
S
ir William Rowan Hamilton ( 1805-1865) dis-
covered quaternions in 1843 while he was 
searching for a way to multiply number triplets 
(vectors in JR3) . Six years earlier he had devel-
oped the complex numbers abstractly as pairs (a, b) 
of real numbers with addition (a, b) +(a' + b' ) = 
(a+ a', b + b') and multiplication (a, b)(a'b' ) = 
(aa' - bb', ab' + a'b); he was then looking for an 
analogous multiplication for 3-vectors that was 
distributive and such that the length of the product 
vector was the product of the lengths of the fac-
tors. After many unsuccessful attempts to multiply 
vectors of the form a+ bi+ cj (where 1, i, j are 
mutually perpendicular), he realized while walking 
along the Royal Canal in Dublin on October 16, 
1843, that he needed a new "imaginary symbol" 
k to be perpendicular to the other three elements. 
He could not "resist the impulse ... to cut with a 
knife on a stone of Brougham Bridge" the fun-
damental defining formulas for multiplying these 
quaternions. 
The quaternions were the first known exam-
ple of a strictly skew field. Though many others 
were subsequently discovered, it was eventually 
noted that none were finite. In 1909 Joseph Henry 
Madagan Wedderburn (1882-1948), then a pre-
ceptor at Princeton University, gave the first proof 
of Theorem 32.10. 
Let the set lHl, for Hamilton, be lR x lR x lR x JR. Now (JR x lR x lR x JR, +) is a 
group under addition by components, the direct product of lR under addition with itself 
four times. This gives the operation of addition on lHl. Let us rename certain elements of 
lHl. We shall let 
1 = (1, 0, 0, 0), 
i = (0, 1, 0, 0), 
j = (0, 0, 1, 0), 
and k = (0, 0, 0, 1). 
We furthermore agree to let 
a , = (a,, 0, 0, 0), 
a2i = (0, a2, 0, 0), 
aJ.i = (0, 0, a3, 0) and 
a4k = (0, 0, 0, a4). 
In view of our definition of addition, we then have 
(a1,a2,a3,a4) =a, + a2i + a3j + a4k. 
Thus 
(a1 + a2i + aJ.i + a4k) + (b1 + b2i + bJ.i + b4k) 
=(a, + bi)+ (a2 + b2)i + (a3 + b3)) + (a4 + b4)k. 
We now give Hamilton's fundamental formulas for multiplication in lHl, We start by 
defining 
and 
la=al=a for aE lHl, 
i2 = j2 = k2 = -1, 
ij = k, 
jk = i, 
ki = j , 
Ji = -k, 
kj = - i, 
and 
ik = -). 

Section 32 
Exercises 
263 
Note the similarity with the so-called cross product of vectors. These formulas are easy 
to remember if we think of the sequence 
i,j, k, i,j, k. 
The product from left to right of two adjacent elements is the next one to the right. The 
product from right to left of two adjacent elements is the negative of the next one to the 
left. We then define a product to be what it must be to make the distributive laws hold, 
namely, 
(a1 + a2i + a,,j + a4k)(b1 + b2i + b,,j + b4k) 
= (a1b1 - a2b2 - a3b3 - a4b4) + (a1b2 + a2b1 + a3b4 - a4b3)i 
+ (a1b3 - a2b4 + a3b1 + a4b2)j 
+ (a1b4 + a2b3 - a3b2 + a4b1)k. 
Exercise 19 shows that the quaternions are isomorphic to a subring of M2(C), so 
multiplication is associative. Since ij = k andji = -k, we see that multiplication is not 
commutative, so IHI is definitely not a field. Turning to the existence of multiplicative 
inverses, let a = a 1 + a2i + a,,j + a4k, with not all a; = 0. Computation shows that 
(a1 + a2i + a,,j + a4k)(a1 - a2i - a,,j - a4k) = a? +al+ a32 +al. 
If we let 
lal2 = a? +al +al+ al 
we see that 
and 
1:i2 
= 1:~2 - c:~2 }- c:~2 )j - c:~2 )k 
is a multiplicative inverse for a. We have demonstrated the following theorem. 
32.9 Theorem 
The quaternions IHI form a strictly skew field under addition and multiplication. 
+ 
Note that G = {±1, ±i, ±j, ±k) is a group of order 8 under quaternion multiplica-
tion. This group is generated by i andj, where 
1
4 = 1, 
·2 
·2 
J = l 
and 
ji=h 
The group G is not cyclic. Recall that Corollary 28.7 states that if F is a field and H is 
a finite subgroup of the multiplicative group F*, then H is cyclic. This example shows 
that Corollary 28.7 cannot be generalized to skew fields. 
There are no finite strictly skew fields. This is the content of a famous theorem of 
Wedderburn, which we state without proof. 
32.10 Theorem 
(Wedderburn's Theorem) Every finite division ring is a field. 
Proof 
See Artin, Nesbitt, and Thrall [24] for a proof of Wedderburn's theorem. 
• 
• EXERCISES 32 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 3, let G = {e, a, b) be a cyclic group of order 3 with identity element e. Write the element 
in the group algebra ZsG in the form 
re+ sa + tb 
for 
r,s,tEZ5. 

264 
Part VI 
Constructing Rings and Fields 
1. (2e + 3a + Ob) + (4e + 2a + 3b) 
2. (2e + 3a + Ob)(4e + 2a + 3b) 
3. (3e + 3a + 3b)4 
In Exercises 4 through 7, write the element of lHI in the form a 1 + a2i + a3) + a4k for a; E ~ . 
4. (i + 3j )(4 + 2j - k) 
6. (i + j )- 1 
5. i2j3kji5 
7. [(I + 3i)(4j + 3k)r1 
8. Referring to the dihedral group D3 = {i, p, p2 , µ,, µ,p, µ,p 2 ) as defined in Section 4, compute the product 
(Oi + Ip+ O(p2) + 0µ, + l(µ,p) + l (µ,p 2))(li + Ip + O(p2) + Iµ, + 0(µ,p) + 1(µ,p2)) 
in the group ring Z2D3. 
9. Find the center of the group (llll*, ·), where llll* is the set of nonzero quaternions. 
Concepts 
10. Find two subsets of lHI different from IC and from each other, each of which is a field isomorphic to IC under 
the induced addition and multiplication from llll. 
11. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. M 11(F) has no divisors of 0 for any n and any field F . 
b. Every nonzero element of M2(Z2) is a unit. 
c. End(A) is always a ring with unity f. 0 for every abelian group A . 
d. End(A) is never a ring with unity f. 0 for any abelian group A. 
e. The subset Iso(A) of End(A), consisting of the isomorphisms of A onto A, forms a subring of End(A) for 
every abelian group A. 
f. R(Z, + ) is isomorphic to (Z, + , ·) for every commutative ring R with unity. 
g. The group ring RG of an abelian group G is a commutative ring for any commutative ring R with unity. 
h. The quaternions are a field. 
i. (llll*, ·) is a group where llll* is the set of nonzero quaternions. 
j . No subring of lHI is a field. 
12. Show each of the following by giving an example. 
a. A polynomial of degree n with coefficients in a strictly skew field may have more than n zeros in the skew 
field. 
b. A finite multiplicative subgroup of a strictly skew field need not be cyclic. 
Theory 
13. Let</> be the element of End( (Z x Z, + )) given in Example 32.2. That example showed that </> is a right divisor 
of 0. Show that </> is also a left divisor of 0. 
14. Show that Mz(F) has at least six units for every field F. Exhibit these units. [Hint: F has at least two elements, 
0 and 1.] 
15. Show that End ( (Z, + )) is naturally isomorphic to (Z, + , ·) and that End( (Z.11, + )) is naturally isomorphic to 
(Z.11, +, ·). 
16. Show that End((Z.2 x Z.2, + )) is not isomorphic to (Z.2 x Z.2, + , ·). 
17. Refening to Example 32.3, show that YX - XY = I. 
18. If G = {e), the group of one element, show that RG is isomorphic to R for any ring R. 
19. There exists a matrix K E Mz(IC) such that </> : lHI --+ M2(1C) defined by 
</>(a + bi+ cj+dk)=a [~ ~J+ b [-~ ~J + c [~ ~J+ dK, 
for all a, b, c, d E ~,g ives an isomorphism of lHI with </>[llll]. 

Section 32 
Exercises 
265 
a. Find the matrix K. 
b. What 8 equations should you check to see that 4> really is a homomorphism? 
c. What other thing should you check to show that 4> gives an isomorphism of JH[ with l/>[JH[]? 
20. Let R be a ring with unity, let a E R, and let A.a : R --+ R be given by 
A.a(x) = ax 
for x E R. 
a. Show that A.a is an endomorphism of (R, +). 
b. Show that R' = {A.a I a E R} is a subring of End( (R, +) ). 
c. Prove the analogue of Cayley's theorem for R by showing that R' of (b) is isomorphic to R. 

This page is intentionally left blank 

PART 
VII 
Commutative Algebra 
Section 33 
Vector Spaces 
Section 34 
Unique Factorization Domains 
Section 3S 
Euclidean Domains 
Section 36 
Number Theory 
Section 37 
Algebraic Geometry 
Section 38 
Grabner Bases for Ideals 
SECTION 33 
VECTOR SPACES 
The notions of a vector space, scalars, independent vectors, and bases may be familiar. 
In this section, we present these ideas where the scalars may be elements of any field. 
We use Greek letters like a and f3 for vectors. In our application, the vectors will be 
elements of a field E containing field F. The proofs are all identical with those often 
given in a first course in linear algebra. 
Definition and Elementary Properties 
The topic of vector spaces is the cornerstone of linear algebra. Since linear algebra is not 
the subject for study in this text, our treatment of vector spaces will be brief, designed 
to develop only the concepts of linear independence and dimension that we need for our 
development of field theory. 
The terms vector and scalar are probably familiar from calculus. Here we allow 
scalars to be elements of any field, not just the real numbers, and develop the theory by 
axioms just as for the other algebraic structures we have studied. 
33.1 Definition 
Let F be a field. A vector space over F (or F-vector space) consists of an abelian group 
V under addition together with an operation of scalar multiplication of each element of 
V by each element of Fon the left, such that for all a, b E F and a, f3 E V the following 
conditions are satisfied: 
'Yf. aa E V. 
o/f. a(ba) = (ab)a. 
<ffe;. (a+ b)a = (aa) +(ha). 
%(". a(a + {J) = (aa) + (a{J). 
~-.la =a. 
The elements of V are vectors and the elements of F are scalars. When only one field 
F is under discussion, we drop the reference to F and refer to a vector space. 
• 
Note that scalar multiplication for a vector space is not a binary operation on one 
set in the sense we defined it in Section 1. It associates an element aa of V with each 
267 

268 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
ordered pair (a, a), consisting of an element a of F and an element a of V. Thus scalar 
multiplication is a function mapping F x V into V. Both the additive identity for V, the 
0-vector, and the additive identity for F, the 0-scalar, will be denoted by 0. 
33.2 Example 
Consider the abelian group (!Rn, +} = IR x IR x · · · x IR for n factors, which consists of 
ordered n-tuples under addition by components. Define scalar multiplication for scalars 
in IR by 
ra = (ra1, ··· , ran) 
for r E IR and a = (a1, · · · , an) E !Rn. With these operations, !Rn becomes a vector space 
over R The axioms for a vector space are readily checked. In particular, IR2 = IR x IR as 
a vector space over IR can be viewed as all "vectors whose starting points are the origin 
of the Euclidean plane" in the sense often studied in calculus courses. 
"'-
33.3 Example 
For any field F, F[x] can be viewed as a vector space over F, where addition of vectors 
is ordinary addition of polynomials in F[x] and scalar multiplication aa of an element 
of F[x ] by an element of Fis ordinary multiplication in F[x]. The axioms Wi through 
q;s for a vector space then follow immediately from the fact that F[x] is a ring with 
unity. 
"'-
33.4 Example 
Let F be a subfield of the field E. Then E can be regarded as a vector space over F, 
where addition of vectors is the usual addition in E and scalar multiplication aa is the 
usual field multiplication in E with a E F and a E E. The axioms follow at once from 
the field axioms for E. Here our field of scalars is actually a subset of our space of 
vectors. It is this example that is the important one for us. 
"'-
We are assuming nothing about vector spaces from previous work and shall prove 
everything we need from the definition, even though the results may be familiar from 
calculus. 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he ideas behind the abstract notion of a vec-
tor space occurred in many concrete examples 
during the nineteenth century and earlier. For ex-
ample, William Rowan Hamilton dealt with com-
plex numbers explicitly as pairs of real numbers 
and, as noted in Section 32, also dealt with triples 
and eventually quadruples of real numbers in his 
invention of the quaternions. In these cases, the 
"vectors" turned out to be objects that could both 
be added and multiplied by scalars, using "reason-
able" rules for both of these operations. Other ex-
amples of such objects included differential forms 
(expressions under integral signs) and algebraic in-
tegers. 
Although Hermann Grassmann (1809- 1877) suc-
ceeded in working out a detailed theory of n 
dimensional spaces in his Die Lineale Ausdehnung 
slehre of 1844 and 1862, the first mathemati-
cian to give an abstract definition of a vector 
space equivalent to Definition 33.1 was Giuseppe 
Peano (1858-1932) in his Calcolo Geometrico of 
1888. Peano's aim in the book, as the title indi-
cates, was to develop a geometric calculus. Ac-
cording to Peano, such a calculus "consists of a 
system of operations analogous to those of al-
gebraic calculus, but in which the objects with 
which the calculations are performed are, in-
stead of numbers, geometrical objects." Curiously, 
Peano's work had no immediate effect on the math-
ematical scene. Although Hermann Wey! (1885-
1955) essentially repeated Peano's definition in his 
Space-Time-Matter of 1918, the definition of a vec-
tor space did not enter the mathematical main-
stream until it was announced for a third time 
by Stefan Banach (1892-1945) in the 1922 pub-
lication of his dissertation dealing with what we 
now call Banach spaces, complete normed vector 
spaces. 

Section 33 
Vector Spaces 
269 
33.5 Theorem If Vis a vector space over F, then Oa = 0, aO = 0, and (-a)a = a(-a) = - (aa) for 
all a E F and a E V. 
Proof The equation Oa = 0 is to be read "(0-scalar)a = 0-vector." Likewise, aO = 0 is to be 
read "a(O-vector) = 0-vector." The proofs here are very similar to those in Theorem 22.8 
for a ring and again depend heavily on the distributive laws Cffe; and q:f Now 
(Oa) = (0 + O)a = (Oa) + (Oa) 
is an equation in the abelian group (V, +), so by the group cancellation law, 0 = Oa. 
Likewise, from 
aO = a(O + 0) = aO + aO, 
we conclude that aO = 0. Then 
0 = Oa =(a+ (-a))a = aa + (-a)a, 
so (-a)a = -(aa). Likewise, from 
0 = aO = a(a +(-a))= aa + a(-a), 
we conclude that a(-a) = -(aa) also. 
• 
Linear Independence and Bases 
33.6 Definition 
Let V be a vector space over F. The vectors in a subset S = {a; Ii E I) of V span (or 
generate) V if for every f3 E V, we have 
f3 = a 1a ;, + aza;2 + · · · + a11a;,, 
for some a1 E F and a;; E S,j = 1, · · · , n. A vector L.:}~ 1 ap;; is a linear combination 
of the a;r 
• 
33.7 Example 
In the vector space lR" over lR of Example 33.2, the vectors 
(I, 0, · · · , 0), (0, l, · · · , 0), · · · , (0, 0, · · · , l) 
clearly span lR", for 
(a1, az, · · · , a 11) = a 1(I ,0, · · · , 0) + az(O, 1, · · · , 0) + · · · + a11(0, 0, · · · , I). 
Also, the monomials :x1" form '.": 0 span F[x] over F, the vector space of Example 33.3 . 
... 
33.8 Definition 
A vector space V over a field F is finite dimensional if there is a finite subset of V 
whose vectors span V. 
• 
33.9 Example 
Example 33.7 shows that JR" is finite dimensional. The vector space F[x] over F is 
not finite dimensional, since polynomials of arbitrarily large degree could not be linear 
combinations of elements of any finite set of polynomials. 
..&. 
The next definition contains the most important idea in this section. 
33.10 Definition 
The vectors in a subset S = {a; I i E /} of a vector space V over a field F are linearly 
independent over F if, for any distinct vectors a;; E S, coefficients a1 E F, and n E 
z +, we have I:}~ 1 a1a;; = 0 in V only if a1 = 0 for j = 1, · · · , n. If the vectors are not 
linearly independent over F, they are linearly dependent over F. 
• 

270 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
Thus the vectors in {a; Ii E /} are linearly independent over F if the only way the 
0-vector can be expressed as a linear combination of the vectors a; is to have all scalar 
coefficients equal to 0. If the vectors are linearly dependent over F, then there exist 
aj E F for j = 1, · · · , n such that LJ= I ap;i = 0, where not all aj = 0. 
33.11 Example 
Observe that the vectors spanning the space R" that are given in Example 33.7 are lin-
early independent over R. Likewise, the vectors in {x'" Im ::: 0} are linearly independent 
vectors of F [x] over F. Note that (1, -1), (2, 1), and (-3, 2) are linearly dependent in 
R2 over R, since 
7 ( 1, -1) + (2, I) + 3( - 3, 2) = (0, 0) = 0. 
33.12 Definition 
If V is a vector space over a field F, the vectors in a subset B = {.B; I i E /} of V form a 
basis for V over F if they span V and are linearly independent. 
• 
33.13 Example 
As seen from Examples 33. 7 and 33 .11, 
{ ( 1, 0, 0, ... , 0), (0, 1, 0, 0, ... ' 0), ... , (0, 0, ... , 0, 1)} 
is a basis for R" and 
{l,x,x2, ... } 
is a basis for F[x] where Fis a field. 
33.14 Example 
Let F be a field and p(x) E F[x] be a degree n ::: I irreducible polynomial over F . 
Theorems 31.9 and 31.25 imply that the factor ring 
E = F[x]/ (p(x)) 
is a field. We can think of Fas a subfield of Eby identifying a E F with a + (p(x)) E £. 
Example 33.4 shows that Eis a vector space over F. The vectors 
aj = xi + (p(x)) 
for 
0 -:S j -:S n - 1 
are linearly independent since if 
aoao + a1a1 + a2a2 + · · · + a11-t<Y11-1 = 0 E F[X]/ (p(x)) , 
then 
ao + a ,x + a2x2 + · · · + a"_,x"-1 E (p(x)) . 
Every polynomial in (p(x)) except the zero polynomial has degree at least n. Thus each 
coefficient aj is zero and the vectors ao, a 1, . . . , a 11_ 1 form an independent set. On the 
other hand, given any polynomialf(x) E F[x], the division algorithm implies thatf (x) + 
(p(x)) = g(x) + (p(x)) for some polynomial g(x) where either g(x) = 0 or the degree of 
g(x) is less than n. It follows that the vectors 
span E and therefore form a basis for E. 
Looking back at this example, it is not necessary for p(x) to be an irreducible poly-
nomial. The field F can be thought of as a subring of the commutative ring with unity 
E = F[x]/ (p(x)) and all the axioms of a vector space follow from the properties of a 
ring and the fact that the unity in F and the unity in E are the same. 
• 
Dimension 
The only other results we wish to prove about vector spaces are that every finite-
dimensional vector space has a basis, and that any two bases of a finite-dimensional 

Section 33 
Vector Spaces 
271 
vector space have the same number of elements. Both these facts are true without the as-
sumption that the vector space is finite dimensional, but the proofs require more knowl-
edge of set theory than we are assuming, and the finite-dimensional case is all we need. 
First we give an easy lemma. 
33.15 Lemma 
Let V be a vector space over a field F, and let a E V. If a is a linear combination of 
vectors {3; in V for i = 1, · · · , m and each {3; is a linear combination of vectors Yj in V 
for j = 1, · · · , n, then a is a linear combination of the Yj· 
Proof 
Let a = I:;:1 a;{3;, and let {3; = L J= I bijyj, where a; and bij are in F. Then 
Ill(" ) "("' ) 
a= La; LbijYj = L 
L:a;bij Yj, 
i=I 
j=I 
j=I 
i=I 
• 
33.16 Theorem 
In a finite-dimensional vector space, every finite set of vectors spanning the space con-
tains a subset that is a basis. 
Proof 
Let V be finite dimensional over F, and let vectors a 1, • • • , a,, in V span V. Let us list 
the a; in a row. Examine each et; in succession, starting at the left with i = 1, and discard 
the first Cij that is some linear combination of the preceding a ; for i < j. Then continue, 
starting with the following aj+1, and discard the next a k that is some linear combination 
of its remaining predecessors, and so on. When we reach a,, after a finite number of 
steps, those a ; remaining in our list are such that none is a linear combination of the 
preceding a; in this reduced list. Lemma 33.15 shows that any vector that is a linear 
combination of the original collection of a; is still a linear combination of our reduced, 
and possibly smaller, set in which no a; is a linear combination of its predecessors. Thus 
the vectors in the reduced set of a; again span V. 
For the reduced set, suppose that 
for i 1 < i2 < · · · < ir and that some aj of. 0. We may assume from Theorem 33.5 
that ar of. 0, or we could drop aret;, from the left side of the equation. Then, using 
Theorem 33.5 again, we obtain 
( a1) 
( ar-1) 
a·= --
a · +···+ ---
a · 
I ,-
11 
lr - 1' 
ar 
ar 
which shows that a;, is a linear combination of its predecessors, contradicting our con-
struction. Thus the vectors a; in the reduced set both span V and are linearly indepen-
dent, so they form a basis for V over F. 
+ 
33.17 Corollary 
A finite-dimensional vector space has a finite basis. 
Proof 
By definition, a finite-dimensional vector space has a finite set of vectors that span the 
space. Theorem 33.16 completes the proof. 
+ 
The next theorem is the culmination of our work on vector spaces. 
33.18 Theorem 
Let S = {a1, • • • , Cir} be a finite set of linearly independent vectors of a finite-dimensional 
vector space V over a field F. Then S can be enlarged to a basis for V over F. Further-
more, if B = {{31, • • • ,{311 ) is any basis for Vover F, then r.:::; n. 
Proof By Corollary 33 .17, there is a basis B = {{31, • • • , {311 } for V over F. Consider the finite 
sequence of vectors 
a1, · · · ,ar,f31, · · · ,f311· 

272 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
These vectors span V, since B is a basis. Following the technique, used in Theorem 33 .16, 
of discarding in turn each vector that is a linear combination of its remaining predeces-
sors, working from left to right, we arrive at a basis for V. Observe that no a; is cast out, 
since the a; are linearly independent. Thus Scan be enlarged to a basis for V over F. 
For the second part of the conclusion, consider the sequence 
a1,f31,···,f3n· 
These vectors are not linearly independent over F, because a 1 is a linear combination 
a 1 = b1f31 + · · · + b11f311, 
since the {3; form a basis. Thus 
a, + (-b1)f31 + · · · + (-b,,){3,, = 0. 
The vectors in the sequence do span V, and if we form a basis by the technique of 
working from left to right and casting out in turn each vector that is a linear combination 
of its remaining predecessors, at least one {3; must be cast out, giving a basis 
ja , ,f3~'l,. .. ,f3,\~ l}, 
where m S n - 1. Applying the same technique to the sequence of vectors 
R( l) 
R(l) 
a1,a2,JJ1 ' ... ,p,,,' 
we arrive at a new basis 
l 
R(2) 
R(2) } 
a1,a2, p1 ,· .. ,,..,s 
' 
with s S n - 2. Continuing, we arrive finally at a basis 
ja,,. .. ,a,,f3 ~r),. .. ,{3,(r)}, 
where 0 S t S n - r. Thus r S n. 
• 
33.19 Corollary 
Any two bases of a finite-dimensional vector space V over F have the same number of 
elements. 
Proof 
Let B = {(31, · · ·, (311 } and B' = {f3;, · · · ,f3;,,} be two bases. Then by Theorem 33.18, 
regarding B as an independent set of vectors and B' as a basis, we see that n S m. A 
symmetric argument gives m S n, so m = n. 
+ 
33.20 Definition 
If V is a finite-dimensional vector space over a field F, the number of elements in a basis 
(independent of the choice of basis, as just shown) is the dimension of V over F. 
• 
33.21 Example 
Let F be a field and V ~ F[x] be the set of all polynomials of degree less than n includ-
ing 0. The monomials l, x,x2 , ... ,.x''- 1 span V and they are independent. Consequently, 
the dimension of V over F is n. From this we can conclude that any set of fewer than n 
polynomials in V does not span V and any set of more than n polynomials in V is not an 
independent set. Of course, an arbitrary set of n polynomials in V may or may not form 
a basis. 
.&. 
Modules over a Ring 
When studying abelian groups using additive notation we defined what it means to 
multiply an integer times an element in a group. For example, if g is an element of an 
abelian group, then 2g = g +g. The table at the beginning of Section 4 looks similar to 
the definition of a vector space. The difference is that instead of a field, in the case of 
abelian groups we used the ring of integers. 
33.22 Definition 
Let R be a ring with unity. A left R-module is an abelian group M under addition 
together with an operation of scalar multiplication of each element of M by each element 

Section 33 
Exercises 
273 
of R on the left, such that for all a, b E R and a, f3 E M the following conditions are 
satisfied: 
M1: 
M2: 
M3: 
M4: 
Ms: 
aa EM 
a(ba) = (ab)a 
(a+ b)a = (aa) + (ba) 
a(a + {3) = (aa) + (af3) 
la =a. 
• 
A right R-module differs from a left R-module simply by multiplying module element 
by an element of R on the right with the obvious changes in the five conditions for a 
left module. Here we consider only left R-modules, so we will use the term R-module 
to mean left R-module. 
33.23 Example 
For any abelian group G, G is a Z-module using the usual notation for an integer times 
an element of G. 
If R is a ring with unity and I s; R is an ideal, then I is an additive abelian group 
and for any r E R and a E /, ra E /. The defining properties of a ring with unity give 
the remaining properties of an R-module. Thus I is an R-module. 
.A. 
33.24 Example 
Elements of IR" (written as column vectors) can be multiplied on the left by elements in 
the ring M11(1R) of n x n matrices with real number entries. The five properties defining 
an R-module are all satisfied, which implies IR
11 is an M11(1R)-module. 
.A. 
The key properties of vector spaces are Corollary 33.17 and Corollary 33.19 (and their 
generalizations to vector spaces that are not finitely generated). They say any vector 
space has a basis, and any two bases of a given vector space have the same number of 
elements. The definitions of independent, spanning, and basis vectors are the same in 
R-module as in vector spaces. However, in general an R-module need not have a basis, 
and even if it does, in some cases two bases may have a different number of elements. 
33.25 Example 
The abelian group Z 3 is a Z-module. There is no nonempty subset of Z 3 that is indepen-
dent since for any a E Z 3, 3a = 0 and 3 is a nonzero integer. A similar argument shows 
that for any finite abelian group G, as a Z-module G has no nonempty independent set. 
We conclude that as a Z-module a finite abelian group does not have a basis. 
.A. 
• EXERCISES 33 
Computations 
1. Find three bases for IR2 over IR, no two of which have a vector in common. 
In Exercises 2 and 3, determine whether the given set of vectors is a basis for IR3 over IR. 
2. ((1, l , 0), (1 , 0, 1), (0, l, 1)) 
3. ((-1, l , 2), (2, -3, 1), (10, -14, 0)) 
Determine if the indicated vector space is finite dimensional over the field. If it is, find a basis. 
In Exercises 4 through 9, give a basis for the indicated vector space over the field. 
4. :£: 13 over :£:13 
S. {a+ b-J2 I a, b E Q} over Q 
6. { ~~~1
1 a, b, c, d E Q and c + d.J3 :;6 0} over Q 
7. IR over {a+ b-J2 I a, b E Q} 
8. C over IR 
9. IR over Q 

274 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
10. There is a field E with 32 elements. Determine which prime field is isomorphic with a subfield of E and 
determine the dimension of E over its prime field. 
Concepts 
In Exercises 11 through 14, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction 
is needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
11. The vectors in a subset S of a vector space V over a field F span V if and only if each fJ E V can be expressed 
uniquely as a linear combination of the vectors in S. 
12. The vectors in a subset Sofa vector space V over a field F are linearly independent over F if and only if the 
zero vector cannot be expressed as a linear combination of vectors in S. 
13. The dimension over F of a finite-dimensional vector space V over a field Fis the minimum number of vectors 
required to span V. 
14. A basis for a vector space V over a field Fis a set of vectors in V that span V and are linearly dependent. 
15. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. The sum of two vectors is a vector. 
b. The sum of two scalars is a vector. 
c. The product of two scalars is a scalar. 
d. The product of a scalar and a vector is a vector. 
e. Every vector space has a finite basis. 
f. The vectors in a basis are linearly dependent. 
g. The 0-vector may be part of a basis. 
h. A vector space over a field Fis an F-module. 
i. If R is a commutative ring with unity and M is an R module, then M has a basis over R. 
j. Every vector space has a basis. 
Exercises 16-27 deal with the further study of vector spaces. In many cases, we are asked to define for vector 
spaces some concept that is analogous to one we have studied for other algebraic structures. These exercises 
should improve our ability to recognize parallel and related situations in algebra. Any of these exercises may 
assume knowledge of concepts defined in the preceding exercises. 
16. Let V be a vector space over a field F. 
a. Define a subspace of the vector space V over F. 
b. Prove that an intersection of subspaces of V is again a subspace of V over F. 
17. Let V be a vector space over a field F, and let S = {a; Ii E /}be a nonempty collection of vectors in V. 
a. Using Exercise l 6(b), define the subspace of V generated by S. 
b. Prove that the vectors in the subspace of V generated by Sare precisely the (finite) linear combinations of 
vectors in S. (Compare with Theorem 7.7.) 
18. Let V1, · · · , Vn be vector spaces over the same field F. Define the direct sum Vi Efl · · · Efl V11 of the vector 
spaces V; for i = l , · · · , n, and show that the direct sum is again a vector space over F. 
19. Generalize Example 33.2 to obtain the vector space F" of ordered n-tuples of elements of F over the field F, 
for any field F. What is a basis for F"? 
20. Define an isomorphism of a vector space V over a field F with a vector space V' over the same field F. 
Theory 
21. Prove that if Vis a finite-dimensional vector space over a field F, then a subset {{J;, f32, · · · , {311 } of Vis a basis 
for V over F if and only if every vector in V can be expressed uniquely as a linear combination of the {J;. 

Section 34 
Unique Factorization Domains 
275 
22. Let F be any field. Consider the "system of m simultaneous linear equations inn unknowns" 
a 11X1 + a 12X2 + · · · + a111X11 = b 1, 
a11X1 + a21X2 + · · · + a111X11 = b2, 
where aij, b; E F. 
a. Show that the "system has a solution," that is, there exist X1, · · · , X11 E F that satisfy all m equations, if 
and only if the vector f3 =(bi,··· , bm) of F
111 is a linear combination of the vectors CXj = (a1j. · · · , amj). 
(This result is straightforward to prove, being practically the definition of a solution, but should really be 
regarded as the fundamental existence theorem for a simultaneous solution of a system of linear equations.) 
b. From part (a), show that if n = m and {aj ij = 1, · · · , n) is a basis for F" , then the system always has a 
unique solution. 
23. Prove that every finite-dimensional vector space V of dimension n over a field F is isomorphic to the vector 
space F" of Exercise 19. 
24. Let V and V' be vector spaces over the same field F. A function <P : V ~ V' is a linear transformation of V 
into V' if the following conditions are satisfied for all a, f3 E V, and a E F: 
<f>(a + {3) = <f>(a) + </>(fJ). 
<f>(aa) = a(<f>(a)). 
a. If {{3; I i E I) is a basis for V over F, show that a linear transformation <P : V ~ V' is completely determined 
by the vectors <f>({J;) E V' . 
b. Let {{3; I i E I) be a basis for V, and let ({3;' I i E I) be any set of vectors, not necessarily distinct, of V'. Show 
that there exists exactly one linear transformation <P : V ~ V' such that </>({3;) = {3;'. 
25. Let V and V' be vector spaces over the same field F, and let <P : V ~ V' be a linear transformation. 
a. To what concept that we have studied for the algebraic structures of groups and rings does the concept of a 
linear transformation correspond? 
b. Define the kernel (or nullspace) of</>, and show that it is a subspace of V. 
c. Describe when <P is an isomorphism of V with V'. 
26. Let V be a vector space over a field F, and let S be a subspace of V. Define the quotient space V / S, and show 
that it is a vector space over F. 
27. Let V and V' be vector spaces over the same field F, and let V be finite dimensional over F. Let dim(V) be the 
dimension of the vector space V over F. Let <P : V ~ V' be a linear transformation. 
a. Show that <f>[V] is a subspace of V'. 
b. Show that dim(<f>[V]) = dim(V) - dim(Ker(</>)). [Hint: Choose a convenient basis for V, using Theo-
rem 33.18. For example, enlarge a basis for Ker(</>) to a basis for V.] 
28. Let R be a commutative ring with unity and Fa subring of R that is a field. Think of Fas the scalars and R as 
the set of vectors with scalar multiplication given by multiplication in the ring R. 
a. Give an example to show that R need not be a vector space over F. 
b. Show that if the unity of Rand the unity of Fare the same, then R is a vector space over F. 
SECTION 34 UNIQUE FACTORIZATION DOMAINS 
The integral domain Z is our standard example of an integral domain in which there is 
unique factorization into primes (irreducibles). Section 28 showed that for a field F , F[x] 
is also such an integral domain with unique factorization. In order to discuss analogous 

276 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
ideas in an arbitrary integral domain, we shall give several definitions, some of which 
are repetitions of earlier ones. It is nice to have them all in one place for reference. 
34.1 Definition 
Let R be a commutative ring with unity and let a, b E R. If there exists c E R such that 
b = ac, then a divides b (or a is a factor of b), denoted by a I b. We read a f b as "a 
does not divide b." 
• 
34.2 Definition 
An element u of a commutative ring with unity R is a unit of R if u divides 1, that is, if 
u has a multiplicative inverse in R. Two elements a, b E Rare associates in R if a = bu, 
where u is a unit in R. 
Exercise 27 asks us to show that this criterion for a and b to be associates is an 
equivalence relation on R. 
• 
34.3 Example 
The only units in Z are 1 and - L Thus the only associates of 26 in Z are 26 and 
-~-
. 
34.4 Definition 
A nonzero element p that is not a unit of an integral domain D is an irreducible of D if 
every factorization p = ab in D has the property that either a orb is a unit 
• 
Note that an associate of an irreducible p is again an irreducible, for if p = uc for a 
unit u, then any factorization of c provides a factorization of p. 
34.5 Definition 
An integral domain D is a unique factorization domain (abbreviated UFD) if the fol-
lowing conditions are satisfied: 
1. Every element of D that is neither 0 nor a unit can be factored into a product 
of a finite number of irreducibles. 
2. If p 1 ···Pr and q1 • • • qs are two factorizations of the same element of D into 
irreducibles, then r = sand the qj can be renumbered so that p; and q; are 
associates. 
• 
34.6 Example 
Theorem 28.21 shows that for a field F, F[x] is a UFD. Also we know that Z is a UFD; 
we have made frequent use of this fact, although we have never proved it. For example, 
in Z we have 
24 = (2)(2)(3)(2) = (-2)(-3)(2)(2). 
Here 2 and -2 are associates, as are 3 and -3. Thus except for order and associates, the 
irreducible factors in these two factorizations of 24 are the same. 
• 
Recall that the principal ideal (a) of D consists of all multiples of the element a. 
After just one more definition we can describe what we wish to achieve in this section. 
34.7 Definition 
An integral domain Dis a principal ideal domain (abbreviated PID) if every ideal in 
D is a principal ideal. 
• 
We know that Z is a PID because every ideal is of the form nZ, generated by some 
integer n. Theorem 31.24 shows that if Fis a field, then F[x] is a PID. Our purpose in 
this section is to prove two exceedingly important theorems: 
1. Every PID is a UFD. (Theorem 34.18) 
2. If Dis a UFD, then D[x ] is a UFD. (Theorem 34.30) 

Section 34 
Unique Factorization Domains 
277 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he question of unique factorization in an inte-
gral domain other than the integers was first 
raised in public in connection with the attempted 
proof by Gabriel Lame (1795- 1870) of Fermat's 
Last Theorem, the conjecture that x' + y' = z" has 
no nontrivial integral solutions for n > 2. It is not 
hard to show that the conjecture is true if it can 
be proved for all odd primes p. At a meeting of 
the Paris Academy on March 1, 1847, Lame an-
nounced that he had proved the theorem and pre-
sented a sketch of the proof. Lame's idea was first 
to factor Jr!' + y' over the complex numbers as 
x'' + y" = 
(x + y)(x + ay)(x + a 2y) · · · (x + a"- 1y) 
where a is a primitive pth root of unity. He next 
proposed to show that if the factors in this ex-
pression are relatively prime and if Jr!' + y' = z", 
then each of the p factors must be a pth power. 
He could then demonstrate that this Fermat equa-
tion would be true for a triplex, y', i, each number 
smaller than the corresponding number in the orig-
inal triple. This would lead to an infinite descend-
ing sequence of positive integers, an impossibility 
that would prove the theorem. 
After Lame finished his announcement, how-
ever, Joseph Liouville (1809-1882) cast serious 
doubts on the purported proof, noting that the con-
clusion that each of the relatively prime factors 
was a pth power because their product was a pth 
power depended on the result that any integer can 
be uniquely factored into a product of primes. 
It was by no means clear that "integers" of the 
form x + aky had this unique factorization prop-
erty. Although Lame attempted to overcome Liou-
ville's objections, the matter was settled on May 
24, when Liouville produced a letter from Ernst 
Kummer noting that in 1844 he had already proved 
that unique factorization failed in the domain Z [a], 
where a is a 23rd root of unity. 
It was not until 1994 that Fermat's Last Theo-
rem was proved, and by techniques of algebraic ge-
ometry unknown to Lame and Kummer. In the late 
1950s, Yutaka Taniyama and Goro Shimura no-
ticed a curious relationship between two seemingly 
disparate fields of mathematics, elliptic curves and 
modular forms. A few years after Taniyama's tragic 
death at age 31, Shimura clarified this idea and 
eventually formulated what became known as the 
Taniyama-Shimura Conjecture. In 1984, Gerhard 
Frey asserted and in 1986 Ken Ribet proved that 
the Taniyama-Shimura Conjecture would imply 
the truth of Fermat's Last Theorem. But it was fi-
nally Andrew Wiles of Princeton University who, 
after secretly working on this problem for seven 
years, gave a series of lectures at Cambridge Uni-
versity in June 1993 in which he announced a proof 
of enough of the Taniyama-Shimura Conjecture 
to derive Fermat's Last Theorem. Unfortunately, a 
gap in the proof was soon discovered, and Wiles 
went back to work. It took him more than a year, 
but with the assistance of his student Richard Tay-
lor, he finally was able to fill the gap. The result 
was published in the Annals of Mathematics in 
May 1995, and this 350-year-old problem was now 
solved. 
The fact that F[x] is a UFD, where Fis a field (by Theorem 28.21 ), illustrates both 
theorems. For by Theorem 31.24, F[x] is a PID. Also, since F has no nonzero elements 
that are not units, F satisfies our definition for a UFD. Thus Theorem 34.30 would give 
another proof that F[x] is a UFD, except for the fact that we shall actually use Theorem 
28.21 in proving Theorem 34.30. In the following section we shall study properties of a 
certain special class of UFDs, the Euclidean domains. 
Let us proceed to prove the two theorems. 
Every PID Is a UFD 
The steps leading up to Theorem 28.21 and its proof indicate the way for our proof of 
Theorem 34.18. Much of the material will be repetitive. We inefficiently handled the 
special case of F [x] separately in Theorem 28.21, since it was easy and was the only 
case we needed for our field theory in general. 

278 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
To prove that an integral domain D is a UFD, it is necessary to show that both 
Conditions 1 and 2 of the definition of a UFD are satisfied. For our special case of F[x] 
in Theorem 28.21, Condition 1 was very easy and resulted from an argument that in 
a factorization of a polynomial of degree > 0 into a product of two nonconstant poly-
nomials, the degree of each factor was less than the degree of the original polynomial. 
Thus we couldn't keep on factoring indefinitely without running into unit factors, that 
is, polynomials of degree 0. For the general case of a PID, it is harder to show that this 
is so. We now turn to this problem. We shall need the definition of the union of an arbi-
trary collection of sets. The definition must include the possibility that the collection of 
sets is infinite. 
34.8 Definition 
If {A; I i E /} is a collection of sets, then the union U;e1A; of the sets A; is the set of all 
x such that x EA; for at least one i E / . 
• 
34.9 Lemma 
Let R be a commutative ring and Jet N1 ~ N2 ~ · · · be an ascending chain of ideals N; 
in R. Then N = U;N; is an ideal of R. 
Proof 
Let a, b EN. Then there are ideals N; and Nj in the chain, with a EN; and b E Nj. Now 
either N; ~ Nj or Nj ~ N;; let us assume that N; ~ Nj, so both a and bare in Nj. This 
implies that a± band ab are in Nj, so a± band ab are in N. Taking a = 0, we see that 
b E N implies -b E N, and 0 E N since 0 E N;. Thus N is a subring of D. For a E N 
and d ED, we must have a EN; for some N;. Then since N; is an ideal, da =ad is in 
N;. Therefore, da E U;N;, that is, da EN. Hence N is an ideal. 
+ 
34.10 Lemma 
(Ascending Chain Condition for a PID) Let D be a PID. If N1 ~ N2 ~ · · · is an 
ascending chain of ideals N;, then there exists a positive integer r such that Nr = Ns for 
alls =:: r. Equivalently, every strictly ascending chain of ideals (all inclusions proper) in 
a PID is of finite length. We express this by saying that the ascending chain condition 
(ACC) holds for ideals in a PID. 
Proof 
By Lemma 34.9, we know that N = U;N; is an ideal of D. Now as an ideal in D, which 
is a PID, N = (c) for some e E D. Since N = U;N;, we must have c E Nr, for some 
r E z+. Fors 2: r, we have 
(c) ~ Nr ~ Ns ~ N = (e). 
Thus Nr = Ns for s 2: r. 
The equivalence with the ACC is immediate. 
• 
34.11 Definition 
A commutative ring with unity R that satisfies the ascending chain condition is a 
Noetherian ring. That is, a commutative ring with unity R is Noetherian if for every 
chain of ideals N1 ~ N2 ~ N3 ~ . .. in R, there is an integer r such that if s =:: r, then 
~=~-
• 
Lemma 34. JO states that every PID is a Noetherian ring. In Section 37 we will see that 
if R is a Noetherian ring, then R[x] is also a Noetherian ring. 
In what follows, it will be useful to remember that for elements a and b of a 
domainD, 
(a) ~ (b) if and only if b divides a, and 
(a) = (b) if and only if a and b are associates. 
For the first property, note that (a) ~ (b) if and only if a E (b), which is true if and 
only if a = bd for some d E D, so that b divides a. Using this first property, we see that 
(a) = (b) if and only if a = be and b = ad for some e, d E D. But then a = ade and by 
canceling, we obtain 1 =de. Thus d and e are units, so a and bare associates. 

Section 34 
Unique Factorization Domains 
279 
We can now prove Condition 1 of the definition of a UFD for an integral domain 
that is a PID. 
34.12 Theorem 
Let D be a PID. Every element that is neither 0 nor a unit in D is a product of irre-
ducibles. 
Proof 
Let G E D, where G is neither 0 nor a unit. We first show that G has at least one irreducible 
factor. If G is an irreducible, we are done. If G is not an irreducible, then G = G 1 b1, where 
neither G 1 nor b1 is a unit. Now 
(G) C (G1 ), 
for (G ) ~ (G 1) follows from G = G 1b 1, and if (G ) = ( G 1 ) , then G and G 1 would be asso-
ciates and b1 would be a unit, contrary to construction. Continuing this procedure then, 
starting now with G 1, we arrive at a strictly ascending chain of ideals 
By the ACC in Lemma 34.10, this chain terminates with some (Gr), and Gr must then be 
irreducible. Thus G has an irreducible factor Gr. 
By what we have just proved, for an element G that is neither 0 nor a unit in D, 
either G is irreducible or a = p 1 c1 for p 1 an irreducible and c1 not a unit. By an argument 
similar to the one just made, in the latter case we can conclude that (a) c (c1). If c 1 is 
not irreducible, then c1 = p2c2 for an irreducible p2 with c2 not a unit. Continuing, we 
get a strictly ascending chain of ideals 
(G) C (c1) C (c2) C · · ·. 
This chain must terminate, by the ACC in Lemma 34.10, with some Cr =qr that is an 
irreducible. Then a = p1p2 · · · Prqr. 
+ 
This completes our demonstration of Condition 1 of the definition of a UFD. Let us 
tum to Condition 2. Our arguments here are parallel to those leading to Theorem 28.21. 
The results we encounter along the way are of some interest in themselves. 
34.13 Lemma 
(Generalization of Theorem 31.25) An ideal (p) in a PID is maximal if and only if p 
is an irreducible. 
Proof 
Let (p) be a maximal ideal of D, a PID. Suppose that p = Gb in D. Then (p) ~ (G). 
Suppose that (G) = (p). Then G and p would be associates, sob must be a unit. If (G) -:/= 
(p), then we must have (a) = (1) = D, since (p) is maximal. But then G and 1 are 
associates, so G is a unit. Thus, if p = ab, either a or b must be a unit. Hence p is an 
irreducible of D. 
Conversely, suppose that p is an irreducible in D. Then if (p) ~ (G), we must have 
p = Gb. Now if G is a unit, then (G) = (1) =D. If G is not a unit, then b must be a unit, 
so there exists u E D such that bu = 1. Then pu = Gbu = G, so (G) ~ (p), and we have 
(a) = (p). Thus (p) ~ (a) implies that either (a) = D or (a ) = (p), and (p) i= D or p 
would be a unit. Hence (p) is a maximal ideal. 
+ 
34.14 Lemma 
(Generalization of Theorem 31.27) In a PID, if an irreducible p divides Gb, then 
either p I G or p I b. 
Proof 
Let D be a PID and suppose that for an irreducible pin D we have p I Gb. Then (ab) E 
(p). Since every maximal ideal in Dis a prime ideal by Corollary 31.16, (ab) E (p) 
implies that either GE (p) orb E (p), giving either p I G or p I b. 
+ 
34.15 Corollary 
If p is an irreducible in a PID and p divides the product G 1 G2 · · · G11 for G; E D, then p I G; 
for at least one i. 

280 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
Proof Proof of this corollary is immediate from Lemma 34.14 if we use mathematical 
induction. 
+ 
34.16 Definition 
A nonzero nonunit element p of an integral domain D is a prime if, for all a, b E D, 
p I ab implies either p I a or p I b. 
• 
Lemma 34.14 focused our attention on the defining property of a prime. In Exer-
cises 25 and 26, we ask you to show that a prime in an integral domain is always an 
irreducible and that in a UFD an irreducible is also a prime. Thus the concepts of prime 
and irreducible coincide in a UFD. Example 34.17 will exhibit an integral domain con-
taining some irreducibles that are not primes, so the concepts do not coincide in every 
domain. 
34.17 Example 
Let F be a field and let D be the subdomain F[x3,xy,y3] of F[x, y]. Then x3,xy, and y3 
are irreducibles in D, but 
(x3)(y3) = (.xy)(.xy)(xy). 
Since xy divides x3y3 but not x3 or y3, we see that xy is not a prime. Similar arguments 
show that neither x3 nor y3 is a prime. 
"'-
The defining property of a prime is precisely what is needed to establish uniqueness 
of factorization, Condition 2 in the definition of a UFD. We now complete the proof of 
Theorem 34.18 by demonstrating the uniqueness of factorization in a PID. 
34.18 Theorem 
(Generalization of Theorem 28.21) Every PID is a UFD. 
Proof Theorem 34.12 shows that if Dis a PID, then each a ED, where a is neither 0 nor a 
unit, has a factorization 
a= PtP2 · · ·p, 
into irreducibles. It remains for us to show uniqueness. Let 
a= qtq2 · · · qs 
be another such factorization into irreducibles. Then we have Pt I (q tq2 · · · q5 ) , which 
implies that Pt I qj for some j by Corollary 34.15. By changing the order of the qj if 
necessary, we can assume that)= 1 so Pt I qt. Then qt =Pt Ut , and since qt is an irre-
ducible, Ut is a unit, so Pt and qt are associates. We have then 
PtP2 ···Pr = PtUtq2 · · · qs, 
so by the cancellation law in D, 
Continuing this process, starting with p2 and so on, we finally arrive at 
Since the qj are irreducibles, we must haver= s. 
• 
Example 34.32 at the end of this section will show that the converse to Theorem 
34.18 is false. That is, a UFD need not be a PID. 
Many algebra texts start by proving the following corollary of Theorem 34.18. We 
have assumed that you were familiar with this corollary and used it freely in our other 
work. 
34.19 Corollary 
(Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic) The integral domain Z is a UFD. 

Section 34 
Unique Factorization Domains 
281 
Proof 
We have seen that all ideals in Z are of the form nZ = (n) for n E Z. Thus Z is a PID, 
and Theorem 34.18 applies. 
+ 
It is worth noting that the proof that Z is a PID was really way back in Corol-
lary 6.7. We proved Theorem 6.6 by using the division algorithm for Z exactly as we 
proved, in Theorem 31.24, that F[x] is a PID by using the division algorithm for F[x]. 
In Section 35, we shall examine this parallel more closely. 
If D Is a UFD, Then D[x] Is a UFD 
We now start the proof of Theorem 34.30, our second main result for this section. The 
idea of the argument is as follows. Let D be a UFD. We can form a field of quotients 
F of D. Then F[x] is a UFD by Theorem 28.21, and we shall show that we can recover 
a factorization for f(x) E D[x ] from its factorization in F[x]. It will be necessary to 
compare the irreducibles in F[x] with those in D [x], of course. This approach, which 
we prefer as more intuitive than some more efficient modern ones, is essentially due to 
Gauss. 
34.20 Definition 
Let D be a UFD and let a1, a2, • · · , a,, be nonzero elements of D. An element d of Dis 
a greatest common divisor (abbreviated gcd) of all of the a; if d I a; for i = 1, · · · , n 
and any other d' E D that divides all the a; also divides d. 
• 
In this definition, we called d "a" gcd rather than "the" gcd because gcd's are only 
defined up to units. Suppose that d and d' are two gcd's of a; for i = I , · · · , n. Then d Id' 
and d' Id by our definition. Thus d = q' d' and d' = qd for some q, q' E D, so ld = q' qd. 
By cancellation in D, we see that q' q = 1 so q and q' are indeed units. 
The technique in the example that follows shows that gcd's exist in a UFD. 
34.21 Example 
Let us find a gcd of 420, - 168, and 252 in the UFD Z. Factoring, we obtain 420 = 22 · 
3 · 5 · 7, - 168 = 23 · (-3) · 7, and 252 = 22 · 32 · 7. We choose one of these numbers, 
say 420, and find the highest power of each of its irreducible factors (up to associates) 
that divides all the numbers, 420, -168, and 252 in our case. We take as gcd the product 
of these highest powers of irreducibles. For our example, these powers of irreducible 
factors of 420 are 22, 31, 5°, and 71 so we take as gcd d = 4 · 3 · 1 · 7 = 84. The only 
other gcd of these numbers in Z is -84, because 1 and - 1 are the only units. 
.A 
Execution of the technique in Example 34.21 depends on being able to factor an 
element of a UFD into a product of irreducibles. This can be a tough job, even in Z. 
Section 35 will exhibit a technique, the Euclidean Algorithm, that will allow us to find 
gcd's without factoring in a class of UFD's that includes Z and F[x] for a field F. 
34.22 Definition 
Let D be a UFD. A nonconstant polynomial 
f(x) = ao + a1x + · · · + a,,x" 
in D[x] is primitive if 1 is a gcd of the a; for i = 0, 1, · · · , n. 
• 
34.23 Example 
In Z [x], 4x2 + 3x + 2 is primitive, but 4x2 + 6x + 2 is not, since 2, a nonunit in Z, is a 
common divisor of 4, 6, and 2. 
.A 
Observe that every nonconstant irreducible in D[x] must be a primitive polynomial. 
34.24 Lemma If D is a UFD, then for every nonconstant f(x) E D [x] we have f(x) = (c)g(x), where 
c E D, g(x) E D[x], and g(x) is primitive. The element c is unique up to a unit factor in 
D and is the content ofj(x). Also g(x) is unique up to a unit factor in D. 

282 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
Proof 
Let f(x) E D[x] be given where f(x) is a nonconstant polynomial with coefficients 
a0, a1, · · · , a,,. Let c be a gcd of the a; for i = 0, 1, · · · , n. Then for each i, we have 
a; = cq; for some q; E D. By the distributive law, we have f(x) = (c)g(x), where no 
irreducible in D divides all of the coefficients q0, q1, • • • , q,, of g(x). Thus g(x) is a 
primitive polynomial. 
For uniqueness, if also f(x) = (d)h(x) for d E D, h(x) E D[x], and h(x) primitive, 
then each irreducible factor of c must divide d and conversely. By setting (c)g(x) = 
(d)h(x) and canceling irreducible factors of c into d, we arrive at (u)g(x) = (v)h(x) for a 
unit u E D. But then v must be a unit of D or we would be able to cancel irreducible fac-
tors of v into u. Thus u and v are both units, so c is unique up to a unit factor. Fromf(x) = 
(c)g(x), we see that the primitive polynomial g(x) is also unique up to a unit factor. 
+ 
34.25 Example 
In Z [x], 
4x2 + 6x - 8 = (2)(2x2 + 3x - 4), 
where 2x3 + 3x - 4 is primitive. 
34.26 Lemma 
(Gauss's Lemma) If Dis a UFD, then a product of two primitive polynomials in D[x] 
is again primitive. 
Proof 
Let 
f(x) = ao + a1x + · · · + a,,x' 
and 
g(x) = bo + b1x + · · · + bmx" 
be primitive in D [x], and let h(x) = f(x)g(x). Let p be an irreducible in D. Then p does 
not divide all a; and p does not divide all bj, since f (x) and g(x) are primitive. Let a, be 
the first coefficient of f(x) not divisible by p ; that is, p I a; for i < r, but p fa, (that is, 
p does not divide a,). Similarly, let p I bj for j < S, but p f b,. The coefficient of x+s in 
h(x) = f(x)g(x) is 
Cr+s = (aobr+s + · · · + a,_1bs+1) + a,bs + (ar+ lbs-1 + · · · + Gr+sbo). 
Now p I a; for i < r implies that 
p I (aobr+s + · · · + a,_1bs+1), 
and also p I bj for j < s implies that 
p I (a,+1bs-I + · · · + a,+,bo). 
But p does not divide a, orb,, sop does not divide a,b5 , and consequently p does not 
divide Cr+s· This shows that given an irreducible p E D, there is some coefficient of 
f(x)g(x) not divisible by p. Thusf(x)g(x) is primitive. 
+ 
34.27 Corollary 
If Dis a UFD, then a finite product of primitive polynomials in D[x] is again primitive. 
Proof 
This corollary follows from Lemma 34.26 by induction. 
• 
Now let D be a UFD and let F be a field of quotients of D. By Theorem 28.21, 
F[x] is a UFD. As we said earlier, we shall show that D[x] is a UFD by carrying a 
factorization in F[x] ofj(x) E D[x] back into one in D[x]. The next lemma relates the 
nonconstant irreducibles of D[x] to those of F[x]. This is the last important step. 
34.28 Lemma 
Let D be a UFD and let F be a field of quotients of D. Letf(x) E D[x], where (degree 
f(x)) > 0. Iff(x) is an irreducible in D [x], thenf(x) is also an irreducible in F[x]. Also, 
ifj(x) is primitive in D[x] and irreducible in F[x], thenf(x) is irreducible in D[x]. 

Section 34 
Unique Factorization Domains 
283 
Proof 
Suppose that a nonconstantf(x) E D[x] factors into polynomials of lower degree in F[x], 
that is, 
f(x) = r(x)s(x) 
for r(x), s(x) E F[x]. Then since F is a field of quotients of D, each coefficient in r(x) 
and s(x) is of the form a/b for some a, b ED. By clearing denominators, we can get 
(d)f (x) = r1 (x)s1 (x) 
ford E D, and r1 (x), s1 (x) E D[x], where the degrees of r1 (x) and s1 (x) are the degrees 
of r(x) and s(x), respectively. By Lemma 34.24,f(x) = (c)g(x), r1 (x) = (c1 )r2(x), and 
s1 (x) = (c2)s2(x) for primitive polynomials g(x), r2(x), and s2(x), and c, c1, c2 E D. Then 
(dc)g(x) = (c1 c2)r2(x)s2(x), 
and by Lemma 34.26, r2(x)s2(x) is primitive. By the uniqueness part of Lemma 34.24, 
c1c2 = dcu for some unit u in D. But then 
(dc)g(x) = (dcu)ri(x)s2(x), 
so 
f(x) = (c)g(x) = (cu)r2(x)s2(x). 
We have shown that if f(x)factors nontrivially in F[x], thenf(x)factors nontrivially into 
polynomials of the same degrees in D[x]. Thus if f(x) E D[x] is irreducible in D[x], it 
must be irreducible in F[x]. 
A nonconstantf(x) E D[x] that is primitive in D[x] and irreducible in F[x] is also 
irreducible in D[x], since D[x] ~ F[x]. 
+ 
Lemma 34.28 shows that if Dis a UFO, the irreducibles in D[x] are precisely their-
reducibles in D, together with the nonconstant primitive polynomials that are irreducible 
in F[x], where Fis a field of quotients of D[x]. 
The preceding lemma is very important in its own right. This is indicated by the 
following corollary, a special case of which was our Theorem 28.12. (We admit that it 
does not seem very sensible to call a special case of a corollary of a lemma a theorem. 
The label assigned to a result depends somewhat on the context in which it appears.) 
34.29 Corollary If Dis a UFO and Fis a field of quotients of D, then a nonconstantf(x) E D[x] factors 
into a product of two polynomials of lower degrees rand sin F[x] if and only if it has a 
factorization into polynomials of the same degrees rand s in D[x]. 
Proof It was shown in the proof of Lemma 34.28 that if f(x) factors into a product of two 
polynomials of lower degree in F[x], then it has a factorization into polynomials of the 
same degrees in D[x] (see the next-to-last sentence of the first paragraph of the proof). 
The converse holds since D[x] ~ F[x]. 
+ 
We are now prepared to prove our main theorem. 
34.30 Theorem If Dis a UFO, then D[x] is a UFO. 
Proof Letf(x) E D[x], where f(x) is neither 0 nor a unit. If f(x) is of degree 0, we are done, 
since Dis a UFO. Suppose that (degreef(x)) > 0. Let 
f(x) = g1 (x)g2(x) · · · gr(x) 
be a factorization of f(x) in D[x] having the greatest number r of factors of positive 
degree. (There is such a greatest number of such factors because r cannot exceed the 
degree off(x).) Now factor each g;(x) in the form g;(x) = c;h;(x) where c; is the content 

284 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
of g;(x) and h;(x) is a primitive polynomial. Each of the h;(x) is irreducible, because if 
it could be factored, none of the factors could lie in D, hence all would have positive 
degree leading to a corresponding factorization of g;(x), and then to a factorization of 
f(x) with more than r factors of positive degree, contradicting our choice of r. Thus we 
now have 
f(x) = c1h1 (x)c2h2(x) · · · crhr(x) 
where the h;(x) are irreducible in D [x]. If we now factor the c; into irreducibles in D, we 
obtain a factorization ofj(x) into a product of irreducibles in D [x]. 
The factorization of f(x) E D[x], where f(x) has degree 0, is unique since D is a 
UFD; see the comment following Lemma 34.28. If f(x) has degree greater than 0, we 
can view any factorization ofj(x) into irreducibles in D[x] as a factorization in F[x] into 
units (that is, the factors in D) and irreducible polynomials in F[x] by Lemma 34.28. 
By Theorem 28.21, these polynomials are unique, except for possible constant factors 
in F . But as an irreducible in D[x], each polynomial of degree >0 appearing in the 
factorization of f(x) in D[x] is primitive. By the uniqueness part of Lemma 34.24, this 
shows that these polynomials are unique in D[x] up to unit factors, that is, associates. 
The product of the irreducibles in D in the factorization off (x) is the content of f(x), 
which is again unique up to a unit factor by Lemma 34.24. Thus all irreducibles in D[x] 
appearing in the factorization are unique up to order and associates. 
+ 
34.31 Corollary If Fis a field and x1, · · · , x11 are indeterminates, then F[x1, · · · , x11 ] is a UFD. 
Proof 
By Theorem 28.21, F[xi] is a UFD. By Theorem 34.30, so is (F[x 1]) [x2] = F[x 1 ,x2]. 
Continuing in this procedure, we see (by induction) that F[xi, · · · ,x11 ] is a UFD. 
+ 
We have seen that a PID is a UFO. Corollary 34.31 makes it easy for us to give an 
example that shows that not every UFD is a PID. 
34.32 Example 
Let F be a field and let x and y be indeterminates. Then F[x,y] is a UFD by Corollary 
34.30. Consider the set N of all polynomials in x and y in F[x, y] having constant term 0. 
Then N is an ideal, but not a principal ideal. Thus F [x,y] is not a PID. 
.&. 
Another example of a UFD that is not a PID is Z [x], as shown in Exercise 12, 
Section 35. 
• EXERCISES 34 
Computations 
In Exercises l through 8, determine whether the element is an irreducible of the indicated domain. 
1. 5 in Z 
3. 14 in Z 
S. 2x - 10 in Z[x] 
7. 2x - 10 in Q [x] 
2. -17 in Z 
4. 2x - 3 in Z[x] 
6. 2x - 3 in Q [x] 
8. 2x - 10 in Z 11 [x] 
9. If possible, give four different associates of 2x - 7 viewed as an element of Z [x]; of Q [x]; of Z 11 [x]. 
10. Factor the polynomial 4x2 - 4x + 8 into a product of irreducibles viewing it as an element of the integral 
domain Z [x]; of the integral domain Q [x]; of the integral domain Z 11 [x]. 
In Exercises 11 through 13, find all gcd's of the given elements of Z. 
11. 234, 3250, 1690 
12. 784, -1960, 448 
13. 2178, 396, 792, 594 

Section 34 
Exercises 
285 
In Exercises 14 through 17, express the given polynomial as the product of its content with a primitive polynomial 
in the indicated UFO. 
14. 18x2 -
12x + 48 in Z [x] 
16. 2x2 - 3x + 6 in Z[x] 
Concepts 
15. 18x2 -
12x + 48 in Q[x] 
17. 2x2 - 3x + 6 in Z'.:7[x] 
In Exercises 18 through 20, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction 
is needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
18. Two elements a and bin an integral domain Dare associates in D if and only if their quotient a/bin Dis a unit. 
19. An element of an integral domain D is an irreducible of D if and only if it cannot be factored into a product 
of two elements of D. 
20. An element of an integral domain D is a prime of D if and only if it cannot be factored into a product of two 
smaller elements of D. 
21. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every field is a UFO. 
b. Every field is a PIO. 
c. Every PIO is a UFO. 
d. Every UFO is a PIO. 
e. Z [x] is a UFO. 
f. Any two irreducibles in any UFO are associates. 
g. If Dis a PIO, then D[x] is a PIO. 
h. If D is a UFO, then D[x] is a UFO. 
i. In any UFO, if p I a for an irreducible p, then p itself appears in every factorization of a. 
j. A UFO has no divisors of 0. 
22. Let D be a UFO. Describe the irreducibles in D[x] in terms of the irreducibles in D and the irreducibles in 
F[x], where Fis a field of quotients of D. 
23. Lemma 34.28 states that if D is a UFO with a field of quotients F, then a nonconstant irreduciblef(x) of D[x] 
is also an irreducible of F[x]. Show by an example that a g(x) E D[x] that is an irreducible of F[x] need not be 
an irreducible of D[x]. 
24. All our work in this section was restricted to integral domains. Taking the same definition in this section 
but for a commutative ring with unity, consider factorizations into irreducibles in Z x Z. What can happen? 
Consider in particular (1, 0). 
Theory 
25. Prove that if p is a prime in an integral domain D, then p is an irreducible. 
26. Prove that if p is an irreducible in a UFO, then p is a prime. 
27. For a commutative ring R with unity show that the relation a~ b if a is an associate of b (that is, if a= bu 
for u a unit in R) is an equivalence relation on R. 
28. Let D be an integral domain. Exercise 39, Section 22 showed that ( U, ·) is a group where U is the set of units 
of D. Show that the set D* -
U of nonunits of D excluding 0 is closed under multiplication. ls this set a group 
under the multiplication of D? 
29. Let D be a UFO. Show that a nonconstant divisor of a primitive polynomial in D[x] is again a primitive 
polynomial. 
30. Show that in a PIO, every proper ideal is contained in a maximal ideal. [Hint: Use Lemma 34.10.] 
31. Factor x3 - y3 into irreducibles in Q [x,y] and prove that each of the factors is irreducible. 
There are several other concepts often considered that are similar in character to the ascending chain condition on 
ideals in a ring. The following three exercises concern some of these concepts. 

286 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
32. Let R be any ring. The ascending chain condition (ACC) for ideals holds in R if every strictly increasing 
sequence N i c N1 c N3 C · · · of ideals in R is of finite length. The maximum condition (MC) for ideals 
holds in R if every nonempty set S of ideals in R contains an ideal not properly contained in any other ideal of 
the set S. The finite basis condition (FBC) for ideals holds in R if for each ideal N in R , there is a fi nite set 
BN = {b1, · · · , b11 ) ~ N such that N is the intersection of all ideals of R containing BN. The set BN is a finite 
generating set for N . 
Show that for every ring R, the conditions ACC, MC, and FBC are equivalent. 
33. Let R be any ring. The descending chain condition (DCC) for ideals holds in R if every strictly decreasing 
sequence N i ::i N1 ::i N3 ::i · · · of ideals in R is of finite length. The minimum condition (mC) for ideals 
holds in R if given any set S of ideals of R, there is an ideal of S that does not properly contain any other ideal 
in the set S. 
Show that for every ring, the conditions DCC and mC are equivalent. 
34. Give an example of a ring in which ACC holds but DCC does not hold. (See Exercises 32 and 33.) 
SECTION 35 EUCLIDEAN DOMAINS 
We have remarked several times on the importance of division algorithms. Our first 
contact with them was the division algorithm for Z in Section 6. This algorithm was 
used to prove the important theorem that a subgroup of a cyclic group is cyclic, that 
is, has a single generator. Of course, this shows at once that Z is a PID. The division 
algorithm for F[x] appeared in Theorem 28.2 and was used in a completely analogous 
way to show that F [x] is a PID. A technique of mathematics is to take some clearly 
related situations and to try to bring them under one roof by abstracting the important 
ideas common to them. The following definition is an illustration of this technique, as 
is this whole text! Let us see what we can develop by starting with the existence of a 
fairly general division algorithm in an integral domain. 
35.1 Definition 
A Euclidean norm on an integral domain D is a function v mapping the nonzero el-
ements of D into the nonnegative integers such that the following conditions are satis-
fied: 
1. For all a, b E D with b "=fa 0, there exist q and r in D such that a = bq + r, 
where either r = 0 or v(r) < v(b). 
2. For all a, b E D, where neither a nor b is 0, v(a) ::: v(ab). 
An integral domain Dis a Euclidean domain if there exists a Euclidean norm on D. 
• 
The importance of Condition 1 is clear from our discussion. The importance of 
Condition 2 is that it will enable us to characterize the units of a Euclidean domain D. 
35.2 Example 
The integral domain Z is a Euclidean domain, for the function v defined by v(n) = lnl 
for n "=fa 0 in Z is a Euclidean norm on Z. Condition 1 holds by the division algorithm 
for Z. Condition 2 follows from labl = lal lbl and lal '.'.: 1 for a "=fa 0 in Z. 
.A. 
35.3 Example If F is a field, then F [x] is a Euclidean domain, for the function v defined by v(f(x)) = 
(degree f(x)) for f(x) E F [x ], and f(x) "=fa 0 is a Euclidean norm. Condition I holds by 
Theorem 28.2, and Condition 2 holds since the degree of the product of two polynomials 
is the sum of their degrees. 
.A. 
Of course, we should give some examples of Euclidean domains other than these 
familiar ones that motivated the definition. We shall do this in Section 36. In view of the 
opening remarks, we anticipate the following theorem. 
35.4 Theorem 
Every Euclidean domain is a PID. 

Section 35 
Euclidean Domains 
287 
Proof 
Let D be a Euclidean domain with a Euclidean norm v, and let N be an ideal in D . 
If N = {0}, then N = (0) and N is principal. Suppose that N f= {0}. Then there exists 
bf= 0 in N. Let us choose b such that v(b) is minimal among all v(n) for n E N. We 
claim that N = (b).Let a EN. Then by Condition 1 for a Euclidean domain, there exist 
q and r in D such that 
a= bq + r, 
where either r = 0 or v(r) < v(b). Now r = a - bq and a, b E N, so that r E N since N 
is an ideal. Thus v(r) < v(b) is impossible by our choice of b. Hence r = 0, so a = bq. 
Since a was any element of N, we see that N = (b). 
+ 
35.5 Corollary 
A Euclidean domain is a UFD. 
Proof 
By Theorem 35 .4, a Euclidean domain is a PID and by Theorem 34.18, a PID is a 
UFD. 
+ 
Finally, we should mention that while a Euclidean domain is a PID by Theo-
rem 35.4, not every PID is a Euclidean domain. Examples of Pills that are not Euclidean 
are not easily found, however. 
Arithmetic in Euclidean Domains 
We shall now investigate some properties of Euclidean domains related to their multi-
plicative structure. We emphasize that the arithmetic structure of a Euclidean domain 
is not affected in any way by a Euclidean norm v on the domain. A Euclidean norm is 
merely a useful tool for possibly throwing some light on this arithmetic structure of the 
domain. The arithmetic structure of a domain D is completely determined by the set D 
and the two binary operations+ and· on D. 
Let D be a Euclidean domain with a Euclidean norm v. We can use Condition 2 of 
a Euclidean norm to characterize the units of D. 
35.6 Theorem 
For a Euclidean domain with a Euclidean norm v , v(l) is minimal among all v(a) for 
nonzero a ED, and u ED is a unit if and only if v(u) = v(I). 
Proof 
Condition 2 for v tells us at once that for a f= 0, 
v(l) _::: v(la) = v(a). 
On the other hand, if u is a unit in D , then 
v(u) _::: v(uu- 1) = v(l). 
Thus 
v(u) = v(l) 
for a unit u in D. 
Conversely, suppose that a nonzero u ED is such that v(u) = v(l). Then by the 
division algorithm, there exist q and r in D such that 
1 = uq + r, 
where either r = 0 or v(r) < v(u). But since v(u) = v(l) is minimal over all v(d) for 
nonzero d E D, v(r) < v(u) is impossible. Hence r = 0 and 1 = uq, sou is a unit. 
+ 

288 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he Euclidean algorithm appears in Euclid's 
Elements as propositions 1 and 2 of Book VII, 
where it is used as here to find the greatest com-
mon divisor of two integers. Euclid uses it again in 
Book X (propositions 2 and 3) to find the greatest 
common measure of two magnitudes (if it exists) 
and to determine whether two magnitudes are in-
commensurable. 
The algorithm appears again in the Brahmes-
phutasiddhanta (Correct Astronomical System of 
Brahma) (628) of the seventh-century Indian math-
ematician and astronomer Brahmagupta. To solve 
the indeterminate equation rx + c = sy in integers, 
Brahmagupta uses Euclid's procedure to "recip-
rocally divide" r by s until he reaches the final 
nonzero remainder. By then using, in effect, a sub-
stitution procedure based on the various quotients 
and remainders, he produces a straightforward al-
gorithm for finding the smallest positive solution 
to his equation. 
The thirteenth-century Chinese algebraist Qin 
Jiushao also used the Euclidean algorithm in his so-
lution of the so-called Chinese Remainder problem 
published in the Shushu jiuzhang (Mathematical 
Treatise in Nine Sections) (1247). Qin's goal was 
to display a method for solving the system of con-
gruences N = r; (mod m;). As part of that method 
he needed to solve congruences of the form Nx = 1 
(mod m), where N and m are relatively prime. 
The solution to a congruence of this form is again 
found by a substitution procedure, different from 
the Indian one, using the quotients and remainders 
from the Euclidean algorithm applied to N and m. 
It is not known whether the common element in 
the Indian and Chinese algorithms, the Euclidean 
algorithm itself, was discovered independently 
in these cultures or was learned from Greek 
sources. 
35.7 Example 
For Z with v(n) = lnl, the minimum of v(n) for nonzero n E Z is 1, and 1 and - 1 
are the only elements of Z with v(n) = I. Of course, I and - 1 are exactly the units 
~ z. 
~ 
35.8 Example 
For F[x] with v(f(x)) = (degreef(x)) forf(x) i= 0, the minimum value of v(f(x)) for all 
nonzero f(x) E F[x] is 0. The nonzero polynomials of degree 0 are exactly the nonzero 
elements of F, and these are precisely the units of F[x]. 
~ 
We emphasize that everything we prove here holds in every Euclidean domain, in 
particular in Z and F[x]. As indicated in Example 34.21, we can show that any a and b 
in a UFD have a gcd and actually compute one by factoring a and b into irreducibles, but 
such factorizations can be very tough to find. However, if a UFD is actually Euclidean, 
and we know an easily computed Euclidean norm, there is an easy constructive way to 
find gcd's, as the next theorem shows. 
35.9 Theorem 
(Euclidean Algorithm) Let D be a Euclidean domain with a Euclidean norm v, and 
let a and b be nonzero elements of D. Let r 1 be as in Condition 1 for a Euclidean norm, 
that is, 
a= bq 1 + r 1, 
where either r 1 = 0 or v(r1) < v(b). If r 1 i= 0, let r2 be such that 
b=r1q2+rz, 
where either r2 = 0 or v(r2) < v(r1 ). In general, let r;+ 1 be such that 
r;_, = r;q;+1 + r;+1, 
where either r;+i = 0 or v(r;+i) < v(r;). Then the sequence r;, r2, · · · must terminate 
with some r5 = 0. If r 1 = 0, then bis a gcd of a and b. If r 1 -:f= 0 and r5 is the first r; = 0, 
then a gcd of a and bis r s-l · 

Section 35 
Euclidean Domains 
289 
Furthermore, if d is a gcd of a and b, then there exist A. and µ, in D such that 
d =A.a+ µ,b. 
Proof 
Since v(r;) < v(r;- i) and v(r;) is a nonnegative integer, it follows that after some finite 
number of steps we must arrive at some rs = 0. 
If ri = 0, then a = bqi, and bis a gcd of a and b. Suppose ri f= 0. Then if d I a and 
di b, we have 
d I (a - bqi), 
sod I ri. However, if di I ri and di I b, then 
so di I a. Thus the set of common divisors of a and bis the same set as the set of common 
divisors of band ri. By a similar argument, if r2 f= 0, the set of common divisors of b 
and rt is the same set as the set of common divisors of rt and r2. Continuing this process, 
we see finally that the set of common divisors of a and b is the same set as the set of 
common divisors of rs- 2 and rs- i, where rs is the first r; equal to 0. Thus a gcd of rs- 2 
and rs- i is also a gcd of a and b. But the equation 
rs- 2 = qsrs- i + rs = qsrs- i 
shows that a gcd of rs-2 and rs- i is rs-i · 
It remains to show that we can express a gcd d of a and b as d = A.a + µ,b. In terms 
of the construction just given, if d = b, then d = Oa + 1 b and we are done. If d = rs- i, 
then, working backward through our equations, we can express each r; in the form 
A.;r;- i + µ,;r;_2 for some A.;,µ,; E D. To illustrate using the first step, from the equation 
we obtain 
(1) 
We then express rs_2 in terms of rs- 3 and r5 _ 4 and substitute in Eq. (1) to express din 
terms of rs- 3 and r5 _ 4 . Eventually, we will have 
d = A.3r2 + µ,3ri = A.3(b - ri q2) + µ,3ri = A.3b + (µ,3 -
A.3q2)ri 
= A.3b + (µ,3 - A.3q2)(a - bqi) 
which can be expressed in the form d = A.a + µ,b. If d' is any other gcd of a and b, then 
d' = ud for some unit u, sod' = (A.u)a + (µ,u)b. 
+ 
The nice thing about Theorem 35.9 is that it can be implemented on a computer. Of 
course, we anticipate that of anything that is labeled an "algorithm." 
35.10 Example 
Let us illustrate the Euclidean algorithm for the Euclidean norm I I on Z by computing a 
gcd of 22,471 and 3,266. We just apply the division algorithm over and over again, and 
the last nonzero remainder is a gcd. We label the numbers obtained as in Theorem 35.9 
to further illustrate the statement and proof of the theorem. The computations are easily 
checked. 
22,471 = (3,266)6 + 2,875 
3,266 = (2,875) l + 391 
2,875 = (391)7 + 138 
391=(138)2 + 115 
138 = (1 15)1 + 23 
115 = (23)5 + 0 
a= 22,471 
b = 3,266 
ri = 2,875 
r2 = 391 
r3 = 138 
r4 = 115 
rs = 23 
r6 = 0 

290 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
Thus r5 = 23 is a gcd of 22,471 and 3,266. We found a gcd without factoring! This 
is important, for sometimes it is very difficult to find a factorization of an integer into 
primes. 
.A. 
35.11 Example 
Note that the division algorithm Condition 1 in the definition of a Euclidean norm says 
nothing about r being "positive." In computing a gcd in Z by the Euclidean algorithm 
for I I, as in Example 35.10, it is surely in our interest to make lr;I as small as possible 
in each division. Thus, repeating Example 35.10, it would be more efficient to write 
22,471 = (3,266)7 - 391 
3,266 = (391)8 + 138 
391 = (138)3 - 23 
138 = (23)6 + 0 
a= 22,471 
b = 3,266 
r1 = -391 
r2 = 138 
r 3 = -23 
r4 = 0 
We can change the sign of r; from negative to positive when we wish since the divisors 
of r ; and -r; are the same. 
.A. 
• EXERCISES 35 
Computations 
In Exercises l through 5, state whether the given function v is a Euclidean norm for the given integral domain. 
1. The function v for Z given by v(n) = n2 for nonzero n E Z 
2. The function v for Z [x] given by v(f(x)) =(degree off(x)) for f (x) E Z[x],f(x) =f. 0 
3. The function v for Z[x] given by v(f(x)) =(the absolute value of the coefficient of the highest degree nonzero 
term off(x)) for nonzerof(x) E Z[x] 
4. The function v for IQ given by v(a) = a2 for nonzero a E IQ 
5. The function v for IQ given by v(a) = 50 for nonzero a E IQ 
6. By referring to Example 35. l l , actually express the gcd 23 in the form A.(22,471) + µ,(3,266) for A., µ, E Z. 
[Hint: From the next-to-last line of the computation in Example 35.11 , 23 = (138)3 - 391. From the line 
before that, 138 = 3,266 - (391)8, so substituting, you get 23 = [3,266 - (391)8]3 - 391, and so on. That is, 
work your way back up to actually find values for A. andµ,.] 
7. Find a gcd of 49,349 and 15,555 in Z. 
8. Following the idea of Exercise 6 and referring to Exercise 7, express the positive gcd of 49,349 and 15,555 in 
Z in the form A.(49,349) + µ,(15 ,555) for A., µ, E Z . 
9. Find a gcd of 
x 10 - 3x9 + 3x8 -
I lx7 + I lx6 -
I lx5 + I 9x4 -
I 3x3 + 8x2 - 9x + 3 
and 
x6 - 3x5 + 3x4 - 9x3 + 5x2 - 5x + 2 
in IQ[x]. 
10. Describe how the Euclidean Algorithm can be used to find the gcd of n members a1, a2, · · · , an of a Euclidean 
domain. 
11. Using your method devised in Exercise 10, find the gcd of2178, 396, 792, and 726. 
Concepts 
12. Let us consider Z [x]. 

Section 35 
Exercises 
291 
a. Is Z[x] a UFD? Why? 
b. Show that {a + xf(x) I a E 2Z,f(x) E Z [x]} is an ideal in Z[x]. 
c. Is Z[x] a PID? (Consider part (b).) 
d. Is Z[x] a Euclidean domain? Why? 
13. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every Euclidean domain is a PID. 
b. Every PID is a Euclidean domain. 
c. Every Euclidean domain is a UFD. 
d. Every UFD is a Euclidean domain. 
e. A gcd of2 and 3 in <Ql is 1· 
f. The Euclidean algorithm gives a constructive method for finding a gcd of two integers. 
g. If v is a Euclidean norm on a Euclidean domain D, then v(I ) :::; v(a) for all nonzero a E D. 
h. If v is a Euclidean norm on a Euclidean domain D, then v(l ) < v(a) for all nonzero a E D, a =/= l. 
i. If v is a Euclidean norm on a Euclidean domain D, then v(I ) < v(a) for all nonzero nonunits a E D. 
j . For any field F, F[x] is a Euclidean domain. 
14. Does the choice of a particular Euclidean norm v on a Euclidean domain D influence the arithmetic structure 
of D in any way? Explain. 
Theory 
15. Let D be a Euclidean domain and let v be a Euclidean norm on D. Show that if a and b are associates in D, 
then v(a) = v(b). 
16. Let D be a Euclidean domain and let v be a Euclidean norm on D. Show that for nonzero a, b E D, one has 
v(a) < v(ab) if and only if b is not a unit of D. [Hint: Argue from Exercise 15 that v(a) < v(ab) implies that 
bis not a unit of D. Using the Euclidean algorithm, show that v(a) = v(ab) implies (a) = (ab). Conclude that 
if bis not a unit, then v(a) < v(ab).] 
17. Prove or disprove the following statement: If v is a Euclidean norm on Euclidean domain D , then {a E 
DI v(a) > v(I)} U (0) is an ideal of D. 
18. Show that every field is a Euclidean domain. 
19. Let v be a Euclidean norm on a Euclidean domain D. 
a. Show that if s E Z such that s + v(l) > 0, then T/ : D* ---+ Z defined by TJ(a) = v(a) + s for nonzero a E D 
is a Euclidean norm on D. As usual, D* is the set of nonzero elements of D. 
b. Show that fort E z+, A. : D* ---+ Z given by A.(a) = t · v(a) for nonzero a E D is a Euclidean norm on D. 
c. Show that there exists a Euclidean normµ, on D such that µ,(I) = I and µ,(a) > I 00 for all nonzero nonunits 
a E D. 
20. Let D be a UFD. An element c in D is a least common multiple (abbreviated lcm) of two elements a and 
b in D if a I c, b I c and if c divides every element of D that is divisible by both a and b. Show that every two 
nonzero elements a and b of a Euclidean domain D have an !cm in D. [Hint: Show that all common multiples, 
in the obvious sense, of both a and b form an ideal of D.] 
21. Use the last statement in Theorem 35.9 to show that two nonzero elements r, s E Z generate the group (Z, +) 
if and only if rand s, viewed as integers in the domain Z, are relatively prime, that is, have a gcd of I. 
22. Using the last statement in Theorem 35.9, show that for nonzero a, b, n E Z, the congruence ax = b (mod n) 
has a solution in Z if a and n are relatively prime. 
23. Generalize Exercise 22 by showing that for nonzero a, b, n E Z, the congruence ax = b (mod n) has a solution 
in Z if and only if the positive gcd of a and n in Z divides b. Interpret this result in the ring Z 11 • 
24. Following the idea of Exercises 6 and 23, outline a constructive method for finding a solution in Z of the 
congruence ax = b (mod n) for nonzero a, b, n E Z, if the congruence does have a solution. Use this method 
to find a solution of the congruence 22x = 18 (mod 42). 

292 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
SECTION 36 NUMBER THEORY 
In this section we will show how the ideas in Section 35 can be used to derive some 
interesting results in number theory. We usually think of number theory as a study of 
properties of the integers, but Gauss expanded the study of numbers to include what is 
now called the Gaussian integers. The Gaussian integers form a subring of the complex 
numbers that, like the integers, form a Euclidean domain, but not a field. After studying 
the Gaussian integers, we will prove that for any prime number p E z+ that is equivalent 
to 1 modulo 4, p can be written as the sum of two squares. 
Gaussian Integers 
36.1 Definition 
A Gaussian integer is a complex number a + bi, where a, b E Z. For a Gaussian integer 
a= a+ bi, the norm N(a) of a is a2 + b2 . 
• 
Although we defined N(a) for a Gaussian integer a , we can also think of N as de-
fined on any complex number using the same formula N(a + bi) = a2 + b2. This norm 
can also be written as N(a) = lal2 . 
We shall let Z[i] be the set of all Gaussian integers. The following lemma gives 
some basic properties of the norm function N on Z[i] and leads to a demonstration that 
the function v defined by v(a) = N(a) for nonzero a E Z [i] is a Euclidean norm on 
Z[i]. Note that the Gaussian integers include all the rational integers, that is, all the 
elements of Z. 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
I
n his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, Gauss studied 
in detail the theory of quadratic residues, that is, 
the theory of solutions to the congruence x2 = p 
(mod q) and proved the famous quadratic reci-
procity theorem showing the relationship between 
the solutions of the congruences x2 = p (mod q) 
and x2 = q (mod p) where p and q are primes. In 
attempting to generalize his results to theories of 
quartic residues, however, Gauss realized that it 
was much more natural to consider the Gaussian 
integers rather than the ordinary integers. 
Gauss's investigations of the Gaussian integers 
are contained in a long paper published in 1832 in 
which he proved various analogies between them 
and the ordinary integers. For example, after not-
ing that there are four units (invertible elements) 
among the Gaussian integers, namely 1, -1, i, and 
-i, and defining the norm as in Definition 36.1, he 
generalized the notion of a prime integer by defin-
ing a prime Gaussian integer to be one that cannot 
be expressed as the product of two other integers, 
neither of them units. He was then able to deter-
mine which Gaussian integers are prime: A Gaus-
sian integer that is not real is prime if and only if 
its norm is a real prime, which can only be 2 or of 
the form 4n + 1. The real prime 2 = (1 + i)(l - i) 
and real primes congruent to 1 modulo 4 like 
13 = (2 + 3i)(2 - 3i) factor as the product of two 
Gaussian primes. Real primes of the form 4n + 3 
like 7 and 11 are still prime in the domain of Gaus-
sian integers. See Exercise 10. 
36.2 Lemma 
In Z [i], the following properties of the norm function N hold for all a, f3 E Z[i]: 
1. N(a) :'.': 0. 
2. 
N(a) = 0 if and only if a = 0. 
3. 
N(af3) = N(a)N(f3). 
Proof If we let a = a 1 + a2i and f3 = b1 + b2i, these results are all straightforward computa-
tions. We leave the proof of these properties as an exercise (see Exercise 11). 
+ 

Section 36 
Number Theory 
293 
The proof of Lemma 36.2 does not depend on the complex numbers a and f3 being 
Gaussian integers. In fact the three properties listed in the lemma are true for all complex 
numbers. 
36.3 Lemma 
Z[i] is an integral domain. 
Proof It is obvious that Z[i] is a commutative ring with unity. We show that there are no 
divisors of 0. Let a , f3 E Z[i]. Using Lemma 36.2, if af3 = 0 then 
N(a)N(f3) = N(af3) = N(O) = 0. 
Thus af3 = 0 implies that N(a) = 0 or N(f3) = 0. By Lemma 36.2 again, this im-
plies that either a = 0 or f3 = 0. Thus Z[i] has no divisors of 0, so Z[i] is an integral 
domain. 
+ 
Of course, since Z[i] is a subring of C, where C is the field of complex numbers, 
it is really obvious that Z[i] has no 0 divisors. We gave the argument of Lemma 36.3 to 
illustrate the use of the multiplicative property 3 of the norm function N and to avoid 
going outside of Z[i] in our argument. 
However, in the proof of Theorem 36.4, we will use property 3 for complex num-
bers that are not Gaussian integers and therefore we will stay outside the Gaussian 
integers. 
36.4 Theorem 
The function v given by v(a) = N(a) for nonzero a E Z[i] is a Euclidean norm on Z[i]. 
Thus Z[i] is a Euclidean domain. 
Proof 
Note that for f3 = b 1 + b2i -:f. 0, N(b 1 + b2i) = b1
2 + b22, so N(f3) '.'.': 1. Then for all 
a, f3 -:f. 0 in Z[i], N(a) :::: N(a)N(f3) = N(af3). This proves Condition 2 for a Euclidean 
norm in Definition 35.1. 
It remains to prove the division algorithm, Condition 1, for N. Let a, f3 E Z[i], with 
a = a 1 + a2i and f3 = b 1 + b2i, where f3 -:f. 0. We must find u and p in Z[i] such that 
a= {Ju+ p, where either p = 0 or N(p) < N(f3) = b 1
2 + b22 . Let a /{3 = r + si for 
r, s E IQ. Let q1 and q2 be integers in Z as close as possible to the rational numbers rand 
s, respectively. Let u = q1 + q2i and p =a - {Ju. If p = 0, we are done. Otherwise, 
by construction of u, we see that lr - q1 I :::: ~ and Is - qzl ::: ~-Therefore 
N(~ -u) = N((r + si) - (q1 + qzi)) 
=N((r - qi)+(s-q2)i):::: (D
2 
+ G)
2 
-2 
Thus we obtain 
N(p) = N(a - {Ju)= N (/J(~ -u)) = N(f3)N(~ - u) :S N(f3)~ , 
so we do indeed have N(p) < N(f3) as desired. 
• 
36.5 Example 
We can now apply all our results of Section 35 to Z [i]. In particular, since N(l) = 1, 
the units of Z[i] are exactly the a = a 1 + a2i with N(a) = a 12 + a22 = 1. From the 
fact that a 1 and a2 are integers, it follows that the only possibilities are a 1 = ±1 with 
a2 = 0, or a 1 = 0 with a2 = ±1. Thus the units of Z[i] are ±1 and ±i. One can also 
use the Euclidean Algorithm to compute a gcd of two nonzero elements. We leave 
such computations to the exercises. Finally, note that while 5 is an irreducible in Z, 
5 is no longer an irreducible in Z [i], for 5 = (1 + 2i)(l - 2i), and neither 1 + 2i nor 
1 - 2i is a unit. 
.& 

294 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
Multiplicative Norms 
Let us point out again that for an integral domain D, the arithmetic concepts of irre-
ducibles and units are not affected in any way by a norm that may be defined on the 
domain. However, as the preceding section and our work thus far in this section show, a 
suitably defined norm may be of help in determining the arithmetic structure of D. This 
is strikingly illustrated in algebraic number theory, where for a domain of algebraic 
integers we consider many different norms of the domain, each doing its part in helping 
to uncover the arithmetic structure of the domain. In a domain of algebraic integers, we 
have essentially one norm for each irreducible (up to associates), and each such norm 
gives information concerning the behavior in the integral domain of the irreducible to 
which it corresponds. This is an example of the importance of studying properties of 
elements in an algebraic structure by means of mappings associated with them. 
Let us study integral domains that have a multiplicative norm satisfying Properties 
2 and 3 of Non Z[i] given in Lemma 36.2. 
36.6 Definition 
Let D be an integral domain. A multiplicative norm N on D is a function mapping D 
into the integers Z such that the following conditions are satisfied: 
1. N(a) = 0 if and only if a = 0. 
2. 
N(etf3) = N(et)N(f3) for all et , f3 ED. 
• 
36.7 Theorem If Dis an integral domain with a multiplicative norm N , then N(I ) = 1 and IN(u)I = 1 
for every unit u in D. If, furthermore, every a such that IN(a)I = I is a unit in D, then 
an element n in D, with IN(rr)I = p for a prime p E Z, is an irreducible of D. 
Proof 
Let D be an integral domain with a multiplicative norm N. Then 
N(l) = N((l)(l)) = N(l)N(I) 
shows that N(I) = 1. Also, if u is a unit in D, then 
1 = N(l) = N(uu- 1) = N(u)N(u- 1). 
Since N(u) is an integer, this implies that IN(u)I = 1. 
Now suppose that the units of D are exactly the elements of norm ± 1. Let n E D 
be such that IN(rr)I = p, where p is a prime in Z. Then if n = af3, we have 
p = IN(rr)I = IN(a)N(f3) 1 = IN(a)l lN(fJ)I, 
so either IN(a)I = 1 or IN(f3)1 = 1. By assumption, this means that either a or f3 is a 
unit of D. Thus n is an irreducible of D. 
+ 
36.8 Example 
On Z[i], the function N defined by N(a + bi) = a2 + b2 gives a multiplicative norm in 
the sense of our definition. We saw that the function v given by v(a) = N(a) for nonzero 
a E Z[i] is a Euclidean norm on Z[i], so the units are precisely the elements a of Z[i] 
with N(a) = N(I) = 1. Thus the second part of Theorem 36.7 applies in Z[i]. We saw 
in Example 36.5 that 5 is not an irreducible in Z[i], for 5 = (I + 2i)(l - 2i). Since 
N(l + 2i) = N(l - 2i) = 12 + 22 = 5 and 5 is a prime in Z, we see from Theorem 36.7 
that 1 + 2i and 1 - 2i are both irreducibles in Z[i]. 
.._ 
As an application of mutiplicative norms, we shall now give another example of 
an integral domain that is not a UFD. We saw one example in Example 34.17. The 
following is the standard illustration. 
36.9 Example 
LetZ[H
] ={a+ ib.../51 a,b E Z). As a subset of the complex numbers closed under 
addition, subtraction, and multiplication, and containing 0 and 1, Z[ H
J is an integral 

Section 36 
Number Theory 
295 
domain. Define N on Z[ H
J by 
N(a + b.../=5) = a2 + 5b2 . 
(Here H 
= i,JS.) Clearly, N(a) = 0 if and only if a =a+ bH = 0. That 
N(af3) = N(a)N(f3) is a straightforward computation that we leave to the exercises 
(see Exercise 12). Let us find all candidates for units in Z[ HJ by finding all ele-
ments a in Z[HJ with N(a) = 1. If a= a+ bH, and N(a) = 1, we must have 
a2 + 5b2 = 1 for integers a and b. This is possible only if b = 0 and a= ±1. Hence ±1 
are the only candidates for units. Since ± 1 are units, they are then precisely the units in 
Z[HJ. 
Now in Z[HJ, we have 21 = (3)(7) and also 
21 = (1 + 2.../=5)(1 - 2.../=5). 
If we can show that 3, 7, 1 + 2H, and 1 - 2H are all irreducibles in Z[ H
J, we 
will then know that Z[ H
J cannot be a UFD, since neither 3 nor 7 is ±(1 + 2H). 
Suppose that 3 = af3. Then 
9 = N(3) = N(a)N(f3 ) 
shows that we must have N(a) = 1, 3, or 9. If N(a) = 1, then a is a unit. If a = a + 
bH, then N(a) = a2 + 5b2, and for no choice of integers a and bis N(a) = 3. If 
N(a ) = 9, then N(f3) = 1, so f3 is a unit. Thus from 3 = af3, we can conclude that either 
a or f3 is a unit. Therefore, 3 is an irreducible in Z[HJ. A similar argument shows 
that 7 is also an irreducible in Z[ HJ. 
If 1 + 2H = y 8, we have 
21 = N(I + 2.../=5) = N(y)N(8). 
so N(y ) = I, 3, 7, or 21. We have seen that there is no element of Z[ HJ of norm 
3 or 7. Thus either N(y) = 1, and y is a unit, or N(y) = 21, so N(8) = 1, and 8 is a 
unit. Therefore, 1+2H is an irreducible in Z[HJ. A parallel argument shows 
that 1 - 2H is also an irreducible in Z[ HJ. 
In summary, we have shown that 
Z[.../=SJ ={a+ ib.JS i a, b E Z} 
is an integral domain but not a UFD. In particular, there are two different factorizations 
21 = 3. 7 = (1 + 2.../=5)(1 - 2.../=5) 
of 21 into irreducibles. These irreducibles cannot be primes, for the property of a prime 
enables us to prove uniqueness of factorization (see the proof of Theorem 34.18). 
.A 
We conclude with a classical application, determining which primes p in Z are 
equal to a sum of squares of two integers in Z. For example, 2 = 12 + 12 , 5 = 12 + 22, 
and 13 = 22 + 32 are sums of squares. Since we have now answered this question for 
the only even prime number, 2, we can restrict ourselves to odd primes. 
36.10 Theorem 
(Fermat's p = a 2 + b2 Theorem) Let p be an odd prime in Z. Then p = a2 + b2 for 
integers a and bin Z if and only if p = 1 (mod 4). 
Proof 
First, suppose that p = a2 + b2 . Now a and b cannot both be even or both be odd since 
p is an odd number. If a= 2r and b = 2s + 1, then a2 + b2 = 4? + 4(s2 + s) + 1, so 
p = 1 (mod 4). This takes care of one direction for this "if and only if" theorem. 
For the other direction, we assume that p = 1 (mod 4). Now the multiplicative 
group of nonzero elements of the finite field Zp is cyclic, and has order p - 1. Since 

296 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
4 is a divisor of p -
1, we see that Zp contains an element n of multiplicative order 
4. It follows that n2 has multiplicative order 2, so n2 = -1 in z,,. Thus in Z , we have 
n2 = -1 (mod p), sop divides n2 + 1 in Z . 
Viewing p and n2 + 1 in Z[i], we see that p divides n2 + 1 = (n + i)(n - i). Sup-
pose that p is irreducible in Z [i]; then p would have to divide n + i or n - i. If p divides 
n + i, then n + i = p(a + bi) for some a, b E Z . Equating coefficients of i, we obtain 
1 = pb, which is impossible. Similarly, p divides n - i would lead to an impossible 
equation -1 = pb. Thus our assumption that p is irreducible in Z [i] must be false. 
Since p is not irreducible in Z[i], we have p = (a+ bi)(c +di) where neither a+ 
bi nor c +di is a unit. Taking norms, we have p2 = (a2 + b2)(c2 + d2) where neither 
a2 + b2 = 1 nor c2 + d2 = 1. Consequently, we have p = a2 + b2 , which completes our 
proof. [Since a2 + b2 = (a + bi)(a - bi), we see that this is the factorization of p, that 
is, c +di= a - bi.] 
+ 
Exercise 10 asks you to determine which primes p in 'll, remain irreducible in Z[i]. 
• EXERCISES 36 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 4, factor the Gaussian integer into a product of irreducibles in Z[i]. [Hint: Since an ir-
reducible factor of a E Z[i] must have norm > l and dividing N(a), there are only a finite number of Gaussian 
integers a+ bi to consider as possible irreducible factors of a given a. Divide a by each of them in IC, and see for 
which ones the quotient is again in Z[i].] 
1. 5 
2. 7 
3. 4+3i 
4. 6- 7i 
5. Show that 6 does not factor uniquely (up to associates) into irreducibles in Z[ .J="S]. Exhibit two different 
factorizations. 
6. Consider a = 7 + 2i and fJ = 3 - 4i in Z[i]. Find CJ and pin Z[i] such that 
a= {JCJ + p 
with 
N(p) < N({J). 
[Hint: Use the construction in the proof of Theorem 36.4. 
7. Use a Euclidean algorithm in Z[i] to find a gcd of 8 + 6i and 5 - 15i in Z[i]. [Hint: Use the construction in 
the proof of Theorem 36.4.] 
Concepts 
8. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Z[i] is a PID. 
b. Z[i] is a Euclidean domain. 
c. Every integer in Z is a Gaussian integer. 
d. Every complex number is a Gaussian integer. 
e. A Euclidean algorithm holds in Z[i]. 
f. A multiplicative norm on an integral domain is sometimes an aid in finding irreducibles of the domain. 
g. If N is a multiplicative norm on an integral domain D, then IN(u)I = 1 for every unit u of D. 
h. If Fis a field, then the function N defined by N(f(x)) = (degree ofj(x)) is a multiplicative norm on F[x]. 
i. If Fis a field, then the function defined by N(f(x)) = 2<degree of f (x)) for f (x) =/= 0 and N(O) = 0 is a multi-
plicative norm on F[x] according to our definition. 
j. Z[ .J=SJ is an integral domain but not a UFD. 
9. Let D be an integral domain with a multiplicative norm N such that IN(a)I = I for a E D if and only if a is a 
unit of D. Let :rr be such that IN(:rr)I is minimal among all IN(fJ)I > 1 for fJ ED. Show that :rr is an irreducible 
of D. 

Section 37 
Algebraic Geometry 
297 
10. a. Show that 2 is equal to the product of a unit and the square of an irreducible in Z[i]. 
b. Show that an odd prime pin Z is irreducible in Z[i] if and only if p = 3 (mod 4). (Use Theorem 36.10.) 
11. Prove Lemma 36.2. 
12. Prove that N of Example 36.9 is multiplicative, that is, that N(a{J) = N(a)N({J) for a , fJ E Z( HJ. 
13. Let D be an integral domain with a multiplicative norm N such that IN(a)I = l for a E D if and only if a is a 
unit of D. Show that every nonzero nonunit of D has a factorization into irreducibles in D. 
14. Use a Euclidean algorithm in Z[i] to find a gcd of 16 + 7i and 10 - Si in Z[i]. [Hint: Use the construction in 
the proof of Theorem 36.4.] 
15. Let (a) be a nonzero principal ideal in Z[i]. 
a. Show that Z[i]/ (a) is a finite ring. [Hint: Use the division algorithm.] 
b. Show that if a is an irreducible of Z(i], then Z[i]/ (a) is a field. 
c. Referring to part (b ), find the order and characteristic of each of the following fields. 
i. Z(i]/(3) 
ii. Z(i]/( l + i) 
iii. Z(i]/( l + 2i) 
16. Let n E z+ be square free, that is, not divisible by the square of any prime integer. Let Z( Fnl = {a + 
ib,./fi. I a, b E Z }. 
a. Show thatthe norm N, defined by N(a) = a2 + nb2 fora =a+ ib,./fi., is a multiplicative norm on Z[J=ll]. 
b. Show thatN(a) = 1 fora E Z[J=ll] ifand only if a is a unit of Z[J=ll]. 
c. Show that every nonzero a E Z[J=ll] that is not a unit has a factorization into irreducibles in Z[J=ll]. 
[Hint: Use part (b).] 
17. Repeat Exercise 16 for Z( ,.fa] = {a + b,./fi. I a, b E Z} for square free n > 1, with N defined by N(a) = 
a2 - nb2 for a =a+ b,./fi. in Z[,./fi.]. For part b show I N(a) I = l. 
18. Show by a construction analogous to that given in the proof of Theorem 36.4 that the division algorithm holds 
in the integral domain Z[ Nl for v(a) = N(a) for nonzero a in this domain (see Exercise 16). (Thus this 
domain is Euclidean. See Hardy and Wright (29] for a discussion of which domains Z[,./fi.] and Z[J=ll] are 
Euclidean.) 
SECTION 37 t ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY 
This section gives a brief introduction to algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry is the 
study of the common zeros of a finite collection of polynomials. For example, the zeros 
of the set of polynomials {.x2 + y2 - 25, (x - 6)2 + y2 - 25} consist of just two points in 
IR.2, (3, 4) and (3, -4). In Section 38 we will develop a very useful algorithm that reduces 
a finite set of polynomials to a simpler set of polynomials whose zeros are identical 
to the zeros of the original set. In the example {.x2 + y2 - 25, (x - 6)2 + y2 - 25), the 
algorithm yields {x - 3,y2 - 16} making it much easier to see the two zeros. 
Algebraic Varieties and Ideals 
Let F be a field. Recall that F[x1, x2, · · · , x11 ] is the ring of polynomials in n in determi-
nants x1, x2, · · · , x11 with coefficients in F. We let F" be the Cartesian product F x F x 
· · · x F for n factors. For ease in writing, we denote an element (a1, a2 , · · · , a11) of F" by 
a, in bold type. Using similar economy, we let F[x] = F[xi,x2, · · · ,x11 ]. For each a E 
F
11
, we have an evaluation homomorphism <Pa: F[x]-+ F just as in Theorem 27.4. That 
is, for f(x) =f(x1,x2.- · · ,x") E F[x], we define <Pa(f(x)) =f(a) =f(a1 ,a2.- · · ,a11). 
t This section is used only in Section 38. 

298 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
The proof that </Ja is indeed a homomorphism follows from the associative, commu-
tative, and distributive properties of the operations in F[x] and F. Just as for the one-
indeterminate case, an element a of F" is a zero of f(x) E F[x] if f(a) = 0. In what 
follows, we further abbreviate a polynomialf(x) by "f." 
In this section and the following we discuss the problem of finding common 
zeros in F" of a finite number of polynomialsf1 ,f2, · · · ,f, in F[x]. Finding and studying 
geometric properties of the set of all these common zeros is the subject of algebraic 
geometry. 
37.1 Definition 
Let S be a finite subset of F[x]. The algebraic variety V(S) in F" is the set of all 
common zeros in F" of the polynomials in S. 
• 
In our illustrative examples, which usually involve at most three indeterminates, we 
use x,y, z in place of x1, x2, and x3. 
37.2 Example 
Let S = {2x + y - 2) c .IR[x, y]. The algebraic variety V(S) in IR2 is the line with 
x-intercept 1 and y-intercept 2. 
.&. 
We leave to Exercise 14 the straightforward proof that for r elements f 1 ,f2, · · · ,f, 
in a commutative ring R with unity, the set 
I = {ctf1 + c2f2 + · · · + crf, I c; ER for i = 1, · · · , r) 
is an ideal of R. We denote this ideal by (f1 ,f2, · · · ,f,). We are interested in the case 
R = F[x] where all the c; and all thef; are polynomials in F [x]. We regard the c; as "co-
efficient polynomials." By its construction, this ideal I is the smallest ideal containing 
the polynomials ft ,f2, · · · ,f,; it can also be described as the intersection of all ideals 
containing these r polynomials. 
37.3 Definition 
Let I be an ideal in a commutative ring R with unity. A subset {bi , b2, · • · , b,} of I is a 
basis for I if I= (bi,b2 , · · · ,b,). 
• 
Unlike the situation in linear algebra, there is no requirement of independence for 
elements of a basis, or of unique representation of an ideal member in terms of a basis. 
37.4 Theorem 
Letf1,f2, · · · ,f, E F[x]. The set of common zeros in F" of the polynomials/; for i = 
I, 2, · · · , r is the same as the set of common zeros in F" of all the polynomials in the 
entire ideal I = (f1 ,J2, · · · ,f,). 
Proof Let 
f = ctf1 + c2f2 + · · · + c,f, 
(1) 
be any element of I, and let a E F" be a common zero off1 ,f2, · · · , andf,. Applying the 
evaluation homomorphism </Ja to Eq. (1), we obtain 
f(a) = c, (a)f1 (a)+ c2(a)fz(a) + · · · + c,(a)f,(a) 
= c, (a)O + c2(a)O + · · · + c,(a)O = 0, 
showing that a is also a zero of every polynomial f in /. Of course, a zero of every 
polynomial in I will be a zero of eachf; because eachf; E /. 
+ 
For an ideal I in F [x], we let V(/) be the set of all common zeros of all elements of 
I. We can summarize Theorem 37.4 as 
Recall that a commutative ring with unity is Noetherian if for every chain N 1 c:; N2 c:; 
N3 <:; ... of ideals in R, there is an integer r such that for s '.::: r, N, = N5 • Lemma 34.10 

Section 37 
Algebraic Geometry 
299 
states that if R is a PID, then R is a Noetherian ring. Theorem 37.5 states that if R 
is a Noetherian ring, then polynomials with coefficients in R also form a Noetherian 
ring. 
37.5 Example 
If R is a Noetherian ring, then R[x] is also a Noetherian ring. 
00 
Proof 
Let /1 ~Ii ~ /3 ~ ... be a chain of ideal in R[x]. As we saw in Lemma 34.9, I= LJ In 
n=l 
is an ideal in R. 
We will show by contradiction that I has a finite basis. So we suppose that no finite 
set of polynomials is a basis for/. We letf 1 be a polynomial in I of minimal degree. We 
then letf 2 be a polynomial of minimum degree that is in/, but not in (f1) . Continuing in 
this manner, we letf,, be a polynomial of minimal degree in/, but not in (f1 J2 , . .. ,J,,_ 1). 
This defines an infinite sequence of polynomials since by our assumption no finite set 
of polynomials is a basis for /. It is clear that deg(f1) S deg(f2) since otherwise we 
should have picked f2 instead of f 1 as the first polynomial in the sequence. In general, 
deg(f1) S deg(f2) S deg(!J) S . . . 
We let aj be the leading coefficient offj. Then in R, we have a chain of ideals 
(at)~ (a1,a2) ~ (a1,a2,a3) ~ .. . 
By the ascending chain condition in R, there is some integer N so that for any s :'.': N, 
In particular, 
N 
GN+I = L: cjaj 
j=I 
for some elements Cj in R. The polynomial 
N 
g(x) = L CjXdeg(fN+1)-deg(fj)fj 
j=I 
is in the ideal (f1,f2,f3, ... JN). ThusfN+t - g tf. (fi,f2, ... JN = J ). The degrees of g 
andfN+t are equal and they have the same leading coefficient aN+t ·Thus the degree of 
fN+I - g is less than the degree of fN+I · But this contradicts the choice of fN+I since 
fN+t - g tf. J JN - g has lower degree thanfN+t, andfN+I has lowest degree among all 
the polynomials in I that are not in (f1 (x)J2(x), ... fN(x)). We conclude that there is a 
finite set of polynomials with I= (f1J2, ... ,f,,). 
Since every polynomialfj is in some hj and / 1 ~ 12 ~ h ~ ... , it follows that there 
is an integer r such thatfj is in/, for eachj. Therefore, I= (f1 J2J3 , ... ,f,,) = !,. 
+ 
By repeated application of Theorem 37.5, it is immediate that F[x1,x2, ... ,xnl is a 
Noetherian ring for any field F. Exercise 21 shows that if Risa commutative ring with 
unity, then Risa Noetherian ring if and only if every ideal I in R has a finite basis. These 
observations prove the following significant theorem. 
37.6 Theorem 
(Hilbert Basis Theorem) Every ideal I in F[x1,x2, . .. ,x,,] has a finite basis. 
+ 
Our objective: 
Given a basis for an ideal I in F[x], modify it if possible to become a 
basis that better exhibits the structure of I and the geometry of the associated algebraic 
variety V(/). 

300 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
The theorem that follows provides a tool for this task. You should notice that the 
theorem gives information about the division algorithm that we did not mention in The-
orem 28.2. We use the same notation here as in Theorem 28.2, but with x rather than x. 
Iff(x) = g(x)h(x) in F(x), then g(x) and h[x] are called "divisors" or "factors" ofj(x). 
37.7 Theorem 
(Property of the Division Algorithm) Letf(x), g(x), q(x), and r(x) be polynomials in 
F [x] such thatf(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x). The common zeros in pn ofj(x) and g(x) are the 
same as the common zeros of g(x) and r(x). Also the common divisors in F[x] of f(x) 
and g(x) are the same as the common divisors of g(x) and r(x). 
Iff(x) and g(x) are two members of a basis for an ideal I of F[x], then replacement 
ofj(x) by r(x) in the basis still yields a basis for I. 
Proof If a E F" is a common zero of g(x) and r(x), then applying <Pa to both sides of the 
equationf(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x), we obtainf(a) = g(a)q(a) + r(a) = Oq(a) + 0 = 0, so 
a is a zero of both f(x) and g(x). If b E F[x] is a common zero off (x) and g(x), then 
applying </Jb yieldsf(b) = g(b)q(b) + r(b) so 0 = Oq(b) + r(b) and we see that r(b) = 0 
and g(b) = 0. 
The proof concerning common divisors is essentially the same, and is left as Exer-
cise 15. 
Finally, Jet B be a basis for an ideal/, Jetf(x), g(x), E B, and Jetf(x) = g(x)q(x) + 
r(x). Let B' be the set obtained by replacing f(x) by r(x) in B, and let I' be the ideal 
having B' as a basis. Let S be the set obtained from B by adjoining r(x) to B. Note 
that Scan also be obtained by adjoiningf(x) to B'. The equationf(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x) 
shows that f(x) E I', so we have B' S S S I'. Thus S is a basis for I'. The equation 
r(x) = f(x) - q(x)g(x) shows that r(x) E /,so we have B S S S I. Thus Sis basis for I. 
Therefore I =I' and B' is a basis for I. 
+ 
A Familiar Linear Illustration 
A basic technique for problem solving in linear algebra is finding all common solutions 
of a finite number of linear equations. For the moment we abandon our practice of never 
writing "f(x) = O" for a nonzero polynomial, and work a typical problem as we do in a 
linear algebra course. 
37.8 Example 
(Solution as in a Linear Algebra Course) Find all solutions in JR.3 of the linear 
system 
x + y - 3z = 
8 
2x + y + z = -5. 
Solution 
We multiply the first equation by -2 and add it to the second, obtaining the new system 
x+ y- 3z = 8 
-y + 7z = -21 
which has the same solution set in JR.3 as the preceding one. For any value z, we can find 
the corresponding y-value from the second equation and then determine x from the first 
equation. Keeping z as parameter, we obtain ( (-4z - 13, 7z + 21 , z) I z E JR.} as solution 
set, which is a line in Euclidean 3-space through the point (-13, 21, 0). 
.._ 
In the notation of this section, the problem in the preceding example can be phrased 
as follows: 
Describe V((x + y - 3z - 8, 2x + y + z + 5)) in JR.3. 

Section 37 
Algebraic Geometry 
301 
We solved it by finding a more useful basis, namely 
{x + y - 3z - 8, -y + 7z + 21). 
Notice that the second member, -y + 7z + 21, of this new basis can be obtained from 
the original two basis polynomials as a remainder r(x, y, z) in a division process, namely 
2 
x + y - 3z - 8 J 2x + y + z + 5 
2x+2y-6z-16 
-y + 7z + 21 
Thus 2x + y + z + 5 = (x + y - 3z - 8)(2) + (-y + 7z + 21), an expression of the 
form f(x, y, z) = g(x, y, z)q(x, y, z) + r(x, y, z). We replaced the polynomial f by the 
polynomial r, as in Theorem 37.7, which assures us that V((f,g)) = V((g, r)) and that 
(f, g) = (g, r). We chose a very simple, 1-step problem in Example 37.8. However, 
it is clear that the method introduced in a linear algebra course for solving a linear 
system can be phrased in terms of applying a division algorithm process repeatedly to 
change a given ideal basis into one that better illuminates the geometry of the associated 
algebraic variety. 
A Single Indeterminate Illustration 
Suppose now that we want to find the variety V(/) in JR. associated with an ideal I in F[x], 
the ring of polynomials in the single indeterminate x. By Theorem 31.24, every ideal in 
F[x] is principal, so there existsf(x) E F[x] such that I= (f(x)). Thus V(/) consists of 
the zeros of a single polynomial, and {f(x)} is probably as simple a basis for I as we 
could desire. We give an example illustrating computation of such a single generator f(x) 
for I in a case where the given basis for I contains more than one polynomial. Because 
a polynomial in JR.[x] has only a finite number of zeros in R we expect two or more 
randomly selected polynomials in IR.[x] to have no common zeros, but we constructed 
the basis in our example carefully! 
37.9 Example 
Let us describe the algebraic variety V in JR. consisting of common zeros of 
f (x) = x4 + x3 -
3.x2 - Sx - 2 
and 
g(x) = x3 + 3x2 - 6x - 8. 
We want to find a new basis for (f, g) having polynomials of as small degree as possible, 
so we use the division algorithmf(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x) in Theorem 28.2, where r(x) will 
have degree at most 2. We then replace the basis {f, g) by the basis (g, r). 
x-2 
x3 + 3x2 - 6x - 8 J x4 + x3 - 3x2 -
Sx -
2 
x4 + 3x3 - 6x2 -
8x 
-2x3 +3x2 + 3x-
2 
- 2x3 - 6x2 + 12x + 16 
9x2 -
9x- 18 
Because zeros of 9x2 - 9x - 18 are the same as zeros of x2 - x - 2, we let r(x) = x2 -
x - 2, and take as new basis 
(g, r) = (x3 + 3x2 - 6x - 8,x2 - x - 2). 

302 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
By dividing g(x) by r(x) to obtain a remainder r1 (x), we will now be able to find a 
basis {r(x), r 1 (x)} consisting of polynomials of degree at most 2. 
x+ 4 
x 2 - x - 2 I x3 + 3x2 - 6x - 8 
x3 -
x2-2x 
4x 2 - 4x - 8 
4x2 - 4x - 8 
0 
Our new basis {r(x), r1 (x)} now becomes {x2 - x - 2}. Thus I= (f(x), g(x)) = 
(x2 - x - 2) = ((x - 2)(x + 1)), and we see that V = {-1, 2}. 
• 
Theorem 37.7 tells us that the common divisors of f(x) and g(x) in the preceding 
example are the same as the common divisors of r(x) and r1 (x). Because 0 = (O)r(x), 
we see that r(x) itself divides 0, so the common divisors of f(x ) and g(x) are just those 
of r(x), which, of course, include r(x) itself. Thus r(x) is called a "greatest common 
divisor" (abbreviated gcd) of/(x) and g(x). 
• EXERCISES 37 
In Exercises 1-4 find a basis for the given ideals in IR[x,y]. 
1. The set of polynomials with constant 0. 
2. The kernel of the evaluation homomorphism </J(2,3) : JR[x,y] ~
JR . 
3. The kernel of the evaluation homomorphism </J(-4,5) : IR[x,y] ~ JR . 
4. The set of all polynomials with zeros on the circle centered at the origin with radius 1. 
In Exercises 5-8, use the techniques from Examples 37.8 and 37.9 to find a simpler basis for the ideal where the 
field is JR. Describe the algebraic variety associated with the ideal. 
5. I = (x + y + z, 2x + y + 3z - 4) 
6. I = (3x + 4y + 7z - 10, 2x + 3y - 2z + l ) 
7. I = (x4 + 5x3 + 3x2 - 7x - 2, x3 + 6x2 + 3x - 10) 
8. I = (x6 - x5 - 6x4 + 3x3 - 8x2 - 4x + 3, x3 - 2x2 - 9) 
9. Describe the algebraic variety for the ideal {O} in F[x, y]. 
10. Describe the algebraic variety for the ideal { 1} in F [x, y]. 
11. Describe the algebraic variety in F for the ideal (x2 + 1) a) for F = lR and b) for F = IC. 
12. Compare the algebraic varieties for the ideals I = (x2 + 4xy + 4y2) and J = (x + 2y). 
Concepts 
13. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every ideal in F[x] has a finite basis. 
b. Every subset of JR2 is an algebraic variety. 
c. The empty subset of JR2 is an algebraic variety. 
d. Every finite subset of JR2 is an algebraic variety. 
e. Every line in JR2 is an algebraic variety. 
f. Every finite collection of lines in JR2 is an algebraic variety. 
g. A greatest common divisor of a finite number of polynomials in JR[x] (one indeterminate) can be computed 
using the division algorithm repeatedly. 

Section 38 
Grobner Bases for Ideals 
303 
h. In the context of ideals in a commutative ring with unity, elements in a basis are independent. 
i. If Risa Noetherian ring, then so is R[x]. 
j. The ideals (x,y) and (.x2,y2) are equal because they both yield the same algebraic variety, namely {(0, 0)}, 
in JR2 . 
Theory 
14. Show that if f1 .f2, · · · .fr are elements of a commutative ring R with unity, then I = {c if1 + c2f2 + · · · + 
crf, I c; ER for i = l, · · · , r) is an ideal of R. 
15. Show that iff(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x) in F[x], then the common divisors in F[x] off(x) and g(x) are the same as 
the common divisors in F[x] of g(x) and r(x). 
16. Let F be a field. Show that if Sis a nonempty subset of F", then 
/ (S) = {f(x) E F[x] lf(s) = 0 for alls E S} 
is an ideal of F[x]. 
17. Referring to Exercise 16, show that S ~ V(/(S)). 
18. Referring to Exercise 16, give an example of a subset S of JR2 such that V(/(S)) i= S. 
19. Referring to Exercise 16, show that if N is an ideal of F[x], then N ~ I (V(N)) . 
20. Referring to Exercise 16, give an example of an ideal Nin JR[x, y] such that I(V(N)) i= N. 
21. Prove for R a commutative ring with unity, R is a Noetherian ring if and only if every ideal in R has a finite 
basis. 
SECTION 38 t GROBNER BASES FOR IDEALS 
We tackle the problem of finding a nice basis for an ideal I in F[x] = F[x1, x2, • • • , x,,]. 
In view of our Section 37 illustrations for the linear and single indeterminant cases, 
it seems reasonable to try to replace polynomials in a basis by polynomials of lower 
degree, or containing fewer indeterrninates. It is crucial to have a systematic way to ac-
complish this. As you probably learned in linear algebra, when row reducing matrices, 
it is important to follow the standard order for which matrix entries you make zero. 
If you make an entry in the second column zero before dealing with the first column, 
you may have wasted your time. As a first step in our goal, we tackle this problem of 
specifying an order for polynomials in a basis. 
Ordering Power Products 
Our polynomials in F[x] have terms of the form ax/"'x;
112 
• • ·x,;
11
" where a E F. 
Let us consider a power product in F[x] to be an expression 
P = xi''' x;
112 
• • • x,;
11
" where all them; '.:: 0 in Z. 
Notice that all x; are present, perhaps some with exponent 0. Thus in F[x, y, z), we 
must write xz2 as xJ°z2 to be a power product. We want to describe a total ordering 
< on the set of all power products so that we know just what it means to say that 
P; < Pj for two power products, providing us with a notion of relative size for power 
products. We can then try to change an ideal basis in a systematic way to create one 
with polynomials having terms a;P; with as "small" power products P; as possible. We 
denote by 1 the power product with all exponents 0, and require that an ordering of 
the power products has the properties listed below. Suppose that such an ordering has 
been described and that P; 'I Pj and P; divides Pj so that Pj = PP; where I < P. From 
Property 4, we then have lP; < PP; = Pj . so P; < Pj. Thus P; divides Pj implies that 
t This section is not used in the remainder of the text. 

304 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
P; < Pj . In Exercise 28, we ask you to show by a counterexample that P; < Pj does not 
imply that P; divides Pj . 
Properties for an Ordering of Power Products 
1. 
I < P for all power products P i= 1. 
2. 
For any two power products P; and Pj, exactly one of 
P; < Pj, P; = Pj, Pj < P; holds. 
3. If P; < Pj and Pj < Pk> then P; < Pk. 
4. If P; < Pj , then PP; < PPj for any power product P. 
It can also be shown that these properties guarantee that any step-by-step process for 
modifying a finite ideal basis that does not increase the size of any maximal power 
product in a basis element and replaces at least one by something smaller at each step 
will terminate in a finite number of steps. 
In F[x] with x the only indeterminate, there is only one power product ordering, for 
by Property 1, we must have 1 < x. Multiplying repeatedly by x and using Property 4, 
we have x < x2, x2 < x 3, etc. Property 3 then shows that 1 < x < x2 < x 3 < · · · is the 
only possible order. Notice that in Example 37.9, we modified a basis by replacing basis 
polynomials by polynomials containing smaller power products. 
There are a number of possible orderings for power products in F[x] with n inde-
terminates. We present just one, the lexicographical order (denoted by "Jex"). In Jex, 
we define 
(2) 
if and only if s; < t; for the first subscript i, reading from left to right, such that s; i= t;. 
Thus in F[x,y], if we write power products in the order .X:
1y
111
, we have y = x0y' < 
x 1 yD = x and xy < xy2 • Using Jex, the order of n indeterminates is given by 1 < x11 < 
x 11_ 1 < · · · < x2 < x 1. Our reduction in Example 37 .8, where we first got rid of all "big" 
x's that we could and then the "smaller" y's, corresponded to the !ex order z < y < x, 
that is, to writing all power products in the x111y11 z! order. For the two-indeterminate case 
with y < x, the total Jex term order schematically is 
1 < y < y2 < y3 · · · < x < xy < xy2 < xy3 < · · · < x2 < x 2y < x2y2 < ... . 
In all the examples that follow we will use lexicographic ordering using a specified 
ordering of the indeterminates. 
An ordering of power products P induces an obvious ordering of terms aP of a 
polynomial in F[x], which we will refer to as a term order. From now on, given an 
ordering of power products, we consider every polynomial f in F[x] to be written in 
decreasing order of terms, so that the leading (first) term has the highest order. We 
denote by 1 t(j) the leading term off and by 1 p(j) the power product of the leading 
term. If f and g are polynomials in F[x] such that lp(g) divides lp(j), then we can 
execute a division off by g, as illustrated by the linear and one-indeterminate cases, in 
Section 37 to obtainf(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x) where I p(r) < I p(f). Note that we did not 
say that lp(r) < lp(g). We illustrate with an example. 
38.1 Example 
By division, reduce the basis {xy2,y2 -
y ) for the ideal I= (xy2,y2 -
y} in JR.[x ,y] to 
one with smaller maximum term size, assuming the order Jex with y < x. 

Section 38 
Grobner Bases for Ideals 
305 
Solution 
We see that y2 divides xy2 and compute 
x 
~ 
xy2 - xy 
xy 
Because y2 does not divide xy, we cannot continue the division. Note that lp(.xy) = xy 
is not less than lp(y2 -
y) = y2. However, we do have lp(xy) < lp(xy2). Our new basis 
for I is {xy,y2 - y}. 
... 
When dealing with more than one indeterminate, it is often easier to perform basis 
reduction by multiplying a basis polynomial g(x) by a polynomial -q(x) and adding it 
to a polynomial f(x) to obtain r(x), as we perform matrix reduction in linear algebra, 
rather than writing out the division display as we did in the preceding example. Starting 
with basis polynomials xy2 and y2 - y, we can reduce the .xy2 by multiplying y2 - y by 
- x and adding the resulting - xy2 + xy to xy2, obtaining the replacement xy for xy2. We 
can do that in our head, and write down the result directly. 
Referring again to Example 38.1, it will follow from what we state later that given 
any polynomial f(x, y) = c1(x, y)(xy) + c2(x,y)(y2 - y) in (.xy,y2 - y), either xy or y2 
will divide lp(f). (See Exercise 32.) This illustrates the defining property of a Grabner 
basis. 
38.2 Definition 
A set {g1,g2, ··· ,gr} of nonzero polynomials in F [x1,x2, · · · ,x11], with term ordering 
< ,is a Grobner basis for the ideal I = (g1, g2, · · · , gr) if and only if, for each nonzero 
f E /,there exists some i where 1 :::: i :::: r such that lp(g;) divides lp(f). 
• 
While we have illustrated the computation of a Grabner basis from a given basis 
for an ideal in Examples 37.8, 37.9, and 38.1, we have not given a specific algorithm. 
We refer the reader to Adams and Loustaunau [23]. The method consists of multiplying 
some polynomial in the basis by any polynomial in F[x] and adding the result to another 
polynomial in the basis in a manner that reduces the size of power products. In our 
illustrations, we have treated the case involving division of f(x) by g(x) where I p(g) 
divides lp(f), but we can also use the process if lp(g) only divides some other power 
product inf. For example, if two elements in a basis are xy - y3 and y2 - 1, we can 
multiply y2 - 1 by y and add it to xy - y3 , reducing xy - y3 to xy - y. Theorem 37.7 
shows that this is a valid computation. 
You may wonder how any basis {g1, g2, ···,gr } can fail to be a Grabner basis for 
I= (g1,g2, ···,gr) because, when we form an element c1g1 + c2g2 + · · · + Crgr in/, 
we see that lp(g;) is a divisor of lp(c;g;) for i = 1, 2, · · · , r. However, cancellation of 
power products can occur in the addition. We illustrate with an example. 
38.3 Example 
Consider the ideal I= (x2y - 2,xy2 - y) in JR[x,y}. The polynomials in the basis shown 
cannot be reduced further. However, the ideal I contains y(x2y - 2) - x(xy2 - y) = xy -
2y, whose leading power product xy is not divisible by either of the leading power 
products x2y or xy2 of the given basis. Thus {x2y - 2, xy2 - y} is not a Grabner basis for 
I, according to Definition 38.2. 
... 
When we run into a situation like that in Example 38.3, we realize that a Grabner 
basis must contain some polynomial with a smaller leading power product than those 
in the given basis. Let f and g be polynomials in the given basis. Just as we did in 
Example 38.3, we can multiply f and g by as small power products as possible so that 
the resulting two leading power products will be the same, the least common multiple 

306 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
(lcm) of lp(f) and lp(g), and then subtract or add with suitable coefficients from F 
so cancellation results. We denote a polynomial formed in this fashion by S(f, g). We 
state without proof a theorem that can be used to test whether a basis is a Grabner 
basis. 
38.4 Theorem 
A basis G = (gi, gz, .. . , gr} is a Grabner basis for the ideal (g I , g2, . .. , gr) if and only 
if, for all i op j, the polynomial S(g;, gj) can be reduced to zero by repeatedly dividing 
remainders by elements of G, as in the division algorithm. 
As we mentioned before, we may prefer to think of reducing S(g;, gj) by a sequence 
of operations consisting of adding (or subtracting) multiples of polynomials in G, rather 
than writing out division. 
We can now indicate how we can obtain a Grabner basis from a given basis. First, 
reduce the polynomials in the basis as far as possible among themselves. Then choose 
polynomials g; and gj in the basis, and form the polynomial S(g;, gj). See if S(g;, gj) 
can be reduced to zero as just described. If so, choose a different pair of polynomials, 
and repeat the procedure with them. If S(g;, gj ) cannot be reduced to zero as described 
above, augment the given basis with this S(g;, gj), and start all over, reducing this basis 
as much as possible. By Theorem 38.4, when every polynomial S(g;, gj) for all i op j can 
be reduced to zero using polynomials from the latest basis, we have arrived at a Grabner 
basis. We conclude with a continuation of Example 38.3. 
38.5 Example 
Continuing Example 38.3, let g 1 = x2y - 2, g2 = xy2 - y, and I = (g1, g2) in IR2. In Ex-
ample 38.3, we obtained the polynomial S(g1, g2) = xy - 2y, which cannot be reduced 
to zero using g1 and g2. We now reduce the basis {x2y - 2,xy2 - y,xy - 2y), indicating 
each step. 
{x2y - 2,xy2 - y,xy - 2y) 
{2xy- 2,xy2 - y,xy- 2y) 
{2xy - 2, 2y2 - y,xy - 2y) 
{4y - 2, 2y2 - y,xy - 2y) 
{4y- 2,0,xy-2y) 
{4y- 2,0, &x- 2y) 
{4y- 2,0, &x- I) 
augmented basis 
by adding (-x) (third) to first 
by adding (-y) (third) to second 
by adding (-2) (third) to first 
by adding (- ~) (first) to second 
by adding (-1) (first) to third 
by adding ( ! ) (first) to third 
Clearly, {y - &,x - 2) is a Grabner basis. Note that if f = y - ! and g = x - 2, then 
S(f,g) = xf - yg = (xy -
~) - (xy - 2y) = -~ + 2y, which can readily be reduced to 
zero by adding !Cx - 2) and -2(y - &). 
From the Grabner basis, we see that the algebraic variety V(/) contains only one 
point, (2, ~), in IR2 . 
.A. 
Applications 
Here we give a simple example of how a Grabner basis can be used to derive a geometric 
formula. 
38.6 Example 
Using a Grabner basis, derive the standard formula for a parabola. 
Solution 
Recall that a parabola is the set of all points in the plane that are equidistant from a 
fixed line (directrix) and a fixed point (focus). In standard form, the directrix is the line 
y = -p and the focus is the point (0,p) where p > 0. The algebraic variety defined by 
the ideal (x2 + (y - p )2 - d2 , y + p - d) gives the set of all points (xo, yo,po, do) E IR4 

Section 38 
Grobner Bases for Ideals 
307 
such that the point (x0, y0) is a distance of do from the point (0, p0) and a distance do from 
the line y = -p. We order the indeterminates by p < x < y < d and seek a Grabner 
basis. 
{-d2 + y2 - 2yp +x2 + p2,d - y- p) 
initial basis 
{-dy - dp + y2 - 2yp + x2 + p2, d - y - p) by adding (d)(second) to first 
{-dp - 3yp + x2 + p2, d - y - p} 
by adding (y)(second) to first 
{-4yp +x2,d - y- p) 
by adding (p)(second) to first 
In Exercise 33 you are asked to check that { -4 yp + x2, d - y - p} is a Grabner 
basis. Note that for any (x0, y0, p0) E R3 that is a zero of the first polynomial -4yp + x2, 
there is a real number do so that (x0 , y0, p0, do) is a zero of the second polynomial. This 
verifies the standard form of the equation of a parabola, 4py = x2. 
... 
(0, p) 
y= - p 
Care must be taken in deciding the order for the indeterminate. In Example 38.6, 
had we taken the order of the indeterminates to bed < p < x < y, the resulting Grabner 
basis would have been {- 4dp + 4p2 + x2, d - p - y), which does not directly give the 
standard form for the equation of a parabola. The reason for making the indeterminate 
d the largest is that the algorithm attempts to eliminate d from polynomials in the basis 
since the reduction process reduces the maximum-sized term. 
The algorithm for computing Grabner bases can be programmed. In fact, it is 
a built-in function on many common mathematical packages including Mathematica, 
Maple, Wolfram Alpha, and others. By carefully picking the order of the indetermi-
nates, it is possible to solve a large variety of problems using automated computations 
of Grabner bases. 
38.7 Example 
We use a software package to compute a Grabner basis that yields the equation of an 
ellipse in standard position. An ellipse in standard position is the set of all points in the 
plane so that the sum of the distances to the two foci (c, 0) and (-c, 0) is a fixed distance 
2a. We start with the basis 
{ (x - c)2 + y2 -
d~, (x + c )2 + y2 -
d~ , d 1 + d1 - 2a} 
where d1 represents the distance to focus (c, 0) and d1 represents the distance to focus 
(-c, 0). We wish to arrive at a polynomial that includes x and y as well as the parameters 
a and c that describe the shape and size of the ellipse. Therefore, we take d1 and d2 as 
the largest indeterminates. Using the order a< c < y < x < d2 < d1, a mathematical 
software package quickly computes the Grabner basis 
(a4 - a2c2 - a2x2 + c2x2 - a2y2, -a2 + ad2 - cx,a3 - ac2 - acs + cd2x - ax2 - ay2, 

308 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
The first polynomial can be written as 
a2(a2 - c2) - (a2 - c2).x2 - a2y2. 
We think of a and c as parameters and recall that in an ellipse, the parameter b > 0 is 
defined by b2 = a2 - c2. We see that the variety in IR2 defined from the ideal (a 2 b2 -
b2.x2 - a2y2) has equation 
.x2 
y2 
2 +2= 1. 
a 
b 
A graph is a finite set with elements called vertices together with a collection of 
pairs of vertices called edges or arcs. Graphs are often drawn as in Figure 38.10, which 
shows a graph with four vertices x1 ,x2, x3, X4 and four edges {x1 ,x2}, {x2, x3}, {x3,x1}, 
{x3,x4}. A coloring of a graph is an assignment of colors to the vertices in such a way 
that no two vertices in the same edge have the same color. The problem of determining 
if a graph can be colored with n colors can be restated as a question about an ideal, 
which can (at least theoretically) be answered using Grabner bases. 
38.8 Theorem 
Let G be a graph with vertex set (x1, x2 , .. . , xd. We identify each vertex with an inde-
terminate and form the ideal I ~ C[x1, x2, . .. , xk] with basis consisting of polynomials 
1 . JI 
1 . JI 
1 
. JI 
1 
h 
. h 
I 
. l .x'.'- 1 
.x'.1-2 
.x'.1-3 2 
x1 -
, ..t2 -
, ..t3 -
, ... , ..<k -
toget er wit a po ynomia ; 
+ ; 
Xj + ; 
xj + 
... + x;~
1-
2 + ~i- I for each edge in the graph. The graph G can be colored with n colors 
if and only if the algebraic variety V(/) is nonempty. 
Proof 
The proof is left for Exercise 34. 
• 
The variety V(/) in Theorem 38.8 gives all possible colorings of the graph G using 
the nth roots of unity for the colors and coloring vertex x1 with the color 1. For each 
point in V(/), the /h coordinate gives the color assigned to Xj . 
38.9 Example 
Using the graph in Figure 38.10, the basis described in Theorem 38.8 for n = 2 is 
{x1 -
l,x~ -
l ,x~ -
l,x~ - l ,x1 +x2,x2 +x3,x3 +x1,x3 +x4). 
38.10 Figure 
A Grabner basis is ( 1}. This can be determined electronically, or by noticing that 
(x1 + x2) - (x2 + x3) + (x3 + x,) = 2x, E /. 
Therefore, x1 E / , so x1 - (x1 -
1) = 1 E /. Thus the ideal is all of C[x1,x2,x3,x4], 
which has { 1} as a basis. Since the algebraic variety for ( 1) is the empty set, the graph 
cannot be colored with two colors. 
We now compute a Grabner basis when n = 3. Theorem 38.8 tells us to start with 
the basis 
(x1 -
1 ,x~ - 1,xj-
1 , x~ -
l ,xf +x1x2 +~ , x~ +x2x3 + ~,x~ +x3x1 
+xf,x~ +x3x4 +~ ). 
Using a software package, a Grabner basis with indeterminate order x1 < x2 < x3 < x4 
is 
(x, -
l ,x~ + X2 + 1, 1 + X2 + X3,X2 - X4 - X2X4 + x~) . 
Lett= -{[ + 1ibeathirdrootofunity. Wefind an element (a1, a2,a3, a4) E V(/): 
a, - 1=0 a, = 1 
a~ + a2 + 1 = 0 a2 is a third root of unity. Let a2 = s 
1 + s + a3 = 0 a3 = -1 - s = s 2 
s - a4 - sa4 +a~= o factoring, Cs - a4)(l - a4) = o. 

Section 38 
Exercises 
309 
We see that we can col or vertex 1 the col or 1, vertex 2 s, vertex 3 s 
2 , and then we can 
color vertex 4 either the color 1 or s. 
A 
There are many applications of Gri:ibner bases in mathematics, statistics, engineer-
ing, and computer science. These include controlling robot arms and automated theorem 
proving. The algorithm to compute a Gri:ibner basis is generally too long and tedious to 
be done by hand, so computers are essential. However, some larger problems are not 
feasible even on modern high-speed computers. 
• EXERCISES 38 
In Exercises I through 4, write the polynomials in ~ [x, y, z] in decreasing term order, using the order !ex for power 
products x"y''t where z < y < x. 
1. 2xy3z5 - 5x2yz3 + 7x2y2z - 3x3 
3. 3y - 7x + 10z3 - 2xy2z2 + 2x2yz2 
2. 3y2z5 - 4x + 5y3z3 - 8z7 
4. 38 - 4xz + 2yz - Sxy + 3yz3 
In Exercises 5 through 8, write the polynomials in ~ [x, y, z] in decreasing term order, using the order !ex for power 
products zm y" x' where x < y < z. 
5. The polynomial in Exercise l. 
7. The polynomial in Exercise 3. 
6. The polynomial in Exercise 2. 
8. The polynomial in Exercise 4. 
Another ordering, deglex, for power products in F[x] is defined as follows: 
if and only if either I:;~, s; < I:;~ , t;, or these two sums are equal and s; < t; for the smallest value of i such that 
s; oF t;. Exercises 9 through 13 are concerned with the order deglex. 
9. List, in increasing order, the smallest 20 power products in ~ [x,y , z] for the order deglex with power products 
x "y" zs where z < y < x. 
In Exercises I 0 through 13, write the polynomials in order of decreasing terms using the order deglex with power 
products x"y"t where z < y < x. 
10. The polynomial in Exercise l. 
11. The polynomial in Exercise 2. 
12. The polynomial in Exercise 3. 
13. The polynomial in Exercise 4. 
For Exercises 14 through 17, let power products in ~ [x, y, z] have order Jex where z < y < x. If possible, perform 
a single-step division algorithm reduction that changes the given ideal basis to one having smaller maximum term 
order. 
14. (xy2 - 2x,x2y + 4xy,xy - y2) 
16. (xyz - 3z2,x 3 + y2z3,x2yz3 + 4) 
15. (xy + y3,y3 + z,x - y4) 
17. (y2z3 + 3,y3z2 - 2z, y2z2 + 3) 
In Exercises 18 and 19, let the order of power products in ~ [w, x, y, z] be Jex with z < y < x < w. Find a Gri:ibner 
basis for the given ideal. 
18. (w + x - y + 4z - 3, 2w + x + y - 2z + 4, w + 3x - 3y + z - 5) 
19. (w - 4x + 3y - z + 2, 2w - 2x + y - 2z + 5, w -
IOx + Sy - z - 1) 
In Exercises 20 through 22, find a Grabner basis for the indicated ideal in ~ [x]. 
20. (x4 +x3 - 3x2 -4x -4,x3 + x2 -4x - 4) 
21. (x4 - 4x3 + 5x2 - 2x,x3 - x2 - 4x + 4,x3 - 3x + 2) 
22. (x5 + x2 + 2x - 5, x3 - x2 + x - 1) 
In Exercises 23 through 26, find a Grabner basis for the given ideal in ~ [x,y]. Consider the order of power products 
to be !ex with y < x . If you can, describe the corresponding algebraic variety in ~ [x, y] . 

310 
Part VII 
Commutative Algebra 
23. (x2y - x - 2,.xy + 2y - 9) 
25. (x2y + x + l ,.xy2 + y - l ) 
Concepts 
24. (x2 y + X, xy2 - y) 
26. (x2y + .xy2,xy - x) 
27. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Polynomials in a Grobner basis are linearly independent. 
b. The set { l} is a Grobner basis. 
c. The set {O) is a Grobner basis. 
d. The order one picks for the power products does not affect the resulting Grobner basis. 
e. For any total ordering of all the power products, xf > x 1. 
f. A Grobner basis can be used to determine if a graph can be colored with n colors starting with a basis 
consisting of polynomials each of degree at most n. 
g. A Grobner basis can be used to determine if a graph can be colored with n colors starting with a basis 
consisting of r + s polynomials where r is the number of vertices in the graph and sis the number of edges 
in the graph. 
h. I have computed Grobner bases before I knew what they were. 
i. Any ideal in F[x] has a unique Grobner basis. 
j . A basis for an ideal I in F[x1,xz, ... ,x11 ] is a Grobner basis if and only if each polynomial in the basis 
cannot be reduced further using the division algorithm. 
28. Let IR[x, y] be ordered by Jex. Give an example to show that P; < Pj does not imply that P; divides Pj. 
29. What other orders of the indeterminate a, c, x, y, d1, dz would you expect the equation of an ellipse to result 
from computing a Grobner basis for the ideal in Example 38.7? 
30. Use a Grobner basis to derive the formula for a hyperbola in standard position. Recall that a hyperbola in 
standard position is the set of all points in the plane whose difference in distances from (c, 0) and (- c, 0) is 
±2a. You may use a computer to compute the Grobner basis. 
31. Use a Grobner basis to show that the graph with vertex set {x1,x2,x3,x4,x5 ) and edge set {{x 1,x2}, {x2,x3}, 
{x3,x4}, {x1 ,x3}, {x 1 ,x5 ), {x5,x4)} cannot be colored with three colors, but it can be colored with four colors. 
You may use a computer to compute the Grobner basis. 
Theory 
32. Show that {.xy, y2 - y) is a Grobner basis for (.xy, y2 - y), as asserted after Example 38.1. 
33. Show that {-4yp+x2,d-y- p) is a Grobner basis for the ideal (-4yp+x2,d-y-p) as asserted in 
Example 38.6. 
34. Prove Theorem 38.8. [Hint: Think about coloring a graph with the nth roots of unity.] 

PART 
VIII 
Extension Fields 
Section 39 
Introduction to Extension Fields 
Section 40 
Algebraic Extensions 
Section 41 
t Geometric Constructions 
Section 42 
Finite Fields 
SECTION 39 
INTRODUCTION TO EXTENSION FIELDS 
Our Basic Goal Achieved 
We are now in a position to achieve our basic goal, which, loosely stated, is to show 
that every nonconstant polynomial has a zero. This will be stated more precisely and 
proved in Theorem 39.3. We first introduce some new terminology for some old ideas. 
39.1 Definition 
A field E is an extension field of a field F if F :S E. 
• 
IC 
F(x, y) 
I
/ ~ 
lR 
F(x) 
F(y) 
I 
~/ 
Q 
F 
39.2 Figure 
Thus R is an extension field of Q, and C is an extension field of both R and Q. As 
in the study of groups, it will often be convenient to use subfield diagrams to picture 
extension fields, the larger field being on top. We illustrate this in Fig. 39.2. (Recall that 
F(x) is the field of quotients constructed from F [x].) A configuration where there is just 
one single column of fields, as at the left-hand side of Fig. 39.2, is often referred to, 
without any precise definition, as a tower of fields. 
Now for our basic goal! This great and important result follows quickly and ele-
gantly from the techniques we now have at our disposal. 
t Section 41 is not required for the remainder of the text. 
311 

312 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
39.3 Theorem 
(Kronecker's Theorem) (Basic Goal) Let F be a field and letf(x) be a nonconstant 
polynomial in F[x]. Then there exists an extension field E of F and an ex E E such that 
f(ex) = 0. 
Proof By Theorem 28.21,f(x) has a factorization in F[x] into polynomials that are irreducible 
over F. Let p(x) be an irreducible polynomial in such a factorization. It is clearly suffi-
cient to find an extension field E of F containing an element ex such that p(ex) = 0. 
By Theorem 31.25, (p(x)) is a maximal ideal in F[x], so F[x]/(p(x)) is a field. We 
claim that F can be identified with a subfield of F[x]/ (p(x)) in a natural way by use of 
the map if! : F ~ F[x]/(p(x)) given by 
if!(a) =a+ (p(x)) 
for a E F. This map is one-to-one, for if if!(a) = if!(b), that is, if a+ (p(x)) = b + (p(x)) 
for some a, b E F, then (a - b) E (p(x)), so a - b must be a multiple of the polynomial 
p(x), which is of degree :'.': 1. Now a, b E F implies that a - b is in F. Thus we must 
have a - b = 0, so a = b. We defined addition and multiplication in F[x]/ (p(x)) by 
choosing any representatives, so we may choose a E (a+ (p(x)) ). Thus if! is a homo-
morphism that maps F one-to-one onto a subfield of F[x]/(p(x)). We identify F with 
{a+ (p(x)) I a E F} by means of this map if!. Thus we shall view E = F[x]/ (p(x)) as an 
extension field of F. We have now manufactured our desired extension field E of F. It 
remains for us to show that E contains a zero of p(x). 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
L
eopold Kronecker is known for his insis-
tence on constructibility of mathematical ob-
jects. As he noted, "God made the integers; all 
else is the work of man." Thus, he wanted to 
be able to construct new "domains of rational-
ity" (fields) by using only the existence of in-
tegers and indeterminates. He did not believe in 
starting with the real or complex numbers, be-
cause as far as he was concerned, those fields 
could not be determined in a constructive way. 
Hence in an 1881 paper, Kronecker created an ex-
tension field by simply adjoining to a given field 
a root ex of an irreducible nth degree polynomial 
p(x); that is, his new field consisted of expressions 
Let us set 
rational in the original field elements and his 
new root ex with the condition that p(ex) = 0. 
The proof of the theorem presented in the text 
(Theorem 39.3) dates from the twentieth century. 
Kronecker completed his dissertation in 1845 
at the University of Berlin. For many years there-
after, he managed the family business, ultimately 
becoming financially independent. He then re-
turned to Berlin, where he was elected to the 
Academy of Sciences and thus permitted to lecture 
at the university. On the retirement of Kummer, he 
became a professor at Berlin, and with Karl Weier-
strass (1815- 1897) directed the influential mathe-
matics seminar. 
ex = x + (p(x)), 
so ex EE. Consider the evaluation homomorphism <l>a : F[x] ~ E, given by Theo-
rem 27.4. If p(x) = ao + a 1x + · · · + a11.x'
1
, where a; E F, then we have 
</>a(p(x)) = ao +a, (x + (p(x))) + · · · + a11(x + (p(x)) )
11 
in E = F[x]/ (p(x)). But we can compute in F[x]/ (p(x)) by choosing representatives, and 
x is a representative of the coset ex = x + (p(x)). Therefore, 
p(ex) = (ao + a,x + · · · + a11~) + (p(x)) 
= p(x) + (p(x)) = (p(x)) = 0 

Section 39 
Introduction to Extension Fields 
313 
in F[x]/(p(x)). We have found an element a in E = F[x]/(p(x)) such thatp(a) = 0, and 
thereforef(a) = 0. 
+ 
We illustrate the construction involved in the proof of Theorem 39.3 by two 
examples. 
39.4 Example 
Let F = R, and letf(x) = x2 + 1, which is well known to have no zeros in JR. and thus 
is irreducible over JR. by Theorem 28.11. Then (x2 + 1) is a maximal ideal in JR.[x], so 
JR.[x]/(x2 + 1) is a field. Identifying r E JR. with r+ (x2 + 1) in IR.[x]/(x2 + 1), we can 
view JR. as a subfield of E = IR.[x]/(x2 + 1). Let 
a = x + (x2 + l ). 
Computing in JR.[x]/(x2 + 1), we find 
a 2 + l = (x + (x2 + 1))2 + (l + (x2 + 1)) 
= (x2 + 1) + (x2 + 1) = 0. 
Thus a is a zero of x2 + 1. We shall identify IR.[x]/ (x2 + l ) with C near the close 
of this section. 
.& 
39.5 Example 
Let F = <Ql, and consider f(x) = x4 - 5x2 + 6. This time f(x) factors in <Ql[x] into 
(x2 - 2)(x2 - 3), both factors being irreducible over <Ql, as we have seen. We can start 
with x2 -
2 and construct an extension field E of <Ql containing a such that a 2 - 2 = 0, 
or we can construct an extension field K of <Ql containing an element f3 such that 
{32 - 3 = 0. The construction in either case is just as in Example 39.4. 
.& 
Algebraic and Transcendental Elements 
As we said before, most of the rest of this text is devoted to the study of zeros of 
polynomials. We commence this study by putting an element of an extension field E of 
a field F into one of two categories. 
39.6 Definition 
An element a of an extension field E of a field F is algebraic over F if f(a ) = 0 
for some nonzero f(x) E F [x]. If a is not algebraic over F , then a is transcendental 
over F. 
• 
39.7 Example 
C is an extension field of <Ql. Since .J2 is a zero of x2 - 2, we see that .J2 is an algebraic 
element over <Ql. Also, i is an algebraic element over <Ql, being a zero of x2 + 1. 
.& 
39.8 Example 
It is well known (but not easy to prove) that the real numbers re and e are transcendental 
over <Ql. Here e is the base for the natural logarithms. 
.& 
Just as we do not speak simply of an irreducible polynomial, but rather of an ir-
reducible polynomial over F, similarly we don't speak simply of an algebraic element, 
but rather of an element algebraic over F. The following illustration shows the reason 
for this. 
39.9 Example 
The real number re is transcendental over <Ql, as we stated in Example 39.8. However, 
re is algebraic over R, for it is a zero of (x - re) E JR.[x]. 
.& 
39.10 Example 
It is easy to see that the real number JI + ,J3 is algebraic over <Ql. For if a = J 1 + ,J3, 
then a 2 = l + ,J3, so a 2 -
l = ,J3 and (a2 -
1)2 = 3. Therefore a 4 - 2a2 - 2 = 0, 
so a is a zero of x4 - 2x2 - 2, which is in <Ql[x]. 
.& 
To connect these ideas with those of number theory, we give the following 
definition. 

314 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
39.11 Definition 
An element of C that is algebraic over Q is an algebraic number. A transcendental 
number is an element of C that is transcendental over Q. 
• 
There is an extensive and elegant theory of algebraic numbers. (See the Bibliogra-
phy.) 
The next theorem gives a useful characterization of algebraic and transcendental 
elements over F in an extension field E of F. It also illustrates the importance of our 
evaluation homomorphisms c/Ja. Note that once more we are describing our concepts in 
terms of mappings. 
39.12 Theorem 
Let E be an extension field of a field F and let a E £. Let c/Ja : F[x] ~ E be the eval-
uation homomorphism of F[x ] into E such that c/Ja(a) =a for a E F and c/Ja(x) =a. 
Then a is transcendental over F if and only if c/Ja gives an isomorphism of F[x] with a 
subdomain of E, that is, if and only if c/Ja is a one-to-one map. 
Proof The element a is transcendental over F if and only if f(a) ¥: 0 for all nonzero f(x) E 
F[x], which is true (by definition) if and only if c/Jaif(x)) ¥: 0 for all nonzerof(x) E F[x], 
which is true if and only ifthe kernel of c/Ja is {O}, that is, if and only if c/Ja is a one-to-one 
~-
. 
The Irreducible Polynomial for a over F 
Consider the extension field lR of Q. We know that ../2 is algebraic over Q, being a 
zero of x2 - 2. Of course, ../2 is also a zero of x3 - 2x and of x4 -
3x2 + 2 = (x2 - 2) 
(x2 -
1). Both these other polynomials having ../2 as a zero were multiples of x2 -
2. 
The next theorem shows that this is an illustration of a general situation. This theorem 
plays a central role in our later work. 
39.13 Theorem 
Let E be a field extension of F, and let a E E be algebraic over F. Then {f(x) E 
F[x] lf(a) = 0) = (p(x) ) for some polynomial p(x) E F[x]. Furthermore, p(x) is irre-
ducible over F. 
Proof Let I= {f(x) E F[x] lf(a) = 0). Then I is the kernel of the evaluation homomorphism 
c/Ja : F[x] ~ E, which implies that I is an ideal in F[x]. By Theorem 31.24, I is a prin-
cipal ideal generated by a polynomial p(x) E F[x]. Thus I= (p(x)). 
It remains to show that p(x) is irreducible over F. The degree of p(x) is at least 1, 
which implies that p(x) is neither 0 nor a unit in F[x]. Suppose that p(x) = r(x)s(x) is 
a factorization of p(x) over the field F. Then applying the evaluation homomorphism, 
either r(a) = 0 or s(a) = 0, since Eis a field. We relabel rand s, if necessary, so that 
r(a) = 0. Then r(x) E I= (p(x)). Thus 
p(x) = r(x)s(x) = p(x)ri (x)s(x) 
for some r1 (x) E F[x]. Canceling p(x) shows that s(x) is a unit. Therefore, p(x) is irre-
ducible. 
+ 
By multiplying by a suitable constant in F, we can assume that the coefficient of the 
highest power of x appearing in p(x) of Theorem 39.13 is L Such a polynomial having 1 
as the coefficient of the highest power of x appearing is a monic polynomial. 
39.14 Corollary 
Let E be an extension field of F, and let a E E be algebraic over F. Then there is a 
unique irreducible polynomial p(x) E F[x] such that p(x) is monic, p(a) = 0, and for 
any polynomialf(x) E F[x] withf(a) = 0, p(x) dividesf(x). 
Proof Let p(x) be the polynomial of Theorem 39.13. By multiplying p(x) with an appropriate 
element of F , we can assume thatp(x) is monic. Since {f(x) lf(a) = 0) = (p(x)),p(a) = 
0 and for any f(x) E F[x] withf(a) = 0, p(x) dividesf(x). 

39.15 Definition 
39.16 Example 
Section 39 
Introduction to Extension Fields 
315 
You are asked to prove uniqueness in Exercise 38. 
• 
Let E be a field extension of a field F, and let a E E be algebraic over F. The unique 
monic polynomial p(x) in Corollary 39.14 is called the irreducible polynomial for a 
over For the minimal polynomial for a over F, and it is denoted irr(a, F). The degree 
of the polynomial irr(a, F) is called the degree of a over F and this number is denoted 
by deg(a, F). 
• 
We know that irr(,J2, IQ>)= x2 - 2. Referring to Example 39.10, we see that for a= 
J 1 + ../3 in JR, a is a zero of x4 - 2x2 - 2, which is in IQ>[x]. Since x4 -
2x2 - 2 is 
irreducible over IQ> (by Eisenstein with p = 2, or by application of the technique of 
Example 28.15), we see that 
irr( J 1 + ../3, IQ>) = x4 - 2x2 - 2. 
Thus J 1 + ../3 is algebraic of degree 4 over IQ>. 
Just as we must speak of an element a as algebraic over F rather than simply as 
algebraic, we must speak of the degree of a over F rather than the degree of a . To take 
a trivial illustration, ,J2 E lR is algebraic of degree 2 over IQ> but algebraic of degree 1 
over lR, for irr( ,J2, JR) = x - ,J2. 
The quick development of the theory here is due to the machinery of homomorphisms 
and ideal theory that we now have at our disposal. Note especially our constant use of 
the evaluation homomorphisms ef>a. 
Simple Extensions 
Let E be an extension field of a field F, and let a E E. Let ef>a be the evaluation homo-
morphism of F[x] into E with ef>a(a) =a for a E F and ef>a(x) =a, as in Theorem 27.4. 
We use two cases to define the field F(a). 
Case I 
Suppose a is algebraic over F. Then as in Corollary 39.14, the kernel 
of ef>a is (irr(a, F)) and by Theorem 31.25, (irr(a, F)) is a maximal 
ideal of F[x]. Therefore, F[x]/ (irr(a, F)) is a field and is isomorphic to 
the image ef>a [F[x]] in E. This subfield ef>a[F[x]] of Eis then the 
smallest subfield of E containing F and a . We shall denote this field 
by F(a). 
Case II Suppose a is transcendental over F. Then by Theorem 39.12, ef>a gives 
an isomorphism of F[x] with a subdomain of E. Thus in this case 
ef>a[F[x]] is not a field but an integral domain that we shall denote by 
F[a]. By Corollary 26.9, E contains a field of quotients of F[a], which 
is thus the smallest subfield of E containing F and a. As in Case I, we 
denote this field by F(a). 
39.17 Example 
Since n is transcendental over IQ>, the field IQ>(n) is isomorphic to the field IQ>(x) of 
rational functions over IQ> in the indeterminate x. Thus from a structural viewpoint, an 
element that is transcendental over a field F behaves as though it were an indeterminate 
over F. 
"' 
39.18 Definition 
An extension field E of a field F is a simple extension of F if E = F(a) for some 
a ER 
• 
Many important results appear throughout this section. We have now developed so 
much machinery that results are starting to pour out of our efficient plant at an alarming 

316 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
rate. The next theorem gives us insight into the nature of the field F(a) in the case where 
a is algebraic over F. 
39.19 Theorem 
Let E = F(a) be a simple extension of a field F with a algebraic over F. Let n = 
deg(a,F). Then every f3 E F(a) can be uniquely expressed in the form 
f3 = bo + b ,a + b2a2 + · · · + bn-1a"-1, 
where the b; are in F. 
Proof 
Let f3 E F(a). Then f3 = f(a) for some polynomialf(x) E F[x] by the definition of F[a]. 
The division algorithm says that there are unique polynomials q(x), r(x) E F[x] such that 
either r(x) = 0 or the degree of r(x) is less than n, and 
f(x) = irr(a, F)q(x) + r(x). 
Applying the evaluation homomorphism </>a, we see thatf(a) = r(a). Thus 
f3 = f(a) = r(a ) = bo + b ,a + b2a2 + · · · + b11-1a"- 1 
for some elements b; in F. 
To show uniqueness, we assume that s(x) E F[x] is any polynomial with r(a) = 
s(a), and s(x) is either zero or else its degree is less than n. Let d(x) = r(x) - s(x). 
Then d(a) = 0, and either d(x) = 0 or deg(d(x)) < n. Since the degree of the minimal 
polynomial for a over F is n, d(x) is the zero polynomial and r(x) = s(x). Thus the 
representation of f3 as 
f3 = bo + b1a + b2a2 + · · · + bn-ia"-1, 
where the b; are in F, is unique. 
We give an impressive example illustrating Theorem 39.19. 
• 
39.20 Example 
The polynomial p(x) = x2 + x + 1 in Z2[x] is irreducible over Z2 by Theorem 28. 11, 
since neither element 0 nor element 1 of Z2 is a zero of p(x). By Theorem 39.3, we 
know that there is an extension field E of Z2 containing a zero a of x2 + x + 1. By 
Theorem 39.19, Z2(a) has as elements 0 + Oa, 1 + Oa, 0 + la, and 1 + la, that is, 0, 
1, a, and 1 +a. This gives us a new finite field, of four elements! The addition and 
multiplication tables for this field are shown in Tables 39.21 and 39.22. For example, to 
compute (1 + a)(l +a) in Z2(a), we observe that since p(a) = a 2 +a+ 1 = 0, then 
Therefore, 
a 2 = -a - 1 = a+ I. 
(1 + a)(l +a) = I +a + a + a2 = I + a 2 = I + a+ I =a. 
.&. 
We can use Theorem 39.19 to fulfill our promise of Example 39.4 and show 
that ffi'.[x]/(x2 + 1) is isomorphic to the field (['. of complex numbers. We saw in 
Example 39.4 that we can view JR'.[x]/(x2 + 1) as an extension field of R Let 
39.21 Table 
39.22 Table 
+ 
0 
I 
a 
l+a 
0 
I 
a 
l+a 
0 
0 
1 
a 
l +a 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
l +a 
a 
1 
0 
1 
a 
l + a 
a 
a 
l+a 
0 
1 
a 
0 
a 
l +a 
1 
l +a 
l +a 
a 
1 
0 
l +a 
0 
l + a 
1 
a 

Section 39 
Exercises 
317 
a = x + (x2 + 1). 
Then JR(a) = JR[x]/ (x2 + 1) and consists of all elements of the form a+ ba for a, b E 
lR, by Theorem 39.19. But since a 2 + 1 = 0, we see that a plays the role of i E <C, and 
a+ ba plays the role of (a+ bi) E C. Thus JR(a):::: <C. This is the elegant algebraic 
way to construct <C from JR. 
39.23 Corollary 
Let E be an extension field of F and let a E E be algebraic over F. If deg(a, F) = n, 
then F(a) is a vector space over F with dimension n and basis {l,a,a2, .•. ,a
11
- 1}. 
Furthermore, every element fJ of F(a) is algebraic over F and deg({J, F) :'.S deg(a,F). 
Proof Since Fis a subfield of F(a), F(a) is a vector space over F. Theorem 39.19 shows that 
the set { 1, a, a2, ... , a
11 - 1} spans F(a). If 
0 = bo(l) + bla + b2a2 + · · · + b11_1a 11- 1, 
by uniqueness of the coefficients in Theorem 39 .19, each b; is 0. We have that 
{ 1, a , a2, .. . , a
11
- 1} is linearly independent over F, and therefore a basis of F(a) over 
F. Thus the dimension of F(a) over Fis n =deg( a, F). 
For any fJ E F(a), F :'.S F({J) :'.S F(a), so any set of more than n vectors in F({J) 
is not linearly independent over F. The set { 1, {J, {32 , . .. , {3
11
} either has fewer than 
n + 1 elements or else it is not linearly independent over F. In the first case, {J' = {35 
for some r ~ s and in the second case, there are elements b; E F, not all zero, such 
that 
bo(l) + b1 fJ + b2f32 + · · · + b11f3
11 = 0. 
In either case, we see that fJ is algebraic over F. Furthermore the dimension of F({J) 
over F, k, is at most n and we have 
deg({J, F) = k :'.Sn= deg(a, F). 
• 
39.24 Example 
The number i E <C has minimal polynomial x2 + 1 over lR and <C = JR(i). By Corol-
lary 39.23, for every complex number {J, deg({J, JR.) :'.S 2. This implies that every com-
plex number that is not a real number is a zero of some irreducible polynomial of degree 
two in JR[x]. Of course, this fact can also be verified using the techniques of Exam-
ple 39.10. 
.A 
• EXERCISES 39 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 5, show that the given number a E C is algebraic over Q by findingf(x) E Q[x] such that 
f(a ) = 0. 
1. l +v'i 
4. J 1 + .v2 
2. v'2 + v'3 
5. J-Vl - i 
3. 1 + i 
In Exercises 6 through 8, find irr(a, Q) and deg(a, Q) for the given algebraic number a E C. Be prepared to prove 
that your polynomials are irreducible over Q if challenged to do so. 
6. J3 - ./6 
8. v'2 + i 

318 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
In Exercises 9 through 16, classify the given a E IC as algebraic or transcendental over the given field F . If a is 
algebraic over F, find deg(a, F). 
9. a = i,F = Q 
11. a = -/JT,F = Q 
13. a = -/JT, F = Q(n) 
15. a = n 2, F = Q(n ) 
10. a = l + i, F = IR 
12. a = -/JT,F = IR 
14. a=n 2,F= Q 
16. a= n 2, F = Q(n3) 
17. Refer to Example 39.20 of the text. The polynomial x2 + x + l has a zero a in Z2(a) and thus must factor into 
a product of linear factors in (Z2(a))[x]. Find this factorization. [Hint: Divide x2 + x + I by x - a by long 
division, using the fact that a 2 =a+ I.] 
18. a. Show that the polynomial x2 + l is irreducible in Z3[x]. 
b. Let a be a zero of x2 + I in an extension field of /l3. As in Example 39.20, give the multiplication and 
addition tables for the nine elements of Z3(a), written in the order 0, I, 2, a, 2a, I +a, I + 2a, 2 +a, and 
2+ 2a . 
Concepts 
In Exercises 19 through 22, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction 
is needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
19. An element a of an extension field E of a field F is algebraic over F if and only if a is a zero of some 
polynomial. 
20. An element f3 of an extension field E of a field F is transcendental over F if and only if f3 is not a zero of any 
polynomial in F[x]. 
21. A manic polynomial in F[x] is one having all coefficients equal to I. 
22. A field E is a simple extension of a subfield F if and only if there exists some a E E such that no proper 
subfield of E contains a. 
23. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. The number Jr is transcendental over Q . 
b. IC is a simple extension of JR. 
c. Every element of a field F is algebraic over F. 
d. IR is an extension field of Q . 
e. Q is an extension field of Z2. 
f. Let a E IC be algebraic over Q of degree n. If f(a) = 0 for non zero f(x) E Q [x], then 
deg (f(x)) ~ n. 
g. Let a E IC be algebraic over Q of degree n. If f(a) = 0 for nonzero f(x) E IR[x], then 
deg (f(x)) ~ n. 
h. Every nonconstant polynomial in F[x] has a zero in some extension field of F. 
i. Every nonconstant polynomial in F[x] has a zero in every extension field of F. 
j. If x is an indeterminate, Q[n ] :::: Q [x]. 
24. We have stated without proof that Jr and e are transcendental over Q . 
a. Find a subfield F of IR such that Jr is algebraic of degree 3 over F . 
b. Find a subfield E of IR such that e2 is algebraic of degree 5 over E. 
25. a. Show that x3 + x2 + l is irreducible over Z2. 
b. Let a be a zero of x3 + x2 + l in an extension field of Z2. Show that x3 + x2 + l factors into three linear 
factors in (Z2(a ))[x] by actually finding this factorization. [Hint: Every element of Z2(a) is of the form 
ao + a1a + a1a2 
for a;= 0, I. 
Divide x3 + x2 + l by x - a by Jong division. Show that the quotient also has a zero in Z2(a) by simply 
trying the eight possible elements. Then complete the factorization.] 

Section 40 
Algebraic Extensions 
319 
26. Let E be an extension field of Z2 and let a E E be algebraic of degree 3 over Z2. Classify the groups 
(Z2(a), + ) and ((Z2(a))*, ·) according to the Fundamental Theorem of finitely generated abelian groups. As 
usual, (/Z2(a))* is the set of nonzero elements of Z2(a). 
27. Definition 39.15 defined the terms irreducible polynomial for a over F and minimal polynomial for a over 
F to mean the same polynomial. Why are both designations appropriate? 
Proof Synopsis 
28. Give a two- or three-sentence synopsis of Theorem 39.3. 
Theory 
29. Let Ebe an extension field of F, and let a, f3 E £.Suppose a is transcendental over F but algebraic over F(f3). 
Show that f3 is algebraic over F(a). 
30. Let Ebe an extension field of a finite field F, where F has q elements. Let a E Ebe algebraic over F of degree 
n. Prove that F(a) has q" elements. 
31. a. Show that there exists an irreducible polynomial of degree 3 in /Z3[x]. 
b. Show from part (a) that there exists a finite field of 27 elements. [Hint: Use Exercise 30.] 
32. Consider the prime field Zp of characteristic p f= 0. 
a. Show that, for p f= 2, not every element in Zp is a square of an element of Zp. [Hint: J 2 = (p - 1 )2 = I 
in Zp. Deduce the desired conclusion by counting.] 
b. Using part (a), show that there exist finite fields of p2 elements for every prime pin z+. 
33. Let E be an extension field of a field F and let a E E be transcendental over F. Show that every element 
of F(a) that is not in Fis also transcendental over F. 
34. Show that {a+ b( --Y2) + c( --Y2)2 I a, b, c E IQ} is a subfield of ~ by using the ideas of this section, rather than 
by a formal verification of the field axioms. [Hint: Use Theorem 39.19.] 
35. Following the idea of Exercise 31, show that there exists a field of 8 elements; of 16 elements; of 25 elements. 
36. Let F be a finite field of characteristic p. Show that every element of Fis algebraic over the prime field Zp .:::: F. 
[Hint: Let F* be the set of nonzero elements of F. Apply group theory to the group (F*, ·) to show that every 
a E F* is a zero of some polynomial in Zp[x] of the form x'' - 1.] 
37. Use Exercises 30 and 36 to show that every finite field is of prime-power order, that is, it has a prime-power 
number of elements. 
38. Prove the uniqueness of the polynomial in Corollary 39.14. 
SECTION 40 ALGEBRAIC EXTENSIONS 
Finite Extensions 
In Corollary 39.23 we saw that if E is an extension field of a field F and a E E is 
algebraic over F, then every element of F (a) is algebraic over F. In studying zeros 
of polynomials in F[x], we shall be interested almost exclusively in extensions of F 
containing only elements algebraic over F. 
40.1 Definition 
An extension field E of a field F is an algebraic extension of F if every element in E is 
algebraic over F. 
• 
40.2 Definition 
If an extension field E of a field Fis of finite dimension n as a vector space over F , then 
E is a finite extension of degree n over F. We shall let [£ : F] be the degree n of E 
over F. 
• 

320 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
To say that a field E is a finite extension of a field F does not mean that Eis a finite 
field. It just asserts that Eis a finite-dimensional vector space over F, that is, that[£ : F] 
is finite. 
We shall often use the fact that if E is a finite extension of F , then, [£ : F] = 1 if 
and only if E =F. We need only observe that by Theorem 33.18, {l} can always be 
enlarged to a basis for E over F. Thus [£ : F] = 1 if and only if E = F(l) = F. 
We show that a finite extension E of a field F must be an algebraic extension of F. 
40.3 Theorem 
A finite extension field E of a field F is an algebraic extension of F. 
Proof 
We must show that for a E £ , a is algebraic over F. By Theorem 33.18 if[£ : F] = n, 
then 
l ,a, · · · , a.
11 
cannot be linearly independent elements, so there exist a; E F such that 
ana" + · · · + a1a + ao = 0, 
and not all a; = 0. Thenf(x) = a11x
11 + · · · + a1x + ao is a nonzero polynomial in F[x], 
andf(a) = 0. Therefore, a is algebraic over F . 
+ 
We cannot overemphasize the importance of our next theorem. It plays a role in 
field theory analogous to the role of the theorem of Lagrange in group theory. While its 
proof follows easily from our brief work with vector spaces, it is a tool of incredible 
power. An elegant application of it in the section that follows shows the impossibility of 
performing certain geometric constructions with a straightedge and a compass. Never 
underestimate a theorem that counts something. 
40.4 Theorem 
If E is a finite extension field of a field F, and K is a finite extension field of E, then K 
is a finite extension of F, and 
[K: F] = [K: £][£: F]. 
Proof Let {a; Ii= 1, · · · ,n} be a basis for E as a vector space over F, and let the set 
{/3j lj = 1, · · · , m} be a basis for K as a vector space over E. The theorem will be 
proved if we can show that the mn elements a;(3j form a basis for K , viewed as a vector 
space over F. (See Fig. 40.5.) 
Let y be any element of K. Since the /3j form a basis for Kover E, we have 
Ill 
r = Lbj/3j 
j = l 
for some bj E £. Since the a; form a basis for E over F, we have 
for some aij E F . Then 
bj = L
a;p; 
i=l 
Y = t ( 
I>ija;)/3j = L
aij(a;/3j), 
j= l 
i=l 
iJ 
so the mn vectors a;{3j span Kover F. 
It remains for us to show that the mn elements a;{3j are independent over F. Suppose 
that "'E;Jc;j(a;(3j) = 0, with cij E F. Then 
t ( i>ij<X;)/3j = 0, 
j = l 
i= l 
and ("'£!'.: 1 c;p;) E £.Since the elements /3j are independent over E, we must have 

Section 40 
Algebraic Extensions 
321 
K l ""'' (Jljl 
Basis {a ;/3) 
E l 
""'''(a;} 
F 
40.5 Figure 
n 
Lc;p; = 0 
i=I 
for all j . But now the a; are independent over F, so I:7=1 c;p; = 0 implies that cu = 0 
for all i and j. Thus the a;{Jj not only span K over F but also are independent over F. 
Thus they form a basis for Kover F. 
+ 
Note that we proved this theorem by actually exhibiting a basis. It is worth remem-
bering that if {a; Ii= 1, · · · , n) is a basis for E over F and {{Jj lj = 1, · · · , m) is a basis 
for Kover E, for fields F:::: E:::: K , then the set {a;{Jj} of mn products is a basis for K 
over F. Figure 40.5 gives a diagram for this situation. We shall illustrate this further in 
a moment. 
40.6 Corollary If F; is a field for i = 1, · · · , rand F;+1 is a finite extension of F;, then Fr is a finite 
extension of F1, and 
[Fr : F1] = [Fr : Fr-1J[Fr- I : Fr-2] . .. [F2 : Fil 
Proof 
The proof is a straightforward extension of Theorem 40.4 by induction. 
• 
40.7 Corollary If Eis an extension field of F , a EE is algebraic over F, and f3 E F(a), then deg({J, F) 
divides deg(a, F). 
Proof 
By Corollary 39.23, deg(a, F) = [F(a) : F] and deg({J, F) = [F(f3) : F]. We have F S 
F(f3) :::: F(a), so by Corollary 40.6 [F(f3): F] divides [F(a) : F]. 
+ 
The following example illustrates a type of argument one often makes using Theo-
rem 40.4 or its corollaries. 
40.8 Example 
By Corollary 40.7, there is no element of <Ql( J2) that is a zero of x3 - 2. Note that 
deg( h. <Ql) = 2, while a zero of x3 - 2 is of degree 3 over <Ql, but 3 does not divide 2 . 
... 
Let E be an extension field of a field F, and let a 1, a2 be elements of E, not 
necessarily algebraic over F. By definition, F(a1) is the smallest extension field of 
F in E that contains a 1. Similarly, (F(a1))(a2) can be characterized as the smallest 
extension field of F in E containing both a 1 and a2. We could equally have started 
with a2, so (F(a1))(a2) = (F(a2))(a1). We denote this field by F(a1,a2). Similarly, for 
a; EE, F(a1, · · · , an) is the smallest extension field of Fin E containing all the a; for 
i = 1, · · · , n. We obtain the field F(a1, · · · , an) from the field F by adjoining to F the 
elements a; in E. Exercise 51 of Section 22 shows that, analogous to an intersection 
of subgroups of a group, an intersection of subfields of a field E is again a subfield 
of E. Thus F(a1, · · · , an) can be characterized as the intersection of all subfields of E 
containing F and all the a; for i = 1, · · · , n. 

322 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
40.9 Example 
Consider Ql( .J2). Corollary 39.23 shows that { 1, .J2} is a basis for Ql( .J2) over Ql. Using 
the technique demonstrated in Example 39.10, we can easily discover that .J2 + ,J3 is 
a zero of x4 -
10.x2 + 1. By the method demonstrated in Example 28.15, we can show 
that this polynomial is irreducible in Ql[x]. Thus irr( .J2 + ,J3, Ql) = x4 -
10.x2 + 1, so 
[Ql( .J2 + ,J3) : Ql] = 4. Thus ( .J2 + ,J3) </. Ql( .J2), so ,J3 </. Ql( .J2). Consequently, 
{l,-J3} is a basis for Ql(.J2,,J3) = (Ql(.J2))(,J3) over Ql(.J2). The proof of Theo-
rem 40.4 (see the comment following the theorem) then shows that { 1, .J2, ,J3, J6} 
is a basis for Ql( .J2, ,J3) over Ql. 
A 
40.10 Example 
Let 21/3 be the real cube root of 2 and 2112 be the positive square root of 2. Then 
2112 <f. Ql(2113) because deg(2112, Ql) = 2 and 2 is not a divisor of 3 = deg(2113,Ql). 
Thus [((1!(2113,2112) : Ql(2113)] = 2. Hence (1 ,2113, 2213} is a basis for Ql(2113) over Ql 
and (1, 2112} is a basis for Ql(21/3, 2112) over Ql(2113). Furthermore, by Theorem 40.4 
(see the comment following the theorem), 
{ 1, 2112, i1/3, 25/6, 22/3, 27/6} 
is a basis for Ql(2112, 2113) over Ql. Because 2716 = 2(2116), we have 2116 E Ql(2112, 2113). 
Now 2116 is a zero of x6 - 2, which is irreducible over Ql, by Eisenstein's criterion, with 
p = 2. Thus 
and by Theorem 40.4 
6 = [Ql(21/2' i1 /3) : Ql] = [Ql(i/2' i1/3) : Ql(21/6)][Ql(i1/6) : Ql] 
= [Ql(21/2, i113): Ql(21/6)](6). 
Therefore, we must have 
[Ql(i/2, i /3): Ql(21/6)] = 1, 
so Ql(2112, 2113) = Ql(2116), by the comment preceding Theorem 40.3. 
Example 40.10 shows that it is possible for an extension F(a 1, · · · , a,,) of a field F 
to be actually a simple extension, even though n > I. 
Let us characterize extensions of F of the form F(a1, · · · , a 11) in the case that all 
the a; are algebraic over F. 
40.11 Theorem 
Let Ebe an algebraic extension of a field F. Then there exist a finite number of elements 
a 1, · · · , a,, in E such that E = F(a1, · · · , a,,) if and only if E is a finite-dimensional 
vector space over F, that is, if and only if Eis a finite extension of F. 
Proof 
Suppose that E = F(a1 , · · · , a 11). Since E is an algebraic extension of F, each a; is 
algebraic over F, so each a; is algebraic over every extension field of Fin E. Thus F(a1) 
is algebraic over F, and in general, F(a1, · · · ,a1) is algebraic over F(a;, · · · ,a1_1) for 
j = 2, · · · , n. Corollary 40.6 applied to the sequence of finite extensions 
F,F(a1),F(a1 ,a2), · · · ,F(a1,- · · ,a11) = E 
then shows that E is a finite extension of F. 
Conversely, suppose that E is a finite algebraic extension of F. If [E : F] = I, 
then E = F(l) = F , and we are done. If E f= F , let a 1 EE, where a 1 <f. F. Then 
[F(a1) : F] > 1. If F(a1) = E, we are done; if not, let a1 E E, where a1 </. F(a1). Con-
tinuing this process, we see from Theorem 40.4 that since [E : F] is finite, we must 
arrive at a,, such that 
F(a1, · ·· , a,,)= E. 
• 

Section 40 
Algebraic Extensions 
323 
Algebraically Closed Fields and Algebraic Closures 
We have not yet observed that if E is an extension of a field F and a, f3 E E are al-
gebraic over F, then so are a + {3, af3, a -
{3, and a / {3, if f3 # 0. This follows from 
Theorem 40.3 and is also included in the following theorem. 
40.12 Theorem 
Let E be an extension field of F . Then 
FE = {a EE I a is algebraic over F ) 
is a subfield of E, the algebraic closure of Fin E. 
Proof 
Let a , f3 Eh. Then Theorem 40.11 shows that F(a, /3) is a finite extension of F, and by 
Theorem 40.3 every element of F(a, /3) is algebraic over F, that is, F(a, /3) ~ FE . Thus 
h contains a + {3, af3, a - {3, and also contains a / f3 for f3 # 0, so FE is a subfield of E . • 
40.13 Corollary 
The set of all algebraic numbers forms a field. 
Proof 
Proof of this corollary is immediate from Theorem 40.12, because the set of all algebraic 
numbers is the algebraic closure of <Ql in C. 
+ 
It is well known that the complex numbers have the property that every nonconstant 
polynomial in C[x] has a zero in <C. This is known as the Fundamental Theorem of 
Algebra. An analytic proof of this theorem is given in Theorem 40.18. We now give a 
definition generalizing this important concept to other fields. 
40.14 Definition 
A field F is algebraically closed if every nonconstant polynomial in F[x] has a zero 
in F. 
• 
Note that a field F can be the algebraic closure of Fin an extension field E without 
F being algebraically closed. For example, <Ql is the algebraic closure of <Ql in <Ql(x), but 
<Ql is not algebraically closed because x2 + 1 has no zero in <Ql. 
The next theorem shows that the concept of a field being algebraically closed can 
also be defined in terms of factorization of polynomials over the field. 
40.15 Theorem 
A field F is algebraically closed if and only if every nonconstant polynomial in F[x] 
factors in F[x] into linear factors. 
Proof 
Let F be algebraically closed, and let f(x) be a nonconstant polynomial in F[x] 
Then f(x) has a zero a E F. By Corollary 28.4, x - a is a factor of f(x), so f(x) = 
(x - a)g(x). Then if g(x) is nonconstant, it has a zero b E F, and we have f(x) = 
(x - a)(x - b)h(x). Continuing, we get a factorization off(x) in F[x] into linear factors. 
Conversely, suppose that every nonconstant polynomial of F[x] has a factorization 
into linear factors. If ax - b is a linear factor off(x), then b/ a is a zero off(x). Thus F 
is algebraically closed. 
+ 
40.16 Corollary 
An algebraically closed field F has no proper algebraic extensions, that is, no algebraic 
extensions E with F < E. 
Proof 
Let Ebe an algebraic extension of F, so F .'.SE. Then if a EE, we have irr(a, F) = 
x - a, by Theorem 40.15, since Fis algebraically closed. Thus a E F, and we must 
haveF =E. 
+ 
In a moment we shall show that just as there exists an algebraically closed extension 
<C of the real numbers R for any field F there exists similarly an algebraic extension 
F of F , with the property that F is algebraically closed. Naively, to find F we proceed 

324 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
as follows. If a polynomialf(x) in F[x] has no zero in F, then adjoin a zero a of such an 
f(x) to F, thus obtaining the field F(a). Theorem 39.3, Kronecker's theorem, is strongly 
used here, of course. If F(a) is still not algebraically closed, then continue the process 
further. The trouble is that, contrary to the situation for the algebraic closure C of IR, 
we may have to do this a (possibly large) infinite number of times. It can be shown (see 
Exercises 33 and 36) that ij is isomorphic to the field of all algebraic numbers, and that 
we cannot obtain ij from Q by adjoining a finite number of algebraic numbers. We shall 
have to first discuss some set-theoretic machinery, Zorn 's lemma, in order to be able to 
handle such a situation. This machinery is a bit complex, so we are putting the proof 
under a separate heading. The existence theorem for F is very important, and we state 
it here so that we will know this fact, even if we do not study the proof. 
40.17 Theorem 
Every field F has an algebraic closure, that is, an algebraic extension F that is alge-
braically closed. 
The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra stating that C is an algebraically closed field 
is well known. Interestingly, the simplest and shortest proofs of the Fundamental The-
orem of Algebra are not algebraic proofs. There are much shorter and easier-to-follow 
proofs using either analysis or topology. However, behind both the analytical and the 
topological proofs lies a significant amount of machinery, so perhaps comparing the 
proofs is not completely fair. At any rate, we include a short proof for students who 
have studied functions of a complex variable and are familiar with Liouville's Theorem. 
40.18 Theorem 
(Fundamental Theorem of Algebra) The field C of complex numbers is an alge-
braically closed field. 
Proof 
Let the polynomialf(z) E C[z] have no zero in C. Then l/f(z) gives an entire function; 
that is, I /f(z) is analytic everywhere. Also if f(z) rf; C, lim1zl-->oo lf(z)I = oo, so lim1zl-->oo 
11/f(z)I = 0. Thus l/f(z) must be bounded in the plane. Hence by Liouville's theorem 
of complex function theory, 1 /f(z) is constant, and thus f(z) is constant. Therefore, a 
nonconstant polynomial in C [z] must have a zero in C, so C is algebraically closed . • 
Proof of the Existence of an Algebraic Closure 
We shall prove that every field has an algebraic extension that is algebraically closed. 
Mathematics students should have the opportunity to see some proof involving the Ax-
iom of Choice by the time they finish college. This is a natural place for such a proof. 
We shall use an equivalent form, Zorn's lemma, of the Axiom of Choice. To state Zorn's 
lemma, we have to give a set-theoretic definition. 
40.19 Definition 
A partial ordering of a set S is given by a relation ::: defined for certain ordered pairs 
of elements of S such that the following conditions are satisfied: 
1. 
a ::: a for all a E S (reflexive law). 
2. If a ::: b and b ::: a, then a = b (antisymmetric law). 
3. If a ::: b and b ::: c, then a ::: c (transitive law). 
• 
In a partially ordered set, not every two elements need be comparable; that is, for 
a, b E S, we need not have either a ::: b or b ::: a. As usual, a < b denotes a ::: b but 
a ofa b. 
A subset T of a partially ordered set S is a chain if every two elements a and b 
in T are comparable, that is, either a ::: b or b ::: a (or both). An element u E S is an 

Section 40 
Algebraic Extensions 
325 
upper bound for a subset A of partially ordered set S if a ::O u for all a E A. Finally, an 
element m of a partially ordered set Sis maximal if there is no s E S such that m < s. 
40.20 Example 
The collection of all subsets of a set forms a partially ordered set under the relation ::O 
given by~. For example, if the whole set is JR., we have Z ~ <Ql. Note, however, that for 
Z and <Q+, neither Z ~ <Q+ nor <Q+ ~ Z. 
.&. 
40.21 Zorn's Lemma If Sis a partially ordered set such that every chain in S has an upper bound in S, then S 
has at least one maximal element. 
We do not prove Zom's lemma. Instead we point out that it can be shown that Zorn's 
lemma is equivalent to the Axiom of Choice. Thus we are really taking Zorn's lemma 
here as an axiom for our set theory. Refer to the literature for a statement of the Axiom 
of Choice and a proof of its equivalence to Zorn's lemma. (See Edgerton [47].) 
Zorn's lemma is often useful when we want to show the existence of a largest 
or maximal structure of some kind. If a field F has an algebraic extension F that is 
algebraically closed, then F will certainly be a maximal algebraic extension of F, for 
since F is algebraically closed, it can have no proper algebraic extensions. 
The idea of our proof of Theorem 40.17 is very simple. Given a field F, we shall 
first describe a class of algebraic extensions of F that is so large that it must contain 
(up to isomorphism) any conceivable algebraic extension of F. We then define a partial 
ordering, the ordinary subfield ordering, on this class, and show that the hypotheses 
of Zorn's lemma are satisfied. By Zom's lemma, there will exist a maximal algebraic 
extension F of F in this class. We shall then argue that, as a maximal element, this 
extension F can have no proper algebraic extensions, so it must be algebraically closed. 
Our proof differs a bit from the one found in many texts. We like it because it uses 
no algebra other than that derived from Theorems 39.3 and 40.4. Thus it throws into 
sharp relief the tremendous strength of both Kronecker's theorem and Zom's lemma. 
The proof looks long, but only because we are writing out every little step. To the 
professional mathematician, the construction of the proof from the information in the 
preceding paragraph is a routine matter. This proof was suggested to the author during 
his graduate student days by a fellow graduate student, Norman Shapiro, who also had 
a strong preference for it. 
We are now ready to carry out our proof of Theorem 40.17, which we restate here. 
40.22 Restated Theorem 40.17 Every field F has an algebraic closure F. 
Proof 
It can be shown in set theory that given any set, there exists a set with strictly more 
elements. Suppose we form a set 
A = {wf,i If E F[x]; i = 0, · · · , (degree!)} 
that has an element for every possible zero of any f(x) E F [x]. Let Q be a set with strictly 
more elements than A. Replacing Q by Q U F if necessary, we can assume F c Q. 
Consider all possible fields that are algebraic extensions of F and that, as sets, consist 
of elements of Q. One such algebraic extension is F itself. If E is any extension field 
of F , and if y E E is a zero f(x) E F[x] for y {; F and deg(y , F) = n, then renaming y 
by w for w E Q and w {; F, and renaming elements a0 + a 1 y + · · · + a,,_ 1 y
11 - 1 of F(y) 
by distinct elements of Q as the a; range over F, we can consider our renamed F(y ) to 
be an algebraic extension field F(w) of F , with F(w) c Q andf(w) = 0. The set Q has 
enough elements to form F(w), since Q has more than enough elements to provide n 
different zeros for each element of each degree n in any subset of F[x]. 
All algebraic extension fields Ej of F, with Ej ~ Q, form a set 
S = {Ej lj E J} 

326 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he Axiom of Choice, although used implicitly 
in the 1870s and 1880s, was first stated explic-
itly by Ernst Zermelo in 1904 in connection with 
his proof of the well-ordering theorem, the result 
that for any set A, there exists an order-relation < 
such that every nonempty subset B of A contains 
a least element with respect to <. Zermelo's Ax-
iom of Choice asserted that, given any set M and 
the set S of all subsets of M, there always exists a 
"choice" function, a function f : S --+ M such that 
f(M') E M' for every M' in S. Zermelo noted, in 
fact, that "this logical principle cannot ... be re-
duced to a still simpler one, but it is applied with-
out hesitation everywhere in mathematical deduc-
tion." A few years later he included this axiom in 
his collection of axioms for set theory, a collection 
that was slightly modified in 1930 into what is now 
called Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory, the axiom sys-
tem generally used today as a basis of that theory. 
Zorn's lemma was introduced by Max Zorn 
(1906-1993) in 1935. Although he realized that it 
was equivalent to the well-ordering theorem (itself 
equivalent to the Axiom of Choice), he claimed that 
his lemma was more natural to use in algebra be-
cause the well-ordering theorem was somehow a 
"transcendental" principle. Other mathematicians 
soon agreed with his reasoning. The lemma ap-
peared in 1939 in the first volume of Nicolas 
Bourbaki's Elements de Mathematique: Les Struc-
tures Fondamentales de / 'Analyse. It was used 
consistently in that work and quickly became an 
essential part of the mathematician's toolbox. 
that is partially ordered under our usual subfield inclusion :::::. One element of S is F 
itself. The preceding paragraphs shows that if F is far away from being algebraically 
closed, there will be many fields E1 in S. 
Let T = {Ej,} be a chain in S, and let W = UkEJ,· We now make W into a field. Let 
a, f3 E W. Then there exist E1,, Eh E S, with a E E1, and f3 E Eh. Since T is a chain, 
one of the fields E1, and Eh is a subfield of the other, say E1, ::::: Eh . Then a, f3 E E1,, and 
we use the field operations of Eh to define the sum of a and f3 in W as (a + {3) E Eh 
and, likewise, the product as (af3) E Eh . These operations are well defined in W; they 
are independent of our choice of Eh, since if a, f3 E Eh also, for Eh in T, then one of the 
fields Eh and Eh is a subfield of the other, since T is a chain. Thus we have operations 
of addition and multiplication defined on W. 
All the field axioms for W under these operations now follow from the fact that 
these operations were defined in terms of addition and multiplication in fields. Thus, 
for example, 1 E F serves as multiplicative identity in W, since for a E W, if 1, a E EJ,, 
then we have la =a in Ej,. so la = a in W, by definition of multiplication in W. As 
further illustration, to check the distributive laws, let a, {3, y E W. Since T is a chain, 
we can find one field in T containing all three elements a , {3, and y, and in this field the 
distributive laws for a, {3, and y hold. Thus they hold in W. Therefore, we can view W 
as a field, and by construction, E1, ::::: W for every Ej, E T. 
If we can show that W is algebraic over F , then W E S will be an upper bound for 
T. But if a E W, then a E E1, for some E1, in T, so a is algebraic over F. Hence W is 
an algebraic extension of F and is an upper bound for T. 
The hypotheses of Zorn's lemma are thus fulfilled, so there is a maximal element F 
of S. We claim that Fis algebraically closed. Letf(x) E F[x], wheref(x) f/:. F. Suppose 
thatf(x) has no zero in F. Since Q has many more elements than F has, we can take 
w E Q, where w f/:. F, and form a field F(w) <; Q, with w a zero ofj(x), as we saw in 
the first paragraph of this proof. Let f3 be in F(w). Then by Theorem 39.19, f3 is a zero 
of a polynomial 
g(x) = ao + a 1x + · · · + a,,x' 

Section 40 
Exercises 
327 
in F[x], with a; E F, and hence each a; is algebraic over F. Then by Theorem 40.11 the 
field F(ao, · · · , a 11 ) is a finite extension of F, and since f3 is algebraic over F(ao, · · · , a 11 ), 
we also see that F(a0 , · · · , a 11 , {3) is a finite extension over F(a0, · · · , a,,). Theorem 40.4 
then shows that F(a0 , · · · , a 11 , {3) is a finite extension of F, so by Theorem 40.3, f3 is 
algebraic over F. Hence F(w) ES and F < F(w), which contradicts the choice of Fas 
maximal in S. Thusf(x) must have had a zero in F, so Fis algebraically closed. 
+ 
The mechanics of the preceding proof are routine to the professional mathemati-
cian. Since it may be the first proof that we have ever seen using Zorn's lemma, we 
wrote the proof out in detail. 
• EXERCISES 40 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 13, find the degree and a basis for the given field extension. Be prepared to justify your 
answers. 
1. Q( .J2) over Q 
3. Q( .J2, .,/3, v'J8) over Q 
S. Q( .J2, --Yi) over Q 
7. Q(.J2../3) over Q 
9. Q(--12, .W, .v24) over Q 
11. Q(.J2 + .,/3) over Q(../3) 
13. Q( .J2, .,/6 + v'JO) over Q( .,/3 + .J5) 
Concepts 
2. Q(.J2, ../3) over Q 
4. Q(--12, .,/3) over Q 
6. Q( .J2 + .,/3) over Q 
8. Q( .J2, 0) over Q 
10. Q( .J2, ../6) over Q( ../3) 
12. Q(.J2, .,/3) over Q(.J2 + .,/3) 
In Exercises 14 through 17, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction 
is needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
14. An algebraic extension of a field Fis a field F(a 1, a2, · · · , a 11 ) where each a; is a zero of some polynomial in 
F[x]. 
15. A finite extension field of a field F is one that can be obtained by adjoining a finite number of elements to F. 
16. The algebraic closure h of a field F in an extension field E of F is the field consisting of all elements of E 
that are algebraic over F. 
17. A field Fis algebraically closed if and only if every polynomial has a zero in F. 
18. Show by an example that for a proper extension field E of a field F, the algebraic closure of F in E need not 
be algebraically closed. 
19. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. If a field E is a finite extension of a field F, then Eis a finite field. 
b. Every finite extension of a field is an algebraic extension. 
c. Every algebraic extension of a field is a finite extension. 
d. The top field of a finite tower of finite extensions of fields is a finite extension of the bottom field. 
e. Q is its own algebraic closure in IR, that is, Q is algebraically closed in JR. 
f. <C is algebraically closed in <C(x), where x is an indeterminate. 
g. <C(x) is algebraically closed, where x is an indeterminate. 
h. The field <C(x) has no algebraic closure, since <C already contains all algebraic numbers. 
i. An algebraically closed field must be of characteristic 0. 
j . If E is an algebraically closed extension field of F, then Eis an algebraic extension of F. 

328 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
Proof Synopsis 
20. Give a one-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 40.3. 
21. Give a one- or two-sentence synopsis of the proof of Theorem 40.4. 
Theory 
22. Let (a + bi) E C where a, b E lR and b f. 0. Show that C = JR(a +bi). 
23. Show that if Eis a finite extension of a field F and [£ : F] is a prime number, then Eis a simple extension of 
F and, indeed, E = F(a) for every a E E not in F. 
24. Prove that x2 - 3 is irreducible over Q(--Y2). 
25. What degree field extensions can we obtain by successively adjoining to a field F a square root of an element 
of F not a square in F, then a square root of some nonsquare in this new field, and so on? Argue from this 
that a zero of x14 - 3x2 + 12 over Q can never be expressed as a rational function of square roots of rational 
functions of square roots, and so on, of elements of Q. 
26. Let E be a finite extension field of F. Let D be an integral domain such that F ~ D ~ E. Show that D is a field. 
27. Prove in detail that Q(.J3 + ./?) = Q(.J3, ./?). 
28. Generalizing Exercise 27, show that if Ja + ../bf. 0, then Q(Ja + ../b) = Q(Ja, ../b) for all a and b in Q. 
[Hint: Compute (a - b)/(Ja + ../b).] 
29. Let E be a finite extension of a field F, and let p(x) E F [x] be irreducible over F and have degree that is not a 
divisor of [E: F] . Show that p(x) has no zeros in E. 
30. Let E be an extension field of F. Let a E E be algebraic of odd degree over F. Show that a 2 is algebraic of 
odd degree over F, and F(a) = F(a2) . 
31. Show that if F, E, and K are fields with F :S E :S K, then K is algebraic over F if and only if E is algebraic 
over F , and K is algebraic over E. (You must not assume the extensions are finite.) 
32. Let E be an extension field of a field F. Prove that every a E E that is not in the algebraic closure FE of F in E 
is transcendental over fte. 
33. Let E be an algebraically closed extension field of a field F. Show that the algebraic closure Fe of F in E is 
algebraically closed. (Applying this exercise to C and Q, we see that the field of all algebraic numbers is an 
algebraically closed field.) 
34. Show that if Eis an algebraic extension of a field F and contains all zeros in F of every f(x) E F[x], then E is 
an algebraically closed field. 
35. Show that no finite field of odd characteristic is algebraically closed. (Actually, no finite field of characteristic 
2 is algebraically closed either.) [Hint: By counting, show that for such a finite field F, some polynomial 
x2 - a, for some a E F, has no zero in F. See Exercise 32, Section 39.] 
36. Prove that, as asserted in the text, the algebraic closure of Q in C is not a finite extension of Q. 
37. Argue that every finite extension field of lR is either lR itself or is isomorphic to C. 
38. Use Zorn's lemma to show that every proper ideal of a ring R with unity is contained in some maximal ideal. 
SECTION 41 
t GEOMETRIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
In this section we digress briefly to give an application demonstrating the power of 
Theorem 40.4. For a more detailed study of geometric constructions, you are referred 
to Courant and Robbins [ 44, Chapter III]. 
In Euclid's Elements, geometry is approached from an axiomatic point of view. The 
first three axioms state that a line segment can be drawn between any two given points, 
t This section is used only briefly in Section 48. 

Section 41 
Geometric Constructions 
329 
a line segment can be extended indefinitely to form a line, and a circle can be drawn 
centered at any given point with any given radius. A straightedge and a compass are ob-
jects that can accomplish the tasks set out in these axioms. A natural question asked by 
the ancient Greek geometers was exactly which points and configurations can be con-
structed using only a compass and a straightedge. They found many constructions that 
are well known today including bisecting angles, bisecting line segments, and trisecting 
line segments. Trisecting an arbitrary angle eluded mathematicians for well over 2000 
years before field theory was developed and it was proven that there are some angles 
that are impossible to trisect using only a straightedge and compass. We shall discuss 
the impossibility of trisecting an angle and other classical questions. 
Constructible Numbers 
Let us imagine that we are given only a single line segment that we shall define to be 
one unit in length. A real number a is constructible if we can construct a line segment 
of length la I in a finite number of steps from this given segment of unit length by using 
a straightedge and a compass. 
The rules of the game are pretty strict. We suppose that we are given just two 
points at the moment, the endpoints of our unit line segment, Jet us suppose that they 
correspond to the points (0, 0) and (1, 0) in the Euclidean plane. We are allowed to draw 
a line only with our straightedge through two points that we have already located. Thus 
we can start by using the straightedge and drawing the line through (0, 0) and (1, 0). 
We are allowed to open our compass only to a distance between points we have already 
found. Let us open our compass to the distance between (0, 0) and (1, 0). We can then 
place the point of the compass at (1, 0) and draw a circle of radius 1, which passes 
through the point (2, 0). Thus we now have located a third point, (2, 0). Continuing in 
this way, we can locate points (3, 0), (4, 0), (-1, 0), (-2, 0), and so on. Now open the 
compass the distance from (0, 0) to (0, 2), put the point at (1, 0), and draw a circle of 
radius 2. Do the same with the point at (- 1, 0). We have now found two new points, 
where these circles intersect, and we can put our straightedge on them to draw what 
we think of as the y-axis. Then opening our compass to the distance from (0, 0) to ( 1, 
0), we draw a circle with center at (0, 0) and locate the point (0, 1) where the circle 
intersects the y-axis. Continuing in this fashion, we can locate all points (x, y) with 
integer coordinates in any rectangle containing the point (0, 0). Without going into more 
detail, it can be shown that it is possible, among other things, to erect a perpendicular to 
a given line at a known point on the line, and find a line passing through a known point 
and parallel to a given line. Our first result is the following theorem. 
41.1 Theorem If a and f3 are constructible real numbers, then so are a+ {3, a - f3,af3 , and a /{3, if 
f3 f 0. 
Proof 
We are given that a and f3 are constructible, so there are line segments of lengths la I and 
I f3 I available to us. For a, f3 > 0, extend a line segment of length a with the straightedge. 
Start at one end of the original segment of length a, and Jay off on the extension the 
length f3 with the compass. This constructs a line segment of length a + f3; a -
f3 is 
similiarly constructible (see Fig. 41.2). If a and f3 are not both positive, an obvious 
f3 
a+f3 
a-{3 
f3 
41.2 Figure 

330 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
breakdown into cases according to their signs shows that a + f3 and a -
f3 are still 
constructible. 
The construction of af3 is indicated in Fig. 41.3. We shall let OA be the line segment 
from the point 0 to the point A, and shall let I OA I be the length of this line segment. If 
OA is of length lal, construct a line l through 0 not containing OA. (Perhaps, if 0 is at 
(0, 0) and A is at (a, 0), you use the line through (0, 0) and (4, 2).) Then find the points 
P and Bon l such that OP is of length 1 and OB is of length lf31- Draw PA and construct 
l' through B, parallel to PA and intersecting OA extended at Q. By similar triangles, we 
have 
1 
lfJ I 
lal 
IOQI' 
so OQ is of length laf31-
41.3 Figure 
Finally, Fig. 41.4 shows that a / f3 is constructible if f3 f=. 0. Let OA be of length la I, 
and construct l through 0 not containing OA. Then find B and Pon l such that OB is of 
length lf31 and OP is of length L Draw BA and construct l' through P, parallel to BA, and 
intersecting OA at Q. Again by similar triangles, we have 
IOQI 
so OQ is of length la/ f31-
• 
41.4 Figure 
41.5 Corollary 
The set of all constructible real numbers forms a subfield F of the field of real numbers. 
Proof 
Proof of this corollary is immediate from Theorem 41.1. 
• 
Thus the field F of all constructible real numbers contains <Q, the field of rational 
numbers, since <Q is the smallest subfield of JR. 

Section 41 
Geometric Constructions 
331 
From now on, we proceed analytically. We can construct any rational number. Re-
garding our given segment 
o __ l 
of length 1 as the basic unit on an x-axis, we can locate any point (q1, q2 ) in the plane 
with both coordinates rational. Any further point in the plane that we can locate by using 
a compass and a straightedge can be found in one of the following three ways: 
and 
1. as an intersection of two lines, each of which passes through two known 
points having rational coordinates, 
2. as an intersection of a line that passes through two points having rational 
coordinates and a circle whose center has rational coordinates and whose 
radius is rational. 
3. as an intersection of two circles whose centers have rational coordinates and 
whose radii are rational. 
Equations of lines and circles of the type discussed in 1, 2, and 3 are of the form 
ax+by+c = 0 
x2 + y2 + dx + ey + f = 0, 
where a, b, c, d, e, andf are all in IQ!. Since in Case 3 the intersection of two circles with 
equations 
and 
is the same as the intersection of the first circle having equation 
x
2 + y2 + dix + eiy + fi = 0, 
and the line (the common chord) having equation 
we see that Case 3 can be reduced to Case 2. For Case 1, a simultaneous solution of 
two linear equations with rational coefficients can only lead to rational values of x and 
y, giving us no new points. However, finding a simultaneous solution of a linear equa-
tion with rational coefficients and a quadratic equation with rational coefficients, as in 
Case 2, leads, upon substitution, to a quadratic equation. Such an equation, when solved 
by the quadratic formula, may have solutions involving square roots of numbers that are 
not squares in IQ!. 
In the preceding argument, nothing was really used involving IQ! except field ax-
ioms. If H is the smallest field containing those real numbers constructed so far, the 
argument shows that the "next new number" constructed lies in a field H (.ja) for some 
a E H, where a > 0. We have proved half of our next theorem. 
41.6 Theorem 
The field F of constructible real numbers consists precisely of all real numbers that we 
can obtain from IQ! by taking square roots of positive numbers a finite number of times 
and applying a finite number of field operations. 
Proof 
We have shown that F can contain no numbers except those we obtain from IQ! by tak-
ing a finite number of square roots of positive numbers and applying a finite number 

332 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
of field operations. However, if a > 0 is constructible, then Fig. 41. 7 shows that ..fii. is 
constructible. Let OA have length a, and find Pon OA extended so that OP has length 
1. Find the midpoint of PA and draw a semjcircle with PA as diameter. Erect a perpen-
dicular to PA at 0, intersecting the semicircle at Q. Then the triangles OPQ and OQA 
are similar, so 
IOQI 
IOPI 
IOAI 
IOQI ' 
and IOQl 2 = la =a. Thus OQ is oflength ..fii.. Therefore square roots of constructible 
numbers are constructible. 
Theorem 41.1 showed that field operations are possible by construction. 
+ 
Q 
p 
0 
A 
41.7 Figure 
41.8 Corollary If y is constructible and y rf. Q, then there is a finite sequence of real numbers 
a1 , · · · , a,, = y such that Q(a1, · · · , a;) is an extension of Q(a1, · · · , a;-1) of degree 2. 
In particular, [Q(y) : Q] = 2r for some integer r :::: 0. 
Proof 
The existence of the a; is immediate from Theorem 41.6. Then 
2" = [Q (a1, · ··,a"): Q] 
= [Q (a1, · · · , a,,) : Q(y )][Q(y) : Q], 
by Theorem 40.4, which completes the proof. 
• 
The Impossibility of Certain Constructions 
We can now show the impossibility of certain geometric constructions. 
41.9 Theorem 
Doubling the cube is impossible, that is, given a side of a cube, it is not always possible 
to construct with a straightedge and a compass the side of a cube that has double the 
volume of the original cube. 
Proof 
Let the given cube have a side of length I, and hence a volume of I. The cube being 
sought would have to have a volume of 2, and hence a side of length 4'2. But 4'2 is a 
zero of irreducible x3 - 2 over Q, so 
[Q (.J2): Q ] = 3. 
Corollary 41.8 shows that to double this cube of volume 1, we would need to have 
3 = 2r for some integer r, but no such r exists. 
+ 

Section 41 
Geometric Constructions 
333 
41.10 Theorem 
Squaring the circle is impossible; that is, given a circle, it is not always possible to 
construct with a straightedge and a compass a square having area equal to the area of 
the given circle. 
Proof 
Let the given circle have a radius of 1, and hence an area of n. We would need to 
construct a square of side ,,/if. But n is transcendental over Q, so ,,Jn is transcendental 
over Q also. 
+ 
41.11 Theorem 
Trisecting the angle is impossible; that is, there exists an angle that cannot be trisected 
with a straightedge and a compass. 
Proof 
Figure 41. 12 indicates that the angle e can be constructed if and only if a segment of 
length I cos e I can be constructed. Now 60° is a constructible angle, and we shall show 
that it cannot be trisected. Note that 
cos 3e = cos(W + e) 
= cosW cose - sin W sin e 
= (2 cos2 e - 1) cos e - 2 sin e cos e sin e 
= (2cos2 8 - l)cose - 2cos8(1 - cos2 8) 
= 4 cos3 e - 3 cos e. 
cos 0 
41.12 Figure 
[We realize that some students have not seen the trigonometric identities we just 
used. Exercise l repeats Exercise 42 of Section 3 and asks you to prove the identity 
cos 38 = 4 cos3 e - 3 cos e from Euler's formula.] 
Let e = 20°, so that cos 38 = ~, and let a = cos 20°. From the identity 4 cos3 e -
3 cos e = cos 38, we see that 
3 
1 
4a - 3a = - . 
2 
Thus a is a zero of 8x3 - 6x - 1. This polynomial is irreducible in Q [x] , since, by 
Theorem 28.12, it is enough to show that it does not factor in Z [x] . But a factorization 
in Z [x] would entail a linear factor of the form (8x ± I), (4x ± 1 ), (2x ± I), or (x ± I). 
We can quickly check that none of the numbers ± i, ± i, ± ~ , and ± 1 is a zero of 8x3 -
6x -
1. Thus 
[Q (a) : Q] = 3, 
so by Corollary 41.8, a is not constructible. Hence 60° cannot be trisected. 
+ 
Note that the regular n-gon is constructible for n ::: 3 if and only if the angle 2n / n 
is constructible, which is the case if and on! y if a line segment of length cos(2n / n) is 
constructible. 

334 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
• HISTORICAL NOTE 
G
reek mathematicians as far back as the fourth 
century B.C. had tried without success to 
find geometric constructions using straightedge 
and compass to trisect the angle, double the cube, 
and square the circle. Although they were never 
able to prove that such constructions were impos-
sible, they did manage to construct the solutions 
to these problems using other tools, including the 
conic sections. 
It was Carl Gauss in the early nineteenth cen-
tury who made a detailed study of constructibil-
ity in connection with his solution of cyclotomic 
equations, the equations of the form ;rf' -
l = 0 
with p prime whose roots form the vertices of a 
regular p-gon. He showed that although all such 
• EXERCISES 41 
Computations 
equations are solvable using radicals, if p - 1 is 
not a power of 2, then the solutions must involve 
roots higher than the second. In fact, Gauss as-
serted that anyone who attempted to find a ge-
ometric construction for a p-gon where p -
I is 
not a power of 2 would "spend his time use-
lessly." Interestingly, Gauss did not prove the 
assertion that such constructions were impossi-
ble. That was accomplished in 1837 by Pierre 
Wantzel (1814-1848), who in fact proved Corol-
lary 41.8 and also demonstrated Theorems 41.9 
and 41.11. The proof of Theorem 41.10, on 
the other hand, requires a proof that TC is tran-
scendental, a result finally achieved in 1882 by 
Ferdinand Lindemann (1852-1939). 
1. Prove the trigonometric identity cos 3€1 = 4 cos3 €1 - 3 cos €1 from the Euler formula, ei9 = cos €1 + i sin €1. 
Concepts 
2. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. It is impossible to double any cube of con-
structible edge by compass and straightedge con-
structions. 
b. It is impossible to double every cube of con-
structible edge by compass and straightedge con-
structions. 
c. It is impossible to square any circle of con-
structible radius by straightedge and compass 
constructions. 
d. No constructible angle can be trisected by 
straightedge and compass constructions. 
e. Every constructible number is of degree 2r over 
IQ for some integer r :::: 0. 
f. We have shown that every real number of degree 
2' over IQ for some integer r :::: 0 is constructible. 
Theory 
g. The fact that factorization of a positive integer 
into a product of primes is unique (up to or-
der) was used strongly at the conclusion of The-
orems 41.9 and 41. 1 I. 
h. Counting arguments are exceedingly powerful 
mathematical tools. 
i. We can find any constructible number in a finite 
number of steps by starting with a given seg-
ment of unit length and using a straightedge and 
a compass. 
j. We can find the totality of all constructible num-
bers in a finite number of steps by starting with a 
given segment of unit length and using a straight-
edge and a compass. 
3. Using the proof of Theorem 41. l l, show that the regular 9-gon is not constructible. 
4. Show algebraically that it is possible to construct an angle of 30°. 

Section 42 
Finite Fields 
335 
5. Referring to Fig. 41.13, where AQ bisects angle OAP, 
show that the regular 10-gon is constructible (and 
therefore that the regular pentagon is also). [Hint: Tri-
angle OAP is similar to triangle APQ. Show alge-
braically that r is constructible.] 
I 
41.13 Figure 
In Exercises 6 through 9 use the results of Exercise 5 where needed to show that the statement is true. 
6. The regular 20-gon is constructible. 
7. The regular 30-gon is constructible. 
8. The angle 72° can be trisected. 
9. The regular 15-gon can be constructed. 
10. Suppose you wanted to explain roughly in just three or four sentences, for a high school plane geometry teacher 
who never had a course in abstract algebra, how it can be shown that it is impossible to trisect an angle of 60°. 
Write down what you would say. 
11. Let S = {n E Z I an n degree angle is constructible with a compass and straightedge}. We are assuming that if 
an angle of n degrees is constructed, then n + k(360) is also constructed for any integer k. Prove that S is the 
principal ideal (3) ~ Z. It may be helpful to use Exercise 5. 
12. The proof of Theorem 41.11 can be simplified by making a different choice of the angle e. Find a constructible 
real number ex so that the angle e = arcc~s(a) can be used in the formula cos 38 = 4 cos3 e - 3 cos e to arrive 
at a polynomial that meets Eisenstein's criteria. Then finish the proof of Theorem 4.11. 
13. Prove that for at least one constructible angle 58, e is not constructible. 
14. Continuing Exercise 13, 
a. Use Euler's formula to show that for any integer n ~ 2, cos(n8) = 2 cos(8) cos((n - l)e) - cos((n - 2)8). 
b. Use part a to rewrite cos(W) and use this formula to prove that there is a constructible angle W such that e 
is not constructible. 
c. For each integer 1 ::::; n ::::; 10, is there a constructible angle ne such that e is not constructible? 
(The polynomials used in this exercise are called Chebyshev polynomials.) 
SECTION 42 
FINITE FIELDS 
The purpose of this section is to determine the structure of all finite fields. We shall 
show that for every prime p and positive integer n, there is exactly one finite field (up to 
isomorphism) of order pn. This field GF(p") is usually referred to as the Galois field of 
order p". We shall be using quite a bit of our material on cyclic groups. The proofs are 
simple and elegant. 
The Structure of a Finite Field 
We now show that all finite fields must have prime-power order. 
42.1 Theorem 
Let E be a finite extension of degree n over a finite field F. If F has q elements, then E 
has q" elements. 

336 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
Proof 
Let {a 1, • · · ,a 11 ) be a basis for E as a vector space over F. By Exercise 21 of Section 33, 
every f3 E E can be uniquely written in the form 
f3 = b1a1 + · · · + h 11a 11 
for b; E F. Since each b; may be any of the q elements of F, the total number of such 
distinct linear combinations of the a; is q11. 
+ 
42.2 Corollary 
If E is a finite field of characteristic p, then E contains exactly p" elements for some 
positive integer n. 
Proof 
Every finite field Eis a finite extension of a prime field isomorphic to the field Zp, where 
p is the characteristic of E. The corollary follows at once from Theorem 42.1. 
+ 
We now turn to the study of the multiplicative structure of a finite field. The follow-
ing theorem will show us how any finite field can be formed from the prime subfield. 
42.3 Theorem 
Let Ebe a field of p11 elements contained in an algebraic closure Zp of Zp. The elements 
of E are precisely the zeros in Zp of the polynomial x"" - x in Zp [x]. 
Proof The set E* of nonzero elements of E forms a multiplicative group of order p11 -
1 under 
the field multiplication. For a E E*, the order of a in this group divides the order p 11 -
1 
of the group. Thus for a E E*, we have a "" - 1 = I , so a P" = a. Therefore, every element 
in E is a zero of JJ1' - x. Since x"" - x can have at most p 11 zeros, we see that E contains 
precisely the zeros of x"" - x in Z". 
+ 
42.4 Definition 
An element a of a field is an nth root of unity if a 11 = 1. It is a primitive nth root of 
unity if a" = 1 and a"' i=- 1 for 0 < m < n. 
• 
Thus the nonzero elements of a finite field of p11 elements are all (p11 -
l)th roots of 
unity. 
Recall that in Corollary 28.7, we showed that the multiplicative group of nonzero 
elements of a finite field is cyclic. This is a very important fact about finite fields; it has 
actually been applied to coding theory and combinatorics. For the sake of completeness 
in this section, we now state it here as a theorem, give a corollary, and illustrate with an 
example. 
42.5 Theorem 
The multiplicative group (F*, ·) of nonzero elements of a finite field F is cyclic. 
Proof 
See Corollary 28.7. 
• 
42.6 Corollary 
A finite extension E of a finite field F is a simple extension of F. 
Proof 
Let a be a generator for the cyclic group E* of nonzero elements of E. Then E = F(a) . • 
42.7 Example 
Consider the finite field Z 11. By Theorem 42.5 (Z1 i*, ·) is cyclic. Let us try to find a 
generator of Z 1 i* by brute force and ignorance. We start by trying 2. Since IZ 11 *I = 10, 2 
must be an element of Z 1 i* of order dividing 10, that is, either 2, 5, or 10. Now 
22 = 4, 
24 = 42 = 5, and 25 = (2)(5) = 10 = -1. 
Thus neither 22 nor 25 is 1, but, of course, 210 = 1, so 2 is a generator of Z 11 *, that is, 2 
is a primitive 1 Oth root of unity in Z 11. We were lucky. 
By the theory of cyclic groups, all the generators of Z11*, that is, all the primitive 
1 Oth roots of unity in Z 11 , are of the form 2
11
, where n is relatively prime to 10. These 
elements are 
2 I = 2, 
23 = 8, 
2 7 = 7, 
29 = 6. 

• HISTORICAL NOTE 
A
lthough Carl F. Gauss had shown that the 
set of residues modulo a prime p satisfied 
the field properties, it was Evariste Galois (1811-
1832) who first dealt with what he called "incom-
mensurable solutions" to the congruence F(x) = 0 
(mod p), where F(x) is an nth degree irreducible 
polynomial modulo p. He noted in a paper written 
in 1830 that one should consider the roots of this 
congruence as "a variety of imaginary symbols" 
that one can use in calculations just as one uses 
.J=T. Galois then showed that if a is any solution 
of F(x) = 0 (mod p), the expression ao + a 1a + 
a2a2 + · · · + a 11_ 1a
11
- 1 takes on precisely p" dif-
ferent values. Finally, he proved results equivalent 
to Theorems 42.3 and 42.5 of the text. 
Galois' life was brief and tragic. He showed 
brilliance in mathematics early on, publishing 
Section 42 
Finite Fields 
337 
several papers before he was 20 and essen-
tially established the basic ideas of Galois theory. 
He was, however, active in French revolutionary 
politics following the July revolution of 1830. In 
May 1831, he was arrested for threatening the life 
of King Louis-Philippe. Though he was acquit-
ted, he was rearrested for participating, heavily 
armed, in a republican demonstration on Bastille 
Day of that year. Two months after his release from 
prison the following March, he was killed in a duel, 
"the victim of an infamous coquette and her two 
dupes"; the previous night he had written a letter to 
a friend clarifying some of his work in the theory of 
equations and requesting that it be studied by other 
mathematicians. Not until 1846, however, were his 
major papers published; it is from that date that his 
work became influential. 
The primitive 5th roots of unity in Z 11 are of the form 2
111
, where the gcd of m and 10 is 
2, that is, 
22 = 4, 
24 = 5, 
26 = 9, 
28 = 3. 
The primitive square root of unity in Z 11 is 25 = 10 = -1. 
The Existence of GF(p
11 ) 
We turn now to the question of the existence of a finite field of order pr for every prime 
power pr, r > 0. We need the following lemma. 
42.8 Lemma If F is a field of prime characteristic p with algebraic closure F, then xP" - x has p" 
distinct zeros in F. 
Proof Because F is algebraically closed, x1' - x factors over that field into a product of linear 
factors x - a, so it suffices to show that none of these factors occurs more than once in 
the factorization. 
Exercise 15 uses derivatives to complete this proof. Although this is an elegant 
method, it requires some effort to develop derivatives for polynomials over an arbitrary 
field, so we proceed using long division. Observe that 0 is a zero of x'" - x of multiplic-
ity 1. Suppose a =F 0 is a zero of xP" - x, and hence is a zero ofj(x) = x1' - 1 -
1. Then 
x - a is a factor ofj(x) in F [x], and by long division, we find that 
f(x) 
= g(x) 
(x - a) 
= / '-2 + ax'"- 3 + a 2xP"- 4 + .. . + a p"- 3x + ap"- 2. 
Now g(x) hasp" - 1 summands, and in g(a), each summand is 
p"- 1 
a""-2 =a __ 
a 
a 

338 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
Thus 
ll 
1 
1 
g(a) = [(p - 1) · l]- = --. 
a 
a 
since we are in a field of characteristic p. Therefore, g(a) f=. 0, so a is a zero off(x) of 
multiplicity 1. 
+ 
42.9 Lemma If Fis a field of prime characteristic p, then (a+ f3Y"' = aP" + f3"" for all a, f3 E F and 
all positive integers n. 
Proof 
Let a, f3 E F. Applying the binomial theorem to (a+ f3Y', we have 
(a+ f3Y' = aP + (p. l)ap-1 f3 + (p(p; 1) . 1 )ap-2{32 
+ · · · + (p · l)a{Jp-I + f3P 
= aP + Oa"- 1 f3 + OaP- 2 {32 + · · · + Oaf3p- I + f3P 
= aP + {3". 
Proceeding by induction on n, suppose that we have (a+ {3yr' = a P"-' + f3""-'. Then 
(a + f3Y"' = [(a + {3yr' ]" = (air' + f31r' )P = aP" + f3P". 
+ 
42.10 Theorem 
A finite field GF(p
11
) of p
11 elements exists for every prime power p
11
• 
Proof 
Let Zp be an algebraic closure of 71,", and let K be the subset of Zp consisting of all 
zeros of x!1' - x in Zp. Let a, f3 EK. Lemma 42.9 shows that (a+ {3) EK, and the 
equation (af3y1' =a"" f3P" = af3 shows that af3 EK. From a"" =a we obtain (-ay1' = 
(-1 Y"' a p" = (-1 Y"' a. If p is an odd prime, then (-1 Y"' = -1 and if p = 2 then - 1 = I. 
Thus (-a)P" = -a, so -a EK. Now 0 and 1 are zeros of xP" - x. For a f=. 0, a"" =a 
implies that (l/ aY"' = l / a. Thus K is a subfield of ZP containing 71,p· Therefore, K is 
the desired field of p
11 elements, since Lemma 42.8 showed that xP" - x has p
11 distinct 
zeros in Zp. 
+ 
42.11 Corollary If Fis any finite field, then for every positive integer n, there is an irreducible polynomial 
in F [x] of degree n. 
Proof 
Let F have q = pr elements, where p is the characteristic of F. By Theorem 42.10, 
there is a field K :::: F containing Zp (up to isomorphism) and consisting precisely of the 
zeros of xPm - x. We want to show F :::: K. Every element of F is a zero of x!" - x, by 
Theorem 42.3. Now p rs = p r pr(s- I). Applying this equation repeatedly to the exponents 
and using the fact that for a E F we have a"' =a, we see that for a E F, 
Thus F:::: K. Then Theorem 42.1 shows that we must have [K: F] = n. We have seen 
that K is simple over Fin Corollary 42.6, so K = F(f3) for some f3 EK. Therefore, 
irr(f3, F) must be of degree n. 
+ 
42.12 Theorem 
Let p be a prime and let n E z+. If E and E' are fields of order p
11
, then E ::::: E'. 
Proof 
Both E and E' have 71," as prime field, up to isomorphism. By Corollary 42.6, E is 
a simple extension of 71,P of degree n, so there exists an irreducible polynomial f (x) 
of degree n in Zp[x] such that E::::: Zp [x] / lf(x)). Because the elements of E are zeros 
of xf" - x, we see thatf(x) is a factor of x!1' -
x in Zp[x]. Because E' also consists of 

Section 42 
Exercises 
339 
zeros of>!'" - x, we see that E' also contains zeros of irreducible f(x) in Zp[x]. Thus, 
because E' also contains exactly p" elements, E' is also isomorphic to Zp[x] / (f(x)). + 
In section 29 we saw that the field Z2 can be used to construct polynomial codes. 
Other finite fields have been used to construct algebraic codes with interesting proper-
ties. For example, in the American Mathematical Monthly 77 (1970): 249-258, Normal 
Levinson constructed an algebraic code that corrects three transmission errors. In this 
construction, the field of order 16 was used. Finite fields are also used in many other 
areas of mathematics including combinatorial designs, finite geometries, and algebraic 
topology. 
• EXERCISES 42 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 3, determine whether there exists a finite field having the given number of elements. (A 
calculator may be useful.) 
1. 4096 
2. 3127 
3. 68,921 
4. Find the number of primitive 8th roots of unity in GF(9). 
5. Find the number of primitive 18th roots of unity in GF(l9). 
6. Find the number of primitive 15th roots of unity in GF(3 l). 
7. Find the number of primitive lOth roots of unity in GF(23). 
Concepts 
8. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. The nonzero elements of every finite field form a cyclic group under multiplication. 
b. The elements of every finite field form a cyclic group under addition. 
c. The zeros in C of (x28 -
1) E Q[x] form a cyclic group under multiplication. 
d. There exists a finite field of 60 elements. 
e. There exists a finite field of 125 elements. 
f. There exists a finite field of 36 elements. 
g. The complex number i is a primitive 4th root of unity. 
h. There exists an irreducible polynomial of degree 58 in Z2[x]. 
i. The nonzero elements of Q form a cyclic group Q* under field multiplication. 
j. If Fis a finite field, then every isomorphism mapping F onto a subfield of an algebraic closure F of Fis an 
automorphism of F. 
Theory 
9. Let Z2 be an algebraic closure of Z2, and let a , f3 E Z2 be zeros of x3 + x2 + 1 and of x3 + x + 1, respectively. 
Using the results of this section, show that Z2(a) = Z2(f3). 
10. Show that every irreducible polynomial in Zp [x] is a divisor of :x!"' - x for some n. 
11. Let F be a finite field of p" elements containing the prime subfield Zp. Show that if a E Fis a generator of the 
cyclic group (F*, ·) of nonzero elements of F, then deg( a , Zp) = n. 
12. Show that a finite field of p" elements has exactly one subfield of p
111 elements for each divisor m of n. 
13. Show that>!'" - x is the product of all monic irreducible polynomials in Zp [x] of a degreed dividing n. 
14. Let p be an odd prime. 

340 
Part VIII 
Extension Fields 
a. Show that for a E Z, where a 'f= 0 (mod p), the congruence x2 =a (mod p) has a solution in Z if and only 
if a(p- l)/ 2 = 1 (mod p). [Hint: Formulate an equivalent statement in the finite field Zp, and use the theory 
of cyclic groups.] 
b. Using part (a), determine whether or not the polynomial x2 - 6 is irreducible in 2:17[x]. 
11 
n 
15. Let F be an arbitrary field. We define the derivative of p(x) = I >kx" E F [x] to be D (p(x)) = L ( 
k · (akJ<- l )). 
k=O 
k= l 
Let p(x), q(x) E F [x], and let n and m be nonnegative integers. Prove the following statements. 
a. D(p(x) + q(x)) = D(p(x)) + D(q(x)). 
b. D(ap(x)) = aD(p(x)) for any a E F. 
c. D(x'x
11 ) = x'D(x"') + D(x')x". 
d. D(p(x)x") = p(x)D(x
11 ) + D(p(x))x" . 
e. D(p(x)q(x)) = p(x)D(q(x)) + D(p(x))q(x). 
f. (x - a)2 divides p(x) if and only if a is a zero of both p(x) and D(p(x)). 
g. Give a proof of Lemma 42.8 using part f. 

PART 
IX 
Galois Theory 
Section 43 
Introduction to Galois Theory 
Section 44 
Splitting Fields 
Section 4S 
Separable Extensions 
Section 46 
Galois Theory 
Section 47 
Illustrations of Galois Theory 
Section 48 
Cyclotomic Extensions 
Section 49 
lnsolvability of the Quintic 
SECTION 43 
INTRODUCTION TO GALOIS THEORY 
An Example 
We learned in high school that the quadratic formula provides zeros for polynomials 
of degree two. There are similar formulas for solutions to polynomials of degree three 
and four. These solutions all involve addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and 
taking radicals. Galois theory, which provides an interesting connection between group 
theory and field theory, can be used to show that it is futile to seek a similar formula for 
polynomials of degree five or greater. Our main goal for the remainder of the book is to 
provide a proof of this fact. 
43.1 Definition 
Let Ebe a field. An automorphism of E is a isomorphism of E onto itself. 
• 
43.2 Theorem 
The set of automorphisms of a field Eis a group under function composition. 
Proof 
The proof is Exercise 29. 
• 
43.3 Example 
A field isomorphism <P : E ~ K maps 1 EE to 1 EK and, it maps 0 E E to 0 EK. 
Therefore, for any automorphism <P of Q , <PO) = I and <PCO) = 0. It follows by induc-
tion that <PCn) = n for any natural number n. Since <PC-x) = -<PCx), for any integer n, 
<PCn) = n. Every rational number is a ratio of integers, so <PCr) = r for every rational 
number r . Therefore the only automorphism of Q is the identity map. 
.& 
43.4 Example 
Let K = QC.J2, ,J3). From Example 40.9, the degree of the extension Kover Q is 4 
and a basis for the vector space Kover the field Q is (1, ,J2, ,J3, ,J6). Thus K ={a+ 
b,J2 + cv'3 + d-J6 I a, b, c, d E Q }. We determine the automorphisms of K. 
Let <P be any automorphism of K . Since </>Cl)= 1, <P maps every rational number to 
2 
itself as shown in the previous example. Since <P is a field automorphism, <PC ,J2 - 2) = 
<PCO) = 0. But <PC .J2
2 
- 2) = <PC ,J2)2 - 2. Thus <PC .J2) is a zero of the polynomial x2 -
2, which means that <PC.J2) is either ,J2 or -.J2. Similarly, <PC.J3) = ±.J3. Given any 
a,b,c,d E Q, if 
a = a + bh + c,./3 + d./6 E K , 
341 

342 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
then 
</J(a) =a+ b<P(.J2) + c<P(../3) + d<P(.J2)<P(../3). 
Once </J( .J2) and </J( ../3) are specified, there is at most one automorphism meeting these 
specifications. We have at most four automorphisms of K given by Table 43.5. 
43.5 Table 
</>( ,,/2) 
</>(-J3) 
<f>(a + b,,/2 + c,J3 + d,,/6) 
2 
3 
a 
-,,/2 
,J3 
r 
,,/2 
--J3 
y 
- ,,/2 
--J3 
It is tedious, but not difficult, to check that each of these maps is a field automor-
phism. By Theorem 43.2, G = { t, a , r , y} forms a group under function composition. 
Every group with exactly four elements is isomorphic with the Klein 4-group or the 
cyclic group of order four. Each element of G has order one or two, so G is isomorphic 
with the Klein 4-group. 
.A. 
43.6 Definition 
If E and K are both field extensions of a field F and a : E --+ K is a field isomorphism, 
then an element a EE is fixed by a if a(a) =a. An element a EE is fixed by a 
collection of isomorphisms if a is fixed by every isomorphism in the collection. A subset 
L of E is fixed by a collection of isomorphisms if every a E L is fixed by the collection. 
Often we write remains fixed instead of simply fixed. 
• 
The discussion in Example 43.3 shows that for any field extensions E and K of Q 
and isomorphism a : E --+ K, Q remains fixed by a. 
43.7 Example 
We find the elements fixed by each of the four automorphisms of Gin Example 43.4. 
From Table 43.5 we see that each element fixes a subfield of Q( ,J2, ../3), and from this 
we can determine the field fixed by each subgroup of G. 
• Each element K is fixed by t. In other words, K remains fixed by the trivial 
subgroup {t}. 
• Each element of {a+ c../3 1 a, c E Q} = Q( ../3) is fixed by a . This implies that 
Q(../3) remains fixed by the subgroup (a ) :S G. 
• Each element of {a+ b,Jl i a, b E Q } = Q( ,}2) is fixed by r. So Q( ,}2) remains 
fixed by the subgroup (r). 
• Each element of {a+ d.J6 I a, d E Q} = Q( .J6) is fixed by y. Therefore, Q( .J6) 
remains fixed by the subgroup (y). 
• The only elements that remain fixed by G are the elements of Q. 
Exercise 30 shows the five fields Q, Q( .J2), Q( ../3), Q( .J6), and Q( .J2, ../3), are 
the only subfields of K. Furthermore, from group theory we know that G, (a ), (r ), (y), 
and {t} are the only subgroups of G. We have established a one-to-one correspondence 
between the subfields of K containing Q, and the subgroups of the automorphism group 
of K that fix elements of Q. Figure 43.8 shows the subfield diagram for Kand the sub-
group diagram for G. Notice that relabeling the fields by their corresponding subgroups 
gives the subgroup diagram, except that it is inverted. The reason that the diagrams are 
flipped is that if Hi :S H2 are both subgroups of the automorphism group of K, then 
every element of K fixed by all the automorphisms in H2 is also fixed by all the ele-
ments of Hi. So the set that remains fixed by H2 is a subset of the set that remains fixed 
~M-
.._ 

Section 43 
Introduction to Galois Theory 
343 
Q(Vl, v'3) 
{t, a , T , y} 
Q(Vl) 
Q(v'3) 
Q(v'6) 
(a) 
(y) 
{t} 
43.8 Figure 
The fact that the subfield diagram and the subgroup diagram correspond by asso-
ciating a subfield of K with a subgroup of G is no accident. In fact, this is the heart of 
Galois theory. Before we can give precise statements of the Galois theorems, we need 
a few definitions and some background lemmas and theorems. It is advisable to have 
Examples 43.4 and 43.7 well in mind when reading the next few sections. 
Subfields and Subgroups 
We now investigate the Galois correspondence between subfields and subgroups of the 
automorphism group of a field. In Example 43.7, K was an extension field of IQ!. In 
general we will investigate the automorphisms of a field that fix elements of a subfield 
that is not necessarily the rational numbers. 
43.9 Theorem 
Let rr be an automorphism of the field E. Then the set Ea of all the elements a E E that 
remain fixed by rr forms a subfield of E. 
Proof 
Suppose that a,b EE remain fixed by rr, that is, rr(a) =a and rr(b) =b. Since rr is a 
field automorphism, we have 
rr(a ± b) = rr(a) ± rr(b) =a± b, 
rr(ab) = rr(a)rr(b) = ab, 
rr(a/ b) = rr(a)/rr(b) = a/b if bf=. 0, 
rr(O) = 0, and 
rr(l) = 1. 
Thus a± b, ab, 0, 1 E Ea and if bf=. 0, a/b E Ea, which imply that Ea is a subfield ofE . • 
43.10 Corollary 
Let {rr; Ii E /} be a collection of automorphisms of a field E. Then the set Ela;}• of all 
a E E that remain fixed by every rr;, for i E /, is a subfield of E. 
Proof 
The set E1a;J = n;E/E{a;J is an intersection of subfields of E, so by Exercise 51 in Section 
22, Ela;} is a subfield of E. 
+ 
We will continue to use the notation Ea to denote the subfield of E that remains 
fixed by the automorphism rr and Ela;} to denote the subfield of E that remains fixed by 
rr; for every i E /. 
43.11 Example 
Continuing Example 43.7, IQl(v'l, .J3)(a) = IQl(.}3) and IQl(v'l, .J3)(y) = IQl(.J6). 
.A 
In the above discussion we started with a set of automorphisms of a field K and saw 
that the elements fixed by the automorphisms form a subfield of K. This provides a way 

344 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
to assign subfields of K to subgroups of the group of automorphisms. We now turn our 
attention to subfields F :::: K and ask if there is a subgroup of the automorphism group 
of K that has exactly the set Fas a fixed set. 
43.12 Definition 
Let F :::: K be a field extension. The set G(K / F) is the set of all automorphisms of the 
field K that fix every element of the field F. 
• 
43.13 Example 
We see from Examples 43.4 and 43.7 that 
G(Q( h , v'3°)/Q) = (i, a, r, y ] 
G(Q(-J2,v'3°)/Q(v'3°)) = (i,a} = (a ) 
G(Q( h, v'3°)/Q( -J2)) = (i, r] = (r) 
G(Q(-J2,v'3°)/Q(~)) = (L, y) = (y ) 
G(Q(-J2, v'3°)/Q(-J2,v'3°)) = (i). 
If K is an extension field of F and F :::: E :::: K , then we will refer to E as an in-
termediate field of the extension. In Examples 43.11 and 43.13, we saw that for ev-
ery intermediate field E of the extension Q :::: Q( ./2, .J3), there was a subgroup H of 
the automorphism group of Q( ./2, .J3) that fixes every element of E and furthermore, 
Q( ./2, v'3°)H = E. This one-to-one correspondence between subgroups of the automor-
phism group and intermediate fields is the essence of Galois theory. There are field 
extensions where the correspondence fails, as shown by the next example. In order to 
have this one-to-one correspondence, a few technical conditions on the field extension 
need to be satisfied. 
43.14 Example 
Let K = Q(--Y2) = {a+ b--Y2 + c4'41 a, b E Q ]. Then G(K/Q) consists of all automor-
phisms of K that fix all the rational numbers. In Q(--Y2) there is only one zero of the 
polynomial x3 - 2 since the other two zeros, --Y2(- l ± .J3i)/ 2, are complex numbers 
and Q( --Y2) is a subfield of the real numbers. For any automorphism a E G(K /Q), 
3~3 
O=a(O)=a(vL -2) 
= (a(~))
3 - 2. 
Thus a(--Y2) is a zero of x3 - 2, which implies that a(--Y2) = --Y2. Therefore any field 
automorphism of K fixes all elements of Q and .,n, which implies that the only automor-
phism of K is the identity automorphism L. Thus G(K/Q) = (i] and Kc(K/Q) = K1t1 = K. 
In this case, there is no subgroup H :::: G(K/Q) with KH = Q . 
.A. 
In the next two sections, we will investigate conditions on field extensions F :::: K 
where there is a one-to-one correspondence between the intermediate fields and the 
subgroups of G(K/ F). 
43.15 Theorem 
Let Ebe a field and Jet F be a subfield of E. Then the set G(E/ F) of all automorphisms 
that fix all the elements of F is a subgroup of the automorphism group of E. Further-
more, Fis a subfield of Ec(E/F)· 
Proof For a, r E G(E/ F) and a E F, 
(ar)(a) = a(r(a)) = a(a) =a, 
soar E G(E/ F).Furthermore, G(E/ F) contains the identity map and a- 1 (a) =a. Thus 
G(E/ F) is a subgroup of the automorphisms of E. 
Finally, since every automorphism in G(E/ F) fixes all the elements of F , F is a 
subset and, therefore, a subfield of Ec(E/FJ· 
+ 

Section 43 
Introduction to Galois Theory 
345 
Since G(E/ F) is a subgroup of the automorphisms of E, we naturally call G(E/ F) 
the group of automorphisms of E that fix F. More briefly, we say that G(E/ F) is the 
group of E over F . 
Beware! The symbol "/" in G(E / F) does not refer to a fraction or a quotient space. 
The symbol "/" is used since we read G(E/ F) as the group of E over F and in the 
subfield diagram, Eis written above F. 
Since G(E/ F) is a subgroup of the automorphisms of E, we naturally call G(E/ F) 
the group of automorphisms of E that fix F. More briefly, we say that G(E/ F) is the 
group of E over F. 
Beware! The symbol"/" in G(E/ F) does not refer to a fraction or a quotient space. 
The symbol "/" is used since we read G(E/ F) as the group of E over F and in the 
subfield diagram, E is written above F. 
Conjugation Isomorphisms 
In our ongoing example of K = IQ!( .../2, .J3), we noticed that for any automorphism CJ 
of K , CJ(.../2) = ±.../2 since the image of a zero of x2 - 2 must also be a zero of x2 - 2. 
This observation can be used for any polynomial and it is the basis for the Conjugation 
Theorem. 
43.16 Definition 
Let E be an algebraic extension of the field F. Two elements a and f3 in E are 
conjugates over F, if both have the same minimal polynomial over F. That is, 
irr(a, F) = irr(f3, F). 
• 
43.17 Example 
The definition of conjugates over F is consistent with our familiar use of the term com-
plex conjugates in the setting of complex numbers. For a, b E R the numbers a+ bi and 
a - bi are complex conjugates. Both are zeros of the polynomial f (x) = x2 - 2ax + 
a2 + b2 and, as long as b f=. 0, f(x) is irreducible over JR.. Thus for b f=. 0, a + bi and 
a - bi have the same minimal polynomial and they are conjugates over JR. in the sense 
of Definition 43.16. 
.A 
43.18 Theorem 
(The Conjugation Isomorphism) 
Let F be a field, K an extension field of F, and 
a , f3 EK algebraic over F with deg( a, F) = n. The map 1/!a,f3 : F(a)--+ F(f3) defined 
by 
1/!a,f3(co + c1a + c2a2 + · · · + Cn-1<Xn-I) = co+ c1f3 + c2f32 + · · · + c11-1f3"- 1, 
for c; E F, is an isomorphism of F(a) onto F(f3) if and only if a and f3 are conjugate 
over F. 
Proof 
We first assume that 1/fa,f3 is an isomorphism. Since deg(a, F) = n, irr(a, F) = x' + g(x), 
for some polynomial g(x) E F[x], where the degree of g(x) is less than n. Therefore 
a"= -g(a). 
Since 1/!a,f3 is an isomorphism, 
1/!a,f3(a") = (1/la,fJ(a))" = {3
11
• 
On the other hand, 
1/!a,fJ(g(a)) = g(f3). 
Thus 
/3
11 = 1/!a,f3(a") = 1/!a,{3(-g(a)) = -g(f3). 
So f3 is a zero of the polynomial x' + g(x) = irr(a, F), which is irreducible over F. By 
the definition of the minimal polynomial, irr(f3, F) = x' + g(x) = irr(a, F). 

346 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
We next assume that a and f3 are conjugates over F with minimal polynomial 
p(x) = irr(a, F) = irr(fJ, F). By Corollary 39.14, the ideal (p(x)) ~ F[x] is the kernel 
of the evaluation homomorphism <Pa: F[x]--+ F(a), which is onto. By the Fundamen-
tal Homomorphism Theorem 30.17, there is an isomorphism 1/Ja: F[x]/(p(x))--+ F(a) 
with 1/Ja(a + (p(x))) =a for all a E F and 1/Ja(x + (p(x))) =a. Similarly, there is an iso-
morphism 1/f{J : F [x]/(p(x))--+ F(f3) with 1/f{J (a + (p(x))) =a for all a E F, and 1/f{J(x + 
(p(x))) = f3. Since 1/Ja and 1/f{J are both isomorphisms, 1/f;;1 : F(a)--+ F[x]/(p(x)) is an 
isomorphism and 1/Ja,fJ = 1/f{J o 1/f;;1 : F(a)--+ F(f3) is also an isomorphism. We have 
1/fa,[J(Ci) = 1/f{J(l/f ;;1 (a) 
= 1/f [J(X + (p(x))) 
= f3. 
We also note that for c E F, 1/Ja,fJ(c) =c. Let co, c1, .. . , c11_1 E F since 1/Ja,fJ is an 
isomorphism, 
1/Ja,fJ(co + c1a+ ... +c11_1a"- 1) 
= 1/Ja,{J(co) + 1/Ja,[J(C1)1/Jcr,{J(a) + · · · + 1/Ja,[J(C11-J)l/Ja,{J(a"- I) 
= Co+ C11/Ja,[J(Ci) + · · · + C11-11/Ja,{J(a)'
1- I 
= CO+ c1f3 +. · · + C11-1f3"-I. 
• 
43.19 Corollary 
Let K be a field extension of F with a E K algebraic over F. Suppose that 1/f is an 
isomorphism of F(a) onto a subfield of K, with the property that every element of Fis 
fixed by 1/f. Then 1/f maps a to a conjugate over F of a. Conversely, if f3 E K is conjugate 
over F with a, then there is a unique isomorphism 1/Ja,fJ mapping F (a) onto a subfield 
of K with the properties that each a E Fis fixed by a and a(a) = f3. 
Proof 
Let 1/f be an isomorphism from F(a) onto a subfield of K with the property that every 
element of Fis fixed by 1/f. Let irr(a, F) = ao + a1x + · · · + a11_1x'
1
- 1. Then 
and 
0 = 1/f(ao + a1a + · · · + a11- 1a "-1) = ao + a 11/f(a) + · · · + a11- 11/f(a)"-1. 
Thus f3 = 1/f(a) has minimal polynomial a0 + a1x + - -- + a 11_1x'
1
- 1 over F, which says 
that a and f3 are conjugates over F. 
Now we let f3 E K be a conjugate of a over F. Theorem 43.18 provides an isomor-
phism 1/Ja,fJ : F(a)--+ F(f3) with the desired properties. Uniqueness follows since any 
isomorphism from F(a) to any field is completely determined by its values on elements 
of F and its value on a. 
+ 
Theorem 43.9 and Corollary 43.19 formalize ideas used in Examples 43.7 and 
43. 14. Any automorphism a of Q(.J2, .}3) when restricted to the subfield Q(.J2) is 
an isomorphism onto a subfield of Q( .J2, .}3). Corollary 43.19 states that the automor-
phism maps .J2 to ±.J2. Similarly .j3 maps to ±.J3, making a total of at most four 
automorphisms of Q( .J2, .J3). 
Looking back at Example 43 .14, any automorphism of Q( ..yl) maps --Y2 to a con-
jugate over Q and fixes elements of Q. But --Y2 has no conjugates in Q(--Y2) other than 
itself, so the only automorphism of Q( --Y2) is the identity map. Corollary 43.19 is essen-
tial for the rest of our study of Galois theory. 
We now give a familiar corollary of Theorem 43.18 concerning complex number 
zeros of polynomials with real coefficients. Corollary 43.20 states that complex zeros 
of polynomials with real coefficients occur in conjugate pairs. 

Section 43 
Exercises 
347 
43.20 Corollary 
Letf(x) E JR[x]. If a, b E lR andf(a +bi) = 0, thenf(a - bi) = 0. 
Proof 
As a field C = JR(i). Both i and -i have minimal polynomial x2 + 1 over JR, so they 
are conjugate over R. Theorem 43.18 assures us that there is an automorphism i/,r;,-; : 
JR(i) = C ~ C given by i/,r;,- ;(a + ib) =a - bi. Let 
f(x) = ao + a 1x + a2x2 + · · · + a,,x' 
and assume that a+ bi is a zero off(x). Then 
0 =f(a +bi)= ao + a 1(a +bi)+ az(a + bi)2 + · · · + a,,(a +bi)", 
so 
0 = i/,r;,-;(f(a +bi)) = ao + a 1 (a - bi)+ az(a - bi)2 + · · · + a,,(a - bi)" = f(a - bi) . 
Thusf(a - bi)= 0. 
• 
In order to pursue the Galois connection between subgroups of G(K / F) and inter-
mediate fields F .:'.S E .:'.S K , we need a technical condition to be sure that K has enough 
conjugate elements so Theorem 43.18 and its Corollary 43.19 can be evoked as often as 
needed. When the technical condition on Eis satisfied, then Eis called a splitting field. 
We investigate splitting fields in Section 44. 
There is one other technical condition that we will need in order to establish the 
Galois correspondence. That condition says that for each a EK, irr(a, F) has deg(a, F) 
distinct zeros in the algebraic closure of K. If the field extension E over F satisfies this 
condition, then the extension is said to be separable. As we will see, essentially all 
of our applications and examples, as well as most field extensions with which we are 
familiar, are separable. But we are getting ahead of ourselves, as properties of separable 
extensions are the focus of Section 45. 
• EXERCISES 43 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 8, find all conjugates in <C of the given number over the given field. 
1. ,J2 over Q 
2. ,J2 over lR 
3. 3 + ,J2 over Q 
4. ,J2 - v'3 over Q 
5. ,J2 + i over Q 
6. ,J2 + i over lR 
7. J1 +.J2over Q 
8. Ji +.J2over Q(,,/2) 
In Exercises 9 through 15, we consider the field E = Q(,,/2, v'3, .J5). It can be shown that [£ : Q] = 8. In the 
notation of Theorem 43.18, we have the following conjugation isomorphisms (which are here automorphisms 
of£): 
1/! ./2.-./2 : (Q( .J3, .J5))( ,,/2) ~ (Q( .J3, .J5))(-.J2), 
1/! ../3,- ../3 : (Q( h , .J5))( .J3) ~ (Q( h, .J5))(- .J3), 
1/! ./5,-./5 : (Q( h, .J3))( .J5) ~ (Q( h , .J3))( -.JS). 
For shorter notation, let r2 = 1/! ./2.-./2• r3 = 1/! ../3,- ../3• and r5 = 1/! ./5,-./5· Compute the indicated element of E. 
9. r2(v'3) 
11. (r3r2)(,,/2 + 3.J5) 

348 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
15. r3rsrj 1(./3 - ,JS) 
In Exercises 16 through 21, refer to the directions for Exercises 9 through 15 and find the fixed field of the 
automorphism or set of automorphisms of E. 
16. r3 
17. rf 
18. {rz, r3} 
19. rsr2 
20. r5r3r2 
21. {r2, r3, rs} 
22. Refer to the directions for Exercises 9 through 15 for this exercise. 
a. Show that each of the automorphisms r2, r3, and rs is of order 2 in G(E/Q). (Remember what is meant by 
the order of an element of a group.) 
b. Find the subgroup H of G(E/Q) generated by the elements r2, r3 , and rs, and give the group table. [Hint: 
There are eight elements.] 
c. Just as was done in Example 43.4, argue that the group H of part (b) is the full group G(E/Q). 
Concepts 
In Exercises 23 and 24, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
23. Two elements, a and {3, of an algebraic extension E of a field F are conjugate over F if and only if they are 
both zeros of the same polynornialf (x) in F [x]. 
24. Two elements, a and {3 , of an algebraic extension E of a field F are conjugate over F if and only if the 
evaluation homomorphisms <Pa : F [x] --+ E and </Jp : F[x] --+ E have the same kernel. 
25. The fields Q( .J2) and Q(3 + .J2) are the same, of course. Let a = 3 + .J2. 
a. Find a conjugate f3 i= a of a over Q. 
b. Referring to part (a), compare the conjugation automorphism 1/f ./2,-./2 of Q(.J2) with the conjugation 
automorphism 1/fa,{3 · 
26. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. For all a, f3 E £,there is always an automorphism of E mapping a onto {3. 
b. For a, f3 algebraic over a field F, there is always an isomorphism of F(a) onto F(f3). 
c. For a, f3 algebraic and conjugate over a field F , there is always an isomorphism of F(a) onto F (f3) . 
d. Every automorphism of every field E fixes every element of the prime subfield of E. 
e. Every automorphism of every field E fixes an infinite number of elements of E. 
f. Every automorphism of every field E fixes at least two elements of E. 
g. Every automorphism of every field E of characteristic 0 fixes an infinite number of elements of E. 
h. All automorphisms of a field E form a group under function composition. 
i. The set of all elements of a field E fixed by a single automorphism of E forms a subfield of E. 
j . For fields F ~ E ~ K , G(K / E) ~ G(K / F). 
Proof Synopsis 
27. Give a one-sentence synopsis of the "if" part of Theorem 43.18. 
28. Give a one-sentence synopsis of the "only if" part of Theorem 43.18. 
Theory 
29. Prove Theorem 43.2. 
30. Show that the only subfields of Q( .J2, ./3) are Q, Q( .J2), Q( ./3), Q( .J6), and Q( .J2, ./3). [Hint: Show that 
a subfield of Q(.J2, ./3) that is a degree 2 extension of Q must be of the form Q(vfs) for some rational 
numbers.] 
31. Let a be algebraic of degree n over F. Show that there are at most n different isomorphisms of F(a) onto a 
subfield of F and leaving F fixed. 
32. Let F(a ,, · · · , a 11 ) be an extension field of F. Show that any automorphism a of F(a ,, · · · , a 11) leaving F fixed 
is completely determined by then values a(a;). 

Section 44 
Splitting Fields 
349 
33. Let E be an algebraic extension of a field F, and let o- be an automorphism of E leaving F fixed. Let a E E. 
Show that o- induces a permutation of the set of all zeros of irr(a, F) that are in E. 
34. Let Ebe an algebraic extension of a field F. Let S = {o-; Ii E !) be a collection of automorphisms of E such that 
every o-; leaves each element of F fixed. Show that if S generates the subgroup Hof G(E/ F), then Es = EH. 
35. Let F be a finite field with characteristic p. Prove that the map</>: F--+ F defined by <f>(a) = aP is a field 
automorphism. This automorphism is called the Frobenius automorphism. 
36. Referring to Exercise 35, let F be a finite field of characteristic p, and let </> be the Frobenius automorphism 
on F. Prove that the fixed field Ft</>l is isomorphic with Zp. 
37. Referring to Exercise 35, show that the finite assumption is necessary by finding an example of a field F with 
characteristic p, such that the map</> : F--+ F given by <f>(a) = aP is not an automorphism. 
38. We saw in Corollary 28.18 that the cyclotomic polynomial 
p- 1 
<f>p(x) = _x_ = xp- I + xr- 2 + · · · + x + 1 
x- 1 
is irreducible over Q for every prime p. Lett be a zero of <f>p(x), and consider the field Q(n. 
a. Show that t , t 2, · · · , tp- I are distinct zeros of <f>p(x), and conclude that they are all the zeros of <f>p(x). 
b. Deduce from Corollary 43.19 and part (a) of this exercise that G(Q(t)/Q) is abelian of order p - I . 
c. Show that the fixed field of G(Q(n/Q) is Q. [Hint: Show that 
{t,t2,- .. , tp- I) 
is a basis for QCn over Q, and consider which linear combinations of t,t2,· ·· ,tr- I are fixed by all 
elements of G(Q(n/Q). 
39. Theorem 43.18 described conjugation isomorphisms for the case where a and f3 were conjugate algebraic ele-
ments over F. Is there a similar isomorphism of F (a) with F (f3) in the case that a and f3 are both transcendental 
over F? 
40. Let F be a field, and let x be an indeterminate over F. Determine all automorphisms of F(x) leaving F fixed, 
by describing their values on x. 
41. Prove the following sequence of theorems. 
a. An automorphism of a field E carries elements that are squares of elements in E onto elements that are 
squares of elements of E. 
b. An automorphism of the field lR of real numbers carries positive numbers onto positive numbers. 
c. If o- is an automorphism of lR and a < b, where a, b E JR, then o-(a) < o-(b). 
d. The only automorphism of lR is the identity automorphism. 
SECTION 44 SPLITTING FIELDS 
In Example 43.4, K = Q( ../2, .J3) included all the zeros of the minimal polynomials for 
../2 and .J3 over Q . This is a key requirement in order to have the Galois correspondence 
between subgroups of the automorphism group of a field extension and intermediate 
fields. We saw in Example 43.14 that the correspondence failed due to the fact that 
the polynomial x3 - 2 had only one zero in Q( ~). Definition 44.1 formalizes this 
idea. 
44.1 Definition 
Let F be a field and P = {f1 (x),f2(x), ... J s(x)} be a finite set of polynomials in F[x ]. 
An extension field K of Fis a splitting field of P over F if every polynomialfk(x) E P 
factors into linear factors in K[x] and for any intermediate field E, F .:::; E < K , at least 
one polynomialfj(x) E P does not factor into linear factors in E[x]. A field K is a split-
ting field for F if Eis a splitting field for some finite set of polynomials. 
• 

350 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
44.2 Example 
The field E = IQ(.y'l, .y'l(-1 + ./3i)/ 2) is a splitting field of {x3 - 2) over IQ. The zeros 
of x3 - 2 are 
-1 + '3i 
,~-1 -
'3i 
~, ~ 
2 
v;) , 
and 
v 2 
2 
v;) ; 
and each is an element of E. Also, any proper subfield of E would either not contain .y'2 
or not contain .y'l(-1 + ./3i)/2. 
A 
Before using splitting fields, we need to verify that they actually exist! Here we give 
a proof based on the existence of an algebraic closure. Exercise 31 gives an alternative 
way of proving the existence without relying on an algebraic closure. 
44.3 Theorem 
Let F be a field and P = {f1 ,f2 , . .. ,fs) a finite set of polynomials in F[x]. Then there is 
a splitting field K of P over F. Furthermore K is a finite extension of F. 
Proof 
Let F be an algebraic closure of F and let o: 1, o:2, ... , 0:11 E F be a list of all the zeros 
of all the polynomials in P. Let K = F(a 1, o:2, ... , 0:11). Since Fis algebraically closed, 
each polynomial fk factors into linear factors in F[x] and, therefore, in K[x]. Further-
more, for any proper subfield E of K that contains F, E does not contain at least one 
aj, which says that at least one fk does not factor into linear factors in E[x]. Thus K 
is a splitting field of P over F. The fact that K is a finite extension of F follows from 
Corollary 40.6, the fact that each ak is algebraic, and there are only a finite number 
~~. 
. 
We only defined splitting fields using a finite collection of polynomials. It is also 
possible to use infinite sets of polynomials, but for our purposes finite sets of polynomi-
als will do. We restrict out attention to splitting fields that are finite algebraic extensions. 
In the proof of Theorem 44.3 we attached all the roots of all the polynomials in 
order to construct a splitting field. We will use the fact that a splitting field K of P 
over F has the property that K = F(cti, ... , 0:11 ), where o: 1, •• • , 0:11 are the zeros of the 
polynomials in P in an algebraic closure of F. Explicitly attaching some of the roots 
may be unnecessary. We saw in Example 44.2 that the splitting field of x3 - 2 over IQ is 
IQ(.y'l,.y'l(-1 + ./3i)/ 2). It is unnecessary to attach .y'l(-1 - ./3i)/2, the third zero 
of x3 -
2, since it is already an element of IQ(~, ~(-1 + ./3i)/2), that is, 
IQ(~,~(-1 + vJi)/2) = IQ(~,~(-1 + vJi)/2,~(-1-vJi)/2). 
The Isomorphism Extension Theorem 
Now that we know splitting fields exist, it is natural to ask if they are unique up to 
isomorphism. To answer the question we need the Isomorphism Extension Theorem. 
We first give a definition that makes the theorem easier to state. 
44.4 Definition 
Let a : F--+ F' be a field isomorphism; then Cfx : F[x] --+ F' [x] , defined by 
ax(ao + a1x + · · · + a11.x!') = a(ao) + a(a1 )x + · · · + a(a11 ).x!', 
is the polynomial extension of a. 
• 
The image axlf(x)) is simply the polynomial in F' [x] that corresponds to the poly-
nomialf(x) in F[x] obtained by relabeling the coefficients via the isomorphism a. It is 
intuitively clear that if a : F--+ F' is an isomorphism, then ax : F[x] --+ F' [x] is also an 
isomorphism. You are asked to verify the details of the proof in Exercise 32 . 

Section 44 
Splitting Fields 
351 
44.5 Lemma 
Let K = F(a), where a is algebraic over F, and Jet a : F--+ F' be a field isomorphism. 
If K' is an extension field of F' and f3 E K' is a zero of ax(irr(a, F)), then there is a 
unique isomorphism cp : F(a)--+ F' (f3) with a(a) = c/J(a) for all a E F and c/J(a) = {3. 
Proof 
Let p(x) = irr(a, F) be the minimal polynomial for a over F. Then p'(x) = ax(p(x)) is 
an irreducible polynomial over F' since any factorization of p'(x) in F' [x] would give a 
factorization of p(x) in F [x]. Since p' (x) is irreducible over F' and f3 is a zero of p' (x), 
p'(x) = irr(f3, F'). 
As in the proof of Kronecker's Theorem 39.3, we have an isomorphism i/f cr : 
F[x]/(p(x)) --+ F(a), which is defined by the formula: 
i/faif(x) + (p(x))) =f(a) 
for any f(x) E F[x]. 
We also have an isomorphism i/fp: F'[x] /(p'(x))--+ F(f3) defined by 
i/fp(g(x) + (p'(x))) = g(f3) 
for any g(x) E F'[x]. 
A third isomorphism is 13 : F[x]/ (p(x)) --+ F' [x]/ (p'(x)) defined by 
13(j(x) + (p(x))) = axif(x)) + (p'(x)) 
for any f(x) E F[x]. The fact that 13 is a homomorphism is Exercise 28 in Section 30. 
Also, using the homomorphism ax- 1 : F'[x] --+ F[x], Exercise 28 in Section 30 shows 
that 13- 1 is well defined. Therefore, 13 is a one-to-one homomorphism mapping onto 
F' [x] /(p'(x)), or an isomorphism. The fact that 13 is an isomorphism is intuitively clear 
since a is an isomorphism between F and F' and the polynomial p(x) E F[x ] corre-
sponds to the polynomial p'(x) by way of the isomorphism ax. 
We now consider the isomorphism r = i/f p o 13 o i/f;; 1. Let a E F. We need to ver-
ify that r(a) = a(a). In the following calculation, we are thinking of a as a constant 
polynomial in F[x], so ax(a) = a(a) and i/fp(ax(a) + (p'(x))) = a(a). We have 
Also, 
r(a) = i/fp o 13 o i/f;; 1(a) 
= i/fp(l3(a + (p(x)))) 
= i/fp(ax(a) + (p'(x))) 
= i/fp(a(a) + (p'(x))) 
= a(a). 
r(a) = i/fp o 13 o i/f;; 1(a) 
= i/f p(l3(x + (p(x))) 
= i/fp(x + (p'(x))) 
= {3. 
Uniqueness follows since an isomorphism p : F(a) --+ F' (f3) is completely deter-
mined by the values of p(a) for a E F and p(a). 
+ 
44.6 Theorem 
(Isomorphism Extension Theorem) 
Let K = F(a1, a 2 , ... , a 11) be a finite extension 
field of F , and let a : F --+ F' be a field isomorphism. If K' contains a splitting field of 
P = {ax(irr(ak,F)) 11 ::: k::: n) over F', then a can be extended to an isomorphism r 
mapping K onto a subfield of K' . 

352 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
Proof 
We first show that CJ can be extended to an isomorphism mapping F(a1) onto a subfield 
of K' . Since K ' is the splitting field of P over F, there is a f3 EK' that is a zero of 
CJx(irr(a1, F)). By Lemma 44.5, there is an isomorphism r with the required properties. 
We proceed by induction. Suppose r is an isomorphism from F(a1, ... , ak) to 
some subfield of K' such that r(a) = CJ(a) for all a E F. We need to extend r to 
an isomorphism from F(a 1, ... , ab ak+ 1) to K'. There is a f3 E K' that is a zero of 
g(x) = rx(irr(ak+1, F(a1, . . . , ak))) since g(x) is a factor of 
rx(irr(ak+I, F)) = CJx(irr(ak+1, F)), 
which factors into linear factors in K'. By Lemma 44.5, there is an isomorphism r ' 
mapping F(a1, . . . , ak+1) to a subfield of K' that extends r. So by induction, CJ can be 
extended to an isomorphism that maps K onto a subfield of K'. 
+ 
44.7 Example 
We consider the extension Q(.J2, ,J3) over Q(.J2). The map 
(J : Q( .J2) --+ Q( .J2) 
defined by 
CJ(a + b../2) =a - b../2 
is an isomorphism. Since Q( ../2, ,J3) is a splitting field of x2 - 3 over Q( ../2), CJ can 
be extended to an isomorphism r : Q( ../2, ,J3) --+ Q( ../2, ,J3) by Theorem 44.6. The 
proof of the theorem actually tells us more. We can choose r to map to either zero of 
x2 - 3, so we have two different choices for r . In the notation of Example 43.4, these 
are the automorphisms CJ and y. 
We could have used the identity map from Q( .J2) to Q( .J2) instead of CJ for the iso-
morphism. Extending the identity isomorphism to Q( .J2, ,J3) gives the automorphisms 
labeled land r in Example 43.4. The Isomorphism Extension Theorem provides us with 
a simple way to show the existence of automorphisms that would otherwise be tedious 
~~fy 
~ 
P rop ert ies of Splitting Fields 
We now show that given a finite set of polynomials, P ~ F[x], a splitting field of P over 
F is unique up to isomorphism. 
44.8 Theorem 
Let F be a field, P = if1,J2, ... J s) ~ F[x] a finite set of polynomials, and both Kand 
K' splitting fields of P over F. Then there is an isomorphism CJ : K--+ K', which is the 
identity map on F. 
Proof Let Kand K' both be splitting fields of P over F. Let a 1, a2, .. . , a ,, be the zeros of the 
polynomials of Pin Kand {3 1, {32, • •• , {3111 the zeros of the polynomials of Pin K'. Then 
K = F(a1, .. . , a,,) and 
K' = F(f31, ... , /3111). 
The extensions K and K' are finite over F since the a; and f3J are algebraic. The exten-
sion K' over Fis a splitting field of P, so it is also a splitting field of P', the set of all 
irreducible factors over F of the polynomials in P. By Theorem 44.6, there is an iso-
morphism r mapping K onto a subfield of K' that fixes the field F. Furthermore, since 
r preserves the degree of the extension over F, the degree of the extension K' over F 
is greater than or equal to the degree of the extension K over F. Similarly, there is an 
isomorphism mapping K' onto a subfield of K, and the degree of the extension K over 
F is greater than or equal to the degree of the extension K' over F. Thus K and K' have 
the same degree as extensions of F. Since r(K) :S K', and each has the same degree as 
an extension over F , r is an isomorphism mapping K onto K' . 
+ 

Section 44 
Splitting Fields 
353 
Theorem 44.8 says that it does not matter how you construct the splitting field for a 
fixed set of polynomials, you will always get the same field up to isomorphism fixing F. 
Because of this we will often speak of the splitting field of a set of polynomials instead 
of a splitting field. 
44.9 Definition 
Let Ebe an extension field of F. A polynomialf(x) E F[x] splits in E if it factors into 
linear factors in E[x]. 
• 
44.10 Example 
The polynomial x4 -
5x2 + 6 E Q [x] splits in the field Q( ./2, ,J3) since 
x4 - sx2 + 6 = (x2 - 2)(x2 - 3) = (x + h)(x - h)(x + .J3)(x - .J3). 
44.11 Theorem 
Let Ebe a finite extension of the field F. Then E is the splitting field of some finite set 
of polynomials in F[x] if and only if for every field extension K over E and for every 
isomorphism a that fixes all the elements of F and maps E onto a subfield of K , a is an 
automorphism of E. 
Proof 
We first assume that Eis the splitting field for some set of polynomials 
P = lf1(x),J2(x), .. . ,fs(x)). 
Let a 1, ... , a,, be the zeros in E of the polynomials in P. Then E = F(a 1, a2, ... a,,). 
Let K be a field extension of E. Since all the polynomialsf;(x) split in E[x] , all the zeros 
of f;(x) in K are actually in E. Let a be an isomorphism from E to a subfield of K that 
fixes elements of F . Since a maps each ak to a zero off;(x), for some i, a(ak) EE. Thus 
a maps E into E. Since a is an isomorphism, isomorphisms preserve the degree of the 
extension, and the degree of E over F is finite, a is an isomorphism mapping E onto E. 
Thus a is an automorphism of E. 
We next assume that for any field extension K over E and any isomorphism a that 
fixes all the elements of F and maps E to a subfield of K , a is an automorphism of E. 
Since Eis a finite extension of F , E = F(a1, a 2, ... , a,,) for some elements ak E E that 
are algebraic over F. Let fk(x) = irr(ak. F) be the minimal polynomial for ak over F 
and P = ifk(x) 11 :S k :Sn ). We show that Eis the splitting field of P over F. Suppose 
by way of contradiction that some fk(x) does not split in E. By reordering the ak we 
can assume that k = 1. Let E be the algebraic closure of E. So f 1 (x) factors into lin-
ear factors in E, which says that there is an element fJ E £, fJ rf. E, and fJ is a zero of 
f1 (x) = irr(a1, F).Thus, 0:1 and fJ are conjugates over F. By Theorem 43.18, there is an 
isomorphism 
1/Ja, ,{J : F(a1) ~ F(fJ) 
that fixes all the elements of F and maps a 1 to fJ . Since E contains the splitting field 
of {(1/Ja,,fJ)x(irr(ak. F(a1))) 11::::: k::::: n), by the Isomorphism Extension Theorem 44.6, 
1/Ja,,fJ extends to an isomorphism a mapping E onto a subfield of E. But 
a(a1) = 1/Ja,,fJ(a1) = fJ </.E. 
This gives a contradiction, which implies that eachfk(x) splits in E [x]. Since each ak is a 
zero of fk(x) and E = F (a1, a 2 , ... , a,,), Eis the smallest subfield of E where eachfk(x) 
splits. Thus E is a splitting field of P over F. 
+ 
The following corollary highlights one of the very strong properties of splitting 
fields. 
44.12 Corollary 
If K is a finite splitting field over F and K contains one zero of an irreducible polynomial 
f(x) E F[x], thenf(x) splits in K[x]. 

354 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
Proof 
Suppose by way of contradiction that f(x) is irreducible over F, f (x) has a zero a in 
K = F(a 1, az, ... , a,,), andf(x) does not split in K. Let K be the algebraic closure of K. 
By our assumption, there is a f3 E K that is a zero of f(x) and f3 rf. K. Theorem 43. 18, 
the Conjugation Isomorphism Theorem, says there is an isomorphism 
Ya,p : F(a)--+ F({J). 
Since K is algebraically closed, it contains the splitting field of 
{(1/fa,p)x(irr(% F(a))) 11 :<::: k :<::: n} 
over F(fJ). The Isomorphism Extension Theorem allows us to extend 1/f a,p to an iso-
morphism u mapping K onto a subfield of K with u(a) = f3 rf. K, which contradicts 
Theorem 44.11. Thusf(x) splits in K[x]. 
+ 
Corollary 44.12 tells us that if K is a splitting field of P over F and the irreducible 
polynomialf(x) E F[x] has a zero in K , then K contains the splitting field ofj(x) over F. 
It is surprising at first glance that a multiple ofj(x) need not be in the set P. 
44.13 Example 
As we have seen, Qi( ../2, ,J3) is the splitting field of {x2 - 2, x2 -
3} over QI. We have 
a = ../2 + ,J3 E Qi( ../2, ,J3) and, as can easily be checked, a is a zero of 
(x2 - 5)2 - 24 = x4 -
10x2 + 1. 
With some effort, it can also be checked that x4 -
10x2 + 1 is irreducible over QI. Thus 
irr(a, Qi) = x4 -
10x2 + 1. By Corollary 44.12, x4 -
10x2 + 1 splits in Qi( ../2, ,J3) and 
Qi( ../2, ,J3) contains a splitting field K of x4 -
1 Ox+ 1 over QI. Since 
Qi( J2 + .J3) :<::: K :<::: Qi( J2, .J3) 
and the two end fields have the same degree, 4, over QI, 
Qi( J2 + .J3) = K = Qi( J2, .J3). 
We have two interesting results. First, the splitting field of x4 -
10x2 + 1 over QI is 
Qi( ../2, ,J3), and second, although Qi( ../2, .J3) does not appear to be a simple extension 
of QI, it is. In the next section we will find that under mild conditions, every finite 
extension is a simple extension. 
A challenging high school exercise is to use the quadratic formula to find all the 
zeros of x4 -
10x2 + 1 and rewrite them to see that they are all in both Qi(../2, ,J3) and 
~../2+~. 
~ 
Theorem 44.11 gives a condition on a finite field extension F :<::: E that is equivalent 
to E being a splitting field. The condition involves looking at all possible extensions 
of E. Corollary 44.14 simplifies the condition significantly. Instead of looking at all 
extensions of E, Corollary 44.14 only requires looking at any one splitting field over F 
that contains E. 
44.14 Corollary 
Let F :<::: E :<::: K be fields with K a finite splitting field over F. Then E is a splitting field 
over F if and only if every isomorphism u that fixes F and maps E to a subfield of K is 
an automorphism of E. 
Proof 
Theorem 44.11 says that if E is a splitting field over F, then every isomorphism u 
mapping E to a subfield of K that fixes F is an automorphism of E. This proves the only 
if direction. 
We next assume that every isomorphism u mapping E to a subfield of K that fixes 
Fis an automorphism of E. Let E = F(a 1,a2, ... ,a,,). Letfk(x) = irr(ab F) and P = 
{fk(x) 11 :<::: k :<::: n}. We first show that in the algebraic closure, K, of K , every conjugate 

Section 44 
Exercises 
355 
over F of every ak is actually in E. By Theorems 43.18 and 44.6, for any conjugate 
f3 E K of ak over F, there is an isomorphism o- that fixes F, maps E onto a subfield of 
the algebraic closure K, and maps ak to f3. Now o-(a;) is a conjugate of aj over F for 
each 1 ~j ~ n. That is, both aj and o-(aj) are zeros offj(x). By Corollary 44.12,fj(x) 
splits in K, so o-(aj) EK for eachj. Thus 
o-(E) = o-(F(a1, a2, ... , a11)) ~ K. 
By our assumption, o- is an automorphism of E, so in particular, f3 EE. We have shown 
that E contains all the conjugates of a 1,a2, ... ,a11 EK over F. Since eachfk(x) splits 
in the algebraically closed field K, eachfk(x) also splits in E = F(a1, a 2, ... , a 11 ). Since 
the splitting field of P over F contains E, Eis the splitting field of P over F. 
+ 
44.15 Example 
We let E = Q (.12) and let K be the splitting field of the irreducible polynomial x3 -
2 
over Q . The field K contains .12, one zero of irr( .12, Q ) = x3 -
2, but it does not contain 
the other two zeros, .12(-1 ± -/3i)/ 2. We can see that E is not the splitting field of 
any set of polynomials over Q from Corollary 44.12. Alternatively, we can use the 
conjugation isomorphism theorem to show there is an isomorphism mapping Q(.12) to 
Q (.12(-1 + -/3i)/2) ~ K. By Corollary 44.14, again we see that Eis not a splitting 
field over Q . 
.A 
• EXERCISES 44 
Computations 
In Exercises 1 through 6, find the degree over Q of the splitting field over Q of the given polynomial in Q [x]. 
1. x2 + 3 
2. x4 -
I 
3. (x2 - 2)(x2 - 3) 
4. x3 - 3 
5. x3 - 1 
6. (x2 - 2)(x3 - 2) 
Refer to Example 44.2 for Exercises 7 through 9. 
7. What is the order of G(Q( ..yl)/Q)? 
8. What is the order of G(Q( .,n, i./3)/Q)? 
9. What is the order of G(Q( .,n, i./3)/Q( ..yl))? 
10. Let a be a zero of x3 + x2 + I over Z2. Show that x3 + x2 + I splits in Z2(a). [Hint: There are eight elements 
in Z2(a). Exhibit two more zeros of x3 + x2 + 1, in addition to a, among these eight elements. Alternatively, 
use the results of Section 42.] 
Let E = Q(,J2, ,./3, ,JS). It can be shown that[£: Q] = 8. In Exercises 11 through 13, for the given isomorphic 
mappings of a sub field of E, give all extensions of the mapping to an isomorphic mapping of E onto a subfield of C. 
Describe the extensions by giving values on the generating set {.J2, ,./3, ,JS} for E over Q . 
11. L: Q(.J2, ../I5)--+ Q(.J2, ../I5), where Lis the identity map. 
12. o-: Q(,J2, ../I5)--+ Q(.J2, ../I5), where o-(,J2) = ,J2 and o-(../I5) = -../I5. 
13. \II J30.-J30: Q(,./30)--+ Q(,./30) 
In Exercises 14 through 16, let 
3r;;;-l + ,./3i 
a2 = v.l 
2 
, 
and 
3r;;;-l - ,./3i 
Ci3 = '\/.l 
2 
, 
where~ is the real number whose cube is 2. The zeros of x 3 - 2 are a1, a2, and a3. 
14. Describe all extensions of the identity map on Q to an isomorphism mapping Q( ..yl) onto a subfield of C. 
15. Describe all extensions of the identity map on Q to an isomorphism mapping Q(./3i, ..yl) onto a 
subfield of C. 

356 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
16. Describe all extensions of the automorphism \11 vf3;,-vf3; on IQ( ,J3i) to an isomorphism mapping IQ( ,J3i, .J2) 
onto a subfield of C. 
17. Let a be an automorphism of lQ(rr) that maps rr onto -rr. 
a. Describe the fixed field of a. 
b. Describe all extensions of a to an isomorphism mapping the field IQ(vfrr') onto a subfield of the splitting 
field of x2 + rr over IQ(rr ). 
Concepts 
In Exercise 18, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is needed, so 
that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
18. A polynomialf(x) in F[x] splits in an extension.field E of F if and only if it factors in E[x] into a product of 
polynomials of lower degree. 
19. Letf(x) be a polynomial in F[x] of degree n. Let Ebe a splitting field off(x) over F. What bounds can be put 
on [E: F]? 
20. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Let a, f3 E E, where E is a splitting field over F. Then there exists an automorphism of E leaving F fixed 
and mapping a onto f3 if and only if irr(a, F) = irr(fj, F). 
b. If f(x) i= g(x) are polynomials in IQ[x], Fis the splitting field of f(x) over IQ, and K is the splitting field of 
g(x) over IQ, then F i= K. 
c. JR is a splitting field over JR. 
d. C is a splitting field over JR. 
e. IQ(i) is a splitting field over IQ. 
f. IQ(rr) is a splitting field over IQ(rr2). 
g. For every splitting field E over F, every isomorphic mapping of Eis an automorphism of E. 
h. For every splitting field E over F, where E ::; K, every isomorphism mapping E onto a subfield of K is an 
automorphism of E. 
i. For every splitting field E over F, where E ::: K, every isomorphism mapping E onto a subfield of K and 
leaving F fixed is an automorphism of E. 
j. If Eis a splitting field over F and a E E, then deg(a, F) divides [E : F]. 
21. Show by an example that Corollary 44. 12 is no longer true if the word irreducible is deleted. 
22. Is IG(E/ F)I multiplicative for finite towers of finite extensions, that is, is 
IG(K/ F)I = IG(K/ E) llG(E/ F)I 
for 
F::;E::; K? 
Why or why not? [Hint: Use Exercises 7 through 9.] 
Theory 
23. Show that if a finite extension E of a field F is a splitting field over F, then E is a splitting field of one 
polynomial in F[x]. 
24. Show that if [E : F] = 2, then Eis a splitting field over F. 
25. Show that for F::: E::: F, Eis a splitting field over F if and only if E contains all conjugates over Fin Ffor 
each of its elements. 
26. Show that the splitting field K of {x2 - 2,x2 - 5} over IQ is IQ(.J2 +,JS). 
27. Show that 
28. a. Show that an automorphism leaving F fixed of a splitting field E over F of a polynomialf(x) E F[x] per-
mutes the zeros off(x) in E. 
b. Show that an automorphism leaving F fixed of a splitting field E over F of a polynomial f(x) E F[x] is 
completely determined by the permutation of the zeros off(x) in E given in part (a). 

Section 45 
Separable Extensions 
357 
c. Show that if E is a splitting field over F of a polynomial f(x) E F[x], then G(E/ F) can be viewed in a 
natural way as a certain group of permutations. 
29. Let K be the splitting field of x3 - 2 over Q. Use Exercise 28 to show that G(K/Q) is isomorphic with S3, the 
symmetric group on three letters. [Hint: Use Theorem 43.18 and complex conjugation to find enough elements 
that the Theorem of Lagrange and Exercise 28 imply the result.] 
30. Show that for a prime p, the splitting field over Q of xP - 1 is of degree p - 1 over Q. [Hint: Refer to Corol-
lary 28.18.] 
31. Let P be a finite set of polynomials with coefficients in the field F. Prove that a splitting field of P over F exists 
without using the algebraic closure of F. 
32. Let a : F---+ F' be a field isomorphism. Show that <rx : F[x] ---+ F'[x], as defined in Definition 44.4, is a ring 
isomorphism. 
SECTION 45 SEPARABLE EXTENSIONS 
Counting Zeros of Irreducible Polynomials 
There is a technical issue in Galois theory that we have not yet discussed. Is it possible 
for an irreducible polynomialf(x) over a field F to have fewer than deg(f(x)) zeros in 
a splitting field over F? We will see, for essentially all the fields we will consider, that 
the answer is no. We start with a calculus-based proof of this fact for subfields of the 
complex numbers. 
45.1 Theorem 
Letf(x) be an irreducible polynomial of degree n with coefficients in the field F,:::: C. 
Then the splitting field for f(x) over F contains n distinct zeros off (x). 
Proof 
We can assume that the coefficient of x' is 1. We can also assume that n '.": 2 since 
otherwise the theorem is trivially true. Then 
f(x) = x' +an-ix'-' + · · · + a,x + ao. 
Since C is algebraically closed, we can writef(x) = (x - a 1 )(x - a1) .. . (x - an) where 
a 1, a 2, ... , an are the zeros of f(x) in C. Since f(x) is monic and irreducible,f(x) is the 
minimal polynomial over F for ak. We show that no two of the ak are equal. We use 
proof by contradiction and assume that two of the ak are equal. Then in C [x], f(x) = 
(x - a k)2q(x) for some polynomial q(x). Since we are considering polynomials over C, 
we can use the derivative of a polynomial, which we denote in the standard way asf'(x). 
The product rule gives 
J'(x) = 2(x - ak)q(x) + (x - ak}2q'(x) = (x - ak)(2q(x) + (x - ak)q'(x)). 
Therefore ak is a zero ofJ'(x). By the usual formula for the derivative of a polyno-
mial 
J'(x) = nx'-' + (n -
l )an- 1x'- 2 + · · · + a 1 
andf' (x) E F[x]. Sincef'(x) has degree n -
l '.": l and ak is a zero of f'(x),f(x) is not 
the minimal polynomial for ak over F. This gives a contradiction and proves that the ak 
are distinct. 
We can construct a splitting field of f(x) over F as a subfield of C. So a splitting 
field for f(x) over F contains n distinct zeros for f(x). Since splitting fields are unique 
up to isomorphism, in any splitting field for f(x) over F,f(x) has n distinct zeros. 
+ 
Although the above proof applies to a special (but very important) case, essentially 
the same proof can be used for any field of characteristic zero. We can simply define the 
derivative of any polynomialf(x) = ao + a,x + a2x2 + · · · + anx' E F[x] to be 
D(f)(x) = J'(x) = a 1 + (2 · a2)x + (3 · a3)x2 + · · · + (n · an)x'-1, 

358 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
where an integer times an element in a field has the usual meaning. In calculus this 
formula is derived using the limit definition of derivatives. For our purposes, we simply 
use this formula as the definition of the derivative, D(j)(x) = J'(x). Exercise 15 in Sec-
tion 42 uses this definition to prove the product rule and other essential rules that are 
required for the proof of Theorem 45.1. Exercise 13 in this Section asks for the details 
of the proof of Theorem 45.2. 
45.2 Theorem 
Let f(x) be an irreducible polynomial of degree n with coefficients in a field F of 
characteristic zero. Then f(x) contains n distinct zeros in the splitting field for f(x) 
over F. 
Proof 
See Exercise 13. 
• 
45.3 Definition 
Letf(x) E F[x], and let a be a zero ofj(x) in a splitting field E over F. If v is the largest 
positive integer such that (x - a)" is a factor of f(x) in E[x], then a is a zero of f(x) 
with multiplicity v. 
• 
Definition 45.3 does not specify which splitting field over F is to be used. It can 
be any splitting field that contains a. In Exercise 19, you are asked to show that the 
definition is independent of which splitting field is used. An equivalent statement of 
Theorem 45.2 is that ifj(x) is an irreducible polynomial with coefficients in a field F of 
characteristic 0, then every zero ofj(x) in any splitting field over F has multiplicity one. 
Characteristic p 
We have seen that for irreducible polynomials over a field F of characteristic zero, zeros 
of multiplicity two or greater cannot occur. We now turn our attention to the case where 
the characteristic is not zero. 
45.4 Theorem 
Let F be a finite field of characteristic p. Any irreducible polynomial f (x) E F[x] has 
k = deg(j(x)) distinct zeros in its splitting field. 
Proof 
Let E ::: F be the splitting field off (x) over F and a a zero f (x) in E. Then IEI = p
11
, 
for some n. We can assume that the leading coefficient off (x) is 1. Therefore f(x) is 
the minimal polynomial for a over F. By Theorem 42.3, a is a zero of the polynomial 
.xP" - x, which implies thatf(x) divides x"' - x. The p" zeros of .xP" - x are distinct in 
the algebraic closure Eby Lemma 42.8, so the linear factors of 
f(x) = (x - a1)(x - a 2) · · · (x - ak) 
must also be distinct in E, and therefore, f(x) has k distinct zeros in its splitting field . • 
Theorems 45.2 and 45.4 say that any irreducible polynomial f(x) E F[x], where 
the field F is either finite or it has characteristic zero, has deg(j(x)) distinct zeros of 
multiplicity one in its splitting field over F. The next example shows that this is not the 
case for all infinite fields of characteristic p. 
45.5 Example 
Let p be a prime and E = Zp(y), where y is an indeterminate. We let F = Zp(yP) ::: E. 
For convenience, we let t = yP, so F = Zp(t). The extension E over Fis algebraic since 
y is a zero of the polynomial .xP - t. By Corollary 39.14, irr(y, F) divides x' - t. We can 
factor x' - t in E as 
x' - t = x' -yP = (x- yy', 

Section 45 
Separable Extensions 
359 
since we are in characteristic p. Furthermore, y ¥:. F, so the degree of irr(y, F) is at least 
two. Therefore the number of distinct zeros of irr(y, F) is one, but its degree is greater 
than one, showing that the finite assumption in Theorem 45.4 is necessary. 
.A 
Counting Automorphisms 
Our goal is to associate intermediate fields in a field extension F ::: K with subgroups 
of the group of automorphisms of K that fix F. In order to apply this correspondence, 
it is very helpful to know the number of automorphisms under consideration. Knowing 
that all irreducible polynomials in F have zeros of multiplicity one in a splitting field K 
gives us the information we need to count the automorphisms in G(K / F). 
45.6 Definition 
An irreducible polynomial f(x) E F[x] of degree n is separable if in the splitting field 
K of f(x) over F, f(x) has n distinct zeros. An element a in an extension field of F is 
separable if irr(a, F) is a separable polynomial. A field extension F ::: E is separable if 
every a E E is separable over F. If every finite extension of a field F is separable, then 
F is perfect. 
• 
It is clear that an irreducible polynomialf(x) E F[x] is separable if and only if every 
zero ofj(x) in its splitting field over F has multiplicity one. 
45.7 Theorem 
Every field of characteristic 0 is perfect and every finite field is perfect. 
Proof 
Let F ::: E be a finite field extension, where either F has characteristic 0 or F is finite. 
Let g(x) be the minimal polynomial for a EE over F. By Theorems 45.2 and 45.4, g(x) 
has deg(g(x)) distinct zeros in the splitting field of g(x) over F. 
+ 
45.8 Theorem 
Let K be a separable extension of the field F and E an intermediate field. Then both the 
extensions K over E and E over F are separable. 
Proof 
Let a E K. Then irr(a, F) has deg(a, F) zeros, each with multiplicity one, in the split-
ting field of irr(a, F) over F, as K is separable over F. Since irr(a, E) divides irr(a, F), 
irr(a, E) has deg( a , E) zeros, each with multiplicity one. Thus a is separable over E and 
K is a separable extension of E. 
We now let fJ E E. Therefore, fJ E K , which implies that irr({J, F) has deg({J, F) 
zeros in the splitting field of irr({J, F) over F. Thus Eis a separable extension of F. 
+ 
The following theorem is very useful for our purposes. It counts the number of 
isomorphisms mapping an intermediate field E, of a separable splitting field F ::: K , 
onto a subfield of K. In particular, using E = K , the theorem tells us the number of 
automorphisms in G(K / F). 
45.9 Theorem 
Let K be a splitting field over F and F ::: E ::: K. If K is a separable extension over 
F , then the number of isomorphisms that map E onto a subfield of K that fix all the 
elements of F is [E: F ]. 
Proof 
Let E = F(a1, a 2 , ... , a 11 ). We use induction on n to show that for each 1 ::: k ::: n the 
number of isomorphisms that fix elements of F and map F(a1, a2, ... , ak) onto a sub-
field of K is [F(a1, a2, . .. , ak) : F]. To save writing, we let Ek = F(a1 , a2, ... , ak). For 
n = 1, £ 1 = F(a1) and [£1 : F] = deg(a1,F). Furthermore, Corollary 43.19 says there 
is exactly one isomorphism that fixes elements of F and maps £ 1 onto a subfield of K 
for each zero of irr(a 1, F) in K. Since K is a splitting field and a 1 is a zero of irr(a 1 ,F), 
Corollary 44.12 says that irr(a1, F) splits into linear factors. But the extension E over F 

360 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
is separable, so irr(a 1, F) has exactly deg(a 1, F) zeros in K. Thus the number of isomor-
phisms mapping E 1 onto a subfield of K is 
deg( a, F) = [E 1 : F]. 
We proceed with the induction step. We assume there are [Ek : F] isomorphisms 
that fix F and map Ek onto a subfield of K. Let a be one of these isomorphisms. We 
let g(x) = irr(ak+ i , Ek). Since ax(g(x)) is a factor of ax(irr(ak+ 1,F)) = irr(ak+1,F), it 
follows that ax(g(x)) factors into deg(g(x)) linear factors in K[x]. By Theorem 45.8, K 
is separable over Ek. Thus ax(g(x)) has exactly deg(g(x)) distinct zeros in K. The map a 
can be extended to exactly 
isomorphisms from Ek+t = Ek(ak+ i ) onto a subfield of K by Lemma 44.5. By the in-
duction hypothesis there are exactly [Ek : F] isomorphisms a that fix elements of F and 
map Ek onto a subfield of K, giving us a total of 
isomorphisms that fix elements of F and map Ek+t onto a subfield of K. This completes 
the induction step, and we conclude that there are exactly [E11 : F ] = [E : F ] isomor-
phisms mapping E onto a subfield of K that fix elements of F. 
+ 
In the case where Eis a separable splitting field over F , Theorems 44.11 and 45.9 
imply that G(E/ F) = [E : F]. However, if Eis not a splitting field of F, then some of 
the isomorphisms fixing F and mapping E onto a subfield of K will map onto a subfield 
of K other than E. 
45.10 Corollary 
Let Ebe a separable splitting field over F . Then IG(E/ F)I = [E: F]. 
Proof The Corollary follows immediately from Theorem 45.9. 
• 
45.11 Corollary 
Let E be a splitting field over F where F is either a field of characteristic 0 or a finite 
field. Then IG(E/ F)I = [E: F]. 
Proof 
Since Fis perfect by Theorem 45.7, the result follows from Corollary 45.10. 
+ 
45.12 Example 
In Example 43.4, we explicitly determined four automorphisms of Q(.J2, .J3) that fix 
elements of Q. Corollary 45.11 shows that there are exactly 
[Q( h , v'3°) : Q] = [Q( h , v'3°) : Q( v'3°)] . [Q( v'3°) : Q] = 2. 2 = 4 
automorphisms without explicitly writing out the formulas. 
On the other hand, in Example 43.14, even though 
[Q(~): Q] = 3, 
there is only one automorphism ofQ(,,y'2). This is due to the fact that that Q(,,y'2) is not 
a splitting field over Q and Theorem 45.9 does not apply. 
• 
The Primitive Element Theorem 
The primitive element theorem is a classic of field theory. It says that any finite separable 
extension of a field is a simple extension. We will find it useful in Section 46 where we 
prove the Galois correspondence. 
45.13 Theorem 
Primitive Element Theorem Let Ebe a finite separable extension of a field F. Then 
there is an a E E such that E = F( a). Any such element a is ea! led a primitive element. 

Section 45 
Separable Extensions 
361 
Proof 
We first consider the case where F is a finite field. In this case E*, the units in E, is 
a cyclic group under multiplication by Theorem 28.7. Clearly E = F(a) where a is a 
generator of the cyclic group E*. 
We next assume that Fis infinite and show that if E = F({J, y), then E has a prim-
itive element. If y E F , then fJ is a primitive element. We therefore assume that y 
is not in F. We seek a primitive element of the form a = fJ + ay where a E F. Let 
f(x) = irr({J,F) and g(x) = irr(y ,F). In the splitting field of {f(x),g(x)) over E, let 
fJ = {31, f32, ... , {J,, be the zeros of f(x) and y = y 1, y2, . .. , y111 the zeros of g(x). Since 
y is not in F, m 2: 2. The only conditions we need on the element a are that a E F and 
that for each l :'S i :'S n and 2 :'S j :'S m, 
a i= {3; - fJ. 
y-Y.i 
There is certainly such an element a E F due to the fact that F is infinite and we only 
eliminate a finite number of possible values for a. Since {31 = fJ and m 2: 2, a i= 0. 
We let 
a= fJ + ay. 
If a = {J; +an for some i andj i= l, then 
{3; + an = fJ + ay 
and 
{J; - fJ 
a=--, 
y -yj 
which is a contradiction. Thus for any i and j i= 1, a i= {J; + GJl.i or equivalently, 
a - ayj i= {J;. 
We now let 
h(x) =f(a - ax) E F(a)[x]. 
Since h(x) is in F(a)[x] and f(x) = irr({J, F) E F [x] :'S F(a)[x], the greatest common 
divisor of h(x) andf(x) is a polynomial in F(a)[x]. For j i= l , 
h(y) =f(a - ay) = f ({J) = 0 
and 
h(Jl.i) = j(a - GJl.i) oj= 0, 
since the only zeros of f(x) are the {J; and a - ayj i= {J; for any i. Therefore the only 
common factor of h(x) and f (x) is x -
{J, so the greatest common divisor of h(x) and 
f(x) is x -
{J. Thus x - fJ E F(a)[x] and fJ E F(a). Since a , fJ E F(a), 
a - fJ 
y = -- E F(a). 
a 
We conclude that F({J, y) :'S F(a). Clearly F(a) :'S F({J, y), so 
F(a) = F({J, y). 
By a straightforward induction argument, any finite separable extension of F has a prim-
itive element. 
+ 
To illustrate the construction of a primitive element for a given extension we pro-
vide the following example. 
45.14 Example 
In Example 44.13, we saw that ,,/2 + J3 is a primative element for the extension 
Q( ,,/2, J3). Let us follow the proof of Theorem 45.13 to find other primitive elements 
a E Q(,,/2, J3). Letf (x) = irr(,,/2, Q) = x2 - 2 and g(x) = irr(J3, Q) = x2 - 3. So 
fJ = f31 = ,,/2, 
f32 = -.J2, 
y = YI = ,J3, 
and 
Y2 = --J3. 

362 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
Thus a can be any rational number other than 
..fi- ..fi 
-----=0 and 
~-(-~) 
-..fi - ..fi 
~- (-~) 
Since - ~ is not a rational number, we can take a= 1, 2, 1/ 2, -17 / 42, or any rational 
number other than 0. Using a= 2, we have that 
a = f3 + ay = ,/2 + 2~. 
Thus 
<Q(h, ~) = <Q(h + 2~) 
and in general, 
<Q( h, J3) = <Q( h + aJ3) 
for any rational number a other than 0. 
45.15 Corollary If F is either a finite field or a field of characteristic 0, then every finite extension of F 
is a simple extension. 
Proof This is an immediate consequence of Theorems 45.7 and 45.13. 
• 
Normal Extensions 
We have now investigated the essential conditions on a field extension F :::: E that are 
required in order to apply Galois theory. The requirements are that E is a separable 
splitting field over F. 
45.16 Definition 
A finite extension E of F is a normal extension of F if E is a separable splitting field 
over F. If Eis a normal extension of F , then G(E/ F) is the Galois group of E over F. 
The Galois group is sometimes denoted by Gal(E/ F). 
• 
Although one can define an infinite normal extension, for our purposes we will 
restrict our attention to finite extensions. In what follows, when we refer to a normal 
extension, it will be assumed that the extension is finite. 
45.17 Theorem 
Let K be a normal extension of F and let E be an intermediate field of the extension, 
F :::: E :::: K. Then K is a normal extension of E and I G(K / E) I = [ K : E]. 
Proof 
Since K is a splitting field over F , there are polynomials f 1 (x),f2(x), .. . Jr(x) E F[x] 
with zeros a 1, a 2, ... , ak such that K = F(a 1, a2, ••• , ak) and each f; factors into lin-
ear factors in K. Then K = E(a 1, a 2, ... , ak), also. Thus K is the splitting field of 
{f1 (x),f2(x), ... J r(x)} over E. Furthermore, Theorem 45.8 states that K is a separable 
extension of E, which implies that K is a normal extension of E. 
Since K is a separable splitting field over E, Corollary 45.10 says that IG(K/ E)I = 
~:m. 
• 
45.18 Corollary If F :::: E :::: K where K is a normal extension of F , then G(K/ E) is a subgroup of 
G(K/ F) with index (G(K/F): G(K/ E)) = [E: F]. 
Proof Theorem 45.17 says that K is a normal extension of E. Each isomorphism a E G(K / E) 
fixes all the elements of E and, therefore, a fixes all the elements of F. Thus a E 
G(K/ F) and G(K/ E) ::; G(K/ F). 

We have 
Section 45 
Exercises 
363 
(G(K/ F) : G(K/ E)) = IG(K/ F)I 
IG(K/ E)I 
[K: F ] 
[K : £] 
= [E: F]. 
• 
45.19 Example 
In Example 44.2 we saw that the splitting field of .x3 - 2 over Q is 
K = Q ( V'l,V'l- 1 : J3i) = Q(V0, vf3i). 
The degree of the extension of K over Q( 4'2) is 
[K: Q(V0)] = deg(vf3i, Q(V0)) = 2. 
Also, the degree of the extension Q(4'2) over Q is 
[Q(V'l), Q] = deg(V'l, Q ) = 3, 
and 
[K: Q] = [K : Q(V0)] · [QV0: Q] = 6. 
Since Q is a perfect field, K is a separable and, therefore, a normal extension of Q . Thus 
Corollary 45.18 applies and we have 
IG(K/ Q )I = 6, IG(K/Q(Vi2)1=2, and (G(K/Q): G(K/Q(V0))) = 3. 
Up to isomorphism, there are two groups of order 6, Z6 and S3 . We will see in Section 
46 that G(K/Q) is isomorphic with S3 . 
.A 
• EXERCISES 45 
Computations 
In Exercises I through 4, find an a such that the given field is Q(a). Show that your a is indeed in the given field. 
Verify by direct computation that the given generators for the extension of Q can indeed be expressed as formal 
polynomials in your a with coefficients in Q. 
1. Q(../2, ~) 
3. Q(../2,~) 
Concepts 
2. Q(~,-Yi) 
4. Q(i,~) 
In Exercises 5 and 6, correct the definition of the italicized term without reference to the text, if correction is 
needed, so that it is in a form acceptable for publication. 
5. Let Ebe a splitting field over F. The multiplicity of a zero a E E of a polynomialf(x) E F[x] is v E z+ if and 
only if (x - a)v is a factor ofj(x) in F[x]. 
6. Let E be an extension of a field F. An element a in E is separable over F if and only if a is a zero of 
multiplicity 1 of irr(a, F). 
7. Give an example of anf(x) E Q[x] that has no zeros in Q but whose zeros in C are all of multiplicity 2. Explain 
how this is consistent with Theorem 45.7, which shows that Q is perfect. 
8. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Every finite extension of every field Fis separable over F. 
b. Every finite extension of every finite field Fis separable over F. 

364 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
c. Every field of characteristic 0 is perfect. 
d. Every polynomial of degree n over every field F always has n distinct zeros in F. 
e. Every polynomial of degree n over every perfect field F always has n distinct zeros in F. 
f. Every irreducible polynomial of degree n over every perfect field F always has n distinct zeros 
in F. 
g. Every algebraically closed field is perfect. 
h. Every field F has an algebraic extension E that is perfect. 
i. If E is a finite separable splitting field extension of F, then JG(£/ F)I = [E: F]. 
j. If a field F is neither finite nor of characteristic 0, then F is not a perfect field. 
Theory 
9. Show that { 1, y, · · · , y"- 1} is a basis for Zp(y) over Zp(y"), where y is an indeterminate. Referring to Exam-
ple 45.5, conclude by a degree argument that :xf' - t is irreducible over Zp(t), where t = y". 
10. Prove that if E is an algebraic extension of a perfect field F, then Eis perfect. 
11. Let Ebe a finite field of order p". 
a. Show that the Frobenius automorphism ap, defined in Exercise 35 of Section 43, has order n. 
b. Deduce from part (a) that G(E/Zp) is cyclic of order n with generator aP. [Hint: Remember that 
JG(E/F)J = [E: F ] 
for a normal field extension E over F .] 
12. Letf(x) E F[x ], and let a E Fbe a zero of/(x) of multiplicity v. Show that v > I if and only if a is also a zero 
off '(x), the derivative of F(x). [Hint: Apply Exercise 15 is Section 42 to the factorizationf (x) = (x - a)"g(x) 
ofj(x) in the ring fix].] 
13. Show from Exercise 12 that every irreducible polynomial over a field F of characteristic 0 is separable. 
14. Show from Exercise 12 that an irreducible polynomial q(x) over a field F of characteristic p # 0 is not sepa-
rable if and only if each exponent of each term of q(x) is divisible by p . 
15. Generalize Exercise 12, showing that f (x) E F[x] has no zero of multiplicity > I if and only if f (x) and f ' (x) 
have no common factor in fix] of degree > 0. 
16. Working a bit harder than in Exercise 15, show thatf(x) E F[x] has no zero of multiplicity > I if and only if 
f(x) andf '(x) have no common nonconstant factor in F[x]. [Hint: Use Theorem 35.9 to show that if I is a gcd 
ofj(x) andf'(x) in F[x], it is a gcd of these polynomials in E[x] for E any splitting field of F, also.] 
17. Describe a feasible computational procedure for determining whetherf(x) E F[x] has a zero of multiplicity > I, 
without actually finding the zeros of/(x). [Hint: Use Exercise 16.] 
18. Let F :':'. E :':'. K be field extensions with K a normal extension of F. By Corollary 45.18, G(K /£)is a subgroup 
of G(K/ F). For two automorphisms a , r E G(K/ F), show that they are in the same left cosets of G(K/ £) :':'. 
G(K/ F) if and only if a(a) = r(a) for all a E £. 
19. Prove that Definition 45.3 does not depend on which splitting field over F is used. 
SECTION 46 
GALOIS THEORY 
The Galois Theorems 
In this section we present the main theorems of Galois theory. These theorems provide 
precise statements regarding the correspondence between intermediate fields of a nor-
mal field extension and subgroups of the Galois group. But first we state key definitions 
related to the correspondence. 
46.1 Definition 
Let K be a normal extension of F, E an intermediate field of the extension, and H a 
subgroup of G(K / F). The set of all a E K such that each element of H fixes a is an 

Section 46 
Galois Theory 
365 
intermediate field of the extension K over F , and it is called the fixed field for H. We 
write KH to denote the fixed field for H. 
We let A.(£) be the set of all a E G(K/ F) that fix all the elements of E, that is, 
A.(£) = G(K / £). We call A.(£) the group of E. 
If K is the splitting field off(x) E F[x], then we say that G(K/ F) is the group of 
the polynomialf(x). 
• 
46.2 Example 
Let K be the splitting field off(x) = x3 - 2 over Q. As we saw in Example 45.19, K is 
a normal extension of Q and 
K = Q(~, ./3i). 
The group off(x) is G(K/Q). Also, 
A.(Q(~)) = {a E G(K/Q) I a(~)=~} = G(K/Q(~)) . 
Both the identity, i, and complex conjugation, a(a +bi) = a - bi, fix~. Therefore, 
(a ) = {i,a} :'.S A.(Q(~)) 
and 
Ka = Q(~). 
At this point, we can only say (a) is a subgroup of A.(Q(~)) since it is conceivable that 
there could be other automorphisms of G(K/Q) that fix Q(~). As we will soon see, 
this cannot be the case, and the two subgroups are equal. 
A 
We now present a series of related theorems that together make up the essence of 
Galois Theory. 
46.3 Theorem 
Let K be a normal extension of a field F and E an intermediate field. The fixed field for 
the set of all automorphisms of K that fix Eis exactly E. That is, 
E = K!..(E)· 
Proof Clearly E ~ K!..(E)· We show that K!..(E) ~E. Let a be an element of K that is not 
in E. The minimal polynomial for a over E has degree at least two and therefore a 
has a conjugate f3 E K, with f3 f= a, by Corollary 44.12 and the fact that K is a separa-
ble extension of F. Theorem 43.18, the Conjugation Isomorphism Theorem, says there 
is an isomorphism 
i/f a,f3 : E(a) --+ E(f3 ) 
that maps a to f3 and fixes all the elements of E. The map i/f a,f3 can be extended to 
an automorphism a : K --+ K by the Isomorphism Extension Theorem, Theorem 44.6. 
Thus a EA.(£), and a does not fix a. We have shown that if a rf. E, then A.(£) does not 
fix a; or equivalently, K!..(E) ~ E, which completes the proof. 
+ 
46.4 Theorem 
Let K be a normal extension of a field F and E an intermediate field. The degree of the 
extension Kover Eis the order of the group A.(£): 
[K: El= IA.(E)I = IG(K/ E)I. 
Furthermore, the number of left cosets of A.(£) in G(K / F) is the degree of the extension 
of E over F. That is, 
(G(K/F): A.(£))= [E: F]. 
Proof Since A.(£)= G(K/ E), this theorem is simply a restatement of Corollary 45.18. 
+ 

366 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
46.5 Example 
Continuing Example 46.2, K = Q (--Y2, .J3i) is the splitting field of x3 - 2 over Q. We 
saw that if a is complex conjugation, then (a) :S A.(Q ( --Y2)). The degree of the extension 
Kover Q (--Y2) is two since a = .J3i </; K, but a is a zero of the degree 2 polynomial 
x2 + 3 E Q (--Y2)[x]. By Theorem 46.4, 
2 = [K: Q(.lz)J = IA.(Q(.lz))I. 
Since (a) ::; A.(Q (4'2)) and both finite groups have the same number of elements, 
(a) = A.(Q(.lz)). 
46.6 Theorem 
Let K be a normal extension of a field F and H a subgroup of the Galois group G(K / F). 
The subgroup of G(K/ F) that fixes all the elements fixed by KH is exactly H. That is, 
Proof It is clear that His a subgroup of A.(KH). We will verify that the two groups are equal 
by checking that they have the same number of elements. Let k = IH I. 
By Theorem 45.13, the field extension K over F has a primitive element, a, so 
K = F(a). Let E = KH, the subfield of K that is fixed by every element in H . Then 
K = E(a) and [K: E] = deg(a,E). We let n = [K: E]. We next let 
f(x) = n 
(x - a(a)) E K[x]. 
a EH 
The degree off is k = IH I. Let r E H, so r is an isomorphism from K onto K. Since 
H is a group, multiplying all the elements of H by r on the left simply permutes the 
elements of H. That is, 
H= {a1,az, .. . ,ak) = {ra,,raz, ... , rak}. 
By Exercise 32 in Section 44, the map rx : K[x] --+ K[x] is an isomorphism and 
rxif(x)) = n 
(x - ra(a)) = n 
(x - a(a)) = f(x). 
a EH 
a EH 
Writingf(x) = ao + a ,x + a2x2 + · · · + akx'<, 
rxif(x)) = r(ao) + r(a1 )x + r(a2)x2 + · · · + r(ak)x'<. 
Equating coefficients in rxif(x)) = f(x), we see that for any r E H, and for any i, a; = 
r(a;). But the only elements of K that are fixed by every element in Hare the elements 
of E = KH, which implies that each a; is in E. Therefore,f(x) E E[x]. Since the identity 
map is in H, a is a zero off(x). Thus irr(a, E) dividesf(x) and 
k = deg(j(x)) ~ deg(irr(a, E)) = deg(a, E) = n. 
Since His a subgroup of A.(KH), 
k =IHI :S IA.(KH) I = [K: E] = n. 
Thus we have k = n and A.(KH) = H . 
• 
Theorems 46.3 and 46.6 together imply that for normal extensions, the map A., 
which maps the intermediate fields of the extension K over F to subgroups of G(K / F), 
is both one-to-one and onto. Furthermore the inverse map A.-1 is simply the map that 
sends a subgroup H ::; G(K / E) to the intermediate field KH = G(K / E). 
46.7 Example 
Let K = Q(.lz, .fii) over Q . In Example 45.19, we determined that IG(K/Q)I = 6. 
In this example, we take an alternate route to arrive at the same conclusion. In 

Section 46 
Galois Theory 
367 
Example 46.5, we saw that for rr E G(K/IQ) given by complex conjugation, >..(IQ(42°)) = 
(rr ). Therefore, 
Theorem 46.4 says that 
(G(K/IQ): (rr)) = (G(K/IQ): >..(IQ(~l2)) = [IQ(.Tl: IQ]= 3. 
Since l(rr)I = 2, 
IG(K/ IQ)I = (G(K/IQ): (rr)) · l(rr) I = 6. 
46.8 Theorem 
Let K be a normal extension of a field F and E an intermediate field of the exten-
sion. Then E is a normal extension of F if and only if >..(£) is a normal subgroup of 
G(K/F). Furthermore, if Eis a normal extension of F, then G(E/ F) is isomorphic with 
G(K/F)/G(K/E). 
Proof 
We first assume that Eis a normal extension of F. Let r E >..(£) = G(K/E) and rr E 
G(K/F). We verify that rrw- 1 E G(K/ E) to show that>..(£) is a normal subgroup of 
G(K/F). By Theorem 44.1 1, rr - 1 maps E isomorphically onto E. Therefore, for any 
a EE, r(rr- 1(a)) = rr- 1(a) and 
rrrn- 1(a) = rr(r(rr- 1(a))) = rr(rr- 1(a)) =a. 
Thus, rrrn- 1 E G(K/ E), and >..(£) is a normal subgroup of G(K/ F). 
We next assume that >..(£) is a normal subgroup of G(K / F) and show that E is a 
normal extension of F. We must show that E is a splitting field over F and that E is 
a separable extension of F. Theorem 45.8 says that the extension is separable. We use 
Corollary 44.14 to show that Eis a splitting field over F. Let rr1 be any isomorphism 
fixing F and mapping E onto a subfield of K. Let rr be an extension of rr1 to an isomor-
phism from K onto K. Such an extension exists by the Isomorphism Extension Theorem 
44.6. Let a EE and r E >..(£). By assumption rr- 1 rrr(a) =a. Thus 
w(a) = rr(a). 
Since every r E >..(£)fixes rr(a), rr(a) E K >..(E)· By Theorem 46.3, rr(a) EE. Thus the 
isomorphism rr1 maps E isomorphically onto E. By Corollary 44.14, Eis a splitting field 
over F, and therefore, Eis a normal extension of F. 
Assuming that E is a normal extension of F , we know that any isomorphism 
of K that fixes F maps E isomorphically onto itself. Using this fact, we can define 
<P: G(K/F)--+ G(E/F) by simply letting </J(rr) be the map rr restricted to E. By the 
Isomorphism Extension Theorem 44.6, <P maps onto G(E/ F). Also 
Ker(</J) = {rr E G(K/ F) I rr(a) =a for all a EE}= G(K/ E). 
Therefore G(E/ F) is isomorphic with 
G(K/ F)/ Ker(</J) = G(K/ F)/ G(K/ E). 
• 
46.9 Example 
Recall from Example 43.14, .x3 - 2 has only one zero in the field extension IQ(42°) 
over IQ. Thus IQ( 42°) over IQ is not a splitting field, and therefore, not a normal extension. 
As we saw, the only automorphism of G(IQ(42°)/IQ) is the identity map t. So the set of 
automorphisms of IQ(42°) fixing IQ(42°) is the same as the set of automorphisms of 
IQ(42°) fixing IQ. In the case of a normal extension, this could not happen since >.. gives 
a one-to-one correspondence. 
In Example 46. 7, we saw that 
IG(IQ( .Tl, J3i)/IQ)I = 6. 

368 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
Up to isomorphism, there are only two groups of order 6, Z6 and S3. Since <Ql(.../'2) 
over <Ql is not a normal extension of <Ql, A.(<Ql(.../'2)) is not a normal subgroup of 
G(<Ql(.../'2, ./3i)/<Ql). Every subgroup of Z6 is a normal subgroup, so G(<Ql(.../'2, ./3i)/<Ql) 
is isomorphic with S3. 
.._ 
The next theorem completes the basic facts that are used to apply Galois theory 
to particular problems. The theorem is usually interpreted in terms of subgroup and 
subfield diagrams. It says that the diagram for subfields is the same as the diagram for 
the corresponding subgroups, except that the diagrams are inverted. 
46.10 Theorem 
Let K be a normal extension of F, with E 1 and E2 intermediate fields. Then 
E1 is a subfield of E2 if and only if A.(E2) is a subgroup of A.(E1 ). 
Proof 
Suppose that E1 _:s E2. Then any automorphism of K that fixes every element of E2 
clearly fixes every element of E1, which means that A.(E2) _:s A.(E1). 
Now suppose that A.(E2) _:s A.(E1). Let a E K ;_(Ei) · Then a is fixed by every element 
of A.(E1) and, therefore, by every element of A.(E2). So a E K ;_(E,)· Thus 
• 
46.11 Example 
As before, we let K be the splitting field for f (x) = x3 - 2 over <Ql. Each u E G(K/<Ql) 
is completely determined by how u permutes the zeros of f(x). Since f(x) has three 
zeros, G(K / E) is isomorphic with a subgroup of the symmetric group S3. As we saw in 
Example 46.9, G(K/<Ql) is isomorphic with S3. By labeling the zeros ofj(x) by 
r1 = 4'2 
,,,/'2 
r1 = 2 ( - 1 + ./3i) 
,,,/'2 
. 
r 3 = 2 (-1 - ./31) 
the isomorphism <P : G(K/<Ql) --+ S3 can be defined by letting <f>(u) be the permutation of 
the zeros ofj(x) by the automorphism u , that is, <f>(u)(i) = j if u(r;) = rj. We will abuse 
notation slightly and identify elements in G(K /<Ql) with their corresponding elements in 
the symmetric group S3. 
The subgroup diagram for S3 is displayed in Figure 46.12 (a). By Theorem 46.10, 
the subfield diagram for K is given in Figure 46.12 (b). 
The automorphism corresponding to the transposition (2, 3) maps r2 to r3 , maps r3 
to r2 , and fixes r 1, which is complex conjugation. As we saw in Example 46.7, K{c2•3)) = 
<Ql(~) = <Ql(r1). The automorphism corresponding to (1, 2) fixes r3, maps r 1 to r1, and 
maps r1 to r1. Thus K((J,2)) = <Ql(r3). Similarly, K ((l ,3)) = <Ql(r2). 
We can determine K {(l,2,3)) by noticing that 
IA.(<Ql( ./3i))I = [K : <Ql( ./3i)] 
= [<Ql( 4'2, .J3i) : <Ql( .J3i)] 
= [<QC 4'2, .J3o : <Ql)J/ [<QlC .J3o : <QlJ 
= 3. 
The subfield diagram shows that there is only one intermediate field E with [K : E] = 3, 
so Kc(l.2,3)) = <Ql( ./3i). Summarizing: 
K 1,1 =K 
Ks, = <Ql 
K{(2,3J) = <Ql(r1) = <Ql( 4'2.) 

Section 46 
Exercises 
369 
S3 
//\~ 
((1 , 2)) 
((1 , 3)) 
((2,3)) 
((l,2,3)) 
~\// 
(i) 
(a) 
K (i ) 
//\~ 
K ((1,2)) 
K ((1,3J) 
K (C2.3l) 
K ((1.2,3)) 
~\// 
K (S3) 
(b) 
46.12 Figure 
(~ 
) 
K{(l,2J) = <Ql(r3) = <Ql 2 (-1 -vi3i) 
(~ 
) 
K{(l ,3)) = <Ql(r2) = <Ql T ( -1 + vl3i) 
K{c1.2,3)) = <Ql( vi3i) 
Normal subgroups of G(K/<Ql) correspond to subfields of K that are normal exten-
sions of <Ql by Theorem 46.8. Thus the only intermediate fields of K that are normal 
extensions of <Ql are K , <Ql, and <QJ(,J3°i) corresponding to the normal subgroups of S3, 
namely {i}, S3, and ((l, 2, 3)), respectively. 
..&. 
Not every subgroup diagram of a Galois group looks like its own inversion, as we 
will see in the next section. 
• EXERCISES 46 
Computations 
The field K = 1Qi(.J2, ,,/3, .JS) is a finite normal extension of !QI. It can be shown that [K: !QI] = 8. In Exercises 1 
through 8, compute the indicated numerical quantity. The notation is that of Definition 46.1. 
1. [K : IQl.J2J 
3. IJ..(IQl)I 
s. IJ..(1Qi(,J6))1 
7. IJ..(IQl(.J2 + .}6))1 
2. IG(K/<Ql)I 
4. IJ..(<QJ(.J2, ,,/3))1 
6. IJ..(Q(,,/30))1 
8. IJ..(K)I 

370 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
9. Describe the group of the polynomial (x4 - 1) E IQ[x] over IQ. 
10. Let G be the group of the polynomial x3 + 2 over IQ. Find the order of G and identify a well-known group that 
is isomorphic with G. 
11. Let K be the splitting field of x3 - 5 over IQ. 
a. Show that K = IQ(-YS, i.J3). 
b. Describe the six elements of G(K/IQ) by giving their values on -Y5 and i.J3. 
c. To what group we have seen before is G(K/IQ) isomorphic? 
d. Using the notation given in the answer to part (b) in the back of the text, give the diagrams for the subfields 
of Kand for the subgroups of G(K/IQ), indicating corresponding intermediate fields and subgroups, as we 
did in Example 46.11. 
12. Describe the group of the polynomial (x4 - 5x2 + 6) E IQ[x] over IQ. 
13. Describe the group of the polynomial (x3 - I) E IQ[x] over IQ. 
Concepts 
14. Give an example of two normal extensions K1 and K2 of the same field F such that K1 and K2 are not isomor-
phic fields but G(K1 / F) ~ G(K2/ F). 
15. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Two different subgroups of a Galois group may have the same fixed field. 
b. If F :::: E < L :::: K are field extensions and K is a normal extension of F, then A.(£) < A.(L). 
c. If K is a normal extension of F, then K is a normal extension of E, where F :::: E :::: K. 
d. If two normal extensions E and L of a field F have isomorphic Galois groups, then [£ : F] = [L : F]. 
e. If Eis a normal extension of F and His a normal subgroup of G(E/ F), then EH is a normal extension of F. 
f. If Eis any normal simple extension of a field F, then the Galois group G(E/ F) is a simple group. 
g. No Galois group is simple. 
h. If two intermediate fields E 1 and £2 of a normal extension K over F have isomorphic groups, A.(E 1) and 
A.(£2), then KJ..(Ei) is isomorphic with K J..(£2). 
i. An extension E of degree 2 over a field F is always a normal extension of F. 
j. An extension E of degree 2 over a field F is always a normal extension of F if the characteristic of F is 
zero. 
Theory 
16. A normal extension K of a field F is abelian over F if G(K / F) is an abelian group. Show that if K is abelian 
over F and F :::: E :::: K, then K is abelian over E and Eis abelian over F. 
17. Let K be a normal extension of a field F. Prove that for every a E K, the norm of a over F, given by 
NKj F(CX) = n c;(a ), 
aEG(K/F) 
and the trace of a over F, given by 
TrK/F(a) = I: c;(a), 
aEG(K/ F) 
are elements of F. 
18. Consider K = IQ( ./2, .J3). Referring to Exercise 17, compute each of the following (see Table 43.5). 
a. NK;Q(./2) 
b. NK;Q(./2 + .J3) 
c. NK/Q(./6) 
d. NK/Q(2) 
e. TrK;Q(./2) 
f. TrK;Q(./2 + .J3) 
g. TrK;Q(./6) 
h. TrK/Q_(2) 

Section 46 
Exercises 
371 
19. Let K = F(a) be a normal extension of F . Let 
irr(a, F ) = X' +an- ix''- ' + · · · + a1x + ao. 
Referring to Exercise 17, show that 
a. NK/F(a) = (-l)"ao, 
b. TrK/ F(a) = - a 11- 1. 
20. Letf(x) E F[x] be a polynomial of degree n such that each irreducible factor is separable over F. Show that 
the order of the group off (x) over F divides n ! . 
21. Letf(x) E F[x] be a polynomial such that every irreducible factor of f(x) is a separable polynomial over F. 
Show that the group of f(x) over F can be viewed in a natural way as a group of permutations of the zeros of 
f(x) in F. 
22. Let F be a field and let ~ be a primitive nth root of unity in F, where the characteristic of Fis 0. 
a. Show that F(t) is a normal extension of F. 
b. Show that G(F(t)/ F) is abelian. [Hint: Every a E G(F(t)/ F) maps~ onto some ~rand is completely 
determined by this value r.] 
23. A normal extension Kofa field Fis cyclic over F if G(K / F) is a cyclic group. 
a. Show that if K is cyclic over F and F :::: E :::: K , then Eis cyclic over F and K is cyclic over£. 
b. Show that if K is cyclic over F, then there exists exactly one field £ , F :::: E :::: K, of degree d over F for 
each divisor d of [K : F]. 
24. Let K be a normal extension of F. 
a. For a E K, show that 
is inF[x]. 
f(x) = 
TI 
(x - a(a)) 
a EC(K / F) 
b. Referring to part (a), show thatf(x) is a power of irr(a, F), andf(x) = irr(a, F) if and only if K = F (a). 
25. Let K be a normal extension of the field F. If E and Lare both intermediate fields of the extension, the join, 
E v L, is the intersection of all intermediate fields of the extension that contain both E and L. See Figure 46.13. 
Describe G(K/ (E v L)) in terms of G(K/E) and G(K / L). 
26. With reference to the situation in Exercise 25, describe G(K/ (E n L)) in terms of G(K/ E) and G(K/L ). 
K 
I 
Ev L 
/~ 
E 
L 
~/ 
EnL 
I 
F 
46.13 Figure 

372 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
SECTION 47 
ILLUSTRATIONS OF GALOIS THEORY 
Symmetric Functions 
Let F be a field of characteristic zero, and let y 1, · · · , Y11 be indeterminates. There are 
some natural automorphisms of F(y1, · · · , y11) leaving F fixed, namely, those defined by 
permutations of {y 1, • • • , y 11 }. To be more explicit, let a be a permutation of { 1, · · · , n}, 
that is, a E S11 • Then a gives rise to a natural map a: F(y1, · · · ,y11) ~ F(y1, · · · ,y11) 
given by 
a(f(y1, ... ,y11)) = f(ya( I)> · · · ,ya(11)) 
g(y,, · · · , Y11) 
g(ya(t), · · · , Ya(11)) 
for f(y1, · · · ,y11),g(y1, · · · ,y11 ) E F[y1, · · · ,y11], with g(y1, · · · ,y11) ~ 0. It is imme-
diate that a is an automorphism of F(y1, · · · , y11 ) leaving F fixed. The elements of 
F(y1, · · · , y11) left fixed by all a, for all a E S,,, are those rational functions that are 
symmetric in the indeterminates y 1, · · · , Y11· 
47.1 Definition 
An element of the field F(y1, · · · , y11) is a symmetric function in y1, · · · , y11 over F, if 
it is fixed by all permutations of y1, • • • , y11, in the sense just explained. 
• 
Let S11 be the group of all the automorphisms a for a E S11 • Observe that S11 is 
naturally isomorphic to S11 • Let K be the subfield of F(y1, · · · ,y11), which is the fixed 
field of S11 • Consider the polynomial 
II 
f(x) = n 
(x - y;); 
i= I 
this polynomial/(x) E (F(y1, · · · ,y11))[x] is a general polynomial of degree n. Let ax 
be the polynomial extension of a, as defined in Definition 44.4, to (F(y1, · · · ,y11))[x], 
where ax(x) = x. Now f(x) is fixed by each map ax for a E S11 ; that is, 
II 
II 
n(x -y;) = n(x -Ya(iJ)· 
i= I 
i= I 
Thus the coefficients off(x) are in K; they are, except for sign, the elementary symmetric 
functions in y1, · · · , y11. As illustration, note that the constant term off (x) is 
(- l)
11Y 1Y2 · · · y,,, 
the coefficient of .x'1- 1 is -(y1 + y2 + · · · + y11), and so on. These are symmetric func-
tions in y1, · · · ,Y11· 
The first elementary symmetric function in y1, • • • , Y11 is 
St = Y t + Y2 + ... + Y11> 
the second is s2 = Y1Y2 + YtY3 + · · · + Y11-1Y11, and so on, and the nth is Sn = Y1Y2 · · · Y11· 
Consider the field E = F(s1, • • • , s11 ). Of course, E _::: K , where K is the field of all 
symmetric functions in y 1, • • • , y11 over F. Since the characteristic of Eis zero, the exten-
sion Kover Eis a separable extension. Thus F(y 1, • • • , y11) is a finite normal extension 
of E, namely, the splitting field of 
f(x) = ncx -y;) 
i=I 
over E. Since the degree ofj(x) is n, we have at once that 
[F(y, , · · · ,y11): E] _::: n! 

Section 47 
Illustrations of Galois Theory 
373 
(see Exercise 19, Section 44). However, since K is the fixed field of Sn and 
ISnl = ISnl = n!, 
we have also 
n! = [F(y1, · · · ,yn) : K ]. 
Therefore, 
n! = [F(y,,· ·· ,yn): K] .'.S [F(y ,,·· · ,yn): E] .'.Sn!, 
so 
K=E. 
The full Galois group of F(y 1, • • • ,yn) over Eis therefore Sn. The fact that K = E shows 
that every symmetric function can be expressed as a rational function of the elementary 
symmetric functions s 1, • • • ,s,,. We summarize these results in a theorem. 
47.2 Theorem 
Let F be a field with characteristic zero. Let s 1, • • • , Sn be the elementary symmetric 
functions in the indeterminates y 1, • • • , Yn· Then every symmetric function of y 1, • • • , y,, 
over Fis a rational function of the elementary symmetric functions. Also, F(y 1, • • • , y,,) 
is a finite normal extension of degree n! of F(s 1, • • • , sn), and the Galois group of this 
extension is naturally isomorphic to Sn. 
47.3 Example 
K = <Q(a, i) 
E = <Q(a) 
47.4 Figure 
In view of Cayley's Theorem 8.11, it can be deduced from Theorem 47.2 that any 
finite group can occur as a Galois group (up to isomorphism). (See Exercise 11.) 
The proof of Theorem 47 .2 only uses the fact that the characteristic of Fis zero to 
conclude that the extension F(y 1, y2, .• • , y,,) over E is a separable extension. With a bit 
more work, the proof can be modified to allow F to be an arbitrary field. 
Examples 
Let us give our promised example of a finite normal extension having a Galois group 
whose subgroup diagram does not look like its own inversion. 
Consider the splitting field in C of x4 - 2 over Q . Now x4 - 2 is irreducible over Q, by 
Eisenstein's criterion, with p = 2. Let a =~be the real positive zero of x4 - 2. Then 
the four zeros of x4 - 2 in C are a , -a, ia , and -ia, where i is the usual zero of x2 + 1 
in C. The splitting field K of x4 - 2 over Q thus contains (ia)/ a =i. Since a is a real 
number, Q(a) < R so Q(a) i= K. However, since Q(a, i) contains all zeros of x4 - 2, 
we see that Q(a, i) = K. Letting E = Q(a), we have the diagram in Fig. 47.4. 
Now { 1, a , a 2 , a 3 } is a basis for E over Q, and { 1, i} is a basis for K over E. Thus 
is a basis for Kover Q. Since [K: Q] = 8, we must have IG(K/Q)I = 8, so we need to 
find eight automorphisms of K leaving Q fixed. We know that any such automorphism 
CY is completely determined by its values on elements of the basis { 1, a, a 2, a 3, i , ia, ia2, 
ia3), and these values are in turn determined by CY(a) and CY(i). But CY(a) must always 
be a conjugate of a over Q, that is, one of the four zeros of irr(a, Q) = x4 - 2. Like-
wise, CY(i) must be a zero of irr(i, Q) = x2 + 1. Thus the four possibilities for CY(a), 
combined with the two possibilities for CY(i), must give all eight automorphisms. We let 
p E G(K/Q) be the automorphism with p(a) = ia and p(i) = i; and we letµ, E G(K/Q) 
be the automorphism with µ,(a)= a and µ,(i) = -i. We have 
p2(a) = p(p(a)) = p(ia) = i(ia) = -a , 
p2(i) = p(p(i)) = p(i) = i. 

374 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
47.5 Table 
l 
p 
p2 
a--+ 
a 
ia -a 
i --+ 
i 
i 
i 
Similarly, we have 
p3 
µ, 
µ,p 
µ,p2 
µ,p3 
- ia 
a 
-ia -a 
ia 
i 
-i -i 
-i 
-i 
µ,p(a) = µ,(p(a)) = µ,(ia) = -ia, 
µ,p(i) = µ,(p(i)) = µ,(i) = -i. 
Table 47.5 shows the results of similar computations for i,p,p2, p3,µ,,µ,p, µ,p2 , 
and µ,p3. These automorphisms account for all eight of the elements of G(K/Q). The 
table looks remarkably like the dihedral group D4 . To verify that G(K/Q) is isomorphic 
with D 4 we check the relations µ,2 = t, p4 = t, and pµ, = µ,p3 by evaluating each at a 
and i. 
µ,2(a) =µ,(a) = a , 
µ,2(i) = µ,(-i) = i, 
p4(a) = p(p3(a)) = p(-ia) = - i2a =a, 
p4(i) = p(p3(i)) = p(i) = i, 
pµ,(a) = p(a) = ia = µ,p3(a), 
pµ,(i) = p(-i) = -i = µ,p3(i). 
The subgroup diagram for the dihedral group is given in Figure 47.6 (a) with the 
corresponding subfield diagram in Figure 47.6 (b).This provides a good illustration of 
how one diagram is the inversion of the other. 
The determination of the fixed fields KH; sometimes requires a bit of ingenuity. 
Let's illustrate. To find KH, , we merely have to find an extension of Q of degree 2 fixed 
by {t,p,p2,p3). Since all-pi leave i fixed, Q(i) is the field we are after. To find KH4 , 
we have to find an extension of Q of degree 4 fixed by t and µ,. Since µ, leaves a fixed 
and a is a zero of irr(a, Q) = x4 - 2, we see that Q(a) is of degree 4 over Q and is 
fixed by {i, µ,).By Galois theory, it is the only such.field. Here we are using strongly 
the one-to-one correspondence given by the Galois theory. If we find one field that 
fits the bill, it is the one we are after. Finding KH, requires more ingenuity. Since H7 
is a group, for any f3 E K, i(f3) + µ,p3(f3) is fixed by t and µ,p3, the elements of H1. 
Letting f3 =a we see that i(a) + µ,p3(a) =a+ ia is fixed by H7 . By checking all eight 
automorphisms in Table 47.5, we see that only t and µ,p 3 fix a+ ia. Thus by the one-
to-one correspondence, we must have 
Suppose we wish to find irr(a + ia, Q). If y =a + ia, then for every conjugate 
of y over Q, there exists an automorphism of K mapping y into that conjugate. Thus 
we need only compute the various different values cr(y ) for er E G(K/Q) to find the 
other zeros of irr(y, Q). Every element in D4 can be written in the form p; (µ,p3 )j where 
0 ::: i ::: 3 and j is either 0 or 1. But µ,p3 (a + ia) = a + ia , so to compute the conjugates 
of a+ ia we only need to compute i(a + ia), p(a + ia), p2(a + ia), and p 3(a + ia). 

Section 47 
Illustrations of Galois Theory 
375 
G(K/Q) 
---------- I ------------
Hi = {i, p2, µ., µ.p2} 
H2 = (p) 
H3 = {i, p2, µ.p, µ.p3} 
/~~I~~ 
H, = {fl) 
H, = (µ~, 
rp~H; =(pp') 
H, = (µp) 
{•} 
(a) 
QC\'.12, i) = K = K {d 
-----------7
1 ~ 
Q(V2) = KH 
Q (iV2) = KH 
Q (\/2, i) = KH, 
Q (efi + iV2) = KH, 
Q (V2 - iV2) = KH, 
~· ~
I ~/ 
Q(Y2)=K~ i~(,V2J= KH, 
Q = Kc(K/Q) 
(b) 
47.6 Figure 
(a) Group diagram. (b) Field diagram. 
The conjugates of y =a+ ia are thus a+ ia, ia - a, -a - ia, and -ia +a. Hence 
irr(y, Q) = [(x - (a+ ia))(x - (ia - a))] 
· [(x - (-a - ia))(x - (-ia +a))] 
= (x2 - 2iax - 2a2)(x2 + 2iax - 2a2) 
= x4 + 4a4 = x4 + 8. 
We have seen examples in which the splitting field of a quartic (4th degree) poly-
nomial over a field Fis an extension of F of degree 8 (Example 47.3) and of degree 24 
(Theorem 47.2, with n = 4). The degree of an extension of a field F that is a splitting 
field of a quartic over F must always divide 4! = 24. The splitting field of (x - 2)4 over 
Q is Q, an extension of degree 1, and the splitting field of (x2 - 2)2 over Q is Q( .J2), 
an extension of degree 2. Our last example will give an extension of degree 4 for the 
splitting field of a quartic. 
47.7 Example 
Consider the splitting field of x4 + 1 over Q. By Theorem 28.12, we can show that 
x4 + 1 is irreducible over Q, by arguing that it does not factor in Z [x]. (See Exercise 1.) 
The work on complex numbers in Section 3 shows that the zeros of x4 + 1 are (1 ± 
i) / .J2 and ( -1 ± i) / .J2. A computation shows that if 
1 +i 
a=--, 
.J2 

376 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
then 
and 
7 
1 - i 
a = ../2. 
Thus the splitting field K of x4 + 1 over Q is Q(a), and [K: Q] = 4. Let us compute 
G(K/Q) and give the group and field diagrams. Since there exist automorphisms of K 
mapping a onto each conjugate of a, and since an automorphism a of Q(a) is com-
pletely determined by a(a), we see that the four elements of G(K/Q) are defined by 
Table 47.8. 
47.8 Table 
a -+ 
a 
a 3 
as 
a7 
Since 
(apk)(a) = aj(ak) = (aj)k = ~k 
and a 8 = 1, we see that G(K/Q ) is isomorphic to the group (1, 3, 5, 7) under multipli-
cation modulo 8. There are only two groups of order 4 up to isomorphism, the cyclic 
group and the Klein 4-group. Since each element of { 1, 3, 5, 7) has order 2 or 1, G(K /Q) 
is isomorphic with the Klein 4-group. The diagrams are given in Fig. 47.9. 
(a) 
IQl = Kc(K/Q) 
(b) 
47.9 Figure 
(a) Group diagram. (b) Field diagram. 
To find K (a,)• it is only necessary to find an element of Knot in Q fixed by {a1, a3 ), 
since [K(a,) : Q] = 2. Clearly a 1 (a)+ a3(a) is fixed by both a1 and a3, since {a1, a 3} 
= (a3) is a group. We have 
a,(a) + a3(a) = a+ a3 = ih. 
Similarly, 

Section 47 
Exercises 
377 
is fixed by (o-7) = {a I , o-7 }. This technique is of no use in finding E (as ), for 
aI (a) + as(a) =a+ a 5 = 0, 
and 0 E Q. But by a similar argument, aI (a)as(a) is fixed by both aI and as, and 
<JI (a )as(a) = aa5 = -i. 
Thus Q(-i) = Q (i) is the field we are after. 
• EXERCISES 47 
Computations (requiring more than the usual amount of theory) 
1. Show that x4 + I is irreducible in Q [x], as we asserted in Example 47.7. 
2. Verify that the intermediate fields given in the field diagram in Fig. 47.6 are correct. (Some are verified in the 
text. Verify the rest.) 
3. For each field in the field diagram in Fig. 47.6, find a primitive element generating the field over Q (see 
Theorem 45.13) and give its irreducible polynomial over Q. 
4. Let t be a primitive 5th root of unity in <C. 
a. Show that Q(t) is the splitting field of x5 - l over Q. 
b. Show that every automorphism of K = Q(t) maps t onto some power t' oft. 
c. Using part (b), describe the elements of G(K/Q). 
d. Give the group and field diagrams for Q(t) over Q, computing the intermediate fields as we did in Exam-
ples 47.3 and 47.7. 
S. Describe the group of the polynomial (x5 - 2) E (Q(t))[x] over Q(t), where t is a primitive 5th root 
of unity. 
6. Repeat Exercise 4 for t a primitive 7th root of unity in <C. 
7. In the easiest way possible, describe the group of the polynomial 
(x8 -
l) E Q[x] 
over Q. 
8. Find the splitting field Kin <C of the polynomial (x4 - 4x2 -
l ) E Q[x]. Compute the group of the polynomial 
over Q and exhibit the correspondence between the subgroups of G(K/Q) and the intermediate fields. In other 
words, do the complete job. 
9. Express each of the following symmetric functions in YI, y2, y3 over Q as a rational function of the elementary 
symmetric functions SI , s2, s3. 
a. YI 2 + Y22 + Y32 
b. ~ + ~ + ~+Y3 + ~ + Y3 
Y2 
YI 
Y3 
YI 
Y3 
Y2 
10. Let a I , a2, a3 be the zeros in <C of the polynomial 
(x3 - 4x2 + 6x - 2) E Q[x]. 
Find the polynomial having as zeros precisely the following: 
a. a I+ a2 +a3 
b. aI2, a22,a32 
Theory 
11. Show that every finite group is isomorphic to some Galois group G(K/ F) for some finite normal extension K 
of some field F. 

378 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
12. Letf(x) E F[x] be a monic polynomial of degree n having all its irreducible factors separable over F. Let K be 
the splitting field ofj(x) over F, and suppose thatf(x) factors in K[x] into 
Let 
II 
TI<x- a;). 
i= l 
t:.(j) = n 
(a; - Cij); 
i<j 
the product (t:.(j))2 is the discriminant ofj(x). 
a. Show that t:.(j) = 0 if and only if f(x) has as a factor the square of some irreducible polynomial in F[x]. 
b. Show that (t:.(j))2 E F. 
c. G(K/ F) may be viewed as a subgroup of S,,, where S11 is the group of all permutations of {a; Ii= 1, · · · , n). 
Show that G(K / F), when viewed in this fashion, is a subgroup of A 11 , the group formed by all even permu-
tations of {a; Ii= 1, · · · , n), if and only if t:.(j) E F. 
13. An element of C is an algebraic integer if it is a zero of some monic polynomial in Z[x]. Show that the set of 
all algebraic integers forms a subring of C. 
SECTION 48 CYCLOTOMIC EXTENSIONS 
The Galois Group of a Cyclotomic Extension 
In this section we consider subfields of the complex numbers obtained by adjoining 
roots of unity to the rational numbers, Q. We apply Galois theory to these extensions to 
determine which regular n-gons are constructible. 
48.1 Definition 
The splitting field of x' - 1 over a field Fis the nth cyclotomic extension of F. 
• 
Since fields of characteristic zero are perfect, the splitting field, K, ofj(x) = x' - 1 
over Q is separable and thus a normal extension of Q. The distinct n zeros of f(x) 
form a cyclic group U11 • (See Section 3.) We saw in Corollary 6.17 that the number of 
generators of a cyclic group of order n is the number of positive integers less than n 
that are relatively prime ton, which we defined to be the Euler phi-function <p(n). These 
<p(n) generators are exactly the primitive nth roots of unity. 
48.2 Definition 
The polynomial 
q>(ll) 
<t>n(x) = n 
(x - a ;) 
i= l 
where the a; are the primitive nth roots of unity in Q , is the nth cyclotomic polynomial 
over Q. 
• 
Let a E G(K/Q). Since an automorphism of the Galois group G(K/Q) must per-
mute the primitive nth roots of unity, we see that ax(<t>11(x)) = <t>11(x), where ax : K[x] --+ 
K[x] is the polynomial extension of a. Thus the coefficients of <1>11 are fixed by every 
a E G(K/Q), and therefore, all the coefficients of <t>11(x) are rational numbers. That is, 
<t>n(X) E Q [x]. The nth cyclotomic polynomial <1>11(x) must divide x' - 1, so <t>n(x) E 
Z [x] by Theorem 28.12. For pa prime number, Corollary 28.18 says that <l>p(x) is ir-
reducible over Q. Although we do not prove it here, it can be shown that <t>11(x) is 
irreducible even when n ::: 2 is not a prime number. 

• HISTORICAL NOTE 
C
arl Gauss considered cyclotomic polynomi-
als in the final chapter of his Disquisitiones 
Arithmeticae of 1801. In that chapter, he gave a 
constructive procedure for actually determining the 
roots of <Pp(x) in the case where p is prime. Gauss's 
method, which became an important example for 
Galois in the development of the general theory, 
was to solve a series of auxiliary equations, each of 
degree a prime factor of p -
1, with the coefficients 
of each in turn being determined by the roots of the 
previous equation. Gauss, of course, knew that the 
roots of <Pp(x) were all powers of one of them, say 
s . He determined the auxiliary equations by taking 
certain sets of sums of the roots sj, which were 
the desired roots of these equations. For exam-
ple, in the case where p = 19 (and p - I = 18 = 
3 x 3 x 2), Gauss needed to find two equations of 
degree 3 and one of degree 2 as his auxiliaries. 
Section 48 
Cyclotomic Extensions 
379 
It turned out that the first one had the three 
roots, ct1 = s +SS+ s7 +SIS+ Sil + s12,ct2 = 
s2 + s 16 + s 14 + s 17 + s3 +SS' and Q'.3 = s4 + 
s 13 +s9+s 15 +s6+s 10. In fact, these three val-
ues are the roots of the cubic equation x3 + x2 -
6x - 7. Gauss then found a second cubic equation, 
with coefficients involving the a's, whose roots 
were sums of two of the powers of s, and finally 
a quadratic equation, whose coefficients involved 
the roots of the previous equation, which had s 
as one of its roots. Gauss then asserted (without a 
complete proof) that each auxiliary equation can in 
turn be reduced to an equation of the form x" - A, 
which clearly can be solved by radicals. That is, he 
showed that the solvability of the Galois group in 
this case, the cyclic group of order p -
1, implied 
that the cyclotomic equation was solvable in terms 
of radicals. (See Section 49.) 
Let i be the usual complex zero of x2 + 1. Our work with complex numbers in 
Section 3 shows that 
( 
2n 
2n ) " 
cos ~ 
+ i sin ~ = cos 2n + i sin 2n = 1, 
so cos(2n/n) + i sin(2n/n) is an nth root of unity. The least integer m such that 
(cos(2n/n) + isin(2n/n))"' = 1 is n. Thus cos(2n/ n) + isin(2n/ n) is a primitive nth 
root of unity, a zero of 
<P,,(x) E Ql[x]. 
48.3 Example 
A primitive 8th root of unity in (['. is 
2n 
. . 2n 
s = cos S + 1 sm S 
Jr 
. . 
Jr 
= cos 4 +1sm 4 
1 
1 
1 + i 
= v'2 +i./2 = v'2. 
By the theory of cyclic groups, in particular by Corollary 6.17, all the primitive 8th roots 
of unity in QI are s , s 3, s 5, and s 7, so 
<Ps(x) = (x - S)(x - s 3)(x - s 5)(x - s 7). 
We can compute, directly from this expression, <Ps(x) = x4 + I (see Exercise 1). Com-
pare this with Example 47.7. 
..A. 
Let us assume, without proof, that <P,,(x) is irreducible over QI. Let 
2n 
. 2n 
S = COS -
+ i Sin -
, 
n 
n 

380 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
so that s is a primitive nth root of unity. Note that s is a generator of the cyclic mul-
tiplicative group of order n consisting of all nth roots of unity. All the primitive nth 
roots of unity, that is, all the generators of this group, are of the form Sm for 1 :::: m < n 
and m relatively prime ton. The field Q(t) is the whole splitting field of x' - 1 over Q. 
Let K = Q(t). If S'" is another primitive nth root of unity, then since s and S'" are con-
jugate over Q, there is an automorphism Tm in G(K/Q) mappings onto S'". Let Tr be 
the similar automorphism in G(K/Q) corresponding to a primitive nth root of unity tr. 
Then 
(TmT,-)(t) = Tm(s r) = (Tm(t))' = (tmr = s"". 
This shows that composing automorphisms Tm and Tr corresponds to multiplying m and 
r modulo n. In other words, the Galois group G(K/Q) is isomorphic with the group of 
units in Z,, under multiplication, with the isomorphism mapping Tm to m. The units in 
Z,, are the numbers less than n that are relatively prime ton. Thus G(K/Q) is an abelian 
group with rp(n) elements. 
Special cases of this material have appeared several times in the text and exercises. 
For example, a of Example 47.7 is a primitive 8th root of unity, and we made arguments 
in that example identical to those given here. We summarize these results in a theorem. 
48.4 Theorem 
The Galois group of the nth cyclotomic extension of Q has rp(n) elements and is iso-
morphic to the group consisting of the positive integers Jess than n and relatively prime 
to n under multiplication modulo n. 
48.5 Example 
Example 47.7 illustrates this theorem, for it is easy to see that the splitting field of 
x4 + 1 is the same as the splitting field of x8 - 1 over Q. This follows from the fact that 
<t>8(x) = x4 + 1 (see Example 48.3 and Exercise 1). 
.A. 
48.6 Corollary 
The Galois group of the pth cyclotomic extension of Q for a prime p is cyclic of order 
p -
1. 
Proof By Theorem 48.4, the Galois group of the pth cyclotomic extension of Q has rp(p) = 
p - 1 elements, and is isomorphic to the group of positive integers Jess than p and 
relatively prime to p under multiplication modulo p. This is exactly the multiplicative 
group (Zp *, ·) of nonzero elements of the field Zp under field multiplication. By Corol-
lary 28.7, this group is cyclic. 
+ 
Constructible Polygons 
We conclude with an application determining which regular n-gons are constructible 
with a compass and a straightedge. We saw in Section 41 that the regular n-gon is 
constructible if and only if cos(2rr / n) is a constructible real number. Now let 
2rr 
. . 2rr 
s = cos -
+ 1 sm -
. 
n 
n 
Then 
2rr 
. . 2rr 
- =cos -
-
1 sm -
, 
s 
n 
n 
for 
( 
2rr 
2rr ) ( 
2rr 
2rr ) 
2 2rr 
2 2rr 
cos -
+ i sin -
cos -
- i sin -
= cos -
+ sin -
= 1. 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 

Section 48 
Cyclotomic Extensions 
381 
But then 
1 
2JT 
s + - = 2cos-. 
s 
n 
Thus Corollary 41.8 shows that the regular n-gon is constructible only ifs + l / s gen-
erates an extension of IQ of degree a power of 2. 
If K is the splitting field of x' - 1 over IQ, then [K : IQ] = <p(n), by Theorem 48.4. 
If <I E G(K/IQ) and <I(S} = t', then 
( 1) 
r 
1 
(J t + ~ = t + t' 
( 
2nr 
2nr) 
( 
2nr 
2nr) 
= 
cos ---;:: + i sin ---;:: + cos ---;:: - i sin ---;:: 
2n r 
= 2cos--. 
n 
But for 1 < r < n, we have 2 cos(2n r/ n) = 2 cos(2JT / n) only in the case that r = n -
1. 
Thus the only elements of G(K /IQ) carrying s + l / s onto itself are the identity automor-
phism and the automorphism T, with r(S) = s "- 1 = l / s . This shows that the subgroup 
of G(K/IQ) leaving IQ(s + l / s) fixed is of order 2, so by Galois theory, 
Hence the regular n-gon is constructible only if <p(n)/2, and therefore also <p(n), is a 
power of2. 
It can be shown by elementary arguments in number theory that if 
where the p; are the distinct odd primes dividing n, then 
<p(n) = 2v- lp1s,-I ... p/'-l(p1 -
1) ... (pt -
1). 
(1) 
If <p(n) is to be a power of 2, then every odd prime dividing n must appear only to the 
first power and must be one more than a power of 2. Thus we must have each 
p; = 2
111 + 1 
for some m. Since -1 is a zero of X1 + 1 for q an odd prime, x + 1 divides X1 + 1 for 
q an odd prime. Thus, if m = qu, where q is an odd prime, then 2
111 + 1 = (2")q + 1 is 
divisible by 2" + 1. Therefore, for p; = 2111 + 1 to be prime, it must be that m is divisible 
by 2 only, sop; has to have the form 
p; = ic2· ) + 1, 
a Fermat prime. Fermat conjectured that these numbers 2(2') + 1 were prime for all 
nonnegative integers k. Euler showed that while k = 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 give the primes 3, 
5, 17, 257, and 65537, for k = 5, the integer 2<2'l + 1 is divisible by 641. It has been 
shown that for 5 :S k :S 19, all the numbers 2<2'l + 1 are composite. The case k = 20 is 
still unsolved as far as we know. For at least 60 values of k greater than 20, including 
k = 9448, it has been shown that 22' + 1 is composite. It is unknown whether the num-
ber of Fermat primes is finite or infinite. 
We have thus shown that the only regular n-gons that might be constructible are 
those where the odd primes dividing n are Fermat primes whose squares do not divide n. 
In particular, the only regular p-gons that might be constructible for p a prime greater 
than 2 are those where p is a Fermat prime. 

382 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
48.7 Example 
The regular 7-gon is not constructible, since 7 is not a Fermat prime. Similarly, the 
regular 18-gon is not constructible, for while 3 is a Fermat prime, its square divi-
des 18. 
.A. 
We now demonstrate that all these regular n-gons that are candidates for being 
constructible are indeed actually constructible. Let s again be the primitive nth root of 
unity cos(2rr/n) + isin(2rr/n). We saw above that 
2rr 
1 
2cos -
= s +-, 
n 
s 
and that 
Suppose now that <p(n) is a power 2s of 2. We saw above that Q(s + 1/ S) is the subfield 
of K = Q(s) fixed by H1 = {i, r}, where i is the identity element of G(K/Q) and r(s) = 
1/ s. By Sy low theory, there exist additional subgroups Hj of order 2) of G(Q(s)/Q) for 
j = 0, 2, 3, · · · , s such that 
{i} =Ho < H, < · · · < Hs = G(Q(S)/Q). 
By Galois theory, 
iTl\ = KH < KH 
< · · · < KH = /Tl\(r + .!.) 
'\/!. 
s 
s- 1 
I 
'\!. 
'::> 
~ 
' 
and [KHj- 1 : KH] = 2. Note that Cs+ l / S) E IR, so Q(s + 1/ s) < R If KHj-1 = KH/aj), 
then aj is a zero of some (ajx2 + bjx + cj) E KH)x]. By the familiar "quadratic formula," 
we have 
KHj-1 = KHj(J b/ - 4ajcj)· 
Since we saw in Section 41 that construction of square roots of positive constructible 
numbers can be achieved by a straightedge and a compass, we see that every element in 
Q(s + l /S), in particular cos(2rr/ n), is constructible. Hence the regular n-gons where 
<p(n) is a power of 2 are constructible. 
We summarize our work under this heading in a theorem. 
48.8 Theorem 
The regular n-gon is constructible with a compass and a straightedge if and only if all 
the odd primes dividing n are Fermat primes whose squares do not divide n. 
48.9 Example 
The regular 60-gon is constructible, since 60 = (22)(3)(5) and 3 and 5 are both Fermat 
primes. 
.A. 
• EXERCISES 48 
Computations 
1. Referring to Example 48.3, complete the indicated computation, showing that <l>s(x) = x4 + l. [Suggestion: 
Compute the product in terms of s, and then use the fact that s8 = I and s4 = - I to simplify the coefficients.] 
2. Classify the group of the polynomial (x20 -
1) E Q[x] over Q according to the Fundamental Theorem of 
Finitely Generated Abelian Groups. Theorem 9.12. [Hint: Use Theorem 48.4.] 
3. Using the formula for <p(n) in terms of the factorization of n, as given in Eq. (1), compute the indicated value: 
a. <p(60) 
b. <p(IOOO) 
c. <p(8100) 
4. Give the first 30 values of n ~ 3 for which the regular n-gon is constructible with a straightedge and a compass. 

Section 48 
Exercises 
383 
5. Find the smallest angle of integral degree, that is, 1°, 2°, 3°, and so on, constructible with a straightedge and a 
compass. [Hint: Constructing a 1° angle amounts to constructing the regular 360-gon, and so on.] 
6. Let K be the splitting field of x 12 -
1 over Q. 
a. Find [K : Q]. 
b. Show that for a E G(K / Q), a 2 is the identity automorphism. Classify G(K /Q) according to the Fundamen-
tal Theorem 9.12 of finitely generated abelian groups. 
Concepts 
7. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. <t>n(x) is irreducible over every subfield of IC. 
b. Every zero in IC of <t>11(x) is a primitive nth root of unity. 
c. The group of <t>11(x) E Q [x] over Q has order n. 
d. The group of <t>11(x) E Q [x] over Q is abelian. 
e. The Galois group of the splitting field of <t>11(x) over Q has order rp(n). 
f. The regular 25-gon is constructible with a straightedge and a compass. 
g. The regular 17-gon is constructible with a straightedge and a compass. 
h. For a prime p, the regular p-gon is constructible if and only if p is a Fermat prime. 
i. All integers of the form 2<2kl + 1 for nonnegative integers k are Fermat primes. 
j. All Fermat primes are numbers of the form 2<2kl + 1 for nonnegative integers k. 
Theory 
8. Show that 
x' - 1 = TI <t>d(x) 
din 
in Q [x], where the product is over all divisors d of n. 
9. Find the cyclotomic polynomial <t>11(x) over Q for n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. [Hint: Use Exercise 8.] 
10. Find <t> 12(x) in Q[x]. [Hint: Use Exercises 8 and 9.] 
11. Show that in Q [x], <t>211(x) = <t>11(-x) for odd integers n > 1. [Hint: If ~ is a primitive nth root of unity for n 
odd, what is the order of - t?l 
12. Let n, m E z+ be relatively prime. Show that the splitting field in IC of x11111 -
I over Q is the same as the 
splitting field in IC of (x" - l )(x
111 -
l) over Q. 
13. Let n, m E z+ be relatively prime. Show that the group of (x'
1111 
-
1) E Q[x] over Q is isomorphic to the direct 
product of the groups of (x'' - 1) E Q[x] and of (x'" - 1) E Q[x] over Q. [Hint: Using Galois theory, show 
that the groups of x'" -
l and x'' -
l can both be regarded as subgroups of the group of xn
111 -
l. Then use 
Exercises 50 and 51 of Section 9.] 

384 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
SECTION 49 
INSOLVABILITY OF THE QUINTIC 
The Problem 
We are familiar with the fact that a quadratic polynomial f(x) = ax2 +bx+ c, a op 0, 
with real coefficients has (-b ± .Jb2 - 4ac)/ 2a as zeros in C. Actually, this is true for 
f(x) E F[x], where F is any field of characteristic op 2 and the zeros are in F. Exercise 4 
asks us to show this. Thus, for example, (x2 + 2x + 3) E <Ql[x] has its zeros in <Ql(.J=2). 
You may wonder whether the zeros of a cubic polynomial over <Ql can also always be 
expressed in terms of radicals. The answer is yes, and indeed, even the zeros of a poly-
nomial of degree 4 over <Ql can be expressed in terms of radicals. After mathematicians 
had tried for years to find the "radical formula" for zeros of a 5th degree polynomial, 
it was a triumph when Abel proved that a quintic need not be solvable by radicals. Our 
first job will be to describe precisely what this means. A large amount of the algebra we 
have developed is used in the forthcoming discussion. 
Extensions by Radicals 
49.1 Definition 
An extension K of a field F is an extension of F by radicals if there are elements 
a 1, · ·· ,a, EK and positive integers n 1, • • • ,n, such that K = F(a 1, • • • ,a,),a;
11 E F 
and a;'; E F(a 1, • • • ,a;_1) for I < i::; r. A polynomialf(x) E F[x] is solvable by rad-
icals over F if the splitting field E of f(x) over F is contained in an extension of F by 
radicals. 
• 
A polynomialf(x) E F(x) is thus solvable by radicals over F if we can obtain every 
zero of f(x) by using a finite sequence of the operations of addition, subtraction, mul-
tiplication, division, and taking n;th roots, starting with elements of F. Now to say that 
the quintic is not solvable in the classic case, that is, characteristic 0, is not to say that 
no quintic is solvable, as the following example shows. 
49.2 Example 
The polynomial x5 - 1 is solvable by radicals over <Ql. The splitting field K of x5 - 1 
is generated over <Ql by a primitive 5th root ~ of unity. Then ~s = 1, and K = <Ql(S). 
Similarly, x5 - 2 is solvable by radicals over <Ql, for its splitting field over <Ql is generated 
by ..:/2 and ~, where ..:/2 is the real zero of x5 - 2. 
.&. 
To say that the quintic is insolvable in the classic case means that there exists some 
polynomial of degree 5 with real coefficients that is not solvable by radicals. We shall 
show this. We assume throughout this section that all fields mentioned have character-
istic 0. 
The outline of the argument is as follows, and it is worthwhile to try to remember it. 
1. 
We shall show that a polynomialf(x) E F[x] is solvable by radicals over F (if 
and) only if its splitting field E over F has a solvable Galois group. Recall that 
a solvable group is one having a composition series with abelian quotients. 
While this theorem goes both ways, we shall not prove the "if' part. 
2. 
We shall show that there is a polynomialf(x) E <l>[x] of degree 5 with a 
splitting field E over <Ql such that G(E/<Ql) ~ Ss, the symmetric group on 5 
letters. Recall that a composition series for Ss is {t} <As < Ss. Since As is 
not abelian, we will be done. 
The following lemma does most of our work for Step 1. 
49.3 Lemma 
Let F be a field of characteristic 0, and let a E F. If K is the splitting field of x' - a over 
F, then G(K / F) is a solvable group. 

• HISTORICAL NOTE 
T
he first publication of a formula for solving cu-
bic equations in terms of radicals was in 1545 
in the Ars Magna of Girolamo Cardano, although 
the initial discovery of the method is in part also 
due to Scipione del Ferro and Niccolo Tartaglia. 
Cardano's student, Lodovico Ferrari, discovered a 
method for solving quartic equations by radicals, 
which also appeared in Cardano's work. 
After many mathematicians had attempted to 
solve quintics by similar methods, it was Joseph-
Louis Lagrange who in 1770 first attempted a de-
tailed analysis of the general principles underlying 
the solutions for polynomials of degree 3 and 4, and 
showed why these methods fail for those of higher 
degree. His basic insight was that in the former 
cases there were rational functions of the roots that 
took on two and three values, respectively, under all 
Section 49 
Insolvability of the Quintic 
385 
possible permutations of the roots, hence these ra-
tional functions could be written as roots of equa-
tions of degree less than that of the original. No 
such functions were evident in equations of higher 
degree. 
The first mathematician to claim to have a 
proof of the insolvability of the quintic equation 
was Paolo Ruffini (1765- 1822) in his algebra text 
of 1799. His proof was along the lines suggested by 
Lagrange, in that he in effect determined all of the 
subgroups of S5 and showed how these subgroups 
acted on rational functions of the roots of the equa-
tion. Unfortunately, there were several gaps in his 
various published versions of the proof. It was 
Niels Henrik Abel who, in 1824 and 1826, pub-
lished a complete proof, closing all of Ruffini 's 
gaps and finally settling this centuries-old question. 
Proof 
Suppose first that F contains all the nth roots of unity. By Corollary 28.7 the nth roots of 
unity form a cyclic subgroup of (F*, ·). Let I; be a generator of the subgroup. (Actually, 
the generators are exactly the primitive nth roots of unity.) Then the nth roots of unity 
are 
1, I;, 1;2, ... , i;n-1. 
If fJ E Fis a zero of (x'' - a) E F[x], then all zeros of x'' - a are 
Since K = F(fJ), an automorphism <Y in G(K / F) is determined by the value <Y(fJ) of the 
automorphism <Y on fJ. Now if <Y (fJ) = I;; fJ and r(fJ) = I; j fJ, where r E G(K / F), then 
(w)(fJ) = r(<Y({J)) = r(l;;{J) = i;ir(fJ) = i;il;j{J, 
since I;; E F. Similarly, 
Thus <JT = T<J , and G(K/ F) is abelian and therefore solvable. 
Now suppose that F does not contain a primitive nth root of unity. Let I; be a 
generator of the cyclic group of nth roots of unity under multiplication in F. Let fJ again 
be a zero of x'' - a. Since fJ and I; fJ are both in the splitting field K of x'' - a, I; = 
(l;fJ)/ fJ is in K . Let F' = F(!;), so we have F < F' :S K. Now F' is a normal extension 
of F, since F' is the splitting field of x'' - I. Since F' = F(I;), an automorphism YJ in 
G(F' / F) is determined by ry(I;), and we must have ry(I;) = I;; for some i, since all zeros 
of x'' - 1 are powers of I;. Ifµ(!;) = l;j forµ E G(F' / F), then 
(µry)(I;) = µ(ry(I;)) = µ(!; ;) = µ(!;); = (l;ji = 1;U, 
and, similarly, 

386 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
Thus G(F' / F) is abelian. By Theorem 46.10, 
{t}::; G(K/ F')::; G(K/ F) 
is a normal series and hence a subnormal series of groups. The first part of the proof 
shows that G(K/ F' ) is abelian, and Galois theory tells us that G(K/ F)/ G(K/ F' ) is iso-
morphic to G(F' / F), which is abelian. Exercise 6 shows that if a group has a subnormal 
series of subgroups with abelian quotient groups, then any refinement of this series also 
has abelian quotient groups. Thus a composition series of G(K / F) must have abelian 
quotient groups, so G(K / F) is solvable. 
+ 
The following theorem will complete Step 1 of our program. 
49.4 Theorem 
Let F be a field of characteristic zero, and let F ::; E ::; K ::; F, where E is a normal 
extension of F and K is an extension of F by radicals. Then G(E/ F) is a solvable group. 
Proof 
We first show that K is contained in a finite normal extension L of F by radicals and 
that the group G(L/ F) is solvable. Since K is an extension of F by radicals, K = 
F(a 1, ·· • ,ar) where a;•; E F(a 1,· •• ,a;_1) for 1 < i ::; rand a7' E F. To form L, we 
first form the splitting field L1 of f 1 (x) = x"' - a;'• over F. Then L1 is a normal exten-
sion of F, and Lemma 49.3 shows that G(L1 / F) is a solvable group. Now a~
2 E L1 and 
we form the polynomial 
fi(x) = TI 
[(x
112 
- a(a2)
112]. 
aEG(L 1/ F) 
Since this polynomial is invariant under action by any a in G(Lt/ F), we see thatfz(x) E 
F[x] . We let Li be the splitting field of fi(x) over L1• Then Li is a splitting field over F 
also and is a normal extension of F by radicals. We can form L2 from L1 via repeated 
steps as in Lemma 49.3, passing to a splitting field of x12 - a(a2 ) 112 at each step. By 
Lemma 49.3 and Exercise 7, we see that the Galois group over F of each new extension 
thus formed continues to be solvable. We continue this process of forming splitting 
fields over Fin this manner: At stage i, we form the splitting field of the polynomial 
f;(x) = TI 
[ex•; - a(a;)";1 
a EG(L;- 1/F) 
over L;_ 1. We finally obtain a field L = Lr that is a normal extension of F by radicals, 
and we see that G(L/ F) is a solvable group. We see from construction that K ::; L. 
To conclude, we need only note that by Theorem 46.8, we have G(E/ F) :::::: G(L/ F)/ 
G(L/ E). Thus G(E/ F) is a factor group, and hence a homomorphic image, of G(L/ F). 
Since G(L/ F) is solvable, Exercise 31 of Section 18 shows that G(E/ F) is solvable . • 
The Insolvability of the Quintic 
It remains to find a polynomial f(x) E Q [x], whose splitting field has Galois group S5. 
The polynomial f(x) = 2x5 - 5x4 + 5 does the trick as we now show. To begin, we 
prove the following theorem that gives a simple condition for a subgroup of S5 to actu-
ally be all of S5. We will use this theorem to show that the Galois group of the splitting 
field off(x) over Q is isomorphic with S5 . 
49.5 Theorem 
Let H be a subgroup of S5 . If H has a transposition and a 5-cycle, then H = S5 . 
Proof 
We can assume, by relabeling the points being permuted, that the 5-cycle (0, 1, 2, 3, 4) 
is in H and the transposition (O,j), j =/= 0, is also in H. We think of S5 as permuting the 

Section 49 
Insolvability of the Quintic 
387 
elements in Z5. By conjugating with the 5-cycle (0, 1,2,3,4)', we have that for each 
0::::: r::::: 4, 
(0, 1, 2, 3, 4)'(0,j)(O, 1, 2, 3, 4)-r = (r, r + j), 
where addition is in Z5. Thus (O,j) and (j, 2j) are both in H; and therefore 
(0,j)(j, 2j)(O,j) = (0, 2j) E H. 
As before, by conjugating (0, 2j) with (0, 1, 2, 3, 4)' we have (r, r + 2j) E H for 
0::::: r ::::: 4. Now, 
(0, 2j)(2j, 3j)(O, 2j) = (0, 3j) E H. 
Again, conjugating with powers of (0, 1, 2, 3, 4) shows that (r, r + 3j) E H. Furthermore, 
(0, 3j)(3j, 4j)(O, 3j) = (0, 4j) E H 
and (r, r + 4j) EH. Summarizing, we have that 
{(r,r+sj l r E Zs ands = z;} EH. 
But 
{sj Is E z;} = z; 
since j f=. 0 is a unit in the field Z5. Therefore, H contains all the transpositions in the 
set 
{(r, r + sj) I r E Z5 and s E z;} = {(r, r + t) I r E Z5 and t E z;}. 
This is the set of all transpositions in S5. By Theorem 8.15, H = S5. 
• 
We now turn our attention back to the polynomial f(x) = 2x5 - 5x4 + 5. We first ob-
serve thatf(x) is irreducible over Q by Eisenstein's criterion, Theorem 28.16, using 
p = 5. In order to better understand the zeros off(x), we compute the following. 
f(-1)=-2 < 0 
f(O) = 5 > 0 
f(2) = -11 < 0 
f(3) = 86 > 0 
The intermediate value theorem from calculus says that iff(x) is a continuous func-
tion andf(a) andf(b) have opposite signs, thenf(x) has a zero between a and b. Since 
the polynomialf(x) is continuous, we have at least three real number zeros off(x); one 
between - 1 and 0, one between 0 and 2, and the third between 2 and 3. The derivative 
off(x) is 
J'(x) = 10x4 - 20x3 = 10x3(x - 2). 
The only zeros ofJ'(x) are 0 and 2. By the mean value theorem from calculus, between 
any two real number zeros of f(x), there is a zero off' (x). Therefore, there cannot be 
more than three zeros of f(x) that are real numbers. Let K be the splitting field of f (x) 
over Q. Sincef(x) is irreducible over Q and Q is a perfect field, K contains five distinct 
zeros off(x). Thusf(x) has two complex zeros, and they are complex conjugates. 
We have that G(K/Q) is isomorphic with a subgroup of the permutation group of 
the zeros off(x). The isomorphism maps each a to the permutation given by the map a 
restricted to the zeros off(x). For any zero a E K off(x), 
[Q(a) : Q] = deg(irr(a,Q)) = deg(f(x)) = 5. 

388 
Part IX 
Galois Theory 
Thus 
IG(K/Q) I = [K: Q] = [K: Q(a)] · [Q(a) : Q] = [K: Q(a)] · 5. 
Cauchy's Theorem 14.20 says that G(K/Q) has a subgroup of order 5 and therefore 
an element of order 5. So G(K/Q) has an element that permutes the zeros of/(x) in a 
5-cycle, since the only elements in S5 that have order 5 are the 5-cycles. Also, complex 
conjugation is an element in G(K /Q) that fixes each real zero of f(x) and switches the 
two complex zeros. Thus an element of G(K /Q) permutes the zeros off (x) by a 2-cycle. 
By Theorem 49.5, G(K/Q) is isomorphic with S5 . 
49.6 Theorem 
There is a polynomial in Q [x] that is not solvable by radicals. 
Proof 
As we just discovered,f(x) = 2x5 - 5x4 + 5 is one such polynomial since its splitting 
field over Q has Galois group isomorphic with S5 , which is not a solvable group. 
+ 
There are many other polynomials that are not solvable by radicals. In the proof 
given above, we need a few key properties for the polynomial/(x) to have Galois group 
Ss. First we require that/(x) be an irreducible polynomial over Q with degree 5. We 
then exploit the fact that/(x) has three real zeros and two complex zeros. As long as a 
polynomial meets these conditions, the polynomial is not solvable by radicals. The set 
of polynomials with these properties is infinite as shown in Exercise 8. 
Exercise 9 gives a different approach to constructing polynomials in F[x] whose 
Galois group over F is S5, where F is a subfield of JR.. This approach also shows that 
there are an infinite number of polynomials that are not solvable by radicals, although 
the polynomials do not have rational coefficients. While Exercises 8 and 9 both produce 
an infinite number of polynomials that are not solvable by radicals, in Exercise 8 the 
number is countable while in Exercise 9 the number is uncountable. 
• EXERCISES 49 
Concepts 
1. Can the splitting field K of .x2 + x + 1 over Z2 be obtained by adjoining a square root to Z2 of an element in 
Z2? Is Kan extension of Z2 by radicals? 
2. Is every polynomial in F [x] of the form a.x8 + bx6 + cx4 + dx2 + e, where a ,P 0, solvable by radicals over F , 
if F _::: JR.? Why or why not? 
3. Determine whether each of the following is true or false. 
a. Let F be a field of characteristic 0. A polynomial in F[x] is solvable by radicals if and only if its splitting 
field in F is contained in an extension of F by radicals. 
b. Let F be a field of characteristic 0. A polynomial in F[x] is solvable by radicals if and only if its splitting 
field in F has a solvable Galois group over F. 
c. The splitting field of x 11 -
5 over Q has a solvable Galois group. 
d. If f(x) E Q[x) is any polynomial of degree five having three real zeros and two complex zeros, thenf(x) is 
not solvable by radicals. 
e. The Galois group of a finite extension of a finite field is solvable. 
f. No quintic polynomial is solvable by radicals over any field. 
g. Every 4th degree polynomial over a field F _::: lR is solvable by radicals. 
h. The zeros of a cubic polynomial over a field F _::: lR can always be attained by means of a finite sequence of 
operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and taking square roots starting with elements 
in F. 

Section 49 
Exercises 
389 
i. The zeros of a cubic polynomial over a field F of characteristic 0 can never be attained by means of a finite 
sequence of operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and taking square roots, starting 
with elements in F. 
j. The theory of subnormal series of groups plays an important role in applications of Galois theory. 
Theory 
4. Let F be a field, and letf(x) = ax2 +bx+ c be in F[x ], where a f. 0. Show that if the characteristic of Fis 
not 2, the splitting field ofj(x) over Fis F(./b2 - 4ac). [Hint: Complete the square, just as in your high school 
work, to derive the "quadratic formula."] 
S. Show that if F is a field of characteristic different from 2 and 
f(x) = ax4 + bx2 + c, 
where a i= 0, thenf(x) is solvable by radicals over F. 
6. Show that for a finite group, every refinement of a subnormal series with abelian quotients also has abelian 
quotients, thus completing the proof of Lemma 49.3. [Hint: Use Theorem 16.8.] 
7. Show that for a finite group, a subnormal series with solvable quotient groups can be refined to a composition 
series with abelian quotients, thus completing the proof of Theorem 49.4. [Hint: Use Theorem 16.8.] 
8. Let p be a prime number andf(x) = x5 - p2x + p E <Q[x]. Prove thatf(x) is not solvable by radicals. [Hint: 
Mimic the proof that 2x5 - 5x4 + 5 is not solvable by radicals.] 
9. This is an alternate method of finding a polynomial with coefficients in a field F , a subfield of JR, whose Galois 
group over Fis Ss. 
a. Suppose that F _:::: lR is a countable field and x is an indeterminate. Show that F [x], F(x), and the set of real 
numbers that are algebraic over F are all countable sets. 
b. Show that there is a sequence of real numbers YI, y2, · · · E lR, with YI transcendental over <Q, and for each 
i > I , y; is transcendental over <Q(yI ,y2, ... ,y;- I ). 
c. Using the notation of part b), let K = <Q(yI ,y2,y3,y4,y5) and 
5 
f(x) = TI<x - y;). 
i= I 
Let SI, s2, s3, s4, ss be the value of the elementary symmetric functions (as defined in Section 47) evaluated 
at yI,y2,y3,y4,y5. Show thatf(x) E F = <Q(sI,S2,s3,s4,s5). 
d. Show that K is the splitting field ofj(x) over F and G(K/ F) is isomorphic with Ss. 

This page is intentionally left blank 

Appendix: Matrix Algebra 
We give a brief summary of matrix algebra here. Matrices appear in examples in some 
chapters of the text and also are involved in several exercises. 
A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers. For example, the array 
[; 
- 1 
~] 
(1) 
is a matrix having two rows and three columns. A matrix having m rows and n columns 
is an m x n matrix, so Matrix (I) is a 2 x 3 matrix. If m = n, the matrix is square. 
Entries in a matrix may be any type of number- integer, rational, real, or complex. We 
let M111x 11(JR) be the set of all m x n matrices with real number entries. If m = n, the 
notation is abbreviated to M11(1R). We can similarly consider M11('ll,), M2 x 3(C), etc. 
Two matrices having the same number m of rows and the same number n of columns 
can be added in the obvious way: we add entries in corresponding positions. 
Al Example 
In M2x3(Z), we have 
[; 
-1 
~J + G 
0 
-7 -n = [~ 
-1 
-6 
We will use uppercase letters to denote matrices. If A, B, and Care m x n matrices, 
it is easily seen that A + B = B +A and that A + (B + C) = (A + B) + C. 
Matrix multiplication, AB, is defined only if the number of columns of A is equal 
to the number of rows of B. That is, if A is an m x n matrix, then B must be an n x s 
matrix for some integers. We start by defining as follows the product AB where A is a 
1 x n matrix and Bis an n x 1 matrix: 
a.] [1] ~ a,b, + a,b, + · · · + a.h,, 
(2) 
Note that the result is a number. (We shall not distinguish between a number and the 
1 x 1 matrix having that number as its sole entry.) You may recognize this product as 
the dot product of vectors. Matrices having only one row or only one column are row 
vectors or column vectors, respectively. 
391 

392 
Appendix: Matrix Algebra 
A2 Example 
We find that 
[3 
- 7 
2) [~] ~ (3)(1) + (-7)(4) + (2)(5) ~ -15. 
Let A be an m x n matrix and let B be an n x s matrix. Note that the number n of 
entries in each row of A is the same as the number n of entries in each column of B. 
The product C = AB is an m x s matrix. The entry in the ith row and jth column of AB 
is the product of the ith row of A times the jth column of B as defined by Eq. (2) and 
illustrated in Example A2. 
A3 Example 
Compute 
AB- [ 2 
-
l 
2 -:] 
4 
0 2 
Solution Note that A is 2 x 3 and B is 3 x 4. Thus AB will be 2 x 4. The entry in its 
second row and third column is 
Computing all eight entries of AB in this fashion, we obtain 
AB= [~ 
A4 Example 
The product 
-2 
17 
9 
18 
is not defined, since the number of entries in a row of the first matrix is not equal to the 
number of entries in a column of the second matrix. 
.A. 
For square matrices of the same size, both addition and multiplication are always 
defined. Exercise 10 asks us to illustrate the fact that matrix multiplication is not com-
mutative. 
That is, AB need not equal BA even when both products are defined, as for A, B E 
M2(Z). It can be shown that A(BC) = (AB)C and A(B + C) = AB +AC whenever all 
these expressions are defined. 
We let / 11 be then x n matrix with entries I along the diagonal from the upper-left 
corner to the lower-right corner, and entries 0 elsewhere. For example, 
It is easy to see that if A is any n x s matrix and Bis any r x n matrix, then !,,A =A and 
BI,, = B. That is, the matrix !,, acts much as the number l does for multiplication when 
multiplication by /,, is defined. 

Appendix: Matrix Algebra 
393 
Let A be an n x n matrix and consider a matrix equation of the form AX = B, 
where A and B are known but X is unknown. If we can find an n x n matrix A - I such 
that A - 1 A = AA - 1 = I,,, then we can conclude that 
and we have found the desired matrix X. Such a matrix A - 1 acts like the reciprocal of a 
number: A- 1A =In and (l/r)r = L This is the reason for the notation A- 1• 
If A- 1 exists, the square matrix A is invertible and A- 1 is the inverse of A. If A- 1 
does not exist, then A is said to be singular. It can be shown that if there exists an n x n 
matrix A- 1 such that A- 1A =In, then AA- 1 =In also, and furthermore, there is only 
one matrix A - 1 having this property. 
AS Example 
Let 
A=[~ ~l 
We can check that 
[-4 
9] [2 9] = [2 9] [-4 
9] = [l OJ 
1 -2 
1 4 
1 4 
1 -2 
0 
1 . 
Thus, 
We leave the problems of determining the existence of A- 1 and its computation to 
a course in linear algebra. 
Associated with each square n x n matrix A is a number called the determinant 
of A and denoted by det(A). This number can be computed as sums and differences 
of certain products of the numbers that appear in the matrix A. For example, the 
determinant of the 2 x 2 matrix [~ !J 
is ad - be. Note that an n x 1 matrix with 
real number entries can be viewed as giving coordinates of a point in n-dimensional 
Euclidean space JRn. Multiplication of such a single column matrix on the left by a real 
n x n matrix A produces another such single column matrix corresponding to another 
point in JR". This multiplication on the left by A thus gives a map of JR" into itself. It can 
be shown that a piece of JR.n of volume V is mapped by this multiplication by A into a 
piece of volume ldet(A)I · V. This is one of the reasons that determinants are important. 
The following properties of determinants for n x n matrices A and B are of interest 
in this text: 
1. det(ln) = 1 
2. det(AB) = det(A) det(B) 
3. det(A) f= 0 if and only if A is an invertible matrix 
4. If Bis obtained from A by interchanging two rows (or two columns) of A, then 
det(B) = - det(A) 
5. If every entry of A is zero above the main diagonal from the upper left corner 
to the lower right corner, then det (A) is the product of the entries on this 
diagonal. The same is true if all entries below the main diagonal are zero. 

394 
Appendix: Matrix Algebra 
• EXERCISES A 
In Exercises I through 9, compute the given arithmetic matrix expression, if it is defined. 
1. [-2 4] 
[4 -3] 
I 5 + I 
2 
2. [I + i -2 3 - i] 
[ 3 
i- 1 -20+ i] 
4 
i 
2-i+3-i 1 + i 
[' -1] [3-i 4i ] 
3. 4 
1 -
2 
l +i 
3 -2i 
3 
-i 
4. [I -!][ 2 4] 
3 
1 -1 3 
5. [-~ i][i 5 -3] 
1 
6 
6. [~ -;J [-l ;] 
7. [ 
i 1][3i 
1] 
-2 1 
4 -2i 
8. [ ~ -br 
9. [ ~ -:r 
10. Give an example in M2(Z) showing that matrix multiplication is not commutative. 
11. Find [ _ ~ b ]-I , by experimentation if necessary. 
12. Find [~ ~ 
0 0 
13. If A= [1~ 
]
- I 
~ 
, by experimentation if necessary. 
-1 
0 OJ 
-2 0 , find det (A). 
17 
8 
14. Prove that if A, B E M,,(C) are invertible, then AB and BA are invertible also. 

Bibliography 
Classic Works 
1. N. Bourbaki, Eliments de Mathematique, Book II of Part I, Algebre. Paris: Hermann, 1942-
58. 
2. N. Jacobson, Lectures in Abstract Algebra. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand, vols. I, 1951, II, 
1953, and Ill, 1964. 
3. 0. Schreier and E. Sperner, Introduction to Modern Algebra and Matrix Theory (English 
translation), 2nd Ed. New York: Chelsea, 1959. 
4. B. L. van der Waerden, Modern Algebra (English translation). New York: Ungar, vols. l, 
1949, and II, 1950. 
General Algebra Texts 
5. M. Artin, Algebra. (Classic Version), 2nd Edition, London: Pearson, 2018. 
6. 
A. A. Albert, Fundamental Concepts of Higher Algebra. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1956. 
7. 
G. Birkhoff and S. MacLane, A Survey of Modern Algebra, 3rd Ed. New York: Macmillan, 
1965. 
8. 
J. A. Gallian, Contemporary Abstract Algebra, 8th Ed. Boston, MA: Brook/Cole, 2013. 
9. 
l. N. Herstein, Topics in Algebra. New York: Blaisdell, 1964. 
JO. 
T. W. Hungerford, Algebra. New York: Springer, 1974. 
11. 
S. Lang, Algebra. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1965. 
12. 
S. MacLane and G. Birkhoff, Algebra. New York: Macmillan, 1967. 
13. N. H. McCoy and G. J. Janusz, Introduction to Modern Algebra. Cambridge, MA: 
Academic Press, 2001. 
14. G. D. Mostow, J. H. Sampson, and J. Meyer, Fundamental Structures of Algebra. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1963. 
15. W. W. Sawyer, A Concrete Approach to Abstract Algebra. Mineola, NY: Dover, 1978. 
Group Theory 
16. 
W. Burnside, Theory of Groups of Finite Order, 2nd Ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2012. 
17. H. S. M. Coxeter and W. 0. Moser, Generators and Relations for Discrete Groups, 2nd Ed. 
Berlin: Springer, 1965. 
18. M. Hall, Jr., The Theory of Groups. Mineola, NY: Dover, 2018. 
19. A. G. Kurosh, The Theory of Groups (English translation). New York: Chelsea, vols. I, 1955, 
and II, 1956. 
20. 
W. Ledermann, Introduction to the Theory of Finite Groups, 4th rev. Ed. New York: Inter-
science, 1961. 
395 

396 
Bibliography 
21. J. G. Thompson and W. Feit, "Solvability of Groups of Odd Order." Pac. J. Math., 13 (1963), 
775- 1029. 
22. M. A. Rabin, "Recursive Unsolvability of Group Theoretic Problems." Ann. Math., 67 
(1958), 172-194. 
Ring Theory 
23. W. W. Adams and P. Loustaunau, An Introduction to Grabner Bases (Graduate Studies in 
Mathematics, vol. 3). Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1994. 
24. E. Artin, C. J. Nesbitt, and R. M. Thrall, Rings with Minimum Condition. Ann Arbor: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press, 1964. 
25. N. H. McCoy, Rings and Ideals (Carus Monograph No. 8), 5th Ed. Buffalo: The Mathemat-
ical Association of America, 197 1. 
26. 
N. H. McCoy, The Theory of Rings. New York: Macmillan, 1964. 
Field Theory 
27. E. Artin, Galois Theory (Notre Dame Mathematical Lecture No. 2), 2nd Ed. Notre Dame, 
IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1944. 
28. 0. Zariski and P. Samuel, Commutative Algebra. Princeton, NJ: Yan Nostrand, vol. I, 1958. 
Number Theory 
29. G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright, An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers, 6th Ed. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2008. 
30. S. Lang, Algebraic Numbers. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1964. 
3 1. W. J. LeYeque, Elementary Theory of Numbers, Mineola, NY: Dover, 1990. 
32. W. J. LeYeque, Topics in Number Theory. Mineola, NY: Dover, 2002. 
33. T. Nagell, Introduction to Number Theory, 2nd Ed. Providence, RI: American Mathematical 
Society, 2001. 
34. I. Niven and H. S. Zuckerman, An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers, 5th Ed. 
New York: Wiley, 1991. 
35. H. Pollard, The Theory of Algebraic Numbers (Carus Monograph No. 9). Buffalo: The Math-
ematical Association of America; New York: Wiley, 1950. 
36. D. Shanks, Solved and Unsolved Problems in Number Theory. Washington, DC: Spartan 
Books, vol. I, 1962. 
37. B. M. Stewart, Theory of Numbers, 2nd Ed. New York: Macmillan, I 964. 
38. J. Y. Uspensky and M. H. Heaslet, Elementary Number Theory. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1939. 
39. E. Weiss, Algebraic Number Theory. Mineola, NY: Dover, 1998. 
Homological Algebra 
40. J.P. Jans, Rings and Homology. New York: Holt, 1964. 
4 1. 
S. MacLane, Homology. Berlin: Springer, 1963. 
Other References 
42. A. A. Albert (ed.), Studies in Modern Algebra (MAA Studies in Mathematics, vol. 2). Buf-
falo: The Mathematical Association of America; Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1963. 
43. E. Artin, Geometric Algebra. New York: lnterscience, 1957. 
44. R. Courant and H. Robbins, What ls Mathematics? Oxford University Press, 1941. 
45. H. S. M. Coxeter, Introduction to Geometry, 2nd Ed. New York: Wiley, 1969. 
46. R.H. Crowell and R.H. Fox, Introduction to Knot Theory. New York: Ginn, 1963. 
47. H. B. Edgerton, Elements of Set Theory. San Diego: Academic Press, 1977. 
48. C. Schumacher, Chapter Zero. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, I 996. 

Notations 
E,a ES 
0 
fj_,a fj_ S 
{x I P(x)) 
B <;A 
Be A 
A x B 
z 
Q 
JR. 
IC 
z+,Q+,JR+ 
Z*,Q*,JR*,IC* .n 
IAI 
</>:A---* B 
<f>(a) 
</>[A] 
++ 
r t 
l{o 
i 
Z/nZ 
=n,a = b(mod n) 
g> (A) 
u 
lRc 
+c 
Un 
membership, l 
empty set, 1 
nonmembership, 1 
set of all x such that P(x), 1 
set inclusion, 2 
subset B -1- A, 2 
Cartesian product of sets, 2 
integers, 2 
rational numbers, 2 
real numbers, 3 
complex numbers, 3 
positive elements of Z, Q, JR, 3 
nonzero elements of Z, Q, JR, IC, 3 
relation, 3 
number of elements in A, 3; as order of group, 4 1 
mapping of A into B by </>, 3 
image of element a under</>, 4 
image of set A under</>, 4 
one-to-one correspondence, 4 
the inverse function of</>, 4 
cardinality of z+, 4 
cell containing x E Sin a partition of S, 6 
residue classes modulo n, , 6 
congruence modulo n, 6 
power set of A, 8 
set of all z E IC such that lzl = 1, 36 
set of all x E lR such that 0 :::: x < c, 33 
addition modulo c, 33 
group of nth roots of unity, 37 
397 

398 
Notations 
Z11 
{0, 1, 2,·· · ,n- 1),32 
*,O* b 
o,f o g,ar 
e 
Mm x n(S) 
M 11(S) 
GL(n, IK) 
det(A) 
a- i , -a 
H .:<:::G; K
.:<::: L 
H < G; K < L 
(a) 
nZ 
n ;e1S;, 
Si ns2 n .. · ns,, 
SA 
L 
S11 
n! 
Dn 
An 
aH ,a+ H 
Ha, H +a 
(G : H ) 
<p 
n~~ l Bi, 
Bi x 82 x · · · x 8 11 
nf1=i G; 
Eflj1= i G; 
lcm 
G; 
H
.:<::: G 
SL (n, IK) 
</>a 
JT; 
r
i [B] 
Ker(</>) 
G/ N; R/ N 
y 
ig 
Z(G) 
c 
Xg 
Gx 
Gx 
R[x] 
R [x i ,x2,. · · ,x11 ] 
F(x) 
F(xi , · · · ,x11) 
cyclic group {0, 1, · · · , n -
I} under addition modulo n, 38 
ring {0, 1, · · · , n - 1} under addition and multiplication 
modulo n, 189 
binary operation, 11 
function composition, 14, 4 1 
identity element, 20 
m x n matrices with entries from S, 22, 393 
n x n matrices with entries from S, 22, 393 
general linear group of degree n, 22, 23 
determinant of square matrix A, 28, 395 
inverse of a, 15 
subgroup inclusion, 52; substructure inclusion, 192 
subgroup H f. G, 52; substructure K f. L, 192 
cyclic subgroup generated by a, 56 
principal ideal generated by a, 256 
subgroup of Z generated by n, 56 
subring (ideal) of Z generated by n, 245 
transpose of A, 57 
greatest common divisor, 63, 283, 304 
intersection of sets, 7 1 
group of permutations of A, 43 
identity map, 43 
symmetric group on n letters, 43 
n factorial, 43 
nth dihedral group, 47 
alternating group on n letters, 84 
left coset of H containing a, 98 
right coset of H containing a, 100 
index of Hin G, 137 
Euler phi-function, 105, 204 
Cartesian product of sets, 88 
direct product of groups, 88, 89 
direct sum of groups, 89 
least common multiple, 90 
natural subgroup of nf1=i G;, 9 1 
H normal subgroup of G, 116 
special linear group, 117 
evaluation homomorphism, 191 
projection onto ith component, 248 
inverse image of the set B under</>, 78 
kernel of homomorphism </>, 78 
factor group, 117; factor ring, 247 
canonical residue class map, 118, 119 
inner automorphism, 120 
center of the group G, 130 
commutator subgroup, 130 
subset of elements of X fixed by g, 136 
isotropy subgroup of elements of G leaving x fixed, 137 
orbit of x under G, 143 
polynomial ring with coefficients in R, 220 
polynomials in n indeterminates, 299 
field of quotients of F [x], 222 
field of rational functions in n indeterminates, 223 

<Pp(x) 
End(A) 
RG 
FG 
lllI 
ACC 
F" 
F[x] 
V(S) 
(b1, ... ,b,) 
lt(f) 
lp(f) 
irr(a, F) 
deg(a, F) 
F(a) 
[E: F] 
F(ai,·· · ,a11) 
F£ 
F 
GF(p") 
HN 
H vN 
N[H] 
F[A] 
(Xj: r;) 
alb 
UFO 
PID 
U;E/S;, 
S1 US2U···US11 
v 
N(a) 
1/!a,{3 
E{rr;}, EH 
G(E/F) 
A.(£) 
cyclotomic polynomial of degree p - 1, 236 
endomorphisms of A, 260 
group ring, 262 
group algebra over the field F, 263 
quaternions, 264, 265 
ascending chain condition, 280 
Cartesian product, 299 
ring of polynomials in x 1, · · · ,x11 over F, 299 
algebraic variety of polynomials in S, 300 
ideal generated by elements b 1, · · · , b,, 300 
leading term of the polynomialf, 306 
power product of lt(f), 306 
irreducible polynomial for a over F, 317 
degree of a over F, 317 
field obtained by adjoining a to field F, 317 
degree of E over F, 321 
Notations 
399 
field obtained by adjoining a 1, · · · , a 11 to F, 323 
algebraic closure of F in £ , 325 
an algebraic closure of F, 325, 326 
Galois field of order p11 , 337 
product set, 148 
subgroup join, 148 
normalizer of H , 152 
free group on A, 175 
group presentation, 181 
a divides (is a factor of) b, 278 
unique factorization domain, 278 
principal ideal domain, 278 
union of sets, 280 
Euclidean norm, 288 
norm of a, 294, 296 
conjugation isomorphism of F(a) with F(/3), 347 
subfield of E fixed by all a; or all a E H , 345 
automorphism group of E over F, 346 
automorphisms that fix E, 367 

This page is intentionally left blank 

SECTION O 
1. {- ,J3,,J3} 
Answers to Odd-Numbered 
Exercises Not Asl<:ing for 
Definitions or Proofs 
3. {l, - 1, 2, -2, 3, -3, 4, - 4, 5, -5, 6, -6, 10, - 10, 12, - 12, 15, - 15, 20, -20, 30, -30, 60, -60) 
5. Not a set (not well defined). A case can also be made for the empty set 0 . 
7. The set 0 
9. It is not a well-defined set. 
11. (a, l ), (a, 2), (a, c), (b, l), (b, 2), (b, c), (c, l), (c, 2), (c, c) 
13. Draw the line through P and x, and let y be the point where it intersects the line segment CD. 
17. Conjecture: n(91' (A)) = 25 . (Proofs are usually omitted from answers.) 
21. 102, 105, l oiso = l 2!So = 21So = IIRI. (The numbers x where 0 ::: x ::: l can be written to base 12 and to base 2 as well 
as to base 10.) 
23. 
l 
25. 5 
27. 52 
29. Not an equivalence relation 
31. Not an equivalence relation. 
33. An equivalence relation; 
I = (1,2, ... ,9}, 
TO= 110, 11, ... ,99}, 
100 = { 100, 101, · · · , 999}, and in general 
Jon = (10", 1011 + 1, ... , 1011+1 - l} 
35. a. ( .. . ,-3,0,3, .. . ), ( . . . , - 2, l , 4, ... }, { .. . ,-5,-2, l , . . . } 
b. { .. . ,-4, 0, 4, .. . }, { .. . ,-3, l,4, ... }, ( ... ,-6,-2,2, . .. }, ( .. . ,-5,-l,3, .. . } 
c. { ... , - 5, o, 5, . . . J, { . . . , - 4, 1, 6, ... J, { ... , - 3, 2, 7, ... J, { ... , - 2, 3, 8 ... J, { ... , - 1, 4, 9, . . . I 
37. I = {x E Z Ix -;- n has remainder 1} depends on the value of n. 
41. The name two-to-two function suggests that such a function! should carry every pair of distinct points into two distinct 
points. Such a function is one to one in the conventional sense. (If the domain has only one element, a function cannot 
fail to be two to two, since the only way it can fail to be two to two is to carry two points into one point, and the set 
does not have two points.) Conversely, every function that is one to one in the conventional sense carries any pair of 
points into two distinct points. Thus the functions conventionally called one to one are precisely those that carry two 
points into two points, which is a much more intuitive unidirectional way of regarding them. Also, the standard way of 
trying to show a function is one to one is precisely to show that it does not carry two points into just one point. Thus, 
proving a function is one to one becomes more natural in the two-to-two terminology. 
401 

402 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
SECTION 1 
1. e, b, a 
3. a, c. * is not associative. 
5. Top row: d; second row: a; fourth row: c, b. 
7. Not commutative, not associative 
9. Commutative, associative, has identity. 
11. Not commutative, not associative 
13. 8, 729, n[n(n+ll/2] 
15. n<11- l)2 
19. An identity in the set S with operation * is an element e E S such that for all a E S, a* e = e *a = a. 
21. Yes 
23. No. Condition 2 is violated. 
25. No. Condition I is violated. 
27. a. Yes. 
b. Yes 
29. Let S = {?, .6.). Define * and *' on S by a* b = ? and a*' b = .6. for all a, b ES. (Other answers are possible.) 
31. True 
33. True 
35. False. Letf(x) = x2, g(x) = x, and h(x) = 2x + I. Then 
(f(x) - g(x)) - h(x) = x2 - 3x - I but 
f(x)- (g(x)- h(x)) = x2 - (-x- I) =x2 +x+ I. 
37. True 
39. True 
41. False. Let * be + and let *' be on Z. 
SECTION2 
1. No. ~ 
fails. 
3. No. ~ fails. 
5. No. ~ fails. 
7. 
·~ 
9. 
·~ 
11. Yes 
13. Yes 
15. No. The matrix with all entries 0 is upper triangular, but has no inverse. 
17. Yes. 
19. (Proofs are omitted.) 
c. -113 
21. 2, 3. (It gets harder for 4 elements, where the answer is not 4.) 
25. a. F 
c. T 
e. F 
g. T 
i. F 
35. b2a12 
SECTION3 
1. -i 
3. - I 
5. 20 - 9i 
7. 
17 -
15i 
9. - 4 + 4i 
~ 
13 . ../2 (-_l_ - _Li) 
11. v :rr~ -t- e~ 
h 
h 
15. -134 ( - 3 + - 5-i) 
-134 
-134 
I 
I 
I 
I 
17. -±-i-- ± -i 
../2 
../2 , ../2 
../2 
3.j3 
3 
19. 3i, ±-2- - 2i 
21. .j3 ± i, ± 2i, -.J3 ± i 
23. 7 
29. x = 6 
31. 5 
33. I, 7 
3 
25. 
-
8 
t 0 tt 0,{3 tt 7,{4 tt 4,{5 tt l ,{6 tt 6,{7 tt 3 
27 . ../2 
37. 
39. 
41. 
With { tt 4, we must have t 2 tt 2, {3 tt 0, and t 4 tt 4 again, which is impossible for a one-to-one correspondence. 
Multiplying, we obtain 
and the desired result follows at once from Exercise 40 and the equation lz1 llz2I = lz1z2I. 
45. Letf: !Rb ~ !Re be given by f(x) = 
~x. 

Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
403 
SECTION4 
1. (: 
5. G 
7. 
l 
234546) 
2 3 6 5 
2 3 4 
5 
6 
5 4 
9. 
l 
~) 
11. a. (! 2 3 4 5 6 7 
325167 
2 
3 4 
5 6 7 
6 4 
2 
1 7 3 
2 
3 4 
5 6 7 
3 
5 4 
7 8 
b. G 
c. G 
3. G ; 3 : 
; 
~) 
~) 
~) 
~) 
13. 
15. 
a. p 6 
b. p 
{I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) 
c. µ,p 10 
17. {I , 5) 
19. a. These are "elementary permutation matrices," resulting from permuting the rows of the identity matrix. When 
another matrix A is multiplied on the left by one of these matrices P, the rows of A are permuted in the same fashion 
that the rows of the 3 x 3 identity matrix were permuted to obtain P. Because all 6 possible permutations of the 
three rows are present, we see they will act just like the elements of S3 in permuting the entries 1, 2, 3 of the given 
column vector. Thus they form a group because s3 is a group. 
b. The symmetric group S3. 
21. Need to add that <P is one-to-one and onto. 
23. This is a good definition. 
25. Not a permutation 
27. Not a permutation 
29. a. T 
c. T 
e. F 
g. F 
SECTION 5 
1. Yes 
3. Yes 
5. Yes 
11. No. Not closed under multiplication. 
13. Yes 
7. IQ!+ and {7T11 In E Z) 
15. a. Yes 
b. No. It is not even a subset of F. 
17. a. No. Not closed under addition. 
b. Yes 
a. Yes 
b. No. The zero constant function is not in F. 
9. Yes 
19. 
21. a. - 50, - 25, 0, 25, 50 
b. 4, 2, 1, 1/2, 114 
c. l , JT,JT 2, l / JT , l/ 7T2 
23. 
25. 
27. 
e. i, (1, 2, 3)(5, 6), (1, 3, 2), (5, 6), (1, 2, 3), (1, 3, 2)(5, 6) 
All matrices [~ ~] for n E Z 
All matrices of the form [ ~
11 
~11 ] or [ _ ~211+ 1 
- 2211+1] 
0 
for n E Z 
4 
29. 3 
31. 4 
33. 2 
35. 3 
39. a. T 
c. T 
e. F 
g. F 
i. T 
41. This is a subgroup: i is in the set, the set is closed under function composition, and if a(b) = b, then a - 1 (b) =b. 
43. This is not a subgroup. Let A = Z, B = z+, and b = 1. The permutation a(n) = n + 1 mapping Z to Z is in the set, 
but a - 1 is not in the set. 
SECTION6 
1. q = 4,r = 6 
3. q = - 5, r = 3 
5. 8 
7. 60 
9. 4 
11. 24 
13. 2 
15. 2 
17. 6 
19. 4 
21. An infinite cyclic group 
23. 75 
25. 6 
27. 12 
29. 30 

404 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
31. 
33. 
41. 
43. 
Z 12 
(3)/ 
"- (2) 
""(6) / 
~ 
(4) 
"- (o) / 
Zs 
I 
(2) 
I 
(4) 
I 
(0) 
a. T 
c. F 
e. T 
< Q,+ > 45. There is none. 
47. i, - i 
49. ~(± I ± i) 
63. (p - l)p r-l 
SECTION7 
g. F 
1. 0, I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 
3. Z2s 
5 .... ,-24,-18,- 12,-6,0,6, 12, 18,24,· ·· 
i. T 
7. 
{i,p2,p4,p6,µ,µp2,µp4 ,µp6 ) 
9. a. c 
b. e 
c. d 
11. 
e 
a 
b 
c 
d 
f 
e 
e 
a 
b 
c 
d f 
a 
a 
e 
c 
b 
f 
d 
b 
b 
d 
e 
f 
a 
c 
c 
c 
f 
a 
d 
e 
b 
d 
d 
b 
f 
e 
c 
a 
f 
f 
c 
d 
a 
b 
e 
13. Choose a pair of generating directed arcs, call them arcl and arc2, start at any vertex of the digraph, and see if the 
sequences arc/ , arc2 and arc2, arc/ lead to the same vertex. (This corresponds to asking if the two corresponding 
group generators commute.) The group is commutative if and only if these two sequences lead to the same vertex for 
every pair of generating directed arcs. 
15. It is not obvious, since a digraph of a cyclic group might be formed using a generating set of two or more elements, no 
one of which generates the group. 
17. 
0 
I 
5 
2 
4 
3 
__ .....,..... __ 
2 
19. a. Starting from any vertex a, every path through the graph that terminates at that same vertex a represents a product 
of generators or their inverses that is equal to the identity and thus gives a relation. 
b. a4 = e, b2 = e, (ab)2 = e 

SECTIONS 
1. Homomorphism 
3. Homomorphism 
5. Not a homomorphism 
7. Homomorphism 
9. Not a homomorphism 
11. Ker(cf>) = (4). 
13. Ker(cf>) = ((5, 3)). 
15. (0,0) 
17. { l, 2, 5), (3), (4, 6) 
19. {l,2,3,4,5},{6}, {7,8} 
21. {2n In E Z}, {2n + I In E Z} 
23. (I, 8) (3, 6, 4) (5, 7) = (l, 8) (3, 4) (3, 6) (5, 7) 
25. (I, 5, 4, 8) (2, 3) (6, 7) =( I, 8) (I, 4) (1, 5) (2, 3)(6, 7) 
31. a. F 
c. F 
e. F 
g. T 
SECTION 9 
1. Element 
Order 
Element 
Order 
(0, 0) 
l 
(0, 2) 
2 
(I , 0) 
2 
( I , 2) 
2 
(0, 1) 
4 
(0, 3) 
4 
(I, I) 
4 
(I, 3) 
4 
The group is not cyclic 
3. 2 
5. 9 
7. 60 
9. ((0, 0), (0, 1)), ((0, 0), (1, 0)), ((0, 0), ( I, I)} 
11. { (0, 0), (0, 1 ), (0, 2), (0, 3)} 
((0, 0), (0, 2), (I , 0), (1, 2)) 
((0, 0), (I , I), (0, 2), (I, 3)) 
13. Z20 x Z3, Z15 x Z4, Z 12 x Z5, Z5 x Z3 x Z4 
15. 12 
17. 168 
19. 180 
21. Zg,Z2xZ4,Z2xZ2xZ2 
i. T 
23. Z32, Z2 x Z16, Z4 x Zg, Z2 x Z2 x Zg, Z2 x Z4 x Z4, 
Z2 x Z2 x Z2 x Z4, Z2 x Z2 x Z2 x Z2 x Z2 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
405 
k. T 
25. Z9 x Z 121,Z3 x Z3 x Z 121,Z9 x Z 11 x Z 11 ,Z3 x Z3 x Z11 x Z 11 
n23
4
56 
7 
8 
29. a. ~~~~~~-+----t~+----+~t-----t~--+~ 
number of groups 
2 
3 
5 
7 
11 
15 
22 
b. i) 225 
ii) 225 
iii) 110 
31. a. It is abelian when the arrows on both n-gons have the same (clockwise or counterclockwise) direction. 
b. Z2 x Z,, 
c. When n is odd. 
d. The dihedral group D11 • 
33. Z2 is an example. 
35. S3 is an example. 
37. The numbers are the same. 
41. (- 1, l } 

406 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
SECTION 10 
1. 
4Z=(· .. ,-8,-4,0,4,8,··· } 
1 + 4Z = {· · · ,-7,-3, 1, 5, 9, · ·· } 
2+ 4Z = {··· ,-6,-2,2, 6, 10, · · ·} 
3+ 4Z = {· ·· ,-5,- 1,3,7, 11, · · · } 
3. (0,3,6,9, 12, 15),{ l ,4,7, 10, 13, 16),{2,5,8, II , 14, 17) 
5. ( 18) = (0, 18), I + (18) = {I , 19), 2 + ( 18) = (2, 20), · · · , 17 + (18) = { 17, 35) 
7. {i, µ,p), {p, J.lp2), {p2, J.lp3), {p3, J.l) 
They are different. 
9. {i, p2), {p, p3), {J.l, J.lp2), {J.lp, J.lP3) 
11. 4 
13. 12 
15. 24 
21. 2Z :<:: Z has only 2 cosets. 
23. G = Z2, subgroup H = Z2. 
25. Impossible. The number of cells must divide the order of the group, and 12 does not divide 6. 
SECTION 11 
1. a. The only isometries of lR leaving a number c fixed are the reflection through c that carries c + x to c - x for all 
x E JR, and the identity map. 
3. 
b. The isometries of JR2 that leave a point P fixed are the rotations about P through any angle (! where 0 :<:: (! < 360° 
and the reflections across any axis that passes through P. 
c. The only isometries of lR that carry a line segment into itself are the reflection through the midpoint of the line 
segment (see the answer to part (a)) and the identity map. 
d. The isometries of JR2 that carry a line segment into itself are a rotation of 180° about the midpoint of the line 
segment, a reflection in the axis containing the line segment, a reflection in the axis perpendicular to the line 
segment at its midpoint, and the identity map. 
e. The isometries of JR3 that carry a line segment into itself include rotations through any angle about an axis that 
contains the line segment, reflections across any plane that contains the line segment, and reflection across the plane 
perpendicular to the line segment at its midpoint. 
T 
p 
J.l 
y 
T 
T 
p 
J.lY 
J.lY 
p 
p 
PT 
J.lY 
J.lY 
J.l 
J.lY 
J.lY 
Tp 
Tp 
y 
J.lY 
J.lY 
Tp 
Tp 
9. Translation: order oo 
Rotation: order any n :".: 2 or oo 
Reflection: order 2 
Glide reflection: order oo 
11. Rotations 
13. Only the identity and reflections. 
17. Yes. The product of two translations is a translation and the inverse of a translation is a translation. 
19. Yes. There is only one reflection J.l across one particular line L, and J.l2 is the identity, so we have a group isomorphic 
to Z2. 

Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
407 
21. Only reflections and rotations (and the identity) because translations and glide reflections do not have finite order in 
the group of all plane isometries. 
25. a. No 
b. No 
c. Yes 
27. a. Yes 
b. No 
29. a. No 
b. No 
31. a. Yes. 90°, 180° 
33. a. No 
b. No 
35. a. Yes. 180° 
37. a. Yes. 120° 
c. No 
c. No 
b. Yes 
b. Yes 
b. Yes 
c. No 
d. No 
d. No 
d. Yes 
c. No 
c. No 
c. No 
e. D00 
e. D00 
e. Z 
39. a. Yes. 120° 
b. No 
c. No 
d. (1, 0), (I, .J3) 
SECTION 12 
1. 3 
9. 4 
3. 4 
11. 3 
5. 3 
13. 5 
7. 
I 
15. 
21. a. When working with a factor group G / H , you would Jet a and b be elements of G, not elements of G / H . The student 
probably does not understand what elements of G/H look like and can write nothing sensible concerning them. 
b. We must show that G / H is abelian. Let aH and bH be two elements of G / H . 
23. a. T 
c. T 
e. T 
g. T 
i. T 
35. Example: Let G = N = S3, and let H = {po. µ. 1 }. Then N is normal in G, but H n N = His not normal in G. 
SECTION 13 
1. Z2 
3. Z4 
5. Z4 x Zs 
7. Z x Z2 
9. Z3 x Z x Z4 
11. Z2 x Z 
13. Z x Z2 
15. Z(D4) = C = {i, p2} 
17. Z(S3 x D4) = {{i, i), {i, p)), C = A3 x {i, p). 
21. a. T 
c. F 
e. F 
g. F 
i. T 
23. {f E F* If (0) = I } 
25. Yes. Letf (x) = 1 for x ;:: 0 andf (x) = - 1 for x < 0. Thenf(x) · f (x) = 1 for all x, so J2 E K* butf is not in K*. Thus 
f K* has order 2 in F* / K*. 
27. u 
29. The multiplicative group U of complex numbers of absolute value 1 
31. Let G = Z2 x Z4. Then H = ((1, 0)) is isomorphic to K = ((0, 2)), but G / H is isomorphic to Z4 while G / K is isomor-
phic to Z2 x Z2. 
33. a. {e} 
b. The whole group 
SECTION14 
1. X, = X , Xp = {C),Xp = {m 1, m2.dJ ,d2,C).XP3 = {C), 
Xµ,p = {s1,s3, m1, m2, C, P1 , P3}, X,.,,P3 = {s2,so, m1,m2, C, P2,Po). 
Xµ, = {2, 0,d 1, d2,C).Xµ,p2 = {l ,3, d 1,d2, C}. 
3. {I, 2, 3, 0), {s1, s2, s3, so). {m1, mz), {d1, dz), {C), {P1, P2, P3, Po) 
5. {l} 
7. There are three orbits: { (µ.), (µ.p2) ), { (µ.p ), (µ.p 3)), { (p2)} 
9. 3, 3; 3, 1, 1, l ; 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1 
11. 8,2; 8, 1, 1; 4, 4, 2; 4,4, 1, 1; 4,2,2,2; 4, 2,2, 1, 1; 4, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1; 4, 1, 1, 1, J, l , 1; 2,2, 2, 2,2; 2, 2,2,2, 1, 1; 
2, 2, 2, I, I, I, I; 
2, 2, I, I, I, I, I, I; 
2, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I; 
I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I 
15. A transitive G-set has just one orbit. 
17. a. {s1,s2,s3,so} and {P1, P2, P3, Po) 
21. b. The set of points on the circle with center at the origin and passing through P 
c. The cyclic subgroup (2n ) of G = lR 

408 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
25. a. K = g0Hg0
1 
b. Conjecture: Hand K should be conjugate subgroups of G. 
27. 
x 
y 
z 
There are four of them: X, Y, Z, and /Z6. 
a 
a 
b 
a 
b 
c 
0 
a 
a 
b 
a 
b 
c 
1 
a 
b 
a 
b 
c 
a 
2 
a 
a 
b 
c 
a 
b 
3 
a 
b 
a 
a 
b 
c 
4 
a 
a 
b 
b 
c 
a 
5 
a 
b 
a 
c 
a 
b 
SECTION 15 
1. 5 
3. 2 
5. 11,712 
7. a. 45 
9. a. 90 
b. 231 
b. 6,426 
SECTION 16 
1. a. K= {0, 3,6, 9). 
b. 0 + K = {0,3, 6, 9), l + K = {l , 4, 7, 10),2+ K = {2, 5, 8, 11). 
c. µ,(0 + K) = 0, µ,(! + K) = 2, µ,(2 + K) = 1. 
3. a. HN = {0, 2, 4,6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20,22),H n N = {0, 12). 
b. 0 + N = {0,6, 12, 18), 2 + N = {2, 8, 14, 20),4 + N = {4, 10, 16, 22). 
c. o + (H n N) = {0, 12),4 + (H n N) = {4, 16), 8 + (H n N) = {8, 20). 
d. µ(0 + (H n N)) = 0 + N = {0, 6, 12, 18), µ(4 + (H n N)) = 4 + N = {4, 10, 16, 20), 
µ(8 + (H n N)) = 8 + N = {2,8, 13, 20). 
5. a. 0 + H = {0, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20), l + H = { l, 5, 9, 13, 17, 21}, 
2 + H = {2, 6, 10, 14, 18, 22), 3 + H = {3, 7, 11, 15, 19, 23). 
b. 0 + K = {0, 8, 16), I + K = {1 ,9, 17),2 + K = {2, 10, 18), 
3 + K={3, ll, 19}, 
4 + K = {4, 12, 20),5 + K = {5, 13,21),6 + K={6, 14, 22), 
7 + K = {7, 15, 23). 
c. O+ K = {0, 8, 16),4 + K = {4, 12,20). 
d. (0 + K) + (H/ K ) = H / K = {0 + K,4 + K) = {{0, 8, 16), 4, 12,20)) 
(1 + K) + (H/ K) = {l + K ,5 + K) = {{1 ,9, 17), {5, 13,21)) 
(2 + K)+ (H / K ) = {2 + K, 6 + K) = {{2, 10, 18), {6, 14, 22)) 
(3 + K)+ (H/ K) = {3 + K, 7 + K) = {{3, II , 19),{7, 15, 23)). 
e. </.>({ {0, 8, 16), {4, 12, 20))) = {0, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20), </.>({ { l, 9, 17), {5, 13, 21}}) 
= { l, 5, 9, 13, 17, 21}, </.>({{2, 10, 18), {6, 14, 22))) = {2, 6, 10, 14, 18, 22), 
</.>({ {3, 11, 19), {7, 15, 23)}) = {3, 7, 11, 15, 19, 23) 
SECTION17 
1. 3 
3. I, 3 
5. The Sy low 3-subgroups are ((!, 2, 3)), ((I , 2, 4)), ((I , 3, 4)), and ((2, 3, 4)). Also (3, 4)((1 , 2, 3))(3, 4) = (( I, 2, 4)), etc. 
7. I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, II , 13, 15, 17, 19. 
13. a. T 
c. F 
e. T 
g. T 
i. F 

Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
409 
SECTIONlS 
1. The refinements (0) < 250Z < lOZ < Z of (0) < lOZ <Zand (0) < 250Z < 25Z < Z ofO < 25Z < Z are isomor-
phic. 
3. (0) < (27) < (9) < Z54 and (0) < (18) < (2) < Z54 
5. The refinements 
((0, 0)) < (4800Z) x Z < (240Z) x Z < (60Z) x Z < (!OZ) x Z < Z x Z of the first series and 
((0, 0)) < Z x (4800Z) < Z x (480Z) < Z x (80Z) < Z x (20Z) < Z x Z of the second series are isomorphic 
refinements. 
7. (0) < (16) < (8) < (4) < (2) < Z4g 
(0) < (24) < (8) < (4) < (2) < Z4g 
(0) < (24) < (12) < (4) < (2) < Z4g 
(0) < (24) < (12) < (6) < (2) < Z4g 
(0) < (24) < (12) < (6) < (3) < Z4g 
9. {(i,0)} < A3 x (0) < S3 x (0) < S3 x Z2 
{(i, 0)) < {l} x Z2 < A3 x Z2 < S3 x Z2 
{(i,0)} < A3 x (0) < A3 x Z2 < S3 x Z2 
11. {i} x Z4 
13. {t} x Z4 5 {t} x Z4 5 {t} x Z4 5 · · · . 
17. a. T 
c. T 
e. F 
g. F 
i. T 
i. The Jordan-Holder theorem applied to the groups Zn implies the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic. 
19. Yes. {i} < {i, p} < {i, p, p2, p 3} < D4 is a composition (actually a principal) series and all factor groups are isomorphic 
to Z2 and are thus abelian. 
21. 
Chain (3) 
(0) ::::: (12) ::::: (12) ::::: (12) 
::::: (12) ::::: (12) ::::: (4) 
5 (2) 5 Z24 5 Z24 
Isomorphisms 
(12)/(0) :::: (12)/(0) :::: Z2, 
(1 2)/(12) '.:::'. (3)/(3) '.:::'. (0), 
(12)/(12) '.:::'. (6)/(6) '.:::'. (0), 
(2)/(4) :::: (6)/(12) :::: Z2, 
Z24/Z24 :::: Zi4/Z24 :::: (0) 
SECTION 19 
1. {(!, I , ! ),(!, 2, ! ), (!, I , 2)) 
Chain (4) 
(0) ::::: (12) < (12) ::::: (6) 
::::: (6) ::::: (6) ::::: (3) 
5 (3) 5 Z24 5 Z24 
(12)/(12) '.:::'. (6)/(6) '.:::'. (0), 
(12)/(12) '.:::'. (12)/(12) '.:::'. (0), 
(4)/( 12) :::: Z24/(3) :::: Z3 
Z24/(2) :::: (3)/(6) :::: Z2 
3. No. n(2, I)+ m(4, I) can never yield an odd number for first coordinate. 
7. 2Z < Z, rank r = I 
SECTION 20 
1. a. a2b2a3c3b- 2, b2c- 3a- 3b- 2a- 2 
3. a. 16 
b. 36 
c. 36 
5. a. 16 
b. 36 
c. 18 
11. a. Partial answer: {I} is a basis for Z4. 
c. Yes 
13. c. A blop group on S is isomorphic to the free group F[S] on S. 

410 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
SECTION21 
1. (a : a4 = I); (a, b : a4 = 1, b = a2); (a, b, c: a= 1, b4 = 1, c = I). (Other answers are possible.) 
3. Octic group: 
1 
a 
a2 
a3 
b 
ab 
a2b a3b 
1 
1 
a 
a2 
a3 
b 
ab 
a2b a3b 
a 
a 
a2 
a3 
I 
ab 
a2b a3b 
b 
a2 
a2 
a3 
1 
a 
a2b a3b 
b 
ab 
a3 
a3 
I 
a 
a2 
a3b 
b 
ab 
a2b 
b 
b 
a3b a2b 
ab 
1 
a3 
a2 
a 
ab 
ab 
b 
a3b a2b 
a 
I 
a3 
a2 
a2b a2b 
ab 
b 
a3b 
a2 
a 
I 
a3 
a3b a3b a2b 
ab 
b 
a3 
a2 
a 
1 
Quaternion group: The same as the table for the octic group except that the 16 entries in the lower right corner are 
a2 
a 
1 
a3 
a3 
a2 
a 
I 
1 
a3 
a2 
a 
a 
I 
a3 
a2 
5. Z2i. (a, b : a7 = 1,b3 =1 ,ba = a2b) 
SECTION22 
1. 0 
3. 
5. (1,6) 
7. Commutative ring, no unity, not a field 
9. Commutative ring with unity, not a field 
11. Commutative ring with unity, not a field 
13. No. {rilr E JR} is not closed under multiplication. 
15. (I , 1),(1, - 1),(- 1, 1), (- 1, - 1) 
17. All nonzero q E IQl 
19. 
1, 3 
21. Let lR = Z with unity I and R' = Z x Z with unity 11 = (I, I). Let <P: R --> R' be defined by </J(n) = (n,0). Then 
</J(l) = (1, 0) -j. 11. 
23. 
<Pt : Z--> Z where <Pi (n) = 0, <Pi : Z--> Z where </J2(n) = n 
25. 
<Pi : Z x Z --> Z where </Ji (n, m) = 0, </J2 : Z x Z--> Z where </J2(n, m) = n 
</J3 : Z x Z--> Z where </J3(n, m) = m 
27. The reasoning is not correct since a product (X - /3)(X + /3) of two matrices may be the zero matrix 0 without having 
either matrix be 0. Counterexample: 
[~ ~ ~] 2 =/3. 
1 0 
0 
29. 2, 10. In the ring Z i4 there are nonzero elements 2 and 7 which when multiplied give 0. This is not the case in Z 13. 
33. a = 2, b = 3 in z 6 
35. a. T 
c. F 
e. T 
g. T 
i. T 

Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
411 
SECTION23 
1. 0, 3, 5, 8, 9, 11 
3. No solutions 
5. 0 
7. 0 
9. 12 
11. 1, 5 are units; 2, 3, 4 are 0 divisors. 
13. 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14 are units; 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 12 are 0 divisors. 
15. (I, I), (I, 2), (2, I), (2, 2) are units; (0, I), (0, 2), (I, 0), (2, 0) are 0 divisors. 
17. a4 + 2a2b2 + b4 
19. a6 + 2a3b3 + b6 
23. a. F 
c. F 
e. T 
g. F 
i. F 
25. 1. Det(A) = 0. 
2. The column vectors of A are dependent. 
3. The row vectors of A are dependent. 
4. Zero is an eigenvalue of A. 
5. A is not invertible. 
SECTION 24 
1. 3 or 5 
3. Any of 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, or 14. 
5. 2 
7. rp( l) = 1 
rp(7) = 6 
rp(l 3) = 12 
rp(l9) = 18 
rp(25) = 20 
rp(2) = I 
rp(8) =4 
rp(l4) = 6 
rp(20) = 8 
rp(26) = 12 
rp(3) = 2 
rp(9) =6 
rp(l5) = 8 
rp(21) = 12 
rp(27) = 18 
rp(4) = 2 
rp(IO) = 4 
rp(l6) = 8 
rp(22) = 10 
rp(28) = 12 
rp(5) = 4 
rp( l l) = 10 
rp(l 7) = 16 
rp(23) = 22 
rp(29) = 28 
rp(6) = 2 
rp( l2) = 4 
rp(l8) = 6 
rp(24) = 8 
rp(30) = 8 
9. (p -
l)(q - I) 
11. I +4Z,3+4Z 
13. No solutions 
15. No solutions 
17. 3 + 65Z, 16 + 65Z, 29 + 65Z, 42 + 65Z, 55 + 65Z 
19. 
I 
21. 9 
23. a. F 
c. T 
e. T 
g. F 
i. F 
SECTION 25 
1. n = pq = 15, (p - l)(q - I) = 8, so the pairs are (3, 3), (5, 5) 
3. n = pq = 33, (p - l)(q - 1) = 20, so the pairs are (3,7), (7,3), (9,9), (11,11), (13,17), (17,13) 
5. s = 77 
7. a. y = 64 
b. r = 13 
c. 6413 = 25 (mod 143) 
9. Private key is p = 257, q = 359, n = 92263, r = 1493. Public key is n = 92263 and s = 9085. 
SECTION 26 
1. {q 1+q2i Jq1,q2E IQi} 
15. It is isomorphic to the ring D of all rational numbers that can be expressed as a quotient of integers with denominator 
some power of 2. 
17. It runs into trouble when we try to prove the transitive property in the proof of Lemma 5.4.2, for multiplicative cancel-
lation may not hold. For R = Z6 and T = {I, 2, 4) we have(!, 2) ~ (2, 4) since (1)(4) = (2)(2) = 4 and (2, 4) ~ (2, 1) 
since (2)(1) = (4)(2) in Z6. However, (I , 2) is not equivalent to (2, I) because (1)(1) 'I (2)(2) in Z6. 
SECTION27 
1. f(x) + g(x) = 2x2 + 5,f(x)g(x) = 6x2 + 4x + 6 
3. f(x) + g(x) = 5x2 + 5x + l ,f(x)g(x) = x3 + 5x 
5. 16 
7. 7 
9. 2 
11. 0 
17. 0, 1,2,3 
13. 2, 3 
15. 0, 2, 4 
21. O,x - 5, 2x - 10, x2 - 25, x2 - 5x, x4 -
5x3. (Other answers are possible.) 
23. a. T 
c. T 
e. F 
g. T 
i. T 
25. a. They are the units of D . 
b. 1, - 1 
c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 
27. b. F 
c. F [x] 
31. a. 4, 27 
b. Z2 x Z2, Z3 x Z3 x Z3 

412 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
SECTION28 
1. q(x) = x4 + x3 + x2 + x - 2, r(x) = 4x + 3 
3. q(x) = 6x4 + 7x3 + 2x2 - x + 2, r(x) = 4 
5. 2, 3 
7. 3, 10, 5, 11, 14, 7, 12, 6 
9. (x - l)(x + l)(x - 2)(x + 2) 
ll. (x - 3)(x + 3)(2x + 3) 
13. Yes. It is of degree 3 with no zeros in Z5. 
2x3+x2 +2x + 2 
15. Partial answer: g(x) is irreducible over !E., but it is not irreducible over IC. 
19. Yes. p = 3 
21. Yes. p = 5 
25. a. T 
c. T 
e. T 
g. T 
i. T 
27. x2 +x+ 1 
29. x2 + 1, x2 + x + 2, x2 + 2x + 2, 2x2 + 2, 2x2 + x + 1, 2x2 + 2x + 1 
31. p(p -
1)2 / 2 
SECTION29 
1. 32 
3. 
z~ 
5. a. {(O, 0)), {(O, O), (1, 1)), z~ b. {O, o, OJ, {(O, o, O), (1, 1, 1)), z~ 
c. {(0,0,0,0)},{(0,0,0,0),(1, 1, 1, l)), {(0,0,0,0),(0, 1,0, 1),(1,0, 1, 0),(1, 1, 1, l)}, Zi 
7. a. x7 + 1 = (x3 + x + l)(x4 + x2 + x + 1) 
b. C consists of the cyclic shifts of x3 + x + 1, x4 + x3 + x2 + I together 
with 0 and x6 + xs + x4 + x3 + x2 + x + 1. 
c. A single bit error can be detected and corrected. 
d. A two-bit error 
can be detected, but not corrected. 
9. a. Use long division to verify that (x3 + I )(x6 + x3 + 1) = x9 + I. 
b.C = {x6 +x3 + l ,x7 +x4 +x,x8 +x5 +x2,x7 +x6 +x4 +x3 +x + l,x8 +x7 +x5 +x4 +x2 + x,x8 +x6 + 
x5 +x3 +x2 + l,x8 +x7 +x6 +xs +x4 +x3 +x2 +x1+ 1,0) 
c. The minimal weight among the nonzero words is 3, so the minimum distance between two different code words is 
3. So C detects and corrects a one bit error. 
d. A two-bit error would be detected, but it could not be corrected. 
ll. x9 + I = (x+ 1)(x2 +x+ 1)(x6 +x3 + 1), so the polynomials x+ 1, x2 +x+ 1, x6 +x3 + I, (x+ l)(x2 +x+ I), 
(x + I )(x6 + x3 + I), and (x2 + x + I )(x6 + x3 + I) all generated cyclic codes with code word length 9. 
SECTION 30 
1. There are just nine possibilities: 
</>(1,0) = (1 ,0) while </>(0, I) = (0,0) or (0, 1), 
</>(1,0) = (0, 1) while </>(0, 1) = (0,0) or (1,0), 
</>(I, 0) = (I, I) while </>(0, I) = (0, 0), and 
<f>(l, 0) = (0, 0) while </>(0, I) = (0, 0), (1 , 0), (0, I), or (I, I). 
3. (0) = {O}, Z12/{0}:::Z12 
(I) = {0, 1,2,3, 4,5,6, 7,8,9, 10, ll }, Z 12/( l) ::: {0) 
(2) = {0, 2,4, 6, 8, IO}, Z 12/(2) :::Z2 
(3) = {0,3,6,9},Z12/(3) :::&::3 
(4) = {0, 4, 8), Z 12/ (4) :::: Z4 
(6) = {0, 6), Z12/(6) :::: Z6 
9. Let </> : Z ~ Z x Z be given by </>(n) = (n, 0) for n E Z. 
ll. R/ R and R/ {0) are not of real interest because R/ R is the ring containing only the zero element, and R/ {0} is isomorphic 
to R. 
13. Z is an integral domain. Z/4Z is isomorphic to &::4, which has a divisor 2 of 0. 
15. {(n, n) In E Z). (Other answers are possible.) 
31. The nilradical of Z 12 is {0, 6). The nilradical of Z is {0) and the nilradical of Z32 is 
{0, 2, 4, 6, 8,". '30). 

35. a. Let R = Z and let N = 4Z. Then ,JN = 2Z 'I 4Z 
b. Let R = Z and let N = 2Z. Then ,JN = N. 
SECTION31 
1. (0, 2, 4) and (0, 3) are both prime and maximal. 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
413 
3. { (0, 0), (I , 0)} and { (0, 0), (0, 1)} are both prime and maximal. 
5. 1 
7. 2 
9. 
1, 4 
15. 2Z x Z 
17. 4Z x (0) 
19. Yes. x2 - 6x + 6 is irreducible over Q by Eisenstein with p = 2. 
27. Yes. Z2 x Z3 
29. No. Enlarging the domain to a field of quotients, you would have to have a field containing two different prime fields 
Z p and Z q, which is impossible. 
SECTION32 
1. le + Oa + 3b 
3. 2e + 2a + 2b 
5. j 
7. (1/ 50)} - (3/50)k 
9. JR*, that is, {a 1 +Oi+O}+Ok la 1 EIR, a 1 '10) 
11. a. F 
c. F 
e. F 
g. T 
i. T 
c. If !Al = I, then End(A) = {0}. 
e. 0 E End(A) is not in Iso(A). 
[ i 0] 
19. a. K = 
O - i . 
b. Denoting by B the matrix with coefficient b and by C the matrix with coefficient c and the 2 x 2 identity matrix by 
/ , we must check that 
B2 = - /, C2 = - I,K2 = - /, 
CK= B,KB = C, CB = - K,KC = - B, and BK= - C. 
c. We should check that tjJ is one-to-one. 
SECTION 33 
1. ((0, I), ( I, 0)), {(I, I), ( - 1, I)}, ((2, I), (I, 2)}. (Other answers are possible.) 
3. No. 2(-1, I, 2) - 4(2, - 3, I) + (1 0, - 14, 0) = (0, 0, 0) 
5. 1, .J2 (answers can vary) 
7. Infinite Dimensional 
9. Infinite Dimensional 
15. a. T 
c. T 
e. F 
g. F 
i. F 
17. a. The subspace of V generated by S is the intersection of all subspaces of V containing S. 
19. Partial answer: A basis for F" is 
{(I, 0, .. · , 0), (0, 1, .. · , 0), .. · , (0, 0, .. · , 1)} 
where 1 is the multiplicative identity of F. 
25. a. A homomorphism 
b. Partial answer: The kernel (or nullspace) of tjJ is {a E V I tjJ(a) = 0). 
c. tjJ is an isomorphism of V with V' if Ker(tjJ) = (0) and tjJ maps V onto V' . 
SECTION 34 
1. Yes 
3. No 
5. No. 
7. Yes 
9. In Z [x] : only 2x - 7, - 2x + 7 
7 
In Q[x] : 4x- 14,x- 2,6x-21, -8x+28 
In Z 11 [x] : 2x - 7, !Ox - 2, 6x + I, 3x - 5, 5x - 1 
11. 26, - 26 
13. 198, - 198 
15. It is already "primitive" because every nonzero element of Q is a unit. Indeed 18ax2 - l 2ax + 48a is primitive for all 
a E Q, a 'I 0. 

414 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
17. 2ax2 - 3ax + 6a is primitive for all a op 0 in Z7 because every such element a is a unit in Z7. 
21. a. T 
c. T 
e. T 
g. F 
i. F 
i. Either p or one of its associates must appear in every factorization into irreducibles. 
23. 2x + 4 is irreducible in Q[x] but not in Z[x]. 
31. Partial answer: x3 - y3 = (x - y)(x2 + xy + y2) 
SECTION35 
1. Yes 
3. No. (1) is violated. 
5. Yes 
7. 61 
9. x3 + 2x _ 1 
11. 66 
13. a. T 
c. T 
e. T 
g. T 
i. T 
23. Partial answer: The equation ax = b has a solution in Z,, for nonzero a, b E Z,, if and only if the positive gcd of a and 
n in Z divides b. 
SECTION36 
1. 5 = (1 + 2i)(J - 2i) 
3. 4 + 3i = (I + 2i)(2 - i) 
5. 6 = (2)(3) = (- 1 + .J=S)(- 1 - .J=S) 
7. 7 - i 
15. c. i) order 9, characteristic 3 
ii) order 2, characteristic 2 
iii) order 5, characteristic 5 
SECTION37 
1. {x,y) 
3. {x+4,y-5) 
5. By multiplying the first polynomial by -2 and adding to the second polynomial, we have I= (x + y + z, - y + z - 4). 
The algebraic variety is {4 - 2z, z - 4, z) I z E IR} which is a line through (4, - 4, 0). 
7. After two careful long divisions, I= (x2 + x - 2). The algebraic variety is {l, -2). 
9. F2 
11. a. 0, b. {i, -i} 
13. a. T 
c. T 
e. T 
SECTION38 
1. -3x3 + 7x2iz - sx2yz3 + 2xy3z5 
3. 2x2yz2 - 2xy2z2 - 7x + 3y + IOz3 
5. 2z5y3 x - Sz3yx2 + 7zy2 x2 - 3x3 
7. 10z3 - 2z2y2x + 2z2yx2 + 3y - 7x 
g. T 
i. T 
9. 1 < z < y < x < z2 < yz < y2 < xz < xy < x2 < z3 < yz2 < i
z < y3 < xz2 < xyz < 
xy2 < x2z < x2y < x3 < · · · 
11. 3y2z5 - 8z7 + Sy3z3 - 4x 
15. 
(y5 + y3, y3 + Z, X - y4) 
19. {l } 
21. {x - l} 
{2x + y - s,y2 - 9y + 18) 
23. 
13. 3yz3 - 8xy - 4xz + 2yz + 38 
17. Ci z3 + 3, - 3y - 2z,i
z2 + 3) 
The algebraic variety is {(I, 3), ( - ~ , 6)}. 
25. {x+y,y3 - y + 1) 
The algebraic variety consists of one point (a, -a) where a ""' 1.3247. 
27. a. F 
c. T 
e. T 
g. T 
i. F 
29. Any order with d i and d2 (in either order) the largest. 

SECTION39 
1. x2-2x- 1 
3. x2 -2x+ 2 
5. x 12 +3x8 -4x6 +3x4 + 12x2 +5 
2 
62 
7. Irr(a, IQI) = x4 - 3x2 - 9 ;deg(a, IQI) = 4 
9. Algebraic, deg(a, F) = 2 
11. Transcendental 
13. Algebraic, deg(a,F) = 2 
15. Algebraic, deg(a, F) = 1 
17. x2 +x+ 1= (x-a)(x+ 1 +a) 
23. a. T 
c. T 
e. F 
g. F 
i. F 
25. b. x3 + x2 + 1 = (x - a)(x - a 2)[x - (1 +a+ a 2)] 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
415 
27. The polynomial irr(a, F) is a generator of the principal ideal of all polynomials in F[x] that have a as a zero. Therefore, 
irr is the monic polynomial of minimum degree that has a as a zero. Also, irr(a, F) is the only irreducible monic 
polynomial that has a as a zero. 
SECTION 40 
1. 2, {l,hJ 
3. 4, {l,.J3,v'2,.J6J 
5. 6,{l,v'2,0,v'2(0),(0)2,v'2(0)2 } 
7. 2,{ l,.J6J 
9. 9, {l, 0, V4, V3, lfc), Vl2, 4'9, 08, ~} 
11. 2,{1,hJ 
13. 2, {l,hl 
19. a. F 
c. F 
e. F 
g. F 
i. F 
23. Partial answer: Extensions of degree 211 for n E z+ are obtained. 
SECTION 41 
All odd-numbered answers require proofs and are not listed here. 
SECTION 42 
1. Yes 
3. Yes 
5. 6 
7. 0 
SECTION 43 
1. h,-h 
3. 3+v'2,3-v'2 
5. 
7. ,/J + h,-,/1 + h,,/1 - h, -,/1 -h 
11. -h + 3vls 
13. -h + .J45 
15 . .J3 -J:_ vis 
17. IQl(v'2, .J3, vis) 
19. IQl(.J3, .y'TI}) 
25. a. 3 - v'2 
b. They are the same maps. 
39. Yes 
SECTION44 
h + i, h - i, -h + i, -h - i 
9 . .J3 
21. IQi 
1. 2 
3. 4 
5. 2 
7. 1 
9. 2 
11. v'2 --+ h , .J3 --+ .J3, vis --+ vis; and v'2 --+ h, .J3 --+ - .J3, vis --+ - vis 
13. h--+ h, .J3--+ .J3, vis--+ -vis; h--+ h, .J3--+ -.J3, vis--+ vis; 
h --+ - h, .J3 --+ .J3, vis --+ vis; h --+ - h , .J3 --+ - .J3, vis --+ - vis 
15. There are six extensions. One for each of the combinations where .J3i maps to ±.J3i and 0 maps to one of a 1, 0:2 , 0:3. 

416 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
17. a. IQl(n2) 
b. ,Jrr can map to either ±,Jrri. 
19. 
I :": [£ : F ] :": n! 
21. Let F = iQI and E = !QI( ,/2). Then 
f(x) = x4 - 5x2 + 6 = (x2 - 2)(x2 -
3) 
has a zero in E, but does not split in E. 
SECTION 45 
1. a = --V2 = 2/ ( ifi.,/2).,/2 = ( ..v2)3, if2. = ( ..v2)2. (Other answers are possible.) 
I 
11 
17 
I 
3. a = ,/2 +.JS. ,/2 = 6
a 3 - 6 a, v's = 6
a - 6
a 3. (Other answers are possible.) 
7. f (x) = x4 - 4x2 + 4 = (x2 - 2)2. Heref(x) is not an irreducible polynomial. Every irreducible factor of f(x) has zeros 
of multiplicity 1 only. 
SECTION 46 
1. 4 
1 8 
~ 4 
~ 2 
9. The group has two elements, the identity automorphism L of IQl(i) and a such that a(i) = -i. 
3~ 
3~- I + i,J'J 
3~- 1 - i,J'J 
11. b. Let a 1 = v 5, 
a2 = v 5 
2 
, 
and 
a3 = v 5 
2 
. 
The maps are 
L, where L is the identity map; 
p, where p(a 1) = a2 and p(i,J'J) = i,J'J; 
p2, where p2(a 1) = a3 and p2(i,J3) = i,J'J; 
µ,where µ(ai) = ai and µ(i,J'J) = -i,J'J; 
µp, where µp(ai) = a3 and µp(i,J'J) = -i,J'J; 
µp2, where µp2(ai) = a2 and µp2(i,J3) = - i,J'J. 
c. S3. The notation in (a) was chosen to coincide with the standard notation for D3 '.:o:'. S3. 
d. 
Group diagram 
/~1K")~ 
tQ(i\/3) = K <p> 
tQ(ri) = K <µ> 
IQl(a2) = K <µp> 
IQl(a3) = K <µ p'> 
~
I ~ 
IQ = Ko, 
Field diagram 
13. The splitting field of (x3 -
I) E IQl[x] is IQl(i,J'J), and the group is cyclic of order 2 with elements: i, where L is the 
identity map of IQl(i,J'J), and a, where a(i,J'J) = -i,J'J. 
15. a. F 
c. T 
e. T 
g. F 
i. F 
25. Partial answer: G(K/ (E v L)) = G(K/ E) n G(K/ L) 

SECTION47 
3. 
IQ(~, i): ~ 
+ i, x8 + 4x6 + 2x4 + 28x2 + 1; 
IQ(~): ~,x4 -2; 
IQ(i~)): i( ~),x4 - 2; 
1Q(,J2, i): .J2 + i,x4 - 2x2 + 9; 
IQ(~+i(~)): ~+i(~),x
4 +8; 
IQ(~ -
i(~)): ~ 
-
i(~),x
4 + 8; 
1Q(,J2): ,J2,x2 -2; 
IQ(i): i,x2 + l ; 
IQ(i.J2): i,J2, x2 + 2; 
IQ: l,x- 1 
5. The group is cyclic of order 5, and its elements are 
where ~ 
is the real Sth root of 2. 
Answers to Odd-Numbered Exercises 
417 
7. The splitting field of x8 -
1 over IQ is the same as the splitting field of x4 + 1 over IQ, so a complete description is 
contained in Example 47.7. (This is the easiest way to answer the problem.) 
9. a. s, 2 - 2s2 
SECTION 48 
3. a. 16 
5. 30 
s1s2 - 3s3 
b. 
s3 
b. 400 
c. 2160 
7. a. T 
c. F 
e. T 
9. <Pi(x)=x-1 
<P2(x) = x+ 1 
<l>3(x)=x2+x+ l 
<l>4(x) = x2 + 1 
<P5(x) = x4 +x3 +x2 +x+ 1 
<P6(x) = x2 - x + l 
SECTION 49 
g. T 
1. No. Yes, K is an extension of Z2 by radicals. 
3. a. T 
c. T 
e. T 
g. T 
APPENDIX 
1. 
[~ ~] 
3. [-3 r2i - 1 --:4] 
-
I 
- i 
5. 
[~ 
16 -3] 
7. [4 ~ 6i 
-i ] 
- 18 
24 
-2-2i 
9. 
[:i -8~] 
11. 
[~ -~J 
13. -48 
i. F 
i. F (x3 - 2x over IQ gives a counterexample.) 

This page is intentionally left blank 

Index 
Abel, Niels Henrik, 21, 150, 191, 385 
Abelian extension, 370 
Abelian group(s), 20 
finitely-generated, fundamental 
theorems of, 92, 93 
free, 167 
torsion free, 96, 119 
Absolute value, 34 
Action 
faithful, 133 
on a group, 132 
transitive, 133 
Addition 
modulo 2:n:, 37 
modulo c, 33 
modulo n, 32, 65 
Additive identity, 14 
Adjoining elements to field, 321 
Al-Tusi Sharaf al-Din, 224 
Algebra 
fundamental theorem of, 257, 324 
group, 261 
Algebraic closure, 324 
Algebraic closure of F in£, 323 
Algebraic element over F , 313 
Algebraic extension, 319 
Algebraic integer, 378 
Algebraic number, 314 
Algebraic number theory, 294 
Algebraic variety, 298 
Algebraically closed field, 323, 327 
Alphabet, 172 
Alternating group on n letters, 84 
Antisymmetric law, 324 
Arc 
of a diagraph, 72 
of a graph, 308 
Arithmetic, fundamental theorem of, 
280 
Artin, Emil, 225 
Ascending central series, 163 
Ascending chain condition, 278, 286 
Aschbacher, Michael, 127 
Associates, 276 
Associative operation, 13, 20 
Automorphism, 341 
of a field, 345 
Frobenius, 349 
of a group, 68, 118 
group of, 345 
inner, 118 
Axiom of choice, 324, 325 
Axis of reflection, 105 
Banach, Stefan, 268 
Basis 
for a finitely-generated abelian 
group, 176 
for a free abelian group, 167 
Grabner, 305 
for an ideal, 298 
for a vector space, 270 
Bessy, Bernard Frenicle de, 201 
Betti number, 92 
Bijection, 4 
Binary operation, 11 
Bit, 237 
Bit errors, 239 
Blip group, 177 
Bloom, David M., 82 
Blop group, 177 
Boolean ring, 194 
Bourbaki, Nicholas, 4, 177, 326 
Brahmagupta, 288 
Burnside, William, 127, 152 
Burnside's formula, 141 
Cancellation laws, 23, 196 
Cardano, Girolamo, 224, 385 
Cardinality, 3, 4 
Cartesian product, 2, 88 
Cauchy Augustin-Louis, 42 
Cauchy's theorem, 136 
Cayley, Arthur, 72, 81, 178 
Cayley digraph, 72 
Cayley's theorem, 79 
Cell,5 
Center of a group, 60, 128, 163 
Chain(s), 324 
Chain condition, 
ascending, 278, 286 
descending, 286 
Characteristic of a ring, 198 
Chief series, 161 
Class 
equivalence, 7 
residue modulo n, 6 
Class equation, 156 
Closed interval, 8 
Closed set under an operation, 12, 37 
Closure, algebraic, 323 
Code,238 
polynomial, 241 
Code word, 238 
Codomain, 3 
Coefficients 
of a polynomial, 219 
torsion, 93, 96 
Coloring of graph, 308 
Commensurable numbers, 223 
Commutative operation, 13 
Commutative ring, 189 
Commutator, 120, 128 
Commutator subgroup, 120, 128 
Comparable elements, 324 
Complex number, 3, 33 
absolute value of, 34 
multiplication of, 34 
Composition, function, 12, 14 
associativity of, 14 
Composition series, 161 
Congruence modulo n, 6 
Conjugate elements over F, 345 
Conjugate subgroups, 119, 120 
Conjugation, 118 
Conjugation isomorphism, 345 
419 

420 
Index 
Consequence, 179 
Constant polynomial, 219 
Constructible number, 329 
Constructible polygon, 380 
Content of a polynomial, 237, 281 
Contraction, elementary, 173 
Correction of bit errors, 239 
Correspondence, one-to-one, 4 
Coset, 97 
double, 104 
left, 98 
right, 100 
Coset group, 97 
Crelle, August, 21 
Cycle(s), 44 
disjoint, 44, 45 
k-, 44 
Cyclic extension, 371 
Cyclic group, 56, 61 
elementary properties of, 61 
finite, subgroups of, 66 
structure of, 64 
Cyclic linear code, 238 
Cyclic subgroup, 55, 61 
Cyclotomic extension, 378 
Cyclotomic polynomial, 234, 378 
Decomposable group, 93 
Decryption, 205 
Dedekind, Richard, 191, 244 
Definitions, I 
Degree 
of a over F, 315 
of an extension, 319 
of a polynomial, 219 
Derivative, 340 
Descartes, Rene, 218 
Descending chain condition, 286 
Detection of bit error, 239 
Determinant of a square matrix, 28 
Diagonal matrix, 28 
Diagram, subgroup, 53 
Digraph, 72 
arc of, 72 
vertex of, 72 
Dihedral group, 46 
Dimension of a vector space over F, 
272 
Direct product, 89 
external, 9 1 
internal, 91 
of rings, 187 
Direct sum, 89 
of vector spaces, 27 4 
Dirichlet, Peter Lejeune, 191 
Discrete frieze group, 107 
Discriminant of a polynomial, 378 
Disjoint cycles, 44, 45 
Disjoint sets, 5 
Disjoint union of G-sets, 140 
Distance between two strings, 238 
Distributive law, 185 
Division algorithm 
for Z, 62 
for F [x], 228, 286, 300 
Division ring, 190 
Divisor, 276, 300 
greatest common, 63, 281 
of a polynomial, 234 
of zero, 194 
Domain 
Euclidean, 286 
of a function, 3 
integral, 196 
principal ideal, 276 
unique factorization, 276 
Double coset, 104 
Doubling the cube, 332 
Edges of graph, 308 
Eisenstein criterion, 233 
Element(s), 1 
adjoining to field, 321 
algebraic over F , 313 
comparable, 324 
conjugate over F, 345 
equivalent, 212 
fixed, 342 
idempotent, 19, 31, 193, 199 
identity, 14, 20 
inverse of, 20 
irreducible, 276 
maximal, 325 
nilpotent, 193, 250 
orbit of, 82, 135 
order of, 61 
prime, 280 
primitive, 360 
separable over F, 359 
transcendental over F , 313 
Elementary contraction, 173 
Elementary symmetric function, 372 
Empty set, 1 
Empty word, 172 
Encryption, 205 
RSA, 206 
Endomorphism, 258 
Equation, class, 156 
Equivalence class, 7 
Equivalence relation, 6 
Equivalent elements, 212 
Errors, bit, 239 
Escher M. C., 109 
Euclid, 201, 288 
Euclidean algorithm, 288 
Euclidean domain, 286 
Euclidean norm, 286 
Euler, Leonard, 21, 34, 202, 381 
Euler formula, 34 
Euler phi-function, 105, 202 
Euler's theorem, 202 
Evaluation homomorphism, 120, 189, 
221 
Even permutation, 83 
Extension(s), 311 
abelian, 370 
algebraic, 319 
cyclic, 371 
cyclotomic, 378 
degree of, 319 
finite, 319 
finite normal, 362 
join of, 371 
of a map, 351 
by radicals, 384 
separable, 347, 359 
simple, 315 
Extension field, 311 
External direct product, 91 
Factor, 276, 300 
of a polynomial, 300 
Factor group, 11 3, 115 
Factor theorem, 229 
Faithful action, 133 
Feit, Walter, 127, 152 
Fermat, Pierre de, 201 
Fermat prime, 381 
Fermat's last theorem, 277 
Fermat's p = a2 + b2 theorem, 295 
Fermat's theorem, 200 
Euler's generalization of, 202 
Ferrari, Lodovico, 385 
Ferro, Scipione de!, 385 
Field, 190 
adjoining elements to, 321 
algebraic closure of, 323 
algebraic closure in £ , 323 
algebraically closed, 323, 327 
extension of, 311 
fixed,365 
Galois, 335 
intermediate, 344 
perfect, 359 
prime, 254 
ofquotient~2 11 ,2 15 
of rational functions, 221 
separable extension of, 359 
simple extension of, 315 
skew, 190 
splitting, 347, 349, 353 
strict! y skew, 190 
subfield of, 190 
tower of, 31 1 
Field extension, 31 1 
simple, 315 
Finite-basis condition, 286 
Finite extension, 3 19 
degree of, 319 
Finite generating set, 286 
Finite group, 25 
Finite presentation, 179 
Finite-dimensional vector space, 269 
Finitely-generated group, 71 
Fixed elements, 342 
Fixed field, 365 
Fixed point, 110 
Free abelian group, 167 
basis for, 167 
rank of, 168 
Free generators, 17 4 
Free group, 173 
rank of, 174 
Frey, Gerhard, 277 
Frieze group, 107 

Frobenius, Georg, I 50 
Frobenius automorphism, 349 
Frobenius homomorphism, 249 
Function(s), 3 
codomain of, 3 
composite, 12, 14 
composition of, 12, 14 
domain of, 3 
elementary symmetric, 372 
Euler phi-, 105, 202 
image of A under, 78 
inverse of, 4 
one-to-one, 4 
onto, 4 
phi-, 105, 202 
polynomial on F, 227 
range of, 3 
rational, 221 
symmetric, 372 
trap door, 206 
two-to-two, 9 
Fundamental homomorphism 
theorem, 117, 247 
Fundamental theorem of algebra, 257, 
324 
Fundamental theorem of arithmetic, 
280 
Fundamental theorem of 
finitely-generated abelian 
groups, 170 
invariant factor version of, 93 
primary factor version of, 92 
G-set(s), 132 
applications to counting, 140 
applications to finite groups, 136 
disjoint union of, 140 
isomorphic, 139 
orbits of, 135 
sub-, 139 
transitive, 133 
Gallian, Joseph A., 108 
Galois, Evariste, 162, 191, 337, 379 
Galois field, 335 
Galois group, 362 
Galois theory, 341 
main theorems of, 364 
Gauss, Carl F., 21, 92, 292, 334, 337, 
379 
Gauss's lemma, 282 
Gaussian integer, 216, 292 
Gaussian norm, 292 
General linear group, 22 
General polynomial of degree n, 372 
Generating set, 70, 7 1 
Generator(s), 56, 61, 70, 71 
for a presentation, 179 
free, 174 
of a group, 56, 6 1 
of a principal ideal, 254 
relation on, 75, 179 
for a vector space, 269 
Glide reflection, 106 
nontrivial, 108 
Graph, 308 
Grassmann, Hermann, 268 
Greatest common divisor, 63, 281 
Griess, Robert L. Jr., 127 
Grebner basis, 305 
Group(s), 20 
abelian, 20 
alternating on n letters, 84 
ascending central series of, 163 
automorphism of, 68, 118 
of automorphisms, 345 
blip, 177 
blop, 177 
center of, 60, 128, 163 
commutator in a, 120 
of cosets, 97 
cyclic, 56, 61 
decomposable, 93 
dihedral, 46 
direct product of, 89 
direct sum of, 89 
discrete frieze, 107 
elementary properties of, 23 
endomorphism of, 258 
factor, 115 
finite, 25 
finitely-generated, 7 1 
free, I 73 
free on A, I 73 
free abelian, 167 
frieze, 107 
Galois, 362 
general linear, 22 
generator(s) of, 56, 61, 70, 71 
indecomposable, 93 
inner automorphism of, 118 
isomorphic, 25, 26 
Klein 4-, 53 
notation and terminology, 39 
octic, 182 
order of, 41 
p-, 137 
permutation, 41 , 77, 79 
plane crystallographic, I 08 
of a polynomial, 365 
presentation of, 178, 179 
quaternion, 183 
quotient, 115 
regular representation of, 80 
series of, I 57 
simple, 126 
solvable, 163 
special linear, 115 
subgroup of, 52 
symmetric on n letters, 43 
of symmetries, 105 
torsion, 119 
torsion free, 119 
wallpaper, 108 
Group action, I 32 
Group algebra, 261 
Group homomorphism, 77 
Group ring, 261 
Group table, 25 
properties of, 27 
Index 
421 
Hamilton, Sir William Rowan, 262, 
268 
Hamming distance, 238 
Hamming weight, 238 
Hilbert, David, 186 
Hilbert basis theorem, 299 
Holder, Otto, I 62, I 78 
Homomorphism, 113, 188 
evaluation, 120, 189, 221 
Frobenius, 249 
fundamental theorem for, 117, 247 
group, 77 
kernel of, 78, 188, 247 
projection, 246 
of a ring, 188, 245 
Homomorphism property, 26 
ldeal(s), 244 
ascending chain condition for, 278, 
286 
basis for, 298 
descending chain condition for, 286 
finite-basis condition for, 286 
improper, 25 1 
left, 258 
maximal, 251 
maximum condition for, 286 
minimum condition for, 286 
nilradical of, 250 
prime, 252 
principal, 254 
product of, 258 
proper nontrivial, 251 
quotient of, 258 
radical of, 250 
right, 258 
sum of, 257 
trivial, 251 
Idempotent element, 19, 31, 193, 199 
Identity element, 14, 20 
left, 25 
Image 
of A, 78 
inverse, 78 
under a map, 78 
Imaginary number, 34 
Improper ideal, 251 
Improper subgroup, 52, 59 
Improper subset, 2 
Indecomposable group, 93 
Indeterminate, 2 18 
Index of a subgroup, 99 
Induced operation, 12, 114 
Infinite order, 6 I 
Infinite set, 4 
Information rate, 238 
Injection, 4 
Injection map, 4, 214 
Inner automorphism, I I 8 
lnteger(s), 2 
algebraic, 378 
Gaussian, 2 16, 292 
rational, 292 
relatively prime, 64 

422 
Integral domain, 196 
associates in, 276 
Euclidean norm on, 286 
prime element of, 280 
Index 
field of quotients of, 211, 215 
unit in, 276 
Intermediate field, 344 
Internal direct product, 91 
Intersection, 60, 71 
Interval, closed, 8 
Invariant factors, 93 
Invariant series, 157 
Invariant subgroup, 1 18 
Inverse 
of an element, 20 
left, 25 
multiplicative, 190 
Inverse function, 4 
Inverse map, 4 
Irreducible element, 276 
Irreducible polynomial, 231 
for a over F , 315, 319 
in F[x], 23 1 
Isometry, 22, 105 
Isomorphic G-sets, 139 
Isomorphic groups, 26 
Isomorphic presentations, 180 
Isomorphic rings, 189 
Isomorphic series, 157 
Isomorphism 
conjugation, 345 
of a G-set, 139 
of a group, 26 
of a ring, 189 
up to, 92 
of a vector space, 274 
Isomorphism extension theorem, 351 
Isomorphism theorems, 145-148 
Isosceles triangle, 2 
Isotropy subgroup, 135 
Join 
of extension fields, 371 
of subgroups, 146 
Jordan, Camille, 21, 162 
Jordan-Holder theorem, 161 
k-cycle, 44 
Kernel, 78, 188, 247 
of a linear transformation, 275 
Khayyam, Omar, 224 
Klein 4-group, 32, 53 
Kronecker, Leopold, 92, 19 1, 312 
Kronecker's theorem, 312 
Kummer, Ernst, 92, 244, 277 
Lagrange, Joseph-Louis, 21, 42, 385 
theorem of, 99, 123 
Lame, Gabriel, 277 
Law 
antisymmetric, 324 
cancellation, 23, 196 
distributive, 185 
reflexive, 324 
transitive, 324 
Least common multiple, 69, 90, 291 
Left cancellation law, 23 
Left coset, 98 
Left distributive law, 185 
Left ideal, 258 
Left identity, 25 
Left inverse, 25 
Left R-module, 272 
Left regular representation, 80 
Length of a code word, 238 
Letter, 172 
Levi ben Gerson, 42 
Levinson, Norman, 339 
Lexicographical order, 304 
Lindemann, Ferdinand, 334 
Linear code, 238 
Linear combination, 269 
Linear group, special, 115 
Linear transformation, 275 
kernel of, 275 
Linearly dependent vectors over F , 
269 
Linearly independent vectors over F, 
269 
Liouville, Joseph, 277 
Main diagonal of a matrix, 28 
Main theorems of Galois theory, 364 
Map, 3 
extension of, 35 1 
image under, 78 
injection, 214 
inverse of, 4 
range of, 3 
Matrix 
determinant of, 28 
diagonal, 28 
main diagonal of, 28 
orthogonal, 57 
transpose of, 57 
upper-triangular, 28 
Maximal element, 325 
Maximal ideal, 251 
Maximal normal subgroup, 127 
Maximum condition, 286 
Mersenne prime, 201 
Minimal polynomial for a over F, 
315,319 
Minimal subset, 55n 
Minimum condition, 286 
Monie polynomial, 314 
Monoid, 25 
Multiple, least common, 69, 90, 291 
Multiplication 
by components, 88 
modulo n, 187 
permutation, 41 
Multiplicative identity, 14 
Multiplicative inverse, 190 
Multiplicative norm, 294 
Multiplicity of a zero, 358 
Nilpotent element, 193, 250 
Nilradical, 250 
Noether, Emmy, 186 
Noetherian ring, 278 
Nontrivial ideal, proper, 251 
Nontrivial subgroup, 52 
Norm 
Euclidean, 286 
Gaussian, 292 
multiplicative, 294 
over F, 370 
Normal extension, finite, 362 
Normal series, 157 
Normal subgroup, 114, 118, 248 
maximal, 127 
Normalizer of a subgroup, 150 
Nullstellensatz, 257 
Number(s) 
algebraic, 314 
Betti, 92 
commensurable, 223 
complex, 3, 33 
constructible, 329 
imaginary, 34 
rational, 2 
real, 2 
transcendental, 314 
Number theory, algebraic, 294 
Octic group, 182 
Odd permutation, 83 
One-to-one correspondence, 4 
One-to-one function, 4 
Onto function, 4 
Operation 
associative, 13, 20 
binary, 11 
commutative, 13 
induced, 12 
well-defined, 16 
Orbit, 51, 82, 135 
Order 
of a group, 41 
of an element, 61 
infinite, 61 
of ring, 192 
term, 304 
Ordering 
lexicographical, 304 
partial, 324 
of power products, 303 
Orientation, 106 
Orthogonal matrix, 57 
p-group, 137 
p-subgroup, 137 
Partial ordering, 324 
Partition, 5 
cells of, 5 
Pattern, periodic, 108 
Peano, Giuseppe, 268 
Perfect field, 359 
Periodic pattern, 108 
Permutation, 41 
even, 83 
groups of, 77, 79 
movement of elements in, 87 
multiplication, 41 

odd,83 
orbits of, 82 
sign of, 84 
Phi-function, 105, 202 
Plane 
isometry of, 22 
translation of, 105 
Plane crystallographic group, 108 
Plane isometry, 105 
Point, fixed, 110 
Polygon, constructible, 380 
Polynomial(s), 219 
coefficients of, 219 
constant, 219 
content of, 237, 281 
cyclotomic, 234, 378 
degree of, 219 
discriminant of, 378 
divisor of, 234, 300 
Eisenstein, 233 
factor of, 300 
general of degree n, 372 
group of, 365 
irreducible for a over F, 315, 319 
irreducible over F , 23 1 
irreducible, 231 
minimal for a over F, 319 
monic, 314 
primitive, 237, 281 
reducible, 231 
ring of, 220 
separable over F, 359 
solvable by radicals over F , 384 
splitting field of, 347, 349, 353 
term ordering of, 304 
zero of, 223, 298 
Polynomial code, 241 
Polynomial extension, 350 
Polynomial function on F, 227 
Power product, 303 
ordering of, 303 
Power set, 8 
Presentation, 178, 179 
finite, 179 
generators for, 179 
isomorphic, 180 
Prime, 280 
Fermat, 381 
Mersenne, 201 
relatively, 291 
Prime field, 254 
Prime ideal, 252 
Primitive element, 360 
Primitive element theorem, 360 
Primitive nth root of unity, 69, 336 
Primitive polynomial, 237, 281 
Principal ideal, 254 
generator of, 254 
Principal ideal domain, 276 
Principal series, 161 
Private key, 206 
Product 
Cartesian, 2, 88 
direct, 89, 187 
of ideals, 258 
power, 303 
Projection homomorphism, 246 
Proper nontrivial ideal, 251 
Proper subgroup,52 
Proper subset, 2 
Public key, 206, 207 
Pythagorean theorem, 224 
Qin Jiushao, 288 
Quaternion group, 183 
Quaternions, 262 
Quotient 
in the division algorithm, 62 
of ideals, 25 8 
Quotient group, 115 
Quotient space, 275 
Rabin, Michael, 180 
Radical(s) 
extension by, 384 
of an ideal, 250 
Range of a map, 3 
Rank, 168, 174 
Rate of linear code, 238 
Rational function, 221 
Rational integer, 292 
Rational number, 2 
Real number, 3 
Reduced word, 173 
Reducible polynomial, 231 
Reduction modulo n, 116 
Refinement of a series, 157 
Reflection, 105 
axis of, 105 
glide, 106 
Reflexive law, 324 
Reflexive relation, 6, 7 
Regular representation, 80 
left, 80 
right, 81 
Relation(s), 3, 75, 179 
consequence of, 179 
equality, 3 
equivalence, 6 
reflexive, 6, 7 
symmetric, 6, 7 
transitive, 6, 7 
Relatively prime, 64, 291 
Relator, 179 
Remainder in the division 
algorithm, 62 
Representation 
left regular, 80 
right regular, 81 
Residue class modulo n, 6 
Ribet, Ken, 277 
Right cancellation law, 23 
Right coset, 100 
Right distributive law, 185 
Right ideal, 258 
Right R-module, 273 
Right regular representation, 81 
Ring(s), 185 
Index 
423 
additive group of, 186 
Boolean, 194 
characteristic of, 198 
commutative, 189 
division, 190 
of endomorphisms, 258 
factor, 245 
group, 261 
homomorphism, 188, 245 
ideal of, 248 
isomorphic, 189 
isomorphism of, 189 
maximal ideal of, 251 
modules over, 272 
nilradical of, 250 
Noetherian, 278 
order of, 192 
of polynomials, 220 
prime ideal of, 252 
quotient, 245 
radical of, 250 
simple, 257 
subring of, 190 
unit in a, 190, 276 
with unity, 189 
zero, 189 
Roots of unity, 37 
nth, 37 
primitive nth, 69, 336 
Rotation, 105 
RSA encryption, 206 
Ruffini, Paolo, 385 
Scalar, 267 
Schreier theorem, 160 
Sefer Yetsirah, 42 
Semigroup, 25 
Separable element over F , 359 
Separable extension, 347, 359 
Separable polynomial over F, 359 
Series 
ascending central, 163 
chief, 161 
composition, 161 
invariant, 157 
isomorphic, 157 
normal, 157 
principal, 161 
refinement of, 157 
subnormal, 157 
Set(s), 1 
binary operation on, 11 
cardinality of, 3 
Cartesian product of, 2, 88 
closed under an operation, 12 
disjoint, 5 
element of, 1 
empty, 1 
finite generating, 286 
G-, 132 
generating, 70, 7 1 
infinite, 4 
intersection of, 60, 71 
partial ordering of, 324 

424 
Set(s) (cont.) 
partition of, 5 
permutation of, 41 
power, 8 
subset of, 2 
union of, 278 
well-defined, 1 
Shimura, Goro, 277 
Sign of a permutation, 84 
Simple extension, 315 
Simple group, 126 
Simple ring, 257 
Skew field, 190 
Smallest subset, 55n 
Solvable group, 163 
Index 
Solvable polynomial over F, 384 
Span, 269 
Special linear group, 115 
Splitting field, 347, 349, 353 
Square matrix 
determinant of, 28 
main diagonal of, 28 
Squaring the circle, 333 
Standard form of dihedral group 
element, 48 
Strictly skew field, 190 
Sub-G-set, 139 
Subfield, 190 
Subgroup(s), 52 
commutator, 120, 128 
conjugate, 119, 120 
cycEc, 55, 61 
improper, 52, 59 
index of, 99 
invariant, 118 
isotropy, 135 
join of, 146 
maximal normal, 127 
nontrivial, 52 
normal, 114, 118, 248 
normalizer of, 150 
p-, 137 
proper, 52 
torsion, 96 
trivial, 52 
Subgroup diagram, 53 
Subnormal series, 157 
Subring, 190 
generated by a, 193 
Subset, 2 
improper, 2 
minimal, 55n 
proper, 2 
smallest, 55n 
upper bound for, 325 
Subspace of a vector space, 274 
Sum 
direct, 89 
of ideals, 257 
modulo n, 65 
Surjection, 4 
Syllable, 172 
Sylow, Peter Ludvig Mejdell, 150 
Sylow p-subgroup, 151 
Sylow theorems, 150 
Symmetric function, 372 
elementary, 372 
Symmetric group on n letters, 43 
Symmetric relation, 6, 7 
Symmetries, group of, 105 
Table, group, 25 
properties of, 27 
Taniyama, Yutaka, 277 
Tartaglia, Niccolo, 385 
Taylor, Richard, 277 
Term ordering, 304 
Thompson, John G., 127, 152 
Torsion coefficient, 93, 96 
Torsion free, 96, 119 
Torsion group, 119 
Torsion subgroup, 96 
Tower of fields, 311 
Trace over F , 370 
Transcendental element over F, 313 
Transcendental number, 314 
Transitive action, 133 
Transitive G-set, 133 
Transitive law, 324 
Transitive relation, 6, 7 
Translation, 105 
Transpose of a matrix, 57 
Transposition, 45, 81 
Trap door functions, 206 
Triangle, isosceles, 2 
Trisection of an angle, 333 
Trivial ideal, 251 
Trivial subgroup, 52 
Two-to-two function, 9 
Union 
of sets, 278 
of G-sets, 140 
Unique factorization domain, 276 
Unit, 190, 276 
Unit circle, 37 
Unity, 189 
nth root of, 37, 336 
primitive nth root of, 69, 336 
Upper bound for a subset, 325 
Upper-triangular matrix, 28 
Variety, algebraic, 298 
Vector(s), 267 
linear combination of, 269 
linearly dependent over F, 269 
linearly independent over F, 269 
Vector space(s), 267 
basis for, 270 
dimension over F, 272 
direct sum of, 274 
finite-dimensional, 269 
isomorphism of, 274 
linear transformation of, 275 
subspace of, 274 
Vertex/vertices 
of a digraph, 72 
of graph, 308 
Viete, Francois, 218 
Von Dyck, Walther, 21, 81 
Wallpaper group, 108 
Wantzel, Pierre, 334 
Weber, Heinrich, 21, 191 
Wedderburn, Joseph Henry Maclagan, 
262 
Wedderburn theorem, 263 
Weierstrass, Karl, 312 
Weight of a string, 238 
Well-defined operation, 16 
Well-defined set, I 
Weyl, Hermann, 268 
Weyl algebra, 260 
Wiles, Andrew, 277 
Wilson's theorem, 205 
Word(s), 172 
empty, 172 
reduced, 173 
Word problem, 180 
Zassenhaus, Hans, 158 
Zassenhaus lemma, 158 
Zermelo, Ernst, 326 
Zero 
multiplicity of, 358 
of a polynomial, 223, 298 
Zero divisors, 194 
Zero ring, 189 
Zorn, Max, 325 
Zorn's lemma, 324, 325 

This page is intentionally left blank 

