 
  

  
 Praise for the writing of Cyndi Friberg
  
  
 Rebel Angels 1: Born of the Shadows
  
  
 Born of the Shadowsis an amazing story with some unique twists. Naomi is a wonderfully strong
heroine, in a time when men usually made all the decisions... This sensuous tale gives vampire lovers
something delightfully different and utterly satisfying. It's highly recommended.
 -- Renee Burnette,The Romance Studio
  
 Born of the Shadowsdefinitely lives up to its “Hot” rating. Gideon is sexy, seductive, and oh, my! There
are not enough words to describe this fallen angel, and Naomi is the perfect mate for him in every way.
First in herRebel Angels series, Cyndi Friberg'sBorn of the Shadows captured my interest and makes
me thirst for more.
 -- Sinclair Reid,Romance Reviews Today
  
 Born of the Shadowsgives great insight into the world of vampires as well as a biblical background...
The sexual tension is really high in this story and when the couple gets together, wow. I am looking
forward to seeing what Cyndi Friberg comes up with for her next story; she is definitely an author to
watch.
 -- Angel,Romance Junkies
  
 I was captivated by Cyndi Friberg'sBorn of the Shadows … I recommendBorn of the Shadows and
theRebel Angels series to anyone who is interested in angels, demons or vampires. You will not be
disappointed.
 -- Tanya,Fallen Angel Reviews
  
  

  
 Rebel Angels 1: Born of the Shadowsis now available from Loose Id.
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 REBEL ANGELS 2:
 ECHOES AND EMBERS
  
  
  
  
 Cyndi Friberg
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 www.loose-id.com
  
  
  
 Warning
  
 This e-book contains sexually explicit scenes and adult language and may be considered offensive to
some readers. Loose Id e-books are for sale to adults ONLY, as defined by the laws of the country in
which you made your purchase. Please store your files wisely, where they cannot be accessed by
under-aged readers.
 * * * * *
 This book is rated:
  
  
 For explicit sensuality and graphic language.
  
 Rebel Angels 2: Echoes and Embers
 Cyndi Friberg
  
 This e-book is a work of fiction. While reference might be made to actual historical events or existing
locations, the names, characters, places and incidents are either the product of the author’s imagination or
are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, business establishments,
events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
  

  
 Published by
 Loose Id LLC
 1802 N Carson Street, Suite 212-29
 Carson City NV 89701-1215
 www.loose-id.com
  
  
 Copyright © January 2005 by Cyndi Friberg
 All rights reserved. This copy is intended for the purchaser of this e-book ONLY. No part of this
e-book may be reproduced or shared in any form, including, but not limited to printing, photocopying,
faxing, or emailing without prior written permission from Loose Id LLC.
  
  
 ISBN 1-59632-078-8
 Available in Adobe PDF, HTML, MobiPocket, and MS Reader
  
  
 Printed in the United States of America
  
Editor: Maryam Salim
 Cover Artist: Fabiano Fabris
  
  
  
 www.loose-id.com
  

 Chapter One
  
 Monthamn Major, England
 1378
  
 A beam of sunlight fell across Sariel’s boots as his quarry entered the church. Though a calculative smile
bowed his lips, he didn’t turn around. Listening to the muted echo of her footfalls against the stone floor,
he waited until she was nearly upon him. Her fresh, feminine scent teased his nose. Did he detect a hint of
cinnamon? Where had she come by such a rare treat in this secluded hamlet?
 Focus, he must focus. He couldn’t allow her youth or apparent innocence to distract him from his
purpose. It was imperative hesense her before he saw her.
 Appearances could deceive.
 Closing his eyes, he searched her essence, scanned her being. His objective was specific, but far from
simple. The outcome of his decision would determine her fate. He must be certain before he passed
judgment.
 “Do you often pray to angels?” He heard her voice from beside him, gentle, yet mocking.
 “Do you often disturb men while they pray?” he countered without opening his eyes.
 Complex and convoluted, the specifics of her nature eluded him. Most humans were simple to interpret,
transparent despite their hypocrisy. He sensed somethingmore within this girl. But what accounted for the
complexity? Was she aware of the duality within her being? Could she control the opposing forces or
were they controlling her?
 Testing the accuracy of his instincts, he tried to picture her. Her head would come no higher than his
chin, but he was uncommonly tall. Dark hair, sable brown, not black, with no curl or wave to distract
from its gleam.
 He heard her take a step away and opened his eyes. This opportunity must not slip away. “I was not
praying.” He halted her retreat with a smile. “I was committing the frescos to memory. They’re
extraordinary.”
 She was just as he had pictured, petite, dark-haired, pretty. Sky-blue eyes dominated her delicate
features. She glanced at the massive painting he’d mentioned and then returned her gaze to his face.
“Where is Father Myron?”
 Taking a step back, Sariel hoped to ease the sudden tension in her tone. “The priest went to arrange
lodgings for me. I didn’t want to presume I’d be welcomed at the castle. The person I’m here to visit is a
guest herself.”
 “Who would that be?”

 “Lady Lailah. She and I are old friends, but she is unaware of my arrival.”
 The girl smiled, a deep blush coloring the crest of her cheeks. “I am Lady Rosalind Monthamn. Any
friend of Lailah’s is welcome at my castle.”
 He made a gallant bow and broadened his smile. “How fortuitous that our paths should cross. I’m
honored to make your acquaintance.”
 “I should go find Father Myron,” she said with obvious reluctance.
 “This is a church, my lady. Be at ease. Tell me about the frescos. I’m enthralled.”
 Despite her hesitation, she assessed him far too boldly. A less honorable man might indulge her curiosity,
but his interest in Rosalind Monthamn had nothing to do with pleasures of the flesh.
 “The original designs were painted by Naomi of Monthamn around 1150.” Her sweet musical voice
provided the information he’d requested. “A restoration took place about a hundred years later and the
frescos, which preserved the original scenes, were done by my grandmother just before ... before the
Black Death swept across England.”
 Sariel studied her expression. She spoke in a calm, clear tone, but he hadn’t missed the emotional catch
when she mentioned her grandmother. “Please, accept my apology. I didn’t realize the subject would
cause you pain.”
 “The subject would only cause me pain if people didn’t appreciate the brilliance of my grandmother’s
work.” Again her voice belied the pain visible in her gaze. “I’m pleased you enjoy them.”
 He nodded, turning to the largest of the six scenes. Three angels fought back to back, their flaming
swords poised to strike the attacking demons. “These angels seem rather fierce. Far more warriors than
messengers of God.”
 She swept her hand toward the far end of the wall. “That one is my favorite. It’s the last Lady Naomi
painted in the church. She continued to paint, but no one managed to convince her to undertake the
ceiling.”
 Sariel smiled as his attention focused on the final scene. A lovely woman stood surrounded by five
children, three male, two female. Behind her stood a dark-haired angel with piercing golden eyes. His
hands rested on the shoulders of the woman and his wings spread wide, sheltering the entire brood. “She
looks rather like you.”
 Rosalind tilted her head as she considered the fresco. “Aye. I suppose she does.”
 The door banged opened, causing Rosalind to start. Cursing the interruption, Sariel turned as a furious
young woman advanced across the church. A cloud of bright red curls bounced and bobbed with her
purposeful stride. Her hands clenched and bright flags of color stained her high cheekbones.
 Deep in Sariel’s being carnal hunger stirred. He ignored the urge to clutch his chest and abdomen. What
was wrong with him? He had battled long and hard to banish these yearnings. Why would they reawaken
now?

 “I’ve been looking everywhere for you.” Fear battled anger within the woman’s expressive eyes.
 “You could not have lookedeverywhere or you would have found me.” Rosalind raised her chin.
 “I’ve been frantic, young lady.” Her tone was tight, but her lips trembled. Clearly, Rosalind had given
this woman quite a scare. “Not even Lailah knew where you’d gone.”
 Rosalind angled her hands, gesturing toward herself. “It would appear I’m more capable of caring for
myself than you believe.”
 The redhead stood her ground. “You will address me with respect, or this will end our conversation.”
 “I didn’t invite this conver--”
 “Butif this ends our conversation, you will be taken back to the castle under guard. Then you will find a
guard stationed outside your bedchamber door, ensuring that you remain within the curtain wall for the
next sennight.”
 Sariel watched the battle of wills, far more intrigued than he cared to admit. What was the relationship
between these two females? They couldn’t be mother and daughter; hardly a decade separated the two.
The red-haired beauty handled Rosalind’s belligerence with remarkable aplomb. Violence was the
response of many to such rebellion.
 As Rosalind considered her alternatives, the woman’s gaze drifted to him. Silver, gray and blue, her eyes
combined the colors into a shade, both pale and sparklingly intense. He’d never seen their like before.
The beast within him yawned and stretched. Restless. How long had it been since he’d held a woman,
felt her softness, caressed her smooth skin? Buried his face in a wild cloud of soft, fragrant curls? He
swallowed awkwardly.
 He couldn’t remember the last time he’d been tempted. Why now? Why this woman?
 Turning back to Rosalind, she asked, “What is expected of you when you leave the castle compound?”
 “They areyour expectations,Alyssa . I was never in any danger.”
 The girl’s gaze darted toward Sariel and he fought back a smile. Rosalind was performing for him. He
recognized the cunning gleam in her eyes. This was not good.
 “Go back to the castle.” Apparently Alyssa reached the same conclusion. “I’ll be with you momentarily.”
 “I’m going to take Sir Sar--”
 “I will see to the needs of your guest.” Alyssa pointed toward the doorway. “Go.”
 Images of all the ways he would like Alyssa to “see to his needs” bombarded Sariel. His shaft hardened
and lengthened. He barely suppressed a moan. Impossible! He had conquered his carnal nature,
transcended the need for physical release. This couldn’t be happening to him, not after all these years.
 Rosalind’s nostrils flared, her lips compressed, and her chin quivered.
 “Now.”

 The girl spun on the ball of her foot and stormed from the church.
 Perhaps he should insist they accompany her. He didn’t trust himself alone with Alyssa.
 How ridiculous. He wouldn’t hide behind a child.
 Gathering the full strength of his angelic intuition, Sariel scanned the lovely creature at his side. She was
an angel and yet she was not. Stunned, he delved deeper. Conflict and confusion battered his senses like
a tempest. He’d never encountered anyone with a nature quite like hers. He didn’t think she was Fallen,
yet undeniable passion surged through every fiber of her being. What was she?
 Alyssa sighed, pausing to rub the bridge of her nose before she returned her gaze to Sariel. “I apologize
for Lady Rosalind’s rude behavior.” Her features relaxed, her full lips softened, increasing their sensual
appeal. “Hers has not been an easy life.”
 “How came you to be her guardian?” Sariel focused on the issue at hand. His mission must take priority
over the mystery that was Alyssa.
 She narrowed her eyes, her brow furrowed in speculation. “Who are you? Why were you with my
ward?”
 “Sariel!”
 He turned at the sound of his name. Lailah rushed across the room, her long skirts billowing out behind
her. All her glorious silver hair had been confined into thick plaits and coiled to each side of her face,
framing her delicate features.
 Her smile was just as bright as he remembered, her eyes as fathomless and dark. In an uncharacteristic
show of emotion, Sariel swept her into his arms and hugged her.
 Bittersweet longing rolled through Sariel as he eased Lailah away. His gaze moved immediately toward
the stunning redhead. His senses had intensified when Alyssa entered the church. She studied him, her
suspicion obvious. A smile tugged at one corner of his mouth. She was right to be wary, but not for the
reasons she supposed.
 Not a carnal thought or impulse had flickered though his mind, until he sawher .
 “You know this man?” Alyssa’s voice reflected her mistrust.
 “Aye.” Lailah smiled, her eyes shining. “I invited him here. But after so long, I feared he wouldn’t come.”
 “I’m Lady Alyssa. Is Sariel your only name?”
 “Sariel Grigori.” He flashed a conspirator’s smile at Lailah. “Grigori is a principality, but Prince Sariel
sounds rather pretentious, so I generally use sir, or just Sariel.”
 “I see.” Alyssa tucked a crimson curl behind her ear. “I must attend to Lady Rosalind.”
 Lailah sighed audibly as the other woman left the church. She stepped up beside him, her voice hushed
and urgent. “I’m so glad you’ve finally come. It’s difficult to keep the entire castle from thinking --”

 “Lailah.” He waited for her to meet his gaze before he continued. “You and I have known each other
since time began, so I will make this perfectly clear. I am obligated to remain separate from the other
angels. You know this. And you knowwhy .”
 “But Sariel.” Her dark gaze searched his, looking for answers he was unable to give. “You came.
You’re here!”
 “I’m not here about Alyssa.” He glanced away and strengthened his resolve. “I’ve come to judge
Rosalind.”
  
 * * * * *
 Alyssa forced her jaw to relax and took a deep breath. “I continue to treat you like a child because you
persist in acting like one.” Staving off Rosalind’s immediate protest with an upraised hand, Alyssa went
on. “You are Lady Monthamn. Your conduct must be above reproach, your manner refined. The days of
running amok with the village children are long past. You must accept your station.”
 Rosalind unfastened her mantle. She ignored Alyssa’s directive to sit, but threw her cloak in the general
direction of the counting room’s only chair. “I wasn’t running amok. I went to visit Mae.”
 “I see.” Alyssa moved behind a sturdy wooden table and sat on the matching bench. She needed the
barrier to keep herself from strangling the stubborn chit. Never in all her days had Alyssa faced a
challenge so daunting as her teenage ward. “Why didn’t you inform someone of your whereabouts? Why
did you leave without an escort?”
 “I don’t need an escort to cross the bloody river!”
 “Mind your tongue, young lady.”
 The girl turned her face away and Alyssa scrambled for a strategy. Rosalind had always been spirited,
but this rebelliousness was new, and out of character. “What business had you with Mae?” She chose
her words carefully, hoping to diffuse the budding argument.
 “I had nobusiness with Mae. She’s my friend. I wanted to see her baby. You continually harp on my
marrying well and producing heirs for Monthamn. I was simply spending time with --”
 “Mae married the blacksmith’s apprentice. Your situations are hardly the same.”
 “Our situations are exactly the same. Mae found a man who treats her kindly, who provides well for her
and her child. She has accomplished what you want me to do. I was attempting to learn from her
example.”
 The urge to reach across the table and shake Rosalind until her teeth rattled nearly overwhelmed Alyssa.
She hid her fists in the fullness of her skirts and studied the girl’s flushed face. Belligerence burned in her
eyes, but another more elusive emotion flickered there as well. Hurt, perhaps, or fear? Alyssa had to
penetrate this defiance, find out what was driving the rebellion.
 Alyssa cleared her throat and began in a gentler tone. “I have no quarrel with your destination, Rosalind.

But you know better than to leave --”
 “What is my punishment? I would rather forgo the lecture.”
 “As you wish. Go to your bedchamber and stay there.”
 Rosalind’s cerulean gaze snapped back to hers. “For how long?”
 “Until I bid you leave. Your confinement is not your punishment. I need time to deliberate.”
 “You’re horrible!” Rosalind stretched out the last word, stomping her dainty foot. “I wish you’d never
come here. I hate you! I will always hate you!” Snatching up her mantle, she rushed from the room.
 Tears blurred Alyssa’s vision at yet another futile effort to reach her rebellious ward. She hurried around
the table and out of the counting room, assuring herself Rosalind’s angry flight had taken her in the
direction of her bedchamber.
 What am I going to do with her?
 Alyssa meandered across the hall, drawn by the warmth of the massive fireplace. She felt ill equipped to
deal with the girl so much of the time. She wanted to be a good influence, a wise guardian. But how
could she, when ...
 Muffled voices drew Alyssa’s attention to the main entrance of the great hall. She tossed her head,
sending her curls tumbling around her shoulders and spiraling wildly to her hips. Whenever Alyssa was in
one of hermoods , she freed her hair. It had become a silent warning to the people of Monthamn Castle.
If Alyssa’s hair was loose -- step aside.
 Alyssa had heard a deep male voice, but Lailah entered the hall alone. “What did you do with your
guest?”
 “He went to the stables to attend to his horse, so we haven’t much time.” The blonde quickly crossed
the hall, joining Alyssa before the hearth. “Look at me and think. Clear your mind andthink .”
 “What am I thinking about?” Alyssa smiled and met her friend’s dark gaze, confused by the desperation
she read there.
 “How long have you known me? How did we meet?”
 “We ...” Mists swirled within her mind, sweeping the answer beyond her grasp. Alyssa blinked
repeatedly, trying to bring them back. “I’ve known you ...”
 “Oh, Alyssa. You must try! Sariel has come to judge her! You must remember what you are.”
 Goosebumps rose along her arms and tension gripped her belly. “WhatI am? You’re frightening me.
Sariel has come to judge whom?” Slipping her hands through the slits in the front of her cotehardie,
Alyssa buried them deeply in the pockets of her underdress. “You must mean Rosalind, but what could
she have done to --”
 The iron-banded door swung open, interrupting Alyssa’s words. Sariel paused in the threshold, the
setting sun at his back. Tall and broad-shouldered, his body filled the doorway. Alyssa swallowed hard.

Thick tawny hair flowed in shiny waves to the middle of his back. Though unfashionable, the choice
somehow suited him. The undeniable urge to comb her fingers through those soft looking strands startled
Alyssa. Responsibilities pressed in on her from every direction and she was lusting after a stranger? Had
she taken leave of her senses?
 He stepped into the hall and released the door. It groaned, then swung shut under its own weight. His
torso shifted and Alyssa saw the outline of scalloped wings shimmering in the sunlight. Gasping softly, she
blinked and the image disappeared.
 Trepidation twisted through her abdomen.
 Wings? Why would she imagine wings upon this man?
 No one spoke as he moved to stand beside Lailah. Firelight illuminated his angular features and accented
his glittering eyes. Sharp cheekbones and a distinct jaw constructed a face uncompromisingly masculine.
And yet she found himbeautiful . Sculpted, the bottom lip slightly fuller than the top, he held his mouth in
a grim, unsmiling line.
 Her wayward gaze focused on his mouth. What would it feel like to tangle her fingers in his hair and kiss
that unsmiling mouth? Why was he so angry? What made him seem so fierce? She shook away her
speculation. Why would she want to kiss someone both angry and fierce?
 A lazy sweep of thick lashes drew Alyssa’s attention to his eyes. Glistening shards of gold decorated the
surface of his rich green gaze. For just a moment there seemed to be a distinct pattern to the shards, like
a golden constellation in a vivid green sky. He blinked again and the pattern scattered.
 The tension gripping her stomach released in a tingling flutter.
 “Milady, please accept my gratitude for your hospitality. I shall endeavor not to overstay my welcome.”
He tossed back his mantle, revealing a richly decorated, parti-colored tunic. The gold half had been
embroidered in green, the green half embroidered in gold. Not since court had Alyssa seen garments so
fine.
 “Your welcome has yet to be determined.” Forced to crane her neck, she managed to meet his gaze.
“Why are you here?”
 He looked at Lailah before responding. “How did Rosalind come to be your ward? Are you a blood
relation?”
 Images rolled and shifted within her mind, undulating in and out of focus. A frail woman with vivid blue
eyes. Craggy features contorted with sorrow. “I ... She ... I swore an oath to keep the Monthamns safe
and have dedicated myself to fulfilling that vow.”
 “To whom was this vow made? How long have you been at Monthamn Castle?” He tilted his head and
the firelight danced in his gaze.
 Alyssa clenched and unclenched her fists within the pockets of her underdress. Why should she be
intimidated by his questions? He was the one with dubious intentions.
 “The Black Death swept through this area five years past with devastating results. Rosalind lost her
parents, two brothers and her grandmother, whom she loved above all others, all in one agonizing

season. She didn’t speak for nearly a year when first we arrived.”
 “This Plague has left its mark upon us all, but you didn’t answer my question. To whom did you make
your vow?”
 Raising her chin a notch Alyssa debated what to say. She knew the answer, but she knew she would
sound mad speaking the name. How could she have made such a vow to Lady Naomi two centuries
before? “We were speaking ofyou , sir. Explain what brings you to Monthamn Castle or depart the way
you came.”
 A lazy, arrogant smile turned up the corners of his mouth. “I’m afraid I answer to a higher power than
you, milady. My business is with Lady Rosalind and I can’t allow you to interfere.”
 “Rosalind is my ward.” Protectiveness rose within Alyssa. No one threatened a Monthamn without
dealing with her! “Any business you think you have with her is entirely my affair. I’m uncomfortable with
your tone and your --”
 “Unfortunately, I’m not in a position to consider your comfort. If you prefer I’ll not stay in the hall, I’ll
sleep in the barracks with the guards.”
 “I prefer you gather your belongings and get off this land.” She spoke with tight-lipped control.
 He inclined his head. “I understand your preference, but that’s not an option.”
 “Oh, I assure you it’s an option. I’ll have your horse readied and --”
 “Alyssa.” Lailah preempted the remainder of her words.
 “What?” She glared at her friend.
 “Let Sariel go to his chamber. We need to talk.”
 “Sariel isn’t going anywhere so long as he persists in this belief that he --”
 “Is a messenger sent from God?”
 The authority in his deep voice drove Alyssa back a step. He hadn’t spoken loudly, but the question
reverberated through her entire body. She pressed her hand over her pounding heart. Wings. Angel’s
wings. But this fierce man couldn’t possibly be an angel. He was too ... savage!
 “I’ll return in a moment,” Lailah said as she led the tall stranger away.
 Alyssa watched their retreat, conflicted and confused. The fire warmed her back, while cool autumn air
seeped through her clothing, compounding her uncertainty. Why did she feel so muddled? Thoughts
danced around her, taunting her, just out of reach.
 What was wrong with her?
 Shifting her feet on the woven rush mat, she turned to face the fire. Bright tapestries covered the stone
walls and expensive glass enclosed the narrow windows; still Alyssa shivered.

 You must remember what you are.
 Lailah’s words echoed through her mind and another violent shiver shook her slender frame. What, not
who. She needed to rememberwhat she was.
 She heard a shuffling behind her and turned around. Lailah had returned, alone, her dark eyes filled with
frustration and fear. Alyssa had no doubt she’d caused the frustration, but why was Lailah afraid?
 “Am I ...” Alyssa’s mouth was so dry she couldn’t form the words. She took a deep breath and tried
again. “Am I an angel?”
  
 Chapter Two
  
 “What do you remember clearly?” Lailah dragged a bench closer to the fire and sat as Alyssa
considered the question.
 Pushing her fingers through her hair, Alyssa combed the curling strands out of her eyes. “I remember
Naomi.”
 “Aye. She was the answer to Sariel’s question. It was to Naomi you gave your vow.”
 “But Naomi of Monthamn lived over two hundred years ago.”
 “True.” Lailah glanced into the fire. Its wavering light cast eerie shadows across her delicate features.
“What else do you remember?”
 “I was alive two hundred years ago?” Her heart pounded. Deep in her being she already knew the
answer, had always known.
 “Aye. And two hundred years before that. Do you remember Gideon?”
 Eyes like molten gold and a smile that made her stomach flutter. Gideon. His image solidified within the
mist. Dark, brooding Gideon. “I remember.”
 “What do you remember?”
 She licked her lips, frustrated by the ever-swirling mists within her mind. “He was there that day ... so
were you. We were all there, when ...”
 “When what? What happened? Tell me what you remember.”
 A vision hovered on the edge of her consciousness. She sensed its importance, the rippling affects of that
one event. Everything had changed that day. Her very nature had evolved.
 Michael!
 With angelic illumination so bright it stung the eyes, the archangel’s image flashed within Alyssa’s mind.

 “No,” she cried as the vision flickered and dispersed.
 Disheartened by her failure, Alyssa focused on more recent happening, a memory she could remember
clearly. “When Naomi passed away. Gideon was heartbroken. They had lived long, full lives, but his
anguish was unbearable.”
 Lailah shook her head, disappointment clear in her dark gaze. “Nay. Go back farther, much farther,
before Gideon met Naomi.”
 “Why do you not simply tell her the truth?” Sariel’s deep voice emanated from behind them. “If she has
forgotten what brought her here, explain it to her.”
 Alyssa turned her head and found Sariel standing in the shadows beyond the firelight. Her heart gave a
little flutter and heat settled deep in her belly. Lailah had only just returned. He must have been two steps
behind.
 “I’ve explained it to her a hundred times, Sariel. She confuses the details before I finish speaking them.
She must remember for herself or --” She broke off, unable to complete the sentence.
 “Gideon loved Naomi,” Alyssa said emphatically. She didn’t understand Lailah’s disappointment, but
she was certain of that fact.
 “Aye. Gideon loved Naomi very much.”
 “Then what am I not remembering?”
 Lailah heaved an audible sigh and stood. The firelight accented the contrast between her alabaster skin
and her night-black eyes. “Think about Gideon, not Naomi. Gideon is the key.”
 “The key to what?” Again Alyssa sensed her friend’s frustration, but didn’t understand the cause.
Lailah’s disappointment compounded her own anxiety.
 “I have to leave in the morning. I’ll only be gone a few days. Sariel has promised not to pass judgment
until I return.”
 “Pass judgment?” Alyssa’s voice snapped with indignation. “Who is he to pass judgment on Rosalind?
Of what is she accused?”
 “I’m not obligated to extend even this courtesy.” His deep voice made the words sound like a growl.
“Don’t antagonize me.”
 Alyssa gasped at his arrogance and pulled her hand from her pockets. “My questions remain. Who are
you to pass judgment on Rosalind and what is her crime?”
 “I am Sariel, Prince of the Angelic Order of Grigori. If Rosalind is a Nephilim, as I believe, then I have
been sanctioned and ordained by Almighty God to pass judgment upon her.”
 Staggering back a step, Alyssa shook her head. “A Nephilim? Half human and half angel? It’s not
possible. The Nephilim were killed in the Great Flood.”

 “Accounts of their extinction have been greatly exaggerated, I assure you.” Sariel crossed his arms over
his chest, his eyes narrowed and glistening.
 What was he talking about? None of this made sense and it wasn’t just her muddled memory confusing
the issue. “You’re inferring one of Rosalind’s parents was an angel. Can the Black Death kill an angel?”
She raised her brow in silent challenge. “You must be mistaken.”
 “Death is easy for an angel to simulate, especially when they’re ready to move on. I have yet to make
my final decision, but Rosalind’s nature is not entirely human.”
 “Gideon.” Alyssa beamed, relief driving away her fear. “Of course. That must be what you’re sensing.
Gideon was an angel ...” Her words trailed away as her thoughts collapsed in on themselves. What had
she been about to say? How did she know Gideon was an angel?
 Her gaze darted to Lailah and the hope shining in her eyes made Alyssa’s confusion all the more
frustrating. Gideon was the key. She had to think about Gideon. But what did Gideon have to do with
Sariel?
 What was the problem again?
 Raking her fingers through her tousled hair, Alyssa surrendered to the mist. It was useless. The harder
she concentrated, the more confused she became.
 “Where are you going?” Alyssa asked Lailah, embarrassed by her uselessness.
 “You know where I’m going. Where do I always go?”
 Alyssa didn’t respond. She should know the answer but she didn’t. Why didn’t she know? Was her
condition getting worse? Panic surged through her in violent waves. Her thoughts spun faster. Was she
going mad? With all this talk of angels and living countless centuries, it was little wonder she was
confused.
 “I must speak with Mae.” Though filled with frustration and conflict, the present made more sense than
the past. “Perhaps she can tell me what has Rosalind so distraught.”
 “I’m sure she can, but why would she?” Lailah averted her gaze before adding, “You’ve made your
opinion of her no secret.”
 “Who is Mae?”
 Alyssa looked at Sariel, captivated by his virility. He emanated power, radiated strength and masculine
appeal. He expected her to believe he was an angel? A messenger dispatched from the throne of God?
Ridiculous!
 “She is Rosalind’s best friend.” Alyssa dragged her gaze away from his rugged features and glanced
back into the fire. Looking at him made her want to touch, to explore the length and breadth of his
powerful body. She may not remember yesteryear, but she remembered desire, and she desired Sariel.
“They’ve known each other since childhood.”
 “Then Mae would have known Rosalind’s parents.”

 Her gaze collided with his. He couldn’t be serious about this Nephilim nonsense, could he? “I suppose.
Mae was only twelve when the Plague hit, but she might be able to put this foolishness to rest.”
 “Darkness has fallen.” He pointed out. “Should we wait until morning?”
 “Why? Are you afraid of the dark?” She smiled into his eyes.
 “There is very little that frightens me.”
 Heat curled through her, setting off tingles in the most inappropriate places. Her nipples gathered against
her shift and a deep, aching pulse thrummed in her feminine core. Was she actually lusting after ... an
angel of God?
 Clearing her throat, she turned away. “Let me fetch my mantle.”
 Lailah fell into step beside Alyssa as she headed for her bedchamber.
 “You are playing with fire, my friend.” Lailah scowled, her tone hushed and urgent. “Sariel is not a man
to trifle with. I saw the way you looked at him. He will --”
 “You would have me believe he is not a man at all. If Sariel is truly an angel, I have nothing to fear from
him.”
 “He is of the Order of Grigori. Do you remember what that means? Who they were? What they did?”
 “Of course I remember.”
 Lailah grabbed her arm, halting her hurried pace. “You will never get better until you stop lying to
yourself. You don’t remember. Why did you say that you do?”
 Alyssa twisted out of Lailah’s grasp. “Ido remember. The Grigori were the oldest and most powerful
angelic order. They were myths, legends, nothing more.”
 “Nay. They were real. Everything you’ve heard about them is true. I didn’t believe the stories either until
Sariel and I were sent on a mission together.”
 “Prince Sariel of the Order of Grigori?” She punctuated the question with a mocking smile.
 Lailah shook her head, her dark eyes flashing disapproval. “Do not make light of him. He will not
tolerate your insubordination. He is more ruthless than you can possibly imagine. He only becomes
involved in the most complicated cases, the rest he delegates to the lesser angels in his order.” She
paused, laying her hand on Alyssa’s arm. “I know this is confusing, but you must understand one thing.
He has promised not to harm Rosalind until I return. He has promisednothing regarding you.”
 “Are you trying to frighten me?”
 “Aye. Be careful; be wary; be terrified. Whatever you do, do not let him touch you!”
  
 * * * * *

 Darkness embraced Sariel more snugly than his ermine-trimmed mantle. Alyssa strode along beside him,
her back straight, her head held high. She hadn’t spoken since they crossed the river. He wasn’t sure
what Lailah had told her; no doubt some dire warning. Alyssa refused to meet his gaze and avoided even
the most casual touch.
 She licked her lips. He drew in a slow, deep breath, expecting the acrid scent of fear. Faint, alluring,
unmistakable, the musk of desire filled his nose. Shock slammed through him. She was aroused by him?
Startled, yet intrigued, he reached out and scanned her thoughts.
 Chaotic. Jumbled. Swirling images he didn’t understand combined with a vivid representation of his
half-naked body. He grinned. The little spitfire was fantasizing about him. Her imagination rapidly worked
to divest him of his clothing. Her hands caressed his naked flesh, squeezed his shoulders, traced the
distinct ridged dissecting his abdomen. Her image reached for the lacings on his hose and his shaft
bucked in eager agreement.
 “It would benefit you greatly to think of something else.”
 Her laughter sounded forced and strangled. “What do you believe occupies my thoughts?”
 He stepped into the path in front of her and turned around. She collided with his chest, then scrambled
back a step. “You were picturing me unclothed, wondering what it would feel like to touch me, to have
my hands caressing you as I --”
 “Enough,” she said sharply, placing her palm on the middle of his chest. “If I were ... I apologize for ...
having impure thoughts about you.”
 He didn’t move. The warmth of her hand seeped through his mantle, stirring fantasies of his own. He
pictured her sinking to her knees, completing the task she’d begun in her mind, and taking his turgid shaft
into her warm, wet mouth. Trembling with the need to make the image real, he stared at her.Aching .
 “How are you able to see into my mind?” Her question interrupted the unwanted stimulation.
 “It is always within my power, but -- impure thoughts are more readily available to me than any others.”
 “How inconvenient.” She moved her hand and put more space between them.
 He laughed. “I’ve been celibate for the past three millennia. It’s a bit more than inconvenient.”
 Her eyes rounded owlishly. “Three thousand years? You’ve not ... for three thousand years?”
 “Two thousand, eight hundred, and sixty-five, so I suppose three millennia is a bit of an exaggeration.”
He turned back to the path, his mantle billowing out around him. “How much farther to Mae’s cottage?”
 “She lives on the far side of the village. This path will take us around.” She hurried to catch up with him
as he continued down the trail. “How many Grigori still exist? Lailah said you delegate the majority of
these missions to lesser angels in your order.”
 “Lailah talks too much.”
 “What makes this mission so important that it warrants the attention of the Prince of the Grigori?”

 He paused and glared at her. “You dare mock me?”
 She flashed an innocent smile, effectively melting his anger. This female was trouble, no doubt about it!
 “It was an honest question. What makes Rosalind’s case so important?”
 “The Grigori assigned to her case has failed to report for some time now. He’s attempting to conceal his
presence from me, which is most disconcerting.” She didn’t need to know that Gadrayel was one of his
closest friends, and this sort of behavior often preceded a Fall. The possibility of losing yet another of his
order tormented Sariel. “My purpose is to locate my ... subordinate as well as conclude Rosalind’s
case.”
 “Conclude her case. That sounds so simple, so harmless. But you’re not harmless at all, are you?” He
didn’t reply. They walked for a time in silence and then Alyssa said, “I thought the stories about your
order were myths.”
 “My order is real enough,” he said stiffly, resenting the pressure in his groin with each step he took. “As
to the stories, I would have to hear them before I can respond.”
 “Are the Grigori really able to produce offspring?” Her tone was hushed with awe.
 The ability to procreate had been withheld from the other angelic orders. The power to create life set the
Grigori apart, made them different. Sariel understood her fascination, but the question led in dark, painful
directions. “Not while we remain celibate.”
 Moonlight filtered through the trees, gilding her lovely face. Her riotous hair appeared brown in the
dimness, but the curling fullness held no less appeal. Her lustful thoughts resonated through him, stirring
his desire like never before. Was it just his incredibly long abstinence or was there something special
about this female?
 Her brows knitted together. Clearly his admission confused her.
 “Do you remain celibate by choice or by decree?”
 “I choose to obey the decree.”
 She smiled faintly, apparently amused by his churlishness. “What happens if you ignore the decree?”
 “If a Grigori ever again indulges in the pleasures of the flesh with a Daughter of Man, he will Fall.”
 I’m not a Daughter of Man.
 Desire tore through him with staggering intensity. His heart thundered and blood roared in his ears.
Sariel’s wings began to unfurl. He stopped the transformation.
 Damn her! She knew he could hear her thoughts.
 He grasped her shoulders and spun her to face him. “Do you want me to toss you to the ground and
ravish you right here, right now?” Her wide gaze shone with indecision, not fear. Sariel wanted to shake
her. Guiding her hand to his erect shaft, he pressed against her palm. “I assure you, I am more than able.”

 Her tongue darted out, wetting her lips. Sariel groaned. Even in the moonlight her mouth appeared lush
and soft. He wanted to trace its fullness with his fingertips and his tongue, to delve inside and taste her.
 Forbidden! Such pleasures were forbidden to his kind. He had made his choice long ago, turned his
back on a life of debauchery and lust, and never looked back.
 He shoved her away. “Issue the invitation again, by word or deed and I will not hesitate to accept your
offer. Do you understand me?”
 “Yes.”
 Despite his threat, determination surged through Sariel, driving back his desire. Hecould not release his
hold on those feelings. Not even for someone as tempting as Alyssa.
 “It’s just around the bend.” She raised her arm, gesturing. Her mantle molded her full breasts and softly
curved hips.
 No! I must not. I will not!
 He dragged his gaze from her body and focused on the light visible through the trees.
  
 * * * * *
 Mae’s cottage had never seemed so tiny before. Alyssa sat before the fire with Mae as the young
woman gently rocked her baby. Sariel stood in the center of the room, the only area of the wattle and
daub structure able to accommodate his height. Twice Mae had asked him to sit, but the bench next to
hers was rickety and low. Alyssa doubted it would support a man Sariel’s size.
 “Where is Karol?” Alyssa asked, drawing Mae’s anxious gaze away from the towering stranger.
 “Our goat got out. Karol went to chase her down. She ain’t much in the way of riches, but come winter,
we’ll be glad to have her milk for cheese.” The baby stirred in Mae’s arms. She raised the infant to her
shoulder, patting her gently on the back.
 Alyssa glanced at Sariel. His gaze was fixed on the baby, his expression complex, inscrutable. What was
he thinking as he looked at the child? Did all angels resent children as Gideon had?
 Frantically grasping for the thought, Alyssa wanted to scream as the mists swirled in again. For just a
moment that one thought had been clear within her mind. Gideon resented children. But that didn’t make
sense. Gideon had fathered five. That was not characteristic of resentment.
 “So, what can I do for you, Lady Alyssa? It’s not often you visit and you’ve never come without Lady
Rosalind before.”
 Returning her attention to Mae’s round face, Alyssa took a moment to study the girl. Buxom,
bright-eyed, and rosy-cheeked, Mae’s appeal would last for years to come. “How is your baby?”
 “Would you like to hold her?”

 Without warning, Alyssa’s chest tightened and she could only nod. Mae stood and placed the baby in
Alyssa’s arms. Alyssa cradled the child in the crock of her elbow, mesmerized by the perfection of the
child’s tiny face.
 “Has Lady Rosalind done something amiss?”
 “Nay. Well, aye. When she visited you earlier, she didn’t tell anyone where she had gone. She frightened
me terribly and put herself in danger.” Alyssa shifted the baby closer to her body and looked up at Mae.
“Rosalind has become quite difficult of late. I was hoping you could help me understand the cause of her
... surliness.”
 Mae fidgeted, glancing at Sariel, then back at Alyssa. “Does she know you’re here?”
 “Nay, and she need not if that’s your wish.”
 “I ... It is not my place --”
 “Mae, I’m at my wits’ end. I know not where to turn. If I had any alternative, I wouldn’t put you in the
middle of our conflict. I must understand why Rosalind has grown so hostile.”
 The young mother wrung her hands. “I’ve spent time with you, milady. I know it’s nothing but foolish
talk. But Lady Rosalind is hurt by their words. She loves you more than she cares to admit.”
 Confused by the convoluted explanation, Alyssa waited for the younger woman to elaborate.
 “Lady Rosalind has heard the whispers, the speculation. She’s not sure how to respond to their ...” As if
realizing just how much she’d said, Mae turned bright red and snapped her mouth shut. “It’s really not
my place.”
 Mae tried to take her daughter back, but Alyssa stood and passed the sleeping infant to Sariel. He made
a startled sound deep in his throat, but settled the baby in the bend of his elbow as Alyssa turned her full
attention on Mae.
 “What are they saying about me in the village that has Rosalind so upset?”
 “Milady, it’s nothing. Foolish gossip.”
 Every moment Mae delayed compounded Alyssa’s discomfort. “Well, this foolish gossip has Rosalind
behaving like a regular termagant, so you better just spit it out.”
 “They say you’ve gone mad.” Mae admitted in a soft rush of words.
 Stunned beyond words, Alyssa just stared at the girl.
 Dread quickly penetrated her stupor. Why was she surprised? The thought had crossed her own mind
more than once. Was she going mad? What would become of Rosalind if reality slipped away?
 “I’m sorry, milady. I don’t believe this foolishness and neither does Lady Rosalind, but she ... Oh, why
did you make me tell you? It’s just idle gossip!”

 “Nay, you were right to tell me. You have my thanks.” Alyssa gave the girl’s arm a quick squeeze, but
the pressure banding her chest made each breath painful.
 They think I’m mad! The people of Monthamn think I’ve gone mad.
 She turned to Sariel, meaning to hand Mae the baby and make a hasty exit. His golden head bowed
toward the child as he whispered words she couldn’t quite hear. A half-smile softened his features,
relaxing the harsh angles of his face. Against the velvety green of his eyes, the golden shards glowed,
making the pattern clearly visible.
 He was ... magnificent.
 Tears blurred her vision and tenderness melded with her seething emotions. Maybe she was crazy. Her
heart, her soul ached for a man she had only just met.
 He lifted his head and their gazes locked, pleasure still illuminating his expression. A tear escaped the
corner of her eye and she furiously brushed it away. Would she ever inspire such happiness in another’s
gaze? Had there been a time in her life when she was happy?
 “This baby is the most delightful creature I have ever beheld,” Sariel told Mae as he gingerly passed the
infant back to her.
 She laughed merrily. “I’ll not argue with you there, kind sir, until she starts to fussing. Do you have
children of your own?”
 “Not anymore.” His smile vanished and the gleaming pattern in his eyes disintegrated. “How well did you
know Lady Rosalind’s parents?” He spoke again before the women could question his sad statement.
 “As well as any of us village folk, I suppose. We lost so many that year. My parents fell to the Black
Death, too.”
 “I’ve been in the parish church,” he began with a quick smile. “Have the Monthamns always had a
fascination with angels?”
 “I don’t know about always, but Lady Rosalind’s grandmother sure did. She used to tell such stories.
She knew the names of so many angels you’d have thought she’d been to Heaven.”
 Alyssa crossed her arms over her chest as she heard Mae’s words. If Rosalind’s grandmother had been
an angel, did that make Rosalind a Nephilim? She couldn’t remember the rules. She couldn’t remember
anything!
  
 Chapter Three
  
 “Tell me about the Grigori.”
 “What is affecting your memory? Why would I need to tellyou about the Order of Grigori?” Sariel
regretted the hasty words as soon as they left his lips. Tears filled her eyes again, shimmering in the

moonlight. But with several rapid blinks, she kept them from passing beyond her long lashes.
 “If I could recall what was affecting my memory, would the people in the village think me mad?” She
raised her chin and squared her shoulders, as if to shove aside her vulnerability. “My memory ebbs and
flows like the tide. The harder I try, the denser the fog becomes.”
 Cool night air curled around them, heavy with the scent of chimney smoke and harvest. They hadn’t
gone far from Mae’s cottage. The trees were thick, the trail secluded. He took a step closer and reached
for her before he realized what he was doing. Clutching his mantle to his chest instead, he glared at
Alyssa through the gloom. What was it about this woman that stirred his protective instincts -- not to
mention the dark desires he had banished long ago?
 “What exactly do you remember about yourself?”
 “I know what I am not.” She lowered her head, hiding her face with the fall of her hair. “I am not human.
But how can I be an angel? I have done things no angel would do.”
 Again the need to protect her, to comfort her, surged through Sariel. He’d never experienced such an
instantaneous reaction to another being. Who was she? He must learn more about her.
 He cupped her chin with his hand and raised her face to the moonlight, needing to see her expression,
her eyes. “I have no answers for you. Those of us who did not Fall were commanded to remain separate.
I know little of the other angelic orders.”
 Moving her face from side to side, she turned his light touch into a caress. Heat spiraled deep into his
body. Sariel snatched his hand away. Why did she continue to torment him? By word ordeed . Had she
not believed his threat or did shewant to be ravished?
 “Those of you who did not Fall?” Her voice sounded distant, speculative. He tried to focus on anything
other than his throbbing cock. “We’re back at the beginning. Tell me about the Grigori.”
 It didn’t matter if she wanted him or not. He would not jeopardize his position. The ban under which he
fell was specific to the Daughters of Man, but that was only because other angels did not feel lust. At
least no other angel he had encountered before now.
 Thankful for the distraction, he continued along the rutted trail. “The Grigori were the first angelic order.
We are more like humans than the angels created after us. We were intended to interact with mankind, to
teach them, to instruct them in the ways of earth, and God’s will.”
 “But some of the Grigori taught humans far more than they were ever meant to know.”
 He paused and looked at her, but her curly hair hid her expression. “Are you supposing? Or do you
remember?”
 “I remember stories whispered in the night.” Tossing back her hair, she glanced up through her long
lashes. “I remember being saddened by the tales, by the suffering that followed.”
 He set his jaw, searching her face with his gaze. Did she mean the suffering of his fellow Grigori or the
humans who had interacted with them? How clearly did she remember what had transpired as a result of
... It didn’t matter now. It all happened long ago.

 “Some members of my order taught the humans about magic and astrology. They were shown the
wonder of fire and the destructive power of weapons. The humans were quick to learn and the Grigori
able teachers.”
 “And for this your order was made to Fall?” She sounded incredulous. Sariel smiled, pleased by her
disapproval. Perhaps her tender feelings had been for his kind.
 “It was far more complicated than unsanctioned information.” He wanted to touch her, to stroke her face
with his fingertips and capture her sighs with his mouth. “We had something the humans wanted and they
had something we wanted. It became an ongoing barter.”
 “What did the humans have that you wanted?” His gaze moved to her mouth, watching intently as she
formed the words.
 Averting his face, he hesitated. Would his admission change the interest in her eyes to distaste or worse?
It had happened so often before. The other angels treated his kind with mistrust and derision. They were
outcasts, shunned.
 “Part of what sets us apart from the other Angelic Orders is our ... carnality.” He looked at her, waiting
for her reaction. “Do I need to be more specific?”
 “Nay.” She shot him a sidelong glance, a teasing smile curving her lips. “Most angels are unaware of
their sexuality. They’re spiritual beings, able to take on corporeal form as their missions dictate. Impure
thoughts are unknown to them. Humans, on the other hand, are fascinated by the pleasures of the flesh.”
 He nodded. Her summation was simplistic, but accurate. So why wasshe aware of her sexuality? She
wasn’t Grigori. He knew every member of his order well. There weren’t that many of them left. “Suffice
it to say the Grigori share man’s fascination with pleasures of the flesh.”
 “You mentioned a barter.” She tucked a stray strand of hair behind her ear. “What did you mean?”
 “We traded knowledge for women -- young, beautiful women.”
 She stopped walking and faced him, her gaze luminous in the moonlight. “Did these women willingly
participate in the barter or were they sacrificed on the altar of knowledge?”
 He laughed. She made it sound almost religious. “It was a very long time ago. I can only speak for
myself. I never accepted an offering not freely -- nay, eagerly -- given.”
 “And they called your children Nephilim?”
 Taking a deep breath, he tried to relay the information without reliving the past. It had happened so long
ago, but the desire twisting through his body made it all too easy to recall. “When the practice began, we
had no idea offspring were even possible. By the time the abnormalities began to manifest, it was too
late.”
 “What abnormalities? Did ...you father children?”
 Pain tore through his carefully erected barriers, shredding his composer. Emotional defenses a thousand
years in the making came crashing down.

 He hooked his hands beneath her arms and spun her toward a massive tree. Pinning her against the wide
trunk, he held her suspended off the ground, her face level with his. “I fathered three children. Two died
by my hand! Every woman I took was wild for it, not just willing. I can make females crave me, become
so ravenous for my touch they will do anything to attain fulfillment! They came to me, over and over, until
I was forced to retreat from their demands.”
 Her full breasts heaved against his chest. Even staring into her eyes her emotions eluded him. He longed
for understanding more desperately than anything he could remember. Why her opinion mattered, he
couldn’t begin to comprehend. But he wanted -- no,needed -- her acceptance. Would she think him
monstrous, barely better than the Fallen? What his kind had done was --
 “I’m sorry.”
 It was not her whispered apology that called to him. He heard the suffering of a kindred spirit. Someone
who understood pain. Setting his teeth, he eased his grasp on her arms, keeping her against the tree with
the weight of his body. “Whatare you?” he whispered.
 “I’m Lady Alyssa of --”
 “Your nature is neither angelic nor demonic, yet you are certainly not human.”
 She touched his face, her fingertips cool against his flushed cheek. “I know not what I am.” Pushing her
fingers into his hair, she leaned forward and brushed his lips with hers. “I’m alone in a world gone awry
and you have become an outcast among angels. Is it wrong for us to comfort each other?”
 “Wrong?” His short, sharp laugh was filled with hopelessness. “Never look to me for comfort. I will
destroy you! I can do nothing else. It’s my nature to consume.”
 “Then consume me.”
 With a feral growl, the beast took over. He claimed her mouth in a brutal kiss, hoping to shock and
dissuade her. Instead, she parted her lips, her tongue ready to play. Groaning deep in his throat, he
accepted her surrender, helpless to resist the sweetness of her taste. She should fight him, shove him
away, but she clung to him, her hands tangling in his hair.
 The Grigori feasted on passion, thrived on pleasures of the flesh. Their carnal appetites grew more
demanding each time they were indulged. If he gave in now and took her, he would devour her, stimulate
her need to the point of obsession. He would enslave her body with his touch. It would only be a matter
of time. He was Prince Grigori, the worst of the decadent lot.
 Dragging his mouth from hers, he pressed their foreheads together. “We can’t do this. You don’t know
what you’re --”
 She wrapped her legs around his hips as well as her clothing would allow. “Ido know. I burn for you. I
want this.”
 Alyssa was no fragile mortal. Could her passion rival his? Shaken by the possibility, he stared into her
face. He had endured centuries of agony as he conquered these impulses. He could not go through that
again.
 “I can’t.” Propelled by frustration, his words sounded hoarse and harsh.

 “Then let me down.”
 He heard the loneliness in her tone, the desolation. “I don’t want to.”
 “If you don’t want me, then --”
 His frantic flurry of activity interrupted her words. Tugging her skirts to her waist, he shifted her legs to
circle him completely and pressed his aching shaft against her feminine mound. She gasped. He groaned.
“Do you feel how desperately I want you? This is not a matter of what I want.”
 His hand found her knee, sliding up her thigh to her hip. Ribbons held her stockings just above her knee,
but the rest of her leg was bare, warm, waiting for his exploration.
 “I can’t indulge my carnal nature.” He sent his hair out of his face with a savage toss. “It costs me too
much to bring it under control.”
 “Then release me,” she snapped, pushing against his chest. “If you will not fill this void, then get your
hands off me.”
 He willed himself back. He visualized his hands releasing her legs and easing away, depriving himself of
her heat. His body refused to obey. “I ...” He dragged in a ragged breath. “I don’t want to hurt you.”
 She rested her head against the tree and slipped her fingers from his hair. “You’re hurting me now. I
ache, Sariel. Oh, how I ache.”
 His hand curved inward, his fingers brushing her feminine curls. “Relax your legs. I’ll ease the ache.”
 Her hands moved to his shoulders and she squeezed her eyes shut. He wanted to undress her, to spread
all that glorious hair around her like a crimson mantle. They would have to be satisfied with this. He was
willing to compromise no further.
 She jerked as his middle finger sank into her slick folds. Hot, wet, ready, her body begged to be filled.
Without his weight pressed against her, she started sliding down the tree. He cupped her bottom with one
hand, maintaining her position.
 “I want to strip you naked and lick every inch of your flesh.”
 She whimpered at his words, her fingers squeezed. “Do as you like. You’re the one resisting.”
 Like a silken temptation, her words echoed through his mind. He sealed his mouth over hers, preparing
to take her in the only way he would allow. He pushed two fingers into her throbbing core as his tongue
took possession of her mouth.
 The kiss muffled her cries, but nothing could conceal her body’s reaction to his touch. Liquid heat
coated his fingers, spilling into his palm. Her mouth was sweet, but he craved the nectar flowing so
generously from her body. Like honey to the bee, he relished the taste of passion. It sustained him, made
him strong.
 His chest heaved. It sustained the beast within him, strengthened the dark nature he had battled for so
long. This was a dangerous game he played. He couldn’t afford to lose control, but he longed for her,

hungered for just one taste.
  
 Alyssa whimpered as Sariel tore his mouth from hers. He sank to his knees and lifted her legs to his
shoulders, keeping her back against the tree. A startled cry escaped her. What was he doing? He buried
his face between her thighs. His hands clasped her bare bottom, anchoring her in place as his mouth
settled against her feminine flesh.
 Shocked and overwhelmed by their unconventional position, she squirmed, clutching his forearms for
balance. He traced her slit slowly, delving deeper, separating her folds until his tongue found its target.
She arched into the caress, sensation coiling tighter with each, firm circular motion.
 Oh, this was decadent! The faintest echo of memory told her she’d been pleasured like this before, but
the utter carnality of the situation thrilled her as much as his skillful touch.
 He didn’t seem to care if they were seen. He feasted from her body as if he would die without her
essence. Her legs trembled and her pulse raced. Even in the grip of this raging passion his touch was
tender, reverent.
 On and on he licked and nibbled. She felt devoured. Consumed! Just as he’d said. His hands squeezed
her bottom, his thumbs sneaking between her thighs, holding her open for his torrid kiss. Stroke after
heated stroke, his mouth drove her higher, wound the passion tighter.
 Shifting her weight, he slowly pushed two fingers into her aching core. Alyssa released a long, keening
cry. Her body accepted the penetration with grateful flutters, but she needed so much more. She needed
his hard, thick shaft filling her, stretching her, claiming her.
 He moved, sliding his fingers in and out as his tongue settled over her swollen nub. Pleasure built and
intensified.
 Then the sensations exploded.
 She covered her face with her hands, muffling her screams as intense pulsations ricocheted through her
body. He continued the slow slide of his fingers and the tender stroking of his tongue until the last tingle
faded from her body.
 He raised his gaze but kept his fingers inside her, grinning with salacious pleasure.
 “Oh, my,” she whispered, her voice shaking.
 He chuckled deep in his throat, licking his lips with obvious relish.
 “You should ... probably let me down. I can no longer feel my legs,” she admitted with a dreamy smile.
 Reluctantly, he eased her legs to the ground. Her wobbly knees collapsed and he swept her into his
arms.
 She snuggled against his chest, enjoying the shelter of his strong embrace. If her body were capable of
the sound, she would have been purring. “What about your pleasure? I may be slightly addled, but I
know you didn’t ... that is ...”

 “I can give you nothing more. I will not become what I once was. I can’t live like that again.”
 Resting her head on his shoulder, Alyssa threaded her fingers through his hair and fought back tears. His
selflessness left her in awe. He’d just given her incredible pleasure, yet he demanded nothing in return.
 He strode along the path, Alyssa cradled in his arms. She was not dainty like Rosalind or willowy like
Lailah, but her tall, curvaceous body seemed not to burden him at all.
 “How long ago was this other Grigori assigned to Rosalind?”
 “Time passes differently in Heaven than it does on earth. I cannot answer that.”
 “Do you know this angel well?” A certain intensity had entered his tone when he spoke of the other
Grigori. If she were to protect Rosalind, Alyssa needed to know as much about the situation as Sariel
was willing to share.
 “I know all of my angels well.” He shifted her higher against his chest.
 “But this one is special to you?”
 “I must know what happened to him. If he Fell there is nothing I can do, but the uncertainty is worse
than not knowing. So many of my order have Fallen. Each loss is felt mightily.”
 “What becomes of Rosalind if you determine she is a Nephilim?”
 His arms tightened, but when he spoke his tone was calm, neutral. “My determination will be made in
stages. If her nature is corrupt, she must be destroyed.”
 Gasping, Alyssa squirmed out of his arms and blocked the path. “What did you say? If you decide
Rosalind is corrupt you will kill her?”
 “The only alternative is that she Fall. Would you rather she be damned for all eternity?”
 “Who are you to pass judgment on anyone? What just transpired between us proves you are --”
 “The dichotomy within my nature is precisely what makes me qualified to determine these cases. It is
also what attracts you to me. We are the same. I don’t understand the specifics, but you are just as
corrupt as I!”
 “I am not Fallen!”
 “Neither am I. But we are different from other angels.”
 “Michael challenged us to ...” Panting harshly, Alyssa raised her fists to her temples. The pounding
intensified, blinding her. It had been there. For just a moment her memory had been intact, the truth of her
situation clear. Then it vanished, evaporated like the mist she despised.
 “Truth.” She grasped the word like a lifeline. “I must find Lailah! This is not about memories. It’s about
lies.”

  
 Chapter Four
  
 “What do you mean she’s departed? It’s the middle of the night.” Resisting the urge to ball up her mantle
and toss it across the room as Rosalind had done earlier, Alyssa folded the garment and draped it over
her arm. Sheneeded to talk to Lailah.
 “I only know what Imogene told me.” Rosalind didn’t bother looking up from her embroidery. Her
wooden bench faced the hearth where a fire gently crackled. “You ordered me to remain in my room, so
how would I know what transpired beyond these walls?”
 Fits of temper suited Rosalind better than sulking, but Alyssa wasn’t about to encourage her along those
lines. “What exactly did Imogene tell you?”
 “That Lailah’s departure couldn’t be delayed until morning. Apparently the need for Lailah was more
urgent than she realized.”
 Accepting the information with a stiff nod, Alyssa chose her words carefully. “Do you know where I
went tonight?”
 Rosalind lowered the needlework to her lap and looked up. “You departed with Sir Sariel. If it’s not
seemly for me to be alone with him then why is it permissible for you to be alone with him?”
 Heat blossomed across Alyssa’s cheeks as images of Sariel’s embrace, his demanding kiss, his hands
and mouth --
 “Is he your lover? Is that why he came here, to see you, not Lailah?”
 “Sir Sariel’s reason for joining us is complicated.” Unsure what she should reveal and what would
needlessly frighten her ward, Alyssa guided the conversation in a different direction. “He escorted me to
see Meg. I wanted to --”
 “My word is no longer sufficient? Why would I lie?”
 “I didn’t visit Meg to verify your story. I wanted to understand your hostility. We were friends once, not
that long ago.”
 “You doubt my word and treat me like a child.” Rosalind fidgeted on the bench, turning her face toward
the fire. “It’s little wonder I’m hostile towards you!”
 Pausing to gather her thoughts and calm her voice, Alyssa studied Rosalind’s delicate profile. She was
so young, so innocent. How could Sariel imagine anything evil resided within Rosalind? “Meg told me
what the people in the village are saying about me. Do you believe I’ve gone mad?”
 Alyssa held her breath as she waited for Rosalind’s answer. The girl was angry. Would that make her
brutally honest or would she seize the opportunity to inflict pain? This had to be resolved between them.
She couldn’t go on fighting Rosalind at every turn.

 “I don’t know what to think. I don’t know who you are anymore.”
 The first sentence gave Alyssa hope, the second cut like a knife. Inclining her head to acknowledge the
response, she let out her breath and debated what to say. “What specifically has changed and when did I
start --”
 “Don’t mock me!” Rosalind shot to her feet, her embroidery falling to the floor, forgotten. “When you
first came here you claimed to be a distant relation, then some relation’s dear friend. You speak about
past events as if you witnessed them, while you can’t remember yesterday. You have never been
married, but several times you’ve claimed to be a widow. Your identity changes with the wind.”
 “Who do you believe I am?”
 Rosalind’s lips trembled and she glanced away. “It took me a long time to figure it out. You’ve been
kind and protective. Father Myron told me --”
 “You spoke to Father Myron about me?”
 “Actually he questioned me.”
 The image of flickering torches and angry villagers pounding on the castle gate flashed within her mind.
What had triggered this hostility toward her? Rosalind’s attitude was obviously a symptom of a much
larger malady. “What did Father Myron ask?”
 “He wanted to know if you had attempted to ... exploit me or Monthamn Castle in any manner.”
 “And what did you tell him? I want you to be honest. This has gone on long enough.”
 “I told him you have been kind and nurturing, that my only concern is your ...”
 Rosalind hesitated. Alyssa picked up the girl’s embroidery and set it on the bench. “Go on. I need to
understand what troubles you.”
 “Father Myron said you likely lie about your past because you are trying to escape something unhappy.
He told me to pose my questions to you directly, or accept you as you are and let it rest.”
 Alyssa reassessed her initial frustration with the priest. She couldn’t have asked for wiser council.
“You’ve been unable to let it rest, so what would you like to ask me? I will do my best to answer.”
 “Were you my father’s mistress?”
 It was a brilliantly simple explanation. Alyssa wished she’d thought of it. No! She must combat the lies,
not compound them. “I never knew your father. What brought you to that conclusion?”
 “If you had been Father’s ... leman, you would have had nowhere else to turn when your benefactor
died.”
 “You don’t believe I am capable of securing another benefactor?” Alyssa smiled, until she saw the pain
in Rosalind’s gaze. “As God is my witness, I never knew your father.”
 “Which god would that be, Alyssa? There are as many in the village who claim you practice the Dark

Arts as those who believe you’ve lost your wits.”
 She was back to torches and pitchforks, only cries of “burn the witch” now augmented the image.
Troubled by this new complication, she pushed her hair out of her eyes and schooled her expression. It
wouldn’t do to let Rosalind know how upsetting she found the conversation. “Who leads the
gossipmongers? Is there one person in particular I should confront?”
 Rosalind shook her head, firelight dancing in her dark hair. “Father Myron is doing everything possible to
combat the rumors.”
 “Has my behavior been so outlandish?”
 “Nay.” A hint of regret sparkled in the girl’s blue eyes, but Alyssa wasn’t sure what caused the emotion.
Was she ashamed of her own behavior or uncomfortable with Alyssa’s? “So many have lost so much.
Everyone wants someone to blame. Your wild tales have made you an easy target.”
 Alyssa suspected the girl was quoting Father Myron. She would have to thank the priest for his
assistance and see if she could allay his misgivings. “My life has been eventful, but I will endeavor to
minimize my wild tales.” Silence descended. Rosalind stared into the fire. She had endured so much in
her young life. Alyssa refused to do anything that would add to her burden. “I want peace between us. Is
that possible?”
 Rosalind nodded.
 Alyssa had hoped for a more enthusiastic response, but this was a start. “If I say something you know to
be untrue, will you tell me?”
 With a soft chuckle, Rosalind faced Alyssa. “Your story has changed so often, how am I to know
what’s true?”
 Encouraged by Rosalind’s playful tone, Alyssa offered a helpless shrug. “I guess you should ask Lailah.”
  
 * * * * *
 Enos Diadem crossed his arms over his chest and took a deep breath. It would be many hours before he
filled his lungs with fresh air again. Paimon should be pleased by his news, but she could be wildly
unpredictable, so he suppressed his optimism.
 Pausing at the mouth of the steep stairwell, Enos braced himself for the putrid stench about to assail his
senses. He hated Paimon’s fortress. Why she chose to inhabit the moldering cavern was beyond him. He
descended the stone steps, avoiding contact with the slimy walls.
 A mangy brown rat scurried across his boot. Enos shuddered. Paimon loved the vile creatures. They
responded faultlessly to her demonic compulsions and in turn she treated them like pets, keeping them
sheltered and well fed.
 Enos kicked an especially large rodent off the bottom stair. If Paimon wouldn’t have sensed its
destruction he would have stomped its narrow head. He might be Fallen, but he chose a much higher
standard than this filth.

 A shrill shriek rent the fetid air and Enos shook his head. If he didn’t know better, he’d think someone
was being tortured. But the familiar cry could only mean one thing. Paimon was being pleasured. The
only thing the demon bitch liked better than rats was being tupped.
 Her sexual appetite rivaled his, and he was Grigori, or had been until he Fell.
 He rounded a corner and hesitated in the archway leading to the cavern’s main chamber. A massive gray
demon sat on Paimon’s favorite chair. She straddled his lap facing Enos, her legs spread wide and
hooked around the outside of the gray demon’s thighs. Her long silvery hair spilling over her naked body
concealed the details from view, but her steady rocking and the blissful expression on her face left no
doubt what was taking place.
 “Shall I return when you’ve finished?” Enos grumbled.
 Paimon stilled and the gray demon growled. “How long are you willing to wait? We could be at this for
hours.”
 Enos nodded stiffly. “I’ll report quickly.” At first glance Paimon still possessed angelic beauty. Her
delicate features and lissome body belied the malice lurking beneath her appealing façade. It was only as
you gazed into her soulless, black eyes that her true nature revealed itself.
 The gray demon’s tail coiled around Paimon’s thigh and disappeared under her hair. She gasped and
quivered. “Please do.”
 Had she meant him or the gray demon? “I’ve located Catherine’s granddaughter.”
 “It took you long enough.” She leaned forward, her eyes closed in ecstasy as the demon did something
beneath her hair that pleased her especially well. Expelling a shuddering breath, her dead gaze opened
and locked on Enos. “I should have ended your miserable existence when you lost her at court. I trusted
you. You cost me time I can ill afford.”
 “I will not fail again.”
 Her brows raised; the threat unmistakable. “You will not be allowed to fail again.”
 Enos inclined his head, not in deference, but to hide his annoyance. It served his purpose for Paimon to
believe she controlled the situation -- at least for now.
  
 * * * * *
 Disconcerted by the trials of the day, Alyssa tossed in her lonely bed. Fractured images and scrambled
memories swirled through her mind. How could she ever hope to make sense of the jumble?
 Sariel didn’t know enough about the other angelic orders to help her reconstruct her past. She needed
Lailah to help clear up the confusion. Her need for Sariel was no less real; it was just very different in
nature.
 The pleasure he had given her in the forest only whetted her appetite for more.

 She tried to remember details about the Order of Grigori, but nothing specific came to mind. Which
order did she belong to or had she belonged to before her transformation? Again, she needed Lailah for
the answers.
 Punching her pillow and rolling onto her side, Alyssa tried to sleep. She released her thoughts and
allowed a soothing lethargy to overcome her.
  
 Hovering over Alyssa’s bed, transparent and intangible, Sariel eased into her mind. She drifted in a state
somewhere between wakefulness and dreams. He guided her, gently influencing her thoughts, coaxing her
memories past the barricade of lies.
 His desire for her burned more brightly than ever before. But he had to understand her unique nature
before he allowed himself to act upon the emotions escalating within his being. In repose she appeared so
vulnerable, so innocent.
 He knew she wasn’t quite as innocent as she seemed, but she was certainly vulnerable. Scanning her
thoughts, he melded with her, leading her with subtle compulsions, allowing her to delve deeper than she
could go alone.
 She tossed her head, sighing, mumbling words he couldn’t understand. An image formed, undulating in
translucent flux before Sariel commanded it to solidify. Seven angels gathered on a hillside in the land of
Nod. Eden’s eastern gate identified the location. Why were they gathered here? Who were the others?
He recognized Alyssa and Lailah, but the five males were strangers to him.
 A towering blond male spoke with practiced authority. He appeared to be the leader of this gathering.
 “Aren’t you tired of the hypocrisy? They cast out Lucifer for the same sort of rebellion the humans
indulge freely. Why was my brother punished while mankind is allowed to flourish?”
 Lucifer’s brother? Was this Ambrose, Prince of the Cherubim? That would explain the locale. The
Order of Cherubim had been charged with guarding Eden’s gate to keep the mortals from partaking of
the Tree of Life.
 “I was there that day.” The passionate voice drew Sariel’s attention to the dark-haired male standing at
Alyssa’s left. His golden gaze burned with rebellion and anger.
 Understanding surged through Sariel. Rosalind’s favorite fresco had depicted this male. Gideon. Lailah
had called him Gideon.
 “You were more than there.” Ambrose sneered. “You participated in the battle. You fought at Gabriel’s
side!”
 “I did as I was commanded,” Gideon snapped.
 “You made your best friend Fall!”
 “Lucifer made his choice long before the battle.” Lailah insisted. “Placing blame won’t change the past.”

 “The truth is --”
 “Truth,” Alyssa scoffed. “Do any of us comprehend the truth? How are we supposed to recognize truth
in the midst of all these lies?”
 “Perhaps my brother was right all along,” Ambrose muttered.
 “We have become slaves to these mortals,” one of the other males said.
 “No,” the male between Lailah and Alyssa said. “We are expecting to find justice and there is no justice
in Heaven.”
 Observing the memory left Sariel shaken. He understood the cost of rebellion all too well. This sort of
defiance was never allowed to fester, not after a third of Heaven Fell in the last uprising.
 As if responding to his thought, a flash of lightning rent the sky. Thunder shook the earth and the Rebel
Angels closed ranks, forming a tight circle back to back in classic angelic battle formation.
 Michael, Prince of the Archangels appeared in front of Ambrose. Wings spread wide, flaming sword
poised to strike, Michael waited for the others to face him before he spoke. “The stench of your
dissension has reached the throne of God.”
 “You have no authority over me, Archangel. My order is more highly ranked than yours.”
 Sariel recoiled from the open hostility radiating from the cherub. Archangel or not, Michael commanded
the armies of God.
 “I have whatever authority I am given.” With a forceful wave of Michael’s hand Ambrose disappeared.
 Time itself seemed to miss a beat.
 Silence descended on the hill.
 Michael turned to the others, gesturing with his flaming sword. “This little band of rebels is about to be
dispersed -- permanently. You each have one chance at redemption, or you will be expected to Fall.”
 “Youare going to grant us this opportunity?” The only male who had not yet spoken stepped forward. “I
want nothing from you.”
 “Then nothing you shall have.” Michael waved his hand and the other angel disappeared.
 Lailah cried out. “Where did you send Caleb? This is so unfair. We did not create this conflict; we are
trapped within in it.”
 “We are slaves to mankind?” Michael paraphrased, pointing his sword at the male who had first uttered
the words. “I think, Nathaniel, you might benefit from such servitude.”
 “Stop it!” Lailah reached for Michael’s arm, but it was too late. Nathaniel disappeared. “How can you
blame us for our discontent? There is no peace in Heaven, and life has lost its splendor.”
 “Life reveals its splendor in the most unlikely ways, Lailah. I pray that you will understand before it is too

late.” With a sad shake of his head, Michael dispatched Lailah.
 “Are we all to Fall?” Gideon shouted, stomping toward the archangel. “While the mortals revel in
immorality and violence, you will punish us?”
 “Whether or not you Fall is and has always been entirely your choosing. I am forcing nothing upon you.”
 “I thirst for their blood,” Gideon cried. “I want to feel it running over my hands and --”
 “Be careful what you wish for, Gideon, or I will give youexactly what you want.”
 “Do your worst! This is madness.”
 “You must find peace within this madness or you will Fall.”
 “No!” Alyssa screamed as Michael dispatched Gideon. Her sleeping body jerked, jarred by the
memory.
 Without releasing his link with her mind, Sariel solidified, pulling her trembling body into his arms. She
clung to him, tears streaming down her cheeks. Her mouth moved forming the words she spoke in the
memory.
 “Is this your game then, Michael? Twist our words to form our punishments?”
 “Punishments?” Michael paused, his expression thoughtful. His wings rippled subtly. “I choose to see
them as opportunities.”
 “Opportunities for what?” the last male demanded.
 “Daniel, don’t,” Alyssa tugged on her friend’s arm, but he twisted away.
 Michael faced the last two Rebel Angels. “If there is no justice in Heaven, perhaps you can find it in the
realm of man.”
 Daniel disappeared, leaving Alyssa alone with the archangel.
  
 Chapter Five
  
 Alyssa screamed, struggling against the arms encircling her. Memories, vivid and dreadful, pelted her
mind like hail. “They’re gone. Michael sent them all away.”
 Trembling, she collapsed against the person holding her, sobbing helplessly. She wrapped her arms
around his back, clutching his tunic.
 The hillside scene receded, leaving a vast emptiness within her soul. She had been angry and discontent,
convinced her resentment was justified. If she had only known, if she had even guessed what awaited in
the human realm ...

 Life as she knew it had ended that day. Her purpose for existence, her closest friends had all been
forfeited to her rebellious spirit.
 A warm hand brushed her hair, tender lips kissed her brow. She opened her eyes and looked into
Sariel’s gold-speckled gaze. Compassion and concern shone as brightly as the miniature constellations.
She released her breath in a ragged sob. Pressing her hand against his cheek, she absorbed the comfort
of his presence. She wasn’t alone. Sariel was here, holding her, protecting her.
 Sariel?What was Sariel doing in her bed? Was she still dreaming?
 The dreaded mists swirled, threatening to reclaim the ground she’d gained. “I must speak of what I
saw,” she whispered, her voice raspy. “I don’t want to forget.”
 “You won’t forget unless you lie about what took place. Each memory you’ve lost has been the result of
a lie you told.”
 Easing back without leaving the security of his embrace, Alyssa studied his shadowed face. They lay on
their sides, one of his legs pressed between her thighs. Even their intimate position couldn’t distract her
from the past. She desperately wanted to feel whole again, competent -- sane.
 “How do you know that?” A strand of tawny hair streamed in front of his face. She combed her fingers
through his hair, pushing the thick mass over his shoulders. “Did you have something to do with my
dream?”
 “It was not a dream, it was a memory.”
 She licked her lips, his evasive tone made her uncomfortable. “Did you somehow induce the memory?”
He brushed his fingers along her side, then rested his hand on her hip. Tingling heat followed his touch.
Was he trying to distract her with desire? Her body hummed, anticipating a more intimate distraction,
appreciating his strategy. “How did you do it? If you can’t ‘indulge your carnal nature,’ why are you
here?”
 He traced her lips with his fingertip. “The conflict within your mind troubles me. I wanted to help ease
your confusion. All I did was light the way. I hadn’t intended to join you here, but the memory was more
upsetting than I anticipated.”
 “You can see into my mind? Share my memories? These are not ordinary angelic gifts.”
 “I’m not an ordinary angel.”
 His smile sent heat curling deep into her belly. He was so beautiful when he smiled. She longed to bury
her hands in his hair, drag his mouth to hers, and abandon herself completely to the passion sizzling
between them. She had no doubt he desired her, but something more powerful than their attraction held
him back.
 He had come to comfort her, to help her battle her confusion. She couldn’t compromise the purity of
that goal by trying to seduce him. Scooting away from his warm body, she sat and took a slow deep
breath.
 “Do you know what happened to the others?” he asked.

 She glanced over her shoulder. He sat as well, his body now on top of the bedding. Odd, she hadn’t felt
the bed shift as he moved. “Some of them. Michael dispatched us to different locations, scattered
throughout time. When I first encountered Lailah, she had just arrived, while I had been trapped in the
human realm for nearly a hundred years.”
 “Did you seek her out or did your paths simply cross?”
 The subtle suspicion in his expression made her smile. “We were not specifically forbidden to interact
with each other.”
 “Michael said he was dispersing your group permanently and then he scattered you to the four winds.
That seemed pretty clear to me.”
 “Don’t you dare defend him to me!” She scowled fiercely. “Do you approve of his actions?”
 He raised his hands towards her, palms out, and shook his head. “I’m not your judge, Alyssa. This is
between you, Michael, and God.” She didn’t reply and his posture gradually relaxed. “What became of
Gideon? I know Rosalind descended from him. How did that come about?”
 She drew her knees to her chest under her nightrail and wrapped her arms around her legs. How could
he defend Michael? Didn’t Sariel realize the living hell her life had become? Endless years of futile
searching, continually on the run. Immortality was agony when purpose had been stripped away.
 Garbled images assailed her, fragments of lifetimes, various locations, and different identities. She
remembered them all, and yet could recall the specifics of none.
 Sariel bent one leg, resting his forearm across his knee. Dense shadows gave his features a sinister cast.
Still, Alyssa was not frightened by his presence in her bed. She had been alone far too long. Despite her
frustration with his attitude, she longed for the shelter of his arms.
 “Gideon.” He prompted in a quiet, conversational tone. “Tell me about Gideon.”
 Resting her chin on her knees, she sifted through memories. “Much of it is still jumbled. Michael allowed
our own words to determine the specifics of our trials. Gideon’s thirst for blood became literal.”
 “I’ve heard of such creatures among the Fallen. How was he redeemed?”
 “He didn’t Fall. His angelic nature was compromised, but none of us Fell. We are something in between,
not demonic, yet no longer angelic.” She let a smile curve her lips. “Rather like you.”
 “But Gideon was not of the Order of Grigori, so how did he father children?” His gaze moved over her
face, lingering on her lips. Was he imagining a kiss? Remembering her taste?
 “The murals Naomi painted in the church tell the tale. After they vanquished Legion, Gideon was
transformed. His bloodlust was lifted and he was made human.” A sharp pang of envy darted through
her. Gideon’s trial was over. He was at peace, forever content, while she battled on.
 “Human?”Sariel sounded incredulous. “He willingly gave up his immortality?”
 “And spent the rest of his days peacefully with the woman he loved. It was a fair exchange.”

 Sariel shook his head, his expression thoughtful. “Where are the others?”
 Ruggedly handsome features and flashing ebony eyes flickered to life within her mind.Daniel . What had
become of Daniel? Specific events and details stayed just beyond her reach. She released a frustrated
sigh. “I’m not sure. You said my memories are being destroyed by lies. What led you to that
conclusion?”
 “Each of the Rebel Angels was cursed by their own words. You said truth was lost in lies. I believe you
are no longer capable of distinguishing truth from falsehood. Each time you say something that is untrue, it
become fact within your mind, distorting what is real.”
 Fiddling with the hem of her nightrail, she silently considered his words. The theory made perfect sense.
It was consistent with what she knew of the other punishments. She could finally see a glimmer of light
through the mist, yet she had never been more discouraged.
 “Rosalind said my identity changes with my mood. I didn’t realize how accurate her assessment was. I
cannot tell people what I am, so I become whatever I tell them.” Pressure erupted in her temples. She
pressed her fingers to the bridge of her nose, closing her eyes. “How will I ever combat this? If I speak
only truth, the villagers will be more convinced than ever that I’m a lunatic. Or a witch!”
  
 Sariel pulled Alyssa onto his lap, cradling her against his chest. He guided her head to his shoulder and
held her close. “Now that you’re aware of the problem, you can choose your words with the utmost
care.”
 Having her in his arms was the sweetest torture he could imagine. She didn’t reply to his assurance, but
cuddled against him. Her hand slipped inside the opening of his tunic, absently rubbing his chest.
 Images flickered through his mind. Female flesh spread before him like a banquet, offered without
hesitation to his ravenous appetite. With a smoldering glance he’d made them want him, a few practiced
caresses and they’d trembled, desperate for the pleasure they found only in his arms.
 He couldn’t do that to Alyssa. He wouldn’t make her a slave to his desire. If he loosed the beast, to
even a small degree, it would devour them both.
 Alyssa’s light floral scent filled his nose. Sariel’s pulse sped and the pressure in his groin intensified. Why
was he doing this? He should leave, return to his bedchamber and never touch her again.
 It had taken thousands of years to rise above his carnal nature. He could not go back now. Not even for
Alyssa.
 “What are you afraid of?” she whispered against his skin.
 Anger burst within him. The beast writhed and roared. She had no idea what he’d been like, what he
was liable to do to her.
 Warm and willing in his arms, she taunted the beast, begging to be devoured.
 He swept her beneath him, pressing her into the mattress with the weight of his body. “I fear nothing! I

amunwilling to endure --”
 “That’s not what I meant. I --”
 He cut off her words with his mouth, dragging her hands above her head and wedging his body between
her legs. If she was so anxious to see the beast, he would give her a glimpse of the darkness within him.
He would frighten her just enough to make her understand.
 She set her teeth and twisted her face to the side, panting harshly.
 “Stop it! I will not be taken in anger.”
 “Why?” He sneered. “What areyou afraid of? Is this not what you wanted? What we’ve both been
waiting for?”
 His mouth claimed hers again. Grasping both her wrists with one large hand, he splayed the fingers of his
other hand against her face, holding her still. He rubbed his mouth against hers, his expectation clear. She
whimpered. Her lips parting and he immediately thrust inside. He captured her distressed cry in his open
mouth, taking the kiss deeper, demanding more.
 Sweet. She tasted so sweet. He was ravenous, desperate, eager to introduce her to wicked, wanton
pleasures sure to shock and thrill her.
 He had to stop.
 He couldn’t stop!
 He wanted her desperately -- but not like this.
 He ground his aching shaft against the heat between her thighs, cursing the clothing separating his flesh
from hers. Breathing in her scent, he absorbed the feel of her softness crushed beneath his much larger
frame.
 He didn’t want to hurt her, knew he couldn’t take her, but he had to touch her!
 Pushing to his knees, he tugged her garment off over her head. She protested each time their mouths
separated. He held firmly to her hands and concentrated on their kiss. With slow, steady penetrations, he
took her mouth as he longed to take her body. She squirmed and twisted, but her mouth grew pliant and
responsive. His hand wandered over her torso, cupping her breasts, teasing her nipples.
 “Shall I stop or pleasure your nipples?” He formed the question against her kiss-dampened lips, fanning
her with his breath.
 “Why are you doing this?” She stilled beneath him, her eyes wide, filled with uncertainty.
 “Stop or go? I will only respond to one of those two words.”
 She licked her lips, inadvertently brushing his in the process. “Go.”
 He released her hands and framed her face between his palms, pausing for a long, leisurely kiss before
he progressed to the promised intimacy. She hesitated for a moment, then her tongue slid against his,

curled around his, tasted him.
 Her neck beckoned, the long slender column warm and soft. He followed her pounding pulse with the
tip of his tongue, dipping into the indentation at the base of her throat before trailing hot kisses into the
valley between her breasts.
 He cupped both soft mounds at the same time, framing her nipples between his thumb and forefinger.
Rubbing one with the pad of his thumb while he suckled the other, he soon had her nipples tightly
puckered and flushed.
 “Stop or go?”
 “Are you going to make love to me?”
 “Stop or go?” His tone demanded an answer.
 “Go. You know I want you, but why ... oh!”
 He parted her folds and pushed two fingers into her throbbing core. “Stop or go.”
 “Go, oh, please go.”
 He slid in and out, brushing his thumb over her swollen nub as his fingers moved within her. She tugged
his tunic up, bunching it beneath his arms as her hands explored his chest and back. The beast heaved
and bucked, demanded more, demandedher .
 She arched against his fingers. A sharp cry escaped her throat.
 He heard a muffled tap and then the groan of iron hinges. Alyssa grabbed his wrist as Rosalind’s angry
voice snapped from the doorway.
 “You liar! You whore! I will not have this in my house. I will not ...” A sob shattered the remainder of
her tirade. Rosalind whirled and ran down the corridor.
 Frantically reaching for her nightrail, Alyssa shoved him aside with surprising strength. “Not now. This
cannot happen now.” She snatched her dressing gown from the foot of the bed and ran after her ward.
 Heaving an exasperated sigh, Sariel dispersed his corporeal body and returned to his own bedchamber.
  
 * * * * *
 Alyssa entered Rosalind’s room through the handmaiden’s door, which the girl had neglected to bar.
Curled on her side with her back to Alyssa, Rosalind shook with muffled sobs. What should she say,
how could she make Rosalind understand thingsshe didn’t fully comprehend.
 I can’t lie.
 The realization tore through Alyssa, making her tremble. Rosalind had suffered so much. Alyssa wanted
to see the girl happy, her future secured. How could she hope to accomplish that goal without uttering a

lie? “Rosalind.”
 “Leave me! I did not give you permission to enter my chamber.”
 She had not given Rosalind permission to enter her chamber either. Knowing the rejoinder would only
antagonize her ward, Alyssa chose another tactic. “What brought you to mine?”
 Rosalind rolled over and stood in one fluid motion. She glared at Alyssa through her tears, an occasional
sob still disrupting her breathing. “I wanted to apologize.” She laughed. The harsh, mocking sound filled
Alyssa with regret. “I thought about what you said and felt guilty that I hadn’t done more to defend you. I
can’t believe what a fool I’ve been.”
 “My relationship with Sariel is complicated. I did not lie to you before. He is not my lover.”
 “Only because I interrupted your tryst.”
 Alyssa crossed her arms over her chest, determined to retain control of her temper. “My relationship
with Sariel concerns no one but --”
 “You live here by my leave. I am Lady Monthamn! Your actions reflect on me.”
 Amused by their role reversal, Alyssa fought back a smile. The concept was sound, the argument valid,
except Rosalind was not yet of age. “You are my ward. I agree that my actions reflect on Monthamn
Castle, but I am responsible for you until you wed.”
 “You are certainly setting a sterling example for me. Either you are lying about having known him before
or you were ... trysting with a man you hardly know.”
 Heat infused Alyssa’s face and she glanced away from Rosalind’s hostile gaze. “I have strong feelings
for Sariel. What happened tonight was not planned, nor will it be repeated. That is all I will say on the
matter.”
 “Is he in your bed even now, awaiting your return?”
 “That’s enough.”
 “The standards and expectations you set for me do not apply to you? I must take an escort to the privy,
while you are free to --”
 “I am not Lady Monthamn, as you were quick to point out. My relationship with Sariel has no bearing
on what is expected of you.”
 “Do as I say and not as I do? There is a word for that, Alyssa. Hypocrisy.”
 “I have found a man who attracts me mightily. Why does that make you angry? Am I not allowed any
measure of happiness?”
 Rosalind had no answer for that. She crossed her arms over her breasts and turned her face away.
 Wishing she had the words to span the ever increasing gap between them, Alyssa sighed. “I will see you
in the morning.” Rosalind said nothing, so Alyssa left the way she’d come.

  
 Chapter Six
  
 Alyssa spent the remainder of the night in restless frustration. Sariel had departed by the time she
returned to her bedchamber. She knew it was for the best, but her heart ached and her body burned for
the comfort of his embrace.
 She tossed in her lonely bed intentionally reliving the hillside scene, attempting to imprint it on her faulty
memory. Sariel had seemed convinced that the image was not in jeopardy unless she told a lie, but
Alyssa was not so sure.
 How long had she been trapped in the human realm, banished to this pointless existence? Gideon and
Naomi had lived hundreds of years before, but Alyssa’s fragmented memories went much further back.
Mist twirled and spun, revealed images only to conceal them again.
 Could Sariel banish the mist permanently? Could he guide her through her past?
 It didn’t matter if he could. He was here to judge Rosalind!
 Alyssa had nearly forgotten the purpose of his mission. The rapid turn of events had distracted her from
the danger he posed to her ward. Shame fueled her determination. She would not be distracted again.
 She dressed quickly and descended to the great hall. Regardless of her feelings for Sariel, she could not
let him harm Rosalind.
 He sat before the fire, breaking his fast, his expression carefully guarded. Slipping onto the bench across
the table from him, Alyssa didn’t bother to smile. Despite her attraction to him, Sariel was more
adversary than ally.
 “How do you intend to judge Rosalind? Do you have specific criteria you’re required to follow or is the
decision entirely up to you? Would we have been better off with your subordinate?”
 Setting aside his tankard, he folded his arms across his chest and gazed at her intently, his expression
inscrutable. “My subordinate could have introduced himself by any number of names. Has there been a
tall male who expressed an interest in Rosalind in the past year?”
 “We spent much of the past year at court. There were many tall males who expressed an interest in
Rosalind. Are you evading the issue?”
 He just smiled.
 “How will you judge Rosalind?” she asked again.
 “My determination will be made in stages. First I must decide whether or not she is a Nephilim.”
 “And how is that determination made.” She rested her forearms on the table, trying not to reveal her
anxiety.

 “As you know, I have the ability to discern a person’s thoughts, emotions, and memories. I’m often able
to retrieve images the person is not aware they possess.”
 How could she doubt his abilities when she’d experienced their effect? He would search Rosalind’s
mind, explore her childhood memories, and hopefully uncover the truth of her origins. Then what? “If her
grandmother was an angel, does that put Rosalind at risk?”
 “Nephilim are seldom able to reproduce. They are the product of an unnatural union, so it is very rare
that they can produce offspring.”
 His voice was gruff, restrained. He had fathered three such beings. Was he remembering those long ago
events? Had one woman borne all his children or had he --
 “My past is not in question. Focus on your ward.”
 Tension crackled between them. Alyssa gave a stiff nod. Suppressing the urge to reach across the table
and touch him, she moved her hands to her lap. Her desire for Sariel made her feel disloyal to Rosalind.
Why couldn’t he have come in response to Lailah’s invitation? He was Alyssa’s best hope of combating
the mist, yet he threatened the mortal she’d sworn to protect. There could be no compromise. Alyssa
had to choose.
 “For the sake of argument let’s say Rosalind is a Nephilim. What must be determined next?”
 “I must ascertain if she is mortal or immortal. If her parents died as you’ve been led to believe, she is
likely mortal.”
 “Not all Nephilim are immortal?”
 “Nay. As with any child, a Nephilim inherits characteristics from each of their parents. Therein lies the
challenge of my missions. I must decide how much of each Nephilim is human and how much is Grigori.
The ones more Grigori than human tend to be corrupt. All the angelic power of the Grigori with the
freewill of man -- it is more than most beings can withstand.”
 He recited the information in an expressionless monotone. How long had he been hunting the offspring of
his order? How many Nephilim had he killed? “You already told me you’re prepared to destroy Rosalind
if she’s corrupt. What are the alternatives? If her nature is pure, what becomes of her?”
 “There is a section of Heaven reserved for my kind. She will accompany me there. If she --”
 “Lady Alyssa!” A middle-aged servant called from across the hall. She stood in the archway leading to
the solar wing, her features tense with worry.
 “What’s amiss, Imogene?” Pushing back her bench, Alyssa went to join the servant.
 “I can’t find Lady Rosalind. I’ve looked everywhere.”
 Sariel loomed behind her. She didn’t need Imogene’s frequent glances to tell her he stood there; she
could sense his presence. “Where have you looked? How long have you been searching?”
 “She hardly touched the tray I took her last eventide. I was worried, you understand. But her bed was

empty, so I set about finding her.”
 “Where did your search take you?” Imogene’s tendency to ramble had never been more frustrating.
 The older woman’s dark eyes shone with unshed tears. “I’ve looked everywhere! She’s not within the
castle walls. I just came from her wardrobe, milady. Her mantle, some of her gowns, and her polished
silver comb are missing. Lady Catherine gave her that comb, milady. Lady Rosalind would not be parted
from it. I believe she’s run away.”
 “Did you check the stables?”
 “No, milady. I thought it best I inform you first.”
 “You’ve done well.”
 She gave the old woman’s narrow shoulder a gentle squeeze before heading across the hall. If
Rosalind’s mare was gone, Imogene was likely correct.
 “Why didn’t I see this coming? She couldn’t force me to leave, so she chose to depart.” Alyssa’s
stomach knotted as she recalled the emotion ravaged gaze of her ward. She’d never seen Rosalind so
angry, or so hurt.
 “Where would she have gone?” Sariel fell into step beside her, his hand brushing the small of her back.
 Twisting away from his light touch, Alyssa moved aside so Sariel could open the door. “We don’t know
for certain that she’s fled.” Even as she spoke the words Alyssa knew Rosalind was gone, sensed her
absence with an awareness Alyssa had forgotten she possessed. One day in Sariel’s company had
awakened many things within her.
 She clenched her hands and hurried her step. If she hadn’t succumbed to her desire for their uninvited
guest, Rosalind would not have run away.
 “This is not your fault.”
 His deep, caressing tone disturbed her as much as the casual brush of his hand. “Aye, it’s yours! If you
had not come here none of this would have happened.”
 He chuckled. “Perhaps, perhaps not. If I recall, you were searching for Rosalind yesterday as well. The
conflict between you began before my arrival.”
 She suppressed the urge to stick her tongue out at him -- barely -- settling for a heated glower instead.
 They crossed the upper ward in silence, Alyssa lost in worry. Rosalind’s mare was missing, as Alyssa
feared.
 The marshal shuffled from foot to foot, avoiding her gaze as he spoke. “One of the stable boys saw her
ride out just after dawn.”
 “Why was I not informed?” Alyssa demanded.
 “He only just told me. I immediately sent him to the hall to find you.”

 Sariel took her by the elbow and led her from the stable. Sunlight gleamed in his hair and caused the
gold flecks in his eyes to sparkle. “I will find her.”
 Alyssa laughed and jerked her arm out of his light hold. “Why would I trust you to return her safely? This
is the perfect opportunity for you to fulfill your mission.”
 “It’s the perfect opportunity for me to gather information. I’ll not deny that’s my intent, but I promised
Lailah I wouldn’t pass judgment until she returns. I have never broken my word.”
 She studied his angular features as she debated the few options open to her. While their nature was
pure, an Angel could speak only truth. Would Sariel answer truthfully? “Were your children all born to
the same mortal woman?”
 “What has that to do with Rosalind?” His gaze narrowed and he took a step back. He obviously did not
want to talk about his past. If he spoke truthfully, she’d have some assurance Rosalind would be safe in
his care. At least until Lailah returned.
 “Answer the question,” she insisted, watching his face closely.
 “Why do you want to know?”
 “Tell me.”
 His jaw flexed and his eyes gleamed. “Nay.”
 “Is that the answer to my question or a refusal to answer?”
 “Three different women bore my children. Why bring this up now?”
 “Can you speak only truth?’
 “I am an angel!”
 “Pardon my confusion. Most angels would not touch me as you touched me last night. Most angels --”
 “Rosalind gains ground with each passing moment!” He forced his voice back to a conversational level.
“I still have wings. Would you like me to search for her or not?”
 Wings. Sariel had wings.
 Had she once possessed wings? Did she have them still? Was there anything left of her angelic nature?
Flashes of images assailed her. Sensations emerged from the mist. She soared above the earth, scanning
as she flew. Strong currents of air streamed through her hair and resisted the strong flapping of her wings
...
 “Show me.” Loss constricted her throat and made her temples pound.
 Sariel led her into the secluded shadows between two outbuildings. He scanned the area with a quick
sweep of his eyes. They were alone. “Stand back. These quarters are nearly too tight.”

 Unfastening his fur-trimmed mantle, he tossed the garment to Alyssa. His scent filled her nose and the
cloak was still warm from his body heat. She clutched it to her chest, wrapping the sturdy fabric around
her hands.
 He faced her and extended his arms. Golden light burst from his back, illuminating the area. She held her
breath, anticipation pounding through her blood. Delicately scalloped and emanating Heaven’s light,
Sariel’s wings gracefully unfurled.
 Awe held her motionless.
 “Breathe.” He chuckled as she obeyed. “Where am I going? Tell me anywhere she might have gone.”
 “I want to go with you.”
 “Rosalind may return. It’s best if you remain here. Besides, I can fly faster without a passenger.”
 Alyssa stared at his glistening wings, quickly listing all of the places he should search. Her heart ached
and her throat burned. She didn’t want to be his passenger. She wanted to unfurl her wings and soar at
Sariel’s side.
  
 * * * * *
 “Milady, you have a visitor.”
 Imogene’s words came at nearly the same moment as her perfunctory knock. The door to the counting
room stood ajar, so Alyssa dismissed her flash of annoyance. The servant wasn’t really intruding. “Who
has come to call?”
 “He introduced himself as Sir Diadem. Rather odd name if you ask me. Says he met Lady Rosalind at
court last summer and wondered if she were available to visitors.”
 Intrigued, Alyssa pushed back her chair and stood. They had met many people during their stay at court,
but she didn’t remember Sir Diadem. The dreaded mist again or had Rosalind not mentioned the
introduction? Impatiently tucking a stray curl into place, Alyssa left the counting room.
 A tall blond man stood facing the fire as Alyssa entered the great hall. One side of his cloak was tossed
back over his shoulder and he was working to remove leather gauntlets. At first glance Alyssa was struck
by how much he resembled Sariel.
 Diadem. Another name for crown. Crowns was one of the angelic orders. Alyssa struggled to calm her
whirling thoughts. Not everyone she met was an angel!
 “May I help you?” The man turned to face her and Alyssa reconsidered. This was no mortal man. Her
instincts surged, prickling uncomfortably.
 “Enos, Lord Diadem. I regret that we have not been properly introduced. We never crossed paths at
court.”
 She acknowledged his bow with the subtle incline of her head. He waited for her to proffer her hand, but

Alyssa just studied him. His features were arranged more delicately than Sariel’s, but there was a definite
resemblance. “What brings you to Monthamn Castle?”
 “I was visiting a neighbor nearby when I was reminded that Monthamn Castle is the home of Lady
Rosalind. I thought only to renew our acquaintance. Is she available?”
 “Who were you visiting?” Her gaze narrowed on his handsome face. Their nearest neighbor was three
hours ride due west and she knew for a fact the family was across the channel in Burgundy.
 “Lord and Lady Consterns. They recently inherited Wolverton Green. That was the purpose for my
visit.”
 His ink-black gaze met hers directly, but Alyssa couldn’t silence her instincts. This man was not what he
seemed. She’d heard of Wolverton Green, but didn’t know who currently occupied the manor.
 Excuses and lies tumbled through her mind, but Alyssa resisted each one. She must speak only truth or
the mists would swirl in and abolish reality. “I’m sorry. My ward is unavailable. You’ve made the trip in
vain. I’ll let her know you stopped by. Would you like to leave a message?”
 He heaved an audible sigh, draping his gauntlets across one broad shoulder. “I noticed an inn in the
village. When do you expect Lady Rosalind to return? I hate to have come all this way for nothing. I
don’t mind waiting a day or two.”
 “I don’t honestly know when she’ll return. I’m sorry you’ve been inconvenienced. If you had sent a
message ahead, I could have saved you the trouble.”
 “Where is Lady Rosalind?” His deep voice carried a subtle compulsion. “Perhaps I can visit her at her
present location.”
 Wickedness flashed within his gaze before he concealed it from view. Alyssa felt it more than saw it.
Fallen! This was no angel. She was entertaining a demon.
 Guarding her expression and her thoughts, she chose her words carefully. Could he read her mind as
Sariel could? Could he sense her emotions? Smell her fear? “I do not know you, sirrah. I’m not
comfortable giving you information about Lady Rosalind.”
 His dark gaze narrowed. They stared at each other, tension mounting.
 “As you will.” He finally relented and strode from the hall.
 Alyssa exhaled a shaky breath and hurried to the stairs leading to the parapets. She climbed to the
highest tower and watched until the stranger emerged on the drawbridge. Her heart pounded and her
spirit cried out for Sariel.
 Had she just located his lost subordinate?
 Why was ademon searching for Rosalind?
  
 Chapter Seven

  
 “Your ruse will not fool them for long, Rosalind. Let me take you back to the castle. It’s not seemly for
us to be here alone and you know it.”
 “Nay.” Wrapping her fingers around the warm pottery cup, Rosalind inhaled the fragrant brew. God
only knew what herbs Ray had mixed into the steaming beverage. His cottage was cozy, welcoming. She
felt more comfortable surrounded by its wattle and daub walls than within the dank, drafty corridors of
Monthamn Castle. “Danny was told to discard my cloak as soon as he crossed the river. No one will
remember me passing their way because a lad is riding my horse.”
 “You put yourself in great danger venturing out alone.” Ray’s sensual mouth pressed into a grim,
disapproving line.
 “You sound just like Alyssa. I came here to escape her. I’ve made up my mind. I’ll not go back until
Alyssa controls me no longer.”
 “Lady Alyssa is your guardian --”
 “For three more years, unless I wed.” Rosalind paused, sipping the tea Ray had given her shortly after
she arrived. Her teeth had stopped chattering, but an occasional chill still shook her shoulders. She hadn’t
realized the forest would be so cold when she gave Danny her mantle. “I’m not spending three years
under the guardianship of ...” Even in her anger, Rosalind couldn’t speak the words. She owed Alyssa a
great debt. Alyssa had appeared at the blackest moment in Rosalind’s life, giving her hope, helping her
beyond the consuming grief. But her friend, her mentor, her confidant slipped further into madness
everyday. “I can’t watch it happen. It’s breaking my heart.”
 He took the tea from her and cupped her fingers between his palms. “What is this about? What has you
so upset?”
 Attracted by the strength of his powerful body and the affection in his leaf-green eyes, Rosalind moved
closer. She rested her head on his shoulder. Time paused as she waited for his arms to close around her.
The gentle pressure came and she sighed.
 “Alyssa is losing her mind,” she whispered against his chest, snuggling close. “I’ve tried to ignore the
signs, to convince myself it isn’t true, but she grows more confused with each passing day.”
 Ray eased her away and looked into her eyes. “You’re serious? Lady Alyssa’s behavior has been
unusual?”
 “Alyssa has always been unusual, but lately ... No, it began clear back at court.”
 “Court can make anyone act erratically.”
 Alyssa cocked one of her eyebrows in speculation. “You say that as if you’ve been there.” So many
things about Ray were inconsistent. From the moment she’d met him at summer’s end, she suspected
there was more to her mysterious gamekeeper than he was willing to share. His speech was too refined,
his clothing too costly for the menial occupation he had accepted.
 Monthamn’s steward frequently hired workers without Rosalind’s specific approval. It was the

steward’s responsibility to see to such matters. Still, Ray fascinated Rosalind. She sensed secrets in his
past, something elusive, dangerous.
 “You have a vivid imagination.” He stroked his fingertip along the side of her face, then stepped away.
“Tell me about Lady Alyssa.”
 Disappointed by his willingness to end their embrace, Rosalind hesitated. Had she been wrong to come
here? She studied him for a moment. Sunlight revealed gold tones in his thick brown hair. Even now his
gaze caressed her. She hadn’t missed the way his hand lingered against her skin or the tension in his
expression as he released her. Her plan was sound. Ray wanted her.
 “Alyssa has always had a tendency to embellish, but at court it was as if she truly believed her wild tales.
Each time we were introduced to someone new she had a different accounting of her past. I thought it
some sort of game, but when I asked her about it, she couldn’t remember anything but her latest story. It
frightened me terribly.”
 “You returned from court before harvest began. Why the upset now? What brings you here this
morning?”
 She grasped the ends of her trailing sleeves and met his gaze directly. “You. I want you to wed with
me.” A smile slowly bowed his lips and tenderness filled his gaze. Her heart fluttered wildly and the secret
place between her thighs ached as never before.
 Take me in your arms. Kiss me senseless. Say you’ve dreamed of this day forever.
 Silence stretched between them. She fidgeted, willing him to speak. Finally, she averted her gaze. “Say
something.”
 “Oh, sweet Rosalind, I’m flattered that you would even consider me, but it would never be allowed.
You will wed a great lord, an earl at least. I’m your gamekeeper.”
 Her heart pounded and she returned her gaze to his handsome face. “Are your affections engaged
elsewhere? I’ve seen how you look at me. I know you have feelings for me.”
 “You’re as fresh and lovely as any man could desire. But you are meant for grander things than me. You
shouldn’t even be here. If Lady Alyssa realized you --”
 She threw herself into his arms, molding her breasts against his chest and stretching to her toes. Pressing
her lips to his, she waited for him to take over.
 He closed his arms around her. His mouth moved against hers for one sweet moment. Then with a
strangled groan he eased her away, maintaining a light hold on her upper arms. “I cannot do this! I am not
of your station. Lady Alyssa could have me arrested just for touching you.”
 She smiled. He hadn’t said he didn’t want her, just that Alyssa would disapprove. “Then don’t touch
me. Let me touch you.” She boldly pressed her palm to the considerable bulge in the front of his hose.
 He caught her wrist and moved her hand to his hip. “What happened last night?”
 “I don’t want to talk about it. I want to touch you and be touched by you. I want to understand ...” She
tried to twist from his grasp, but his hands wouldn’t release her. He stared into her eyes, his gaze patient

and compelling. “At court several men kissed me, one even dared to touch my breast. I want to feel
those sensations again. I want to understand where they lead.”
 “Your curiosity is natural, but you didn’t answer my question. Something specific happened to bring all
these emotions to the surface. Talk to me.”
 “A friend of Lailah’s came to visit, but he isn’t Lailah’s friend at all. As soon as Lailah departed I found
him with Alyssa. In her chamber. In her bed!”
 “Ahh, I see. Is this gentleman perchance handsome and quite appealing to you?”
 She gasped. “I am not jealous.” Heat crawled up along her throat. “At least not in the way you mean.”
 He cupped her shoulders with his hands. “You envy their pleasure?”
 She leaned toward him, lowering her lashes to conceal her gaze. “Not just their pleasure. I long for
companionship, security. I want someone to hold me in the night and kiss me in the morning.”
 “You will have that and more when you are wed.”
 “I know.” She wrapped her arms around his neck. “That’s why I want to wed with you.”
 He smiled and shook his head. “It would never be allowed. You must marry a gentleman, a man of
wealth and --”
 “I want you.”
 “You don’t even know me.” He tugged on her arms, but she locked her fingers, refusing to budge.
“What is my full name? Where was I born? Do I have a wife and children already?”
 “You use no other name but Ray. There is an unusual inflection in your speech, but I’ve been unable to
determine its origin. I’ve thought long and hard about the circumstances that would have brought
someone like you to this secluded cottage.”
 “Someone like me?” His hands descended along her arms, settling against her waist, but he didn’t push
her away.
 “I think you lost your family to the Black Death, just as I did. I think you turned your back on the land of
your birth because it was too painful to remain. I think you made your living with your sword for a time,
but grew tired of the killing, and now you’re hiding from the world, until your ravaged heart heals.”
 “That’s quite a supposition.”
 He hadn’t argued even one point. How close to the truth had she stumbled? “You are more than a
gamekeeper, Ray. I want you for my husband.”
 His eyes gleamed with emotions she couldn’t decipher. Circling her waist with one arm, he drew her
against him. He cupped her cheek, his thumb stroking her bottom lip. “You want a husband to set you
free and I am the convenient solution. Do you love me?”
 “I’ve never felt for any man what I feel for you. I don’t know if it’s love or not.”

 He closed his eyes for a moment, inhaling a slow deep breath. “I cannot be your husband, Rosalind. No
matter how much I wish it were so.”
 “You want me.” She touched his face, waiting until he opened his eyes before she went on. “I hear it in
your voice and feel it in your touch. You want this as much as I do. Are you already wed? Is that what
keeps you from me?”
 “You don’t know the things I’ve done, can’t comprehend the things I’ve seen.”
 “I don’t care. We can begin anew today. Nothing came before this moment and the future is ours to
control.”
 “Until the past consumes it.”
 He lifted her against his chest, claiming her mouth with his. Her feet barely grazed the floor. She hung
suspended in his embrace. Looping her arms around his neck, she opened her mouth, accepting the bold
thrust of his tongue. Hot darts of pleasure shot down her spine and lodged low in her belly. Even the
most daring court swain had not kissed her with such fervor.
 Their kiss went on and on. He delved deeply, nibbled, and tasted. His hot breath filled her lungs. Her
head spun. If his arms hadn’t clutched her to him, she would have crumpled to the floor at his feet. She
felt weak and dizzy, giddy with desire.
 Please, let this never end!
 He cupped her bottom, rubbing her feminine heat against his hardened shaft. “We have to stop,” he
whispered against her kiss-dampened lips. “I cannot wed you and I will not take what belongs to your
husband.”
 “I want this. I want you.”
 With a frantic sweep of his arm, he cleared the wooden table and set Rosalind upon it. She parted her
thighs automatically. He pushed her skirts above her knees. Their mouths met and molded as he worked
the laces of her gown. She’d won! He would take her, make her a woman. Make her his.
 She would be free.
 His hands moved with remarkable speed. She lifted her arms from the sleeves, the fabric bunched
around her waist. He paused to cup her breast through the translucent material of her chemise. Arching
into his hand, she absorbed the heat, thrilled at the pressure of his palm against her flesh.
 He unfastened the front of her chemise and parted the undergarment. Dragging his mouth from hers, he
gazed at the treasure he’d bared. “So beautiful.”
 She took his hand and guided it back to her breast. “Touch me. Don’t stop touching me.”
 He cupped the back of her head with one hand while the other explored her breasts, squeezing her
nipples. Tingling pleasure erupted, twisted and shot into the very core of her body. She gasped. His
mouth returned to hers, his kiss deep and demanding. He grew bolder, more aggressive. His tongue
thrust rhythmically. A pang of fear intruded on Rosalind’s arousal. Would he marry her once he had

taken her virginity?
 His hand slipped beneath her skirt, stroking her thighs. Should she allow him these liberties now or wait
until he wed her? She ached for their joining, but she couldn’t afford to play the fool.
 “Relax,” he whispered against her mouth. “I’m not going to hurt you.”
 She wasn’t worried about physical pain. She knew it would sting when he ... mounted her, but he had to
be willing to follow through with her plan or she would surrender her body for nothing.
 His lips slid along her throat, explored her shoulder and the upper curve of her breasts. He closed his
lips around her nipple and eased his fingers between her thighs. Passion coiled within her, deep, aching
pulses of desire. She needed him inside her, burned for the culmination to these sensations.
 He suckled one breast and then the other, his fingers absently stroking her damp folds. “Say the word
and I’ll stop.” It was more of a taunt than an assurance. The proof of her desire was at his fingertips. He
paused, staring deep into her eyes. “We both burn for something we cannot have, but I can give you this,
at least. I can show you where the sensations lead.”
 “You’re not going to ... take me?”
 “Nay.” He stroked her with his middle finger, grazing her feminine slit. “But I’ll touch you and let you
touch me.”
 She trembled at the implication. He intended to bare his body and let her explore. “Aye, please.”
 Moving to her side, he kept his hand between her legs, caressing, teasing. “Loosen my hose.” Rosalind
licked her lips, her gaze falling to the thick column outlined by his clingy garment. “If you want to touch
me, uncover me.”
 Her fingers shook as she tugged on his laces. Never before had she seen an aroused man. Her body
melted, throbbing forcefully. Desire made her bold. She tugged his hose down and watched him spring
free. Thick and long, his shaft arched toward her from a nest of dark gold curls. She closed her hand
around him, awed by the contrast of silky-soft skin and marble-hard flesh.
 He showed her how to move, how to please him. “Now close your eyes and imagine me here.” He
pushed his finger into her aching passage and Rosalind cried out. Her inner muscles fluttered, and her legs
shook. “That’s right. Move as I move.”
 He pushed in and out of her tight core, while she stroked him with her hand. She arched against his
finger. He thrust into her fist.
 “It ... hurts,” she cried, her eyes tightly shut. His thumb found a spot so exquisitely sensitive that it made
her whole body jerk. He rubbed the little nub as he pushed deeper.
 “Relax, let the pleasure come.”
 Wrapping his fingers around the back of her neck, he drew her face toward him and covered her mouth
with his. Each individual movement came together in a graceful dance. His fingers stroked, her hand
pumped, and his tongue thrust.

 Pleasure burst within her and she squeezed his hand between her thighs. Her inner muscles rippled. He
cried out against her mouth and covered her hand with his, increasing the pressure of her fist. His shaft
jerked wildly, then stilled within the circle of her fingers.
 His mouth gentled, his finger withdrew. She wanted to draw him back, to fan the embers and be
consumed. “Don’t send me back,” she whispered.
 “I must. I cannot wed you, and I will not treat you like a whore.”
 She flinched; the implication reverberated through her. “Even if I’m acting like one?” She hopped off the
table and turned her back as she righted her clothes.
 “I did not say that.”
 “You didn’t have to.” Choking back a sob, she spun toward the door. He caught her about the waist.
“Let go of me!”
 “Rosalind.” He said her name with such longing it made her tremble. “I would give anything to be what
you want me to be. It is not that I don’t want you. I ache as you ache.”
 She held perfectly still, resenting his touch, even as she burned for more. “Then why? What keeps you
from me?”
 “A life you could never understand.”
  
 * * * * *
 Responding to the urgency in Alyssa’s mental call, Sariel abandoned the sky. He landed behind her on
the tower and pulled her into his arms as he furled his wings. “The stench of fear surrounds you. What
has frightened you?”
 “He was here. A Grigori. He looked like you and yet he was Fallen. His eyes. Evil gleamed in his eyes.
He asked after Rosalind, said he had met her at court, but I don’t remember. You must help me
remember!”
 Leaning in, he buried his face in her hair and inhaled deeply. Beyond the fear, beyond her unique scent,
he detected her visitor. “Enos!” He staggered back a step. “Enos was here?”
 “Aye. He called himself Lord Diadem.”
 Closing his eyes, Sariel shook his head. Why was Enos here? What did he want with Rosalind? It had
been many centuries since he crossed paths with --
 “Who is Enos? Why do you react with such dread? Is he not the Grigori you sent originally?”
 “You thought I dispatched Enos? Nay. Enos Fell long ago.”
 “Then what does he want with Rosalind? How does he know about her?”

 “He asked for Rosalind by name? Tell me exactly what happened.” She explained in short succinct
sentences exactly what was said. “He just left? You told him Rosalind was unavailable and he bowed to
you and left?”
 “Why do you sound so incredulous? Who is Enos Diadem?”
 “Enos is my brother. Or he was before he Fell.”
  
 * * * * *
 They descended to the great hall and were discussing where next to search when Rosalind strolled into
the keep. Alyssa smiled, thrilled to see Rosalind safe, but anger immediately doused her relief. “Where
have you been?”
 “Giving the village lads a good hard tumble.”
 Alyssa charged toward Rosalind, but Sariel caught her arm. He stepped past her and stood before
Rosalind, staring down from his great height. “You are either a spoiled brat in need of a good thrashing or
a very foolish child.”
 Rosalind gasped and Alyssa grinned. The way he had grabbed Alyssa’s arm had led her to believe he
meant to defend Rosalind.
 “You can’t speak to me like this. You’re a guest in my castle.”
 “There is a creature pursuing you. We do not yet understand his motivation. Until we do, you will remain
within the castle compound.”
 Rosalind glanced at Alyssa, a bit of the fight going out of her stance. “Acreature? Why would you use
that term?”
 “Only a fool makes the same mistake twice. When I encountered you in the church Alyssa was
searching for you. Correct?”
 “I was within the curtain walls. There was no danger.”
 “And today?” Alyssa could only see his broad back, but his tone snapped with challenge and authority.
 “I ... Who is after me and why did you refer to him as a creature?”
 “Where did you go today?” Sariel persisted.
 “Beyond the curtain walls,” Rosalind admitted in a small, shaky voice. “I didn’t intend to return, but --
Mae insisted.”
 “You were not with Mae. I spoke to her.”
 Alyssa stepped up beside Sariel. “Who insisted you return to the castle?”

 “The one person I counted on most.” Tears swam behind her long lashes and her dainty chin quivered.
“You win, Alyssa. I have tried. There is no escaping you.”
 Alyssa’s breath hitched and her cheeks burned. Rosalind’s words stung like a slap. “Why would you
want toescape me?”
 Tears spilled onto Rosalind’s cheeks as the words came tumbling out. “I love you like a sister, but the
whispers in the village are not idle gossip. Youare going mad. You frighten me, Alyssa. I never know
what you’ll do, what you’ll say, who you’ll be. I just want my friend back. I want ...”
 Alyssa reached for her but Rosalind twisted away.
 “This ends now.” Sariel’s deep voice drew the attention of both females. “Alyssa is not going mad. The
truth may be hard for you to accept. She has lied to protect you from the fear of superstitious fools. If her
true nature were revealed, the gossipmongers might find the courage to act.”
 “Hertrue nature? What does that mean?”
 Sariel didn’t speak the words; he just unfurled his wings.
  
 Chapter Eight
  
 Sariel watched Rosalind’s awe turn to terror and quickly retracted his wings. “Fear not. I only showed
you to assure you that I can speak only truth. That is what complicated Alyssa’s memory. Most angels
cannot lie.”
 “Alyssa is an angel.” Befuddled, the girl stumbled back and sank onto one of the benches scattered
about the great hall.
 “The truth is complicated, but her angelic nature is the secret she has been attempting to conceal.”
 Rosalind’s wide blue gaze shot toward Alyssa. “You couldn’t trust me with your secret?”
 “Would you have believed me?” Alyssa’s voice shook and she crossed her arms over her chest. Was
she relieved to have the subject uncovered or angry that he had forced her hand? “I can no longer unfurl
my wings. If Sariel had not been here to demonstrate, you would have been completely convinced of my
madness.”
 “I’m sorry. I ...”
 He wanted to let Alyssa savor the moment, to solidify the reconciliation with her ward, but important
matters remained unspoken. They were running out of time. “When Alyssa speaks an untruth her mind
adjusts reality to accommodate the lie. She has been unable to tell you the truth, so her mind continually
creates new realities. Do you understand what that must be like?”
 Blinking away the last of her tears, Rosalind nodded. “I saw it clearly at court. Court was horrible. I
have never been so ...”

 “Ashamed?” Alyssa supplied, her gaze still wounded.
 “Aye.” Rosalind’s expression twisted with regret. “But I didn’t understand. How could I have known?”
 Sariel pulled a bench near to Rosalind and straddled it, resting his forearms on his knees. Accepting the
reality of angels was only the first step. With Enos involved Sariel had no alternative but to make her
enlightenment abrupt. “Angels are real.” He paused, waiting for her to meet his gaze. “And so are
demons. The creature I spoke of earlier is Fallen. He is ruthless and you must do exactly as we say or we
will not be able to protect you from him.”
 Her hand flew to her throat, her eyes wide and fearful. “What interest has a demon in me?”
 “We don’t know yet, but you may have knowledge that can help us unravel his motives.”
 Alyssa sat on the bench behind him. He could sense her depression and anxiety. She didn’t trust him, but
her angelic nature understood what must be done.
 Rosalind folded her hands in her lap and watched him cautiously. Not since their initial encounter in the
church had he seen her so resigned. “Have you been approached by any men you did not know?”
 “Not since we returned from court. Court was swarming with people we didn’t know. The purpose for
being there was to encounter new people.”
 “Enos looks rather like me, only his eyes are a darker green. Did anyone resembling me approach you at
court?”
 “Lord Diadem?”
 Alyssa gasped and scooted closer to his back, resting her hand on his shoulder as she peered around
him at her ward. “Did you mention this person to me? I have no recollection of such an introduction.”
 Rosalind shook her head and turned her face toward the fire. “He frightened me. I danced with him
once, but ... Are you saying Lord Diadem is a demon? That isn’t possible.”
 “Why did he frighten you?” Sariel asked. Blending in with humanity was Enos’ specialty. He was the
perfect demonic spy. Only the most discerning soul could sense his evil.
 “His eyes, there was something unnatural about his eyes.”
 “Were you ever alone with him?” He insinuated himself into her mind. Her expressive face made his
abilities almost unnecessary, but now they needed to delve deeper, to investigate issues she may be
reluctant to discuss.
 “Nay. He tried to separate me from the crush several times, but I returned to Alyssa.”
 He sensed only truth. “Did anyone else at court seem out of place?”
 “Other than me, you mean? I have never felt so rustic and clumsy.”
 Alyssa moved her hand from his shoulder to his upper arm. The simple caress sent heat cascading

through his body. Would she never learn? The beast within him was ravenous, ready to feast, and she
continued to poke sticks at it.
 “A member of Sariel’s order was supposed to have contacted you,” Alyssa said. She squeezed his arm,
drawing his attention. “How would he have introduced himself? What does he look like? Is he able to
pass for a human?”
 “All the Grigori can pass for human and we are all uncommonly tall. His true name is Gadrayel, but I
doubt he would have introduced himself as such. His hair is darker than mine and he can change the color
of his eyes, though they are most often green.” A jumbled surge of emotions twisted through the girl. He
had just described someone she knew, but she was frantically trying to protect his identity. “Did you
encounter this man at court?”
 “I met no one like that at court.”
 Truth tainted with omission. Sariel smiled. “When did you encounter him?”
 “I didn’t say I had encountered anyone like that.”
 “You don’t have to say it, Rosalind,” Alyssa told her. “He can read your thoughts.”
  
 * * * * *
 Refusing to leave the females unguarded, Sariel sent out an angelic command, summoning Gadrayel to
him. Alyssa and Rosalind sat on a bench by the fire talking softly, their heads slightly bowed. He scanned
Rosalind’s being, searched her mind, examining every nuance of her soul. Spiritual forces had definitely
played a part in her development, but he couldn’t define the specifics of her nature.
 “She is not a Nephilim,” Gadrayel said from behind him.
 Sariel didn’t turn around. Gadrayel should be chastised for his misbehavior, but Sariel couldn’t help but
empathize with his subordinate. This mission was unusually complicated. “Your silence had me wondering
if you were nearing a Crisis of Faith. You should have reported your findings.”
 “I apologize.” Gadrayel stepped up beside Sariel. The lesser angel remained intangible, only discernable
to highly trained angelic senses. “I had nothing to report.”
 “You claim she is not a Nephilim. How came you to that conclusion?” Sariel used his angelic voice,
projecting the words only loud enough for Gadrayel to hear.
 “I observed her at court. I listened and searched her being extensively. I’ve never encountered anyone
quite like her.”
 Sariel smiled. That thought applied equally to Rosalind and Alyssa. “You did not approach her while she
was at court?”
 “Nay. I only interact with my objectives when absolutely necessary.”
 Sariel understood what he didn’t bother to say. It was easier to destroy a being with which you had

never interacted. If a simple scan of their nature could determine that a Nephilim was corrupt, there was
no need for conversation.
 “Did you sense Enos at court?”
 “Enos is about?” Gadrayel’s shock sounded genuine.
 “He appeared to Alyssa asking about Rosalind. Do you have any idea what Enos would want with
Rosalind?”
 Gadrayel shook his head. “Nay. She has no significant powers and is completely unaware of the few she
does possess.”
 Sariel nodded. Gadrayel had told him nothing he didn’t already know. “Why did you conceal yourself
from me?”
 “I had nothing conclusive to report, sir, and did not wish to risk your ire.”
 Sariel snorted. “Her scent covers you like a cloak. How far did you indulge your carnal nature?”
 “Not nearly as far as I wanted to.” Sariel followed the direction of Gadrayel’s stare and found Rosalind.
“Never before have I faced such a temptation.”
 Another sentiment Sariel understood all too well, only his temptation sat beside Gadrayel’s. “You were
wise to return Rosalind to the castle. Who does she believe you are?”
 “Her gamekeeper.”
 “For the time being let’s allow her misconception. Guard her well. With Enos about, we can take no
chances. But only appear to her as this gamekeeper.”
 A long pause followed, then Gadrayel asked, “Is Rosalind forbidden to me? She is not human. I have
been able to determine that much. Will I Fall if I ... indulge my carnal nature with her?”
 Sariel locked his hands behind his back and shook his head. “I don’t know the answer. In fact, I’m
struggling with the same question.”
 Gadrayel’s gaze moved to Alyssa, his expression curious. “Is she an angel?”
 “Aye.” Sariel chuckled. “And nay. Much like Rosalind, Alyssa is unique.”
 “And you desire her?”
 “As I have never desired another.”
 Turning to face him, Gadrayel’s features reflected his confusion. “If she is an angel it is not forbidden.
You sanction unions among the members of our order. How is this different?”
 “She is not Grigori.”
 Gadrayel’s brow furrowed and he glanced back at Alyssa. “Then how is she aware ... Does she desire

you?”
 “It is not as simple as desire,” Sariel grumbled. The beast jerked against the chains restraining it. “I will
never allow my carnal nature to rule me again. I cannot live as we lived back then.”
 Silence stretched between them as the past overshadowed the present. Passion and decadence,
unbridled lust, the Grigori had worshipped at their altars for far too long.
 “That’s why you’ve never chosen a mate among our own,” Gadrayel said thoughtfully.
 “Aye.” Sariel locked away the memories and focused on the females seated before the hearth. “The
beast within me is too strong. I’m not sure I could be with any female and remain in control. Alyssa is out
of the question.”
 “Our dilemmas are much the same.” Gadrayel sighed. “Have you been able to determine Rosalind’s true
nature?”
 “I’m working on it.”
 Accepting the assurance with a solemn nod, Gadrayel spread his wings to depart.
 “Gadrayel.” Their gazes locked. “Do not touch her until my decision is made.”
 Obviously displeased by the directive, Gadrayel inclined his head and disappeared.
  
 * * * * *
 Alyssa tried not to stare at the shimmering being beside Sariel. Several times Rosalind had glanced at
Sariel, but she hadn’t reacted to the entity. Apparently her ward couldn’t see the cloud of golden light. It
undulated in and out of focus, disappearing entirely only to reappear again.
 “How long have you been alive?”
 Rosalind’s hushed tone drew Alyssa’s attention away from the visual anomaly. “Time passes differently
in the spiritual realm. I’ve been as I am now for over four hundred years.” Startled by the revelation,
Alyssa searched for other details. She seemed to access her memories more easily when she didn’t
concentrate too hard.
 “As you are now?”
 Alyssa sighed. Every time she spoke of the hillside confrontation with Michael it became more real. She
was glad for the clarity of thought, but the emotions burned like fire. The one advantage to her faulty
memory was forgetting the fury, the resentment, the regret.
 “Some of my friends and I had become discontent and rebellious. We gathered on a hillside one
afternoon and Michael overheard our protests. He scattered us through time and gave each a specific
challenge to overcome.”
 “Why were you discontent?”

 Alyssa extended her hands toward the fire. How could she begin to explain such a complicated conflict?
“I’m not sure I can make you understand. The anger and frustration within us built gradually over several
of your lifetimes.”
 “But how did it begin? Every rebellion has a beginning.”
 “Our minor rebellion was an echo of the great rebellion.” Knowing Rosalind would never accept such an
ambiguous response, Alyssa continued, “Angels are not born as humans are born; we are created. Those
of us who are created and trained at the same time become very much like siblings. That’s why I call
Lailah my sister.”
 Rosalind nodded, her gaze wide and intent upon Alyssa’s face.
 “Ambrose was Lucifer’s brother. He didn’t Fall as Lucifer Fell, but Ambrose refused to participate in
the battle. Gideon, your ancestor --”
 “Gideon of Monthamn was an angel?” Rosalind gasped. “The frescos. Lady Naomi was not being
fanciful. Those scenes actually took place?”
 Relieved that Rosalind could find some pleasure in the tale, Alyssa allowed the momentary tangent.
“Aye. Gideon was victorious. He triumphed over his challenge and lived out his life in peace with the
woman he loved.”
 “But Gideon died. I thought angels are immortal.”
 “Gideon exchanged his immortality for the ability to reproduce. I would think you would be glad he
wanted to father children with Lady Naomi.”
 A faint smile gracing her mouth, Rosalind raised her fingers to her temples and rubbed firmly. “My head
is spinning with all of this. How can it be true?”
 “Shall we continue tomorrow? This is a lot for anyone to comprehend.”
 “Nay. Please, go back to the hillside gathering.”
 Alyssa paused to gather her thoughts and suppress the strongest of her emotions. Striving for a
conversational tone, she resumed her tale. “Ambrose was of the order of Cherubim, so he was very
much involved with the development of mankind. He watched God pour out unconditional love on a race
of beings who were often violent and self-serving. God allowed humans to express the sort of rebellion
for which his brother had Fallen. Ambrose was the most vocal of our group, but we all resented God’s
new creation; we all expressed our frustration in our own way.”
 “What did you say?”
 “I asked how we were expected to recognize truth in the midst of all the lies.”
 “But Sariel said angels cannot lie.”
 “Truth has a bit to do with perception. We spoke honestly of things you believed to be true, but our
attitudes, our bitterness had corrupted the truth.”

 “So being unable to distinguish truth from lies became your challenge, the trial you must overcome.”
 “Aye. Were it not for Sariel’s ability to see into my mind, I might still be lost in lies.”
 Rosalind shifted on the bench, scooting nearer. Her voice dropped to nearly a whisper as she asked,
“Why does Sir Sariel need to read the thoughts of others? It seems an odd ability for an angel.”
 Alyssa looked away from Rosalind’s expectant gaze. What could she say that would be true, yet not
frighten Rosalind further?
 “Have you ever heard of a Nephilim?” Sariel asked as he neared them.
 Rosalind glanced over her shoulder, watching him round the bench and stand beside the hearth. She
shook her head. “What is a Nephilim?”
 “Angels are divided into orders.” He rested his arm casually on the wide stone mantel. The Order of
Grigori --”
 “You introduced yourself as Sariel Grigori.”
 “Aye. I am Prince of the Order of Grigori.”
 “Not just an angel, but a prince.” Rosalind rubbed her temples again and closed her eyes for a moment.
“Perhaps I am the one going mad.”
 Alyssa rubbed her back and waited for her eyes to open. “I think you should rest for a while. You are
clearly overwrought.”
 “Nay.” Rosalind took a deep breath and squared her shoulders. “I would rather hear it all now. No
more surprises. You were speaking of the Nephilim.”
 Sariel hesitated, his gaze moving cautiously over Rosalind’s face. “My order, the Grigori, are able to
interact with humans in a way other angels are not.”
 Rosalind’s cheeks bloomed with color. “As you were interacting with Alyssa?”
 “Aye.” His smile was completely unrepentant. “What we did not realize was that as well as being able to
enjoy the pleasures of the flesh we are able to produce offspring.”
 “Angels can have children?” Rosalind’s eyes widened comically.
 “Only the Grigori and there are very few of us left.”
 Rosalind paused, fitting all of the pieces of the puzzle together. “Are Nephilim the offspring of the Grigori
and humans?”
 “Aye.”
 Rosalind stood and moved to the other side of Alyssa. Her eyes narrowed and her hands clenched. She
shook her head. “Nay. Is this why Alyssa came to me? Gideon’s blood makes me a Nephilim?”

 “I wish it were so simple.” Sariel remained where he was, but his tone softened. “Gideon’s blood has
been diluted by many generations. What I sense in you is a far more recent mixing of human and ...
non-human blood.”
 “What does this mean? What is to become of me? Is this why the demon is after me?”
 Alyssa rose and wrapped her arm around Rosalind’s shoulders, not surprised to find her slender body
trembling. “What do you remember of your parents? How did they meet? Was theirs a love match?”
 Turning to Alyssa, Rosalind buried her face against the other woman’s throat. “Don’t let him hurt me. He
means me harm. I see the suspicion in his eyes.”
 Alyssa stroked her back and shook her head when Sariel opened his mouth to speak. Sariel could find
out what he needed to know without traumatizing Rosalind. “Let’s go to your solar. You should rest. This
has been a trying day.”
 Rosalind laughed, a sharp humorless sound. “I feel like my entire life has been a dream and reality is a
nightmare.”
  
 * * * * *
 Rosalind tossed against the cool bed linens. Disturbing images rolled through her mind, shimmering angel
wings and shadowy impressions converged and twisted. Her heart pounded. Her limbs thrashed. The
dream expanded, focused, and solidified.
 She was surrounded by a crowded forest, struggling through bushes and brambles. Sharp branches
snagged her clothes and scraped her skin as she fled the unseen evil. Fear constricted her throat and
dried out her mouth. Something was out there, hunting her, closing in. She burst through the underbrush
and ran.
 Her leg muscles cramped and her lungs burned as she forced her body to greater speeds. Closer. It was
nearly upon her.
 She collided with something solid and warm. Screaming, she flailed, kicking and thrashing against the
arms restraining her.
 “Rosalind. Fear not. Nothing will harm you. I will keep you safe.”
 Ray’s deep, musical voice washed over her in a soothing wave. She looked up into his handsome face
and dissolved into tears. Ray had found her. How had he known she was in danger? It didn’t matter. She
was safe!
 He lifted her in his arms and carried her into his cottage. The surrounding forest had never seemed so
dark and ominous. She clung to him. “How did you find me?” she whispered in between sobs.
 “I always know where you are.”
 What a wonderful thought. She pushed her fingers into his thick hair, marveling at the softness of the

gold-streaked strands. Warm. His cottage was warm and safe, a sanctuary in the darkness. “The world
is topsy-turvy. I no longer fear that Alyssa has slipped into madness. I am the one --”
 “Hush, my love.” He placed her on his bed and stretched out beside her, his rich green gaze caressed
her face. “You are safe with me. Nothing can harm you here.”
 “Here?” He’d said the word with an odd inflection. She glanced beyond him at the familiar cottage.
Everything was in its place, yet nothing seemed quiet real. “Where are we?” Trepidation cooled her
desire. What was happening to her?
 “This is a dream,” he said in a very serious voice, his gaze intent upon her face. “A safe, sweet dream.
We can do whatever we want here, be whatever we choose.”
 What did he mean? Why was he behaving so strangely? She tried to smile, to ease the tension twisting
through her. “What would you choose to be that you are not already?”
 “Your lover.”
 She just stared at him. Was he serious? He had sent her away before, sworn their union was impossible.
A cold, hard knot formed in the pit of her belly. He wasn’t asking to wed her, just make love to her.
 “Do you want this? Do you want to feel me moving inside you even though it’s only a dream?”
 A dream. A safe, sweet dream.
 “Aye.” She opened her arms to him. “I want to kiss you and touch you. I want everything.”
 His lips pressed over hers, sealing their mouths, initiating a connection more intense than a simple kiss.
Her body tingled. Her being pulsed as if he literally touched her soul. She trembled. How could this be a
dream? She could feel him, smell, and taste him.
 She threaded her fingers through his hair and mimicked the movement of his mouth. This was a dream,
only a dream. He was free from his past here. Free to love her as she longed to be loved and accept her
love in return.
 He pulled her nightrail off over her head. She gasped. Why was she wearing her nightrail? Dreaming. Of
course, she was dreaming.
 “You are perfection.” His breath hissed out, his eyes glowed with emerald fire. “I have wanted to touch
you for so long.”
 Thrilled by his praise, Rosalind arched, offering her body in brazen invitation. He cupped one breast and
lowered his mouth to the other. “Aye!” she murmured. His tongue stroked, his fingers explored.
 He paused to rid himself of his clothes. The urgency in his movements made her smile. He was desperate
for this, desperate for her. She understood his need. Her being cried out for his, her body ached for his
fullness. Parting her thighs, he lowered himself between them, pressing against, but not into her.
 She touched him boldly, memorizing his shape, fascinated by his texture. So soft. So hard. So hot! Every
new discovery fueled her desire, made her more anxious for their final joining.

 His mouth claimed hers again, firm, demanding. She returned the kiss with equal vigor, all hesitation lost
in the dream. This was Ray, her haven, her lover. She was safe in his arms.
 He caressed her breasts and slid against her. His shaft rubbed the knot of nerves hidden within her
feminine folds. Delicious sensations flowed through her, spreading out from the point of contact until her
entire body tingled. She squirmed, aching, burning, needing the shattering pleasure she had only known
with this man.
 “Oh, Ray! Please don’t deny me. Fill me. I want you inside me.”
 He grinned and pushed to his knees. “Like this?” Raising her hips off the bed, he impaled her with one
forceful thrust.
 Rosalind cried out with shock and delight. There was no pain, just the blissful fullness of his thick shaft
inside her aching core. “Just like that.” She sighed, wrapping her legs around his waist. “Always like
that.” She never wanted to be separated from him. She wanted him inside her forever.
 He pulled back and drove deep. She clung to him with her arms and legs.
 Chuckling at her enthusiasm, he eased her back to the bed. “Loosen your legs, love. I can’t move when
you clutch me like that.”
 Laughter welled up within her. She was happy, content ... safe.
 Relaxing her legs, she caressed his chest and squeezed his shoulders, while he hooked her legs over his
arms. The new position spread her legs wide, giving him room to move. He surged into her, stretching
her, filling her.
 Shouldn’t she feel uncertain or ashamed? This man was not her husband. Surely this was a sin. It didn’t
matter. This was only a dream.
 He took her with strong even strokes, driving rational thought from her mind. This was a dream. A safe,
fantastical dream. They could do whatever they wanted, be whomever they chose.
 Dragging his mouth back to hers, Rosalind surrendered to the pleasure, and abandoned herself
completely to the dream.
  
 Chapter Nine
  
 “Rosalind is finally asleep.” Alyssa joined Sariel before the fire. He stood in nearly the same position he
had been in when she left the hall several hours before. “She seemed restless for a time, but she is
sleeping soundly now. What troubles you?” The question was so absurd it made her laugh. “I guess the
more appropriate question is which of your troubles has you so captivated?”
 He looked up and offered a wan smile. “I’ve been praying. Angels are known to do that from time to
time.”

 “When they remember they are angels.” Letting her gaze wander where her fingers longed to travel, she
stared at Sariel. It was easy to forget she was an angel when she looked at him. The feelings he inspired
were undeniably carnal. His quick mind fascinated her and she was awed by his power. Tenderness
surged through her each time their gazes met, but under the more complex emotions simmered the
elemental attraction of a female for her mate. “Have you found the answers you seek?”
 “Nay.” He shook his tawny head and rolled his shoulders. An uncharacteristic weariness clouded his
gaze. “Just more questions.”
 She hesitated to start a lengthy conversation. “I just came down to gather a quick repast. I don’t want to
leave Rosalind alone.”
 A slow, secretive smile bowed his lips. “Rosalind is not alone.”
 An image of the golden entity that had hovered at Sariel’s side flickered within her mind. “Who were you
speaking with earlier?”
 “You were able to see him?” Sariel’s brows drew together and he sounded surprised.
 “To some extent. I couldn’t discern his shape, but I knew he was there.”
 “You’re more perceptive than you know. To which order did you originally belong?”
 Was he avoiding her question? He had a knack for doing so. His surprise seemed genuine, so she
searched her memory, and smiled when she found the answer. “I belonged to the Order of Dominions, as
did Lailah.”
 “Each time you speak truth a bit of the mist disintegrates.”
 She only nodded. It was disconcerting to know he could literally hear her most secret thoughts and
sense her feelings, while he remained completely guarded, separate from her. “Who or what did I see?”
 “Gadrayel, my missing subordinate. It seems he has not deserted his mission after all. When I described
him to Rosalind it was obvious she knew someone fitting his description. She has no idea, of course, but
your ward is infatuated with an angel.”
 Alyssa blew a stray curl out of her eyes and thought about naïve, impressionable Rosalind at the hands
of a seductive Grigori. If Gadrayel were half as charismatic as Sariel, Rosalind didn’t stand a chance.
“Her flight to escape me took her right into the arms of your missing subordinate?”
 “Aye, and that’s why she was returned so quickly. Gadrayel may be attracted to her, but he isn’t willing
to Fall.”
 “Gadrayel has feelings for Rosalind? Are the members of your order naturally drawn to the Daughters of
Man?”
 “Don’t we always want most what we are forbidden?” He shot her a challenging smile. “But Rosalind is
not human. At least not entirely.”
 His casual statement caught Alyssa by surprise. She crossed her arms and tucked her hands inside the
loose sleeves of her gown. Had he made his determination then? Was Rosalind a Nephilim? Loath to

speak the words, she tried another tactic. “If she is not entirely human, what else contributes to her
nature?”
 “Now that is a very good question.”
 “But you don’t have the answer?”
 “Nay. I do, but it will only upset you, so I’ll hold my peace until I understand the situation more
completely.”
 His convoluted statement earned him a scowl. “How do you intend to gain this understanding?”
 “After Rosalind has had a night to rest and recover from the shock of what she has learned thus far I will
guide her through her memories much as I guided you.”
 She had expected as much. “Is Gadrayel with her now?”
 “Aye.”
 “Is she safe with him?”
 “Safe with him or safe from him?” One corner of his mouth quirked.
 “You are not increasing my confidence in your order.”
 He chuckled and reached for her hand. “Gadrayel will guard her with his life and he can summon me
with a thought should the need arise.”
 Surprised by his willingness to touch her, she stepped closer and raised her gaze to his face. Firelight
complimented his golden coloring and accented the desire in his gaze. How would they ever resolve these
longings? They wanted the same thing, yet he held himself back.
 He cupped her shoulders with his hands, his expression intense and conflicted.
 She only knew she had to try to reach beyond his barriers. “Last night I asked you what frightened you.”
He started to speak, but she placed her fingers against his lips, staying his objections. “You
misunderstood me then. I want to explain myself now. I don’t doubt your courage. One glance into your
eyes would convince anyone you are a force with which to reckon. I need to understand what you think
will happen if you allow yourself to care for me.”
 “I care for you already, don’t you know that?” The passion in his tone sped her pulse. “It’s not affection
I resist; it’s desire.”
 Swallowing past the lump in her throat, she asked. “What do you think will happen if you surrender to
your desire for me?”
 He heaved a heavy sigh, obviously dreading the topic. “Why must you persist in this? I cannot make love
to you and that’s all that matters.” He removed his hands from her and turned back toward the fire.
 “Youwill not make love to me. I understand the difference, but I don’t understand the cause.”

 “Why do you want to know these things?” He crossed his arms over his chest, withdrawing even further.
“The entire incident happened so long ago. Besides, I doubt you’ll find comfort in my answers. Those
were wild, lawless times. My order is still paying the price for the role we played in them.”
 Slowly licking her lips, she organized her thoughts. She wanted to understand, she needed to
understand, but she hated that she was causing him pain. “And you personally. What part did you play in
them?”
 He laughed, a harsh, humorless sound. “I am their leader, Alyssa. What do you think? I encouraged the
decadence and reveled in the excess. I took and gave pleasure without a second thought. I indulged my
beast until there was nothing left of me. I --”
 “That’s not true. You are not a beast now. You conquered that part of yourself.”
 “Only after I destroyed countless lives and ...”
 Pain pulsed off him. Alyssa could barely catch her breath. What was he remembering? What could
possibly -- “Your children,” she whispered.
 He stared into the fire, his face an expressionless mask. “Two were corrupt. I could not save them, but I
would not allow them to Fall.”
 She chocked back tears to form the words, but she had to understand. “What happens to a Nephilim if
it is destroyed? Why is it better than Falling?”
 “The Nephilim are unique creatures. They possess two separate natures, two souls. Their behavior and
abilities are determined by whichever nature is in control. This can change over time. A Nephilim can go
for many years with no sigh of wickedness and then their corrupt nature can take over.” He heaved an
audible sigh and raked his fingers through his hair. “When a Nephilim is corrupted, but not Fallen, the
human soul can still be saved.”
 “But the body must be destroyed?”
 “Aye. By killing the corrupted spirit, we set the human soul free.”
 His passionate revelation in the forest came back to haunt her. He had fathered three children and two
had died by his hand.
 Without glancing away from the fire, he responded to her thoughts. “Aye. Two of my children had to be
destroyed. I murdered them while their mothers screamed, clawing at my flesh and cursing my name.”
 Alyssa’s legs trembled so badly she sank onto a wooden bench. Three thousand years was not enough
time to heal such a wound. No wonder he hesitated to touch her. She couldn’t even imagine such
devastation.
 “How many of your order Fell?”
 “Nine-tenths. When our sin was revealed, nine-tenths of the Grigori joined the ranks of the Fallen. I was
not allowed to Fall. I was given the task of locating and judging the Nephilim. Beginning with the three I
had fathered.”

 Tears slipped from the corners of her eyes. She quickly wiped them away, not wanting to draw his
attention. He would resent her pity and he wasn’t ready to accept her compassion. One question still
bothered her, but she hesitated. She had caused him enough pain.
 “What do you want to know?” he demanded impatiently.
 “Are Fallen Grigori still able to reproduce?”
 He closed his eyes, his hands clenching into fists against his sides. “All can beget demonic children, but
the most powerful can still impregnate humans.”
 “Then the Nephilim you hunt, some of them are sired byFallen Grigori?”
 “Theyall are, Alyssa. If the Grigori is not Fallen before he lays with a Daughter of Man, the act seals his
fate. It is forbidden!”
 His hostility compounded her fear. He was speaking in generalities but her mind had focused on
Rosalind. “How many Nephilim are allowed to live and how many are destroyed?”
 “You know the answer. Why are you doing this to me?”
 “Are any of them saved? Is it only a matter of time for Rosalind?” He was right. She found no comfort in
his answers. She had only managed to make them both miserable.
 “We find a rare few who inherit their father’s angelic nature while it is still pure. But the vast majority
must be destroyed.”
 She covered her mouth with her hand, shaking. Hearing what he had been through tore at her heart, but
Rosalind loomed before them, even larger than his past. He had already determined Rosalind was not
human, so she must --
 “Do you understand now?” His sharp tone cut through her troubled thoughts. “Lust cost my order
everything. We fed our carnal natures until we were ruled by them. We devoured any female flesh within
our reach. That beast is still very much a part of me. If I lose my hold on it, to even the smallest degree, I
amafraid it will control me again. I amafraid I will revert to the creature I was then. Not even for you
will I risk such a fate.”
 They balanced on a razor’s edge. His mission loomed from one side, threatening to tear them apart. His
past pelted them from the other. The temptation to retreat, to leave him with his torment and surrender to
the mist called to Alyssa. They had so much to overcome.
 Do you love him?The voice was so pure and confident, it took Alyssa a moment to recognize it as her
own. Her angelic nature, the protective, selfless part that had been neglected for so long, stirred and
stretched, waking from its slumber.Does he need your love?
 “What did you feel for these women?” She kept her voice soft, compelling. “When you held them in
your arms and joined your body to theirs, did you feel only lust?”
 “Aye! It was new and intoxicating. I couldn’t get enough.”
 Shame and regret radiated off Sariel. They were uncomfortable emotions, but Alyssa was thrilled with

her ability to sense them. “And what do you feel when you touch me?”
 He considered the question for a long while. His gaze caressed her face and then he looked into the fire.
“I feel more deeply for you than I did for the Daughters of Man.”
 “Then you needn’t be ... afraid.” She hesitated over the word, not wanting to anger him again. “If
tenderness guides your hand, it will hold the beast at bay.”
 “You don’t know that,” he snapped. “You have no idea what I was like back them, how ruthlessly I
pursed my desires.”
 “I know what you’re like now.” She took a step toward him, her need to touch him, to comfort him,
nearly overwhelming. But if she reached for him now, he’d turn away. “I feel only tenderness when you
touch me. I’m not afraid of the beast. We can tame it together.”
 “You’ve never seen the beast, or you’d be terrified.”
 Frustrated by his stubbornness she poked him in the chest. “Then what do you suggest we do? Ignore
these feelings? Deprive ourselves what comfort we can find in this uncertain world?”
 He glanced down at the spot where her finger had collided with his chest. Was he so used to people
bowing and scraping? Did no one stand up to him? She wanted to laugh. Of course they didn’t! He was
prince of the most ancient angelic order. Who would dare rile Prince Sariel?
 “How do you see this ending?” His quiet, thoughtful tone calmed her seething emotions, made her
seriously consider the question.
 “I see the mist forever banished and you standing at my side. Is that so much to expect?”
 “And what becomes of me? Do I sacrifice my immortality and abandon my purpose to grow old at your
side?”
 He was speaking of Gideon and Naomi. She resented his dismissal of the choices they had made.
“Would that be so terrible a fate?”
 “Aye. For me it would be unbearable. I have responsibilities. I protect humanity from an insidious threat,
a threat I and my kind created. Others rely on me. My order must come first.”
 Another complication. She sighed, even as determination surged through her. Anything worth having was
worth the fight. Her battle for Sariel had just begun.
  
 “None within your order are allowed to love?”
 The challenge in her question took Sariel back to his conversation with Gadrayel. The Grigori were
allowed to choose permanent mates so long as they were also Grigori. It was only the Daughters of Man
who were forbidden to them. “You are not Grigori. I don’t honestly know if I’m allowed to love you.”
 She smiled and placed her hand against his chest. “Love doesn’t often wait for permission. I know it
flared within me when our eyes first met. I was surrounded by conflict and confusion, and you drew me

like a star shining in the night.” Her cheeks flushed and she glanced away, but her hand lingered on his
chest. “Aren’t I fanciful all of a sudden?”
 He covered her hand with his, pressing her palm against his heart. “The attraction is mutual. I think you
know that.”
 “When two members of your order wish to be together, what do they do?”
 Her gaze returned to his and Sariel’s heart lurched within his chest. She was so beautiful, so vulnerable,
so willing to trust. The thought of hurting her terrified him. Despite her calm assurance, she would not
survive the beast. “They ask me to bless their union and then they are one.”
 “So bless our union, so we can be one. I’m tired of being alone. Aren’t you?”
  
 * * * * *
 Enos clasped his hand over the woman’s mouth, tired of her shrill screams. She writhed beneath him as
he thrust into her with brutal force. He had mastered this game. It was almost too easy now. They came
to him willingly, eager for the pleasure he promised with gentle kisses and tender caresses. He aroused
them to the point of madness, then revealed his demonic nature with the first thrust of his mighty shaft.
 “Haven’t lost your taste for human flesh, I see.”
 The woman went limp beneath him and Enos ground his teeth. Couldn’t Paimon have waited until he
finished? “Unlike you, I seldom welcome an audience.” Leaving the human sprawled and senseless on his
bed, he turned to confront his uninvited guest. He didn’t bother to dress. Paimon had seen him naked
more times than he cared to remember.
 She gazed with licentious interest at his erect shaft. “Shall I take you in my mouth while you explain why
you’re wasting time between the thighs of a mortal?”
 The thought of having her on her knees before him excited him more than the promise of her kiss. He
grabbed her by the hair and urged her to her knees on the wood planked floor. The act required far less
force than he would have liked. She could at least pretend!
 She closed her fingers around him and slowly slid her hand from the base to the tip. “Why are you
dallying with a human when you have work to do?”
 He jerked back on her hair. She gasped and he thrust into her mouth. “First, I work with you, not for
you.” He pushed deep, punctuating his point. “Second, there have been unforeseen complications.” She
sucked hard and he cried out as pleasure spiked through his groin.Damn it, he would not let her take
control! Pressing her face between his hands he slowed his pace, ignoring the taunting swirl of her
tongue. “Third, I have a surprise for you.”
 She paused, trying to pull back so she could speak. He laughed and thrust deeply. She grasped his hips
and pushed, but he held her firmly, continuing the steady slide into her mouth.
 “You’ll have your answers when I’m finished. You interrupted my pleasure, now satisfy me!” Glaring up
at him, she maintained a tight circle with her lips, but no longer caressed him with her tongue or drew

upon him.
 He pulled out and planted his fists on his hips. “What’s the matter, Paimon? Can you only find pleasure
when you’re in control?”
 “I find pleasure when and where I choose. You will not dictate to me!”
 “Are you sure about that?”
 Her dark eyes narrowed, hostile and glistening. It was so seldom that he held the upper hand. He
intended to savor every moment.
 “What have you learned?” she demanded with her gaze as well as her voice. “I know that smug
expression. Tell me.”
 He laughed. “I’m going to return this mortal to her bed. I want you naked and ready for me when I
return.”
 “Forget the mortal. She’s unconscious. Tell me --”
 He lifted the human in his arms. “Naked and ready for whatever I command.” Her gaze flared at the last
word and Enos laughed again. “Oh, I will command you, Paimon, and you will obey.”
  
 Chapter Ten
  
 Alyssa held her breath, waiting for Sariel to respond to her semi-playful suggestion. She knew he was
tired of being alone. Their passions wouldn’t have flared so brightly had they been content with their
circumstances. They responded to each other with a need born of loneliness and want.
 “I cannot bless my own union,” he mused. “Still there must be someone ...”
 His words trailed away, but Alyssa was pleased. At least he was considering the concept.
 Satisfied for the moment with their progress, she exhaled and digressed. “Who does Rosalind believe
Gadrayel to be?”
 “Her gamekeeper.” Amusement gleamed in his gaze as the firelight caressed his rugged features. “I have
instructed him to only appear to her as such. There is no need to overwhelm her completely.”
 Alyssa tucked a stray curl behind her ear and offered a soft smile. “I think it’s too late for that. Rosalind
is well and truly overwhelmed.” She thought of all she had learned, all Sariel had assisted her in
remembering. “Even I am overwhelmed. I’d like to meet him.”
 “Gadrayel?” She nodded. “Why?” His voice snapped with defensiveness. “I told you he will guard her
with his life.”
 “You also told me he is tempted by her. I would like to meet theman Rosalind ran to for refuge. She is

my ward, after all. If he has an interest in her, I have an interest in him.”
 Sariel clasped his hands behind his back, studying her in thoughtful silence for a moment. “He is with her
now. Speak to him with your angelic voice and he will appear.”
 It was a challenge of sorts, an opportunity to further her spiritual awakening. “Are you coming with me?”
 “Nay. I have another matter to attend.”
 Accepting his response with a nod, Alyssa headed for the solar wing. She eased the door open and
slipped inside the richly appointed bedchamber.
 She’d drawn the bed hangings earlier when Rosalind agreed to lie down. The scene appeared
undisturbed. Late afternoon sunlight filtered through the wooden shutters, casting a golden haze across
the room. If Sariel had commanded the other angel to stand guard, Alyssa had no doubt he was here.
Still she saw nothing, sensed no one.
 Speak to him with your angelic voice and he will appear.
 That was simple enough when you remembered how to use your angelic voice. She sighed audibly.
These things should be natural to her, instinctual, but four hundred years was a long time to wander
through the mist.
 While she’d struggled with her feelings for Sariel, she’d heard her angelic voice. The memory made her
heart flutter and warm tingles danced down her spine. Focusing on the tone, the unique inflection, she
reproduced the sound.
 “Gadrayel. I would like a word with you.” She watched for a glimmer, a spark indicating his location.
 “Do you intentionally change your appearance?” She spun toward the unfamiliar voice. The man -- male
stood nearly as tall as Sariel, but his hair was dark, as were his eyes.
 “Why do you ask?”
 “When I saw you at court your hair was blonde and your eyes were gray.”
 Did her appearance change or had he confused her with someone else? “We met at court?” She
narrowed her gaze on his handsome face. Sariel said he was pretending to be a gamekeeper. Rosalind
wouldn’t accept his role if they had met at court.
 “I saw you at court.” His smile was indolent, yet engaging. “No onesaw me.” A stray sunbeam revealed
the true color of his eyes, the rich green of midsummer leaves.
 “How long has Rosalind been sneaking away to spend time with you?” She shot right to the heart of the
matter.
 “I noticed her spying on me several times before I spoke with her.” He paused and looked at the
enclosed bed. “I would never harm, Lady Rosalind. You understand --”
 “I understand you would have destroyed her had you believed her nature corrupt.” He didn’t object, so
she continued. “I’m thrilled she’s still alive, but why does the debate continue?”

 “What has Sariel told you of her nature?”
 A manipulative half-truth sprang to mind. The words were on the tip of her tongue before she realized
what she was about to do. She bit back the lie and slipped her hands into the pockets of her gown.I
must speak only truth or reality will change . She chose her words with the utmost care. “I asked you
why you’re still here. Why is this decision taking so long?”
 He crossed his arms over his chest. Another smile curved the corners of his mouth. “Some people are
more complicated than others.”
 His answer didn’t please her, but she understood his evasion. Sariel had used the same strategy. They
knew more than they were willing to say, which was probably for the better. Every time she thought
about their harming Rosalind, rash and reckless plots to save her ward formed within her mind. “Is
Rosalind’s life still at risk or is it now a matter of deciding what to do with her?”
 “These are questions for Sariel. Why did he send you to me?”
 Gadrayel lacked the inherent authority that characterized Sariel’s every word and movement, but it was
easy to see what attracted Rosalind to this male. His pleasing appearance and quiet confidence would
appeal to most females. “I wanted to speak with you. Rosalind is my ward and I care about her deeply.
What are her feelings for you?”
 “Rosalind is not a child. She is a young woman experiencing the first stirrings of her carnal nature.”
 “Carnal nature. You Grigori are rather fond of that phrase.”
 “We Grigori invented the phrase.” He slanted her a smile, his eyes sparkling merrily.
 Irritation sparked despite his charm. How could he make light of the topic. “Have you ... compromised
Rosalind?”
 His amusement vanished. “She wanted me to. She did her best to seduce me so I would be compelled
to wed with her.”
 “Because by wedding you she frees herself from me.” Alyssa sighed, defeated by the realization. She
had tried so hard to mentor Rosalind, to teach her and guide her --
 “She loves you very much, milady. You have taught her more than you realize.”
 “Can all Grigori read minds?” She stiffened at the ease with which he analyzed her.
 “I read your expression, not your mind. Sariel alone can see into a person’s memories and hear their
thoughts. I have ... other abilities, but your thoughts are safe with me.”
 “Is my ward?”
 “Until such time as I can lawfully make her mine, I will not touch her.”
 Angels could speak only truth, but the hairs on the back of her neck prickled. There was some hidden
meaning to his words.

  
 * * * * *
 “Thank you for coming, sir.” Waiting for Michael’s corporeal body to finish absorbing Heaven’s light,
Sariel bolted the door to the counting room. When the blinding illumination dimmed, he ventured a glance
at the archangel. Strength and authority emanated from him. Even without his flaming sword Michael was
impressive. “I know your time is precious.”
 “Sir?” One of Michael’s golden eyebrows arched in challenge. “Your order outranks mine. By rights I
should bow to you.”
 “My order is all but abolished and I am imposing on you.”
 Bright golden hair, not unlike Sariel’s own, flowed in distinct waves to Michael’s shoulders. His robe
was pristine white and elaborately embellished with angelic script. “What can I do for you?”
 “Are you aware of Alyssa’s progress?” Sariel moved away from the door. “She has made significant
strides toward combating her web of lies.”
 Michael nodded, his intense gaze assessing. “Such has been reported to me. What is it you wish to
know?”
 “How much longer will she be subjected to her malady and what becomes of her once the trial is over?”
 “None of the Rebel Angels were given a specific period of time to reform.” Michael turned as Sariel
passed him and leaned a hip against the sturdy wooden table. “She is making strides in the right direction,
but she has far to go. You have shared her memories. You understand all of this. What is it you really
want to know?”
 Sariel balked at Michael’s candor. He’d hoped to ease into the subject. “Alyssa and I have developed
feelings for each other. Her unique nature and mine naturally draw us together. I am only forbidden to
mate with the Daughters of Man. Alyssa is an angel. If I take her as my mate, will I in any way
compromise her recovery?”
 Michael folded his hands in front of his face and rubbed his lips with his index fingers. It was an odd, yet
thoughtful pose. Sariel fidgeted as he waited for the answer.
 “I see no reason why developing a relationship with you would compromise her recovery.”
 Joy burst within Sariel, making him want to shout. She was not forbidden! They could be together -- if
he could control the beast.
 He cleared his throat and fought for a calm, neutral tone. “Generally I sanction such unions. Are you
authorized to ... would you consider ...”
 “Are you asking for my blessing?”
 Squaring his shoulders, Sariel met Michael’s gaze directly. “Aye, I am. Will you bless the union of
Alyssa and me?”

 “Contrary to what she may have told you, I don’t want the Rebel Angels to Fall. If your love for Alyssa
makes her stronger, more focused on the Light, then by all means you have my blessing. Sariel, go claim
your bride.”
  
 Chapter Eleven
  
 Sariel wasn’t in the great hall when Alyssa returned. Disconcerted by her conversation with Gadrayel,
she started toward the counting room. Until he couldlawfully make Rosalind his? What had Gadrayel
meant? Did he intend to court Rosalind if ... if Sariel didn’t destroy her first.
 Alyssa’s steps faltered. Sariel couldn’t mean to kill Rosalind. Regardless of the complexities in her
nature, Rosalind was not evil.
 She tapped on the counting room door, surprised to find it bolted. “Sariel?” A moment passed and she
heard the bolt slide releasing the door. She reached for the latch, but the door swung inward and Sariel
filled the threshold. “What are you doing?”
 His mouth parted in a slow, sensual smile, his gaze warm and caressing. “At sundown I will show you.”
 She sighed. Her memory was clearer now than it had been in decades, but no one was making sense.
She was about to question him further, when his head snapped up. He sniffed the air and lifted her out of
his way. His wings unfurled in a blinding flash of golden light and he flew across the great hall.
 Stunned, Alyssa shook away the lingering dazzle and ran after him. He disappeared up the stairs, his
speed accelerating beyond what her eyes could detect. A sharp scream rent the air as Alyssa reached the
top landing. She darted down the corridor toward Rosalind’s bedchamber. Golden light emanated from
the doorway, terrifying in its beauty.
 Rosalind screamed again. Alyssa skid to a halt just inside the threshold, mystified by the scene. Enos and
Sariel battled with flaming swords. Each time the blades connected metal grated and sparks flew into the
air. Gadrayel stood at the foot of the bed, his wings spread wide, sword in hand. Rosalind huddled
against the headboard, pale and terrified.
 Enos lunged, the sulfuric stench of evil swirled in a putrid cloud. Sariel deftly blocked the blow and
slapped the demon with his wing. Enos flew backward, slamming into the wall. Roaring in rage and
frustration, Enos charged again. Sariel brought his weapon up, tearing the sword out of Enos’ hand.
 Alarm twisted through Alyssa and she swung toward the bed. Gadrayel watched the fight, poised to
assist if he was needed. Completely absorbed by the fray, he didn’t notice a shadow undulate on the
other side of the bed, the faintest hint of a form.
 Alyssa advanced, studying the shadow. The stench of evil intensified. Her spine burned and her eyes
stung. Alyssa leapt into the air, colliding with the entity as it solidified. Her momentum drove the creature
backward and they landed on the floor beside the bed.
 Long silver hair tangled about the creature’s face. Alyssa trembled.Please God, nay! Not Lailah.

 The demon shrieked and bucked, clawing at Alyssa’s forearms as she straddled its chest. If Lailah had
Fallen, she must be destroyed. Whoever this creature was, it had tried to harm Rosalind. For that alone,
it would pay the price! Fierce protectiveness surged through Alyssa. She wrestled the demon’s arms
over its head and pinned them against the floor with her knees.
 Alyssa’s hand trembled as she brushed the hair away from the demon’s face.Let it be anyone but
Lailah. A sob caught in Alyssa’s throat. The demon’s features were delicate, beautiful ... familiar.
 “Nay!” Alyssa cried, grief slicing through her like a blade.
 The demon opened its eyes and Alyssa gasped. Endlessly black and soulless, the creature stared back
at her. “Enos told me he’d found you both. I didn’t believe him.”
 “Paimon?”
 “It’s been a long time.” Her glistening eyes narrowed. She laughed and disintegrating into vapor.
 Panting harshly, Alyssa struggled to her feet, stunned and weak with relief. It hadn’t been Lailah. But
where was Lailah?
 Sariel stood in the middle of the room, sword still in hand, but his opponent had fled as well.
 Gadrayel opened his fist and his sword disappeared. He took two steps toward the bed, reaching for
Rosalind. She screamed and scurried off the other side. Huddling in the corner, she crossed her arms
over her chest, her terrified gaze darting from one angel to the next. “Are there no humans in all of
Monthamn?” Her voice was sharp and shrill.
 Alyssa moved toward the frightened girl and felt her wings flutter.Her wings? Glancing over her
shoulder, her breath escaped in a sudden rush. When had she unfurled her wings? How? The stinging
pain, her sudden speed, without thought or effort, she had done what came naturally -- protected her
loved one.
 Visualizing the transformation, Alyssa managed to retract her wings. She glanced at Gadrayel. His chest
heaved and his eyes gleamed, but he had also concealed his wings.
 “Rosalind,no one in this room is human.” Heaven’s light emanated from Sariel. His wings rippled
gracefully and his hair glistened. He opened his hand, dispersing his sword, but he seemed in no hurry to
repress his true nature. “We are here to protect you.”
 Alyssa’s heart lurched at his words. Why would he protect Rosalind if he believed she was evil? He
could speak only truth. Should this give her hope?
 “Why do they want me?” Rosalind trembled visibly, her eyes wide and unblinking. “What have I done?”
 “I think it’s time we found out.” Sariel extended his hand toward Rosalind. Alyssa hadn’t felt the
compulsion in his words, but Rosalind responded without hesitation. Placing her hand in his, Rosalind
glanced again and again toward Gadrayel.
 “Perhaps you should introduce yourself,” Alyssa suggested.

 Cautiously approaching, Gadrayel looked to Sariel for permission before speaking to Rosalind. “I am
Gadrayel of the Angelic Order of Grigori. Prince Sariel dispatched me to observe you, to judge your
nature. I have failed in my mission. I don’t understand what I sense in you, but it is imperative that we
figure it out.”
 “I thought angels couldn’t lie.” Her voice was stronger now, steadier. “You intentionally misrepresented
yourself. Is that not the same thing?”
 “I’ve worked diligently as your gamekeeper. What have I misrepresented?”
 Rosalind narrowed her eyes, but Alyssa saw a rosy flush climb along her neck. The attraction between
the two was nearly palpable.
 “The female demon,” Sariel drew her attention, “you knew her by name.”
 Alyssa nodded. “But her name is all I recall. I sense that I have known her since before she Fell, but I
cannot remember anything beyond her name.”
 “She looked like Lailah, or like Lailah would if she were evil.” Rosalind shuddered and pushed her hair
out of her face.
 Sariel’s gaze settled on Alyssa. His expression promised a more lengthy conversation regarding Paimon,
but he directed Rosalind back the issue at hand. “Generally I give someone the opportunity to share their
memories verbally before I invade their mind. I’m afraid we’ve run out of time for that consideration. I
need to search the images in your memory and see if I can determine why Enos and Paimon are
interested in you.”
 “I can’t believe he’s a demon. I danced with him at court.”
 Suddenly struck by the complete inappropriateness of the situation, Alyssa snatched Rosalind’s dressing
gown from the foot of the bed. “This is upsetting enough. Would you two please turn around.” Both
males chuckled, but did as she asked. After helping Rosalind into the garment, Alyssa told Sariel to
continue.
 A smile tugged at the corners of his mouth, but his gaze gleamed, revealing the seriousness of the
subject. “Enos has learned how to suppress his demonic nature so well he can effortlessly move among
mortals. It is one of the things that makes him so dangerous.”
 “I knew there was something odd about him.” Rosalind buried her hands in the pockets of her dressing
gown. She looked so young, so vulnerable. Alyssa wanted to hug her, shelter her. “I felt it the first time
he touched me.”
 “More proof that you are not a mere mortal.” Sariel told her. “Most humans would have no idea he was
anything other than what he appeared.”
 “Would you be more comfortable if we moved into the antechamber?” Alyssa asked, keeping her tone
casual and light.
 “Nay.” Rosalind looked at Sariel. “What do you want to do to me?”
 His smile was meant to soothe, no doubt, but his height and commanding features made the expression

almost predatory. He still hadn’t retracted his wings. Was he preparing Rosalind to accept the fact that
she wasn’t human? Or was he simply unwilling to deny his true nature?
 “I will cast you into a deep sleep and search for the information I need. If the memories don’t seem to
upset you, I’ll simply withdraw. If you are frightened by what I discover, I’ll suppress the memories
before I severe the link.”
 Nodding absently, Rosalind glanced at Alyssa. “When Lord Diadem spoke with me at court, his interest
seemed different than all the others. That’s why I avoided him. His questions were odd. They made me
uncomfortable. It was as if he were not interested in me so much as ... I don’t know how to explain it.”
 “What did he want to know?” Alyssa asked.
 “He approached me without an introduction, so his first few questions confirmed my identity.”
 That made no sense to Alyssa. Often an angel’s abilities grew stronger when they Fell. Demons
frequently used the concept to tempt angels away from the Light. Why would he have approached her if
he wasn’t sure who she was? “What did he ask after he was certain of your identity?”
 “Mostly questions about my grandmother. I didn’t understand how he could have known her. I didn’t
think he was that much older than I.” She rubbed her arms through the sleeves of her dressing gown. A
subtle tremor shook her body. “But if he is one of you, he --”
 “Enos is not one ofus ,” Sariel objected vehemently. “Never let his appearance deceive you. Enos is
Fallen. What specifically did he wish to know?”
 “How many times Gram had wed. How many children she’d borne. When and how she died.
Everything.”
 “He asked all of this about your grandmother? The woman who painted the frescoes in the parish
church?” Sariel rubbed his chin absorbed in contemplation.
 “Aye.” She fiddled with the belt on her dressing gown, her head bowed, her shoulders slumped. “He
couldn’t have known. I wasn’t supposed to know.”
 Her voice barely reached Alyssa’s ears. She rested her hand on the middle of Rosalind’s back and the
girl started. “What weren’t you supposed to know?”
 “My grandmother was taken against her will shortly after she wed my grandfather. Grandmother swears
that she was already increasing when the attack took place, but there are those who believe my mother
was a product of the violation.”
 A violent chill shook Alyssa. She looked at Sariel. Could this be the answer? Had Lady Catherine been
ravished by a Grigori?
 “Thank you for sharing this, Rosalind.” Sariel furled his wings and softened his tone. “It will help me
greatly when I begin my search.”
 “Can ... Would it be all right if Ray held me while --”
 Gadrayel didn’t let her finish. He swept her into his arms and sat on the edge of the bed, cradling her

against his chest. She clung to him, obviously comfortable in his embrace. Alyssa’s heart ached for the
same sort of comfort, but Sariel was bound by a higher calling.
 Sariel knelt beside the bed and held out his hand. “When you’re ready, place your hand in mine.”
 Rosalind pressed her face against Gadrayel’s chest and hesitantly took Sariel’s hand. Gadrayel rocked
her gently, whispering into her ear. Alyssa watched in silence, torn between trepidation and tenderness.
Rosalind’s future would be determined in the next few minutes.
 Heaven’s light radiated from Sariel, expanding until it encompassed Rosalind and Gadrayel. Rosalind
moaned, tossing restlessly. The light intensified. Gadrayel’s lips moved in silent prayer, his eyes squeezed
shut.
 Afraid to distract them, but too anxious to stand still, Alyssa crept to the window and eased open one
side of the shutters. Twilight had descended beyond the window, painting the castle compound with a
purple haze. Countless humans went about their business, oblivious to the spiritual warfare raging in their
midst. At some other time, Alyssa might have found the thought amusing. Right now she felt only dread.
 Rosalind cried out, drawing Alyssa’s attention back to the bed. Sariel released her hand, speaking
ancient words as he passed his hands over Rosalind’s head. Alyssa couldn’t understand what he said,
but the rhythm of his speech was familiar. She used to know this language. There was so much she used
to know.
 Gadrayel stood and placed Rosalind on the bed, then they joined Alyssa at the window.
 “Is she all right?”
 “She’ll sleep through the night.” Sariel sounded distracted, thoughtful.
 “What were you able to learn?” Gadrayel asked.
 “I’m not sure. The images are skewed by a child’s perception. I’m still trying to unravel the intricacies.”
 Alyssa sensed his resistance. He understood far more than he was saying. “Did you see her father?”
 “Aye.” He heaved a sigh and looked out into the purple twilight.
 “Who was he?” Direct questions were harder to avoid. Alyssa had tired of his evasiveness long ago. She
needed to know once and for all if Rosalind was a Nephilim.
 “His name was Balam.”
 “Balam?” Gadrayel gasped. “But she is not a Nephilim. I have sensed the nature of a Nephilim
thousands of times and Rosalind is --”
 “Unique.” Sariel agreed.
 “Who is Balam?”
 Sariel turned toward her, leaning his shoulder against the window frame. The setting sun cast eerie
shadows across his features, making him look sinister. Or perhaps it was just his gloomy mood.

 “Balam was one of our best. Strong, dependable, focused. I dispatched him on a mission and he never
returned. After years of futile searching, I had no choice but to accept that he had Fallen.”
 “That’s not possible. Lord Baldwin of Monthamn is interred with his wife beneath the parish church.”
 “I’ve heard it said that an angel can surrender their immortality to avoid Falling. I’ve never known
anyone who did so, but I’ve heard it can be done.”
 “That would explain why we never sensed Balam’s Fall,” Gadrayel said. “If he surrendered without
succumbing to corruption, he would have disappeared.”
 They spoke in hushed, urgent tones. Alyssa grew more anxious with every word they uttered. They
shared information, but she was no less confused. What did it all mean? If an angel surrendered its
immortality, what became of it? Where did it go? What did --
 “Humans join our realm when they leave their mortal bodies. Our reality is what they think of as the
afterlife.” Sariel answered her unspoken question.
 “Then what became of Balam? What becomes of the Nephilim you destroy?”
 “That’s two different questions. If Balam was about to Fall and he surrendered his immortality instead,
his essence, his energy would have simply dispersed.”
 “But Gideon became mortal when he surrendered his immortality,” Alyssa said.
 “Gideon repented and was transformed. Balam simply surrendered.”
 “How sad.” She glanced at the bed where Rosalind slept. They were speaking of her father. “He no
longer exists in any reality?”
 “If Balam was about to Fall,” Gadrayel put in, “he escaped an eternity of damnation. I say well done.”
 She still didn’t understand. Why were they being so evasive? All of these facts still danced around the
real issue -- Rosalind! “This doesn’t explain what you sense in Rosalind. Is she or is she not a Nephilim?”
 “If her father were Grigori and her mother --”
 “She isnot a Nephilim. Her nature is far more complicated.” Gadrayel interrupted, his eyes gleaming
dangerously.
 Sariel chuckled. “I agree. She is not a Nephilim. I don’t think there is a term for what she is.”
 Alyssa could stand the tension no longer. She stepped in front of Sariel and grabbed his upper arms.
Resisting the urge to shake him, she looked deeply into his eyes. “Tell me exactly what you saw. Must
Rosalind be destroyed?”
  
 Chapter Twelve

  
 Sariel understood Alyssa’s frustration, but he was not intentionally skirting the facts. What he’d sensed
within Rosalind was confusing and convoluted. “When Lady Catherine spoke of her attack, she was lying
about the child. Rosalind sensed it then, even as young as she was. Rosalind’s motherwas the result of
Lady Catherine’s ravishment.”
 “Did Lady Catherine know her attacker?”
 “That’s not at all clear. Lady Catherine spoke of the incident with grief and regret. Rosalind’s deep
affection for her grandmother made her especially intuitive, but Lady Catherine never explained the
specifics of the attack.”
 “Rosalind said she wasn’t supposed to know about it. How did she find out?”
 “She came upon her grandmother weeping in the garden one afternoon. Lady Catherine reluctantly
shared the tale. She had promised her husband she would never speak of it. He threatened to lock her in
a convent if she ever mentioned what happened.”
 Alyssa shook her head, her brow furrowed thoughtfully. “Then Rosalind’s mother had no idea she was
not Lord Monthamn’s child.”
 “Correct.”
 “How does this change Rosalind’s nature? What am I not understanding?” Fatigue and worry shadowed
Alyssa’s gaze.
 He wanted to take her in his arms and comfort her, but nothing he could say would make this easier for
her to accept. “Rosalind’s mother was a Nephilim.” He paused while that fact sank in. “I believe Lady
Catherine succumbed to the seduction or was taken against her will by a Grigori. Balam was not
dispatched to judge Rosalind’s mother, but obviously at some point their paths crossed and attraction
erupted. He spent thirteen years at her side and surrendered his immortality when she was infected by the
Black Death.”
 “Then Rosalind is the child of an angel and a Nephilim?” Alyssa glanced toward the bed. “She is more
angel than human.”
 “Which is why her nature is so confusing to us.” He waited for her to look at him before he continued.
“Very few Nephilim are capable of reproducing. To my knowledge one has never before begat a child
with an angel.”
 Alyssa shook her head, rubbing her eyes with her fingertips. “Is her angelic nature pure? Does this
conclude your mission?”
 “I sense Balam’s strength and determination. That portion of her nature is pure. Her human nature is
complex, as human natures always are, but she is primarily good.”
 “What about the other angel, her grandfather?”
 Sariel sighed. Alyssa was too perceptive for her own good. He had hoped to avoid attempting to explain
what he sensed. “That portion of Rosalind’s nature is well hidden. As of right now, she has it completely

suppressed, but the right set of circumstances, could shift the balance within her.”
 “That’s true of everyone, be they angel or mortal.” Her lovely features tensed with dread. Fear lit her
bright blue eyes. “Even demons occasionally have a kind thought. We are all a blending of light and
darkness.”
 Sariel smiled, wanting this business behind them once and for all. “Which is why my judgment is to let
her live, under strict supervision.”
 Alyssa’s hand flew to her chest and she released and audible sigh. “Oh, thank God!” Her obvious relief
was followed almost immediately by a barrage of questions. “How will we ever make her understand all
this? I can scarcely comprehend it myself. Is Rosalind immortal? Can she produce offspring? Will her
offspring be at risk?”
 “Is she forbidden to me?”
 Gadrayel’s softly spoken question snapped Sariel’s attention to his friend and dragged a soft gasp from
Alyssa. If Alyssa was not forbidden to him, how could Rosalind be forbidden to Gadrayel? Both females
were a unique blinding of angelic and carnal natures.
 “Does she love you?” He watched Gadrayel’s expression closely as he waited for the answer.
 He glanced at Alyssa before returning his gaze to Sariel’s face. “She loves Ray. She doesn’t know me.”
 “Then spend time with her as Gadrayel and see how she responds.” Gadrayel’s mouth parted in a
beaming smile. Sariel felt compelled to add, “Just so we’re perfectly clear, you do not yet have my
blessing.”
 Gadrayel nodded. “I understand.”
 Sariel reached for Alyssa’s hand but she stepped back.
 “What about Enos and Paimon? What if they come for her again?”
 “Monthamn Castle is surrounded by a legion of Michael’s warriors. He has made them available to me
until this business with Enos is concluded.”
 Her eyes widened and she looked out the window as if she expected to see them circling in the sky.
“When did this come about?”
 “Let’s retire to a more comfortable chamber and I’ll explain.” She slipped her hand into his and they
started across the room. “Gadrayel, let her sleep.”
 “Aye, sir.” Gadrayel answered immediately, but Sariel heard amusement in his tone.
  
 Alyssa followed Sariel to her bedchamber and he asked that she await him there. The request confused
her, but she didn’t question his intentions. Her mind whirled with everything she’d learned and all that
remained unanswered.

 Rosalind was safe, at least from the Grigori.
 Alyssa wrapped the thought around herself like a fur-lined cloak, absorbing the comfort and security.
Sariel was no longer her enemy. They could face Enos and Paimon united.
 Paimon. The name sparked disjointed images within Alyssa’s mind. Who was this demon who looked
so much like Lailah? What had she wanted with Rosalind?
 Alyssa stoked the fire as she waited for Sariel’s return. When had he spoken with Michael? And why
had Sariel chosen such an intimate setting for his conversation with her? He’d made his feelings for her
more than obvious, so why torment her with what could never be?
 A firm rap came upon the door. Alyssa crossed the room and pulled the door open.
 “Sorry. My hands were full.” Sariel smiled and carried the serving tray into the bedchamber. He must
have kicked the door with the toe of his boot.
 “We are going to dine here?” She eyed the contents of the tray.
 “Unless you have some objection.”
 Slipping her hands inside her cotehardie and into the pockets of her undergown, Alyssa hesitated.
Nothing appealed to her more than being alone with Sariel, taking their meals in the privacy of her
chamber. She wanted to share her bed, her body, her life with him, but he had made her understand why
it was impossible.
 “I think it’s best if we’re not alone together,” she said quietly.
 He moved to the small wooden table against the wall and set the tray upon it. “I promise I’ll keep the
table between us at all times. You have nothing to fear from me.”
 She wasn’t the one resisting their attraction. “Must I make the same promise?”
 He chuckled and returned to close and bolt the door. His last action surprised her again. Why would he
want the door bolted? Flutters erupted in her belly, making her smile.
 “Come, sit with me. Let’s share some wine.”
 Joining him at the table, she accepted the cup he passed to her. Candlelight reflected off his tawny hair
and accented the golden speckles in his green eyes. He appeared relaxed, comfortable, remarkably at
ease.
 His apparent nonchalance only made her more uncomfortable.
 “What do you remember about Paimon?” he asked casually.
 “Just her name.” She took a sip of wine, searching her memory. “I know our acquaintance is long and
close, but the details are lost to me. Do you wish to search my memories for information about her?”
 “Not tonight.” He flashed a devastating smile. The flutters in her belly intensified. “We are protected. We
can relax. Tomorrow is soon enough to plan our strategy.”

 The tray rested between them, Alyssa glanced down at the contents. Bread, cheese, fresh apple wedges
and the pitcher from which he’d poured the wine.
 “Are you hungry?”
 She was ravenous, but not for food. Nodding absently, she picked up a slice of apple and nibbled.
“When did you speak with Michael? Did he mention me?”
 “Michael had just left the counting room when you arrived, and you were the main topic of our
conversation.”
 “I see.” She reached again for her wine.
 “He is aware of the progress you’re making.”
 Her hand trembled as she set down the cup. Was she making progress? Everything was still so
confused. “And is he pleased?”
 “Michael is not your judge. He wouldn’t welcome the description, but he is basically a messenger. Your
rebellion is against God and His creation. It is with the Creator you must reconcile.”
 “What if I don’t know how?” She wrapped both hands around her cup, staring into its murky depths.
Her soul ached, empty and battle-scarred. “My mind is so muddled I can barely remember the incident
that set me upon this path. I only know I am weary of the conflict. I want order within my mind and
peace within my heart.”
 “I can help you remember and wanting to reconcile is the biggest step of all.”
 “I do want to reconcile. I want this conflict ended.” She set her cup aside, knowing she should keep
silent, but unable to stay the words. “And I want you.”
 Despite his promise not to touch her, he reached across the table and stroked her check. “I asked
Michael if a union between you and I would in anyway compromise your recovery.”
 Her heart missed a beat and she caught his hand, pressing his fingers against her face. “What did he
say?”
 “He gave us his blessing.”
 Tears blurred her vision. She released his hand and stood so quickly her chair toppled over. If he were
teasing her, she would kill him. This was beyond cruel. She studied his expression, searching for any hint
of insincerity.
 “You asked Michael if we could join together?” She whispered the words, terrified her voice would
break the spell or awaken her from the dream. “What about ... Are you no longer afraid?”
 He stood and moved around the table. His hands stayed at his side. “I’m terrified. I won’t pretend there
isn’t risk in what we want. But I love you, Alyssa. That has to account for something.”
 “You love me?” She covered her face with her hands, no longer able to suppress her tears. His arms

closed around her, molding her body to his.
 “I thought this would make you happy. I thought it was what we both wanted.”
 “I want nothing more!” She lowered her hands to his chest, trembling in his arms. “But I know what this
could cost you. I want your happiness.”
 “We’ll tame the beast together. Isn’t that what you said?”
 “Aye. Together.” She pressed her hands to his face and pushed to her toes. Even balancing on the balls
of her feet, she couldn’t reach his mouth.
 He grinned, obviously knowing what she wanted. “You’ve spent many years in the realm of man. Do
you require some sort of ceremony to make this real to you?”
 “I require a private ceremony. You and me, in that bed together.”
  
 Chapter Thirteen
  
 Sariel swept her into his arms and carried her to bed. When she knelt upon the high mattress, it put their
faces on a level. He smiled into her eyes but still refused to kiss her. “We must at least speak words, or I
will feel cheated.”
 She returned his smile, resting her hands on his shoulders. “I know little of these matters. Say whatever
you like. Just say it quickly.”
 He chuckled at her enthusiasm. “I will love you with my heart, my mind, and my body. I will guard you
with my power and my strength. I will amuse you as well as I am able. I vow to be yours alone.”
 Her lips trembled and tears sparkled in her eyes. “I will love you with my heart, my mind, and my body.
I will revel in your strength. I will protect you with my powers.” She laughed. A single tear escaped the
corner of one eye. “As soon as I remember what those powers are. I’m much more amusing than you, so
I’ll make you smile as often as I possibly can. I dedicate my life to making you happy. I vow to be yours
alone.”
 Their mouths met and melded, sealing their vows with a passionate kiss. He tilted his head, fitting his lips
more securely to hers as his tongue eased past her teeth. She welcomed him, stroked him, shared her
breath and her heat.
 They communicated in a language older than the spoken word, more elemental than dedications, more
meaningful than promises. He touched her face, sliding his fingertips along her cheek and into her hair.
She reached for the laces at the front of his tunic, obviously anxious to begin.
 Understanding her urgency, Sariel tugged his tunic off over his head and bent to remove his boots. When
he turned back to the bed, Alyssa wore only her sheer chemise and a welcoming smile. Desire pounded
through his body, speeding his pulse and heating his blood. He waited for the demand of his dark nature
to surge, to try and take control.

 Tenderness softened her expression, affection illuminated her gaze. He couldn’t hurt her. He couldnever
hurt her. Their love held the monster at bay.
 Cupping her cheek with one hand, he traced her features with the other. “You are so beautiful. My entire
body aches just looking at you.”
 She smiled. “You’re welcome to do more than look. I certainly intend to.”
 Her hands stroked over his chest and squeezed his shoulders, then trailed down along his arms, lightly
abrading his skin with her nails. He shivered. Her teasing touch sent tingles skittering down his spine.
 She eased off the bed and unlaced his hose. Her warm hands brushed his hips and thighs as she rid him
of his garments. There was no hesitation in her touch, no maidenly demureness. She knew what she
wanted and wasn’t afraid to take it. Her boldness thrilled him more than anything he could remember,
and escalated his desire to the point of pain.
 It had been so long! Nay, it had never been like this before.
 With her hands on his hips she turned him toward the bed and pushed against him until he sat. “You
tasted my passion in the forest. Now it’s my turn to devour you.”
 Sariel groaned at her brazen promise, blood thundered through his groin. She knelt before him and
circled his shaft with her hand.
 “Amuse yourself quickly.” He panted. “I cannot allow this for long.”
 She laughed and guided his hands to the bed on either side of his hips. “You’re notallowing anything,
Prince Sariel. Your body is mine to do with as I will. You said so in your vow.”
 Easing his legs apart, she scooted between them and lowered her mouth. His head dropped back on his
shoulders and a long, low groan escaped his throat. Hot, wet heat enveloped him. He trembled, his legs
flexed as she pleasured him with her mouth. She slid up and down his shaft, circling his sensitive crest at
the apex of each gliding stroke.
 Sucking firmly, she drew him deeper, her tongue explored, tormented. Her hand caressed his balls. They
tightened, pulling up close against his body.
 “I don’t want to ...”
 She flicked his tip with her tongue and moved faster, tightening her lips around his pulsing length. He was
beyond thought, but not beyond caring. “Stop now or I’ll --”
 Sucking firmly, she demanded his release. He cried out and drove deep, wave after wave of scalding
pleasure crashing down upon him.
  
 Alyssa raised her head and smiled into his eyes. His willingness to surrender control, even momentarily
thrilled her more than he realized. Powerful, ancient, Prince Sariel had yielded his will to her. “Now we
are even. You took me, and I took you. Now we can enjoy each other.”

 He laughed. “You don’t think I enjoyed that?”
 She crawled onto his lap, straddling his hips. “Probably as much as I enjoyed what you did in the
forest.”
 Grinning with obvious intent, he lifted her and turned, laying her back across the bed. “You like having
my mouth on you?”
 She arched her brow. “Did you like having my mouth on you?”
 “More than you can imagine,” he whispered, his gaze suddenly intensifying.
 Chuckling low in her throat she caught a strand of his hair and gave it a playful tug. “Don’t be too sure of
that. I have a very vivid imagination.”
 “I see.” His heated gaze caressed her body, making her quiver. “Are you challenging me to take you in a
way you’ve never imagined?”
 “Not tonight. We have the rest of eternity to shock and thrill each other.”
 “Shock and thrill?” He grinned. “I like the sound of that.”
 He stretched out beside her on his side and slipped his arm beneath her neck. Cupping her breast with
his other hand, he kissed her slowly, thoroughly. She was surprised at first, afraid he’d be put off by the
taste of himself in her mouth. His tongue moved boldly, aggressively.
 “It thrills me to know you love me enough to pleasure me in that way.” He whispered the words against
her damp lips, obviously reading her thoughts. “Now, part your thighs. I want to feel your pleasure.”
 She didn’t hesitate. Bending her knees she opened herself to his touch, eager for the promised release.
Feeling him move in her mouth had already flooded her with excitement. He groaned when his fingers
encountered her slick folds.
 “You’re so wet.”
 “I want you.” The words were so inadequate compared to the emotions raging through her. “I feel like
I’ve wanted you forever.”
 His mouth returned to hers as his fingers parted her folds. She waited for the blissful pressure of his
finger pushing into her body. He didn’t move. Cool air wafted against her damp flesh, accenting the heat.
She whimpered.
 He waited.
 “Please,” she gasped out the word against his mouth.
 “Please touch me? Please fill me? Or please taste me?”
 “Aye, please.”

 Her throaty chuckle ended in a gasp as he rubbed his thumb over her ultra-sensitive nub. Her hips
jerked, but he moved with her, maintaining the rhythmic pressure. Control. Pleasure came when she
surrendered. He’d yielded to her, now she must yield to him. Forcing her hips to still, she relaxed her
inner muscles and allowed him to control the tension building inside of her.
 She kissed him with all the love burning in her heart, expressed her affection with each stroke of her
tongue. His thumb pressed down, stopping a hairsbreadth from pain. She gasped. Her inner muscles
contracted, desperate for something to squeeze.
 “Fill me?” He challenged.
 “Aye!”
 He pushed two fingers into her and Alyssa went wild. Arching and bucking, she imagined him there,
pretended the sweet penetration of his fingers was something far more substantial.
 She flew toward orgasm. Her back bowed and a soft keening sound escaped her throat. He withdrew
his fingers and the pleasure receded, leaving her weak and shaken.
 “Taste you?”
 “Nay. Fill me. Fill me now!” She had waited too long; she needed him too desperately to withstand
these teasing games. “Please, Sariel, I ache, I burn. I need you deep inside me.”
 He moved over her. She parted her legs, making room for his big body. Tenderness and passion
combined in his bright gaze. “I don’t want to hurt you.”
 “You won’t hurt me. I’m stronger than you know.”
 Kneeling between her thighs, he slipped his hands beneath her bottom and raised her hips. Anticipation
twisted through her, compounding the tension already threatening to snap her in two. He pushed into her
with slow, steady pressure. Alyssa whimpered.
 He immediately stilled. “Am I hurting you?”
 “Nay,” she assured him. “I’ve never felt more complete.”
 A violent tremor passed through him. He arched over her, thrusting deep as he claimed her mouth. She
could hardly breathe, but it didn’t matter. It felt wonderful. She needed him there, in her body, in her
mouth, in her heart. She raised her legs high against his sides and returned his kiss with abandon.
 Each deep, forceful thrust drove her higher. She opened her mind, revealing the depths of her feelings,
the strength of her love. He gasped. Heat inundated her senses and Alyssa understood. These were his
feelings, his desire for her. He was stimulating her with his passion, binding them together with mutual
need.
 They melded.
 They bonded.
 They joined.

 Harder and faster, they surrendered to each other. Alyssa arched. Sariel thrust deep, clasping her to him
as they shook with the force of their simultaneous release.
  
 Chapter Fourteen
  
 For the next three days Alyssa spent her nights in Sariel’s arms and her days attempting to answer
Rosalind’s myriad questions.
 “I don’t know.” This was the sixth time Alyssa had repeated the answer.
 “How can you not know?” Rosalind’s dark eyebrows drew together in a frown. “If Sariel is as powerful
as Ray says, he must know if I’m immortal.”
 “I’m not avoiding your questions. According to what the Grigori believed, you should not exist.” That
quieted her for a blissful moment.
 “Ray is immortal. How can he and I have any kind of a life together if I grow old, while he remains
unchanged?”
 Alyssa didn’t miss the sudden wistfulness in Rosalind’s tone. “Is that what you want, to build a life with
Gadrayel?”
 “Gadrayel.” Rosalind pushed her plate aside. They sat in the great hall breaking their fast when the girl’s
questions erupted. “It’s such a silly name. He will always be Ray to me.”
 Alyssa was about to rephrase her question when the doors at the far end of the hall burst open. Sariel
stormed in; Gadrayel and three other males followed in his wake. None were currently revealing their
wings or wielding flaming swords, but all five were angels. Alyssa had no doubt.
 “What’s this about?” Rosalind whispered, moving closer to Alyssa.
 “I believe we’re about to find out.” Alyssa scooted back the bench and stood.
 “They have Lailah,” Sariel informed them without preamble.
 “What?” Icy fingers of dread stroked down her spine. “How do you know?”
 He held out a scrap of parchment. Alyssa recognized the symbols as angelic script, but she couldn’t
decipher them. Her heart pounded within her breast and her hand shook so badly the symbols blurred
before her eyes.
 “They are asking for an exchange.” His gaze darted toward Rosalind.
 “Nay!” Alyssa stepped in front of her ward. “How do we even know they truly have Lailah?”
 Sariel turned the parchment over. The backside was smeared with blood. Alyssa touched the brownish

stain and Lailah’s terrified image sprang to life within her mind.
 She shoved the parchment back into his hands and wrapped her arm around Rosalind’s shoulders.
“How is the exchange supposed to be conducted? Does the message reveal where they are?”
 Rosalind gasped, twisting away from Alyssa. “Lailah’s life is more valuable than mine?”
 “She didn’t say that,” Sariel defended.
 “I didn’t even think of accepting the exchange.” Alyssa shook her head. Would Rosalind always think
the worst of her?
 “It says another message will arrive before nightfall and we should be prepared to travel when the
message appears.”
 “Appears? There was no messenger?” Rosalind asked.
 “No visible messenger,” Gadrayel stated. His gaze moved from Alyssa to Rosalind and back again. “We
don’t have a lot of time to construct a strategy. What should we do?”
 “Learn all we can about Paimon.” Sariel unfastened his mantle and tossed it over the back of a nearby
chair.
 Alyssa shuddered. He meant another memory regression and she was still reeling from the first
encounter. “Why was Rosalind able to sleep while you searched her memories, but I relived mine?”
 “The process is different. Rosalind’s memories are intact. I simply sifted through information stored
within her mind. Your memories must be triggered, uncovered.”
 Dreading another waking nightmare, Alyssa braced herself for the emotional turmoil. The lives of two of
the people she loved most were at stake. She would do what must be done, but she didn’t have to like it.
 Sariel took her hand and led her to the counting room. The three angels Alyssa didn’t recognize stayed
by the main entrance. Rosalind and Gadrayel stopped just outside the counting room door, offering
Alyssa privacy for the unpleasant task.
 Leaning against the sturdy wooden table, Sariel pulled Alyssa into his arms. “Try and relax. Let me guide
you.”
 She closed her eyes and rested her forehead against his chest. “The memories will be older than the
hillside scene. I knew Paimon before she Fell.”
 “Are you certain she Fell before Michael disbursed the Rebel Angels?”
 “I’m not sure of anything.” She sounded as weary as she felt.
 “Was she part of the Great Rebellion?”
 She glanced up at him, wanting only to have this finished, so they could devise a plan. Every passing
moment increased the danger to her sister. The demons must keep her alive if they truly intended to
exchange her for Rosalind, but that wouldn’t keep them from tormenting Lailah.

 “I don’t know.”
 He caressed her cheek with his fingers, then pulled her snug against his chest. Alyssa molded her body
against his, listening to the steady rhythm of his heartbeat. Closing her eyes, she felt Sariel gently insinuate
himself into her mind.
 Mist swirled around them. She clung to him, physically and mentally. He sent a wave of tingling warmth
through her body, relaxing her, soothing her.
 Laughter erupted in the mist, distant, muffled. The gurgle of water tumbling over a rocky riverbed guided
them through the mist. Light emerged, a golden sliver infiltrating the endless gray.
 They stepped out into a sunlit meadow, dotted with wildflowers. A crystal blue brook dissected the
clearing and two females sat on the grassy bank, dangling their feet in the water. Their silvery hair flowed
in waves to the grass on which they sat. Alyssa thought she was viewing Lailah and Paimon, until one
figure turned and she saw her own features and bright blue eyes.
 “I can change my appearance,” Alyssa whispered.
 Sariel chuckled. “They can’t hear you, love. They are memories.”
 “Gadrayel asked me if I did it intentionally. I wasn’t sure what he meant.”
 “When reality adjusts to compensate for your lies, apparently your appearance is part of what changes.”
 That made sense. As much as any of this made sense.
 Another peal of laughter drew Alyssa’s attention to the brook. A figure emerged from the trees on the
other side of the water. Paimon strolled toward them, her fingertips skimming each flower she passed. A
warm breeze fanned out her hair and her dark eyes gleamed in the midday sun.
 “Where have you been?” Lailah asked rather sharply. “You missed morning lessons -- again.”
 Paimon shrugged, her mouth curving into a secretive smile. “I’ve found someone far more interesting
than our instructor.”
 “You’ve been with that cherub again.” Alyssa recognized her own voice, though her image faced
Paimon.
 “Ambrose is no mere cherub. He is Prince of the Order of Cherubim.”
 The image spun on ahead, the conversation accelerated to a rate that should have been indiscernible.
Still Alyssa understood every word. Other scenes, other images swirled together as the mist rolled away.
 She felt Sariel release his hold on her mind. It took her a moment longer to separate herself from the
barrage of information. Her mind struggled to order all the new memories. “She wasn’t there on the
hillside that day, but she had become a disciple of Ambrose.”
 “Go on.”

 “Lailah is my sister as Enos was your brother. Paimon was created not long after us and she envied our
connection, the bond we shared.”
 “Angels are frequently created in pairs. Did Paimon not have a sister?”
 “Not that I remember. Lailah and I tried to include her in our activities, but that wasn’t what Paimon
wanted. She wanted Lailah to abandon me.”
 “Did she introduced you to Ambrose, the leader of the Rebel Angels?”
 “I’m not sure any of us considered Ambrose our leader, but aye, Paimon introduced him to us.”
 So many of the images were still fragmented. She sighed in frustration. Never before had her inability
been more of a hindrance.
 “Your memories have been twisting around each other for several centuries. They are not going to
unravel overnight. Don’t let this frustrate you.”
 Fortifying herself with a deep breath, she squared her shoulders and stepped out of Sariel’s arms. “I
don’t think Paimon was after Rosalind at all. I think she was after me.”
 “Or she could have intended to use Rosalind to draw you out. You clearly surprised her yesterday. You
surprised us all.”
 Alyssa smiled, warmed by the approval in his expression. She had shocked herself when her wings
unfurled. Instinct had taken over and her nature did the rest. For one glorious moment, she’d been an
angel again.
 Her eyes narrowed and she raked her fingers through her hair. Exchanging Rosalind for Lailah was not
an option. She would never sacrifice one friend for another. Besides, she was more convinced than ever
that Paimon’s true target was her.
 “If my appearance alters to accommodate my lies, perhaps we can use this to our advantage.”
 “What are you thinking?” Sariel sounded dubious, his features tense and wary. “If you speak a lie, your
mind will adjust reality --”
 “I understand that.” She was playing with fire, but what choice did they have? She couldn’t leave Lailah
at the mercy of Paimon. “If I’m careful I can control it.” A shiver shook her as she heard her own words.
She had been controlled by the mist for so long. What made her think she could control it now? She had
to try! “If this doesn’t work, you’ll have to retrieve me from the mist as soon as Lailah is safe.”
 “What are you talking about?” He rested his hands on her shoulders, his gaze boring into hers. “What
are you thinking? You cannot speak a lie. Please, don’t do this. You’ve come too far!”
 “I am Alyssa of the Angelic Order of Dominions, but I look and sound exactly like Lady Rosalind
Monthamn.”
  
 Sariel trembled as the lie passed Alyssa’s lips. Energy burst from her body, driving him back a step,

stinging his hands. His heartbeat thundered in his ears and he stared at the woman before him. She
looked exactly like Rosalind.
 What had Alyssa done?
 “Who are you?” he asked carefully, terrified of what she would say.
 “Fear not.” Alyssa said in Rosalind’s voice. “It worked beautifully. At least I think it did. Do I look like
Rosalind?”
 He exhaled a shaky breath. “You could fool Gadrayel.”
 Alyssa smiled. “Good. Gadrayel must take Rosalind somewhere safe. I want her beyond the reach of
any demon.”
 Sariel nodded averting his gaze. “I’ll see to it.” She expected Gadrayel to take Rosalind to Heaven.
Sariel knew that was impossible. Alyssa had yet to accept it, but Rosalind’s grandfather was Fallen.
  
 * * * * *
 “What are you hoping to accomplish by this?” Lailah glared at Paimon.
 Enos sat back and silently watched the scene. The similarity in their appearance was striking, at first
glance. Lailah’s silver-blond hair circled her head in a braided coronet, while Paimon’s flowed to her hips
in rippling waves. Their bodies were lithe and graceful. Both possessed night-black eyes.
 “Alyssa has held you back your entire life. You have existed in her shadow, followed silently in her
wake, always ready to rescue her from herself. I intend to free you from your burden.”
 Lailah didn’t dignify the nonsense with a response. She turned her face away and clenched her hands
into fists. Her wrists were secured to the stone wall behind her by demonic chains. Enos imagined all the
things he would do to her while she writhed helplessly, bound by those chains.
 “Shouldn’t they be here by now?” Paimon grumbled. “I’m tired of waiting. I want to watch Alyssa’s face
as you defile Lailah.”
 “And I’m anxious to play.”
 Lailah’s dark gaze darted to him, the smell of her fear intoxicating. He hadn’t defiled an angel in
decades. Only the Grigori appealed to him. The other orders were nearly childlike in their purity and he
had no taste for children. But there was no sensation sweeter than feeling a conflicted spirit slip into
corruption.
 He stood and crossed the cold, dank cavern to where Lailah was chained. “Do you know who I am?”
 “I knowwhat you are.”
 “Well, obviously I am Fallen. I meant --”

 “You were once Grigori. I understood the question.” Her voice was calm, her features held in an
expressionless mask, but he could still smell her fear.
 Paimon laughed. “Do you see why I want her so badly? Think of the fun we shall have once she Falls.”
 “Nothing he can do to me will make me Fall.”
 Paimon shot her a challenging smirk and sauntered back to her side. “Don’t be too sure of that. You’ve
never been taken by a Grigori. Enos can makeme beg for it. You’ll be no challenge at all.”
 Enos looked into Lailah’s defiant gaze and knew Paimon was deluded. Defiling this one would take time
and patience. Luckily for Paimon, he had plenty of both. “I existed for ages among the Grigori, an outcast
among the angelic orders.”
 Lailah looked at him, uncertainty sparked within her dark eyes.
 “You know how that feels.” He used his most compelling voice, insinuating himself into her mind. “You
know the agony of being trapped in the shadows. You’re shunned by the light, yet afraid of the
darkness.” He felt her dark nature stir and pushed deeper, intensified the compulsion. “I’ve been there,
Lailah. I understand your isolation, but you’re not alone. Let me comfort you. Let me teach you. Let me
--”
 “I want nothing from you! I will not Fall!” She shook her head and strained against the chains.
 Enos spun from her, his face raised to sniff the air. Paimon’s fortress was so foul he nearly missed his
brother’s scent. “They’re here.”
 “Finally!”
 Golden light illuminated the stairwell as two figures emerged from the gloom. Sariel stepped into the
chamber, his wings spread wide, shielding the female behind him. The light came not from a torch but
from Sariel’s flaming sword.
 “We’ve come for Lailah,” Sariel stated.
 “We offered an exchange,” Paimon sneered. “Where is the girl?”
 They both knew Alyssa would fight to the death to protect her ward. Their proposed exchange had
been a simple ruse.
 Sariel folded his wings and Rosalind stepped into view.
 Paimon gasped.
 Enos stared. What was the meaning of this?
 “I am here,” Rosalind said softly, her voice tight with resignation.
 “Where is Alyssa?” Paimon charged forward, but Sariel blocked her advance with his sword.
 “You offered an exchange and we are here to accept.” Rosalind motioned toward the wall. “Release

Lailah.”
 Paimon turned on Enos, her dark eyes glowing. “Why is that creature here? I want Alyssa!”
 He moved past the indignant demon and stared at Rosalind. “Do you know who I am?”
 “Enos, Lord Diadem is what you called yourself at court, but you are not ...” She licked her lips, her
eyes wide and luminous, so like Catherine’s. “What do you want with me? Why have you been pursuing
me?”
 “Sariel, get her out of here! What were you thinking? They cannot force me to Fall.” Lailah jerked
against the chains, twisting wildly, her face flushed with anger and fear.
 Ignoring Lailah’s outburst, Enos went on. “We were searching for Alyssa at court. Imagine my surprise
when I found you.” He paused, his gaze intent on Rosalind’s innocent face. “Paimon, release Lailah. I’ve
changed my mind. I will accept the exchange.”
 “Nay!” Paimon screeched, flying at him with her claws bared.
 He flung her away with the wave of his hand. She collided with the stone wall not far from Lailah.
“Never touch me unless I give you leave!”
 “This was not our arrangement. You promised to seduce Lailah. You promised --”
 Focusing his gaze on her throat, Enos cut off her protests midstream. “I promise a lot of things.”
 Trembling, Paimon struggled to her feet and faced Lailah. “Life has lost its splendor because you have
surrendered to mediocrity.”
 Paimon’s pleading tone disgusted Enos. He had lost interest in her long ago. Their separate motivations
carried them in the same direction, so he had indulged her for a time. His gaze narrowed as her whining
continued. Why had he put up with her for so long?
 “We can show you splendor.” Paimon leaned in and Lailah turned her face away. “We can give you
power like you’ve never imagined. Join us!”
 “Go back to Hell where you belong!” Lailah shouted.
 “There is no one quite as blind as one who will not see!” Paimon lunged for Lailah. Her hand pressed
over the Rebel Angel’s eyes.
 Lailah screamed.
  
 Chapter Fifteen
  
 “Nay!” Alyssa shouted as she launched herself toward Paimon.

 Sariel and Enos arrived before her, their flaming swords impaled the demon, one from either side.
Glaring at each other, the brothers flung Paimon to the stone floor and withdrew their swords at exactly
the same time.
 Paimon jerked, her breath rasping. “Why?” She stared up at Enos as her energy dispersed, and her
body dissolved into ash.
 Alyssa rushed past the males and gently turned Lailah’s face toward the torch light. Lailah moaned and
Alyssa cried out. “Oh, dear God.” She sobbed brokenly. Lailah’s eyelids were seared black and sealed
shut. “Undo this! Look what that creature did!”
 Sariel slammed his sword against one chain and then the other. Lailah collapsed into Alyssa’s arms.
They sank to the floor together. Alyssa wept; Lailah lay unconscious.
 Sariel spun, his sword pressed against Enos’ chest, directly over his heart. “My blow alone would not
have killed her. Tell me why you struck.”
 Enos shrugged and glanced away. “Old habits die hard.”
 “Can you undo the damage?” Sariel nodded toward Lailah.
 Enos shook his head.
 “Did you defile Lady Catherine?”
 The question brought Alyssa head up, dread slicing through her grief.Enos was Rosalind’s grandfather?
 The demon looked at her, something akin to tenderness in his bright green eyes. “I don’t know how
Catherine managed to conceal the truth from me, but when I sensed who you were at court ... Oh, child,
I seduced your grandmother. I did not force her. I never even revealed what I was.”
 “Why?” Sariel demanded his brother’s attention with the point of his sword. Blood trickled down Enos’
chest. He didn’t struggle. He seemed resigned to die. “Isn’t that your favorite pleasure? Watching
passion turn to terror as your victims realize what you are?”
 Enos stared into Sariel’s eyes. “Just as you’re fascinated by the darkness, I sometimes hunger for the
light.”
 Enos disappeared and Alyssa cried out. “Why did you let him go?”
 Sariel sank to his knees, his sword dissolving as he opened his hand. “He saved Lailah’s life.”
 “You should have killed him.” Alyssa cried, rocking Lailah against her chest.
 Shaking his head, Sariel met her gaze, his expression utterly tormented. “If God wants him dead, another
will have to be dispatched. Enos is my brother.”
  
 * * * * *

 Alyssa sat beside Lailah’s bed, tears streaming freely down her cheeks. The mists were vanquished. She
remembered everything clearly, and she had never been more miserable.
 She had applied a healing salve to Lailah’s burns and covered them with clean bandages, but Alyssa
knew without being told that her sister would never see again.
 Paimon had won!
 Bitterness surged within her and all of her angelic resolve couldn’t suppress her fury or frustration. How
could Lailah find splendor if she couldn’t see!
 “That is her quest, not yours, Alyssa. You have your own wounds to heal.”
 Dragging her gaze away from Lailah’s bandaged face, Alyssa found Gabriel standing at the foot of the
bed. Kind, patient Gabriel. A fresh rush of tears spilled from her eyes and she rushed into his
outstretched arms. Warmth inundated her senses and she buried her face in his golden hair.
 “This isn’t right!” she cried. “How can she help but fail? How can she possibly ...”
 He eased her away and placed his finger against her lips. “You must be strong for her. These negative
thoughts will compound the darkness.”
 Wiping her tears on the back of her hand, Alyssa focused on her anger, driving back the pain. “She will
know nothing but darkness now. Why was this allowed to happen?”
 “Why is generally a useless question,” Gabriel said firmly. “But you are mistaken about the darkness.
Only Lailah’s corporeal eyes were damaged. Her angelic sight is still intact.”
 “What does that mean?”
 “I’ve been given permission to train her, to help her through this crisis.”
 Alyssa studied his angular features, his gold-speckled brown eyes. Hope shimmered on the fringes of her
consciousness, but she was afraid to embrace it. She couldn’t bear another disappointment; another
failure would destroy her.
 She turned from Gabriel and walked back to the bed. He hadn’t come to ask permission. He’d come to
collect his newest assignment. Alyssa tried to find comfort in the thought. She couldn’t help Lailah, but
perhaps Gabriel could.
 “What about her missions? Isthis penance enough or will she still be expected --”
 “Lailah’s missions were never part of her penance. She is what she was created to be.”
 “But now ... can’t she be given some other task, something less ... dismal.”
 “Lailah is an Angel of Death, but death is not always dismal. Death can be a joyous release from
suffering. Death is as much a part of the cycle as birth. Lailah understands this.”
 Alyssa sat on the edge of the bed and brushed the hair back from her sister’s brow. Lailah had stayed
by her side while the mists consumed her. Lailah had never lost hope. “Are you taking her with you

now?”
 “Aye.”
 She’d known the answer before she asked the question, but a pang of loneliness still squeezed her heart.
“Will I be allowed to visit her?”
 “Of course.” Gabriel smiled, his gaze warm and encouraging. “But your work here is not yet finished.
You’ve one last task to complete.”
 She indulged in a heavy sigh. “Rosalind.”
 “Aye.” He paused, studying her silently for a moment. “Are you prepared to see this through?”
 Meeting his gaze directly, she said in a strong, sure voice, “I am through with lies!”
  
 * * * * *
 After searching for nearly an hour, Sariel found Alyssa in the high tower room, looking out at the castle
compound far below. She had opened the window and a steady breeze rippled her long silver hair. Her
true appearance had returned as the mist dissipated. He would miss her flame-red hair, but her silver
locks made her look more ... angelic.
 “Gideon set up this room as a scriptorium for Naomi,” she said without turning around. Sariel had
materialized silently, but her angelic senses had returned full force. “He wanted her to be happy in her
new life.”
 He stepped up behind her and wrapped his arms around her waist. “And did she find happiness?”
 “Aye.” She turned within the circle of his arms, leaning her bottom against the stone sill. Breathing out a
little sigh, she looked into his eyes. “Gabriel came for Lailah.”
 He cupped the side of her face and pressed a light kiss to her forehead, tenderness tightened his chest.
“Are you all right?”
 “I hate to be parted from her, but it gives me hope.” She wrapped her arms around his back and molded
her body to his. “Where have you been?”
 “Gathering information.”
 She eased away and looked up again. “Regarding what?”
 “Options.” He smiled into her eyes. “Yours and mine, Gadrayel and Rosalind’s. None of us can make
decisions until we understand what is permissible.”
 “What is permissible?” She returned his smile, her curiosity obvious in her expression.
 “Gadrayel and Rosalind will return with the dawn. I will explain what I’ve learned then. Tonight is for
you and me. We can walk in the garden or cuddle before the fire. You have only to tell me what you

want and it’s yours.”
 She closed her eyes for a long moment, her lips slightly pursed. When she looked at him again her eyes
sparkled with mischief. “I want to stay right here and make love until it grows dark and no one can see
us.”
 He glanced at the clear blue sky. “Are you challenging my stamina? Nightfall is a long way off.”
 “Are you not up for the challenge?”
 “I’m always up for the challenge. I have only to look at you and I’m up for anything.”
 She laughed. The light, musical sound soothed him as nothing else could. After all she had had been
through, he’d been terrified she’d pull away.
 “And once it grows dark and no one can see us ...” She slid her hands up along his chest. “... I want to
soar across the sky at your side.”
 “Do you remember how to fly?” he asked carefully, not wanting to upset her.
 “I want to find out. Are you strong enough to catch me if I falter?”
 He lifted her effortlessly and kissed her full on the mouth. “I think I can manage.”
 Her lips parted sweetly beneath his and her tongue curled around him as he pushed past her teeth.
Looping her arms around his neck, she relaxed, confident in the strength of his arms. He set her on the
wide stone sill and reached behind her to close the window.
 “Nay, leave it open. I love to feel the wind in my hair.”
 “Someone could see you.”
 She worked the laced at the front of her cotehardie and smiled invitingly. “As long as we only rearrange
my clothing, no one will be the wiser even if they do happen to glance this way.”
 Thrilled by her boldness, Sariel wasn’t about to argue. She still wanted him. Even after letting Enos
escape, she still wanted him.
 Her fingers paused and she looked deeply into his eyes. “You were right not to kill him. Your brother’s
blood should not be on your hands.”
 Surprised that she had read his thoughts so clearly, it took him a moment to respond. The tightness in his
throat made the words difficult, but he wanted her to understand. “Thousands of years have passed and I
am still tormented by what I did to --”
 She pressed her fingers to his lips. “You did what you werecommanded to do to protect the world from
evil. But you have suffered enough. You are not responsible for Enos. Someone else can bring him to
justice.”
 He buried his face in her hair, filling his nose with her womanly scent. She wrapped her arms around his
neck and her legs around his waist, holding him tightly. “How have I survived so long without you?” He

whispered the words into her silky hair.
 “I have no idea.” She eased away and smiled into his eyes. “But you’ll never be without me again.” She
guided his hand to her breast, her gaze gleaming with sensual invitation.
 He parted her gown and slipped his hand inside her chemise, cupping her full breast, skin to skin. She
sighed, her eyelids drooping languidly. He stroked her with his thumb. Her nipple gathered beneath his
insistent caress.
 “I think we should go to our bedchamber. I want you naked.”
 She shook her head. “I want you now.”
 “As you wish.” He ripped her chemise down the middle, baring her breasts. Her startled gasp turned to
a giggle as he lavished attention on her nipples. She was so delightfully responsive. He would never tire of
the sounds she made, her abandoned expression or the way her body felt when she surrendered to
release.
 Kneeling on the floor in front of her, he lifted her skirt to her waist. She glanced over her shoulder but
didn’t close the window.
 “Oh, you are in a naughty mood.” He chuckled, heat rushing to his groin.
 “You make me think naughty thoughts and want naughty things.”
 He draped her legs over his shoulders, teasing her inner thighs with feather-light kisses. “What naughty
thing are you wanting right now?”
 “I want your mouth on me. I want you to lick me until the pleasure comes.”
 “As I said, I’m yours to command.” Parting her folds with his fingers, he breathed against her damp
flesh. She leaned back on her elbows and canted her hips, offering herself brazenly. He watched her face
as he settled his mouth against her, awed by the beauty of her response. Her lips parted and her tongue
darted out, wetting her lips.
 His body throbbed in silent demand. They would definitely have to exploremutual pleasure once he had
her back on a bed.
 He traced her feminine slit and flicked his tongue against her swollen nub. Each gasp, each pant assured
him of her pleasure. Pulling her hips to the edge of the sill, he pushed two fingers into her slick core. She
cried out sharply. Her head dropped back on her shoulders as her inner muscles rippled and pulsed.
 Grinning against her damp folds, he whispered, “You like that?”
 “You know I do.”
 Sliding his fingers in and out, he circled her with his tongue, establishing a new cycle of arousal as her
legs trembled against his shoulders. She arched into the thrust of his hand and tangled her fingers in his
hair, whimpering softly as her passion escalated.
 She was hot, wet, so ready to be taken, but he enjoyed her pleasure too much to stop. Dragging his

fingers out, he cupped her bottom and lifted her against his mouth. She gasped, then groaned,
abandoning herself to his carnal kiss.
 Parting her folds with his tongue, he pushed directly into her core. Again and again he took her with his
tongue, until her thighs tightened against him and her spine bowed in a dramatic arch.
 He caught her against him as her muscles relaxed, lowering her hips, but keeping her legs draped over
his shoulders. She reclined on the sill now, her hair wild about her face, her skin passion flushed and rosy.
 She had never looked more beautiful to him. He had never wanted her more. Frantically loosening his
clothing, he positioned himself against her entrance and sank into her wet heat. She closed around him,
squeezing him with firm pressure. Deeper he pushed, not stopping until he filled her completely. He held
her close and enjoyed the intimacy of their joining.
 Pulling back just a bit, he insinuated his hand between their bodies and rubbed her firmly with his thumb.
“Do it again,” he whispered. He stayed deep within her, filling her, stretching her, while his thumb
stimulated her mercilessly. She tossed her head and her breasts quivered with her ragged breaths. “Do it,
now!”
 He pressed her nub between his thumb and forefinger. She shattered, her forceful spasms squeezing him.
 Finally satisfied that she was well pleasured, he moved within her tight core. His deep, driving thrusts
made her gasp and arch. Her legs slipped to his elbows as he reared up, penetrating her more deeply.
 Her tight body caressed him with each forceful lunge. He threw his head back and trembled, desperate
to make the pleasure last.
 “Do it,” she coaxed. “Do it, now!”
 She tightened her inner muscles and Sariel was lost.
 Thrusting hilt deep into her heat, he shook violently with the force of his release. When his head cleared
enough for coherent thought, he found her smiling up at him and his heart lurched within his chest.
 “I love you so much it frightens me,” he whispered.
 Her smile broadened and her eyes sparkled. “Don’t worry. I’ll protect you. Keep you safe.”
 He laughed and pulled her up off the stone sill. She wrapped her legs around his waist keeping him deep
inside her. They kissed, slow, deep kisses filled with love and laughter. He turned in a slow circle, looking
for some other place to set her down. “There is no furniture in this room.”
 She tightened her legs around his waist and wiggled enticingly. “We’ll just have to be creative.”
 “More challenges?”
 “Shock and thrill me until the sun goes down.”
 He chuckled deep in his throat. “I will shock and thrill you much longer than that.”
  

 * * * * *
 “Are you sure you want to do this?”
 Alyssa laughed nervously. “I wasn’t sure I wanted to do half of what we’ve done tonight, but you
haven’t disappointed me yet.” He grinned with obvious pride and she slapped at him playfully. “Arrogant
beast.”
 “You’re the one who held me captive in the tower room, demanding I appease your insatiable
appetites.”
 “Do you have strength left enough for this lesson or do you need to recuperate? You are much older
than I am, after all.”
 He grasped her waist and lifted her to stand beside him atop the crenellation surrounding the high tower.
“I may be ancient, but it takes more than a lusty tumble to wear me out.”
 “One? I remember three.”
 Holding tightly to her hand, Sariel spread his wings. “Are we going to fly or find a room with furniture?”
 “Both,” she suggested and unfurled her wings.
 “Don’t let go of my hand until you’re sure you remember how to do this.”
 She interlaced their fingers, but he shook his head and grasped her wrist. Rotating her arm, she grabbed
his wrist as well and stared out into the night.
 “Are you frightened?” His voice was deep and caressing.
 “Everyone is the first time.”
 “I won’t let go of you. I promise.”
 Pausing for one long, slow breath, Alyssa bent her knees and launched herself into the sky. She flapped
her wings with a strong sure rhythm that was only the faintest of memories. Sariel held tightly to her wrist,
matching his wing strokes to hers, following her lead.
 “It’s so beautiful.” She sighed.
 The wind caressed her face and streamed through her hair. Starlight lit their path, silvering the earth far
below. Sariel’s hand remained steady and strong. Enjoying the tangible connection with her mate, Alyssa
didn’t let go. She squeezed his wrist as they soared side by side.
  
 Chapter Sixteen
  

 The following morning they gathered in the counting room. Sariel and Alyssa shared a bench facing
Gadrayel and Rosalind across the wooden table. Alyssa fidgeted. Anticipation and dread tightened her
stomach with alternating turns.
 “What happened yesterday?” Rosalind asked after a prolonged period of silence.
 “We rescued Lailah,” Sariel began, “but not without a cost. Paimon burned Lailah’s eyes before we
were able to destroy the demon.”
 “Nay!” Rosalind cried, her hand flew to her mouth and tears filled her eyes. “How badly was she
burned? Is she ... blind?”
 Torn between comforting Rosalind and the guilt still twisting her soul, Alyssa looked away from the girl’s
grief-stricken face.
 You must be strong for her.Gabriel had been referring to Lailah, but the same held true for Rosalind.
She swallowed with difficulty and turned back to her ward.
 “Lailah’s physical eyes were destroyed,” Alyssa explained, her tone carefully controlled, “but her angelic
sight is still intact.”
 “What does that mean?”
 “She will have to learn how to see in a different way.”
 “Where is Lailah now?” Gadrayel slipped his arm around Rosalind’s shoulders and pulled her close
against his side.
 “Gabriel has taken over her care until she recovers from this attack,” Sariel told him. “He will teach her
how to compensate for her blindness with angelic sight.”
 “Gabriel?” Rosalind’s eyes widened and her mouth gaped. “TheGabriel?”
 Alyssa nodded. The wonder in Rosalind’s tone was a common reaction when people heard Gabriel’s
name. “What happened to Lailah is only a small part of what you need to know.”
 “You said Paimon was destroyed,” Gadrayel commented. “What about Enos?”
 “The situation with Enos is more complicated.” Sariel folded his hands on the tabletop and shifted his
weight on the bench. He hid his anxiety well, but Alyssa could sense his reluctance and his pain. “Before
Enos Fell he was my brother.”
 Gadrayel didn’t react to the news. Alyssa suspected he already knew. She looked at Rosalind and
found her confusion rapidly turning to disgust. Before the emotion could progress any further, Alyssa
rushed on. “Every demon was once someone’s brother or sister, Rosalind. Angels and demons are
flipsides of the same coin. You must stop thinking like a human.”
 Rosalind accepted the reprimand with a stiff nod. “What did they want with me? I still don’t understand
why all this happened.”
 “For Paimon, you were a means to an end. For Enos it was more complicated.” Alyssa braced herself

for what she was about to reveal. Reality for Rosalind had shifted and changed continually over the past
few days, and the adjustments had only begun. “As I just said angels, are generally created in pairs, they
train together, mature together, much like human siblings. Paimon and her sister were created shortly
before the Great Rebellion. She lost her sister when a third of Heaven Fell.”
 “Is that when Enos Fell?” Rosalind looked to Sariel for the answer.
 “Nay.” He glanced away from her expectant gaze. “His Fall was more recent, but we will return to
Enos. Let Alyssa explain.”
 Accepting his cue, Alyssa went on. “Paimon longed for the security of her sister. The bond, the
connection is important to an angel. No one wants to be alone. So, she set her sights on Lailah.”
 “But Lailah is your sister.”
 “Aye. Paimon did everything in her power to lure Lailah away from me, to create conflict between us.”
She paused for a deep breath, knowing the tale was about to get much more complicated. “About this
same time Paimon met a cherub named Ambrose.”
 Rosalind gasped. “Lucifer’s brother. You spoke of him before. Did Michael give Paimon a challenge like
he gave you and Gideon?”
 “Nay. Paimon was not there that day on the hillside. She had to have learned about the Rebel Angels
after we were dispersed.” Alyssa licked her lips, wishing she had a cup of water, or better yet, wine.
“Lailah was lost to her and Paimon was truly alone.”
 “So she Fell.”
 “Aye.” An unexpected twinge of pity pierced Alyssa’s heart. How could she feel sorry for that creature
for even an instant?
 Just as you’re fascinated by the darkness, I sometimes hunger for the light.
 Enos’ words echoed back to her, compounding her conflicted emotions.
 With a ragged sigh, Alyssa forced back her compassion and focused on the facts. “Paimon’s
determination to have Lailah didn’t end with her Fall. I don’t know when or how she joined forces with
Enos, but it was obvious they were helping each other. When I arrived in your form Paimon was furious.
She knew I would never intentionally put you in danger. She counted on my coming to confront her. But
instead of me, you appeared, offering yourself in exchange for Lailah.”
 Sariel took up the tale. “Paimon tried to tempt Lailah into Falling and when she refused Paimon punished
her. I couldn’t reach her before she touched Lailah’s eyes.”
 “Enos attacked her as well.” Alyssa added. “The combination of his demonic sword and Sariel’s angelic
sword destroyed Paimon.”
 “Enos helped kill Paimon?” Rosalind sounded aghast. “Why would he do that?”
 “Becauseyou were there, or he thought I was you.”

 Rosalind didn’t speak, but her posture stiffened and her eyes filled with dread.
 “Enos sought you out at court ...” The truth lodged in Alyssa’s throat. There was no easy way to explain
the final revelation. “Enos’ search for us led him to you. Lady Catherine, or perhaps your father,
concealed the truth from him. Enos didn’t realize you existed until he saw you that day at court. He
wanted you to know he didn’t force your grandmother. He seduced her, but he didn’t ravage her.”
 “Enos is my grandfather.” There was no question in her tone, just a shaky acceptance of fact. “I am part
demon.” She turned her head and looked at Gadrayel. “That’s why you couldn’t take me to Heaven. I
wanted to see your home, but you insisted we hide in the abbey.”
 “We were unable to identify your nature because, to our knowledge, you are unique.” Gadrayel stroked
the side of her face, his eyes filled with tenderness.
 “Am I evil?”
 “There is evil in you as there is evil in all mankind,” Sariel said with quiet authority. “But you control your
nature; your nature does not control you. Your life will be filled with temptations and choices. Your future
is determined by the choices you make.”
 She caught her bottom lip between her teeth and turned back to Sariel. “What are my choices? Am I
immortal?”
 Sariel smiled. “I met with the Council of Ancients. I knew you would have many questions. They were
able to prepare some answers; others are simply up to you. You are not immortal, but they suspect you
will live much longer than an ordinary human, perhaps several hundred years. As you mature, they
anticipate your developing angelic abilities, but they were unable to predict which ones.”
 Her eyes grew a bit rounder with each fact he revealed. “Will I be able to have children and will my
children inherit these abilities?”
 “There are different scenarios that produce different outcomes.”
 Rosalind chucked at the obvious evasion. “You were doing so well. I had never heard you provide such
specific, detailed information before.” She paused, then tried again. “Am I able to bear children?”
 “Aye.”
 Her gaze narrowed and her cheeks flushed as understanding finally struck. “If a human fathers my
children it will dilute my angelic blood. But if an angel ...” She looked at Gadrayel, then back at Sariel.
“Can Ray and I have children?”
 “There was much debate regarding that possible outcome. Gadrayel is capable of producing offspring
and so are you. Gadrayel is immortal, while you will eventually die. The complications that developed
with the Nephilim stemmed from the incompatibility of angelic and human physiology. Your physiology is
not human.”
 “Meaning?” she asked impatiently.
 “The council could find no justification for forbidding your union with Gadrayel. You must each
understand there will be great challenges awaiting you, and Rosalind must remain here on Earth.” He

took a deep breath and glanced at Alyssa before he said, “I’ve been sanctioned to bless your union if
that’s what you desire.”
 “Our children would be ...”
 “A unique race of beings,” Sariel said, as if it were an insignificant detail. “Like you they would not be
immortal, but their lifespan would be prolonged. They would likely have various angelic abilities.” He
paused again, his expression commanding her full attention. “The council was insistent on one point. With
great power comes great responsibility. If this is allowed, you would become a race of guardians,
champions, healers and teachers, living among, but separate from mankind.”
 Rosalind stared back at him, silent and still.
 “You’ve shocked her into silence.” Alyssa smiled. “This has to be a first.”
 “The decision need not be made right now. I’m simply explaining your options.”
 Gadrayel inclined his head, his gaze shining. Alyssa could sense the emotional tempest raging beneath his
calm exterior. He was thrilled and excited, frightened and confused, but overshadowing all was his
overwhelming joy that a future with Rosalind was possible.
 “We appreciate your effort on our behalf,” Gadrayel said, his voice revealing more than his calm
features. “You’ve given us much to think about, much to discuss. I’m sure you and Lady Alyssa have
plans to make, as well. We’ll leave you to it.”
 He escorted Rosalind from the room.
 “Will Gadrayel give up Heaven for Rosalind?” Alyssa asked after the other couple departed.
 “Without hesitation.” Sariel rolled his shoulders and pivoted on the bench to face her. “He loves her and
he has grown weary of the hunt.”
 “Is hunting the Nephilim all your order does?”
 “Nay. Our missions are widely varied, but Gadrayel is one of my best hunters.” He smiled. “Or he was
until your ward stole his heart.”
 She didn’t know how to begin the next phase of the conversation. Had the Council of Ancients had sage
words for them? Or was their future still undecided? “Did you gather information for us or was the
meeting regarding Rosalind alone?”
 “What do you think?” His smile caressed her, melted the tension gripping her heart. “I must return to my
order, but I want my mate at my side.”
 She pressed her lips together to conceal their trembling. “They will allow it? I can ... go with you?”
 “As long as you speak only truth you will be welcomed in the fifth level of Heaven.”
 “What of Rosalind? If she must remain here and I --”
 “There are no prisoners in Heaven. If you return with me, you can visit Rosalind and monitor her

progress. You will not be allowed beyond the fifth level of Heaven, but others can join you there.”
 “Gideon and Naomi? I could see them again?”
 Smiling broadly, he nodded.
 Alyssa stared at him unable to speak.
 He laughed softly. “Now who is stunned into silence?”
 Pressing her hands against her flushed cheeks, she could only smile. Her heart pounded within her breast
and tears of joy blurred her vision.
 His smile faltered and his expression grew serious. “You do know that it is Rosalind’s human nature that
allows her to procreate. The Grigori can produce children with humans, but a child has never resulted
when two angels mate.”
 “We cannot have children?” The thought gave her a moment’s pause.
 “It is not possible.”
 The mists were gone; she had found her true mate, and her heart nearly burst with love. Did he expect
her to be disappointed? “But we can still make love?” she asked with a mischievous smile.
 He grinned. “Every chance we get.”
 “And we are both immortal?”
 He nodded.
 She threw her arms around his neck and kissed him passionately. “Oh, my love, we will spend eternity
together -- and I am going home!”
  
  
  
  
  
 Cyndi Friberg
  

 Cyndi has been a member of Romance Writers of America since 1999 and also belongs to two local
chapters of RWA. She is the winner of multiple national contests, including The Molly and The Merritt. In
2003, she was chosen as a finalist in the prestigious Golden Heart, as well as winning the Jasmine with
Rebel Angels 1: Born of the Shadows. After dabbling in freelance journalism and songwriting, she
returned to her true passion: paranormal romance. Visit Cyndi on the Web at www.cyndifriberg.com, or
email her at cyndi@cyndifriberg.com.
 * * * * *
 Read on for a glimpse of the first book in Cyndi Friberg’s newest series:
  
 Ontarian Chronicles 1: Taken by the Storm
  
 Available Now from Loose Id
 Ontarian Chronicles 1: Taken by the Storm
  
 Charlotte snuggled into the warmth enveloping her. She splayed her fingers to better absorb the heat,
and curled her toes. Her skin tingled and her mind swam within a sensual haze. She was aware of the
sensations, but coherent thought was just beyond her grasp. Her face was buried against something warm
and solid. Long arms encircled her back, molding her body against another body -- a hard, heated body.
Her legs tangled with other legs -- muscular, masculine legs. Pressing her breasts more firmly against the
solid wall of muscle in front of her, she arched into the heat. It felt strange. It felt wonderful. But it felt
wrong.
 There was no man in her life. No lover to keep her warm.
 She had just begun to sort through the confusion when his mouth touched hers. Gently, he pressed his
lips over hers, caressing her, luring her. She parted her lips, responding instinctively to the velvety slide of
his mouth against hers. The tip of his tongue touched hers and she groaned. It had been so long since she
reveled in the intimacy of a deep, passionate kiss. She offered her mouth and accepted his tongue.
 Her hands clutched his broad back, and her legs moved against his until her sex made contact with one
thick thigh. Aching heat flared within her, making her wild. She arched and undulated, her hands tangling
in his long hair -- impossibly long hair.
 Charlotte dragged her mouth away from his and forced her eyes to open. His hot, seeking mouth moved
to her throat, but she didn't need to see his face to know who held her. His embrace was strong,
demanding, and his silky hair was stroking her entire body all at once. It was the most erotic thing she
had ever felt. Like silk fringe or the fur of a Persian cat, the strands moved over her skin, circling her
limbs and caressing her flesh.
 She couldn't think, couldn't struggle. Heat and liquid desire rolled through her body. She tried to
disentangle herself from the silken web, but he only rolled with her, dragging her beneath him.

 His weight pressed her into the bed and his face hovered above hers. She stared up into his otherworldly
eyes, panting and rigid. He was a stranger to her. She didn't even know his name.
 He wasn't human!
 He spoke in a hushed, tender tone, but his words were as alien as his eyes. She could still feel his hair
wrapped around her, clinging to her, caressing her. “What do you want from me?” Her voice broke and
tears gathered behind her lashes.
 He spoke again and she closed her eyes. He was trying to soothe her, but his otherworldly eyes,
combined with their sexual position, terrified her. His warm palms skimmed up and down along the sides
of her body, and his hair continued to slide against her skin. Charlotte fought against the stimulation. She
couldn't let herself be seduced. But, boy, did it feel good!
 This couldn't be happening. Why was this happening?
 “I will not hurt you.”
 She gasped and opened her eyes. An odd accent flavored his words, but they were clearly English.
“Who are you?” she asked. “Why were you kissing me?”
 “I must have more of what I took from you on the mountain.” He spoke slowly, as if searching for each
word. “This will not harm you, but it will restore me to health. Do you understand? My levels are low --
no, not just low. I am dangerously weak. If I do not have more energy, my essence will disperse.”
 “What you were doing a minute ago is different than what you did on the mountain. On the mountain you
only ...” She gasped and squirmed, as she realized just how much of his warm skin was rubbing against
hers. “Why the hell am I naked?”
 “Do you have a mate?”
 “If this exchange involves something I would ordinarily do with my mate, forget about it.”
 He shifted his weight, touching her face with his fingertips. “A full body joining would afford me the
highest concentration of energy, but it is not necessary.”
 “Glad to hear it, because I'm not doingthat with you.”
 He chuckled and nuzzled the side of her neck. Charlotte tried to push him away, but he moved again,
rolling them onto their sides, facing each other.
 “May I touch you?” he whispered near her ear.
 Charlotte's head began to spin. “Touch me how? What exactly is necessary for this exchange?”
 “I must give you pleasure.”
 Did he mean ... surely, he didn't mean she had to have an ... “And if I refuse to allow this? Will you
simply take what you need?”
 “The exchange is tainted when it is forced. As weak as I am, it would do me no good. I need this

desperately, and it must be soon, or it will be too late.”
 She trembled. He meant every word; she could see it in his otherworldly eyes. If she didn't allow him to
touch her, he would die. Could she really be so selfish?
 “I have so many questions. Once you're restored, will you answer my --”
 He must have taken her phrasing as consent; he cut off her words with a quick, urgent kiss. One arm
slipped beneath her neck, and his hand moved to her hip, pulling her more tightly against him.
 This isn't sexual. It's medicinal.
 She tried to relax, to accept the warm pressure of his mouth, but fear kept her stiff and unresponsive. He
deepened the contact, coaxing her lips apart, but he refused to penetrate her mouth. He seemed to want
her to come to him. Tentatively, Charlotte touched his tongue with hers.
 He groaned, the desperation returning full force. Slanting his mouth over hers, he took possession. His
lips molded and moved, his tongue traced and stroked and finally delved deeply. She arched into his
embrace and returned his kiss with an eagerness she didn't fully understand. She wanted to taste him and
wanted him to taste her. She needed to touch him, needed to feel his hands moving across her skin.
 Tingling sensations erupted all over her body. She could feel it happening again, like it had on the
mountain. He was gathering something within her, only it was different this time, more acute, more
powerful. She was trapped by his arms and tangled in his hair. Her breasts swelled and her nipples
tightened painfully, while the sensations focused and coalesced. Scalding heat radiated out from her
feminine core, until even her toes felt hot. Consumed by the heat, she surrendered to the storm.
  
 * * * * *
 What people are saying about
  
 Ontarian Chronicles 1: Taken by the Storm
  
 There were so many inner stories within the larger story that I was never bored and always intrigued. If
you love espionage, there’s a nice dose of that in the story also.Ontarian Chronicles 1: Taken by the
Storm has it all: romance, suspense, sex (loved the sex scenes…hot, hot, hot), and danger. Just the right
recipe for a great book.
 -- Kelly,Sizzling Romances

