Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
1
 
ENDOCRINE PANCREAS & FUEL HOMEOSTASIS  
 
 
 
 
Emma Jakoi, Ph.D. 
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
1. Explain the two metabolic states of fed and fasting and the minute to minute regulation of 
these states by hormones.    
2. Identify the major hormones secreted by the pancreas, their cells of origin and their 
chemical nature. 
3. Identify the time course for the onset and duration for the biological actions of insulin 
and of glucagon.  
4. Describe the relationship between blood glucose concentrations and insulin secretion.  
5. List the major target organs for insulin and the effect of insulin on these organs. 
6. Describe the control of glucagon secretion. 
7. Identify the target organ for glucagon. 
8. Identify disease states caused by a lack of insulin or by resistance to insulin and describe 
the principle symptoms of each. 
 
METABOLIC STATES 
Metabolism is classified as one of two states, fed and fasting. 
 
Fed or anabolic state occurs immediately after a meal when the energy of nutrients 
(carbohydrate, protein, or fat) is transferred to high energy compounds for immediate use or for 
storage. Peripheral tissues (predominantly skeletal muscle) buffer ingested glucose by storing it 
as glycogen.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Changes in fuel depots associated with fed and fasted states.   
 
FAT 
 
MUSCLE 
MUSCLE 
FAT 
LIVER 
LIVER 
GI TRACT 
BRAIN 
OTHER 
FFA 
GLC 
GLC 
KETONES 
aa 
aa 
FFA 
FED STATE 
FASTING 
STATE 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
2
Fasted or catabolic state occurs later when the level of available nutrients decreases in the 
blood, and the stored reserves (initially glycogen) are mobilized to perform work or to generate 
heat. During prolonged fasting, fat oxidation and ketone bodies are used to meet whole body 
energy requirements.  
 
One of the most important aspects of metabolism is the regulated use of carbohydrates, proteins 
and fat to generate glucose. Plasma glucose is closely regulated (80-100 mg/dL) because it is the 
primary fuel metabolized by the brain. Minute-to-minute regulation of glucose levels depends on 
the opposing actions of two pancreatic hormones, insulin and glucagon. The secretion of these 
two hormones is controlled in a reciprocal manner by blood glucose levels (Fig 2).  
 
High insulin to low glucagon ratio (Fig 2) occurs in the fed state activating anabolic pathways, 
such as storage of glucose and fatty acids as triglycerides (fats). Insulin is secreted from the 
pancreatic islet beta cells when blood glucose levels are higher than 100 mg/dL. 
 
Low insulin to high glucagon ratio (Fig 2) occurs in the fasting and “fight or flight’ states 
resulting in increased levels of blood glucose. Glucose is released into the blood by the break 
down of glycogen (glycogenolysis) and fat (lipolysis). Glucagon is secreted from the pancreatic 
islet alpha cells when blood glucose levels are lower than 80 mg/dL. 
 
 
Figure 2. Feedback between glucose concentration and insulin secretion. 
 
PANCREAS SECRETES INSULIN & GLUCAGON 
The endocrine cells of the pancreas are located in islets. The islets contain four distinct cell types, 
each secreting a different peptide hormone.  
 
Approximately 75% of the islet cells are β cells which produce insulin. Another 20% are α cells 
that secrete glucagon. The δ cells produce the paracrine, somatostatin (SRIF). Which inhibits both 
insulin and glucagon secretion.  
 
Plasma Glucose 
β Cells of Pancreas 
 Muscle        Fat     Liver 
Plasma Glucose  
α Cells of Pancreas 
Insulin 
Glucagon 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
3
Insulin is secreted from the pancreas by a process called glucose stimulated insulin secretion 
(GSIS) (Fig 3). 
GSIS: Glucose Stimulated 
Insulin Secretion
Step 1. Glucose enters via 
GLUT2 transporter
Step 2. Glucose is 
phosphorylated to Glc6P
Step 3. Glc6P converted to 
ATP
Step 4. ATP inhibits ATP 
sensitive K+ channel 
causing depolarization of 
beta cell
Step 5. Depolarization 
opens Ca voltage channel
Step 6. Ca entry causes 
Ca++ release from the ER. 
Step 7. Rise in cytosolic
Ca++ leads to secretion of 
insulin 
Step 8. Opening of voltage 
gated K+ channel 
repolarizes the cell. 
Glc6P
ATP
K+
4
3
2
X
1
Ca++
5
nucleus
6
7
mito
ER
insulin
K+
8
Glc
 
Figure 3. Insulin secretion is regulated by glucose in β cells.  
 
Insulin is secreted in a biphasic manner. The initial burst reflects the release of preformed 
secretory vesicles; it lasts 5-15 minutes. The second more gradual and sustained secretion (30 
min) is due to the release of newly synthesized insulin molecules.  
 
The half life of insulin, like most protein hormones, is short (~ 5 minutes). Most of secreted 
insulin is degraded by the liver and kidney.  
 
Insulin secretion is regulated by factors other than glucose (Fig 4). Both an increase in plasma 
amino acids and the feed forward signaling by glucagon like peptide from the small intestine will 
lead to secretion of insulin.  
 
INHIBITION OF INSULIN SECRETION 
There are several potent inhibitors of insulin secretion including somatostatin and the 
catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine) (Fig 4). While the paracrine role of 
pancreatic somatostatin in regulating insulin secretion is not well understood, the antagonistic 
effect of catecholamines is consistent with their role in mobilizing glucose stores during periods 
of stress.   
 
 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
4
 
Figure 4. Positive and negative regulation of secretion by the pancreatic beta cell.   
 
EFFECTS OF INSULIN 
The primary targets for insulin are liver, skeletal muscle, and fat. Insulin has multiple actions in 
each of these tissues, the net result of which is fuel storage (glycogen or fat).   
  
Glucose enters the circulation either from the diet or from synthesis in the liver. It enters all cells 
via the glucose transporter (GLUT). To prevent glucose from leaving the cells via this transporter, 
the glucose is rapidly phosphorylated to glucose-6-phosphate. There is a family of glucose 
transporters (e.g., GLUT 1, GLUT 2, GLUT 4). In skeletal muscle and fat cells, insulin binds to 
the insulin receptor which causes the active recruitment of the glucose transporter, GLUT 4, to 
the cell surface. Once located at the cell surface, GLUT 4 increases the amount of glucose that 
enters fat and skeletal muscle cells. The GLUT4 action enables a rapid removal of glucose from 
the circulation thereby restoring plasma levels to 80-100 mg/dL. 
 
INSULIN DEFICIENCY 
Problems arise from: 
- Reduced glucose uptake into various tissues (energy starvation). 
- Increased release of glucose from the liver (hyperglycemia)  
 
The effect of these two deficiencies is simple:  
- Too little glucose inside cells.  
- Too much glucose in the blood (hyperglycemia)  
  
Glucose deficiency inside cells shifts the energy source to protein, fat, and glycogen. A first 
consequence is protein deficiency and the second consequence is an increase in free fatty acids 
and triglycerides from increased lipolysis. The liver uses these products to generate ketones 
which are acids. The brain does not store fuel. It uses glucose (primarily) and ketones which are 
supplied by the blood to drive its metabolism. In excess, circulating ketones can lead to metabolic 
acidosis (lower blood pH).  
 
Hyperglycemia (excess glucose in the blood) can lead to cellular dehydration. Once the kidney 
reaches its threshold for glucose reabsorption, glucose is excreted in the urine. This leads to an 
increased output of urine and loss of electrolytes. Long term hyperglycemia can lead to vascular 
injury resulting in blindness and end-stage renal disease. 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
5
PATHOLOGY 
Diabetes mellitus: IDDM (type I) and NIDDM (type II) 
Symptoms include frequent urination, increased thirst, increased food consumption, and weight 
loss.  
 
Diabetes mellitus is diagnosed by a blood glucose value > or = 126 mg/dL following an overnight 
fast (FOG) and by an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) of 200 mg/dL or higher (Table 1).  
 
 
Table 1. Diagnostic Values For Diabetes Mellitus.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Normal 
(mg/dL) 
Prediabetic 
(mg/dL) 
Diabetic 
(mg/dL) 
Fasting 
Overnight 
Glucose (FOG) 
80- 100  
100-125 
126 or higher 
Oral Glucose 
Tolerance 
Test (OGTT) 
140 or less 
140-200 
200 or higher 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT), a subject is given 75 mg of glucose orally. Timed 
blood draws are tested for glucose (Table 1).  In normal subjects, the plasma glucose returns to 
80-100 mg/dL by 2 hours after ingestion of glucose. In the diabetic subject, plasma glucose 
remains elevated even 4 hours after ingestion of the glucose.   
 
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM, type I) - these patients do not produce sufficient 
amounts of insulin and therefore they must be injected with insulin daily.  
 
Non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM, type II) - these patients are characterized by 
either insulin insufficiency due to beta cell dysfunction and/or by target cell receptor resistance. 
Following glucose ingestion, the diabetes type II patient will exhibit prolonged, elevated plasma 
glucose with either normal or elevated plasma insulin.   
 
GLUCAGON 
Glucagon is a peptide hormone secreted from the pancreatic islet alpha cells when glucose levels 
are less than 80 mg/dL. Glucagon circulates unbound in the plasma; it has a half- life of 6 
minutes. 
 
Glucagon is a peptide hormone. It binds a plasma membrane receptor which initiates a second 
messenger signaling cascade. The target tissue for glucagon is the liver.  Glucagon causes the 
liver to secrete glucose leading to a net decrease in stored glycogen and an increase in plasma 
glucose.  
 
In the absence of insulin, glucagon is secreted. Glucagon acts in a synergistic manner with 
cortisol and epinephrine to raise blood glucose levels (Fig 6).  

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
6
 
 
 
Figure 6. Synergy of glucagon, cortisol and epinephrine actions raises plasma glucose during  
stress. 
 
GENERAL CONCEPTS 
1. Endocrine pancreas produces insulin and glucagon which regulate fuel homeostasis in the 
fed and fasted states, respectively. 
2. Insulin is secreted primarily in response to an increased blood glucose level. Glucagon is 
secreted in response to decreased blood glucose level. 
3. In the fed state, insulin directs the storage of excess nutrients in the form of glycogen, 
triglycerides, and protein. The targets of insulin are liver, muscle, and adipose tissue.  
4. In the fasting state, glucagon directs the movement of stored nutrients into the blood. 
Liver is the main physiological target of glucagon. 
5. Diabetes mellitus occurs when there is a deficiency of insulin action as a result of either 
insufficient insulin secretion or resistance (receptor impairment) to insulin at its target 
tissue.  
 
QUESTIONS 
1. Which of the following will be elevated in the blood of a diabetic type I individual who is 
not well controlled? 
 
A. Adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH) 
 
B. Insulin 
 
C. Glucagon 
 
D. Insulin like growth factor 1 
 
2. Which of the following inhibit insulin secretion from the pancreas? 
 
A. glucagon  
 
B. glucagon like peptide  
 
C. epinephrine 
 
D. norepinephrine 
 
E. C and D 

Introductory Human Physiology 
 
 
 
©copyright Emma Jakoi 
 
7
3. During the fed (anabolic) state nervous tissue derives most of its metabolic energy 
from: 
 
A. glucose 
 
B. fatty acids 
 
C. amino acids 
 
D. ketones  
 
ANSWERS 
1. C is correct  
2. E is correct 
3. A is correct 

