 
  
 
 
This method is based off of ItsFluffy's Monetizing eBook, but more in depth. This is an autopilot 
method that all you need is to just keep your computer on, and let the money rise up. I myself cant 
really keep my computer on all the time due to electric bills. Its a gaming PC, uses loads of energy. But, if 
you have lets say a laptop, then this is a perfect method for it. Since laptops dont really connect to 
house's electric unless its being charged. I highly recommend something portable that wont take much 
electricity. NO a phone will not work since you require iMacros and Firefox to do the job. The earnings 
on this site really depend on how long your PC or Laptop is active. Though it may take a while to get 
money, but you can just leave this in the background and i dont know play call of duty while it autopilots 
site. Now enough said, time to get to work.  
 
 
 
 
 
 The site is called CashNHits, its basically like HitLeap but you earn money by looking at PTC ads. 
You actually dont look at the ads, the Macro script will do all the work. I have left the script on for about 
an hour and gotten at least 10 cents, YEAH I KNOW ITS NOT MUCH, but later on you will earn more from 
the ads. The payout on the site is I believe 60 cents, which is not much but I guess worth it. I want you to 
first sign up on CashNHits before even getting to the "What you need" section of eBook. The link is 
shown below: BTW its a ref link, so I can see your progress on the site. This is mandatory BTW, and you 
will get full HF support.  
 
 
 
 
http://www.cashnhits.com/index.php?ref=BlueTigerSlayer 
 
 
 
Here below I will explain on how to make CashNHits fully autopilot with Fluffy's guidance. 

 YOU WILL NEED: 
The following below, 
-Firefox 
-GreaseMonkey with CashNHits script installed 
-Account on CashNHits 
 
CashnHits  
This tool will make your day: it will click ads, get YouTube view credits, earn you your own paid to click 
ad credits (so you don’t have to pay for any of them yourself), and much more. All you have to do is 
install the tool just like the other ones and stay on the view ads page. Do not go to autosurf! This will do 
the autosurf for you from the ads page. I leave my FF browser open all day while it does the autosurf 
option all day since there’s so much of it every new day and I earn more and more because of it. There’s 
no way you’re not going to love this I promise! I have a guide posted but I’ll be straight with all of you, 
this tool kind of renders any guide pointless since it will do everything for you except refer friends (oh so 
sad I know). But enjoy the tool and guide as always. 
You need to get Firefox 
You need to install greasemonkey (easy, safe, and free) Make sure this stays up to date! 
https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox...asemonkey/ 
 
Below are the scripts you need to install 
http://userscripts.org/scripts/show/157466 
This is how your page should look; with the exception being that I did all my ads (as I do every day): 
http://i.imgur.com/bcZeByc.png 
Here is one example of some clicks of mine; I NEVER clicked a single one: 
http://img707.imageshack.us/img707/9964/3rj.png 
A rather detailed guide on CashnHits. Enjoy  
http://buxtalk.com/index.php?topic=726.0 
 

 
Now I want you to go to the cashnhits website. Im guessing you already signed up under the refferal 
link.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           Go to www.cashnhits.com.  
 
 
 
 
It should look like this:  
 
 
I want you to navigate to earn money, there should be a drop down menu for PTC ads as shown. 
And click on it.  
 

 
Now on the bottom right hand corner you should see this little green box with numbers, if so that means 
you did all the steps correctly and you are now able to leave your PC or laptop on for it to work.  
 
 

 
You are now set, now just go play some game or do something while it gets your money. NOTE: I dont 
gurantee a load of money to be earned off of this, I only know it is fully autopilot and can be left in the 
background for you to do other stuff. No need to do anything, no doing surveys, offers, no nothing. 
Just sit back and enjoy life.  
 
 
 
 
      Thanks, and Full HF support,  
BlueTigerSlayer  
 
 
 
 
 

