Fundamentals of Human Resource 
Sixth Edition
Noe  |  Hollenbeck  |  Gerhart  |  Wright
MANAGEMENT

http://bit.ly/LS4Apple
http://bit.ly/LS4Droid
> AVAILABLE 
ON-THE-GO
More than 60%
of all students agreed 
LearnSmart was a 
very or extremely 
helpful learning tool
*Based on 750,000 student survey responses
Over 20%
more students 
pass the class 
with LearnSmart
*A&P Research Study
Without LearnSmart
4.7%
4.5%
A
30.5%
A
19.3%
B
38.6%
C
28.0%
D
9.6%
B
33.5%
C
22.6%
D
8.7%
Without LearnSmart Pass Rate - 57%
Pass Rate - 70%
LEARNSMART ADVANTAGE WORKS
Jan - Dec 2011
Jan - Mar 2012
– Extremely
– Very
– Moderately
– Slightly
– Not at all
Jan–Dec 2011
Jan–Mar 2012
100% –
80% –
60% –
40% –
20% –
0 –
More C students 
earn B’s
*Study: 690 students / 6 institutions

How do you rank against your peers? 
Let’s see how confident 
you are on the questions.
BOOK
LEARNSMART
ASSIGNMENTS
Looseleaf
Bound Book
Access Code
Access Code
eBook
Save some green and some trees!
Check with your instructor about 
a custom option for your course.
The smartest way to get from 
a B to an A.
The first and only book that 
adapts to you!
The #1 Student Choice!
Pop the pages into your own 
binder or carry just the pages 
you need.
COMPARE AND CHOOSE WHAT’S RIGHT FOR YOU
LearnSmart, assignments, and 
SmartBook—all in one digital 
product for maximum savings!
> Buy directly from the source at http://shop.mheducation.com.
 What you know (green) and
what you still need to review 
(yellow), based on your answers.

fundamentals of
Human Resource Management


fundamentals of
Human Resource Management
SIXTH EDITION
Raymond A. Noe
The Ohio State University
John R. Hollenbeck
Michigan State University
Barry Gerhart
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Patrick M. Wright
University of South Carolina

www.mhhe.com
FUNDAMENTALS OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, SIXTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2016 
by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous 
 editions © 2014, 2011, and 2009. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in 
any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written 
consent of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or other 
electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers 
outside the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOW/DOW 1 0 9 8 7 6 5
ISBN 978-0-07-771836-7
MHID 0-07-771836-4
Senior Vice President, Products & Markets: Kurt L. Strand
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Michael Ryan
Vice President, Content Design & Delivery: Kimberly Meriwether David
Brand Manager: Anke Weeks
Product Developer: Jane Beck
Marketing Manager: Michael Gedatus
Director of Development: Ann Torbert
Director, Content Design & Delivery: Terri Schiesl
Executive Program Manager: Faye M. Herrig
Content Project Managers: Jessica Portz, Danielle Clement, Judi David
Buyer: Debra R. Sylvester
Design: Studio Montage, St. Louis, MO
Content Licensing Specialists: Keri Johnson, Ann Marie Jannette
Cover Image: Dimitri Otis/Getty Images
Compositor: MPS Limited
Typeface: 10/12 Janson Text Lt Std
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the 
copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Noe, Raymond A.
 Fundamentals of human resource management / Raymond A. Noe, John R.
Hollenbeck, Barry Gerhart, Patrick M. Wright.—Sixth edition.
  pages cm
 ISBN 978-0-07-771836-7 (alk. paper)
1. Personnel management.  I. Title.
 HF5549.F86 2016
 658.3--dc23
                           2014041580
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a 
website does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-
Hill Education does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.

In tribute to the lives of Raymond and Mildred Noe
—R.A.N. 
To my parents, Harold and Elizabeth, my wife, Patty, and 
my children, Jennifer, Marie, Timothy, and Jeffrey
—J.R.H. 
To my parents, Robert and Shirley, my wife, Heather, and 
my children, Chris and Annie
—B.G. 
To my parents, Patricia and Paul, my wife, Mary, and my 
sons, Michael and Matthew
—P.M.W. 

viii
John R. Hollenbeck holds the positions of 
University Distinguished Professor at Michigan 
State University and Eli Broad Professor of Man-
agement at the Eli Broad Graduate School of Busi-
ness Administration. Dr. Hollenbeck received his 
PhD in Management from New York University in 
1984. He served as the acting editor at Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes in 1995, 
the associate editor of Decision Sciences from 1999 
to 2004, and the editor of Personnel Psychology from 
1996 to 2002. He has published over 90 articles and 
book chapters on the topics of team decision making 
and work motivation. According to the Institute for 
Scientific Information, this body of work has been 
cited over 3,000 times by other researchers. Dr. 
Hollenbeck has been awarded fellowship status in 
both the Academy of Management and the Ameri-
can Psychological Association, and was recognized 
with the Career Achievement Award by the HR 
Division of the Academy of Management (2011) and 
the Early Career Award by the Society of Industrial 
and Organizational Psychology (1992). At  Michigan 
State, Dr. Hollenbeck has won several teaching 
awards including the Michigan State Distinguished 
Faculty Award, the Michigan State Teacher-Scholar 
Award, and the Broad MBA Most Outstanding 
 Faculty Member.
Raymond A. Noe is the Robert and Anne 
Hoyt Designated Professor of Management at The 
Ohio State University. He was previously a profes-
sor in the Department of Management at Michigan 
State University and the Industrial Relations Center 
of the Carlson School of Management, University 
of Minnesota. He received his BS in psychology 
from The Ohio State University and his MA and 
PhD in psychology from Michigan State University. 
Professor Noe conducts research and teaches 
undergraduate as well as MBA and PhD students 
in human resource management, managerial skills, 
quantitative methods, human resource information 
systems, training, employee development, and orga-
nizational behavior. He has published articles in the 
Academy of Management Annals, Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, Academy of Management Review, Journal 
of Applied Psychology, Journal of Vocational Behavior, 
and Personnel Psychology. Professor Noe is currently 
on the editorial boards of several journals including 
Personnel Psychology, Journal of Applied Psychology, and 
Journal of Organizational Behavior. Professor Noe has 
received awards for his teaching and research excel-
lence, including the Ernest J. McCormick Award for 
Distinguished Early Career Contribution from the 
Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychol-
ogy. He is also a fellow of the Society of Industrial 
and Organizational Psychology. 
About the Authors

About the Authors ix
Barry Gerhart is Professor of Management 
and Human Resources and the Bruce R. Ellig 
Distinguished Chair in Pay and Organizational 
Effectiveness, School of Business, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison. He has also served as depart-
ment chair or area coordinator at Cornell, Vander-
bilt, and Wisconsin. His research interests include 
compensation, human resource strategy, interna-
tional human resources, and employee retention. 
Professor Gerhart received his BS in psychol-
ogy from Bowling Green State Univer sity and his 
PhD in industrial relations from the University of 
 Wisconsin-Madison. His research has been pub-
lished in a variety of outlets, includ ing the Academy 
of Management Annals, Academy of Management Jour-
nal, Annual Review of Psy chology, International Journal 
of Human Resource Management, Journal of Applied 
Psychology, Man agement and Organization Review, 
and Personnel Psychology. He has co-authored two 
books in the area of compensation. He serves on 
the edi torial boards of journals such as the  Academy 
of Management Journal, Industrial and Labor Rela-
tions Review, International Journal of Human Resource 
Management, Journal of Applied Psychology, Jour nal of 
World Business, Management & Organization Review, 
and Personnel Psychology. Professor Ger hart is a past 
recipient of the Heneman Career Achievement 
Award, the Scholarly Achieve ment Award, and of 
the International Human  Resource Management 
Scholarly Research Award, all from the Human 
Resources Divi sion, Academy of Management. He is 
a Fellow of the Academy of Management, the Amer-
ican Psychological Association, and the Society for 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology. 
Patrick  M. Wright is the Thomas C. Vandiver 
Bicentennial Chair in the Darla Moore School of 
Business at the University of South Carolina. Prior 
to joining USC, he served on the faculties at Cornell 
University, Texas A&M University, and the Univer-
sity of Notre Dame. 
Professor Wright teaches, conducts research, and 
consults in the area of Strategic Human Resource 
Management (SHRM), particularly focusing on 
how firms use people as a source of competitive 
advantage and the changing nature of the Chief 
HR Officer role. For the past eight years he has 
been studying the CHRO role through a series of 
confidential interviews, public podcasts, small dis-
cussion groups, and conducting the HR@Moore 
Survey of Chief HR Officers. In addition, he is the 
faculty leader for the Cornell ILR Executive Edu-
cation/NAHR program, “The Chief HR Officer: 
Strategies for Success,” aimed at developing poten-
tial succes sors to the CHRO role. He served as the 
lead edi tor on the recently released book, The Chief 
HR  Officer: Defining the New Role of Human Resource 
Leaders, published by John Wiley and Sons. 
He has published more than 60 research arti cles 
in journals as well as more than 20 chapters in books 
and edited volumes. He is the Incoming Editor at 
the Journal of Management. He has co edited a special 
issue of Research in Personnel and Human Resources 
Management titled “Strategic Human Resource 
Management in the 21st Cen tury” and guest edited 
a special issue of Human Resource Management 
Review titled “Research in Strategic HRM for the 
21st Century.” 
He has conducted programs and consulted for a 
number of large organizations, including Comcast, 
Royal Dutch Shell, Kennametal, Astra-Zeneca, BT, 
and BP. He currently serves as a mem ber on the 
Board of Directors for the National Academy of 
Human Resources (NAHR). He is a former board 
member of HRPS, SHRM Foun dation, and World 
at Work (formerly American Compensation Asso-
ciation). In 2011, 2012, and 2013 he was named by 
HRM Magazine as one of the 20 “Most Influential 
Thought Leaders in HR.”

x
Managing human resources is a critical component of any company’s overall mis-
sion to provide value to customers, shareholders, employees, and the community in 
which it does business. Value includes profits as well as employee growth and satisfac-
tion, creation of new jobs, contributions to community programs, and protection of 
the environment. All aspects of human resource management, including acquiring, 
preparing, developing, and compensating employees, can help companies meet their 
daily challenges, create value, and provide competitive advantages in the global mar-
ketplace. In addition, effective human resource management requires an awareness 
of broader contextual issues affecting business, such as the economy, legislation, and 
globalization.
Both the media and academic research show that effective HRM practices result 
in greater value for shareholders and employees. For example, the human resource 
practices at companies such as Google, SAS, The Boston Consulting Group, Edward 
Jones, and Quicken Loans helped them earn recognition on Fortune magazine’s 
recent list of “The Top 100 Companies to Work For.” This publicity creates a posi-
tive vibe for these companies, helping them attract talented new employees, motivate 
and retain current employees, and make their products and services more desirable 
to consumers.
Our Approach: Engage, Focus, and Apply
Following graduation, most students will find themselves working in businesses or 
not-for-profit organizations. Regardless of position or career aspirations, their role in 
directly managing other employees or understanding human resource management 
practices is critical for ensuring both company and personal success. As a result, Fun-
damentals of Human Resource Management, Sixth Edition, focuses on human resource 
issues and how HR is used at work. Fundamentals is applicable to both HR majors and 
students from other majors or colleges who are taking an HR course as an elective or 
a requirement.
Our approach to teaching human resource management involves engaging students 
in learning through the use of real-world examples and best practices; focusing them 
on important HR issues and concepts; and applying what they have learned through 
chapter features and end-of-chapter exercises and cases. Students not only learn about 
best practices but are actively engaged through the use of cases and decision making. 
As a result, students will be able to take what they have learned in the course and apply 
it to solving HRM problems they will encounter on the job.
As described in the guided tour of the book that follows, each chapter includes sev-
eral different pedagogical features. “Best Practices” provides examples of companies 
whose HR activities work well. “HR Oops!” highlights HRM issues that have been 
handled poorly. “Did You Know?” offers interesting statistics about chapter topics and 
Preface

Preface xi
how they play out in real-world companies. “HRM Social” demonstrates how social 
media and the Internet can be useful in managing HR activities in any organization. 
“Thinking Ethically” confronts students with issues that occur in managing human 
resources. For this new edition, we have added questions to each of the features to 
assist students with critical thinking and to spark classroom discussions. 
Fundamentals also assists students with learning “How to” perform HR activities, 
such as writing effective HR policies, being strategic about equal employment opportu-
nities, and making the most of HR analytics. These are all work situations students are 
likely to encounter as part of their professional careers. The end-of-chapter cases focus 
on corporate sustainability (“Taking Responsibility”), managing the workforce (“Man-
aging Talent”), and HR activities in small organizations (“HR in Small Business”).
Organization of the Sixth Edition
Based on user and reviewer feedback, we have made several changes to the chapter 
organization for the Sixth Edition. The chapter on developing human resources now 
concludes Part 2, and the chapter on creating and maintaining high-performance 
organizations has been moved up to open Part 3. We believe these changes will help 
strengthen the discussion of key concepts.
Part 1 (Chapters 1–4) discusses the environmental forces that companies face in 
trying to manage human resources effectively. These forces include economic, tech-
nological, and social trends; employment laws; and work design. Employers typically 
have more control over work design than trends and equal employment laws, but all of 
these factors influence how companies attract, retain, and motivate human resources. 
Chapter 1 discusses why HRM is a critical component to an organization’s overall suc-
cess. The chapter introduces HRM practices and the roles and responsibilities of HR 
professionals and other managers in managing human resources.
Some of the major trends discussed in Chapter 2 include how workers continue to 
look for employment as the U.S. economy recovers from recession and how the recov-
ery has motivated employees to look for new jobs and career opportunities. The chap-
ter also highlights the greater availability of new and less expensive technologies for 
HRM, including social media and the Internet; the growth of HRM on a global scale 
as more U.S. companies expand beyond national borders; the types of skills needed for 
today’s jobs; and the importance of aligning HRM with a company’s overall strategy to 
gain competitive advantage. Chapter 3 provides an overview of the major laws affect-
ing employees and the ways organizations can develop HR practices that comply with 
the laws. Chapter 4 highlights how jobs and work systems determine the knowledge, 
skills, and abilities that employees need to perform their jobs and influence employ-
ees’ motivation, satisfaction, and safety at work. The chapter also discusses the process 
of analyzing and designing jobs.
Part 2 (Chapters 5–8) deals with acquiring, training, and developing human 
resources. Chapter 5 discusses how to develop a human resources plan. It empha-
sizes the strengths and weaknesses of different options for dealing with shortages 
and excesses of human resources, including outsourcing, use of contract workers, and 
downsizing. Strategies for recruiting talented employees are highlighted, including  
use of electronic recruiting sources such as social media and online job sites.
Chapter 6 emphasizes that employee selection is a process that starts with screen-
ing applications and résumés and concludes with a job offer. The chapter takes a look 
at the most widely used methods for minimizing mistakes in choosing employees, 
including employment tests and candidate interviews. Selection method standards, 

xii 
Preface
such as reliability and validity, are discussed in understandable terms. Chapter 7 covers 
the features of effective training systems. Effective training includes not only creating 
a good learning environment but also hiring managers who encourage employees to 
use training content in their jobs and hiring employees who are motivated and ready 
to learn. Concluding Part 2, Chapter 8 demonstrates how assessment, job experiences, 
formal courses, and mentoring relationships can be used to develop employees for 
future success. 
Part 3 (Chapters 9–11) focuses on assessing and improving performance. Chap-
ter 9 sets the tone for this section of the book by discussing the important role of 
HRM in creating and maintaining an organization that achieves a high level of per-
formance for employees, managers, customers, shareholders, and community. The 
chapter describes high-performance work systems and the conditions that contribute 
to high performance. Chapter 10 examines the strengths and weaknesses of different 
performance management systems. Chapter 11 discusses how to maximize employee 
engagement and productivity and retain valuable employees as well as how to fairly 
and humanely separate employees when the need arises because of poor performance 
or economic conditions.
Part 4 (Chapters 12–14) covers rewarding and compensating human resources, 
including how to design pay structures, recognize good performers, and provide ben-
efits. Chapter 12 discusses how managers weigh the importance and costs of pay to 
develop a compensation structure and levels of pay for each job given the worth of 
the jobs, legal requirements, and employee judgments about the fairness of pay levels. 
Chapter 13 covers the advantages and disadvantages of different types of incentive 
pay, including merit pay, gainsharing, and stock ownership. Chapter 14 highlights the 
contents of employee benefits packages, the ways organizations administer benefits, 
and what companies can do to help employees understand the value of benefits and 
control benefits costs.
Part 5 (Chapters 15–16) covers other HR topics including collective bargaining 
and labor relations and managing human resources on a global basis. Chapter 15 
explores HR activities as they pertain to employees who belong to unions or who are 
seeking to join unions. Traditional issues in labor–management relations such as union 
membership and contract negotiations are discussed. The chapter also highlights new 
approaches to labor relations, the growing role of employee empowerment, and the 
shrinking size of union membership.
Concluding Part 5, Chapter 16 focuses on HR activities in international settings, 
including planning, selecting, training, and compensating employees who work overseas. 
The chapter also explores how cultural differences among countries and workers affect 
decisions about human resources.
New Features and Content Changes
In addition to all new or revised chapter pedagogy, the Sixth Edition of Fundamentals 
contains the following features:
 • New Format for Chapter Summaries: To help students learn chapter content, 
the Chapter Summary has been revamped to highlight key points in a bulleted list 
format for each chapter learning objective.
 • Review Questions Keyed to Learning Objectives: As a way of pinpointing 
key concepts, the chapter review questions now tie in to specific chapter learning 
objectives for quick student reference.

Preface xiii
 • Key Terms in Discussion Order: To assist students in learning important chap-
ter topics, key terms are now listed in discussion order rather than alphabetical 
order at the end of the chapter. The key terms and definitions are also listed in the 
end-of-book glossary for additional study. 
 • HR in Small Business: A case has been added to each chapter that highlights 
some of the HR challenges faced by small businesses. 
The following content changes help students and instructors keep current on 
important HR trends and topics: 
 • Chapter 1 addresses the new chapter reorganization in Figure 1.1 and Table 1.3. It 
also discusses a recent trend in which some companies are doing away with sepa-
rate HR departments, encouraging managers and other employees to handle HR 
issues as they arise. Table 1.2 has been updated to list the top qualities employers 
look for in potential employees. Figure 1.3 has been revised to reflect the compe-
tencies and example behaviors defined by the Society of Human Resource Man-
agement (SHRM). Figure 1.6 has been updated to reflect current median salaries 
for HRM positions. 
 • Chapter 2 provides updated workforce statistics, including projections for num-
ber of workers over the next several years, as well as a discussion on various age 
and ethnic groups within the workforce. Chapter figures have been revised to 
reflect current labor force data. Other trends discussed include which occupa-
tions are expected to gain the most jobs in the coming decade. A new section on 
the trends in cost control and the impact of the Affordable Care Act is touched 
on and revisited later in the benefits chapter (Chapter 14). New sections on 
declining union membership and reshoring of jobs back to the United States 
have been added. 
 • Chapter 3 has been updated to include a discussion on the Lilly Ledbetter Fair 
Pay Act and its impact on pay discrimination and employment law. Chapter 
 figures have been updated to reflect current statistics on age discrimination, dis-
ability complaints filed under ADA, types of charges filed with the EEOC, and 
rates of occupational injuries and illnesses. A section has been added about how to 
keep emergency response workers safe as they aid victims of disasters. 
 • Chapter 4 includes a new discussion on analyzing teamwork and an updated dis-
cussion on the growing trend among companies to encourage telework arrange-
ments with workers. 
 • Chapter 5’s discussion on downsizing, reducing hours, and outsourcing includes 
new company examples that help students understand how real-world companies 
deal with the ups and downs of everyday business and decisions relating to human 
resources. 
 • Chapter 6 has several topics that have been updated, including the importance of 
hiring workers who will fit in well with a company’s culture; how the legalization 
of marijuana may impact drug testing as part of the employee selection process; 
and how companies are changing their approach to subjectivity when it comes to 
interviewing job candidates. 
 • In the training chapter (Chapter 7), new examples explore how some compa-
nies are thinking differently about training strategies, employing virtual reality, 
simulations, teamwork exercises, and social media for learning reinforcement and 
employee motivation. 

xiv 
Preface
 • Chapter 8 focuses on development and includes an updated section on the use of 
assessment tools, including the DiSC assessment tool. 
 • Chapter 9 provides an updated discussion of how HRM practices can contribute to 
high performance of any organization, including job design, recruitment and selec-
tion, training, performance management, and compensation. 
 • Chapter 10 includes a new discussion on how managers should adjust their 
approach to performance feedback to the level of performance demonstrated by 
individual employees. 
 • Chapter 11 provides an expanded discussion on implementing strategies to ensure 
a company’s discipline system follows procedures consistent for all employees. 
 • Chapter 12’s discussion about earnings data for women, men, and minorities 
has been updated, as well as the discussion about HRM salaries in various parts 
of the country. The chapter also contains current statistics about CEO pay and 
compensation. 
 • Chapter 13 focuses on recognizing employee contributions with pay, including 
new real-world examples about how businesses are rethinking their approach to 
performance bonuses, tying them to company performance, and the increased use 
of retention bonuses for executives and other key employees as part of company 
mergers and acquisitions. 
 • Chapter 14 includes updated data on employee benefits as a percentage of total 
compensation, Social Security information, and taxes paid by employers and 
employees. The section on health care benefits, including updates about the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act, has been revised to include current informa-
tion and requirements. 
 • Chapter 15 has been updated with current trends and statistics in union member-
ship. Content on work stoppages and lockouts has been added. New sections focus 
on increased cooperation between unions and management and highlight several 
nonunion representation systems currently being used by companies across the 
country. 
 • Concluding the Sixth Edition, Chapter 16 highlights trends in managing human 
resources globally, including the issue of labor relations in various countries, which 
may impact a company’s ability to be successful on foreign soil.
The author team believes that the focused, engaging, and applied approach of Funda-
mentals distinguishes it from other books that have similar coverage of HR topics. The 
book has timely coverage of important HR issues, is easy to read, has many features that 
grab the students’ attention, and gets students actively involved in learning.
We would like to thank those of you who have adopted previous editions of Fun-
damentals, and we hope that you will continue to use upcoming editions. For those 
of you considering Fundamentals for adoption, we believe that our approach makes 
Fundamentals your text of choice for human resource management.
Acknowledgments
The Sixth Edition of Fundamentals of Human Resource Management would not have been 
possible without the staff of McGraw-Hill Education. Despite the uncertainty surrounding 
the reorganization at McGraw-Hill, Mike Ablassmeir and Anke Weekes, the editors who 
worked on this edition of Fundamentals, deserve kudos for their laser focus on ensuring 

Preface xv
that we continue to improve the book based on the ideas of both adopters and students. 
Also, we appreciate that they gave us creative license to use new cases and examples in the 
chapter pedagogy and text to keep Fundamentals interesting and current. John Weimeister, 
our former editor, helped us develop the vision for the book and gave us the resources we 
needed to develop a top-of-the-line HRM teaching package. Jane Beck’s valuable insights 
and organizational skills kept the author team on deadline and made the book more visu-
ally appealing than the authors could have ever done on their own. We would also like 
to thank Cate Rzasa who worked diligently to make sure that the book was interesting, 
practical, and readable and remained true to findings of human resource management 
research. We also thank Michael Gedatus for his marketing efforts for this new edition.
We would like to extend our sincere appreciation to all of the professors who gave 
of their time to offer their suggestions and insightful comments that helped us to 
develop and shape this new edition:
Glenda Barrett
University of Maryland, University College
Marian Canada
Ivy Tech Community College
Jeanie Douglas
Columbia College
Joseph Eppolito
Syracuse University
Betty Fair
Georgia College and State University
Amy Falink
University of Minnesota
Lisa Foeman
University of Maryland, University College
Deborah Good
University of Pittsburgh
Jonathon Halbesleben
University of Alabama, Birmingham
Tanya Hubanks
Chippewa Valley Technical College
Roy Johnson
Iowa State University
Chris McChesney
Indian River State College
Garry McDaniel
Franklin University
Liliana Meneses
University of Maryland, University College
Barbara Minsky
Troy State University, Dothan
Richard Murdock
Utah Valley University
Dan Nehring
Morehead State University
James Phillips
Northeastern State University
David Ripley
University of Maryland, University College
Rudy Soliz
Houston Community College
Gary Stroud
Franklin University
Gary Thurgood
Texas A&M University, College Station
Sheng Wang
University of Nevada, Las Vegas
Donna Wyatt
University of Maryland, University College
Joy Young
University of South Carolina, Columbia
Our supplement authors deserve thanks for helping us create a first-rate teaching 
package. Joyce LeMay of Bethel University wrote the newly custom-designed Instruc-
tor’s Manual and Dr. Connie Sitterly authored the new PowerPoint presentation.

xvi 
Preface
We would also like to thank the professors who gave of their time to review the 
previous editions through various stages of development.
Michelle Alarcon, Esq.
Hawaii Pacific University
Dr. Minnette A. Bumpus
University of the District of Columbia
Brennan Carr
Long Beach City College/El Camino College
Tom Comstock
Gannon University
Susie S. Cox
McNeese State University
Juan J. DelaCruz
Lehman College—CUNY
AnnMarie DiSienna
Dominican College
Lorrie Ferraro
Northeastern University
Carla Flores
Ball State University
Linette P. Fox
Johnson C. Smith University
Britt Hastey
UCLA, Chapman University, and Los 
Angeles City College
Kim Hester
Arkansas State University
Samira B. Hussein
Johnson County Community College
Joseph V. Ippolito
Brevard College
Adonis “Sporty” Jeralds
The University of South Carolina–Columbia
Guy Lochiatto
Mass Bay Community College
Liliana Meneses
University of Maryland University College
Kelly Mollica
The University of Memphis
Tami Moser
Southern Oklahoma State University
Richard J. Wagner
University of Wisconsin–Whitewater
Brandon L. Young
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
Raymond A. Noe
John R. Hollenbeck
Barry Gerhart
Patrick M. Wright

xvii
xvii
The sixth edition of 
Fundamentals of Human 
Resource Management 
continues to offer  students 
a brief introduction to 
HRM that is rich with 
examples and engaging in 
its application.
Please take a moment to 
page through some of 
the highlights of this new 
edition.

xviii
xviii
Students who want 
to learn more about 
how human resource 
management is used 
in the everyday work 
environment will 
fi nd that the sixth 
edition is engaging, 
focused, and applied, 
giving them the HRM 
knowledge they need 
to succeed.
WHAT DO I NEED TO KNOW?
2
Trends in Human Resource 
Management
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 2-1 Describe trends in the labor force composition and 
how they affect human resource management.
 LO 2-2 Summarize areas in which human resource 
management can support the goal of creating a 
high-performance work system.
 LO 2-3 Deﬁ ne employee empowerment, and explain its 
role in the modern organization.
 LO 2-4 Identify ways HR professionals can support organi-
zational strategies for growth, quality, and efﬁ ciency.
 LO 2-5 Summarize ways in which human resource 
management can support organizations expanding 
internationally.
 LO 2-6 Discuss how technological developments are 
affecting human resource management.
 LO 2-7 Explain how the nature of the employment 
relationship is changing.
 LO 2-8 Discuss how the need for ﬂ exibility affects human 
resource management.
Introduction
Business experts point out that if you want your company to gain an advan-
tage over competitors, you have to do something differently. Some manag-
ers are taking a hard look at human resources management, asking if it 
needs to be a department at all. At the consulting firm LRN Corporation, 
management decided to eliminate the human resources department. Their 
idea was that if all managers were responsible for managing talent, they 
would make those decisions in a way that directly served their group’s per-
formance. Beam, the maker of spirits such as Maker’s Mark bourbon and 
Jim Beam whiskey, made its line managers responsible for hiring, training, 
and making compensation decisions. They are advised by a small group of 
“business partners,” who consult with the line managers on HR questions.1
Is this the end of human resource management? Probably not. The typ-
ical company today is maintaining the size of its human resource depart-
ment and even spending a little more on the function.2 At LRN, current and 
former employees have said line managers sometimes struggle with mak-
ing HR decisions. For example, a line manager needs time to figure out how 
to define a job and set a salary range for it, which slows down the whole 
hiring process. At Beam, the HR business partners are playing a more 
strategic role than a traditional HR staffer focused on routine processes. 
A lot of managers are disappointed 
in the support they get from their HR 
teams, according to a survey by the 
Hay Group, a global consulting fi rm. 
The survey questioned line manag-
ers and HR directors in China, the 
United Kingdom, and the United 
States about their working relation-
ships. The results suggest that those 
relationships are often strained.
HR directors reported being chal-
lenged by cutbacks in their depart-
ment. One-third said they spend 21% 
to 50% of their time responding to 
inquiries from managers, and three-
fourths said line managers want 
 immediate responses. For their part, 
41% of line managers in the United 
States said the HR department is too 
slow in responding, and 47% said 
they could make decisions better 
and faster if they had more informa-
tion from the department. An embar-
rassing 29% rated Google above the 
HR department for providing perti-
nent information.
Hay’s consultants suggest that 
human resource managers need to 
focus on how they can empower line 
managers by providing them with 
easy access to relevant information.
Questions
 1. Suggest one way that HR 
managers might improve their 
helpfulness to line managers
 2. Suggest one way that line 
managers can improve 
communications with HR 
managers, so they get the 
support they need.
Sources: Laurence Doe, “Relationship 
between Line Managers and HR under 
Increasing Strain, Hay Group Finds,” 
HR Magazine (UK), November 21, 2013, 
http://www.hrmagazine.co.uk; Hay 
Group, “More Managers Turn to Google 
for HR Information,” Business Wire, 
 November 20, 2013, http://www
.businesswire.com; Philip Spriet, 
“‘Power On’: From Passing the Buck 
to Activating the Line,” Hay Group 
Blog, October 16, 2013, http://blog
.haygroup.com.
Less Helpful than a Search Engine?
HR Oops!
Engage students through examples of 
 companies whose HR departments have fallen 
short. Discussion questions at the end of each 
feature encourage student analysis of the situ-
ation. Examples include “Few Companies Are 
Prepared for Future Talent Needs,” “401(k) 
Plans Are a Missed Opportunity for Many,” 
and “Cross-Cultural Management Mishaps.”
HR Oops!
UPDATED!
Assurance of learning:
• Learning objectives open each chapter.
• Learning objectives are referenced in the page mar-
gins where the relevant discussion begins and are 
referenced in each Review and Discussion Question 
at the end of the chapter.
• The chapter summary is written around the same 
learning objectives and is provided in an easy-to-read 
bulleted list format.
• Instructor testing questions are tagged to the 
 appropriate objective they cover.
F e a t u r e s

xix
xix
Expanding into Global Markets
LO 2-5 Summarize
Land O’Lakes is an example of a 
company that has successfully re-
duced costs by outsourcing human 
resource activities. Best known for 
its butter and other dairy products, 
the company is a food and agricul-
ture cooperative owned by the farm-
ers who participate in the business. 
The co-op’s 10,000 employees work 
toward a strategy of delivering strong 
fi nancial performance for its farmer-
owners while providing programs 
and services that help the farmers 
operate more successfully.
In support of that strategy, Pam 
Grove, the senior director of ben-
efi ts and HR operations, led Land 
O’Lakes to outsource the adminis-
tration of employee benefi ts. Man-
agement determined that benefi ts 
administration was not an activity 
that contributed to the company’s 
strategy, and Land O’Lakes already 
had successfully used an outside 
fi rm to administer its 401(k) retire-
ment savings plan. So Grove ar-
ranged to have a fi rm administer its 
health insurance and pension plans 
as well.
Outsourcing achieved the basic 
goal of reducing costs, but that was 
not the only advantage. Grove freed 
up time for focusing on strategy-
related activities, and she says the 
outsourcing arrangement also has 
improved service to employees. 
When the company tackled health 
benefi t costs by offering a high-
deductible health plan, which shifts 
spending decisions to employees, 
Grove and her staff visited 100 Land 
O’Lakes locations to explain the new 
option. Employee enrollment was 
double her expectations, helping 
the company save millions of dollars 
while keeping employees satisfi ed 
with their benefi ts.
Questions
 1. When does outsourcing 
make strategic sense for an 
organization such as Land 
O’Lakes?
 2. How does Grove ensure that a 
cost-conscious practice such 
as outsourcing is well received 
by employees?
Sources: Land O’Lakes Inc., “Com-
pany,” http://www.landolakesinc
.com, accessed April 22, 2014; Land 
O’Lakes Inc., “Careers,” http://www
.landolakesinc.com/careers, accessed 
April 22, 2014; Susan J. Wells, “Benefi ts 
Strategies Grow: And HR Leads the 
Way,” HR Magazine, March 2013. 
Outsourcing Enriches the Bottom Line for Land O’Lakes
Best Practices
Engage students through examples of 
 companies whose HR departments are work-
ing well. Examples include “Morton Salt’s 
Prize-Winning Safety Program,” “Employees 
Are Quicken Loans’ Most Valuable Asset,” 
and “Machinists and Steelworkers Unions 
Help Harley-Davidson Get Lean.”
In the age of social networking, information sharing has become far more  powerful 
than simply a means of increasing effi ciency through self-service. Creative organizations 
are enabling information sharing online to permit a free fl ow of knowledge among the 
i
ti
’
l
E il
I t
ti
l
i l
t
ki
t i
l
i
i
Software companies are creating 
apps that let employees view their 
pay stubs, request time off, check 
the amounts of their bonuses, fi ll out 
and approve time sheets, look up 
coworkers in company directories, 
and more. At the same time, a grow-
ing number of employees expect to 
be able to use their mobile devices 
for looking up work-related infor-
mation. Given the possibility of and 
pressure for mobile HRM, here are 
some guidelines for making it work:
 • Learn which mobile devices 
employees are using. Make sure 
applications will run properly on 
all the devices.
 • Set priorities for introducing 
mobile applications that support 
your company’s strategy.
 • Make sure your company has 
mobile-friendly versions of 
its careers website. Many of 
today’s job hunters are look-
ing for leads on their mobile 
devices, and they expect to be 
able to submit an application 
that way.
 • If your company uses online 
training, create versions that run 
well on mobile devices.
 • Select vendors that not only 
have software for existing mobile 
devices but also will be fl exible 
as hardware changes. Check 
references to fi nd out whether 
vendors have a history of keep-
ing up with changing technology.
 • Investigate the security protec-
tion built into any app you are 
considering.
 • Test mobile HRM apps to be 
sure they are easy to use and 
understand.
Questions
 1. How could offering a mobile 
version of its careers website 
support an organization’s 
strategy?
 2. What could be an advantage 
of using a software vendor 
for mobile HR apps, instead 
of having your organization’s 
employees create the apps?
Sources: Dave Zielinski, “The Mobiliza-
tion of HR Tech,” HR Magazine, February 
2014, Business Insights: Global, http://
bi.galegroup.com; Jennifer Alsever, 
“Objective: Hire Top Talent,” Fortune, 
January 23, 2014, http://money.cnn.com; 
Tom Keebler, “New Considerations for 
HR Service Delivery Success: Where to 
Begin?” Workforce Solutions Review, 
December 2013, pp. 17–19.
Providing HR Services on Mobile Devices
HR How To
Engage students through examples of how 
HR departments use social media as part of 
their daily activities. Examples include “The 
Discrimination Risk of Using Social Media 
in Hiring,” “Salary Talk Is Trending,” and 
“Social Support for Getting Healthy.”
Some managers believe organiza-
tions need policies restricting em-
ployees’ access to social media 
such as Twitter and Facebook. Their 
belief is based on the assumption 
that using social media is merely 
a distraction from doing real work. 
However, the research evidence for 
this assumption is mixed—and the 
impact of social media may vary 
across generations of workers.
Some studies simply ask em-
ployees for their opinions about 
their access to social media. A 
survey of Canadian workers found 
that almost two-thirds have been 
distracted by social media, e-mail, 
or Web browsing. One-third re-
ported losing more than an hour a 
day in checking e-mail and social 
media, and two-thirds said they 
would get more done if they were 
international survey of information 
workers, almost half said using so-
cial media had increased their pro-
ductivity. The younger the workers, 
the more likely they were to asso-
ciate social-media use with greater 
productivity and to say they could 
do their jobs even better if their em-
ployer would loosen restrictions on 
the use of social media.
Another study, conducted by the 
Warwick Business School, in the 
United Kingdom, measured output 
instead of opinions. According to the 
researchers, using social media was 
associated with greater productiv-
ity. The two-year study of employees 
at a telecommunications company 
found that they were more produc-
tive when they used social media to 
communicate with customers. The 
mixed results suggest that a single 
Questions
1. Thinking about your current job 
or a job you would like to have, 
would access to social media 
help or distract you? Do you 
think your age plays a role in 
your opinion? Why?
2. How could human resource 
management support decisions 
about creating a policy for using 
social media?
Sources: Thomson Reuters, “Two-Thirds 
of Workers Distracted by Emails, Inter-
net, Social Media: Survey,” Canadian 
HR Reporter, April 17, 2014, http://www.
hrreporter.com; Shea Bennett, “Social 
Media Increases Offi ce Productivity, but 
Management Still Resistant, Says Study,” 
MediaBistro, June 26, 2013, http://www.
mediabistro.com; Bernhard Warner, 
“When Social Media at Work Don’t Create 
Productivity Killing Distractions ” Bloomberg
What Social-Media Policies Are Suitable across Generations?
HRM Social
Engage students through specific steps to 
 create HRM programs and tackle common 
challenges. Examples include “Writing 
Effective HR Policies,” “Providing HR Ser-
vices on Mobile Devices,” and “Complying 
with the Affordable Care Act.”
Did You Know?
Half of employed workers are look-
ing for a new job or would welcome 
an offer, according to a U.S. survey 
by the Jobvite software company. 
Looking at both employed and 
unemployed workers, Jobvite found 
that 71% are actively seeking or open 
to a new job. Jobvite’s CEO notes 
that workers with mobile devices are 
looking for jobs “all the time.”
Question
What challenges and opportuni-
ties do employers face in a climate 
where half of an organization’s em-
ployees feel ready to leave?
Sources: Bureau of National Affairs, 
“Half of Workers Open to or Actively 
Seeking New Job, Jobvite Survey 
Finds,” HR Focus, March 2014, p. 16; 
Dinah Wisenberg Brin, “Study: Most 
U.S. Workers Willing to Quit,” Society 
for Human Resource Management, 
February 25, 2014, http://www.shrm.
org; company website, “Jobvite Seeker 
Nation Study,” 2014, http://recruiting.
jobvite.com.
Half of U.S. Employees Interested in Changing Jobs
U.S. labor force
Employed workers
Workers Seeking or Open to a New Job
rs
e
Engage students through interesting sta-
tistics related to chapter topics. Examples 
include “Half of U.S. Employees Interested 
in Changing Jobs,” “Selection Decisions 
Affect the Bottom Line,” and “Employers 
Stress Merit Pay to Retain Workers.”
Best Practices
HRM Social
Did You Know?
HR How To
UPDATED!
UPDATED!
UPDATED!
UPDATED!

xx
xx
Focused on ethics. Reviewers indicate 
that the Thinking Ethically feature, 
which confronts students in each 
chapter with an ethical issue regarding 
managing human resources, is a high-
light. This feature has been updated 
throughout the text.
Apply the concepts in each chapter 
through comprehensive review and 
 discussion questions, which are now 
keyed to chapter learning objectives.
Apply concepts in each chapter 
through three cases that focus on 
corporate sustainability,  talent 
management, and HR in small 
business. These cases can be used 
as the basis for class lectures, and 
the questions provided at the 
end of each case are suitable for 
assignments or discussion.
THINKING ETHICALLY
HOW SHOULD EMPLOYERS PROTECT 
THEIR DATA ON EMPLOYEES’ DEVICES?
One area in which business managers might consult 
with HR managers involves the treatment of company 
data on employees’ electronic devices. In the past, or-
ganizations stored their data on their own hardware. But 
laptop computers and, more recently, tablet computers 
and smartphones make it possible for employees to 
carry around data on these mobile devices. Increasingly 
often, the devices are not even owned by the company, 
but by the employees themselves. For example, an em-
ployee’s smartphone might include business as well as 
personal contacts in several mobile apps.
The situation is convenient for everyone until 
something goes wrong: a device is lost, an employee 
becomes upset with a manager, or the organization 
lays off some workers. From the standpoint of pro-
tecting data, the obvious solution is to remove the 
data from the devices. So far, no law forbids this. 
However, it has consequences for the employees. 
Remotely wiping data from a device will remove all of 
it, including the user’s personal data, such as photos 
and addresses.
Companies are addressing concerns by crafting se-
curity policies for employees who want to use their own 
devices for work-related tasks such as e-mail. Typi-
cally, the policy requires the employee to download a 
program for mobile device management. If specifi ed 
conditions arise, such as loss of the device or termina-
tion of the employee, the company can use the software 
to send the device a message that wipes out all the data 
stored on the device. The company also can give the 
employee some notice, allowing time to save personal 
data, but this increases the risk to the company. Some 
employees have complained about their phones being 
unexpectedly erased after they left a company. They 
admit they might have been given a link to terms and 
conditions but tend not to read the terms of using a pro-
gram such as company e-mail.
Questions
 1. Imagine you work in the human resources depart-
ment of a company considering a policy to protect 
its data on employees’ mobile devices. In advising 
on this policy, what rights should you consider?
 2. What advice would you give or actions would you 
take to ensure that the policy is administered fairly 
and equitably?
Sources: “Using Your Personal Phone for Work Could Cost 
You,” CBS Miami, March 26, 2014, http://miami.cbslocal.com; 
Lauren Weber, “BYOD? Leaving a Job Can Mean Losing Pic-
tures of Grandma,” Wall Street Journal, January 21, 2014, http://
online.wsj.com; Society for Human Resource Management, 
“Safety and Security Technology: Can an Employer  Remotely 
Wipe/Brick an Employee’s Personal Cell Phone?” SHRM 
 Knowledge Center, November 5, 2013, http://www.shrm.org.
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. What is the role of each branch of the federal gov-
ernment with regard to equal employment oppor-
tunity? (LO 3-1)
 2. For each of the following situations, identify one or 
more constitutional amendments, laws, or execu-
tive orders that might apply. (LO 3-2)
 
a.  A veteran of the Vietnam conflict experiences 
lower-back pain after sitting for extended peri-
ods of time. He has applied for promotion to 
a supervisory position that has traditionally 
involved spending most of the workday behind 
a desk.
 
b.  One of two female workers on a road construc-
tion crew complains to her supervisor that she 
feels uncomfortable during breaks, because the 
other employees routinely tell off-color jokes.
 
c.  A manager at an architectural firm receives a 
call from the local newspaper. The reporter 
wonders how the firm wishes to respond to 
calls from two of its employees alleging racial 
discrimination. About half of the firm’s employ-
ees (including all of its partners and most of its 
architects) are white. One of the firm’s clients is 
the federal government.
 3. For each situation in the preceding question, 
what actions, if any, should the organization take? 
(LO 3-4)
 4. The Americans with Disabilities Act requires that 
employers 
make 
reasonable 
accommodations 
for individuals with disabilities. How might this 
requirement affect law enforcement offi cers and 
fi refi ghters? (LO 3-4)
 5. To identify instances of sexual harassment, the 
courts may use a “reasonable woman” standard of 
what constitutes offensive behavior. This standard 
is based on the idea that women and men have dif-
ferent ideas of what behavior is appropriate. What 
are the implications of this distinction? Do you 
think this distinction is helpful or harmful? Why? 
(LO 3-5)
 6. Given that the “reasonable woman” standard re-
ferred to in Question 5 is based on women’s ideas 
of what is appropriate, how might an organization 
with mostly male employees identify and avoid be-
havior that could be found to be sexual harassment? 
(LO 3-5)
 7. What are an organization’s basic duties under the 
Occupational Safety and Health Act? (LO 3-6)
 8. OSHA penalties are aimed at employers, rather than 
employees. How does this affect employee safety? 
(LO 3-7)
 9. How can organizations motivate employees to pro-
mote safety and health in the workplace? (LO 3-8)
 10. For each of the following occupations, identify at 
least one possible hazard and at least one action 
employers could take to minimize the risk of an in-
jury or illness related to that hazard. (LO 3-8)
 
a. Worker in a fast-food restaurant
 
b. Computer programmer
 
c. Truck driver
 
d. House painter
58
e
u a
esou ce
o
e t
Netflix Treats Workers “Like Adults”
When Patty McCord talks about human resource man-
agement at Netfl ix, she refers to treating people “like 
adults.” McCord, until recently the company’s chief tal-
ent offi cer, means the company hires people who are 
mature enough to take responsibility and then simply 
gives them responsibility. The result, McCord insists, is 
that employees live up to what is expected of them. If 
not, the company feels free to fi nd someone else. That 
direct approach makes sense to the knowledge work-
ers who populate the results-oriented, data-respecting 
world of information technology.
When McCord was at Netfl ix, she and CEO Reed 
Hastings settled on fi ve principles that would direct the 
company’s approach to human resource management:
 1. Hire, reward, and keep only “fully formed adults.” For 
McCord and Hastings, such employees use common 
sense, address problems openly, and put company in-
terests ahead of their own. People like this need not 
be managed with endless policies. Rather, the com-
pany can trust them to take off time when they need 
it and spend money appropriately. The employees 
also are literally adults; Netfl ix favors hiring experi-
enced workers over recruiting at colleges.
 2. Tell the truth about performance. Managers are expected 
to make performance feedback part of their routine 
conversations with employees. If an employee is no 
longer working out, managers are supposed to let him 
or her know directly, offering a good severance pack-
age to smooth a dignifi ed path to the exit.
3 Managers are responsible for creating great teams The
 4. The company’s leaders must create the company culture. 
Netfl ix executives are supposed to model behaviors 
such as truth-telling and treating people like adults. 
 5. HR managers should think of themselves fi rst as business-
people. As chief talent manager, McCord focused on 
the company’s fi nancial success and products, not on 
employee morale. She assumed that if employees, as 
adults, were able to make Netfl ix a high-performance 
organization and be compensated fairly, that would 
improve morale more than anything.
To put these principles into action, Netfl ix rewards high-
performing employees with fair pay and a fl exible sched-
ule. Employees who do not perform up to standards are 
asked to leave. Rewarding high performance, in fact, 
makes it easier to allow fl exibility and empowerment, be-
cause managers do not have to police every action and 
decision. It also creates an environment in which employ-
ees do not assume they have a Netfl ix job forever. Rather, 
they are responsible for doing good work and developing 
the skills that continue to make them valuable to their 
employer. Netfl ix’s approach to talent helps the company 
stay agile—perhaps agile enough to withstand the shift-
ing winds of entertainment in the digital age.
Questions
 1. How well suited do you think Netfl ix’s principles are 
to managing the knowledge workers (mainly soft-
ware engineers) who work for Netfl ix? Explain.
 2. What qualities of Netfl ix support the idea that it is a 
high-performance work system? What other quali-
MANAGING TALENT
F e a t u r e s

xxi
Across the country, instructors and students continue to raise an important question: 
How can Human Resource Management courses further support students throughout 
the learning process to shape future business leaders? While there is no one solution, 
we see the impact of new learning technologies and innovative study tools that not 
only fully engage students in course material but also inform instructors of the stu-
dents’ skill and comprehension levels.
Interactive learning tools, including those offered through McGraw-Hill 
 Connect, are being implemented to increase teaching effectiveness and learn-
ing efficiency in thousands of colleges and universities. By facilitating a stron-
ger connection with the course and incorporating the latest  technologies—such 
as  McGraw-Hill LearnSmart, an adaptive learning program—these tools enable 
 students to succeed in their college careers, which will ultimately increase the per-
centage of students completing their postsecondary degrees and create the business 
leaders of the future.
McGraw-Hill Connect
business
® Connect is an all-digital teaching and learning environment 
designed from the ground up to work with the way instructors 
and students think, teach, and learn. As a digital teaching, 
assignment, and assessment platform, Connect strengthens the link among faculty, stu-
dents, and coursework, helping everyone accomplish more in less time. 
LearnSmart
THE SMARTEST WAY TO GET FROM B TO A 
LearnSmart is the most widely used and 
intelligent adaptive learning resource. It 
is proven to strengthen memory recall, 
improve course retention, and boost 
grades by distinguishing between what 
students know and what they don’t know 
and honing in on the concepts that they 
are most likely to forget. LearnSmart con-
tinuously adapts to each student’s needs 
by building an individual learning path. As 
a result, students study smarter and retain 
more knowledge.
Results-Driven Support
Grade Distribution
Without 
LearnSmart
A
30.5%
B
33.5%
C
22.6%
A
19.3%
B
38.6%
C
28.0%
With 
LearnSmart
58% more As
with LearnSmart
With 
LearnSmart
Without 
LearnSmart
Student Pass Rate
25% more students
passed with LearnSmart

xxii 
Results-Driven Support
SmartBook 
A REVOLUTION IN READING 
Fueled by LearnSmart, SmartBook is the first and only adaptive reading experience 
available today. SmartBook personalizes content for each student in a continuously 
adapting reading experience. Reading is no longer a passive and linear experience, 
but an engaging and dynamic one where students are more likely to master and retain 
important concepts, coming to class better prepared. 
LearnSmart Achieve 
EXCEL IN YOUR CLASS
Accelerate student success with Learn-
Smart Achieve™—the first and only adap-
tive study experience that pinpoints 
individual student knowledge gaps and  provides targeted, interactive help at the 
moment of need.
Interactive Applications
A HIGHER LEVEL OF LEARNING
These exercises require students to APPLY what they have learned in a real-world 
scenario. These online exercises will help students assess their understanding of the 
concepts.
Media Rich eBook
Connect provides students with a cost-saving alternative to the traditional textbook. A 
seamless integration of a media rich eBook features the following:
• A web-optimized eBook, allowing for anytime, anywhere online access to the 
textbook.
• Powerful search function to pinpoint and connect key concepts in a snap.
• Highlighting and note-taking capabilities as well as access to shared instructors’ 
notations.

xxiii
Connect and LearnSmart allow students to 
present course material to students in more 
ways than just the explanations they hear 
from me directly. Because of this, students 
are processing the material in new ways, 
requiring them to think. I now have more 
students asking questions in class because 
the more we think, the more we question.
Instructor at Hinds Community College
business
® McGraw-Hill strengthens the link between faculty, students, 
and coursework, helping everyone accomplish more in less 
time.
Efficient Administrative Capabilities
Connect offers you, the instructor, auto-gradable material in an effort to facilitate 
teaching and learning. 
The Best Instructor 
Support on the Market
60 minutes
without Connect
Reviewing Homework
60 minutes
without Connect
15 minutes
with Connect
60 minutes
without Connect
0 minutes
with Connect
12 minutes
with Connect
Giving Tests or Quizzes
Grading
Student Progress Tracking
Connect keeps instructors informed about how each student, section, and class is per-
forming, allowing for more productive use of lecture and office hours. The progress 
tracking function enables instructors to:
 • View scored work immediately and track individual or group performance with 
assignment and grade reports.
 • Access an instant view of student or class performance relative to learning objectives.
 • Collect data and generate reports required by 
many accreditation organizations, such as 
AACSB.
Actionable Data
Connect Insight is a powerful data analytics tool that 
allows instructors to leverage aggregated information 
about their courses and students to provide a more per-
sonalized teaching and learning experience.

xxiv 
The Best Instructor Support on the Market
Connect Instructor Library 
Connect’s instructor library serves as a one-stop, secure site for essential course materi-
als, allowing you to save prep time before class. The instructor resources found in the 
library include:
 • Instructor’s Manual: The custom-designed Instructor’s Manual includes chapter 
summaries, learning objectives, an extended chapter outline, key terms, description 
of text boxes, discussion questions, summary of end-of-chapter cases, and additional 
activities.
 • Test Bank: The Test Bank has been revised and updated to reflect the content of 
the Sixth Edition of the book. Each chapter includes multiple-choice, true/false, 
and essay questions.
 • EZ Test: McGraw-Hill’s EZ Test is a flexible and easy-to-use electronic testing 
program. The program allows instructors to create tests from book-specific items. 
It accommodates a wide range of question types and instructors may add their own 
questions. Multiple versions of the test can be created and any test can be exported 
for use with course management systems such as BlackBoard, D2L, or Moodle. 
The program is available for Windows and Macintosh environments.
 • PowerPoint: The slides include lecture material, additional content to expand 
concepts in the text, and discussion questions, and the PowerPoint slides also 
include detailed teaching notes.
 • Videos: Human Resource Management Video DVD, volume 3, offers video clips 
on HRM issues for each chapter of this edition. You’ll find a new video produced 
by the SHRM Foundation entitled “Once the Deal Is Done: Making Mergers 
Work.” Three new videos specifically address employee benefits: “GM Cuts Ben-
efits and Pay,” “Sulphur Springs Teachers,” and “Google Employees’ Perks.” Other 
new videos available for this edition include “E-Learning English” for the chapter 
on employee development and “Recession Job Growth” for the chapter on HR 
planning recruitment. Two new videos specifically address recession-related HR 
issues: “Some Workers Willing to Sacrifice to Avoid Layoffs” and “Stretched Small 
Business Owners Forced to Lay Off Employees.” Other notable videos available for 
this edition include “Johnson & Johnson eUniversity” for the chapter on training 
and “Hollywood Labor Unions” for the chapter on collective bargaining and labor 
relations.
Video Library DVDs
McGraw-Hill offers the most comprehensive video support for the Human Resource 
Management classroom through course library video DVDs. This discipline has 
library volume DVDs tailored to integrate and visually reinforce chapter concepts. 
The library volume DVD contains more than 40 clips! The rich video material, organ-
ized by topic, comes from sources such as PBS, NBC, BBC, SHRM, and McGraw-
Hill. Video cases and video guides are provided for some clips.
Destination CEO Videos
These video clips feature CEOs on a variety of topics. Accompanying each clip are 
multiple-choice questions and discussion questions to use in the classroom or assign 
as a quiz.

The Best Instructor Support on the Market xxv
Create
Instructors can now tailor their teach-
ing  resources to match the way they 
teach! With McGraw-Hill Create, www.
mcgrawhillcreate.com, instructors can 
easily rearrange chapters, combine material from other content sources, and quickly 
upload and integrate their own content, like course syllabi or teaching notes. Find the 
right content in Create by searching through thousands of leading McGraw-Hill text-
books. Arrange the material to fit your teaching style. Order a Create book and receive 
a complimentary print review copy in three to five business days or a complimentary 
electronic review copy via e-mail within one hour. Go to www.mcgrawhillcreate.
com today and register.
Binder-Ready Loose-Leaf Text (ISBN 9781259304415)
This full-featured text is provided as an option to the price-sensitive student. It is a 
four-color text that’s three-hole punched and made available at a discount to students. 
It is also available in a package with Connect. 
Tegrity Campus 
®
Tegrity makes class time available 24/7 by auto-
matically capturing every lecture in a searchable 
format for students to review when they study and 
complete assignments. With a simple one-click start-and-stop process, you capture all 
computer screens and corresponding audio. Students can replay any part of any class 
with easy-to-use browser-based viewing on a PC or Mac. Educators know that the 
more students can see, hear, and experience class resources, the better they learn. In 
fact, studies prove it. With patented Tegrity “search anything” technology, students 
instantly recall key class moments for replay online or on iPods and mobile devices. 
Instructors can help turn all their students’ study time into learning moments imme-
diately supported by their lecture. To learn more about Tegrity, watch a two-minute 
Flash demo at http://tegritycampus.mhhe.com.
Blackboard® Partnership 
McGraw-Hill Education and Blackboard have teamed 
up to simplify your life. Now you and your students can 
access Connect and Create right from within your Black-
board course—all with one single sign-on. The grade 
books are seamless, so when a student completes an inte-
grated Connect assignment, the grade for that assignment 
automatically (and instantly) feeds your Blackboard 
grade center. Learn more at www.domorenow.com.
McGraw-Hill Campus™
McGraw-Hill Campus is a new one-stop teach-
ing and learning experience available to users 
of any learning management system. This 
institutional service allows faculty and students 

xxvi 
The Best Instructor Support on the Market
to enjoy single sign-on (SSO) access to all McGraw-Hill Higher Education materials, 
including the award-winning McGraw-Hill Connect platform, from directly within the 
institution’s website. With McGraw-Hill Campus, faculty receive instant access to 
teaching materials (e.g., eBooks, test banks, PowerPoint slides, animations, learning 
objects, etc.), allowing them to browse, search, and use any instructor ancillary content 
in our vast library at no additional cost to instructor or students. 
Course Design and Delivery
In addition, students enjoy SSO access to a variety of free content (e.g., quizzes, flash 
cards, narrated presentations, etc.) and subscription-based products (e.g., McGraw-
Hill Connect). With McGraw-Hill Campus enabled, faculty and students will never 
need to create another account to access McGraw-Hill products and services. Learn 
more at www.mhcampus.com.
Assurance of Learning Ready
Many educational institutions today focus on the notion of assurance of learning, an 
important element of some accreditation standards.  Fundamentals of Human Resource 
Management is designed specifically to support instructors’ assurance of learning ini-
tiatives with a simple yet powerful solution. Each test bank question maps to a specific 
chapter learning objective listed in the text. Instructors can use our test bank software, 
EZ Test and EZ Test Online, to easily query for learning objectives that directly relate 
to the learning outcomes for their course. Instructors can then use the reporting fea-
tures of EZ Test to aggregate student results in similar fashion, making the collection 
and presentation of assurance of learning data simple and easy.
AACSB Tagging 
McGraw-Hill Education is a proud corporate mem-
ber of AACSB International. Understanding the 
importance and value of AACSB accreditation, Fun-
damentals of Human Resource Management recognizes 
the curricula guidelines detailed in the AACSB standards for business accreditation by 
connecting selected questions in the text and the test bank to the six general knowl-
edge and skill guidelines in the AACSB standards. The statements contained in Fun-
damentals of Human Resource Management are provided only as a guide for the users of 
this textbook. The AACSB leaves content coverage and assessment within the purview 
of individual schools, the mission of the school, and the faculty. While the Fundamen-
tals of Human Resource Management teaching package makes no claim of any specific 
AACSB qualification or evaluation, we have labeled selected questions according to 
the six general knowledge and skills areas.
McGraw-Hill Customer Experience Group Contact Information
At McGraw-Hill Education, we understand that getting the most from new technology 
can be challenging. That’s why our services don’t stop after you purchase our products. 
You can e-mail our Product Specialists 24 hours a day to get product training online. 
Or you can search our knowledge bank of Frequently Asked Questions on our support 
website. For Customer Support, call 800-331-5094 or visit www.mhhe.com/support. 
One of our Technical Support Analysts will be able to assist you in a timely fashion.

xxvii
Brief Contents
Preface x
PART 1
The Human Resource Environment 1
1 
Managing Human Resources 2
2 
Trends in Human Resource 
Management 29
3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity 
and a Safe Workplace 62
4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs 101
PART 2
Acquiring, Training, and Developing 
Human Resources 131
5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human 
Resources 132
6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them 
in Jobs 167
7 
Training Employees 200
8 
Developing Employees for Future 
Success 236
PART 3
Assessing and Improving 
Performance 269
9 
Creating and Maintaining High-
Performance Organizations 270
10 Managing Employees’ Performance 298
11 Separating and Retaining Employees 332
PART 4
Compensating Human Resources 365
12 Establishing a Pay Structure 366
13 Recognizing Employee Contributions 
with Pay 395
14 Providing Employee Benefits 423
PART 5
Meeting Other HR Goals 459
15 Collective Bargaining and Labor 
Relations 460
16 Managing Human Resources 
Globally 495
Glossary 530
Credits 540
Name and Company Index 541
Subject Index 555

xxviii
Contents
Preface x
PART 1
The Human Resource Environment 1
1 
Managing Human Resources 2
Introduction 2
Human Resources and Company Performance 3
Responsibilities of Human Resource 
Departments 5
Analyzing and Designing Jobs 7
Recruiting and Hiring Employees 7
Training and Developing Employees 8
Managing Performance 8
BEST PRACTICES
How Abbott Laboratories Creates a Healthy 
Business 9
Planning and Administering Pay and Benefits 9
Maintaining Positive Employee Relations 10
Establishing and Administering Personnel 
Policies 10
HR HOW TO
Writing Effective HR Policies 11
Managing and Using Human Resource Data 11
Ensuring Compliance with Labor Laws 12
Supporting the Organization’s Strategy 12
HR OOPS!
“Talent Management Sounds Great, but . . .” 13
Skills of HRM Professionals 14
DID YOU KNOW?
CEO and CFO Relationships with HRM 16
HR Responsibilities of Supervisors 17
Ethics in Human Resource Management 18
Employee Rights 18
Standards for Ethical Behavior 19
Careers in Human Resource Management 20
HRM SOCIAL
SHRM’s Social-Media Presence 21
Organization of This Book 22
THINKING ETHICALLY
How Should an Employer Weigh Conflicting 
Values? 23
Summary 23
Key Terms 24
Review and Discussion Questions 24
Taking Responsibility: How “Good Things Happen 
to” Costco 25
Managing Talent: Ingersoll Rand’s Problem-Solving 
Approach to HRM 26
HR in Small Business: Managing HR at a Services 
Firm 26
Notes 27
2 
Trends in Human Resource 
Management 29
Introduction 29
Change in the Labor Force 30
An Aging Workforce 30
HRM SOCIAL
What Social-Media Policies Are Suitable across 
Generations? 32
A Diverse Workforce 32
Skill Deficiencies of the Workforce 35
High-Performance Work Systems 35
Knowledge Workers 36
Employee Empowerment 38
Teamwork 38
Focus on Strategy 39
HR OOPS!
Less Helpful than a Search Engine? 40

Contents xxix
Mergers and Acquisitions 40
High Quality Standards 41
Cost Control 42
BEST PRACTICES
Outsourcing Enriches the Bottom Line for Land 
O’Lakes 45
Expanding into Global Markets 45
Technological Change in HRM 47
Electronic Human Resource 
Management (e-HRM) 48
Sharing of Human Resource Information 49
HR HOW TO
Providing HR Services on Mobile Devices 50
Change in the Employment Relationship 50
A Psychological Contract 51
Declining Union Membership 51
DID YOU KNOW?
Half of U.S. Employees Interested in Changing Jobs 52
Flexibility 52
THINKING ETHICALLY
How Should Employers Protect Their Data on 
Employees’ Devices? 54
Summary 55
Key Terms 56
Review and Discussion Questions 56
Taking Responsibility: Taking Care of People Gives 
Cisco Systems a Strategic Advantage 57
Managing Talent: Netflix Treats Workers “Like 
Adults” 58
HR in Small Business: Radio Flyer Rolls 
Forward 58
Notes 59
3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity 
and a Safe Workplace 62
Introduction 62
Regulation of Human Resource Management 63
Equal Employment Opportunity 64
Constitutional Amendments 64
Legislation 66
Executive Orders 72
The Government’s Role in Providing for Equal 
Employment Opportunity 73
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC) 73
HR HOW TO
Being Strategic about EEO 74
Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs 
(OFCCP) 75
Businesses’ Role in Providing for Equal 
Employment Opportunity 76
Avoiding Discrimination 76
HRM SOCIAL
The Discrimination Risk of Using Social Media in 
Hiring 78
HR OOPS!
Lack of Rewards May Explain “Leaky 
Pipeline” 80
Providing Reasonable Accommodation 81
Preventing Sexual Harassment 82
Valuing Diversity 83
Occupational Safety and Health Act 
(OSH Act) 84
General and Specific Duties 85
Enforcement of the OSH Act 87
Employee Rights and Responsibilities 87
Impact of the OSH Act 88
Employer-Sponsored Safety and Health 
Programs 88
Identifying and Communicating Job Hazards 89
BEST PRACTICES
Morton Salt’s Prize-Winning Safety Program 90
Reinforcing Safe Practices 91
DID YOU KNOW?
Top 10 Causes of Workplace Injuries 92
Promoting Safety Internationally 93
THINKING ETHICALLY
Is Discrimination against the Unemployed Ethical? 93
Summary 94
Key Terms 95
Review and Discussion Questions 96
Taking Responsibility: Keeping Sprint’s 
Subcontractors Safe 96
Managing Talent: Walmart’s Struggle to Manage 
Diversity and Safety on a Grand Scale 97

xxx 
Contents
Managing Talent: Amazon’s Warehouse Jobs: 
Good or Grueling Work? 128
HR in Small Business: Inclusivity Defines 
BraunAbility’s Products and Its Jobs 128
Notes 129
PART 2
Acquiring, Training, and Developing 
Human Resources 131
5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human 
Resources 132
Introduction 132
The Process of Human Resource Planning 133
Forecasting 133
Goal Setting and Strategic Planning 136
HR OOPS!
Trimming More Than Just Fat 139
HR HOW TO
Using Temporary Employees and Contractors 142
Implementing and Evaluating the HR Plan 144
DID YOU KNOW?
The Biggest Hiring Challenges Involve Recruiting 145
Applying HR Planning to Affirmative Action 145
Recruiting Human Resources 146
Personnel Policies 147
Recruitment Sources 148
Internal Sources 148
BEST PRACTICES
Sources of Talent for Advanced Technology Services 149
External Sources 149
HRM SOCIAL
Social Networks Can Also Be Career Networks 152
Evaluating the Quality of a Source 155
Recruiter Traits and Behaviors 156
Characteristics of the Recruiter 157
Behavior of the Recruiter 157
Enhancing the Recruiter’s Impact 157
THINKING ETHICALLY
Is Something Wrong with a Mutual Agreement Not to 
“Steal” Employees? 159
Summary 160
HR in Small Business: Company Fails Fair-
Employment Test 98
Notes 99
4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs 101
Introduction 101
Work Flow in Organizations 102
Work Flow Analysis 102
Work Flow Design and an Organization’s 
Structure 103
HR OOPS!
Workers Often Don’t Have What They Need to 
Succeed 104
Job Analysis 105
Job Descriptions 105
Job Specifications 106
HR HOW TO
Identifying Relevant KSAOs 108
Sources of Job Information 109
Position Analysis Questionnaire 109
Fleishman Job Analysis System 110
Analyzing Teamwork 111
Importance of Job Analysis 111
HRM SOCIAL
With Good Analysis, Work Isn’t Just a Game 112
Competency Models 112
Trends in Job Analysis 114
Job Design 114
Designing Efficient Jobs 115
Designing Jobs That Motivate 115
BEST PRACTICES
Big Data for High Efficiency at UPS 116
DID YOU KNOW?
Occasional Telework Dominates Flexibility Options 121
Designing Ergonomic Jobs 121
Designing Jobs That Meet Mental Capabilities and 
Limitations 122
THINKING ETHICALLY
How Can You Ethically Design a Dangerous Job? 124
Summary 125
Key Terms 126
Review and Discussion Questions 126
Taking Responsibility: How Google Searches for 
the Right Job Requirements 127

Contents xxxi
Preparing to Interview 189
Selection Decisions 189
How Organizations Select Employees 189
HR OOPS!
Interview Alarm Bells 190
Communicating the Decision 191
THINKING ETHICALLY
Is a Policy of Not Hiring Smokers Ethical? 191
Summary 192
Key Terms 193
Review and Discussion Questions 194
Taking Responsibility: How Gild Aims to Create 
Golden Opportunities for Underappreciated 
Workers 194
Managing Talent: Hiring for an Oil Boom 195
HR in Small Business: Kinaxis Chooses Sales 
Reps with Personality 196
Notes 197
7 
Training Employees 200
Introduction 200
Training Linked to Organizational Needs 201
BEST PRACTICES
A Strategic Approach to Learning at ConAgra 
Foods 202
Needs Assessment 203
Organization Analysis 203
Person Analysis 204
Task Analysis 205
Readiness for Training 206
Employee Readiness Characteristics 206
Work Environment 206
Planning the Training Program 207
Objectives of the Program 207
DID YOU KNOW?
Many Companies Outsource Training Tasks 208
In-House or Contracted Out? 208
Choice of Training Methods 209
Training Methods 210
Classroom Instruction 210
Audiovisual Training 211
Computer-Based Training 211
HR HOW TO
Developing Training Content for Mobile Devices 212
Key Terms 161
Review and Discussion Questions 161
Taking Responsibility: SAP’s Inclusive Approach to 
Recruiting 162
Managing Talent: Boeing’s High-Flying Approach 
to HR Planning and Recruitment 162
HR in Small Business: For Personal Financial 
Advisors, a Small Staffing Plan with a Big 
Impact 163
Notes 164
6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in 
Jobs 167
Introduction 167
Selection Process 168
Reliability 170
Validity 170
Ability to Generalize 172
DID YOU KNOW?
Selection Decisions Affect the Bottom Line 173
Practical Value 173
Legal Standards for Selection 174
Job Applications and Résumés 176
Application Forms 176
Résumés 178
References 178
Background Checks 179
HRM SOCIAL
Using Social Media as a Background Check 180
Employment Tests and Work Samples 181
Physical Ability Tests 181
BEST PRACTICES
St. Joseph Health Matches Physical Abilities to Job 
Requirements 182
Cognitive Ability Tests 182
Job Performance Tests and Work Samples 183
Personality Inventories 183
Honesty Tests and Drug Tests 185
Medical Examinations 186
Interviews 186
Interviewing Techniques 186
Advantages and Disadvantages of 
Interviewing 187
HR HOW TO
Interviewing Job Candidates Effectively 188

xxxii 
Contents
Formal Education 239
Assessment 240
HR HOW TO
Setting Up Stretch Assignments for Employees 245
Job Experiences 245
Interpersonal Relationships 249
HRM SOCIAL
Online Support for Career Development 250
Systems for Career Management 251
Data Gathering 252
HR OOPS!
Managers Must Look Outside for Development 
Support 253
Feedback 254
Goal Setting 255
Action Planning and Follow-Up 255
Development-Related Challenges 257
The Glass Ceiling 257
Succession Planning 257
DID YOU KNOW?
A Ceiling above a Ceiling 258
Dysfunctional Managers 260
THINKING ETHICALLY
Should Managers Feel Obligated to Be Mentors? 260
Summary 261
Key Terms 262
Review and Discussion Questions 263
Taking Responsibility: Taking Care of Employees 
Helps the Patent Office Serve the Public 263
Managing Talent: Procter & Gamble’s Succession 
Management Slip-Up 264
HR in Small Business: Employee Sabbatical 
Benefits Others at Little Tokyo Service 
Center 265
Notes 266
PART 3
Assessing and Improving 
Performance 269
9 
Creating and Maintaining High-
Performance Organizations 270
Introduction 270
On-the-Job Training 213
Simulations 214
Business Games and Case Studies 215
Behavior Modeling 216
Experiential Programs 216
Team Training 217
Action Learning 218
Implementing the Training Program 218
Principles of Learning 218
Transfer of Training 220
HRM SOCIAL
Social Learning with Visual Impact on Pinterest 221
Measuring Results of Training 222
Evaluation Methods 222
Applying the Evaluation 223
HR OOPS!
Training Executives Are Unimpressed with Their 
Measurement Processes 224
Applications of Training 224
Orientation of New Employees 224
Diversity Training 225
THINKING ETHICALLY
Internships: Opportunity or Exploitation? 227
Summary 228
Key Terms 230
Review and Discussion Questions 230
Taking Responsibility: How MasTec’s Training 
Helps Keep Workers Safe 231
Managing Talent: Hewlett-Packard Builds Its Own 
“University” 232
HR in Small Business: How Nick’s Pizza Delivers 
Training Results 232
Notes 233
8 
Developing Employees for Future 
Success 236
Introduction 236
Training, Development, and Career 
Management 237
Development and Training 237
Development for Careers 238
BEST PRACTICES
How KPMG Develops for the Future 239
Approaches to Employee Development 239

Contents xxxiii
HR in Small Business: Employees Make a 
Difference at Amy’s Ice Creams 295
Notes 296
10 Managing Employees’ Performance 298
Introduction 298
The Process of Performance Management 299
HR OOPS!
“Where Have I Heard That Before?” 301
Purposes of Performance Management 301
Criteria for Effective Performance 
Management 302
Methods for Measuring Performance 303
BEST PRACTICES
A Goal-Oriented System of Performance 
Management 304
Making Comparisons 304
Rating Individuals 306
DID YOU KNOW?
Popular Performance Measures 307
Measuring Results 311
Total Quality Management 313
Sources of Performance Information 314
Managers 314
Peers 315
Subordinates 315
HRM SOCIAL
Crowdsourcing Performance Reviews 316
Self 316
Customers 317
Errors in Performance Measurement 317
Types of Rating Errors 318
Ways to Reduce Errors 318
Political Behavior in Performance Appraisals 318
Giving Performance Feedback 319
Scheduling Performance Feedback 319
Preparing for a Feedback Session 320
Conducting the Feedback Session 320
HR HOW TO
Discussing Employee Performance 321
Finding Solutions to Performance Problems 321
Legal and Ethical Issues in Performance 
Management 322
High-Performance Work Systems 271
Elements of a High-Performance Work System 272
Outcomes of a High-Performance Work System 273
Conditions That Contribute to High 
Performance 274
Teamwork and Empowerment 275
Knowledge Sharing 275
HRM SOCIAL
When Social-Media Tools Support Knowledge 
Sharing 276
Job Satisfaction and Employee Engagement 277
DID YOU KNOW?
Three in Ten U.S. Workers Describe Themselves as 
Engaged 278
Ethics 279
HRM’s Contribution to High Performance 280
HRM Practices 280
HR OOPS!
Few Companies Are Prepared for Future Talent 
Needs 281
HRM Technology 283
HRM Applications 283
Human Resource Information Systems 284
Human Resource Management Online: 
E-HRM 285
BEST PRACTICES
How e-HRM Helps Plan International Respond to 
Crises with Agility 286
Effectiveness of Human Resource 
Management 287
Human Resource Management Audits 288
Analyzing the Effect of HRM Programs 288
HR HOW TO
Making the Most of HR Analytics 290
THINKING ETHICALLY
How Can—and Should—Organizations Measure 
Ethics Performance? 291
Summary 292
Key Terms 293
Review and Discussion Questions 293
Taking Responsibility: The Container Store Puts 
Employees First 293
Managing Talent: Valuing Labor Drives High 
Performance at HindlePower 294

xxxiv 
Contents
Supervisors and Co-Workers 352
BEST PRACTICES
Employees Are Quicken Loans’ Most Valuable 
Asset 353
Pay and Benefits 354
Monitoring Job Satisfaction 354
THINKING ETHICALLY
Is It Ethical to Fire by E-mail and Text? 356
Summary 357
Key Terms 358
Review and Discussion Questions 358
Taking Responsibility: General Motors Tries to 
Steer in a New Direction 359
Managing Talent: What Makes Genentech So 
Great for Scientists? 360
HR in Small Business: Learning to Show 
Appreciation at Datotel 361
Notes 362
PART 4
Compensating Human Resources 365
12 Establishing a Pay Structure 366
Introduction 366
Decisions about Pay 367
Legal Requirements for Pay 368
Equal Employment Opportunity 368
Minimum Wage 369
Overtime Pay 370
HR OOPS!
Overlooking Overtime 371
Child Labor 371
Prevailing Wages 372
Economic Influences on Pay 372
Product Markets 372
Labor Markets 373
DID YOU KNOW?
Management, Professional, Computer Occupations 
Are the Highest Paid 374
Pay Level: Deciding What to Pay 374
Gathering Information about Market Pay 375
Employee Judgments about Pay 
Fairness 375
Legal Requirements for Performance 
Management 322
Electronic Monitoring and Employee Privacy 323
THINKING ETHICALLY
How Fair Are Forced Rankings? 324
Summary 324
Key Terms 326
Review and Discussion Questions 327
Taking Responsibility: REI’s Purpose Drives Its 
Performance Management 327
Managing Talent: Adobe Systems Asks Managers 
to Check-In 328
HR in Small Business: Appraisals Matter at 
Meadow Hills Veterinary Center 329
Notes 330
11 Separating and Retaining Employees 332
Introduction 332
Managing Voluntary and Involuntary Turnover 333
Employee Separation 334
Principles of Justice 335
Legal Requirements 336
HRM SOCIAL
Employees’ Privacy vs. Employer’s Reputation 338
Progressive Discipline 338
Alternative Dispute Resolution 340
HR HOW TO
Announcing a Disciplinary Action 341
Employee Assistance Programs 342
Outplacement Counseling 343
Employee Engagement 343
DID YOU KNOW?
Where Profits Are Growing, More Employees Are 
Engaged 344
Job Withdrawal 345
Job Dissatisfaction 345
Behavior Change 347
Physical Job Withdrawal 348
HR OOPS!
Bizarre Excuses for Absences 349
Psychological Withdrawal 349
Job Satisfaction 350
Personal Dispositions 350
Tasks and Roles 351

Contents xxxv
Performance Bonuses 402
HR OOPS!
Giving Arbitrary Bonuses to Employees 403
Sales Commissions 403
Pay for Group Performance 404
Gainsharing 404
Group Bonuses and Team Awards 405
Pay for Organizational Performance 406
Profit Sharing 406
Stock Ownership 407
BEST PRACTICES
Profit Sharing at Paul Downs Cabinetmakers 408
Balanced Scorecard 410
Processes That Make Incentives Work 411
HRM SOCIAL
Scoring Social Influence 412
Participation in Decisions 412
Communication 412
HR HOW TO
Getting the Most from a Limited Compensation 
Budget 413
Incentive Pay for Executives 414
Performance Measures for Executives 414
Ethical Issues 415
THINKING ETHICALLY
Can Incentives Promote Ethics? 416
Summary 416
Key Terms 418
Review and Discussion Questions 418
Taking Responsibility: At Rhino Foods, Incentive 
Pay Is an Expression of Respect 418
Managing Talent: Making Hilcorp Energy’s 
Employees Feel (and Act) like Owners 419
HR in Small Business: Employees Own Bob’s 
Red Mill 420
Notes 421
14 Providing Employee Benefits 423
Introduction 423
The Role of Employee Benefits 424
Benefits Required by Law 426
Social Security 426
Unemployment Insurance 427
Workers’ Compensation 428
HR HOW TO
Gathering Wage Data at the BLS Website 376
Judging Fairness 376
Communicating Fairness 377
HRM SOCIAL
Salary Talk Is Trending 378
Job Structure: Relative Value of Jobs 379
Pay Structure: Putting It All Together 380
Pay Rates 380
Pay Grades 381
BEST PRACTICES
Parkland Health Rethinks Entry-Level Pay 
Rates 382
Pay Ranges 382
Pay Differentials 383
Alternatives to Job-Based Pay 384
Pay Structure and Actual Pay 385
Current Issues Involving Pay Structure 386
Pay During Military Duty 386
Pay for Executives 386
THINKING ETHICALLY
Is Pay Disparity in the Fast-Food Business 
Ethical? 388
Summary 388
Key Terms 390
Review and Discussion Questions 390
Taking Responsibility: IKEA Aims to Pay a Living 
Wage 391
Managing Talent: Twitter Tries to Be an Employer 
You’d Tweet About 391
HR in Small Business: Changing the Pay Level at 
Eight Crossings 392
Notes 393
13 Recognizing Employee Contributions 
with Pay 395
Introduction 395
Incentive Pay 396
DID YOU KNOW?
Employers Stress Merit Pay to Retain Workers 398
Pay for Individual Performance 398
Piecework Rates 399
Standard Hour Plans 400
Merit Pay 400

xxxvi 
Contents
PART 5
Meeting Other HR Goals 459
15 Collective Bargaining and Labor 
Relations 460
Introduction 460
Role of Unions and Labor Relations 461
National and International Unions 462
Local Unions 463
Trends in Union Membership 463
Unions in Government 465
DID YOU KNOW?
Profile of a Typical Union Worker 466
Impact of Unions on Company Performance 466
Goals of Management, Labor Unions, 
and Society 467
Management Goals 467
Labor Union Goals 468
BEST PRACTICES
Machinists and Steelworkers Unions Help 
Harley-Davidson Get Lean  469
Societal Goals 469
Laws and Regulations Affecting 
Labor Relations 470
National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) 470
Laws Amending the NLRA 471
HR HOW TO
Avoiding Unfair Labor Practices 472
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) 473
Union Organizing 474
HRM SOCIAL
Protected Social Activity 475
The Process of Organizing 475
Management Strategies 476
HR OOPS!
Did Too Many Voters Spoil the Election? 477
Union Strategies 477
Decertifying a Union 479
Collective Bargaining 479
Bargaining over New Contracts 479
When Bargaining Breaks Down 481
Contract Administration 483
New Approaches to Labor Relations 485
Unpaid Family and Medical Leave 429
Health Care Benefits 429
HR HOW TO
Complying with the Affordable Care Act 430
Optional Benefits Programs 431
Paid Leave 432
Group Insurance 433
HRM SOCIAL
Social Support for Getting Healthy 437
Retirement Plans 437
HR OOPS!
401(k) Plans Are a Missed Opportunity for 
Many 440
“Family-Friendly” Benefits 442
Other Benefits 443
Selecting Employee Benefits 444
The Organization’s Objectives 444
Employees’ Expectations and Values 444
Benefits’ Costs 446
BEST PRACTICES
Big Data Looks Like a Sure Bet for Caesars 
Entertainment 447
Legal Requirements for Employee 
Benefits 448
Tax Treatment of Benefits 448
Antidiscrimination Laws 448
Accounting Requirements 449
DID YOU KNOW?
Employees Say Benefits Matter 450
Communicating Benefits to Employees 450
THINKING ETHICALLY
Should All Employees Pay the Same Amount for 
Health Insurance? 451
Summary 452
Key Terms 454
Review and Discussion Questions 454
Taking Responsibility: The Starbucks Way to Get 
an Education 454
Managing Talent: Sodexo’s Stumble on Benefits for 
Workers at Colleges 455
HR in Small Business: Babies Welcomed at 
T3 456
Notes 457

Contents xxxvii
Global Employee Development 510
Performance Management across 
National Boundaries 510
Compensating an International Workforce 510
Pay Structure 511
Incentive Pay 512
Employee Benefits 512
International Labor Relations 513
Managing Expatriates 514
Selecting Expatriate Managers 514
HRM SOCIAL
Online Communities to Support Expatriates’ 
Spouses 515
Preparing Expatriates 515
Managing Expatriates’ Performance 518
Compensating Expatriates 518
DID YOU KNOW?
Priciest Cities Are Spread over Three 
Continents 520
Helping Expatriates Return Home 521
THINKING ETHICALLY
Can Offshoring Be Done More Ethically? 523
Summary 523
Key Terms 525
Review and Discussion Questions 525
Taking Responsibility: Coping with Pollution in 
Beijing 526
Managing Talent: Global Mindset Gives Renault-
Nissan a Strategic Edge 526
HR in Small Business: Is Translating a Global 
Business? 527
Notes 528
Glossary 530
Credits 540
Name and Company Index 541
Subject Index 555
Labor-Management Cooperation 485
Nonunion Representation Systems 486
THINKING ETHICALLY
Free Ride or Free Speech? 487
Summary 487
Key Terms 489
Review and Discussion Questions 489
Taking Responsibility: The SEIU’s “Fight for 15” 
Campaign 490
Managing Talent: Volkswagen Wants the United 
Auto Workers 490
HR in Small Business: Republic Gets Serious 491
Notes 492
16 Managing Human Resources Globally
Introduction 495
HRM in a Global Environment 496
Employees in an International Workforce 497
Employers in the Global Marketplace 498
Factors Affecting HRM in International 
Markets 499
Culture 499
HR OOPS!
Cross-Cultural Management Mishaps 502
Education and Skill Levels 503
Economic System 503
Political-Legal System 504
Human Resource Planning in a Global 
Economy 504
HR HOW TO
Supporting a Multinational Strategy 505
Selecting Employees in a Global Labor 
Market 506
Training and Developing a Global Workforce 507
Training Programs for an International 
Workforce 507
Cross-Cultural Preparation 508
BEST PRACTICES
Standard Chartered Bank Invests in Its 
Expatriates 509


The Human Resource 
Environment
CHAPTER
Managing Human Resources
CHAPTER
Trends in Human Resource Management
CHAPTER
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and 
a Safe Workplace
CHAPTER
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs
1
2
3
4
PART ONE

1
Introduction
Sarah Koustrup calls her position at National Hospitality Services (NHS) in Fargo, 
North Dakota, “a job with a lot of meaning.” NHS, which operates more than a 
dozen hotels, hired Koustrup to be its director of human resources. In that role, 
Koustrup puts into action the chief executive’s vision of a company treating its 
employees well so they in turn will treat customers well. She works directly with 
the CEO and has input on all areas of the business.
Josephine Simmons also believes her work matters. Simmons, another direc-
tor of human resources, works for SatCom Marketing in Brooklyn Park, Minne-
sota. The telemarketing firm hired her to build a human resources department 
from the ground up. SatCom’s chief executive also wanted Simmons to improve 
the company’s culture, a challenge that requires skills in creating enthusiasm 
about change.
Koustrup and Simmons are enthusiastic about their function: finding great 
people and creating the conditions that enable those people to help a company 
succeed in its mission. The significance of this work helps  explain why, in a 
 recent pair of surveys, human resources professionals were more likely than 
employees overall to say they are satisfied with their current job. Workers in 
this field also appreciate the variety in the skills they use and  projects they 
tackle.1
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 1-1 Deﬁ ne human resource management, and 
explain how HRM contributes to an organization’s 
performance.
 LO 1-2 Identify the responsibilities of human resource 
departments.
 LO 1-3 Summarize the types of skills needed for human 
resource management.
 LO 1-4 Explain the role of supervisors in human resource 
management.
 LO 1-5 Discuss ethical issues in human resource 
management.
 LO 1-6 Describe typical careers in human resource 
management.
Managing Human 
Resources
PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment

CHAPTER 1 
Managing Human Resources 3
The challenges and professional rewards that Sarah Koustrup and Josephine 
 Simmons experience are important dimensions of human resource management 
(HRM), the policies, practices, and systems that infl uence employees’ behavior, at-
titudes, and performance. Many companies refer to HRM as involving “people prac-
tices.” Figure 1.1 emphasizes that there are several important HRM practices that 
should support the organization’s business strategy: analyzing work and designing 
jobs, determining how many employees with specifi c knowledge and skills are needed 
(human resource planning), attracting potential employees (recruiting), choosing em-
ployees (selection), teaching employees how to perform their jobs and preparing them 
for the future (training and development), evaluating their performance (performance 
management), rewarding employees (compensation), and creating a positive work en-
vironment (employee relations). An organization performs best when all of these prac-
tices are managed well. At companies with effective HRM, employees and customers 
tend to be more satisfi ed, and the companies tend to be more innovative, have greater 
productivity, and develop a more favorable reputation in the community.2
In this chapter, we introduce the scope of human resource management. We begin 
by discussing why human resource management is an essential element of an orga-
nization’s success. We then turn to the elements of managing human resources: the 
roles and skills needed for effective human resource management. Next, the chapter 
describes how all managers, not just human resource professionals, participate in the 
activities related to human resource management. The following section of the chap-
ter addresses some of the ethical issues that arise with regard to human resource man-
agement. We then provide an overview of careers in human resource management. 
The chapter concludes by highlighting the HRM practices covered in the remainder 
of this book.
Human Resources and Company Performance
Managers and economists traditionally have seen human resource management as a 
necessary expense, rather than as a source of value to their organizations. Economic 
value is usually associated with capital—cash, equipment, technology, and facilities. 
However, research has demonstrated that HRM practices can be valuable.3 Deci-
sions such as whom to hire, what to pay, what training to offer, and how to evaluate 
Human Resource 
Management (HRM)
The policies, practices, 
and systems that 
 inﬂ uence employees’ 
behavior, attitudes, and 
performance.
LO 1-1 Deﬁ ne human 
resource management, 
and explain how HRM 
contributes to an organi-
zation’s performance.
Figure 1.1
Human Resource Management Practices
Analysis and
design of work
HR
planning
Recruiting
Selection
Training and
development
Performance
management
Compensation
Employee
relations
Strategic HRM
Company
Performance

4 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
employee performance directly affect employees’ motivation and ability to provide 
goods and services that customers value. Companies that attempt to increase their 
competitiveness by investing in new technology and promoting quality throughout 
the organization also invest in state-of-the-art staffi ng, training, and compensation 
practices.4
The concept of “human resource management” implies that employees are resources 
of the employer. As a type of resource, human capital means the organization’s em-
ployees, described in terms of their training, experience, judgment, intelligence, rela-
tionships, and insight—the employee characteristics that can add economic value to 
the organization. In other words, whether it manufactures automobiles or forecasts 
the weather, for an organization to succeed at what it does, it needs employees with 
certain qualities, such as particular kinds of training and experience. This view means 
employees in today’s organizations are not interchangeable, easily replaced parts of a 
system but the source of the company’s success or failure. By infl uencing who works for 
the organization and how those people work, human resource management therefore 
contributes to basic measures of an organization’s performance, such as quality, profi t-
ability, and customer satisfaction. Figure 1.2 shows this relationship.
In the United States, low-price retailers are notorious for the ways they keep labor 
costs down. They pay low wages, limit employees to part-time status (providing little 
or no employee benefi ts), and make last-minute adjustments to schedules so staffi ng is 
minimal when store traffi c is light. Retailing expert Zeynep Ton has studied retailers 
that invest more in employees—paying higher wages and offering full-time schedules, 
greater training, and more opportunity for advancement. Ton has found that these 
stores tend to enjoy higher sales and greater profi tability. At Costco, for example, 
employees earn about 40% more than at the company’s main competitor, Sam’s Club, 
and most store managers are promoted from within. Costco’s sales per square foot are 
almost double those of Sam’s Club, and its rating in the American Customer Satisfac-
tion Index is comparable to that of the prestigious Nordstrom chain. The QuikTrip 
chain of convenience stores trains employees to handle a wide variety of tasks, from 
brewing coffee to ordering merchandise and cleaning restrooms. Instead of sending 
employees home when traffi c is slow, QuikTrip expects them to handle tasks other 
Human Capital
An organization’s 
 employees, described in 
terms of their training, 
experience, judgment, 
intelligence, relation-
ships, and insight.
Figure 1.2
Impact of Human 
 Resource Management

CHAPTER 1 
Managing Human Resources 5
than selling. Employees have predictable schedules, stay busy 
throughout their shift, and sell 66% more per square foot 
than the average convenience store. In these and other chains 
that see employees as more than just an expense, retailers are 
outperforming their competitors.5
Human resource management is critical to the success of 
organizations because human capital has certain qualities that 
make it valuable. In terms of business strategy, an organization 
can succeed if it has a sustainable competitive advantage (is better 
than competitors at something and can hold that advantage 
over a sustained period of time). Therefore, we can conclude 
that organizations need the kind of resources that will give 
them such an advantage. Human resources have these neces-
sary qualities:
 • Human resources are valuable. High-quality employees provide a needed service as 
they perform many critical functions.
 • Human resources are rare in the sense that a person with high levels of the needed 
skills and knowledge is not common. An organization may spend months looking 
for a talented and experienced manager or technician.
 • Human resources cannot be imitated. To imitate human resources at a high- 
performing competitor, you would have to fi gure out which employees are provid-
ing the advantage and how. Then you would have to recruit people who can do 
precisely the same thing and set up the systems that enable those people to imitate 
your competitor.
 • Human resources have no good substitutes. When people are well trained and highly 
motivated, they learn, develop their abilities, and care about customers. It is diffi cult 
to imagine another resource that can match committed and talented employees.
These qualities imply that human resources have enormous potential. An or-
ganization realizes this potential through the ways it practices human resource 
management.
Effective management of human resources can form the foundation of a high-
performance work system—an organization in which technology, organizational structure, 
people, and processes work together seamlessly to give an organization an advantage in 
the competitive environment. As technology changes the ways organizations manufacture, 
transport, communicate, and keep track of information, human resource management 
must ensure that the organization has the right kinds of people to meet the new chal-
lenges. High-performance work systems also have been essential in making organizations 
strong enough to weather the storm of the recent recession and remain profi table as the 
economy slowly begins to expand again. Maintaining a high-performance work system 
may include development of training programs, recruitment of people with new skill sets, 
and establishment of rewards for such behaviors as teamwork, fl exibility, and learning. In 
the next chapter, we will see some of the changes that human resource managers are plan-
ning for, and Chapter 9 examines high-performance work systems in greater detail.
Responsibilities of Human Resource Departments
In all but the smallest organizations, a human resource department is responsible for 
the functions of human resource management. On average, an organization has one or 
two full-time HR staff persons for every hundred employees on the payroll.6 One way 
LO 1-2 Identify the 
 responsibilities of human 
resource departments.
At Intel, the company’s focus is on keeping employees 
loyal, trained, and compensated. In turn, there is a low 
turnover rate and a high degree of customer satisfaction.

6 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
to defi ne the responsibilities of HR departments is to think of HR as a business within 
the company with three product lines7:
 1. Administrative services and transactions—Handling administrative tasks (for exam-
ple, hiring employees and answering questions about benefi ts) effi ciently and with 
a commitment to quality. This requires expertise in the particular tasks.
 2. Business partner services—Developing effective HR systems that help the organiza-
tion meet its goals for attracting, keeping, and developing people with the skills it 
needs. For the systems to be effective, HR people must understand the business so 
it can understand what the business needs.
 3. Strategic partner—Contributing to the company’s strategy through an understand-
ing of its existing and needed human resources and ways HR practices can give the 
company a competitive advantage. For strategic ideas to be effective, HR people 
must understand the business, its industry, and its competitors.
Another way to think of HR responsibilities is in terms of specifi c activities. 
Table 1.1 details the responsibilities of human resource departments. These responsi-
bilities include the practices introduced in Figure 1.1 plus two areas of responsibility 
that support those practices: (1) establishing and administering personnel policies and 
(2) ensuring compliance with labor laws.
Although the human resource department has responsibility for these areas, 
many of the tasks may be performed by supervisors or others inside or outside the 
organization. No two human resource departments have precisely the same roles 
because of differences in organization sizes and characteristics of the workforce, 
the industry, and management’s values. In some companies, the HR department 
handles all the activities listed in Table 1.1. In others, it may share the roles and du-
ties with managers of other departments such as fi nance, operations, or information 
Table 1.1
Responsibilities of HR 
Departments
Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Human Resources Managers,” Occupational Outlook  Handbook, 
2014–2015, January 8, 2014, http://www.bls.gov/ooh; SHRM-BNA Survey No. 66, “Policy and Practice 
Forum: Human Resource Activities, Budgets, and Staffs, 2000–2001,” Bulletin to Management, Bureau of 
National Affairs Policy and Practice Series (Washington, DC: Bureau of National Affairs, June 28, 2001).
FUNCTION
RESPONSIBILITIES
Analysis and design of work
Work analysis; job design; job descriptions
Recruitment and selection
Recruiting; job postings; interviewing; testing; coordinating use of 
temporary labor
Training and development
Orientation; skills training; career development programs
Performance management
Performance measures; preparation and administration of 
performance appraisals; discipline
Compensation and beneﬁ ts
Wage and salary administration; incentive pay; insurance; vacation 
leave administration; retirement plans; proﬁ t sharing; stock plans
Employee relations
Attitude surveys; labor relations; employee handbooks; company 
publications; labor law compliance; relocation and outplacement services
Personnel policies
Policy creation; policy communication
Employee data and 
information systems
Record keeping; HR information systems; workforce analytics
Compliance with laws
Policies to ensure lawful behavior; reporting; posting information; 
safety inspections; accessibility accommodations
Support for strategy
Human resource planning and forecasting; talent management; 
change management

CHAPTER 1 
Managing Human Resources 7
technology. In some companies, the HR department actively 
advises top management. In others, the department responds 
to top-level management decisions and implements staffi ng, 
training, and compensation activities in light of company 
strategy and policies. And, in a recent trend, some companies 
are doing away with their HR departments altogether, prefer-
ring to fl atten their organizational structure and to encourage 
department managers and other employees to handle HR is-
sues as they arise.8
Let’s take an overview of the HR functions and some of the 
options available for carrying them out. Human resource man-
agement involves both the selection of which options to use and 
the activities involved with using those options. Later chapters 
of the book will explore each function in greater detail.
Analyzing and Designing Jobs
To produce their given product or service (or set of products or services), companies 
require that a number of tasks be performed. The tasks are grouped together in vari-
ous combinations to form jobs. Ideally, the tasks should be grouped in ways that help 
the organization operate effi ciently and obtain people with the right qualifi cations to 
do the jobs well. This function involves the activities of job analysis and job design. 
Job analysis is the process of getting detailed information about jobs. Job design 
is the process of defi ning the way work will be performed and the tasks that a given 
job requires.
In general, jobs can vary from having a narrow range of simple tasks to having a 
broad array of complex tasks requiring multiple skills. At one extreme is a worker on 
an assembly line at a poultry-processing facility; at the other extreme is a doctor in an 
emergency room. In the past, many companies have emphasized the use of narrowly 
defi ned jobs to increase effi ciency. With many simple jobs, a company can easily fi nd 
workers who can quickly be trained to perform the jobs at relatively low pay. However, 
greater concern for innovation and quality has shifted the trend to using more broadly 
defi ned jobs. Also, as we will see in Chapters 2 and 4, some organizations assign work 
even more broadly, to teams instead of individuals.
Recruiting and Hiring Employees
Based on job analysis and design, an organization can determine the kinds of employ-
ees it needs. With this knowledge, it carries out the function of recruiting and hiring 
employees.  Recruitment is the process through which the organization seeks appli-
cants for potential employment. Selection refers to the process by which the orga-
nization attempts to identify applicants with the necessary knowledge, skills, abilities, 
and other characteristics that will help the organization achieve its goals. An organiza-
tion makes selection decisions in order to add employees to its workforce, as well as to 
transfer existing employees to new positions.
Approaches to recruiting and selection involve a variety of alternatives. Some orga-
nizations may actively recruit from many external sources, such as Internet job post-
ings, online social networks, and college recruiting events. Other organizations may 
rely heavily on promotions from within, applicants referred by current employees, and 
the availability of in-house people with the necessary skills.
Job Analysis
The process of getting 
detailed information 
about jobs.
Job Design
The process of deﬁ ning 
the way work will be 
performed and the tasks 
that a given job requires.
Recruitment
The process through 
which the organization 
seeks applicants for 
 potential employment.
Selection
The process by which the 
organization attempts to 
identify applicants with 
the necessary knowl-
edge, skills, abilities, and 
other characteristics that 
will help the organization 
achieve its goals.
Home Depot and other retail stores use in-store kiosks 
similar to the Career Center shown here to recruit 
 applicants for employment.

8 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
At some organizations the selection process may focus on specifi c skills, such as 
experience with a particular programming language or type of equipment. At other 
organizations, selection may focus on general abilities, such as the ability to work as 
part of a team or fi nd creative solutions. The focus an organization favors will affect 
many choices, from the way the organization measures ability, to the questions it asks 
in interviews, to the places it recruits. Table 1.2 lists the top fi ve qualities that employ-
ers say they are looking for in job candidates.
Training and Developing Employees
Although organizations base hiring decisions on candidates’ existing qualifi cations, 
most organizations provide ways for their employees to broaden or deepen their 
knowledge, skills, and abilities. To do this, organizations provide for employee training 
and development. Training is a planned effort to enable employees to learn job-related 
knowledge, skills, and behavior. For example, many organizations offer safety training 
to teach employees safe work habits. Development involves acquiring knowledge, 
skills, and behaviors that improve employees’ ability to meet the challenges of a vari-
ety of new or existing jobs, including the client and customer demands of those jobs. 
Development programs often focus on preparing employees for management respon-
sibility. Likewise, if a company plans to set up teams to manufacture products, it might 
offer a development program to help employees learn the ins and outs of effective 
teamwork.
Decisions related to training and development include whether the organization 
will emphasize enabling employees to perform their current jobs, preparing them for 
future jobs, or both. An organization may offer programs to a few employees in whom 
the organization wants to invest, or it may have a philosophy of investing in the train-
ing of all its workers. Some organizations, especially large ones, may have extensive 
formal training programs, including classroom sessions and training programs on-
line. Other organizations may prefer a simpler, more fl exible approach of encouraging 
employees to participate in outside training and development programs as needs are 
identifi ed. For an example of a company where decisions about training and other 
HR practices are aimed at success in a tumultuous global environment, see the “Best 
Practices” box.
Managing Performance
Managing human resources includes keeping track of how well employees are perform-
ing relative to objectives such as job descriptions and goals for a particular position. 
The process of ensuring that employees’ activities and outputs match the organiza-
tion’s goals is called performance management. The activities of performance 
management include specifying the tasks and outcomes of a job that contribute to the 
Training
A planned effort to en-
able employees to learn 
job-related knowledge, 
skills, and behavior.
Development
The acquisition of 
knowledge, skills, and 
behaviors that improve 
an employee’s ability 
to meet changes in job 
requirements and in 
customer demands.
Performance 
Management
The process of ensuring 
that employees’ activi-
ties and outputs match 
the organization’s goals.
Table 1.2
Top Qualities Employers 
Look For in Employees
 1. Teamwork skills
 2. Decision making, problem solving
 3. Planning, prioritizing tasks
 4. Verbal communication skills
 5. Gathering/processing information
Source: Based on National Association of Colleges and Employers, “The Candidate Skills/Qualities 
 Employers Want,” news release, October 10, 2013, http://www.naceweb.org.

9
organization’s success. Then various measures are used to compare the employee’s per-
formance over some time period with the desired performance. Often, rewards—the 
topic of the next section—are developed to encourage good performance.
The human resource department may be responsible for developing or obtaining 
questionnaires and other devices for measuring performance. The performance mea-
sures may emphasize observable behaviors (for example, answering the phone by the 
second ring), outcomes (number of customer complaints and compliments), or both. 
When the person evaluating performance is not familiar with the details of the job, 
outcomes tend to be easier to evaluate than specifi c behaviors.9 The evaluation may 
focus on the short term or long term and on individual employees or groups. Typically, 
the person who completes the evaluation is the employee’s supervisor. Often employ-
ees also evaluate their own performance, and in some organizations, peers and subor-
dinates participate, too.
Planning and Administering Pay and Benefits
The pay and benefi ts that employees earn play an important role in motivating them. 
This is especially true when rewards such as bonuses are linked to the individual’s or 
group’s achievements. Decisions about pay and benefi ts can also support other as-
pects of an organization’s strategy. For example, a company that wants to provide an 
Anant Jain left a job at a consumer 
goods company to work for the fi -
nance department of Abbott Labo-
ratories. It was a step that would 
propel him up the management 
ranks. Abbott paid for Jain to earn 
an MBA, including the skills neces-
sary for making fi nancial forecasts. 
Before long, Jain was ready to move 
to Dubai in the United Arab Emirates 
to take charge of fi nancial planning 
for the Middle Eastern region.
Jain’s story is hardly unique. Ab-
bott’s business strategy is based 
on hiring talented people and help-
ing them develop their careers as 
they gain skills that increase their 
value to the company. When new 
employees join Abbott, the human 
resources department helps them 
set short-term goals and map out 
a career path. Reviews of employ-
ees’ performance consider whether 
the employees are on track. Further 
development comes from a combi-
nation of on-the-job learning, train-
ing programs, and support from 
mentors.
Jain was hired by Abbott’s sub-
sidiary in India, but the commitment 
to employee growth and develop-
ment is part of Abbott’s global strat-
egy. The company operates in more 
than 150 countries. Its industry—
medical devices and (outside the 
United States) pharmaceuticals—
undergoes constant change from 
innovation and regulation. To stay 
at the forefront of knowledge while 
remaining profi table in a turbulent 
industry, Abbott needs a special 
kind of employee who is fl exible, 
open to change, and committed to 
excellence. Along with careful hiring 
and commitment to training, Ab-
bott recruits and retains talent with 
efforts such as a mentoring pro-
gram, surveys of employees, and in 
the United States, aid in translating 
veterans’ military skills into career-
related skills relevant to the civilian 
sector.
Questions
1. How could a company such as 
Abbott benefi t from sending an 
employee to school to study 
fi nance or another business 
subject?
2. How do you think hiring and 
training could work hand-in-
hand to help a company such 
as Abbott meet its business 
objectives?
Sources: Company website, “Careers 
and Opportunities,” http://www.abbott.
com, accessed April 8, 2014; Abbott 
India Ltd., “About Us,” http://www.
abbott.co.in, accessed April 8, 2014; 
Suprotip Ghosh, “What the Doctor 
Ordered,” Business Today, August 4, 
2013, pp. 78, 80.
How Abbott Laboratories Creates a Healthy Business
Best Practices

10 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
exceptional level of service or be exceptionally inno-
vative might pay signifi cantly more than competitors 
in order to attract and keep the best employees. At 
other companies, a low-cost strategy requires knowl-
edge of industry norms, so that the company does 
not spend more than it must.
Planning pay and benefi ts involves many decisions, 
often complex and based on knowledge of a multitude 
of legal requirements. An important decision is how 
much to offer in salary or wages, as opposed to bo-
nuses, commissions, and other  performance-related 
pay. Other decisions involve which benefi ts to offer, 
from retirement plans to various kinds of insurance 
to time off with pay. All such decisions have implica-
tions for the organization’s bottom line, as well as for 
employee motivation.
Administering pay and benefi ts is another big re-
sponsibility. Organizations need systems for keeping track of each employee’s earnings 
and benefi ts. Employees need information about their health plan, retirement plan, 
and other benefi ts. Keeping track of this involves extensive record keeping and report-
ing to management, employees, the government, and others.
Maintaining Positive Employee Relations
Organizations often depend on human resource professionals to help them maintain posi-
tive relations with employees. This function includes preparing and distributing employee 
handbooks that detail company policies and, in large organizations, company publications 
such as a monthly newsletter or a website on the organization’s intranet. Preparing these 
communications may be a regular task for the human resource department.
The human resource department can also expect to handle certain kinds of commu-
nications from individual employees. Employees turn to the HR department for answers 
to questions about benefi ts and company policy. If employees feel they have been dis-
criminated against, see safety hazards, or have other problems and are dissatisfi ed with 
their supervisor’s response, they may turn to the HR department for help. Members of 
the department should be prepared to address such problems.
In organizations where employees belong to a union, employee relations entail ad-
ditional responsibilities. The organization periodically conducts collective bargain-
ing to negotiate an employment contract with union members. The HR department 
maintains communication with union representatives to ensure that problems are re-
solved as they arise.
Establishing and Administering Personnel Policies
All the human resource activities described so far require fair and consistent deci-
sions, and most require substantial record keeping. Organizations depend on their 
HR department to help establish policies related to hiring, discipline, promotions, and 
benefi ts. For example, with a policy in place that an intoxicated worker will be immedi-
ately terminated, the company can handle such a situation more fairly and objectively 
than if it addressed such incidents on a case-by-case basis. The company depends on its 
HR professionals to help develop and then communicate the policy to every employee, 
One reason W.L. Gore is repeatedly named one of the 100 Best 
 Companies to Work For in the United States is the company’s unusual 
corporate hierarchy that dispenses with titles in favor of small teams 
and direct communication among employees. How do you think this 
boosts morale in the workplace?

11
so that everyone knows its importance. If anyone violates the rule, a supervisor can 
quickly intervene—confi dent that the employee knew the consequences and that any 
other employee would be treated the same way. Not only do such policies promote fair 
decision making, but they also promote other objectives, such as workplace safety and 
customer service.
Developing fair and effective policies requires strong decision-making skills, the abil-
ity to think ethically, and a broad understanding of business activities that will be covered 
by the policies. For more ideas on writing HR policies, see “HR How To.” In addition, 
for employees to comply with policies, they have to know and understand the policies. 
Therefore, human resource management requires the ability to communicate through 
a variety of channels. Human resource personnel may teach policies by giving presenta-
tions at meetings, posting documents online, writing e-mail messages, setting up social-
media pages for employees, and in many other ways.
Managing and Using Human Resource Data
All aspects of human resource management require careful and discreet record keep-
ing, from processing job applications, to performance appraisals, benefi ts enrollment, 
and government-mandated reports. Handling records about employees requires 
 accuracy as well as sensitivity to employee privacy. Whether the organization keeps re-
cords in fi le cabinets or on a sophisticated computer information system, it must have 
Effective policies make it clear to 
employees what the organization 
requires. Policies should be easily 
understandable and relevant to em-
ployees. To write effective policies, 
apply the following guidelines:
 • Decide whether a policy is 
needed for a situation. For exam-
ple, does the law require a pol-
icy? Does behavior by employees 
or managers suggest that they 
need guidance? What would lead 
to better outcomes—a consistent 
standard or fl exibility?
 • Find out whether any legal 
 requirements affect the policy. 
For example, hiring and pro-
motion decisions must meet 
legal requirements for avoiding 
discrimination.
 • Consult with experts to be sure 
the needs of the situation are 
clear. Experts might include 
employees, managers, and the 
company’s legal advisers.
 • Be specifi c about the policy’s 
purpose, the people it applies 
to, and the actions to take or 
avoid. Avoid jargon, and defi ne 
any terms employees may not 
fully understand.
 • Imagine scenarios where the pol-
icy might come into play. Make 
sure the way the policy applies in 
each situation is clear and appro-
priate, revising it if necessary.
 • Tell where employees can ask 
questions or look up answers.
Questions
1. Why do you think it is important 
to tell employees the purpose of 
a policy?
2. Suppose some employees are 
coming to work dressed in a 
way that distracts others. How 
could writing a dress code 
policy help in this situation? 
If you were a manager, would 
you rather handle the situation 
by referring to a policy or 
discussing a specifi c employee’s 
clothing choices? Why?
Sources: HR Council for the Nonprofi t 
Sector, “HR Policies and Employment Leg-
islation,” HR Toolkit, http://hrcouncil.ca, 
accessed April 8, 2014; Susan M. Heath-
fi eld, “How to Write a Policy,” About.com 
Human Resources, http://humanresources.
about.com, accessed April 8, 2014; Susan 
M. Heathfi eld, “How to Develop a Policy,” 
About.com Human Resources, http://hu-
manresources.about.com, accessed April 
8, 2014; Suzanne Lucas, “Policies Never 
Solve People Problems,” Inc., August 28, 
2013, http://www.inc.com.
Writing Effective HR Policies
HR How To

12 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
methods for ensuring accuracy and for balancing privacy concerns with easy access for 
those who need information and are authorized to see it.
Thanks to computer tools, employee-related information is not just an administra-
tive responsibility; it also can be the basis for knowledge that gives organizations an 
edge over their competitors. Data about employees can show, for example, which of 
the company’s talent has the most promise for future leadership, what kinds of em-
ployees tend to perform best in particular positions, and in which departments the 
need for hiring will be most pressing. To use the data for answering questions such as 
these, many organizations have set up human resource information systems. They may 
engage in workforce analytics, which is the use of quantitative tools and scientifi c 
methods to analyze data from human resource databases and other sources to make 
evidence-based decisions that support business goals. Chapter 2 will take a closer look 
at how developments in technology are enabling more sophisticated analysis of em-
ployee data to support decision making.
Ensuring Compliance with Labor Laws
As we will discuss in later chapters, especially Chapter 3, the government has many laws 
and regulations concerning the treatment of employees. These laws govern such mat-
ters as equal employment opportunity, employee safety and health, employee pay and 
benefi ts, employee privacy, and job security. Government requirements include fi ling 
reports and displaying posters, as well as avoiding unlawful behavior. Most managers 
depend on human resource professionals to help them keep track of these requirements.
Ensuring compliance with laws requires that human resource personnel keep watch 
over a rapidly changing legal landscape. For example, the increased use of and access to 
electronic databases by employees and employers suggest that in the near future leg-
islation will be needed to protect employee privacy rights. Currently, no federal laws 
outline how to use employee databases in such a way as to protect employees’ privacy 
while also meeting employers’ and society’s concern for security.
Lawsuits that will continue to infl uence HRM practices concern job security. Be-
cause companies are forced to close facilities and lay off employees because of eco-
nomic or competitive conditions, cases dealing with the illegal discharge of employees 
have increased. The issue of “employment at will”—that is, the principle that an em-
ployer may terminate employment at any time without notice—will be debated. As the 
age of the overall workforce increases, as described in the next chapter, the number 
of cases dealing with age discrimination in layoffs, promotions, and benefi ts will likely 
rise. Employers will need to review work rules, recruitment practices, and performance 
evaluation systems, revising them if necessary to ensure that they do not falsely com-
municate employment agreements the company does not intend to honor (such as 
lifetime employment) or discriminate on the basis of age.
Supporting the Organization’s Strategy
At one time, human resource management was primarily an administrative function. 
The HR department focused on fi lling out forms and processing paperwork. As more 
organizations have come to appreciate the signifi cance of highly skilled human re-
sources, however, many HR departments have taken on a more active role in support-
ing the organization’s strategy. As a result, today’s HR professionals need to understand 
the organization’s business operations, project how business trends might affect the 
business, reinforce positive aspects of the organization’s culture, develop talent for pres-
ent and future needs, craft effective HR strategies, and make a case for them to top 
Workforce Analytics
The use of quantita-
tive tools and scientiﬁ c 
methods to analyze 
data from human re-
source databases and 
other sources to make 
 evidence-based deci-
sions that support busi-
ness goals.

13
management. Evidence for greater involvement in strategy comes from interviews with 
fi nance and HR executives who say they are more interested than ever in collaborating 
to strengthen their companies.10 Finance leaders can see that employees are a major 
budget item, so they want to make sure they are getting the best value for that expense. 
HR leaders, for their part, are learning to appreciate the importance of using quantita-
tive tools to measure performance.
An important element of this responsibility is human resource planning, identify-
ing the numbers and types of employees the organization will require in order to meet 
its objectives. Using these estimates, the human resource department helps the organi-
zation forecast its needs for hiring, training, and reassigning employees. Planning also 
may show that the organization will need fewer employees to meet anticipated needs. 
In that situation, human resource planning includes how to handle or avoid layoffs. 
Human resource planning provides important information for talent management—
a systematic, planned effort to attract, retain, develop, and motivate highly skilled em-
ployees and managers. When managers are clear about the kinds of people they will 
need to achieve the organization’s goals, talent management combines recruiting, selec-
tion, training, and motivational practices to meet those needs. Approaching these tasks 
in terms of talent management is one way HR managers are making the link to orga-
nizational strategy. At Zeno Group, a Chicago public relations fi rm, CFO Tony Blasco 
has collaborated with the HR manager to identify people to hire as future strategic 
needs arise. Together, says Blasco, they are planning for how future hires will “further 
our ambitious growth goals.”11 Unfortunately, as described in the “HR Oops!” box, this 
commitment to talent management has yet to catch on at many organizations.
As part of its strategic role, one of the key contributions HR can make is to engage 
in evidence-based HR. Evidence-based HR refers to demonstrating that human re-
source practices have a positive infl uence on the company’s profi ts or key stakeholders 
Human Resource 
Planning
Identifying the numbers 
and types of employ-
ees the organization 
will require to meet its 
objectives.
Talent Management
A systematic, planned 
effort to attract, retain, 
develop, and motivate 
highly skilled employees 
and managers.
Evidence-Based HR
Collecting and using data 
to show that human re-
source practices have a 
positive inﬂ uence on the 
company’s bottom line or 
key stakeholders.
“We don’t have time for it.” At least, 
that seems to be the thinking at 
many companies.
Many managers agree that it 
sounds wise to plan for the kinds of 
people needed to carry out the orga-
nization’s strategy, just as they would 
plan for every other resource. And it 
makes sense that managers would 
set goals for and measure the suc-
cess of employee selection, training, 
performance feedback, and retention.
However, when the consult-
ing fi rm Right Management sur-
veyed hundreds of managers, the 
researchers found that only 12% 
have established and implemented 
a strategy for talent management. 
Companies are much more likely to 
treat HR activities as separate pro-
cesses disconnected from business 
objectives. In spite of that, about 
half the managers claimed that their 
company’s leaders consider talent 
management a top priority. Even 
worse off may be the companies 
where 38% of managers said talent 
management is not a priority.
Questions
 1. Why do you suppose half 
the managers say talent 
management is important at 
their company but only 12% 
say their company is doing it? 
In other words, what is missing 
when people fail to do what they 
say is important?
 2. How might a company that 
uses talent management gain 
an advantage over a competitor 
that treats HR tasks as unrelated 
activities?
Sources: Toni Hodges DeTuncq and 
Lynn Schmidt, “Examining Integrated 
Talent Management,” T+D, September 
2013, pp. 31–35; Bloomberg BNA, 
“Study Finds Little Consensus on Talent 
Management,” Report on Salary Sur-
veys, March 1, 2013, http://news.bna.
com; Right Management, “The Struggle 
over Talent Management Strategy,” 
Research Highlights, 2012, http://www.
right.com.
“Talent Management Sounds Great, but . . .”
HR Oops!

14 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
(employees, customers, community, shareholders). This practice helps show that the 
money invested in HR programs is justifi ed and that HRM is contributing to the com-
pany’s goals and objectives. For example, data collected on the relationship between 
HR practices and productivity, turnover, accidents, employee attitudes, and medical 
costs may show that HR functions are as important to the business as fi nance, account-
ing, and marketing.
Often, an organization’s strategy requires some type of change—for example, add-
ing, moving, or closing facilities; applying new technology; or entering markets in other 
regions or countries. Common reactions to change include fear, anger, and  confusion. 
The organization may turn to its human resource department for help in managing the 
change process. Skilled human resource professionals can apply knowledge of human 
behavior, along with performance management tools, to help the organization manage 
change constructively.
Another strategic challenge tackled by a growing number of companies is how 
to seek profi ts in ways that communities, customers, and suppliers will support over 
the long run. This concern is called sustainability—broadly defi ned as an organiza-
tion’s ability to profi t without depleting its resources, including employees, natural 
resources, and the support of the surrounding community. Success at sustainability 
comes from meeting the needs of the organization’s stakeholders, all the parties 
who have an interest in the organization’s success. Typically, an organization’s stake-
holders include shareholders, the community, customers, and employees. Sustainable 
organizations meet their needs by minimizing their environmental impact, providing 
high-quality products and services, ensuring workplace safety, offering fair compensa-
tion, and delivering an adequate return to investors. Sustainability delivers a strategic 
advantage when it boosts the organization’s image with customers, opens access to new 
markets, and helps attract and retain talented employees. In an organization with a sus-
tainable strategy, HR departments focus on employee development and empowerment 
rather than short-term costs, on long-term planning rather than smooth turnover and 
outsourcing, and on justice and fairness over short-term profi ts.12 At IBM, human 
resource management sustainably addresses the company’s global presence and drive 
for innovation in several ways. Diversity training helps people work productively in 
teams regardless of ethnicity, gender, or other differences. Global Enablement Teams 
address employee development needs in various regions by sending employees from 
highly developed nations to mentor employees in developing nations; the mentors 
teach business skills while learning about these high-potential markets. And IBM’s 
Smarter Planet projects to lower resource use and pollution attract talented innova-
tors; job candidates are excited about the chance to be part of this effort.13
Skills of HRM Professionals
With such varied responsibilities, the human resource department needs to bring to-
gether a large pool of skills. The Society of Human Resource Management (SHRM) 
has defi ned sets of behaviors and skills associated with success, grouping these into nine 
categories it calls HR success competencies: relationship management, ethical practice, 
HR expertise, business acumen, critical evaluation, diversity and inclusion, leadership 
and navigation, consultation, and communication.14 Figure 1.3 describes the compe-
tencies and provides example behaviors that HR professionals should demonstrate as 
part of their growth and development.15 Members of the HR department need to be:
 1. Credible activists—Are so well respected in the organization that they can infl uence 
the positions taken by managers. HR professionals who are competent in this area 
Sustainability
An organization’s ability 
to proﬁ t without deplet-
ing its resources, includ-
ing employees, natural 
resources, and the sup-
port of the surrounding 
community.
Stakeholders
The parties with an 
interest in the com-
pany’s success (typically, 
shareholders, the com-
munity, customers, and 
employees).
LO 1-3 Summarize the 
types of skills needed 
for human resource 
management.

CHAPTER 1 
Managing Human Resources 15
have the most infl uence over the organization’s success, but to build this compe-
tency, they have to gain credibility by mastering all the others.
 2. Cultural and change steward—Understands the organization’s culture and helping 
to build and strengthen or change that culture by identifying and expressing its 
values through words and actions.
 3. Talent manager/organizational designer—Knows the ways that people join the orga-
nization and move to different positions within it. To do this effectively requires 
knowledge of how the organization is structured and how that structure might be 
adjusted to help it meet its goals for developing and using employees’ talents.
 4. Strategic architect—Requires awareness of business trends and an understanding of how 
they might affect the business, as well as opportunities and threats they might present. 
Competencies
for HR
Professionals
HR Expertise & Practice
Apply HRM principles
to contribute to
company success
Relationship
Management
Manage interactions
with others with goal
of providing service
and organizational
success
Consultation
Provide guidance
and advice to
stakeholders
Direct initiatives and
processes within
the company
Organizational
Leadership
Communications
Create a free ﬂow
of communication
among stakeholders
at all levels to produce
meaningful outcomes
Behaviors:
Remains current on
laws and regulations;
develops and uses
best practices
Behaviors:
Provides customer service
to stakeholders; ensures
strategic alignment
between HR and overall
organization
Behaviors:
Demonstrates ability
to understand business
operations and functions;
understands metrics and
their relationship to
business success
Behaviors:
Serves as people
management expert;
develops consultative
and coaching skills
Behaviors:
Fosters collaboration;
exhibits behaviors
consistent with company
culture
Behaviors:
Provides constructive
feedback; helps managers
communicate effectively
Manage human
resources within
and across
organizational
boundaries
Global & Cultural
Effectiveness
Ethical Practice
Integrate core values,
integrity, and
accountability
throughout
organization
Critical Evaluation
Interpret pertinent 
information skillfully
to determine impact
of business decisions
Business Acumen
Able to understand
business functions
and metrics on
company and industry
level
Behaviors:
Embraces inclusion;
works effectively
with diverse cultures
Behaviors:
Maintains
conﬁdentiality;
acts with personal
and professional
integrity
Behaviors:
Gathers critical
information; makes
sound decisions
based on evaluation
of information
Figure 1.3
Competencies and Example Behaviors for HR Professionals
Source: Based on Society for Human Resource Management, “SHRM Elements for HR Success,” www.shrm.org, accessed May 13, 2014.

16
A person with this capability spots ways effective management of human resources 
can help the company seize opportunities and confront threats to the business.
 5. Business allies—Know how the business makes money, who its customers are, and 
why customers buy what the company sells.
 6. Operational executors—At the most basic level carry out particular HR functions 
such as handling the selection, training, or compensation of employees and com-
municating through a variety of media. All of the other HR skills require some 
ability as operational executor, because this is the level at which policies and trans-
actions deliver results by legally, ethically, and effi ciently acquiring, developing, 
motivating, and deploying human resources.
All of these competencies require interpersonal skills. Successful HR professionals must 
be able to share information, build relationships, and infl uence persons inside and outside 
the company. The “Did You Know?” box suggests some of the challenges involved.
Did You Know?
Executives want HR leaders to play 
a key role in strategic planning, 
according to a survey of chief ex-
ecutive offi cers and chief fi nancial 
offi cers in the United States and 
Europe. But while over half of CEOs 
think HR is fulfi lling that role, few 
CFOs agree. This is partly because 
the fi nancial offi cers want to mea-
sure hard numbers, and many HR 
executives are not delivering that 
quantitative view of performance.
Question
What skills or competencies could 
help HR managers build stronger 
relationships with chief fi nancial 
offi cers?
Sources: IBM, “Essential Partnerships 
for HR,” IBM and Oracle, http://www
.ibm.com, accessed April 8, 2014; “New 
Study Details Ways Human  Resources 
Executives Can Take a Bigger Role 
in Driving Growth,” Market Wired, 
February 11, 2013, http://www
.marketwired.com; IBM and Oracle, 
“CFO Perspectives: How HR Can Take 
On a Bigger Role in Driving Growth,” 
Economist Intelligence Unit, 2012, 
http://www.oracle.com
CEO and CFO Relationships with HRM
Consider HR a key
player in strategic
planning
Say HR does a good 
job of understanding
the HR needs of
the business
Want HR as a key
player in strategic
planning
100%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
CEOs
CFOs

CHAPTER 1 
Managing Human Resources 17
HR Responsibilities of Supervisors
Although many organizations have human resource departments, HR activities are by 
no means limited to the specialists who staff those departments. In large organizations, 
HR departments advise and support the activities of the other departments. In small 
organizations, there may be an HR specialist, but many HR activities are carried out 
by line supervisors. Either way, non-HR managers need to be familiar with the basics 
of HRM and their role in managing human resources.
At a start-up company, the fi rst supervisors are the company’s founders. Not all 
founders recognize their HR responsibilities, but those who do have a powerful advan-
tage. When Rusty George fi rst founded his marketing fi rm, Rusty George Creative, in 
Tacoma, Washington, hiring was just something he did to keep up with rising demand. 
As he signed on law fi rms, museums, and other clients, he added staff to take care of 
them. Then the economy took a dive, and all the clients decided to do without the 
fi rm’s services. George had no way to continue paying all 17 of his employees. He laid 
off 9 of them. When business started to build again, George knew he had to be more 
methodical about hiring. He now analyzes all the costs associated with a new hire, 
including parking spaces, equipment, and even coffee. Then he looks at the additional 
revenue a particular position can generate. Only when those numbers show that a new 
hire will be profi table does George start contacting candidates who have submitted 
their résumés. Based on a painful lesson, George has learned to align his hiring prac-
tices with his business requirements.16
As we will see in later chapters, supervisors typically have responsibilities related to 
all the HR functions. Figure 1.4 shows some HR responsibilities that supervisors are 
likely to be involved in. Organizations depend on supervisors to help them determine 
what kinds of work need to be done (job analysis and design) and how many employees 
are needed (HR planning). Supervisors typically interview job candidates and partici-
pate in the decisions about which candidates to hire. Many organizations expect su-
pervisors to train employees in some or all aspects of the employees’ jobs. Supervisors 
conduct performance appraisals and may recommend pay increases. And, of course, su-
pervisors play a key role in employee relations because they are most often the voice of 
management for their employees, representing the company on a day-to-day basis. In 
all these activities, supervisors can participate in HRM by taking into consideration the 
ways that decisions and policies will affect their employees. Understanding the prin-
ciples of communication, motivation, and other elements of human behavior can help 
supervisors inspire the best from the organization’s human resources.
LO 1-4 Explain the role 
of supervisors in human 
resource management.
Figure 1.4
Supervisors’ Involve-
ment in HRM: Common 
Areas of Involvement

18 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Ethics in Human Resource Management
Whenever people’s actions affect one another, ethical issues arise, and business deci-
sions are no exception. Ethics refers to fundamental principles of right and wrong; 
ethical behavior is behavior that is consistent with those principles. Business decisions, 
including HRM decisions, should be ethical, but the evidence suggests that is not 
always what happens. Recent surveys indicate that the general public and managers 
do not have positive perceptions of the ethical conduct of U.S. businesses. For ex-
ample, in a Gallup poll on honesty and ethics in 21 professions, only 18% of Americans 
rated business executives high or very high; close to twice as many rated them low or 
very low. And within organizations, a recent survey of workers found that 45% had 
 witnessed some form of unethical conduct at their workplace.17
Many ethical issues in the workplace involve human resource management. The re-
cent fi nancial crisis, in which the investment bank Lehman Brothers collapsed, insurance 
giant AIG survived only with a massive infusion of government funds, and many observers 
feared that money for loans would dry up altogether, had many causes. Among these, some 
people believe, were ethical lapses related to compensation and other HR policies.
Employee Rights
In the context of ethical human resource management, HR managers must view em-
ployees as having basic rights. Such a view refl ects ethical principles embodied in the 
U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights. A widely adopted understanding of human rights, 
based on the work of the philosopher Immanuel Kant, as well as the tradition of the 
Enlightenment, assumes that in a moral universe, every person has certain basic rights:
 • Right of free consent—People have the right to be treated only as they knowingly 
and willingly consent to be treated. An example that applies to employees would be 
that employees should know the nature of the job they are being hired to do; the 
employer should not deceive them.
 • Right of privacy—People have the right to do as they wish in their private lives, and 
they have the right to control what they reveal about private activities. One way an 
employer respects this right is by keeping employees’ personal records confi dential.
 • Right of freedom of conscience—People have the right to refuse to do what violates 
their moral beliefs, as long as these beliefs refl ect commonly accepted norms. A 
supervisor who demands that an employee do something that is unsafe or envi-
ronmentally damaging may be violating this right if the task confl icts with the em-
ployee’s values. (Such behavior could be illegal as well as unethical.)
 • Right of freedom of speech—People have the right to criticize an organization’s ethics 
if they do so in good conscience and their criticism does not violate the rights of 
individuals in the organization. Many organizations address this right by offering 
hot lines or policies and procedures designed to handle complaints from employees.
 • Right to due process—If people believe their rights are being violated, they have the 
right to a fair and impartial hearing. As we will see in Chapter 3, Congress has ad-
dressed this right in some circumstances by establishing agencies to hear complaints 
when employees believe their employer has not provided a fair hearing. For exam-
ple, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission may prosecute complaints of 
 discrimination if it believes the employer did not fairly handle the problem.
One way to think about ethics in business is that the morally correct action is the one 
that minimizes encroachments on and avoids violations of these rights.
Organizations often face situations in which the rights of employees are affected. 
In particular, the right of privacy of health information has received much attention 
LO 1-5 Discuss 
ethical issues in human 
resource management.
Ethics
The fundamental princi-
ples of right and wrong.

CHAPTER 1 
Managing Human Resources 19
in recent years. Computerized record keeping and computer networks have greatly 
increased the ways people can gain (authorized or unauthorized) access to records 
about individuals. Health-related records can be particularly sensitive. HRM responsi-
bilities include the ever-growing challenge of maintaining confi dentiality and security 
of employees’ health information as required by the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA).
Standards for Ethical Behavior
Ethical, successful companies act according to four principles.18 First, in their relation-
ships with customers, vendors, and clients, ethical and successful companies emphasize 
mutual benefi ts. Second, employees assume responsibility for the actions of the com-
pany. Third, such companies have a sense of purpose or vision that employees value 
and use in their day-to-day work. Finally, they emphasize fairness; that is, another 
person’s interests count as much as their own.
Executives at 3M realized the company needed to recommit to principles such as 
these when the company was trying for a comeback after several diffi cult years. In 
an effort to improve profi ts, past leadership had focused on cutting costs, and 3M’s 
reputation as an innovator suffered from neglect. When George W. Buckley took the 
chief executive’s job, 3M intended to refocus employees on growth and innovation. 
This would require changes in employees’ actions and mind-sets. Angela S. Lalor, 
3M’s senior vice president of human resources, explained to the leadership team that 
successful change on that scale would require a high level of employee trust. In par-
ticular, employees would need to feel they trusted their immediate supervisors. So the 
company’s HR professionals focused on creating plans to build trusting relationships 
by ensuring that supervisors treated employees fairly. The company also sought to en-
gage employees by ensuring they were aware of and connected to its efforts to operate 
sustainably by reducing pollution, providing grants for community projects, and pro-
moting employee health. Since 3M launched the effort, employee surveys have shown 
higher levels of trust in managers and engagement with the company. The company’s 
fi nancial performance improved as well.19
For human resource practices to be considered ethical, they must satisfy the three 
basic standards summarized in Figure 1.5.20 First, HRM practices must result in the 
greatest good for the largest number of people. Second, employment practices must 
Figure 1.5
Standards for Identify-
ing Ethical Practices

20 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
respect basic human rights of privacy, due process, consent, and free speech. Third, 
managers must treat employees and customers equitably and fairly. At 3M, the human 
resources department helped supervisors treat employees fairly by educating the su-
pervisors in what kinds of conduct employees consider fair—for example, commu-
nicating in ways that are honest, open, and realistic. The training also emphasized 
the importance of listening carefully to employees and asking questions rather than 
dictating solutions. HR staffers provided supervisors with information about how 3M 
establishes pay rates so the supervisors themselves can share the information with 
 employees and demonstrate that the decisions are based on fair criteria.21
Careers in Human Resource Management
There are many different types of jobs in the HRM profession. Figure 1.6 shows se-
lected HRM positions and their salaries. The salaries vary depending on education and 
experience, as well as the type of industry in which the person works. As you can see 
from Figure 1.6, some positions involve work in specialized areas of HRM such as re-
cruiting, compensation, or employee benefi ts. Usually, HR generalists make between 
$50,000 and $80,000, depending on their experience and education level. General-
ists usually perform the full range of HRM activities, including recruiting, training, 
 compensation, and employee relations.
The vast majority of HRM professionals have a college degree, and many also have 
completed postgraduate work. The typical fi eld of study is business (especially human 
resources or industrial relations), but some HRM professionals have degrees in the 
LO 1-6 Describe 
typical careers in human 
 resource management.
HR service center representative, entry level
Beneﬁts analyst, intermediate level
Campus recruiter
Human resource assistant, entry level
HRIS specialist
Human resources manager
Training director
Director of human resources
Position
$40,000
$80,000
$120,000
$160,000
$0
Salary
Figure 1.6
Median Salaries for HRM Positions
Source: Data from Salary Wizard, Salary.com, http://swz.salary.com, accessed April 8, 2014.

21
social sciences (economics or psychology), the humanities, and law programs. Those 
who have completed graduate work have master’s degrees in HR management, busi-
ness management, or a similar fi eld. This is important because to be successful in HR, 
you need to speak the same language as people in the other business functions. You 
have to have credibility as a business leader, so you must be able to understand fi nance 
and to build a business case for HR activities.
HR professionals can increase their career opportunities by taking advantage of 
training and development programs. These may include taking courses toward a mas-
ter’s degree, accepting assignments to spend time observing, or “shadowing,” a man-
ager in another department, or taking a position in another department to learn more 
about the business. When Michael Brady was a district HR manager for Walmart, he 
would travel with the operations manager for his region. Each manager was interested 
in learning more about the other’s perspective on the business, and they eventually 
learned enough to help one another spot issues to address. Marian M. Graddick-Weir 
started her HR career as a generalist at AT&T. Her supervisor asked her to serve as 
chief of staff to the company’s vice chairman. The position was heavy on clerical duties 
but gave Graddick-Weir access to the kinds of decisions and conversations that take 
place at the highest level of the organization. Graddick-Weir paid attention and then 
took that knowledge with her when she returned to the HR department. Today she is 
executive vice president of human resources at Merck & Co.22
Some HRM professionals have a professional certifi cation in HRM, but many more 
are members of professional associations. The primary professional organization for 
HRM is the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM). SHRM is the world’s 
largest human resource management association, with more than 250,000 professional 
Members of the Society of Human 
Resource Management can connect 
with the organization’s resources and 
with one another online, thanks to 
several applications of social media:
 • SHRM has a Twitter account 
(http://twitter.com/shrm), so 
members can sign up for the 
group’s Twitter feed.
 • At the SHRM website, the SHRM 
Blog (http://blog.shrm.org) 
gives members a place to read 
the organization’s latest thoughts 
and get involved in the conver-
sation by reading and posting 
comments.
 • Also at the website, SHRM has 
established its own members-
only social network called SHRM 
Connect (http:// community
.shrm.org). Those who join the 
network can meet other SHRM 
members online and trade ideas. 
SHRM’s features include search 
capabilities and e-mail alerts so 
members can look up and be 
aware of discussions on topics 
of interest.
 • Another way to participate in 
member discussions at the 
 website is to visit HR Talk (http://
shrm.org/hrtalk), a  discussion 
forum where  members can post 
questions and answers in vari-
ous HR  subject areas.
 • SHRM has a members-only 
group on LinkedIn, the ca-
reers networking site. The 
SHRM Group has more than 
2,000 members.
Questions
1. Do you use Twitter or LinkedIn? 
Would you be interested in 
seeing career-related information 
in social media such as these?
2. How might participating in online 
discussion groups help you in 
your career?
Sources: Based on Henry G. Jackson, 
“Embracing Social Media,” HR Maga-
zine, December 2011, p. 10; Society for 
Human Resource Management, “SHRM 
Membership: Do More with More,” mem-
ber benefi ts guide, http://www.shrm.org, 
 accessed April 8, 2014; SHRM, “HR Talk,” 
https://www.shrm.org, accessed April 8, 
2014; SHRM, “SHRM Connect,” http:
//community.shrm.org/home,  accessed 
April 8, 2014; “SHRM Group,” LinkedIn, 
http://www.linkedin.com, accessed 
April 8, 2014.
SHRM’s Social-Media Presence
HRM Social

22 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
 I. The Human Resource Environment
 
1. Managing Human Resources
 
2. Trends in Human Resource Management
 
3. Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace
 
4. Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs
 II. Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
 
5. Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources
 
6. Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs
 
7. Training Employees
 
8. Developing Employees for Future Success
 III. Assessing and Improving Performance
 
9. Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations
 
10. Managing Employees’ Performance
 
11. Separating and Retaining Employees
 IV. Compensating Human Resources
 
12. Establishing a Pay Structure
 
13. Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay
 
14. Providing Employee Benefits
 V. Meeting Other HR Goals
 
15. Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations
 
16. Managing Human Resources Globally
Table 1.3
Topics Covered in 
This Book
and student members throughout the world. SHRM provides education and informa-
tion services, conferences and seminars, government and media representation, and 
online services and publications (such as HR Magazine). You can visit SHRM’s website 
to see their services at www.shrm.org. SHRM also connects with members through 
various social-media tools, as described in “HRM Social.”
Organization of This Book
This chapter has provided an overview of human resource management to give you a 
sense of its scope. In this book, the topics are organized according to the broad areas 
of human resource management shown in Table 1.3. The numbers in the table refer to 
the part and chapter numbers.
The remaining chapters in Part 1 discuss aspects of the human resource environment: 
trends shaping the fi eld (Chapter 2), legal requirements (Chapter 3), and the work to be 
done by the organization, which is the basis for designing jobs (Chapter 4). Part 2 explores 
the responsibilities involved in acquiring and equipping human resources for current and 
future positions: HR planning and recruiting (Chapter 5), selection and placement of 
employees (Chapter 6), training (Chapter 7), and developing (Chapter 8). Part 3 turns to 
the assessment and improvement of performance through creation of high-performance 
organizations (Chapter 9), performance management (Chapter 10), and appropriate han-
dling of employee separation when the organization determines it no longer wants or 
needs certain employees (Chapter 11). Part 4 addresses topics related to compensation: 
pay structure (Chapter 12), pay to recognize performance (Chapter 13), and benefi ts 
(Chapter 14). Part 5 explores special topics faced by HR managers today: human resource 
management in organizations where employees have or are seeking union representation 
(Chapter 15) and international human resource management (Chapter 16).

CHAPTER 1 
Managing Human Resources 23
Along with examples highlighting how HRM helps a company maintain high per-
formance, the chapters offer various other features to help you connect the principles 
to real-world situations. “Best Practices” boxes tell success stories related to the chap-
ter’s topic. “HR Oops!” boxes identify situations gone wrong and invite you to fi nd 
better alternatives. “HR How To” boxes provide details about how to carry out a prac-
tice in each HR area. “Did You Know?” boxes are snapshots of interesting statistics 
related to chapter topics. Many chapters also include an “HRM Social” box identifying 
ways that human resource professionals are applying social media to help their organi-
zations excel in the fast-changing modern world.
SUMMARY
LO 1-1 Defi ne human resource management, and explain 
how HRM contributes to an organization’s performance.
• Human resource management consists of an organi-
zation’s policies, practices, and systems that infl uence 
employees’ behavior, attitudes, and performance.
• HRM infl uences who works for an organization 
and how.
• Well-managed human resources can be a source of 
sustainable competitive advantage by contributing 
to quality, profi ts, and customer satisfaction.
LO 1-2 Identify the responsibilities of human resource 
departments.
• Analyze and design jobs.
• Recruit and select employees.
• Equip employees by training and developing 
them.
• Through performance management, ensure that 
employees’ activities and outputs match the orga-
nization’s goals.
• Plan and administer pay and employee benefi ts.
THINKING ETHICALLY
HOW SHOULD AN EMPLOYER WEIGH 
CONFLICTING VALUES?
One of the largest relief organizations in the United States 
recently struggled with HR policy. As a religious (Christian)-
based organization, it may use religion as the basis for 
employment standards. This organization has developed 
policies in an employee conduct manual intended to en-
sure that employees demonstrate the beliefs and morals 
of its founders’ faith. Among those requirements is “absti-
nence before marriage and fi delity in marriage.”
The problem for the organization’s board of directors 
was that some states—including Washington, where 
it is headquartered—have made same-sex marriage 
legal, so the organization could potentially receive job 
applications from people who have married a partner of 
the same sex. To respect the values of employees and 
donors who hold traditional religious views, the organi-
zation had been denying them employment.
The board decided that religious views in the United 
States had become diverse enough that it should begin 
to allow people in same-sex marriages to work for the 
organization. However, when the board announced the 
decision, many donors became upset; by some re-
ports, about 2,000 child sponsorships were ended. The 
board quickly reversed its decision. The organization’s 
president expressed regret for not having consulted 
more with its community of supporters.
The organization tries to set high ethical standards 
for its employees. Neither the decision to allow hiring 
of workers in same-sex marriages nor the reversal of 
that decision violated the law as it applies to a religious-
based organization. However, it did create embarrassing 
publicity for an organization that was trying to broaden 
its appeal and keep the focus on charity.
Questions
 1. In this situation, whose rights were affected? What 
basic rights were at stake?
 2. How well do you think the organization applied 
standards for ethical behavior? Why?
Sources:  Sarah Pulliam Bailey, “Analysis: World Vision’s Gay 
Marriage Flip-Flop Reflects Evangelical Angst as Culture 
Shifts,” Salt Lake Tribune, March 28, 2014, http://www.sltrib
.com; Joel Connelly, “World Vision, in Reversal, Won’t Hire 
Christians in Same-Sex Marriages,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 
March 26, 2014, http://blog.seattlepi.com; Sarah Pulliam 
 Bailey, “World Vision to Recognize Employees’ Same-Sex 
Marriages,” Washington Post, March 25, 2014, http://www
.washingtonpost.com.

24 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
• Engage in employee relations—for example, com-
munications and collective bargaining.
• Establish and administer personnel policies and 
keep records.
• Help ensure compliance with labor laws.
• Support the development and execution of corpo-
rate strategy.
LO 1-3 Summarize the types of skills needed for human 
resource management.
• Communication, negotiation, and team develop-
ment skills.
• Decision-making skills based on HR knowledge 
and company business.
• Leadership skills for managing confl ict and change.
• Technical skills including knowledge of current 
techniques, applicable laws, and computer systems.
LO 1-4 Explain the role of supervisors in human resource 
management.
• Help analyze work.
• Interview job candidates and participate in selec-
tion decisions.
• Provide employee training.
• Conduct performance appraisals.
• Recommend pay increases.
• Represent the company to their employees.
LO 1-5 Discuss ethical issues in human resource 
management.
• Should make decisions that result in the greatest 
good for the largest number of people.
• Should respect basic rights of privacy, due process, 
consent, and free speech.
• Should treat others equitably and fairly.
• Should recognize ethical issues that arise in areas 
such as employee privacy, protection of employee 
safety, and fairness in employment practices.
LO 1-6 Describe typical careers in human resource 
management.
• Careers may involve specialized work (e.g., 
recruiting, training, or labor relations).
• Others may be generalists, performing a range of 
activities.
• A college degree in business or social sciences 
usually is required.
• People skills must be balanced with attention to 
details of law and knowledge of business.
KEY TERMS
human resource management 
(HRM), 3
human capital, 4
job analysis, 7
job design, 7
recruitment, 7
selection, 7
training, 8
development, 8
performance management, 8
workforce analytics, 12
human resource planning, 13
talent management, 13
evidence-based HR, 13
sustainability, 14
stakeholders, 14
ethics, 18
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. How can human resource management contribute to 
a company’s success? (LO 1.1)
 2. Imagine that a small manufacturing company decides 
to invest in a materials resource planning (MRP) 
system. This is a computerized information system 
that improves effi ciency by automating such work 
as planning needs for resources, ordering materials, 
and scheduling work on the shop fl oor. The company 
hopes that with the new MRP system, it can grow by 
quickly and effi ciently processing small orders for a 
variety of products. Which of the human resource 
functions are likely to be affected by this change? How 
can human resource management help the organiza-
tion carry out this change successfully? (LO 1.2)
 3. What skills are important for success in human re-
source management? Which of these skills are al-
ready strengths of yours? Which would you like to 
develop? (LO 1.3)
 4. Traditionally, human resource management practices 
were developed and administered by the company’s 
human resource department. Line managers are now 
playing a major role in developing and implementing 
HRM practices. Why do you think non-HR manag-
ers are becoming more involved? (LO 1.4)

CHAPTER 1 
Managing Human Resources 25
 5. If you were to start a business, which aspects of 
human resource management would you want to en-
trust to specialists? Why? (LO 1.3)
 6. Why do all managers and supervisors need knowl-
edge and skills related to human resource manage-
ment? (LO 1.4)
 7. Federal law requires that employers not discriminate 
on the basis of a person’s race, sex, national origin, 
or age over 40. Is this also an ethical requirement? A 
competitive requirement? Explain. (LO 1.5)
 8. When a restaurant employee slipped on spilled soup 
and fell, requiring the evening off to recover, the owner 
realized that workplace safety was an issue to which 
she had not devoted much time. A friend warned the 
owner that if she started creating a lot of safety rules 
and procedures, she would lose her focus on custom-
ers and might jeopardize the future of the restaurant. 
The safety problem is beginning to feel like an ethi-
cal dilemma. Suggest some ways the restaurant owner 
might address this dilemma. What aspects of human 
resource management are involved? (LO 1.5)
 9. Does a career in human resource management, based 
on this chapter’s description, appeal to you? Why or 
why not? (LO 1.6)
How “Good Things Happen to” Costco
Talking to a reporter, Costco’s chief executive, Craig 
Jelinek, had a habit of stating the conditions in which 
“good things will happen to you.” To summarize his 
retail company’s strategy, Jelinek said, “As long as you 
continue to take care of the customer, take care of em-
ployees, and keep your expenses in line, good things are 
going to happen to you.” Indeed, good things have hap-
pened to Costco, which stands out from other retailers 
for remaining profi table and avoiding layoffs during the 
Great Recession and beyond.
Although Costco has an online presence, the com-
pany is mainly a chain of warehouse stores that charge 
consumers a membership fee to enjoy rock-bottom 
prices. By ordering in bulk packages, displaying goods 
on pallets and steel shelving, and setting markups just a 
sliver over costs, Costco lures shoppers with low prices. 
It makes most of its profi ts from selling memberships. 
Consumers like the arrangement: the renewal rate is 
nearly 90%.
Costco’s commitment to shaving expenses carries 
over to its plain headquarters but not to the way it 
treats employees. Since the 1980s, Costco has in-
creased pay rates every three years, keeping com-
pensation above industry norms. Even during the 
fi nancial crisis in 2009, Costco announced raises. 
On average, a Costco worker earns $20.89 an hour, 
compared with $12.67 for an hourly employee work-
ing full-time for Walmart, which runs Costco’s chief 
competitor, Sam’s Club. In addition, Costco reported 
that 88% of its employees had company-sponsored 
health insurance plans, compared with Walmart’s 
statement saying “more than half” of employees were 
covered. Costco also has resisted layoffs. For example, 
as other companies downsized store workforces and 
installed self-checkout lanes, Costco determined that 
its employees were more effi cient and better suited to 
its customer service goals.
These decisions assume that satisfi ed employees will 
build a stronger company by being more committed 
to the organization and less likely to quit. Costco has a 
low rate of employee turnover (the percentage who quit 
each year): 5% among employees with at least a year 
on the job, or about one-fourth the industry average. 
The company therefore spends less to recruit and train 
new employees, and employees have more experience 
they can apply to providing great service. Costco also 
uses store employees as its main source of management 
talent. It pays tuition for hourly workers to pursue their 
education and move up the corporate ladder. 
Costco’s executives credit the treatment of employ-
ees with helping the company thrive. Its sales and stock 
price have been surging over the past few years. The 
company has been expanding in Europe and Asia, where 
it hopes its commitment to employee well-being will 
serve the company equally well.
Questions
 1. In what ways does Costco meet the criteria for a 
“sustainable” organization?
 2. What would you describe as Costco’s basic strategy 
as a retailer? How do its human resource practices 
support that strategy?
Sources: Elizabeth A. Harris, “Walmart Will Lay Off 2,300 Sam’s Club 
Workers,” New York Times, January 24, 2014, www.nytimes.com; Caroline 
Fairchild, “Bulking Up Abroad,” Fortune, January 16, 2014, http://money
.cnn.com; Brad Stone, “Costco CEO Craig Jelinek Leads the Cheapest, 
Happiest Company in the World,” Bloomberg Businessweek, June 6, 2013, 
www.businessweek.com; Anne Fisher, “A Blueprint for Creating Better 
Jobs—and Bigger Profits,” Fortune, December 12, 2013, http://
management.fortune.cnn.com.
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY

26 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Ingersoll Rand’s Problem-Solving Approach to HRM
When Craig Mundy joined Ingersoll Rand as a human 
resources executive, he brought a business perspec-
tive. His approach was welcome at the company, which 
makes transportation and building products in support 
of a mission to create “comfortable, sustainable and ef-
fi cient environments.” The business’s perspective is one 
of solving problems. In construction, for example, be-
yond selling heating and ventilation systems, it aims to 
improve air quality and comfort while reducing energy 
consumption. Likewise, in looking at its own opera-
tions, Ingersoll Rand has harnessed employee creativity 
to improve energy effi ciency.
In contrast, Mundy knew that the focus of human re-
source management has often been on tasks more than 
on solutions. At a previous employer, Mundy had man-
aged business projects. There, the company’s HR staff 
was not always as helpful as he would have wished. Ap-
plying the experience, he came to Ingersoll Rand with 
determination to solve business problems.
Mundy started by identifying the strategic priorities of 
his business unit. He learned, for example, that Ingersoll 
Rand was seeking growth in countries with developing 
economies, a goal that required excellent country-level 
management. Mundy had the HR team determine how 
many country managers the company would need, when 
the need for each would arise, and what qualities make 
someone an excellent country manager. This informa-
tion formed the basis of goals for supporting international 
growth. To achieve the goals, the HR team evaluated tal-
ent inside and outside the company and set up ways to 
help employees acquire the needed skills.
Mundy developed this approach into a Talent Solu-
tions framework for addressing challenges facing each 
business area. He learned that one region had a problem 
with high turnover among sales representatives. Managers 
had tried to handle the problem by improving the process 
for recruiting new sales reps, but the high turnover con-
tinued. Applying the Talent Solutions framework, the HR 
team analyzed the pattern of turnover. The analysts found 
that turnover was highest after salespeople had been on 
the job about two and a half years, and that this was the 
point at which they were just becoming productive. The 
HR team decided to focus on helping salespeople become 
productive faster, so their jobs would become more re-
warding faster. The team studied the entire process of 
hiring, training, and retaining employees and set goals for 
improvement in each stage of the process. Before long, 
salespeople were more engaged, delivered better results, 
and were less likely to quit.
Mundy’s focus on business problems and solutions 
has improved Ingersoll Rand’s performance. It also has 
reshaped the way Ingersoll Rand’s business managers 
think about human resource management. Today they see 
Mundy’s group as a strategic partner.
Questions
 1. What important HRM skills has Craig Mundy ap-
plied to his role at Ingersoll Rand?
 2. How do talent management and evidence-based HR 
support Mundy’s efforts to offer solutions?
Sources: Ingersoll Rand, “Our Culture,” http://company.ingersollrand.com, 
accessed April 8, 2014; Ingersoll Rand, “Ingersoll Rand Recognized as One 
of the Achievers 50 Most Engaged Workplaces in the United States,” news 
release, January 20, 2014, http://investor.shareholder.com/ir; Ingersoll Rand, 
“Ingersoll Rand Changes Segment Reporting to Align with Reorganization 
Following Expected Security Spin,” news release, November 6, 2013, http://
investor.shareholder.com/ir; Marc Major, “One Step Forward: Driving 
Sustainability at Ingersoll Rand,” EHS Today, June 2013, pp. 45–49; J. Craig 
Mundy, “Be a Strategic Performance Consultant,” HR Magazine, March 2013.
MANAGING TALENT
Managing HR at a Services Firm
Susan K. Dubin describes herself as someone who en-
joys helping others and making her company a positive 
place to work. Those attitudes have provided a strong 
basis for her successful career in human resource man-
agement. In two different companies, Dubin took on 
responsibilities for payroll, training, and employee re-
lations. As she built her experience, she established a 
strong working relationship with Danone Simpson, an 
insurance agent. 
Dubin was impressed with what she saw as Simpson’s 
“commitment to client services.” So when Simpson 
prepared to open her own insurance services business, 
Dubin was interested in signing on. For several years 
now, Dubin has been HR director for Montage Insur-
ance Solutions (formerly Danone Simpson Insurance 
Services), which operates from offi ces in Woodland 
Hills, California. She also answers questions from cli-
ents who call the agency’s HR hotline.
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

CHAPTER 1 
Managing Human Resources 27
Dubin sees herself as contributing to the fastgrow-
ing company’s success. For example, she looks for the 
best deals in benefi ts programs in order to have room 
in her budget for the little things that contribute to an 
 employee-friendly workplace: monthly luncheons, raffl e 
prizes, and break rooms. That’s a priority, Dubin says, 
because employees who are “happy at work” are “more 
productive, so everybody wins.” Simpson sees that bal-
ance between nurturing and practicality in Dubin. Ac-
cording to Simpson, Dubin is supportive but also fi rm 
in enforcing standards: “She doesn’t put up with any 
nonsense . . . but does it in a wonderful way.”
Perhaps the Careers page of the company’s website 
puts it best. Besides promoting the agency as an “honest 
and hardworking team,” it says simply, “Please be ad-
vised that our organization cares about its employees.”
Questions
 1. Based on the description in this case, how well would 
you say Susan Dubin appreciates the scope of human 
resource management? What, if any, additional skills 
of an HR professional would you encourage her to 
develop?
 2. Look up descriptions of HR jobs by searching under 
“human resources” in the latest edition of the Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics’ Occupational Outlook Hand-
book (available online at www.bls.gov/OCO/). What 
position in the handbook best matches Dubin’s job, 
as described in this case?
 3. How would you expect Dubin’s job in a small ser-
vices company to be different from a similar position 
in a large manufacturing company?
Source: Montage Insurance Solutions corporate website, http://www
.montageinsurance.com, accessed April 16, 2014; Susan Dubin, “How 
HR Inspires Me,” Montage Blog, http://www.montageinsurance.com, 
 accessed April 16, 2014; Mark R. Madler, “Valley’s Top Human Resources 
 Professionals: Susan K. Dubin,” San Fernando Valley Business Journal, 
April 13, 2009, Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet
.galegroup.com.
 1. Adrienne Fox, “The Joy of Work in HR,” HR Magazine, 
 January 2014, https://www.shrm.org.
 2. A. S. Tsui and L. R. Gomez-Mejia, “Evaluating Human 
Resource Effectiveness,” in Human Resource Management: 
Evolving Rules and Responsibilities, ed. L. Dyer  (Washington, 
DC: BNA Books, 1988), pp. 1187–227; M. A. Hitt, B. W. 
Keats, and S. M. DeMarie, “Navigating in the New 
Competitive Landscape: Building Strategic Flexibility 
and Competitive Advantage in the 21st Century,” Acad-
emy of Management Executive 12, no. 4 (1998), pp. 22–42; 
J. T.  Delaney and M. A. Huselid, “The Impact of Human 
 Resource Management Practices on Perceptions of Orga-
nizational Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 
39 (1996), pp. 949–69.
 3. W. F. Cascio, Costing Human Resources: The Financial Impact of 
Behavior in Organizations, 3rd ed. (Boston: PWS-Kent, 1991).
 4. S. A. Snell and J. W. Dean, “Integrated Manufacturing and 
Human Resource Management: A Human Capital Perspec-
tive,” Academy of Management Journal 35 (1992), pp. 467–504; 
M. A. Youndt, S. Snell, J. W. Dean Jr., and D. P. Lepak, 
“Human Resource Management, Manufacturing Strategy, 
and Firm Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 39 
(1996), pp. 836–66.
 5. Zeynep Ton, “Why Good Jobs Are Good for Retailers,” Har-
vard Business Review, January– February 2012, pp. 124–31; Brad 
Stone, “Costco CEO Craig Jelinek Leads the Cheapest, Hap-
piest Company in the World,” Bloomberg Businessweek, June 6, 
2013, http://www.businessweek.com; Anne Fisher, “A Blueprint 
for Creating Better Jobs—and Bigger Profi ts,”  Fortune, Decem-
ber 12, 2013, http://management.fortune.cnn.com.
 6. Steve Wexler, “How Many HR Employees Do You Have—
and Should You Have—in Your Organization?” Institute for 
Corporate Productivity, May 21, 2010, http://www.i4cp.com; 
Eric Krell, “Is HR Doing More with Less? Or Is It Undergo-
ing a Transformation?” HR Magazine, September 2013, www
.shrm.org.
 7. E. E. Lawler, “From Human Resource Management to Or-
ganizational Effectiveness,” Human Resource Management 44 
(2005), pp. 165–69.
 8. Lauren Weber and Rachel Feintzeig, “Companies Say No to 
Having an HR Department,” The Wall Street Journal, April 9, 
2014, http://online.wsj.com.
 9. S. Snell, “Control Theory in Strategic Human Resource 
Management: The Mediating Effect of Administrative 
Information,” Academy of Management Journal 35 (1992), 
pp. 292–327.
 10. Joanne Sammer, “A Marriage of Necessity,” HR Magazine, 
October 2011, pp. 58–62.
 11. Ibid., p. 61.
 12. Wendy S. Becker, “Are You Leading a Socially Responsible 
and Sustainable Human Resource Function?” People & 
Strategy, March 2011, pp. 18–23.
 13. Brad Power, “IBM Focuses HR on Change,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, January 10, 2012, http://www.businessweek
.com.
 14. Society for Human Resource Management, “Competencies: 
Model,” www.shrm.org, accessed April 2, 2014.
 15. Robert J. Grossman, “New Competencies for HR,” HR Mag-
azine, June 2007, pp. 58–62.
 16. Wendy Kaufman, “A Single Hire Is a Big Deal to a Small 
Business,” National Public Radio, October 10, 2011, http://
www.npr.org.
 17. Jeffrey M. Jones, “Record 64% Rate Honesty, Ethics of 
Members of Congress Low,” Gallup,  December 12, 2011, 
NOTES

28 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
http://www.gallup.com; Corruption Currents, “Survey 
Sees Less Misconduct but More Reporting and Retalia-
tion,” The Wall Street Journal, January 5, 2012, http://blogs
.wsj.com.
 18. M. Pastin, The Hard Problems of Management: Gaining the 
Ethics Edge (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1986); T. Thomas, 
J. Schermerhorn Jr., and J. Dienhart, “Strategic Leadership 
of Ethical Behavior in Business,” Academy of Management 
 Executive 18 (2004), pp. 56–66.
 19. Benjamin Schneider and Karen B. Paul, “In the Company 
We Trust,” HR Magazine, January 2011, Business & Com-
pany Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 20. G. F. Cavanaugh, D. Moberg, and M. Velasquez, “The Ethics 
of Organizational Politics,” Academy of Management Review 6 
(1981), pp. 363–74.
 21. Schneider and Paul, “In the Company We Trust.”
 22. Adrienne Fox, “Paths to the Top,” HR Magazine, November 
2011, pp. 30–35.

2
Trends in Human Resource 
Management
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 2-1 Describe trends in the labor force composition and 
how they affect human resource management.
 LO 2-2 Summarize areas in which human resource 
management can support the goal of creating a 
high-performance work system.
 LO 2-3 Deﬁ ne employee empowerment, and explain its 
role in the modern organization.
 LO 2-4 Identify ways HR professionals can support organi-
zational strategies for growth, quality, and efﬁ ciency.
 LO 2-5 Summarize ways in which human resource 
management can support organizations expanding 
internationally.
 LO 2-6 Discuss how technological developments are 
affecting human resource management.
 LO 2-7 Explain how the nature of the employment 
relationship is changing.
 LO 2-8 Discuss how the need for ﬂ exibility affects human 
resource management.
Introduction
Business experts point out that if you want your company to gain an advan-
tage over competitors, you have to do something differently. Some manag-
ers are taking a hard look at human resources management, asking if it 
needs to be a department at all. At the consulting firm LRN Corporation, 
management decided to eliminate the human resources department. Their 
idea was that if all managers were responsible for managing talent, they 
would make those decisions in a way that directly served their group’s per-
formance. Beam, the maker of spirits such as Maker’s Mark bourbon and 
Jim Beam whiskey, made its line managers responsible for hiring, training, 
and making compensation decisions. They are advised by a small group of 
“business partners,” who consult with the line managers on HR questions.1
Is this the end of human resource management? Probably not. The typ-
ical company today is maintaining the size of its human resource depart-
ment and even spending a little more on the function.2 At LRN, current and 
former employees have said line managers sometimes struggle with mak-
ing HR decisions. For example, a line manager needs time to figure out how 
to define a job and set a salary range for it, which slows down the whole 
hiring process. At Beam, the HR business partners are playing a more 
strategic role than a traditional HR staffer focused on routine processes. 

30 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
However, these changes may be a sign that today’s businesses are impatient with the 
status quo. It is no longer enough to manage human resources a certain way because 
other companies do it that way. Rather, HR managers and employees are valuable to the 
extent they are willing to understand the organization in business terms, including the 
financial, accounting, and analytic tools that managers use to measure their success.3
Despite the hard look that managers are directing at human resource management, 
organizations depend on this work more than ever. Even with a slow pace of economic 
growth, many employers report that recruiting the specifi c kinds of talent they need is 
getting harder. The skills required within industries often are changing as technology 
advances, so current employees need training as much as ever. Rising costs of benefi ts, 
especially health insurance, have demanded creativity in planning compensation pack-
ages. The diffi cult economy has made it essential for organizations to fi nd ways for their 
employees to work more effi ciently—getting more done faster and placing lighter de-
mands on natural resources, all without sacrifi cing quality and customer service. These 
effi ciency improvements can only come from creative thinking by highly motivated and 
well-trained workers. Addressing all of these challenges and other trends in today’s 
business climate requires more innovative human resource management than ever.
This chapter describes major trends that are affecting human resource management. 
It begins with an examination of the modern labor force, including trends that are de-
termining who will participate in the workforce of the future. Next is an exploration of 
the ways HRM can support a number of trends in organizational strategy, from efforts 
to maintain high-performance work systems to changes in the organization’s size and 
structure. Often, growth includes the use of human resources on a global scale, as more 
and more organizations hire immigrants or open operations overseas. The chapter then 
turns to major changes in technology, especially the role of the Internet. As we will ex-
plain, the Internet is changing organizations themselves, as well as providing new ways 
to carry out human resource management. Finally, we explore the changing nature of 
the employment relationship, in which careers and jobs are becoming more fl exible.
Change in the Labor Force
The term labor force is a general way to refer to all the people willing and able to work. 
For an organization, the internal labor force consists of the organization’s workers—
its employees and the people who have contracts to work at the organization. This 
internal labor force has been drawn from the organization’s external labor market, 
that is, individuals who are actively seeking employment. The number and kinds of 
people in the external labor market determine the kinds of human resources available 
to an organization (and their cost). Human resource professionals need to be aware of 
trends in the composition of the external labor market because these trends affect the 
organization’s options for creating a well-skilled, motivated internal labor force.
An Aging Workforce
In the United States, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), an agency of the Depart-
ment of Labor, tracks changes in the composition of the U.S. labor force and forecasts 
employment trends. The BLS has projected that from 2012 to 2022, the total U.S. civil-
ian labor force will grow from 155 million to 163 million workers.4 This 5.5% increase 
is noticeably lower than the more than 13% increase experienced during the 1990s.
LO 2-1 Describe trends 
in the labor force com-
position and how they 
affect human resource 
management.
Internal Labor Force
An organization’s work-
ers (its employees and 
the people who have 
contracts to work at the 
organization).
External Labor Market
Individuals who are 
actively seeking 
employment.

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 31
Some of the expected change involves the distribution of work-
ers by age. From 2012 to 2022, the fastest-growing age group 
is expected to be workers 55 and older. The 25- to 44-year-old 
group will increase its numbers only slightly, so its share of the 
total workforce will fall. And young workers between the ages of 
16 and 24 will actually be fewer in number. This combination of 
trends will cause the overall workforce to age. Figure 2.1 shows 
the change in age distribution, as forecast by the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics between 2012 and 2022. By 2022, all baby boomers will 
be at least 55 years old, swelling the ranks of workers nearing 
retirement.5 Human resource professionals will therefore spend 
much of their time on concerns related to planning retirement, 
retraining older workers, and motivating workers whose careers 
have plateaued. Organizations will struggle with ways to control 
the rising costs of health care and other benefi ts, and many of 
tomorrow’s managers will supervise employees much older than 
themselves. At the same time, organizations will have to fi nd ways 
to attract, retain, and prepare the youth labor force.
Today’s older generation includes many people who are in no 
hurry to retire. They may enjoy making a contribution at work, 
have ambitious plans for which they want to earn money, or sim-
ply be among the many who have inadequate savings for full re-
tirement. Therefore, older workers often want to be allowed to 
gradually move toward retirement by working part-time or taking 
temporary assignments. Scripps Health helps its employees gradu-
ally transition to full retirement. Employees are allowed to reduce 
their work hours gradually while maintaining their health insur-
ance. Employees who work at least 16 hours a week are eligible for training programs and 
fl extime. Atlantic Health System allows retirees to take part-time jobs, per diem jobs (bill-
ing for each day worked), and temporary assignments. Retired employees have returned 
to work as consultants and contract workers, and some have telecommuting arrangements 
(working from home). Many of these assignments give older employees a chance to act as 
mentors to their younger colleagues.6
With older workers continuing to hold jobs at least part-time, today’s workplaces 
often bring together employees representing three or four generations. This creates a 
As more and more of the workforce reaches retirement 
age, some companies have set up mentoring programs 
between older and younger workers so that knowledge 
is not lost but passed on. How does the company  benefi t 
from these mentoring programs?
2012
2022
16 to 24 years old
25 to 54 years old
55 years and older
2012
2022
65%
63%
26%
11%
21%
14%
Figure 2.1
Age Distribution of U.S. 
Labor Force, 2012 and 
2022
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment Projections, 2012–2022,” news release, December 19, 2013, 
http://www.bls.gov/emp.

32
need for understanding the values and work habits that tend to characterize each gen-
eration.7 For example, members of the silent generation (born between 1925 and 1945) 
tend to value income and employment security and avoid challenging authority. Baby 
boomers (born between 1946 and 1964) tend to value unexpected rewards, opportuni-
ties for learning, and time with management. Members of Generation X (1965–1980) 
tend to be pragmatic and cynical, and they have well-developed self-management 
skills. Those born from 1981 to 1995, often called millennials, or Generation Y, are 
comfortable with the latest technology, and they want to be noticed, respected, and 
involved. Some generational differences can be addressed through effective human 
resource management. For example, organizations train managers to provide frequent 
feedback to members of Generation Y, and they show respect for older generations’ 
hard work and respect for authority by asking them to mentor younger workers. 
Generational differences also can affect how managers approach policies about social 
media, as described in the “HRM Social” box.
A Diverse Workforce
Another kind of change affecting the U.S. labor force is that it is growing more diverse 
in racial, ethnic, and gender terms. As Figure 2.2 shows, the 2022 workforce is expected 
to be 78% white, 12% African American, and 10% Asian and other minorities. The 
fastest growing of these categories are Asian and “other groups” because these groups 
Some managers believe organiza-
tions need policies restricting em-
ployees’ access to social media 
such as Twitter and Facebook. Their 
belief is based on the assumption 
that using social media is merely 
a distraction from doing real work. 
However, the research evidence for 
this assumption is mixed—and the 
impact of social media may vary 
across generations of workers.
Some studies simply ask em-
ployees for their opinions about 
their access to social media. A 
survey of Canadian workers found 
that almost two-thirds have been 
distracted by social media, e-mail, 
or Web browsing. One-third re-
ported losing more than an hour a 
day in checking e-mail and social 
media, and two-thirds said they 
would get more done if they were 
disconnected from the Internet 
for a set time each day. But in an 
international survey of information 
workers, almost half said using so-
cial media had increased their pro-
ductivity. The younger the workers, 
the more likely they were to asso-
ciate social-media use with greater 
productivity and to say they could 
do their jobs even better if their em-
ployer would loosen restrictions on 
the use of social media.
Another study, conducted by the 
Warwick Business School, in the 
United Kingdom, measured output 
instead of opinions. According to the 
researchers, using social media was 
associated with greater productiv-
ity. The two-year study of employees 
at a telecommunications company 
found that they were more produc-
tive when they used social media to 
communicate with customers. The 
mixed results suggest that a single 
policy might not apply equally well to 
all employees.
Questions
1. Thinking about your current job 
or a job you would like to have, 
would access to social media 
help or distract you? Do you 
think your age plays a role in 
your opinion? Why?
2. How could human resource 
management support decisions 
about creating a policy for using 
social media?
Sources: Thomson Reuters, “Two-Thirds 
of Workers Distracted by Emails, Inter-
net, Social Media: Survey,” Canadian 
HR Reporter, April 17, 2014, http://www.
hrreporter.com; Shea Bennett, “Social 
Media Increases Offi ce Productivity, but 
Management Still Resistant, Says Study,” 
MediaBistro, June 26, 2013, http://www.
mediabistro.com; Bernhard Warner, 
“When Social Media at Work Don’t Create 
 Productivity-Killing Distractions,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, April 1, 2013.
What Social-Media Policies Are Suitable across Generations?
HRM Social

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 33
are experiencing immigration and birthrates above the 
national average. In addition to these racial categories, 
the ethnic category of Hispanics is growing even faster, 
and the Hispanic share of the U.S. labor force is ex-
pected to reach 19% of the total by 2022.8 Along with 
greater racial and ethnic diversity, there is also greater 
gender diversity. More women today than in the past 
are in the paid labor force, and the labor force partici-
pation rate for men has been slowly declining. During 
the economic recession and slow recovery, women’s 
labor force participation rate also declined slightly, but 
between 2012 and 2022, women’s share of the labor 
force is expected to  remain steady, at around 47%.9
One important source of racial and ethnic diversity is 
immigration. The U.S. government establishes proce-
dures for foreign nationals to follow if they wish to live 
and work permanently in the United States, and it sets 
limits on the number of immigrants who are admitted 
through these channels. Of the more than 1 million immigrants who come to the United 
States legally each year, more than 6 out of 10 are relatives of U.S. citizens. Another 14% 
come on work-related visas, some of which are set aside for workers with exceptional 
qualifi cations in science, business, or the arts. (About half of the work-related visas go to 
the immediate relatives of those coming to the United States to work, allowing workers 
to bring their spouse and children.) The U.S. government also grants temporary work 
visas to a limited number of highly educated workers, permitting them to work in the 
United States for a set period of time but not to remain as immigrants. U.S. law requires 
employers to verify that any job candidate who is not a U.S. citizen has received permis-
sion to work in the United States as an immigrant or with a temporary work permit. (This 
requirement is discussed in Chapter 6.)
Other foreign-born workers in the United States arrived in this country without 
meeting the legal requirements for immigration or asylum. These individuals, known 
as undocumented or illegal immigrants, likely number in the millions. While gov-
ernment policy toward immigrants is a matter of heated public debate, the human 
resource implications have two practical parts. The fi rst involves the supply of and de-
mand for labor. Many U.S. industries, including meatpacking, construction, farming, 
and services, rely on immigrants to perform demanding work that may be low paid. 
In other industries, such as computer software development, employers say they have 
diffi culty fi nding enough qualifi ed U.S. workers to fi ll technical jobs. These employers 
are pressing for immigration laws to allow a greater supply of foreign-born workers.
The other HR concern is the need to comply with laws. In recent years, Immigra-
tion and Customs and Enforcement has focused its efforts on auditing employers to 
ensure they are following proper procedures to avoid employing undocumented im-
migrants. Businesses that have justifi ed hiring these people on the grounds that they 
work hard and are needed for the business to continue operating now are facing greater 
legal risks.10 Even as some companies are lobbying for changes to immigration laws, 
the constraints on labor supply force companies to consider a variety of ways to meet 
their demand for labor, including job redesign (see Chapter 4), higher pay (Chapter 12), 
and foreign operations (Chapter 16).
The greater diversity of the U.S. labor force challenges employers to create HRM 
practices that ensure they fully utilize the talents, skills, and values of all employees. As 
White
Black
Asian
Other groups
78%
6%
4%
12%
Figure 2.2
Projected Racial/Ethnic Makeup of the U.S. Workforce, 2022
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment Projections, 
2012–2022,” news release, December 19, 2013, http://www.bls
.gov/emp.

34 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
a result, organizations cannot afford to ignore or discount the potential contributions 
of women and minorities. Employers will have to ensure that employees and HRM 
systems are free of bias and value the perspectives and experience that women and 
minorities can contribute to organizational goals such as product quality and customer 
service. As we will discuss further in the next chapter, managing cultural diversity in-
volves many different activities. These include creating an organizational culture that 
values diversity, ensuring that HRM systems are bias-free, encouraging career develop-
ment for women and minorities, promoting knowledge and acceptance of cultural dif-
ferences, ensuring involvement in education both within and outside the organization, 
and dealing with employees’ resistance to diversity.11 Figure 2.3 summarizes ways in 
which HRM can support the management of diversity for organizational success.
Many U.S. companies have already committed themselves to ensuring that they 
recognize the diversity of their internal labor force and use it to gain a competitive 
advantage. In a recent survey of executives at large global corporations, 85% said a 
“diverse and inclusive workforce” is important for encouraging innovation. Majori-
ties of respondents said their companies have a program to recruit a diverse group of 
employees (65%) and develop an inclusive workforce (53%).12
An organization doesn’t have to be a huge global enterprise to benefi t from valuing 
diversity. In Poughkeepsie, New York, the Bridgeway Federal Credit Union has realized 
that it can best serve the groups in its community by ensuring that its employees are 
representative of that community. About one-fourth of Bridgeway’s members are African 
American, and about 12% are Hispanics. Many of these members come from low-income 
households where access to banking services has been limited in the past. To attract and 
include employees from this community, Bridgeway conducts outreach events in neigh-
borhoods and provides diversity training programs for its employees. With ideas from 
its diverse employees, Bridgeway has come up with helpful products, such as its Drive 
Up Savings Account, which provides qualifi ed customers with an auto loan that has a 
Figure 2.3
HRM Practices That Support Diversity Management
Source: Based on M. Loden and J. B. Rosener, Workforce America! (Homewood, IL: Business One Irwin, 1991).

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 35
payment plan in which a part of the monthly payments is directed into a savings plan. 
When the loan is paid off, Bridgeway rewards the borrowers by giving them a discount 
on the interest they paid, and the customers fi nd that they have saved up a tidy sum.13
Throughout this book, we will show how diversity affects HRM practices. For ex-
ample, from a staffi ng perspective, it is important to ensure that tests used to select em-
ployees are not unfairly biased against minority groups. From the perspective of work 
design, employees need fl exible schedules that allow them to meet nonwork needs. In 
terms of training, it is clear that employees must be made aware of the damage that 
stereotypes can do. With regard to compensation, organizations are providing benefi ts 
such as elder care and day care as a way to accommodate the needs of a diverse work-
force. As we will see later in the chapter, successfully managing diversity is also critical 
for companies that compete in international markets.
Skill Deficiencies of the Workforce
The increasing use of computers to do routine tasks has shifted the kinds of skills 
needed for employees in the U.S. economy. Such qualities as physical strength and 
mastery of a particular piece of machinery are no longer important for many jobs. 
More employers are looking for mathematical, verbal, and interpersonal skills, such as 
the ability to solve math or other problems or reach decisions as part of a team. Often, 
when organizations are looking for technical skills, they are looking for skills related to 
computers and using the Internet. Today’s employees must be able to handle a variety 
of responsibilities, interact with customers, and think creatively.
To fi nd such employees, most organizations are looking for educational achieve-
ments. A college degree is a basic requirement for many jobs today. Competition for 
qualifi ed college graduates in many fi elds is intense. At the other extreme, workers with 
less education often have to settle for low-paying jobs. Some companies are unable to 
fi nd qualifi ed employees and instead rely on training to correct skill defi ciencies.14 
Other companies team up with universities, community colleges, and high schools to 
design and teach courses ranging from basic reading to design blueprint reading.
Not all the skills employers want require a college education. The National Associ-
ation of Manufacturers year after year has reported that the manufacturing companies 
in the United States have diffi culty fi nding enough people who can operate sophisti-
cated computer-controlled machinery. These jobs rely at least as much on intelligence 
and teamwork as on physical strength. In some areas, companies and communities 
have set up apprenticeship and training programs to fi x the worker shortage. Some 
companies are turning to veterans of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. These work-
ers have already demonstrated high levels of commitment and teamwork, as well as 
the ability to make creative use of the resources at hand in diffi cult situations. Many 
of them have been trained already by the military in a variety of technical skills. The 
challenge for employers has been to support these employees in other areas, such as 
helping them weather the emotional strain of the transition back to civilian life, as well 
as training them in the technical requirements of their new jobs.15
High-Performance Work Systems
Human resource management is playing an important role in helping organizations gain 
and keep an advantage over competitors by becoming high-performance work 
 systems. These are organizations that have the best possible fi t between their social sys-
tem (people and how they interact) and technical system (equipment and processes).16 As 
the nature of the workforce and the technology available to organizations have changed, 
High-Performance 
Work Systems
Organizations that have 
the best possible ﬁ t 
between their social 
system (people and how 
they interact) and techni-
cal system (equipment 
and processes).

36 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
so have the requirements for creating a high-performance work system. Customers are 
demanding high quality and customized products, employees are seeking fl exible work 
arrangements, and employers are looking for ways to tap people’s creativity and interper-
sonal skills. Such demands require that organizations make full use of their people’s knowl-
edge and skill, and skilled human resource management can help organizations do this.
Among the trends that are occurring in today’s high-performance work systems 
are reliance on knowledge workers, empowerment of employees to make decisions, 
and use of teamwork. The following sections describe those three trends, and Chap-
ter  9 will explore the ways HRM can support the creation and maintenance of a 
high- performance work system. HR professionals who keep up with change are well 
positioned to help create high-performance work systems.
Knowledge Workers
The growth in e-commerce, plus the shift from a manufacturing to a service and in-
formation economy, has changed the nature of employees who are most in demand. 
The Bureau of Labor Statistics forecasts that between 2012 and 2022, most new jobs 
will be in service occupations, especially health care and social assistance. Construction 
jobs also are expected to increase, but mostly to replace jobs that were lost during the 
fi nancial crisis and recession of a few years ago.
The number of service jobs has important implications for human resource man-
agement. Research shows that if employees have a favorable view of HRM  practices—
career opportunities, training, pay, and feedback on performance—they are more likely 
to provide good service to customers. Therefore, quality HRM for service employees 
can translate into customer satisfaction.
Besides differences among industries, job growth varies according to the type of job. 
Table 2.1 lists the 10 occupations expected to gain the most jobs between 2012 and 
2022 and the 10 expected to grow at the fastest rate. Occupations with the most jobs 
are expected to involve health care, sales, food preparation, as well as other services. 
Many of the fastest-growing occupations also are in the health care fi eld.17 These and 
other fast-growing occupations refl ect the steadily growing demand for health care and 
an expected rebound in the construction industry. While some of these jobs and other 
MOST NEW JOBS
FASTEST RATE OF GROWTH
Personal care aides
Industrial-organizational psychologists
Registered nurses
Personal care aides
Retail salespersons
Home health aides
Home health aides
Insulation workers, mechanical
Combined food preparation and serving workersa
Interpreters and translators
Nursing assistants
Diagnostic medical sonographers
Secretaries and administrative assistantsb
Helpers: brickmasons, blockmasons, 
stonemasons, and tile and marble setters
Customer service representatives
Occupational therapy assistants
Janitors and cleanersc
Genetic counselors
Construction laborers
Physical therapist assistants
Table 2.1
Top 10 Occupations for 
Job Growth
Source: Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, “Employment 
Projections, 2012–2022,” 
news release, December 
19, 2013, http://www
.bls.gov, Tables 4, 5.
aIncludes fast food. 
bExcept legal, medical, and executive. 
cExcept maids and housekeeping cleaners.
LO 2-2 Summarize areas 
in which human  resource 
management can sup-
port the goal of creating 
a high- performance work 
system.

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 37
fast-growing occupations require a college degree, many of the fast-growing occupations 
require only on-the-job training. (Exceptions are industrial-organizational psychologists 
and registered nurses.) This means that many companies’ HRM departments will need 
to provide excellent training as well as hiring.
These high-growth jobs are evidence of another trend: The future U.S. labor 
market will be both a knowledge economy and a service economy.18 Along with low- 
education jobs in services like health care and food preparation, there will be many 
high-education professional and managerial jobs. To meet these human capital 
needs, companies are increasingly trying to attract, develop, and retain knowledge 
workers. Knowledge workers are employees whose main contribution to the orga-
nization is specialized knowledge, such as knowledge of customers, a process, or a 
profession. Further complicating that challenge, many of these knowledge workers 
will have to be “technoservice” workers who not only know a specialized fi eld such 
as computer  programming or engineering, but also must be able to work directly 
with customers.
Knowledge workers are in a position of power because they own the knowledge that 
the company needs in order to produce its products and services, and they must share 
their knowledge and collaborate with others in order for their employer to succeed. An 
employer cannot simply order these employees to perform tasks. Managers depend on 
the employees’ willingness to share information. Furthermore, skilled knowledge work-
ers have many job opportunities, even in a slow economy. If they choose, they can leave 
a company and take their knowledge to another employer. Replacing them may be dif-
fi cult and time consuming.
The idea that only some of an organization’s workers are knowledge workers has 
come under criticism.19 To the critics, this defi nition is no longer realistic in a day of 
computerized information systems and computer-controlled production processes. For 
the company to excel, everyone must know how their work contributes to the organi-
zation’s success. At the same time,  employees—especially younger generations, which 
grew up with the Internet—will expect to have wide access to information. From this 
perspective, successful organizations treat all their workers as knowledge workers. They 
let employees know how well the organization is performing, and they invite ideas 
about how the organization can do better.
Can the “knowledge worker” label really fi t everywhere? Think of the expectations 
organizations have for the typical computer programmer. These high-in-demand em-
ployees expect to be valued for their skills, not the hours they put in or the way they 
dress. Organizations that successfully recruit and retainer computer programmers give 
them plenty of freedom to set up their work space and their own schedule. They moti-
vate by assigning tasks that are interesting and challenging and by encouraging friendly 
collaboration. To some degree, these kinds of measures apply to many employees and 
many work situations. W. W. Grainger, for example, is not a glamorous company, but 
it is one that many companies depend on. Grainger distributes an enormous variety of 
supplies and parts needed by its business customers. Grainger creates an attractive en-
vironment for the modern-day version of the knowledge worker by helping to match 
them up with jobs in which they matter and can excel, even if that means trying out 
jobs in a variety of departments. Linda Kolbe, the manager of Grainger’s e-commerce, 
started as an administrative assistant and worked her way up, with help from the com-
pany’s mentoring program. And branch manager Roger Lubert has found that the 
company is eager to try out his ideas for managing inventory and store operations. The 
company treats these and other employees as individuals who can both expand their 
knowledge and apply it to benefi t the entire organization.20
Knowledge Workers
Employees whose main 
contribution to the or-
ganization is specialized 
knowledge, such as 
knowledge of custom-
ers, a process, or a 
profession.

38 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Employee Empowerment
To completely benefi t from employees’ knowledge, organizations need a management 
style that focuses on developing and empowering employees. Employee  empowerment 
means giving employees responsibility and authority to make decisions regarding all 
aspects of product development or customer service.21 Employees are then held ac-
countable for products and services. In return, they share the resulting losses and re-
wards. Employee empowerment can also extend to innovation. Employees at all levels 
are encouraged to share their ideas for satisfying customers better and operating more 
effi ciently and safely. This is empowering if management actually listens to the ideas, 
implements valuable ones, and rewards employees for their innovations. 
HRM practices such as performance management, training, work design, and com-
pensation are important for ensuring the success of employee empowerment. Jobs 
must be designed to give employees the necessary latitude for making a variety of 
decisions. Employees must be properly trained to exert their wider authority and use 
information resources such as the Internet as well as tools for communicating infor-
mation. Employees also need feedback to help them evaluate their success. Pay and 
other rewards should refl ect employees’ authority and be related to successful han-
dling of their responsibility. In addition, for empowerment to succeed, managers must 
be trained to link employees to resources within and outside the organization, such 
as customers, co-workers in other departments, and websites with needed informa-
tion. Managers must also encourage employees to interact with staff throughout the 
organization, must ensure that employees receive the information they need, and must 
reward cooperation. Finally, empowered employees deliver the best results if they are 
fully engaged in their work. Employee engagement—full involvement in one’s work and 
commitment to one’s job and company—is associated with higher productivity, better 
customer service, and lower turnover.22
As with the need for knowledge workers, use of employee empowerment shifts the 
recruiting focus away from technical skills and toward general cognitive and interper-
sonal skills. Employees who have responsibility for a fi nal product or service must be 
able to listen to customers, adapt to changing needs, and creatively solve a variety of 
problems.
Teamwork
Modern technology places the information that employees need for improving quality 
and providing customer service right at the point of sale or production. As a result, the 
employees engaging in selling and producing must also be able to make decisions 
about how to do their work. Organizations need to set up work in a way that gives 
employees the authority and ability to make those decisions. One of the most popular 
ways to increase employee responsibility and control is to assign work to teams. Team-
work is the assignment of work to groups of employees with various skills who inter-
act to assemble a product or provide a service. Work teams often assume many activities 
traditionally reserved for managers, such as selecting new team members, scheduling 
work, and coordinating work with customers and other units of the organization. 
Work teams also contribute to total quality by performing inspection and quality-
control activities while the product or service is being completed.
In some organizations, technology is enabling teamwork even when workers are at 
different locations or work at different times. These organizations use virtual teams—
teams that rely on communications technology such as videoconferences, e-mail, and 
cell phones to keep in touch and coordinate activities.
LO 2-3 Deﬁ ne employee 
empowerment, and 
explain its role in the 
modern organization.
Employee 
Empowerment
Giving employees 
 responsibility and au-
thority to make decisions 
regarding all aspects of 
product development or 
customer service.
Teamwork
The assignment of work 
to groups of employees 
with various skills who 
interact to assemble 
a product or provide a 
service.

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 39
Teamwork can motivate employees by making work 
more interesting and signifi cant. At organizations that 
rely on teamwork, labor costs may be lower as well. 
Spurred by such advantages, a number of companies are 
reorganizing assembly operations—abandoning the as-
sembly line in favor of operations that combine mass 
production with jobs in which employees perform mul-
tiple tasks, use many skills, control the pace of work, and 
assemble the entire fi nal product.
Witnessing the resulting improvements, companies 
in the service sector also have moved toward greater 
use of teamwork. Teamwork is a necessary component 
of more and more computer programming tasks. Com-
panies that develop software are increasingly using an 
approach they call agile, which involves weaving the development process more tightly 
into the organization’s activities and strategies. In agile software development, self-
directed teams of developers and programmers work directly with the business users 
of the software, using as much face-to-face communication as possible. Rather than 
devoting endless hours to negotating contracts and documenting processes, the teams 
focus on frequently delivering usable components of the software. Throughout the 
development process the team is open to changing requirements and computer code 
as a result of their communication with users. Users of agile software development 
say it increases customer satisfaction and speeds up the time from concept to usable 
software.23
Focus on Strategy
As we saw in Chapter 1, traditional management thinking treated human resource 
management primarily as an administrative function, but managers today are begin-
ning to see a more central role for HRM. They are looking at HRM as a means to 
support a company’s strategy—its plan for meeting broad goals such as profi tability, 
quality, and market share. This strategic role for HRM has evolved gradually. At many 
organizations, managers still treat HR professionals primarily as experts in designing 
and delivering HR systems (see the “HR Oops!” box). But at a growing number of 
organizations, HR professionals are strategic partners with other managers.
This means they use their knowledge of the business and of human resources to 
help the organization develop strategies and to align HRM policies and practices with 
those strategies. To do this, human resource managers must focus on the future as well 
as the present, and on company goals as well as human resource activities. They may, 
for example, become experts at analyzing the business impact of HR decisions or at 
developing and keeping the best talent to support business strategy. Organizations do 
this, for example, when they integrate all the activities involved in talent management 
with each other and with the organization’s other processes to provide the skills the or-
ganization needs to pursue its strategy. An integrated approach to talent management 
includes acquiring talent (recruiting and selection), providing the right opportunities 
for training and development, measuring performance, and creating compensation 
plans that reward the needed behaviors. To choose the right talent, provide the right 
training, and so on, HR professionals need to be in close, ongoing contact with the 
members of the organization who need the talent. And when the organization modi-
fi es its strategy, HR professionals are part of the planning process so they can modify 
LO 2-4 Identify ways HR 
professionals can sup-
port organizational strat-
egies for quality, growth, 
and efﬁ ciency.
One way companies can increase employee responsibility and 
control is to assign work to teams.

40
talent management efforts to support the revised strategy. One organization that does 
all this is Universal Weather and Aviation, which provides services and support to 
the owners of private jets. In this market niche, the company does not expect to fi nd 
people with the precise set of skills it needs; rather, its talent management program 
emphasizes fi nding individuals who are a good fi t with the organization’s culture and 
then training them in the areas where their skills are weak. Executives are rewarded for 
achieving talent management objectives that include retaining the best-performing 
employees and identifying potential successors to fi ll key positions.24
The specifi c ways in which human resource professionals support the organization’s 
strategy vary according to their level of involvement and the nature of the strategy. 
Strategic issues include emphasis on quality and decisions about growth and effi ciency. 
Human resource management can support these strategies, including efforts such as 
quality improvement programs, mergers and acquisitions, and restructuring. Deci-
sions to use reengineering and outsourcing can make an organization more effi cient 
and also give rise to many human resource challenges. International expansion pres-
ents a wide variety of HRM challenges and opportunities. Figure 2.4 summarizes these 
strategic issues facing human resource management.
Mergers and Acquisitions
Often, organizations join forces through mergers (two companies becoming one) and 
acquisitions (one company buying another). Some mergers and acquisitions result in 
consolidation within an industry, meaning that two fi rms in one industry join to hold 
a greater share of the industry. For example, British Petroleum’s acquisition of Amoco 
Oil represented a consolidation, or a reduction of the number of companies in the oil 
A lot of managers are disappointed 
in the support they get from their HR 
teams, according to a survey by the 
Hay Group, a global consulting fi rm. 
The survey questioned line manag-
ers and HR directors in China, the 
United Kingdom, and the United 
States about their working relation-
ships. The results suggest that those 
relationships are often strained.
HR directors reported being chal-
lenged by cutbacks in their depart-
ment. One-third said they spend 21% 
to 50% of their time responding to 
inquiries from managers, and three-
fourths said line managers want 
 immediate responses. For their part, 
41% of line managers in the United 
States said the HR department is too 
slow in responding, and 47% said 
they could make decisions better 
and faster if they had more informa-
tion from the department. An embar-
rassing 29% rated Google above the 
HR department for providing perti-
nent information.
Hay’s consultants suggest that 
human resource managers need to 
focus on how they can empower line 
managers by providing them with 
easy access to relevant information.
Questions
 1. Suggest one way that HR 
managers might improve their 
helpfulness to line managers
 2. Suggest one way that line 
managers can improve 
communications with HR 
managers, so they get the 
support they need.
Sources: Laurence Doe, “Relationship 
between Line Managers and HR under 
Increasing Strain, Hay Group Finds,” 
HR Magazine (UK), November 21, 2013, 
http://www.hrmagazine.co.uk; Hay 
Group, “More Managers Turn to Google 
for HR Information,” Business Wire, 
 November 20, 2013, http://www
.businesswire.com; Philip Spriet, 
“‘Power On’: From Passing the Buck 
to Activating the Line,” Hay Group 
Blog, October 16, 2013, http://blog
.haygroup.com.
Less Helpful than a Search Engine?
HR Oops!

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 41
industry. Other mergers and acquisitions cross industry lines. In a merger to form Citi-
group, Citicorp combined its banking business with Traveler’s Group’s insurance busi-
ness. Furthermore, these deals more frequently take the form of global megamergers, 
or mergers of big companies based in different countries (as in the case of BP-Amoco).
HRM should have a signifi cant role in carrying out a merger or acquisition. Differ-
ences between the businesses involved in the deal make confl ict inevitable. Training efforts 
should therefore include development of skills in confl ict resolution. Also, HR profession-
als have to sort out differences in the two companies’ practices with regard to compensa-
tion, performance appraisal, and other HR systems. Settling on a consistent structure to 
meet the combined organization’s goals may help bring employees together.
High Quality Standards
To compete in today’s economy, companies need to provide high-quality products and 
services. If companies do not adhere to quality standards, they will have diffi culty 
 selling their product or service to vendors, suppliers, or customers. Therefore, many 
organizations have adopted some form of total quality management (TQM)—a 
companywide effort to continually improve the ways people, machines, and systems 
accomplish work.25 TQM has several core values26:
 • Methods and processes are designed to meet the needs of internal and external 
customers (that is, whomever the process is intended to serve).
 • Every employee in the organization receives training in quality.
 • Quality is designed into a product or service so that errors are prevented from occur-
ring, rather than being detected and corrected in an error-prone product or service.
Total Quality 
Management (TQM)
A companywide effort to 
continually improve the 
ways people, machines, 
and systems accomplish 
work.
Figure 2.4
Business Strategy: 
Issues Affecting HRM

42 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
 • The organization promotes cooperation with vendors, suppliers, and customers to 
improve quality and hold down costs.
 • Managers measure progress with feedback based on data.
Based on these values, the TQM approach provides guidelines for all the organiza-
tion’s activities, including human resource management. To promote quality, organiza-
tions need an environment that supports innovation, creativity, and risk taking to meet 
customer demands. Problem solving should bring together managers, employees, and 
customers. Employees should communicate with managers about customer needs.
Quality improvement can focus on the HRM function itself. One area where man-
agers are increasingly pressing for improvement is performance management. Busi-
ness consultants note that many companies have grown dissatisfi ed with the ways they 
measure and reward performance, believing that the traditional practices do not yield 
measurable benefi ts. George Boué, a human resources executive with the real estate 
fi rm Stiles Corporation, says his company has tried to improve the quality of perfor-
mance management by hiring coaches to help employees fi gure out how to develop 
their skills.27
Cost Control
Some organizations have a low-cost, low-price strategy. These organizations par-
ticularly depend on human resource management to identify ways for limiting costs 
related to maintaining a qualifi ed, motivated workforce. However, this challenge is 
relevant in any organization. HR managers contribute to success whenever they help 
lower costs without compromising quality.
Human resource management supports cost control both by helping the organiza-
tion use human resources more effi ciently and by making HRM processes as effi cient 
as possible. This has become particularly relevant to employee benefi ts, specifi cally 
health insurance.28 As we will discuss in Chapter 14, the cost of this benefi t has grown 
rapidly, while the Affordable Care Act has introduced a set of employer requirements, 
which can be expensive. How to manage the costs while meeting the requirements is 
complicated. Employers need to weigh factors such as legal requirements, the costs 
and types of plans available, the impact on departments’ budgets, and the effect on 
employee morale and retention, as well as on the ability to recruit new employees. 
Management relies on well-informed HR managers to identify alternatives and rec-
ommend which ones will best support the company’s strategy.
Beyond specifi c issues such as health insurance and the Affordable Care Act, human 
resource management can support strategic efforts to control costs through downsiz-
ing, reengineering, and outsourcing.
Downsizing As shown in Figure 2.5, the number of employees laid off when orga-
nizations downsized soared in 2008 and 2009.29 Since those years, downsizing has con-
tinued, but at a declining rate. The surge in unemployment created a climate of fear 
for many workers. Even at organizations that were maintaining their workforce, em-
ployees tended to worry, and employees who might have otherwise left tended to hold 
on to their jobs if they could. Therefore, an important challenge for employers was 
how to maintain a reputation as an employer of choice and how to keep employees en-
gaged in their work and focused on the organization’s goals. The way employers meet 
this challenge will infl uence how sustainably they can compete, especially as unem-
ployment falls and talented workers see possibilities for work in other organizations.

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 43
Downsizing presents a number of challenges and opportunities for HRM. In terms 
of challenges, the HRM function must “surgically” reduce the workforce by cutting only 
the workers who are less valuable in their performance. Achieving this is diffi cult because 
the best workers are most able (and often willing) to fi nd alternative employment and 
may leave voluntarily before the organization lays off anyone. Early- retirement programs 
are humane, but they essentially reduce the workforce with a “grenade”  approach—not 
distinguishing good from poor performers but rather eliminating an entire group of 
employees. In fact, contrary to popular belief, research has found that downsizing is 
 associated with negative stock returns and lower profi tability following the layoffs. One 
reason may be that although labor costs fall after a downsizing, sales per employee also 
tend to fall. Circuit City, for example, tried to save money by laying off its highest-paid 
salespeople. Customers soon found that they preferred other electronics retailers, and 
Circuit City went out of business. In contrast, Southwest Airlines, which has never laid 
off employees—not even after air travel plummeted following the terrorist attacks of 
September 11, 2001—has outperformed its rivals. Like Southwest’s managers, Susan 
Marvin, president of Marvin Windows, thinks it is illogical to call employees the com-
pany’s “greatest asset” and then lay them off. Although the recent economic recession has 
been devastating to the construction business and its suppliers, Marvin has avoided lay-
offs and let employment decline naturally by not replacing employees who have retired 
during the lean years. Instead, employees have been doing without bonuses and some 
employee benefi ts, and the workweek has been shortened, reducing pay to hourly work-
ers. Susan Marvin is convinced that the impact on morale of everyone pulling together 
during tough times builds a strong commitment to the organization.30
500,000
0
1,000,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
2,500,000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Number of Separations from 2002 to 2012
Figure 2.5
Number of Employees Laid Off during the Past Decade
Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Extended Mass Layoffs: Fourth Quarter 2011, Annual Totals 2011,” news release, February 10, 2012, 
http://www.bls.gov/mls; Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Mass Layoff Statistics,” last updated May 13, 2013, http://data.bls.gov.

44 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Another HRM challenge is to boost the morale of employees who remain after the 
reduction; this is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 5. HR professionals should 
maintain open communication with remaining employees to build their trust and com-
mitment, rather than withholding information.31 All employees should be informed 
why the downsizing is necessary, what costs are to be cut, how long the downsizing 
will last, and what strategies the organization intends to pursue. Finally, HRM can 
provide downsized employees with outplacement services to help them fi nd new jobs. 
Such services are ways an organization can show that it cares about its employees, even 
though it cannot afford to keep all of them on the payroll.
Reengineering Rapidly changing customer needs and technology have caused 
many organizations to rethink the way they get work done. For example, when an or-
ganization adopts new technology, its existing processes may no longer result in ac-
ceptable quality levels, meet customer expectations for speed, or keep costs to profi table 
levels. Therefore, many organizations have undertaken reengineering—a complete 
review of the organization’s critical work processes to make them more effi cient and 
able to deliver higher quality.
Ideally, reengineering involves reviewing all the processes performed by all the or-
ganization’s major functions, including production, sales, accounting, and human re-
sources. Therefore, reengineering affects human resource management in two ways. 
First, the way the HR department itself accomplishes its goals may change dramati-
cally. Second, the fundamental change throughout the organization requires the HR 
department to help design and implement change so that all employees will be com-
mitted to the success of the reengineered organization. Employees may need training 
for their reengineered jobs. The organization may need to redesign the structure of 
its pay and benefi ts to make them more appropriate for its new way of operating. 
It also may need to recruit employees with a new set of skills. Often, reengineering 
results in employees being laid off or reassigned to new jobs, as the organization’s 
needs change. HR professionals should also help with this transition, as they do for 
downsizing.
Outsourcing Many organizations are increasingly outsourcing some of their busi-
ness activities. Outsourcing refers to the practice of having another company (a ven-
dor, third-party provider, or consultant) provide services. For instance, a manufacturing 
company might outsource its accounting and transportation functions to businesses 
that specialize in these activities. Outsourcing gives the company access to in-depth 
expertise and is often more economical as well.
Not only do HR departments help with a transition to outsourcing, but many HR 
functions are being outsourced. According to a recent survey of human resource man-
agers, about 70% of companies had outsourced at least one HR activity. The functions 
that were most likely to be outsourced were employee assistance, retirement planning, 
and outplacement.32 Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company improved its recruiting and 
hiring practices by outsourcing these activities to a specialist. The recruiting service 
provider started by learning about Goodyear’s history, culture, and experiences with 
recruiting. It used Internet technology to streamline the hiring process and track the 
progress of job candidates throughout that process. After outsourcing this function, 
Goodyear began making quicker hiring decisions, improved the diversity and quality 
of employees it hired, and reduced employee turnover.33 See the “Best Practices” box 
for another example of HR outsourcing.
Reengineering
A complete review of the 
organization’s critical 
work processes to make 
them more efﬁ cient and 
able to deliver higher 
quality.
Outsourcing
The practice of having 
another company (a ven-
dor, third-party provider, 
or consultant) provide 
services.

45
Expanding into Global Markets
Companies are fi nding that to survive they must compete in international markets as 
well as fend off foreign competitors’ attempts to gain ground in the United States. 
To meet these challenges, U.S. businesses must develop global markets, keep up with 
competition from overseas, hire from an international labor pool, and prepare employ-
ees for global assignments. This global expansion can pose some challenges for human 
resource management as HR employees learn about the cultural differences that shape 
the conduct of employees in other parts of the world.
Companies that are successful and widely admired not only operate on a multina-
tional scale, but also have workforces and corporate cultures that refl ect their global 
markets. Yum Brands was quick to seize on the potential of China’s massive popula-
tion: in 1987, its KFC restaurants became the fi rst fast-food chain to enter China, 
and its Pizza Hut brand was the fi rst pizza chain there in 1990. Today the company 
has more than 6,000 restaurants in the country with plans to open hundreds more. 
More than half the company’s sales are made in China. Behind the success of this 
overseas expansion is a willingness to adapt menus to local tastes and develop local 
management talent.34
The Global Workforce 
For today’s and tomorrow’s employers, talent comes 
from a global workforce. Organizations with international operations hire at least 
some of their employees in the foreign countries where they operate. In fact, 
LO 2-5 Summarize 
ways in which human 
resource management 
can support organi-
zations expanding 
internationally.
Land O’Lakes is an example of a 
company that has successfully re-
duced costs by outsourcing human 
resource activities. Best known for 
its butter and other dairy products, 
the company is a food and agricul-
ture cooperative owned by the farm-
ers who participate in the business. 
The co-op’s 10,000 employees work 
toward a strategy of delivering strong 
fi nancial performance for its farmer-
owners while providing programs 
and services that help the farmers 
operate more successfully.
In support of that strategy, Pam 
Grove, the senior director of ben-
efi ts and HR operations, led Land 
O’Lakes to outsource the adminis-
tration of employee benefi ts. Man-
agement determined that benefi ts 
administration was not an activity 
that contributed to the company’s 
strategy, and Land O’Lakes already 
had successfully used an outside 
fi rm to administer its 401(k) retire-
ment savings plan. So Grove ar-
ranged to have a fi rm administer its 
health insurance and pension plans 
as well.
Outsourcing achieved the basic 
goal of reducing costs, but that was 
not the only advantage. Grove freed 
up time for focusing on strategy-
related activities, and she says the 
outsourcing arrangement also has 
improved service to employees. 
When the company tackled health 
benefi t costs by offering a high-
deductible health plan, which shifts 
spending decisions to employees, 
Grove and her staff visited 100 Land 
O’Lakes locations to explain the new 
option. Employee enrollment was 
double her expectations, helping 
the company save millions of dollars 
while keeping employees satisfi ed 
with their benefi ts.
Questions
 1. When does outsourcing 
make strategic sense for an 
organization such as Land 
O’Lakes?
 2. How does Grove ensure that a 
cost-conscious practice such 
as outsourcing is well received 
by employees?
Sources: Land O’Lakes Inc., “Com-
pany,” http://www.landolakesinc
.com, accessed April 22, 2014; Land 
O’Lakes Inc., “Careers,” http://www
.landolakesinc.com/careers, accessed 
April 22, 2014; Susan J. Wells, “Benefi ts 
Strategies Grow: And HR Leads the 
Way,” HR Magazine, March 2013. 
Outsourcing Enriches the Bottom Line for Land O’Lakes
Best Practices

46 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
regardless of where their customers are located, organizations are looking overseas 
to hire talented people willing to work for less pay than the U.S. labor market re-
quires. The efforts to hire workers in other countries are common enough that they 
have spurred the creation of a popular name for the practice: offshoring. Just a few 
years ago, most offshoring involved big manufacturers building factories in coun-
tries with lower labor costs. But today it is so easy to send information and software 
around the world that even start-ups are hiring overseas. During the 2000s, large 
U.S.-based multinational companies were shrinking their domestic employment 
while hiring overseas. Even when they made cuts overseas during the last recession, 
they tended to cut more domestic than foreign workers. The trend was driven by 
more than labor costs: demand for the companies’ products was often growing faster 
in other parts of the world. More recently, however, the offshoring trend has slowed. 
Labor costs in popular locations such as China have risen, and some companies have 
even announced plans for reshoring, or reestablishing some of their operations in 
North America.35
Hiring in developing nations such as India, Mexico, and Brazil gives employers 
access to people with potential who are eager to work yet who will accept lower 
wages than elsewhere in the world. Challenges, however, may include employees’ 
lack of familiarity with technology and corporate practices, as well as political and 
economic instability in the areas. Important issues that HR experts can help com-
panies weigh include whether workers in the offshore locations can provide the 
same or better skills, how offshoring will affect motivation and recruitment of em-
ployees needed in the United States, and whether managers are well prepared to 
manage and lead offshore employees. At the same time, as companies based in these 
parts of the world are developing experienced employees and managers, they are 
becoming competitors for global talent. Information technology companies based 
in India, for example, have in recent years increased their 
hiring of employees in the United States and Europe.36 
This poses a new challenge for U.S. recruiters who may 
need to improve their tactics and offers if they want to win 
the war for the best talent.
Even hiring at home may involve selection of employees 
from other countries. The beginning of the 21st century, 
like the beginning of the last century, has been a time of 
signifi cant immigration, with over a million people obtain-
ing permanent resident status in 2012 alone.37 Figure 2.6 
shows the distribution of immigration by continent of ori-
gin. The impact of immigration is especially large in some 
regions of the United States, with the largest immigrant 
populations being in the cities and suburbs of New York, 
Los Angeles, Miami, Chicago, and Houston. About 7 out 
of 10 foreign-born workers are Hispanics and Asians.38 
Employers in tight labor markets—such as those seeking 
experts in computer science, engineering, and information 
systems—have been especially likely to recruit interna-
tional students.
International Assignments Besides hiring an interna-
tional workforce, organizations must be prepared to send em-
ployees to other countries. This requires HR expertise in 
Offshoring
Moving operations from 
the country where a 
company is headquar-
tered to a country where 
pay rates are lower but 
the necessary skills are 
available.
Asia
42%
North America
28%
Central and
South America
12%
Europe
8%
Africa
10%
Other 1%
Figure 2.6
Where Immigrants to the United States Came from 
in 2012
Source: Department of Homeland Security, Offi ce of 
 Immigration Statistics, “U.S. Legal Permanent Residents: 
2012,” Annual Flow Report, March 2013, Table 3, p. 4, 
www.dhs.gov.

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 47
selecting employees for international assignments and preparing them for those 
 assignments. Employees who take assignments in other countries are called 
expatriates.
U.S. companies must better prepare employees to work in other countries. The fail-
ure rate for U.S. expatriates is greater than that for European and Japanese expatriates.39 
To improve in this area, U.S. companies must carefully select employees to work abroad 
based on their ability to understand and respect the cultural and business norms of 
the host country. Qualifi ed candidates also need language skills and technical ability. In 
Chapter 16, we discuss practices for training employees to understand other cultures.
Technological Change in HRM
Advances in computer-related technology have had a major impact on the use of 
information for managing human resources. Large quantities of employee data 
(including training records, skills, compensation rates, and benefi ts usage and cost) 
can easily be stored on personal computers and manipulated with user-friendly 
spreadsheets or statistical software. Often these features are combined in a human 
resource information system (HRIS), a computer system used to acquire, store, 
manipulate, analyze, retrieve, and distribute information related to an organiza-
tion’s human resources.40 An HRIS can support strategic decision making, help the 
organization avoid lawsuits, provide data for evaluating programs or policies, and 
support day-to-day HR decisions. Table 2.2 describes some of the technologies 
that may be included in an organization’s HRIS.
The support of an HRIS can help HR professionals think strategically. As strat-
egies are planned, implemented, and changed, the organization must be constantly 
prepared to have the right talent in place at all levels. This requires keeping track of an 
enormous amount of information related to employees’ skills, experience, and training 
needs, as well as the organization’s shifting needs for the future. An HRIS can support 
talent management by integrating data on recruiting, performance management, and 
Expatriates
Employees who take 
assignments in other 
countries.
LO 2-6 Discuss how 
technological devel-
opments are affect-
ing human resource 
management.
Human Resource Infor-
mation System (HRIS)
A computer system 
used to acquire, store, 
manipulate, analyze, 
retrieve, and distribute 
information related to 
an organization’s human 
resources.
TECHNOLOGY
WHAT IT DOES
EXAMPLE
Internet portal
Combines data from several sources into 
a single site; lets user customize data 
without programming skills.
A company’s manager can track 
labor costs by work group.
Shared service 
centers
Consolidate different HR functions into a 
single location; eliminate redundancy and 
reduce administrative costs; process all 
HR transactions at one time.
AlliedSignal combined more than 
75 functions, including ﬁ nance 
and HR, into a shared service 
center.
Cloud computing, 
such as application 
service providers 
(ASPs)
Lets companies rent space on a remote 
computer system and use the system’s 
software to manage its HR activities, 
including security and upgrades.
KPMG Consulting uses an ASP to 
host the company’s computerized 
learning program.
Business 
intelligence
Provides insight into business trends and 
patterns and helps businesses improve 
decisions.
Managers use the system 
to analyze labor costs and 
productivity among different 
employee groups.
Data mining
Uses powerful computers to analyze large 
amounts of data, such as data about 
employee traits, pay, and performance.
Managers can identify high-
potential employees throughout a 
large organization and offer them 
development opportunities.
Table 2.2
New Technologies 
Inﬂ uencing HRM

48 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
training. Integrating the data means, for example, that the 
HRIS user can see how specifi c kinds of recruiting, hiring, 
and training decisions relate to performance success. This 
helps HR professionals identify how to develop the orga-
nization’s talent and where to recruit new talent so that an 
ongoing supply of human resources is available to fi ll new 
positions or new openings in existing positions.41
Electronic Human Resource 
Management (e-HRM)
Many HRM activities have moved onto the Internet. Elec-
tronic HRM applications let employees enroll in and par-
ticipate in training programs online. Employees can go 
online to select from items in a benefi ts package and enroll 
in the benefi ts they choose. They can look up answers to 
HR-related questions and read company news, perhaps 
downloading it as a podcast. This processing and transmis-
sion of digitized HR information is called electronic 
human resource  management (e-HRM).
E-HRM has the potential to change all traditional HRM 
functions. For example, employees in different geographic 
areas can work together. Use of the Internet lets companies 
search for talent without geographic limitations. Recruit-
ing can include online job postings, applications, and candi-
date screening from the company’s website or the websites 
of companies that specialize in online recruiting, such as 
Monster.com or CareerBuilder. Employees from different 
geographic locations can all receive the same training over the company’s computer 
network.
Technology trends that are shaping Internet use are also shaping e-HRM. One 
example, introduced in Chapter 1, is social networking. Table 2.3 identifi es some ways 
that creative organizations are applying social networking tools to human resource 
management.
Another recent technology trend is cloud computing, which generally refers to ar-
rangements in which remote server computers do the user’s computing tasks. Thus, an 
organization that once owned a big mainframe computer to process data for payroll 
and performance data could contract with a service provider to do the data processing 
on its computer network and make the results available online. Access to cloud com-
puting makes powerful HRIS tools available even to small organizations with limited 
computer hardware. Some organizations specialize in offering such services. An ex-
ample is Workday, which hosts software for human resource management, including 
workforce planning, job design, analysis of compensation to make sure it is aligned 
with performance, and assessment of the organization’s skills and training needs.42
Privacy is an important issue in e-HRM. A great deal of HR information is confi -
dential and not suitable for posting on a website for everyone to see. One solution is 
to set up e-HRM on an intranet, which is a network that uses Internet tools but limits 
access to authorized users in the organization. With any e-HRM application, however, 
the organization must ensure that it has suffi cient security measures in place to protect 
employees’ privacy.
Electronic Human 
 Resource Management 
(e-HRM)
The processing and 
transmission of digitized 
HR information, especially 
using computer network-
ing and the Internet.
 The Internet and e-HRM are helpful for employees who work 
outside the offi ce because they can receive and share infor-
mation online easily. The benefi ts of products such as smart-
phones are enormous, but is it possible to be too accessible? 

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 49
Sharing of Human Resource Information
Information technology is changing the way HR departments handle record keeping 
and information sharing. Today, HR employees use technology to automate much of 
their work in managing employee records and giving employees access to information 
and enrollment forms for training, benefi ts, and other programs. As a result, HR em-
ployees play a smaller role in maintaining records, and employees now get information 
through self-service. This means employees have online access to information about 
HR issues such as training, benefi ts, compensation, and contracts; go online to enroll 
themselves in programs and services; and provide feedback through online surveys. 
Today, employees routinely look up workplace policies and information about their 
benefi ts online, and they may receive electronic notifi cation when deposits are made 
directly to their bank accounts.
Self-service is especially convenient when combined with today’s use of mobile com-
puting devices such as smartphones and tablet computers. For example, organizations 
that use the services of ADP can download a free mobile app that enables employees 
to look up their payroll and benefi ts information. Employees can use the app to fi ll out 
their time sheet or look up their 401(k) (retirement savings plan) contributions and bal-
ance. Employers can use the app to deliver company news or offer a directory with 
employees’ contact information.43 To read more ideas for providing HR applications 
on mobile devices, see the “HR How To” box.
A growing number of companies are combining employee self-service with manage-
ment self-service, such as the ability to go online to authorize pay increases, approve 
expenses, and transfer employees to new positions. More sophisticated systems extend 
management applications to decision making in areas such as compensation and per-
formance management. To further support management decisions, the company may 
create an HR dashboard, or a display of how the company is performing on specifi c HR 
metrics, such as productivity and absenteeism. For example, Cisco Systems helps with 
talent management by displaying on its HR dashboard how many of its people move 
and why.44 The data can help management identify divisions where the managers are 
successfully developing new talent.
Self-Service
System in which em-
ployees have online 
access to information 
about HR issues and 
go online to enroll 
themselves in programs 
and provide feedback 
through surveys.
APPLICATION
PURPOSE
Sites for capturing, sharing, storing knowledge
Preserving knowledge that otherwise could be lost 
when employees retire
Online surveys to gather employees’ opinions
Increasing employees’ engagement with the jobs 
and the organization
Networking tools to create online expert 
communities
Identifying employee expertise and making it 
available to those who can apply it
Online discussions, such as commenting tools
Promoting creativity and innovation
Sites where users can post links to articles, 
webinars, training programs, and other information
Reinforcing lessons learned during training and on-
the-job experience
Instant messaging and other communication 
tools to use with mentors and coaches
Providing employee development through 
mentoring and coaching
Site where the HR department posts job 
openings and responds to candidates’ questions
Identifying and connecting with promising job 
candidates
Table 2.3
HRM Applications for 
 Social Networking
Sources: P. Brotherson, “Social Networks Enhance Employee Learning,” T 1 D, April 2011, pp. 18–19; 
T. Bingham and M. Connor, The New Social Learning (Alexandria, VA: American Society for Training and 
Development, 2010); M. Derven, “Social Networking: A Frame for Development,” T 1 D, July 2009, 
pp. 58–63; M. Weinstein, “Are You Linked In?” Training, September/October 2010, pp. 30–33.

50
In the age of social networking, information sharing has become far more  powerful 
than simply a means of increasing effi ciency through self-service. Creative organizations 
are enabling information sharing online to permit a free fl ow of knowledge among the 
organization’s people. Essilor International uses social networking to improve learning in 
the 40 countries where it makes and sells lenses for use by eye doctors. Trainers share 
knowledge of what is working best for them: for example, a Thai lens-processing center 
came up with a game to teach workers to understand lens shapes and then made it available 
online.45 A more dramatic application of social networking to human resource manage-
ment is the talent management at Morning Star, a California tomato processor. Morning 
Star has no formal hierarchy or job descriptions. Instead, each employee writes a letter 
describing his or her responsibilities. As the company has grown to hundreds of full-time 
employees, it began to use a database of the employees’ letters. Employees can go into the 
database to modify their letters, search for employees with needed experience, or offer 
one another feedback related to the commitments they made in their letters.46
Change in the Employment Relationship
Technology and the other trends we have described in this chapter require manag-
ers at all levels to make rapid changes in response to new opportunities, competi-
tive challenges, and customer demands. These changes are most likely to succeed in 
fl exible, forward-thinking organizations, and the employees who will thrive in such 
LO 2-7 Explain how the 
nature of the employ-
ment relationship is 
changing.
Software companies are creating 
apps that let employees view their 
pay stubs, request time off, check 
the amounts of their bonuses, fi ll out 
and approve time sheets, look up 
coworkers in company directories, 
and more. At the same time, a grow-
ing number of employees expect to 
be able to use their mobile devices 
for looking up work-related infor-
mation. Given the possibility of and 
pressure for mobile HRM, here are 
some guidelines for making it work:
 • Learn which mobile devices 
employees are using. Make sure 
applications will run properly on 
all the devices.
 • Set priorities for introducing 
mobile applications that support 
your company’s strategy.
 • Make sure your company has 
mobile-friendly versions of 
its careers website. Many of 
today’s job hunters are look-
ing for leads on their mobile 
devices, and they expect to be 
able to submit an application 
that way.
 • If your company uses online 
training, create versions that run 
well on mobile devices.
 • Select vendors that not only 
have software for existing mobile 
devices but also will be fl exible 
as hardware changes. Check 
references to fi nd out whether 
vendors have a history of keep-
ing up with changing technology.
 • Investigate the security protec-
tion built into any app you are 
considering.
 • Test mobile HRM apps to be 
sure they are easy to use and 
understand.
Questions
 1. How could offering a mobile 
version of its careers website 
support an organization’s 
strategy?
 2. What could be an advantage 
of using a software vendor 
for mobile HR apps, instead 
of having your organization’s 
employees create the apps?
Sources: Dave Zielinski, “The Mobiliza-
tion of HR Tech,” HR Magazine, February 
2014, Business Insights: Global, http://
bi.galegroup.com; Jennifer Alsever, 
“Objective: Hire Top Talent,” Fortune, 
January 23, 2014, http://money.cnn.com; 
Tom Keebler, “New Considerations for 
HR Service Delivery Success: Where to 
Begin?” Workforce Solutions Review, 
December 2013, pp. 17–19.
Providing HR Services on Mobile Devices
HR How To

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 51
organizations need to be fl exible and open to change as well. In this environment, em-
ployers and employees have begun to reshape the employment relationship.47
A Psychological Contract
We can think of that relationship in terms of a psychological contract, a description 
of what an employee expects to contribute in an employment relationship and what 
the employer will provide the employee in exchange for those contributions.48 Unlike 
a written sales contract, the psychological contract is not formally put into words. In-
stead, it describes unspoken expectations that are widely held by employers and em-
ployees. In the traditional version of this psychological contract, organizations expected 
their employees to contribute time, effort, skills, abilities, and loyalty. In return, the 
organizations would provide job security and opportunities for promotion.
However, this arrangement is being replaced with a new type of psychological 
contract. Companies expect employees to take more responsibility for their own 
careers, from seeking training to balancing work and family. These expectations re-
sult in less job security for employees, who can count on working for several com-
panies over the course of a career. In exchange for top performance and working 
longer hours without job security, employees want companies to provide fl exible 
work schedules, comfortable working conditions, more control over how they ac-
complish work, training and development opportunities, and fi nancial incentives 
based on how the organization performs. Employees realize that companies cannot 
provide employment security, so they want employability. This means they want their 
company to provide training and job experiences to help ensure that they can fi nd 
other employment opportunities.
In the federal government’s most recent survey of employee tenure, workers age 25 and 
older report they had been working with their present employer for a median of just 4.6 
years.49 Workers 55 and older tend to have a much longer tenure, and so do workers in 
government jobs. Still, if four and a half years with a company is typical, this amounts to 
many employers in the course of one’s career. In fact, some employees engage in job hop-
ping, the intentional practice of changing jobs frequently—say, every year or two (see the 
“Did You Know?” box).50 Job hopping can be appealing to an employee as a way to stave 
off boredom and win some rapid increases in pay and responsibility. Some employees even 
are able to pick short-term jobs that give them valuable, carefully targeted experiences. 
However, there are some signifi cant disadvantages. Every time the employee starts with 
a new employer, the employee needs to learn a new network of contacts and a new set of 
policies and procedures. This can slow down the employee’s ability to learn a career in 
depth and reduce the employee’s value to each employer. Therefore, employers tend to be 
wary of a job candidate who seems to have a history of job hopping. They may interpret 
job hopping as evidence of a character fl aw such as inability to make a commitment or lack 
of conscientiousness. Often, employees can enjoy variety, develop skills, and build an inter-
esting career without job hopping by asking for challenging assignments and cultivating a 
network of professional contacts within their present company.
Declining Union Membership
Another trend affecting the employment relationship has been ongoing for several 
decades. As we will explore in Chapter 15, the percentage of employees who belong to 
unions has been declining since the 1980s. Outside of government agencies, fewer U.S. 
workers today are union members. This trend is consistent with the idea of individual 
workers taking responsibility for their own careers. Whereas once many workers saw 
Psychological Contract
A description of what 
an employee expects to 
contribute in an employ-
ment relationship and 
what the employer will 
provide the employee 
in exchange for those 
contributions.

52
Did You Know?
Half of employed workers are look-
ing for a new job or would welcome 
an offer, according to a U.S. survey 
by the Jobvite software company. 
Looking at both employed and 
unemployed workers, Jobvite found 
that 71% are actively seeking or open 
to a new job. Jobvite’s CEO notes 
that workers with mobile devices are 
looking for jobs “all the time.”
Question
What challenges and opportuni-
ties do employers face in a climate 
where half of an organization’s em-
ployees feel ready to leave?
Sources: Bureau of National Affairs, 
“Half of Workers Open to or Actively 
Seeking New Job, Jobvite Survey 
Finds,” HR Focus, March 2014, p. 16; 
Dinah Wisenberg Brin, “Study: Most 
U.S. Workers Willing to Quit,” Society 
for Human Resource Management, 
February 25, 2014, http://www.shrm.
org; company website, “Jobvite Seeker 
Nation Study,” 2014, http://recruiting.
jobvite.com.
Half of U.S. Employees Interested in Changing Jobs
U.S. labor force
Employed workers
Workers Seeking or Open to a New Job
Percentage
100
0
20
40
60
80
rs
e
strength in numbers from joining a union, perhaps workers of the Internet era will 
prefer using numbers a different way: fi nding salary data and employer reviews online 
to negotiate their own career paths.
Flexibility
The psychological contract largely results from the HRM challenge of building a 
committed, productive workforce in turbulent economic conditions—conditions that 
offer opportunity for fi nancial success but can also quickly turn sour, making every 
employee expendable. From the organization’s perspective, the key to survival in a 
fast-changing environment is fl exibility. Organizations want to be able to change as 
fast as customer needs and economic conditions change. Flexibility in human resource 
management includes fl exible staffi ng levels and fl exible work schedules.
Flexible Stafﬁ ng Levels A fl exible workforce is one the organization can quickly 
reshape and resize to meet its changing needs. To be able to do this without massive 
hiring and fi ring campaigns, organizations are using more alternative work arrange-
ments. Alternative work arrangements are methods of staffi ng other than the tra-
ditional hiring of full-time employees. There are a variety of methods, with the 
following being most common:
LO 2-8 Discuss how 
the need for ﬂ exibility 
affects human resource 
management.
Alternative Work 
Arrangements
Methods of stafﬁ ng other 
than the traditional hiring 
of full-time employees 
(for example, use of 
independent contractors, 
on-call workers, tempo-
rary workers, and con-
tract company workers).

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 53
 • Independent contractors are self-employed individuals with multiple clients.
 • On-call workers are persons who work for an organization only when they are 
needed.
 • Temporary workers are employed by a temporary agency; client organizations pay the 
agency for the services of these workers.
 • Contract company workers are employed directly by a company for a specifi c time 
specifi ed in a written contract.
However, employers need to use these options with care. In general, if employers direct 
workers in the details of how and when they do their jobs, these workers are legally defi ned 
as employees, not contractors. In that case, employers must meet the legal requirements for 
paying the employer’s share of Social Security, Medicare, and unemployment insurance.
Recent research suggests that the use of contingent workers has been growing and has 
surpassed 2 million workers in the United States and one-fourth of total work hours.51
Employers once mainly relied on contingent workers to fi ll administrative jobs, but now 
turn to contingent work arrangements for production workers, technical support, and even 
some professional tasks, such as graphic design, engineering, and fi nance. A major reason 
for the popularity of contingent work arrangements is that paying contractors enables an 
organization to pay only for completion of specifi c tasks and therefore to control costs.
More workers in alternative employment relationships are choosing these arrange-
ments, but preferences vary. Most independent contractors and contract workers have 
this type of arrangement by choice. In contrast, temporary agency workers and on-call 
workers are likely to prefer traditional full-time employment. There is some debate 
about whether nontraditional employment relationships are good or bad. Some labor 
analysts argue that alternative work arrangements are substandard jobs featuring low 
pay, fear of unemployment, poor health insurance and retirement benefi ts, and dissat-
isfying work. Sometimes it is diffi cult or impossible for organizations to know whether 
these contract workers, located anywhere in the world, have safe working conditions 
and are not children. Others claim that these jobs provide fl exibility for companies and 
employees alike. With alternative work arrangements, organizations can more easily 
modify the number of their employees. Continually adjusting staffi ng levels is espe-
cially cost effective for an organization that has fl uctuating demand for its products 
and services. And when an organization downsizes by laying off temporary and part-
time employees, the damage to morale among permanent full-time workers is likely 
to be less severe.
Flexible Work Schedules The globalization of the world 
economy and the  development of e-commerce have made the 
notion of a 40-hour workweek obsolete. As a result, companies 
need to be staffed 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Employees 
in manufacturing environments and  service call centers are being 
asked to work 12-hour days or to work afternoon or midnight 
shifts. Similarly, professional employees face long hours and work 
demands that spill over into their  personal lives. E-mail, texts, and 
tweets bombard employees with  information and work demands. 
In the car, on vacation, on planes, and even in the bathroom, em-
ployees can be interrupted by work demands. More demanding 
work results in greater  employee stress, less satisfi ed employees, 
loss of productivity, and higher turnover—all of which are costly 
for companies.
 Multitasking has become a way of life for many employ-
ees who need to make the most of every minute. This 
trend is affecting human resource management and the 
employees it supports. 

54 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Many organizations are taking steps to provide more fl exible work schedules, to pro-
tect employees’ free time, and to more productively use employees’ work time. Workers 
consider fl exible schedules a valuable way to ease the pressures and confl icts of trying 
to balance work and nonwork activities. Employers are using fl exible schedules to re-
cruit and retain employees and to increase satisfaction and productivity. For Weatherby 
Healthcare, this kind of fl exibility is a good fi t with its corporate strategy of provid-
ing superior service by “putting people fi rst.” Weatherby, a physician staffi ng company, 
helps hospitals and other health care institutions fi nd qualifi ed physicians. Weatherby’s 
employees must be skilled at uncovering its clients’ culture, needs, and preferences and 
also be able to identify thousands of top-quality candidates every year, verify their cre-
dentials, and discern which clients would be a match for those candidates. To fi nd and 
keep employees with the necessary level of people skills, Weatherby hires primarily for 
personal qualities, provides coaching, and works hard to create a positive atmosphere at 
work. Then they are allowed freedom to get their work done. Eddie Rodriguez, senior 
marketing coordinator, says, “No one’s chained to their desk here.” If workers need a 
break, they are free to go play table tennis or watch the news in the employee lounge. 
And if they meet their weekly goals by three o’clock on Friday, they are welcome to get 
an early start on the weekend.52
THINKING ETHICALLY
HOW SHOULD EMPLOYERS PROTECT 
THEIR DATA ON EMPLOYEES’ DEVICES?
One area in which business managers might consult 
with HR managers involves the treatment of company 
data on employees’ electronic devices. In the past, or-
ganizations stored their data on their own hardware. But 
laptop computers and, more recently, tablet computers 
and smartphones make it possible for employees to 
carry around data on these mobile devices. Increasingly 
often, the devices are not even owned by the company, 
but by the employees themselves. For example, an em-
ployee’s smartphone might include business as well as 
personal contacts in several mobile apps.
The situation is convenient for everyone until 
something goes wrong: a device is lost, an employee 
becomes upset with a manager, or the organization 
lays off some workers. From the standpoint of pro-
tecting data, the obvious solution is to remove the 
data from the devices. So far, no law forbids this. 
However, it has consequences for the employees. 
Remotely wiping data from a device will remove all of 
it, including the user’s personal data, such as photos 
and addresses.
Companies are addressing concerns by crafting se-
curity policies for employees who want to use their own 
devices for work-related tasks such as e-mail. Typi-
cally, the policy requires the employee to download a 
program for mobile device management. If specifi ed 
conditions arise, such as loss of the device or termina-
tion of the employee, the company can use the software 
to send the device a message that wipes out all the data 
stored on the device. The company also can give the 
employee some notice, allowing time to save personal 
data, but this increases the risk to the company. Some 
employees have complained about their phones being 
unexpectedly erased after they left a company. They 
admit they might have been given a link to terms and 
conditions but tend not to read the terms of using a pro-
gram such as company e-mail.
Questions
 1. Imagine you work in the human resources depart-
ment of a company considering a policy to protect 
its data on employees’ mobile devices. In advising 
on this policy, what rights should you consider?
 2. What advice would you give or actions would you 
take to ensure that the policy is administered fairly 
and equitably?
Sources: “Using Your Personal Phone for Work Could Cost 
You,” CBS Miami, March 26, 2014, http://miami.cbslocal.com; 
Lauren Weber, “BYOD? Leaving a Job Can Mean Losing Pic-
tures of Grandma,” Wall Street Journal, January 21, 2014, http://
online.wsj.com; Society for Human Resource Management, 
“Safety and Security Technology: Can an Employer  Remotely 
Wipe/Brick an Employee’s Personal Cell Phone?” SHRM 
 Knowledge Center, November 5, 2013, http://www.shrm.org.

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 55
SUMMARY
LO 2-1 Describe trends in the labor force composition 
and how they affect human resource management.
• An organization’s internal labor force comes from 
its external labor market—individuals actively 
seeking employment.
• In the United States, the labor market is aging and 
becoming more racially and ethnically diverse, 
with women representing roughly half of the total.
• To compete for talent, organizations must be fl exi-
ble enough to meet the needs of older workers and 
must recruit from a diverse population; establish 
bias-free HR systems; and help employees under-
stand and appreciate cultural differences.
• Organizations need employees with skills that may 
be hard to fi nd: decision making, customer service, 
and teamwork, as well as technical skills.
• To meet this challenge, organizations may hire 
employees who lack certain skills, then train them 
for their jobs.
LO 2-2 Summarize areas in which human resource man-
agement can support the goal of creating a high-perfor-
mance work system.
• To fi nd and keep the best possible fi t between their 
social system and technical system, HRM recruits 
and selects employees with broad skills and strong 
motivation, especially in organizations that rely on 
knowledge workers.
• Job design and appropriate systems for assessment 
and rewards have a central role in supporting em-
ployee empowerment and teamwork.
LO 2-3 Defi ne employee empowerment, and explain its 
role in the modern organization.
• Employee empowerment means giving employ-
ees responsibility and authority to make decisions 
regarding all aspects of product development or 
customer service. The organization holds employ-
ees accountable for products and services, and in 
exchange, the employees share in the rewards (or 
losses) that result.
• Selection decisions should provide employees who 
have the necessary decision-making and interper-
sonal skills.
• Job design should give employees latitude for de-
cision making.
• Employees should be trained to handle their broad 
responsibilities.
• Feedback and rewards must be appropriate for the 
work of empowered employees.
• HRM can also play a role in giving employees ac-
cess to the information they need.
LO 2-4 Identify ways HR professionals can support orga-
nizational strategies for growth, quality, and effi ciency.
• HR professionals should be familiar with the 
 organization’s strategy and may even play a role in 
developing the strategy.
• In a merger or acquisition, HRM must lead efforts 
to manage change with skillful employee relations 
and meaningful rewards. HR professionals can bring 
“people issues” to the attention of the managers lead-
ing change, provide training in confl ict-resolution 
skills, and apply knowledge of the other organiza-
tion’s culture. HR professionals also must resolve dif-
ferences between the companies’ HR systems, such 
as benefi ts packages and performance appraisals.
• For empowering employees to practice total qual-
ity management, job design is essential.
• Cost control may focus on a specifi c issue, such 
as managing health benefi ts, or on support for a 
strategic move such as downsizing, reengineering, 
or outsourcing.
• To support cost control through downsizing, the 
HR department can develop voluntary programs 
to reduce the workforce or can help identify the 
least valuable employees to lay off. Employee rela-
tions can help maintain the morale of employees 
who remain after a downsizing.
• In reengineering, the HR department can lead 
in communicating with employees and provid-
ing training. It will also have to prepare new ap-
proaches for recruiting and appraising employees 
that are better suited to the reengineered jobs.
• Outsourcing presents similar issues related to job 
design and employee selection.
LO 2-5 Summarize ways in which human resource manage-
ment can support organizations expanding internationally.
• Organizations with international operations hire 
employees in foreign countries where they oper-
ate, so they need knowledge of differences in cul-
ture and business practices.
• At home, qualifi ed candidates include immigrants, 
so HRM needs to understand and train employees 
to deal with differences in cultures, as well as to 
ensure laws are followed.
• HRM helps organizations select and prepare em-
ployees for overseas assignments.
• To support effi ciency and growth, HR staff can 
prepare companies for offshoring, in which op-
erations are moved to countries where wages are 
lower or demand is growing. HR experts can help 
organizations determine whether workers in off-
shore locations can provide the same or better 

56 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
skills, how offshoring will affect motivation and 
recruitment of employees needed in the United 
States, and whether managers are prepared to 
manage offshore employees.
LO 2-6 Discuss how technological developments are af-
fecting human resource management.
• Information systems for HRM are widely used 
and often are provided through the Internet. 
• Internet applications include searching for talent 
globally, using online job postings, screening can-
didates online, providing career-related informa-
tion on the organization’s website, and delivering 
training online.
• Online information sharing enables employee 
self-service for many HR needs, from application 
forms to training modules to information about 
the details of company policies and benefi ts.
• Organizations can structure work that involves 
collaboration among employees at different times 
and places, so HR professionals must ensure that 
communications remain effective enough to de-
tect and correct problems when they arise.
LO 2-7 Explain how the nature of the employment rela-
tionship is changing.
• The employment relationship takes the form of 
a “psychological contract” that describes what 
employees and employers expect from the em-
ployment relationship, including unspoken expec-
tations that are widely held.
• In the traditional version, organizations expected 
their employees to contribute time, effort, skills, 
abilities, and loyalty in exchange for job security 
and opportunities for promotion.
• Modern organizations’ needs are constantly chang-
ing, so organizations require top performance and 
longer work hours but cannot provide job security. 
Instead, employees seek fl exible work schedules, 
comfortable working conditions, greater auton-
omy, opportunities for training and development, 
and performance-related fi nancial incentives.
• For HRM, the changes require planning for fl ex-
ible staffi ng levels.
• For employees, the changes may make job hop-
ping look attractive, but this career strategy often 
backfi res.
• Union membership has been declining, which is 
consistent with the idea of taking personal respon-
sibility for one’s career.
LO 2-8 Discuss how the need for fl exibility affects human 
resource management.
• Organizations seek fl exibility in staffi ng levels 
through alternatives to the traditional employ-
ment relationship—outsourcing and temporary 
and contract workers. The use of such workers can 
affect job design and also the motivation of the or-
ganization’s permanent employees.
• Organizations also may seek fl exible work sched-
ules, including shortened workweeks, which can 
be a way for employees to adjust work hours to 
meet personal and family needs.
• Organizations also may move employees to differ-
ent jobs to meet changes in demand.
KEY TERMS
internal labor force, 30
external labor market, 30
high-performance work 
systems, 35
knowledge workers, 37
employee empowerment, 38
teamwork, 38
total quality management 
(TQM), 41
reengineering, 44
outsourcing, 44
offshoring, 46
expatriates, 47
human resource information 
system (HRIS), 47
electronic human resource 
management (e-HRM), 48
self-service, 49
psychological contract, 51
alternative work arrangements, 52
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. How does each of the following labor force trends 
affect HRM? (LO 2-1)
 
a. Aging of the labor force.
 
b. Diversity of the labor force.
 
c. Skill deficiencies of the labor force.
 2. At many organizations, goals include improv-
ing people’s performance by relying on knowledge 
workers, empowering employees, and assigning 
work to teams. How can HRM support these efforts? 
(LO 2-2)
 3. How do HRM practices such as performance man-
agement and work design encourage employee 
 empowerment? (LO 2-3)

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 57
 4. Merging, downsizing, and reengineering all can radi-
cally change the structure of an organization. Choose 
one of these changes, and describe HRM’s role in 
making the change succeed. If possible, apply your 
discussion to an actual merger, downsizing, or re-
engineering effort that has recently occurred. (LO 2-4)
 5. When an organization decides to operate facilities 
in other countries, how can HRM practices support 
this change? (LO 2-5)
 6. Why do organizations outsource HRM functions? 
How does outsourcing affect the role of human re-
source professionals? Would you be more attracted 
to the role of the HR professional in an organization 
that outsources many HR activities or in the outside 
fi rm that has the contract to provide the HR ser-
vices? Why? (LO 2-6)
 7. What HRM functions could an organization provide 
through self-service? What are some advantages and 
disadvantages of using self-service for these func-
tions? (LO 2-6)
 8. How is the employment relationship that is typical 
of modern organizations different from the relation-
ship of a  generation ago? (LO 2-7)
 9. Discuss several advantages of fl exible work sched-
ules. What are some disadvantages? (LO 2-8)
Taking Care of People Gives Cisco Systems a Strategic Advantage
Strategic thinking about human resource management 
and other services has helped Cisco Systems take care 
of its people and even people beyond the organization. 
At the same time, it has helped the company, which sells 
computer networking hardware and services, maintain 
consistent growth and profi tability.
During the recent recession, sales slowed, and Cisco’s 
executives sought more effi cient ways to operate. Out of 
that effort came a plan for restructuring HRM and other 
services such as purchasing and customer support. Man-
agement determined that these services would be deliv-
ered on a global scale as part of a Global Business Services 
unit. That unit, in turn, was divided into groups focused 
on delivering day-to-day services and others focused on 
strategic planning. HRM employees were divided, with 
some assigned to tactics and others to strategy.
The head of tactical HRM is Don McLaughlin, Cisco’s 
vice president of employee experience. Applying his back-
ground in manufacturing, McLaughlin took a businesslike 
approach. He set measurable goals for hiring, training, re-
wards, communication, and work design, treating Cisco’s 
employees as customers of those services. He measures the 
time to deliver each service and his customers’ satisfaction. 
While driving down the cost of each service by at least 
10%, McLaughlin has maintained or raised customer sat-
isfaction scores. He works closely with the human resource 
partners assigned to support strategy for each Cisco group 
around the world. Those HR managers get to know their 
businesses and create plans for improving the company’s 
talent, leadership, organization, and culture.
One of the regional HR managers is Danielle 
Monaghan, human resource partner in Cisco’s  Technical 
Services Division in San Jose, California. Born in South 
Africa, Monaghan worked for other technology compa-
nies before joining Cisco to manage human resources in 
Asia. In the Asian assignment, she saw fi rsthand some of 
the challenges of recruiting and developing talent in the 
continent’s distinctive cultures. In Japan, for example, 
she needed to build networks to locate talent, because it 
is inappropriate to make a job search public. In China, 
the issues are developing leadership skills and learning 
to manage the rise of unions. Monaghan’s global per-
spective is now helping Monaghan tackle strategic is-
sues such as workforce planning.
Perhaps one of the company’s most distinctive  efforts 
is the Cisco Learning Network, which grew out of the 
training efforts of Cisco’s education services division. The 
division trains customers and partners, and it saw an on-
line network as a way to reach people around the world 
with information about how to use the technology Cisco 
sells. People from high school students through experi-
enced professionals join the network to take classes, study 
together, and share ideas. As participation has ballooned 
from 600,000 in the fi rst year to more than 2 million re-
cently, the company added information about careers, job 
openings, and industry trends. The data created through 
social networking and the connections to a worldwide 
community have given Cisco an edge in building its rep-
utation and understanding its labor market.
Questions
 1. How has Cisco Systems prepared itself for respond-
ing to trends in the labor force?
 2. How have Cisco’s HR managers balanced concerns 
for cost and quality?
Sources: Ladan Nikravan, “Cisco: Divide and Conquer,” Talent Management, 
February 4, 2014, http://talentmgt.com; John Scorza, “An HR Journey 
Leads to Insights on Asia,” HR Magazine, July 2013, Business Insights: 
Global, http://bi.galegroup.com; Robert Berkman, “How Cisco’s Learning 
Network Became a Social Hub for the IT Industry,” MIT Sloan Manage-
ment Review, February 12, 2013, http://sloanreview.mit.edu; “Analysts’ 
Choice: Strong, Steady Cisco Wins Race,” Dow Theory Forecasts, July 29, 
2013, p. 8.
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY

58 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Netflix Treats Workers “Like Adults”
When Patty McCord talks about human resource man-
agement at Netfl ix, she refers to treating people “like 
adults.” McCord, until recently the company’s chief tal-
ent offi cer, means the company hires people who are 
mature enough to take responsibility and then simply 
gives them responsibility. The result, McCord insists, is 
that employees live up to what is expected of them. If 
not, the company feels free to fi nd someone else. That 
direct approach makes sense to the knowledge work-
ers who populate the results-oriented, data-respecting 
world of information technology.
When McCord was at Netfl ix, she and CEO Reed 
Hastings settled on fi ve principles that would direct the 
company’s approach to human resource management:
 1. Hire, reward, and keep only “fully formed adults.” For 
McCord and Hastings, such employees use common 
sense, address problems openly, and put company in-
terests ahead of their own. People like this need not 
be managed with endless policies. Rather, the com-
pany can trust them to take off time when they need 
it and spend money appropriately. The employees 
also are literally adults; Netfl ix favors hiring experi-
enced workers over recruiting at colleges.
 2. Tell the truth about performance. Managers are expected 
to make performance feedback part of their routine 
conversations with employees. If an employee is no 
longer working out, managers are supposed to let him 
or her know directly, offering a good severance pack-
age to smooth a dignifi ed path to the exit.
 3. Managers are responsible for creating great teams. The 
manager of each group is expected to envision what 
that group should accomplish and what skills are nec-
essary. If the manager needs different skills than the 
ones already on the team, the manager is supposed to 
make changes. To keep workers on the team, Netfl ix 
is open about paying salaries in line with the labor 
market—what employees would be offered if they 
considered leaving for a competitor.
 4. The company’s leaders must create the company culture. 
Netfl ix executives are supposed to model behaviors 
such as truth-telling and treating people like adults. 
 5. HR managers should think of themselves fi rst as business-
people. As chief talent manager, McCord focused on 
the company’s fi nancial success and products, not on 
employee morale. She assumed that if employees, as 
adults, were able to make Netfl ix a high-performance 
organization and be compensated fairly, that would 
improve morale more than anything.
To put these principles into action, Netfl ix rewards high-
performing employees with fair pay and a fl exible sched-
ule. Employees who do not perform up to standards are 
asked to leave. Rewarding high performance, in fact, 
makes it easier to allow fl exibility and empowerment, be-
cause managers do not have to police every action and 
decision. It also creates an environment in which employ-
ees do not assume they have a Netfl ix job forever. Rather, 
they are responsible for doing good work and developing 
the skills that continue to make them valuable to their 
employer. Netfl ix’s approach to talent helps the company 
stay agile—perhaps agile enough to withstand the shift-
ing winds of entertainment in the digital age.
Questions
 1. How well suited do you think Netfl ix’s principles are 
to managing the knowledge workers (mainly soft-
ware engineers) who work for Netfl ix? Explain.
 2. What qualities of Netfl ix support the idea that it is a 
high-performance work system? What other quali-
ties would contribute to it being a high-performance 
work system?
Sources: Patty McCord, “How Netfl ix Reinvented HR,” Harvard Business 
Review, January–February 2014, pp. 71–6; Edward E. Lawler III, “Netfl ix: 
We Got It Right!” Forbes, June 24, 2013, http://www.forbes.com; Francesca 
Fenzi, “Three Big Ideas to Steal from Netfl ix,” Inc., February 5, 2013, 
http://www.inc.com; Robert J. Grossman, “Tough Love at Netfl ix,” HR 
Magazine, April 1, 2010, http://www.shrm.org.
MANAGING TALENT
Radio Flyer Rolls Forward
The mid-2000s were a diffi cult time for Radio Flyer, a 
private business famous for its little red wagons. After 
spending hundreds of thousands of dollars to develop 
what they hoped was a hit, managers realized their idea 
wouldn’t fl y, so they killed it. And in the same year, man-
agement decided the company could no longer afford to 
build wagons in the United States.
First, the development fl op: Thomas Schlegel, vice 
president for product development, thought he had a 
winner with an idea for a collapsible wagon to be called 
Fold 2 Go Wagon. It would be a fun product that par-
ents could fold up and toss into the back of a minivan for 
a trip to the park or other outings. The problem was, a 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 59
collapsing toy that children sit inside is diffi cult to make 
both functional and safe. The costs were excessive.
When Schlegel ended the project, he feared his 
reputation might suffer as well. But CEO Robert Pasin 
assured Schlegel that failure was acceptable as long as 
the company could learn from it. The value placed on 
learning became something that Schlegel capitalized 
on as his team applied what they learned to the devel-
opment of a new success, the Twist Trike and a new 
model of its wagons called the Ultimate Family Wagon. 
 Furthermore, Pasin expanded that one experience into a 
teaching opportunity. He invites new employees to join 
him for breakfasts, during which he recalls the incident 
as a way to reinforce the company’s commitment to in-
novation and learning.
The story of Radio Flyer’s need to outsource manu-
facturing has what some might see as a less-happy end-
ing. Looking at the numbers, management determined 
that it would have to close its factory in Chicago and lay 
off about half of its workforce. Manufacturing moved 
to a factory in China. Pasin describes the effort as “an 
incredibly diffi cult time.”
The company’s effort with its remaining U.S. em-
ployees focused on building morale. These efforts in-
clude creating ideas for employees to have fun and 
pursue their passions, with events such as the Radio 
Flyer Olympics, during which employees compete in 
silly contests like tricycle races. More seriously, teams of 
employees tackle issues that they care about. The well-
ness committee put together a cash benefi t that pays 
employees up to $300 for participating in health-related 
activities such as weight-loss counseling or running 
races. Another committee brought together employ-
ees concerned about the environment. They assembled 
a campaign aimed at persuading employees to reduce 
their carbon footprint.
In caring for the U.S. employees, Radio Flyer hasn’t 
forgotten the ones in China. The company tries to 
maintain similar levels of benefi ts and engagement 
among the four dozen employees in its China offi ce.
Questions
 1. How could a human resource manager help Radio 
Flyer get the maximum benefi t from the motiva-
tional efforts described in this case?
 2. Do you think outsourcing would be harder on em-
ployees in a small company such as Radio Flyer than 
in a large corporation? Why or why not? How could 
HRM help smooth the transition?
 3. What additional developments described in this 
chapter could help Radio Flyer live out the high 
value it places on learning and innovation?
Sources: Radio Flyer corporate website, www.radiofl yer.com, accessed April 
24, 2014; “2013 Best Small Workplaces: #13: Radio Flyer, Inc.,” Great Place 
to Work, www.greatplacetowork.com, accessed April 24, 2014; Jessie Scanlon, 
“Radio Flyer Learns from a Crash,” Bloomberg Businessweek, October 21, 
2010, http://www.businessweek.com.
 1. Lauren Weber and Rachel Feintzeig, “Companies Say No to 
Having an HR Department,” The Wall Street Journal, April 
8, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Todd Henneman, “Is HR at 
Its Breaking Point?” Workforce, March 22, 2013, http://www.
workforce.com.
 2. Eric Krell, “Is HR Doing More with Less? Or Is It Undergo-
ing a Transformation?” HR Magazine, September 2013, Busi-
ness Insights: Global, http://bi.galegroup.com.
 3. Bureau of National Affairs, “2014 Outlook: Screening, Re-
cruiting, ACA Compliance, Talent Management on HR’s 
Agenda,” HR Focus, February 2014, pp. 1–6.
 4. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment Projections, 2012–
2022,” news release, December 19, 2013, http://www.bls.gov.
 5. Ibid.
 6. AARP, “Best Employers for Workers over 50: 2011 Win-
ners,” September 2011, http://www.aarp.org.
 7. A. Fox, “Mixing It Up,” HR Magazine, May 2011, pp. 22–7; 
B. Hite, “Employers Rethink How They Give Feedback,” 
The Wall Street Journal, October 13, 2008, p. B5; E. White, 
“Age Is as Age Does: Making the Generation Gap Work for 
You,” The Wall Street Journal, June 30, 2008, p. B3.
 8. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment Projections, 
2012–2022.”
 9. Ibid.
 10. For background, see Randall Monger and James Yankay, 
“U.S. Legal Permanent Residents: 2012,” Annual Flow Re-
port, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Offi ce of Im-
migration Statistics, March 2013, http://www.dhs.gov; U.S. 
Citizenship and Immigration Services, “Green Card (Perma-
nent Residence),” http://www.uscis.gov, last updated May 13, 
2011; U.S. Department of State, “Temporary Worker Visas,” 
http://travel.state.gov, accessed April 14, 2014; Amy Sher-
man, “Obama Holds Record for Cracking Down on Employ-
ers Who Hire Undocumented Workers, Says Wasserman 
Schultz,” Politifact, July 3, 2013, http://www.politifact.com 
(rating Wasserman Schultz’s statement “half true”); Doris 
Meissner, Donald M. Kerwin, Muzaffar Chishti, and Claire 
Bergeron, Immigration Enforcement in the United States: The 
Rise of a Formidable Machinery (Washington, DC: Migration 
Policy Institute, January 2013), p. 6, accessed at http://www.
migrationpolicy.org.
 11. T. H. Cox and S. Blake, “Managing Cultural Diversity: Im-
plications for Organizational Competitiveness,” The Execu-
tive 5 (1991), pp. 45–56.
 12. “Global Diversity and Inclusion: Fostering Innovation 
through a Diverse Workforce,” Forbes Insights, July 2011, 
http://www.forbes.com/forbesinsights.
NOTES

60 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
 13. Craig Wolf, “Diversity Helps Bridgeway Grow,” Poughkeepsie 
(N.Y.) Journal, January 14, 2012, http://www.poughkeepsie-
journal.com.
 14. Bureau of National Affairs, “Employers Report Diffi culty 
Finding Qualifi ed Candidates for Certain Positions, Poll Re-
veals,” HR Focus, June 2013, p. 7; Lorri Freifeld, “Bridging the 
Skills Gap,” Training, April 3, 2013, http://www.trainingmag.
com; Bureau of National Affairs, “2014 Outlook,” p. 6; K. 
Frasch, “The Talent-Job Mismatch,” Human Resource Executive, 
March 2013, p. 10.
 15. James R. Hagerty, “Industry Puts Heat on Schools to Teach 
Skills Employers Need,” The Wall Street Journal, June 6, 
2011, http://online.wsj.com; Lucia Mutikani, “Veterans Help 
Manufacturers Plug Skills Gap,” Reuters, February 2, 2012, 
http://www.reuters.com.
 16. J. A. Neal and C. L. Tromley, “From Incremental Change to 
Retrofi t: Creating High-Performance Work Systems,” Acad-
emy of Management Executive 9 (1995), pp. 42–54.
 17. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment Projections, 
2012–2022.”
 18. M. Hilton, “Skills for Work in the 21st Century: What Does 
the Research Tell Us?” Academy of Management Executive, No-
vember 2008, pp. 63–78.
 19. Evan Rosen, “Every Worker Is a Knowledge Worker,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, January 11, 2011, http://www
.businessweek.com; Joe McKendrick, “These Days, Who Is 
Not a ‘Knowledge Worker’?” SmartPlanet, April 12, 2010, 
http://www. smartplanet.com.
 20. Corilyn Shropshire, “Grainger Gives Employees Room to 
Grow,” Chicago Tribune, November 15, 2011, http://www
.chicagotribune.com. See also Jessica Stillman, “The Perpet-
ually Vexing Problem of Hiring Programmers,” Inc., January 
5, 2012, http://www.inc.com.
 21. T. J. Atchison, “The Employment Relationship: Untied or Re-
Tied,” Academy of Management Executive 5 (1991), pp. 52–62.
 22. R. Vance, Employee Engagement and Commitment (Alexandria, 
VA: Society for Human Resource Management, 2006); M. 
Huselid, “The Impact of Human Resource Management 
Practices on Turnover, Productivity, and Corporate Finan-
cial Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 38 (1995), 
pp. 635–72; S. Payne and S. Webber, “Effects of Service 
Provider Attitudes and Employment Status on Citizenship 
Behaviors and Customers’ Attitudes and Loyalty Behavior,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 91 (2006), pp. 365–68; J. Hartner, 
F. Schmidt, and T. Hayes, “Business-Unit Level Relationship 
between Employee Satisfaction, Employee Engagement, and 
Business Outcomes: A Meta-analysis,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 87 (2002), pp. 268–79.
 23. Alex Adamopoulos, “‘Agile’ Grows Up, Readies to Take 
Over Your Whole Business,” VentureBeat, February 9, 2012, 
http://venturebeat.com; Agile Alliance, “What Is Agile Soft-
ware Development?” http://www.agilealliance.org, accessed 
February 10, 2012.
 24. Adrienne Fox, “Achieving Integration: Boost Corporate Per-
formance,” HR Magazine, April 2011, Business & Company 
Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 25. J. R. Jablonski, Implementing Total Quality Management: An 
Overview (San Diego: Pfeiffer, 1991).
 26. R. Hodgetts, F. Luthans, and S. Lee, “New Paradigm Orga-
nizations: From Total Quality to Learning to World-Class,” 
Organizational Dynamics, Winter 1994, pp. 5–19.
 27. Bureau of National Affairs, “2014 Outlook,” pp. 4–5.
 28. Ibid., p. 3; Bureau of National Affairs, “Experts Detail the 
Evolving Role of HR and Compensation,” Report on Salary 
Surveys, July 2013, pp. 8–10; Bureau of National Affairs, “HR 
in the Middle as Employers Consider Health Care Coverage 
Options,” Managing Benefi ts Plans, March 2014, pp. 5–6.
 29. Bureau 
of 
Labor 
Statistics, “Extended 
Mass 
Lay-
offs: 
Fourth 
Quarter 
2011, 
Annual 
Totals 
2011,” 
news 
release, 
February 
10, 
2012, 
http://www.bls
.gov/mls; Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Mass Layoff Statistics,” 
last updated May 13, 2013, http://data.bls.gov. In response to 
budget cuts, the BLS stopped publishing mass layoff statistics 
after the fi rst quarter of 2013.
 30. “Lay Off the Layoffs,” Newsweek, February 4, 2010, http://
www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek; Ryan Bakken, “Marvin: 
A Window on the Economy,” Grand Forks (ND) Herald, No-
vember 21, 2011, Business & Company Resource Center, 
http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 31. A. Church, “Organizational Downsizing: What Is the Role of 
the Practitioner?” Industrial- Organizational Psychologist 33, no. 1 
(1995), pp. 63–74.
 32. Dori Meinert, “HR Budgets Show Modest Growth,” HR 
Magazine, November 2011, p. 24.
 33. The Right Thing, “The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Com-
pany Discovers Key to Successful Outsourcing Partner-
ships,” Workforce Management, March 2011, p. S2.
 34. Yum Brands, “Yum Restaurants China,” http://www.yum
.com, accessed April 24, 2014; Laurie Burkitt, “Yum Bids to 
Regain Consumer Confi dence in China with New Menu,” 
Wall Street Journal, March 27, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; 
Caitlin Bowling, “China: The Key to Yum Brands Bounce-
Back Year,” Louisville Business First, April 24, 2014, http://
www.bizjournals.com/louisville; Reuters, “Yum Brands’ 
China Restaurant Sales Improve, Shares Rise,” April 22, 
2014, http://www.reuters.com.
 35. David Wessel, “Big U.S. Firms Shift Hiring Abroad,” The 
Wall Street Journal, April 19, 2011, http://online.wsj.com; 
David Wessel, “U.S. Firms Keen to Add Foreign Jobs,” The 
Wall Street Journal, November 22, 2011, http://online.wsj
.com; M. Hess, “Homeward Bound,” Workforce Management, 
February 2013, pp. 26–31; Emily Chasan, “Outsourcing 
Loses Its Luster for U.S. Tech Companies,” The Wall Street 
Journal, March 6, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com. 
 36. Megha Bahree, “Indian Tech Firms Look to Hire Abroad,” 
The Wall Street Journal, November 11, 2011, http://online
.wsj.com; Bureau of National Affairs, “2014 Outlook,” p. 5.
 37. Monger and Yankay, “U.S. Legal Permanent Residents: 
2012.”
 38. Audrey Singer, “Immigrants in 2010 Metropolitan America: A 
Decade of Change,” State of Metropolitan America, no. 43, Brook-
ings Institution, October 24, 2011, http://www.brookings.edu; 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Foreign-Born Workers: Labor 
Force Characteristics, 2012,” news release, May 22, 2013, http://
www.bls.gov/cps.
 39. R. L. Tung, “Expatriate Assignments: Enhancing Success and 
Minimizing Failure,” Academy of Management Executive 12, 
no. 4 (1988), pp. 93–106.
 40. M. J. Kavanaugh, H. G. Guetal, and S. I. Tannenbaum, 
Human Resource Information Systems: Development and Applica-
tion (Boston: PWS-Kent, 1990).

CHAPTER 2 
Trends in Human Resource Management 61
 41. Dave Zielinski, “HRIS Features Get More Strategic,” HR 
Magazine, December 2011, p. 15.
 42. Ed Frauenheim, “Strong to the Core,” Workforce Management, 
August 2013, Business Insights: Global, http://bi.galegroup
.com.
 43. “Payroll as You Go,” Entrepreneur, October 2011, p. 45.
 44. N. Lockwood, Maximizing Human Capital: Demonstrating HR 
Value with Key Performance Indicators (Alexandria, VA: SHRM 
Research Quarterly, 2006).
 45. “Social Technologies on the Front Line: The Management 2.0 
M-Prize Winners,” McKinsey Quarterly, September 2011, http://
www.mckinseyquarterly.com.
 46. Ibid.
 47. J. O’Toole and E. Lawler III, The New American Workplace 
(New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006).
 48. D. M. Rousseau, “Psychological and Implied Contracts in 
Organizations,” Employee Rights and Responsibilities Journal 
2 (1989), pp. 121–29.
 49. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employee Tenure in 2012,” news 
release, September 18, 2012, http://www.bls.gov/cps.
 50. Dan Schawbel, “How Job Hopping Can Hurt Your 
Career,” 
CNN, 
January 
17, 
2012, 
http://articles
.cnn.com; Chrissy Scivicque, “How to Stop Job Hopping 
Once and for All,” Forbes, January 23, 2012, http://www
.forbes.com; Alina Dizik, “The Pros and Cons of Job- 
Hopping,” CNN, July 4, 2011, http://www.cnn.com.
 51. Fast Fact, “Temporary Workforce Stronger than Ever,” 
T  1  D, May 2011, p. 21; Kate Lister, “Freelance Nation,” 
Entrepreneur, September 2010, pp. 89–97; Pete Fehrenbach, 
“Temp Help as Labor Force  De-volatile-izer,” Industry Week, 
October 2013, p. 40.
 52. Ed Finkel, “Positive Thinking,” Modern Healthcare, October 
24, 2011, Business & Company Resource Center, http://
galenet.galegroup.com; Weatherby Healthcare, “About Us,” 
http://www.weatherbyhealthcare.com, accessed January 25, 
2012.

3
Providing Equal 
Employment Opportunity 
and a Safe Workplace
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 3-1 Explain how the three branches of government 
regulate human resource management.
 LO 3-2 Summarize the major federal laws requiring equal 
employment opportunity.
 LO 3-3 Identify the federal agencies that enforce equal 
employment opportunity, and describe the role of 
each.
 LO 3-4 Describe ways employers can avoid illegal 
discrimination and provide reasonable 
accommodation.
 LO 3-5 Deﬁ ne sexual harassment, and tell how employers 
can eliminate or minimize it.
 LO 3-6 Explain employers’ duties under the Occupational 
Safety and Health Act.
 LO 3-7 Describe the role of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration.
 LO 3-8 Discuss ways employers promote worker safety 
and health.
Introduction
When Donald Sterling, then owner of the Los Angeles Clippers basketball team, 
chided a female friend for bringing her black friends to games, he might have 
thought the conversation was purely personal. Even when he discovered that the 
conversation had been recorded and leaked to the media, he might have thought 
the exposure of blatantly racist remarks was just a personal embarrassment. If he 
thought so, he soon discovered that he was wrong. Furious Clippers players pro-
tested, and Clippers fans threatened to boycott the remaining games of the season.
NBA Commissioner Adam Silver stepped in and investigated. He determined 
that Sterling’s actions were not merely rude but a violation of the NBA’s core val-
ues. Noting that the NBA has a history of taking “a leadership role in matters 
of race relations,” Silver called Sterling’s comments “contrary to the principles of 
inclusion and respect that form the foundation of our diverse, multicultural and 
multiethnic league.” Silver fined Sterling $2.5 million and barred him from entering any 
Clippers facility. Sterling’s family recently sold the team to former Microsoft CEO, Steve 
Ballmer.1 Silver’s decision made a point that is relevant outside the world of sports: the 
leaders of an organization set the tone for the organization. Organizations depend on 
leaders to model ethical and legal conduct that is consistent with their values, and they 
depend on employees to follow that good example.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 63
As we saw in Chapter 1, human 
resource management takes place 
in the context of the company’s 
goals and society’s expectations for 
how a company should operate. 
In the United States, the federal 
government has set some limits 
on how an organization can prac-
tice human resource management. 
Among these limits are require-
ments intended to prevent discrim-
ination in hiring and employment 
practices and to protect the health 
and safety of workers while they 
are on the job. Questions about a 
company’s  compliance with these 
requirements can result in law-
suits and negative publicity that 
often cause serious problems for 
a company’s success and survival. 
Conversely, a company that skill-
fully navigates the maze of regula-
tions can gain an advantage over 
its competitors. A further advantage may go to companies that go beyond mere legal 
compliance to make fair employment and worker safety important components of the 
company’s business strategy. The NBA commissioner was not required to punish Don-
ald Sterling because of a law; rather, he was maintaining a climate in the professional 
basketball league that would be favorable to the best players of all races and welcoming 
to fans of all races and ethnicities. Similarly, an employer that requires employees to treat 
one another with respect fosters a climate that attracts and keeps talented workers.
This chapter provides an overview of the ways government bodies regulate equal 
employment opportunity and workplace safety and health. It introduces you to major 
laws affecting employers in these areas, as well as the agencies charged with enforcing 
those laws. The chapter also discusses ways organizations can develop practices that 
ensure they are in compliance with the laws.
One point to make at the outset is that managers often want a list of dos and don’ts 
that will keep them out of legal trouble. Some managers rely on strict rules such as 
“Don’t ever ask a female applicant if she is married,” rather than learning the reasons 
behind those rules. Clearly, certain practices are illegal or at least inadvisable, and this 
chapter will provide guidance on avoiding such practices. However, managers who 
merely focus on how to avoid breaking the law are not thinking about how to be ethi-
cal or how to acquire and use human resources in the best way to carry out the compa-
ny’s mission. This chapter introduces ways to think more creatively and constructively 
about fair employment and workplace safety.
Regulation of Human Resource Management
All three branches of the U.S. government—legislative, executive, and judicial—play 
an important role in creating a legal environment for human resource management. 
The legislative branch, which consists of the two houses of Congress, has enacted a 
LO 3-1 Explain how the 
three branches of gov-
ernment regulate human 
resource management.
One way the executive branch communicates information about laws is through websites like 
Youth Rules!. This site is designed to provide young workers with a safe workplace by making 
them aware of laws that, for example, restrict the amount of work they can do and the machinery 
they can operate.

64 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
number of laws governing human resource activities. Senators and U.S. representa-
tives generally develop these laws in response to perceived societal needs. For example, 
during the civil rights movement of the early 1960s, Congress enacted Title VII of the 
Civil Rights Act to ensure that various minority groups received equal opportunities 
in many areas of life.
The executive branch, including the many regulatory agencies that the president 
oversees, is responsible for enforcing the laws passed by Congress. Agencies do this 
through a variety of actions, from drawing up regulations detailing how to abide by 
the laws to fi ling suit against alleged violators. Some federal agencies involved in reg-
ulating human resource management include the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. In addition, 
the president may issue executive orders, which are directives issued solely by the 
president, without requiring congressional approval. Some executive orders regulate 
the activities of organizations that have contracts with the federal government. For 
example, President Lyndon Johnson signed Executive Order 11246, which requires 
all federal contractors and subcontractors to engage in affi rmative-action programs 
designed to hire and promote women and minorities. (We will explore the topic of 
affi rmative action later in this chapter.)
The judicial branch, the federal court system, infl uences employment law by inter-
preting the law and holding trials concerning violations of the law. The U.S. Supreme 
Court, at the head of the judicial branch, is the court of fi nal appeal. Decisions made 
by the Supreme Court are binding; they can be overturned only through laws passed 
by Congress. The Civil Rights Act of 1991 was partly designed to overturn Supreme 
Court decisions.
Equal Employment Opportunity
Among the most signifi cant efforts to regulate human resource management are those 
aimed at achieving equal employment opportunity (EEO)—the condition in which 
all individuals have an equal chance for employment, regardless of their race, color, 
religion, sex, age, disability, or national origin. The federal government’s efforts to cre-
ate equal employment opportunity include constitutional amendments, legislation, 
and executive orders, as well as court decisions that interpret the laws. Table 3.1 sum-
marizes major EEO laws discussed in this chapter. These are U.S. laws; equal employ-
ment laws in other countries may differ.
Constitutional Amendments
Two amendments to the U.S. Constitution—the Thirteenth and Fourteenth—have 
implications for human resource management. The Thirteenth Amendment abolished 
slavery in the United States. Though you might be hard-pressed to cite an example 
of race-based slavery in the United States today, the Thirteenth Amendment has been 
applied in cases where discrimination involved the “badges” (symbols) and “incidents” 
of slavery.
The Fourteenth Amendment forbids the states from taking life, liberty, or property 
without due process of law and prevents the states from denying equal protection of 
the laws. Recently it has been applied to the protection of whites in charges of reverse 
discrimination. In a case that marked the early stages of a move away from race-based 
quotas, Alan Bakke alleged that as a white man he had been discriminated against in 
the selection of entrants to the University of California at Davis medical school.2 The 
LO 3-2 Summarize 
the major federal laws 
requiring equal employ-
ment opportunity.
Equal Employment 
Opportunity (EEO)
The condition in which 
all individuals have an 
equal chance for em-
ployment, regardless of 
their race, color, religion, 
sex, age, disability, or 
national origin.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 65
ACT
REQUIREMENTS
COVERS
ENFORCEMENT 
AGENCY
Thirteenth Amendment
Abolished slavery
All individuals
Court system
Fourteenth Amendment
Provides equal protection for 
all citizens and requires due 
process in state action
State actions (e.g., 
 decisions of government 
organi zations)
Court system
Civil Rights Acts (CRAs) 
of 1866 and 1871 (as 
amended)
Grants all citizens the right 
to make, perform, modify, 
and terminate contracts and 
enjoy all beneﬁ ts, terms, and 
conditions of the contractual 
relationship
All individuals
Court system
Equal Pay Act of 1963
Requires that men and women 
performing equal jobs receive 
equal pay
Employers engaged in 
interstate commerce
EEOC
Title VII of CRA
Forbids discrimination based 
on race, color, religion, sex, or 
national origin
Employers with 15 or more 
employees working 20 or 
more weeks per year; labor 
unions; and employment 
agencies
EEOC
Age Discrimination in 
Employment Act of 1967
Prohibits discrimination in 
employment against individuals 
40 years of age and older
Employers with 15 or more 
employees working 20 
or more weeks per year; 
labor unions; employment 
 agencies; federal government
EEOC
Rehabilitation Act of 1973
Requires afﬁ rmative action in 
the employment of individuals 
with disabilities
Government agencies; 
federal contractors and 
 subcontractors with  contracts 
greater than $2,500
OFCCP
Pregnancy Discrimination 
Act of 1978
Treats discrimination based on 
pregnancy-related conditions as 
illegal sex discrimi nation
All employees covered by 
Title VII
EEOC
Americans with Disabilities 
Act of 1990
Prohibits discrimination  against 
individuals with disabilities
Employers with more than 
15 employees
EEOC
Executive Order 11246
Requires afﬁ rmative action in 
hiring women and minorities
Federal contractors and 
subcontractors with 
contracts greater than 
$10,000
OFCCP
Civil Rights Act of 1991
Prohibits discrimination (same 
as Title VII)
Same as Title VII, plus applies 
Section 1981 to employment 
discrimination cases
EEOC
Uniformed Services 
 Employment and 
 Reemployment Rights 
Act of 1994
Requires rehiring of employees 
who are absent for military 
service, with training and 
accommodations as needed
Veterans and members of 
reserve components
Veterans’ Employment and 
Training Service
Genetic Information 
 Nondiscrimination Act of 
2008
Prohibits discrimination 
because of genetic information
Employers with 15 or more 
employees
EEOC
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act 
of 2009
Allows employees to claim 
discriminatory compensation 
within a set time after receiving 
a discriminatory paycheck
Employees covered by Title 
VII of CRA, Age Discrimination 
in Employment Act, and 
Americans with Disabilities 
Act
EEOC
Table 3.1
Summary of Major EEO Laws and Regulations

66 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
university had set aside 16 of the available 100 places for “disadvantaged” applicants 
who were members of racial minority groups. Under this quota system, Bakke was able 
to compete for only 84 positions, whereas a minority applicant was able to compete for 
all 100. The federal court ruled in favor of Bakke, noting that this quota system had 
violated white individuals’ right to equal protection under the law.
An important point regarding the Fourteenth Amendment is that it applies only to 
the decisions or actions of the government or of private groups whose activities are 
deemed government actions. Thus, a person could fi le a claim under the Fourteenth 
Amendment if he or she had been fi red from a state university (a government organi-
zation) but not if the person had been fi red by a private employer.
Legislation
The periods following the Civil War and during the civil rights movement of the 
1960s were times when many voices in society pressed for equal rights for all without 
regard to a person’s race or sex. In response, Congress passed laws designed to provide 
for equal opportunity. In later years, Congress has passed additional laws that have 
extended EEO protection more broadly.
Civil Rights Acts of 1866 and 1871 During Reconstruction, Congress passed 
two Civil Rights Acts to further the  Thirteenth Amendment’s goal of abolishing slav-
ery. The Civil Rights Act of 1866 granted all persons the same property rights as white 
citizens, as well as the right to enter into and enforce contracts. Courts have inter-
preted the latter right as including employment contracts. The Civil Rights Act of 
1871 granted all citizens the right to sue in federal court if they feel they have been 
deprived of some civil right. Although these laws might seem outdated, they are still 
used because they allow the plaintiff to recover both compensatory and punitive dam-
ages (that is, payment to compensate them for their loss plus additional damages to 
punish the offender).
Equal Pay Act of 1963 Under the Equal Pay Act of 1963, if men and women in 
an organization are doing equal work, the employer must pay them equally. The act 
defi nes equal in terms of skill, effort, responsibility, and working conditions. However, 
the act allows for reasons why men and women performing the same job might be paid 
differently. If the pay differences result from differences in seniority, merit, quantity or 
quality of production, or any factor other than sex (such as participating in a training 
program or working the night shift), then the differences are legal.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 The major law regulating equal em-
ployment opportunity in the United States is Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 
Title VII directly resulted from the civil rights movement of the early 1960s, led by 
such individuals as Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. To ensure that employment opportuni-
ties would be based on character or ability rather than on race, Congress wrote and 
passed Title VII, and President Lyndon Johnson signed it into law in 1964. The law is 
enforced by the Equal Employment  Opportunity Commission (EEOC), an agency 
of the Department of Justice.
Title VII prohibits employers from discriminating against individuals because of 
their race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. An employer may not use these char-
acteristics as the basis for not hiring someone, for fi ring someone, or for discriminating 
Equal Employment 
Opportunity 
 Commission (EEOC)
Agency of the Depart-
ment of Justice charged 
with enforcing Title VII 
of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 and other antidis-
crimination laws.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 67
against them in the terms of their pay, conditions of employment, or privileges of 
employment. In addition, an employer may not use these characteristics to limit, seg-
regate, or classify employees or job applicants in any way that would deprive any indi-
vidual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his or her status as 
an employee. The act applies to organizations that employ 15 or more persons work-
ing 20 or more weeks a year and that are involved in interstate commerce, as well as 
state and local governments, employment agencies, and labor organizations.
Title VII also states that employers may not retaliate against employees for either 
“opposing” a perceived illegal employment practice or “participating in a proceed-
ing” related to an alleged illegal employment practice. Opposition refers to expressing 
to someone through proper channels that you believe an illegal employment act has 
taken place or is taking place. Participation in a proceeding refers to testifying in an 
investigation, hearing, or court proceeding regarding an illegal employment act. The 
purpose of this provision is to protect employees from employers’ threats and other 
forms of intimidation aimed at discouraging employees from bringing to light acts 
they believe to be illegal. Companies that violate this prohibition may be liable for 
punitive damages.
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) One category of employ-
ees not covered by Title VII is older workers. Older workers sometimes are concerned 
that they will be the targets of discrimination, especially when a company is downsiz-
ing. Older workers tend to be paid more, so a company that wants to cut labor costs 
may save by laying off its oldest workers. To counter such discrimination, Congress 
in 1967 passed the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), which prohibits 
discrimination against workers who are over the age of 40. Similar to Title VII, the 
ADEA outlaws hiring, fi ring, setting compensation rates, or other employment deci-
sions based on a person’s age being over 40.
Many fi rms have offered early-retirement incentives as an alternative or supple-
ment to involuntary layoffs. Because this approach to workforce reduction focuses on 
older employees, who would be eligible for early retirement, it may be in violation of 
the ADEA. Early-retirement incentives require that participating employees sign an 
agreement waiving their rights to sue under the ADEA. Courts have tended to uphold 
the use of early-retirement incentives and waivers as long as the individuals were not 
coerced into signing the agreements, the agreements were presented in a way the em-
ployees could understand (including technical legal requirements such as the ages of 
discharged and retained employees in the employee’s work unit), and the employees 
had been given enough time to make a decision.3 Also, these waivers must meet the 
basic requirements of a contract, so the employer must offer something of value—for 
example, payment of a percentage of the employee’s salary—in exchange for the em-
ployee giving up rights under the waiver.
To defend against claims of discrimination, one practical way is to establish 
 performance-related criteria for layoffs, rather than age- or salary-related criteria. Of 
course, those criteria must be genuinely performance related. The EEOC recently 
sued a Michigan manufacturer for apparently manipulating its layoff criteria in order 
to target the oldest engineers for layoffs. In the fi rst round of layoffs at Hutchin-
son Sealing Systems, the oldest project engineer was the one who met the criteria. 
Then the company revised its criteria and laid off two more engineers, again the oldest 
on the payroll. If the criteria had not been changed, younger engineers would have met 
the layoff criteria, and the EEOC saw that as evidence of age discrimination.4

68 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Age discrimination complaints make up a large percentage of the complaints fi led 
with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and whenever the economy is 
slow, the number of complaints grows. For example, as shown in Figure 3.1, the num-
ber of age discrimination cases jumped in 2008, when many fi rms were downsizing, 
and has fallen slightly as the recovery has proceeded at a slow pace. Another increase 
in age discrimination claims accompanied the economic slowdown at the beginning 
of the 2000s.
In today’s environment, in which fi rms are seeking talented individuals to achieve 
the company’s goals, older employees can be a tremendous pool of potential resources. 
Researchers have found that although muscle power tends to decline with age, older 
workers tend to offer other important strengths, including conscientiousness and in-
terpersonal skills.5 Older workers also may have acquired deep knowledge of their 
work, industry, and employer. Successful companies are fi nding ways to keep these 
valuable older workers on the job and contributing. Union Carbide asks retired man-
agers to serve as mentors for its current managers. In Australia, a bank called Westpac 
has identifi ed knowledgeable older workers, labeled them “sages,” and asked them to 
create a database of what they know about the organization and their work. At Mercy 
Health Systems, workers approaching retirement are allowed to take leaves of absence 
with benefi ts, and retired workers are invited to be part of a temporary workforce that 
comes back during periods of heavy demand.
Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1973 In 1973, Congress passed the Voca-
tional Rehabilitation Act to enhance employment opportunity for individuals with dis-
abilities. This act covers executive agencies and contractors and subcontractors that 
receive more than $2,500 annually from the federal government. These organizations 
must engage in affi rmative action for individuals with disabilities. Afﬁ rmative action 
Afﬁ rmative Action
An organization’s active 
effort to ﬁ nd opportuni-
ties to hire or promote 
people in a particular 
group.
Figure 3.1
Age Discrimination Complaints, 1999–2013
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Source: Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, http://www1.eeoc.gov//eeoc/statistics/enforcement/.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 69
is an organization’s active effort to fi nd opportunities to hire or promote people in a 
particular group. Thus, Congress intended this act to encourage employers to recruit 
qualifi ed individuals with disabilities and to make reasonable accommodations to all 
those people to become active members of the labor market. The Department of 
 Labor’s Employment Standards Administration enforces this act.
Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Act of 1974 Similar to the Reha-
bilitation Act, the Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Act of 1974 requires federal 
contractors and subcontractors to take affi rmative action toward employing veterans 
of the Vietnam War (those serving between August 5, 1964, and May 7, 1975). The 
Offi ce of Federal Contract Compliance Procedures, discussed later in this chapter, has 
authority to enforce this act.
Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978 An amendment to Title VII of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978 defi nes discrimi-
nation on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions to be a form 
of illegal sex discrimination. According to the EEOC, this means that employers may 
not treat a female applicant or employee “unfavorably because of pregnancy, child-
birth, or a medical condition related to pregnancy or childbirth.”6 For example, an em-
ployer may not refuse to hire a woman because she is pregnant. Decisions about work 
absences or accommodations must be based on the same policies as the organization 
uses for other disabilities. Benefi ts, including health insurance, should cover pregnancy 
and related medical conditions in the same way that it covers other medical conditions.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 One of the farthest-
reaching acts concerning the management of human resources is the Americans with 
Disabilities Act. This 1990 law protects individuals with disabilities from being dis-
criminated against in the workplace. It prohibits discrimination based on disability in 
all employment practices, such as job application procedures, hiring, fi ring, promo-
tions, compensation, and training. Other employment activities covered by the ADA 
are employment advertising, recruitment, tenure, layoff, leave, and fringe benefi ts.
The ADA defi nes disability as a physical or mental impairment that substantially 
limits one or more major life activities, a record of having such an impairment, or 
being regarded as having such an impairment. The fi rst part of the defi nition refers to 
individuals who have serious disabilities—such as epilepsy, blindness, deafness, or pa-
ralysis—that affect their ability to perform major bodily functions and major life ac-
tivities such as walking, learning (for example, functions of the brain and immune 
system), caring for oneself, and working. The second part refers to individuals who 
have a history of disability, such as someone who has had cancer but is currently in 
remission, someone with a history of mental illness, and someone with a history of 
heart disease. The third part of the defi nition, “being regarded as having a disability,” 
refers to people’s subjective reactions, as in the case of someone who is severely disfi g-
ured; an employer might hesitate to hire such a person on the grounds that people will 
react negatively to such an employee.7
The ADA covers specifi c physiological disabilities such as cosmetic disfi gurement 
and anatomical loss affecting the body’s systems. In addition, it covers mental and psy-
chological disorders such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional 
or mental illness, and learning disabilities. Conditions not covered include obesity, 
substance abuse, irritability, and poor judgment.8 Also, if a person needs ordinary 
Disability
Under the Americans 
with Disabilities Act, 
a physical or mental 
impairment that sub-
stantially limits one or 
more major life activities, 
a record of having such 
an impairment, or being 
regarded as having such 
an impairment.

70 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
eyeglasses or contact lenses to perform each major life activity with little or no dif-
fi culty, the person is not considered disabled under the ADA. (In determining whether 
an impairment is substantially limiting, mitigating measures, such as medicine, hearing 
aids, and prosthetics, once could be considered but now must be ignored.) Figure 3.2 
shows the types of disabilities associated with complaints fi led under the ADA in 2013.
In contrast to other EEO laws, the ADA goes beyond prohibiting discrimination to 
require that employers take steps to accommodate individuals covered under the act. 
If a disabled person is selected to perform a job, the employer (perhaps in consultation 
with the disabled employee) determines what accommodations are necessary for the 
employee to perform the job. Examples include using ramps and lifts to make facili-
ties accessible, redesigning job procedures, and providing technology such as TDD 
lines for hearing-impaired employees. Some employers have feared that accommoda-
tions under the ADA would be expensive. However, the Department of Labor has 
found that two-thirds of accommodations cost less than $500, and many of these cost 
nothing.9 As technology advances, the cost of many technologies has been falling. In 
addition, the federal government has created a tax credit, the Work Opportunity Tax 
Credit, of up to $2,400 for each qualifi ed disabled worker hired. That means accom-
modating disabled workers can lower an employer’s income taxes.
Civil Rights Act of 1991 In 1991 Congress broadened the relief available to 
victims of discrimination by passing a Civil Rights Act (CRA 1991). CRA 1991 amends 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as well as the Civil Rights Act of 1866, the 
Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 
1967. One major change in EEO law under CRA 1991 has been the addition of com-
pensatory and punitive damages in cases of discrimination under Title VII and the 
Americans with Disabilities Act. Before CRA 1991, Title VII limited damage claims 
to equitable relief, which courts have defi ned to include back pay, lost benefi ts, front 
pay in some cases, and attorney’s fees and costs. CRA 1991 allows judges to award 
Figure 3.2
Disabilities Associated 
with Complaints Filed 
under ADA
Source: Equal Employ-
ment Opportunity Com-
mission, “ADA Charge 
Data by Impairments/
Bases: Receipts, FY1997–
FY2013,” http://www1.
eeoc.gov, accessed April 
29, 2014.
Emotional/
psychiatric 
(23.8%)
Regarded as 
disabled (11.4%)
Back (9.0%)
Nonparalytic 
orthopedic (8.8%)
Record of 
disability (6.6%)
Diabetes (4.7%)
Cancer (3.7%)
Heart (3.6%)
Other neurological 
(3.6%)
Hearing (2.9%)
E
ps
(2
Other (21.9%)

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 71
compensatory and punitive damages when the plaintiff proves the discrimination was 
intentional or reckless. Compensatory damages include such things as future monetary 
loss, emotional pain, suffering, and loss of enjoyment of life. Punitive damages are a 
punishment; by requiring violators to pay the plaintiff an amount beyond the actual 
losses suffered, the courts try to discourage employers from discriminating.
Recognizing that one or a few discrimination cases could put an organization out 
of business, and so harm many innocent employees, Congress has limited the amount 
of punitive damages. As shown in Table 3.2, the amount of damages depends on the 
size of the organization charged with discrimination. The limits range from $50,000 
per violation at a small company (14 to 100 employees) to $300,000 at a company with 
more than 500 employees. A company has to pay punitive damages only if it discrimi-
nated intentionally or with malice or reckless indifference to the employee’s federally 
protected rights.
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 
1994 When members of the armed services were called up following the terrorist 
attacks of September 2001, a 1994 employment law—the Uniformed Services Employ-
ment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA)—assumed new signifi cance. Under 
this law, employers must reemploy workers who left jobs to fulfi ll military  duties for 
up to fi ve years. When service members return from active duty, the employer must 
reemploy them in the job they would have held if they had not left to serve in the 
military, providing them with the same seniority, status, and pay rate they would have 
earned if their employment had not been interrupted. Disabled veterans also have 
up to two years to recover from injuries received 
during their service or training, and employers must 
make reasonable accommodations for a remaining 
disability.
Service members also have duties under 
USERRA. Before leaving for duty, they are to 
give their employers notice, if possible. After their 
service, the law sets time limits for applying to be 
reemployed. Depending on the length of service, 
these limits range from approximately 2 to 90 days. 
Veterans with complaints under USERRA can ob-
tain assistance from the Veterans’ Employment 
and Training Service of the Department of Labor.
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination 
Act of 2008 Thanks to the deco ding of the 
human genome and developments in the fi elds of 
genetics and medicine, researchers can now iden-
tify more and more genes associated with risks for 
EMPLOYER SIZE
DAMAGE LIMIT
14 to 100 employees
$ 50,000
101 to 200 employees
100,000
201 to 500 employees
200,000
More than 500 employees
300,000
Table 3.2
Maximum Punitive 
 Damages Allowed under 
the Civil Rights Act 
of 1991
Aric Miller, an Army reservist sergeant, was deployed for service with the 
363rd military police unit in Iraq for over a year. When he returned to the 
states, he was able to resume his job as an elementary school teacher 
thanks to the 1994 Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment 
Rights Act. The act requires employers to reemploy service members in 
the job they would have held if they had not left to serve in the military. 
Why is this act important? 

72 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
developing particular diseases or disorders. While learning that you are at risk of, say, 
colon cancer may be a useful motivator to take precautions, the information opens up 
some risks as well. For example, what if companies began using genetic screening to 
identify and avoid hiring job candidates who are at risk of developing costly diseases? 
Concerns such as this prompted Congress to pass the Genetic Information Nondis-
crimination Act (GINA) of 2008.
Under GINA’s requirements, companies with 15 or more employees may not use 
genetic information in making decisions related to the terms, conditions, or privileges 
of employment—for example, decisions to hire, promote, or lay off a worker. This 
genetic information includes information about a person’s genetic tests, genetic tests 
of the person’s family members, and family medical histories. Furthermore, employ-
ers may not intentionally obtain this information, except in certain limited situations 
(such as an employee voluntarily participating in a wellness program or requesting 
time off to care for a sick relative). If companies do acquire such information, they 
must keep the information confi dential. The law also forbids harassment of any em-
ployee because of that person’s genetic information.
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 In reaction to a  Supreme Court deci-
sion overturning an EEOC policy that defi ned the time frame when employees may 
fi le a complaint, Congress passed the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act. The act covers 
discrimination in pay; that is, when an individual receives different pay than his or 
her coworkers, and the difference is due to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, 
age, or disability. Named after the worker whose pay discrimination complaint did not 
withstand the Supreme Court’s ruling, the act made the EEOC’s policy a federal law. It 
provides three ways to determine the time period within which an employee may fi le 
a complaint: counting from (1) when the employer’s decision or other discriminatory 
practice happened; (2) when the person became subject to the decision or practice; or 
(3) when the compensation was affected by the decision or practice, including each 
time the employee received a discriminatory level of compensation from the employer.
Executive Orders
Two executive orders that directly affect human resource management are Executive 
Order 11246, issued by Lyndon Johnson, and Executive Order 11478, issued by Rich-
ard Nixon. Executive Order 11246 prohibits federal contractors and subcontractors 
from discriminating based on race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. In addition, 
employers whose contracts meet minimum size requirements must engage in affi r-
mative action to ensure against discrimination. Those receiving more than $10,000 
from the federal government must take affi rmative action, and those with contracts 
exceeding $50,000 must develop a written affi rmative-action plan for each of their 
establishments. This plan must be in place within 120 days of the beginning of the 
contract. This executive order is enforced by the Offi ce of Federal Contract Compli-
ance Procedures.
Executive Order 11478 requires the federal government to base all its employment 
policies on merit and fi tness. It specifi es that race, color, sex, religion, and national ori-
gin may not be considered. Along with the government, the act covers all contractors 
and subcontractors doing at least $10,000 worth of business with the federal govern-
ment. The U.S. Offi ce of Personnel Management is in charge of ensuring that the 
government is in compliance, and the relevant government agencies are responsible 
for ensuring the compliance of contractors and subcontractors.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 73
The Government’s Role in Providing for Equal 
Employment Opportunity
At a minimum, equal employment opportunity requires that employers comply with 
EEO laws. To enforce those laws, the executive branch of the federal government uses 
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the Offi ce of Federal Contract 
Compliance Programs.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforc-
ing most of the EEO laws, including Title VII, the Equal Pay Act, and the Americans 
with Disabilities Act. To do this, the EEOC investigates and resolves complaints about 
discrimination, gathers information, and issues guidelines. As described in “HR How 
To,” the EEOC has tried to increase its effectiveness by setting priorities where it be-
lieves its enforcement will have the most impact.
When individuals believe they have been discriminated against, they may fi le a com-
plaint with the EEOC or a similar state agency. They must fi le the complaint within 
180 days of the incident. The meaning of an “incident” for this purpose is defi ned by 
law. For example, the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act establishes that for determining 
pay discrimination, an incident can be receiving a paycheck. Figure 3.3 illustrates the 
number of charges fi led with the EEOC for different types of discrimination in 2013. 
LO 3-3 Identify the 
federal agencies that en-
force equal employment 
opportunity, and describe 
the role of each.
Figure 3.3
Types of Charges Filed with the EEOC
40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
Total Charges: 93,727
0
Retaliation
Race
Disability
Age
Religion
Color
Equal Pay Act
Genetic
information
National origin
Sex
Source: Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Charge Statistics FY 1997 through FY 2013,” http://www1.eeoc.gov, accessed 
April 29, 2014.

74
Recently, the Equal Employment 
Opportunity 
Commission 
an-
nounced that it would be more 
strategic about how it carries out 
its mission. Employers may fi nd 
it useful to be equally strategic in 
compliance.
The EEOC established six areas 
that would be priorities because 
they have the greatest potential to 
reduce and deter employment dis-
crimination. The six areas are (1) 
eliminating barriers in recruitment 
and hiring; (2) protecting immigrant, 
migrant, and other workers con-
sidered vulnerable; (3) addressing 
emerging issues, such as accom-
modating workers with disabili-
ties and preventing discrimination 
against gay and lesbian employ-
ees, which could take the form of 
sex discrimination; (4) enforcing 
equal pay laws; (5) preserving ac-
cess to the legal system by target-
ing retaliation; and (6) preventing 
harassment.
Employers must, of course, obey 
all the EEO laws. But the commis-
sion’s focus on these concerns sug-
gest that employers can have the 
most impact on compliance and 
reduce legal problems by ensuring 
that the organization is performing 
well in the same six areas. Employ-
ers should:
• Review all of their selec-
tion methods to be sure 
none of them discriminates 
unintentionally.
• Ensure all employees know how 
to avoid harassing or segregat-
ing groups of workers, such as 
immigrants or gay and lesbian 
employees.
• Train all supervisors and HR 
decision makers in avoiding dis-
crimination and retaliation. 
• Keep complete records of 
performance reviews and pay 
decisions to ensure that pay 
gaps are due to performance 
differences.
Questions
 1. Suppose you are an HR 
manager in a U.S. company. 
How would you explain to your 
company’s business managers 
the importance of the EEOC’s 
strategic priorities?
 2. How would you suggest 
that your department apply 
these priorities in planning 
its management training 
programs?
Sources: Nicole Saleem, “National Pri-
orities: The EEOC’s Four Year Plan,” 101 
Practice Series (American Bar Associa-
tion Young Lawyers Division), http://www.
americanbar.org, accessed April 30, 2014; 
Andrea Davis, “EEOC Goes CSI,” Em-
ployee Beneﬁ t News, April 15, 2013, pp. 8, 
10; Lydell C. Bridgeford, “Q&A: Key Take-
aways from EEOC’s Strategic Enforcement 
Plan,” Bloomberg BNA Labor & Employ-
ment Blog, January 7, 2013, http://www.
bna.com; Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission, “EEOC Approves Strategic 
Enforcement Plan,” news release, Decem-
ber 18, 2012, http://www1.eeoc.gov.
Being Strategic about EEO
HR How To
Many individuals fi le more than one type of charge (for instance, both race discrimi-
nation and retaliation), so the total number of complaints fi led with the EEOC is less 
than the total of the amounts in each category.
After the EEOC receives a charge of discrimination, it has 60 days to investigate 
the complaint. If the EEOC either does not believe the complaint to be valid or fails 
to complete the investigation within 60 days, the individual has the right to sue in 
federal court. If the EEOC determines that discrimination has taken place, its repre-
sentatives will attempt to work with the individual and the employer to try to achieve 
a reconciliation without a lawsuit. Sometimes the EEOC enters into a consent decree 
with the discriminating organization. This decree is an agreement between the agency 
and the organization that the organization will cease certain discriminatory practices 
and possibly institute additional affi rmative-action practices to rectify its history of 
discrimination. A settlement with the EEOC can be costly, including such remedies as 
back pay, reinstatement of the employee, and promotions.
If the attempt at a settlement fails, the EEOC has two options. It may issue a “right 
to sue” letter to the alleged victim. This letter certifi es that the agency has investigated 
the victim’s allegations and found them to be valid. The EEOC’s other option, which 
it uses less often, is to aid the alleged victim in bringing suit in federal court.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 75
The EEOC also monitors organizations’ hiring practices. Each year organiza-
tions that are government contractors or subcontractors or have 100 or more em-
ployees must fi le an Employer Information Report (EEO-1) with the EEOC. The 
EEO-1 report is an online questionnaire requesting the number of employees in 
each job category (such as managers, professionals, and laborers), broken down by 
their status as male or female, Hispanic or non-Hispanic, and members of various 
racial groups. The EEOC analyzes those reports to identify patterns of discrimina-
tion, which the agency can then attack through class-action lawsuits. Employers 
must display EEOC posters detailing employment rights. These posters must be in 
prominent and accessible locations—for example, in a company’s cafeteria or near its 
time clock. Also, employers should retain copies of documents related to employ-
ment decisions—recruitment letters, announcements of jobs, completed job applica-
tions, selections for training, and so on. Employers must keep these records for at 
least six months or until a complaint is resolved, whichever is later.
Besides resolving complaints and suing alleged violators, the EEOC issues guide-
lines designed to help employers determine when their decisions violate the laws en-
forced by the EEOC. These guidelines are not laws themselves. However, the courts 
give great consideration to them when hearing employment discrimination cases. 
For example, the Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures is a set 
of guidelines issued by the EEOC and other government agencies. The guidelines 
identify ways an organization should develop and administer its system for selecting 
employees so as not to violate Title VII. The courts often refer to the Uniform Guide-
lines to determine whether a company has engaged in discriminatory conduct. Simi-
larly, in the Federal Register, the EEOC has published guidelines providing details about 
what the agency will consider illegal and legal in the treatment of disabled individuals 
under the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP)
The Ofﬁ ce of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) is the agency 
responsible for enforcing the executive orders that cover companies doing business 
with the federal government. As we stated earlier in the chapter, businesses with con-
tracts for more than $50,000 may not discriminate in employment based on race, color, 
religion, national origin, or sex, and they must have a written affi rmative-action plan 
on fi le. This plan must include three basic components:
 1. Utilization analysis—A comparison of the race, sex, and ethnic composition of the 
employer’s workforce with that of the available labor supply. The percentages in 
the employer’s workforce should not be greatly lower than the percentages in the 
labor supply.
 2. Goals and timetables—The percentages of women and minorities the organization 
seeks to employ in each job group, and the dates by which the percentages are to 
be attained. These are meant to be more fl exible than quotas, requiring only that 
the employer have goals and be seeking to achieve the goals.
 3. Action steps—A plan for how the organization will meet its goals. Besides working 
toward its goals for hiring women and minorities, the company must take affi rma-
tive steps toward hiring Vietnam veterans and individuals with disabilities.
Each year, the OFCCP audits government contractors to ensure they are actively pur-
suing the goals in their plans. The OFCCP examines the plan and conducts on-site visits 
to examine how individual employees perceive the company’s affi rmative-action policies. 
EEO-1 Report
The EEOC’s Employer In-
formation Report, which 
counts employees sorted 
by job category, sex, eth-
nicity, and race.
Uniform Guidelines on 
 Employee Selection 
Procedures
Guidelines issued by the 
EEOC and other agen-
cies to identify how an 
organization should 
develop and administer 
its system for selecting 
employees so as not to 
violate antidiscrimination 
laws.
Ofﬁ ce of Federal 
 Contract Compliance 
Programs (OFCCP)
The agency respon-
sible for enforcing the 
executive orders that 
cover companies doing 
business with the federal 
government.

76 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
If the agency fi nds that a contractor or subcontractor is not complying with the require-
ments, it has several options. It may notify the EEOC (if there is evidence of a violation 
of Title VII), advise the Department of Justice to begin criminal proceedings, request 
that the Secretary of Labor cancel or suspend any current contracts with the company, 
and forbid the fi rm from bidding on future contracts. For a company that depends on the 
federal government for a sizable share of its business, that last penalty is severe.
Businesses’ Role in Providing for Equal 
Employment Opportunity
Rare is the business owner or manager who wants to wait for the government to iden-
tify that the business has failed to provide for equal employment opportunity. Instead, 
out of motives ranging from concern for fairness to the desire to avoid costly lawsuits 
and settlements, most companies recognize the importance of complying with these 
laws. Often, management depends on the expertise of human resource professionals 
to help in identifying how to comply. These professionals can help organizations take 
steps to avoid discrimination and provide reasonable accommodation.
Avoiding Discrimination
How would you know if you had been discriminated against? Decisions about human 
resources are so complex that discrimination is often diffi cult to identify and prove. 
However, legal scholars and court rulings have arrived at some ways to show evidence 
of discrimination.
Disparate Treatment One potential sign of discrimination is disparate 
treatment— differing treatment of individuals, where the differences are based on the 
individuals’ race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability status. For ex-
ample, disparate treatment would include hiring or promoting one person over an 
equally qualifi ed person because of the individual’s race. Or suppose a company fails to 
hire women with school-age children (claiming the women will be frequently absent) 
but hires men with school-age children. In that situation, the women are victims of 
disparate treatment, because they are being treated differently based on their sex. To 
sustain a claim of discrimination based on disparate treatment, the women would have 
to prove that the employer intended to discriminate.
To avoid disparate treatment, companies can evaluate the questions and investi-
gations they use in making employment decisions. These should be applied equally. 
For example, if the company investigates conviction records of job applicants, it 
should investigate them for all applicants, not just for applicants from certain ra-
cial groups. Companies may want to avoid some types of questions altogether. For 
example, questions about marital status can cause problems, because interviewers 
may unfairly make different assumptions about men and women. (Common ste-
reotypes about women have been that a married woman is less fl exible or more 
likely to get pregnant than a single woman, in contrast to the assumption that a 
married man is more stable and committed to his work.)
Evaluating interview questions and decision criteria to make sure they are job re-
lated is especially important given that bias is not always intentional or even conscious. 
 Researchers have conducted studies fi nding differences between what people say about 
how they evaluate others and how people actually act on their attitudes. Duke Uni-
versity business professor Ashleigh Shelby Rosette has found various ways to uncover 
LO 3-4 Describe ways 
employers can avoid 
illegal discrimination 
and provide reasonable 
accommodation.
Disparate Treatment
Differing treatment of 
individuals, where the 
differences are based 
on the individuals’ race, 
color, religion, sex, 
national origin, age, or 
disability status.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 77
how individuals evaluate the performance of others.10 In a recent study, she and col-
leagues compared the way sports reporters interpreted the performance of college 
 quarterbacks—the leaders of football teams. The researchers found that when teams 
with a white quarterback performed well, the commentators more often gave credit to 
the intelligence of the quarterback. When the winning teams had a black quarterback, 
the announcers were more likely to praise the athletic strengths of the quarterback. 
When teams with a black quarterback lost, the announcers blamed the quarterback’s 
decision making. In prior research, Rosette has found similar patterns in commentary 
about the leadership of corporations. In describing successful companies led by black 
managers, analysts more often credit the managers for their good sense of humor or 
speaking ability or even point to a favorable market rather than crediting the leaders 
for their intelligence. Notice that the pattern is not to say people consciously think 
the black leaders lack intelligence; rather, the association between the leader and intel-
ligence simply is not made. These results suggest that even when we doubt we have 
biases, it may be helpful to use decision-making tools that keep the focus on the most 
important criteria.
Is disparate treatment ever legal? The courts have held that in some situations, a 
factor such as sex or religion may be a bona ﬁ de occupational qualiﬁ cation 
(BFOQ), that is, a necessary (not merely preferred) qualifi cation for performing a job. 
A typical example is a job that includes handing out towels in a locker room. Requiring 
that employees who perform this job in the women’s locker room be female is a BFOQ. 
However, it is very diffi cult to think of many jobs where criteria such as sex and reli-
gion are BFOQs. In a widely publicized case from the 1990s, Johnson Controls, a 
manufacturer of car batteries, instituted a “fetal protection” policy that excluded 
women of childbearing age from jobs that would expose them to lead, which can cause 
birth defects. Johnson Controls argued that the policy was intended to provide a safe 
work place and that sex was a BFOQ for jobs that involved exposure to lead. However, 
the Supreme Court disagreed, ruling that BFOQs are limited to policies directly re-
lated to a worker’s ability to do the job.11
Disparate Impact 
Another way to assess potential discrimination is by iden-
tifying  disparate impact—a condition in which employment practices are seem-
ingly neutral yet disproportionately exclude a protected group from employment 
opportunities. In other words, the company’s employment practices lack obvious 
discriminatory content, but they affect one group differently than others. Exam-
ples of employment practices that might result in disparate impact include pay, 
hiring, promotions, or training. In the area of hiring, for example, many companies 
encourage their employees to refer friends and family members for open positions. 
These referrals can produce a pool of well-qualifi ed candidates who would be a 
good fi t with the organization’s culture and highly motivated to work with people 
they already know. However, given people’s tendency to associate with others like 
themselves, this practice also can have an unintentional disparate impact on groups 
not already well represented at the employer. Organizations that encourage em-
ployee referrals therefore should combine the program with other kinds of recruit-
ment and make sure that every group in the organization is equally encouraged to 
participate in the referral program.12 For another example of disparate impact, see 
“HRM Social.” 
A commonly used test of disparate impact is the four-ﬁ fths rule, which fi nds evi-
dence of potential discrimination if the hiring rate for a minority group is less than 
four-fi fths the hiring rate for the majority group. Keep in mind that this rule of thumb 
Bona Fide Occupational 
Qualiﬁ cation (BFOQ)
A necessary (not merely 
preferred) qualiﬁ cation 
for performing a job.
Disparate Impact
A condition in which 
employment practices 
are seemingly neutral 
yet disproportionately 
exclude a protected 
group from employment 
opportunities.
Four-Fifths Rule
Rule of thumb that pro-
vides (or shows) evidence 
of potential discrimination 
if an organization’s hiring 
rate for a minority group 
is less than four-ﬁ fths the 
hiring rate for the majority 
group.

78
compares rates of hiring, not numbers of employees hired. Figure 3.4 illustrates how to 
apply the four-fi fths rule.
If the four-fi fths rule is not satisfi ed, it provides evidence of potential discrimination. 
To avoid declarations of practicing illegally, an organization must show that the disparate 
impact caused by the practice is based on a “business necessity.” This is accomplished by 
showing that the employment practice is related to a legitimate business need or goal. 
Of course, it is ultimately up to the court to decide if the evidence provided by the orga-
nization shows a real business necessity or is illegal. The court will also consider if other 
practices could have been used that would have met the business need or goal but not 
resulted in discrimination.
An important distinction between disparate treatment and disparate impact is 
the role of the employer’s intent. Proving disparate treatment in court requires 
showing that the employer intended the disparate treatment, but a plaintiff need 
not show intent in the case of disparate impact. It is enough to show that the result 
of the treatment was unequal. For example, the requirements for some jobs, such 
as fi refi ghters or pilots, have sometimes included a minimum height. Although the 
intent may be to identify people who can perform the jobs, an unintended result 
may be disparate impact on groups that are shorter than average. Women tend to 
At many organizations, the people 
who make hiring decisions conduct 
an online search of social media to 
learn more about candidates. The 
objective is to gain greater insight 
into people’s character and spot red 
fl ags that a person might behave 
unprofessionally. However, some 
recent research at Carnegie Mellon 
University suggests that screen-
ing candidates with social media 
contributes to discriminatory hiring 
decisions.
The study was an experiment in 
which the researchers created fi c-
tional résumés and social-media 
profi les and sent the résumés to 
U.S. businesses that had advertised 
job openings. All the résumés listed 
the same qualifi cations under dif-
ferent names, but the social media 
hinted that applicants were either 
Christian or Muslim or that they 
were either gay or straight. The 
companies were more likely to call 
the applicants with the Christian-
sounding profi les than the ones 
who seemed to be Muslim. Broken 
down geographically, the difference 
was statistically signifi cant in some 
states. The researchers did not fi nd 
a difference in response rates re-
lated to sexual orientation.
The Equal Employment Oppor-
tunity Commission has recognized 
concerns about whether use of 
social media promotes discrimi-
natory employment decisions. It 
recently held a meeting to gather 
information about the issue. Pan-
elists described the need for 
 caution—that employers must be 
sure the information they gather 
is related to job qualifi cations. 
They also suggested that employ-
ers consider using a third-party 
company to conduct background 
checks on social media. That 
agency would report only the job-
related information obtained from 
the background check and omit 
protected information, such as an 
employee’s religion, health, and 
pregnancy status.
Questions
 1. Explain how the Carnegie Mellon 
study is an example of disparate 
impact.
 2. For the employee characteristics 
protected by EEO laws, which 
could you avoid revealing on a 
social-media career site such 
as LinkedIn? Which would be 
diffi cult or impossible to avoid 
disclosing?
Sources: Jon Hyman, “EEOC Holds Pub-
lic Meeting on Social Media in the Work-
place,” Workforce, March 13, 2014, http://
www.workforce.com; Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission, “Social Media 
Is Part of Today’s Workplace but Its Use 
May Raise Employment Discrimination 
Concerns,” news release, March 12, 2014, 
http://www1.eeoc.gov; Jennifer Valentino-
DeVries, “Bosses May Use Social Media 
to Discriminate against Job Seekers,” Wall 
Street Journal, November 20, 2013, http://
online.wsj.com.
The Discrimination Risk of Using Social Media in Hiring
HRM Social

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 79
be shorter than men, and people of Asian ancestry tend to be shorter than people 
of European ancestry.
One way employers can avoid disparate impact is to be sure that employment 
decisions are really based on relevant, valid measurements. If a job requires a certain 
amount of strength and stamina, the employer would want measures of strength and 
stamina, not simply individuals’ height and weight. The latter numbers are easier 
to obtain but more likely to result in charges of discrimination. Assessing validity 
of a measure can be a highly technical exercise requiring the use of statistics. The 
essence of such an assessment is to show that test scores or other measurements are 
signifi cantly related to job performance. Some employers are also distancing them-
selves from information that could be seen as producing a disparate impact. For ex-
ample, many employers are investigating candidates by looking up their social-media 
profi les. This raises the possibility that candidates for hiring or promotion could say 
the company passes them over because of information revealed about, say, their re-
ligion or ethnic background. Therefore, some companies hire an outside researcher 
to check profi les and report only information related to the person’s job-related 
qualifi cations.13
Many employers also address the challenge of disparate impact by analyzing their 
pay data to look for patterns that could signal unintended discrimination. If they fi nd 
such patterns, they face diffi cult decisions about how to correct any inequities. An 
obvious but possibly expensive option is to increase the lower-paid employees’ pay so 
it is comparable to pay for the higher-paid group. If these pay increases are diffi cult to 
afford, the employer could phase in the change gradually. Another way to handle the 
issue is to keep detailed performance records, because they may explain any pay dif-
ferences. Finally, to make a pay gap less likely in the future, employers can ensure that 
lower-paid employees are getting enough training, experience, and support to reach 
their full potential and earn raises.14
Figure 3.4
Applying the Four-Fifths 
Rule

80
EEO Policy Employers can also avoid discrimination and defend against claims of 
discrimination by establishing and enforcing an EEO policy. The policy should defi ne 
and prohibit unlawful behaviors, as well as provide procedures for making and investi-
gating complaints. The policy also should require that employees at all levels engage in 
fair conduct and respectful language. Derogatory language can support a court claim 
of discrimination.
Afﬁ rmative Action and Reverse Discrimination 
In the search for ways 
to avoid discrimination, some organizations have used affi rmative-action pro-
grams, usually to increase the representation of minorities. In its original form, 
affi rmative action was meant as taking extra effort to attract and retain minority 
employees. These efforts have included extensively recruiting minority candidates 
on college campuses, advertising in minority-oriented publications, and providing 
educational and training opportunities to minorities. Such efforts have helped to 
increase diversity among entry-level employees. Although as the “HR Oops!” box 
describes, other efforts are needed to promote diversity at the top. Over the years, 
however, many organizations have resorted to quotas, or numerical goals for the 
proportion of certain minority groups, to ensure that their workforce mirrors the 
proportions of the labor market. Sometimes these organizations act voluntarily; in 
other cases, the quotas are imposed by the courts or the EEOC.
Whatever the reasons for these hiring programs, by increasing the proportion of 
minority or female candidates hired or promoted, they necessarily reduce the propor-
tion of white or male candidates hired or promoted. In many cases, white and/or male 
At the biggest U.S. companies, 
evidence shows increasing levels 
of diversity among nonmanagement 
employees. But when researchers 
measure the percentage of women 
and minorities at each level of the 
organization, they fi nd less and 
less diversity as they move up the 
hierarchy. In other words, the tal-
ent pipeline is leaking women and 
minorities.
One reason may be that al-
though companies say they want 
to promote diversity and inclu-
sion, they do not actually reward 
managers for their performance 
in this area. According to a poll 
of executives by Korn Ferry, a re-
cruiting agency, 96% agree that 
“having a diverse and inclusive 
workforce can improve employee 
engagement and business per-
formance.” Almost three-quarters 
said their company has a strategy 
for promoting diversity and inclu-
sion. However, only about half said 
their performance appraisals mea-
sure how well they promote diver-
sity. Less than one-fourth said any 
part of their bonus pay is tied to 
performance on diversity.
Learning to work with people 
who are different from oneself can 
take extra energy and insight. Ex-
ecutives are under daily pressure 
to deliver results. If they are not re-
warded for helping diverse employ-
ees navigate their career paths—or 
punished for failing to do so—they 
might well consider that promoting 
employees like themselves is the 
path of least resistance.
Questions
 1. How might a bonus related 
to diversity affect the ways 
executives promote, train, and 
develop their employees?
 2. What issues of fairness would 
you need to consider in tying 
part of an executive’s bonus to 
performance on diversity?
Sources: Dennis McCafferty, “How 
Diversity Delivers on ROI, Employee 
Engagement,” CIO Insight, December 
3, 2013, http://www.cioinsight.com; 
 Andrew McIlvaine, “Engaging the C-
Suite,” HRE Online, November 20, 
2013, http://www.hreonline.com; Anne 
Fisher, “Could Bonuses Lead to More 
Diversity at the Top?” Fortune, October 
30, 2013, http://management.fortune.
cnn.com.
Lack of Rewards May Explain “Leaky Pipeline”
HR Oops!

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 81
individuals have fought against affi rmative action and quotas, alleging what is called 
reverse discrimination. In other words, the organizations are allegedly discriminating 
against white males by preferring women and minorities. Affi rmative action remains 
controversial in the United States. Surveys have found that Americans are least likely 
to favor affi rmative action when programs use quotas.15
Besides going beyond EEO laws to actively recruit women and minorities, some 
companies go beyond the USERRA’s requirement to reemploy workers returning 
from military service. These companies actively seek returning veterans to hire. In 
doing so, they are addressing a pressing need in U.S. society. Recent fi gures show that 
the unemployment rate for veterans of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan was recently 
9%, which is higher than the overall U.S. rate.16
Providing Reasonable Accommodation
Especially in situations involving religion and individuals with disabilities, equal em-
ployment opportunity may require that an employer make reasonable 
 accommodation. In employment law, this term refers to an employer’s obligation to 
do something to enable an otherwise qualifi ed person to perform a job. Accommoda-
tions for an employee’s religion often involve decisions about what kinds of clothing to 
permit or require. Imperial Security ran afoul of discrimination laws when it would not 
allow a Muslim security guard to wear a khimar, a covering for her hair, ears, and neck. 
When the employee arrived for her fi rst day on the job, she was asked to remove the 
khimar. When she said she couldn’t because her religion required it, the company fi red 
her. In contrast, Belk, a retailer, requested that an employee wear a Santa hat and holi-
day apron during the weeks leading up to Christmas. The employee, a Jehovah’s Wit-
ness, explained that her religion does not permit her to celebrate holidays, so she 
would not wear the items. Her company also fi red her for not complying with its dress 
requirements. In both cases, the EEOC fi led a lawsuit against the employer and even-
tually settled for tens of thousands of dollars.17
In the context of religion, this principle recognizes that for some individuals, reli-
gious observations and practices may present a confl ict with work duties, dress codes, 
or company practices. For example, some religions require head coverings, or individ-
uals might need time off to observe the sabbath or other holy days, when the company 
might have them scheduled to work. When the employee has a legitimate religious 
belief requiring accommodation, the employee should demonstrate this need to the 
employer. Assuming that it would not present an undue hardship, employers are re-
quired to accommodate such religious practices. They may have to adjust schedules so 
that employees do not have to work on days when their religion forbids it, or they may 
have to alter dress or grooming requirements.
For employees with disabilities, reasonable accommodations also vary according to 
the individuals’ needs. As shown in Figure 3.5, employers may restructure jobs, make 
facilities in the workplace more accessible, modify equipment, or reassign an employee 
to a job that the person can perform. In some situations, a disabled individual may 
provide his or her own accommodation, which the employer allows, as in the case of a 
blind worker who brings a guide dog to work.
If accommodating a disability would require signifi cant expense or diffi culty, how-
ever, the employer may be exempt from the reasonable accommodation requirement 
(although the employer may have to defend this position in court). An accommodation 
is considered “reasonable” if it does not impose an undue hardship on the employer, 
such as an expense that is large in relation to a company’s resources.
Reasonable 
Accommodation
An employer’s obligation 
to do something to en-
able an otherwise quali-
ﬁ ed person to perform 
a job.

82 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Preventing Sexual Harassment
Based on Title VII’s prohibition of sex discrimination, the EEOC defi nes sexual ha-
rassment of employees as unlawful employment discrimination. Sexual harassment 
refers to unwelcome sexual advances. The EEOC has defi ned the types of behavior 
and the situations under which this behavior constitutes sexual harassment:
Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical 
contact of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when
 
1. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition 
of an individual’s employment,
 
2. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for 
employment decisions affecting such individual, or
 
3. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an indi-
vidual’s work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working 
environment.18
Under these guidelines, preventing sexual discrimination includes managing the 
workplace in a way that does not permit anybody to threaten or intimidate employees 
through sexual behavior.
LO 3-5 Deﬁ ne sexual 
harassment, and tell how 
employers can eliminate 
or minimize it
Sexual Harassment
Unwelcome sexual 
 advances as deﬁ ned by 
the EEOC.
Figure 3.5
Examples of Reasonable Accommodations under the ADA
Making facilities
accessible
Modifying
work schedules
Acquiring or modifying
equipment
Modifying exams
or training programs
Providing
qualiﬁed
readers or
interpreters
Note: Reasonable accommodations do not include hiring an unqualifi ed person, lowering quality standards, or compromising co-workers’ safety.
Source: Based on Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “The ADA: Your Responsibilities as an Employer,” modifi ed August 1, 2008, www
.eeoc.gov.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 83
In general, the most obvious examples of sexual harassment involve quid pro quo 
harassment, meaning that a person makes a benefi t (or punishment) contingent on an 
employee’s submitting to (or rejecting) sexual advances. For example, a manager who 
promises a raise to an employee who will participate in sexual activities is engaging in 
quid pro quo harassment. Likewise, it would be sexual harassment to threaten to reas-
sign someone to a less-desirable job if that person refuses sexual favors.
A more subtle, and possibly more pervasive, form of sexual harassment is to create 
or permit a “hostile working environment.” This occurs when someone’s behavior in 
the workplace creates an environment in which it is diffi cult for someone of a particular 
sex to work. Common complaints in sexual harassment lawsuits include claims that ha-
rassers ran their fi ngers through the plaintiffs’ hair, made suggestive remarks, touched 
intimate body parts, posted pictures with sexual content in the workplace, and used 
sexually explicit language or told sex-related jokes. The reason that these behaviors are 
considered discrimination is that they treat individuals differently based on their sex.
Although a large majority of sexual harassment complaints received by the EEOC 
involve women being harassed by men, a growing share of sexual harassment claims 
have been fi led by men. Some of the men claimed that they were harassed by women, 
but same-sex harassment also occurs and is illegal. In one case, a teenager working at 
McDonald’s eventually overcame his embarrassment and reported that a male man-
ager was making sexual comments and had started grabbing him. Three other employ-
ees also came forward and fi led a complaint with the EEOC. The restaurant settled the 
lawsuit for $90,000.19
To ensure a workplace free from sexual harassment, organizations can follow some 
important steps. First, the organization can develop a policy statement making it very 
clear that sexual harassment will not be tolerated in the workplace. Second, all em-
ployees, new and old, can be trained to identify inappropriate workplace behavior. In 
addition, the organization can develop a mechanism for reporting sexual harassment 
in a way that encourages people to speak out. Finally, management can prepare to act 
promptly to discipline those who engage in sexual harassment, as well as to protect the 
victims of sexual harassment.
Valuing Diversity
As we mentioned in Chapter 2, the United States is a diverse nation, and becoming 
more so. In addition, many U.S. companies have customers and operations in more 
than one country. Managers differ in how they approach the challenges related to this 
diversity. Some defi ne a diverse workforce as a competitive advantage that brings them 
a wider pool of talent and greater insight into the needs and behaviors of their diverse 
customers. These organizations say they have a policy of valuing diversity.
The practice of valuing diversity has no single form; it is not written into law or 
business theory. Organizations that value diversity may practice some form of affi rma-
tive action, discussed earlier. They may have policies stating their value of understand-
ing and respecting differences. Organizations may try to hire, reward, and promote 
employees who demonstrate respect for others. They may sponsor training programs 
designed to teach employees about differences among groups. Whatever their form, 
these efforts are intended to make each individual feel respected. Also, these actions 
can support equal employment opportunity by cultivating an environment in which 
individuals feel welcome and able to do their best.
Valuing diversity, especially in support of an organization’s mission and strat-
egy, need not be limited to the categories protected by law. For example, many 

84 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
organizations see workers struggling to meet the demands of family and career, so 
they provide family-friendly benefi ts and policies, as described in Chapter 14. Man-
agers and human resource professionals also are concerned about learning how to 
treat transgender employees respectfully and appropriately. Transgender individuals 
who are transitioning to the opposite sex would typically change their names. This 
change involves administrative decisions for a human resource department. Some of 
these—for example, changing e-mail addresses and business cards—are a simple mat-
ter of calling employees by the names they wish to use. Typically, organizations already 
do this when, for example, Rebecca Jones wants to be known as Becky or Paul John 
Smith wants to be known as P. J. If company policies are too rigid to allow this kind of 
personal decision, the needs of the transgender employee may prompt a review of the 
policies. Other aspects of the change must meet legal requirements; for example, the 
name on tax documents must match the name on the employee’s Social Security card, 
so changing those documents must wait for a legal name change. Even so, employers 
can respect diversity by demanding no more documentation for name changes in this 
situation than in other types of name changes (for example, for a woman who wishes 
to change her name after getting married).20
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH Act)
Like equal employment opportunity, the protection of employee safety and health is 
regulated by the government. Through the 1960s, workplace safety was primarily an 
issue between workers and employers. By 1970, however, roughly 15,000 work-related 
fatalities occurred every year. That year, Congress enacted the Occupational Safety 
and Health Act (OSH Act), the most comprehensive U.S. law regarding worker 
safety. The OSH Act authorized the federal government to establish and enforce 
LO 3-6 Explain employ-
ers’ duties under the 
Occupational Safety and 
Health Act
Occupational Safety and 
Health Act (OSH Act)
U.S. law authorizing the 
federal government to 
establish and enforce 
occupational safety and 
health standards for all 
places of employment 
engaging in interstate 
commerce.
Organizations that value diversity may try to hire, reward, and promote employees who demonstrate respect for others.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 85
occupational safety and health standards for all places of employment engaging in in-
terstate commerce.
The OSH Act divided enforcement responsibilities between the Department 
of  Labor and the Department of Health. Under the Department of Labor, the 
 Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is responsible for in-
specting employers, applying safety and health standards, and levying fi nes for viola-
tion. The Department of Health is responsible for conducting research to determine 
the criteria for specifi c operations or occupations and for training employers to com-
ply with the act. Much of the research is conducted by the National Institute for Oc-
cupational Safety and Health (NIOSH).
General and Specific Duties
The main provision of the OSH Act states that each employer has a general duty to 
furnish each employee a place of employment free from recognized hazards that cause 
or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm. This is called the act’s general-duty 
clause. Employers also must keep records of work-related injuries and illnesses and 
post an annual summary of these records from February 1 to April 30 in the following 
year. Figure 3.6 shows a sample of OSHA’s Form 300A, the annual summary that must 
be posted, even if no injuries or illnesses occurred.
The act also grants specifi c rights; for example, employees have the right to:
• Request an inspection
• Have a representative present at an inspection
• Have dangerous substances identifi ed
•  Be promptly informed about exposure to hazards and be given 
access to accurate records regarding exposure
• Have employer violations posted at the work site
Although OSHA regulations have a (sometimes justifi able) repu-
tation for being complex, a company can get started in meet-
ing these requirements by visiting OSHA’s website (www.osha
.gov) and looking up resources such as the agency’s Small Busi-
ness Handbook and its step-by-step guide called “Compliance As-
sistance Quick Start.”
The Department of Labor recognizes many specifi c types 
of hazards, and employers must comply with all the occupa-
tional safety and health standards published by NIOSH. One 
area of concern is the illnesses and injuries experienced by 
emergency response workers who are putting aside concern 
for themselves as they aid victims of a disaster. The General 
Accounting Offi ce and Rand Corporation noted that the 
health of workers responding to the World Trade Center at-
tacks in 2001 was not suffi ciently addressed. Despite attempts 
to learn from the experience, problems occurred again fol-
lowing Hurricane Katrina and the Deepwater Horizon oil spill 
in the Gulf of Mexico. In an effort to improve planning for 
how to monitor the health and safety of emergency response 
workers, NIOSH partnered with other federal agencies 
to develop a set of guidelines for protecting these workers. 
The guidelines include efforts ahead of emergencies, such as 
Occupational 
Safety and Health 
 Administration (OSHA)
Labor Department 
agency responsible 
for inspecting employ-
ers, applying safety 
and health standards, 
and levying ﬁ nes for 
violation.
OSHA is responsible for inspecting businesses, apply-
ing safety and health standards, and levying fi nes for 
violations. OSHA regulations prohibit notifying employ-
ers of inspections in advance.

86
Figure 3.6
OSHA Form 300A: Summary of Work-Related Injuries and Illnesses
Source: Occupational Safety and Health Administration, “Injury & Illness Recordkeeping Forms,” accessed at https://www.osha.gov.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 87
health screening and safety training of emergency responders, as well as require-
ments for during and after deployment.21
Although NIOSH publishes numerous standards, it is impossible for regulators to 
anticipate all possible hazards that could occur in the workplace. Thus, the general-
duty clause requires employers to be constantly alert for potential sources of harm in 
the workplace (as defi ned by the standard of what a reasonably prudent person would 
do) and to correct them. Information about hazards can come from employees or 
from outside researchers. The union-backed Center for Construction Research and 
Training sponsored research into the safety problems related to constructing energy-
effi cient buildings. The study found that workers in “green” construction faced greater 
risks of falling and were exposed to new risks from building innovations such as roof-
top gardens and facilities for treating wastewater. Employers need to make these con-
struction sites safer through measures such as better fall protection and more use of 
prefabrication.22
Enforcement of the OSH Act
To enforce the OSH Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration conducts 
inspections. OSHA compliance offi cers typically arrive at a workplace unannounced; 
for obvious reasons, OSHA regulations prohibit notifying employers of inspections 
in advance. After presenting credentials, the compliance offi cer tells the employer the 
reasons for the inspection and describes, in a general way, the procedures necessary to 
conduct the investigation.
An OSHA inspection has four major components. First, the compliance offi cer re-
views the company’s records of deaths, injuries, and illnesses. OSHA requires this kind 
of record keeping at all fi rms with 11 or more full- or part-time employees. Next, the 
offi cer—typically accompanied by a representative of the employer (and perhaps by 
a representative of the employees)—conducts a “walkaround” tour of the employer’s 
premises. On this tour, the offi cer notes any conditions that may violate specifi c pub-
lished standards or the less specifi c general-duty clause. The third component of the 
inspection, employee interviews, may take place during the tour. At this time, anyone 
who is aware of a violation can bring it to the offi cer’s attention. Finally, in a closing 
conference, the compliance offi cer discusses the fi ndings with the employer, noting 
any violations.
Following an inspection, OSHA gives the employer a reasonable time frame within 
which to correct the violations identifi ed. If a violation could cause serious injury or 
death, the offi cer may seek a restraining order from a U.S. District Court. The re-
straining order compels the employer to correct the problem immediately. In addition, 
if an OSHA violation results in citations, the employer must post each citation in a 
prominent place near the location of the violation.
Besides correcting violations identifi ed during the inspection, employers may 
have to pay fi nes. These fi nes range from $20,000 for violations that result in 
death of an employee to $1,000 for less-serious violations. Other penalties include 
criminal charges for falsifying records that are subject to OSHA inspection or 
for warning an employer of an OSHA inspection without permission from the 
 Department of Labor.
Employee Rights and Responsibilities
Although the OSH Act makes employers responsible for protecting workers from 
safety and health hazards, employees have responsibilities as well. They have to follow 
LO 3-7 Describe the 
role of the Occupational 
Safety and Health 
Administration.

88 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
OSHA’s safety rules and regulations governing employee behavior. Employees also 
have a duty to report hazardous conditions.
Along with those responsibilities go certain rights. Employees may fi le a complaint 
and request an OSHA inspection of the workplace, and their employers may not retali-
ate against them for complaining. Employees also have a right to receive information 
about any hazardous chemicals they handle in the course of their jobs. OSHA’s Hazard 
Communication Standard and many states’ right-to-know laws require employers 
to provide employees with information about the health risks associated with exposure 
to substances considered hazardous. State right-to-know laws may be more stringent 
than federal standards, so organizations should obtain requirements from their state’s 
health and safety agency, as well as from OSHA.
Under OSHA’s Hazard Communication Standard, organizations must have 
 material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for chemicals that employees are exposed 
to. An MSDS is a form that details the hazards associated with a chemical; the 
chemical’s producer or importer is responsible for identifying these hazards and 
detailing them on the form. Employers must also ensure that all containers of haz-
ardous chemicals are labeled with information about the hazards, and they must 
train employees in safe handling of the chemicals. Offi ce workers who encounter a 
chemical infrequently (such as a secretary who occasionally changes the toner in a 
copier) are not covered by these requirements. In the case of a copy machine, the 
Hazard Communication Standard would apply to someone whose job involves 
spending a large part of the day servicing or operating such equipment.
Impact of the OSH Act
The OSH Act has unquestionably succeeded in raising the level of awareness of oc-
cupational safety. Yet legislation alone cannot solve all the problems of work site safety. 
Indeed, the rate of occupational illnesses more than doubled between 1985 and 1990, 
according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, while the rate of injuries rose by about 
8 percent. However, as depicted in Figure 3.7, the combined rate of injuries and ill-
nesses has showed a steady downward trend since then, and illnesses remain a small 
share of the total, at around 5%.23 A more troubling trend is an increase in the number 
of claims of retaliation against employees who report injuries. The data do not indi-
cate whether more employers are actually retaliating, however, or more employees are 
learning that the law forbids retaliation.24
Many industrial accidents are a product of unsafe behaviors, not unsafe working 
conditions. Because the act does not directly regulate employee behavior, little behavior 
change can be expected unless employees are convinced of the standards’ importance.25
Conforming to the law alone does not necessarily guarantee their employees will 
be safe, so many employers go beyond the letter of the law. In the next section we ex-
amine various kinds of employer-initiated safety awareness programs that comply with 
OSHA requirements and, in some cases, exceed them.
Employer-Sponsored Safety and Health Programs
Many employers establish safety awareness programs to go beyond mere compliance 
with the OSH Act and attempt to instill an emphasis on safety. The “Best Practices” 
box provides an example. A safety awareness program has three primary components: 
identifying and communicating hazards, reinforcing safe practices, and promoting 
safety internationally.
Right-to-Know Laws
State laws that require 
employers to provide 
employees with informa-
tion about the health 
risks associated with 
exposure to substances 
considered hazardous.
Material Safety Data 
Sheets (MSDSs)
Forms on which chemi-
cal manufacturers and 
importers identify 
the hazards of their 
chemicals.
LO 3-8 Discuss ways 
employers promote 
worker safety and health.

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 89
Figure 3.7
Rates of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
Incidences per 100 Full-Time Workers in Private Industry
2005
2004
2003
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Injuries and
Illnesses
Injuries and
Illnesses
Note: Data do not include fatal work-related injuries and illnesses.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employer-Reported Workplace Injuries and Illnesses, 2012,” news release, November 7, 2013, http://www.
bls.gov.
Identifying and Communicating Job Hazards
Employees, supervisors, and other knowledgeable sources need to sit down and 
discuss potential problems related to safety. One method for doing this is the job 
hazard analysis technique.26 With this technique, each job is broken down into 
basic elements, and each of these is rated for its potential for harm or injury. If 
there is agreement that some job element has high hazard potential, the group 
isolates the element and considers possible technological or behavior changes to 
reduce or eliminate the hazard. This method poses some special challenges for 
high-tech companies, where workers may be exposed to materials and conditions 
that are not yet well understood. An example is nanotechnology, which involves 
applications of extremely tiny products. Masks and other traditional protective 
equipment do not necessarily prevent nanoparticles from entering the body, and 
their impact on health is not known. Some exposures may be harmless, but re-
searchers are only beginning to learn their impact.27
Another means of isolating unsafe job elements is to study past accidents. The 
technic of operations review (TOR) is an analysis method for determining which 
specifi c element of a job led to a past accident.28 The fi rst step in a TOR analysis is to 
establish the facts surrounding the incident. To accomplish this, all members of the 
work group involved in the accident give their initial impressions of what happened. 
The group must then, through discussion, come to an agreement on the single, sys-
tematic failure that most likely contributed to the incident, as well as two or three 
major secondary factors that contributed to it.
McShane Construction Company combined job analysis with mobile comput-
ing technology when it signed on with Field ID to provide the software for its 
Job Hazard Analysis 
Technique
Safety promotion tech-
nique that involves 
breaking down a job into 
basic elements, then 
rating each element for 
its potential for harm or 
injury.
Technic of Operations 
Review (TOR)
Method of promoting 
safety by determining 
which speciﬁ c element 
of a job led to a past 
accident.

90
safety inspections. When safety inspectors visit construction sites, they use a mo-
bile device to scan a bar code or read a radio frequency identifi cation (RFID) tag 
on each piece of equipment. The code calls up a checklist of safety measures for 
that equipment, and the inspector simply checks off or scores the items one by 
one. The mobile device then transmits the inspection data to a Field ID database, 
where information can easily be retrieved if the company ever needs to study the 
cause of an accident.29
To communicate with employees about job hazards, managers should talk directly 
with their employees about safety. Memos also are important because the written com-
munication helps establish a “paper trail” that can later document a history of the em-
ployer’s concern regarding the job hazard. Posters, especially if placed near the hazard, 
serve as a constant reminder, reinforcing other messages.
Many of Morton Salt’s employees 
work in one of the most dangerous 
industries: mining. Even so, the com-
pany recently earned a spot on EHS 
Today magazine’s list of America’s 
safest companies. The honor was 
no accident. The company makes 
safety one of its sustainability goals 
and actively promotes employee in-
volvement in safe practices.
 Morton’s safety program in-
volves four main efforts. First, the 
company directs employees to 
report to a supervisor any “near 
misses,” or hazards that could 
cause an accident if ignored. Morton 
has learned that the more near-miss 
reports it receives (and responds 
to), the fewer accidents occur, so it 
strives for 750 reports each quarter.
 The second safety effort is an 
annual Safety Day held at each fa-
cility. Production stops so employ-
ees can participate in team building 
and safety training exercises, with a 
break for lunch hosted by top man-
agers. Third, Morton invites safety 
suggestions, which it posts online 
and distributes via e-mail. Prizes go 
to employees whose ideas are se-
lected as the best.
 Finally, the company partici-
pates in OSHA’s Voluntary Protec-
tion Program (VPP). OSHA approves 
an application to this program only 
if the company has demonstrated 
that it has established corporate-
level systems for managing health 
and safety, implements them effec-
tively, and uses control processes to 
evaluate each facility’s performance 
at maintaining worker safety and 
health. Many VPP-certifi ed organi-
zations are federal agencies; Morton 
was the seventh business to be cer-
tifi ed, and as of this writing, only fi ve 
businesses currently participate.
 While VPP certifi cation and a 
place on EHS Today’s list are cer-
tainly honors to appreciate, the real 
accomplishment is the well-being of 
Morton’s employees. Morton peri-
odically celebrates this accomplish-
ment with events for employees 
whose facilities have passed safety 
milestones. For example, the facil-
ity in Grand Saline, Texas, recently 
held a banquet to celebrate a mil-
lion work hours without an accident, 
and an event in Rittman, Ohio, cel-
ebrated that facility’s achievement 
of nine million accident-free hours.
Questions
 1. How does Morton Salt’s 
safety program surpass the 
requirements of the OSH Act?
 2. How might a human resource 
manager at Morton Salt 
support the company’s efforts 
to promote worker health and 
safety?
Sources: Morton Salt, “Sustainabil-
ity,” http://www.mortonsalt.com, ac-
cessed April 30, 2014; Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration, 
“Voluntary Protection Programs: VPP 
Corporate,” https://www.osha.gov, 
accessed April 30, 2014; “Morton Salt 
Honors Employees,” Grand Saline 
(TX) Sun, March 8, 2014, http://www.
grandsalinesun.com; “America’s Saf-
est Companies 2013 Protect Workers, 
Production and Property,” EHS Today, 
November 2013, pp. 35–43; “Mor-
ton Salt Achieves Prestigious OSHA 
Award,” Amboy Guardian, October 4, 
2013, http://www.amboyguardian.com; 
Morton Salt, “More than Nine Million 
Reasons to Celebrate at Morton Salt,” 
news release, December 13, 2011, 
http://www.mortonsalt.com.
Morton Salt’s Prize-Winning Safety Program
Best Practices

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 91
In communicating risk, managers should recognize that different groups of in-
dividuals may constitute different audiences. Safety trainer Michael Topf often 
encounters workplaces where employees speak more than one language. In those 
situations, Topf says, it is important to provide bilingual training and signs. But 
English skills alone do not guarantee that safety messages will be understood. Su-
pervisors and trainers need to use vocabulary and examples that employees will 
understand, and they need to ask for feedback in a culturally appropriate way. For 
example, in some cultures, employees will think it is improper to speak up if they 
see a problem. It is therefore important for managers to promote many opportu-
nities for communication.30 Human resource managers can support this effort by 
providing opportunities for supervisors to learn about the values and communica-
tion styles of the cultures represented at work.
Safety concerns and safety training needs also vary by age group. According to the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, injuries and illnesses requiring time off from work occurred 
at the highest rate among workers between the ages of 45 and 54; workers aged 55 to 
64 were the next highest group. However, patterns vary according to type of injury. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found the highest rates of falls lead-
ing to a doctor visit occurring among people older than 75, with the next highest rate 
being among teenagers. Thus, safety training needs to address the needs of all age 
groups. Older workers may have more appreciation of the need for safety, as they have 
experienced the impact of wear and tear on their bodies and perhaps have seen people 
injured on the job. Younger workers will expect training to be fast-paced and engag-
ing, and if possible, to incorporate technology. One trainer addressed the needs of 
multiple generations in a session on fall protection. The group reviewed a few slides of 
background information, then engaged in discussions of actual workplace conditions 
and planned how to protect workers. Finally, the group tried on the safety equipment 
required for their jobs.31
Reinforcing Safe Practices
To ensure safe behaviors, employers should not only defi ne how to work safely 
but reinforce the desired behavior. One common technique for reinforcing safe 
practices is implementing a safety incentive program to reward workers for their 
support of and commitment to safety goals. Such programs start by focusing on 
monthly or quarterly goals or by encouraging suggestions for improving safety. 
Possible goals might include good housekeeping practices, adherence to safety 
rules, and proper use of protective equipment. Later, the program expands to in-
clude more wide-ranging, long-term goals. Typically, the employer distributes 
prizes in highly public forums, such as company or department meetings. Surpris-
ingly, one of the most obvious ways to reinforce behavior often does not occur: 
when employees report unsafe conditions or behavior, the employer should take 
action to correct the problem. This response signals that the organization is seri-
ous when it says it values safety. In a recent survey of employees, most said their 
organization had a policy that encouraged reporting safety concerns, but many 
said they did not bother because they had come to expect a negative reaction or no 
response at all.32
Besides focusing on specifi c jobs, organizations can target particular types of inju-
ries or disabilities, especially those for which employees may be at risk. For example, 
Prevent Blindness America estimates that more than 2,000 eye injuries occur every 
day in occupational settings.33 Organizations can prevent such injuries through a 

92
Did You Know?
Every year, Liberty Mutual conducts 
research it calls the Workplace 
Safety Index. In 2011, the most re-
cent year for which data is available, 
serious work-related injuries cost 
employers more than $55 billion. 
The leading cause was overexer-
tion (for example, excessive lifting, 
pushing, carrying, or throwing), fol-
lowed by falls on the same level 
(rather than from a height, such as 
a ladder) and being struck by an ob-
ject or equipment.
Question
Think about your current job, 
your most recent job, or the job 
you would like to have. Which of 
the categories of injuries shown 
in the graph are most likely to 
occur on that job? (Don’t as-
sume injuries never occur in offi ce 
jobs!)
Sources: Liberty Mutual, “2013 Lib-
erty Mutual Workplace Safety Index,” 
http://www.libertymutualgroup.com, 
accessed April 29, 2014; Langdon 
Dement, “Employee Injuries Cost 
US Companies in Excess of a Billion 
Dollars a Week,” EHS Safety News 
America, March 14, 2014, http://
ehssafetynews.wordpress.com; Lib-
erty Mutual Research Institute for 
Safety, “Ten Leading Causes of Dis-
abling Workplace Injuries: 2013 Work-
place Safety Index,” From Research to 
Reality, Winter 2013–14, pp. 6–7.
Top 10 Causes of Workplace Injuries
4
2
0
6
8
10
12
14
16
Roadway incidents3
Falls on same level
Caught in or compressed
by equipment5
Repetitive motion4
d
Slip or trip without fall
2
0
Struck against object
Struck by object
Bodily reaction2
Falls to lower level
Overexertion1
10 Leading Causes of Workplace Injuries in 2011
Cost ($ billion)
1 Overexertion involving outside source includes 
  injuries related to lifting, pushing, pulling,
  holding, carrying, or throwing.
2 Other exertions or bodily reactions include
  injuries that result from bending, crawling,
  reaching, twisting, climbing, stepping,
  kneeling, sitting, standing, or walking.
3 Roadway incidents are those involving
  a motorized land vehicle.
5 Caught in or compressed by equipment
  includes objects as well as equipment.
4 Repetitive motions are those involving
  micro-tasks.
combination of job analysis, written policies, safety training, protective eyewear, re-
wards and sanctions for safe and unsafe behavior, and management support for the 
safety effort. Similar practices for preventing other types of injuries are available in 
trade publications, through the National Safety Council, and on the website of the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (www.osha.gov).

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 93
Promoting Safety Internationally
Given the increasing focus on international management, organizations also need to 
consider how to ensure the safety of their employees regardless of the nation in which 
they operate. Cultural differences may make this more diffi cult than it seems. For ex-
ample, a study examined the impact of one standardized corporationwide safety policy 
on employees in three different countries: the United States, France, and Argentina. 
The results of this study indicate that employees in the three countries interpreted the 
policy differently because of cultural differences. The individualistic, control-oriented 
culture of the United States stressed the role of top management in ensuring safety in a 
top-down fashion. However, this policy failed to work in Argentina, where the culture 
is more “collectivist” (emphasizing the group). Argentine employees tend to feel that 
safety is everyone’s joint concern, so the safety programs needed to be defi ned from the 
bottom of the organization up.34
Another challenge in promoting safety internationally is that laws, enforcement 
practices, and political climates vary from country to country. With the extensive use 
of offshoring, described in Chapter 2, many companies have operations in countries 
where labor standards are far less strict than U.S. standards. Managers and employees 
in these countries may not think the company is serious about protecting workers’ 
health and safety. In that case, strong communication and oversight will be necessary if 
the company intends to adhere to the ethical principle of valuing its foreign workers’ 
safety as much as the safety of its U.S. workers. 
Overseas experience also can provide insights for improving safety at home as well 
as abroad. Liberty Mutual’s Center for Injury Epidemiology (CIE) noticed that dur-
ing harvest season in Vietnam, people who worked both in agricultural and industrial 
jobs were injured at far higher rates than those who worked only in one position. The 
CIE applied that insight to the U.S. workforce and investigated accident rates among 
employees holding two jobs at the same time. The researchers found much higher 
accident rates for these workers, both on and off the job. Possible reasons include 
that they may be less experienced, under more stress, or more poorly trained than 
employees holding one job.35 Given that many employers today are hiring people to 
work part-time, they should consider that these workers may try to hold two jobs and 
be at greater risk of injury. Training programs and incentives should take that risk into 
account—for example, with more fl exible schedules for safety training.
THINKING ETHICALLY
IS DISCRIMINATION AGAINST THE 
UNEMPLOYED ETHICAL?
Imagine that your job includes identifying qualifi ed ap-
plicants to fi ll job openings at your company. As you 
compare two résumés, you see that the applicants’ 
experiences are similar, except that one applicant was 
working until a month ago, while the other’s last job 
ended a year ago. How will you choose between them?
Reports and some research suggest that some com-
panies are more likely to choose the candidate who was 
employed until recently. Some job advertisements have 
even specifi ed that the company will not consider the 
long-term unemployed. Practical thinking may be be-
hind the practice: if you assume that someone who has 
been out of work for a long time has been job hunt-
ing, you might suspect that other employers have found 
reasons not to hire him or her. It seems effi cient not 
to repeat the process of uncovering those problems, 
whatever they might be.
In most states, the practice is legal, despite some ef-
forts to pass laws against it. At the same time, however, 

94 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
SUMMARY
LO 3-1 Explain how the three branches of government 
regulate human resource management.
• The legislative branch develops laws such as those 
governing equal employment opportunity and 
worker safety and health.
• The executive branch establishes agencies such as 
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
and Occupational Safety and Health Administra-
tion to enforce the laws by publishing regulations, 
fi ling lawsuits, and performing other activities. 
The president may also issue executive orders, 
such as requirements for federal contractors.
• The judicial branch hears cases related to employ-
ment law and interprets the law.
LO 3-2 Summarize the major federal laws requiring 
equal employment opportunity.
• The Civil Rights Acts of 1866 and 1871 grant all 
persons equal property rights, contract rights, and 
the right to sue in federal court if they have been 
deprived of civil rights.
• The Equal Pay Act of 1963 requires equal pay for 
men and women who are doing work that is equal 
in terms of skill, effort, responsibility, and working 
conditions.
• Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits 
employment discrimination on the basis of race, 
color, religion, sex, or national origin.
• The Age Discrimination in Employment Act pro-
hibits employment discrimination against persons 
older than 40.
• The Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1973 requires 
that federal contractors engage in affi rmative ac-
tion in the employment of persons with disabilities.
• The Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Act of 
1974 requires affi rmative action in employment of 
veterans who served during the Vietnam War.
• The Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978 treats 
discrimination based on pregnancy-related condi-
tions as illegal sex discrimination.
• The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 re-
quires reasonable accommodations for qualifi ed 
workers with disabilities.
• The Civil Rights Act of 1991 provides for com-
pensatory and punitive damages in cases of 
discrimination.
• The Uniformed Services Employment and Re-
employment Rights Act of 1994 requires that 
it creates conditions that strike many people as unfair 
and even cruel to those who are already struggling. 
Following the severe recession of a few years ago, the 
short-term unemployment rate has returned to levels 
experienced before the recession. But for those out of 
work for at least 27 weeks, the unemployment rate is 
more than twice as high. Working-age men have been 
hit disproportionately hard, as job losses were severest 
in male-dominated industries, especially in jobs requir-
ing less than a college education. The share of men no 
longer even trying to fi nd jobs has been growing, which 
has implications for society as a whole.
In response to these concerns, volunteers with the 
Society for Human Resource Management have de-
veloped guidelines to encourage hiring policies that do 
not discriminate “based solely on their unemployment 
status.” The Obama administration urged businesses 
to pledge not to discriminate against the unemployed, 
and several hundred have signed the pledge, including 
Apple, Gap, General Motors, and Walt Disney Company.
Questions
 1. If an employer’s hiring policies give preference 
to those who are already employed, what is the 
impact on (1) the company’s performance; (2) work-
ers seeking jobs; and (3) the communities where a 
company operates? Based on the impact of these 
policies, would you say they are ethical? Why or 
why not?
 2. Apply the ethical value of fairness to these policies: 
is it fair to discriminate against the long-term unem-
ployed? Is it fair not to let employers choose employ-
ees with a track record of holding a job? What hiring 
policy best achieves fairness?
Sources: Lisa Guerin, “Discrimination against the Unem-
ployed,” Nolo Legal Topics, http://www.nolo.com, accessed 
April 29, 2014; Mark Peters and David Wessel, “More Men in 
Prime Working Ages Don’t Have Jobs,” Wall Street Journal, 
February 5, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Kathleen Hennessey, 
“CEOs Pledge Not to Discriminate against Long-Term Unem-
ployed,” Los Angeles Times, January 31, 2014, http://articles.
latimes.com; Bill Leonard, “Obama Urges Employers to Hire 
the Long-Term Unemployed,” HR News (Society for Human 
Resource Management), January 31, 2014, http://www.shrm.
org; Matthew Yglesias, “Statistical Discrimination against the 
Long-Term Unemployed,” Slate, April 23, 2013, http://www.
slate.com. 

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 95
employers reemploy service members who left 
jobs to fulfi ll military duties.
• The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act 
(GINA) of 2008 forbids employers from using ge-
netic information in making decisions related to 
the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment.
• Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009 allows employ-
ees to claim discriminatory compensation within a 
set time after receiving a discriminatory paycheck.
LO 3-3 Identify the federal agencies that enforce equal 
employment opportunity, and describe the role of each.
• The Equal Employment Opportunity Commis-
sion is responsible for enforcing most of the EEO 
laws, including Title VII and the Americans with 
Disabilities Act. It investigates and resolves com-
plaints, gathers information, and issues guidelines.
• The Offi ce of Federal Contract Compliance Pro-
cedures is responsible for enforcing executive or-
ders that call for affi rmative action by companies 
that do business with the federal government. It 
monitors affi rmative-action plans and takes ac-
tion against companies that fail to comply.
LO 3-4 Describe ways employers can avoid illegal discrim-
ination and provide reasonable accommodation.
• Employers can avoid discrimination by avoiding 
disparate treatment of job applicants and employ-
ees, as well as policies that result in disparate impact.
• Companies can develop and enforce an EEO pol-
icy coupled with policies and practices that dem-
onstrate a high value placed on diversity.
• Affi rmative action may correct past discrimination, 
but quota-based activities can result in charges of 
reverse discrimination.
• To provide reasonable accommodation, companies 
should recognize needs based on individuals’ reli-
gion or disabilities. Accommodations could include 
adjusting schedules or dress codes, making the 
workplace more accessible, or restructuring jobs.
LO 3-5 Defi ne sexual harassment, and tell how employ-
ers can eliminate or minimize it.
• Sexual harassment is unwelcome sexual advances 
and related behavior that makes submitting to the 
conduct a term of employment or the basis for 
employment decisions or that interferes with an 
individual’s work performance or creates a work en-
vironment that is intimidating, hostile, or offensive.
• Organizations can prevent sexual harassment by 
developing a policy that defi nes and forbids it, 
training employees to recognize and avoid this 
behavior, and providing a means for employees to 
complain and be protected.
LO 3-6 Explain employers’ duties under the Occupa-
tional Safety and Health Act.
• Under the Occupational Safety and Health Act, 
employers have a general duty to provide employ-
ees a place of employment free from recognized 
safety and health hazards.
• They must inform employees about hazardous 
substances.
• They must maintain and post records of accidents 
and illnesses.
• They must comply with NIOSH standards about 
specifi c occupational hazards.
LO 3-7 Describe the role of the Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration.
• The Occupational Safety and Health Administra-
tion publishes regulations and conducts inspections.
• If OSHA fi nds violations, it discusses them with 
the employer and monitors the employer’s re-
sponse in correcting the violation.
LO 3-8 Discuss ways employers promote worker safety 
and health.
• Besides complying with OSHA regulations, em-
ployers often establish safety awareness programs 
designed to instill an emphasis on safety.
• They may identify and communicate hazards 
through the job hazard analysis technique or the 
technic of operations review.
• They may adapt communications and training to 
the needs of different employees, such as differ-
ences in experience levels or cultural differences 
from one country to another.
• Employers may also establish incentive programs 
to reward safe behavior.
KEY TERMS
equal employment opportunity 
(EEO), 64
Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission (EEOC), 66
affi rmative action, 68
disability, 69
EEO-1 report, 75
Uniform Guidelines on Employee 
Selection Procedures, 75

96 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. What is the role of each branch of the federal gov-
ernment with regard to equal employment oppor-
tunity? (LO 3-1)
 2. For each of the following situations, identify one or 
more constitutional amendments, laws, or execu-
tive orders that might apply. (LO 3-2)
 
a.  A veteran of the Vietnam conflict experiences 
lower-back pain after sitting for extended peri-
ods of time. He has applied for promotion to 
a supervisory position that has traditionally 
involved spending most of the workday behind 
a desk.
 
b.  One of two female workers on a road construc-
tion crew complains to her supervisor that she 
feels uncomfortable during breaks, because the 
other employees routinely tell off-color jokes.
 
c.  A manager at an architectural firm receives a 
call from the local newspaper. The reporter 
wonders how the firm wishes to respond to 
calls from two of its employees alleging racial 
discrimination. About half of the firm’s employ-
ees (including all of its partners and most of its 
architects) are white. One of the firm’s clients is 
the federal government.
 3. For each situation in the preceding question, 
what actions, if any, should the organization take? 
(LO 3-4)
 4. The Americans with Disabilities Act requires that 
employers 
make 
reasonable 
accommodations 
for individuals with disabilities. How might this 
requirement affect law enforcement offi cers and 
fi refi ghters? (LO 3-4)
 5. To identify instances of sexual harassment, the 
courts may use a “reasonable woman” standard of 
what constitutes offensive behavior. This standard 
is based on the idea that women and men have dif-
ferent ideas of what behavior is appropriate. What 
are the implications of this distinction? Do you 
think this distinction is helpful or harmful? Why? 
(LO 3-5)
 6. Given that the “reasonable woman” standard re-
ferred to in Question 5 is based on women’s ideas 
of what is appropriate, how might an organization 
with mostly male employees identify and avoid be-
havior that could be found to be sexual harassment? 
(LO 3-5)
 7. What are an organization’s basic duties under the 
Occupational Safety and Health Act? (LO 3-6)
 8. OSHA penalties are aimed at employers, rather than 
employees. How does this affect employee safety? 
(LO 3-7)
 9. How can organizations motivate employees to pro-
mote safety and health in the workplace? (LO 3-8)
 10. For each of the following occupations, identify at 
least one possible hazard and at least one action 
employers could take to minimize the risk of an in-
jury or illness related to that hazard. (LO 3-8)
 
a. Worker in a fast-food restaurant
 
b. Computer programmer
 
c. Truck driver
 
d. House painter
Keeping Sprint’s Subcontractors Safe
Recently, a worker on a Sprint communication tower 
in North Carolina fell about 200 feet to his death after 
unsuccessfully trying to attach his safety harness to the 
tower. The same month, in Oregon, a worker at a Sprint 
tower was critically injured when the aerial lift he was 
in tipped over. A few months after that, a man working 
on a Sprint cell network installed on a water tower in 
Maryland fell 180 feet and died.
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY
Offi ce of Federal Contract 
Compliance Programs 
(OFCCP), 75
disparate treatment, 76
bona fi de occupational qualifi cation 
(BFOQ), 77
disparate impact, 77
four-fi fths rule, 77
reasonable accommodation, 81
sexual harassment, 82
Occupational Safety and Health 
Act (OSH Act), 84
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA), 85
right-to-know laws, 88
material safety data sheets 
(MSDSs), 88
job hazard analysis technique, 89
technic of operations review 
(TOR), 89

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 97
 Sadly, those incidents were not isolated but part of 
a larger pattern of accidents affecting communication 
tower workers. In 2008, after 18 tower workers were 
killed in accidents, the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration called this industry the most dangerous 
in the United States, because it had the highest rate of 
accidents. The industry is small, with only about 10,000 
workers. The rate dropped the following year but spiked 
again in 2013 as cell phone service providers pushed 
hard to upgrade their networks faster than the competi-
tion. Sprint, for example, has been engaged in an ambi-
tious program to upgrade all of its 38,000 towers. Of 
the 19 fatal accidents reported to OSHA, 17 involved 
towers for mobile-phone networks; 4 of these involved 
Sprint sites.
 OSHA responded by investigating the accidents 
and trying to change what it considers an ineffective ap-
proach to safety in the industry. The agency announced 
that as it studies accident data, it will identify which 
mobile networks were involved, regardless of whether 
the workers were employees or contractors. OSHA is 
concerned that because carriers usually line up contrac-
tors to work on their towers, company management is 
not invested enough in the workers’ safety. The agency 
sent all businesses in the industry a letter indicating 
they could be held accountable if they do not insist in 
their contracts that workers follow safe procedures. It 
also directed businesses to consider safety criteria in 
choosing contractors. In addition, OSHA assigned its 
employees to inspect all worksites they encounter in-
volving communication towers, because tower work is 
too short-term for problems to be caught with random 
inspections.
 Initial reports suggest that what pushed aside 
concern for safety was the industry’s ambitious drive 
to improve networks. Workers reportedly have been 
on the job for 12 to 16 hours at a time, rarely taking 
a day off to rest. Employees acknowledge that they 
are responsible for following safety rules, but some 
point out the diffi culty of taking all precautions while 
under pressure to work fast. Investigators have found 
evidence of poor safety training, improper equipment, 
and intense time pressure. OSHA inspections reveal 
that workers often are not properly protected from 
falling. The National Association of Tower Erectors 
(NATE), a trade association, shares OSHA’s concern. 
NATE has developed safety guidelines and checklists, 
which it encourages its members to use as part of cre-
ating a culture of safety. One NATE member, U.S. 
Cellular, has been requiring that all tower contractors 
be members of NATE, as a way to ensure they are well 
qualifi ed to operate safely.
 Sprint insists that safety is a top priority. The 
company says it requires contractors to have a written 
safety program and put someone in charge of safety at 
each worksite. Sprint has stepped up its efforts to en-
sure that workers, even those employed by contractors, 
are safe. The company hired PICS Auditing to review 
its contractors’ safety performance, including accident 
rates, training programs, and the content of their safety 
manuals.
Questions
 1. What responsibility do you think Sprint has to the 
employees of subcontractors working on its com-
munication towers? How well is it meeting that 
responsibility?
 2. Beyond the steps Sprint says it has taken, what else 
could it do to meet or exceed OSHA requirements to 
protect worker safety at its communication towers?
Sources: Liz Day, “Feds to Look Harder at Cell Carriers When Tower 
Climbers Die,” Frontline, April 1, 2014, http://www.pbs.org; David Mi-
chaels, letter to communication tower industry employers, Occupational 
Health and Safety Administration, February 10, 2014, https://www.osha.
gov; Glenn Bischoff, “It’s Been a Tough Year for Tower Safety,” Urgent 
Communications, September 19, 2013, http://urgentcomm.com; Phil Gold-
stein, “Spike in Cell Tower Worker Deaths Prompts Fresh Concern,” Fierce 
Wireless, August 22, 2013, http://www.fi ercewireless.com; Ryan Knutson, 
“A New Spate of Deaths in the Wireless Industry,” Wall Street Journal, 
August 21, 2013, http://online.wsj.com; Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, “Communication Towers,” Safety and Health Topics, 
https://www.osha.gov.
Walmart’s Struggle to Manage Diversity and Safety on a Grand Scale
Walmart drew national attention when it announced an 
initiative it calls the Veterans Welcome Home Commit-
ment. Under that policy, any veteran who has been hon-
orably discharged from the U.S. military and applies to 
work at Walmart within 12 months of being discharged 
is guaranteed a job, assuming he or she passes a drug test 
and background check. The company said it expected to 
hire more than 100,000 veterans over fi ve years under 
the program. Walmart U.S. chief executive Bill Simon 
pointed out that this serves a practical as well as patri-
otic purpose: “Veterans have a record of performance 
under pressure,” as well as being “quick learners” and 
“team players.”
For Walmart, hiring veterans is just one way it lives 
out its mission of “Making better possible.” That in-
cludes helping shoppers save money, but also enabling 
people to work in a fair and honest environment. The 
company teaches four beliefs: service to customers, 
MANAGING TALENT

98 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Company Fails Fair-Employment Test
Companies have to comply with federal as well as state 
and local laws. One company that didn’t was Profes-
sional Neurological Services (PNS), which was cited by 
the Chicago Commission on Human Relations when it 
discriminated against an employee because she is a par-
ent. Chicago is one of a few cities that prohibit this type 
of discrimination.
The diffi culties began with employee Dena Lock-
wood as soon as she was interviewing for a sales posi-
tion with PNS. The interviewer noticed that Lockwood 
made a reference to her children, and he asked her if 
her responsibilities as a parent would “prevent her from 
working 70 hours a week.” Lockwood said no, but the 
job offer she received suggests that the interviewer had 
his doubts. According to Lockwood’s later complaint, 
female sales reps without children routinely were paid a 
$45,000 base salary plus a 10% commission. Lockwood 
was offered $25,000 plus the 10% commission. Lock-
wood negotiated and eventually accepted $45,000 plus 
5%, with a promise to increase the commission rate to 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS
respect for individuals, striving for excellence, and act-
ing with integrity. At its headquarters, respect for oth-
ers is expressed in a festive environment at an annual 
Cultural World Fair, where employees representing dif-
ferent ethnic backgrounds share food and the arts with 
one another. Employees in the corporate offi ces also can 
fi nd sympathetic colleagues by joining resource groups 
such as UNITY, the African American resource group, 
and Pride, a group for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans-
gender employees and their allies.
These principles, as well as policies such as hiring 
veterans, have a large impact, because Walmart operates 
on a massive scale. The company employs 2.2 million 
people in more than two dozen countries around the 
world. Principles such as valuing diversity affect more 
than a million workers in the United States alone. In 
the case of hiring veterans, the 20,000 veterans hired per 
year is a huge number but account for only about 4% 
of Walmart’s new U.S. employees. The disadvantage is 
that spreading a value such as equal opportunity is diffi -
cult to do in such a large organization, where many per-
sonnel decisions are made at the individual-store level.
Evidence for the diffi culty comes from the variety 
of complaints made to the Equal Employment Op-
portunity Commission, as well as the resulting lawsuits 
and settlements. In one recent settlement, Walmart 
paid more than $360,000 after store managers failed to 
stop an employee from sexually harassing an intellec-
tually disabled coworker for several years. In another, 
the company paid $87,500 after a store refused to hire a 
brother and sister whose mother previously had charged 
the company with sex discrimination. The EEOC 
found that the store’s decision was retaliation against 
the mother. In yet another case, the EEOC sued Wal-
Mart Stores of Texas for violating the Age Discrimina-
tion in Employment Act for harassing and eventually 
fi ring a 54-year-old manager who had requested ac-
commodation for his diabetes. And the agency recently 
sued Wal-Mart Stores East when the management of a 
Maryland store refused to authorize a saliva drug test 
for a job applicant who had end-stage renal disease and 
therefore could not take a urine test.
These complaints are a contrast from corporate pol-
icy and publicity. Walmart notes that more than half of 
the promotions granted to hourly workers in its stores 
go to women. At headquarters, the company recently 
announced a 40 percent increase in the number of 
women holding top executive positions. For human re-
source managers, the question is how to build on these 
successes and help spread fair employment practices 
throughout the entire organization.
Questions
 1. In what ways is Walmart trying to meet legal re-
quirements for equal employment opportunity? In 
what ways do its actions exceed legal requirements?
 2. What could Walmart’s HR managers do to help the 
company improve its performance in complying with 
EEO laws?
Sources: Walmart, “Working at Walmart,” http://careers.walmart.com, 
accessed April 29, 2014; Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC), “Wal-Mart to Pay $363,419 to Settle EEOC Sexual Harassment 
and Retaliation Suit,” news release, March 25, 2014, http://www1.eeoc.gov; 
EEOC, “EEOC Sues Wal-Mart Stores East for Disability Discrimination,” 
news release, March 21, 2014, http://www1.eeoc.gov; Kevin McGuinness, 
“EEOC Sues Wal-Mart for Age Discrimination,” PlanSponsor, March 12, 
2014, http://www.plansponsor.com; EEOC, “Wal-Mart to Pay $87,500 
to Settle EEOC Suit for Unlawful Retaliation,” news release, January 27, 
2014, http://www1.eeoc.gov; “Leadership Team Shows Diversity,” MMR, 
December 9, 2013, Business Insights: Global, http://bi.galegroup.com; 
Kim Souza, “Wal-Mart’s Home Office Celebrates Diversity,” City Wire, 
September 19, 2013, http://www.thecitywire.com; Saabira Chaudhuri, 
“Wal-Mart Unveils Plans to Offer Jobs to Veterans; Boost Domestic 
Sourcing by $50 Billion,” Wall Street Journal, January 16, 2013, http://
online.wsj.com; Christopher Matthews, “Is Walmart’s Buy American/Hire 
Veterans Initiative Anything More Than a PR Stunt?” Time, January 15, 
2013, http://business.time.com; James Dao, “Wal-Mart Plans to Hire Any 
Veteran Who Wants a Job,” New York Times, January 14, 2013, http://www.
nytimes.com. 

CHAPTER 3 
Providing Equal Employment Opportunity and a Safe Workplace 99
10% when she reached sales of $300,000. She was also 
offered fi ve vacation days a year; when she objected, she 
was told not to worry.
Lockwood worked hard and eventually reached her 
sales goal. Then the company raised the requirement 
for the higher commission rate, and the situation took a 
turn for the worse. Lockwood’s daughter woke up one 
morning with pink-eye, a highly contagious ailment. 
Lockwood called in to reschedule a meeting for that 
day, but her manager told her not to bother; she was 
being fi red. When Lockwood asked why, the manager 
said “it just wasn’t working out.”
She went to the Chicago Human Relations Commis-
sion for help. The commission investigated and could 
fi nd no evidence of performance-related problems that 
would justify her dismissal. Instead, the commission 
found that Lockwood was a victim of “blatant” discrim-
ination against employees with children and awarded 
her $213,000 plus attorney’s fees—a hefty fi ne for a 
company with fewer than 50 employees. PNS stated 
that it would appeal the decision.
Questions
 1. Why do you think “parental discrimination” was the 
grounds for this complaint instead of a federally pro-
tected class? Could you make a case for discrimina-
tion on the basis of sex? Why or why not?
 2. How could Professional Neurological Services have 
avoided this problem?
 3. Imagine that the company has called you in to help 
it hold down human resources costs, including costs 
of lawsuits such as this one. What advice would you 
give? How can the company avoid discrimination 
and still build an effi cient workforce?
Sources: Courtney Rubin, “Single Mother Wins $200,000 in Job Bias Case,” 
Inc., January 25, 2010, www.inc.com; Ameet Sachdev, “She Took a Day 
Off to Care for Sick Child, Got Fired,” Chicago Tribune, January 24, 2010, 
NewsBank, http://infoweb.newsbank.com.
 1. Michael Martinez and Lindy Hall, “Steve Ballmer Now 
Owns NBA’s Clippers for Record $2 Billion,” CNN, August 
12, 2014, http://www.cnn.com; Ben Bolch, “Donald Sterling 
Sanctioned: Adam Silver Moves to Eject Clippers Owner,” 
Los Angeles Times, April 29, 2014, http://www.latimes.com; 
“Full Transcript of Adam Silver on Donald Sterling Ban,” 
USA Today, April 29, 2014, http://www.usatoday.com; Ashby 
Jones, “NBA’s Decision against Clippers’ Owner: Is It Legal?” 
Wall Street Journal, April 29, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com.
 2. Bakke v. Regents of the University of California, 17 F.E.P.C. 
1000 (1978).
 3. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Understand-
ing Waivers of Discrimination Claims in Employee Severance 
Agreements,” http://www.eeoc.gov, accessed February 14, 2012; 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Age Discrimi-
nation,” http://www1.eeoc.gov, accessed February 14, 2012.
 4. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “EEOC Sues 
Hutchinson Sealing Systems for Age Discrimination,” news 
release, January 20, 2012, http://www1.eeoc.gov.
 5. “Age Shall Not Wither Them,” The Economist, April 9, 2011, 
EBSCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 6. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Pregnancy 
Discrimination,” http://www1.eeoc.gov, accessed February 14, 
2012.
 7. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Facts about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act,” http://www1.eeoc.
gov//eeoc/publications/, accessed March 3, 2010; Equal Em-
ployment Opportunity Commission, “Notice Concerning
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Amendments Act 
of 2008,” http://www1.eeoc.gov, accessed February 14, 2012.
 8. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Questions and 
Answers for Small Businesses: The Final Rule Implementing the 
ADA Amendments Act of 2008,” http://www1.eeoc.gov, accessed 
February 20, 2012, University of New Hampshire Human 
Resources, “Americans with Disabilities Act, as Amended 
2008 (ADAAA),” http://www.unh.edu/hr/ada.htm, accessed 
 February 20, 2012.
 9. Jenell L. S. Wittmer and Leslie Wilson, “Turning Diversity 
into Dollars: A Business Case for Hiring People with Dis-
abilities,” T 1 D, February 2010, pp. 58–61; Offi ce of Dis-
ability Employment Policy, “Disability Employment Policy 
Resources by Topic,” http://www.dol.gov/odep/, accessed 
February 20, 2012.
 10. Melissa Korn, “Race Infl uences How Leaders Are Assessed,” 
The Wall Street Journal, January 3, 2012, http://online.wsj.
com; Katherine W. Phillips, “Transparent Barriers,” Kellogg 
Insight (Kellogg School of Management), November 2008, 
http://insight.kellogg.northwestern.edu.
 11. UAW v. Johnson Controls, Inc., 499 U.S. 187 (1991).
 12. Karen Burke, “Referrals and Diversity, Transgender Name 
Changes, Termination Meeting Pay,” HR Magazine, Novem-
ber 2011, pp. 27–8.
 13. Anne Fisher, “Checking Out Job Applicants on Facebook? 
Better Ask a Lawyer,” Fortune, March 2, 2011, http://manage-
ment.fortune.cnn.com.
 14. Bureau of National Affairs, “HR Pros Believe Gender Pay 
Gaps Exist—but What to Do about It?” Report on Salary Sur-
veys, April 2011, pp. 1–8; Joann S. Lublin, “Coaching Urged 
for Women,” Wall Street Journal, April 4, 2011, http://online.
wsj.com; Conor Dougherty, “Strides by Women, Still a Wage 
Gap,” Wall Street Journal, March 1, 2011, http://online.wsj.
com.
 15. D. Kravitz and J. Platania, “Attitudes and Beliefs about 
Affi rmative Action: Effects of Target and of Respondent 
Sex and Ethnicity,” Journal of Applied Psychology 78 (1993), 
pp. 928–38.
 16. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment Situation of Veter-
ans, 2013,” news release, March 20, 2014, http://www.bls.gov.
NOTES

100 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
 17. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Imperial Secu-
rity Will Pay $50,000 to Settle EEOC Religious Discrimination 
Lawsuit,” news release, November 23, 2011, http://www1.eeoc.
gov; Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Belk, Inc. 
to Pay $55,000 to Settle EEOC Religious Discrimination Suit,” 
news release, March 16, 2011, http://www1.eeoc.gov.
 18. EEOC guideline based on the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title 
VII.
 19. Dana Mattioli, “More Men Make Harassment Claims,” The 
Wall Street Journal, March 23, 2010, http://online.wsj.com; 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Sexual Ha-
rassment Charges: EEOC and FEPAs Combined, FY1997–
FY2011,” http://www1.eeoc.gov, accessed February 15, 2012.
 20. Burke, “Referrals and Diversity,” p. 28.
 21. John A. Decker, Renée Funk, and D. Gayle DeBord, “Con-
ducting Responder Health Research and Biomonitoring dur-
ing and following Disasters,” NIOSH Science Blog, October 
18, 2013, http://blogs.cdc.gov; Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, “Emergency Responder Health Monitor-
ing and Surveillance (ERHMS),” last updated July 31, 2012, 
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh.
 22. Laura Walter, “‘Green’ Construction Workers May 
Face Additional Safety Risks,” EHS Today, November 
30, 2011, http://www.ehstoday.com.
 23. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employer-Reported Workplace 
Injuries and Illnesses, 2012,” news release, November 7, 
2013, http://www.bls.gov.
 24. James R. Hagerty, “Workplace Injuries Drop, but Claims 
of Employer Retaliation Rise,” Wall Street Journal, July 22, 
2013, http://online.wsj.com.
 25. J. Roughton, “Managing a Safety Program through Job Haz-
ard Analysis,” Professional Safety 37 (1992), pp. 28–31.
 26. Roughton, “Managing a Safety Program”; “The Basics of Job 
Hazard Analysis,” Safety Compliance Letter, September 2013, 
Business Insights: Global, http://bi.galegroup.com.
 27. Duncan Graham-Rowe, “Is Nanotechnology Safe in the 
Workplace?” Guardian, February 13, 2012, http://www
.guardian.co.uk; Jennifer L. Topmiller and Kevin H. Dunn, 
“Controlling Exposures to Workers Who Make or Use 
Nanomaterials,” NIOSH Science Blog, December 9, 2013, 
http://blogs.cdc.gov.
 28. R. G. Hallock and D. A. Weaver, “Controlling Losses and 
Enhancing Management Systems with TOR Analysis,” Profes-
sional Safety 35 (1990), pp. 24–6.
 29. Field ID, “McShane Construction Selects Field ID 
to 
Enhance 
Worksite 
Safety 
and 
Quality 
Assur-
ance,” news release, October 11, 2011, http://www
.fi eldid.com; Field ID, “What Is Field ID?” http://www
. fi eldid.com, accessed February 21, 2012.
 30. Jill Jusko, “Meeting the Safety Challenge of a Diverse Work-
force,” Industry Week, December 2011, p. 14.
 31. Anthony Geise, “The Barriers to Effective Safety Train-
ing: Finding Training Techniques That Bridge Generation 
Gaps,” EHS Today, October 2011, pp. 72–6; Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, “Nonfatal Occupational Injuries and Illnesses Re-
quiring Days Away from Work, 2010,” news release, Novem-
ber 9, 2011, http://www.bls.gov; Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, “QuickStats: Rate of Nonfatal, Medically 
Consulted Fall Injury Episodes, by Age Group,” Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly, February 3, 2012, http://www.cdc.gov.
 32. Phillip Ragain, Ron Ragain, Michael Allen, and Mike Allen, 
“A Study of Safety Intervention: The Causes and Con-
sequences of Employees’ Silence,” EHS Today, July 2011, 
pp. 36–8.
 33. Prevent Blindness America, “Eye Safety at Work,” http://
www.preventblindness.org, accessed  April 29, 2014; American 
Optometric Association, “Protecting Your Eyes at Work,” Pa-
tients and Public: Caring for Your Vision, http://www.aoa.org, 
accessed April 29, 2014.
 34. M. Janssens, J. M. Brett, and F. J. Smith, “Confi rmatory 
Cross-Cultural Research: Testing the Viability of a Corpora-
tion-wide Safety Policy,” Academy of Management Journal 38 
(1995), pp. 364–82.
 35. Liberty Mutual Research Institute for Safety (RIS), “Mul-
tiple Job Holding: Present-Day Reality Raises New Ques-
tions,” From Research to Reality, Winter 2013–14, p. 3; RIS, 
“Research Focus: Does Multiple Job Holding Increase Risk 
of Injury?” From Research to Reality, Winter 2013–14, pp. 4–5.

Analyzing Work 
and Designing Jobs
4
Introduction
As workers master new technology, they are sometimes surprised to find 
that old ways of doing business still matter. An example is using the tele-
phone. So much communication has shifted to texting and sending e-mail 
that many people who grew up with mobile devices feel uncomfortable 
about picking up the phone and talking. Patty Baxter noticed this in the 
sales office of her company, Metro Guide Publishing. The room used to be 
filled with the chatter of employees asking businesspeople to buy ads, but 
they had switched to the more comfortable task of sending out  e-mails to 
potential clients. However, this new approach didn’t work as well. E-mail was less ef-
fective for building customer relationships, and employees sometimes misinterpreted 
prospects’ needs and intentions. Baxter hired a trainer to build her employees’ tele-
phone skills and confidence. She also modified their jobs by providing scripts for 
voice messages and adding the requirement that they keep records of the way they 
contact each client.
The trainer that Baxter hired for Metro Guide is not alone in noticing that more 
employees are uncomfortable with using the phone. A trainer at a utility company re-
cently recalled teaching an employee the technical features of a desktop telephone—
for example, the dial tone and absence of a Send button. But at least as important as 
knowing devices’ technical features is skill at using one’s voice, both on and off the 
phone. Recent research supports the idea that a person’s tone of voice affects the 
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 4-1 Summarize the elements of work ﬂ ow analysis.
 LO 4-2 Describe how work ﬂ ow is related to an 
organization’s structure.
 LO 4-3 
Deﬁ ne the elements of a job analysis, and discuss 
their signiﬁ cance for human resource management.
 LO 4-4 Tell how to obtain information for a job analysis.
 LO 4-5 Summarize recent trends in job analysis.
 LO 4-6 Describe methods for designing a job so that it 
can be done efﬁ ciently.
 LO 4-7 Identify approaches to designing a job to make it 
motivating.
 LO 4-8 Explain how organizations apply ergonomics to 
design safe jobs.
 LO 4-8 Discuss how organizations can plan for the 
mental demands of a job.

102 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
impression he or she makes. When subjects are asked to rate people based on record-
ings of their voices, they form negative opinions of people who speak in breathy, rough, 
strained, or weak tones. Another habit that creates a negative impression is ending 
sentences in a rising voice, as if asking a question. Fortunately for individuals with these 
speaking styles, clear and pleasant speech is a skill people can learn.1 
Metro Guide Publishing earns money by selling ads to local businesses, so it needs 
strong relationships with many different companies. That need gives rise to knowl-
edge of the kinds of skills and work habits employees must provide, such as the ability 
to speak and listen well over the phone. Consideration of such elements is at the heart 
of analyzing work, whether in a start-up enterprise, a multinational corporation, or a 
government agency.
This chapter discusses the analysis and design of work and, in doing so, lays out 
some considerations that go into making informed decisions about how to create and 
link jobs. The chapter begins with a look at the big-picture issues related to analyzing 
work fl ow and organizational structure. The discussion then turns to the more specifi c 
issues of analyzing and designing jobs. Traditionally, job analysis has emphasized the 
study of existing jobs in order to make decisions such as employee selection, training, 
and compensation. In contrast, job design has emphasized making jobs more effi cient 
or more motivating. However, as this chapter shows, the two activities are interrelated.
Work Flow in Organizations
Informed decisions about jobs take place in the context of the organization’s overall 
work fl ow. Through the process of work ﬂ ow design, managers analyze the tasks 
needed to produce a product or service. With this information, they assign these tasks 
to specifi c jobs and positions. (A job is a set of related duties. A position is the set of 
duties performed by one person. A school has many teaching positions; the person fi ll-
ing each of those positions is performing the job of teacher.) Basing these decisions on 
work fl ow design can lead to better results than the more traditional practice of look-
ing at jobs individually.
Work Flow Analysis
Before designing its work fl ow, the organization’s planners need to analyze what work 
needs to be done. Figure 4.1 shows the elements of a work fl ow analysis. For each type 
of work, such as producing a product line or providing a support service (accounting, 
legal support, and so on), the analysis identifi es the output of the process, the activities 
involved, and the three categories of inputs (materials and information, equipment, 
and human resources).
Outputs are the products of any work unit, say, a department or team. Outputs may 
be tangible, as in the case of a restaurant meal or fi nished part. They may be intangible, 
such as building security or an answered question about employee benefi ts. In identi-
fying the outputs of particular work units, work fl ow analysis considers both quantity 
and quality. Thinking in terms of these outputs gives HRM professionals a clearer view 
of how to increase each work unit’s effectiveness.
Work fl ow analysis next considers the work processes used to generate the outputs 
identifi ed. Work processes are the activities that a work unit’s members engage in to 
produce a given output. They are described in terms of operating procedures for every 
task performed by each employee at each stage of the process. Specifying the processes 
LO 4-1 Summarize the 
elements of work ﬂ ow 
analysis.
Work Flow Design
The process of analyz-
ing the tasks necessary 
for the production of a 
product or service.
Job
A set of related duties.
Position
The set of duties (job) 
performed by a particu-
lar person.

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  103
helps HRM professionals design effi cient work systems by clarifying which tasks are 
necessary. Knowledge of work processes also can guide staffi ng changes when work is 
automated, outsourced, or restructured.
Finally, work fl ow analysis identifi es the inputs required to carry out the work pro-
cesses. As shown in Figure 4.1, inputs fall into three categories: raw inputs (materials 
and information), equipment, and human resources (knowledge, skills, and abilities). In 
the advertising industry, for example, technology has changed the relative importance 
of inputs. The stars of the ad business used to be the creative minds who dreamed up 
messages for television ads that would get people talking (and buying). But as consum-
ers turn their attention to digital media, ad agencies need people who understand the 
latest in social media and who can not only generate a stream of messages but also can 
measure the reactions streaming back from consumers. Data and skill in analyzing data 
are today’s hotly demanded inputs for advertising.2 Another way to understand the 
importance of identifying inputs is to consider what can go wrong. The “HR Oops!” 
box illustrates that if an organization’s outputs fall short of goals, HR managers might 
fi nd that the cause is a failure in planning for inputs.
Work Flow Design and an Organization’s Structure
Work fl ow takes place in the context of an organization’s structure. It requires the 
cooperation of individuals and groups. Ideally, the organization’s structure brings 
together the people who must collaborate to create the desired outputs effi ciently. 
The structure may do this in a way that is highly centralized (that is, with authority 
LO 4-2 Describe how 
work ﬂ ow is related 
to an organization’s 
structure.
Figure 4.1
Developing a Work 
Flow Analysis
What materials,
data, and
information are
needed?
Raw Inputs
What special
equipment,
facilities, and
systems are
needed?
Equipment
What tasks are
required in the
production of the
output?
Activity
What product,
information, or
service is provided?
How is the output
measured?
Output
What knowledge,
skills, and abilities
are needed by
those performing
the tasks?
Human Resources

104
Work fl ow analysis spells out the 
human and other resources needed 
for carrying out well-defi ned tasks 
that will meet objectives. Success 
requires the right people with ac-
cess to resources including equip-
ment and information. However, 
research suggests that some of 
these inputs may be missing at 
many organizations.
In a survey of more than 500 U.S. 
workers in different industries, At-
Task, a maker of project management 
software,  found that large numbers 
of workers are struggling to meet ob-
jectives on time—if they even know 
what their objectives are. According 
to AtTask, 60% of the workers said 
they are completely overwhelmed or 
barely meeting deadlines.
Responses to other questions in 
the survey point to some possible 
causes. One-third of the workers 
said they are unable to turn in as-
signments on time because some re-
sources they need are not available. 
Even more (about 50%) say their 
organizations do not have enough 
people to get all the necessary tasks 
fi nished unless people work over-
time. More than a third of them say 
they are only somewhat, a little, or 
not clear about desired outputs—
how their work is measured or how 
their supervisor defi nes success.
Questions
 1. What consequences might an 
organization expect to result 
from the conditions described 
by the AtTask survey?
 2. How might an organization use 
work fl ow analysis to prevent 
some of these problems?
Sources: AtTask, “2013 AtTask State 
of Work Survey: Executive Summary,” 
http://www.attask.com, accessed 
May 6, 2014; Dennis McCafferty, 
“Projects Suffer from Lack of Staffi ng, 
Resources,” CIO Insight, December 
19, 2013, http://www.cioinsight.com; 
AtTask, “AtTask Survey: Workers Over-
whelmed by Deadlines Blame Lack of 
Focus and Constant Interruptions,” 
news release, November 14, 2013, 
http://www.attask.com. 
Workers Often Don’t Have What They Need to Succeed
HR Oops!
concentrated in a few people at the top of the organization) or decentralized (with 
authority spread among many people). The organization may group jobs according 
to functions (for example, welding, painting, packaging), or it may set up divisions to 
focus on products or customer groups.
Although there are an infi nite number of ways to combine the elements of an 
organization’s structure, we can make some general observations about structure and 
work design. If the structure is strongly based on function, workers tend to have 
low authority and to work alone at highly specialized jobs. Jobs that involve team-
work or broad responsibility tend to require a structure based on divisions other than 
functions. When the goal is to empower employees, companies then need to set up 
structures and jobs that enable broad responsibility, such as jobs that involve em-
ployees in serving a particular group of customers or producing a particular product, 
rather than performing a narrowly defi ned function. The organization’s structure also 
affects managers’ jobs. Managing a division responsible for a product or customer 
group tends to require more experience and cognitive (thinking) ability than manag-
ing a department that handles a particular function. In contrast, managing a func-
tional department requires skill in managing confl icts and aligning employees’ efforts 
with higher-level goals, because these employees tend to identify heavily with their 
department or profession.3
Work design often emphasizes the analysis and design of jobs, as described in the re-
mainder of this chapter. Although all of these approaches can succeed, each focuses on one 
isolated job at a time. These approaches do not necessarily consider how that single job 
fi ts into the overall work fl ow or structure of the organization. To use these techniques ef-
fectively, human resource personnel should also understand their organization as a whole. 

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  105
For example, Procter & Gamble traditionally gives each product division a great deal 
of control over its activities. Thus, research and development for a product line was 
the responsibility of the division controlling that line. But when consumers responded 
to diffi cult economic times by spending less on P&G’s brand-name consumer goods, 
each division tightened its research budget to the point that the company overall was 
not spending enough to develop new ideas. The company’s top leaders decided to 
restructure work by making R&D a corporate-wide function so they could concen-
trate resources on ideas that would have the most impact on the company’s overall 
performance.4
Job Analysis
To achieve high-quality performance, organizations have to understand and match 
job requirements and people. This understanding requires job analysis, the process 
of getting detailed information about jobs. Analyzing jobs and understanding what is 
required to carry out a job provide essential knowledge for staffi ng, training, perfor-
mance appraisal, and many other HR activities. For instance, a supervisor’s evaluation 
of an employee’s work should be based on performance relative to job requirements. 
In very small organizations, line managers may perform a job analysis, but usually the 
work is done by a human resource professional. A large company may have a com-
pensation management department that includes job analysts (also called personnel 
analysts). Organizations may also contract with fi rms that provide this service.
Job Descriptions
An essential part of job analysis is the creation of job descriptions. A job description 
is a list of the tasks, duties, and responsibilities (TDRs) that a job entails. TDRs are 
observable actions. For example, a news photographer’s job requires the jobholder to 
use a camera to take photographs. If you were to observe someone in that position for 
a day, you would almost certainly see some pictures being taken. When a manager at-
tempts to evaluate job performance, it is most important to have detailed information 
about the work performed in the job (that is, the TDRs). This information makes it 
possible to determine how well an individual is meeting each job requirement.
A job description typically has the format shown in Figure 4.2. It includes the job 
title, a brief description of the TDRs, and a list of the essen-
tial duties with detailed specifi cations of the tasks involved in 
carrying out each duty. Although organizations may modify this 
format according to their particular needs, all job descriptions 
within an organization should follow the same format. This helps 
the organization make consistent decisions about such matters as 
pay and promotions. It also helps the organization show that it 
makes human resource decisions fairly.
Whenever the organization creates a new job, it needs a new 
job description. Preparation of a job description begins with 
gathering information about the job from people already per-
forming the task, the position’s supervisor, or the managers cre-
ating the position. Based on that information, the writer of the 
job description identifi es the essential duties of the job, includ-
ing mental and physical tasks and any methods and resources 
required. Job descriptions should then be reviewed periodically 
LO 4-3 Deﬁ ne the ele-
ments of a job analysis, 
and discuss their sig-
niﬁ cance for human 
resource management.
Job Analysis
The process of getting 
detailed information 
about jobs.
Job Description
A list of the tasks, du-
ties, and responsibilities 
(TDRs) that a particular 
job entails.
Careful job analysis makes it possible to defi ne what 
a person in a certain position does and what qualifi ca-
tions are needed for the job. Firefi ghters use specifi c 
equipment to extinguish fi res, require physical strength 
to do their jobs, and must possess the ability to make 
decisions under pressure.

106 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
(say, once a year) and updated if necessary. Performance appraisals can provide a good 
opportunity for updating job descriptions, as the employee and supervisor compare 
what the employee has been doing against the details of the job description.
Organizations should give each newly hired employee a copy of his or her job 
 description. This helps the employee to understand what is expected, but it shouldn’t 
be presented as limiting the employee’s commitment to quality and customer satisfac-
tion. Ideally, employees will want to go above and beyond the listed duties when the 
situation and their abilities call for that. Many job descriptions include the phrase and 
other duties as requested as a way to remind employees not to tell their supervisor, “But 
that’s not part of my job.”
Job Specifications
Whereas the job description focuses on the activities involved in carrying out a job, a 
job speciﬁ cation looks at the qualities or requirements the person performing the 
job must possess. It is a list of the knowledge, skills, abilities, and other character-
istics (KSAOs) that an individual must have to perform the job. Knowledge refers to 
Job Speciﬁ cation
A list of the knowledge, 
skills, abilities, and other 
characteristics (KSAOs) 
that an individual must 
have to perform a par-
ticular job.
Figure 4.2
Sample Job Description
Source: Union Pacifi c, 
“Union Pacifi c Careers: 
Train Crew,” https://
up.jobs/train-crew.html, 
accessed May 7, 2014.
TRAIN CREW/SERVICE AT UNION PACIFIC
OVERVIEW
JOB DESCRIPTION
DUTIES
MAJOR TASKS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
When you work on a Union Paciﬁc train crew, you’re working at 
the very heart of our railroad. Train crew employees are
responsible for serving our customers by providing the safe,
on-time, and on-plan movement of freight trains.
In this entry-level position, you’ll start as a Switchperson or 
Brakeperson, working as on-the-ground trafﬁc control. You 
don’t need any previous railroad experience; we provide all 
training. These jobs directly lead to becoming a Conductor and 
a Locomotive Engineer, where you will have a rare opportunity 
to work on board a moving locomotive. The Conductor is 
responsible for the train, the freight and the crew. The 
Locomotive Engineer actually operates the locomotive.
You will work outdoors in all weather conditions and frequently
at elevations more than 12 feet above the ground. You must
wear personal protective equipment, such as safety glasses
and safety boots. You will frequently carry loads and regularly
step on and off equipment and work from ladders. You will use
and interpret hand signals and sounds, use computers, count
train cars, and follow posted regulations.
You won’t work a standard 40-hour workweek. Train crews are 
always on call, even on weekends and holidays. You’ll travel 
with our trains, sometimes spending a day or more away from 
your home terminal.

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  107
factual or procedural information that is necessary for successfully performing a task. 
For example, this course is providing you with knowledge in how to manage human 
resources. A skill is an individual’s level of profi ciency at performing a particular 
task—that is, the capability to perform it well. With knowledge and experience, you 
could acquire skill in the task of preparing job specifi cations. Ability, in contrast to 
skill, refers to a more general enduring capability that an individual possesses. A per-
son might have the ability to cooperate with others or to write clearly and precisely. 
Finally, other characteristics might be personality traits such as someone’s persistence 
or motivation to achieve. Some jobs also have legal requirements, such as licensing 
or certifi cation. Figure 4.3 is a set of sample job specifi cations for the job description 
in Figure 4.2.
In developing job specifi cations, it is important to consider all of the elements of 
KSAOs. As with writing a job description, the information can come from a combi-
nation of people performing the job, people supervising or planning for the job, and 
trained job analysts. A study by ACT’s Workforce Development Division interviewed 
manufacturing supervisors to learn what they do each day and what skills they rely 
on. The researchers learned that the supervisors spend much of their day monitoring 
their employees to make sure the workplace is safe, product quality is maintained, and 
work processes are optimal. Also, they rely heavily on their technical knowledge of 
the work processes they supervise.5 Based on this information, job specifi cations for a 
Figure 4.3
Sample Job 
Specifi cations
Source: Union Pacifi c, 
“Union Pacifi c Careers: 
Train Crew,” https://
up.jobs/train-crew.html, 
accessed May 7, 2014.
TRAIN CREW/SERVICE AT UNION PACIFIC
REQUIREMENTS
You must be at least 18 years old. You must speak and read 
English because you’ll be asked to follow posted bulletins, 
regulations, rule books, timetables, switch lists, etc. You must 
pass a reading comprehension test (see sample) to be 
considered for an interview.
JOB REQUIREMENTS
You must be able to use a computer keyboard, and you must 
be able to count and compare numbers. (You might, for 
example, be asked to count the cars on a train during 
switching.)
You must have strong vision and hearing, including the ability 
to: see and read hand signals from near and far; distinguish 
between colors; visually judge the speed and distance of 
moving objects; see at night; and recognize changes in sounds.
You must also be physically strong: able to push, pull, lift, and 
carry up to 25 pounds frequently; up to 50 pounds occasionally; 
and up to 83 pounds infrequently. You’ll need good balance to 
regularly step on and off equipment and work from ladders to 
perform various tasks. And you must be able to walk, sit, stand, 
and stoop comfortably.
You must be able to solve problems quickly and react to
changing conditions on the job.

108
manufacturing supervisor would include skill in observing how people work, as well as 
in-depth knowledge of manufacturing processes and tools.
In contrast to tasks, duties, and responsibilities, KSAOs are characteristics of people 
and are not directly observable. They are observable only when individuals are car-
rying out the TDRs of the job—and afterward, if they can show the product of their 
labor. Thus, if someone applied for a job as a news photographer, you could not sim-
ply look at the individual to determine whether he or she can spot and take effective 
photographs. However, you could draw conclusions later about the person’s skills by 
looking at examples of his or her photographs. Similarly, many employers specify edu-
cational requirements. Meeting these requirements is treated as an indication that a 
person has some desired level of knowledge and skills.
Accurate information about KSAOs is especially important for making decisions 
about who will fi ll a job. A manager attempting to fi ll a position needs information 
about the characteristics required and about the characteristics of each applicant. 
 Interviews and selection decisions should therefore focus on KSAOs. For more guide-
lines on writing KSAOs, see “HR How To.”
Without strong support from human 
resource management, organiza-
tions may be tempted to use short-
cuts for defi ning job specifi cations. 
They might guess, say, that some-
one who has a business degree and 
two years’ experience in a similar 
job would be well qualifi ed for an ad-
ministrative position. Hiring experts, 
however, have identifi ed some ways 
to pinpoint the relevant knowledge, 
skills, abilities, and other criteria di-
rectly related to success in a job:
 • Rather than assuming education 
provides all necessary job skills, 
tie specifi cations to the actual 
skills needed for successful job 
performance. For example, re-
search by the ACT testing orga-
nization found that most people 
with a college degree have the 
reading and math skills needed 
for entry-level jobs in account-
ing and auditing. But fewer than 
half have the necessary level of 
skill in locating information (for 
example, interpreting graphs 
and tables). Job specifi cations 
should identify these skills, so 
companies can test for them.
 • Set standards high enough 
that candidates who meet the 
specifi cations will do more than 
just barely complete the work. 
Rather, write specifi cations for 
an employee who can succeed 
in the job. This requires previous 
creation of a job description that 
defi nes successful performance.
 • Use performance data. Espe-
cially when many people in the 
organization perform similar 
jobs, the company’s perfor-
mance data can become a 
treasure trove for identifying the 
behaviors and KSAOs associ-
ated with success. Google, for 
example, is famous for analyzing 
employee performance data on 
a company-wide level to see 
what kinds of behaviors are as-
sociated with better outcomes. 
The company then makes abil-
ity to perform in those effective 
ways part of its job specifi ca-
tions. Among other measures, 
the company has found that an 
applicant’s school grades are 
less important than learning 
ability and intellectual skills. 
Applicants for technical jobs 
also must demonstrate skill in 
writing software code.
Questions
 1. Why do you think many 
companies include education 
level and years of experience 
in their job specifi cations?
 2. Suppose you are writing job 
specifi cations for the position 
of production supervisor. 
Suggest a few ways to identify 
KSAOs for that position.
Sources: Google company website, “How 
We Hire,” Careers, http://www.google.
com, accessed May 6, 2014; Thomas L. 
Friedman, “How to Get a Job at Google,” 
New York Times, February 22, 2014, 
http://www.nytimes.com; Melissa Murer 
Corrigan, “Measure Work Readiness for 
Tomorrow’s Jobs,” Chief Learning Ofﬁ cer, 
October 2013, pp. 44–6; Brad Remillard, 
“Traditional Job Descriptions Don’t Attract 
Top Talent,” Supervision, February 2013, 
pp. 6–7. 
Identifying Relevant KSAOs
HR How To

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  109
Sources of Job Information
Information for analyzing an existing job often comes from incumbents, that is, people 
who currently hold that position in the organization. They are a logical source of informa-
tion because they are most  acquainted with the details of the job. Incumbents should be 
able to provide very accurate information.
A drawback of relying solely on incumbents’ information is that they may have an in-
centive to exaggerate what they do in order to appear more valuable to the organization. 
Information from incumbents should therefore be supplemented with information from 
observers, such as supervisors, who look for a match between what incumbents are doing 
and what they are supposed to do. Research suggests that supervisors may provide the 
most accurate estimates of the importance of job duties, while incumbents may be more 
accurate in reporting information about the actual time spent performing job tasks and 
safety-related risk factors.6 For analyzing skill levels, the best source may be external job 
analysts who have more experience rating a wide range of jobs.7
The government also provides background information for analyzing jobs. In 
the 1930s, the U.S. Department of Labor created the Dictionary of Occupational Titles 
(DOT) as a vehicle for helping the new public employment system link the demand for 
skills and the supply of skills in the U.S. workforce. The DOT described over 12,000 
jobs, as well as some of the requirements of successful job holders. This system served 
the United States well for over 60 years, but it became clear to Labor Department of-
fi cials that jobs in the new economy were so different that the DOT no longer served 
its purpose. The Labor Department therefore introduced a new system, called the 
Occupational Information Network (O*NET).
Instead of relying on fi xed job titles and narrow task descriptions, the O*NET 
uses a common language that generalizes across jobs to describe the abilities, 
work styles, work activities, and work context required for 1,000 broadly de-
fi ned occupations. Users can visit O*NET OnLine (http://www.onetonline
.org) to review jobs’ tasks, work styles and 
context, and requirements including skills, 
training, and experience. ManpowerGroup, 
a staffi ng services agency, uses O*NET’s 
information on skills to match individuals 
more precisely to jobs it has been hired to 
fi ll. Piedmont Natural Gas uses O*NET to 
conduct job analyses and match job appli-
cants’ skills and preferences to the require-
ments of available positions. The effort 
has helped reduce turnover among Pied-
mont’s entry-level workers.8 Furthermore, 
although the O*NET was developed to 
analyze jobs in the U.S. economy, research 
suggests that its ratings tend to be the same 
for jobs located in other countries.9
Position Analysis Questionnaire
After gathering information, the job ana-
lyst uses the information to analyze the job. 
One of the broadest and best-researched 
instruments for analyzing jobs is the 
LO 4-4 Tell how to 
obtain information for 
a job analysis.
O*NET OnLine provides job seekers with detailed descriptions of many broadly 
defi ned occupations.

110 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
 Position Analysis Questionnaire (PAQ). This is a standardized job analysis ques-
tionnaire containing 194 items that represent work behaviors, work conditions, and 
job characteristics that apply to a wide variety of jobs. The questionnaire organizes 
these items into six sections concerning different aspects of the job:
 1. Information input—Where and how a worker gets information needed to perform 
the job.
 2. Mental processes—The reasoning, decision making, planning, and information-
processing activities involved in performing the job.
 3. Work output—The physical activities, tools, and devices used by the worker to 
perform the job.
 4. Relationships with other persons—The relationships with other people required in 
performing the job.
 5. Job context—The physical and social contexts where the work is performed.
 6. Other characteristics—The activities, conditions, and characteristics other than 
those previously described that are relevant to the job.
The person analyzing a job determines whether each item on the questionnaire 
applies to the job being analyzed. The analyst rates each item on six scales: extent of 
use, amount of time, importance to the job, possibility of occurrence, applicability, and 
special code (special rating scales used with a particular item). The PAQ headquarters 
uses a computer to score the questionnaire and generate a report that describes the 
scores on the job dimensions.
Using the PAQ provides an organization with information that helps in comparing 
jobs, even when they are dissimilar. The PAQ also has the advantage that it considers 
the whole work process, from inputs through outputs. However, the person who fi lls 
out the questionnaire must have college-level reading skills, and the PAQ is meant to 
be completed only by job analysts trained in this method. In fact, the ratings of job 
incumbents tend to be less reliable than ratings by supervisors and trained analysts.10 
Also, the descriptions in the PAQ reports are rather abstract, so the reports may not be 
useful for writing job descriptions or redesigning jobs.
Fleishman Job Analysis System
To gather information about worker requirements, the Fleishman Job Analysis 
 System asks subject-matter experts (typically job incumbents) to evaluate a job in 
terms of the abilities required to perform the job. The survey is based on 52 catego-
ries of abilities, ranging from written comprehension to deductive reasoning, manual 
dexterity, stamina, and originality. The person completing the survey indicates which 
point on the scale represents the level of the ability required for performing the job 
being analyzed. For example, consider the ability, “written comprehension.” Written 
comprehension includes understanding written English words, sentences, and para-
graphs. It is different from oral comprehension (listen and understand spoken Eng-
lish words and sentences) and oral expression (speak English words and sentences so 
others can understand). The phrase for the highest point on the seven-point scale is 
“requires understanding of complex or detailed information in writing containing un-
usual words and phrases and involves fi ne distinctions in meaning among words.” The 
phrase for the lowest point on the scale is “requires written understanding of short, 
simple written information containing common words and phrases.”11
When the survey has been completed in all 52 categories, the results provide a 
picture of the ability requirements of a job. Such information is especially useful for 
employee selection, training, and career development.
Position Analysis 
Questionnaire (PAQ)
A standardized job 
analysis questionnaire 
containing 194 questions 
about work behaviors, 
work conditions, and job 
characteristics that apply 
to a wide variety of jobs.
Fleishman Job 
Analysis System
Job analysis technique 
that asks subject-matter 
experts to evaluate a 
job in terms of the abili-
ties required to perform 
the job.

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  111
Analyzing Teamwork
Work design increasingly relies on teams to accomplish an organization’s objectives, 
so HR managers often must identify the best ways to handle jobs that are highly inter-
dependent. Just as there are standardized instruments for assessing the nature of a job, 
there are standard ways to measure the nature of teams. Three dimensions are most 
critical 12:
 1. Skill differentiation—The degree to which team members have specialized knowl-
edge or functional capacities.
 2. Authority differentiation—The allocation of decision-making authority among in-
dividuals, subgroups, and the team as a whole.
 3. Temporal (time) stability—The length of time over which team members must work 
together.
Importance of Job Analysis
Job analysis is so important to HR managers that it has been called the building block of 
everything that personnel does.13 The fact is that almost every human resource manage-
ment program requires some type of information that is gleaned from job analysis 14:
 • Work redesign—Often an organization seeks to redesign work to make it more ef-
fi cient or to improve quality. The redesign requires detailed information about the 
existing job(s). In addition, preparing the redesign is similar to analyzing a job that 
does not yet exist.
 • Human resource planning—As planners analyze human resource needs and how to meet 
those needs, they must have accurate information about the levels of skill required in 
various jobs, so that they can tell what kinds of human resources will be needed.
 • Selection—To identify the most qualifi ed applicants for various positions, decision 
makers need to know what tasks the individuals must perform, as well as the neces-
sary knowledge, skills, and abilities.
 • Training—Almost every employee hired by an organization will require training. 
Any training program requires knowledge of the tasks performed in a job so that 
the training is related to the necessary knowledge and skills.
 • Performance appraisal—An accurate performance appraisal requires information 
about how well each employee is performing in order to reward employees who per-
form well and to improve their performance if it is below standard. Job analysis helps 
in identifying the behaviors and the results associated with effective performance.
 • Career planning—Matching an individual’s skills and aspirations with career oppor-
tunities requires that those in charge of career planning know the skill requirements 
of the various jobs. This allows them to guide individuals into jobs in which they 
will succeed and be satisfi ed.
 • Job evaluation—The process of job evaluation involves assessing the relative dollar 
value of each job to the organization in order to set up fair pay structures. If employ-
ees do not believe pay structures are fair, they will become dissatisfi ed and may quit, 
or they will not see much benefi t in striving for promotions. To put dollar values on 
jobs, it is necessary to get information about different jobs and compare them.
Job analysis is also important from a legal standpoint. As we saw in Chapter 3, 
the government imposes requirements related to equal employment opportunity. 
Detailed, accurate, objective job specifi cations help decision makers comply with 
these regulations by keeping the focus on tasks and abilities. These documents 
also provide evidence of efforts made to engage in fair employment practices. For 

112
example, to enforce the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission may look at job descriptions to identify the essential func-
tions of a job and determine whether a disabled person could have performed those 
functions with reasonable accommodations. Likewise, lists of duties in different jobs 
could be compared to evaluate claims under the Equal Pay Act. However, job de-
scriptions and job specifi cations are not a substitute for fair employment practices.
Besides helping human resource professionals, job analysis helps supervisors and 
other managers carry out their duties. Data from job analysis can help managers iden-
tify the types of work in their units, as well as provide information about the work fl ow 
process, so that managers can evaluate whether work is done in the most effi cient way. 
Job analysis information also supports managers as they make hiring decisions, review 
performance, and recommend rewards. For an example of this, see “HRM Social.”
Competency Models
These traditional approaches to job analysis are too limited for some HRM needs, 
 however. When human resource management is actively engaged in talent management 
LO 4-5 Summarize 
recent trends in job 
analysis.
Job analysis can support one of 
the hot trends in business, called 
gamiﬁ cation. To gamify work, or-
ganizations use elements of games 
designed to yield better results, and 
they apply them to jobs to enable 
stronger performance. For example, 
they observe how runners and cy-
clists are motivated when they can 
share their routes and mileage with 
their friends on social media, or how 
teams of players collaborate to de-
feat an enemy in an online game. 
A “leaderboard” displaying a list of 
the top scorers also is a widely used 
tool to motivate players to improve 
and earn a place on the list.
Employers can easily create a 
leader board of top salespeople, ask 
employees to post their progress on 
a team project, or award badges for 
completing training modules. But 
when a gamifi cation effort is just a 
matter of adding playful features 
to the company’s internal website, 
employees may ignore it. Well-
planned gamifi cation helps employ-
ees achieve goals that are relevant 
to their own and their organization’s 
success. This is where job analysis 
comes in, by pinpointing what em-
ployees should be accomplishing 
and what skills and resources they 
need. Gamifi cation works when it 
aligns with job requirements and the 
learning of relevant skills.
In the United Kingdom, for ex-
ample, the Department of Work 
and Pensions (DWP) wanted its 
employees to become more ac-
tive in developing useful ideas for 
innovation. To gamify this aspect 
of employees’ jobs, the company 
set up a collaboration site on its 
internal network. Employees are 
encouraged to submit ideas and 
vote on the ideas they think are 
most valuable. As ideas earn votes, 
they move up a leaderboard, and 
the company acts on them. Com-
ing up with an idea that wins votes 
is exciting; seeing it move up the 
leaderboard is even more motivat-
ing; and of course, seeing it make 
a change for the better is the best 
prize of all.
Questions
 1. Suppose you are a human 
resource manager at a 
company that is going 
to gamify the job of its 
salespeople. How would job 
analysis help you advise the 
team on which behaviors to 
reward?
 2. In the same scenario, how 
would job analysis help 
you advise the team on 
which kinds of rewards to 
incorporate?
Sources: Brian Burke, “Why Gamifi ca-
tion’s Not a Game,” CIO Journal, May 6, 
2014, http://blogs.wsj.com; Farhad Man-
joo, “High Defi nition: The ‘Gamifi cation’ 
of the Offi ce Approaches,” Wall Street 
Journal, January 12, 2014, http://online.
wsj.com; Meghan M. Biro, “Five Ways 
Leaders Win at Gamifi cation Technology,” 
Forbes, September 15, 2013, http://www.
forbes.com; Cliff Saran, “A Business Case 
for Gameplay at Work,” Computer Weekly, 
August 20–26, 2013, pp. 19–22.
With Good Analysis, Work Isn’t Just a Game
HRM Social

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  113
as a way to support strategy, organizations need to think beyond skills for particular 
jobs. They must identify the capabilities they need to acquire and develop in order to 
promote the organization’s success. For this purpose, organizations develop compe-
tency models.
A competency is an area of personal capability that enables employees to per-
form their work successfully.15 For example, success in a job or career path might 
require leadership strength, skill in coaching others, and the ability to bring out the 
best in each member of a diverse team of employees. A competency model identifi es 
and describes all the competencies required for success in a particular occupation or 
set of jobs. Organizations may create competency models for occupational groups, 
levels of the organization, or even the entire organization. A competency model 
might require that all middle managers or all members of the organization be able 
to act with integrity, value diversity, and commit themselves to delighting customers. 
Table 4.1 shows an example of a competency model for a project manager. The left 
side of the table lists competencies required for a project manager (organizational & 
planning skills; communications; and fi nancial & quantitative skills). The right side 
of the table shows behaviors that might be used to determine a project manager’s 
level of profi ciency for each competency. As in these examples, competency models 
focus more on how people work, whereas job analysis focuses more on work tasks 
and outcomes.
Competency models help HR professionals ensure that all aspects of talent man-
agement are aligned with the organization’s strategy. Looking at the competen-
cies needed for a particular occupational group, department, or the organization 
as a whole shows which candidates will be the best to fi ll open positions. Not only 
can the organization select those who can carry out a particular job today, but it 
can spot those with competencies they can develop further to assume greater re-
sponsibility in the future. Competency models for a career path or for success in 
Competency
An area of personal ca-
pability that enables em-
ployees to perform their 
work successfully.
Table 4.1
Example of Competencies and a Competency Model
PROJECT MANAGER COMPETENCIES
PROFICIENCY RATINGS
Organizational & Planning Skills
Ability to establish priorities on projects and 
schedule activities to achieve results.
1—Below Expectations: Unable to perform basic tasks.
2—Meets Expectations: Understands basic principles and performs routine 
tasks with reliable results; works with minimal supervision or assistance.
3—Exceeds Expectations: Performs complex and multiple tasks; can coach, 
teach, or lead others.
Communications
Ability to build credibility and trust through 
open and direct communications with internal 
and external customers.
1—Below Expectations: Unable to perform basic tasks.
2—Meets Expectations: Understands basic principles and performs routine 
tasks with reliable results; works with minimal supervision or assistance.
3—Exceeds Expectations: Performs complex and multiple tasks; can coach, 
teach, or lead others.
Financial & Quantitative Skills
Ability to analyze ﬁ nancial information 
accurately and set ﬁ nancial goals that have a 
positive impact on company’s bottom line and 
ﬁ scal objectives.
1—Below Expectations: Unable to perform basic tasks.
2—Meets Expectations: Understands basic principles and performs routine 
tasks with reliable results; works with minimal supervision or assistance.
3—Exceeds Expectations: Performs complex and multiple tasks; can coach, 
teach, or lead others.
Source: Based on R. J. Mirabile, “Everything You Wanted to Know about Competency Modeling,” Training and Development 
(August 1997): pp. 73–77.

114 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
management show the organization which competencies to emphasize in plans for 
development of high-potential employees. And competency models identify the im-
portant capabilities to measure in performance evaluations and to reward with pay 
and promotions.
Trends in Job Analysis
As we noted in the earlier discussion of work fl ow analysis, organizations have been 
appreciating the need to analyze jobs in the context of the organization’s structure 
and strategy. In addition, organizations are recognizing that today’s workplace must 
be adaptable and is constantly subject to change. Thus, although we tend to think of 
“jobs” as something stable, they actually tend to change and evolve over time. Those 
who occupy or manage jobs often make minor adjustments to match personal prefer-
ences or changing conditions.16 Indeed, although errors in job analysis can have many 
sources, most inaccuracy is likely to result from job descriptions being outdated. For 
this reason, job analysis must not only defi ne jobs when they are created, but also de-
tect changes in jobs as time passes.
With global competitive pressure and economic downturns, one corporate 
change that has affected many organizations is downsizing. Research suggests that 
successful downsizing efforts almost always entail changes in the nature of jobs, 
not just their number. Jobs that have survived the downsizing of the most re-
cent recession tend to have a broader scope of responsibilities coupled with less 
supervision.17
These changes in the nature of work and the expanded use of “project-based” 
organizational structures require the type of broader understanding that comes from 
an analysis of work fl ows. Because the work can change rapidly and it is impossible 
to rewrite job descriptions every week, job descriptions and specifi cations need to 
be fl exible. At the same time, legal requirements (as discussed in Chapter 3) may 
discourage organizations from writing fl exible job descriptions. This means organi-
zations must balance the need for fl exibility with the need for legal documentation. 
This presents one of the major challenges to be faced by HRM departments in the 
next decade. Many professionals are meeting this challenge with a greater emphasis 
on careful job design.
Job Design
Although job analysis, as just described, is important for an understanding of exist-
ing jobs, organizations also must plan for new jobs and periodically consider whether 
they should revise existing jobs. When an organization is expanding, supervisors and 
human resource professionals must help plan for new or growing work units. When 
an organization is trying to improve quality or effi ciency, a review of work units and 
processes may require a fresh look at how jobs are designed.
These situations call for job design, the process of defi ning how work will be 
performed and what tasks will be required in a given job, or job redesign, a similar 
process that involves changing an existing job design. To design jobs effectively, 
a person must thoroughly understand the job itself (through job analysis) and its 
place in the larger work unit’s work fl ow process (through work fl ow analysis). Hav-
ing a detailed knowledge of the tasks performed in the work unit and in the job, a 
manager then has many alternative ways to design a job. As shown in Figure 4.4, 
the available approaches emphasize different aspects of the job: the mechanics of 
LO 4-6 Describe meth-
ods for designing a job 
so that it can be done 
efﬁ ciently.
Job Design
The process of deﬁ ning 
how work will be per-
formed and what tasks 
will be required in a 
given job.

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  115
doing a job effi ciently, the job’s impact on motivation, the use of safe work prac-
tices, and the mental demands of the job.
Designing Efficient Jobs
If workers perform tasks as effi ciently as possible, not only does the organization bene-
fi t from lower costs and greater output per worker, but workers should be less fatigued. 
This point of view has for years formed the basis of classical industrial  engineering, 
which looks for the simplest way to structure work in order to maximize effi ciency. 
Typically, applying industrial engineering to a job reduces the complexity of the work, 
making it so simple that almost anyone can be trained quickly and easily to perform 
the job. Such jobs tend to be highly specialized and repetitive.
In practice, the scientifi c method traditionally seeks the “one best way” to perform 
a job by performing time-and-motion studies to identify the most effi cient movements 
for workers to make. Once the engineers have identifi ed the most effi cient sequence 
of motions, the organization should select workers based on their ability to do the job, 
then train them in the details of the “one best way” to perform that job. The company 
also should offer pay structured to motivate workers to do their best. (Chapters 12 and 
13 discuss pay and pay structures.) For an example of a company using data analytics 
to improve effi ciency, see “Best Practices.”
Industrial engineering provides measurable and practical benefi ts. However, a focus 
on effi ciency alone can create jobs that are so simple and repetitive that workers get 
bored. Workers performing these jobs may feel their work is meaningless. Hence, most 
organizations combine industrial engineering with other approaches to job design.
Designing Jobs That Motivate
Especially when organizations must compete for employees, depend on skilled knowl-
edge workers, or need a workforce that cares about customer satisfaction, a pure focus 
on effi ciency will not achieve human resource objectives. Employers also need to en-
sure that workers have a positive attitude toward their jobs so that they show up at 
work with enthusiasm, commitment, and creativity. To improve job satisfaction, orga-
nizations need to design jobs that take into account factors that make jobs motivating 
and satisfying for employees.
Industrial Engineering
The study of jobs to 
ﬁ nd the simplest way to 
structure work in order 
to maximize efﬁ ciency.
LO 4-7 Identify 
 approaches to  designing 
a job to make it 
motivating.
Figure 4.4
Approaches to Job 
Design
Design for Mental Capacity
• Filtering information
• Clear displays and
   instructions
• Memory aids
Design for Motivation
• Job enlargement
• Job enrichment
• Teamwork
• Flexibility
JOB
Design for Efﬁciency
(Industrial Engineering)
Design for Safety and Health
(Ergonomics)

116
A model that shows how to make jobs more motivating is the Job Characteristics 
Model, developed by Richard Hackman and Greg Oldham. This model describes jobs 
in terms of fi ve characteristics18:
 1. Skill variety—The extent to which a job requires a variety of skills to carry out the 
tasks involved.
 2. Task identity—The degree to which a job requires completing a “whole” piece of 
work from beginning to end (for example, building an entire component or re-
solving a customer’s complaint).
 3. Task signifi cance—The extent to which the job has an important impact on the lives 
of other people.
 4. Autonomy—The degree to which the job allows an individual to make decisions 
about the way the work will be carried out.
 5. Feedback—The extent to which a person receives clear information about perfor-
mance effectiveness from the work itself.
As shown in Figure 4.5, the more of each of these characteristics a job has, the more 
motivating the job will be, according to the Job Characteristics Model. The model 
predicts that a person with such a job will be more satisfi ed and will produce more 
and better work. An example of such a job is that of senior analyst at Internet Identity 
(IID), which combats a kind of online scam known as phishing. Suppose a scam artist 
United Parcel Service is the world’s 
largest package-shipping company, 
so saving a tiny bit of gasoline on 
every truck route can generate enor-
mous savings, both in expenses 
and in impact on the environment. 
For example, reducing each route 
by one mile per day for a year can 
save the company $50 million. 
Thus, effi ciency is a major factor in 
work design. UPS keeps improv-
ing its ability to gather, analyze, and 
apply data to making every aspect 
of package handling use fewer re-
sources. Some of its requirements 
are as detailed as requiring drivers 
to hook their truck keys over one 
fi nger instead of stashing them in a 
pocket.
Recently, 
the 
company 
an-
nounced that it would begin using 
a system called Orion (for On-Road 
Integrated Optimization and Navi-
gation) for its 55,000 drivers in the 
United States. The Orion system 
gathers data from customers, ve-
hicles, and drivers’ handheld com-
puters. It analyzes the data—even 
times for pickup and delivery when 
customers have special requests—
and designs routes for each driver 
to use the minimum time and fuel, 
driving the minimum distance. 
According to UPS, Orion is ex-
pected to save the company more 
than 1.5 million gallons of fuel and 
eliminate 14,000 metric tons of 
carbon dioxide emissions in its 
fi rst year. The company hopes that 
Orion will eventually do even more 
to improve outcomes—for example, 
updating routes when accidents 
or construction sites cause traffi c 
congestion.
With results like these, it is easy 
to see why UPS invested years to 
develop the Orion system. The 
challenge for managers is to fi nd 
drivers who are willing to commit to 
a system in which their every turn is 
planned by a computer and to keep 
those jobs engaging.
Questions
 1. What benefi ts does UPS 
derive from using Orion to help 
it make drivers’ work more 
effi cient?
 2. What challenges does the 
system pose for drivers and 
their managers?
Sources: Thomas H. Davenport, “Big 
Brown Finds Big Money from Big Data,” 
Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2014, http://
blogs.wsj.com; Richard Waters, “Big 
Data Sparks Cultural Changes,” Financial 
Times, March 25, 2014, http://www
.ft.com; Mary Schlangenstein, “UPS 
Crunches Data to Make Routes More 
Effi cient, Save Gas,” Bloomberg News, 
October 30, 2013, http://www.bloomberg
.com.
Big Data for High Effi ciency at UPS
Best Practices

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  117
uses the name of a major bank and pretends to represent the bank in messages that ask 
its customers to visit a Web page and enter their account number. The bank hires IID 
to fi nd where the phony Web pages are hosted and have them taken down; senior ana-
lysts such as Kyle Paris do that detective work. Paris evaluates client requests, analyzes 
e-mail, studies computer code to identify suspicious practices, and uses detective skills 
to identify website owners. He directly contacts owners, who may be located anywhere 
in the world, so he may use a service to translate their conversations. He needs skill 
in persuasion, because the people hosting the site usually do not even know about the 
scammers’ page and may not see a need to act. Paris also employs people skills to build 
relationships with clients and Internet service providers. While skill variety and task 
identity make Paris’s work interesting, he especially values his signifi cant role in help-
ing to make the Internet safer for its users.19 In contrast to his experience, employees 
in a job that rates low on these characteristics would not fi nd it very motivating.
Applications of the job characteristics approach to job design include job enlarge-
ment, job enrichment, self-managing work teams, fl exible work schedules, and tele-
work. In applying these methods, HR managers should keep in mind that individual 
differences among workers will affect how much they are motivated by job character-
istics and able to do their best work.20 For example, someone who thrives in a highly 
structured environment might not actually be motivated by autonomy and would be a 
better fi t for a job where a supervisor makes most decisions.
Job Enlargement In a job design, job enlargement refers to broadening the 
types of tasks performed. The objective of job enlargement is to make jobs less re-
petitive and more interesting. Jobs also become enlarged when organizations add new 
goals or ask fewer workers to accomplish work that had been spread among more peo-
ple. In those situations, the challenge is to avoid crossing the line from interesting jobs 
into jobs that burn out employees. In Minnesota, school principals have been asked 
to stretch beyond their administrative tasks such as staffi ng, budgeting, and ensuring 
building security to take responsibility for student success and teacher development. 
These goals emphasize the basic purpose that likely drew many principals to careers 
in education. However, the new goals require many additional hours to observe and 
Job Enlargement
Broadening the types of 
tasks performed in a job.
Figure 4.5
 Characteristics of a Motivating Job 

118 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
evaluate teachers. Schools that can afford 
it are adding behavior specialists and ad-
ministration managers to help principals 
keep schools running as they focus on 
their new priorities.21
Organizations that use job enlarge-
ment to make jobs more motivational 
employ techniques such as job exten-
sion and job rotation. Job extension 
is enlarging jobs by combining several 
relatively simple jobs to form a job with 
a wider range of tasks. An example might 
be combining the jobs of receptionist, 
typist, and fi le clerk into jobs containing all three kinds of work. This approach to job 
enlargement is relatively simple, but if all the tasks are dull, workers will not necessar-
ily be more motivated by the redesigned job.
Job rotation does not actually redesign the jobs themselves, but moves em-
ployees among several different jobs. This approach to job enlargement is common 
among production teams. During the course of a week, a team member may carry 
out each of the jobs handled by the team. Team members might assemble compo-
nents one day and pack products into cases another day. As with job extension, the 
enlarged jobs may still consist of repetitious activities, but with greater variation 
among those activities.
Job Enrichment 
The idea of job enrichment, or empowering workers by 
adding more decision-making authority to their jobs, comes from the work of Fred-
erick Herzberg. According to Herzberg’s two-factor theory, individuals are moti-
vated more by the intrinsic aspects of work (for example, the meaningfulness of 
a job) than by extrinsic rewards, such as pay. Herzberg identifi ed fi ve factors he 
associated with motivating jobs: achievement, recognition, growth, responsibility, 
and performance of the entire job. Thus, ways to enrich a manufacturing job might 
include giving employees authority to stop production when quality standards are 
not being met and having each employee perform several tasks to complete a par-
ticular stage of the process, rather than dividing up the tasks among the employees. 
For a salesperson in a store, job enrichment might involve the authority to resolve 
customer problems, including the authority to decide whether to issue refunds or 
replace merchandise.
In practice, however, it is important to note that not every worker responds posi-
tively to enriched jobs. These jobs are best suited to workers who are fl exible and 
responsive to  others; for these workers, enriched jobs can dramatically improve 
motivation.22
Self-Managing Work Teams Instead of merely enriching individual jobs, some 
organizations empower employees by designing work to be done by self-managing 
work teams. As described in Chapter 2, these teams have authority for an entire work 
process or segment. Team members typically have authority to schedule work, hire 
team members, resolve problems related to the team’s performance, and perform other 
duties traditionally handled by management. Teamwork can give a job such motivating 
characteristics as autonomy, skill variety, and task identity.
Job Extension
Enlarging jobs by com-
bining several relatively 
simple jobs to form a 
job with a wider range 
of tasks.
Job Rotation
Enlarging jobs by moving 
employees among sev-
eral different jobs.
Job Enrichment
Empowering workers by 
adding more decision-
making authority to jobs.
 Nordstrom empowers its employees to resolve 
customer problems, which can enhance their job 
experience. 

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  119
Because team members’ responsibilities are great, their jobs usually are defi ned 
broadly and include sharing of work assignments. Team members may, at one time or 
another, perform every duty of the team. The challenge for the organization is to pro-
vide enough training so that the team members can learn the necessary skills. Another 
approach, when teams are responsible for particular work processes or customers, is 
to assign the team responsibility for the process or customer, then let the team decide 
which members will carry out which tasks.
A study of work teams at a large fi nancial services company found that the right 
job design was associated with effective teamwork.23 In particular, when teams are 
self-managed and team members are highly involved in decision making, teams are 
more productive, employees more satisfi ed, and managers are more pleased with per-
formance. Teams also tend to do better when each team member performs a variety of 
tasks and when team members view their effort as signifi cant.
Flexible Work Schedules One way in which an organization can give employ-
ees some say in how their work is structured is to offer fl exible work schedules. De-
pending on the requirements of the organization and the individual jobs, organizations 
may be able to be fl exible about when employees work. As introduced in Chapter 2, 
types of fl exibility include fl extime and job sharing. Figure 4.6 illustrates alternatives 
to the traditional 40-hour workweek.
Flextime is a scheduling policy in which full-time employees may choose starting 
and ending times within guidelines specifi ed by the organization. The fl extime policy 
Flextime
A scheduling policy in 
which full-time employ-
ees may choose starting 
and ending times within 
guidelines speciﬁ ed by 
the organization.
Figure 4.6
Alternatives to the 
8-to-5 Job
Core Time
9:00 AM–3:00 PM
IBM permits a meal
break of up to two
hours so employees
can do personal tasks.
Two lawyers, both
fathers, share the
job of assistant
general counsel
at Timberland.
All employees of
Red Dot Corporation
have the option of
working 10 hours per
day, Monday through
Thursday.
7–6
7:00 AM
6:00 PM
M
Flextime
Job Sharing
Compressed Workweek
7–6
T
7–6
W
7–6
TH
O
F

120 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
may require that employees be at work between certain hours, say, 10:00 am and 3:00 pm. 
Employees work additional hours before or after this period in order to work the full 
day. One employee might arrive early in the morning in order to leave at 3:00 pm 
to pick up children after school. Another employee might be a night owl who prefers 
to arrive at 10:00 am and work until 6:00, 7:00, or even later in the evening. A fl extime 
policy also may enable workers to adjust a particular day’s hours in order to make time 
for doctor’s appointments, children’s activities, hobbies, or volunteer work. A work 
schedule that allows time for community and family interests can be extremely moti-
vating for some employees.
Job sharing is a work option in which two part-time employees carry out the 
tasks associated with a single job. Such arrangements can enable an organization to 
attract or retain valued employees who want more time to attend school or to care 
for family members. The job requirements in such an arrangement include the 
ability to work cooperatively and coordinate the details of one’s job with another 
person. 
Although not strictly a form of fl exibility for all individual employees, another 
scheduling alternative is the compressed workweek. A compressed workweek is a sched-
ule in which full-time workers complete their weekly hours in fewer than fi ve days. 
For example, instead of working eight hours a day for fi ve days, the employees could 
complete 40 hours of work in four 10-hour days. This alternative is most common, 
but some companies use other alternatives, such as scheduling 80 hours over nine days 
(with a three-day weekend every other week) or reducing the workweek from 40 to 
38 or 36 hours. Employees may appreciate the extra days available for leisure, family, 
or volunteer activities. An organization might even use this schedule to offer a kind of 
fl exibility—for example, letting workers vote whether they want a compressed work-
week during the summer months. This type of schedule has a couple of drawbacks, 
however. One is that employees may become exhausted on the longer workdays. An-
other is that if the arrangement involves working more than 40 hours during a week, 
the Fair Labor Standards Act requires the payment of overtime wages to nonsupervi-
sory employees.
Telework Flexibility can extend to work locations as well as work schedules. Be-
fore the Industrial Revolution, most people worked either close to or inside their own 
homes. Mass production technologies changed all this, separating work life from home 
life, as people began to travel to centrally located factories and offi ces. Today, however, 
skyrocketing prices for offi ce space, combined with drastically reduced prices for por-
table communication and computing devices, seem ready to reverse this trend. The 
broad term for doing one’s work away from a centrally located offi ce is telework, or 
telecommuting.
For employers, advantages of telework include less need for offi ce space and the 
ability to offer greater fl exibility to employees who are disabled or need to be avail-
able for children or elderly relatives. The employees using telework arrangements 
may have fewer absences from work than employees with similar demands who must 
commute to work. Telecommuting can also support a strategy of corporate social re-
sponsibility because these employees do not produce the greenhouse gas emissions 
that result from commuting by car. Telework is easiest to implement for people in 
managerial, professional, or sales jobs, especially those that involve working and com-
municating on a computer. A telework arrangement is generally diffi cult to set up for 
manufacturing workers. The Census Bureau has found telework to be most common 
Job Sharing
A work option in which 
two part-time employees 
carry out the tasks asso-
ciated with a single job.

121
among management and business professionals, with the fastest growth occurring in 
computer, engineering, and science jobs. A Chinese website called Ctrip conducted an 
experiment. It invited its call center workers to choose telework and then compared 
workers’ results over nine months. Productivity was higher among the workers who 
chose to work at home, presumably because they had fewer distractions but also be-
cause they tended to use some of the time saved on commuting to work longer hours. 
The company also noted that certain categories of workers, such as those who are 
younger, tended to want to be together at the offi ce, rather than teleworking.24
Given the possible benefi ts, it is not surprising that telework has been a rising trend. 
In a survey conducted by the Families and Work Institute with the Society for Human 
Resource Management, the use of telework grew between 2008 and 2014.25 In fact, as 
shown in the “Did You Know?” box, the organization found that occasional telework 
is available at two-thirds of companies.
Designing Ergonomic Jobs
The way people use their bodies when they work—whether toting heavy furniture 
onto a moving van or sitting quietly before a computer screen—affects their physical 
well-being and may affect how well and how long they can work. The study of the 
LO 4-8 Explain how 
organizations apply 
ergonomics to design 
safe jobs.
Did You Know?
In a survey by the Families and Work 
Institute and the Society for Human 
Resource Management, most com-
panies said they provide fl exible 
work arrangements. However, the 
most common kinds of fl exibility 
are limited—letting employees ad-
just their quitting time or control 
when they take breaks. Among the 
fl exible work schedules and places 
discussed in the chapter, telework 
on an occasional basis is the most 
common option.
 
Question
What advantages of telework 
might make it the most widely 
used form of fl exibility?
Sources: Lauren Weber, “Employ-
ers Are Getting More Flexible—Up 
to a Point,” Wall Street Journal, 
April 29, 2014, http://blogs.wsj
.com; Sarah Halzack, “A Not-
So-Flexible Defi nition of Flexible 
Work,” Washington Post, May 1, 
2014, http://www.washingtonpost
.com; Kenneth Matos and Ellen 
Galinsky, “2014 National Study of 
Employers,” Families and Work 
Institute and Society for Human 
Resource Management, accessed 
at http://www.whenworkworks.org.
Occasional Telework Dominates Flexibility Options
Occasional telework
Compressed workweek
Flextime on a daily basis
Regular telework
Job sharing
Flexibility Allowed for at Least Some Employees
Percentage
100
0
20
40
60
80
0
20

122 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
interface between individuals’ physiology and the characteristics of the physical work 
environment is called ergonomics. The goal of ergonomics is to minimize physical 
strain on the worker by structuring the physical work environment around the way 
the human body works. Ergonomics therefore focuses on outcomes such as reducing 
physical fatigue, aches and pains, and health complaints. Ergonomic research includes 
the context in which work takes place, such as the lighting, space, and hours worked.26
Ergonomic job design has been applied in redesigning equipment used in jobs 
that are physically demanding. Such redesign is often aimed at reducing the physical 
demands of certain jobs so that anyone can perform them. In addition, many inter-
ventions focus on redesigning machines and technology—for instance, adjusting the 
height of a computer keyboard to minimize occupational illnesses, such as carpal tun-
nel syndrome. The design of chairs and desks to fi t posture requirements is very im-
portant in many offi ce jobs. One study found that having employees participate in an 
ergonomic redesign effort signifi cantly reduced the number and severity of cumulative 
trauma disorders (injuries that result from performing the same movement over and 
over), lost production time, and restricted-duty days.27
A recent ergonomic challenge comes from the popularity of mobile devices. As 
workers fi nd more and more uses for these devices, they are at risk from repetitive-
stress injuries (RSIs). Typing with one’s thumbs to send frequent text messages on a 
smartphone can result in infl ammation of the tendons that move the thumbs. Laptop 
and notebook computers are handy to carry, but because the screen and keyboard 
are attached in a single device, the computer can’t be positioned to the ergonomi-
cally correct standards of screen at eye level and keyboard low enough to type with 
arms bent at a 90-degree angle. Heavy users of these devices must therefore trade off 
eyestrain against physical strain to wrists, unless they can hook up their device to an 
extra, properly positioned keyboard or monitor. Touchscreens pose their own risks. 
They are typically part of a fl at device such as a smartphone or tablet computer, and 
these are diffi cult to position for optimal viewing and typing. Using vertically oriented 
touchscreens causes even more muscle strain than tapping on a screen lying fl at. In 
addition, because touchscreens usually lack the tactile feedback of pressing keys on a 
keyboard, users tend to strike them with more force than they use on real keys. At-
taching a supplemental keyboard addresses this potential source of strain. When using 
mobile devices or any computer, workers can protect themselves by taking frequent 
breaks and paying attention to their posture while they work.28
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration has a “four-pronged” strategy 
for encouraging ergonomic job design. The fi rst prong is to issue guidelines (rather 
than regulations) for specifi c industries. As of 2012, these guidelines have been issued 
for the nursing home, grocery store, and poultry-processing industries, and shipyards. 
Second, OSHA enforces violations of its requirement that employers have a general 
duty to protect workers from hazards, including ergonomic hazards. Third, OSHA 
works with industry groups to advise employers in those industries. And fi nally, OSHA 
established a National Advisory Committee on Ergonomics to defi ne needs for further 
research. You can learn more about OSHA’s guidelines at the agency’s website, www
.osha.gov.
Designing Jobs That Meet Mental 
Capabilities and Limitations
Just as the human body has capabilities and limitations, addressed by ergonomics, 
the mind, too, has capabilities and limitations. Besides hiring people with certain 
Ergonomics
The study of the 
interface between in-
dividuals’ physiology 
and the characteristics 
of the physical work 
environment.
LO 4-9 Discuss how 
organizations can plan 
for the mental demands 
of a job.

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  123
mental skills, organizations can design jobs so that 
they can be accurately and safely performed given 
the way the brain processes information. Generally, 
this means reducing the information-processing re-
quirements of a job. In these simpler jobs, workers 
may be less likely to make mistakes or have acci-
dents. Of course, the simpler jobs also may be less 
motivating. Research has found that challenging 
jobs tend to fatigue and dissatisfy workers when 
they feel little control over their situation, lack 
social support, and feel motivated mainly to avoid 
errors. In contrast, they may enjoy the challenges 
of a diffi cult job where they have some control and 
social support, especially if they enjoy learning and 
are unafraid of making mistakes.29 Because of this 
drawback to simplifying jobs, it can be most ben-
efi cial to simplify jobs where employees will most appreciate having the mental de-
mands reduced (as in a job that is extremely challenging) or where the costs of errors 
are severe (as in the job of a surgeon or air-traffi c controller).
There are several ways to simplify a job’s mental demands. One is to limit the 
amount of information and memorization that the job requires. Organizations can 
also provide adequate lighting, easy-to-understand gauges and displays, simple-to-
operate equipment, and clear instructions. For project management, teamwork, and 
work done by employees in different locations, organizations may provide software 
that helps with tracking progress. Often, employees try to simplify some of the mental 
demands of their own jobs by creating checklists, charts, or other aids. Finally, every 
job requires some degree of thinking, remembering, and paying attention, so for every 
job, organizations need to evaluate whether their employees can handle the job’s men-
tal demands.
Changes in technology sometimes reduce job demands and errors, but in some 
cases, technology has made the problem worse. Some employees try to juggle informa-
tion from several sources at once—say, talking on a cell phone while typing, surfi ng 
the web for information during a team member’s business presentation, or repeatedly 
stopping work on a project to check e-mail or Twitter feeds. In these cases, the cell 
phone, handheld computer, and e-mail or tweets are distracting the employees from 
their primary task. They may convey important information, but they also break the 
employee’s train of thought, reducing performance and increasing the likelihood of 
errors. Research by a fi rm called Basex, which specializes in the knowledge economy, 
found that a big part of the information overload problem is recovery time, that is, 
the time it takes a person’s thinking to switch back from an interruption to the task at 
hand. The Basex researchers found that recovery time is from 10 to 20 times the length 
of the interruption. For example, after a 30-second pause to check a Twitter feed, the 
recovery time could be fi ve minutes or longer.30
Organizations probably can’t design interruption-free jobs, and few employees 
would want to isolate themselves entirely from the information and relationships 
available online. But employers can design jobs that empower workers to manage their 
time—for example, allowing them to schedule blocks of time when they concentrate 
on work and do not answer phone calls, e-mails, or text messages. Some employees set 
aside one or two periods during the day when they will open their e-mail programs, 
read messages, and respond to the messages immediately. As a vice president at United 
Technological advances can sometimes increase job demands. Some 
employees may be required to juggle information from several sources 
at once, which may distract them from their primary job task.

THINKING ETHICALLY
HOW CAN YOU ETHICALLY DESIGN A 
DANGEROUS JOB?
The most popular professional sport in the United States 
is football, but the future of the National Football League 
(NFL) is uncertain. Behind the doubts about football’s 
future is new scientifi c evidence suggesting that inju-
ries sustained by football players are more serious than 
had previously been thought. Winning a game requires 
aggressive play, including head collisions. Sometimes 
the result is a major concussion, known to be serious. 
But scientists have observed a link between taking less-
severe hits day in and day out and a condition called 
chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). With CTE, the 
brain’s repeated contact with the skull causes the for-
mation of abnormal protein tangles. People with CTE 
suffer from headaches, memory loss, episodes of anger, 
and suicidal tendencies.
A group of players and their families have sued the 
NFL for covering up the dangers of concussions in the 
past. They say the league formed a committee to in-
vestigate the consequences of these injuries but down-
played the long-term dangers it learned about. The 
plaintiffs are seeking a settlement of $5 billion to be paid 
out over 25 years. One of the lawyers points out that for 
a business earning $9 billion a year, it could be seen as 
reasonable to compensate former players who are dis-
abled by brain injuries sustained on the job.
Meanwhile, the NFL has tried modifying players’ jobs 
by creating new rules for the game. The rules include 
requiring knee pads to reduce knee-to-head collisions 
and moving kick-offs up fi ve yards to reduce the num-
ber of returns. Another change is that players will have 
fewer full-contact workouts during the preseason. In ad-
dition, when players experience symptoms associated 
with concussions, they may not return to play or practice 
until they have been cleared by a neurologist who is not 
affi liated with their team. These changes may reduce the 
injuries to players, but some players are concerned the 
changes will make the game less appealing to fans.
Questions
 1. How do the basic human rights defi ned in Chapter 
1—free consent, privacy, freedom of conscience, 
freedom of speech, and due process—apply to 
professional football players and the safety risks 
described here?
 2. Will making football players’ jobs safe achieve the 
ethical goal of the greatest good for the greatest 
number of people? Why or why not? Is there an 
ethical level of safety in football?
Sources: William Weinbaum and Steve Delsohn, “Dorsett, 
Others Show Signs of CTE,” ESPN Outside the Lines, April 
5, 2014, http://espn.go.com; Joseph Serna, “Study Finds 
Chronic Brain Damage in Former NFL Players,” Los Angeles 
Times, January 22, 2013, http://articles.latimes.com; Paul M. 
Barrett, “Pain Point,” Bloomberg Businessweek, January 13, 
2013, http://www.businessweek.com; Mark Fainaru-Wade, 
Jim Avila, and Steve Fainaru, “Doctors: Junior Seau’s Brain 
Had CTE,” Outside the Lines, ESPN, January 11, 2013, http://
espn.go.com.
124 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Health Group, Kyle McDowell has autonomy to structure his day to be as effective as 
possible. His tactic is to keep mornings free of meetings and other interruptions so he 
can spend time focusing on strategic goals.31
Information-processing errors also are greater in situations in which one person 
hands off information to another. Such transmission problems have become a major 
concern in the fi eld of medicine because critical information is routinely shared among 
nurses, doctors, and medical technicians, as well as between hospital employees chang-
ing shifts. Problems during shift changes are especially likely as a result of fatigue 
and burnout among employees with stressful jobs.32 A study of handoffs at Yale–New 
Haven Hospital found that the information conveyed was often informal, incomplete, 
and vague. One-fourth of the studied handoffs led to errors in the care given to pa-
tients afterward. Pediatrician Ted Sectish has conducted a pilot program to improve 
information-sharing during handoffs. After he trained young doctors in teamwork, set 
up computerized summaries of patients, and established a structure for what informa-
tion to convey, medical errors fell by 40%.33

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  125
SUMMARY
LO 4-1 Summarize the elements of work fl ow analysis.
• First, the analysis identifi es the amount and qual-
ity of a work unit’s outputs (products, parts of 
products, or services).
• Next, the analyst determines the work processes 
required to produce the outputs, breaking down 
tasks into those performed by each person.
• Finally, the work fl ow analysis identifi es the inputs 
used to carry out the processes.
LO 4-2 Describe how work fl ow is related to an organi-
zation’s structure.
• Within an organization, units and individuals 
must cooperate to create outputs, and the orga-
nization’s structure brings people together for 
this purpose.
• The 
structure 
may 
be 
centralized 
or 
decentralized.
• People may be grouped according to function or 
into divisions focusing on particular products or 
customer groups.
• A functional structure is most appropriate for peo-
ple who perform highly specialized jobs and hold 
relatively little authority.
• Employee empowerment and teamwork succeed 
best in a divisional structure.
LO 4-3 Defi ne the elements of a job analysis, and 
discuss their signifi cance for human resource 
management.
• Job analysis is the process of getting detailed in-
formation about jobs. It includes preparation of 
job descriptions and job specifi cations.
• A job description lists the tasks, duties, and re-
sponsibilities of a job.
• Job specifi cations look at the qualities needed in 
a person performing the job. They list the knowl-
edge, skills, abilities, and other characteristics 
that are required for successful performance of a 
job.
• Job analysis provides a foundation for carrying out 
many HRM responsibilities, including work rede-
sign, human resource planning, employee selection 
and training, performance appraisal, career plan-
ning, and job evaluation to determine pay scales.
LO 4-4 Tell how to obtain information for a job 
analysis.
• Information for analyzing an existing job often 
comes from incumbents and their supervisors.
• The Labor Department publishes general back-
ground information about jobs in the Dictionary of 
Occupational Titles and Occupational Information 
Network (O*NET).
• Job analysts, employees, and managers may 
complete a Position Analysis Questionnaire or 
fi ll out a survey for the Fleishman Job Analysis 
System.
• In the case of teamwork, there are standard ways 
to measure the nature of teams, such as looking 
at three critical dimensions: skill differentiation, 
authority differentiation, and temporal (time) 
stability.
LO 4-5 Summarize recent trends in job analysis.
• To broaden traditional approaches to job 
analysis in support of talent management, or-
ganizations develop competency models. A 
competency model identifi es and describes all 
the competencies, or personal capabilities, re-
quired for  success in a particular occupation or 
set of jobs.
• Because today’s workplace requires a high de-
gree of adaptability, job tasks and requirements 
are subject to constant change. For example, as 
some organizations downsize, they are defi ning 
jobs more broadly, with less supervision of those 
positions.
• Organizations 
are 
also 
adopting 
project-
based structures and teamwork, which also re-
quire fl exibility and the ability to handle broad 
responsibilities.
LO 4-6 Describe methods for designing a job so that it 
can be done effi ciently.
• The basic technique for designing effi cient 
jobs is industrial engineering, which looks for 
the simplest way to structure work to maximize 
effi ciency.
• Through methods such as time-and-motion stud-
ies, the industrial engineer creates jobs that are 
relatively simple and typically repetitive.
• These jobs may bore workers because they are so 
simple.
LO 4-7 Identify approaches to designing a job to make it 
motivating.
• According to the Job Characteristics Model, jobs 
are more motivating if they have greater skill vari-
ety, task identity, task signifi cance, autonomy, and 
feedback about performance effectiveness.
• Ways to create such jobs include job enlargement 
(through job extension or job rotation) and job 
enrichment.

126 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
• Self-managing work teams also offer greater skill 
variety and task identity.
• Flexible work schedules and telework offer greater 
autonomy.
LO 4-8 Explain how organizations apply ergonomics to 
design safe jobs.
• The goal of ergonomics is to minimize physical 
strain on the worker by structuring the physical 
work environment around the way the human 
body works.
• Ergonomic design may involve (1) modifying 
equipment to reduce the physical demands of per-
forming certain jobs or (2) redesigning the jobs 
themselves to reduce strain.
• Ergonomic design may target work practices as-
sociated with injuries.
LO 4-9 Discuss how organizations can plan for the men-
tal demands of a job.
• Employers may seek to reduce mental as well as 
physical strain.
• The job design may limit the amount of informa-
tion and memorization involved.
• Adequate lighting, easy-to-read gauges and  displays, 
simple-to-operate equipment, and clear instructions 
also can minimize mental strain.
• Computer software can simplify jobs—for ex-
ample, by performing calculations or fi ltering out 
spam from important e-mail.
• Organizations can select employees with the 
necessary abilities to handle a job’s mental 
demands.
KEY TERMS
work fl ow design, 102
job, 102
position, 102
job analysis, 105
job description, 105
job specifi cation, 106
Position Analysis Questionnaire 
(PAQ), 110
Fleishman Job Analysis System, 110
competency, 113
job design, 114
industrial engineering, 115
job enlargement, 117
job extension, 118
job rotation, 118
job enrichment, 118
fl extime, 119
job sharing, 120
ergonomics, 122
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. Assume you are the manager of a fast-food res-
taurant. What are the outputs of your work unit? 
What are the activities required to produce those 
outputs? What are the inputs? (LO 4-1)
 2. Based on Question 1, consider the cashier’s job in 
the restaurant. What are the outputs, activities, and 
inputs for that job? (LO 4-1)
 3. Consider the “job” of college student. Perform a 
job analysis on this job. What tasks are required in 
the job? What knowledge, skills, and abilities are 
necessary to perform those tasks? Prepare a job de-
scription based on your analysis. (LO 4-3)
 4. Discuss how the following trends are changing 
the skill requirements for managerial jobs in the 
United States. (LO 4-5)
 
a. Increasing use of social media
 
b. Increasing international competition
 
c. Increasing work-family confl icts
 5. Suppose you have taken a job as a trainer in a large 
bank that has created competency models for all 
its positions. How could the competency models 
help you succeed in your career at the bank? How 
could the competency models help you develop the 
bank’s employees? (LO 4-5)
 6. Consider the job of a customer service representative 
who fi elds telephone calls from customers of a retailer 
that sells online and through catalogs. What measures 
can an employer take to design this job to make it ef-
fi cient? What might be some drawbacks or challenges 
of designing this job for effi ciency? (LO 4-6)
 7. How might the job in Question 6 be designed to 
make it more motivating? How well would these 
considerations apply to the cashier’s job in  Question 
2? (LO 4-7)
 8. What ergonomic considerations might apply to 
each of the following jobs? For each job, what kinds 

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  127
of costs would result from addressing ergonomics? 
What costs might result from failing to address er-
gonomics? (LO 4-8)
 
a. A computer programmer.
 
b. A UPS delivery person.
 
c. A child care worker.
 9. Modern electronics have eliminated the need 
for a store’s cashiers to calculate change due on 
a purchase. How does this development modify 
the job description for a cashier? If you were 
a store manager, how would it affect the skills 
and qualities of job candidates you would want 
to hire? Does this change in mental processing 
requirements affect what you would expect from 
a cashier? How? (LO 4-9)
 10. Consider a job you hold now or have held recently. 
Would you want this job to be redesigned to place 
more emphasis on effi ciency, motivation, ergonom-
ics, or mental processing? What changes would you 
want, and why? (Or why do you not want the job to 
be redesigned?) (LO 4-9)
How Google Searches for the Right Job Requirements
Each year, around 2.5 million people apply to work 
at Google—about 60 résumés for every current 
employee. What makes the company so attractive? 
Google is famous for perks such as free food and on-
site recreation, but these are just the most obvious 
signs of a philosophy of valuing employees. Google’s 
leaders are committed to designing jobs that are 
highly motivating—partly to do what is right but also 
to unleash creativity.
Decisions about job design, like other decisions at 
Google, are driven by data. The company conducts 
frequent surveys to measure whether employees are 
satisfi ed with a variety of personnel decisions, such 
as how compensation is structured or how they feel 
about a new workspace. It shares the results with 
employees and uses attitude and performance mea-
sures to identify decisions associated with high 
performance.
Jobs at Google are motivating for several reasons. 
First, the company defi nes its mission in exciting 
terms. Software engineers, for example, do not just 
create programs or systems; they help “develop the 
next-generation technologies that change how mil-
lions interact.” Employees have great control over 
their time: they can negotiate work hours with their 
supervisor or take breaks to work out, get a mas-
sage, or take a nap whenever they need to recharge. 
Every employee may devote up to 20 percent of each 
workweek to a project he or she chooses, within or 
beyond the employee’s job description. Google also 
offers fl exibility related to the differences in how 
people do their best thinking and working. It creates 
workspaces for diversity, with areas to meet and talk 
as well as areas for quiet concentration and spaces for 
exercise. To support hiring of people who thrive with 
fl exibility, job specifi cations include versatility, strong 
ambition, problem-solving skills, and ability to work 
on teams.
When Google applies data to managers’ jobs, it looks 
for the behaviors associated with motivated workers. 
Job descriptions may be as specifi c as detailing actions 
to take on an employee’s fi rst day. These actions, ac-
cording to Laszlo Bock, the head of People Operations 
at Google, are associated with 15 percent greater pro-
ductivity months later.
Google applies its concern for employee well-being to 
ergonomics. The main concern in an offi ce setting is that 
hours behind a desk can be unhealthy. The health risks in-
crease further when employees are snacking and gaining 
weight. Here, as in other areas, solutions focus on choices, 
with the company nudging employees toward healthy op-
tions. While all snacks are free, the healthiest options are 
displayed most prominently. For ergonomics, employees 
may choose adjustable sit-stand desks or treadmill desks, 
so they can spend time out of their chairs.
Questions
 1. What elements of motivating jobs has Google put 
into place, according to this description? Name a 
few other elements that might be appropriate at 
Google.
 2. What are the ergonomic challenges of jobs at 
Google? How does the company give workers fl ex-
ibility in meeting those challenges?
Sources: Google company website, “Software Engineering,” Careers, http://
www.google.com, accessed May 7, 2014; Christopher Coleman, as told 
to Venessa Wong, “How to Create a Workplace People Never Want to 
Leave,” Bloomberg Businessweek, April 11, 2013, http://www.businessweek.
com; Mark C. Crowley, “Not a Happy Accident: How Google Deliber-
ately Designs Workplace Satisfaction,” Fast Company, March 21, 2013, 
http://www.fastcompany.com; James B. Stewart, “Looking for a Lesson 
in Google’s Perks,” New York Times, March 15, 2013, http://www.nytimes.
com; John Blackstone, “Inside Google’s Workplaces, from Perks to Nap 
Pods,” CBS News, January 22, 2013, http://www.cbsnews.com.
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY

128 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
Amazon’s Warehouse Jobs: Good or Grueling Work?
As the economy slowly recovers, one concern is that 
many jobs being created are not “good” jobs—that is, 
they offer low pay and little prospect for career ad-
vancement. However, online retailer Amazon is add-
ing jobs it says are good. With sales steadily increasing, 
Amazon keeps adding distribution centers to store, sort, 
and ship merchandise. In each new distribution center, 
it needs employees. Recently, the company announced 
it would add 5,000 full-time employees to fi ll orders in 
its distribution centers.
Amazon said these fulfi llment jobs are “not your 
typical warehouse jobs,” with the difference being the 
scale of operations. A typical Amazon fulfi llment cen-
ter occupies a million square feet. The job description 
includes operating a forklift and moving heavy boxes to 
pick, pack, and ship orders. Job specifi cations include 
the ability to put in 12-hour days of walking, bending, 
and reaching in a facility where temperatures may range 
between 60 and 90 degrees. Applicants also must be at 
least 18 years old, have a high school diploma or the 
equivalent, and be able to read directions in English.
In exchange for hard work, Amazon says it pays 
30 percent more than the average worker earns in a 
retail store. With the average retail wage near $10 per 
hour, that puts Amazon’s pay at about $13 per hour. In 
addition, full-time employees receive health insurance, 
a retirement savings plan, shares of the company’s stock, 
and tuition reimbursement up to $3,000 per year.
While working in an Amazon warehouse might pay 
more than working in the warehouse behind a brick-
and-mortar store, managers realize that the strenuous 
work may not seem like a good job to everyone who 
tries it. The company therefore has borrowed an idea 
from Zappos, a business it acquired: it will pay fulfi ll-
ment center employees to quit. An employee who 
decides within the fi rst year that he or she doesn’t want 
to stay at Amazon will receive $2,000 in severance pay. 
The amount increases by a thousand dollars a year until 
the fourth year, when employees who quit will receive 
$5,000. The goal of the program, which has the slogan 
“Please Don’t Take This Offer,” is to ensure that all em-
ployees are satisfi ed and committed to their work.
It also may be a way for Amazon to address com-
plaints expressed by some workers in its distribution 
centers. For example, some employees have fi led com-
plaints with the federal government that high tempera-
tures have created unsafe conditions and contributed to 
injuries resulting in trips to the hospital. Amazon could 
benefi t if employees who fi nd the working conditions 
too diffi cult choose to take the severance pay or sign 
up for tuition reimbursement to learn another kind of 
work.
Questions
 1. Based on the information provided, write a simple 
work fl ow analysis listing the inputs, activities, and 
outputs of an Amazon distribution center.
 2. Suppose Amazon hired you as a consultant to help 
it minimize the cost of severance pay to fulfi llment 
center workers. Suggest a few ways Amazon might 
consider improving the design of the jobs.
Sources: Mike Davis, “Amazon Warehouse Accepting Applications for Ful-
fi llment Positions,” Times of Trenton (NJ), April 22, 2014, http://blog
.nj.com; “Would You Take $5,000 to Quit Your Job? Amazon Banks on It,” 
AirTalk, April 14, 2014, http://www.scpr.org; Kim Peterson, “Why  Amazon 
Pays Employees $5,000 to Quit,” CBS News, April 11, 2014, http://www
.cbsnews.com; Shannon Mullen, “Is a Job at Amazon a ‘Good Job’?” 
 Marketplace, July 29, 2013, http://www.marketplace.org; Amazon company 
website, “Amazon Creates More than 5,000 New Full-Time Jobs across 
Growing U.S. Fulfi llment Network; Hiring Starts Now,” news release, 
July 29, 2013, http://www.amazon.com/pr. 
MANAGING TALENT
Inclusivity Defines BraunAbility’s Products and Its Jobs
Ralph Braun built his company out of his creativity in 
meeting his own personal needs. Growing up in rural 
Indiana, Braun had diffi culty climbing stairs, and doctors 
diagnosed him with spinal muscular atrophy. At age 14, 
Braun needed a wheelchair to get around. He was disap-
pointed but developed his mechanical aptitude, honed by 
years of helping his uncles fi x motorcycles and race cars, 
and used it to build himself a battery-powered scooter. 
With the scooter, Braun was able to navigate his way 
around a job at an automotive supply factory, where co-
workers would ask him to build something similar for 
their family members and acquaintances. Later, for better 
transportation to and from the job, Braun fi gured out how 
to convert a Dodge van with a lift so he could enter the 
van on his scooter and drive it from there. Again, people 
saw the van and asked for something similar. Eventually, 
Braun took all his earnings from scooters and van con-
versions and started Save-A-Step Manufacturing, later 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

CHAPTER 4 
Analyzing Work and Designing Jobs  129
named BraunAbility, which has become the world’s largest 
maker of wheelchair-accessible vans and wheelchair lifts.
The passion and purposefulness of the company’s 
founder are refl ected in the structure of BraunAbility’s 
jobs and work. Recruiting is inclusive, with an especially 
great appreciation for the potential of disabled work-
ers. Cyndi Garnett, the company’s director of human 
resources, notes that a person with a disability has to go 
through life solving accessibility problems creatively, so 
that person is likely to have become a great innovator. 
Wherever possible, work schedules are tailored to em-
ployees’ needs. Many employees have fl exible schedules, 
working their choice of eight hours between 7:00 a.m. 
and 6:00 p.m. Some employees telecommute full-time or 
part-time. Even production workers, who must coordi-
nate their tasks as vans move from one work station to 
the next, have fl exibility to negotiate arrangements that 
work for them as a group. They told the company that 
they wanted just a couple of short breaks during the day 
instead of a long lunch break, so they could leave earlier. 
BraunAbility went along with the idea.
As you might expect from a company founded by 
a creative man, innovation is valued over hierarchy at 
BraunAbility. Garnett says, “If anyone has an idea, that 
person is listened to.” For example, an employee sug-
gested that, rather than going through the process of 
safely disposing of leftover paint, workers use it to paint 
the vehicle fl oors under the carpet, for a little additional 
protection of the vehicle. The company readily adopted 
the suggestion.
Along with feeling respected, workers at BraunAbil-
ity feel their work matters to society. In Garnett’s words, 
because the company’s vans make it possible to travel 
independently, employees “know that they’re changing 
the lives of people with disabilities with every product 
that goes out the door.”
Questions
 1. In what ways is work at BraunAbility motivating? 
What other features of motivating work might 
BraunAbility be able to offer its employees?
 2. What place would effi cient job design have in a 
company like BraunAbility? How could BraunAbil-
ity improve job effi ciency in a way that is consistent 
with the company’s emphasis on inclusiveness and 
fl exibility?
 3. Imagine that you work with the HR director at 
BraunAbility, and she has asked you to suggest some 
ways to reinforce employees’ sense that their jobs 
have an important positive impact on others. What 
would you suggest?
Sources: Company website, www.braunability.com, accessed May 14, 2014; 
“Collaboration, Inclusion Help Create That ‘Small-Town’ Feeling,” white 
paper, HR.BLR.com, January 18, 2010, http://hr.blr.com; “How I Did It: 
Ralph Braun of BraunAbility,” Inc., December 1, 2009, http://www.inc.com; 
“BraunAbility Launches EntervanXT to Accommodate Needs of Taller 
Wheelchair and Scooter Users,” Marketing Weekly News, October 10, 2009, 
Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 1. Anita Hofschneider, “Bosses Say ‘Pick Up the Phone,’” The 
Wall Street Journal, August 27, 2013, http://online.wsj.com; 
Sue Shellenbarger, “Is This How You Really Talk?” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 23, 2013, http://online.wsj.com.
 2. Suzanne Vranica, “Old-School Ad Execs Sweat as Data 
Geeks Flex Muscle,” The Wall Street Journal, August 4, 2013, 
http://online.wsj.com.
 3. J. R. Hollenbeck, H. Moon, A. Ellis, et al., “Structural Con-
tingency Theory and Individual Differences: Examination of 
External and Internal Person-Team Fit,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 87 (2002), pp. 599–606; Sam Grobart, “Hooray for 
Hierarchy,” Bloomberg Businessweek, January 14, 2013, p. 74.
 4. J. E. Ellis, “At P&G, the Innovation Well Runs Dry,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, September 12, 2012, pp. 24–6.
 5. Oliver W. Cummings, “What Do Manufacturing Supervisors 
Really Do on the Job?” Industry Week, February 2010, p. 53.
 6. A. O’Reilly, “Skill Requirements: Supervisor- Subordinate 
Confl ict,” Personnel Psychology 26 (1973), pp. 75–80; J. Hazel, 
J. Madden, and R. Christal, “Agreement between Worker-
Supervisor Descriptions of the Worker’s Job,” Journal of 
Industrial Psychology 2 (1964), pp. 71–9; A. K. Weyman, “Inves-
tigating the Infl uence of Organizational Role on Perceptions 
of Risk in Deep Coal Mines,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88 
(2003), pp. 404–12.
 7. L. E. Baranowski and L. E. Anderson, “Examining Rater Source 
Variation in Work Behavior to KSA Linkages,”  Personnel Psy-
chology 58 (2005), pp. 1041–54.
 8. National Center for O*NET Development, “O*NET Prod-
ucts at Work,” Spring 2011, http://www.onetcenter.org.
 9. P. J. Taylor, W. D. Li, K. Shi, and W. C. Borman, “The Trans-
portability of Job Information across Countries,” Personnel Psy-
chology 61 (2008), pp. 69–111.
 10. PAQ Newsletter, August 1989; E. C. Dierdorff and M. A. Wilson, 
“A Meta-analysis of Job Analysis Reliability,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 88 (2003), pp. 635–46.
 11. E. Fleishman and M. Reilly, Handbook of Human Abilities 
(Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1992); 
E. Fleishman and M. Mumford, “Evaluating Classifi ca-
tions of Job Behavior: A Construct Validation of the Ability 
Requirements Scales,” Personnel Psychology 44(1991): 523–75.
 12. J. R. Hollenbeck, B. Beersma, and M. E. Schouten, “Beyond 
Team Types and Taxonomies: A Dimensional Scaling Ap-
proach for Team Description,” Academy of Management Re-
view 37 (2012): 82–108.
NOTES

130 PART 1 
The Human Resource Environment
 13. W. Cascio, Applied Psychology in Personnel Management, 4th ed. 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991).
 14. P. Wright and K. Wexley, “How to Choose the Kind of Job 
Analysis You Really Need,” Personnel, May 1985, pp. 51–5.
 15. M. 
Campion, 
A. 
Fink, 
B. 
Ruggeberg, 
L. 
Carr, 
G. Phillips, and R. Odman, “Doing Competencies Well: Best 
Practices in Competency Modeling,” Personnel Psychology 64 
(2011): 225–262; R. A. Noe, Employee Training and Development, 
5e (New York: McGraw-Hill Irwin, 2010);  J. Shippmann, 
R. Ash, M. Battista, L. Carr, L. Eyde, B. Hesketh, 
J. Kehow, K. Pearlman, and J. Sanchez, “The Practice of 
Competency Modeling,” Personnel Psychology 53 (2000): 703–
740; A. Lucia and R. Lepsinger, The Art and Science of Compe-
tency Models (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999).
 16. M. K. Lindell, C. S. Clause, C. J. Brandt, and 
R. S. Landis, “Relationship between Organizational Context 
and Job Analysis Ratings,” Journal of Applied Psychology 83 
(1998), pp. 769–76.
 17. D. S. DeRue, J. R. Hollenbeck, M. D. Johnson, 
D. R. Ilgen, and D. K. Jundt, “How Different Team Downsiz-
ing Approaches Infl uence Team-Level Adaptation and Perfor-
mance,” Academy of Management Journal 51 (2008), pp. 182–96; 
Anne Kadet, “‘Superjobs’: Why You Work More, Enjoy It 
Less,” The Wall Street Journal, May 8, 2011, http://online
.wsj.com.
 18. R. Hackman and G. Oldham, Work Redesign ( Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 1980).
 19. Rachel King, “A Day in the Life of an Internet Hall Monitor,” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 28, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com.
 20. M. R. Barrick, M. K. Mount, and N. Li, “The Theory of 
Purposeful Work Behavior: The Role of Personality, Higher- 
Order Goals, and Job Characteristics,” Academy of Manage-
ment Review 38 (2013): 132–53.
 21. Alleen Brown, “Twin Cities Principals See Expanding Job 
Descriptions and Longer Work Hours,” Twin Cities (MN) 
Daily Planet, October 30, 2011, http://www.tcdailyplanet.net.
 22. F. W. Bond, P. E. Flaxman, and D. Bunce, “The Infl uence of 
Psychological Flexibility on Work Redesign: Mediated Mod-
eration of a Work Reorganization Intervention,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 93 (2008), pp. 645–54.
 23. M. A. Campion, G. J. Medsker, and A. C. Higgs, “Relations 
between Work Group Characteristics and Effectiveness: Im-
plications for Designing Effective Work Groups,” Personnel 
Psychology 46 (1993), pp. 823–50.
 24. Scott Berinato, “To Raise Productivity, Let More Employ-
ees Work from Home,” Harvard Business Review, January– 
February 2014, pp. 28–9; Neil Shah, “Nearly One in Ten 
Employees Works from Home,” The Wall Street Journal, 
March 5, 2013, http://blogs.wsj.com.
 25. Lauren Weber, “Employers Are Getting More Flexible—Up 
to a Point,” The Wall Street Journal, April 29, 2014, http://
blogs.wsj.com; Kenneth Matos and Ellen Galinsky, “2014 
National Study of Employers,” Families and Work Institute 
and Society for Human Resource Management, accessed at 
http://www.whenworkworks.org.
 26. See, for example, S. Sonnentag and F. R. H. Zijistra, “Job 
Characteristics and Off-the-Job Activities as Predictors of 
Need for Recovery, Well-Being, and Fatigue,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 91 (2006), pp. 330–50.
 27. D. May and C. Schwoerer, “Employee Health by Design: 
Using Employee Involvement Teams in Ergonomic Job Re-
design,” Personnel Psychology 47 (1994), pp. 861–86.
 28. Franklin Tessler, “The Hidden Danger of Touch-
screens,” 
InfoWorld.com, 
January 
11, 
2012, 
Busi-
ness 
& 
Company 
Resource 
Center, 
http://galenet
. galegroup.com.
 29. N. W. Van Yperen and M. Hagerdoorn, “Do High Job De-
mands Increase Intrinsic Motivation or Fatigue or Both? The 
Role of Job Support and Social Control,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 46 (2003), pp. 339–48; N. W. Van Yperen and 
O. Janssen, “Fatigued and Dissatisfi ed or Fatigued but Sat-
isfi ed? Goal Orientations and Responses to High Job De-
mands,” Academy of Management Journal 45 (2002), pp. 
1161–71.
 30. Jonathan Spira, “Information Overload: None Are Immune,” 
Information Management, September/October 2011, p. 32.
 31. Alina Dizik, “For Some Executives, Doing Less Means Get-
ting More Done,” The Wall Street Journal, April 27, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com.
 32. L. E. LaBlanc, J. J. Hox, W. B. Schaufell, T. W. Taris, and M. 
C. W. Peters, “Take Care! The Evaluation of a Team-Based 
Burnout Intervention Program for Oncology Health Care 
Providers,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92 (2007), pp. 213–27.
 33. Darshak Sanghavi, “The Last of the All-Nighters,” 
The New York Times Magazine, August 7, 2011, Busi-
ness 
& 
Company 
Resource 
Center, 
http://galenet
.galegroup.com.

CHAPTER
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources
CHAPTER
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in 
Jobs
CHAPTER
Training Employees
CHAPTER
Developing Employees for Future Success
Acquiring, Training, and 
Developing Human Resources
PART TWO
5
6
7
8

PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Introduction
When you interview for a job, you know you should make a good first impression, 
so you dress appropriately, shake hands, and make eye contact. Employers, too, 
care about making a good first impression. That was at the top of Lars Schmidt’s 
mind when he joined National Public Radio as its director of talent acquisition. 
He explored the careers section of NPR’s website and realized it was not exactly 
displaying the best of the organization. While NPR was innovating in the media 
industry, its website had gone stale—no video, no social media, and a format 
that did not display well on mobile devices. In a day when people first go online 
for information, including information about jobs, Schmidt knew that the site was 
unacceptable. Under Schmidt’s direction, NPR updated the site with a better design, 
links to NPR’s presence on social media, and clips of  employees telling about NPR’s 
creative culture.
Schmidt also made changes to help NPR reach out to today’s mobile genera-
tion. He set up a career-related Twitter handle, @nprjobs, for tweets related to job 
openings and what life is like for the organization’s employees. Employees use the 
hashtag #nprlife when they share thoughts or photos of their work-related activi-
ties. Schmidt hopes people interested in radio will follow NPR and develop a posi-
tive image of the organization. Evidence suggests that the social-media presence is 
a plus. For example, one year when NPR had fewer students than usual applying for 
internships, NPR sent out a tweet that the application deadline would be extended. 
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 5-1 Discuss how to plan for human resources needed 
to carry out the organization’s strategy.
 LO 5-2 Determine the labor demand for workers in 
various job categories.
 LO 5-3 Summarize the advantages and disadvantages 
of ways to eliminate a labor surplus and avoid a 
labor shortage.
 LO 5-4 Describe recruitment policies organizations use to 
make job vacancies more attractive.
 LO 5-5 List and compare sources of job applicants.
 LO 5-6 Describe the recruiter’s role in the recruitment 
process, including limits and opportunities.
Planning for and Recruiting 
Human Resources
5

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 133
Following that one short message, the organization received 140 additional applica-
tions yielding 15 qualified new interns. Similarly, it filled a digital-news position when 
an already-employed worker noticed a tweet about the job and then began following 
NPR employees on Twitter and Tumblr. This worker liked what she saw of the individu-
als and NPR’s culture, so she applied and was hired.1
As this example shows, technology trends have created new opportunities for link-
ing workers and employers. At the same time, changing technological and economic 
conditions can pose challenges. The explosion in the use of social media and mobile 
technology has meant stiff competition for workers who understand these technolo-
gies. When customer demand rises (or falls), organizations may need more (or fewer) 
employees. When the labor market changes—say, when more people go to college or 
when a sizable share of the population retires—the supply of qualifi ed workers may 
grow, shrink, or change in nature. To prepare for and respond to these challenges, or-
ganizations engage in human resource planning—defi ned in Chapter 1 as identifying the 
numbers and types of employees the organization will require to meet its objectives.
This chapter describes how organizations carry out human resource planning. In 
the fi rst part of the chapter, we lay out the steps that go into developing and imple-
menting a human resource plan. Throughout each section, we focus especially on re-
cent trends and practices, including downsizing, employing temporary workers, and 
outsourcing. The remainder of the chapter explores the process of recruiting. We de-
scribe the process by which organizations look for people to fi ll job vacancies and the 
usual sources of job candidates. Finally, we discuss the role of recruiters.
The Process of Human Resource Planning
Organizations should carry out human resource planning so as to meet business objec-
tives and gain an advantage over competitors. To do this, organizations need a clear 
idea of the strengths and weaknesses of their existing internal labor force. They also 
must know what they want to be doing in the future—what size they want the organi-
zation to be, what products and services it should be producing, and so on. This knowl-
edge helps them defi ne the number and kinds of employees they will need. Human 
resource planning compares the present state of the organization with its goals for the 
future, then identifi es what changes it must make in its human resources to meet those 
goals. The changes may include downsizing, training existing employees in new skills, 
or hiring new employees.
These activities give a general view of HR planning. They take place in the human 
resource planning process shown in Figure 5.1. The process consists of three stages: 
forecasting, goal setting and strategic planning, and program implementation and 
evaluation. Each of these steps is important, but a recent survey found differences in 
how well organizations carry out the steps. In particular, most organizations are active 
in forecasting, but high-performing businesses are much more likely than others to do 
the work of tying human resource planning to the company’s strategy.2
Forecasting
The fi rst step in human resource planning is forecasting, as shown in the top por-
tion of Figure 5.1. In personnel forecasting, the HR professional tries to determine 
the supply of and demand for various types of human resources. The primary goal is 
to predict which areas of the organization will experience labor shortages or 
surpluses.
LO 5-1 Discuss how 
to plan for human re-
sources needed to carry 
out the organization’s 
strategy.
Forecasting
The attempts to deter-
mine the supply of and 
demand for various types 
of human resources to 
predict areas within the 
organization where there 
will be labor shortages 
or surpluses.

134 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Forecasting supply and demand can use statistical methods or judgment. Statisti-
cal methods capture historic trends in a company’s demand for labor. Under the right 
conditions, these methods predict demand and supply more precisely than a human 
forecaster can using subjective judgment. But many important events in the labor 
market have no precedent. When such events occur, statistical methods are of little 
use. To prepare for these situations, the organization must rely on the subjective judg-
ments of experts. Pooling their “best guesses” is an important source of ideas about 
the future.
Forecasting the Demand for Labor Usually, an organization forecasts de-
mand for specifi c job categories or skill areas. After identifying the relevant job catego-
ries or skills, the planner investigates the likely demand for each. The planner must 
forecast whether the need for people with the necessary skills and experience will in-
crease or decrease. There are several ways of making such forecasts.
At the most sophisticated level, an organization might use trend analysis, con-
structing and applying statistical models that predict labor demand for the next year, 
given relatively objective statistics from the previous year. These statistics are called 
leading indicators—objective measures that accurately predict future labor demand. 
They might include measures of the economy (such as sales or inventory levels), ac-
tions of competitors, changes in technology, and trends in the composition of the 
workforce and overall population. For example, ranchers feed corn to their cattle, so 
an increase in corn prices will cause an increase in the price of beef and a reduction in 
demand, reducing the need for workers in slaughterhouses. Thus, when a severe 
drought in 2012 caused corn prices to spike, Cargill forecast a reduction in the need 
for workers in its beef-processing operations the following year. The company closed 
a processing plant in Plainview, Texas, ahead of the reduced demand, so it did not have 
to pay idle workers there.3
Statistical planning models are useful when there is a long, stable history that 
can be used to reliably detect relationships among variables. However, these models 
LO 5-2 Determine 
the labor demand for 
workers in various job 
categories.
Trend Analysis
Constructing and apply-
ing statistical models 
that predict labor de-
mand for the next year, 
given relatively objective 
statistics from the previ-
ous year.
Leading Indicators
Objective measures that 
accurately predict future 
labor demand.
Forecasts of labor
surplus or shortage
Goal setting and
strategic planning
Program implementation
and evaluation
Forecasts of
labor demand
Forecasts of
labor supply
Figure 5.1
Overview of the Human 
Resource Planning 
Process

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 135
almost always have to be complemented with sub-
jective judgments of experts. There are simply too 
many “once-in-a-lifetime” changes to consider, and 
statistical models cannot capture them.
Determining Labor Supply Once a company 
has forecast the demand for labor, it needs an indi-
cation of the fi rm’s labor supply. Determining the 
internal labor supply calls for a detailed analysis of 
how many people are currently in various job cat-
egories or have specifi c skills within the organization. 
The planner then modifi es this analysis to refl ect 
changes expected in the near future as a result of re-
tirements, promotions, transfers, voluntary turnover, 
and terminations.
One type of statistical procedure that can be used for 
this purpose is the analysis of a transitional matrix. 
This is a chart that lists job categories held in one pe-
riod and shows the proportion of employees in each of those job categories in a future 
period. It answers two questions: “Where did people who were in each job category go?” 
and “Where did people now in each job category come from?” Table 5.1 is an example of 
a transitional matrix.
This example lists job categories for an auto parts manufacturer. The jobs listed 
at the left were held in 2011; the numbers at the right show what happened to the 
people in 2014. The numbers represent proportions. For example, .95 means 95% of 
the people represented by a row in the matrix. The column headings under 2014 refer 
to the row numbers. The fi rst row is sales managers, so the numbers under column 
(1) represent people who became sales managers. Reading across the fi rst row, we see 
that 95 of the people who were sales managers in 2011 are still sales managers in 2014. 
The other 5% correspond to position (8), “Not in organization,” meaning the 5% of 
employees who are not still sales managers have left the organization. In the second 
row are sales representatives. Of those who were sales reps in 2011, 5% were promoted 
to sales manager, 60% are still sales reps, and 35% have left the organization. In row 
(3), half (50%) of sales apprentices are still in that job, but 20% are now sales reps and 
30% have left the organization. This pattern of jobs shows a career path from sales ap-
prentice to sales representative to sales manager. Of course, not everyone is promoted, 
and some of the people leave instead.
Transitional Matrix
A chart that lists job 
categories held in one 
period and shows the 
proportion of employees 
in each of those job 
categories in a future 
period.
 As the average age of many workers in skilled trades grows, the com-
ing demand for workers in many trades is expected to outstrip supply 
in the United States. There is a potential for employers in some areas 
to experience a labor shortage because of this. How can HR prepare 
for this reality? What should be done now to avoid the shortage? 
Table 5.1
Transitional Matrix: 
 Example for an Auto Parts 
Manufacturer
2014
2011
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(1) Sales manager
.95
.05
(2) Sales representative
.05
.60
.35
(3) Sales apprentice
.20
.50
.30
(4) Assistant plant manager
.90
.05
.05
(5) Production manager
.10
.75
.15
(6) Production assembler
.10
.80
.10
(7) Clerical
.70
.30
(8) Not in organization
.00
.20
.50
.00
.10
.20
.30

136 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Reading down the columns provides another kind of information: the sources of 
employees holding the positions in 2014. In the fi rst column, we see that most sales 
managers (95%) held that same job three years earlier. The other 5% were promoted 
from sales representative positions. Skipping over to column (3), half the sales ap-
prentices on the payroll in 2014 held the same job three years before, and the other 
half were hired from outside the organization. This suggests that the organization fi lls 
sales manager positions primarily through promotions, so planning for this job would 
focus on preparing sales representatives. In contrast, planning to meet the organiza-
tion’s needs for sales apprentices would emphasize recruitment and selection of new 
employees.
Matrices such as this one are extremely useful for charting historical trends in 
the company’s supply of labor. More important, if conditions remain somewhat 
constant, they can also be used to plan for the future. For example, if we believe that 
we are going to have a surplus of labor in the production assembler job category 
in the next three years, we can plan to avoid layoffs. Still, historical data may not 
always reliably indicate future trends. Planners need to combine statistical forecasts 
of labor supply with expert judgments. For example, managers in the organization 
may see that a new training program will likely increase the number of employees 
qualifi ed for new openings. Forecasts of labor supply also should take into account 
the organization’s pool of skills. Many organizations include inventories of em-
ployees’ skills in an HR database. When the organization forecasts that it will need 
new skills in the future, planners can consult the database to see how many existing 
employees have those skills.
Besides looking at the labor supply within the organization, the planner should 
examine trends in the external labor market. The planner should keep abreast of labor 
market forecasts, including the size of the labor market, the unemployment rate, and 
the kinds of people who will be in the labor market. For example, we saw in  Chapter 2 
that the U.S. labor market is aging and that immigration is an important source of new 
workers. Important sources of data on the external labor market include the Occupa-
tional Outlook Quarterly and the Monthly Labor Review, published by the Labor Depart-
ment’s Bureau of Labor Statistics. Details and news releases are available at the website 
of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (www.bls.gov).
Determining Labor Surplus or Shortage Based on the forecasts for labor 
demand and supply, the planner can compare the fi gures to determine whether there 
will be a shortage or surplus of labor for each job category. Determining expected 
shortages and surpluses allows the organization to plan how to address these 
challenges.
Goal Setting and Strategic Planning
The second step in human resource planning is goal setting and strategic planning, as 
shown in the middle of Figure 5.1. The purpose of setting specifi c numerical goals is 
to focus attention on the problem and provide a basis for measuring the organization’s 
success in addressing labor shortages and surpluses. The goals should come directly 
from the analysis of labor supply and demand. They should include a specifi c fi gure in-
dicating what should happen with the job category or skill area and a specifi c timetable 
for when the results should be achieved.
For each goal, the organization must choose one or more human resource strate-
gies. A variety of strategies is available for handling expected shortages and surpluses 
LO 5-3 Summarize 
the advantages and 
disadvantages of ways 
to eliminate a labor 
 surplus and avoid a 
labor shortage.

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 137
of labor. The top of Table 5.2 shows major options for reducing an expected labor sur-
plus, and the bottom of the table lists options for avoiding an expected labor shortage.
This planning stage is critical. The options differ widely in their expense, speed, and 
effectiveness. Options for reducing a labor surplus cause differing amounts 
of human suffering. The options for avoiding a labor shortage differ in 
terms of how easily the organization can undo the change if it no longer 
faces a labor shortage. For example, an organization probably would not 
want to handle every expected labor shortage by hiring new employees. 
The process is relatively slow and involves expenses to fi nd and train new 
employees. Also, if the shortage becomes a surplus, the organization will 
have to consider laying off some of the employees. Layoffs involve an-
other set of expenses, such as severance pay, and they are costly in terms of 
human suffering.
Another consideration in choosing an HR strategy is whether the em-
ployees needed will contribute directly to the organization’s success. Orga-
nizations are most likely to benefi t from hiring and retaining employees 
who provide a core  competency—that is, a set of knowledge and skills 
that make the organization superior to competitors and create value for 
customers. At a store, for example, core competencies include choosing 
merchandise that shoppers want and providing shoppers with excellent ser-
vice. For other work that is not a core competency—say, cleaning the store 
and providing  security—the organization may benefi t from using HR strat-
egies other than hiring full-time employees.
Organizations try to anticipate labor surpluses far enough ahead that 
they can freeze hiring and let natural attrition (people leaving on their own) 
reduce the labor force. Unfortunately for many workers, organizations 
Core Competency
A set of knowledge and 
skills that make the 
organization superior to 
competitors and create 
value for customers.
Table 5.2
HR Strategies for 
 Addressing a Labor 
Shortage or Surplus
OPTIONS FOR REDUCING A SURPLUS
OPTION
SPEED OF RESULTS
AMOUNT OF SUFFERING CAUSED
Downsizing
Fast
High
Pay reductions
Fast
High
Demotions
Fast
High
Transfers
Fast
Moderate
Work sharing
Fast
Moderate
Hiring freeze
Slow
Low
Natural attrition
Slow
Low
Early retirement
Slow
Low
Retraining
Slow
Low
OPTIONS FOR AVOIDING A SHORTAGE
OPTION
SPEED OF RESULTS
ABILITY TO CHANGE LATER
Overtime
Fast
High
Temporary employees
Fast
High
Outsourcing
Fast
High
Retrained transfers
Slow
High
Turnover reductions
Slow
Moderate
New external hires
Slow
Low
Technological innovation
Slow
Low
Cold Stone Creamery employees give 
their company the competitive advantage 
with their “entertainment factor.” The 
company is known to seek out employees 
who like to perform and then “audition” 
rather than interview potential employees.

138 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
often stay competitive in a fast-changing environment by responding to a labor surplus 
with downsizing, which delivers fast results. The impact is painful for those who lose 
jobs, as well as those left behind to carry on without them. To handle a labor shortage, 
organizations typically hire temporary employees or use outsourcing. Because down-
sizing, using temporary employees, and outsourcing are most common, we will look at 
each of these in greater detail in the following sections.
Downsizing As we discussed in Chapter 2, downsizing is the planned elimina-
tion of large numbers of personnel with the goal of enhancing the organization’s com-
petitiveness. The primary reason organizations engage in downsizing is to promote 
future competitiveness. According to surveys, they do this by meeting four objectives:
 1. Reducing costs—Labor is a large part of a company’s total costs, so downsizing is an 
attractive place to start cutting costs.
 2. Replacing labor with technology—Closing outdated factories, automating, or intro-
ducing other technological changes reduces the need for labor. Often, the labor 
savings outweigh the cost of the new technology.
 3. Mergers and acquisitions—When organizations combine, they often need less bu-
reaucratic overhead, so they lay off managers and some professional staff members.
 4. Moving to more economical locations—Some organizations move from one area of the 
United States to another, especially from the Northeast and Midwest to the South 
and the mountain regions of the West. For example, managers looking for ways to 
cut costs at H. J. Heinz observed that the facility in Pocatello, Idaho, was no longer 
mainly processing locally grown potatoes. Rather, in response to shifting consumer 
demands, it was making products for which 70% of the ingredients came from east of 
the Mississippi (traveling 1,000 miles or so) and other ingredients were from Denver 
(almost 600 miles away). Heinz decided to close the Idaho facility and have its Ohio 
factory handle the production of all frozen foods, because Ohio is more centrally 
located for both ingredients and customers.4 Other moves have shifted jobs to other 
countries, including Mexico, India, and China, where wages are lower.
Although downsizing has an immediate effect on costs, much of the evidence sug-
gests that it hurts long-term organizational effectiveness. This is especially true for 
certain kinds of companies, such as those that emphasize research and development 
and where employees have extensive contact with customers.5 The negative effect of 
downsizing was especially high among fi rms that engaged in high-involvement work 
practices, such as the use of teams and performance-related pay incentives. As a result, 
the more a company tries to compete through its human resources, the more layoffs 
hurt productivity.6
Why do so many downsizing efforts fail to meet expectations? There seem to be 
several reasons. First, although the initial cost savings give a temporary boost to prof-
its, the long-term effects of an improperly managed downsizing effort can be nega-
tive. Downsizing leads to a loss of talent, and it often disrupts the social networks 
through which people are creative and fl exible.7 Unless the downsizing is managed 
well, employees feel confused, demoralized, and even less willing to stay with the or-
ganization. Organizations may not take (or even know) the steps that can counter 
these reactions—for example, demonstrating how they are treating employees fairly, 
building confi dence in the company’s plans for a stronger future, and showing the 
organization’s commitment to behaving responsibly with regard to all its stakeholders, 
including employees, customers, and the community.8 The “HR Oops!” box illustrates 
consequences of not taking those steps.
Downsizing
The planned elimination 
of large numbers of per-
sonnel with the goal of 
enhancing the organiza-
tion’s competitiveness.

139
Also, many companies wind up rehiring. Downsizing campaigns often eliminate 
people who turn out to be irreplaceable. In one survey, 80% of the fi rms that had 
downsized later replaced some of the very people they had laid off. In one Fortune 
100 fi rm, a bookkeeper making $9 an hour was let go. Later, the company realized she 
knew many things about the company that no one else knew, so she was hired back as 
a consultant—for $42 an hour.9 However, recent trends in employment suggest that 
companies will not rehire employees for many of the jobs eliminated when they re-
structure, introduce automation, or move work to lower-cost regions.10
Finally, downsizing efforts often fail because employees who survive the purge be-
come self-absorbed and afraid to take risks. Motivation drops because any hope of 
future promotions—or any future—with the company dies. Many employees start 
looking for other employment opportunities. The negative publicity associated with 
a downsizing campaign can also hurt the company’s image in the labor market, so it is 
harder to recruit employees later.
Many problems with downsizing can be reduced with better planning. Instead of 
slashing jobs across the board, successful downsizing makes surgical strategic cuts that 
improve the company’s competitive position, and management addresses the prob-
lem of employees becoming demoralized. During the housing boom of the previous 
decade, landscaping companies struggled to fi nd enough talented, motivated work-
ers, especially at the supervisory level. When bust followed boom, well-managed 
Getting lean improves an organiza-
tion’s effi ciency and makes it stron-
ger for the long haul. But some 
organizations are so desperate to 
cut costs that they don’t just get 
lean, they starve themselves of im-
portant human resources.
Some shoppers and business 
observers think that’s what Walmart 
did during the most recent reces-
sion. Since 2008, the start of the 
recession, the company increased 
the number of stores by 13% but re-
duced its workforce by 1.4%. While 
cuts at headquarters could account 
for some of the difference between 
these percentages, it’s likely that the 
impact includes stores trying to op-
erate with fewer employees.
Customers have observed less 
help available and longer checkout 
lines. They also complain that over-
whelmed employees are unable to 
keep shelves stocked with merchan-
dise. Walmart’s offi cial response is 
that the percentage of items in stock 
has actually improved. However, 
reporters have cited examples of 
employees saying that the merchan-
dise indeed has been delivered to 
the store, but they don’t have time 
to move it to the shelves. And in 
the American Customer Satisfac-
tion Index, a survey of consumer 
opinions about major corporations, 
Walmart recently was the lowest-
ranked brand of department or dis-
count store—the sixth year it was 
last or tied for last.
One employee said she was 
told her store was not allowed to 
schedule more worker-hours un-
less it had higher sales. Is this an 
example of a company that staffs 
effi ciently or one that is starving it-
self of human resources? Sales at 
Walmart have been falling, though 
profi ts have held steady. Spending 
less for human resources is one way 
to limit costs and maintain profi ts 
when sales decline. But if custom-
ers are leaving to fi nd better service 
elsewhere, the company could be 
setting up a downward spiral.
Questions
 1. What pros and cons of 
downsizing do you think apply 
to this example?
 2. Besides reducing the 
workforce in its stores, how 
else could a retailer like 
Walmart respond to a decline 
in demand?
Sources: Michael Calia, “Wal-Mart Of-
fers Weak Outlook; U.S. Sales Keep 
Falling,” The Wall Street Journal,
May 15, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; 
Bill Saporito, “The Trouble Lurking on 
Walmart’s Empty Shelves,” Time, April 9, 
2013, http://business.time.com; Renee 
Dudley, “Walmart Faces the Cost of 
Cost-Cutting: Empty Shelves,” Bloom-
berg Businessweek, March 28, 2013, 
http://www.businessweek.com.
Trimming More Than Just Fat
HR Oops!

140 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
landscapers used downsizing as an opportunity to improve quality. Bill Davids of 
 Clarence Davids & Co. was one landscaping manager who selected the least produc-
tive employees for layoffs. He then rallied the remaining employees to focus on how to 
operate more effi ciently and keep the business afl oat during lean times. Davids told a 
reporter, “Once [employees] see you’re serious and several people have exited, you get 
the buy-in pretty quick.”11 In fact, for good workers, it can be motivating to be part of 
a higher-quality, if smaller, team.
Reducing Hours Given the limitations of downsizing, many organizations are 
more carefully considering other avenues for eliminating a labor surplus. Among the 
alternatives listed in Table 5.2, one that is seen as a way to spread the burden more 
fairly is cutting work hours, generally with a corresponding reduction in pay. Besides 
the thought that this is a more equitable way to weather a slump in demand, compa-
nies choose a reduction in work hours because it is less costly than layoffs requiring 
severance pay, and it is easier to restore the work hours than to hire new employees 
after a downsizing effort. When plastics manufacturer Saint-Gobain in Bristol, Rhode 
Island, experienced a business slowdown, it did not lay off any workers but cut many 
workers’ hours by 40%. The state stepped in and contributed 70% of the lost wages 
in exchange for the workers’ continued employment—less than it would have paid in 
unemployment compensation. This kind of “work share” program, which helps em-
ployers keep experienced employees, has been popular in Europe but is fairly new to 
the United States.12
Early-Retirement Programs Another popular way to reduce a labor surplus is 
with an early-retirement program. As we discussed in Chapter 2, the average age of the 
U.S. workforce is increasing. But even though many baby boomers are reaching tra-
ditional retirement age, indications are that this group has no intention of leaving the 
workforce soon.13 Reasons include improved health of older people, jobs becoming 
less physically demanding, concerns about the long-term viability of Social Security 
and pensions, the recent drop in the value of older workers’ retirement assets (espe-
cially stock funds and home values), and laws against age discrimination. Under the 
pressures associated with an aging labor force, many employers try to encourage older 
workers to leave voluntarily by offering a variety of early-retirement incentives. The 
more lucrative of these programs succeed by some measures. Research suggests that 
these programs encourage lower-performing older workers to retire.14 Sometimes 
they work so well that too many workers retire.
Many organizations are moving from early-retirement programs to phased- 
retirement programs. In a phased-retirement program, the organization can continue 
to enjoy the experience of older workers while reducing the number of hours that 
these employees work, as well as the cost of those employees. This option also can give 
older employees the economic and psychological benefi ts of easing into retirement, 
rather than being thrust entirely into a new way of life.15
Employing Temporary and Contract Workers While downsizing has been 
a popular way to reduce a labor surplus, the most widespread methods for eliminating 
a labor shortage are hiring temporary and contract workers and outsourcing work. 
Employers may arrange to hire a temporary worker through an agency that specializes 
in linking employers with people who have the necessary skills. The employer pays 
the agency, which in turn pays the temporary worker. Employers also may contract 
directly with individuals, often professionals, to provide a particular service.

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 141
To use this source of labor effectively, employers need to overcome some disad-
vantages. In particular, temporary and contract workers may not be as committed 
to the organization, so if they work directly with customers, that attitude may spill 
over and affect customer loyalty. Therefore, many organizations try to use permanent 
employees in key jobs and use temporary and contract workers in ways that clearly 
 supplement—and do not potentially replace—the permanent employees.16
Temporary Workers As we saw in Chapter 2, the federal government estimated that 
organizations are using over a million temporary workers. Temporary employment is 
popular with employers because it gives them fl exibility they need to operate effi ciently 
when demand for their products changes rapidly. If an employer believes a higher level of 
demand will persist, it often can hire the temps as permanent workers. Siemens contracts 
with a temporary employment agency to provide production and warehouse workers for 
its Rail Systems Division in Sacramento. If Siemens determines a long-term need for ad-
ditional workers, it selects high-performing temporary employees to put on its payroll.17
In addition to fl exibility, temporary employment offers lower costs. Using temporary 
workers frees the employer from many administrative tasks and fi nancial burdens associ-
ated with being the “employer of record.” The cost of employee benefi ts, including health 
care, pension, life insurance, workers’ compensation, and unemployment insurance, can 
account for 40% of payroll expenses for permanent employees. Assuming the agency pays 
for these benefi ts, a company using temporary workers may save money even if it pays the 
agency a higher rate for that worker than the usual wage paid to a permanent employee.
Agencies that provide temporary employees also may handle some of the tasks as-
sociated with hiring. Small companies that cannot afford their own testing programs 
often get employees who have been tested by a temporary agency. Many temporary 
agencies also train employees before sending them to employers. This reduces em-
ployers’ training costs and eases the transition for the temporary worker and employer.
Finally, temporary workers may offer value not available from permanent employ-
ees. Because the temporary worker has little experience at the employer’s organiza-
tion, this person brings an objective point of view to the organization’s problems and 
procedures. Also, a temporary worker may have a great deal of experience in other 
organizations that can be applied to the current assignment.
To obtain these benefi ts, organizations need to overcome the disadvantages associ-
ated with temporary workers. For example, tension can develop between temporary 
and permanent employees. Employers can minimize resentment and ensure that all 
workers feel valued by not bringing in temporary or contract workers immediately 
after downsizing and by hiring temporary workers from agencies that provide benefi ts. 
In addition, employers must avoid the legal pitfalls associated with temporary employ-
ees and contract workers, as described in “HR How To.”
Employee or Contractor? Besides using a temporary employment agency, a com-
pany can obtain workers for limited assignments by entering into contracts with them. 
If the person providing the services is an independent contractor, rather than an em-
ployee, the company does not pay employee benefi ts, such as health insurance and 
vacations. As with using temporary employees, the savings can be signifi cant, even if 
the contractor works at a higher rate of pay.
This strategy carries risks, however. If the person providing the service is a contrac-
tor and not an employee, the company is not supposed to directly supervise the worker. 
The company can tell the contractor what criteria the fi nished assignment should 
meet but not, for example, where or what hours to work. This distinction is signifi cant, 
because under federal law, if the company treats the contractor as an employee, the 

142
company has certain legal obligations, described in Part 4, related to matters such as 
overtime pay and withholding taxes.
When an organization wants to consider using independent contractors as a way to 
expand its labor force temporarily, human resource professionals can help by alerting the 
company to the need to verify that the arrangement will meet the legal requirements. A 
good place to start is with the advice to small businesses at the Internal Revenue Service 
website (www.irs.gov); search for “independent contractor” to fi nd links to information 
and guidance. In addition, the organization may need to obtain professional legal advice.
Outsourcing Instead of using a temporary or contract employee to fi ll a single 
job, an organization might want a broader set of services. Contracting with another 
When a company lands a big order, 
needs to catch up on administrative 
work, or isn’t sure demand will con-
tinue at present levels, contingent 
workers look like the ideal solution. 
The company can hire workers from 
a temp agency or negotiate con-
tracts for short-term projects, and 
when the project ends or demand 
falls, the company doesn’t have to 
fi gure out what to do with the work-
ers. In addition, the company may 
be able to save money because it 
doesn’t have to provide employee 
benefi ts or withhold taxes from con-
tract workers’ pay.
However, it is not up to the com-
pany to decide whether its workers 
are really independent contractors. 
The Internal Revenue Service has 
guidelines for what constitutes an 
employee and an independent con-
tractor. Here are some tips for how 
to classify workers:
 • Companies can specify what 
they want a contractor to ac-
complish. But if the employer 
tells the workers how to do the 
work and controls the workers’ 
activities, then the workers are 
employees, not independent 
contractors.
 • Providing the workers with sup-
plies or tools and reimbursing 
the workers for the expenses 
associated with their work tend 
to be signs that the workers are 
employees.
 • Providing the workers with ben-
efi ts such as insurance and paid 
vacation time is a sign that the 
workers are employees. Usu-
ally, temporary workers receive 
these benefi ts from an agency 
that employs them, not from the 
company that pays the agency 
for the workers’ services.
 • If a company hires workers from 
a temp agency to do work for 
a long period of time, directly 
controls what these workers do, 
and uses them to perform key 
roles, the government may see 
the company as an employer 
or “joint employer” with the 
temp agency. A company that 
is a joint employer has to fol-
low labor laws, including those 
against discrimination (see 
Chapter 3) and legal require-
ments for pay (see Chapter 12).
 • If a company is not sure whether 
its workers are employees or in-
dependent contractors, it should 
get professional advice. Compa-
nies and workers may ask the IRS 
to decide. The way to do this 
is to fi le a Form SS-8 requesting a 
determination from the IRS. 
The form is available at the IRS 
website (http://www.irs.gov).
Questions
 1. Suppose a small company 
does not want the headaches 
of administering benefi ts 
programs, so it hires its 
workers from a temp agency 
and keeps them on for several 
years. Would you expect the 
IRS to agree that these are not 
employees? Why or why not?
 2. Suppose you work in the HR 
department of a company 
that wants to hire production 
workers as independent 
contractors. What advice 
would you give management 
about this idea?
Sources: Internal Revenue Service, “In-
dependent Contractor vs. Employee,” 
Tax Topic 762, last updated March 20, 
2014, http://www.irs.gov; Internal Revenue 
Service, “Independent Contractor (Self-
Employed) or Employee?” last updated 
November 5, 2013, http://www.irs.gov; 
“Hiring Temporary Employees,” Entrepre-
neur, February 25, 2013, http://www
.entrepreneur.com.
Using Temporary Employees and Contractors
HR How To

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 143
organization to perform a broad set of services is called outsourcing. Organizations 
use outsourcing as a way to operate more effi ciently and save money. They choose 
outsourcing fi rms that promise to deliver the same or better quality at a lower cost. 
One reason they can do this is that the outside company specializes in the service and 
can benefi t from economies of scale (the economic principle that producing some-
thing in large volume tends to cost less for each additional unit than producing in 
small volume). This effi ciency is often the attraction for outsourcing human resource 
functions such as payroll. Costs also are lower when the outsourcing fi rm is located in 
a part of the world where wages are relatively low. The labor forces of countries such 
as China, India, Jamaica, and those in Eastern Europe have been creating an abundant 
supply of labor for unskilled and low-skilled work.
The fi rst uses of outsourcing emphasized manufacturing and routine tasks. 
However, technological advances in computer networks and transmission have 
speeded up the outsourcing process and have helped it spread beyond manufactur-
ing areas and low-skilled jobs. For example, newspapers outsource ad creation to 
Outsourcing USA, a small business in Dallas, Pennsylvania. At Outsourcing USA, 
employees design advertisements for print, web, and mobile editions of their cli-
ents’ newspapers. The company offers low costs by specializing in a niche market, 
focusing relentlessly on effi ciency, and hiring recent graduates. Careful supervi-
sion and a one-month training program ensure that Outsourcing USA delivers 
quality work.18
Using outsourcing may be a necessary way to operate as effi ciently as competitors, 
but it does pose challenges. Quality-control problems, security violations, and poor cus-
tomer service have sometimes wiped out the cost savings attributed to lower wages. To 
ensure success with an outsourcing strategy, companies should follow these guidelines:
 • Learn about what the provider can do for the company, not just the costs. Make 
sure the company has the necessary skills, including an environment that can meet 
standards for clear communication, on-time shipping, contract enforcement, fair 
labor practices, and environmental protection. Outsourcing USA fi nds that its cli-
ents prefer buying ad production services from a local company rather than going 
overseas for potentially lower prices. The Pennsylvania company can offer news-
papers in the region faster communications (by being in the same time zone) and 
greater familiarity with the nuances of American English.19
 • Do not offshore any work that is proprietary or requires tight security.20
 • Start small and monitor the work closely, especially in the beginning, when prob-
lems are most likely. Indiana’s experience offers a cautionary tale with its attempt 
to outsource the processing of welfare benefi ts to IBM. While IBM could offer 
expertise in developing a website and managing the data, it soon became apparent 
that the company was unfamiliar with some of the challenges of serving the poor. 
IBM had expected most recipients to sign up online, but most phoned or came into 
state welfare offi ces because they were unable to use the Internet or simply more 
accustomed to handling matters face-to-face. Callers were on hold for hours, and 
processing fell far behind. Indiana ended up changing the arrangement so that state 
employees work with clients while IBM handles the back end of the system.21
 • Look for opportunities to outsource work in areas that promote growth, for example, 
by partnering with experts who can help the organization tap new markets. Mans-
fi eld Sales Partners offers this type of advantage to companies that have a limited 
sales force or want to test a new market. Such companies can use Mansfi eld’s team of 
experienced salespeople to introduce their products in markets around the world.22
Outsourcing
Contracting with another 
organization to perform a 
broad set of services.

144 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Overtime and Expanded Hours 
Organizations facing a labor shortage 
may be reluctant to hire employees, even temporary workers, or to commit to an 
outsourcing arrangement. Especially if the organization expects the shortage to 
be temporary, it may prefer an arrangement that is simpler and less costly. Under 
some conditions, these organizations may try to garner more hours from the exist-
ing labor force, asking them to go from part-time to full-time status or to work 
overtime.
A major downside of overtime is that the employer must pay nonmanagement em-
ployees one-and-a-half times their normal wages for work done overtime. Even so, 
employers see overtime pay as preferable to the costs of hiring and training new em-
ployees. The preference is especially strong if the organization doubts that the current 
higher level of demand for its products will last long.
For a short time at least, many workers appreciate the added compensation for 
working overtime. Over extended periods, however, employees feel stress and frustra-
tion from working long hours. Overtime therefore is best suited for short-term labor 
shortages.
Implementing and Evaluating the HR Plan
For whatever HR strategies are selected, the fi nal stage of human resource planning 
involves implementing the strategies and evaluating the outcomes. This stage is rep-
resented by the bottom part of Figure 5.1. When implementing the HR strategy, the 
organization must hold some individual accountable for achieving the goals. That per-
son also must have the authority and resources needed to accomplish those goals. It is 
also important that this person issue regular progress reports, so the organization can 
be sure that all activities occur on schedule and that the early results are as expected. 
The “Did You Know?” box reports some of the major challenges managers face during 
the implementation of an HR plan.
Implementation that ties planning and recruiting to the organization’s strategy 
and to its efforts to develop employees becomes a complete program of talent man-
agement. Today’s computer systems have made talent management more practical. 
Companies can tap into databases and use analytic tools to keep track of which skills 
and knowledge they need, which needs have already been fi lled, which employees are 
developing experiences to help them meet future needs, and which sources of talent 
have met talent needs most effi ciently. For example, large warehouses are using labor 
management systems to staff their facilities in the most effi cient way. If the system 
detects a surge of orders to be picked, it can help managers reassign workers to keep 
up with the highest-priority tasks and delay low-priority work. The systems also can 
forecast the number of positions needed to get work done on time. Furthermore, labor 
management systems are useful for other HR decisions, such as work design and per-
formance measurement.23
In evaluating the results, the most obvious step is checking whether the organiza-
tion has succeeded in avoiding labor shortages or surpluses. Along with measuring 
these numbers, the evaluation should identify which parts of the planning process 
contributed to success or failure. For example, consider a company where meeting 
human resource needs requires that employees continually learn new skills. If there 
is a gap between needed skills and current skill levels, the evaluation should consider 
whether the problem lies with failure to forecast the needed skills or with imple-
mentation. Are employees signing up for training, and is the right kind of training 
available?

145
Applying HR Planning to Affirmative Action
As we discussed in Chapter 3, many organizations have a human resource strategy that 
includes affi rmative action to manage diversity or meet government requirements. 
Meeting affi rmative-action goals requires that employers carry out an additional level 
of human resource planning aimed at those goals. In other words, besides looking at its 
overall workforce and needs, the organization looks at the representation of subgroups 
in its labor force—for example, the proportion of women and minorities.
Affi rmative-action plans forecast and monitor the proportion of employees who are 
members of various protected groups (typically, women and racial or ethnic minori-
ties). The planning looks at the representation of these employees in the organization’s 
job categories and career tracks. The planner can compare the proportion of employ-
ees who are in each group with the proportion each group represents in the labor 
market. For example, the organization might note that in a labor market that is 25% 
Hispanic, 60% of its customer service personnel are Hispanic. This type of compari-
son is called a workforce utilization review. The organization can use this process 
to determine whether there is any subgroup whose proportion in the relevant labor 
market differs substantially from the proportion in the job category.
If the workforce utilization review indicates that some group—for example, 
 African Americans—makes up 35% of the relevant labor market for a job category 
Workforce Utilization 
Review
A comparison of the 
proportion of employees 
in protected groups with 
the proportion that each 
group represents in the 
relevant labor market.
Did You Know?
In a survey of more than 700 small 
business owners, the main hiring 
challenge was simply fi nding the 
right people. More than four out 
of ten said fi nding qualifi ed work-
ers is their biggest hiring-related 
challenge. Almost one-fourth said 
their biggest challenge is fi nding 
employees who are a good fi t with 
their company’s culture.
Question
Suppose a new local restaurant has 
brought you in to advise on how it can 
gain a competitive advantage over 
other restaurants in the community. 
Applying the results of this survey, 
what would you suggest the restau-
rant’s management focus on doing 
better?
Sources: Vistage, “Small Business CEO 
Survey,” April 2014, http://www.vistage-
index.com; Rhonda Colvin, “April Sur-
vey Results: Many Small-Firms Expect 
to Hire,” The Wall Street Journal, April 
30, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Vistage, 
“WSJ/Vistage Small Business CEO Sur-
vey,” Vistage press center, https://www.
vistage.com, accessed May 15, 2014.
The Biggest Hiring Challenges Involve Recruiting
Biggest Challenge in Hiring
Finding qualiﬁed workers
Finding employees who ﬁt
culture 
Determining whether to hire based
on forecasts 
Competing with larger companies
Ensuring training pays off
Other challenges
46%
25%
17%
6%
4%
2%

146 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
but that this same group constitutes only 5% of the employees actually in the job 
category at the organization, this is evidence of underutilization. That situation 
could result from problems in selection or from problems in internal movement 
(promotions or other movement along a career path). One way to diagnose the situ-
ation would be to use transitional matrices, such as the matrix shown in Table 5.1 
earlier in this chapter.
The steps in a workforce utilization review are identical to the steps in the HR 
planning process that were shown in Figure 5.1. The organization must assess current 
utilization patterns, then forecast how they are likely to change in the near future. If 
these analyses suggest the organization is underutilizing certain groups and if forecasts 
suggest this pattern is likely to continue, the organization may need to set goals and 
timetables for changing. The planning process may identify new strategies for recruit-
ment or selection. The organization carries out these HR strategies and evaluates their 
success.
Recruiting Human Resources
As the fi rst part of this chapter shows, it is diffi cult to always predict exactly how 
many (if any) new employees the organization will have to hire in a given year in a 
given job category. The role of human resource recruitment is to build a supply of 
potential new hires that the organization can draw on if the need arises. In human 
resource management, recruiting consists of any practice or activity carried on by 
the organization with the primary purpose of identifying and attracting potential 
employees.24 It thus creates a buffer between planning and the actual selection of 
new employees (the topic of the next chapter). The goals of recruiting (encourag-
ing qualifi ed people to apply for jobs) and selection (deciding which candidates 
would be the best fi t) are different enough that they are most effective when per-
formed separately, rather than combined as in a job interview that also involves 
selling candidates on the company.25
Because of differences in companies’ strategies, they may assign different de-
grees of importance to recruiting.26 In general, however, all companies have to 
make decisions in three areas of recruiting: personnel policies, recruitment sources, 
and the characteristics and behavior of the recruiter. As shown in Figure 5.2, these 
LO 5-4 Describe recruit-
ment policies organi-
zations use to make 
job vacancies more 
attractive.
Recruiting
Any activity carried on 
by the organization with 
the primary purpose of 
identifying and attracting 
potential employees.
Figure 5.2
Three Aspects of 
Recruiting
Job Choice
Recruitment Inﬂuences
Vacancy
characteristics
Personnel
policies
Recruiter
traits and
behaviors
Recruitment
sources
Applicant
characteristics
Job
choice

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 147
aspects of recruiting have different effects on whom the organization ultimately 
hires. Personnel policies infl uence the characteristics of the positions to be fi lled. 
Recruitment sources infl uence the kinds of job applicants an organization reaches. 
And the nature and behavior of the recruiter affect the characteristics of both the 
vacancies and the applicants. Ultimately, an applicant’s decision to accept a job 
offer—and the organization’s decision to make the offer—depend on the match 
between vacancy characteristics and applicant characteristics.
The remainder of this chapter explores these three aspects of recruiting: personnel 
policies, recruitment sources, and recruiter traits and behaviors.
Personnel Policies
An organization’s personnel policies are its decisions about how it will carry out human 
resource management, including how it will fi ll job vacancies. These policies infl uence 
the nature of the positions that are vacant. According to the research on recruitment, 
it is clear that characteristics of the vacancy are more important than recruiters or 
recruiting sources for predicting job choice. Several personnel policies are especially 
relevant to recruitment:
 • Internal versus external recruiting—Organizations with policies to “promote from 
within” try to fi ll upper-level vacancies by recruiting candidates internally—that 
is, fi nding candidates who already work for the organization. Opportunities for ad-
vancement make a job more attractive to applicants and employees. Decisions about 
internal versus external recruiting affect the nature of jobs, recruitment sources, and 
the nature of applicants, as we will describe later in the chapter.
 • Lead-the-market pay strategies—Pay is an important job characteristic for almost 
all applicants. Organizations have a recruiting advantage if their policy is to take 
a “lead-the-market” approach to pay—that is, pay more than the current market 
wages for a job. Higher pay can also make up for a job’s less desirable features, such 
as working on a night shift or in dangerous conditions. Organizations that compete 
for applicants based on pay may use bonuses, stock options, and other forms of pay 
besides wages and salaries. Chapters 12 and 13 will take a closer look at these and 
other decisions about pay.
 • Employment-at-will policies—Within the laws of the state where they are operating, 
employers have latitude to set polices about their rights in an employment relation-
ship. A widespread policy follows the principle of employment at will, which holds 
that if there is no specifi c employment contract saying otherwise, the employer or 
employee may end an employment relationship at any time. An alternative is to estab-
lish extensive due-process policies, which formally lay out the steps an employee 
may take to appeal an employer’s decision to terminate that employee. An organiza-
tion’s lawyers may advise the company to ensure that all recruitment documents say 
the employment is “at will” to protect the company from lawsuits about wrongful 
charge. Management must decide how to weigh any legal advantages against the im-
pact on recruitment. Job applicants are more attracted to organizations with due-
process policies, which imply greater job security and concern for protecting 
employees, than to organizations with employment-at-will policies.27
 • Image advertising—Besides advertising specifi c job openings, as discussed in the 
next section, organizations may advertise themselves as a good place to work 
in general. Advertising designed to create a generally favorable impression of 
the organization is called image advertising. Image advertising is particularly 
Employment at Will
Employment principle 
that if there is no speciﬁ c 
employment contract 
saying otherwise, the 
employer or employee 
may end an employment 
relationship at any time, 
regardless of cause.
Due-Process Policies
Policies that formally 
lay out the steps an 
employee may take to 
appeal the employer’s 
decision to terminate 
that employee.

148 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
important for organizations in highly competitive labor markets that perceive 
themselves as having a bad image.28 Research suggests that the image of an orga-
nization’s brand—for example, innovative, dynamic, or fun— infl uences the degree 
to which a person feels attracted to the organization.29 This attraction is especially 
true if the person’s own traits seem to match those of the organization. Also, job 
applicants seem to be particularly sensitive to issues of diversity and inclusion in 
image advertising, so organizations should ensure that their image advertisements 
refl ect the broad nature of the labor market from which they intend to recruit.30
Recruitment Sources
Another critical element of an organization’s recruitment strategy is its decisions about 
where to look for applicants. The total labor market is enormous and spread over the 
entire globe. As a practical matter, an organization will draw from a small fraction of 
that total market. The methods the organization chooses for communicating its labor 
needs and the audiences it targets will determine the size and nature of the labor mar-
ket the organization taps to fi ll its vacant positions.31 A person who responds to a job 
advertisement on the Internet is likely to be different from a person responding to a 
sign hanging outside a factory. Each of the major sources from which organizations 
draw recruits has advantages and disadvantages. For an example of a company that 
weighs these carefully, see the “Best Practices” box.
Internal Sources
As we discussed with regard to personnel policies, an organization may emphasize in-
ternal or external sources of job applicants. Internal sources are employees who cur-
rently hold other positions in the organization. Organizations recruit existing 
employees through job posting, or communicating information about the vacancy on 
company bulletin boards, in employee publications, on corporate intranets, and any-
where else the organization communicates with employees. Managers also may iden-
tify candidates to recommend for vacancies. Policies that emphasize promotions and 
even lateral moves to achieve broader career experience can give applicants a favorable 
impression of the organization’s jobs. The use of internal sources also affects what 
kinds of people the organization recruits.
For the employer, relying on internal sources offers several advantages.32 First, it 
generates applicants who are well known to the organization. In addition, these ap-
plicants are relatively knowledgeable about the organization’s vacancies, which min-
imizes the possibility they will have unrealistic expectations about the job. Finally, 
fi lling vacancies through internal recruiting is generally cheaper and faster than look-
ing outside the organization.
One company that has benefi ted from a strong internal hiring system is Inter-
continental Hotels Group. Intercontinental has been opening about one new hotel 
every day. These expansion plans are driving a need for hundreds of thousands of 
new employees, but the company wants to fi ll as many positions as possible from 
inside the organization. Internal recruiting supports the organization’s strategy of 
staffi ng with people who are so dedicated to the brand that this attitude shows up in 
exceptional customer service. People already working at the company are most likely 
to have developed the desired level of commitment. To match employees with open 
positions, the company runs a Careers Week twice a year. During Careers Week, In-
tercontinental encourages its employees to create a profi le in the company’s online 
LO 5-5 List and 
compare sources of 
job applicants.
Job Posting
The process of com-
municating information 
about a job vacancy on 
company bulletin boards, 
in employee publica-
tions, on corporate 
intranets, and anywhere 
else the organization 
communicates with 
employees.

149
talent management system. So far, 5,000 employees in 89 countries have created 
profi les that include preferences for the locations and functions in which they would 
like to work. When Intercontinental has an opening, it can easily search the profi les 
to fi nd candidates who might be interested and well qualifi ed. Using the talent man-
agement system, Intercontinental is fi lling 84% of general manager positions and 
26% of corporate jobs with current employees. The initiative has lowered recruiting 
costs, increased employee loyalty, and boosted productivity and profi tability.33
External Sources
Despite the advantages of internal recruitment, organizations often have good reasons 
to recruit externally.34 For entry-level positions and perhaps for specialized upper-level 
positions, the organization has no internal recruits from which to draw. Also, bringing 
in outsiders may expose the organization to new ideas or new ways of doing business. 
An organization that uses only internal recruitment can wind up with a  workforce 
whose members all think alike and therefore may be poorly suited to  innovation.35 
In providing its clients with hard-to-
fi nd skills, Advanced Technology 
Services (ATS) helps them with a 
recruiting problem—and also has 
to tackle the problem itself. Based 
in Peoria, Illinois, ATS provides ma-
chinery repair and maintenance 
services to clients’ factories. Cli-
ents can focus on designing, mak-
ing, and selling products, while ATS 
keeps the factories humming.
This service is valuable because 
skilled and reliable machinists and 
maintenance technicians have be-
come hard to fi nd. The offshor-
ing trend of the past few decades 
scared many young people away 
from manufacturing careers, and 
people with math and technical 
skills were urged to pursue college 
degrees instead of vocational train-
ing. Many of the skilled workers who 
remain are nearing retirement. Man-
ufacturers complain they cannot 
fi nd qualifi ed workers and lack the 
resources to train employees who 
might learn the necessary skills.
Instead, addressing that need for 
labor is the main focus of ATS. The 
company fi lls its demand for labor 
by recruiting from several sources. 
First, the company is committed to 
hiring military veterans. The com-
pany fi nds many who have done 
mechanical and maintenance work 
and who have good self-discipline. 
These qualities enable them to learn 
the skills for maintaining particular 
kinds of civilian machinery.
ATS also watches for factory 
closings. When these operations 
shut down, ATS recruiters move in 
with an opportunity to apply. This 
effort can provide experienced 
workers.
Finally, ATS collaborates with 
high schools and community col-
leges where it operates. It identifi es 
needed skills, such as the ability to 
use computer controls, and it en-
courages the schools to teach these 
skills. When it fi nds candidates with 
technical interests and factory ex-
perience but without the specifi c 
skills needed, it brings them aboard 
at an entry level and connects them 
to training at area schools.
This combination of recruit-
ing methods is positioning ATS for 
growth at a time when manufactur-
ers are moving operations back to 
the United States.
Questions
 1. How does ATS’s approach to 
recruitment make it valuable to 
its clients?
 2. Why is it important for ATS 
to recruit and train young 
workers instead of only hiring 
experienced employees from 
factories that are closing?
Sources: Advanced Technology Ser-
vices website, http://www.advancedtech
.com, accessed May 15, 2014; James 
R. Hagerty, “Skilled Worker Supplier 
Fuels U.S. Manufacturing Revival,” 
The Wall Street Journal, May 13, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com; Amit Chowdhry, 
“Peoria Based Advanced Technology 
Services Helps Improve Manufacturing 
Productivity,” Forbes, August 21, 2013, 
http://www.forbes.com.
Sources of Talent for Advanced Technology Services
Best Practices

150 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
And fi nally, companies that are able to grow during a slow economy can gain a com-
petitive edge by hiring the best talent when other organizations are forced to avoid 
hiring, freeze pay increases, or even lay off talented people. So organizations often 
recruit through direct applicants and referrals, advertisements, employment agencies, 
schools, and websites. Figure 5.3 shows which of these sources are used most among 
large companies surveyed.
Direct Applicants and Referrals 
Even without a formal effort to reach job 
applicants, an organization may hear from candidates through direct applicants 
and referrals. Direct applicants are people who apply for a vacancy without 
prompting from the organization. Referrals are people who apply because some-
one in the organization prompted them to do so. According to the survey results 
shown in Figure  5.3, the largest share (roughly one-fourth) of new employees 
hired by large companies came from referrals, and almost as many (23.4%) came 
from direct applications made at the careers section of the employer’s website.36 
These two sources of recruits share some characteristics that make them excellent 
pools from which to draw.
Direct Applicants
People who apply for 
a vacancy without 
prompting from the 
organization.
Referrals
People who apply for a 
vacancy because some-
one in the organization 
prompted them to do so.
Figure 5.3
External Recruiting 
Sources
Source: Based on Gerry 
Crispin and Mark Mehler, 
“Sources of Hire 2013: 
Perception Is Reality,” 
CareerXroads, March 
2013, http://www
.careerxroads.com.
5
0
10
15
20
25
30
Walk-ins
Other
Hiring temporary/contract workers
Career fairs
Print ads
Social media
Third-party recruiters
Rehiring former employees
College recruiting
Recruiter-initiated contacts
Company careers website
Job boards
Referrals
Source
Percentage of Employees Hired

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 151
One advantage is that many direct applicants are to some extent already “sold” on 
the organization. Most have done some research and concluded there is enough fi t be-
tween themselves and the vacant position to warrant submitting an application, a pro-
cess called self-selection, which, when it works, eases the pressure on the organization’s 
recruiting and selection systems. A form of aided self-selection occurs with referrals. 
Many job seekers look to friends, relatives, and acquaintances to help fi nd employ-
ment. Using these social networks not only helps the job seeker but also simplifi es 
recruitment for employers.37 Current employees (who are familiar with the vacancy as 
well as the person they are referring) decide that there is a fi t between the person and 
the vacancy, so they convince the person to apply for the job.
An additional benefi t of using such sources is that it costs much less than formal 
recruiting efforts. Considering these combined benefi ts, referrals and direct applica-
tions are among the best sources of new hires. Some employers offer current employees 
fi nancial incentives for referring applicants who are hired and perform acceptably on 
the job (for example, if they stay 180 days). Others, including the accounting fi rm Ernst 
& Young, have set goals to increase the percentage of new employees who result from 
referrals; Ernst & Young’s target is 50%. In support of that goal, applicants referred 
by employees move through Ernst & Young’s selection process faster, partly because 
designated HR employees give their applications special attention. Ernst & Young’s 
preference for referrals is data-driven: employees who were referred have a track record 
of superior performance, longer employment, and a shorter time to get up to speed.38
The major downside of referrals is that they limit the likelihood of exposing the orga-
nization to fresh viewpoints. People tend to refer others who are like themselves. Further-
more, sometimes referrals contribute to hiring practices that are or that appear unfair, an 
example being nepotism, or the hiring of relatives. Employees may resent the hiring and 
rapid promotion of “the boss’s son” or “the boss’s daughter,” or even the boss’s friend.
Electronic Recruiting Few employers can fi ll all their vacant positions through 
direct applications and referrals, so most need to advertise openings. Most often today, 
that means posting information online. Online recruiting generally involves post-
ing career information at company websites to address people who are interested in 
the particular company and posting paid advertisements at career services to attract 
people who are searching for jobs. Job boards such as Monster and CareerBuilder 
are widely used, but they can generate an unmanageable fl ood of applications from 
unqualifi ed workers. Ads on a company’s careers 
web page, in contrast, may generate too little 
notice, especially at a company that is not large 
or famous. Employers therefore may advertise 
on an industry or professional group’s website, or 
they may select specialized niche boards, such 
as Dice.com’s job listings for information tech-
nology professionals. In addition, companies are 
increasingly fi nding candidates through social 
media, as described in “HRM Social.” 
On any of these sites, employers are compet-
ing for attention amid the fl ood of online infor-
mation.  Research by The Ladders, a jobs website, 
found that workers spend less than a minute and 
a half reading a job ad before deciding whether 
to apply. In that context, gaining the interest of 
Nepotism
The practice of hiring 
relatives.
Career pages on corporate websites have become the second most 
 common source of job applicants after personal referrals.

152
qualifi ed workers requires straightforward, simple job descriptions that highlight what 
is meaningful about the position. For example, in an ad for health care workers, So-
dexo USA says these employees have “a tremendous impact on patient satisfaction.”39
Most large companies and many smaller ones make career information available 
at their websites. To make that information easier to fi nd, they may register a domain 
name with a “.jobs” extension, such as www.starbucks.jobs for a link to informa-
tion about careers at Starbucks and www.att.jobs for information about careers 
at AT&T. To be an effective recruiting tool, corporate career information should 
move beyond generalities, offering descriptions of open positions and an easy way 
to submit a résumé. One of the best features of this kind of electronic recruiting is 
the ability to target and attract job candidates whose values match the organization’s 
values and whose skills match the job requirements.40 Candidates also appreciate an 
e-mail response that the company has received the résumé—especially a response 
that gives a timetable about further communications from the company.
Listing job openings online is an 
easy way to let potential employ-
ees know about positions. But the 
ease of searching and responding 
to the ads means companies have 
been swamped with hundreds or 
thousands of résumés, often from 
individuals without the necessary 
qualifi cations. Employers therefore 
are trying to maintain more control 
over the search process.
Many are turning to social media. 
Most often they use the career- 
focused LinkedIn network. LinkedIn 
profi les emphasize work experience, 
skills, and interests. The site hosts 
discussion groups related to particu-
lar careers and industries. Employers 
can post job openings addressed to 
members of selected groups. Also, by 
joining the groups, they can read com-
ments and identify participants who 
offer valuable ideas. Using an app 
created by software company Taleo, 
LinkedIn members can enter their pro-
fi le data on job applications and give 
recruiters access to their profi les.
Employers 
often 
go 
beyond 
LinkedIn’s free services and buy the 
site’s “talent solutions” for human re-
source management. These products 
include the Recruiter tool, which can 
search member profi les to identify in-
dividuals with desired characteristics. 
For selected candidates, recruiters 
can send e-mail and invite them to 
connect and get better acquainted. 
The Recruiter tool also uses speci-
fi ed characteristics to suggest can-
didates to recruiters. Other tools 
can organize recruiters’ information 
and plans. Organizations also may 
create a career page on LinkedIn to 
describe themselves using keywords 
candidates might use, highlight job 
listings, and tailor messages accord-
ing to visitors’ own profi les.
Most basically, of course, recruit-
ers can use their own contacts on 
social-networking sites. Recruiters 
should be active wherever candi-
dates are active, whether on Linked-
In, Facebook, Twitter, or industry or 
professional networks. They can 
ask their own contacts to suggest 
people to fi ll key openings. Linked-
In is popular because it offers such 
a variety of ways to identify, learn 
about, and interact with potential 
candidates. Recruiters for Klarna, an 
online payments company in Swe-
den, are encouraged to use LinkedIn 
because of members’ detailed résu-
més and the site’s large membership 
(more than 230 million), including 
people who are not actively search-
ing for a job but might be a perfect 
fi t. According to Linked-In’s data, 
about 60% of members are not ac-
tively looking but would be open to 
considering an offer.
Questions
 1. Based on this description, 
what are some advantages of 
fi nding a candidate with social 
media rather than posting jobs 
on the company’s website?
 2. Based on this description, 
would you want to post 
a profi le for yourself on 
LinkedIn? Why or why not?
Sources: LinkedIn, “Recruiting Solutions 
on LinkedIn,” http://business.linkedin.
com, accessed May 15, 2014; Rachel King, 
“LinkedIn Revamps Recruiter Tools as It 
Approaches ‘Mobile Moment,’” ZDNet, April 
10, 2014, http://www.zdnet.com; Sarah 
Halzack, “How LinkedIn Has Changed 
the Way You Might Get Your Next Job,” 
 Washington Post, August 4, 2013, http://
www.washingtonpost.com; Evelyn M. 
Rusli, “LinkedIn: The Ugly Duckling of So-
cial Media,” The Wall Street Journal, Febru-
ary 27, 2013, http://online.wsj.com. 
Social Networks Can Also Be Career Networks
HRM Social

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 153
Accepting applications at the company website is not so successful for smaller and 
less well-known organizations because fewer people are likely to visit the website. 
These organizations may get better results by going to the websites that are set up to 
attract job seekers, such as Monster, Yahoo HotJobs, and CareerBuilder, which attract 
a vast array of applicants. At these sites, job seekers submit standardized résumés. Em-
ployers can search the site’s database for résumés that include specifi ed key terms, and 
they can also submit information about their job opportunities, so that job seekers can 
search that information by key term. With both employers and job seekers submitting 
information to and conducting searches on them, these sites offer an effi cient way to 
fi nd matches between job seekers and job vacancies. However, a drawback is that the 
big job websites can provide too many leads of inferior quality because they are so 
huge and serve all job seekers and employers, not a select segment.
Because of this limitation of the large websites, smaller, more tailored websites 
called “niche boards” focus on certain industries, occupations, or geographic areas. 
Telecommcareers.net, for example, is a site devoted to, as the name implies, the tele-
communications industry. CIO.com, a companion site to CIO Magazine, specializes in 
openings for chief information offi cers.
Advertisements in Newspapers and Magazines Although computer 
search tools have made electronic job listings the most popular way to advertise a job 
opening, some recruiters still follow the traditional route and advertise open positions 
in newspapers or magazines. When the goal is to fi nd people who know the local 
community, advertising in a local newspaper can reach that audience. Similarly, when 
the goal is to fi nd people in a specialized fi eld, advertising in a trade, professional, or 
industry publication can reach the right subset of job candidates.
Advertising can be expensive, so it is especially important that the ads be well 
 written. The person designing a job advertisement needs to answer two questions:
What do we need to say?
To whom do we need to say it?
With respect to the fi rst question, an ad should give readers enough information to 
evaluate the job and its requirements, so they can make a well-informed judgment about 
their qualifi cations. Providing enough information may require long advertisements, 
which cost more. The employer should evaluate the additional costs against the costs 
of providing too little information: Vague ads generate a huge number of applicants, 
including many who are not reasonably qualifi ed or would not accept the job if they 
learned more about it. Reviewing all these applications to eliminate unsuitable applicants 
is expensive. In practice, the people who write job advertisements tend to overstate the 
skills and experience required, perhaps generating too few qualifi ed candidates.
Specifying whom to reach with the message helps the advertiser decide where to 
place the ad. Ads placed in the classifi ed section of local newspapers are relatively inex-
pensive yet reach many people in a specifi c geographic area who are currently looking 
for work (or at least interested enough to be reading the classifi eds). On the downside, 
this medium offers little ability to target skill levels. Typically, many of the people read-
ing classifi ed ads are either over- or underqualifi ed for the position. Also, people who 
are not looking for work rarely read the classifi eds. These people may include candidates 
the organization could lure from their current employers. For reaching a specifi c part of 
the labor market, including certain skill levels and more people who are employed, the 
organization may get better results from advertising in professional or industry journals. 
Some employers also advertise on television— particularly cable television.41

154 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Public Employment Agencies The Social Security Act of 1935 requires that 
everyone receiving unemployment compensation be registered with a local state em-
ployment offi ce. These state employment offi ces work with the U.S. Employment Ser-
vice (USES) to try to ensure that unemployed individuals eventually get off state aid 
and back on employer payrolls. To accomplish this, agencies collect information from 
the unemployed people about their skills and experience.
Employers can register their job vacancies with their local state employment offi ce, 
and the agency will try to fi nd someone suitable, using its computerized inventory 
of local unemployed individuals. The agency refers candidates to the employer at no 
charge. The organization can interview or test them to see if they are suitable for its 
vacancies. Besides offering access to job candidates at low cost, public employment 
agencies can be a useful resource for meeting certain diversity objectives. Laws often 
mandate that the agencies maintain specialized “desks” for minorities, disabled indi-
viduals, and war veterans. Employers that feel they currently are underutilizing any 
of these subgroups of the labor force may fi nd the agencies to be an excellent source.
Government-run employment agencies also may partner with nonprofi t groups to 
meet the needs of a community. In California’s Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, 
several agencies have cooperated to form EastBay Works. This organization is dedi-
cated to bringing together employers and workers in the two counties. EastBay Works 
offers a variety of recruiting tools at its website. Employers can post job openings, re-
search the local labor market, and set up a search tool to identify candidates who have 
skills the employer is looking for. Job seekers can visit the site to hunt for jobs, set up a 
search tool that fi nds jobs related to the skills in their profi le, assess their existing skills, 
and arrange for training in skills that employers want.42
Private Employment Agencies In contrast to public employment agencies, 
which primarily serve the blue-collar labor market, private employment agencies pro-
vide much the same service for the white-collar labor market. Workers interested in 
fi nding a job can sign up with a private employment agency whether or not they are 
currently unemployed. Another difference between the two types of agencies is that 
private agencies charge the employers for providing referrals. Therefore, using a pri-
vate employment agency is more expensive than using a public agency, but the private 
agency is a more suitable source for certain kinds of applicants.
For managers or professionals, an employer may use the services of a type of private 
agency called an executive search fi rm (ESF). People often call these agencies “head-
hunters” because, unlike other employment agencies, they fi nd new jobs for people 
almost exclusively already employed. For job candidates, dealing with executive search 
fi rms can be sensitive. Typically, executives do not want to advertise their availability, 
because it could trigger a negative reaction from their current employer. ESFs serve as 
a  buffer, providing confi dentiality between the employer and the recruit. That benefi t 
may give an employer access to candidates it cannot recruit in other, more direct ways. 
The advantages of using a private fi rm are most evident in recruiting top executives. 
For middle-management jobs, the trend is for companies to hire their own recruiters 
to tap social media and other business networks.43
Colleges and Universities Most colleges and universities have placement ser-
vices that seek to help their graduates obtain employment. On-campus interviewing is 
the most important source of recruits for entry-level professional and managerial vacan-
cies. Organizations tend to focus especially on colleges that have strong reputations in 
areas for which they have critical needs—say, chemical engineering or public accounting. 
Bain & Co., a consulting fi rm, recruits on about 15 U.S. campuses each year and may 

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 155
hire up to 40 students at one school for positions and interns and 
full-time employees. It chooses schools to visit based on their size, 
reputation, and whether it has succeeded in fi nding good employ-
ees at the school in the past.44
Many employers have found that successfully competing for the 
best students requires more than just signing up prospective gradu-
ates for interview slots. One of the best ways to establish a stron-
ger presence on a campus is with a college internship program. 
Internship programs give an organization early access to potential 
applicants and let the organization assess their capabilities directly. 
Internships also give applicants fi rsthand experience with the em-
ployer, so both parties can make well-informed choices about fi t 
when it comes time to consider long-term commitment.45 Google 
calls internships “one of the primary ways we fi nd full-time hires.” 
In a recent year, the company hired 1,000 engineering interns.46
Another way of increasing the employer’s presence on campus is to participate in 
university job fairs. In general, a job fair is an event where many employers gather for a 
short time to meet large numbers of potential job applicants. Although job fairs can be 
held anywhere (such as at a hotel or convention center), campuses are ideal locations 
because of the many well-educated, yet unemployed, individuals who are there. Job 
fairs are an inexpensive means of generating an on-campus presence. They can even 
provide one-on-one dialogue with potential recruits—dialogue that would be impos-
sible through less interactive media, such as newspaper ads.
Evaluating the Quality of a Source
In general, there are few rules that say what recruitment source is best for a given job 
vacancy. Therefore, it is wise for employers to monitor the quality of all their recruit-
ment sources. One way to do this is to develop and compare yield ratios for each 
source.47 A yield ratio expresses the percentage of applicants who successfully move 
from one stage of the recruitment and selection process to the next. For example, the 
organization could fi nd the number of candidates interviewed as a percentage of the 
total number of résumés generated by a given source (that is, number of interviews 
divided by number of résumés). A high yield ratio (large percentage) means that the 
source is an effective way to fi nd candidates to interview. By comparing the yield ratios 
of different recruitment sources, HR professionals can determine which source is the 
best or most effi cient for the type of vacancy.
Another measure of recruitment success is the cost per hire. To compute this 
amount, fi nd the cost of using a particular recruitment source for a particular type of 
vacancy. Then divide that cost by the number of people hired to fi ll that type of va-
cancy. A low cost per hire means that the recruitment source is effi cient; it delivers 
qualifi ed candidates at minimal cost.
To see how HR professionals use these measures, look at the examples in 
Table 5.3. This table shows the results for a hypothetical organization that used 
six kinds of recruitment sources to fi ll a number of vacancies. For each recruit-
ment source, the table shows four yield ratios and the cost per hire. To fi ll these 
jobs, the best two sources of recruits were local universities and employee re-
ferral programs. Online job board ads generated the largest number of recruits 
(7,000 résumés). However, only 350 were judged acceptable, of which a little more 
than half accepted employment offers, for a cumulative yield ratio of 200/7,000, 
or 3%. Recruiting at renowned universities generated highly qualifi ed applicants, 
Yield Ratio
A ratio that expresses the 
percentage of applicants 
who successfully move 
from one stage of the 
 recruitment and selection 
process to the next.
Cost per Hire
The total amount of 
money spent to ﬁ ll a job 
vacancy. The number is 
computed by ﬁ nding the 
cost of using a particular 
recruitment source and 
dividing that cost by 
the number of people 
hired to ﬁ ll that type of 
vacancy.
 One of the best ways for a company to establish a 
stronger presence on a campus is with a college intern-
ship program. Embassy Suites is one company that 
participates in such a program. How does this benefi t 
the company and the students at the same time? 

156 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
but relatively few of them ultimately accepted positions with the organization. 
Executive search fi rms produced the highest cumulative yield ratio. These gen-
erated only 20 applicants, but all of them accepted interview offers, most were 
judged acceptable, and 79% of these acceptable candidates took jobs with the or-
ganization. However, notice the cost per hire. The executive search fi rms charged 
$90,000 for fi nding these 15 employees, resulting in the largest cost per hire. 
In contrast, local universities provided modest yield ratios at the lowest cost per 
hire. Employee referrals provided excellent yield ratios at a slightly higher cost.
The cost per hire is not simply related to the type of recruiting method. These costs 
also tend to vary by industry and organization size. A recent survey found that the me-
dian cost per hire at companies with more than 10,000 employees was $1,949; small 
companies paid far more for each hire, a median of $3,665. One reason for this dif-
ference is that small companies have fewer recruiters in-house, so they are likelier to 
hire outsiders at a higher cost. Comparing industries, manufacturers paid the highest 
cost per hire, because fi nding individuals with knowledge of the relevant equipment or 
software is more diffi cult than fi nding employees with standard kinds of certifi cation, 
as in the case of nurses.48 At any employer, however, recruiters’ challenge is to identify 
the particular methods that will yield the best candidates as effi ciently as possible.
Recruiter Traits and Behaviors
As we showed in Figure 5.2, the third infl uence on recruitment outcomes is the re-
cruiter, including this person’s characteristics and the way he or she behaves. The 
recruiter affects the nature of both the job vacancy and the applicants generated. How-
ever, the recruiter often becomes involved late in the recruitment process. In many 
cases, by the time a recruiter meets some applicants, they have already made up their 
minds about what they desire in a job, what the vacant job has to offer, and their likeli-
hood of receiving a job offer.49
LO 5-6 Describe the 
recruiter’s role in the 
recruitment process, 
including limits and 
opportunities.
Table 5.3
Results of a Hypothetical Recruiting Effort
RECRUITING SOURCE
LOCAL 
UNIVERSITY
RENOWNED 
UNIVERSITY
EMPLOYEE 
REFERRALS
NEWSPAPER 
AD
ONLINE 
JOB BOARD 
AD
EXECUTIVE 
SEARCH 
FIRMS
Résumés generated
200
400
50
500
7,000
20
Interview offers 
accepted
175
100
45
400
500
20
Yield ratio
87%
25%
90%
80%
7%
100%
Applicants judged 
acceptable
100
95
40
50
350
19
Yield ratio
57%
95%
89%
12%
70%
95%
Accept employment 
offers
90
10
35
25
200
15
Yield ratio
90%
11%
88%
50%
57%
79%
Cumulative yield ratio
90/200
10/400
35/50
25/500
200/7,000
15/20
45%
3%
70%
5%
3%
75%
Cost
$30,000
$50,000
$15,000
$20,000
$5,000
$90,000
Cost per hire
$333
$5,000
$428
$800
$25
$6,000

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 157
Many applicants approach the recruiter with some skepticism. Knowing it is the recruit-
er’s job to sell them on a vacancy, some applicants discount what the recruiter says in light 
of what they have heard from other sources, such as friends, magazine articles, and profes-
sors. When candidates are already familiar with the company through knowing about its 
products, the recruiter’s impact is especially weak.50 For these and other reasons, recruiters’ 
characteristics and behaviors seem to have limited impact on applicants’ job choices.
Characteristics of the Recruiter
Most organizations must choose whether their recruiters are specialists in human re-
sources or are experts at particular jobs (that is, those who currently hold the same kinds 
of jobs or supervise people who hold the jobs). According to some studies, applicants 
perceive HR specialists as less credible and are less attracted to jobs when recruiters are 
HR specialists.51 The evidence does not completely discount a positive role for person-
nel specialists in recruiting. It does indicate, however, that these specialists need to take 
extra steps to ensure that applicants perceive them as knowledgeable and credible.
In general, applicants respond positively to recruiters whom they perceive as warm 
and informative. “Warm” means the recruiter seems to care about the applicant and 
to be enthusiastic about the applicant’s potential to contribute to the organization. 
“Informative” means the recruiter provides the kind of information the applicant is 
seeking. The evidence of impact of other characteristics of recruiters—including their 
age, sex, and race—is complex and inconsistent.52
Behavior of the Recruiter
Recruiters affect results not only by providing plenty of information, but by providing 
the right kind of information. Perhaps the most-researched aspect of recruiting is the 
level of realism in the recruiter’s message. Because the recruiter’s job is to attract candi-
dates, recruiters may feel pressure to exaggerate the positive qualities of the vacancy and 
to downplay its negative qualities. Applicants are highly sensitive to negative informa-
tion. The highest-quality applicants may be less willing to pursue jobs when this type 
of information comes out.53 But if the recruiter goes too far in a positive direction, the 
candidate can be misled and lured into taking a job that has been misrepresented. Then 
unmet expectations can contribute to a high turnover rate. When recruiters describe 
jobs unrealistically, people who take those jobs may come to believe that the employer 
is deceitful.54
Many studies have looked at how well realistic job previews—background informa-
tion about jobs’ positive and negative qualities—can get around this problem and help 
organizations minimize turnover among new employees. On the whole, the research sug-
gests that realistic job previews have a weak and inconsistent effect on turnover.55 Al-
though realistic job previews have only a weak association with reduced turnover, the cost 
of the effort is low, and they are relatively easy to implement. Consequently, employers 
should consider using them as a way to reduce turnover among new hires.56
Finally, for affecting whether people choose to take a job, but even more so, whether 
they stick with a job, the recruiter seems less important than an organization’s person-
nel policies that directly affect the job’s features (pay, security, advancement opportuni-
ties, and so on).
Enhancing the Recruiter’s Impact
Nevertheless, although recruiters are probably not the most important infl uence 
on people’s job choices, this does not mean recruiters cannot have an impact. Most 
Realistic Job Preview
Background information 
about a job’s positive 
and negative qualities.

158 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
recruiters receive little training.57 If we were to determine what does matter to job 
candidates, perhaps recruiters could be trained in those areas.
Researchers have tried to fi nd the conditions in which recruiters do make a differ-
ence. Such research suggests that an organization can take several steps to increase the 
positive impact that recruiters have on job candidates:
 • Recruiters should provide timely feedback. Applicants dislike delays in feedback. 
They may draw negative conclusions about the organization (for starters, that the 
organization doesn’t care about their application).
 • Recruiters should avoid offensive behavior. They should avoid behaving in ways that 
might convey the wrong impression about the organization.58 Figure 5.4 quotes 
Figure 5.4
Recruits Who Were Offended by Recruiters

THINKING ETHICALLY
IS SOMETHING WRONG WITH A 
MUTUAL AGREEMENT NOT TO “STEAL” 
EMPLOYEES?
In the high-tech industry, recruiting is a war for talent 
as companies compete for the best engineers and pro-
grammers. Presumably, anyone good enough to get 
hired by Apple or Google would be an asset for another 
company, so one strategy is to recruit at those and other 
big-name companies by contacting employees directly 
and seeing what it would take to lure them away. The 
aim of this strategy is to get the best people at the ex-
pense of competitors, which presumably are left with 
the second best.
Competing for already-employed workers imposes 
high costs on employers. They have to pay employ-
ees so generously that they would not consider leav-
ing. When recruiting, they have to make even more 
generous offers. And if many employers are using this 
recruiting tactic, companies are constantly scrambling 
to replace workers “stolen” or “poached” by other 
companies.
Evidence has surfaced that some of the most 
prominent high-tech fi rms, including Google, Apple, 
Intel, and Adobe Systems, may have tried to put a 
stop to this expensive competition for talent. Corre-
spondence among some executives and HR employ-
ees refers to informal agreements not to recruit one 
another’s employees. At some companies, includ-
ing Facebook and Palm, however, there is evidence 
that executives have refused to participate in these 
arrangements.
The possibility of no-poaching agreements came to 
light because employees complained the practice was 
suppressing competition in the labor market. What 
employers were thinking of as poaching employees, 
these employees viewed as a chance to seek the best 
employment opportunities. In response to their al-
legations, the Justice Department fi led a civil lawsuit 
against several companies, saying they illegally col-
luded to restrict the free movement of labor and to fi x 
wages. The companies settled by agreeing not to re-
strict recruiting or hiring in the future, while not admit-
ting to any past wrongdoing. More recently, a group of 
64,000 engineers fi led an antitrust lawsuit. The parties 
reached a settlement for about $300 million, which if 
approved, will give each engineer several thousand 
dollars after the lawyers are paid.
Questions
 1. What has been the fi nancial incentive for high-
tech companies to agree not to recruit from one 
another? If the arrangements had not been chal-
lenged in court, would you consider them ethical? 
Why or why not?
 2. Given that the Justice Department has seen 
these arrangements as possibly violating anti-
trust laws, what would be the most ethical way to 
decide whether to recruit employees from other 
companies?
Sources: David Streitfeld, “Tech Giants Settle Antitrust Hir-
ing Suit,” The New York Times, April 24, 2014, http://www.
nytimes.com; Jeff Elder, “Silicon Valley Tech Giants Discussed 
Hiring, Say Documents,” The Wall Street Journal, April 20, 
2014, http://online.wsj.com; S. Lynch, “Google and Apple 
Are Safe from Anti-Poaching Laws, but Not for Long,” Silicon 
Valley Business Journal Online, April 5, 2013; M. Wohsten, 
“Gentlemen’s Agreements,” Lansing State Journal, January 
29, 2012, p. 13A.
CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 159
applicants who felt they had extremely bad experiences with recruiters. Their state-
ments provide examples of behaviors to avoid.
 • The organization can recruit with teams rather than individual recruiters. Appli-
cants view job experts as more credible than HR specialists, and a team can include 
both kinds of recruiters. HR specialists on the team provide knowledge about com-
pany policies and procedures.
Through such positive behavior, recruiters can give organizations a better chance 
of competing for talented human resources. In the next chapter, we will describe how 
an organization selects the candidates who best meet its needs.

SUMMARY
LO 5-1 Discuss how to plan for human resources needed 
to carry out the organization’s strategy.
• The fi rst step in human resource planning is per-
sonnel forecasting. Through trend analysis and 
good judgment, the planner tries to determine 
the supply of and demand for various human 
resources.
• Based on whether a surplus or a shortage is ex-
pected, the planner sets goals and creates a strat-
egy for achieving those goals.
• The organization then implements its HR strat-
egy and evaluates the results.
LO 5-2 Determine the labor demand for workers in vari-
ous job categories.
• The planner can look at leading indicators, assum-
ing trends will continue in the future.
• Multiple regression can convert several leading in-
dicators into a single prediction of labor needs.
• Analysis of a transitional matrix can help the plan-
ner identify which job categories can be fi lled in-
ternally and where high turnover is likely.
LO 5-3 Summarize the advantages and disadvantages 
of ways to eliminate a labor surplus and avoid a labor 
shortage.
• To reduce a surplus, downsizing, pay reductions, 
and demotions deliver fast results but at a high 
cost in human suffering that may hurt surviv-
ing employees’ motivation and future recruiting. 
Also, the organization may lose some of its best 
employees.
• Transferring employees and requiring them to 
share work are also fast methods, and the conse-
quences in human suffering are less severe.
• A hiring freeze or natural attrition is slow to take 
effect but avoids the pain of layoffs.
• Early-retirement packages may unfortunately in-
duce the best employees to leave and may be slow 
to implement; however, they, too, are less painful 
than layoffs.
• Retraining can improve the organization’s overall 
pool of human resources and maintain high mo-
rale, but it is relatively slow and costly.
• To avoid a labor shortage, requiring overtime is 
the easiest and fastest strategy, which can easily be 
changed if conditions change. However, overtime 
may exhaust workers and can hurt morale.
• Using temporary employees and outsourcing do 
not build an in-house pool of talent, but they 
quickly and easily modify staffi ng levels.
• Transferring and retraining employees require 
investment of time and money, but can enhance 
the quality of the organization’s human resources; 
however, this may backfi re if a labor surplus 
develops.
• Hiring new employees is slow and expensive, but 
strengthens the organization if labor needs are ex-
pected to expand for the long term. Hiring is dif-
fi cult to reverse if conditions change.
• Using technology as a substitute for labor can be 
slow to implement and costly, but it may improve 
the organization’s long-term performance. New 
technology also is diffi cult to reverse.
LO 5-4 Describe recruitment policies organizations use 
to make job vacancies more attractive.
• Internal recruiting (promotions from within) 
generally makes job vacancies more attractive be-
cause candidates see opportunities for growth and 
advancement.
• Lead-the-market pay strategies make jobs eco-
nomically desirable.
• Due-process policies signal that employers are 
concerned about employee rights.
• Image advertising can give candidates the impres-
sion that the organization is a good place to work.
LO 5-5 List and compare sources of job applicants.
• Internal sources, promoted through job postings, 
generate applicants who are familiar to the orga-
nization and motivate other employees by demon-
strating opportunities for advancement. However, 
internal sources are usually insuffi cient for all of 
an organization’s labor needs.
• Direct applicants and referrals tend to be inex-
pensive and to generate applicants who have self-
selected; this source risks charges of unfairness, 
especially in cases of nepotism.
• Electronic recruiting gives organizations access to 
a global labor market, tends to be inexpensive, and 
allows convenient searching of databases.
• Newspaper and magazine advertising reaches a 
wide audience and may generate many applica-
tions, although many are likely to be unsuitable.
• Public employment agencies are inexpensive and 
typically have screened applicants.
• Private employment agencies charge fees but may 
provide many services.
• Another inexpensive channel is schools and col-
leges, which may give the employer access to top-
notch entrants to the labor market.
160 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources

LO 5-6 Describe the recruiter’s role in the recruitment 
process, including limits and opportunities.
• Through their behavior and other characteristics, 
recruiters infl uence the nature of the job vacancy 
and the kinds of applicants generated.
• Applicants tend to perceive job experts as more 
credible than recruiters who are HR specialists.
• Applicants tend to react more favorably to recruit-
ers who are warm and informative.
• Recruiters should not mislead candidates. Realis-
tic job previews have only a weak association with 
reduced turnover, but given their low cost and ease 
of implementation, employers should consider 
using them.
• Recruiters can improve their impact by providing 
timely feedback, avoiding behavior that contrib-
utes to a negative impression of the organization, 
and teaming up with job experts.
CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 161
KEY TERMS
forecasting, 133
trend analysis, 134
leading indicators, 134
transitional matrix, 135
core competency, 137
downsizing, 138
outsourcing, 143
workforce utilization review, 145
recruiting, 146
employment at will, 147
due-process policies, 147
job posting, 148
direct applicants, 150
referrals, 150
nepotism, 151
yield ratio, 155
cost per hire, 155
realistic job preview, 157
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. Suppose an organization expects a labor shortage 
to develop in key job areas over the next few years. 
Recommend general responses the organization 
could make in each of the following areas: (LO 5-1)
 
a. Recruitment
 
b. Training
 
c. Compensation (pay and employee benefits)
 2. Review the sample transitional matrix shown in 
Table 5.1. What jobs experience the greatest turn-
over (employees leaving the organization)? How 
might an organization with this combination of 
jobs reduce the turnover? (LO 5-2)
 3. In the same transitional matrix, which jobs seem 
to rely the most on internal recruitment? Which 
seem to rely most on external recruitment? Why? 
(LO 5-2)
 4. Why do organizations combine statistical and 
judgmental forecasts of labor demand, rather than 
relying on statistics or judgment alone? Give an ex-
ample of a situation in which each type of forecast 
would be inaccurate. (LO 5-3)
 5. Some organizations have detailed affi rmative-ac-
tion plans, complete with goals and timetables, for 
women and minorities, yet have no formal human 
resource plan for the organization as a whole. Why 
might this be the case? What does this practice 
suggest about the role of human resource manage-
ment in these organizations? (LO 5-1)
 6. Give an example of a personnel policy that would 
help attract a larger pool of job candidates. Give 
an example of a personnel policy that would likely 
reduce the pool of candidates. Would you expect 
these policies to infl uence the quality as well as the 
number of applicants? Why or why not? (LO 5-4)
 7. Discuss the relative merits of internal versus exter-
nal recruitment. Give an example of a situation in 
which each of these approaches might be particu-
larly effective. (LO 5-4)
 8. List the jobs you have held. How were you re-
cruited for each of these? From the organization’s 
perspective, what were some pros and cons of re-
cruiting you through these methods? (LO 5-4)
 9. Recruiting people for jobs that require international 
assignments is increasingly important for many orga-
nizations. Where might an organization go to recruit 
people interested in such assignments? (LO 5-5)
 10. A large share of HR professionals have rated 
e-cruiting as their best source of new talent. What 
qualities of electronic recruiting do you think con-
tribute to this opinion? (LO 5-5)
 11. How can organizations improve the effectiveness 
of their recruiters? (LO 5-6)

162 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
SAP’s Inclusive Approach to Recruiting
Headquartered in Germany, SAP makes software that 
businesses use to keep the enterprise running smoothly 
and effi ciently. Its 65,000 employees work in more than 
130 countries. Given that the company sells complex 
business systems rather than famous consumer prod-
ucts, recruiting includes educating workers about the 
company.
SAP’s recruiting strategy is based on the idea that its 
human resources are a source of competitive advantage. 
Co-CEO Bill McDermott has said SAP is constantly 
recruiting “young, brilliant minds” and training people, 
because “sustainability is much more than natural re-
sources. It’s also people resources.” SAP cultivates the 
image of a leader in innovation. The careers page of its 
website says, “We respect the individuality of our em-
ployees,” and represents this with a transparent process 
linking each applicant to any relevant openings. Candi-
dates also may set up a “job agent” to send notifi cations 
of new openings meeting specifi ed criteria, read “Advice 
Bytes” stories from employees, and sign up to follow 
SAP on Twitter.
Where SAP’s idea of sustainable human resources 
really stands out, however, is in an initiative to recruit 
workers with autism. These workers have trouble fi nd-
ing jobs because they struggle with social tasks like in-
terviewing and networking. For SAP, however, hiring 
people with autism is not just a matter of accommodat-
ing people with disabilities, but one of identifying an 
often-overlooked group of workers who bring value to 
the table. The autism spectrum includes a wide range 
of conditions from high functioning to severe, and 
some individuals are not only able to work but gifted 
in some areas. For example, their thinking patterns may 
be highly structured, and they may pay careful attention 
to details. For some jobs, such as writing manuals and 
debugging software, these ways of thinking are exactly 
what SAP needs. The company therefore has a target 
that by 2020, up to 1% of its workforce will be employ-
ees with autism.
SAP tested its recruitment of workers with autism in 
Germany and India; based on the pilot program’s suc-
cess, it rolled out the effort to Ireland, Canada, and the 
United States. A Danish training and consulting fi rm 
called Specialisterne screens candidates. Those who 
pass the screening are referred to SAP. After SAP se-
lects employees, it provides adaptation training to help 
them adjust to working on teams, and it assigns them to 
a mentor. In exchange for this extra effort, the company 
sees a competitive advantage. Luisa Delgado, a member 
of SAP’s executive board, put it this way: “Only by em-
ploying people who think differently and spark innova-
tion will SAP be prepared to handle the challenges of 
the 21st century.” 
Questions
 1. What recruiting methods described here support 
SAP’s need for talented workers who help the com-
pany innovate?
 2. Suggest a few other recruiting methods that would 
help SAP remain a strong, innovative company.
Sources: SAP careers page, http://www.careersatsap.com, accessed May 15, 
2014; Shirley S. Wang, “How Autism Can Help You Land a Job,” The Wall 
Street Journal, March 27, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Rob Preston, “SAP 
CEO Envisions Younger, Greener, Cloudier Company,” InformationWeek, 
November 25, 2013, http://www.informationweek.com; Katie Moisse, 
“Tech Giant Sees ‘Competitive Advantage’ in Autistic Workforce,” ABC 
News, May 22, 2013, http://abcnews.go.com; Dave Smith, “SAP Recruits 
Autism Employees to ‘Spark Innovation,’” International Business Times, May 
22, 2013, http://www.ibtimes.com.
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY
Boeing’s High-Flying Approach to HR Planning and Recruitment
As the world’s biggest aerospace company, Boeing is well 
acquainted with the industry’s major human resource 
challenge: identifying, attracting, and keeping enough 
skilled workers. Across manufacturing, the demand for 
engineers is intense, but it is especially so in aerospace. 
Engineers fl ocked to aerospace companies during the 
space race, but more recently, Internet companies are 
the main attraction. Consequently, the average age for 
aeronautical engineers is 47, compared with 42 for U.S. 
workers overall. In other words, many are approaching 
retirement. Compounding the problem, Boeing is in the 
defense business, so it faces legal limits on the number 
of non-U.S. citizens it may hire.
To meet the challenge, Boeing has dedicated years 
to establishing a systematic approach to talent manage-
ment linked to strategy. The system begins with the 
establishment of priorities. HR executives talk to busi-
ness leaders about anticipated workforce needs. They 
divide the workforce into segments and identify which 
are most critical to success and where the current skills 
of the workforce do not meet those critical needs. They 
use predictive models to forecast business trends and 
MANAGING TALENT

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 163
workforce demographics. They analyze all this informa-
tion to identify the changes needed to fi ll in the gaps in 
Boeing’s workforce. Then, to apply the results of this 
analysis, Boeing’s HR team plans how to make the nec-
essary changes through a combination of three tactics: 
promotions within the company, transfers of employ-
ees into positions where they can be developed to meet 
future needs, and recruitment of employees outside 
Boeing.
A key aspect of recruitment is reaching out to entry-
level engineers on college and university campuses. 
Boeing has intensifi ed these efforts and is matching 
other companies’ practice of making job offers earlier 
during students’ senior years. During recruitment, stu-
dents interview with several different managers and tour 
company facilities, so they understand the company 
and its culture and opportunities. Then, to ensure that 
the reality of working for Boeing lives up to the image 
portrayed during recruitment, Boeing has a workforce 
development program that plans career growth oppor-
tunities as carefully as the company plans hiring.
Recruiting efforts alone cannot meet Boeing’s 
needs unless schools are preparing individuals for 
 technology-related jobs. Therefore, Boeing also enters 
into partnerships with schools. As analysis of workforce 
needs uncovers important emerging skills, Boeing helps 
school leaders plan how to teach those skills. Support-
ing university research projects bolsters the company’s 
innovative image on campus. Boeing has also set up a 
Higher Education Integration Board, which identifi es 
needs for continuing education, evaluates the quality of 
employees hired from specifi c schools, and sets strategy 
for future recruiting and research efforts.
Questions
 1. To meet labor shortages within the company, Boe-
ing starts with promotions and transfers. What ad-
vantages might it experience from fi lling positions 
with current employees?
 2. Besides the external recruitment sources described 
here, what other sources would you recommend for 
Boeing? Why?
Sources: Claire Zillman, “America’s Defense Industry Is Going Gray,” For-
tune, November 14, 2013, http://management.fortune.cnn.com; 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, “The Right Stuff,” Keyword, July 2013, http://
www.pwc.com; Kathleen Koster, “Talent Management: Establishing 
a Flight Plan,” Employee Benefi t News, April 1, 2013, Business Insights: 
Global, http://bi.galegroup.com; Agence France-Presse, “Boeing and 
Airbus ‘Fight like Hell,’ for Aerospace Engineers,” Industry Week, June 26, 
2012, http://www.industryweek.com.
For Personal Financial Advisors, a Small Staffing Plan with a Big Impact
Robert J. Reed has been a fi nancial planner since 1978 
and received his Certifi ed Financial Planner designation 
in 1981. In 1999, he hired Lucy Banquer, a former legal 
secretary, to work as his assistant and the only employee 
at his fi rm, Personal Financial Advisors LLC in Coving-
ton, Louisiana. At that point, human resource planning 
wasn’t on Reed’s radar at all.
But around 2005, Reed began to act on a desire to 
have a more complete plan for his fi rm’s growth. He 
determined that he wanted the business to grow from 
about $400,000 in annual revenues to become a million-
dollar fi rm by 2012. That was a realistic goal, but not 
one he could achieve with only the support of Banquer. 
Although Banquer does an excellent job of fi elding cli-
ent phone calls and answering questions, Reed needed to 
bring in more fi nancial expertise to serve more clients.
Typically, a fi nancial-planning fi rm like Reed’s ex-
pands by hiring an entry-level adviser to handle rou-
tine tasks while learning on the job until he or she can 
take on clients independently. But Reed didn’t simply 
take the usual path; he considered what role he wanted 
for himself in his fi rm as it grew. Reed realized that the 
part he excelled at and loved most was managing the 
investments, not the presentations to clients, and that 
he wanted the fi rm to grow in a way that would free 
more time for him to spend with his family, not expand 
his hours to supervise others. As Reed defi ned the scope 
of his own desired job, he clarifi ed what he wanted from 
his next employee: a Certifi ed Financial Planner who 
had experience plus an interest in all the planning and 
advising tasks except investment management.
With that strategy in mind, Reed began the search 
for another planner to work with him. After about eight 
months of recruiting, Reed met Lauren Gadkowski, 
who was running her own advisory fi rm in Boston, but 
preparing to relocate to Baton Rouge to be with her 
future husband, Lee Lindsay. Reed wanted his new fi -
nancial planner to operate independently, so he agreed 
to the idea of her offi ce being in Baton Rouge, about a 
45-minute drive from his, and he let her determine how 
often she would need to visit the Covington offi ce.
Reed stuck to his plan: Lauren Lindsay quickly 
began working with Reed’s larger clients and introduced 
herself as their main contact with the fi rm. After sit-
ting in on a few meetings to satisfy himself that he had 
made a good hiring decision, Reed shifted his efforts 
to managing the investments. About 10% of the clients 
indicated they would prefer to maintain their working 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

164 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
relationship with Reed. Lindsay took over the remain-
ing 90% as well as the new clients she has brought into 
the fi rm since joining it.
Reed’s decision to focus on investment management 
has paid off for Personal Financial Advisors, giving the 
fi rm better-than-average performance on its invest-
ments even as revenues have climbed. And with Lindsay 
on board to handle client contact, Reed became able to 
follow the more traditional path to further growth by 
hiring an associate fi nancial planner, David Hutchinson, 
in 2008. In contrast to Lindsay, Hutchinson is still pre-
paring to become a Certifi ed Financial Planner, but he 
has an educational background in fi nancial planning and 
experience as an investment broker.
Questions
 1. Is a company ever too small for the need to engage in 
human resource planning? Why or why not? Discuss 
whether you think Robert Reed planned his hiring 
strategy at an appropriate time in the fi rm’s growth.
 2. Using Table 5.2, review the options for avoiding a 
labor shortage, and discuss how well the options be-
sides new hires could have worked for Reed to reach 
his goals for growth. As you do so, consider qualities 
of a fi nancial-planning business that might be rel-
evant (for example, direct client contact and the need 
for confi dentiality).
 3. Suppose that when Reed was seeking to hire a cer-
tifi ed fi nancial planner, he asked you for advice on 
where to recruit this person. Which sources would 
you suggest, and why?
Sources: Angie Herbers, “Letting Go,” Investment Advisor, June 2009, pp. 96–97; 
Personal Financial Advisors, “Why Choose Us?” corporate website, http://
www.mypfa.com, accessed May 21, 2014. 
 1. Andrew Lapin, “NPR Talent Leader Schmidt Leaves to 
Start Recruiting Company,” Current.org, December 19, 2013, 
http://www.current.org; Bureau of National Affairs, “To 
Improve Recruiting, Jazz Up Job Sites and Get Employees 
Involved,” HR Focus, December 2013, pp. 13–14; Sarah Hal-
zack, “For Nonprofi t NPR, Social Media Is ‘a Great Equal-
izer’ When It Comes to Hiring,” Washington Post, January 6, 
2013, http://www.washingtonpost.com.
 2. Bureau of National Affairs, “Firm Says High-Performing 
Employers Do It Differently,” Report on Salary Surveys, July 
2013, pp. 13–14.
 3. M. Phillips and S. Singh, “High Corn Prices Ripple through 
Economy,” Businessweek, February 4, 2013, pp. 13–14.
 4. Annie Gasparro, “Tightfi sted New Owners Put Heinz on 
Diet,” Wall Street Journal, February 10, 2014, http://online.
wsj.com.
 5. J. P. Guthrie, “Dumb and Dumber: The Impact of Downsizing 
on Firm Performance as Moderated by Industry Conditions,” 
Organization Science 19 (2008), pp. 108–23; “Lay Off the Lay-
offs,” Newsweek, February 4, 2010, http://www.thedailybeast
.com/newsweek/.
 6. C. D. Zatzick and R. D. Iverson, “High-Involvement Manage-
ment and Workforce Reduction: Competitive Advantage or 
Disadvantage?” Academy of Management Journal 49 (2006), 
pp. 999–1015.
 7. P. P. Shaw, “Network Destruction: The Structural Implica-
tions of Downsizing,” Academy of Management Journal 43 
(2000), pp. 101–12.
 8. Brenda Kowske, Kyle Lundby, and Rena Rasch, “Turning 
‘Survive’ into ‘Thrive’: Managing Survivor Engagement in 
a Downsized Organization,” People & Strategy 32, no. (4), 
(2009), pp. 48–56.
 9. W. F. Cascio, “Downsizing: What Do We Know? What Have 
We Learned?” Academy of Management Executive 7 (1993), pp. 
95–104.
 10. Hagerty, “U.S. Factories Buck Decline”; Scott Kirsner, “The 
Tech Bust: 10 Years After,” Boston Globe, February 20, 2011, 
http://www.boston.com; Bill Saporito and Deirdre Van Dyk, 
“Where the Jobs Are,” Time, January 17, 2011, EBSCOhost, 
http://web.ebscohost.com; Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew 
McAfee, “Jobs, Productivity and the Great Decoupling,” The 
New York Times, December 11, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com.
 11. Dan Jacobs, “Lessons from the Recession,” Landscape Man-
agement, June 2011, pp. S21–S23.
 12. L. Woellert, “Half the Hours, Most of the Pay,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, January 31, 2013, pp. 23–24.
 13. CareerBuilder, “Retirement May Be a Thing of the Past, New 
CareerBuilder Survey Finds,” news release, February 16, 2012, 
http://www.careerbuilder.com.
 14. S. Kim and D. Feldman, “Healthy, Wealthy, or Wise: Pre-
dicting Actual Acceptances of Early Retirement Incentives 
at Three Points in Time,” Personnel Psychology 51 (1998), pp. 
623–42.
 15. Donna Rosato, “Ease Your Way into Retirement,” Money, 
February 2012, EBSCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 16. S. A. Johnson and B. E. Ashforth, “Externalization of 
 Employment in a Service Environment: The Role of 
 Organizational and Customer Identifi cation,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior 29 (2008), pp. 287–309; M. Vidal 
and L. M. Tigges, “Temporary Employment and Strategic 
Staffi ng in the Manufacturing Sector,” Industrial Relations 48 
(2009), pp. 55–72.
 17. “Where Do You Find New Talent?” Mass Transit, September/
October 2011, pp. 102–103.
 18. Tim Sohn, “Don’t Go It Alone,” Editor & Publisher, April 2011, 
EBSCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 19. Ibid.
 20. A. Tiwana, “Does Firm Modularity Complement Ignorance? 
A Field Study of Software Outsourcing Alliances,” Strategic 
Management Journal 29 (2008), pp. 1241–52.
NOTES

CHAPTER 5 
Planning for and Recruiting Human Resources 165
 21. Joel Schectman, “Indiana Says It Is Recovering from Failed 
Experiment in IT Outsourcing,” The Wall Street Journal, 
March 7, 2013, http://blogs.wsj.com.
 22. Mansfi eld Sales Partners, “Sales Outsourcing: Expand Rap-
idly into New Markets,” http://www .mansfi eldsp.com, ac-
cessed March 3, 2012.
 23. Bridget McCrea, “LMS: Optimizing the Human Supply 
Chain,” Modern Materials Handling, April 2013, pp. 48–50.
 24. A. E. Barber, Recruiting Employees (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 
1998).
 25. C. K. Stevens, “Antecedents of Interview Interactions, Inter-
viewers’ Ratings, and Applicants’ Reactions,” Personnel Psy-
chology 51 (1998), pp. 55–85; A. E. Barber, J. R. Hollenbeck, 
S. L. Tower, and J. M. Phillips, “The Effects of Interview 
Focus on Recruitment Effectiveness: A Field Experiment,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 79 (1994), pp. 886–96; D. S. 
Chapman and D. I. Zweig, “Developing a Nomological 
Network for Interview Structure: Antecedents and Con-
sequences of the Structured Selection Interview,” Personnel 
 Psychology 58 (2005), pp. 673–702.
 26. J. D. Olian and S. L. Rynes, “Organizational Staffi ng: Inte-
grating Practice with Strategy,” Industrial Relations 23 (1984), 
pp. 170–83.
 27. M. 
Leonard, 
“Challenges 
to 
the 
Termination-
at-Will Doctrine,” Personnel Administrator 28 (1983), pp. 49–56; 
C. Schowerer and B. Rosen, “Effects of Employment-at-Will 
Policies and Compensation Policies on Corporate Image and 
Job Pursuit Intentions,” Journal of Applied Psychology 74 (1989), 
pp. 653–56.
 28. S. L. Rynes and A. E. Barber, “Applicant Attraction Strate-
gies: An Organizational Perspective,” Academy of Management 
Review 15 (1990), pp. 286–310; J. A. Breaugh, Recruitment: 
Science and Practice (Boston: PWS-Kent, 1992), p. 34.
 29. J. E. Slaughter, M. J. Zickar, S. Highhouse, and D. C. Mohr, 
“Personality Trait Inferences about Organizations: Develop-
ment of a Measure and Assessment of Construct Validity,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 89 (2004), pp. 85–103; D. S. Chap-
man, K. L. Uggerslev, S. A. Carroll, K. A. Piasentin, and D. A. 
Jones, “Applicant Attraction to Organizations and Job Choice: 
A Meta-analytic Review of the Correlates of Recruiting Out-
comes,” Journal of Applied Psychology 90 (2005), pp. 928–44. 
For a contrasting view, see Mark Ritson, “Employer Branding 
Can Do Real Harm so Stop It,” Marketing Week, July 11, 2013, 
EBSCOhost, http://web.b.ebscohost.com.
 30. D. R. Avery, “Reactions to Diversity in Recruitment 
Advertising—Are Differences in Black and White?” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 88 (2003), pp. 672–79.
 31. M. A. Conrad and S. D. Ashworth, “Recruiting Source Effec-
tiveness: A Meta-Analysis and Re-examination of Two Rival 
Hypotheses,” paper presented at the annual meeting of the 
Society of Industrial/Organizational Psychology, Chicago, 
1986.
 32. Breaugh, Recruitment.
 33. Taleo Corporation, “Intercontinental Hotels Group Mobi-
lizes Internal Talent with Taleo in Biggest Ever Recruitment 
Drive,” news release, February 6, 2012, http://ir.taleo.com.
 34. Breaugh, Recruitment, pp. 113–14.
 35. R. S. Schuler and S. E. Jackson, “Linking Competitive Strate-
gies with Human Resource Management Practices,” Academy 
of Management Executive 1 (1987), pp. 207–19.
 36. Gerry Crispin and Mark Mehler, “Sources of Hire 2013: Per-
ception Is Reality,” CareerXroads, March 2013, http://www.
careerxroads.com.
 37. C. R. Wanberg, R. Kanfer, and J. T. Banas, “Predictors and 
Outcomes of Networking Intensity among Job Seekers,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 85 (2000), pp. 491–503.
 38. Nelson D. Schwartz, “In Hiring, a Friend in Need Is a Pros-
pect, Indeed,” The New York Times, January 27, 2013, http://
www.nytimes.com.
 39. Lauren Weber, “Help Wanted—on Writing Job Descrip-
tions,” Wall Street Journal, October 2, 2013, http://online.wsj.
com.
 40. B. Dineen and R. A. Noe, “Effects of Customization on Ap-
plicant Decisions and Applicant Pool Characteristics in a 
Web-Based Recruiting Context,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
94 (2009), pp. 224–34.
 41. Breaugh, Recruitment, p. 87.
 42. EastBay Works, “What Is EastBay Works?” http://www.
eastbayworks.com, accessed March 3, 2012.
 43. Carol Hymowitz and Jeff Green, “Executive Headhunters 
Squeezed by In-House Recruiters,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
January 17, 2013, http://www.businessweek.com.
 44. Melissa Korn, “Companies Size Up Options at Small 
Schools,” The Wall Street Journal, March 1, 2012, http:// 
online.wsj.com.
 45. Hao Zhao and Robert C. Liden, “Internship: A Recruitment 
and Selection Perspective,” Journal of Applied Psychology 96 
(2011): 221–229.
 46. Jessica E. Vascellaro, “Interns Are Largest Target in Battle for 
Tech Talent,” The Wall Street Journal, December 22, 2011, 
http://online.wsj.com.
 47. R. Hawk, The Recruitment Function (New York: American 
Management Association, 1967).
 48. Lauren Weber, “For Smaller Firms, Recruiting Costs Add 
Up,” The Wall Street Journal, November 28, 2011, http://on-
line.wsj.com.
 49. C. K. Stevens, “Effects of Preinterview Beliefs on Applicants’ 
Reactions to Campus Interviews,” Academy of Management 
Journal 40 (1997), pp. 947–66.
 50. C. Collins, “The Interactive Effects of Recruitment Practices 
and Product Awareness on Job Seekers’ Employer Knowledge 
and Application Behaviors,” Journal of Applied Psychology 92 
(2007), pp. 180–90.
 51. M. S. Taylor and T. J. Bergman, “Organizational Recruitment 
Activities and Applicants’ Reactions at Different Stages of the 
Recruitment Process,” Personnel Psychology 40 (1984), pp. 261–
85; C. D. Fisher, D. R. Ilgen, and W. D. Hoyer, “Source Cred-
ibility, Information Favorability, and Job Offer Acceptance,” 
Academy of Management Journal 22 (1979), pp. 94–103.
 52. L. M. Graves and G. N. Powell, “The Effect of Sex Similarity 
on Recruiters’ Evaluation of Actual Applicants: A Test of the 
Similarity-Attraction Paradigm,” Personnel Psychology 48 (1995), 
pp. 85–98.
 53. R. D. Tretz and T. A. Judge, “Realistic Job Previews: A Test 
of the Adverse Self-Selection Hypothesis,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 83 (1998), pp. 330–37.
 54. P. Hom, R. W. Griffeth, L. E. Palich, and J. S. Bracker, “An 
Exploratory Investigation into Theoretical Mechanisms 
Underlying Realistic Job Previews,” Personnel Psychology 51 
(1998), pp. 421–51.

166 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
 55. G. M. McEvoy and W. F. Cascio, “Strategies for Reducing 
Employee Turnover: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 70 (1985), pp. 342–53; S. L. Premack and J. P. Wanous, 
“A Meta- Analysis of Realistic Job Preview Experiments,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 70 (1985), pp. 706–19.
 56. D. R. Earnest, D. G. Allen, and R. S. Landis, “Mecha-
nisms Linking Realistic Job Previews with Turnover: A 
Meta-Analytic Path Analysis,” Personnel Psychology 64 (2011), 
pp. 865–897.
 57. R. W. Walters, “It’s Time We Become Pros,” Journal of College 
Placement 12 (1985), pp. 30–33.
 58. S. L. Rynes, R. D. Bretz, and B. Gerhart, “The Importance 
of Recruitment in Job Choice: A Different Way of Looking,” 
Personnel Psychology 44 (1991), pp. 487–522.

Selecting Employees 
and Placing Them in Jobs
6
Introduction
With all the references to U.S. service members as “heroes” and the calls 
to “support our troops,” you might expect that employers would be lining 
up to hire veterans. Indeed, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, an associa-
tion of businesses, has created a Hiring Our Heroes program offering job 
fairs and workshops to veterans, and many individual companies make 
a point of recruiting veterans. Even so, the unemployment rate among 
post–9/11 veterans persists at several percentage points above the rate 
for the overall U.S. workforce. 
What is keeping companies from hiring more veterans? Survey evidence suggests 
that one hurdle is employers’ fears about injuries such as post-traumatic stress dis-
order (PTSD). Some—incorrectly—worry that individuals with PTSD will be unable to 
function in the workplace or that accommodating this disability will be expensive. Some 
employers also operate on the assumption that the experience of following orders in 
the military has made veterans uncreative, even though military service more typically 
requires people to be resourceful and solve problems quickly in a variety of challenging 
situations. A third challenge is that the tasks performed by a service member may seem 
unrelated to any civilian jobs. It is usually up to veterans to figure out how to translate 
their experiences and accomplishments into general terms a civilian employer can ap-
preciate. To help veterans overcome these hurdles, the U.S. Army’s Warrior Transi-
tion Command recently partnered with the Society for Human Resource Management 
and recruiting firm Orion International to create educational resources for employers. 
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 6-1 Identify the elements of the selection process.
 LO 6-2 Deﬁ ne ways to measure the success of a 
selection method.
 LO 6-3 Summarize the government’s requirements for 
employee selection.
 LO 6-4 Compare the common methods used for selecting 
human resources.
 LO 6-5 Describe major types of employment tests.
 LO 6-6 Discuss how to conduct effective interviews.
 LO 6-7 Explain how employers carry out the process of 
making a selection decision.

168 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Their message is that employers who select qualified veterans will gain workers with an 
impressive work ethic, self-discipline, and ability to perform under pressure.1
Hiring decisions are about fi nding the people who will be a good fi t with the job 
and the organization. Any organization that appreciates the competitive edge provided 
by good people must take the utmost care in choosing its members. The organization’s 
decisions about selecting personnel are central to its ability to survive, adapt, and grow. 
Selection decisions become especially critical when organizations face tight labor mar-
kets or must compete for talent with other organizations in the same industry. If a 
competitor keeps getting the best applicants, the remaining companies must make do 
with who is left.
This chapter will familiarize you with ways to minimize errors in employee selec-
tion and placement. The chapter starts by describing the selection process and how to 
evaluate possible methods for carrying out that process. It then takes an in-depth look 
at the most widely used methods: applications and résumés, employment tests, and 
interviews. The chapter ends by describing the process by which organizations arrive 
at a fi nal selection decision.
Selection Process
Through personnel selection, organizations make decisions about who will or will 
not be allowed to join the organization. Selection begins with the candidates identifi ed 
through recruitment and with attempts to reduce their number to the individuals best 
qualifi ed to perform the available jobs. At the end of the process, the selected individu-
als are placed in jobs with the organization.
The process of selecting employees varies considerably from organization to or-
ganization and from job to job. At most organizations, however, selection includes 
the steps illustrated in Figure 6.1. First, a human resource professional reviews the 
applications received to see which meet the basic requirements of the job. For can-
didates who meet the basic requirements, the organization administers tests and re-
views work samples to rate the candidates’ abilities. Those with the best abilities 
are invited to the organization for one or more interviews. Often, supervisors and 
team members are involved in this stage of the process. By this point, the decision 
makers are beginning to form opinions about which candidates are most desirable. 
For the top few candidates, the organization should check references and conduct 
background checks to verify that the organization’s information is correct. Then 
LO 6-1 Identify the ele-
ments of the selection 
process.
Personnel Selection
The process through 
which organizations 
make decisions about 
who will or will not 
be allowed to join the 
organization.
Figure 6.1
Steps in the Selection Process

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  169
supervisors, teams, and other decision makers select a person to receive a job offer. 
In some cases, the candidate may negotiate with the organization regarding salary, 
benefi ts, and the like. If the candidate accepts the job, the organization places him or 
her in that job.
Nowadays, the ease of applying online coupled with the high unemployment rates 
of the past few years have made this processing overwhelming for many recruiters. 
A simple job posting online could generate hundreds of résumés in one day. Many 
employers are coping by automating much of the selection process with an applicant-
tracking system. Typically, the system starts by receiving the data provided in elec-
tronically submitted résumés and matching it against the company’s selection criteria. 
The system might fi nd that half the résumés lack necessary keywords, so it sends those 
applicants a polite “no thank you” e-mail. The applications that survive the automated 
screening go to a hiring manager, often ranked by how well they meet preset criteria. 
The manager reviews these applications and selects candidates to contact for a tele-
phone or face-to-face interview and/or testing.
Critics point out that these automated systems may arbitrarily reject highly 
qualifi ed people who submit a creatively worded résumé rather than simply mim-
icking the wording of the job posting. Moreover, a recent study by the Talent 
Board suggests that rejected job applicants have the potential to hurt a company’s 
bottom line. More than 8% of the study’s participants said that their job rejection 
would affect their relationship as customers with the company, the sentiment being 
“if I’m not good enough to work here I probably don’t want to be a customer.” 
Nevertheless, automated systems can make the application process more effi cient 
by speeding up the steps and perhaps allowing applicants to check the status of 
their applications.2
How does an organization decide which of these steps to use and in what order? 
Some organizations simply repeat a selection process that is familiar. If members 
of the organization underwent job interviews, they conduct job interviews, asking 
familiar questions. However, what organizations should do is to create a selection 
process in support of its job descriptions. In Chapter 3, we explained that a job 
description identifi es the knowledge, skills, abilities, and other characteristics re-
quired for successfully performing a job. The selection process should be set up 
in such a way that it lets the organization identify people who have the necessary 
KSAOs. In Winston-Salem, North Carolina, a mortgage company called BB&T 
bases its growth strategy on excellent customer service. BB&T hires customer-
focused loan offi cers by seeking a combination of cultural fi t with the organi-
zation and skill in “relationship selling” (selling that builds 
long-term customer relationships by identifying and meeting 
customers’ needs). First, the BB&T recruiter and hiring man-
ager assess cultural fi t by talking to candidates about how they 
work with customers. If candidates focus on their earnings or 
express little interest in customers’ well-being, BB&T screens 
them out no matter how skillful they are at closing a deal. 
Candidates with the necessary attitude are invited to continue 
with an assessment of their technical skills. Candidates who 
pass both steps of the initial screening are invited to inter-
view with branch managers. If all the interviewers agree that 
the candidate is a good fi t, BB&T makes an offer. This care-
ful approach to hiring has built a workforce characterized by 
 exceptionally high productivity and low turnover.3
For employees who work directly with customers, com-
panies should create a selection process that measures 
employees’ interest in customers and their ability to 
interact in a positive way.

170 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
This kind of strategic approach to selection requires ways to measure the effective-
ness of selection tools. From science, we have basic standards for this:
 • The method provides reliable information.
 • The method provides valid information.
 • The information can be generalized to apply to the candidates.
 • The method offers high utility (practical value).
 • The selection criteria are legal.
Reliability
The reliability of a type of measurement indicates how free that measurement is from 
random error.4 A reliable measurement therefore generates consistent results. Assum-
ing that a person’s intelligence is fairly stable over time, a reliable test of intelligence 
should generate consistent results if the same person takes the test several times. Or-
ganizations that construct intelligence tests should be able to provide (and explain) 
information about the reliability of their tests.
Usually, this information involves statistics such as correlation coeffi cients. These sta-
tistics measure the degree to which two sets of numbers are related. A higher cor-
relation coeffi cient signifi es a stronger relationship. At one extreme, a correlation 
coeffi cient of 1.0 means a perfect positive relationship—as one set of numbers goes 
up, so does the other. If you took the same vision test three days in a row, those scores 
would probably have nearly a perfect correlation. At the other extreme, a correlation 
of 21.0 means a perfect negative correlation—when one set of numbers goes up, the 
other goes down. In the middle, a correlation of 0 means there is no correlation at 
all. For example, the correlation (or relationship) between weather and intelligence 
would be at or near 0. A reliable test would be one for which scores by the same person 
(or people with similar attributes) have a correlation close to 1.0.
Reliability answers one important question—whether you are measuring some-
thing accurately—but ignores another question that is as important: Are you measur-
ing something that matters? Think about how this applies at companies that try to 
identify workers who will fi t in well with the company’s culture. Often these com-
panies depend on teamwork, social networking, and creativity, and they expect those 
behaviors to prevail when workers get along well and share similar values. However, 
efforts to seek cultural fi t often translate into favoring the most likable candidates—for 
example, those who make eye contact, display an interest in others, and tell engaging 
stories.5 This approach not only raises questions of reliability—for example, whether 
making eye contact in a job interview is a reliable measure of a person’s behavior on the 
job over time—it also raises questions about the extent to which being likable really 
translates into effective teamwork and creative problem solving. Perhaps the prickly 
member of the team will be the one who opens up a new and valuable line of thinking. 
As in this example, employers need to consider both the reliability of their selection 
methods and their validity, defi ned next.
Validity
For a selection measure, validity describes the extent to which performance on the 
measure (such as a test score) is related to what the measure is designed to assess (such 
as job performance). Although we can reliably measure such characteristics as weight 
and height, these measurements do not provide much information about how a person 
will perform most kinds of jobs. Thus, for most jobs height and weight provide little 
LO 6-2 Deﬁ ne ways to 
measure the success of 
a selection method.
Reliability
The extent to which a 
measurement is free 
from random error.
Validity
The extent to which per-
formance on a measure 
(such as a test score) 
is related to what the 
measure is designed 
to assess (such as job 
performance).

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  171
validity as selection criteria. One way to determine whether a measure is valid is to 
compare many people’s scores on that measure with their job performance. For ex-
ample, suppose people who score above 60 words per minute on a keyboarding test 
consistently get high marks for their performance in data-entry jobs. This observation 
suggests the keyboarding test is valid for predicting success in that job. 
As with reliability, information about the validity of selection methods often uses 
correlation coeffi cients. A strong positive (or negative) correlation between a measure 
and job performance means the measure should be a valid basis for selecting (or re-
jecting) a candidate. This information is important not only because it helps organi-
zations identify the best employees, but also because organizations can demonstrate 
fair employment practices by showing that their selection process is valid. The federal 
government’s Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures accept three ways of 
measuring validity: criterion-related, content, and construct validity.
Criterion-Related Validity The fi rst category, criterion-related validity, is a 
 measure of validity based on showing a substantial correlation between test scores and 
job performance scores. In the example in Figure 6.2, a company compares two 
 measures—an intelligence test and college grade point average—with performance as 
sales representative. In the left graph, which shows the relationship between the intel-
ligence test scores and job performance, the points for the 20 sales reps fall near the 
45-degree line. The correlation coeffi cient is near .90 (for a perfect 1.0, all the points 
would be on the 45-degree line). In the graph at the right, the points are scattered 
more widely. The correlation between college GPA and sales reps’ performance is 
much lower. In this hypothetical example, the intelligence test is more valid than GPA 
for predicting success at this job.
Two kinds of research are possible for arriving at criterion-related validity:
 1. Predictive validation—This research uses the test scores of all applicants and 
looks for a relationship between the scores and future performance. The 
Criterion-Related 
Validity
A measure of validity 
based on showing a 
substantial correlation 
between test scores and 
job performance scores.
Predictive Validation
Research that uses the 
test scores of all ap-
plicants and looks for a 
relationship between the 
scores and future perfor-
mance of the applicants 
who were hired.
Figure 6.2
Criterion-Related Measurements of a Student’s Aptitude

172 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
researcher administers the tests, waits a set period of time, and then measures the 
performance of the applicants who were hired.
 2. Concurrent validation—This type of research administers a test to people who 
currently hold a job, then compares their scores to existing measures of job per-
formance. If the people who score highest on the test also do better on the job, the 
test is assumed to be valid.
Predictive validation is more time consuming and diffi cult, but it is the best mea-
sure of validity. Job applicants tend to be more motivated to do well on the tests, and 
their performance on the tests is not infl uenced by their fi rsthand experience with the 
job. Also, the group studied is more likely to include people who perform poorly on 
the test—a necessary ingredient to accurately validate a test.6
Content and Construct Validity Another way to show validity is to establish 
 content validity—that is, consistency between the test items or problems and the kinds 
of situations or problems that occur on the job. A test that is “content valid” exposes the 
job applicant to situations that are likely to occur on the job. It tests whether the applicant 
has the knowledge, skills, or ability to handle such situations. In the case of a company 
using tests for selecting a construction superintendent, tests with content validity included 
organizing a random list of subcontractors into the order they would appear at a con-
struction site and entering a shed to identify construction errors that had intentionally 
been made for testing purposes.7 More commonly today, employers use computer role-
playing games in which software is created to include situations that occur on the job. The 
game measures how the candidate reacts to the situations, and then it computes a score 
based on how closely the candidate’s responses match those of an ideal employee.8
The usual basis for deciding that a test has content validity is through expert judgment. 
Experts can rate the test items according to whether they mirror essential functions of 
the job. Because establishing validity is based on the experts’ subjective judgments, con-
tent validity is most suitable for measuring behavior that is concrete and observable.
For tests that measure abstract qualities such as intelligence or leadership ability, 
establishment of validity may have to rely on construct validity. This involves estab-
lishing that tests really do measure intelligence, leadership ability, or other such “con-
structs,” as well as showing that mastery of this construct is associated with successful 
performance of the job. For example, if you could show that a test measures something 
called “mechanical ability,” and that people with superior mechanical ability perform 
well as assemblers, then the test has construct validity for the assembler job. Tests that 
measure a construct usually measure a combination of behaviors thought to be associ-
ated with the construct.
Ability to Generalize
Along with validity in general, we need to know whether a selection method is valid in 
the context in which the organization wants to use it. A generalizable method applies 
not only to the conditions in which the method was originally developed—job, 
 organization, people, time period, and so on. It also applies to other organizations, 
jobs, applicants, and so on. In other words, is a selection method that was valid in one 
context also valid in other contexts?
Researchers have studied whether tests of intelligence and thinking skills (called cog-
nitive ability) can be generalized. The research has supported the idea that these tests are 
generalizable across many jobs. However, as jobs become more complex, the validity of 
many of these tests increases. In other words, they are most valid for complex jobs.9
Concurrent Validation
Research that consists 
of administering a test 
to people who currently 
hold a job, then com-
paring their scores to 
existing measures of job 
performance.
 Content Validity 
 Consistency between the 
test items or problems 
and the kinds of situa-
tions or problems that 
occur on the job. 
Construct Validity
Consistency between a 
high score on a test and 
high level of a construct 
such as intelligence or 
leadership ability, as well 
as between mastery of 
this construct and suc-
cessful performance of 
the job.
Generalizable
Valid in other contexts 
beyond the context in 
which the selection 
method was developed.

173
Practical Value
Not only should selection methods such as tests and interview responses accurately pre-
dict how well individuals will perform, but they should also produce information that 
actually benefi ts the organization. Being valid, reliable, and generalizable adds value to a 
method. Another consideration is the cost of using the selection method. Selection pro-
cedures such as testing and interviewing cost money. They should cost signifi cantly less 
than the benefi ts of hiring the new employees. Methods that provide economic value 
greater than the cost of using them are said to have utility.
The choice of a selection method may differ according to the job being fi lled. 
If the job involves providing a product or service of high value to the organiza-
tion, it is worthwhile to spend more to fi nd a top performer. At a company where 
salespeople are responsible for closing million-dollar deals, the company will be 
willing to invest more in selection decisions. At a fast-food restaurant, such an in-
vestment will not be worthwhile; the employer will prefer faster, simpler ways to 
select workers who ring up orders, prepare food, and keep the facility clean. Still, 
as the “Did You Know?” box illustrates, careless selection decisions are costly in 
any kind of organization.
Utility
The extent to which 
something provides eco-
nomic value greater than 
its cost.
Did You Know?
Almost two-thirds (66%) of U.S. em-
ployers surveyed by CareerBuilder 
said their company had experienced 
negative consequences as a result 
of selecting someone who was not 
a good fi t or did not perform the job 
well. Of these respondents, 27% 
said a poor hiring decision had cost 
their company more than $50,000. 
When asked to identify the types of 
consequences, respondents in the 
United States most often said pro-
ductivity suffered.
Question
Do the results of this survey indicate 
that U.S. companies should spend 
up to $50,000 to select an employee 
for every vacant position? Why or 
why not?
Sources: Rachel Gillett, “Infographic: 
How Much a Bad Hire Will Actually Cost 
You,” Fast Company, April 8, 2014, 
http://www.fastcompany.com; Adecco, 
“Hiring Mistakes, the Cost of a Bad 
Hire,” AdeccoUSA blog, June 10, 2013, 
http://blog.adeccousa.com; Career-
Builder, “More Than Half of Companies 
in the Top Ten World Economies Have 
Been Affected by a Bad Hire, according 
to a CareerBuilder Survey,” news re-
lease, May 8, 2013, http://www.careeer
builder.com. 
Selection Decisions Affect the Bottom Line
Lost productivity
Lower morale
Expense of recruiting,
training replacement
Worsened client relations
Lower sales
Consequences of a Bad Hire
Percentage of U.S. Respondents
40
0
10
20
30
y
e
,
t
,
s
s
0
10

174 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Legal Standards for Selection
As we discussed in Chapter 3, the U.S. government imposes legal limits on selection 
decisions. The government requires that the selection process be conducted in a way 
that avoids discrimination and provides access to employees with disabilities. The laws 
described in Chapter 3 have many applications to the selection process:
 • The Civil Rights Act of 1991 and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 
1967 place requirements on the choice of selection methods. An employer that uses 
a neutral-appearing selection method that damages a protected group is obligated 
to show that there is a business necessity for using that method. For example, if an 
organization uses a test that eliminates many candidates from minority groups, the 
organization must show that the test is valid for predicting performance of that job. 
In this context, good performance does not include “customer preference” or “brand 
image” as a justifi cation for adverse impact. As we saw in Chapter 3, the courts may 
view a discriminatory pattern of hiring as evidence that the company is engaged in 
illegal discrimination.
 • The Civil Rights Act of 1991 also prohibits preferential treatment in favor of minor-
ity groups. In the case of an organization using a test that tends to reject members of 
minority groups, the organization may not simply adjust minority applicants’ scores 
upward. Such practices can create an environment that is demotivating to all em-
ployees and can lead to government sanctions. In Buffalo, New York, minority fi re-
fi ghters scored poorly on civil service exams, so the city let its list of candidates for 
promotion expire rather than promote only white fi refi ghters. White fi refi ghters 
who had been on the list fi led a lawsuit claiming they were discriminated against, 
and they won back pay, benefi ts, and damages for emotional distress. Their attor-
ney said the situation had created morale problems among fi refi ghters who saw the 
discriminatory treatment as unfair.10
 • Equal employment opportunity laws affect the kinds of information an organization 
may gather on application forms and in interviews. As summarized in Table 6.1, the 
organization may not ask questions that gather information about a person’s pro-
tected status, even indirectly. For example, requesting the dates a person attended 
high school and college could indirectly gather information about an applicant’s age.
 • The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1991 requires employers to make 
“reasonable accommodation” to disabled individuals and restricts many kinds of 
questions during the selection process. Under the ADA, preemployment questions 
may not investigate disabilities, but must focus on job performance. An interviewer 
may ask, “Can you meet the attendance requirements for this job?” but may not 
ask, “How many days did you miss work last year because you were sick?” Also, the 
employer may not, in making hiring decisions, use employment physical exams or 
other tests that could reveal a psychological or physical disability.
Along with equal employment opportunity, organizations must be concerned about 
candidates’ privacy rights. The information gathered during the selection process may 
include information that employees consider confi dential. Confi dentiality is a par-
ticular concern when job applicants provide information online. Employers should 
collect data only at secure websites, and they may have to be understanding if online 
applicants are reluctant to provide data such as Social Security numbers, which hack-
ers could use for identity theft. For some jobs, background checks look at candidates’ 
credit history. The Fair Credit Reporting Act requires employers to obtain a candi-
date’s consent before using a third party to check the candidate’s credit history or 
LO 6-3 Summarize the 
government’s require-
ments for employee 
selection.

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  175
references. If the employer then decides to take an adverse action (such as not hiring) 
based on the report, the employer must give the applicant a copy of the report and 
summary of the applicant’s rights before taking the action.
Another legal requirement is that employers hiring people to work in the United 
States must ensure that anyone they hire is eligible for employment in this country. 
Under the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, employers must verify 
and maintain records on the legal rights of applicants to work in the United States. 
They do this by having applicants fi ll out the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Ser-
vices’ Form I-9 and present documents showing their identity and eligibility to work. 
Employers must complete their portion of each Form I-9, check the applicant’s docu-
ments, and retain the Form I-9 for at least three years. Employers may (and in some 
cases must) also use the federal government’s electronic system for verifying eligibility 
to work. To use the system, called E-Verify, employers go online (www.uscis.gov/
e-verify) to submit information on the applicant’s I-9. The system compares it against 
information in databases of the Social Security Administration and Department of 
Homeland Security. It then notifi es the employer of the candidate’s eligibility, usually 
Immigration Reform 
and Control Act of 1986
Federal law requiring 
employers to verify and 
maintain records on 
applicants’ legal rights 
to work in the United 
States.
PERMISSIBLE QUESTIONS
IMPERMISSIBLE QUESTIONS
What is your full name?
Have you ever worked under a different name? 
[Ask all candidates.]
What was your maiden name?
What’s the nationality of your name?
If you are hired, can you show proof of age (to 
meet a legal age requirement)?
How old are you?
How would you feel about working for someone 
younger than you?
Will you need any reasonable accommodation 
for this hiring process?
Are you able to perform this job, with or without 
reasonable accommodation?
What is your height? Your weight?
Do you have any disabilities?
Have you been seriously ill? 
Please provide a photograph of yourself.
Are you ﬂ uent in [language needed for job]?
[Statement that employment is subject 
to veriﬁ cation of applicant’s identity and 
employment eligibility under immigration laws]
What is your ancestry? Are you a citizen of the 
United States? Where were you born? How did 
you learn to speak that language?
What schools have you attended? What degrees 
have you earned? What was your major?
Is that school afﬁ liated with [religious group]?
When did you attend high school? [to learn 
applicant’s age]
Can you meet the requirements of the work 
schedule? [Ask all candidates.]
What is your religion? What religious holidays do 
you observe?
Can you meet the job requirement to travel 
overnight several times a month?
What is your marital status? Would you like to be 
addressed as Mrs., Ms., or Miss? Do you have any 
children?
Have you ever been convicted of a crime?
Have you ever been arrested?
What organizations or groups do you belong 
to that you consider relevant to being able to 
perform this job?
What organizations or groups do you belong to?
Note: This table provides examples and is not intended as a complete listing of permissible and impermis-
sible questions. The examples are based on federal requirements; state laws vary and may affect these 
examples.
Sources: Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Pre-employment Inquiries (General),” Prohibited 
Employment Policies/Practices, http://www.eeoc.gov, accessed May 20, 2014; Louise Kursmark, “Keep 
the Interview Legal,” Monster Resource Center: Recruiting and Hiring Advice, http://hiring.monster.com, 
accessed May 20, 2014; Lisa Guerin, “Illegal Interview Questions,” Nolo Legal Topics: Employment Law, 
http://www.nolo.com, accessed May 20, 2014.
Table 6.1
Permissible and 
Impermissible Questions 
for Applications and 
Interviews

176 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
within 24 hours. At the same time, assuming a person is eligible to work under the Im-
migration Reform and Control Act, the law prohibits the employer from discriminating 
against the person on the basis of national origin or citizenship status.
An important principle of selection is to combine several sources of information 
about candidates, rather than relying solely on interviews or a single type of testing. 
The sources should be chosen carefully to relate to the characteristics identifi ed in 
the job description. When organizations do this, they are increasing the validity of 
the decision criteria. They are more likely to make hiring decisions that are fair and 
unbiased. They also are more likely to choose the best candidates.
Job Applications and Résumés
Nearly all employers gather background information on applicants at the begin-
ning of the selection process. The usual ways of gathering background informa-
tion are by asking applicants to fi ll out application forms and provide résumés. 
Organizations also verify the information by checking references and conducting 
background checks.
Asking job candidates to provide background information is inexpensive. The or-
ganization can get reasonably accurate information by combining applications and 
résumés with background checks and well-designed interviews.11 A major challenge 
with applications and résumés is the sheer volume of work they generate for the orga-
nization. Human resource departments often are swamped with far more résumés than 
they can carefully review.
Application Forms
Asking each applicant to fi ll out an employment application is a low-cost way to gather 
basic data from many applicants. It also ensures that the organization has certain stan-
dard categories of information, such as mailing address and employment history, from 
each. Figure 6.3 is an example of an application form.
Employers can buy general-purpose application forms from an offi ce supply store, 
or they can create their own forms to meet unique needs. Either way, employment ap-
plications include areas for applicants to provide several types of information:
 • Contact information—The applicant’s name, address, phone number, and e-mail 
address.
 • Work experience—Companies the applicant worked for, job titles, and dates of 
employment.
 • Educational background—High school, college, and universities attended and 
degree(s) awarded.
 • Applicant’s signature—Signature following a statement that the applicant has pro-
vided true and complete information.
The application form may include other areas for the applicant to provide additional 
information, such as specifi c work experiences, technical skills, or memberships in pro-
fessional or trade groups. Also, including the date on an application is useful for keeping 
up-to-date records of job applicants. The application form should not request informa-
tion that could violate equal employment opportunity standards. For example, questions 
about an applicant’s race, marital status, or number of children would be inappropriate.
By reviewing application forms, HR personnel can identify which candidates 
meet minimum requirements for education and experience. They may be able to rank 
LO 6-4 Compare the 
common methods used 
for selecting human 
resources.

177
Figure 6.3
Sample Job Application Form
APPLICATION FOR EMPLOYMENT
PLEASE ANSWER ALL ITEMS. IF NOT APPLICABLE, WRITE N/A.
WORK PREFERENCE
An Equal Opportunity Employer
FIRST NAME
LOCAL
STREET ADDRESS
YES
NO
CITY AND STATE
ZIP CODE
TELEPHONE
PERMANENT
ELECTRONIC MAIL ADDRESS
ARE YOU A U.S. CITIZEN OR AUTHORIZED TO BE LEGALLY EMPLOYED ON AN ONGOING BASIS IN THE U.S.
BASED ON YOUR VISA OR IMMIGRATION STATUS?
DO YOU CURRENTLY HAVE A NONIMMIGRANT U.S. VISA?
YES
NO
DO YOU HAVE ANY RELATIVES EMPLOYED HERE?
IF YES, GIVE NAME, RELATIONSHIP, AND LOCATION WHERE THEY WORK
YES
NO
DO YOU HAVE ANY RELATIVES EMPLOYED BY THE COMPETITION?
WHEN
SPECIFIC POSITION FOR WHICH YOU ARE APPLYING
LIST COMPUTER SOFTWARE PACKAGES OR PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE SKILLS
STARTING SALARY EXPECTED
DATE AVAILABLE TO START WORK
HOW DID YOU HAPPEN TO APPLY FOR A POSITION HERE?
NUMBER OF YEARS OF
RELATED EXPERIENCE
WHERE
NATURE OF OFFENSE(S)
ARE YOU ABLE TO TRAVEL AS REQUIRED FOR THE POSITION SOUGHT?
      YES                NO
ARE YOU WILLING TO RELOCATE?
      YES                NO
YES
WHAT COMPANY?
NO
ARE THERE GEOGRAPHICAL AREAS WHICH YOU WOULD PREFER OR REFUSE?
YES
IF YES, PLEASE SPECIFY:
NO
HAVE YOU EVER WORKED AT, OR APPLIED FOR WORK HERE BEFORE?
IF YES: WHEN?                                                                                          WHERE?
LIST EMPLOYMENT REFERENCES HERE, IF NOT INCLUDED ON ATTACHED RESUME
YES
NO
TURN OVER
HAVE YOU EVER BEEN CONVICTED OR PLED GUILTY TO ANY FELONY OR MISDEMEANOR OTHER THAN FOR A MINOR TRAFFIC VIOLATION?
IF YES, STATE THE DATE(S) AND LOCATION(S):
YES
NO
IF YES, PLEASE SPECIFY:
ARE YOU OVER
18 YEARS OF AGE?
YES
NO
STREET ADDRESS
CITY AND STATE
ZIP CODE
TELEPHONE
MIDDLE NAME
LAST NAME
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER
COMPLETE THIS SECTION IF INFORMATION IS NOT INCLUDED ON ATTACHED RESUME
HIGH SCHOOL
CIRCLE THE HIGHEST GRADE COMPLETED: ELEMENTARY 6   7   8
HIGH SCHOOL   1   2   3   4
COLLEGE   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8
EDUCATION
LIST MOST RECENT FIRST. I AGREE TO FURNISH VERIFICATION IF REQUESTED.
ATTACH RESUME. RESPOND BELOW IF INFORMATION IS NOT INCLUDED ON RESUME.
EMPLOYMENT AND MILITARY RECORD
NAME(S)
COLLEGE
ACADEMIC HONORS OR OTHER SPECIAL RECOGNITION
FOREIGN LANGUAGES READ
NAME AND ADDRESS
OF EMPLOYER
POSITION HELD
PRIMARY
RESPONSIBILITIES
AND ACCOUNTABILITIES
ENCIRCLE THOSE EMPLOYERS YOU DO NOT WANT US TO CONTACT
TURN OVER
SALARY
START
FINISH
FROM
TO
DATES
REASON FOR
LEAVING
HAVE YOU TAKEN THE GMAT, GRE, SAT, OR OTHER ACADEMIC ENTRANCE TEST(S) WITHIN THE LAST TEN YEARS?
IF YES, LIST TEST(S), DATE(S) AND HIGHEST SCORE(S).
SAT
ACT
GRE (GENERAL TEST)
GMAT
OTHER
TOTAL:
TOTAL:
TOTAL:
TOTAL:
TOTAL:
VERBAL:
MATHEMATICAL:
ANALYTICAL:
AWA:
ENGLISH:
VERBAL:
VERBAL:
MATHEMATICS:
     QUANTITATIVE:
     MATH:
YES
DATE TAKEN
SCORE(S)
READING:
SCIENCE:
NO
FOREIGN LANGUAGES SPOKEN
NAME(S)
LOCATION(S)
MAJOR FIELD(S) OF STUDY AND
PRINCIPAL PROFESSOR
(OR ADVISOR)
DEGREE(S)
RECEIVED
OVERALL
AND MAJOR
GPAS
LOCATION(S)
GRADUATED
GRADE AVERAGE
CLASS RANK
OUT OF
YES
NO

178 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
applicants—for example, giving applicants with 10 years of experi-
ence a higher ranking than applicants with 2 years of experience. 
In this way, the applications enable the organization to narrow the 
pool of candidates to a number it can afford to test and interview.
Résumés
The usual way that applicants introduce themselves to a poten-
tial employer is to submit a résumé. An obvious drawback of this 
information source is that applicants control the content of the 
information as well as the way it is presented. This type of infor-
mation is therefore biased in favor of the applicant and (although 
this is unethical) may not even be accurate. However, résumés 
are an inexpensive way to gather information and provide em-
ployers with a starting point. Organizations typically use résumés as a basis for decid-
ing which candidates to investigate further.
As with employment applications, an HR staff member reviews the résumés to 
identify candidates meeting such basic requirements as educational background, re-
lated work performed, and types of equipment the person has used. Because résumés 
are created by the job applicants (or the applicants have at least approved résumés 
created by someone they hire), they also may provide some insight into how candi-
dates communicate and present themselves. Employers tend to decide against ap-
plicants whose résumés are unclear, sloppy, or full of mistakes. On the positive side, 
résumés may enable applicants to highlight accomplishments that might not show up 
in the format of an employment application. In a recent trend, applicants can even 
include a link to an online portfolio of work samples; however, few employers have 
made checking those portfolios part of the selection process. Some are too pressed for 
time, while many lack the capability in their HR software or are concerned they will 
see information, such as photos, that will raise fair-employment concerns.12 Review 
of résumés is most valid when the content of the résumés is evaluated in terms of the 
elements of a job description.
References
Application forms often ask that applicants provide the names of several references. 
Applicants provide the names and phone numbers of former employers or others who 
can vouch for their abilities and past job performance. In some situations, the applicant 
may provide letters of reference written by those people. It is then up to the organiza-
tion to have someone contact the references to gather information or verify the ac-
curacy of the information provided by the applicant.
As you might expect, references are not an unbiased source of information. Most 
applicants are careful to choose references who will say something positive. In addi-
tion, former employers and others may be afraid that if they express negative opinions, 
they will be sued. Equally problematic from the standpoint of getting useful informa-
tion is that some candidates fail to list people who can speak about their work history. 
On occasion, references barely know the candidate or know him or her only in a social 
context. A hiring manager in a government offi ce even saw his own name listed as a 
reference for a candidate the manager had never met. In that case, the visibly uncom-
fortable worker offered the manager an unconvincing explanation, so the references at 
least tested the candidate’s honesty (and he did not get hired).13
An HR staff member typically reviews résumés from 
job applicants to identify candidates who meet basic 
job requirements, such as education and related work 
experience.

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  179
Usually the organization checks references after it has determined that the appli-
cant is a fi nalist for the job. Contacting references for all applicants would be time 
consuming, and it does pose some burden on the people contacted. Part of that burden 
is the risk of giving information that is seen as too negative or too positive. If the per-
son who is a reference gives negative information, there is a chance the candidate will 
claim defamation, meaning the person damaged the applicant’s reputation by making 
statements that cannot be proved truthful.14 At the other extreme, if the person gives 
a glowing statement about a candidate, and the new employer later learns of misdeeds 
such as sexual misconduct or workplace violence, the new employer might sue the 
former employer for misrepresentation.15
Because such situations occasionally arise, often with much publicity, people who 
give references tend to give as little information as possible. Most organizations have 
policies that the human resource department will handle all requests for references 
and that they will only verify employment dates and sometimes the employee’s fi nal 
salary. In organizations without such a policy, HR professionals should be careful—
and train managers to be careful—to stick to observable, job-related behaviors and to 
avoid broad opinions that may be misinterpreted. In spite of these drawbacks of refer-
ences, the risks of not learning about signifi cant problems in a candidate’s past out-
weigh the possibility of getting only a little information. Potential employers should 
check references. In general, the results of this effort will be most valid if the employer 
contacts many references (if possible, going beyond the list of names provided by the 
applicant), speaks with them directly by phone, and listens carefully for clues such as 
tone of voice.16
Background Checks
A background check is a way to verify that applicants are as they represent them-
selves to be. Unfortunately, not all candidates are open and honest. Liz Crawford, 
who is responsible for hiring employees at Factory VFX, has seen some notable 
attempts to deceive her. One candidate handed her a résumé including employ-
ment experience at a company Crawford knows well. When she commented on 
this, the candidate gave her a different résumé and tried to explain that the fi rst one 
was a “wish résumé” of positions she wished she had held. Another candidate an-
nounced at his interview that he had been recommended by a Factory VFX artist. 
At the end of the interview,  Crawford picked up the phone and dialed the artist so 
they could greet one another—and the embarrassed candidate admitted he didn’t 
actually know the artist.17 In light of incidents such as these, it’s no wonder that 
many hiring managers are interested in using social media to check employees’ 
backgrounds (see “HRM Social”).
Besides checking employment references, many employers also conduct crimi-
nal background checks. Some positions are so sensitive that the law may even limit 
hiring a person with certain kinds of convictions: for example, a person convicted 
of domestic violence may not hold positions that involve shipping fi rearms. The 
use of criminal background checks is a sensitive issue in the United States, how-
ever, especially since crackdowns on crime have resulted in many arrests. An addi-
tional concern is the disparate impact of considering criminal history. Men are far 
more likely to have a criminal record than women, and arrests and convictions are 
far more common among African Americans than whites. The Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission has published guidelines that employers who check 
criminal histories do so consistently; that is, they should conduct the same type 

180
of background check for all candidates and apply the same standards for acting on 
the information. However, the EEOC also recommends that employers review the 
particular details of each situation, including the seriousness of each offense, the 
amount of time that has passed since conviction or completion of sentence, and the 
crime’s relevance to the job the candidate is applying for.18
Another type of background check that has recently drawn greater scrutiny is the 
use of credit checks. Employers in certain situations, such as processes that involve 
handling money, are concerned that employees with credit problems will behave less 
honestly. To avoid hiring such employees, these employers conduct a background 
check. Also, some employers see good credit as an indicator that a person is respon-
sible. But in a time of high unemployment and many home foreclosures, some people 
see this type of investigation as unfair to people who are desperately trying to fi nd 
work: the worse their fi nancial situation, the harder the job search becomes. Under 
Searching for a job candidate’s 
name online is so easy that it seems 
like an obvious way to check the 
person’s background. Public infor-
mation could show, for example, 
whether the person really is vice 
president of marketing at XYZ Cor-
poration or has done something that 
could later embarrass the employer. 
Indeed, research indicates that 
employers are interested. A survey 
by CareerBuilder found that 39% 
use social media to research can-
didates, and a survey by recruiting 
fi rm Challenger, Grey and Christmas 
found even greater use: 22% said 
they always review social media, 
and another 38% said they some-
times do so.
Employers need to proceed with 
caution, however. A particular con-
cern is to avoid discrimination, yet 
the very nature of social media en-
courages sharing the kinds of infor-
mation related to being a member 
of a protected group. For example, 
photos and descriptions of activi-
ties can tell or suggest a person’s 
age, race, sex, religion, marital 
status, and disabilities. Employers 
can try to avoid discrimination by 
postponing their search of social 
media until after they have identifi ed 
a candidate they want to hire, after 
which they use social media to rule 
out specifi c problems. 
An even safer way to use so-
cial media is to involve someone 
who is not the decision maker. The 
company can use a designated HR 
employee or contract with a service 
that specializes in screening job 
candidates. The service uses crite-
ria from the employer—for example, 
screening out candidates who show 
evidence of using illegal drugs, en-
gaging in hate speech, or misrep-
resenting qualifi cations. It gathers 
information about the candidate and 
reports to the employer only the job-
related information gathered. Before 
using a service such as this or con-
ducting any background check, em-
ployers should obtain permission 
from the candidate.
Finally, a few companies have 
sought greater insight than what is 
available publicly by asking can-
didates for their passwords, so 
the employer can look at a candi-
date’s private information. Experts 
advise against this practice, which 
is invasive, probably violates the 
media sites’ terms of use, violates 
some states’ laws, and is likely to 
alienate many good candidates.
Questions
 1. How well does searching social 
media fulfi ll the requirements of 
providing reliable, valid, high-
utility, and legal information for 
selection decisions?
 2. What would show up in a 
search of public information 
about your name? How do 
you try to represent yourself 
online?
Sources: Catey Hill, “Your Boss Doesn’t 
Care about Your Facebook, Twitter Pro-
fi les,” MarketWatch, May 19, 2014, http://
www.marketwatch.com; Rebecca Weiss, 
“Social Media’s Impact on Hiring, Manage-
ment and Discipline: What Every Employer 
Needs to Know,” Lexology, September 2, 
2013, http://www.lexology.com; 
CareerBuilder, “More Employers Finding 
Reasons Not to Hire Candidates on Social 
Media, Finds CareerBuilder Survey,” news 
release, June 27, 2013, http://www
.careerbuilder.com; Steve Bates, “Use So-
cial Media Smartly When Hiring,”  Society 
for Human Resource Management, HR 
Topics and Strategy, March 19, 2013, 
http://www.shrm.org. 
Using Social Media as a Background Check
HRM Social

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  181
federal law, conducting a credit check is legal if the person consents, but some states 
ban or are considering bans on the practice.
Employment Tests and Work Samples
When the organization has identifi ed candidates whose applications or résumés indi-
cate they meet basic requirements, the organization continues the selection process 
with this narrower pool of candidates. Often, the next step is to gather objective data 
through one or more employment tests. These tests fall into two broad categories:
 1. Aptitude tests assess how well a person can learn or acquire skills and abilities. 
In the realm of employment testing, the best-known aptitude test is the General 
Aptitude Test Battery (GATB), used by the U.S. Employment Service.
 2. Achievement tests measure a person’s existing knowledge and skills. For ex-
ample, government agencies conduct civil service examinations to see whether 
applicants are qualifi ed to perform certain jobs.
Before using any test, organizations should investigate the test’s validity and 
reliability. Besides asking the testing service to provide this information, it is wise 
to consult more impartial sources of information, such as the ones identifi ed in 
Table 6.2.
Physical Ability Tests
Physical strength and endurance play less of a role in the modern workplace than in 
the past, thanks to the use of automation and modern technology. Even so, many jobs 
still require certain physical abilities or psychomotor abilities (those connecting brain 
and body, as in the case of eye-hand coordination). When these abilities are essential 
to job performance or avoidance of injury, the organization may use physical ability 
tests. These evaluate one or more of the following areas of physical ability: muscular 
tension, muscular power, muscular endurance, cardiovascular endurance, fl exibility, 
balance, and coordination.19
Although these tests can accurately predict success at certain kinds of jobs, they also 
tend to exclude women and people with disabilities. As a result, use of physical ability 
tests can make the organization vulnerable to charges of discrimination. It is therefore 
important to be certain that the abilities tested for really are essential to job perfor-
mance or that the absence of these abilities really does create a safety hazard. See “Best 
Practices” for an example of an organization that does this.
LO 6-5 Describe major 
types of employment 
tests.
Aptitude Tests
Tests that assess how 
well a person can learn 
or acquire skills and 
abilities.
Achievement Tests
Tests that measure a 
person’s existing knowl-
edge and skills.
Mental Measurements Yearbook
Descriptions and reviews of tests that are 
commercially available
Principles for the Validation and Use of Personnel 
Selection Procedures (Society for Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology)
Guide to help organizations evaluate tests
Standards for Educational and Psychological 
Tests (American Psychological Association)
Description of standards for testing programs
Tests: A Comprehensive Reference for 
Assessments in Psychology, Education, and 
Business
Descriptions of thousands of tests
Test Critiques
Reviews of tests, written by professionals 
in the ﬁ eld
Table 6.2
Sources of Information 
about Employment Tests

182
Cognitive Ability Tests
Although fewer jobs require muscle power today, brainpower is essential for most jobs. 
Organizations therefore benefi t from people who have strong mental abilities. Cogni-
tive ability tests—sometimes called “intelligence tests”—are designed to measure 
such mental abilities as verbal skills (skill in using written and spoken language), quan-
titative skills (skill in working with numbers), and reasoning ability (skill in thinking 
through the answer to a problem). Many jobs require all of these cognitive skills, so 
employers often get valid information from general tests. Many reliable tests are com-
mercially available. The tests are especially valid for complex jobs and for those requir-
ing adaptability in changing circumstances.20 Employers should, however, be sure tests 
are administered with security measures to prevent cheating. This is especially an issue 
with electronic standardized tests, as there is a demand for test takers to share test 
questions and answers.21
The evidence of validity, coupled with the relatively low cost of these tests, makes 
them appealing, except for one problem: concern about legal issues. These concerns 
arise from a historical pattern in which use of the tests has had an adverse impact 
on African Americans. Some organizations responded with race norming, establishing 
Cognitive Ability Tests
Tests designed to 
measure such mental 
abilities as verbal skills, 
quantitative skills, and 
reasoning ability.
If you visit a hospital and observe 
the activities there, you will see 
many employees engaged in physi-
cal activities—perhaps lifting pa-
tients, pushing carts loaded with 
meals, reaching for supplies, or 
moving swiftly but safely down the 
halls to respond to an emergency. 
Hiring decisions for these em-
ployees need to take into account 
whether they can safely carry out 
job-related activities (with or without 
accommodations). 
St. Joseph Health, based in Ir-
vine, California, has taken a thor-
ough and objective approach to 
meeting the challenge. The regional 
health system’s 24,000 employees 
serve patients in California, Texas, 
and New Mexico. The faith-based 
(Catholic) organization expects its 
employees to demonstrate the val-
ues of dignity, service, excellence, 
and justice. In the case of hiring de-
cisions, this includes fairly match-
ing people to jobs they can perform 
well. That requires clearly defi ning 
job functions and tests that dem-
onstrate the ability to perform those 
functions.
At St. Joseph Health, this effort 
began several years ago with a pro-
cess of developing job function de-
scriptions for 1,200 positions. With 
the help of experienced consultants 
advised by medical and legal ex-
perts, the organization identifi ed 
appropriate test requirements for 
these functions. For example, ap-
plicants to be security guards must 
demonstrate the strength to restrain 
a suspect or run up several fl ights 
of stairs carrying a load as heavy as 
fi refi ghting gear.
St. Joseph Health uses these 
requirements and tests not only to 
make better hiring decisions but 
also to help injured employees as-
sess their need for job accommo-
dations and ability to return to their 
regular jobs. Since using the ob-
jective measurements, the health 
system has seen greater morale 
among supervisors and employees, 
as well as less time off for recovery 
from injuries.
Questions
 1. Based on the information 
given, how well do the physical 
ability tests for St. Joseph 
Health meet the criteria of 
validity and utility (practical 
value)?
 2. How can St. Joseph 
Health ensure that it uses 
physical ability tests in a 
nondiscriminatory manner?
Sources: DSI Work Solutions, “DSI 
Job Function Matching Method and 
Outcome,” http://www.dsiworksolu-
tions.com, accessed May 21, 2014; St. 
Joseph Health, “Fact Sheet,” January 
2014, http://www.stjhs.org; Roberto Ce-
niceros, “Employers Put Job Seekers’ 
Physical Ability to the Test,” Business 
Insurance, June 17, 2013, Business In-
sights: Global, http://bi.galegroup.com.
St. Joseph Health Matches Physical Abilities to Job Requirements
Best Practices

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  183
different norms for hiring members of different racial groups. Race norming poses 
its own problems, not the least of which is the negative reputation it bestows on the 
minority employees selected using a lower standard. In addition, the Civil Rights Act 
of 1991 forbids the use of race or sex norming. As a result, organizations that want to 
base selection decisions on cognitive ability must make diffi cult decisions about how to 
measure this ability while avoiding legal problems. One possibility is a concept called 
banding. This concept treats a range of scores as being similar, as when an instructor 
gives the grade of A to any student whose average test score is at least 90. All applicants 
within a range of scores, or band, are treated as having the same score. Then within the 
set of “tied” scores, employers give preference to underrepresented groups. This is a 
controversial practice, and some have questioned its legality.22
Job Performance Tests and Work Samples
Many kinds of jobs require candidates who excel at performing specialized tasks, such 
as operating a certain machine, handling phone calls from customers, or designing 
advertising materials. To evaluate candidates for such jobs, the organization may ad-
minister tests of the necessary skills. Sometimes the candidates take tests that involve a 
sample of work, or they may show existing samples of their work. Testing may involve 
a simulated work environment, a diffi cult team project, or a complex computer pro-
gramming puzzle.23 Examples of job performance tests include tests of keyboarding 
speed and in-basket tests. An in-basket test measures the ability to juggle a variety of 
demands, as in a manager’s job. The candidate is presented with simulated memos 
and phone messages describing the kinds of problems that confront a person in the 
job. The candidate has to decide how to respond to these messages and in what order. 
Examples of jobs for which candidates provide work samples include graphic designers 
and writers.
Tests for selecting managers may take the form of an assessment center—a 
wide variety of specifi c selection programs that use multiple selection methods to 
rate applicants or job incumbents on their management potential. An assessment 
center typically includes in-basket tests, tests of more general abilities, and person-
ality tests. Combining several assessment methods increases the validity of this 
approach.
Job performance tests have the advantage of giving applicants a chance to show 
what they can do, which leads them to feel that the evaluation was fair.24 The tests also 
are job specifi c—that is, tailored to the kind of work done in a specifi c job. So they 
have a high level of validity, especially when combined with cognitive ability tests and 
a highly structured interview.25 This advantage can become a disadvantage, however, if 
the organization wants to generalize the results of a test for one job to candidates for 
other jobs. The tests are more appropriate for identifying candidates who are generally 
able to solve the problems associated with a job, rather than for identifying which par-
ticular skills or traits the individual possesses.26 Developing different tests for different 
jobs can become expensive. One way to save money is to prepare computerized tests 
that can be delivered online to various locations.
Personality Inventories
In some situations, employers may also want to know about candidates’ personali-
ties. For example, one way that psychologists think about personality is in terms of 
the “Big Five” traits: extroversion, adjustment, agreeableness, conscientiousness, and 
Assessment Center
A wide variety of speciﬁ c 
selection programs that 
use multiple selection 
methods to rate appli-
cants or job incumbents 
on their management 
potential.

184 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
inquisitiveness (explained in Table 6.3). There is evidence that people who score high 
on conscientiousness tend to excel at work, especially when they also have high cog-
nitive ability.27 For people-related jobs like sales and management, extroversion and 
agreeableness also seem to be associated with success.28 Strong social skills help con-
scientious people ensure that they get positive recognition for their hard work.29 How-
ever, high scores are less than ideal for some traits in some situations. For example, the 
best performers often score in the middle of the range on emotional stability. In other 
words, an employee can be either too nervous or too calm to do the best work.30
The usual way to identify a candidate’s personality traits is to administer one of the 
personality tests that are commercially available. The employer pays for the use of the 
test, and the organization that owns the test then scores the responses and provides 
a report about the test taker’s personality. An organization that provides such tests 
should be able to discuss the test’s validity and reliability. Assuming the tests are valid 
for the organization’s jobs, they have advantages. Administering commercially avail-
able personality tests is simple, and these tests have generally not violated equal op-
portunity employment requirements.31 On the downside, compared with intelligence 
tests, people are better at “faking” their answers to a personality test to score higher on 
1. Extroversion
Sociable, gregarious, assertive, talkative, expressive
2. Adjustment
Emotionally stable, nondepressed, secure, content
3. Agreeableness
Courteous, trusting, good-natured, tolerant, cooperative, forgiving
4. Conscientiousness
Dependable, organized, persevering, thorough, achievement-oriented
5. Inquisitiveness
Curious, imaginative, artistically sensitive, broad-minded, playful
Table 6.3
Five Major Personality 
Dimensions Measured by 
Personality Inventories
To test tech workers’ programming and problem-solving skills, Google sponsors contests called Code Jams at 
locations around the world. The winners gain fame as well as visibility with Google recruiters. The Code Jams also 
cement Google’s reputation for hiring the best thinkers and offering them exciting challenges.

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  185
desirable traits.32 For example, people tend to score higher on conscientiousness when 
fi lling out job-related personality tests than when participating in research projects.33 
Ways to address this problem include using trained interviewers rather than surveys, 
collecting information about the applicant from several sources, and letting applicants 
know that several sources will be used.34
One trend in favor of personality tests is organizations’ greater use of teamwork, 
where personality confl icts can be a signifi cant problem. Traits such as agreeableness 
and conscientiousness have been associated with effective teamwork.35 In addition, an 
organization might try to select team members with similar traits and values in order 
to promote a strong culture where people work together harmoniously, or they instead 
might look for a diversity of personalities and values as a way to promote debate and 
creativity.
Honesty Tests and Drug Tests
No matter what employees’ personalities may be like, organizations want employees 
to be honest and to behave safely. Some organizations are satisfi ed to assess these 
qualities based on judgments from reference checks and interviews. Others investigate 
these characteristics more directly through the use of honesty tests and drug tests.
The most famous kind of honesty test is the polygraph, the so-called lie detector 
test. However, in 1988 the passage of the Polygraph Act banned the use of poly-
graphs for screening job candidates. As a result, testing services have developed 
paper-and-pencil honesty (or integrity) tests. Generally these tests ask applicants di-
rectly about their attitudes toward theft and their own experiences with theft. Much 
of the research into the validity of these tests has been conducted by the testing 
companies, which tend to fi nd stronger correlations. However, evidence suggests 
that honesty tests do have some ability to predict such behavior as theft of the em-
ployer’s property.36
As concerns about substance abuse have grown during recent decades, so has the 
use of drug testing. As a measure of a person’s exposure to drugs, chemical testing has 
high reliability and validity. However, these tests are controversial for several reasons. 
Some people are concerned that they invade individuals’ privacy. Others object from a 
legal perspective. When all applicants or employees are subject to testing, whether or 
not they have shown evidence of drug use, the tests might be an unreasonable search 
and seizure or a violation of due process. Taking urine and blood samples involves 
invasive procedures, and accusing someone of drug use is a serious matter. On the 
positive side, a recent analysis of hiring data suggests that drug tests may provide a 
correction for discriminatory employment decisions. In states that adopted laws en-
couraging drug testing, hiring trends for white males were unchanged, but the hiring 
of black men increased. That change did not occur in states where laws were unfavor-
able to drug testing. Although the study did not prove (or disprove) discrimination, it 
does show an infl uence that is helpful to black males.37
Employers considering the use of drug tests should ensure that their drug-testing 
programs conform to some general rules38:
 • Administer the tests systematically to all applicants for the same job.
 • Use drug testing for jobs that involve safety hazards.
 • Have a report of the results sent to the applicant, along with information about how 
to appeal the results and be retested if appropriate.
 • Respect applicants’ privacy by conducting tests in an environment that is not intru-
sive and keeping results confi dential.

186 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Even at an organization with these best practices, employers have to keep in mind 
that drug testing will not uncover all problems with impairment. One recent con-
cern is that much drug abuse today involves legal prescription painkillers rather than 
substances traditionally tested for. Routine testing for prescription drugs (or possibly 
even marijuana in states that have legalized medical marijuana) is diffi cult because the 
employer has to be careful not to discriminate on the basis of disabilities.
Medical Examinations
Especially for physically demanding jobs, organizations may wish to conduct medical 
examinations to see that the applicant can meet the job’s requirements. Employers 
may also wish to establish an employee’s physical condition at the beginning of 
employment, so that there is a basis for measuring whether the employee has suf-
fered a work-related disability later on. At the same time, as described in Chapter 3, 
organizations may not discriminate against individuals with disabilities who could 
perform a job with reasonable accommodations. Likewise, they may not use a mea-
sure of size or strength that discriminates against women, unless those require-
ments are valid in predicting the ability to perform a job. Furthermore, to protect 
candidates’ privacy, medical exams must be related to job requirements and may 
not be given until the candidate has received a job offer. Therefore, organiza-
tions must be careful in how they use medical examinations. Many organizations 
make selection decisions fi rst and then conduct the exams to confi rm that the em-
ployee can handle the job with any reasonable accommodations required. Limiting 
the use of medical exams in this way also holds down the cost of what tends to be 
an expensive process.
Interviews
Supervisors and team members most often get involved in the selection process at the 
stage of employment interviews. These interviews bring together job applicants and rep-
resentatives of the employer to obtain information and evaluate the applicant’s qualifi ca-
tions. While the applicant is providing information, he or she is also forming opinions 
about what it is like to work for the organization. Most organizations use interviewing as 
part of the selection process. In fact, this method is used more than any other.
Interviewing Techniques
Interview techniques include choices about the type of questions to ask and the num-
ber of people who conduct the interview. Several question types are possible:
 • In a nondirective interview, the interviewer has great discretion in choosing 
questions. The candidate’s reply to one question may suggest other questions to ask. 
Nondirective interviews typically include open-ended questions about the candi-
date’s strengths, weaknesses, career goals, and work experience. Because these inter-
views give the interviewer wide latitude, their reliability is not great, and some 
interviewers ask questions that are not valid or even legal.
•   A structured interview establishes a set of questions for the interviewer to ask. 
Ideally, the questions are related to job requirements and cover relevant knowledge, 
skills, and experiences. The interviewer is supposed to avoid asking questions that 
are not on the list. Although interviewers may object to being restricted, the results 
may be more valid and reliable than with a nondirective interview.
LO 6-6 Discuss how 
to conduct effective 
interviews.
Nondirective Interview
A selection interview in 
which the interviewer 
has great discretion in 
choosing questions to 
ask each candidate.
Structured Interview
A selection interview that 
consists of a predeter-
mined set of questions 
for the interviewer to ask.

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  187
•   A situational interview is a structured interview in which 
the interviewer describes a situation likely to arise on the job 
and asks the candidate what he or she would do in that situa-
tion. This type of interview may have high validity in predict-
ing job performance.39
•   A behavior description interview (BDI) is a structured 
 interview in which the interviewer asks the candidate to 
 describe how he or she handled a type of situation in the past. 
Questions about candidates’ actual experiences tend to have 
the highest validity.40
The common setup for either a nondirected or structured inter-
view is for an individual (an HR professional or the supervisor for 
the vacant position) to interview each candidate face to face. How-
ever, variations on this approach are possible. In a panel interview, 
several members of the organization meet to interview each candi-
date. A panel interview gives the candidate a chance to meet more people and see how 
people interact in that organization. It provides the organization with the judgments of 
more than one person, to reduce the effect of personal biases in selection decisions. Panel 
interviews can be especially appropriate in organizations that use teamwork. At the other 
extreme, some organizations conduct interviews without any interviewers; they use a com-
puterized interviewing process. The candidate sits at a computer and enters replies to the 
questions presented by the computer. Such a format eliminates a lot of personal bias—
along with the opportunity to see how people interact. Therefore, computer interviews are 
useful for gathering objective data, rather than assessing people skills.
For suggestions on how to apply these techniques to conduct effective job inter-
views, see “HR How To.”
Advantages and Disadvantages of Interviewing
The wide use of interviewing is not surprising. People naturally want to see prospective 
employees fi rsthand. As we noted in Chapter 1, the top qualities that employers seek in 
new hires include communication skills and interpersonal skills. Talking face to face can 
provide evidence of these skills. Interviews can give insights into candidates’ personalities 
and interpersonal styles. They are more valid, however, when they focus on job knowledge 
and skill. Interviews also provide a means to check the accuracy of information on the ap-
plicant’s résumé or job application. Asking applicants to elaborate about their experiences 
and offer details reduces the likelihood of a candidate being able to invent a work history.41
Despite these benefi ts, interviewing is not necessarily the most accurate basis for 
making a selection decision. Research has shown that interviews can be unreliable, 
low in validity,42 and biased against a number of different groups.43 Interviews are 
also costly. They require that at least one person devote time to interviewing each 
candidate, and the applicants typically have to be brought to one geographic location. 
Interviews are also subjective, so they place the organization at greater risk of discrimi-
nation complaints by applicants who were not hired, especially if those individuals 
were asked questions not entirely related to the job. The Supreme Court has held that 
subjective selection methods like interviews must be validated, using methods that 
provide criterion-related or content validation.44
Organizations can avoid some of these pitfalls.45 Human resource staff should keep 
the interviews narrow, structured, and standardized. The interview should focus on 
Situational Interview
A structured interview 
in which the interviewer 
describes a situation 
likely to arise on the job, 
then asks the candidate 
what he or she would do 
in that situation.
Behavior Description 
Interview (BDI)
A structured interview 
in which the interviewer 
asks the candidate to 
describe how he or she 
handled a type of situa-
tion in the past.
Panel Interview
Selection interview in 
which several members 
of the organization 
meet to interview each 
candidate.
When interviewing candidates, it’s valid to ask about 
willingness to travel if that is part of the job. Interview-
ers might ask questions about previous business travel 
experiences and/or how interviewees handled situa-
tions requiring fl exibility and self-motivation (qualities 
that would be an asset in someone who is traveling 
alone and solving business problems on the road).

188
accomplishing a few goals, so that at the end of the interview, the organization has 
ratings on several observable measures, such as ability to express ideas. The interview 
should not try to measure abilities and skills—for example, intelligence—that tests 
can measure better. As noted earlier, situational interviews are especially  effective 
for doing this. Organizations can prevent problems related to subjectivity by train-
ing interviewers and using more than one person to conduct interviews. Training 
typically includes focusing on the recording of observable facts, rather than on 
making subjective judgments, as well as developing interviewers’ awareness of 
their biases.46 Using a structured system for taking notes or scoring responses may 
help limit subjectivity and help the interviewer remember and justify an evaluation 
later.47 Finally, to address costs of interviewing, many organizations videotape inter-
views and send the tapes (rather than the applicants) from department to department.
Amazon addresses subjectivity by bringing together multiple interviewer perspec-
tives. Candidates for jobs at headquarters typically undergo a series of phone and in-
person interviews with several Amazon employees. Interviewers include “bar raisers,” 
who are not HR professionals but employees in any area of the company who have 
demonstrated interviewing skills. A bar raiser is assigned to interview candidates who 
Interviewing job candidates is time 
consuming, and unfortunately, many 
companies waste that time with 
highly subjective, unplanned inter-
views that fail to reveal much rel-
evant information. Here are some 
ideas for making the most of the 
 interview process:
 • Plan questions ahead of time, 
based on a job analysis. Be sure 
the questions are related to the 
competencies and behaviors re-
lated to successful performance 
of the job. To keep interviews 
to a reasonable length, prepare 
about four to six questions for 
a half-hour interview or eight 
to 12 questions for a one-hour 
interview.
 • Ask the same specifi c questions 
in every interview to fi ll a given 
position. If the interview ques-
tions are consistent, candidates’ 
responses will be easier to 
compare.
 • Although every interview should 
cover the same questions, be 
fl exible enough to gather com-
plete and accurate information. 
If a candidate’s response is un-
clear or incomplete, ask follow-
up questions.
 • Ask candidates to provide spe-
cifi c examples of job-related 
activities and accomplishments, 
rather than generalize. For ex-
ample, “Tell me about a time 
when you handled a customer 
who was upset” will yield better 
information than “Tell me more 
about your current job.”
 • Take notes during the interview. 
Not only does it provide informa-
tion for later review, but it sets a 
professional tone and shows the 
candidate that you are paying 
attention.
 • Avoid distractions and interrup-
tions. Phone calls can wait until 
after the interview. Interviewers 
should demonstrate the same 
respect they expect to receive 
from job candidates.
Questions
 1. Imagine that you have been 
asked to interview candidates 
to work as cashiers in a store. 
You will meet with them at a 
table in a conference room. 
What should you bring to the 
interview?
 2. Your friend suggests that the 
easiest approach to your task 
would be to simply say, “Tell 
me about yourself” and then 
ask, “Why should we hire 
you?” and let the candidates 
do the rest. How would you 
improve on this idea?
Sources: Alaina Brandenburger, “Hiring: 
Easy Tips for Conducting an Effective In-
terview,” CBS Denver, February 17, 2014, 
http://denver.cbs.local.com; Chad Brooks, 
“Seven Tips for Conducting an Effective 
Job Interview,” Fox Small Business Center, 
October 2, 2013, http://smallbusiness.fox-
business.com; Lauren Weber, “Now Hir-
ing? Tips for Conducting Interviews,” The 
Wall Street Journal, December 4, 2012, 
http://online.wsj.com.
Interviewing Job Candidates Effectively
HR How To

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  189
will work in a department other than the bar raiser’s; the idea is that he or she will 
think of issues that others have missed. This approach to interviewing assumes that the 
various perspectives on each candidate will result in a more objective selection and that 
the chosen candidate will succeed in more than one position at Amazon.48
Preparing to Interview
Organizations can reap the greatest benefi ts from interviewing if they prepare carefully. 
A well-planned interview should be standardized, comfortable for the participants, and 
focused on the job and the organization. The interviewer should have a quiet place in 
which to conduct interviews without interruption. This person should be trained in how 
to ask objective questions, what subject matter to avoid, and how to detect and handle 
his or her own personal biases or other distractions in order to fairly evaluate candidates.
The interviewer should have enough documents to conduct a complete interview. 
These should include a list of the questions to be asked in a structured interview, with 
plenty of space for recording the responses. When the questions are prepared, it is also 
helpful to determine how the answers will be scored. For example, if questions ask 
how interviewees would handle certain situations, consider what responses are best in 
terms of meeting job requirements. If the job requires someone who motivates oth-
ers, then a response that shows motivating behavior would receive a higher score. The 
interviewer also should have a copy of the interviewee’s employment application and 
résumé to review before the interview and refer to during the interview. If possible, the 
interviewer should also have printed information about the organization and the job. 
Near the beginning of the interview, it is a good idea to go over the job specifi cations, 
organizational policies, and so on, so that the interviewee has a clearer understanding 
of the organization’s needs.
The interviewer should schedule enough time to review the job requirements, dis-
cuss the interview questions, and give the interviewee a chance to ask questions. To 
close, the interviewer should thank the candidate for coming and provide information 
about what to expect—for example, that the organization will contact a few fi nalists 
within the next two weeks or that a decision will be made by the end of the week.
Selection Decisions
After reviewing applications, scoring tests, conducting interviews, and checking refer-
ences, the organization needs to make decisions about which candidates to place in 
which jobs. In practice, most organizations fi nd more than one qualifi ed candidate 
to fi ll an open position. The selection decision typically combines ranking based on 
objective criteria along with subjective judgments about which candidate will make the 
greatest contribution.
How Organizations Select Employees
The selection decision should not be a simple matter of whom the supervisor likes best 
or which candidate will take the lowest offer. Also, observing confi dence in job can-
didates does not necessarily mean they are competent. Rather, the people making the 
selection should look for the best fi t between candidate and position. In general, the 
person’s performance will result from a combination of ability and motivation. Often, 
the selection is a choice among a few people who possess the basic qualifi cations. The 
decision makers therefore have to decide which of those people have the best combina-
tion of ability and motivation to fi t in the position and in the organization as a whole.
LO 6-7 Explain how 
employers carry out the 
process of making a se-
lection decision.

190
The usual process for arriving at a selection decision is to gradually narrow the pool 
of candidates for each job. This approach, called the multiple-hurdle model, is based 
on a process such as the one shown earlier in Figure 6.1. Each stage of the process is a 
hurdle, and candidates who overcome a hurdle continue to the next stage of the pro-
cess. For example, the organization reviews applications and/or résumés of all candi-
dates, conducts some tests on those who meet minimum requirements, conducts initial 
interviews with those who had the highest test scores, follows up with additional inter-
views or testing, and then selects a candidate from the few who survived this process. 
Another, more expensive alternative is to take most applicants through all steps of the 
process and then to review all the scores to fi nd the most desirable candidates. With 
this alternative, decision makers may use a compensatory model, in which a very 
high score on one type of assessment can make up for a low score on another. Think 
about how each of those two models would apply if you encountered the candidates 
described in the “HR Oops!” feature.
Whether the organization uses a multiple-hurdle model or conducts the same assess-
ments on all candidates, the decision maker or makers need criteria for choosing among 
qualifi ed candidates. An obvious strategy is to select the candidates who score highest 
on tests and interviews. However, employee performance depends on motivation as well 
as ability. It is possible that a candidate who scores very high on an ability test might be 
Multiple-Hurdle Model
Process of arriving at 
a selection decision by 
eliminating some can-
didates at each stage of 
the selection process.
Compensatory Model
Process of arriving at 
a selection decision in 
which a very high score 
on one type of assess-
ment can make up for a 
low score on another.
When managers or HR profession-
als select candidates to interview, 
they are trying to fi nd the best match 
among candidates with basic quali-
fi cations. Sometimes, unfortunately, 
what happens in an interview sig-
nals a troubling lack of motivation 
or business sense. For example, 
interviewers are unimpressed with 
someone who arrives at an inter-
view after making no effort to learn 
anything about the company or pre-
pare any questions to ask. 
Sometimes candidates’ behav-
ior demonstrates such poor moti-
vation and lack of judgment that it 
resembles a bad comedy routine. 
Interviewers have complained of 
candidates checking Facebook or 
wearing headphones during an in-
terview; one even took a phone call 
about a job at another company. 
Some make odd statements: one 
told an interviewer she had taken 
“too much Valium” beforehand, and 
another said his personal hero was 
himself.
Some memorable incidents re-
ported by interviewers are down-
right frightening. One applicant had 
a car accident—hitting the employ-
er’s building. Another tried making a 
 secret recording of the interview. And 
a third applicant, responding to an in-
terviewer’s prompt to “impress me,” 
lit the interviewer’s newspaper on fi re.
Questions
 1. With a multiple-hurdle 
model, interviewing typically 
comes late in the selection 
process. Based on what you 
know about the steps in the 
process, why do you think 
the candidates described 
here made it past the earlier 
hurdles? (For example, might 
they have other qualifi cations, 
or might there be problems 
with the process?)
 2. In the compensatory model, 
a high score on one type of 
assessment can make up 
for a low score on another. 
Assuming the candidates 
described here had low scores 
on their interviews, can you 
think of a situation in which 
a high score on some other 
measure would make these 
candidates the best choice for 
a position? Explain.
Sources: Ryan Caldbeck, “These Five 
Interview Blunders Will Probably Kill 
Your Job Prospects,” Entrepreneur, 
March 14, 2014, http://www.entre-
preneur.com; Adam Auriemma, “Fire, 
Valium, Dentures: Job Interviews Gone 
Wild,” The Wall Street Journal, January 
16, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com; 
CareerBuilder, “Employers Share Most 
Memorable Interview Blunders,” news 
release, January 16, 2014, http://www.
careerbuilder.com. 
Interview Alarm Bells
HR Oops!

THINKING ETHICALLY
IS A POLICY OF NOT HIRING SMOKERS 
ETHICAL?
Over the past several years, hospitals in nearly a dozen 
states have announced that they will no longer hire 
workers who smoke. Rather than merely forbidding em-
ployees from smoking at work, they make abstinence 
from smoking a requirement for selection. Some en-
force the policy by relying on candidates to tell the truth; 
others use drug tests.
Reasons given in favor of the decision emphasize eco-
nomic considerations. For example, when the University 
of Pennsylvania Health System announced its decision 
to stop hiring smokers, it claimed that employees who 
smoke cost the employer an average of $3,391 per year 
in additional health care costs. It also noted that taking 
breaks to smoke can be disruptive. Beyond the costs, 
the health system pointed out that the smell of smoke 
on employees’ clothing can be unpleasant for patients 
and co-workers. Beyond the hospital’s reasoning,  others 
have measured higher costs of employing workers who 
smoke, for reasons such as greater absenteeism or 
poorer health while on the job. From a purely economic 
standpoint, an employer might have to pay more to get 
enough workers if it hires only nonsmokers, but if these 
workers are less expensive in other ways, the employer 
can still be ahead in terms of costs.
CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  191
“overqualifi ed”—that is, the employee might be bored by the job the organization needs 
to fi ll, and a less-able employee might actually be a better fi t. Similarly, a highly motivated 
person might learn some kinds of jobs very quickly, potentially outperforming someone 
who has the necessary skills. Furthermore, some organizations have policies of develop-
ing employees for career paths in the organization. Such organizations might place less 
emphasis on the skills needed for a particular job and more emphasis on hiring candidates 
who share the organization’s values, show that they have the people skills to work with 
others in the organization, and are able to learn the skills needed for advancement.
Finally, organizations have choices about who will make the decision. Usually a 
supervisor makes the fi nal decision, often alone. This person may couple knowledge of 
the job with a judgment about who will fi t in best with others in the department. The 
decision could also be made by a human resource professional using standardized, ob-
jective criteria. Especially in organizations that use teamwork, selection decisions may 
be made by a work team or other panel of decision makers.
Communicating the Decision
The human resource department is often responsible for notifying applicants about 
the results of the selection process. When a candidate has been selected, the organiza-
tion should communicate the offer to the candidate. The offer should include the job 
responsibilities, work schedule, rate of pay, starting date, and other relevant details. If 
placement in a job requires that the applicant pass a physical examination, the offer 
should state that contingency. The person communicating the offer should also indi-
cate a date by which the candidate should reply with an acceptance or rejection of the 
offer. For some jobs, such as management and professional positions, the candidate 
and organization may negotiate pay, benefi ts, and work arrangements before they ar-
rive at a fi nal employment agreement.
The person who communicates this decision should keep accurate records of who 
was contacted, when, and for which position, as well as of the candidate’s reply. The 
HR department and the supervisor also should be in close communication about 
the job offer. When an applicant accepts a job offer, the HR department must notify 
the supervisor so that he or she can be prepared for the new employee’s arrival.

Some people have criticized these no-smoker poli-
cies as unfair. Critics point out that other off-work be-
havior also can drive up health costs. They say job 
requirements can specify the same breaks for all em-
ployees, regardless of whether they will use the breaks 
for smoking. They suggest that it would be more ethical 
for hospitals to consider hiring smokers and offer sup-
port to those who are trying to quit. Another criticism is 
that if smokers have trouble fi nding jobs, they might be 
inclined to lie about it and therefore be less likely to get 
help quitting. A related concern is whether the policy 
of refusing to hire individuals is too drastic, compared 
with other measures such as requiring smokers to pay 
a greater share of health insurance benefi ts or offering 
them a lower wage.
Questions
 1. Who is affected by a hospital’s decision not to hire 
smokers? Discuss whether this decision achieves 
the greatest good for the greatest number of 
individuals.
 2. How well does this policy meet the standard of 
being fair and equitable? Explain.
Sources: Mark Pauly, “Refusing to Hire Workers Who Smoke: 
An Economic Perspective,” Knowledge@Wharton, August 8, 
2013, http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu; Dave Warner, 
“Pennsylvania Hospitals’ Ban on Hiring Smokers Prompts De-
bate,” Reuters, June 28, 2013, http://www.reuters.com; Arthur 
Caplan, “Barring Smokers from Hospital Jobs Unfair,” CNN
.com, March 1, 2013, http://www.cnn.com.
SUMMARY
LO 6-1 Identify the elements of the selection process.
• Selection typically begins with a review of candi-
dates’ employment applications and résumés.
• The organization administers tests to candidates 
who meet basic requirements.
• Qualifi ed candidates undergo one or more 
interviews.
• Organizations check references and conduct back-
ground checks to verify the accuracy of informa-
tion provided by candidates.
• A candidate is selected to fi ll each vacant position.
• Candidates who accept offers are placed in the po-
sitions for which they were selected.
LO 6-2 Defi ne ways to measure the success of a selection 
method.
• One criterion is reliability, meaning free from ran-
dom error, so that measurements are consistent.
• A selection method should also be valid, meaning 
that performance on the measure (such as a test 
score) is related to what the measure is designed 
to assess (such as job performance).
• Criterion-related validity shows a correlation be-
tween test scores and job performance scores.
• Content validity shows consistency between the 
test items or problems and the kinds of situations 
or problems that occur on the job.
• Construct validity establishes that the test actually 
measures a specifi ed construct, such as intelligence 
or leadership ability, which is presumed to be as-
sociated with success on the job.
• A selection method also should be generalizable, 
or applicable to more than one specifi c situation.
• Each selection method should have utility, mean-
ing it provides economic value greater than its cost.
• Selection methods should meet the legal require-
ments for employment decisions.
LO 6-3 Summarize the government’s requirements for 
employee selection.
• The selection process must be conducted in a way 
that avoids discrimination and provides access to 
persons with disabilities.
• Selection methods must be valid for job perfor-
mance, and scores may not be adjusted to discrim-
inate against or give preference to any group.
• Questions may not gather information about a 
person’s membership in a protected class, such as 
race, sex, or religion, nor may the employer inves-
tigate a person’s disability status.
• Employers must respect candidates’ privacy rights 
and ensure that they keep personal information 
confi dential.
• Employers must obtain consent before conducting 
background checks and notify candidates about 
adverse decisions made as a result of background 
checks.
LO 6-4 Compare the common methods used for select-
ing human resources.
• Nearly all organizations gather information 
through employment applications and résumés. 
These methods are inexpensive, and an application 
form standardizes basic information received from 
all applicants. The information is not necessarily 
reliable, because each applicant provides the infor-
mation. These methods are most valid when evalu-
ated in terms of the criteria in a job description.
• References and background checks help verify the 
accuracy of applicant-provided information.
192 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources

• Employment tests and work samples are more ob-
jective. To be legal, any test must measure abilities 
that actually are associated with successful job per-
formance. Employment tests range from general 
to specifi c. General-purpose tests are relatively 
inexpensive and simple to administer. Tests should 
be selected to be related to successful job perfor-
mance and avoid charges of discrimination.
• Interviews are widely used to obtain information 
about a candidate’s interpersonal and communica-
tion skills and to gather more detailed informa-
tion about a candidate’s background. Structured 
interviews are more valid than unstructured ones. 
Situational interviews provide greater validity 
than general questions. Interviews are costly and 
may introduce bias into the selection process. Or-
ganizations can minimize the drawbacks through 
preparation and training.
LO 6-5 Describe major types of employment tests.
• Physical ability tests measure strength, endurance, 
psychomotor abilities, and other physical abilities. 
They can be accurate but can discriminate and are 
not always job related.
• Cognitive ability tests, or intelligence tests, tend 
to be valid, especially for complex jobs and those 
requiring adaptability. They are a relatively low-
cost way to predict job performance but have been 
challenged as discriminatory.
• Job performance tests tend to be valid but are not 
always generalizable. Using a wide variety of job 
performance tests can be expensive.
• Personality tests measure personality traits such 
as extroversion and adjustment. Research supports 
their validity for appropriate job situations, espe-
cially for individuals who score high on conscien-
tiousness, extroversion, and agreeableness. These 
tests are relatively simple to administer and gener-
ally meet legal requirements.
• Organizations may use paper-and-pencil honesty 
tests, which can predict certain behaviors, includ-
ing employee theft. Organizations may not use 
polygraphs to screen job candidates.
• Organizations may also administer drug tests (if 
all candidates are tested and drug use can be an 
on-the-job safety hazard).
• Passing a medical examination may be a condi-
tion of employment, but to avoid discrimination 
against persons with disabilities, organizations 
usually administer a medical exam only after mak-
ing a job offer.
LO 6-6 Discuss how to conduct effective interviews.
• Interviews should be narrow, structured, and 
standardized.
• Interviewers should identify job requirements 
and create a list of questions related to the 
requirements.
• Interviewers should be trained to recognize 
their own personal biases and conduct objective 
interviews.
• Panel interviews can reduce problems related to 
interviewer bias.
• Interviewers should put candidates at ease in 
a comfortable place that is free of distractions. 
Questions should ask for descriptions of relevant 
experiences and job-related behaviors.
• The interviewers also should be prepared to provide 
information about the job and the organization.
LO 6-7 Explain how employers carry out the process of 
making a selection decision.
• The organization should focus on the objective of 
fi nding the person who will be the best fi t with the 
job and organization. This includes an assessment 
of ability and motivation.
• Decision makers may use a multiple-hurdle model 
in which each stage of the selection process elimi-
nates some of the candidates from consideration 
at the following stages. At the fi nal stage, only a 
few candidates remain, and the selection decision 
determines which candidate is the best fi t.
• An alternative is a compensatory model, in which 
all candidates are evaluated with all methods. A 
candidate who scores poorly with one method 
may be selected if he or she scores very high on 
another measure.
KEY TERMS
personnel selection, 168
reliability, 170
validity, 170
criterion-related validity, 171
predictive validation, 171
concurrent validation, 172
content validity, 172
construct validity, 172
generalizable, 172
utility, 173
Immigration Reform and Control 
Act of 1986, 175
aptitude tests, 181
achievement tests, 181
cognitive ability tests, 182
CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  193

assessment center, 183
nondirective interview, 186
structured interview, 186
situational interview, 187
behavior description interview 
(BDI), 187
panel interview, 187
multiple-hurdle model, 190
compensatory model, 190
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. What activities are involved in the selection pro-
cess? Think of the last time you were hired for a 
job. Which of those activities were used in selecting 
you? Should the organization that hired you have 
used other methods as well? (LO 6-1)
 2. Why should the selection process be adapted to fi t 
the organization’s job descriptions? (LO 6-1)
 3. Choose two of the selection methods identifi ed in 
this chapter. Describe how you can compare them 
in terms of reliability, validity, ability to generalize, 
utility, and compliance with the law. (LO 6-2)
 4. Why does predictive validation provide better in-
formation than concurrent validation? Why is this 
type of validation more diffi cult? (LO 6-2)
 5. How do U.S. laws affect organizations’ use of each 
of the employment tests? Interviews? (LO 6-3)
 6. Suppose your organization needs to hire several 
computer programmers, and you are reviewing ré-
sumés you obtained from an online service. What 
kinds of information will you want to gather from 
the “work experience” portion of these résumés? 
What kinds of information will you want to gather 
from the “education” portion of these résumés? 
What methods would you use for verifying or ex-
ploring this information? Why would you use those 
methods? (LO 6-4)
 7. For each of the following jobs, select the two kinds 
of tests you think would be most important to in-
clude in the selection process. Explain why you 
chose those tests. (LO 6-5)
 
a. City bus driver
 
b. Insurance salesperson
 
c. Member of a team that sells complex high-tech 
equipment to manufacturers
 
d. Member of a team that makes a component of 
the equipment in (c)
 8. Suppose you are a human resource professional at 
a large retail chain. You want to improve the com-
pany’s hiring process by creating standard designs 
for interviews, so that every time someone is in-
terviewed for a particular job category, that person 
answers the same questions. You also want to make 
sure the questions asked are relevant to the job and 
maintain equal employment opportunity. Think of 
three questions to include in interviews for each of 
the following jobs. For each question, state why you 
think it should be included. (LO 6-6)
 
a. Cashier at one of the company’s stores
 
b. Buyer of the stores’ teen clothing line
 
c. Accounts payable clerk at company headquarters
 9. How can organizations improve the quality of 
their interviewing so that interviews provide valid 
 information? (LO 6-6)
 10. Some organizations set up a selection process that 
is long and complex. In some people’s opinion, 
this kind of selection process not only is more 
valid but also has symbolic value. What can the 
use of a long, complex selection process symbol-
ize to job seekers? How do you think this would 
affect the organization’s ability to attract the best 
 employees? (LO 6-7)
How Gild Aims to Create Golden Opportunities for Underappreciated Workers
No matter how hard employers try to provide equal op-
portunity, total fairness is diffi cult. For example, com-
panies that rely on referrals or recruiting at top-ranked 
schools exclude great workers who did not graduate 
from the right school or don’t know a current employee. 
Luca Bonmassar and Sheeroy Desai looked at this 
problem and saw opportunity: big data can objectively 
identify who possesses specifi c skills in high-demand 
fi elds. So Bonmassar and Desai founded Gild, a San 
Francisco–based company, and hired Vivienne Ming 
as its chief scientist. Ming is deeply interested in Gild’s 
mission because she has experienced the assumptions 
that many humans make. Ming, who holds a doctorate 
in psychology and computational neuroscience, grew up 
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY
194 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources

as a male and underwent gender transition as an adult. 
When she began living as a woman, changes occurred 
in the way she was treated—for example, students asked 
her fewer math-related questions. She sees data as a way 
to reduce “wasted talent” by limiting bias in employ-
ment decisions.
Gild looks for publicly available data about computer 
programmers. It analyzes the data to create algorithms 
that identify the best programmers. For millions of com-
puter programmers, it compiles hundreds of variables 
such as the quality of computer code the individual has 
written and posted for public use, the number of times 
someone uses the code, productivity measures for paid 
projects, the language used in discussing technical issues 
on discussion boards, and popularity ratings for online 
advice. Its algorithm computes a score of each person’s 
skill. Employers can use the score in conjunction with 
other measures to make hiring decisions. Eventually, 
Gild hopes to create algorithms for other jobs, such as 
website designer, fi nancial analyst, or graphic designer.
Gild has used its algorithm in its own selection de-
cisions. The company identifi ed the highest-scoring 
job candidate in Southern California—the owner of a 
T-shirt business who became fed up with high school, 
dropped out, taught himself to run a business and 
write code for its website, and became active on web-
sites where computer programmers trade ideas. Gild 
interviewed him and hired him for his programming 
brilliance, acknowledging that it is a challenge for this 
independent-minded individual to thrive in a corporate 
environment.
This example points to the main critique of Gild’s 
business. Even if the algorithm accurately measures 
technical skills, those are not the only requirements for 
success. A person also has to function well within the 
organization. 
Nevertheless, Ming believes that by expanding the 
use of big data, Gild is doing good. It creates oppor-
tunities for people to advance based on talent. Ming 
even believes that similar analytics can identify talent 
in children so that high-potential but underprivileged 
children can be paired with mentors, creating opportu-
nities in communities where there had previously been 
little hope.
Questions
 1. Review the criteria for a successful selection 
method: reliable, valid, generalizable, practical, and 
legal. Evaluate how Gild’s algorithm addresses or 
should address these criteria.
 2. Recommend how an employer could use interviews 
along with Gild’s scoring method to arrive at fair 
hiring decisions.
Sources: Tom Foremski, “Gild Says Its Algorithms Could Be Used to Lift 
People Out of Poverty,” ZDNet, April 11, 2014, http://www.zdnet.com; 
Don Peck, “They’re Watching You at Work,” Atlantic, December 2013, 
http://www.theatlantic.com; “Algorithm Finds Top Programmers, No 
 Resume Required,” Here and Now, May 21, 2013, http://hereandnow
.wbur.org; Matt Richtel, “How Big Data Is Playing Recruiter for Special-
ized Workers,” The New York Times, April 27, 2013, http://www.nytimes
.com; Mohana Ravindranath, “Facebook, Amazon Recruiting Programmers 
Based on Social ‘Footprint,’” Washington Post, December 14, 2012, http://
www.washingtonpost.com.
Hiring for an Oil Boom
North Dakota is experiencing an oil boom as drilling 
companies apply fracking technology and horizontal 
drilling to the Bakken shale formation in the state’s west-
ern region. The state has surpassed Alaska as the second 
largest oil producer behind only Texas. Its unemploy-
ment rate is under 3%, and in the town of Williston—the 
fastest-growing small U.S. city—it is below 1%. North 
Dakota offi cials recently said 25,000 jobs remain unfi lled.
 Those vacancies are at the more than 150 oil and 
gas operators operating in North Dakota, the hundreds 
of subcontractors providing them with labor, and the 
services businesses growing to meet demand. The state 
forecasts a peak of about 60,000 drilling jobs, which by 
2025 will fall to 50,000 positions needed for longer-
term oil production. Another 20,000 jobs are indirectly 
related to drilling—for example, the restaurant, retail, 
and health care jobs needed for a growing community.
 Given that just about everyone who wants a job is al-
ready working, employers are struggling to fi ll vacancies. 
One solution is to lure talent from other states, but many 
workers are leery of North Dakota’s harsh climate, and 
even those who come discover that housing is scarce and 
expensive. Furthermore, employees may not stay with a 
company long. Turnover is high as workers jump from 
job to job, improving their earnings with each move.
 In this environment, employers use a variety of 
tactics. To limit turnover, they may study résumés for 
signs that employees are not job hopping. Some com-
panies relax their job specifi cations. One company, for 
example, recruited a receptionist to be an HR worker, 
though she had no experience in the fi eld. Others pro-
mote workers to management positions without train-
ing them for the responsibility. In contrast, for the 
high-paying jobs at gas and oil companies, employers 
MANAGING TALENT
CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  195

screen out inexperienced applicants and select those 
who have worked in the fi eld, often with subcontrac-
tors. Truck drivers, another high-growth occupation, 
must hold a commercial license. Mechanics servicing 
wells need clean driving records and technical skills.
 Employers must weigh the need to meet qualifi -
cations against the need to convince even marginally 
qualifi ed workers to take (and keep) the job. While job 
candidates need to sell themselves to employers, com-
panies need to sell themselves to the workers. Some of 
them buy or build housing for their workers, or they 
pay a housing allowance because rents in the area are 
so high. They offer generous pay packages, such as $17 
for an entry-level job at Walmart or a signing bonus 
to work in a restaurant. Unfortunately, attracting pay-
focused employees means company workers are likely 
to be attracted to slightly higher wages somewhere else, 
once they gain a little job experience.
Questions
 1. How could an employer’s interviewing methods 
help the company address the challenges of hiring 
during a boom when unemployment rates are near 
zero?
 2. If you were advising a North Dakota company 
about its selection process, would you advise it to 
relax its selection criteria during the oil boom? 
Why or why not?
Sources: Associated Press, “North Dakota Desperate for Workers to Fill 
Empty Jobs,” AOL Jobs, March 18, 2014, http://jobs.aol.com; Ashe Schow, 
“Another Hiring Surge in North Dakota Thanks to Shale Oil,” Washington 
Examiner, December 31, 2013, http://washingtonexaminer.com; 
Jessica Holdman, “Oil Service Companies on Hiring Blitz,” Bismarck (ND) 
Tribune, December 26, 2013, http://bismarcktribune.com; Dori Meinert, 
“Hiring Frenzy,” HR Magazine, June 1, 2013, http://www.shrm/org. 
196 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Kinaxis Chooses Sales Reps with Personality
Kinaxis is a software company headquartered in 
Ottawa, Ontario, that sells to clients around the 
world. Its specialty is software for supply chain 
 management—all the processes and relationships 
through which companies obtain supplies as needed 
and get their products to customers on time and at 
minimal cost. This is a sophisticated type of prod-
uct, tailored to a company’s specifi c needs. There-
fore, Kinaxis depends on salespeople who understand 
how businesses work, who listen carefully to identify 
needs, and who provide excellent customer service to 
maintain long-term business relationships.
Recently, Bob Dolan, vice president for sales at 
Kinaxis, needed to hire a sales team to serve clients in 
North America. The company had just one salesperson 
serving the continent, and Dolan wanted to add four 
more. He received about 100 résumés and wanted to 
select from these. He started by reviewing the résumés 
against job requirements and selected 20 candidates for 
a fi rst round of interviews. The interview process helped 
Dolan cut the list of candidates in half, so he needed 
another way to narrow his options.
Dolan decided his next step would be personality 
testing. He hired a fi rm called Opus Productivity Solu-
tions to administer a test called PDP ProScan to the 
remaining 10 candidates. In addition, Dolan himself 
took the test and had his current sales rep do the same. 
The existing salesperson was doing an excellent job, so 
the results of his test could help Dolan and Opus pin-
point the characteristics of someone likely to succeed in 
sales at Kinaxis. Based an analysis of all the results, Opus 
created a benchmark of traits associated with success in 
the job.
Representatives from Opus also discussed the test 
results with each candidate, giving each one a chance to 
disagree with the scores. No one did. Dolan observed 
that all the candidates scored high in assertiveness and 
 extroversion—not surprising for people in sales. In ad-
dition, two of them scored above the benchmark in con-
formity and below the benchmark in dominance. Those 
results suggested to Dolan that these candidates might 
be so eager to please that they would be quick to give in 
to whatever customers requested—a pattern that could 
become costly for the company. Dolan eliminated those 
two candidates.
That meant Dolan still had eight candidates to 
fi ll four positions. He asked each one to give him 
the names of major accounts he or she had signed up 
in the previous two years. Four candidates were able to 
come up with three or four large clients. Those were the 
candidates Dolan hired.
Since then, Dolan says his experience with personal-
ity testing has only reinforced his belief that this selec-
tion method helps Kinaxis identify the best candidates. 
For example, one sales rep had scored low on “pace,” 
indicating that the individual might lack the patience 
needed for the slow cycles required to close a sale of a 
complex software system. Dolan hoped the issue could 
be overcome if he provided enough coaching, but in 
fact, the sales rep sometimes behaved impatiently, an-
noying prospects. After three years of trying to help him 
grow into the job, Dolan laid him off.
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  197
The company’s commitment to careful selection is 
expressed on its website: “As a growing and determined 
company, we’re always looking for people eager to push 
the limits each day of what’s possible.” Kinaxis was re-
cently named one of Canada’s top employers for young 
people.
Questions
 1. What selection methods did Bob Dolan use for hir-
ing salespeople? Did he go about using these meth-
ods in the best order? What, if anything, would you 
change about the order of the methods used?
 2. What were the advantages to Kinaxis of using per-
sonality tests to help select sales representatives? 
What were the disadvantages?
 3. Given the information gathered from the selection 
methods, what process did Dolan use to make his 
selection decision? What improvements can you rec-
ommend to this process for decisions to hire sales 
reps in the future?
Sources: Susan Greco, “Personality Testing for Sales Recruits,” Inc., March 
1, 2009, www.inc.com; Kinaxis Web site, Corporate Overview and Careers 
pages, www.kinaxis.com, accessed May 27, 2014.
 1. Katherine Reynolds Lewis, “Three Reasons Why Companies 
Don’t Hire Veterans,” Fortune, November 11, 2013, http://
management.fortune.cnn.com; J. D. Leipold, “Warrior Tran-
sition Command Launches ‘Hire a Veteran’ Campaign,” U.S. 
Army news archive, November 20, 2012, http://www.army.mil.
 2. Lauren Weber, “Angry Job Applicants Can Hurt Bottom 
Line,” The Wall Street Journal, March 13, 2012, http://online.
wsj.com; Lauren Weber, “Your Résumé vs. Oblivion,” The 
Wall Street Journal,  January 24, 2012, http://online.wsj.com.
 3. Patricia M. Sherlock, “Walking the Walk,” Mortgage Banking, 
May 2011, Business & Company Resource Center, http://
galenet.galegroup.com.
 4. J. C. Nunnally, Psychometric Theory (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1978).
 5. Sue Shellenbarger, “Why Likability Matters More at Work,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 25, 2014, http://online.wsj
.com; Logan Hill, “Only BFFs Need Apply,” Bloomberg Busi-
nessweek, January 7–13, 2013, pp. 63–65.
 6. N. 
Schmitt, 
R. 
Z. 
Gooding, 
R. 
A. 
Noe, 
and 
M. Kirsch, “Meta-Analysis of Validity Studies Published be-
tween 1964 and 1982 and the Investigation of Study Charac-
teristics,” Personnel Psychology 37 (1984), pp. 407–22.
 7. D. D. Robinson, “Content-Oriented Personnel Selection 
in a Small Business Setting,” Personnel Psychology 34 (1981), 
pp. 77–87.
 8. George Anders, “Work: The Games They Make You Play,” 
Guardian (London), October 29, 2011, Business & Company 
Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 9. F. L. Schmidt and J. E. Hunter, “The Future of Criterion-
Related Validity,” Personnel Psychology 33 (1980), pp. 41–60; 
F. L. Schmidt, J. E. Hunter, and K. Pearlman, “Task Differ-
ences as Moderators of Aptitude Test Validity: A Red Her-
ring,” Journal of Applied Psychology 66 (1982), pp. 166–85;  
R. L. Gutenberg, R. D. Arvey, H. G. Osburn, and R. P. 
 Jeanneret, “Moderating Effects of Decision- Making/Infor-
mation Processing Dimensions on Test Validities,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 68 (1983), pp. 600–8.
 10. Dan Herbeck, “Firefi ghters Are Awarded $2.7 Million in 
Bias Case,” Buffalo (NY) News, February 9, 2012, Business & 
Company Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 11. T. W. Dougherty, D. B. Turban, and J. C.  Callender, “Con-
fi rming First Impressions in the Employment Interview: A 
Field Study of Interviewer Behavior,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 79 (1994), pp. 659–65.
 12. Melissa Korn, “Giant Résumés Fail to Impress Employers,” The 
Wall Street Journal, February 5, 2014, http://online.wsj.com.
 13. Claire Suddath, “Your Résumé: Imaginary Friends as Job 
References,” Bloomberg Businessweek, January 14, 2013, http://
www.businessweek.com.
 14. A. Ryan and M. Lasek, “Negligent Hiring and Defamation: 
Areas of Liability Related to Preemployment Inquiries,” 
Personnel Psychology 44 (1991), pp. 293–319.
 15. A. Long, “Addressing the Cloud over Employee References: 
A Survey of Recently Enacted State Legislation,” William and 
Mary Law Review 39 (October 1997), pp. 177–228.
 16. Dori Meinert, “Seeing behind the Mask,” HR Magazine, 
February 2011, pp. 31–37; Jay Goltz, “Why Checking Refer-
ences Isn’t a Waste of Time,” The New York Times, March 10, 
2011, http://boss.blogs.nytimes.com.
 17. Sarah E. Needleman, “Big Blunders Job Hunters Make,” The 
Wall Street Journal, June 28, 2010, http://online.wsj.com.
 18. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Background 
Checks: What Employers Need to Know,” EEOC and Fed-
eral Trade Commission, http://www1.eeoc.gov, accessed 
May 20, 2014; Bureau of National Affairs, “Gray Areas Re-
main on Background Checks under EEOC Guidance,” HR 
Focus, January 2014, pp. 14–15; Scott Thurm, “Employment 
Checks Fuel Race Complaints,” The Wall Street Journal, June 
11, 2013, http://online.wsj.com.
 19. L. C. Buffardi, E. A. Fleishman, R. A. Morath, and P. M. 
McCarthy, “Relationships between Ability Requirements and 
Human Errors in Job Tasks,” Journal of Applied Psychology 85 
(2000), pp. 551–64; J. Hogan, “Structure of Physical Perfor-
mance in Occupational Tasks,” Journal of Applied Psychology 76 
(1991), pp. 495–507.
 20. J. 
F. 
Salagado, 
N. 
Anderson, 
S. 
Moscoso, 
C. 
 Bertuas, 
and 
F. 
De 
Fruyt, 
“International 
Valid-
ity Generalization of GMA and Cognitive Abilities: 
A 
European 
Community 
Meta-analysis,” 
Personnel 
Psychology 56 (2003), pp. 573–605; M. J. Ree, J. A. Earles, and 
M. S. Teachout, “Predicting Job Performance: Not Much 
More than g,” Journal of Applied Psychology 79 (1994), pp. 518–
24; L. S. Gottfredson, “The g Factor in Employment,” Journal 
of Vocational Behavior 29 (1986), pp. 293–96; J. E. Hunter and 
NOTES

198 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
R. H. Hunter, “Validity and Utility of Alternative Predictors 
of Job Performance,” Psychological Bulletin 96 (1984), pp. 72–
98; Gutenberg et al., “Moderating Effects of Decision-Mak-
ing/Information Processing Dimensions on Test Validities”; 
F. L. Schmidt, J. G. Berner, and J. E. Hunter, “Racial Differ-
ences in Validity of Employment Tests: Reality or Illusion,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 58 (1974), pp. 5–6; J. A.  LePine, 
J. A. Colquitt, and A. Erez, “Adaptability to  Changing Task 
Contexts: Effects of General Cognitive Ability, Conscien-
tiousness, and Openness to Experience,” Personnel Psychology 
53 (2000), pp. 563–93.
 21. Cameron McWhirter, “High-Tech Cheaters Pose Test,” The 
Wall Street Journal, June 10, 2013, http://online.wsj.com.
 22. D. A. Kravitz and S. L. Klineberg, “Reactions to Versions of 
Affi rmative Action among Whites, Blacks, and Hispanics,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology (2000), pp. 597–611.
 23. George Anders, “The Rare Find,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
October 17, 2011, EBSCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 24. D. J. Schleiger, V. Venkataramani, F. P. Morgeson, and M. A. 
Campion, “So You Didn’t Get the Job . . . Now What Do You 
Think? Examining Opportunity to Perform Fairness Percep-
tions,” Personnel Psychology 59 (2006), pp. 559–90.
 25. F. L. Schmidt and J. E. Hunter, “The Validity and 
Utility 
of 
Selection 
Methods 
in 
Personnel 
Psy-
chology: 
Practical 
and 
Theoretical 
Implications 
of 
85 Years of Research Findings,” Psychological Bulletin 124 
(1998), pp. 262–74.
 26. W. Arthur, E. A. Day, T. L. McNelly, and P. S. Edens, “Meta-
Analysis of the Criterion-Related Validity of Assessment 
Center Dimensions,” Personnel Psychology 56 (2003), pp. 125–
54; C. E. Lance, T. A. Lambert, A. G. Gewin, F. Lievens, and 
J. M. Conway, “Revised Estimates of Dimension and Exercise 
Variance Components in Assessment Center Postexercise 
Dimension Ratings,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89 (2004), 
pp. 377–85.
 27. N. M. Dudley, K. A. Orvis, J. E. Lebieki, and J. M. Cortina, 
“A Meta-analytic Investigation of Conscientiousness in the 
Prediction of Job Performance: Examining the Intercorre-
lation and the Incremental Validity of Narrow Traits,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 91 (2006), pp. 40–57; W. S. Dunn, 
M. K. Mount, M. R. Barrick, and D. S. Ones, “Relative 
Importance of Personality and General Mental Ability on 
Managers’ Judgments of Applicant Qualifi cations,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 79 (1995), pp. 500–9; P. M. Wright, K. M. 
Kacmar, G. C. McMahan, and K. Deleeuw, “P 5 f(M 3 A): 
Cognitive Ability as a Moderator of the Relationship be-
tween Personality and Job Performance,” Journal of Man-
agement 21 (1995), pp. 1129–39.
 28. M. Mount, M. R. Barrick, and J. P. Strauss, “Validity of 
 Observer Ratings of the Big Five Personality Factors,” 
 Journal of Applied Psychology 79 (1994), pp. 272–80.
 29. L. A. Witt and G. R. Ferris, “Social Skill as Moderator of the 
Conscientiousness–Performance Relationship: Convergent 
Results across Four Studies,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88 
(2003), pp. 809–20.
 30. H. Le, I. S. Oh, S. B. Robbins, R. Ilies, E. Holland, and P. 
Westrick, “Too Much of a Good Thing? Curvilinear Rela-
tionship between Personality Traits and Job Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 96 (2011): 113–33.
 31. L. Joel, Every Employee’s Guide to the Law (New York: Pan-
theon, 1993).
 32. N. Schmitt and F. L. Oswald, “The Impact of Corrections 
for Faking on the Validity of Non- cognitive Measures in 
Selection Contexts,” Journal of Applied Psychology (2006), pp. 
613–21.
 33. S. A. 
Birkland, T. 
M. 
Manson, 
J. 
L. 
Kisamore, 
M. T. Brannick, and M. A. Smith, “Faking on Personality 
Measures,” International Journal of Selection and Assessment 14 
(December 2006), pp. 317–35.
 34. C. 
H. 
Van 
Iddekinge, 
P. 
H. 
Raymark, 
and 
P. L. Roth, “Assessing Personality with a Structured Employ-
ment Interview: Construct-Related Validity and Susceptibil-
ity to Response Infl ation,” Journal of Applied Psychology 90 
(2005), pp. 536–52; R. Mueller-Hanson, E. D. Heggestad, and 
G. C. Thornton, “Faking and Selection: Considering the 
Use of Personality from Select-In and Select-Out Perspec-
tives,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88 (2003), pp. 348–55; 
N. L. Vasilopoulos, J. M. Cucina, and J. M. McElreath, “Do 
Warnings of Response Verifi cation Moderate the Relation-
ship between Personality and Cognitive Ability?” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 90 (2005), pp. 306–22; J. A. Shaffer and 
J. E. Postlewaite, “A Matter of Context: A Meta-analytic Inves-
tigation of the Relative Validity of Contextualized and Non-
contextualized Personality Measures,” Personnel Psychology 
65 (2012): 445–94.
 35. V. 
Knight, 
“Personality 
Tests 
as 
Hiring 
Tools,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 15, 2006, p. B1; 
G. L. Steward, I. S. Fulmer, and M. R. Barrick, “An Explora-
tion of Member Roles as a Multilevel Linking Mechanism 
for Individual Traits and Team Outcomes,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy 58 (2005), pp. 343–65; M. Mount, R. Ilies, and E. Johnson, 
“Relationship of Personality Traits and Counterproductive 
Work Behaviors: The Mediation Effects of Job Satisfaction,” 
Personnel Psychology 59 (2006), pp. 591–622.
 36. D. S. Ones, C. Viswesvaran, and F. L. Schmidt, “Comprehen-
sive Meta-analysis of Integrity Test Validities: Findings and 
Implications for Personnel Selection and Theories of Job Per-
formance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 78 (1993), pp. 679–703; 
H. J. Bernardin and D. K. Cooke, “Validity of an Honesty Test 
in Predicting Theft among Convenience Store Employees,” 
Academy of Management Journal 36 (1993), pp. 1079–1106; 
C. H. Van Iddekinge, P. L. Roth, P. H. Raymark, and H. N. 
Odle-Dusseau, “The Criterion-Related Validity of Integrity 
Tests: An Updated Meta-analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 
97 (2012): 499–530.
 37. Abigail K. Wozniak, “Discrimination and the Effects of 
Drug Testing on Black Employment,” NBER Working 
Paper 20095, May 2014, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, available at http://www.nber.org. For discus-
sion of the research, see Rebecca J. Rosen, “Racism, Again: 
Why Drug Tests Are Helping Black Americans Get Jobs,” 
 Atlantic, May 8, 2014, available at http://fi nance.yahoo.com; 
Ben  Steverman, “How to Fight Racism with a Drug Test,” 
Bloomberg News, May 5, 2014, http://www.bloomberg.com.
 38. K. R. Murphy, G. C. Thornton, and D. H.  Reynolds, “Col-
lege Students’ Attitudes toward Drug Test Programs,” Per-
sonnel Psychology 43 (1990), pp. 615–31; M. E. Paronto, D. 
M. Truxillo, T. N. Bauer, and M. C. Leo, “Drug Testing, Drug 

CHAPTER 6 
Selecting Employees and Placing Them in Jobs  199
Treatment, and Marijuana Use: A Fairness Perspective,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 87 (2002), pp. 1159–66.
 39. M. A. McDaniel, F. P. Morgeson, E. G. Finnegan, M. A. 
Campion, and E. P. Braver man, “Use of Situational Judg-
ment Tests to Predict Job Performance: A Clarifi cation of 
the Literature,” Journal of Applied Psychology 86 (2001), pp. 
730–40; J. Clavenger, G. M.  Perreira, D. Weichmann, N. 
Schmitt, and V. S. Harvey, “Incremental Validity of Situ-
ational Judgment Tests,” Journal of Applied Psychology 86 
(2001), pp. 410–17.
 40. M. A. Campion, J. E. Campion, and J. P. Hudson, “Structured 
Interviewing: A Note of Incremental Validity and Alternative 
Question Types,” Journal of Applied Psychology 79 (1994), pp. 
998–1002; E. D. Pulakos and N. Schmitt, “Experience-Based 
and Situational Interview Questions: Studies of Validity,” 
Personnel Psychology 48 (1995), pp. 289–308; A. P. J. Ellis, B. J. 
West, A. M. Ryan, and R. P. DeShon, “The Use of Impression 
Management Tactics in Structured Interviews: A Function of 
Question Type?” Journal of Applied Psychology 87 (2002), pp. 
1200–8.
 41. N. Schmitt, F. L. Oswald, B. H. Kim, M. A.  Gillespie, L. J. 
Ramsey, and T. Y Yoo, “The Impact of Elaboration on So-
cially Desirable Responding and the Validity of Biodata Mea-
sures,” Journal of Applied Psychology 88 (2003), pp. 979–88; N. 
Schmitt and C. Kunce, “The Effects of Required Elabora-
tion of Answers to Biodata Questions,” Personnel Psychology 55 
(2002), pp. 569–87.
 42. Hunter and Hunter, “Validity and Utility of Alternative Pre-
dictors of Job Performance.”
 43. R. Pingitore, B. L. Dugoni, R. S. Tindale, and B. Spring, “Bias 
against Overweight Job Applicants in a Simulated Interview,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 79 (1994), pp. 184–90.
 44. Watson v. Fort Worth Bank and Trust, 108  Supreme Court 
2791 (1988).
 45. M. A. McDaniel, D. L. Whetzel, F. L. Schmidt, and S. D. Mau-
rer, “The Validity of Employment Interviews: A Comprehen-
sive Review and Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 79 
(1994), pp. 599–616; A. I. Huffcutt and W. A. Arthur, “Hunter 
and Hunter (1984) Revisited: Interview Validity for Entry-
Level Jobs,” Journal of Applied Psychology 79 (1994), pp. 184–90.
 46. Y. Ganzach, A. N. Kluger, and N. Klayman, “Making Deci-
sions from an Interview: Expert Measurement and Mechani-
cal Combination,” Personnel Psychology 53 (2000), pp. 1–21; 
G. Stasser and W. Titus, “Effects of Information Load and 
Percentage of Shared Information on the Dissemination of 
Unshared Information during Group Discussion,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 53 (1987),  pp. 81–93.
 47. C. H. Middendorf and T. H. Macan, “Note-Taking in 
the Interview: Effects on Recall and Judgments,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology 87 (2002), pp. 293–303; K. G. 
Melchers, N. Lienhardt, M. Von Aartburg, and M. Klein
mann, “Is More Structure Really Better? A Comparison of 
Frame of Reference Training and Descriptively Anchored 
Rating Scales to Improve Interviewers’ Rating Quality,” Per-
sonnel Psychology 64 (2011), pp. 53–87.
 48. Greg Bensinger, “Amazon’s Current Employees Raise the 
Bar for New Hires,” The Wall Street Journal, January 7, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com.

Training Employees
7
Introduction
If you listen to or read the comments of employers, you will often hear about a 
“skills shortage,” especially in manufacturing and high-tech jobs. This worry might 
seem strange in light of persistently high unemployment, but many companies re-
port difficulty in finding qualified people to fill all their open positions. However, 
some business experts and even some employers criticize companies for having 
unrealistic expectations. Employers today are apt to look for workers who have 
already performed the job requirements elsewhere; in the past, companies were 
more likely to hire hardworking, intelligent individuals and train them to perform the 
duties of the job. In the words of Grainger CEO James Ryan, some companies have 
been “on the sidelines” when it comes to training. They need to “get off the bench” 
and “take some responsibility in investing in training and education.”1
One company not loafing on the sidelines is Microsoft. An assessment of sales 
representatives’ performance showed they had excellent technical knowledge of the 
company’s products but had difficulty discussing solutions with Microsoft’s business 
customers. Instead of complaining about a skills gap, Microsoft set up a training pro-
gram called Pitch Perfect. The program includes online courses that teach skills in 
identifying customers’ needs and showing how Microsoft can meet those needs. Sales-
people also pair up for role-playing exercises, which are customized for each group, 
and they receive coaching from trained Microsoft managers. Thousands of Microsoft 
sales reps have participated in Pitch Perfect, and they say their communication skills 
have improved—a result that should translate directly into higher sales.2
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 7-1 Discuss how to link training programs to 
organizational needs.
 LO 7-2 Explain how to assess the need for training.
 LO 7-3 Explain how to assess employees’ readiness for 
training.
 LO 7-4 Describe how to plan an effective training 
program.
 LO 7-5 Compare widely used training methods.
 LO 7-6 Summarize how to implement a successful 
training program.
 LO 7-7 Evaluate the success of a training program.
 LO 7-8 Describe training methods for employee 
orientation and diversity management.

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 201
So that sales employees can contribute better to the company’s growth strategy, 
Microsoft provides them with the right kind of training. Training consists of an or-
ganization’s planned efforts to help employees acquire job-related knowledge, skills, 
abilities, and behaviors, with the goal of applying these on the job. A training pro-
gram may range from formal classes to one-on-one mentoring, and it may take place 
on the job or at remote locations. No matter what its form, training can benefi t the 
organization when it is linked to organizational needs and when it motivates 
employees.
This chapter describes how to plan and carry out an effective training program. We 
begin by discussing how to develop effective training in the context of the organiza-
tion’s strategy. Next, we discuss how organizations assess employees’ training needs. 
We then review training methods and the process of evaluating a training program. 
The chapter concludes by discussing some special applications of training: orientation 
of new employees and the management of diversity.
Training Linked to Organizational Needs
The nature of the modern business environment makes training more important 
today than it ever has been. Rapid change, especially in the area of technology, re-
quires that employees continually learn new skills. The new psychological contract, 
described in Chapter 2, has created the expectation that employees invest in their 
own career development, which requires learning opportunities. Growing reliance 
on teamwork creates a demand for the ability to solve 
problems in teams, an ability that often requires formal 
training.  Finally, the diversity of the U.S. population, 
coupled with the globalization of business, requires that 
employees be able to work well with people who are dif-
ferent from them. Successful organizations often take 
the lead in developing this ability.
With training so essential in modern organizations, it 
is important to provide training that is effective. An effec-
tive training program actually teaches what it is designed 
to teach, and it teaches skills and behaviors that will help 
the organization achieve its goals. To achieve those goals, 
HR professionals approach training through instruc-
tional  design—a process of systematically developing 
training to meet specifi ed needs.3
A complete instructional design process includes 
the steps shown in Figure 7.1. It begins with an assess-
ment of the needs for training—what the organization 
requires that its people learn. Next, the organization 
ensures that employees are ready for training in terms 
of their attitudes, motivation, basic skills, and work en-
vironment. The third step is to plan the training pro-
gram, including the program’s objectives, instructors, 
and methods. The organization then implements the 
program. Finally, evaluating the results of the training 
provides feedback for planning future training pro-
grams. For an example of a company that effectively 
uses this process, see the “Best Practices” box.
Training
An organization’s 
planned efforts to help 
employees acquire job-
related knowledge, skills, 
abilities, and behaviors, 
with the goal of applying 
these on the job.
LO 7-1 Discuss how to 
link training programs to 
organizational needs.
Instructional Design
A process of systemati-
cally developing training 
to meet speciﬁ ed needs.
Figure 7.1
Stages of Instructional 
Design

202
To carry out this process more effi ciently and effectively, a growing number of 
organizations are using a learning management system (LMS), a computer ap-
plication that automates the administration, development, and delivery of a com-
pany’s training programs.4 Managers and employees can use the LMS to identify 
training needs and enroll in courses. LMSs can make training programs more 
widely available and help companies reduce travel and other costs by providing 
online training. Administrative tools let managers track course enrollments and 
program completion. The system can be linked to the organization’s performance 
management system to plan for and manage training needs, training outcomes, and 
associated rewards together.
Learning Management 
System (LMS)
A computer applica-
tion that automates the 
administration, develop-
ment, and delivery of 
training programs.
ConAgra Foods has a strategic 
goal to be the fastest-growing 
food company (in terms of sales 
and profi ts) by 2017. The com-
pany, whose brands include Chef 
Boyardee, Healthy Choice, and 
Hunt’s, has been acquiring other 
businesses, helping it grow to more 
than 25,000 employees. HR manag-
ers on ConAgra’s Enterprise Learn-
ing team realized they would need a 
strategy to ensure that the company 
has the skills needed to support 
further growth. So ConAgra devel-
oped a strategy for sharing training 
resources among local facilities to 
meet each employee’s individual 
training needs.
In the sales function, for ex-
ample, ConAgra has a goal that 
all of its salespeople will know 
their product line and customers 
so well they can serve as trusted 
advisers. This requires that sales-
people understand fi nancial data, 
specifi cally how sales of their 
products contribute to ConAgra’s 
profi ts. The Enterprise Learning 
team pinpointed the required skills 
and knowledge, using that infor-
mation as the basis for creating a 
three-stage training program. The 
fi rst stage is a set of simulations, 
videos, and reading materials 
to support classroom training in 
basic business principles. Next, 
fi ve sales teams (about 100 partic-
ipants each) gathered for two-day 
workshops at which they applied 
the basic principles, engaging in 
role-plays to practice what they 
were learning. To sustain what 
was learned, managers in the fi nal 
stage of training set goals for the 
salespeople and monitored their 
performance. Since the training, 
the Enterprise Learning team has 
measured a substantial improve-
ment in profi ts among the trained 
salespeople.
Other training programs target 
management. For the fi rst layer 
of management, front-line super-
visors, ConAgra established the 
Foundations of Leadership pro-
gram. This program addresses 
how to become a leader of individ-
uals and teams—skills a front-line 
supervisor may not yet have prac-
ticed. The goal for Foundations 
of Leadership is that supervisors 
will understand what is involved in 
being a leader at ConAgra Foods 
so their groups can deliver bet-
ter results. Surveys of employ-
ees provide feedback used for 
additional training and efforts to 
sustain what supervisors have 
learned. The Enterprise Learning 
team also measured lower aver-
age turnover of employees whose 
supervisors participated in Foun-
dations of Leadership, saving an 
estimated $116,100 for every class 
of 28 supervisors trained. Another 
program, called Managing Talent 
for Results, used a board game to 
teach 500 managers how to im-
prove business results by choosing 
the best people to fi ll positions as 
needs open up.
Questions
 1. What were the training 
objectives for salespeople? 
How did ConAgra measure the 
results of training them?
 2. Why was there a need to train 
fi rst-line supervisors? What 
results of that training program 
did ConAgra observe?
Sources: ConAgra Foods, careers page, 
http://www.conagrafoodscareers.com, 
 accessed May 29, 2014; “2013 Chief 
Learning Ofﬁ cer Learning in Practice 
Awards,” Chief Learning Ofﬁ cer, De-
cember 2013, pp. 33–53; Kris Zilliox, 
“Strategies for Success,” Training, No-
vember 2013, www.trainingmag.com; 
Lorri Freifeld, “ConAgra Foods  Activates 
Sales GMs,” Training, April 1, 2013, 
http://www.trainingmag.com.
A Strategic Approach to Learning at ConAgra Foods
Best Practices

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 203
Needs Assessment
Instructional design logically should begin with a needs assessment, the process of 
evaluating the organization, individual employees, and employees’ tasks to determine 
what kinds of training, if any, are necessary. As this defi nition indicates, the needs as-
sessment answers questions in three broad areas5:
 1. Organization—What is the context in which training will occur?
 2. Person—Who needs training?
 3. Task—What subjects should the training cover?
The answers to these questions provide the basis for planning an effective training program.
A variety of conditions may prompt an organization to conduct a needs assessment. 
Management may observe that some employees lack basic skills or are performing 
poorly. Decisions to produce new products, apply new technology, or design new jobs 
should prompt a needs assessment because these changes tend to require new skills. 
The decision to conduct a needs assessment also may be prompted by outside forces, 
such as customer requests or legal requirements.
The outcome of the needs assessment is a set of decisions about how to address the 
issues that prompted the needs assessment. These decisions do not necessarily include 
a training program, because some issues should be resolved through methods other 
than training. For example, suppose a company uses delivery trucks to transport anes-
thetic gases to medical facilities, and a driver of one of these trucks mistakenly hooks 
up the supply line of a mild anesthetic from the truck to the hospital’s oxygen sys-
tem, contaminating the hospital’s oxygen supply. This performance problem prompts 
a needs assessment. Whether or not the hospital decides to provide more training will 
depend partly on the reasons the driver erred. The driver may have hooked up the sup-
ply lines incorrectly because of a lack of knowledge about the appropriate line hookup, 
anger over a request for a pay raise being denied, or mislabeled valves for connecting 
the supply lines. Out of these three possibilities, only the lack of knowledge can be 
corrected through training. Other outcomes of a needs assessment might include plans 
for better rewards to improve motivation, better hiring decisions, and better safety 
precautions.
The remainder of this chapter discusses needs assessment and then what the or-
ganization should do when assessment indicates a need for training. The possibilities 
for action include offering existing training programs to more employees; buying or 
developing new training programs; and improving existing training programs. Before 
we consider the available training options, let’s examine the elements of the needs as-
sessment in more detail.
Organization Analysis
Usually, the needs assessment begins with the organization analysis. This is a pro-
cess for determining the appropriateness of training by evaluating the characteristics 
of the organization. The organization analysis looks at training needs in light of the 
organization’s strategy, resources available for training, and management’s support for 
training activities.
Training needs will vary depending on whether the organization’s strategy is 
based on growing or shrinking its personnel, whether it is seeking to serve a broad 
customer base or focusing on the specifi c needs of a narrow market segment, and 
various other strategic scenarios. An organization that concentrates on serving a 
niche market may need to continually update its workforce on a specialized skills 
LO 7-2 Explain how 
to assess the need for 
training.
Needs Assessment
The process of evaluat-
ing the organization, 
individual employees, 
and employees’ tasks 
to determine what kinds 
of training, if any, are 
necessary.
Organization Analysis
A process for determin-
ing the appropriateness 
of training by evaluating 
the characteristics of the 
organization.

204 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
set. A company that is cutting costs with a downsizing strategy may need to train 
employees who will be laid off in job search skills. The employees who remain 
following the downsizing may need cross-training so that they can handle a wider 
variety of responsibilities.
Anyone planning a training program must consider whether the organization has 
the budget, time, and expertise for training. For example, if the company is installing 
computer-based manufacturing equipment in one of its plants, it can ensure that it has 
the necessary computer-literate employees in one of three ways. If it has the techni-
cal experts on its staff, they can train the employees affected by the change. Or the 
company may use testing to determine which of its employees are already computer 
literate and then replace or reassign employees who lack the necessary skills. The third 
choice is to purchase training from an outside individual or organization.
Even if training fi ts the organization’s strategy and budget, it can be viable only if 
the organization is willing to support the investment in training. Managers increase 
the success of training when they support it through such actions as helping trainees 
see how they can use their newly learned knowledge, skills, and behaviors on the job.6 
Conversely, the managers will be most likely to support training if the people planning 
it can show that it will solve a signifi cant problem or result in a signifi cant improve-
ment, relative to its cost. Managers appreciate training proposals with specifi c goals, 
timetables, budgets, and methods for measuring success.
Person Analysis
Following the organizational assessment, needs assessment turns to the remaining 
areas of analysis: person and task. The person analysis is a process for determining 
Person Analysis
A process of determining 
individuals’ needs and 
readiness for training.
Pfi zer employees go through a representative training phase which teaches them about different Pfi zer products 
and how to market them. Success at a drug company such as Pfi zer depends on the frequent introduction of new 
medicines and the expertise of sales representatives who tell health care professionals about those products.

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 205
individuals’ needs and readiness for training. It involves answering  several 
questions:
 • Do performance defi ciencies result from a lack of knowledge, skill, or ability? (If so, 
training is appropriate; if not, other solutions are more relevant.)
 • Who needs training?
 • Are these employees ready for training?
The answers to these questions help the manager identify whether training is ap-
propriate and which employees need training. In certain situations, such as the intro-
duction of a new technology or service, all employees may need training. However, 
when needs assessment is conducted in response to a performance problem, training 
is not always the best solution.
The person analysis is therefore critical when training is considered in response 
to a performance problem. In assessing the need for training, the manager should 
identify all the variables that can infl uence performance. The primary variables are the 
person’s ability and skills, his or her attitudes and motivation, the  organization’s input 
(including clear directions, necessary resources, and freedom from interference and 
distractions), performance feedback (including praise and performance standards), and 
positive consequences to motivate good performance. Of these variables, only ability 
and skills can be affected by training. Therefore, before  planning a training program, 
it is important to be sure that any performance problem results from a defi ciency in 
knowledge and skills. Otherwise, training dollars will be wasted, because the training 
is unlikely to have much effect on performance.
The person analysis also should determine whether employees are ready to un-
dergo training. In other words, the employees to receive training not only should 
require additional knowledge and skill, but must be willing and able to learn. (After 
our discussion of the needs assessment, we will explore the topic of employee readiness 
in greater detail.)
Task Analysis
The third area of needs assessment is task analysis, the process of identifying the 
tasks, knowledge, skills, and behaviors that training should emphasize. Usually, task 
analysis is conducted along with person analysis. Understanding shortcomings in per-
formance usually requires knowledge about the tasks and work environment as well as 
the employee.
To carry out the task analysis, the HR professional looks at the conditions in 
which tasks are performed. These conditions include the equipment and environ-
ment of the job, time constraints (for example, deadlines), safety considerations, 
and performance standards. These observations form the basis for a description 
of work activities, or the tasks required by the person’s job. For a selected job, the 
analyst interviews employees and their supervisors to prepare a list of tasks per-
formed in that job. Then the analyst validates the list by showing it to employees, 
supervisors, and other subject-matter experts and asking them to complete a ques-
tionnaire about the importance, frequency, and diffi culty of the tasks. For each task 
listed, the subject-matter expert uses a sliding scale (for example, 0 5 task never 
performed to 5 5 task often performed) to rate the task’s importance, frequency, 
and diffi culty.7
The information from these questionnaires is the basis for determining which 
tasks will be the focus of the training. The person or committee conducting the needs 
Task Analysis
The process of identify-
ing and analyzing tasks 
to be trained for.

206 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
assessment must decide what levels of importance, frequency, and diffi culty signal a 
need for training. Logically, training is most needed for tasks that are important, fre-
quent, and at least moderately diffi cult. For each of these tasks, the analysts must iden-
tify the knowledge, skills, and abilities required to perform the task. This information 
usually comes from interviews with subject-matter experts, such as employees who 
currently hold the job.
Readiness for Training
Effective training requires not only a program that addresses real needs, but also a 
condition of employee readiness. Readiness for training is a combination of em-
ployee characteristics and positive work environment that permit training. It exists 
when employees are able and eager to learn and when their organizations encourage 
learning.
Employee Readiness Characteristics
To be ready to learn, employees need basic learning skills, especially cognitive ability, 
which includes being able to use written and spoken language, solve math problems, 
and use logic to solve problems. Ideally, the selection process identifi ed job candidates 
with enough cognitive ability to handle not only the requirements for doing a job, but 
also the training associated with that job. However, recent forecasts of the skill levels 
of the U.S. workforce indicate that many companies will have to work with employees 
who lack basic skills.8 For example, they may have to provide literacy training or access 
to classes teaching math skills before some employees can participate in job-related 
training.
Employees learn more from training programs when they are highly motivated to 
learn—that is, when they really want to learn the content of the training program.9 
Employees tend to feel this way if they believe they are able to learn, see potential 
benefi ts from the training program, are aware of their need to learn, see a fi t between 
the training and their career goals, and have the basic skills needed for participating 
in the program. Managers can infl uence a ready attitude in a variety of ways—for 
example, by providing feedback that encourages employees, establishing rewards for 
learning, and communicating with employees about the organization’s career paths 
and future needs.
Work Environment
Readiness for training also depends on two broad characteristics of the work environ-
ment: situational constraints and social support.10 Situational constraints are the limits 
on training’s effectiveness that arise from the situation or the conditions within the 
organization. Constraints can include a lack of money for training, lack of time for 
training or practicing, and failure to provide proper tools and materials for learning or 
applying the lessons of training. Conversely, trainees are likely to apply what they learn 
if the organization gives them opportunities to use their new skills and if it rewards 
them for doing so.11
Social support refers to the ways the organization’s people encourage training, in-
cluding giving trainees praise and encouraging words, sharing information about 
participating in training programs, and expressing positive attitudes toward the orga-
nization’s training programs. Table 7.1 summarizes some ways in which managers can 
support training.
LO 7-3 Explain how 
to assess employees’ 
readiness for training.
Readiness for Training
A combination of em-
ployee characteristics 
and positive work en-
vironment that permit 
training.

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 207
Support can also come from employees’ peers. Readiness for training is greater in an 
organization where employees share knowledge, encourage one another to learn, and 
have a positive attitude about carrying the extra load when co-workers are attending 
classes. Employers foster such attitudes and behavior when they reward learning.
Planning the Training Program
Decisions about training are often the responsibility of a specialist in the organiza-
tion’s training or human resources department. When the needs assessment indicates a 
need for training and employees are ready to learn, the person responsible for training 
should plan a training program that directly relates to the needs identifi ed. Planning 
begins with establishing objectives for the training program. Based on those objec-
tives, the planner decides who will provide the training, what topics the training will 
cover, what training methods to use, and how to evaluate the training.
Objectives of the Program
Formally establishing objectives for the training program has several benefi ts. First, 
a training program based on clear objectives will be more focused and more likely 
to succeed. In addition, when trainers know the objectives, they can communicate 
them to the employees participating in the program. Employees learn best when they 
know what the training is supposed to accomplish. Finally, down the road, establishing 
objectives provides a basis for measuring whether the program succeeded, as we will 
discuss later in this chapter.
Effective training objectives have several characteristics:
 • They include a statement of what the employee is expected to do, the quality or 
level of performance that is acceptable, and the conditions under which the em-
ployee is to apply what he or she learned (for instance, physical conditions, mental 
stresses, or equipment failure).12
 • They include performance standards that are measurable.
 • They identify the resources needed to carry out the desired performance or out-
come. Successful training requires employees to learn but also employers to provide 
the necessary resources.
A related issue at the outset is who will participate in the training program. Some 
training programs are developed for all employees of the organization or all members 
LO 7-4 Describe how to 
plan an effective training 
program.
Understand the content of the training.
Know how training relates to what you need employees to do.
In performance appraisals, evaluate employees on how they apply training to their jobs.
Support employees’ use of training when they return to work.
Ensure that employees have the equipment and technology needed to use training.
Prior to training, discuss with employees how they plan to use training.
Recognize newly trained employees who use training content.
Give employees release time from their work to attend training.
Explain to employees why they have been asked to attend training.
Give employees feedback related to skills or behavior they are trying to develop.
If possible, be a trainer.
Sources: Based on A. Rossett, “That Was a Great Class, but . . .” Training and Development, July 1977, 
p. 21; R. Bates, “Managers as Transfer Agents,” In E. Hotiton III and T. Baldwin (eds.), Improving Learning 
Transfer in Organizations (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2003): pp. 243–270.
Table 7.1
What Managers Should Do 
to Support Training

208
of a team. Other training programs identify individuals who lack desirable skills or 
have potential to be promoted, then provide training in the areas of need that are 
identifi ed for the particular employees. When deciding whom to include in train-
ing, the organization has to avoid illegal discrimination. The organization should 
not—intentionally or unintentionally—exclude members of protected groups, such 
as women, minorities, and older employees. During the training, all participants 
should receive equal treatment, such as equal opportunities for practice. In addition, 
the training program should provide reasonable accommodation for trainees with 
disabilities. The kinds of accommodations that are appropriate will vary according to 
the type of training and type of disability. One employee might need an interpreter, 
whereas another might need to have classroom instruction provided in a location ac-
cessible to wheelchairs.
In-House or Contracted Out?
An organization can provide an effective training program, even if it lacks expertise 
in training. As shown in the “Did You Know?” box, many organizations use outside 
experts to develop and instruct training courses. Many companies and consultants pro-
vide training services to organizations. Community colleges often work with employ-
ers to train employees in a variety of skills.
To select a training service, an organization can mail several vendors a request for 
proposal (RFP), which is a document outlining the type of service needed, the type and 
number of references needed, the number of employees to be trained, the date by 
which the training is to be completed, and the date by which proposals should be re-
ceived. A complete RFP also indicates funding for the project and the process by which 
the organization will determine its level of satisfaction. Putting together a request for 
Did You Know?
A recent survey of U.S.-based 
corporations found that over half 
outsourced at least some of the 
instruction of training courses. Al-
most half used contractors to oper-
ate or host a learning management 
system, and 45% used contractors 
to develop at least some of their 
custom content. In terms of spend-
ing, an average of 8% of com-
panies’ training budgets went to 
contractors.
Question
Suppose you need to train offi ce 
workers on how to use social media 
without risking your company’s 
reputation or data security. 
What are some advantages of 
company employees developing 
the course content? What are 
some advantages of using a fi rm 
that specializes in training about 
information technology?
Source: “2013 Training Industry 
 Report,” Training, November/December 
2013, pp. 22–35.
Many Companies Outsource Training Tasks
Development of custom
content
Operation/hosting of
learning management system
Instruction
Percentage of Companies Outsourcing Task
20
0
10
30
50
40
60

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 209
proposal is time consuming but worthwhile because it helps the organization clarify its 
objectives, compare vendors, and measure results.
Vendors that believe they are able to provide the services outlined in the RFP sub-
mit proposals that provide the types of information requested. The organization re-
views the proposals to eliminate any vendors that do not meet requirements and to 
compare the vendors that do qualify. They check references and select a candidate, 
based on the proposal and the vendor’s answers to questions about its experience, work 
samples, and evidence that its training programs meet objectives.
The cost of purchasing training from a contractor can vary substantially. In general, 
it is much costlier to purchase specialized training that is tailored to the organization’s 
unique requirements than to participate in a seminar or training course that teaches 
general skills or knowledge. Preparing a specialized training program can require a 
signifi cant investment of time for material the consultant won’t be able to sell to other 
clients. Not surprisingly then, companies reduced the amount they spent for outsourc-
ing during the recent recession and have tended to maintain or further cut spending 
on outside training products and services.13
Even in organizations that send employees to outside training programs, someone 
in the organization may be responsible for coordinating the overall training pro-
gram. Called training administration, this is typically the responsibility of a human 
resources professional. Training administration includes activities before, during, and 
after training sessions.
Choice of Training Methods
Whether the organization prepares its own training programs or buys training from 
other organizations, it is important to verify that the content of the training relates 
directly to the training objectives. Relevance to the organization’s needs and objectives 
ensures that training money is well spent. Tying training content closely to objectives 
also improves trainees’ learning, because it increases the likelihood that the training 
will be meaningful and helpful.
After deciding on the goals and content of the training program, planners must 
decide how the training will be conducted. As we will describe in the next section, a 
wide variety of methods is available. Training methods fall into the broad categories 
described in Table 7.2: presentation, hands-on, and group-building methods.
METHOD
TECHNIQUES
APPLICATIONS
Presentation methods: trainees 
receive information provided by 
others
Lectures, workbooks, video 
clips, podcasts, websites
Conveying facts or 
comparing alternatives
Hands-on methods: trainees 
are actively involved in trying 
out skills
On-the-job training, simulations, 
role-plays, computer games
Teaching speciﬁ c skills; 
showing how skills are 
related to job or how to 
handle interpersonal issues
Group-building methods: 
trainees share ideas and 
experiences, build group 
identities, learn about 
interpersonal relationships and 
the group
Group discussions, experiential 
programs, team training
Establishing teams or 
work groups; managing 
performance of teams or 
work groups
Table 7.2
Categories of Training 
Methods

210 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Training programs may use these methods alone or in combination. In general, the 
methods used should be suitable for the course content and the learning abilities of the 
participants. The following section explores the options in greater detail.
Training Methods
A wide variety of methods is available for conducting training. Figure 7.2 shows the per-
centage of training hours delivered to employees by each of several methods: instruc-
tor-led classrooms, online self-study, virtual classrooms, social media, mobile  devices, 
and combinations of these methods. Although the share of instruction provided online 
is growing, classroom training remains the most popular of these methods.14
Classroom Instruction
At school, we tend to associate learning with classroom instruction, and that type of 
training is most widely used in the workplace, too. Classroom instruction typically 
involves a trainer lecturing a group. Trainers often supplement lectures with slides, 
discussions, case studies, question-and-answer sessions, and role playing. Actively 
 involving trainees enhances learning.
When the course objectives call for presenting information on a specifi c topic 
to many trainees, classroom instruction is one of the least expensive and least time-
consuming ways to accomplish that goal. Learning will be more effective if trainers 
enhance lectures with job-related examples and opportunities for hands-on learning.
Modern technology has expanded the notion of the classroom to classes of trainees 
scattered in various locations. With distance learning, trainees at different locations attend 
programs online, using their computers to view lectures, participate in discussions, and 
share documents. Technology applications in distance learning may include videoconfer-
encing, e-mail, instant messaging, document-sharing software, and web cameras. When 
Steelcase was ready to begin selling its Node chair, a fl exible classroom chair with a swivel 
seat, storage for backpacks, and a customizable work surface, it needed to show its global 
sales force how adaptable it was to today’s classrooms and teaching methods. Steelcase 
LO 7-5 Compare widely 
used training methods.
Figure 7.2
Use of Instructional 
Methods
Source: “2013 Training 
Industry Report,” Train-
ing, November/December 
2013, pp. 22–35.
10
20
30
40
50
00
Virtual classroom/webcast
Social network
Mobile only
Online or computer-based
Blended (combination of methods)
Instructor-led classroom
Percentage of Total Training Hours
k
y
st
k
d
st
s)
d
m
s)

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 211
also had to deliver the training fast, so that the sales reps would be prepared before schools 
were making their annual purchases for the next academic year. The solution was a virtual 
classroom, which allowed trainees to see the chair as well as hear the training.15
Distance learning provides many of the benefi ts of classroom training without the 
cost and time of travel to a shared classroom. The major disadvantage of distance 
learning is that interaction between the trainer and audience may be limited. To over-
come this hurdle, distance learning usually provides a communications link between 
trainees and trainer. Also, on-site instructors or facilitators should be available to an-
swer questions and moderate question-and-answer sessions.
Audiovisual Training
Presentation methods need not require trainees to attend a class. Trainees can also 
work independently, using course material in workbooks, on DVDs, or on the Internet. 
Audiovisual techniques such as overhead transparencies, PowerPoint or other presen-
tation software, and video or audio clips can also supplement classroom instruction.
With modern technology, audiovisual materials can easily be made available on a va-
riety of devices, from desktop computers to the tiny screens of smartphones and MP3 
players. Today’s mobile devices can display charts, play audio podcasts, and link to video 
clips. The DoubleTree by Hilton in Bloomington, Illinois, has placed two iPads loaded 
with training material at its front desk so employees can use them to complete training 
programs during slow periods. DoubleTree’s training lessons are available in a choice of 
English or Spanish.16  The “HR How To” box offers ideas for effectively delivering train-
ing on iPads and other mobile devices.
Users of audiovisual training often have some control over the presentation. They can 
review material and may be able to slow down or speed up the lesson. Videos can show 
situations and equipment that cannot be easily demonstrated in a classroom. Another 
advantage of audiovisual presentations is that they give trainees a consistent presenta-
tion, not affected by an individual trainer’s goals and skills. The problems associated with 
these methods may include their trying to present too much material, poorly written 
dialogue, overuse of features such as humor or music, and drama that distracts from the 
key points. A well-written and carefully produced video can overcome these problems.
Computer-Based Training
Although almost all organizations use classroom training, new technologies are gain-
ing in popularity as technology improves and becomes cheaper. With computer-based 
training, participants receive course materials and instruction distributed over the 
Internet or on CD-ROM. Often, these materials are interactive, so participants can 
answer questions and try out techniques, with course materials adjusted according to 
participants’ responses. Online training programs may allow trainees to submit ques-
tions via e-mail and to participate in online discussions. Multimedia capabilities enable 
computers to provide sounds, images, and video presentations, along with text.
Computer-based training is generally less expensive than putting an instructor in a 
classroom of trainees. The low cost to deliver information gives the company fl exibil-
ity in scheduling training so that it can fi t around work requirements. Training can be 
delivered in smaller doses so material is easier to remember. Trainees often appreciate 
the multimedia capabilities, which appeal to several senses, and the chance to learn 
from experts anywhere in the world. Finally, it is easier to customize computer-based 
training for individual learners.

212
Current applications of computer-based training can extend its benefi ts:
 • E-learning involves receiving training via the Internet or the organization’s intranet, 
typically through some combination of web-based training modules, distance learn-
ing, and virtual classrooms. E-learning uses electronic networks for delivering and 
sharing information, and it offers tools and information for helping trainees improve 
performance. Training programs may include links to other online information re-
sources and to trainees and experts for collaboration on problem solving. The e-
learning system may also process enrollments, test and evaluate participants, and 
monitor progress. Quicken Loans uses e-learning to motivate employees to learn 
from their peers’ best practices in customer service. It created an online contest called 
“Quicken’s Got Talent.” Employees who serve customers over the phone can submit 
recordings of calls they handled well. Trainers pick one submission per day to post on 
the game. Employees listen to the recordings and rate their co-worker’s performance 
on a scale of 1 to 5. Each month the employee who submitted the top-scoring call 
receives a prize worth up to $200; winners of the monthly round are eligible for a 
competition with a $1,000 prize. The e-learning program tracks participation and 
creates a library of best-practices clips that are available for future learning.17
E-Learning
Receiving training via the 
Internet or the organiza-
tion’s intranet.
Nowadays, workers are already 
using—or would like to use—a vari-
ety of mobile devices, such as smart-
phones and tablet computers. These 
devices have the potential to deliver 
effective training. The following tips 
can help trainers ensure that mobile 
learning (m-learning) is well prepared 
and tailored to users’ needs and the 
company’s objectives:
 • Learn what devices employees 
are already using. Also fi nd out 
what devices your company’s 
information technology policy al-
lows employees to use for work. 
Some companies allow employ-
ees to load company data onto 
personal devices; others require 
that employees use company-
provided hardware and software.
 • Train employees to use the de-
vices on which the training will 
be provided. Even if employees 
are using a device to make 
phone calls or play games, they 
might not know how to use the 
company’s learning applications.
 • Train a few employees in m-
learning. Let them be the cham-
pions for the new system and 
perhaps train their co-workers in 
how to use the system or coach 
a co-worker who is struggling.
 • If the content covers more than 
trainees will easily use and re-
member at once, provide tools 
that make the content easy to 
search for the relevant subject 
matter.
 • Incorporate analytic tools such 
as Google Analytics into training 
software and use it to keep track 
of how many people are using 
the content, what hardware and 
operating system the trainees 
use, and how long they interact 
with the training material. This 
information will provide valuable 
feedback for improving the m-
learning program.
 • Test training content on all the 
kinds of devices the trainees 
will use. Make sure it works 
as intended on each kind of 
hardware and with the type of 
network connection that will be 
available to trainees.
Questions
 1. Suppose your company 
creates an m-learning 
program, but the analytics tool 
shows that employees almost 
never open the content. Which 
of the tips listed here might the 
trainers have overlooked?
 2. Suppose your company’s 
plan is to provide training 
on whatever mobile devices 
employees already bring to 
work. Which of the guidelines 
listed will be more diffi cult 
because of this plan?
Sources: Nick Floro, “Thinking Mobile 
First,” Training, November 2013, www.
trainingmag.com; John Coné, “Look Be-
fore You Leap into Mobile Learning,” T+D, 
June 2013, pp. 40–45; Barry Jass, “Take 
the Mobile  Learning Plunge,” T+D, Febru-
ary 2013, pp. 29–31.
Developing Training Content for Mobile Devices
HR How To

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 213
 • Electronic performance support systems (EPSSs) are computer applications 
that provide access to skills training, information, and expert advice when a problem 
occurs on the job.18 Employees needing guidance can use the EPSS to look up the 
particular information they need, such as detailed instructions on how to perform 
an unfamiliar task. Using an EPSS is faster and more relevant than attending classes, 
even classes offered online. These advantages of an EPSS make it especially appro-
priate for mobile learning. Xerox, for example, makes performance support videos 
available on employees’ mobile devices. Employees can easily search the learning 
database to fi nd the relevant content.19
The best e-learning combines the advantages of the Internet with the principles of a 
good learning environment. It takes advantage of the web’s dynamic nature and ability 
to use many positive learning features, including hyperlinks to other training sites and 
content, control by the trainee, and ability for trainees to collaborate.
On-the-Job Training
Although people often associate training with classrooms, much learning occurs while 
employees are performing their jobs. On-the-job training (OJT) refers to training 
methods in which a person with job experience and skill guides trainees in practicing 
job skills at the workplace. This type of training takes various forms, including appren-
ticeships and internships.
An apprenticeship is a work-study training method that teaches job skills through 
a combination of structured on-the-job training and classroom training. The OJT com-
ponent of an apprenticeship involves the apprentice assisting a certifi ed tradesperson (a 
journeyman) at the work site. Typically, the classroom training is provided by local trade 
schools, high schools, and community colleges. Government requirements for an ap-
prenticeship program vary by occupation, but programs generally range from one to six 
years. Requirements may be based on a minimum amount of time (often at least 2,000 
hours of on-the-job learning), mastery of specifi ed skills following classroom or online 
instruction plus on-the-job learning, or some combination of the two measures.20 Some 
apprenticeship programs are sponsored by individual companies, others by employee 
unions. As shown in the left column of Table 7.3, most apprenticeship programs are in 
the skilled trades, such as plumbing, carpentry, and electrical work.
For trainees, a major advantage of apprenticeship is the ability to earn an income 
while learning a trade. In addition, training through an apprenticeship is usually effec-
tive because it involves hands-on learning and extensive practice. Some employers are 
concerned that an apprenticeship program will require working with a union or that 
employees who receive such training will leave for a better job. However, unionization 
is not strongly associated with employer-paid training in most industries, and when 
an employer provides apprenticeships, employees may in fact feel greater loyalty.21 
Electronic Performance 
Support System (EPSS)
Computer application 
that provides access to 
skills training, informa-
tion, and expert advice 
as needed.
On-the-Job Training 
(OJT)
Training methods in 
which a person with 
job experience and skill 
guides trainees in prac-
ticing job skills at the 
workplace.
Apprenticeship
A work-study training 
method that teaches job 
skills through a com-
bination of on-the-job 
training and classroom 
training.
APPRENTICESHIP
INTERNSHIP
Bricklayer
Accountant
Carpenter
Doctor
Electrician
Journalist
Plumber
Lawyer
Nursing assistant
Nurse
Welder
Table 7.3
Typical Jobs for 
Apprentices and Interns

214 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Volkswagen partnered with the Tennessee Technology Center of Chattanooga State 
Community College to create an apprenticeship program in automotive mechatronics. 
In this three-year program, apprentices receive classroom instruction and on-the-job 
training in machining, electricity, pneumatics, robotics, automation, programmable 
logic controls, and computer numeric controls. Volkswagen pays the apprentices for 
their on-the-job training time, and in return it acquires a workforce with hard-to-fi nd 
skills in fi xing problems in an automated manufacturing facility.22
An internship is on-the-job learning sponsored by an educational institution as a 
component of an academic program. The sponsoring school works with local employ-
ers to place students in positions where they can gain experience related to their area 
of study. Ernst & Young hires interns to prepare them for possible permanent jobs as 
consultants and accountants if they demonstrate they can lead a project and work with 
a diverse team. Whirlpool hires interns to test their skills as it prepares them for posi-
tions in sales, technology, and human resource management.23 Many internships pre-
pare students for professions such as those listed in the right column of Table 7.3.
To be effective, OJT programs should include several characteristics:
 • The organization should issue a policy statement describing the purpose of OJT 
and emphasizing the organization’s support for it.
 • The organization should specify who is accountable for conducting OJT. This ac-
countability should be included in the relevant job descriptions.
 • The organization should review OJT practices at companies in similar industries.
 • Managers and peers should be trained in OJT principles.
 • Employees who conduct OJT should have access to lesson plans, checklists, proce-
dure manuals, training manuals, learning contracts, and progress report forms.
 • Before conducting OJT with an employee, the organization should assess the em-
ployee’s level of basic skills.24
Simulations
A simulation is a training method that represents a real-life situation, with trainees 
making decisions resulting in outcomes that mirror what would happen on the job. 
Simulations enable trainees to see the impact of their decisions in an artifi cial, risk-free 
environment. They are used for teaching production and process skills as well as man-
agement and interpersonal skills. Simulations used in training include call centers 
stocked with phones and reference materials, as well as mockups of houses used for 
training cable installers. Airlines purchasing Boeing’s latest-model passenger jet, the 
787 Dreamliner, are using simulators to train the pilots who will fl y it. Although the 
787 fl ight deck is designed with the same layout as the familiar 777, it has a new feature 
called the head-up display (HUD). When fl ying conditions are poor, this small see-
through screen drops down in pilots’ line of vision to provide information to help 
them navigate. Pilots need to practice with the simulator until they are accustomed to 
landing the jet while using the HUD.25
Simulators must have elements identical to those found in the work environment. 
The simulator needs to respond exactly as equipment would under the conditions and 
response given by the trainee. For this reason, simulators are expensive to develop and 
need constant updating as new information about the work environment becomes 
available. Still, they are an excellent training method when the risks of a mistake on the 
job are great. Trainees do not have to be afraid of the impact of wrong decisions when 
using the simulator, as they would be with on-the-job training. Also, trainees tend 
Internship
On-the-job learning 
sponsored by an edu-
cational institution as a 
component of an aca-
demic program.
Simulation
A training method that 
represents a real-life 
situation, with trainees 
making decisions result-
ing in outcomes that 
mirror what would hap-
pen on the job.

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 215
to be enthusiastic about this type of 
learning and to learn quickly, and 
the lessons are generally related very 
closely to job performance. Given 
these benefi ts, this training method 
is likely to become more widespread 
as its development costs fall into a 
range more companies can afford.26
When simulations are conducted 
online, trainees often participate by 
creating  avatars, or computer depic-
tions of themselves, which they ma-
nipulate onscreen to play roles as 
workers or other participants in a job-
related situation. Another way to en-
hance the simulation experience is to 
use virtual reality, a computer-based 
technology that provides an interac-
tive, three-dimensional learning expe-
rience. Using specialized equipment 
or viewing the virtual model on a computer screen, trainees move through the simulated 
environment and interact with its components. Devices relay information from the envi-
ronment to the trainees’ senses. For example, audio interfaces, gloves that provide a sense 
of touch, treadmills, or motion platforms create a realistic but artifi cial environment. 
 Devices also communicate information about the trainee’s movements to a computer.
Virtual reality is a practical choice for PPD, a business that provides research 
 services to pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies. Its employees are based 
in offi ces in 46 countries. Training effi ciency is important because time spent travel-
ing to and participating in traveling sessions is time that the employees cannot be 
billing PPD’s clients for services. PPD therefore hired a fi rm to create a 3D virtual 
training environment that includes a doctor’s offi ce, reception area, and training and 
conference rooms. Trainers and trainees alike create avatars to participate in this en-
vironment online. Not only has this method given employees faster, cheaper access 
to training, the participants say they prefer it to classroom training and feel more 
engaged in learning.27
Business Games and Case Studies
Training programs use business games and case studies to develop employees’ man-
agement skills. A case study is a detailed description of a situation that trainees study 
and discuss. Cases are designed to develop higher-order thinking skills, such as the 
ability to analyze and evaluate information. They also can be a safe way to encourage 
trainees to take appropriate risks, by giving them practice in weighing and acting on 
uncertain outcomes. There are many sources of case studies, including Harvard Busi-
ness School, the Darden Business School at the University of Virginia, and McGraw-
Hill publishing company.
With business games, trainees gather information, analyze it, and make decisions 
that infl uence the outcome of the game. To train salespeople in its Winning Major 
program, Humana assembles teams of fi ve trainees and has each team imagine it is 
a salesperson for a robotics company. Each team plays three rounds of simulations 
Avatars
Computer depictions 
of trainees, which the 
trainees manipulate in 
an online role-play.
Virtual Reality
A computer-based 
technology that provides 
an interactive, three-
dimensional learning 
experience.
Here an individual works within a virtual reality training lab during a recent coal mine  rescue 
simulation. Virtual reality is one way to provide an interactive learning experience for 
workers.

216 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
in which it handles issues from three imaginary clients. The team that generates the 
most revenue is declared the winner.28 Games stimulate learning because they actively 
involve participants and mimic the competitive nature of business. A realistic game 
may be more meaningful to trainees than presentation techniques such as classroom 
instruction.
Training with case studies and games requires that participants come together to 
discuss the cases or the progress of the game. This requires face-to-face or electronic 
meetings. Also, participants must be willing to be actively involved in analyzing the 
situation and defending their decisions.
Behavior Modeling
Research suggests that one of the most effective ways to teach interpersonal skills is 
through behavior modeling.29 This involves training sessions in which participants 
observe other people demonstrating the desired behavior, then have opportunities 
to practice the behavior themselves. For example, a training program could involve 
several days of four-hour sessions, each focusing on one interpersonal skill, such as 
communicating or coaching. At the beginning of each session, participants hear the 
reasons for using the key behaviors; then they watch a video of a model performing the 
key behaviors. They practice through role-playing and receive feedback about their 
performance. In addition, they evaluate the performance of the model in the video and 
discuss how they can apply the behavior on the job.
Experiential Programs
To develop teamwork and leadership skills, some organizations enroll their employees 
in a form of training called experiential programs. In experiential programs, partici-
pants learn concepts and then apply them by simulating the behaviors involved and 
analyzing the activity, connecting it with real-life situations.30 A training company 
called Pendaran offers its clients a three-day simulation of a golf cart factory at its of-
fi ces in Ann Arbor, Michigan. The program’s goal is to train workers and supervisors 
to think calmly and creatively under pressure. Some features might sound silly: the 
characters have fantastic names, workers must wear protective equipment while carry-
ing out tasks simulated on computers, and a toy vacuum represents a forklift. But as 
staffers bombard the participants with one challenge after another, the trainees come 
to appreciate the need to plan how they will meet job requirements, rather than simply 
react to one preventable crisis after another.31
Experiential training programs should follow several guidelines. A program should 
be related to a specifi c business problem. Participants should feel challenged and move 
outside their comfort zones but within limits that keep their motivation strong and 
help them understand the purpose of the program.
One form of experiential program, called adventure learning, uses challenging, 
structured outdoor activities, which may include diffi cult sports such as dogsledding 
or mountain climbing. Other activities may be structured tasks like climbing walls, 
completing rope courses, climbing ladders, or making “trust falls” (in which each 
trainee stands on a table and falls backward into the arms of other group members).
The impact of adventure learning programs has not been rigorously tested, but 
participants report they gained a greater understanding of themselves and the ways 
they interact with their co-workers. One key to the success of such programs may 
be that the organization needs to insist that entire work groups participate together. 
Experiential Programs
Training programs in 
which participants learn 
concepts and apply them 
by simulating behaviors 
involved and analyzing 
the activity, connecting it 
with real-life situations.
Adventure Learning
A teamwork and leader-
ship training program 
based on the use of 
challenging, structured 
outdoor activities.

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 217
This encourages people to see, discuss, and correct the kinds of behavior that keep the 
group from performing well.
Before requiring employees to participate in experiential programs, the organi-
zation should consider the possible drawbacks. Because these programs are usually 
physically demanding and often require participants to touch each other, companies 
face certain risks. Some employees may be injured or may feel that they were sexually 
harassed or that their privacy was invaded. Also, the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(discussed in Chapter 3) raises questions about requiring employees with disabilities to 
participate in physically demanding training experiences.
Team Training
A possible alternative to experiential programs is team training, which coordinates 
the performance of individuals who work together to achieve a common goal. An or-
ganization may benefi t from providing such training to groups when group members 
must share information and group performance depends on the performance of the 
individual group members. Examples include the military, nuclear power plants, and 
commercial airlines. In those work settings, much work is performed by crews, groups, 
or teams. Success depends on individuals’ coordinating their activities to make deci-
sions, perhaps in dangerous situations.
Ways to conduct team training include cross-training and coordination training.32 
In cross-training, team members understand and practice each other’s skills so that 
they are prepared to step in and take another member’s place. In a factory, for example, 
production workers could be cross-trained to handle all phases of assembly. This en-
ables the company to move them to the positions where they are most needed to 
complete an order on time.
Cross-Training
Team training in which 
team members under-
stand and practice each 
other’s skills so that they 
are prepared to step in 
and take another mem-
ber’s place.
One of the most important features of organizations today is teamwork. Experiential programs include team- 
building exercises like wall climbing and rafting to help build trust and cooperation among employees.

218 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Coordination training trains the team in how to share information and decisions 
to obtain the best team performance. This type of training is especially important for 
commercial aviation and surgical teams. Both of these kinds of teams must monitor 
different aspects of equipment and the environment, at the same time sharing infor-
mation to make the most effective decisions regarding patient care or aircraft safety 
and performance. One way to focus on teamwork behaviors is to have team members 
participate in an unfamiliar type of project. For example, a group of managers from 
Thermo Fisher Scientifi c divided into fi ve teams, each assigned to make one course for 
the night’s dinner. Each team was given the ingredients for a particular dish but not a 
recipe, and the group members had to fi gure out how they would solve the problem 
together. A similar type of learning occurs in a team training program called Dig This, 
which assigns teams to complete a mission using heavy construction equipment.33
Training may also target the skills needed by the teams’ leaders. Team leader 
training refers to training people in the skills necessary for team leadership. For ex-
ample, the training may be aimed at helping team leaders learn to resolve confl icts or 
coordinate activities.
Action Learning
Another form of group building is action learning. In this type of training, teams or 
work groups get an actual problem, work on solving it and commit to an action plan, and 
are accountable for carrying out the plan. Ideally, the project is one for which the efforts 
and results will be visible not only to participants but also to others in the organization. 
The visibility and impact of the task are intended to make participation exciting, rele-
vant, and engaging. At Automatic Data Processing, action learning assigns teams of 
10 managers to study a real business problem or opportunity facing the company and 
present recommendations to senior executives.34 To heighten learning, organizations 
can get their best leaders involved as mentors and coaches to the participants.
The effectiveness of action learning has not been formally evaluated. This type of 
training seems to result in a great deal of learning, however, and employees are able to 
apply what they learn because action learning involves actual problems the organiza-
tion is facing. The group approach also helps teams identify behaviors that interfere 
with problem solving.
Implementing the Training Program
Learning permanently changes behavior. For employees to acquire knowledge and 
skills in the training program, the training program must be implemented in a way that 
applies what is known about how people learn. Equally important, implemen tation 
of a training program should enable employees to transfer what they have learned to 
the workplace—in other words, employees should behave differently as a result of the 
training.
Principles of Learning
Researchers have identifi ed a number of ways employees learn best.35 Table 7.4 sum-
marizes ways that training can best encourage learning. In general, effective train-
ing communicates learning objectives clearly, presents information in distinctive and 
memorable ways, and helps trainees link the subject matter to their jobs.
Employees are most likely to learn when training is linked to their current job ex-
periences and tasks.36 There are a number of ways trainers can make this link. Training 
Coordination Training
Team training that 
teaches the team how 
to share information 
and make decisions to 
obtain the best team 
performance.
Team Leader Training
Training in the skills 
necessary for effectively 
leading the organiza-
tion’s teams.
Action Learning
Training in which teams 
get an actual problem, 
work on solving it and 
commit to an action 
plan, and are account-
able for carrying it out.
LO 7-6 Summarize how 
to implement a success-
ful training program.

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 219
sessions should present material using familiar concepts, terms, and examples. As far as 
possible, the training context—such as the physical setting or the images presented on 
a computer—should mirror the work environment. Along with physical elements, the 
context should include emotional elements. In the example of store personnel training 
to handle upset customers, the physical context is more relevant if it includes train-
ees acting out scenarios of personnel dealing with unhappy customers. The role-play 
interaction between trainees adds emotional realism and further enhances learning.
To fully understand and remember the content of the training, employees need a 
chance to demonstrate and practice what they have learned. Trainers should provide 
ways to actively involve the trainees, have them practice repeatedly, and have them com-
plete tasks within a time that is appropriate in light of the learning objectives. Practice 
requires physically carrying out the desired behaviors, not just describing them. Practice 
sessions could include role-playing interactions, fi lling out relevant forms, or operating 
machinery or equipment to be used on the job. The more the trainee practices these 
activities, the more comfortable he or she will be in applying the skills on the job. People 
tend to benefi t most from practice that occurs over several sessions, rather than one 
long practice session.37 For complex tasks, it may be most effective to practice a few 
skills or behaviors at a time, then combine them in later practice sessions.
Trainees need to understand whether or not they are succeeding. Therefore, train-
ing sessions should offer feedback. Effective feedback focuses on specifi c behaviors 
and is delivered as soon as possible after the trainees practice or demonstrate what 
TRAINING ACTIVITY
WAYS TO PROVIDE TRAINING ACTIVITY
Communicate the learning 
objective.
Demonstrate the performance to be expected.
Give examples of questions to be answered.
Use distinctive, attention-getting 
messages.
Emphasize key points.
Use pictures, not just words.
Limit the content of training.
Group lengthy material into chunks.
Provide a visual image of the course material.
Provide opportunities to repeat and practice material.
Guide trainees as they learn.
Use words as reminders about sequence of activities.
Use words and pictures to relate concepts to one another 
and to their context.
Prompt trainees to evaluate whether they understand and 
are using effective tactics to learn the material.
Elaborate on the subject.
Present the material in different contexts and settings.
Relate new ideas to previously learned concepts.
Practice in a variety of contexts and settings.
Provide memory cues.
Suggest memory aids.
Use familiar sounds or rhymes as memory cues.
Transfer course content to 
the workplace.
Design the learning environment so that it has elements 
in common with the workplace.
Require learners to develop action plans that apply 
training content to their jobs.
Use words that link the course to the workplace.
Provide feedback about 
performance.
Tell trainees how accurately and quickly they are 
performing their new skill.
Show how trainees have met the objectives of the training.
Sources: Adapted from R. M. Gagne, “Learning Processes and Instruction,” Training Research Journal 1 
(1995/96), pp. 17–28; and Traci Sitzmann, “Self-Regulating Online Course Engagement,” T&D, March 2010, 
Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
Table 7.4
Ways That Training Helps 
Employees Learn

220 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
they have learned.38 One way to do this is to videotape trainees, then show the video 
while indicating specifi c behaviors that do or do not match the desired outcomes of the 
training. Feedback should include praise when trainees show they have learned mate-
rial, as well as guidance on how to improve.
Well-designed training helps people remember the content. Training programs 
need to break information into chunks that people can remember. Research suggests 
that people can attend to no more than four to fi ve items at a time. If a concept or 
procedure involves more than fi ve items, the training program should deliver informa-
tion in shorter sessions or chunks.39 Other ways to make information more memorable 
include presenting it with visual images and practicing some tasks enough that they 
become automatic.
Written materials should have an appropriate reading level. A simple way to assess 
readability—the diffi culty level of written materials—is to look at the words being used 
and at the length of sentences. In general, it is easiest to read short sentences and simple, 
standard words. If training materials are too diffi cult to understand, several adjustments 
can help. The basic approach is to rewrite the material looking for ways to simplify it.
 • Substitute simple, concrete words for unfamiliar or abstract words.
 • Divide long sentences into two or more short sentences.
 • Divide long paragraphs into two or more short paragraphs.
 • Add checklists (like this one) and illustrations to clarify the text.
Another approach is to substitute video, hands-on learning, or other nonwritten 
methods for some of the written material. A longer-term solution is to use tests to 
identify employees who need training to improve their reading levels and to provide 
that training fi rst.
Transfer of Training
Ultimately, the goal of implementation is transfer of training, or on-the-job use of 
knowledge, skills, and behaviors learned in training. Transfer of training requires that 
employees actually learn the content of the training program. Then, for employees to 
apply what they learned, certain conditions must be in place: social support, technical 
support, and self-management.
Social support, as we saw in the discussion of readiness for training, includes support 
from the organization and from trainees’ peers. Before, during, and after implementation, 
the organization’s managers need to emphasize the importance of training, encourage 
their employees to attend training programs, and point out connections between training 
content and employees’ job requirements. The organization can formally provide peer 
support by establishing communities of practice—groups of employees who work 
together, learn from each other, and develop a common understanding of how to get 
work accomplished. It also may assign experienced employees to act as mentors, who 
provide advice and support to the trainees. Social support has been essential for transfer 
of training at hospitals teaching doctors to use electronic medical records, which can re-
duce errors and costs. For example, Good Samaritan Hospital in Vincennes, Indiana, had 
a tech-savvy radiologist conduct the training. At Deaconess Health System in Evansville, 
Indiana, the most effective motivation for reluctant physicians came from the doctors 
who received training early on and who would prod their colleagues to catch up.40
Transfer of training is greater when organizations also provide technical re-
sources that help people acquire and share information. Technical support may come 
from electronic performance support systems (EPSS), described earlier as a type of 
Readability
The difﬁ culty level of 
written materials.
Transfer of Training
On-the-job use of knowl-
edge, skills, and behav-
iors learned in training.
Communities of 
Practice
Groups of employees 
who work together, learn 
from each other, and de-
velop a common under-
standing of how to get 
work accomplished.

221
computer-based training. Knowledge management systems including online and data-
base tools also make it easy for employees to look up information they want to review 
or consult later.
Organizations are beginning to provide a strong combination of social and techni-
cal support for transfer of training by setting up social media applications that promote 
learning. When participants use social media to share with other employees what they 
are learning or discuss questions posted by the trainers, it can reinforce lessons and 
build the whole group’s motivation to learn. It also can blur the line between trainer 
and trainee, as employees share how they are applying principles in practical ways on 
the job. This expands the total knowledge shared, but it also poses a challenge to the 
trainers, because they give up some control over the training content.41 For an ex-
ample of a social-media tool that trainers are experimenting with, see “HRM Social.”
Finally, to ensure transfer of training, an organization’s training programs should 
prepare employees to self-manage their use of new skills and behaviors on the job.42 
To that end, the trainer should have trainees set goals for using skills or  behaviors on 
the job, identify conditions under which they might fail to use the skills and behaviors, 
and identify the consequences (positive and negative) of using them.  Employees should 
The Pinterest website does for social 
media what a bulletin board in the 
break room does for sharing mes-
sages in the workplace or a magnet-
covered refrigerator does for sharing 
artwork and shopping lists in a busy 
family. It is a place where users set 
up Pinboards where they post visual 
expressions and ideas for others to 
enjoy. Pinterest lets users organize 
these images according to the top-
ics they select, so the images are 
searchable by topic.
Training professionals are dis-
covering ways to use Pinterest in 
support of training objectives. They 
might pin pictures of ideas for proj-
ects or outlines for training courses. 
They might pin instructional videos 
or photos. They might get employ-
ees excited about participating in 
training programs by pinning pho-
tos of past events. Ahead of an 
event, they might post graphics 
containing questions or puzzles for 
the participants to think about and 
prepare to discuss. They also can 
conduct searches on Pinterest to 
gather fresh ideas for their training 
programs.
Trainers also can encourage 
learners to pin items to the training 
program’s Pinboard. For example, 
if the training includes simulations, 
games, or experiential learning, 
participants might have creations 
they can photograph. Or feedback 
forms might be made visually in-
teresting for participants to post 
on the Pinboard. If the training in-
volves a group project, participants 
can post their ideas on a shared 
Pinboard.
Consider, for example, how 
Pinterest could support training of 
newly hired employees. A compa-
ny’s Pinboard could show photos 
of employees at work on a typical 
day. It could include pictures of fa-
cilities such as conference rooms 
and break rooms, to help employ-
ees fi nd their way around. It can 
include links to information such 
as background about the company, 
employee 
contact 
information, 
profi les about key employees, and 
company blogs. Employees can 
visit Pinterest as an enjoyable and 
engaging way to get to know their 
new employer.
Questions
 1. How could photos of activities 
at a team-training event 
support transfer of training for 
the members of the team who 
participated?
 2. Besides setting up a Pinterest 
account, what kinds of 
technical support would 
trainers need to provide if they 
want to use Pinterest to aid 
transfer of training?
Sources: Kella B. Price, “Using Pinter-
est as a Training and Development Tool,” 
T+D, November 2013, pp. 76–77; Michelle 
Baker, “Pinterest for Onboarding: Part 
One,” Phase (Two) Learning, January 7, 
2013, http://phasetwolearning.wordpress.
com; Michelle Baker, “Pinterest for On-
boarding: Part Two,” Phase (Two) Learning, 
January 13, 2013, http://phasetwolearning.
wordpress.com.
Social Learning with Visual Impact on Pinterest
HRM Social

222 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
practice monitoring their use of the new skills and behaviors. The trainer should stress 
that learning to use new skills on the job is naturally diffi cult and will not necessarily 
proceed perfectly, but that employees should keep trying.  Trainers also should support 
managers and peers in fi nding ways to reward employees for  applying what they learned.
Measuring Results of Training
After a training program ends, or at intervals during an ongoing training program, or-
ganizations should ensure that the training is meeting objectives. The stage to prepare 
for evaluating a training program is when the program is being developed. Along with 
designing course objectives and content, the planner should identify how to measure 
achievement of objectives. Depending on the objectives, the evaluation can use one or 
more of the measures shown in Figure 7.3: trainee satisfaction with the program, knowl-
edge or abilities gained, use of new skills and behavior on the job (transfer of training), 
and improvements in individual and organizational performance. The usual way to mea-
sure whether participants have acquired information is to administer tests on paper or 
electronically.  Trainers or supervisors can observe whether participants demonstrate the 
desired skills and behaviors. Surveys measure changes in attitude. Changes in company 
performance have a variety of measures, many of which organizations keep track of for 
preparing performance appraisals, annual reports, and other routine documents in order 
to demonstrate the fi nal measure of success shown in Figure 7.3: return on investment.
Evaluation Methods
To measure whether the conditions are in place for transfer of training, the organiza-
tion can ask employees three questions about specifi c training-related tasks:
 1. Do you perform the task?
 2. How many times do you perform the task?
 3. To what extent do you perform diffi cult and challenging learned tasks?
Frequent performance of diffi cult training-related tasks would signal great opportunity 
to perform. If there is low opportunity to perform, the organization should conduct 
further needs assessment and reevaluate readiness to learn. Perhaps the organization 
does not fully support the training activities in general or the employee’s supervisor 
does not provide opportunities to apply new skills. Lack of transfer can also mean that 
employees have not learned the course material. The or-
ganization might offer a refresher course to give trainees 
more practice. Another reason for poor transfer of training 
is that the content of the training may not be important 
for the employee’s job.
Assessment of training also should evaluate training 
outcomes, that is, what (if anything) has changed as a result 
of the training. The relevant training outcomes are the 
ones related to the organization’s goals for the training 
and its overall performance. Possible outcomes include 
the following:
• 
Information such as facts, techniques, and procedures 
that trainees can recall after the training.
• 
Skills that trainees can demonstrate in tests or on the 
job.
LO 7-7 Evaluate the 
success of a training 
program.
Figure 7.3
Measures of Training 
Success

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 223
 • Trainee and supervisor satisfaction with the training program.
 • Changes in attitude related to the content of the  training (for example, concern for 
safety or tolerance of diversity).
 • Improvements in individual, group, or company performance (for example, greater 
customer satisfaction, more sales, fewer defects).
Training is a signifi cant part of many organizations’ budgets. Therefore,  economic 
measures are an important way to evaluate the success of a training program.  Businesses 
that invest in training want to achieve a high return on investment—the monetary bene-
fi ts of the investment compared to the amount invested, expressed as a percentage. For 
 example, Mayo Clinic provided training for its managers after it discovered that em-
ployees were quitting because of dissatisfaction with their  managers. After the training, 
 employee turnover rates improved. To determine the return on the investment in the 
training, Mayo’s human resource department calculated that one-third of the employ-
ees retained (29 employees) would have left if the training had not  occurred. The 
department  calculated the cost of an employee leaving as 75% of average total com-
pensation, or $42,000 per employee. Multiplied by the number of employees ($42,000 
times 29), that is equivalent to lowering costs by $609,000. The training cost $125,000, 
so the company saved $484,000 by providing it. The return on investment would be 
$484,000 divided by $125,000, or an impressive 387%.43 Even if some of the estimates 
were wrong, Mayo’s HR department could feel confi dent in making a case that the 
training was benefi cial.
For any of these methods, the most accurate but most costly way to evaluate the 
training program is to measure performance, knowledge, or attitudes among all em-
ployees before the training and then train only part of the employees. After the train-
ing is complete, the performance, knowledge, or attitudes are again measured, and the 
trained group is compared with the untrained group. A simpler but less accurate way 
to assess the training is to conduct the pretest and posttest on all trainees, comparing 
their performance, knowledge, or attitudes before and after the training. This form of 
measurement does not rule out the possibility that change resulted from something 
other than training (for example, a change in the compensation system). The simplest 
approach is to use only a posttest. Use of only a posttest can show if trainees have 
reached a specifi ed level of competency, knowledge, or skill. Of course, this type of 
measurement does not enable accurate comparisons, but it may be suffi cient, depend-
ing on the cost and purpose of the training.
Applying the Evaluation
The purpose of evaluating training is to help with future decisions about the organiza-
tion’s training programs. Using the evaluation, the organization may identify a need 
to modify the training and gain information about the kinds of changes needed. The 
organization may decide to expand on successful areas of training and cut back on 
training that has not delivered signifi cant benefi ts.
A major producer of packaged foods has identifi ed both successes and needs for im-
provement after analyzing its training programs. The company began conducting man-
agement training for supervisors and treated the fi rst 12 months as a test of the program. 
After a year, the company determined that turnover rates were much lower among su-
pervisors who had received training. That difference was strongest among more recently 
hired supervisors and persisted even after the company made statistical adjustments for 
other possible infl uences on turnover. The company therefore  recommitted to its train-
ing goals for supervisors, especially targeting those hired most recently. In contrast, 

224
training had a minimal impact on safety performance at the company’s facilities. The 
training department concluded it would have to improve the safety component of the 
training program or replace it with a new approach to safety training.44 
Unfortunately—as described in “HR Oops!”—organizations often fail to gain the 
insights that come from careful evaluation of training. This leaves room for companies 
that take evaluation seriously to gain an edge over competitors by fully preparing their 
employees.
Applications of Training
Two training applications that have become widespread among U.S. companies are 
orientation of new employees and training in how to manage workforce diversity.
Orientation of New Employees
Many employees receive their fi rst training during their fi rst days on the job. This 
training is the organization’s orientation program—its training designed to prepare 
employees to perform their job effectively, learn about the organization, and establish 
work relationships. Organizations provide for orientation because, no matter how re-
alistic the information provided during employment interviews and site visits, people 
feel shock and surprise when they start a new job.45 Also, employees need to become 
LO 7-8 Describe training 
methods for employee 
orientation and diversity 
management.
Orientation
Training designed to 
prepare employees to 
perform their jobs effec-
tively, learn about their 
organization, and estab-
lish work relationships.
In a recent survey of more than 
200 chief learning offi cers, roughly 
three-quarters of them reported a 
need to improve their company’s 
measurement of training effective-
ness. Worse, the numbers have 
been heading in the wrong direction. 
In four years of asking this question, 
the researchers have seen the share 
of executives who are satisfi ed with 
measurement decline, while the dis-
satisfi ed share has been rising.
One source of dissatisfaction 
may be that the most common mea-
surements used at respondents’ 
companies are not directly tied to 
business success. Most compa-
nies measure the amount of training 
they do: number of courses, num-
ber of students, hours of training. 
A majority of companies also ask 
participants if they are satisfi ed with 
training they participated in. Less 
than half ask about employee per-
formance or impact of the training 
on the company’s business results.
In this context, training profession-
als can give their company an edge by 
linking training programs to business 
strategy. Ideally, whenever consider-
ing a training program, they would 
start by determining how the compa-
ny’s performance should change as a 
result of the employees learning new 
information or skills. They would es-
tablish training content to make that 
performance improvement possible, 
and they would measure whether the 
desired results indeed have followed 
the training program.
Questions
 1. Suppose you are a training 
leader at a manufacturing 
company, and you have been 
asked to deliver a report about 
the value of your department’s 
work. You report the number 
of training hours provided by 
your staff and the number 
of employees trained. How 
do you think the company’s 
business managers would 
react to this report?
 2. Give examples of a few 
measures that might be more 
relevant to these managers.
Sources: Cushing Anderson, “Bad 
Meas urement Affects Training Impact,” 
Chief Learning Ofﬁ cer, May 2014, 
pp. 44–46; James D. Kirkpatrick and 
Wendy K. Kirkpatrick, “Creating a 
Post-Training Evaluation Plan,” T+D, 
June 2013, pp. 26–28; David Zahn, “No 
Excuse for Not Measuring Training’s 
Impact,” Connecticut News, June 10, 
2013, http://blog.ctnews.com.
Training Executives Are Unimpressed with Their 
Measurement Processes
HR Oops!

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 225
familiar with job tasks and learn the details of the organization’s practices, policies, and 
procedures. A well-designed orientation program also can strengthen employees’ 
commitment to the organization by connecting them to co-workers and showing them 
early on how their work contributes to the company’s mission.
The objectives of orientation programs include making new employees familiar 
with the organization’s rules, policies, and procedures. Table 7.5 summarizes the con-
tent of a typical orientation program. Such a program provides information about the 
overall company and about the department in which the new employee will be work-
ing. The topics include social as well as technical aspects of the job. Miscellaneous in-
formation helps employees from out of town learn about the surrounding community.
While these orientation basics could easily be covered in a classroom setting, some 
trainers doubt whether that approach adequately engages new employees. For example, 
when Hyatt Hotels adopted an HR strategy emphasizing teamwork, the company rede-
signed its orientation program to put the new values in practice from the fi rst day on the 
job. Each new employee is partnered with a more experienced co-worker, who greets 
the new employee and teaches about the job and facility. At some hotels, new employees 
learn their way around by going on a scavenger hunt with their training partner.46
Orientation programs may combine various training methods, such as printed and 
audiovisual materials, classroom instruction, on-the-job training, and e-learning. De-
cisions about how to conduct the orientation depend on the type of material to be 
covered and the number of new employees, among other factors. 
Diversity Training
In response to Equal Employment Opportunity laws and market forces, many organi-
zations today are concerned about managing diversity—creating an environment that 
Company-level information
Company overview (e.g., values, history, mission)
Key policies and procedures
Compensation
Employee beneﬁ ts and services
Safety and accident prevention
Employee and union relations
Physical facilities
Economic factors
Customer relations
Department-level information
Department functions and philosophy
Job duties and responsibilities
Policies, procedures, rules, and regulations
Performance expectations
Tour of department
Introduction to department employees
Miscellaneous
Community
Housing
Family adjustment
Source: J. L. Schwarz and M. A. Weslowski, “Employee Orientation: What Employers Should Know,” 
 Journal of Contemporary Business Issues, Fall 1995, p. 48. Used with permission.
Table 7.5
Content of a Typical 
Orientation Program

226 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
allows all employees to contribute to organizational 
goals and experience personal growth. This kind of 
environment includes access to jobs as well as fair 
and positive treatment of all employees. Chapter 3 
described how organizations manage diversity by 
complying with the law. Besides these efforts, many 
organizations provide training designed to teach 
employees attitudes and behaviors that support the 
management of diversity, such as appreciation of 
cultural differences and avoidance of behaviors that 
isolate or intimidate others.
Training designed to change employee attitudes 
about diversity and/or develop skills needed to work 
with a diverse workforce is called diversity training. 
These programs generally emphasize either attitude 
awareness and change or behavior change.
Programs that focus on attitudes have objectives 
to increase participants’ awareness of cultural and 
ethnic differences, as well as differences in personal 
characteristics and physical characteristics (such as 
disabilities). These programs are based on the as-
sumption that people who become aware of differ-
ences and their stereotypes about those differences 
will be able to avoid letting stereotypes infl uence 
their interactions with people. Many of these pro-
grams use video and experiential exercises to increase employees’ awareness of the 
negative emotional and performance effects of stereotypes and resulting behaviors on 
members of minority groups. A risk of these programs—especially when they defi ne 
diversity mainly in terms of race, ethnicity, and sex—is that they may alienate white 
male employees, who conclude that if the company values diversity more, it values 
them less.47 Diversity training is more likely to get everyone onboard if it emphasizes 
respecting and valuing all the organization’s employees in order to bring out the best 
work from everyone to open up the best opportunities for everyone.
Programs that focus on behavior aim at changing the organizational policies and 
individual behaviors that inhibit employees’ personal growth and productivity. Some-
times these programs identify incidents that discourage employees from working up to 
their potential. Employees work in groups to discuss specifi c promotion opportunities 
or management practices that they believe were handled unfairly. Another approach 
starts with the assumption that all individuals differ in various ways and teaches skills 
for constructively handling the communication barriers, confl icts, and misunderstand-
ings that necessarily arise when different people try to work together.48 Trainees may 
be more positive about receiving this type of training than other kinds of diversity 
training. Finally, some organizations provide diversity training in the form of cultural 
immersion, sending employees directly into communities where they have to interact 
with persons from different cultures, races, and nationalities. Participants might talk 
with community members, work in community organizations, or learn about events 
that are signifi cant to the community they visit. Sometimes cultural immersion comes 
with the job. At a large Japanese automaker, Japanese, U.S., and Mexican employees 
often had to interact but frequently fell victim to misunderstandings. The company 
hired a training consultant to develop a different classroom training program for each 
Diversity Training
Training designed to 
change employee at-
titudes about diversity 
and/or develop skills 
needed to work with a 
diverse workforce.
Diversity training programs, like the one conducted by Harvard Pilgrim 
Health Care, are designed to teach employees attitudes and behaviors 
that support the management of diversity. Why is it important for com-
panies to provide this type of training?

THINKING ETHICALLY
INTERNSHIPS: OPPORTUNITY OR 
EXPLOITATION?
For many college students, an important summer expe-
rience is completing an internship and seeing fi rsthand 
the career they hope to pursue. The pay might be some-
what below the entry-level rate for a full-time employee, 
but the interns get practice they hope will aid in their job 
search after graduation. Some employers, however, do 
not even pay a low wage; they expect their interns to 
work for free.
The idea of working for little or no pay has been 
justifi ed on the grounds that the internship experience 
is valuable training. Schools that agree may provide 
course credit for an internship. However, some students 
and schools are questioning that argument. Survey data 
from the National Association of Colleges and Employ-
ers showed nearly the same rate of hiring for graduates 
with no internships and those with unpaid internships. 
(Students with paid internships on their résumés were 
hired at a higher rate.)
Employers that want to offer unpaid internships need 
to meet legal requirements. Under the Fair Labor Stan-
dards Act, an unpaid internship must be educational and 
may not exist for the direct benefi t of the employer. In 
addition, the company may not hire unpaid interns as re-
placements for paid employees. State laws may impose 
further requirements. In New York, for example, em-
ployers must sacrifi ce some productivity for the sake of 
providing training to the interns, and the training should 
CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 227
group, focusing on the other groups’ cultural expectations and ways to communicate 
effectively. She also coached employees before they went on international assignments. 
The training program was well received because it helped employees avoid confl ict.49
Does diversity training yield improvements in business performance? So far, re-
search has not demonstrated a direct relationship.50 Training may, however, contrib-
ute to the kind of environment in which diversity can enhance performance because 
people learn from one another’s differences. This is most likely when diversity training 
is part of management’s long-term commitment to managing diversity because the 
company’s leaders consider diversity to be an opportunity for employees to learn from 
one another, work in a supportive environment, and acquire teamwork skills. In other 
words, successful diversity programs are not merely a training topic but part of an 
organizational culture that expresses its appreciation for diversity also through other 
actions, including recruiting, hiring, and developing diverse employees.51
Some organizations are getting it right. At the Oregon Center for Nursing, many 
of the nurses are eager to learn how to provide better care to patients who come from 
different cultures. The organization hosts online seminars on cultural backgrounds 
represented in the area, including Latino, Burmese, and Somali/Bantu people. The 
training also provides general guidelines for identifying relevant cultural differences 
so that nurses can apply the principles to cultural groups they haven’t specifi cally stud-
ied. In contrast, at a big-box retail chain, diversity training had to start by convincing 
employees of the need for training. The store had launched a strategy calling for im-
proved customer service, and employees were demonstrating that they were learning 
the lessons taught in sales training programs, but sales were not improving. Research 
showed that the problem lay with the assumptions salespeople were making: they 
were operating according to stereotypes about which types of customers would make 
a purchase, and they were ignoring customers who didn’t fi t the right profi le. The 
retailer studied purchase data and was able to show salespeople that their assumptions 
were false. The company developed new training that focused on confronting and cor-
recting the stereotypes. Salespeople began to apply these new lessons, and sales soon 
began to climb.52

cover skills that apply beyond the particular job at the 
particular company. For-profi t companies that do not 
meet the requirements for an unpaid internship must pay 
at least minimum wage plus a higher rate for overtime. In 
some publicized cases, interns have fi led lawsuits against 
companies they say did not meet those requirements.
At least until recently, unpaid internships were com-
mon in some industries, such as fashion, entertainment, 
and publishing. However, with the negative attention, 
some employers have pulled back from the practice—
either ending their internships or beginning to pay for 
positions that had been unpaid. Nevertheless, espe-
cially in the case of employers that pay interns at least 
minimum wage, advocates of internship continue to 
say these programs provide valuable preparation for 
careers. One way to check whether internships can 
withstand legal scrutiny is to consider the organiza-
tion’s purpose for creating these programs—whether 
it is to deliver training or to fi ll positions inexpensively.
Questions
 1. Suppose a publishing company wants to hire an 
intern to help the company catch up with its pa-
perwork over the summer. Who would be affected 
by this decision? What would be the benefi ts or 
harm to each person?
 2. How could a well-designed training program 
help make this idea meet ethical as well as legal 
standards?
Sources: J. Corey Asay, “How to Keep Your Unpaid Intern-
ship Program Legal,” Lexology, May 22, 2014, http://www
.lexology.com; Gale Scott, “Pressure Rises on Businesses 
to Pay Interns,” Crain’s New York Business, May 13, 2014, 
http://www.crainsnewyork.com; Rachel Feintzeig and 
 Melissa Korn, “Colleges, Employers Rethink Internship 
Policies,” The Wall Street Journal, April 22, 2014, http://
online.wsj.com.
228 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
SUMMARY
LO 7-1 Discuss how to link training programs to organi-
zational needs.
• Organizations need to establish training programs 
that are effective—in other words, programs that 
(1)  teach what they are designed to teach and 
(2) teach skills and behaviors that will help the or-
ganization achieve its goals.
• Organizations create such programs through in-
structional design.
• The steps in this process are to conduct a 
needs assessment, ensure readiness for train-
ing (including employee characteristics and 
organizational support), plan a training pro-
gram, implement the program, and evaluate the 
results.
LO 7-2 Explain how to assess the need for training.
• Needs assessment consists of an organization 
analysis, person analysis, and task analysis.
• The organization analysis determines the appro-
priateness of training by evaluating the character-
istics of the organization, including its strategy, 
resources, and management support.
• The person analysis determines individuals’ needs 
and readiness for training.
• The task analysis identifi es the tasks, knowledge, 
skills, and behaviors that training should em-
phasize. It is based on examination of the con-
ditions in which tasks are performed, including 
equipment and environment of the job, time con-
straints, safety considerations, and performance 
standards.
LO 7-3 Explain how to assess employees’ readiness for 
training.
• Readiness for training is a combination of em-
ployee characteristics and positive work environ-
ment that permit training.
• The necessary employee characteristics include 
ability to learn the subject matter, favorable at-
titudes toward the training, and motivation to 
learn.
• A positive work environment avoids situational 
constraints such as lack of money and time. In a 
positive environment, both peers and manage-
ment support training.
LO 7-4 Describe how to plan an effective training 
program.
• Planning begins with establishing training objec-
tives, which should defi ne an expected performance 
or outcome, the desired level of performance, 
and the conditions under which the performance 
should occur.
• Based on the objectives, the planner decides who 
will provide the training, what topics the training 
will cover, what training methods to use, and how 
to evaluate the training.

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 229
• Even when organizations purchase outside train-
ing, someone in the organization, usually a mem-
ber of the HR department, often is responsible for 
training administration.
• The training methods selected should be related 
to the objectives and content of the training 
program.
• Training methods may include presentation 
methods, hands-on methods, or group-building 
methods.
LO 7-5 Compare widely used training methods.
• Classroom instruction is most widely used and is 
one of the least expensive and least time-consum-
ing ways to present information on a specifi c topic 
to many trainees. It also allows for group interac-
tion and may include hands-on practice.
• Audiovisual and computer-based training (often 
called e-learning) need not require that trainees 
attend a class, so organizations can reduce time 
and money spent on training. Computer-based 
training may be interactive and may provide for 
group interaction.
• On-the-job training methods such as appren-
ticeships and internships give trainees fi rsthand 
experiences.
• A simulation represents a real-life situation, en-
abling trainees to see the effects of their decisions 
without dangerous or expensive consequences.
• Business games and case studies are other methods 
for practicing decision-making skills. Participants 
need to come together in one location or collabo-
rate online.
• Behavior modeling gives trainees a chance to ob-
serve desired behaviors, so this technique can be 
effective for teaching interpersonal skills.
• Experiential and adventure learning programs 
provide an opportunity for group members to 
interact in challenging circumstances but may ex-
clude members with disabilities.
• Team training focuses a team on achievement of a 
common goal.
• Action learning offers relevance, because the train-
ing focuses on an actual work-related problem.
LO7-6 Summarize how to implement a successful train-
ing program.
• Implementation should apply principles of learn-
ing and seek transfer of training.
• In general, effective training communicates learn-
ing objectives, presents information in distinctive 
and memorable ways, and helps trainees link the 
subject matter to their jobs.
• Employees are most likely to learn when training 
is linked to job experiences and tasks. Employees 
learn best when they demonstrate or practice what 
they have learned and when they receive feedback 
that helps them improve.
• Trainees remember information better when it is 
broken into small chunks, presented with visual 
images, and practiced many times. Written mate-
rials should be easily readable by trainees.
• Transfer of training is most likely when there is 
social support (from managers and peers), techni-
cal support, and self-management.
LO 7-7 Evaluate the success of a training program.
• Evaluation of training should look for transfer 
of training by measuring whether employees 
are performing the tasks taught in the training 
program.
• Assessment of training also should evaluate train-
ing outcomes, such as change in attitude, ability to 
perform a new skill, and recall of facts or behaviors 
taught in the training program.
• Training should result in improvement in the 
group’s or organization’s outcomes, such as cus-
tomer satisfaction or sales. An economic measure 
of training success is return on investment.
LO 7-8 Describe training methods for employee orienta-
tion and diversity management.
• Employee orientation is training designed to pre-
pare employees to perform their job effectively, 
learn about the organization, and establish work 
relationships.
• Organizations provide for orientation because, 
no matter how realistic the information provided 
during employment interviews and site visits, peo-
ple feel shock and surprise when they start a new 
job, and they need to learn the details of how to 
perform the job.
• A typical orientation program includes informa-
tion about the overall company and the depart-
ment in which the new employee will be working, 
covering social as well as technical aspects of the 
job.
• Orientation programs may combine several train-
ing methods, from printed materials to on-the-job 
training to e-learning.
• Diversity training is designed to change employee 
attitudes about diversity and/or develop skills 
needed to work with a diverse workforce.
• Evidence regarding these programs suggests that 
diversity training is most effective if it is part of 
management’s long-term commitment to man-
aging diversity as an opportunity for people to 
learn from one another and acquire teamwork 
skills.

230 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
KEY TERMS
training, 201
instructional design, 201
learning management system 
(LMS), 202
needs assessment, 203
organization analysis, 203
person analysis, 204
task analysis, 205
readiness for training, 206
e-learning, 212
electronic performance support 
system (EPSS), 213
on-the-job training (OJT), 213
apprenticeship, 213
internship, 214
simulation, 214
avatars, 215
virtual reality, 215
experiential programs, 216
adventure learning, 216
cross-training, 217
coordination training, 218
team leader training, 218
action learning, 218
readability, 220
transfer of training, 220
communities of practice, 220
orientation, 224
diversity training, 226
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. “Alicia!” bellowed David to the company’s HR spe-
cialist, “I’ve got a problem, and you’ve got to solve 
it. I can’t get people in this plant to work together 
as a team. As if I don’t have enough trouble with our 
competitors and our past-due accounts, now I have 
to put up with running a zoo. You’re responsible 
for seeing that the staff gets along. I want a training 
proposal on my desk by Monday.” Assume you are 
Alicia. (LO 7-1)
 a. Is training the solution to this problem? How 
can you determine the need for training?
 b. Summarize how you would conduct a needs 
assessment.
 2. How should an organization assess readiness for 
learning? In Question 1, how do David’s comments 
 suggest readiness (or lack of readiness) for  learning? 
(LO 7-2)
 3. Assume you are the human resource manager of a 
small seafood company. The general manager has 
told you that customers have begun complaining 
about the quality of your company’s fresh fi sh. Cur-
rently, training consists of senior fi sh cleaners show-
ing new employees how to perform the job. Assuming 
your needs assessment indicates a need for training, 
how would you plan a training program? What steps 
should you take in planning the program? (LO 7-4)
 4. Many organizations turn to e-learning as a less-ex-
pensive alternative to classroom training. What are 
some other advantages of substituting e-learning 
for classroom training? What are some disadvan-
tages? (LO 7-5)
 5. Suppose the managers in your organization tend 
to avoid delegating projects to the people in their 
groups. As a result, they rarely meet their goals. A 
training needs analysis indicates that an appropriate 
solution is training in management skills. You have 
identifi ed two outside training programs that are 
consistent with your goals. One program involves 
experiential programs, and the other is an interac-
tive computer program. What are the strengths and 
weaknesses of each technique? Which would you 
choose? Why? (LO 7-5)
 6. Consider your current job or a job you recently 
held. What types of training did you receive for the 
job? What types of training would you like to re-
ceive? Why? (LO 7-5)
 7. A manufacturing company employs several main-
tenance employees. When a problem occurs with 
the equipment, a maintenance employee receives 
a description of the symptoms and is supposed to 
locate and fi x the source of the problem. The com-
pany recently installed a new, complex electronics 
system. To prepare its maintenance workers, the 
company provided classroom training. The trainer 
displayed electrical drawings of system compo-
nents and posed problems about the system. The 
trainer would point to a component in a drawing 
and ask, “What would happen if this component 
were faulty?” Trainees would study the diagrams, 
describe the likely symptoms, and discuss how to 
repair the problem. If you were responsible for this 
company’s training, how would you evaluate the 
success of this training program? (LO 7-6)
 8. In Question 7, suppose the maintenance supervi-
sor has complained that trainees are having dif-
fi culty trouble shooting problems with the new 
electronics system. They are spending a great deal 
of time on problems with the system and com-
ing to the supervisor with frequent questions that 
show a lack of understanding. The supervisor 

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 231
is convinced that the employees are motivated 
to learn the system, and they are well qualifi ed. 
What do you think might be the problems with 
the current training program? What recommen-
dations can you make for improving the program? 
(LO 7-7)
 9. Who should be involved in orientation of new em-
ployees? Why would it not be appropriate to pro-
vide employee orientation purely online? (LO 7-8)
 10. Why do organizations provide diversity training? 
What kinds of goals are most suitable for such 
training? (LO 7-8)
How MasTec’s Training Helps Keep Workers Safe
The top management of MasTec Utility Services 
Group has defi ned one of its competitive challenges 
as fi nding and keeping the best employees. MasTec 
works as a contractor for utilities, constructing and 
maintaining systems for delivering electricity, oil, 
natural gas, and communications signals. The work 
is diffi cult and often dangerous, so a key area of com-
petence is working safely under stressful conditions. 
A company whose employees work safely not only 
is more socially responsible, but also operates with 
lower costs.
Under John Congemi as director of employee de-
velopment, MasTec set out to develop a “culture of 
learning,” with training programs that would enable 
workers to be safe as well as skilled at their jobs. When 
Congemi joined MasTec, he was new to the utility con-
struction industry, so he started by visiting construc-
tion sites and meeting with operations managers and 
safety professionals. This helped him understand work-
place challenges, and it built credibility for the training 
program.
Congemi and his employee development team es-
tablished three main objectives: (1)  develop a cur-
riculum for employee orientation; (2)  implement a 
learning management system (LMS); and (3) start an 
apprenticeship program for line workers. Each divi-
sion at MasTec had been following its own approach 
to orientation, but Congemi’s group worked with the 
company’s safety team to identify the skills most impor-
tant for protecting workers throughout the company. 
For each skill, the company is developing English- and 
Spanish-language videos showing workers using the 
skills in the fi eld.
MasTec’s new LMS is designed to improve the ef-
fi ciency of and access to training. It makes training 
materials available online, so the company no longer 
requires a trainer on-site every time an employee needs 
to learn a skill. The LMS also will be a more effi cient 
and accurate way to keep track of who is participating 
in each training program, as well as give employees in-
formation about training requirements.
The apprenticeship program links training to pro-
motions and pay increases. Line workers who complete 
the program earn certifi cates from MasTec and the 
U.S. Department of Labor, along with the job title of 
lineman. The curriculum for this three- to four-year 
program covers technical skills and safe work practices 
in installing, maintaining, and removing transmission 
and distribution systems. To create the training, Mas-
Tec worked with a training contractor that specializes 
in utility construction, so that the program would meet 
industry standards while applying the lessons to Mas-
Tec’s operations. The apprenticeship combines on-the-
job training with videos and instructor-led classroom 
training. Supervisors must validate that employees are 
applying their lessons on the job. At the end of each 
year, apprentices who have successfully met the year’s 
requirements receive a pay increase, as well as feedback 
about their progress.
Questions
 1. Based on the information given, what issues did 
Congemi and his employee development group 
consider that would be part of a needs assessment 
and readiness for training?
 2. What training methods are described in this case? 
Would you recommend MasTec use other training 
methods besides these for its line workers? Why or 
why not?
Sources: MasTec, company website, http://www.mastec.com, accessed May 
29, 2014; John Congemi, “Journey to a Culture of Learning,” Training, 
January 2014, www.trainingmag.com; John Congemi, “Part 2: MasTec’s 
Apprenticeship Mission,” Training, March 2014, www.trainingmag.com; 
John Congemi, “Part 3: MasTec Overhauls Onboarding,” Training, May 
2014, www.trainingmag.com. 
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY

232 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Hewlett-Packard Builds Its Own “University”
When Meg Whitman became CEO of struggling 
Hewlett-Packard, she was determined to rekindle growth 
with a strategy of resurrecting and refurbishing HP’s 
reputation for technological excellence. This involves 
treating employees as assets to be managed so their 
value to the organization will grow. Whitman charged 
Tracy Keogh, HP’s executive vice president of human 
resources, with crafting a plan for talent management.
Keogh’s approach is to align training activities that 
bring employees up to speed in their current jobs with 
development efforts that prepare employees to fi ll va-
cancies expected to arise in the future. Previously, HP 
treated training and development as separate functions. 
Now it makes them part of a continuous process.
To carry out this process, Keogh had to identify the 
learning needs of 300,000 employees handling 19 busi-
ness functions in more than 100 countries. For that mas-
sive task, Keogh decided that all learning should take place 
within one system, named HP University. HP University 
comprises career paths and learning requirements, as well 
as physical training centers and online course offerings. 
At its website, employees identify training needed for a 
career path, search for resources, and register for courses. 
The site also gathers data about system usage.
To plan and implement HP University, Keogh’s 
group organized learning content into nine “colleges,” 
such as engineering and sales. They designed an on-
line course catalog and a web portal where users can 
gather information and sign up for training. After test-
ing their work on groups of employees, they refi ned the 
system. Next, they trained the training staff in the use 
of HP University, so the staffers could train HP’s busi-
ness managers. The system launched in 2012 with about 
10,000 courses. During the fi rst week, the site logged 
nearly 80,000 visits. By year-end, employees had ac-
cessed a course 2.7 million times, representing an 8% 
growth over the previous year. User comments were 
full of praise. Based on feedback, Keogh’s group began 
planning additional courses, as well as refi nements to 
the system.
Although HP offers other formats, most courses 
(84%) involve online learning. For example, to train its 
sales force, HP hired viaLearning to create games that 
teach HP’s sales strategy and competencies. The com-
pany chose “metaphor-based” games, in which demon-
strating knowledge helps the learner solve a problem 
portrayed on the screen, such as winning an Olympics 
competition or quelling the “storm” of a confused cus-
tomer. After two to fi ve minutes spent obtaining in-
formation, the trainee uses that information to play 
the game. HP training manager Carol Cohen says the 
games make learning more interesting, so salespeople 
are motivated to learn. Cohen also notes that the meta-
phor format is readily adaptable into different languages 
and even different content areas.
Questions
 1. What aspects of HP University effectively link 
training to the organization’s needs?
 2. Hewlett-Packard is a technology company, yet 
it turned to a contractor to create computerized 
training games. Evaluate the pros and cons of using 
a contractor in that situation.
Sources: Hewlett-Packard, “Global Citizenship: HP People,” http://www8.
hp.com, accessed May 29, 2014; “2013 Chief Learning Offi cer Learning in 
Practice Awards,” Chief Learning Offi cer, December 2013, pp. 33–53; Chuck 
Battipede, “HP University Supports Company Journey,” T+D, August 
2013, pp. 32–37; Chanin Ballance, “HP Is Playing Learning Games,” Chief 
Learning Offi cer, May 3, 2013, http://www.clomedia.com. 
MANAGING TALENT
How Nick’s Pizza Delivers Training Results
At fi rst glance, Nick’s Pizza & Pub sounds as ordi-
nary as a company can be: a pizza restaurant with two 
 locations, each in one of Chicago’s northwest suburbs. 
But when you take a look at the company’s performance 
measures, something special seems to be going on. In 
an industry where 200% employee turnover and op-
erating profi ts around 6   1 _ 
2  % are normal, Nick’s has to 
replace only 20% of its employees each year and enjoys 
operating profi ts of 14% or more. These results are 
amazing, especially for a business in which 4 out of 10 
employees are high school students.
What makes the difference? It could be the culture 
at Nick’s. Rather than hiring expert managers and lay-
ing down a lot of rules, Nick’s is choosy about who gets 
hired for every position and then provides them with 
enough training to operate skillfully and exercise sound 
judgment. The whole training program emphasizes 
ways to develop trustworthy, dedicated employees.
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 233
Training at Nick’s begins with a two-day orientation 
program. Trainees learn the company’s purpose, values, 
and culture, and they participate in role-playing activi-
ties to practice those lessons. Then it’s on to skills train-
ing, beginning with a course called simply 101. During 
that four-hour hands-on lesson in the kitchen, all the 
new employees—regardless of what their future job will 
be— learn to make a pizza. From there, the trainees di-
vide into work groups for the next level of training. In 
201, these groups of trainees embark on longer-term 
training to be certifi ed in performing a particular job. 
For example, an employee might train in pizza making 
for a few weeks until he or she earns a certifi cation as a 
pizza maker.
Class 201 ends the mandatory training, but Nick’s 
provides incentives for further learning. An employee 
can participate in additional 201 courses to learn more 
jobs and earn a pay increase. An employee who earns 
two more certifi cations (say, one in salad making and 
one in sandwich preparation) enjoys a wage increase of 
75 cents an hour—and the prestige of exchanging the 
uniform’s tan hat for a red hat. Some employees earn 
nine certifi cations, after which their pay rises another 
$2 an hour, and they get to wear a black hat with their 
uniform.
Yet another level of training prepares employees to 
be trainers themselves. This level—301—prepares em-
ployees to earn a top skill rating in their areas of certifi -
cation. Besides these task-oriented skills, the employees 
receive training in communication and leadership and 
study a book called Mastery: The Keys to Success and Long-
Term Fulfi llment by George Leonard. Employees who 
complete these requirements receive a Leadership 301 
Passport, which includes a checklist of behaviors they 
are expected to model for the employees they lead. 
During the weeks that follow, they watch for situations 
in which they or others are exhibiting each behavior, 
jotting down descriptions of what they witnessed. When 
the listed behaviors have all been observed and noted, 
the participants take a course in training, and they fi -
nally are ready to be named trainers themselves.
Along with these formal training programs, Nick’s 
provides further on-the-job learning through coaching 
by managers and trainers. The goal is to provide feed-
back in the moment, not waiting for performance ap-
praisal meetings. For example, at the end of each shift, 
trainers will ask trainees to identify one thing they did 
well that day and one thing they would like to improve. 
In addition, managers are taught to observe employees’ 
behavior on the job and ask themselves whether what 
they see would make them want to hire the employee. If 
yes, the manager is expected to give immediate positive 
feedback. If no, the manager is expected to coach the 
employee on how to do better.
Questions
 1. To the extent that you can provide details from the 
information given and a visit to the Nick’s Pizza 
 website (www.nickspizzapub.com), prepare a needs 
assessment for training kitchen staff at Nick’s. Re-
member to include organization, person, and task 
analyses.
 2. How does the work environment support training 
at Nick’s? In what additional ways, besides those 
described, could the work environment support 
training?
 3. Do you think an outside contractor could provide 
training for Nick’s as effectively as its current meth-
ods do? Why or why not? Are there some types or 
topics of training for which a contractor might be 
appropriate? If so, which ones?
Sources: Nick’s Pizza & Pub corporate website, www.nickspizzapub .com, 
accessed March 15, 2012; and based on Bo Burlingham, “Lessons from a 
 Blue-Collar Millionaire,” Inc., February 2010, www.inc.com.
 1. Tristan Lejeune, “To Close Skills Gap, Employers Need to 
‘Get Off the Bench,’” Employee Benefi t News, April 1, 2013, 
p. 10; Tanya A. Mulvey and Jennifer Schramm, “Educational 
Qualifi cations in Tomorrow’s Job Market,” Chief Learning 
Offi cer, December 2013, pp. 66–68.
 2. “Microsoft Corporation: Pitch Perfect,” Training, March 
2014, EBSCOhost, http://web.b.ebscohost.com.
 3. R. Noe, Employee Training and Development, 6th ed. (New 
York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2013).
 4. Ryann K. Ellis, A Field Guide to Learning Management Systems, 
Learning Circuits (American Society for Training & Devel-
opment, 2009), accessed at http://www.astd.org.
 5. Noe, Employee Training and Development; E. A. Surface, 
“Training Needs Assessment: Aligning Learning and 
Capability with Performance Requirements and Organiza-
tional Objectives,” in The Handbook of Work Analysis: Meth-
ods, Systems, Applications and Science of Work Measurement in 
Organizations, eds. M. A. Wilson, W. Bennett, S. G. Gibson, 
and G. M. Alliger (New York: Routledge Academic, 2012), 
pp. 437–62.
 6. J. Z. Rouillier and I. L. Goldstein, “Determinants of the 
Climate for Transfer of Training” (presented at Society of 
Industrial/Organizational Psychology meetings, St. Louis, 
MO, 1991); J. S. Russell, J. R. Terborg, and M. L. Powers, 
“Organizational Performance and Organizational Level 
Training and Support,” Personnel Psychology 38 (1985), 
pp. 849–63; H. Baumgartel, G. J. Sullivan, and L. E. Dunn, 
“How Organizational Climate and Personality Affect the 
NOTES

234 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Payoff from Advanced Management Training Sessions,” Kan-
sas Business Review 5 (1978), pp. 1–10.
 7. E. F. Holton III and C. Bailey, “Top-to-Bottom Curricu-
lum Redesign,” Training and Development, March 1995, 
pp. 40–44.
 8. Eric Spiegel, “Making Science and Math a Priority,” Boston 
Globe, December 9, 2011, http://www.boston.com; Lucia 
Mutikani, “So Many U.S. Manufacturing Jobs, So Few 
Skilled Workers,” Reuters, October 13, 2011, http://www
.reuters.com; Steve Hargreaves, “Americans Lacking in 
Basic Skills,” CNNMoney, October 29, 2013, http://money
.cnn.com.
 9. R. A. Noe, “Trainees’ Attributes and Attitudes: Neglected In-
fl uences on Training Effectiveness,” Academy of Management 
Review 11 (1986), pp. 736–49; T. T. Baldwin, R. T. Magjuka, 
and B. T. Loher, “The Perils of Participation: Effects of 
Choice on Trainee Motivation and Learning,” Personnel Psy-
chology 44 (1991), pp. 51–66; S. I. Tannenbaum, J. E. Mathieu, 
E. Salas, and J. A. Cannon-Bowers, “Meeting Trainees’ Ex-
pectations: The Infl uence of Training Fulfi llment on the De-
velopment of Commitment, Self-Effi cacy, and Motivation,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 76 (1991), pp. 759–69.
 10. L. H. Peters, E. J. O’Connor, and J. R. Eulberg, “Situational 
Constraints: Sources, Consequences, and Future Consider-
ations,” in Research in Personnel and Human Resource Manage-
ment, eds. K. M. Rowland and G. R. Ferris (Greenwich, CT: 
JAI Press, 1985), vol. 3, pp. 79–114; E. J. O’Connor, L. H. 
Peters, A. Pooyan, J. Weekley, B. Frank, and B. Erenkranz, 
“Situational Constraints’ Effects on Performance, Affective 
Reactions, and Turnover: A Field Replication and Exten-
sion,” Journal of Applied Psychology 69 (1984), pp. 663–72; D. 
J. Cohen, “What Motivates Trainees?” Training and Develop-
ment Journal, November 1990, pp. 91–93; Russell, Terborg, 
and Powers, “Organizational Performance.”
 11. J. B. Tracey, S. I. Trannenbaum, and M. J. Kavanaugh, “Apply-
ing Trade Skills on the Job: The Importance of the Work En-
vironment,” Journal of Applied Psychology 80 (1995), pp. 239–52; 
P. E. Tesluk, J. L. Farr, J. E. Mathieu, and R. J. Vance, “Gener-
alization of Employee Involvement Training to the Job Set-
ting: Individuals and Situational Effects,” Personnel Psychology 
48 (1995), pp. 607–32; J. K. Ford, M. A. Quinones, D. J. Sego, 
and J. S. Sorra, “Factors Affecting the Opportunity to Per-
form Trained Tasks on the Job,” Personnel Psychology 45 (1992), 
pp. 511–27.
 12. B. Mager, Preparing Instructional Objectives, 2nd ed. (Belmont, 
CA: Lake, 1984); B. J. Smith and B. L. Delahaye, How to Be an 
Effective Trainer, 2nd ed. (New York: Wiley, 1987).
 13. “2013 Training Industry Report,” Training, November/De-
cember 2011, pp. 22–35.
 14. Ibid., p. 30.
 15. Jennifer J. Salopek, “Learning Has a Seat at the Table,” 
T 1 D, October 2011, pp. 49–50.
 16. Karina Gonzalez, “iPad a Training Tool at Twin City Hotel,” 
Pantagraph.com (Bloomington, IL), March 7, 2012, http://
www.pantagraph.com.
 17. “Best Practices and Outstanding Initiatives,” Training, Janu-
ary/February 2011, EBSCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 18. American Society for Training and Development, Learn-
ing 
Circuits: 
Glossary, 
http://www.astd.org/LC/glossary.
htm, accessed March 16, 2012; Katie Kuehner-Hebert, “Go 
 Mobile?” Chief Learning Offi cer, March 2014, pp. 18–21.
 19. Kuehner-Hebert, “Go Mobile?” pp. 19–20.
 20. U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Ad-
ministration (ETA), “At-a-Glance: Three Approaches to 
Apprenticeship Program Completion, Apprenticeship Final 
Rule, 29 CFR Part 29,” http://www.doleta.gov, accessed 
March 16, 2012; ETA, “Apprenticeship Final Rule Fact 
Sheet,” http://www.doleta.gov, accessed March 16, 2012; 
ETA, “At-a-Glance: Electronic Media in Related Instruction, 
Apprenticeship Final Rule, 29 CFR Part 29,” http://www.
doleta.gov, accessed March 16, 2012.
 21. Lauren Weber, “Apprenticeships Help Create Jobs. So Why 
Are They in Decline?” The Wall Street Journal, April 27, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com; C. Jeffrey Waddoups, “Union Cover-
age and Work-Related Training in the Construction Indus-
try,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 67 (2) (April 2014): 
532–55.
 22. “Apprenticeships Multiply at Volkswagen,” Chattanooga (TN) 
Times/Free Press, February 22, 2012, Business & Company 
Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com; Chatta-
nooga State Community College, “Automotive Mechatron-
ics Program (AMP),” last modifi ed February 17, 2012, http://
www.chattanoogastate.edu.
 23. Richard Rothschild, “Basic Chemistry? Paid Internships 
Tend to Yield Full-Time Jobs,” Workforce Management, Au-
gust 2011, Business & Company Resource Center, http://
galenet.galegroup.com.
 24. W. J. Rothwell and H. C. Kanzanas, “Planned OJT Is Pro-
ductive OJT,” Training and Development Journal, October 
1990, pp. 53–56.
 25. Doug Cameron, “Dreamliner’s Here: Now Learn to Fly It,” 
The Wall Street Journal, November 1, 2011, http://online.wsj.
com.
 26. T. Sitzmann, “A Meta-analytic Examination of the In-
structional Effectiveness of Computer-Based Simulation 
Games,” Personnel Psychology 64 (2011): 489–528; C. Cor-
nell, “Better Than the Real Thing?” Human Resource Execu-
tive,  August 2005, pp. 34–37; S. Boehle, “Simulations: The 
Next Generation of E-Learning,” Training, January 2005, 
pp. 22–31.
 27. Paul Harris, “Avatars Rule,” T+D, October 2013, pp. 58–61.
 28. Ladan Nikravan, “More than Fun and Games,” Chief Learn-
ing Offi cer, January 2012, pp. 20–21.
 29. G. P. Latham and L. M. Saari, “Application of Social Learn-
ing Theory to Training Supervisors through Behavior Mod-
eling,” Journal of Applied Psychology 64 (1979), pp. 239–46.
 30. D. Brown and D. Harvey, An Experiential Approach to Orga-
nizational Development (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
2000); Larissa Jõgi, review of The Handbook of Experiential 
Learning and Management Education, eds. Michael Reynolds 
and Russ Vince, Studies in the Education of Adults 40, no. 2 
(Autumn 2008): pp. 232–234, accessed at OCLC FirstSearch, 
http://newfi rstsearch.oclc.org.
 31. Ashlee Vance, “Inside a Job-Training Program That’s Just 
Hellacious Enough to Get Results,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
July 12, 2013, http://www.businessweek.com.
 32. J. Cannon-Bowers and C. Bowers, “Team Development and 
Functioning,” in Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psy-
chology, ed. S. Zedeck, volume 1 (Washington, DC: American 

CHAPTER 7 
Training Employees 235
Psychological Association, 2011) pp. 597–650; L. Delise, C. 
Gorman, A. Brooks, J. Rentsch, and D. Steele- Johnson, “The 
Effects of Team Training on Team Outcomes: A Meta-analy-
sis,” Performance Improvement Quarterly 22 (2010): 53–80.
 33. Toddi Gutner, “For Team-Building Events, a New Ingre-
dient: Fun,” The Wall Street Journal, April 27, 2014, http://
online.wsj.com.
 34. “Best Practices and Outstanding Initiatives.”
 35. C. E. Schneier, “Training and Development Programs: What 
Learning Theory and Research Have to Offer,” Personnel Jour-
nal, April 1974, pp. 288–93; M. Knowles, “Adult Learning,” in 
Training and Development Handbook, 3rd ed., ed. R. L. Craig 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1987), pp. 168–79; B. J. Smith and 
B. L. Delahaye, How to Be an Effective Trainer, 2nd ed. (New 
York: Wiley, 1987); Traci Sitzmann, “Self-Regulating Online 
Course Engagement,” T&D, March 2010, Business & Com-
pany Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 36. K. A. Smith-Jentsch, F. G. Jentsch, S. C. Payne, and E. Salas, 
“Can Pretraining Experiences Explain Individual Differ-
ences in Learning?” Journal of Applied Psychology 81 (1996), 
pp. 110–16.
 37. W. McGehee and P. W. Thayer, Training in Business and In-
dustry (New York: Wiley, 1961).
 38. R. M. Gagne and K. L. Medsker, The Condition of Learning 
(Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt-Brace, 1996).
 39. J. C. Naylor and G. D. Briggs, “The Effects of Task Com-
plexity and Task Organization on the Relative Effi ciency of 
Part and Whole Training Methods,” Journal of Experimental 
Psychology 65 (1963), pp. 217–24.
 40. Katherine Hobson, “Getting Docs to Use PCs,” The Wall 
Street Journal, March 15, 2011, http://online.wsj.com.
 41. Kuehner-Hebert, “Go Mobile?” p. 20; Katie Kuehner- 
Hebert, “Who Controls Your Social Learning?” Chief Learn-
ing Offi cer, April 2014, pp. 18–21.
 42. R. D. Marx, “Relapse Prevention for Managerial Training: 
A Model for Maintenance of Behavior Change,” Academy of 
Management Review 7 (1982): 433–41; G. P. Latham and C. A. 
Frayne, “Self-Management Training for Increasing Job At-
tendance: A Follow-Up and Replication,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 74 (1989): 411–16.
 43. D. Sussman, “Strong Medicine Required,” T&D, November 
2005, pp. 34–38.
 44. Karie Willyerd and Gene A. Pease, “How Does Social Learn-
ing Measure Up?” T 1 D, January 2011, pp. 32–37.
 45. M. R. Louis, “Surprise and Sense Making: What Newcomers 
Experience in Entering Unfamiliar Organizational Settings,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 25 (1980), pp. 226–51; Rachel 
Emma Silverman, “Companies Try to Make the First Day 
for New Hires More Fun,” The Wall Street Journal, May 28, 
2013, http://online.wsj.com.
 46. Catherine Dunn, “Hyatt’s One-Person Welcoming Commit-
tee,” Fortune, March 20, 2014, http://fortune.com.
 47. Peter Bregman, “Diversity Training Doesn’t Work,” Forbes, 
March 12, 2012, http://www.forbes.com.
 48. Todd Henneman, “Making the Pieces Fit,” Workforce Manage-
ment, August 2011, Business & Company Resource Center, 
http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 49. Mary Beauregard, “Culturally Canny,” T  1  D,  September 
2011, p. 88.
 50. T. Kochan, K. Bezrukova, R. Ely, S. Jackson, A. Joshi, K. 
Jehn, J. Leonard, D. Levine, and D. Thomas, “The Effects of 
Diversity on Business Performance: Report of the Diversity 
Research Network,” Human Resource Management 42 (2003): 
8–21; F. Hansen, “Diversity’s Business Case Just Doesn’t Add 
Up,” Workforce, June 2003, pp. 29–32; M. J. Wesson and C. I. 
Gogus, “Shaking Hands with the Computer: An Examina-
tion of Two Methods of Newcomer Socialization,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 90 (2005): 1018–26; R. Anand and M. Win-
ters, “A Retrospective View of Corporate Diversity Training 
from 1964 to the Present,” Academy of Management Learning 
and Education 7 (2008): 356–72.
 51. C. T. Schreiber, K. F. Price, and A. Morrison, “Workforce 
Diversity and the Glass Ceiling: Practices, Barriers, Pos-
sibilities,” Human Resource Planning 16 (1994): 51–69; 
K. Bezrvkova, K. Jehn, and C. Spell, “Reviewing Diver-
sity Training: Where Have We Been and Where Should 
We Go?” Academy of Management Learning and Education 
11(2012): 207–27.
 52. Christen McCurdy, “Cultural Competency Training Offered 
by Oregon Center for Nursing,” The Lund Report, March 8, 
2012, http://www. thelundreport.org; Aaron DeSmet, Mon-
ica McGurk, and Elizabeth Schwartz, “Getting More from 
Your Training Programs,” McKinsey Quarterly, October 2010, 
http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com.

Developing Employees 
for Future Success
8
Introduction
When sports fans want to see or hear who is winning or losing, they often find 
the coverage they want on one of ESPN’s eight cable TV networks, its mobile app, 
its website, or one of its 300 radio affiliates. Providing up-to-the-minute news 
about more than 65 sports is a fast-paced business, which creates a human 
resource challenge: employees are so busy producing and delivering program-
ming that they might feel too pressed for time to consider the next stage of their 
career. At the same time, employees know they need to keep learning so they 
can advance and take on more responsibility, while ESPN knows that preparing 
employees to assume more responsibility is essential for ensuring it has the 
right talent in place as positions open up.
ESPN meets the challenge with careful planning for employees to develop their 
skills. The company requires each employee to create an individual development 
plan (IDP). The IDP helps employees consider where they currently are in their 
careers, where they want to go in the future, and how they can meet their goals. 
Employees creating an action plan for their IDP can use ESPN’s Leadership GPS, 
a tool that supports goal setting, choosing activities, and tracking progress toward 
goals. The company provides several opportunities for development, emphasizing 
ways to learn on the job, such as shadowing another employee or tackling a chal-
lenging new experience. In addition, employees can take business courses taught 
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 8-1 Discuss how development is related to training 
and careers.
 LO 8-2 Identify the methods organizations use for 
employee development.
 LO 8-3 Describe how organizations use assessment 
of personality type, work behaviors, and job 
performance to plan employee development.
 LO 8-4 Explain how job experiences can be used for 
developing skills.
 LO 8-5 Summarize principles of successful mentoring 
programs.
 LO 8-6 Tell how managers and peers develop employees 
through coaching.
 LO 8-7 Identify the steps in the process of career 
management.
 LO 8-8 Discuss how organizations are meeting the 
challenges of the “glass ceiling,” succession 
planning, and dysfunctional managers.

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  237
by executives through ESPN The University. Employees who demonstrate high potential 
for leadership also are invited to take part in ESPN Center Court, which rotates them 
through jobs in several areas of the company and gives them opportunities to interact 
with top-level managers.1
As ESPN realizes and as we noted in Chapter 1, employees’ commitment to their 
organization depends on how their managers treat them. To “win the war for talent,” 
managers must be able to identify high-potential employees, make sure the organiza-
tion uses the talents of these people, and reassure them of their value so that they 
do not become dissatisfi ed and leave the organization. Managers also must be able 
to listen. Although new employees need strong direction, they expect to be able to 
think independently and be treated with respect. In all these ways, managers provide 
for employee development—the combination of formal education, job experiences, 
relationships, and assessment of personality and abilities to help employees prepare for 
the future of their careers. Human resource management establishes a process for em-
ployee development that prepares employees to help the organization meet its goals.
This chapter explores the purpose and activities of employee development. We begin 
by discussing the relationships among development, training, and career management. 
Next, we look at development approaches, including formal education, assessment, job 
experiences, and interpersonal relationships. The chapter emphasizes the types of skills, 
knowledge, and behaviors that are strengthened by each development method, so employ-
ees and their managers can choose appropriate methods when planning for development. 
The third section of the chapter describes the steps of the career management process, 
emphasizing the responsibilities of employee and employer at each step of the process. 
The chapter concludes with a discussion of special challenges related to employee devel-
opment—the so-called glass ceiling, succession planning, and dysfunctional managers.
Training, Development, and Career Management
Organizations and their employees must constantly expand their knowledge, skills, 
and behavior to meet customer needs and compete in today’s demanding and rapidly 
changing business environment. More and more companies operate internationally, 
requiring that employees understand different cultures and customs. More companies 
organize work in terms of projects or customers, rather than specialized functions, so 
employees need to acquire a broad range of technical and interpersonal skills. Many 
companies expect employees at all levels to perform roles once reserved for manage-
ment. Modern organizations are expected to provide development opportunities to 
employees without regard to their sex, race, ethnic background, or age so that they 
have equal opportunity for advancement. In this climate, organizations are placing 
greater emphasis on training and development. To do this, organizations must under-
stand development’s relationship to training and career management.
Development and Training
The defi nition of development indicates that it is future oriented. Development im-
plies learning that is not necessarily related to the employee’s current job.2 Instead, it 
prepares employees for other jobs or positions in the organization and increases their 
ability to move into jobs that may not yet exist.3 Development also may help employ-
ees prepare for changes in responsibilities and requirements in their current jobs, such 
as changes resulting from new technology, work designs, or customers.
Employee Development
The combination of 
formal education, job 
 experiences, relation-
ships, and assessment of 
personality and  abilities 
to help employees 
 prepare for the future of 
their careers.
LO 8-1 Discuss how de-
velopment is related to 
training and careers.

238 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
In contrast, training traditionally focuses on helping employees improve perfor-
mance of their current jobs. Many organizations have focused on linking training pro-
grams to business goals. In these organizations, the distinction between training and 
development is more blurred. Table 8.1 summarizes the traditional differences. 
For an example of a company that links training and development to future- oriented 
business goals, see the “Best Practices” box.
Development for Careers
The concept of a career has changed in recent years. In the traditional view, a career 
consists of a sequence of positions within an occupation or organization.4 For example, 
an academic career might begin with a position as a university’s adjunct professor. It 
continues with appointment to faculty positions as assistant professor, then associate 
professor, and fi nally full professor. An engineer might start as a staff engineer, then 
with greater experience earn promotions to the positions of advisory engineer, senior 
engineer, and vice president of engineering. In these examples, the career resembles 
a set of stairs from the bottom of a profession or organization to the top. Especially 
at organizations where careers progress in this way, development programs need to 
ensure that employees are prepared to ascend to each new level. 
Recently, however, changes such as downsizing and restructuring have become the 
norm, so the concept of a career has become more fl uid. Today’s employees are more 
likely to have a protean career, one that frequently changes based on changes in the 
person’s interests, abilities, and values and in the work environment. For example, an engi-
neer might decide to take a sabbatical from her job to become a manager with Engineers 
without Borders, so she can develop managerial skills and decide whether she likes man-
aging. As in this example, employees in protean careers take responsibility for managing 
their careers. This practice is consistent with the modern psychological contract described 
in Chapter 2. Employees look for organizations to provide not job security and a career 
ladder to climb, but instead development opportunities and fl exible work arrangements.
To remain marketable, employees must continually develop new skills. Fewer of 
today’s careers involve repetitive tasks, and more rely on an expanding base of knowl-
edge.5 Jobs are less likely to last a lifetime, so employees have to prepare for newly 
created positions. Beyond knowing job requirements, employees need to understand 
the business in which they are working and be able to cultivate valuable relationships 
with co-workers, managers, suppliers, and customers. They also need to follow trends 
in their fi eld and industry, so they can apply technology and knowledge that will match 
emerging priorities and needs. Learning such skills requires useful job experiences as 
well as effective training programs.
These relationships and experiences often take an employee along a career path 
that is far different from the traditional steps upward through an organization or pro-
fession. Although such careers will not disappear, more employees will follow a spiral 
career path in which they cross the boundaries between specialties and organizations. 
As organizations provide for employee development (and as employees take control 
Protean Career
A career that frequently 
changes based on 
changes in the person’s 
interests, abilities, and 
values and in the work 
environment.
Table 8.1
Training versus 
Development
TRAINING
DEVELOPMENT
Focus
Current
Future
Use of work experiences
Low
High
Goal
Preparation for current job
Preparation for changes
Participation
Required
Voluntary

239
of their own careers), they will need to (1) determine their interests, skills, and weak-
nesses and (2) seek development experiences involving jobs, relationships, and formal 
courses. As discussed later in the chapter, organizations can meet these needs through 
a system for career management or development planning. Career management helps em-
ployees select development activities that prepare them to meet their career goals. It 
helps employers select development activities in line with their human resource needs.
Approaches to Employee Development
The many approaches to employee development fall into four broad categories: formal 
education, assessment, job experiences, and interpersonal relationships.6 Figure 8.1 
summarizes these four methods. Many organizations combine these approaches.
Formal Education
Organizations may support employee development through a variety of formal ed-
ucational programs, either at the workplace or off-site. These may include work-
shops designed specifi cally for the organization’s employees, short courses offered 
LO 8-2 Identify the 
methods organiza-
tions use for employee 
development.
As one of the leading accounting 
and business advisory fi rms, KPMG 
seeks what it calls a “high-perfor-
mance culture,” employing “the best 
people with the skills and determina-
tion to deliver above and beyond.” 
For this, the fi rm needs people with 
in-depth, 
up-to-date 
knowledge 
of their profession and clients’ in-
dustries. The kinds of bright, am-
bitious people who join a fi rm like 
KPMG want careers with room for 
advancement, which means they 
will have to develop leadership skills 
as they gain experience. To meet 
all of these needs, KPMG’s training 
organization—the KPMG Business 
School—has established a three-
part strategy: understand the mar-
ketplace of the future, build the fi rm 
of the future, and develop the work-
force of the future.
To carry out this future-oriented 
strategy, 
the 
KPMG 
Business 
School offers training in job skills 
and industry trends. This training 
program focuses on assessments 
of what skills KPMG will need in its 
employees as they move into fu-
ture roles. For example, instead of 
promoting employees into their fi rst 
managerial job and then teaching 
them management skills, KPMG 
identifi es 
future 
managers 
and 
teaches them to manage as they 
prepare for those positions. Top 
executives visit training sessions 
to demonstrate the value the fi rm 
places on learning. The formal train-
ing is backed up with mobile and 
social-media resources that rein-
force learning.
Along with training programs, the 
company intentionally offers its em-
ployees challenging assignments. 
From the beginning of their career 
at KPMG, employees have respon-
sibilities that keep them practicing 
important skills. Many of them take 
on international assignments or ro-
tate through various positions in the 
fi rm to gain a broader perspective.
The fi rm also matches thousands 
of employees to experienced men-
tors. These relationships help the 
junior employees learn by observing 
senior employees, asking them 
questions, and receiving guidance.
Questions
 1. Describe how the activities 
described here fi t the defi nition 
of employee development.
 2. Suppose KPMG tried to save 
money by replacing employee 
development with simply 
ensuring it has people with 
the skills needed to fi ll current 
positions. What impact do 
you predict this change would 
have on KPMG’s business 
performance? Why?
Sources: Company website, “KPMG 
Campus: High-Performance Culture,” 
http://www.kpmgcampus.com, ac-
cessed June 4, 2014; Kate Everson, 
“KPMG: Building the Firm of the Future,” 
Chief Learning Ofﬁ cer, June 2014, 
pp. 42–43; Lorri Freifeld, “Solving Today’s 
Skill Gaps,” Training, November 2013, 
http://www.trainingmag.com; Jenni-
fer Keirn, “2013 Best Places to Work: 
KPMG,” Inside Business, September/
October 2013, http://ibmag.com.
How KPMG Develops for the Future
Best Practices

240 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
by consultants or universities, university pro-
grams offered to employees who live on cam-
pus during the program, and executive MBA 
programs (which enroll managers to meet on 
weekends or evenings to earn a master’s degree 
in business administration). These programs 
may involve lectures by business experts, busi-
ness games and simulations, experiential pro-
grams, and meetings with customers. Chapter 7 
described most of these training methods, in-
cluding their pros and cons.
Many companies operate training and 
 development centers that offer seminars and 
longer-term programs. Among the most fa-
mous are General Electric’s John F. Welch 
Leadership Center in Crotonville, New York, 
and McDonald’s Hamburger University in 
Oak Brook, Illinois. The thousands of restau-
rant managers and owner-operators who at-
tend Hamburger U each year get classroom 
training and simulations on how to run a busi-
ness that delivers consistent service, quality, 
and cleanliness. They also receive coaching 
and peer support face-to-face and online. The 
company’s highest-performing executives participate in a nine-month leadership insti-
tute at Hamburger U, where they tackle major issues facing the company.7
Independent institutions offering executive education include Harvard, the Whar-
ton School of Business, the University of Michigan, and the Center for Creative Lead-
ership. At the University of Virginia, the Darden School of Business offers an executive 
MBA program in which students attend classes on campus once a month on Thursday 
through Saturday. The on-campus time provides opportunities for students to col-
laborate on presentations, simulations, and case studies. The school also brings ex-
ecutive MBA students to campus four times for leadership residencies. During each 
weeklong residency, the students use workshops, coaching, and refl ection to get better 
at handling their everyday management challenges. Between the times on campus, the 
students continue their education with independent study, online classes, and tools for 
virtual meetings and online exams.8
Another trend in executive education is for employers and the education provider 
to create short courses with content designed specifi cally for the audience. Hasbro 
worked with Dartmouth’s Tuck School of Business to create the Hasbro Global Lead-
ership Program. This annual weeklong program covers areas where the toy company’s 
managers needed greater strength: global strategy, emerging markets, personal leader-
ship, ethics, and brand building.9
Assessment
Another way to provide for employee development is assessment—collecting in-
formation and providing feedback to employees about their behavior, communica-
tion style, or skills.10 Information for assessment may come from the employees, their 
peers, managers, and customers. The most frequent uses of assessment are to identify 
LO 8-3 Describe how 
organizations use as-
sessment of personality 
type, work behaviors, 
and job performance 
to plan employee 
development.
Assessment
Collecting information 
and providing feedback 
to employees about their 
behavior, communication 
style, or skills.
Figure 8.1
Four Approaches to Employee Development

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  241
employees with managerial potential to measure current managers’ strengths and 
weaknesses. Organizations also use assessment to identify managers with potential to 
move into higher-level executive positions. Organizations that assign work to teams 
may use assessment to identify the strengths and weaknesses of individual team mem-
bers and the effects of the team members’ decision-making and communication styles 
on the team’s productivity.
For assessment to support development, the information must be shared with the 
employee being assessed. Along with that assessment information, the employee needs 
suggestions for correcting skill weaknesses and for using skills already learned. The sug-
gestions might be to participate in training courses or develop skills through new job 
experiences. Based on the assessment information and available development opportuni-
ties, employees should develop action plans to guide their efforts at self-improvement.
Organizations vary in the methods and sources of information they use in develop-
mental assessment. Many organizations appraise performance. Organizations with so-
phisticated development systems use psychological tests to measure employees’ skills, 
personality types, and communication styles. They may collect self, peer, and manager 
ratings of  employees’ behavior and style of working with others. In a recent survey, 
business professionals said the tool used most widely in their organization was a type 
of performance appraisal known as 360-degree assessments, followed by two popular 
psychological tests (the  Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and the DiSC assessment).11 A 
less-used but potentially benefi cial approach is to send employees to an assessment 
center for in-depth evaluation of their skills, strengths, and weaknesses. Whether or 
not they use an assessment center, employers often combine assessment tools for a 
fuller picture of employees.
Psychological Proﬁ les When organizations choose assessment tools, they 
often include some type of questionnaire in which employees answer questions about 
themselves or select words or statements they agree describe themselves. From the 
answers, a testing service creates an inventory or profi le describing the person’s traits 
or the way the person tends to behave. Two of the most widely used assessments are 
the ones mentioned in the previous paragraph: the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and 
the DiSC assessment.
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) identifi es individuals’ preferences for source 
of energy, means of information gathering, way of decision making, and lifestyle. The 
assessment consists of more than 100 questions about how the person feels or prefers 
to behave in different situations (such as “Are you usually a good ‘mixer’ or rather quiet 
and reserved?”). The results describe these individuals’ preferences in the four areas:
 1. The energy dichotomy indicates where individuals gain interpersonal strength 
and vitality, measured as their degree of introversion or extroversion. Extroverted 
types (E) gain energy through interpersonal relationships. Introverted types (I) 
gain energy by focusing on inner thoughts and feelings.
 2. The information-gathering dichotomy relates to the preparations individu-
als make before making decisions. Individuals with a Sensing (S) preference 
tend to gather the facts and details to prepare for a decision. Intuitive types 
(N) tend to focus less on the facts and more on possibilities and relationships 
among them.
 3. In decision making, individuals differ in the amount of consideration they give to 
their own and others’ values and feelings, as opposed to the hard facts of a situ-
ation. Individuals with a Thinking (T) preference try always to be objective in 
Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator (MBTI)
Psychological test that 
identiﬁ es individuals’ 
preferences for source 
of energy, means of 
information gathering, 
way of decision making, 
and lifestyle, providing 
information for team 
building and leadership 
development.

242 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
making decisions. Individuals with a Feeling (F) preference tend to evaluate the 
impact of the alternatives on others, as well as their own feelings; they are more 
subjective.
 4. The lifestyle dichotomy describes an individual’s tendency to be either fl exible 
or structured. Individuals with a Judging (J) preference focus on goals, establish 
deadlines, and prefer to be conclusive. Individuals with a Perceiving (P) preference 
enjoy surprises, are comfortable with changing a decision, and dislike deadlines.
The alternatives for each of the four dichotomies result in 16 possible combinations. 
Of course people are likely to be mixtures of these types, but the point of the assess-
ment is that certain types predominate in individuals.
As a result of their psychological types, people develop strengths and weaknesses. For 
example, individuals who are Introverted, Sensing, Thinking, and Judging (known as 
ISTJs) tend to be serious, quiet, practical, orderly, and logical. They can organize tasks, be 
decisive, and follow through on plans and goals. But because they do not have the opposite 
preferences (Extroversion, Intuition, Feeling, and Perceiving), ISTJs have several weak-
nesses. They may have diffi culty responding to unexpected opportunities, appear to their 
colleagues to be too task-oriented or impersonal, and make decisions too fast.
Applying this kind of information about employees’ preferences or tendencies helps 
organizations understand the communication, motivation, teamwork, work styles, and 
leadership of the people in their groups. For example, salespeople or executives who 
want to communicate better can apply what they learn about their own personality 
styles and the way other people perceive them. For team development, the MBTI can 
help teams match team members with assignments based on their preferences and thus 
improve problem solving.12 The team could assign brainstorming (idea-generating) 
tasks to employees with an Intuitive preference and evaluation of the ideas to employ-
ees with a Sensing preference.
Research on the validity, reliability, and effectiveness of the MBTI is inconclu-
sive.13 People who take the MBTI fi nd it a positive experience and say it helps them 
change their behavior. However, MBTI scores are not necessarily stable over time. 
Studies in which the MBTI was administered at two different times found that as 
few as one-fourth of those who took the assessment were classifi ed as exactly the 
same type the second time. Still, the MBTI is a valuable tool for understanding 
communication styles and the ways people prefer to interact with others. It is not 
appropriate for measuring job performance, however, or as the only means of evalu-
ating promotion potential.
The DiSC assessment tool is an inventory of behavioral styles based on the work of 
William Marston, a psychologist who attempted to categorize normal behavior pat-
terns.14 Over the years, different people have used Marston’s model to construct tests 
to measure versions of Marston’s categories; the most widely used instrument, pub-
lished by Inscape, distinguishes itself with the lowercase i in its name. Because there 
are variations in these inventories, employers should be careful to use a version that 
has been tested and shown to be valid and reliable.
 An employee taking Inscape’s DiSC inventory receives a profi le report describing 
his or her behavioral style, preferred environment, and strategies for effectiveness. The 
style is described in terms of the following categories (which provide the letters for the 
DiSC acronym):
 • Dominance means the person emphasizes results and displays confi dence. This type 
of person takes on challenges, sees the big picture, and can be blunt and to the point.
DiSC
Brand of assessment tool 
that identiﬁ es individu-
als’ behavioral patterns 
in terms of dominance, 
inﬂ uence, steadiness, 
and conscientiousness.

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  243
 • Infl uence means the person emphasizes relation-
ships and persuasion. This type of person likes to 
collaborate, dislikes being ignored, and displays 
optimism and enthusiasm.
 • Steadiness means the person emphasizes coop-
eration, sincerity, and dependability. This type of 
person behaves calmly and with humility, dislikes 
rushing, and is supportive of others.
 • Conscientiousness means the person emphasizes 
quality and accuracy, displaying competency. 
This type of person worries about mistakes and 
wants to get the details. He or she favors objec-
tive thinking and enjoys working independently.
Assessment Centers At an assessment 
center, multiple raters or evaluators (assessors) 
evaluate employees’ performance on a number of 
exercises.15 An assessment center is usually an off-
site location such as a conference center. Usually 6 to 
12 employees participate at one time. The primary 
use of assessment centers is to identify whether em-
ployees have the personality characteristics, admin-
istrative skills, and interpersonal skills needed for 
managerial jobs. Organizations also use them to determine whether employees have 
the skills needed for working in teams. A complete half-day or full-day assessment 
at an assessment center can cost as much as $20,000, so employers tend to use this 
method mainly for employees in the highest levels of management.
The types of exercises used in assessment centers include leaderless group discus-
sions, interviews, in-baskets, and role-plays.16 In a leaderless group discussion, a 
team of fi ve to seven employees is assigned a problem and must work together to solve 
it within a certain time period. The problem may involve buying and selling supplies, 
nominating a subordinate for an award, or assembling a product. Interview questions 
typically cover each employee’s work and personal experiences, skill strengths and 
weaknesses, and career plans. In-basket exercises, discussed as a selection method in 
Chapter 6, simulate the administrative tasks of a manager’s job, using a pile of docu-
ments for the employee to handle. In role-plays, the participant takes the part of a 
manager or employee in a situation involving the skills to be assessed. For example, 
a participant might be given the role of a manager who must discuss performance 
problems with an employee, played by someone who works for the assessment center. 
Other exercises in assessment centers might include interest and aptitude tests to eval-
uate an employee’s vocabulary, general mental ability, and reasoning skills. Personality 
tests may be used to determine employees’ ability to get along with others, tolerance 
for uncertainty, and other traits related to success as a manager or team member.
The assessors are usually managers who have been trained to look for employee 
behaviors that are related to the skills being assessed. Typically, each assessor observes 
and records one or two employees’ behaviors in each exercise. The assessors review 
their notes and rate each employee’s level of skills (for example, 5 5 high level of lead-
ership skills, 1 5 low level of leadership skills). After all the employees have completed 
the exercises, the assessors discuss their observations of each employee. They compare 
their ratings and try to agree on each employee’s rating for each of the skills.
Assessment Center
Typically an off-site 
 location at which mul-
tiple raters or evaluators 
(assessors) evaluate 
 employees’ performance 
on a number of exercises, 
usually as they work in 
a group.
Leaderless Group 
Discussion
An assessment center 
exercise in which a 
team of ﬁ ve to seven 
employees is assigned a 
problem and must work 
together to solve it within 
a certain time period.
One way to develop employees is to begin with an assessment that 
may consist of assigning an activity to a team and seeing who brings 
what skills and strengths to the team. How can this assessment help 
employees?

244 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
As we mentioned in Chapter 6, research suggests that assessment center ratings are 
valid for predicting performance, salary level, and career advancement.17 Assessment 
centers may also be useful for development because of the feedback that participants 
receive about their attitudes, skill strengths, and weaknesses.18
Performance Appraisals and 360-Degree Feedback 
A performance ap-
praisal, or formal process for measuring employee performance, is a major component 
of performance management, which will be described in Chapter 10. This informa-
tion also can be useful for employee development under certain conditions.19 The 
appraisal system must tell employees specifi cally about their performance problems 
and ways to improve their performance. Employees must gain a clear understand-
ing of the differences between current performance and expected performance. The 
appraisal process must identify causes of the performance discrepancy and  develop 
plans for improving performance. Managers must be trained to deliver  frequent 
 performance feedback and must monitor employees’ progress in carrying out their 
action plans.
A recent trend in performance appraisals, also discussed in Chapter 10, is 360-degree 
feedback—performance measurement by the employee’s supervisor, peers, employees, 
and customers. Often the feedback involves rating the individual in terms of work-
related behaviors. For development purposes, the rater would identify an area of be-
havior as a strength of that employee or an area requiring further development. The 
results presented to the employee show how he or she was rated on each item and 
how self-evaluations differ from other raters’ evaluations. The individual reviews the 
results, seeks clarifi cation from the raters, and sets specifi c development goals based 
on the strengths and weaknesses identifi ed.20 Luck Companies, a Virginia miner and 
supplier of crushed stone, uses 360-degree assessments for all its managers to mea-
sure their performance in terms of criteria such as company values and competencies 
 associated with good leadership.21
There are several benefi ts of 360-degree feedback. Organizations collect mul-
tiple perspectives of managers’ performance, allowing employees to compare their 
own personal evaluations with the views of others. This method also establishes 
formal communications about behaviors and skill ratings between employees and 
their internal and external customers. Several studies have shown that performance 
improves and behavior changes as a result of participating in upward feedback and 
360-degree feedback systems.22 The change is greatest in people who received 
lower ratings from others than what they gave themselves. The 360-degree feed-
back system is most likely to be effective if the rating instrument enables reliable 
or consistent ratings, assesses behaviors or skills that are job related, and is easy to 
use. Other ways the organization can make it more likely that 360-degree feedback 
will yield benefi ts are to have the assessment results delivered by a trained person 
and to hold the employees accountable in follow-up meetings with their manager 
or a coach.23
There are potential limitations of 360-degree feedback. This method demands a 
signifi cant amount of time for raters to complete the evaluations. If raters, especially 
subordinates or peers, provide negative feedback, some managers might try to iden-
tify and punish them. A facilitator is needed to help interpret results. Finally, simply 
delivering ratings to a manager does not provide ways for the manager to act on the 
feedback (for example, development planning, meeting with raters, or taking courses). 
As noted earlier, any form of assessment should be accompanied by suggestions for 
improvement and development of an action plan.

245
Job Experiences
Most employee development occurs through job experiences24—the combination of 
relationships, problems, demands, tasks, and other features of an employee’s jobs. Using 
job experiences for employee development assumes that development is most likely to 
occur when the employee’s skills and experiences do not entirely match the skills required 
for the employee’s current job. To succeed, employees must stretch their skills. In other 
words, they must learn new skills, apply their skills and knowledge in new ways, and mas-
ter new experiences.25 For example, companies that want to prepare employees to expand 
overseas markets are assigning them to a variety of international jobs. To read tips for 
setting up work assignments that stretch employees, see “HR How To.”
Most of what we know about development through job experiences comes from 
a series of studies conducted by the Center for Creative Leadership.26 These studies 
asked executives to identify key career events that made a difference in their manage-
rial styles and the lessons they learned from these experiences. The key events included 
job assignments (such as fi xing a failed operation), interpersonal relationships (getting 
along with supervisors), and types of transitions (situations in which the manager at 
LO 8-4 Explain how job 
experiences can be used 
for developing skills.
Job Experiences
The combination of 
relationships, problems, 
demands, tasks, and 
other features of an 
employee’s jobs.
Ideally, a stretch assignment will be 
a diffi cult but positive experience 
in which the employee fi gures out 
how to meet the challenge. Here are 
some principles for achieving that 
ideal:
 • Establish a purpose for each 
assignment. Have in mind par-
ticular skills or competencies 
the employee would learn in 
the assignment—for example, 
understanding the customer’s 
perspective or infl uencing others 
in the organization.
 • Include one or more of the con-
ditions that make assignments 
challenging: unfamiliar tasks, 
greater responsibility, effort to 
bring about change, work with 
people in other areas of the or-
ganization, and leadership of a 
diverse group.
 • Create a safe context for learn-
ing. One approach is to identify 
the conditions necessary for 
the employee to succeed and 
verify that those conditions are 
in place. Another approach is to 
make sure that the assignment 
is one where a failure will not 
harm the organization, so failure 
is tolerated.
 • Determine how you will track 
the employee’s progress and 
measure success. For example, 
if the employee will develop 
decision-making skills, prepare 
to measure how the employee is 
making decisions, as well as the 
quality of the decisions.
 • Before placing an employee 
in an assignment, assess the 
employee’s current skills. Use 
assessment results to match 
employees with assignments 
they are prepared to handle.
 • Clearly defi ne for the employee 
the requirements of the stretch 
assignment. Lay out the ex-
pectations for the tasks the 
employee will perform and the 
defi nition of success.
 • Assign qualifi ed persons to give 
support and feedback to em-
ployees in stretch assignments. 
The support could come from 
a more experienced mentor or 
coach. In addition, a group of 
peers might share knowledge as 
they learn together.
Questions
 1. Which of these principles 
help ensure that a stretch 
assignment is not so simple 
that it is just another routine 
job responsibility?
 2. Which of these principles 
help ensure that a stretch 
assignment is not so hard that 
it generates panic and failure?
Sources: Stu Crandell, “Getting Ready 
for the Big Jump,” Chief Learning Ofﬁ cer, 
July 2013, pp. 34–7; Robert Bullock, 
“Developing Leaders through On the Job 
Learning,” Scontrino-Powell blog, June 1, 
2013, http://www.scontrino-powell.com; 
Halelly Azulay, “Learning beyond the Com-
fort Zone,” T+D, January 2013, Business 
Insights: Global, http://bi.galegroup.com; 
Gary Cohen, “Stretch Assignments for 
High Potential Employees,” CO2 Partners 
blog, May 21, 2012, http://www.co2
partners.com.
Setting Up Stretch Assignments for Employees
HR How To

246 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
fi rst lacked the necessary background). Through job experiences like these, managers 
learn how to handle common challenges, prove themselves, lead change, handle pres-
sure, and infl uence others.
The usefulness of job experiences for employee development varies depending on 
whether the employee views the experiences as positive or negative sources of stress. 
When employees view job experiences as positive stressors, the experiences challenge 
them and stimulate learning. When they view job experiences as negative stressors, 
employees may suffer from high levels of harmful stress. Of the job demands studied, 
managers were most likely to experience negative stress from creating change and 
overcoming obstacles (adverse business conditions, lack of management support, lack 
of personal support, or a diffi cult boss). Research suggests that all of the job demands 
except obstacles are related to learning.27 Organizations should offer job experiences 
that are most likely to increase learning, and they should consider the consequences of 
situations that involve negative stress.
Although the research on development through job experiences has focused on 
managers, line employees also can learn through job experiences. Organizations may, 
for example, use job experiences to develop skills needed for teamwork, including 
confl ict resolution, data analysis, and customer service. These experiences may occur 
when forming a team and when employees switch roles within a team.
Various job assignments can provide for employee development. The organization 
may enlarge the employee’s current job or move the employee to different jobs.  Lateral 
moves include job rotation, transfer, or temporary assignment to another  organization. 
The organization may also use downward moves or promotions as a source of job 
 experience. Figure 8.2 summarizes these alternatives.
Job Enlargement As Chapter 4 stated in the context of job design, job  enlargement 
involves adding challenges or new responsibilities to employees’ current jobs. Ex-
amples include completing a special project, switching roles within a work team, or 
Figure 8.2
How Job Experiences 
Are Used for Employee 
Development

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  247
researching new ways to serve customers. An engineering employee might join a task 
force developing new career paths for technical employees. The work on the project 
could give the engineer a leadership role through which the engineer learns about the 
company’s career development system while also practicing leadership skills to help 
the task force reach its goals. In this way, job enlargement not only makes a job more 
interesting, but also creates an opportunity for employees to develop new skills.
Job Rotation Another job design technique that can be applied to employee de-
velopment is job rotation, moving employees through a series of job assignments in one 
or more functional areas. Cummins uses job rotations as the major element of its En-
gineering Development Program for newly hired engineers with leadership potential. 
During the fi ve-year program, engineers spend 18 months each in two rotations where 
they develop basic skills in areas of engineering that are related to the manufacturing 
company’s processes, including electronics and design for applied mechanics. Next is a 
12-month rotation into a position that involves working with customer concerns. The 
fi nal rotation is a 12-month job emphasizing product development. Throughout the 
program, the engineers are guided by mentors assigned by the company.28
Job rotation helps employees gain an appreciation for the company’s goals, in-
creases their understanding of different company functions, develops a network of 
contacts, and improves problem-solving and decision-making skills.29 Job rotation also 
helps employees increase their salary and earn promotions faster. However, job rota-
tion poses some problems for employees and the organization. Knowing they will be 
rotated to another job may give the employees a short-term perspective on problems 
and their solutions. Employees may feel less satisfi ed and motivated because they have 
diffi culty developing specialized skills and leave the position too soon to fulfi ll any 
challenging assignments. The rotation of employees through a department may hurt 
productivity and increase the workload of those who remain after employees are ro-
tated out. Job rotation is most likely to succeed when it meets certain conditions:30
 • The organization establishes and communicates clear policies about which posi-
tions are eligible for job rotation. Job rotation for nonmanagement employees as 
well as managers can be benefi cial, depending on the program’s objectives.
 • Employees and their managers understand and agree on the expectations for the 
job rotation, including which skills are to be developed.
 • Goals for the program support business goals. These might include exposing high-
potential employees to a variety of business units, customers, or geographic areas 
in preparation for management positions or rotating an experienced, talented em-
ployee through several business units to mentor or coach employees.
 • The rotation schedule is realistic, taking into account how long employees will need 
to become familiar with their new position, as well as how much time is needed for 
employees to complete the assignments.
 • Top management is committed to the program’s success.
 • Someone is responsible for measuring whether the program is meeting its goals.
Transfers, Promotions, and Downward Moves Most companies use upward, 
downward, and lateral moves as an option for employee development. In a transfer, the 
organization assigns an employee to a position in a different area of the company. Trans-
fers do not necessarily increase job responsibilities or compensation. They are usually 
lateral moves, that is, moves to a job with a similar level of responsibility. They may 
involve relocation to another part of the country or even to another country.
Transfer
Assignment of an em-
ployee to a position in 
a different area of the 
company, usually in a 
lateral move.

248 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Relocation can be stressful because of the de-
mands of moving, especially when family members 
are affected. People have to fi nd new housing, shop-
ping, health care, and leisure facilities, and they often 
lack the support of nearby friends and family. These 
stresses come at the same time the employee must 
learn the expectations and responsibilities associated 
with the new position. Because transfers can provoke 
anxiety, many companies have diffi culty getting em-
ployees to accept them. Employees most willing to 
accept transfers tend to be those with high career 
ambitions and beliefs that the organization offers a 
promising future and that accepting the transfer will 
help the company succeed.31
A downward move occurs when an employee 
is given less responsibility and authority. The orga-
nization may demote an employee because of poor 
performance or move the employee to a lower-level 
position in another function so that the employee 
can develop different skills. The temporary cross-
functional move is the most common way to use downward moves for employee de-
velopment. For example, engineers who want to move into management often take 
lower-level positions, such as shift supervisor, to develop their management skills.
Many employees have diffi culty associating transfers and downward moves with 
development; these changes may feel more like forms of punishment. Employees often 
decide to leave an organization rather than accept such a change, and then the organi-
zation must bear the costs of replacing those employees. Employees will be more likely 
to accept transfers and downward moves as development opportunities if the organiza-
tion provides information about the change and its possible benefi ts and involves the 
employee in planning the change. Employees are also more likely to be positive about 
such a recommendation if the organization provides clear performance objectives and 
frequent feedback. Employers can encourage an employee to relocate by providing 
fi nancial assistance with the move, information about the new location and job, and 
help for family members, such as identifying schools, child care and elder care options, 
and job search assistance for the employee’s spouse.32
A promotion involves moving an employee into a position with greater challenges, 
more responsibility, and more authority than in the previous job. Usually promotions 
include pay increases. Because promotions improve the person’s pay, status, and feel-
ings of accomplishment, employees are more willing to accept promotions than lateral 
or downward moves. Even so, employers can increase the likelihood that employees 
will accept promotions by providing the same kind of information and assistance that 
are used to support transfers and downward moves. Organizations can more easily 
offer promotions if they are profi table and growing. In other conditions, opportunities 
for promoting employees may be limited.
Temporary Assignments with Other Organizations In some cases, an em-
ployer may benefi t from the skills an employee can learn at another organization. The 
employer may encourage the employee to participate in an externship—a full-time 
temporary position at another organization. Externships are an attractive option for em-
ployees in analytical positions, who otherwise might solve the same kinds of problems 
Downward Move
Assignment of an em-
ployee to a position with 
less responsibility and 
authority.
Promotion
Assignment of an em-
ployee to a position 
with greater challenges, 
more responsibility, and 
more authority than in 
the previous job, usually 
accompanied by a pay 
increase.
Externship
Employee development 
through a full-time 
temporary position at 
another organization.
Working outside one’s home country is the most important job 
 experience that can develop an employee for a career in the 
global economy.

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  249
over and over, becoming bored as they miss out on exposure to challenging new ideas 
and techniques. A variation on this approach that may not require a full-time com-
mitment of employees is to encourage skills-based volunteering, in which employees 
apply and increase their skills by engaging in community service projects. The com-
pany pays the employees for the time they spend on the projects, and the employees 
apply their developing talents to a good cause. For example, employees of United-
Health Group participate in projects that help community members manage diabetes 
and heart disease. Hewlett-Packard employees have coached entrepreneurs in socially 
conscious start-ups and run “hackathons” where programmers develop apps for non-
profi ts. HP encourages employees to seek leadership roles in their volunteer efforts.33
Temporary assignments can include a sabbatical—a leave of absence from an orga-
nization to renew or develop skills. Employees on sabbatical often receive full pay and 
benefi ts. Sabbaticals let employees get away from the day-to-day stresses of their jobs 
and acquire new skills and perspectives. Sabbaticals also allow employees more time for 
personal pursuits such as writing a book or spending more time with family members. 
Universities often give sabbaticals to faculty members; some offer these development 
opportunities to staff members as well. After Shenandoah University in Winchester, 
Virginia, made sabbaticals available to employees who had worked there for at least 
10 years, a staff member took time off and spent it interviewing alumni. The resulting 
stories will provide a valuable resource for creating the school’s marketing materials. 
Jenny Lynne Semenza, a librarian at Idaho State University, used a six-month sabbatical 
to travel between Arizona and Alaska, visiting academic libraries along the way. Semenza 
gathered ideas for improving ISU’s library when she returned to her job.34 How employ-
ees spend their sabbaticals varies from company to company. Some employees may work 
for a nonprofi t service agency; others may study at a college or university or travel and 
work on special projects in non-U.S. subsidiaries of the company.
Interpersonal Relationships
Employees can also develop skills and increase their knowledge about the organiza-
tion and its customers by interacting with a more experienced organization member. 
Increasingly, these interactions are taking place online with social-media tools, as de-
scribed in “HRM Social.” More formally, two  types of relationships used for employee 
development are mentoring and coaching.
Mentors A mentor is an experienced, productive senior employee who helps de-
velop a less-experienced employee, called the protégé. Most mentoring relationships 
develop informally as a result of interests or values shared by the mentor and protégé. 
According to research, the employees most likely to seek and attract a mentor have 
certain personality characteristics: emotional stability, ability to adapt their behavior to 
the situation, and high needs for power and achievement.35 Mentoring relationships 
also can develop as part of the organization’s planned effort to bring together success-
ful senior employees with less-experienced employees.
One major advantage of formal mentoring programs is that they ensure access to 
mentors for all employees, regardless of gender or race. A mentoring program also can 
ensure that high-potential employees are matched with wise, experienced mentors in 
key areas—and that mentors are hearing the challenges facing employees who have less 
authority, work directly with customers, or hold positions in other parts of the organi-
zation.36 However, in an artifi cially created relationship, mentors may have diffi culty 
providing counseling and coaching.37 One practical way employees can address this 
shortcoming is to look for more than one mentor, including informal relationships with 
Sabbatical
A leave of absence from 
an organization to renew 
or develop skills.
LO 8-5 Summarize 
principles of successful 
mentoring programs.
Mentor
An experienced, produc-
tive senior employee 
who helps develop 
a less-experienced 
 employee (a protégé).

250
interested people outside the organization. Employees also should accept the  limits of 
mentoring relationships. Mentoring is not, for example, a substitute for therapy: a men-
tor might offer tips for navigating a business presentation, whereas a therapist is a better 
choice for someone who needs help with persistent anxiety.38
Mentoring programs tend to be most successful when they are voluntary and par-
ticipants understand the details of the program. Rewarding managers for employee de-
velopment is also important because it signals that mentoring and other development 
activities are worthwhile. In addition, the organization should carefully select mentors 
based on their interpersonal and technical skills, train them for the role, and evaluate 
whether the program has met its objectives.39
Mentors and protégés can both benefi t from a mentoring relationship. Protégés receive 
career support, including coaching, protection, sponsorship, challenging assignments, and 
visibility among the organization’s managers. They also receive benefi ts of a positive rela-
tionship—a friend and role model who accepts them, has a positive opinion toward them, 
One of the great advantages of so-
cial media is the ease of fi nding and 
communicating with people who 
share a common interest. You can 
locate old friends from high school 
or join a group discussing a cause 
or sports team you’re passionate 
about. Applying that technique to 
careers, employees can join social-
media groups whose members 
work at the same company or in the 
same profession. Most likely, those 
groups will include people who have 
more experience and knowledge in 
some areas, giving the online rela-
tionships potential as a source of 
career development.
While family and friends certainly 
can give valuable advice, the main 
sources of social-media career de-
velopment will be on career-related 
sites. These could include a general 
careers site, such as LinkedIn, which 
offers millions of groups, or discus-
sion groups on the websites of trade 
or professional organizations, such 
as the Society for Human Resource 
Management. Also, many compa-
nies have set up their own social-
media tools for employees only. 
These are especially useful in large 
companies with operations around 
the world.
To make the most of any of these 
sites, employees should think about 
how to be valuable participants. 
That includes learning the rules and 
etiquette. For example, rather than 
using the site just to get help, one 
should also offer help. Expressing 
ideas in a positive manner creates a 
positive image. And before posting 
their questions, users should respect 
participants’ time by searching to 
see if people have already answered 
that question.
People who become known as 
polite, helpful, value-adding mem-
bers of a social-media group do more 
than gain knowledge from their peers 
and senior members of the group. 
They also foster relationships that 
can lead to more in-depth conversa-
tions, both online and offl ine. Their 
names are more likely to turn up in 
searches for candidates to take on 
stretch assignments or interview for 
job openings. And when employees 
take on a stretch assignment that re-
quires assembling a team, those with 
a strong social-media network have 
an edge in locating the best people.
Questions
 1. Describe a few possible 
advantages of using social 
media to offer ideas and 
advice rather than just asking 
for help and information.
 2. Suppose you work in the HR 
department of a consumer 
products company and are 
interested in making a lateral 
move to another department 
as a way to develop your 
career. Your company has 
a social-media site where 
employees can search for 
co-workers with particular 
interests, experience, and 
skills. How might you use that 
site to plan your lateral move?
Sources: Rich Hein, “How to Use Social 
Networking to Succeed in Business,” CIO, 
June 3, 2014, http://www.cio.com; 
Rosabeth Moss Kanter, “How to Use 
Social Media to Advance Your Career,” The 
Wall Street Journal, May 12, 2014, http://
blogs.wsj.com; Sarah Archer, “Tweet Your 
Way to a Job: Using Social Media to 
Develop Your Career,” The Guardian, 
March 12, 2014, http://careers.
theguardian.com.
Online Support for Career Development
HRM Social

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  251
and gives them a chance to talk about their worries. Employees with 
mentors are also more likely to be promoted, earn higher salaries, 
and have more infl uence within their organization.40 Acting as a 
mentor gives managers a chance to develop their interpersonal skills 
and increase their feelings that they are contributing something im-
portant to the organization. Working with a technically trained pro-
tégé on matters such as new research in the fi eld may also increase 
the mentor’s technical knowledge.
So that more employees can benefi t from mentoring, some orga-
nizations use group mentoring programs, which assign four to six pro-
tégés to a successful senior employee. A potential advantage of group 
mentoring is that protégés can learn from each other as well as from 
the mentor. The leader helps protégés understand the organization, 
guides them in analyzing their experiences, and helps them clarify 
career directions. Each member of the group may complete specifi c 
assignments, or the group may work together on a problem or issue.
Coaching A coach is a peer or manager who works with an 
employee to motivate the employee, help him or her develop 
skills, and provide reinforcement and feedback. Coaches may 
play one or more of three roles41:
 1. Working one-on-one with an employee, as when giving 
feedback.
 2. Helping employees learn for themselves—for example, help-
ing them fi nd experts and teaching them to obtain feedback from others
 3. Providing resources such as mentors, courses, or job experiences
When ConAgra Foods selected lawyer Colleen Batcheler to be its general coun-
sel, the company’s human resource department offered her executive coaching to 
help prepare for this high-level role. Batcheler met several times with the coaching 
team, using the assessments and homework they gave her to draw up goals for what 
she wanted to achieve. For accountability, she met with ConAgra’s chief executive 
and with her staff to review her goals with them. One of Batcheler’s goals was to 
spend more time learning about the strengths of each person on the legal team so 
she could apply team members’ unique qualities in a way that would get the best 
results for the team overall. Learning to look for personal qualities was diffi cult at 
fi rst, but she practiced the behavior until it became second nature. As a result, she is a 
more effective leader, and her team members are more committed and productive.42
Research suggests that coaching helps managers improve by identifying areas for im-
provement and setting goals.43 Getting results from a coaching relationship can take at 
least six months of weekly or monthly meetings. To be effective, a coach generally con-
ducts an assessment, asks questions that challenge the employee to think deeply about 
his or her goals and motives, helps the employee create an action plan, and follows up 
regularly to help the employee stay on track. Employees contribute to the success of 
coaching when they persevere in practicing the behaviors identifi ed in the action plan.44
Systems for Career Management
Employee development is most likely to meet the organization’s needs if it is part of 
a human resource system of career management. In practice, organizations’ career 
management systems vary. Some rely heavily on informal relationships, while others 
LO 8-6 Tell how manag-
ers and peers develop 
employees through 
coaching.
Coach
A peer or manager who 
works with an employee 
to motivate the em-
ployee, help him or her 
develop skills, and 
provide reinforcement 
and feedback.
LO 8-7 Identify the 
steps in the process of 
career management.
Acting as a mentor gives managers and other experienced 
employees a chance to develop their interpersonal skills 
and increase their feelings that they are contributing 
something important to the organization.

252 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
are sophisticated programs. As shown in Figure 8.3, a basic career management system 
involves four steps: data gathering, feedback, goal setting, and action planning and 
follow-up. Human resource professionals can contribute to the system’s success by en-
suring that it is linked to other HR practices such as performance management, train-
ing, and recruiting. Applied Materials helps employees develop for leadership roles by 
identifying proven measures of the traits and behaviors of effective leaders. Employees 
at the high-tech company use assessment tools to identify where they stand in terms 
of those measures, and they can participate in classroom training and coaching to 
strengthen leadership skills. The HR department customizes the development pro-
gram for the needs of particular departments or countries, and it is incorporating the 
leadership behaviors into its performance measures and performance-based rewards.45 
Unfortunately, not all organizations prepare their employees for leadership roles. See 
the “HR Oops!” box.
Data Gathering
In discussing the methods of employee development, we highlighted several 
 assessment tools. Such tools may be applied to data gathering, the fi rst step in the 
career management process. Self-assessment refers to the use of information 
by employees to determine their career interests, values, aptitudes, and behav-
ioral tendencies. The employee’s responsibility is to identify opportunities and 
 personal areas needing improvement. The organization’s responsibility is to pro-
vide  assessment information for identifying strengths, weaknesses, interests, and 
values.
Self-assessment tools often include psychological tests such as the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator (described earlier in the chapter), the Strong-Campbell Interest Inven-
tory, and the Self-Directed Search. The Strong-Campbell inventory helps employees 
identify their occupational and job interests. The Self-Directed Search identifi es em-
ployees’ preferences for working in different kinds of environments—sales, counseling, 
Self-Assessment
The use of information 
by employees to deter-
mine their career inter-
ests, values, aptitudes, 
behavioral tendencies, 
and development needs.
Data gathering
Criteria
for
success
Focus on
competencies
needed for
career success.
Maintain
conﬁdentiality.
Involve
management and
coaches/mentors.
Involve
management and
coaches/mentors.
Verify that pace
of development is
realistic.
Specify
developmental
methods.
Include a
variety of
measures.
Focus on speciﬁc
success factors,
strengths, and
improvement
areas.
Specify
competencies and
knowledge to be
developed.
Measure success
and adjust plans
as needed.
Feedback
Goal setting
Action planning
&
Follow-up
Figure 8.3
Steps in the Career Management Process

253
and so on. Tests may also help employees identify the relative values they place on 
work and leisure activities. Self-assessment tools can include exercises such as the one 
in Figure 8.4. This type of exercise helps an employee consider his or her current ca-
reer status, future plans, and the fi t between the career and the employee’s current situ-
ation and resources. Some organizations provide counselors to help employees in the 
self-assessment process and to interpret the results of psychological tests. Completing 
the self-assessment can help employees identify a development need. Such a need can 
result from gaps between current skills or interests and the type of work or position 
the employee has or wants.
Self-assessments play an important role in career development of employees being 
developed for leadership roles at Tyson Foods, a major processor of chicken, beef, and 
pork. These employees begin the development process by reading a book called The 
Organization Champion and completing an assessment that measures their skills in being 
an organization champion. The assessment helps the employees identify their strengths 
and areas for improvement. Next, the employees participate in a two-day event that in-
cludes time to identify their perspectives on life, their skills, what inspires them, and the 
HR departments are failing at devel-
oping leaders, according to Herminia 
Ibarra, a professor of leadership and 
organizational behavior at the inter-
national business school INSEAD. 
In her experience, organizations 
provide training to their managers 
mainly after promoting them to a 
new position—but in today’s econ-
omy, those promotions are rare.
Ibarra wondered what managers 
were relying on to develop leadership 
skills, so she conducted a survey that 
asked, “What, if anything, has helped 
you to become a more effective leader 
today?” The top answers were an ex-
ternal leadership program (such as 
attending business school), support 
from friends and family, and peers or 
an external network. In other words, 
the top sources of support were all 
outside the company. The two low-
est-ranked choices were formal train-
ing at the managers’ company and, at 
the bottom, their company’s human 
resource management.
Ibarra says the solution is 
basic: HR managers should be 
identifying the leadership skills 
that get results at the organiza-
tion and then delivering opportu-
nities for employees to develop 
those skills. Particularly important 
are stretch assignments, which 
provide meaningful experiences 
that prepare people for greater 
responsibility.
At the same time, managers do 
not have to wait for HRM to develop 
their careers for them. Managers who 
feel stuck in one position can take a 
look at whom they interact with—typ-
ically, the same job-related people, 
over and over. They can fi nd rea-
sons to contact people in other de-
partments and at other levels of the 
organization. They can join outside 
groups, where they can learn what is 
happening in other organizations and 
industries. Building relationships in 
new areas is an effective way to ex-
pand one’s career prospects.
Questions
 1. How might it hurt an 
organization when HR 
managers wait to provide 
leadership education until 
after employees have been 
promoted?
 2. Suppose you are an HR 
manager at a company with 
high turnover among middle 
managers (that is, many of 
them quit to work elsewhere). 
Write a brief argument telling 
the company’s executives why 
a modest but well-planned 
investment in leadership 
development might help 
the company keep its best 
managers.
Sources: Herminia Ibarra, “How Com-
panies Are Putting Managers in a 
Bind,” The Wall Street Journal, April 27, 
2014, http://online.wsj.com; Herminia 
Ibarra, “How to Break Through a Career 
Impasse,” Harvard Business Review, 
October 10, 2013, http://blogs.hbr.org; 
Herminia Ibarra, “To Close the Gender 
Gap, Focus on Assignments,” Harvard 
Business Review, May 22, 2012, http://
blogs.hbr.org.
Managers Must Look Outside for Development Support
HR Oops!

254 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
unique contributions they make to the company. All of these efforts deliver information 
the Tyson employees can apply to setting goals for their career development.46
Feedback
In the next step of career management, feedback, employees receive information 
about their skills and knowledge and where these assets fi t into the organization’s 
plans. The employee’s responsibility is to identify what skills she or he could realisti-
cally develop in light of the opportunities available. The organization’s responsibil-
ity is to communicate the performance evaluation and the opportunities available to 
the employee, given the organization’s long-range plans. Opportunities might include 
promotions and transfers.
Usually the employer conducts the reality check as part of a performance appraisal 
or as the feedback stage of performance management. In well-developed career man-
agement systems, the manager may hold separate discussions for performance feed-
back and career development.
Feedback
Information employers 
give employees about 
their skills and knowl-
edge and where these 
assets ﬁ t into the organi-
zation’s plans.
Step 1: Where am I?
Examine current position of life and career.
Think about your life from past and present to
the future. Draw a time line to represent
important events.
Step 2: Who am I?
Examine different roles.
Using 3" 3  5" cards, write down one answer
per card to the question “Who am I?”
Step 3: Where would I like to be, and what
would I like to happen?
Begin setting goals.
Consider your life from present to future. Write
an autobiography answering these questions:
• What do you want to have accomplished?
• What milestones do you want to achieve?
• What do you want to be remembered for?
Step 4: An ideal year in the future
Identify resources needed.
Consider a one-year period in the future.
Answer these questions:
• If you had unlimited resources, what would
   you do?
• What would the ideal environment look like?
• Does the ideal environment match Step 3?
Step 5: An ideal job
Create current goal.
In the present, think about an ideal job for
you with your available resources. Describe
your role, resources, and type of training or
education needed.
Step 6: Career by objective inventory
Summarize current situation.
• What gets you excited each day?
• What do you do well? What are you known for?
• What do you need to achieve your goals?
• What could interfere with reaching your goals?
• What should you do now to move toward
   reaching your goals?
• What is your long-term career objective?
Figure 8.4
Sample Self-Assessment Exercise
Source: Based on J. E. McMahon and S. K. Merman, “Career Development,” in The ASTD Training and Development Handbook, 4e, edited by R. 
L. Craig (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996), pp. 679–697. Reproduced with permission.

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  255
Texas electric utility Oncor makes feedback an important part of its career develop-
ment. Besides conducting 360-degree reviews of employees in its leadership develop-
ment program, it brings these employees together in groups to work on challenging 
projects. As they meet to discuss the projects and what they are learning, employees 
often fi nd that the groups provide the most important source of feedback and mo-
tivation because the group members grow so familiar with one another’s strengths, 
concerns, and goals.47
Goal Setting
Based on the information from the self-assessment and reality check, the employee 
sets short- and long-term career objectives. These goals usually involve one or more 
of the following categories:
 • Desired positions, such as becoming sales manager within three years.
 • Level of skill to apply—for example, to use one’s budgeting skills to improve the 
unit’s cash fl ow problems.
 • Work setting—for example, to move to corporate marketing within two years.
 • Skill acquisition, such as learning how to use the company’s human resource infor-
mation system.
As in these examples, the goals should be specifi c, and they should include a date by 
which the goal is to be achieved. It is the employee’s responsibility to identify the goal 
and the method of determining her or his progress toward that goal.
Usually the employee discusses the goals with his or her manager. The orga-
nization’s responsibilities are to ensure that the goal is specifi c, challenging, and 
attainable and to help the employee reach the goal. In the Patient Care and Clini-
cal Informatics (PCCI) division of Philips Healthcare, employees take assessments 
and then engage in regular career discussions to establish goals for where they 
want to go in PCCI and how they will get there over the next one to fi ve years. 
These personalized goals can involve lateral moves, enrichment of one’s ability 
to contribute in a current position, or even an exploration of career possibilities, 
not simply advancement to the next job upward in the company hierarchy. Just 
six months after PCCI launched this career management program, employees re-
ported feeling much more excited about working there.48
Action Planning and Follow-Up
During the fi nal step, employees prepare an action plan for how they will achieve 
their short- and long-term career goals. The employee is responsible for identifying 
the steps and timetable to reach the goals. The employer should identify resources 
needed, including courses, work experiences, and relationships. The employee and the 
manager should meet in the future to discuss progress toward career goals.
Action plans may involve any one or a combination of the development meth-
ods discussed earlier in the chapter—training, assessment, job experiences, or the 
help of a mentor or coach. The approach used depends on the particular develop-
mental needs and career objectives. For example, suppose the program manager in 
an information systems department uses feedback from performance appraisals to 
determine that he needs greater knowledge of project management software. The 
manager plans to increase that knowledge by reading articles (formal education), 
meeting with software vendors, and contacting the vendors’ customers to ask them 

256 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
about the software they have used (job experiences). The manager and his supervisor 
agree that six months will be the target date for achieving the higher level of knowl-
edge through these activities.
The outcome of action planning often takes the form of a career development plan. 
Figure 8.5 is an example of a development plan for a product manager. Development 
plans usually include descriptions of strengths and weaknesses, career goals, and devel-
opment activities for reaching each goal.
Name: 
Title: Product Manager 
Immediate Manager:
Competencies
Please identify your three greatest strengths and areas for improvement.
Strengths
• Strategic thinking and execution (conﬁdence, command skills, action orientation)
• Results orientation (competence, motivating others, perseverance)
• Spirit for winning (building team spirit, customer focus, respect colleagues)
Areas for Improvement
• Patience (tolerance of people or processes and sensitivity to pacing)
• Written communications (ability to write clearly and succinctly)
• Overly ambitious (too much focus on successful completion of projects rather than developing
   relationships with individuals involved in the projects)
Career Goals
Please describe your overall career goals.
• Long-term: Accept positions of increased responsibility to a level of general manager (or beyond).
   The areas of speciﬁc interest include, but are not limited to, product and brand management,
   technology and development, strategic planning, and marketing.
• Short-term: Continue to improve my skills in marketing and brand management while utilizing my
   skills in product management, strategic planning, and global relations.
Next Assignments
Identify potential next assignments (including timing) that would help you develop toward your
career goals.
• Manager or director level in planning, development, product, or brand management. Timing estimated
   to be Spring 2016.
Training and Development Needs
List both training and development activities that will either help you develop in your current assignment
or provide overall career development.
• Master’s degree classes will allow me to practice and improve my written communications skills. The
   dynamics of my current position, teamwork, and reliance on other individuals allow me to practice
   patience and to focus on individual team members’ needs along with the success of the projects.
Employee ____________________________ 
Date __________
Immediate Manager __________________ 
Date __________
Mentor ______________________________ 
Date __________
Figure 8.5
Career Development Plan

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  257
Development-Related Challenges
A well-designed system for employee development can help organizations face three 
widespread challenges: the glass ceiling, succession planning, and dysfunctional behav-
ior by managers.
The Glass Ceiling
As we mentioned in Chapter 1, women and minorities are rare in the top level of U.S. 
corporations. Observers of this situation have noted that it looks as if an invisible barrier is 
keeping women and minorities from reaching the top jobs, a barrier that has come to be 
known as the glass ceiling. A recent examination of the boards of directors of the largest 
100 companies based in the United States, Europe, and Asia found that 82% have at least 
two women on their board of directors, but in a separate analysis of the Fortune 500 (top 
U.S. companies), women held just 17% of the seats on the board. In other words, most 
companies have few, if any, women on their boards. Outside the United States, their rep-
resentation is even lower.49 For more evidence of the glass ceiling, see “Did You Know?”
The glass ceiling is likely caused by a lack of access to training programs, to appropriate 
developmental job experiences, and to developmental relationships such as mentoring.50 
With regard to developmental relationships, women and minorities often have trouble 
fi nding mentors. They may not participate in the organization’s, profession’s, or commu-
nity’s “old boys’ network.” Also, recent evidence fi nds differences in how women and men 
pursue advancement and in how executives perceive women’s and men’s qualifi cations and 
ambitions. Female managers tend to fi nd more mentors, but primarily mentors who give 
advice; their male counterparts fi nd, on average, mentors who are more senior and will 
sponsor them for key positions. Patterns of promotion suggest that companies are more 
willing to select men from outside the organization based on their potential, while women 
do better when they stay with the same company where they can demonstrate a track 
record of achievements. Consistent with this difference, women who actively promote 
their achievements tend to advance further in an organization, whereas broadcasting their 
achievements does not make much difference in their male colleagues’ advancement.51
Organizations can use development systems to help break through the glass ceil-
ing. Managers making developmental assignments need to carefully consider whether 
stereotypes are infl uencing the types of assignments men and women receive. A for-
mal process for regularly identifying development needs and creating action plans can 
make these decisions more objective.
An organization that is actively trying to eliminate the glass ceiling is Coca-Cola Com-
pany, where the effort is part of a commitment to corporate sustainability. The company’s 
chairman, Muhtar Kent, points out that at least two-thirds of the customers who buy the 
company’s products are women. Coca-Cola can best serve these customers, Kent suggests, 
if it is demographically more like them. Under a program called 2020, Coca-Cola set goals 
for identifying and developing talented female employees. In the program’s fi rst three and 
a half years, the percentage of women in Coca-Cola’s management rose from less than 
one-quarter of all managers to 40%. The company has a program aimed at developing 
managers’ ability to foster inclusiveness, as well as a Women in Leadership program that 
selects high-potential female managers for accelerated development.52
Succession Planning
Organizations have always had to prepare for the retirement of their leaders, but the 
need is more intense than ever. The aging of the workforce means that a greater share 
LO 8-8 Discuss how 
organizations are meet-
ing the challenges of the 
“glass ceiling,” succes-
sion planning, and dys-
functional managers.
Glass Ceiling
Circumstances resem-
bling an invisible barrier 
that keep most women 
and minorities from at-
taining the top jobs in 
organizations.

258
of employees are reaching retirement age. Many organizations are fueling the trend by 
downsizing through early-retirement programs. As positions at the top of organizations 
become vacant, many organizations have determined that their middle managers are fewer 
and often unprepared for top-level responsibility. This situation has raised awareness of the 
need for succession planning—the process of identifying and tracking high-potential 
employees who will be able to fi ll top management positions when they become vacant.
Succession planning offers several benefi ts.53 It forces senior management to regularly 
and thoughtfully review the company’s leadership talent. It ensures that top-level manage-
ment talent is available. It provides a set of development experiences that managers must 
complete to be considered for top management positions, so the organization does not 
promote managers before they are ready. Succession planning systems also help attract and 
retain ambitious managerial employees by providing development opportunities.
Succession planning focuses on high-potential employees, that is, employees the orga-
nization believes can succeed in higher-level business positions such as general man-
ager of a business unit, director of a function (such as marketing or fi nance), or chief 
Succession Planning
The process of identifying 
and tracking high-
potential employees 
who will be able to ﬁ ll 
top management posi-
tions when they become 
vacant.
Did You Know?
British consulting fi rm 20-fi rst sees 
a second glass ceiling for women 
who have risen to an organization’s 
board of directors. Among the di-
rectors, those with the greatest role 
in making decisions and defi ning 
strategy are the members of the ex-
ecutive committee. But especially 
outside the United States, female 
directors are much less likely than 
their male counterparts to serve on 
their board’s executive committee.
Furthermore, of the women who 
do land a spot, the majority hold staff 
positions such as head of the legal 
or HR department, rather than run-
ning sales or operations—suggest-
ing that companies are not actively 
developing women through stretch 
assignments in line positions.
Question
What do the data presented here 
suggest to you about how an em-
ployee development program could 
help an organization seeking greater 
diversity in its leadership?
Sources: Avivah Wittenberg-Cox, 
“Study: Female Executives Make Prog-
ress, but Mostly in Support Functions,” 
Harvard Business Review, April 21, 
2014, http://blogs.hbr.org; Martha C. 
White, “Women in Business Leadership: 
Up Against a Second Glass Ceiling,” 
NBC News, April 21, 2014; 20-fi rst, 
“20-fi rst’s 2014 Global Gender Balance 
Scorecard: Where the World’s Top Com-
panies Stand,” March 2014, http://20-
fi rst.com.
A Ceiling above a Ceiling
Firms with at Least Two Women at Each Level
United States
Europe
Asia
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage
Board of directors
Executive committee

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  259
executive offi cer.54 A typical approach to development of high-potential employees is 
to have them complete an individual development program including education, exec-
utive mentoring and coaching, and rotation through job assignments. Job assignments 
are based on the successful career paths of the managers whom the high-potential 
employees are preparing to replace. High-potential employees may also receive special 
assignments, such as making presentations and serving on committees and task forces.
Research shows that an effective program for developing high-potential employees 
has three stages55:
 1. Selection of high-potential employees—Organizations may select outstanding perform-
ers and employees who have completed elite academic programs, such as earning a 
master’s degree in business administration from a prestigious university. They may 
also use the results of psychological tests 
such as assessment centers.
 2. Developmental experiences—As employees 
participate in developmental experiences, 
the organization identifi es those who 
succeed in the experiences. The organi-
zation looks for employees who continue 
to show qualities associated with suc-
cess in top jobs, such as communication 
skills, leadership talent, and willingness 
to make sacrifi ces for the organization. In 
today’s high-performance business envi-
ronment, these assessments should mea-
sure whether participants in the program 
are demonstrating an ability to lead and 
delivering results that contribute to the 
company’s success. Employees who dis-
play these qualities continue to be con-
sidered high-potential employees.
 3.  Active involvement with the CEO—High-
potential employees seen by top man-
agement as fi tting into the organization’s 
culture and having personality charac-
teristics necessary for representing the 
company become actively involved with 
the chief executive offi cer. The CEO 
exposes these employees to the orga-
nization’s key people and gives them a 
greater understanding of the organiza-
tion’s culture. The development of high-
potential employees is a slow process. 
Reaching stage 3 may take 15 to 20 years.
Figure  8.6 breaks this process into eight 
steps. It begins with identifying the positions 
to be planned for and the employees to be 
included in the plan. Planning should also in-
clude establishing position requirements and 
deciding how to measure employees’ potential 
Figure 8.6
Process for Developing 
a Succession Plan
Sources: Based on 
B. Dowell, “Succession 
Planning,” in Implementing 
Organizational Interven-
tions, ed. J. Hedge and 
E. Pulakos (San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass, 2002), 
pp. 78–109; R. Barnett 
and S. Davis, “Creat-
ing Greater Success in 
Succession Planning,” 
Advances in Developing 
Human Resources 10 
(2008): 721–39.

260 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
for being able to fi ll those requirements. The organization also needs to develop a process 
for reviewing the existing talent. The next step is to link succession planning with other 
human resource systems. Then the organization needs a way to provide employees with 
feedback about career paths available to them and how well they are progressing toward 
their goals. Finally, measuring the plan’s effectiveness provides information for continuing 
or adjusting future succession plans.
A good example of succession planning is the effort at General Electric. GE insists that 
there be in place a plan identifying the top candidate to replace each executive in a key 
position, as well as two or three backup candidates in case something goes wrong with the 
plan for the top choice. During six-month reviews, GE’s board of directors learns about 
these individuals, so that if someone quickly fi lls a vacancy, the board is already familiar 
with that person. For instance, when senior vice president Larry Johnston left GE to be-
come chief executive of Albertsons, the company’s board already knew who would replace 
him. GE was able to announce the new senior vice president at the same time it announced 
Johnston’s departure—in fact, it could also announce other management changes as a se-
ries of promotions took place to fi ll each key vacancy that resulted.56
Dysfunctional Managers
A manager who is otherwise competent may engage in some behaviors that make 
him or her ineffective or even “toxic”—someone who stifl es good ideas and drives 
away employees. These dysfunctional behaviors include insensitivity to others, in-
ability to be a team player, arrogance, poor confl ict-management skills, inability to 
meet business objectives, and inability to adapt to change.57 For example, a manager 
who has strong technical knowledge but is abrasive and discourages employees from 
contributing their ideas is likely to have diffi culty motivating employees and may 
alienate people inside and outside the organization.
When a manager is an otherwise valuable employee and is willing to improve, the 
organization may try to help him or her change the dysfunctional behavior. The usual 
ways to provide this type of development include assessment, training, and counseling. 
Development programs for managers with dysfunctional behavior may also include 
specialized programs such as one called Individual Coaching for Effectiveness (ICE). 
The ICE program includes diagnosis, coaching, and support activities tailored to each 
manager’s needs.58 Psychologists conduct the diagnosis, coach and counsel the man-
ager, and develop action plans for implementing new skills on the job. Research sug-
gests that managers who participate in programs like ICE improve their skills and are 
less likely to be terminated.59 One possible conclusion is that organizations can ben-
efi t from offering development opportunities to valuable employees with performance 
problems, not just to star performers.
THINKING ETHICALLY
SHOULD MANAGERS FEEL OBLIGATED TO 
BE MENTORS?
If mentors play an important role in helping people develop 
their careers, should managers feel obligated to serve as 
mentors? It’s a delicate question for female managers, 
given the evidence that women continue to lag behind 
men in moving through the talent pipeline. Some, hearing 
about the low rate of women who report ever having had 
a mentor, want to help correct the imbalance. Managers 
who have experienced or witnessed other forms of dis-
crimination also might feel committed to mentoring as a 
way to even out the opportunities for talented workers.

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  261
One idea behind this kind of thinking is that the status 
quo in which some employees are at a disadvantage will 
never change unless people in charge behave differently. 
Change requires that someone in power step forward and 
make a point of helping the ones who have talent but aren’t 
sure how to navigate an unfamiliar business culture. Man-
agers who interpret the situation this way see themselves 
as the ones who must step forward, often by mentoring.
The question of whether to limit mentoring is tricky 
because time spent mentoring junior employees ben-
efi ts the protégés and the employer but not necessarily 
the mentor. Some consultants say they have observed 
managers, especially women, taking on so many pro-
tégés that they neglect their own career development. 
These observers suggest that such managers need to 
think more strategically about which employees to men-
tor—for example, selecting protégés who excel, contrib-
ute to the company, and refl ect well on the mentor.
Questions
 1.  Does committing signifi cant time to mentoring em-
ployees necessarily mean that a manager cannot 
develop his or her own career? Why or why not?
 2. Suppose you manage a mentoring program for 
your employer, and a well-liked manager tells you 
she receives so many requests to be a mentor that 
she isn’t sure how to handle them fairly. How could 
you help keep the program fair and equitable?
Sources: Peggy Drexler, “Can Women Succeed without a 
Mentor?” Forbes, March 4, 2014, http://www.forbes.com; 
Joann S. Lublin, “When Women Mentor Too Much,” The 
Wall Street Journal, October 11, 2013, http://online.wsj.com; 
 Barbara Frankel, “Sheryl Sandberg’s Message on Mentoring 
Is Wrong—and Dangerous,” DiversityInc, March 25, 2013, 
http://www.diversityinc.com.
SUMMARY
LO8-1 Discuss how development is related to training 
and careers.
• Employee development is the combination of 
formal education, job experiences, relationships, 
and assessment of personality and abilities to help 
employees prepare for the future of their careers.
• Training is more focused on improving perfor-
mance in the current job, but training programs 
may support employee development.
• In modern organizations, the concept of a career 
is fl uid—a protean career that changes along with 
changes in a person’s interests, abilities, and val-
ues and changes in the work environment. To plan 
and prepare for a protean career requires active 
career management, which includes planning for 
employee development.
LO8-2 Identify the methods organizations use for em-
ployee development.
• Organizations may use formal educational pro-
grams at the workplace or off-site, such as work-
shops, university courses and degree programs, 
company-sponsored training, or programs offered 
by independent institutions.
• An assessment process can help employees 
 identify strengths and areas requiring further de-
velopment. Assessment can help the organization 
identify employees with managerial potential or 
identify areas in which teams need to develop.
• Job experiences help employees develop by 
stretching their skills as they meet new challenges.
• Interpersonal relationships with a more experienced 
member of the organization—often in the role of 
mentor or coach—can help employees develop their 
understanding of the organization and its customers.
LO8-3 Describe how organizations use assessment of 
personality type, work behaviors, and job performance 
to plan employee development.
• Organizations collect information and provide 
feedback to employees about their behavior, com-
munication style, and skills.
• The information may come from the employees, 
their peers, managers, and customers.
• Many organizations use performance appraisals 
as a source of assessment information. Appraisals 
may take the form of 360-degree feedback.
• Some organizations use psychological tests  designed 
for this purpose, including the  Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator and the DiSC assessment.
• Assessment centers combine a variety of methods 
to provide assessment information.
• Managers must share the assessments, along with 
suggestions for improvement.
LO8-4 Explain how job experiences can be used for de-
veloping skills.
• Job experiences contribute to development 
through a combination of relationships, prob-
lems, demands, tasks, and other features of an em-
ployee’s jobs.
• The assumption is that development is most likely 
to occur when the employee’s skills and experiences 

262 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
do not entirely match the skills required for the 
employee’s current job, so employees must stretch 
to meet the demands of the new assignment.
• The impact varies according to whether the em-
ployee views the experience as a positive or nega-
tive source of stress.
• Job experiences that support employee develop-
ment may include job enlargement, job rotations, 
transfers, promotions, downward moves, and 
temporary assignments with other organizations.
LO8-5 Summarize principles of successful mentoring 
programs.
• A mentor is an experienced, productive senior 
employee who helps develop a less-experienced 
employee.
• Although most mentoring relationships develop 
informally, organizations can link mentoring to de-
velopment goals by establishing a formal mentor-
ing program. A formal program provides a basis for 
ensuring that all eligible employees are included.
• Mentoring programs tend to be most successful 
when they are voluntary and participants under-
stand the details of the program.
• The organization should reward managers for 
employee development, carefully select mentors 
based on interpersonal and technical skills, train 
them for the role, and evaluate whether the pro-
gram has met its objectives.
LO8-6 Tell how managers and peers develop employees 
through coaching.
• A coach is a peer or manager who works with an em-
ployee to motivate the employee, help him or her de-
velop skills, and provide reinforcement and feedback.
• Coaches should be prepared to take on one or 
more of three roles: working one-on-one with 
an employee, helping employees learn for them-
selves, and providing resources, such as mentors, 
courses, or job experiences.
LO8-7 Identify the steps in the process of career 
management.
• The process begins with data gathering. Employ-
ees use information to determine their career 
interests, values, aptitudes, and behavioral tenden-
cies, looking for opportunities and areas needing 
improvement. Data-gathering tools often include 
psychological tests or exercises that ask about ca-
reer status and plans.
• The organization then provides feedback by com-
municating information about the employee’s 
skills and knowledge and how these fi t into the 
organization’s plan.
• The employee sets goals and discusses them with 
his or her manager, who ensures that the goals are 
specifi c, challenging, and attainable.
• Finally, the employee works with his or her man-
ager to create an action plan and follow-up for de-
velopment activities that will help the employee 
achieve the goals.
LO8-8 Discuss how organizations are meeting the chal-
lenges of the “glass ceiling,” succession planning, and 
dysfunctional managers.
• The glass ceiling is a barrier that has been observed 
preventing women and other minorities from 
achieving top jobs in an organization. Development 
programs can ensure that these employees receive 
access to development resources, such as coaches, 
mentors, and developmental job assignments.
• Succession planning ensures that the organization 
prepares qualifi ed employees to fi ll management 
jobs as managers retire. It focuses on applying 
employee development to high-potential employ-
ees. Effective succession planning includes meth-
ods for selecting these employees, providing them 
with developmental experiences, and getting the 
CEO actively involved with employees who dis-
play qualities associated with success as they par-
ticipate in the developmental activities.
• For dysfunctional managers who have the poten-
tial to contribute to the organization, the organiza-
tion may offer development targeted at correcting 
the areas of dysfunction. Typically, the process in-
cludes collecting information about the manager’s 
personality, skills, and interests; providing feed-
back, training, and counseling; and ensuring that 
the manager can apply new, functional behaviors 
on the job.
KEY TERMS
employee development, 237
protean career, 238
assessment, 240
Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator (MBTI), 241
DiSC, 242
assessment center, 243
leaderless group discussion, 243
job experiences, 245
transfer, 247
downward move, 248
promotion, 248
externship, 248
sabbatical, 249
mentor, 249

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  263
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. How does development differ from training? How 
does development support career management in 
modern organizations? (LO 8-1)
 2. What are the four broad categories of development 
methods? Why might it be benefi cial to combine 
all of these methods into a formal development 
program? (LO 8-2)
 3. Recommend a development method for each of 
the following situations, and explain why you chose 
that method. (LO 8-2)
a.  An employee recently promoted to the job of 
plant supervisor is having diffi culty motivating 
employees to meet quality standards.
b.  A sales manager annoys salespeople by dictating 
every detail of their work.
c.  An employee has excellent leadership skills but 
lacks knowledge of the fi nancial side of business.
d.  An organization is planning to organize its pro-
duction workers into teams for the fi rst time.
 4. A company that markets sophisticated business man-
agement software systems uses sales teams to help 
customers defi ne needs and to create systems that 
meet those needs. The teams include programmers, 
salespeople who specialize in client industries, and 
software designers. Occasionally sales are lost as a 
result of confl ict or communication problems among 
team members. The company wants to improve the 
effectiveness of these teams, and it wants to begin with 
assessment. How can the teams use 360-degree feed-
back and psychological tests to develop? (LO 8-3)
 5. In an organization that wants to use work experi-
ences as a method of employee development, what 
basic options are available? Which of these options 
would be most attractive to you as an employee? 
Why? (LO 8-4)
 6. Many employees are unwilling to relocate because 
they like their current community and family 
members prefer not to move. Yet preparation for 
management requires that employees develop new 
skills, strengthen areas of weakness, and be exposed 
to new aspects of the organization’s business. How 
can an organization change an employee’s current 
job to develop management skills? (LO 8-4)
 7. Many people feel that mentoring relationships 
should occur naturally, in situations where senior 
managers feel inclined to play that role. What are 
some advantages of setting up a formal mentoring 
program, rather than letting senior managers de-
cide how and whom to help? (LO 8-5)
 8. What are the three roles of a coach? How is a coach 
different from a mentor? What are some advan-
tages of using someone outside the organization as 
a coach? Some disadvantages? (LO 8-6)
 9. Why should organizations be interested in  helping 
employees plan their careers? What benefi ts can 
companies gain? What are the risks? (LO 8-7)
 10. What are the manager’s roles in a career manage-
ment system? Which role do you think is most dif-
fi cult for the typical manager? Which is the easiest 
role? List reasons why managers might resist be-
coming involved in career management. (LO 8-7)
 11. What is the glass ceiling? What are the possible con-
sequences to an organization that has a glass ceiling? 
How can employee development break the glass ceil-
ing? Can succession planning help? Explain. (LO 8-8)
 12. Why might an organization benefi t from giving 
employee development opportunities to a dysfunc-
tional manager, rather than simply dismissing the 
manager? Do these reasons apply to nonmanage-
ment employees as well? (LO 8-8)
coach, 251
self-assessment, 252
feedback, 254
glass ceiling, 257
succession planning, 258
Taking Care of Employees Helps the Patent Office Serve the Public
When David Kappos became director of the U.S. Patent 
and Trademark Offi ce (USPTO) several years ago, he 
wanted to strengthen the federal agency’s focus on de-
livering high-quality service. The role of the USPTO’s 
11,000-plus employees is to review requests for patents 
and trademarks and to grant all requests that meet the 
legal requirements. As Kappos understood the agency, 
this means that the lawyers reviewing the requests will 
handle them accurately and effi ciently, and all the other 
employees will provide the support necessary to help the 
lawyers serve the public accurately and effi ciently. Fur-
thermore, Kappos determined that to create this service-
oriented culture, managers would have to gather input 
from stakeholders (especially applicants and employees), 
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY

264 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Procter & Gamble’s Succession Management Slip-Up
Consumer products giant Procter & Gamble made 
headlines recently when CEO Robert McDonald re-
tired and was replaced with former CEO A. G. Lafl ey. 
McDonald’s retirement was not a surprise, because 
P&G had struggled to recover since the recent reces-
sion dampened sales of P&G’s premium brands such as 
Tide detergent and Pampers diapers. What did surprise 
observers was that the company brought back a former 
CEO—implying it had not prepared anyone to move 
into the CEO’s position.
Lafl ey previously served as CEO from 2000 to 2009, 
during which time he gained a reputation for promoting 
innovation and for leading a successful international ex-
pansion. He mentored McDonald, who was chief oper-
ating offi cer when Lafl ey retired. However, McDonald 
did not hold positions that gave him practice in setting 
strategy or leading organizational change; he focused 
on managing operations. 
Expectations are that Lafl ey will stay for a few years 
and make grooming a replacement one of his main 
goals. This would be in keeping with Lafl ey’s behavior 
during his previous tenure as CEO, when he directed 
the board to begin thinking about his successor just six 
months after he took the position.
Lafl ey’s return raised questions about why P&G had 
no one ready to fi ll McDonald’s shoes. Some observers 
pointed to the departures of several leading executives 
during McDonald’s tenure. Still, at a struggling com-
pany, the board of directors (which is responsible for 
fi nding a replacement) would know it will need a re-
placement at the top in the near future.
This failure in succession planning was surprising 
to many because P&G has been known for its strong 
development program. Given its vast size and global 
scope, it offers many opportunities for management de-
velopment through job experiences, and top executives 
MANAGING TALENT
respond to the input, and develop systems that support 
employees in their efforts to provide great service.
One of the key systems is employee development. 
The agency created a leadership development imple-
mentation team to plan and administer this program. To 
ensure that the team would hear from its stakeholders, it 
includes executives and other decision makers from the 
agency’s departments. 
The USPTO offers development programs to all 
employees, not just managers. Based on the idea that 
leadership skills are relevant at all levels of the organiza-
tion, the development team identifi ed fi ve audiences for 
leadership training: individual leader, aspiring leader, 
new supervisor, midlevel leader, and senior leader. Ap-
plying leadership competencies identifi ed by the Offi ce 
of Personnel Management, the team identifi ed which 
skills and content are relevant to each level. In addition, 
each employee takes a “180-degree” assessment that 
combines self-assessments with feedback from supervi-
sors or mentors, aimed at identifying existing skills and 
areas requiring development. Employees use informa-
tion in the assessment report to identify the develop-
ment activities that will help them build relevant skills.
Managers not only engage in developing their own 
careers but also assist in developing the agency’s em-
ployees, so they receive additional developmental sup-
port. All senior managers undergo 360-degree feedback 
every two years and review the results with an executive 
coach. Also every two years, the company holds a one-
week leadership forum at which all levels of management 
discuss leadership issues. Bringing together managers 
across levels helps them understand issues they might 
not encounter on the job.
Employees appreciate these efforts. In annual em-
ployee surveys conducted by the Partnership for Pub-
lic Service, U.S. government employees rate their job 
satisfaction and commitment. In 2007, two years before 
Kappos became director, employee ratings placed the 
USPTO in 172nd place out of 222 agencies. Since then, 
the ratings have climbed until, in 2013, the USPTO 
reached fi rst place—the best place to work in the fed-
eral government. Satisfaction with employee develop-
ment was among the areas of work life that got the most 
credit.
Questions
 1. Besides the approaches to employee development 
described in the case, how else would you rec-
ommend that the USPTO provide for employee 
development?
 2. How could the USPTO strengthen the development 
program’s contribution to achieving the goal of cre-
ating a service-oriented culture?
Sources: Jennifer Tokar and John Tindal, “Lessons from the Best,” T+D, 
April 2014, pp. 55–58; Partnership for Public Service, “Profi les of Notable 
Movers,” Best Places to Work 2014, http://bestplacestowork.org; David J. 
Kappos, “Building a Service-Oriented Agency: Lessons from the USPTO,” 
McKinsey Center for Government, April 2014, http://www.mckinsey.
com; Danette R. Campbell, “Patent Offi ce Honored as Best Place to 
Work,” Public Manager, Summer 2013, Business Insights: Global, http://
bi.galegroup.com.

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  265
usually are promoted to their jobs from within the com-
pany. P&G’s learning team has a mission of developing 
an employee over 30 or 40 years through formal learn-
ing and varied job experiences. Each employee’s career 
development aims at goals spelled out in a development 
contract agreed upon by the employee and his or her 
manager. P&G also has a sophisticated computer sys-
tem for managing its succession planning.
Despite the departures of some key executives, 
some who remain may have potential to become the 
next CEO. Examples include Melanie Healey, group 
president of North America; Deb Henretta, group 
president of the global beauty care business unit; 
Martin Riant, group president of global baby care; 
and David Taylor, group president of global health 
and grooming. Other possible candidates are execu-
tives who left P&G to run other businesses, including 
Estee Lauder Companies and the private-equity fi rm 
Carlyle Group.
Questions
 1. Although the board of directors is responsible for 
fi lling the CEO position, how could HR managers 
support the board with a succession management 
program?
 2. Based on the information given, what developmental 
approaches were part of McDonald’s career develop-
ment? What approaches would you recommend for 
preparing P&G’s next top executives?
Sources: Ladan Nikravan, “Learning Is the Business at Procter & Gamble,” 
Chief Learning Offi cer, June 2014, pp. 30–31; Nadia Damouni, Olivia Oran, 
and Phil Wahba, “Exclusive: P&G Eyes Alumni Unit Heads as Candidates 
for CEO Job,” Reuters, February 13, 2014, http://www.reuters.com; Boris 
Groysberg and Deborah Bell, “Who’s Really Responsible for P&G’s Suc-
cession Problems?” Harvard Business Review, June 3, 2013, http://blogs.hbr.
org; Joann S. Lublin, Ellen Byron, and Emily Glazer, “P&G’s Lafl ey Be-
gins New Hunt,” The Wall Street Journal, May 24, 2013, http://online.wsj.
com; Lauren Coleman-Lochner and Carol Hymowitz, “P&G Says A. G. 
Lafl ey Rejoins as Chairman, CEO,” Bloomberg News, May 24, 2013, http://
www.bloomberg.com/news. 
Employee Sabbatical Benefits Others at Little Tokyo Service Center
The 100 full-time and 50 part-time employees of the 
Little Tokyo Service Center (LTSC) work to provide 
a range of social services targeting Asians and Pacifi c 
Islanders in Los Angeles County. The organization’s 
focus is on the needs of people in fi nancial diffi culty, 
with physical disabilities, or struggling with language or 
cultural barriers. Services include counseling, transpor-
tation, translation, and consumer education. Emergency 
care is provided in several different Asian languages 
plus English and Spanish. LTSC also has sponsored the 
construction or renovation of community development 
projects including apartments and community facilities 
such as child care centers.
LTSC’s executive director, Bill Watanabe, says he 
“really loves” his work, and no wonder, given the orga-
nization’s importance to the community. Consequently, 
the thought of taking a sabbatical would not have oc-
curred to him. But several years ago, Watanabe pro-
vided a professional reference to a colleague who had 
applied to the Durfee Foundation for a grant to fund a 
sabbatical. A staff member at the foundation suggested 
that Watanabe, too, might benefi t from a sabbatical. His 
initial response was that he didn’t need one. After all, he 
wasn’t burning out. But the staff member explained that 
a sabbatical could help LTSC’s people learn to operate 
more independently. When Watanabe mentioned this 
to the board of directors, they encouraged him to apply.
With that backing, Watanabe took a three-month 
sabbatical from LTSC. The fi rst two months were 
devoted to travel: a tour of Israel and Egypt, a vaca-
tion in Tahiti, and a road trip with his brother-in-law. 
After that, Watanabe stayed put long enough to write 
an autobiography.
Watanabe found that stepping away for a few months 
freshened his perspective on LTSC. When he returned, 
he applied his vision and renewed energy to restructure 
the agency through a merger of its community services 
center and its community development corporation, 
and he accelerated progress on a community organiz-
ing project. He also launched more vigorous advocacy 
to build a community gymnasium in the Little Tokyo 
neighborhood of Los Angeles, drawing positive atten-
tion from politicians and funding sources.
While Watanabe felt personally restored during his 
time away, he believes the agency benefi ted, too. In par-
ticular, he discovered that his absence provided develop-
mental opportunities for others at LTSC. The agency’s 
deputy director served as interim executive director 
while Watanabe was away, and two employees reporting 
to the deputy director shouldered the deputy’s respon-
sibilities. One of them has since been promoted. Build-
ing on these experiences, the second tier of management 
at LTSC has taken more direct control of the agency’s 
day-to-day activities, freeing Watanabe to concentrate 
on broader strategy. Their greater preparation also 
amounts to a kind of succession planning. According to 
LTSC’s board chairman, “If Bill were to leave tomorrow, 
the organization would be in very good hands.”
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

266 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
Questions
 1. Based on the information given, how well did Little 
Tokyo Service Center follow the career management 
process described in Figure 8.3? Which elements of 
that system, if any, were missing?
 2. Imagine that LTSC has called you in as a consul-
tant before Watanabe is to start his sabbatical. The 
agency has asked you to help obtain the maximum 
developmental benefi t from the sabbatical arrange-
ment. How would you recommend that Watanabe, 
the board of directors, and the second tier of man-
agement proceed?
 3. Keeping in mind that an agency like LTSC would 
have limited funding and just a few senior managers, 
suggest two additional development activities that 
are likely to be most benefi cial to the organization, 
and explain why you chose them.
Sources: Deborah S. Linnell and Tim Wolfred, Creative Disruption: Sabbaticals 
for Capacity Building and Leadership Development in the Nonprofit Sector (Com-
passPoint Nonprofit Services, 2009), p. 8; Little Tokyo Service Center, ”
About LTSC,” corporate website, www.ltsc.org, accessed June 10, 2014.
 1. F. Kalman, “ESPN’s Top Play: Learning,” Chief Learning Of-
fi cer, March 2013, pp. 22–25, 47; ESPN careers page, http://
espncareers.com.
 2. M. London, Managing the Training Enterprise  (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 1989); D. Day, Developing Leadership Talent 
 (Alexandria, VA: SHRM Foundation, 2007).
 3. R. W. Pace, P. C. Smith, and G. E. Mills, Human Resource De-
velopment (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991); W. 
Fitzgerald, “Training versus Development,” Training and De-
velopment Journal, May 1992, pp. 81–84; R. A. Noe, S. L. Wilk, 
E. J. Mullen, and J. E. Wanek, “Employee Development: Issues 
in Construct Defi nition and Investigation of Antecedents,” in 
Improving Training Effectiveness in Work Organizations, ed. J. K. 
Ford (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1997), pp. 153–89.
 4. J. H. Greenhaus and G. A. Callanan, Career Management, 2nd 
ed. (Fort Worth, TX: Dryden Press, 1994); D. Hall, Careers in 
and out of Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2002).
 5. M. B. Arthur, P. H. Claman, and R. J. DeFillippi, “Intel-
ligent Enterprise, Intelligent Careers,” Academy of Manage-
ment Executive 9 (1995), pp. 7–20; M. Lazarova and S. Taylor, 
“Boundaryless Careers, Social Capital, and Knowledge Man-
agement: Implications for Organizational Performance,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior 30 (2009): 119–39; D. 
Feldman and T. Ng, “Careers: Mobility, Embeddedness, and 
Success,” Journal of Management 33 (2007): 350–77.
 6. R. Noe, Employee Training and Development, 6th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill Irwin, 2013).
 7. Pat Galagan, “90,000 Served: Hamburger University Turns 
50,” T 1 D, April 2011, pp. 46–51; Beth Kowitt, “Why Mc-
Donald’s Wins in Any Economy,” Fortune, September 5, 
2011, EBSCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 8. University of Virginia Darden School of Business, 
“MBA 
for 
Executives,” 
http://www.darden.virginia
.edu, accessed March 30, 2012.
 9. Alicia Korney, “From Toys to Talent,” Chief Learning Offi cer, 
September 2011, pp. 48–52.
 10. A. Howard and D. W. Bray, Managerial Lives in Transition: Ad-
vancing Age and Changing Times (New York: Guilford, 1988); 
J. Bolt, Executive Development (New York: Harper Business, 
1989); J. R. Hinrichs and G. P. Hollenbeck, “Leadership De-
velopment,” in Developing Human Resources ed. K. N. Wexley 
(Washington, DC: BNA Books, 1991), pp. 5-221–5-237; Day, 
Developing Leadership Talent.
 11. Adrienne Fox, “Organizational and Employee Development 
Special Report: Upon Further Assessment . . . ,” HR Maga-
zine, August 2013, http://www.shrm.org.
 12. A. Thorne and H. Gough, Portraits of Type (Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press, 1993).
 13. D. Druckman and R. A. Bjork, eds., In the Mind’s Eye: Enhanc-
ing Human Performance (Washington, DC: National Academy 
Press, 1991); M. H. McCaulley, “The Myers-Briggs Type In-
dicator and Leadership,” in Measures of Leadership, eds. K. E. 
Clark and M. B. Clark (West Orange, NJ: Leadership Library 
of America, 1990), pp. 381–418.
 14.  Inscape Publishing, “DiSC Profi le,” http://www.discprofi le.
com, accessed June 5, 2014; Fox, “Organizational and Em-
ployee Development Special Report.”
 15. G. 
C. Thornton 
III 
and W. 
C. 
Byham, 
Assess-
ment 
Centers 
and 
Managerial 
Performance 
(New 
York: Academic Press, 1982); L. F. Schoenfeldt and 
J. A. Steger, “Identifi cation and Development of Manage-
ment Talent,” in Research in Personnel and Human Resource 
Management, eds. K. N. Rowland and G. Ferris (Greenwich, 
CT: JAI Press, 1989), vol. 7, pp. 151–81; Fox, “Organizat ional 
and Employee Development Special Report.”
 16. Thornton and Byham, Assessment Centers and Managerial 
Performance.
 17. P. G. W. Jansen and B. A. M. Stoop, “The Dynamics of As-
sessment Center Validity: Results of a Seven-Year Study,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 86 (2001), pp. 741–53; D. Chan, 
“Criterion and Construct Validation of an Assessment Cen-
tre,” Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology 69 
(1996), pp. 167–81.
 18. R. G. Jones and M. D. Whitmore, “Evaluating Developmen-
tal Assessment Centers as Interventions,” Personnel Psychology 
48 (1995), pp. 377–88.
 19. S. B. Silverman, “Individual Development through Per-
formance Appraisal,” in Developing Human Resources, 
pp. 5-120–5-151.
 20. J. F. Brett and L. E. Atwater, “360-Degree Feed-
back: Accuracy, Reactions, and Perceptions of Use-
fulness,” 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Psychology 
86 
(2001), 
pp. 930–42.
 21. Fox, “Organizational and Employee Development Special 
Report.”
NOTES

CHAPTER 8 
Developing Employees for Future Success  267
 22. L. Atwater, P. Roush, and A. Fischthal, “The Infl uence of Up-
ward Feedback on Self- and Follower Ratings of Leadership,” 
Personnel Psychology 48 (1995), pp. 35–59; J. F. Hazucha, S. A. 
Hezlett, and R. J. Schneider, “The Impact of 360-Degree Feed-
back on Management Skill Development,” Human Resource 
Management 32 (1993), pp. 325–51; J. W. Smither, M. London, 
N. Vasilopoulos, R. R. Reilly, R. E. Millsap, and N. Salvemini, 
“An Examination of the Effects of an Upward Feedback Pro-
gram over Time,” Personnel Psychology 48 (1995), pp. 1–34; 
J. Smither and A. Walker, “Are the Characteristics of Nar-
rative Comments Related to Improvements in Multirater 
Feedback Ratings over Time?” Journal of Applied Psychology 
89 (2004), pp. 575–81; J. Smither, M. London, and R. Reilly, 
“Does Performance Improve Following Multisource Feed-
back? A Theoretical Model, Meta-analysis, and Review of 
Empirical Findings,” Personnel Psychology 58 (2005), pp. 33–66.
 23. Center for Creative Leadership, “360-Degree Feedback: 
Best Practices to Ensure Impact,” 2011, http://www.ccl.org, 
accessed March 30, 2012.
 24. M. W. McCall Jr., High Flyers (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 1998).
 25. R. S. Snell, “Congenial Ways of Learning: So Near 
yet 
So 
Far,” 
Journal 
of 
Management 
Development 
9 (1990), pp. 17–23.
 26. M. McCall, M. Lombardo, and A. Morrison, Lessons of Experi-
ence (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1988); M. W. McCall, 
“Developing Executives through Work Experiences,” Human 
Resource Planning 11 (1988), pp. 1–11; M. N. Ruderman, 
P. J. Ohlott, and C. D. McCauley, “Assessing Opportunities 
for Leadership Development,” in Measures of Leadership, 
pp. 547–62; C. D. McCauley, L. J. Estman, and P. J. Ohlott, 
“Linking Management Selection and Development through 
Stretch Assignments,” Human Resource Management 34 (1995), 
pp. 93–115.
 27. C. D. McCauley, M. N. Ruderman, P. J. Ohlott, and J. E. Mor-
row, “Assessing the Developmental Components of Manage-
rial Jobs,” Journal of Applied Psychology 79 (1994), pp. 544–60.
 28. Jill Jusko, “Engineering Bench Strength,” Industry Week, Au-
gust 2011, p. 18.
 29. M. London, Developing Managers (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 1985); M. A. Camion, L. Cheraskin, and M. J. Stevens, 
“Career-Related Antecedents and Outcomes of Job Rota-
tion,” Academy of Management Journal 37 (1994), pp. 1518–42; 
 London, Managing the Training Enterprise.
 30. Margaret Fiester, “Job Rotation, Total Rewards, Measuring 
Value,” HR Magazine, August 2008, Business & Company 
Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com; “Energize 
and Enhance Employee Value with Job Rotation,” HR Focus, 
January 2008, OCLC FirstSearch, http://newfi rstsearch
.oclc.org.
 31. R. A. Noe, B. D. Steffy, and A. E. Barber, “An Investiga-
tion of the Factors Infl uencing Employees’ Willingness to 
Accept Mobility Opportunities,” Personnel Psychology 41 
(1988), pp. 559–80; S. Gould and L. E. Penley, “A Study 
of the Correlates of Willingness to Relocate,” Academy of 
Management Journal 28 (1984), pp. 472–78; J. Landau and 
T. H. Hammer, “Clerical Employees’ Perceptions of Intraor-
ganizational Career Opportunities,” Academy of Management 
Journal 29 (1986), pp. 385–405; M. Brett and A. H. Reilly, 
“On the Road Again: Predicting the Job Transfer Decision,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 73 (1988), pp. 614–20.
 32. J. M. Brett, “Job Transfer and Well-Being,” Jour-
nal 
of 
Applied 
Psychology 
67 
(1992), 
pp. 
450–63; 
F. J. Minor, L. A. Slade, and R. A. Myers, “Career Transitions 
in Changing Times,” in Contemporary Career Development Is-
sues, eds. R. F. Morrison and J. Adams (Hillsdale, NJ: Law-
rence Erlbaum, 1991), pp. 109–20; C. C. Pinder and K. G. 
Schroeder, “Time to Profi ciency Following Job Transfers,” 
Academy of Management Journal 30 (1987), pp. 336–53; Bev-
erly Kaye, “Up Is Not the Only Way . . . Really!” T 1 D, 
September 2011, pp. 40–45.
 33. Bureau of National Affairs, “Companies Encouraging Em-
ployees to Use Their Professional Skills,” HR Focus, April 
2013, pp. 5–7.
 34. Adrienne Fox, “Make a ‘Deal,’” HR Magazine,  January 2012, 
Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.gale-
group.com; “Wandering Librarian,” Library Journal, March 
15, 2012, EBSCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 35. D. B. Turban and T. W. Dougherty, “Role of Protégé 
 Personality in Receipt of Mentoring and Career Success,” 
Academy of Management Journal 37 (1994), pp. 688–702; E. 
A. Fagenson, “Mentoring: Who Needs It? A Comparison of 
Protégés’ and Nonprotégés’ Needs for Power, Achievement, 
Affi liation, and Autonomy,” Journal of Vocational Behavior 41 
(1992), pp. 48–60.
 36. A. 
H. 
Geiger, 
“Measures 
for 
Mentors,” 
Train-
ing 
and 
Development 
Journal, 
February 
1992, 
pp. 65–67; Lynnie Martin and Tyler Robinson, “Why You 
Should Get on Board the Mentor Ship,” Public Manager, 
Winter 2011, pp. 42–45; “The Payoff,” California CPA, Oc-
tober 2011, p. 12.
 37. K. E. Kram, Mentoring at Work: Developmental Relation-
ships in Organizational Life (Glenview, IL: Scott-Foresman, 
1985); L. L. Phillips-Jones, “Establishing a Formalized 
Mentoring Program,” Training and Development Journal 
2 (1983), pp. 38–42; K. Kram, “Phases of the Mentoring 
Relationship,” Academy of Management Journal 26 (1983), 
pp. 608–25; G. T. Chao, P. M. Walz, and P. D. Gardner, 
“Formal and Informal Mentorships: A Comparison of 
Mentoring Functions and Contrasts with Nonmentored 
Counterparts,” Personnel Psychology 45 (1992), pp. 619–36; 
C. Wanberg, E. Welsh, and S. Hezlett, “Mentoring Re-
search: A Review and Dynamic Process Model,” in Re-
search in Personnel and Human Resources Management, eds. 
J.  Martocchio and G. Ferris (New York:  Elsevier Science, 
2003), pp. 39–124.
 38. Michele Lent Hirsch, “Mentor Makeover,” Psychology Today, 
July/August 2011, EBSCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 39. L. Eby, M. Butts, A. Lockwood, and A. Simon,  “Protégés’ 
Negative Mentoring Experiences: Construct Develop-
ment and Nomological Validation,” Personnel Psychology 57 
(2004), pp. 411–47; R. Emelo, “Conversations with Men-
toring Leaders,” T  1  D, June 2011, pp. 32–37; M. Wein-
stein, “Please Don’t Go,” Training, May/June 2011, pp. 
38–34; “Training Top 125,” Training, January/February 2011, 
pp. 54–93.
 40. R. A. Noe, D. B. Greenberger, and S. Wang, “Mentoring: 
What We Know and Where We Might Go,” in Research in 
Personnel and Human Resources Management, eds. G. Ferris and 

268 PART 2 
Acquiring, Training, and Developing Human Resources
J. Martocchio (New York: Elsevier Science, 2002), vol. 21, 
pp. 129–74; T. D. Allen, L. T. Eby, M. L. Poteet, E. Lentz, 
and L. Lima, “Career Benefi ts Associated with Mentoring for 
Protégés: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 89 
(2004), pp. 127–36.
 41. D. B. Peterson and M. D. Hicks, Leader as Coach (Minneapo-
lis: Personnel Decisions, 1996).
 42. Alex Vorro, “Coaching Counsel,” InsideCounsel, February 
2012, Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.
galegroup.com.
 43. J. Smither, M. London, R. Flautt, Y. Vargas, and 
L. Kucine, “Can Working with an Executive Coach 
Improve Multisource Ratings over Time? A Quasi-
experimental 
Field 
Study,” 
Personnel 
Psychology 
56 (2003), pp. 23–44.
 44. Vorro, “Coaching Counsel.”
 45. Terri Armstrong Welch, “A Renewed Focus on Leadership,” 
T+D, November 2013, pp. 68–69.
 46. M. Thompson, “What Makes Tyson’s High-Potential 
Leadership Program Critical to Company Success?” T 1 D, 
April 2011, pp. 98–100.
 47. Debbi Elmer and T. Michael Quinn, “A Culture of Devel-
opment,” Transmission and Distribution World, February 2013, 
EBSCOhost, http://web.b.ebscohost.com.
 48. “Ladder Not Required,” T 1 D, March 2012, p. 80.
 49. Avivah Wittenberg-Cox, “Female Executives Make Progress, 
but Mostly in Support Functions,” Harvard Business Review, 
April 21, 2014, http://blogs.hbr.org; Catalyst, “Quick Take: 
Women on Boards,” Catalyst Knowledge Center, March 3, 
2014, http://www.catalyst.org.
 50. P. J. Ohlott, M. N. Ruderman, and C. D. McCauley, “Gen-
der Differences in Managers’ Developmental Job Experi-
ences,” Academy of Management Journal 37 (1994), pp. 46–67; 
L. A. Mainiero, “Getting Anointed for Advancement: The 
Case of Executive Women,” Academy of Management Ex-
ecutive 8 (1994), pp. 53–67; P. Tharenov, S. Latimer, and D. 
Conroy, “How Do You Make It to the Top? An Examina-
tion of Infl uences on Women’s and Men’s Managerial Ad-
vancements,” Academy of Management Journal 37 (1994), 
pp. 899–931.
 51. R. A. Noe, “Women and Mentoring: A Review and Research 
Agenda,” Academy of Management Review 13 (1988), pp. 65–78; 
B. R. Ragins and J. L. Cotton, “Easier Said than Done: Gen-
der Differences in Perceived Barriers to Gaining a Mentor,” 
Academy of Management Journal 34 (1991), pp. 939–51; Joann 
S. Lublin, “Female Directors: Why So Few?” The Wall Street 
Journal, December 27, 2011, http://online.wsj.com; Christine 
Silva and Nancy Carter, “New Research Busts Myths about the 
Gender Gap,” Harvard Business Review, October 6, 2011, http://
blogs.hbr.org; Catalyst, “Catalyst Study Explodes Myths about 
Why Women’s Careers Lag Men’s,” news release, October 13, 
2011, http://www.catalyst.org; “Too Many Suits,” The Economist, 
November 26, 2011, EBSCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 52. Josh Dzieza, “Coke CEO: Promoting Women Is Good 
 Business,” The Daily Beast, March 9, 2012, http://www.
thedailybeast.com; Coca-Cola Company, As Inclusive as 
Our Brands, 2010 U.S. Diversity Stewardship Report, ac-
cessed at http://www.thecoca-colacompany.com; Coca-
Cola Enterprises Ltd., “Corporate Responsibility Review, 
2010/11,” http://www.cokecorporateresponsibility.co.uk, ac-
cessed March 30, 2012.
 53. W. J. Rothwell, Effective Succession Planning, 2nd ed. (New 
York: AMACOM, 2001).
 54. B. E. Dowell, “Succession Planning,” in Implementing Orga-
nizational Interventions, eds. J. Hedge and E. D. Pulakos (San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2002), pp. 78–109.
 55. C. B. Derr, C. Jones, and E. L. Toomey, “Managing High-
Potential Employees: Current Practices in Thirty-Three 
U.S. Corporations,” Human Resource Management 27 (1988), 
pp. 273–90; K. M. Nowack, “The Secrets of Succession,” Train-
ing and Development 48 (1994), pp. 49–54; W. J. Rothwell, Effec-
tive Succession Planning, 4th ed. (New York: AMACOM, 2010).
 56. Robert J. Grossman, “Rough Road to Succession,” HR Maga-
zine, June 2011, pp. 47–51.
 57. M. W. McCall Jr. and M. M. Lombardo, “Off the Track: Why 
and How Successful Executives Get Derailed,” Technical Re-
port, no. 21 (Greensboro, NC: Center for Creative Leader-
ship, 1983); E. V. Veslo and J. B. Leslie, “Why Executives 
Derail: Perspectives across Time and Cultures,” Academy of 
Management Executive 9 (1995), pp. 62–72.
 58. L. W. Hellervik, J. F. Hazucha, and R. J. Schneider, “Behav-
ior Change: Models, Methods, and a Review of Evidence,” in 
Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 2nd ed., 
eds. M. D. Dunnette and L. M. Hough (Palo Alto, CA: Con-
sulting Psychologists Press, 1992), vol. 3, pp. 823–99.
 59. D. B. Peterson, “Measuring and Evaluating Change in Ex-
ecutive and Managerial Development,” paper presented at 
the annual conference of the Society for Industrial and Or-
ganizational Psychology, Miami, 1990.

CHAPTER
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance 
Organizations
CHAPTER
Managing Employees’ Performance
CHAPTER
Separating and Retaining Employees
PART THREE
9
10
11
Assessing and Improving 
Performance

Introduction
Stories of factory closings and offshoring are so common that people can be 
forgiven for believing that manufacturing in the United States is doomed. And it 
was surely a tense time for the employees of General Cable’s Jackson, Tennessee, 
plant a few years ago when the company undertook a study to determine whether 
it would be feasible to keep the facility open. General Cable, one of the world’s 
largest makers of wire and cable products, operates factories in 26 countries 
and has a vision of being the most highly regarded and successful company in 
its industry. If the company’s managers did not like the performance they saw in 
Jackson, they could certainly move production somewhere else.
Instead, management decided to keep the Jackson plant open, but it would have 
to improve its quality, safety, and efficiency—with no excuses about the severe 
recession into which the world economy had just plunged. The Jackson facility’s 
managers shut down operations for a day and called all the employees together. 
They announced a program called All In. Everyone who wanted to stay had to com-
mit to being flexible and learning new skills. Together, they would determine how to 
exceed expectations for safety and quality. Work was rearranged into production 
cells, with employees working as teams to make a complete product. Team mem-
bers were put in charge of their cell’s safety, quality, and productivity performance. 
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 9-1 
Deﬁ ne high-performance work systems, and 
identify the elements of such a system.
 LO 9-2 
Summarize the outcomes of a high-performance 
work system.
 LO 9-3 
Describe the conditions that create a high-
performance work system.
 LO 9-4 
Explain how human resource management can 
contribute to high performance.
 LO 9-5 
Discuss the role of HRM technology in high-
performance work systems.
 LO 9-6 
Summarize ways to measure the effectiveness of 
human resource management.
Creating and Maintaining 
High-Performance 
Organizations
PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
9

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 271
The company provided training to equip the employees for their new responsibilities. 
These changes have driven a 129% increase in productivity, as well as 54% growth 
in first-pass yield, a measure of production quality. Four years into the new program, 
General Cable named the Jackson plant its best facility in North America.1
The example of General Cable’s Jackson facility is a story of a company improving 
its performance. Measures of business performance include long-term profi ts, quality, 
and customer satisfaction. When the Jackson plant improves its safety and productiv-
ity, its costs go down, so General Cable is more profi table. Improving the quality of 
the products made in Jackson contributes to the company’s reputation and encourages 
stronger sales. But performance does not just happen at companies and production fa-
cilities. Performance at the company level depends on the performance of each depart-
ment, each production cell (team), and each employee. Human resource management 
can contribute to high performance at each of these levels—creating work systems 
associated with high performance, managing the performance of individual employees 
(discussed in the next chapter), and maintaining a high-performing workforce through 
decisions to separate and retain employees (discussed in Chapter 11).
This chapter begins with the basic goal for performance: the creation of 
 high-performance work systems. The chapter defi nes these systems and describes their 
elements and outcomes. We explain how human resource management can contribute 
to high  performance. Finally, we introduce ways to measure the effectiveness of human 
 resource management.
High-Performance Work Systems
The challenge facing managers today is how to make their organizations into 
 high-performance work systems, with the right combination of people, technol-
ogy, and organizational structure to make full use of resources and opportunities in 
achieving their organizations’ goals. To function as a high-performance work system, 
each of these elements must fi t well with the others in a smoothly functioning whole. 
Many manufacturers use the latest in processes including fl exible manufacturing tech-
nology, total quality management, and just-in-time inventory control (meaning parts 
and supplies are automatically restocked as needed), but of course these processes do 
not work on their own; they must be run by qualifi ed people. Organizations need to 
determine what kinds of people fi t their needs, and then locate, train, and motivate 
those special people.2 According to research, organizations that introduce integrated 
high-performance work practices usually experience increases in productivity and 
long-term fi nancial performance.3
Creating a high-performance work system contrasts with traditional management 
practices. In the past, decisions about technology, organizational structure, and human 
resources were treated as if they were unrelated. An organization might acquire a new 
information system, restructure jobs, or add an offi ce in another country without con-
sidering the impact on its people. More recently, managers have realized that success 
depends on how well all the elements work together. Consider how Massachusetts 
General Hospital addressed the information technology (IT) changes that came when 
the state of Massachusetts introduced health care reform. The hospital had to intro-
duce electronic health records, requiring IT investments at the same time it was im-
proving the organization’s overall effi ciency. But instead of assuming that effi ciency 
requires layoffs, the hospital brought its IT staff together and invited them to work 
in teams developing ideas for how to redesign their work to be more effi cient and 
LO 9-1 Deﬁ ne high-
performance work 
systems, and identify 
the elements of such a 
system.
High-Performance 
Work System
The right combination of 
people, technology, and 
organizational structure 
that makes full use of the 
organization’s resources 
and opportunities in 
achieving its goals.

272 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
deliver higher-quality service. Physicians spoke to the group about how their work was 
important to the hospital’s mission. Inspired by the mission and the chance to have a 
say, the teams developed ideas for managing information more effi ciently and with a 
focus on patients’ well-being. Those ideas could be carried out within the budget while 
avoiding layoffs. They also laid the groundwork for an information system that has 
continued to save the organization money as it has grown in subsequent years.4
Elements of a High-Performance Work System
As shown in Figure 9.1, in a high-performance work system, the elements that must 
work together include organizational structure, task design, people (the selection, 
training, and development of employees), reward systems, and information systems, 
and human resource management plays an important role in establishing all these.
Organizational structure is the way the organization groups its people into useful 
divisions, departments, and reporting relationships. The organization’s top manage-
ment makes most decisions about structure, for instance, how many employees report 
to each supervisor and whether employees are grouped according to the functions 
they carry out or the customers they serve. Such decisions affect how well employ-
ees coordinate their activities and respond to change. In a high-performance work 
system, organizational structure promotes cooperation, learning, and continuous 
improvement.
Task design determines how the details of the organization’s necessary activities will 
be grouped, whether into jobs or team responsibilities. In a high-performance work 
system, task design makes jobs effi cient while encouraging high quality. In Chapter 4, 
we discussed how to carry out this HRM function through job analysis and job design.
The right people are a key element of high-performance work systems. HRM has 
a signifi cant role in providing people who are well suited and well prepared for their 
jobs. Human resource personnel help the organization recruit and select people with 
the needed qualifi cations. Training, development, and career management ensure that 
these people are able to perform their current and future jobs with the organization.
Figure 9.1
Elements of a 
 High- Performance 
Work System

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 273
Reward systems contribute to high performance by encourag-
ing people to strive for objectives that support the organization’s 
overall goals. Reward systems include the performance measures 
by which employees are judged, the methods of measuring per-
formance, and the incentive pay and other rewards linked to suc-
cess. Human resource management plays an important role in 
developing and administering reward systems, as we will explore 
in Chapters 12–14.
The fi nal element of high-performance work systems is the 
organization’s information systems. Managers make  decisions 
about the types of information to gather and the sources of in-
formation. They also must decide who in the organization should 
have access to the information and how they will make the in-
formation available. Modern information systems, including the 
Internet, have enabled organizations to share information widely. 
HR departments take advantage of this technology to give employees access to in-
formation about benefi ts, training opportunities, job openings, and more, as we will 
describe later in this chapter.
Outcomes of a High-Performance Work System
Consider the practices of steel minimills in the United States. Some of these mills have 
strategies based on keeping their costs below competitors’ costs; low costs let them op-
erate at a profi t while winning customers with low prices. Other steel minimills focus 
on “differentiation,” meaning they set themselves apart in some way other than low 
price—for example, by offering higher quality or unusual product lines. Research has 
found that the minimills with cost-related goals tend to have highly centralized struc-
tures, so managers can focus on controlling through a tight line of command. These 
organizations have low employee participation in decisions, relatively low wages and 
benefi ts, and pay highly contingent on performance.5 At minimills that focus on differ-
entiation, structures are more complex and decentralized, so authority is more spread 
out. These minimills encourage employee participation and have higher wages and 
more generous benefi ts. They are high-performance work systems. In general, these 
differentiator mills enjoy higher productivity, lower scrap rates, and lower employee 
turnover than the mills that focus on low costs.
Outcomes of a high-performance work system thus include higher productivity 
and effi ciency. These outcomes contribute to higher profi ts. A high-performance work 
system may have other outcomes, including high product quality, great customer satis-
faction, and low employee turnover. Some of these outcomes meet intermediate goals 
that lead to higher profi ts (see Figure 9.2). For example, high quality contributes to 
customer satisfaction, and customer satisfaction contributes to growth of the busi-
ness. Likewise, improving productivity lets the organization do more with less, which 
satisfi es price-conscious customers and may help the organization win over custom-
ers from its competitors. Other ways to lower cost and improve quality are to reduce 
absenteeism and turnover, providing the organization with a steady supply of experi-
enced workers. In the previous example of minimills, some employers keep turnover 
and scrap rates low. Meeting those goals helps the minimills improve productivity, 
which helps them earn more profi ts.
In a high-performance work system, the outcomes of each employee and work group 
contribute to the system’s overall high performance. The organization’s individuals and 
LO 9-2 Summarize 
the outcomes of a 
high- performance work 
system.
In a high-performance work system, all the elements—
people, technology, and organizational structure—work 
together for success.

274 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
groups work effi ciently, provide high-quality goods and services, and so on, and in this 
way, they contribute to meeting the organization’s goals. When the organization adds or 
changes goals, people are fl exible and make changes as needed to meet the new goals.
Conditions That Contribute 
to High Performance
Certain conditions underlie the formation of a high-performance work system6:
 • Teams perform work.
 • Employees participate in selection.
 • Employees receive formal performance feedback and are actively involved in the 
performance improvement process.
 • Ongoing training is emphasized and rewarded.
 • Employees’ rewards and compensation relate to the company’s fi nancial 
performance.
 • Equipment and work processes are structured, and technology is used to encourage 
maximum fl exibility and interaction among employees.
 • Employees participate in planning changes in equipment, layout, and work methods.
 • Work design allows employees to use a variety of skills.
 • Employees understand how their jobs contribute to the fi nished product or service.
 • Ethical behavior is encouraged.
Practices involving rewards, employee empowerment, and jobs with variety con-
tribute to high performance by giving employees skills, incentives, knowledge, 
LO 9-3 Describe the 
conditions that create a 
high-performance work 
system.
Figure 9.2
Outcomes of a High-Performance Work System

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 275
autonomy—and satisfaction, another condition associated with 
high performance. Ethical behavior is a necessary condition of 
high performance because it contributes to good long-term re-
lationships with employees, customers, and the public.
Teamwork and Empowerment
As we discussed in Chapter 2, today’s organizations empower em-
ployees. They expect employees to make more decisions about how 
they perform their jobs. One of the most popular ways to empower 
employees is to design work so that it is performed by teams. On 
a work team, employees bring together various skills and experi-
ences to produce goods or provide services. The organization may 
charge the team with making decisions traditionally made by managers, such as hiring 
team members and planning work  schedules. Teamwork and empowerment contribute to 
high performance when they improve job satisfaction and give the organization fuller use 
of employees’ ideas and expertise.
At General Electric’s Greenville Airfoils facility in Piedmont, South Carolina, pro-
duction workers are cross-trained to work on teams. The production teams are involved 
in the employee selection process, interviewing job candidates and observing them as 
they participate in games where they work as a team to build a helicopter from blocks. 
In this way, they choose team members who work together effectively. In addition, the 
teams are empowered to design their own work processes. Teams have been so effective 
in improving effi ciency that GE lets the teams carry out essentially the same processes 
in different ways, if that is how they design the work.7
For empowerment to succeed, managers must serve in linking and coordinating 
roles8 and provide the team with the resources it needs to carry out its work. The man-
ager should help the team and its members interact with employees from other depart-
ments or teams and should make sure communication fl ows in both  directions—the 
manager keeps the team updated on important issues and ensures that the team shares 
information and resources with others who need them.
Knowledge Sharing
For more than a decade, managers have been interested in creating a learning organization, 
that is, an organization in which the culture values and supports lifelong learning by 
enabling all employees to continually acquire and share knowledge. The people in a 
learning organization have resources for training, and they are encouraged to share their 
knowledge with colleagues. Managers take an active role in identifying training needs 
and encouraging the sharing of ideas.9 An organization’s information systems, discussed 
later in this chapter, have an important role in making this learning activity possible. 
Information systems capture knowledge and make it available even after individual em-
ployees who provided the knowledge have left the organization. Ultimately, people are 
the essential ingredients in a learning organization. They must be committed to learn-
ing and willing to share what they have learned. 
A learning organization has several key features10:
 • It engages in continuous learning, each employee’s and each group’s ongoing ef-
forts to gather information and apply the information to their decisions. In many 
organizations, the process of continuous learning is aimed at improving quality. To 
engage in continuous learning, employees must understand the entire work system 
Learning Organization
An organization that 
supports lifelong learning 
by enabling all 
employees to acquire 
and share knowledge.
Continuous Learning
Each employee’s and 
each group’s  ongoing 
efforts to gather 
 information and apply 
the information to their 
decisions in a learning 
organization.
It’s important for companies to capture and share the 
knowledge of workers who have had years to learn 
their specialty.

276
they participate in, the relationships among jobs, their work units, and the organiza-
tion as a whole. Employees who continuously learn about their work system are 
adding to their ability to improve performance.
 • Knowledge is shared. Therefore, to create a learning organization, one challenge is 
to shift the focus of training away from merely teaching skills and toward a broader 
focus on generating and sharing knowledge.11 In this view, training is an invest-
ment in the organization’s human resources; it increases employees’ value to the 
organization. Also, training content should be related to the organization’s goals. 
Human resource departments can support the creation of a learning organization 
by planning training programs that meet these criteria, and they can help create 
both face-to-face and electronic systems for employee collaboration to create, cap-
ture, and share knowledge. Increasingly, this includes giving employees access to 
social-media tools for knowledge sharing, as described in “HRM Social.”
Given that we use social media to 
swap status updates, broadcast our 
ideas, and post content, it seems ob-
vious that social-media sites would 
be a tool for knowledge sharing. 
However, some social-media ex-
perts have questioned that assump-
tion. They point out some differences 
between what people do on social 
media and how organizations need 
employees to share knowledge. Their 
insights suggest ways that compa-
nies can improve knowledge sharing 
that occurs via social media.
Perhaps the biggest distinction 
is that much of the activity on so-
cial media involves individuals shar-
ing their own thoughts or ideas with 
other individuals, whereas knowl-
edge in organizations often is the 
product or need of groups. Thus, for 
example, effective knowledge shar-
ing would not be a company vice 
president writing a blog about cus-
tomer service. It might be teams of 
customer service representatives in 
different geographic areas discuss-
ing how they handle angry custom-
ers. As they trade ideas, they develop 
a broader body of knowledge.
Another distinction involves the 
kinds of content people tend to post. 
Typically, people use social media 
to post their thoughts or links to re-
sources they fi nd interesting. They are 
pushing content to the people in their 
networks. However, people tend to 
gain valuable knowledge when they 
post questions that pull in ideas from 
the people in their network. This sug-
gests that organizations can make 
social media more useful for knowl-
edge sharing if they train and encour-
age users to approach social media 
as a resource for soliciting ideas. The 
sites will be even more useful if em-
ployees can search them to look up 
relevant content.
Ideally, knowledge sharing deliv-
ers a complete body of objective, 
accurate information. However, the 
knowledge available is only as com-
plete as the people who choose to 
participate by posting it. Experience 
shows us that some people in a net-
work will post unverifi ed information 
or even nonsense. Thus, if organiza-
tions want employees to gather in-
formation through social media, they 
need to make the knowledge more 
complete by treating use of those 
tools as one of its expectations for 
employees. Rewards for participation 
also can help. To protect accuracy, 
they should look for sites with well-
informed moderators and should ap-
point moderators for their own sites. 
Questions
 1. Which sounds more useful 
for a business: a site where 
salespeople write stories 
about their daily experiences 
or one where salespeople 
ask for advice on handling 
challenges? Why?
 2. Suppose your company is 
considering a social-media 
site as a way for technicians 
to share tips for repairing 
equipment. Suggest at least 
two ways to keep the ideas 
useful and safe.
Sources: Knoco corporate website, “Knowl-
edge Management Behaviours and Culture,” 
Knowledge Management Reference, http://
www.knoco.com, accessed June 12, 2014; 
Nick Milton, “‘Social Media Will Destroy the 
Value in KM’—Discuss,” Knoco Stories, 
September 23, 2013, http://www.nickmilton
.com; Mark P. McDonald, “Social Media 
versus Knowledge Management,” Gartner, 
May 9, 2013, http://blogs.gartner.com; 
Lauren Trees, “Social Media’s Role in Knowl-
edge Management,” APQC Blog (American 
Productivity and Quality Center), March 11, 
2013, http://www.apqc.org.
When Social-Media Tools Support Knowledge Sharing
HRM Social

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 277
 • Critical, systematic thinking is widespread. This occurs when organizations encour-
age employees to see relationships among ideas and to test assumptions and observe 
the results of their actions. Reward systems can be set up to encourage employees 
and teams to think in new ways.
 • The organization has a learning culture—a culture in which learning is rewarded, 
promoted, and supported by managers and organizational objectives. This culture 
may be refl ected in performance management systems and pay structures that reward 
employees for gathering and sharing more knowledge. A learning culture creates the 
conditions in which managers encourage fl exibility and experimentation. The organi-
zation should encourage employees to take risks and innovate, which means it cannot 
be quick to punish ideas that do not work out as intended.
 • Employees are valued. The organization recognizes that employees are the source of 
its knowledge. It therefore focuses on ensuring the development and well-being of 
each employee.
Continuous learning and knowledge sharing can support an environment of em-
ployee empowerment. For example, some organizations are giving employees access 
to software that monitors their productivity on the assumption that if they know data 
about their performance, they can use the data to improve their own productivity. For 
example, a program called RescueTime measures how long computer users spend on 
each website and application, as well as their time away from the computer; TallyZoo 
lets users enter data—say, time spent on activities and amount of work completed—
and create interactive graphs for measuring progress and spotting trends and other 
patterns. One employee who used tools such as these discovered that he was most pro-
ductive when he switched tasks periodically, so he set up the software to remind him 
every 20 minutes to do something different. A programmer who assumed that chatting 
online was making him less productive tested that assumption and found that time 
chatting was associated with writing more lines of code. Armed with that information, 
the programmer gave a higher priority to networking with co-workers and customers. 
Notice in these examples that the workers had latitude to discover how they work best 
and to control how they applied what they learned.12
Job Satisfaction and Employee Engagement
A condition underpinning any high-performance organization is that employees be 
fully engaged with their work. Employee engagement is the degree to which em-
ployees are fully involved in their work and the strength of their commitment to 
their job and company. Being fully engaged tends to require that employees experi-
ence their jobs as fulfi lling or allowing them to fulfi ll important values. Research 
supports the idea that employees’ job satisfaction and job performance are related.13 
Higher performance at the individual level should contribute to higher performance 
for the organization as a whole. Consultants at Gallup have found that the organiza-
tions with the most engaged employees have signifi cantly greater customer satisfac-
tion, productivity, and profi tability.14 Aon Hewitt, another major consulting fi rm, 
has measured an association between employee engagement and revenue growth. 
Companies studied by Aon Hewitt cut spending on talent during the 2009 recession 
and saw engagement drop. As companies began reinvesting in employees, those that 
saw the biggest surge in employee engagement also reported the strongest growth in 
revenues.15 Organizations that want to beat the competition with highly engaged 
employees have plenty of room to compete; the “Did You Know?” box shows that 
the majority of U.S. workers are not engaged.
Employee Engagement
The degree to which em-
ployees are fully involved 
in their work and the 
strength of their job and 
company commitment.

278
As we will explore further in Chapter 11, organizations can promote job satisfaction 
and employee engagement in several ways. They include making jobs more interest-
ing, setting clear and challenging goals, and providing valued rewards that are linked 
to performance in a performance management system that employees consider fair. 
Globally, Aon Hewitt has found that the practices that do most to promote employee 
engagement are opportunities for career progress, recognition for accomplishments, 
and brand alignment.  Brand alignment is the process of ensuring that HR policies, 
practices, and programs support or are congruent with an organization’s overall cul-
ture or brand, including its products and services. One way to ensure HR policies align 
with a company’s strategic vision is to educate employees about the company’s “brand” 
and their role in bringing that brand to life as part of everyday work activities. Some 
companies discuss brand alignment as part of employee orientation programs while 
others develop in-depth training programs about the company’s brand and how each 
employee is an important contributor to the company’s overall success. In North 
America, employers have the most impact on brand alignment by providing career op-
portunities, using effective performance management systems, and maintaining a posi-
tive reputation.16
Brand Alignment
The process of  ensuring 
that HR policies, 
 practices, and programs 
support or are congruent 
with an organization’s 
overall culture (or brand), 
products, and services.
Did You Know?
A recent survey by Gallup found 
that in the United States, 30% of 
employees are engaged—defi ned 
to mean involved in, enthusiastic 
about, and committed to their work 
and making a positive contribu-
tion to their organization. Another 
52% are not engaged, and 18% 
are actively disengaged, meaning 
unhappy and unproductive. How-
ever, the U.S. workers were more 
likely than their counterparts in 
more than 90 other countries to be 
engaged; the only exceptions were 
Costa Rica (33% engaged) and 
Panama (37%).
Three in Ten U.S. Workers Describe Themselves as Engaged
Question
Suppose you are the HR manager 
for a chain of restaurants, and you 
want to propose that your company 
develop a highly engaged work-
force. How could you use this chart 
to promote your idea to the com-
pany’s business managers?
Sources: Gallup, “State of the American 
Workplace,” 2013, http://www.gallup
.com, accessed June 16, 2014; Steve 
Crabtree, “Worldwide, 13% of Em-
ployees Are Engaged at Work,” Gallup, 
http://www.gallup.com, accessed June 
16, 2014; Victor Lipman, “Surprising, 
Disturbing Facts from the Mother of 
All Employee Engagement Surveys,” 
Forbes, September 23, 2013, http://
www.forbes.com.
U.S. Employee Engagement
18% actively
disengaged
30% engaged
52%
not engaged

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 279
Some organizations are moving beyond concern with mere job satisfaction and are 
trying to foster employees’ passion for their work. Passionate people are fully engaged 
with something so that it becomes part of their sense of who they are. Feeling this way 
about one’s work has been called occupational intimacy.17 People experience occupa-
tional intimacy when they love their work, when they and their co-workers care about 
one another, and when they fi nd their work meaningful. Human resource managers 
have a signifi cant role in creating these conditions. For example, they can select people 
who care about their work and customers, provide methods for sharing knowledge, 
design work to make jobs interesting, and establish policies and programs that show 
concern for employees’ needs. Such efforts may become increasingly important as the 
business world increasingly uses employee empowerment, teamwork, and knowledge 
sharing to build fl exible organizations.18
Ethics
In the long run, a high-performance organization meets high ethical standards. 
Ethics, defi ned in Chapter 1, establishes fundamental principles for behavior, such 
as honesty and fairness. Organizations and their employees must meet these stan-
dards if they are to maintain positive long-term relationships with their customers 
and their community.
Ethical behavior is most likely to result from values held by the organization’s lead-
ers combined with systems that promote ethical behavior. At Arthur J. Gallagher & 
Company, an insurance brokerage and risk management fi rm, a vice president of cor-
porate ethics and sustainability reports directly to the fi rm’s CEO to ensure that ethi-
cal conduct is a priority. That vice president, Tom Tropp, travels to the fi rm’s more 
than 100 offi ces to discuss its values and listen to employees tell about issues they face. 
Employees might not expect at fi rst that the company really means what it says, but 
after Tropp takes employees’ concerns back to headquarters and the employees see 
top management respond, they recognize that the concern for ethics is real. Often, the 
person in charge of ethics is a lawyer, but Tropp’s training is in ethics and philosophy, 
which helps him think about ethical matters in a deeper way than mere compliance 
with the law.19
A number of organizational systems can promote ethical behavior.20 These include 
a written code of ethics that the organization distributes to employees and expects 
them to use in decision making. This type of guidance can be especially effective if 
developed with input from employees about situations they encounter. However, stan-
dards alone are not enough—the organization should reinforce ethical behavior. For 
example, performance measures should include ethical standards, and misdeeds should 
receive swift discipline. The organization should provide channels employees can use 
to ask questions about ethical behavior or to seek help if they are expected to do some-
thing they believe is wrong. Organizations also can provide training in ethical deci-
sion making, including training for supervisors in how to handle employees’ concerns 
about ethical matters.
As these examples suggest, ethical behavior is a human resource management con-
cern. The systems that promote ethical behavior include such HRM functions as train-
ing, performance management, and discipline policies. A reputation for high ethical 
standards can also help a company attract workers—and customers—who share those 
high standards. CA Technologies, which develops management software, includes 
standards for maintaining an ethical culture among its criteria for managers to re-
ceive performance-based pay. The company also provides training to help managers 

280 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
guide their employees in how to handle situations ethically. A chief ethics offi cer in CA 
Technologies’ legal department meets with managers and focus groups of employees 
to ensure they understand what the ethical standards are and how the company’s legal 
and ethical resources can help them navigate diffi cult decisions.21
HRM’s Contribution to High Performance
Management of human resources plays a critical role in determining companies’ suc-
cess in meeting the challenges of a rapidly changing, highly competitive environment.22 
The HR practices introduced in Chapter 1 are investments that directly affect employ-
ees’ motivation and ability to provide products and services that are valued by custom-
ers. Table 9.1 lists examples of HRM practices that contribute to high performance.
Research suggests that it is more effective to improve HRM practices as a whole 
than to focus on one or two isolated practices, such as the organization’s pay structure 
or selection system.23 Also, to have the intended infl uence on performance, the HRM 
practices must fi t well with one another and the organization as a whole.24
HRM Practices
Let’s take a closer look at how the HRM practices can contribute to high performance. 
Some of these are practices we have introduced already; others will be the subject of 
later chapters.
Job design can enable the organization to benefi t from teamwork and employee em-
powerment, two of the work conditions associated with high performance.  Job design 
aimed at empowerment includes access to resources such as information technology. 
The Lowe’s chain of home improvement stores wanted to empower its salespeople 
with more information they need to close sales. So it equipped the salespeople with 
iPhones that have apps for price scanning, locating items in the store, checking inven-
tory, and looking up competitors’ prices. Eventually, the phones also will be able to 
scan customers’ credit cards to complete sales transactions.25 Lowe’s hopes this much 
access to information will enable its salespeople to initiate conversations with shoppers 
and walk them through the entire decision process to the closing of a sale.
Recruitment and selection aim at obtaining employees who are enthusiastic about and 
able to contribute to teamwork, empowerment, and knowledge sharing. Qualities such 
as creativity and ability to cooperate as part of a team may play a large role in selec-
tion decisions. High-performance organizations need selection methods that identify 
more than technical skills like ability to perform accounting and engineering tasks. 
LO 9-4 Explain how 
human resource man-
agement can contribute 
to high performance.
 • 
HRM practices match organization’s 
goals.
 • 
Individuals and groups share 
knowledge.
 • 
Work is performed by teams.
 • 
Organization encourages continuous 
learning.
 • 
Work design permits flexibility in where 
and when tasks are performed.
 • 
Selection system is job related and 
legal.
 • 
Performance management system measures 
customer satisfaction and quality.
 • 
Organization monitors employees’ 
satisfaction.
 • 
Discipline system is progressive.
 • 
Pay systems reward skills and 
accomplishments.
 • 
Skills and values of a diverse workforce are 
valued and used.
 • 
Technology reduces time and costs of tasks 
while preserving quality.
Table 9.1
HRM Practices That 
Can Help Organizations 
Achieve High Performance

281
Employers may use group interviews, open-ended questions, and psychological tests 
to fi nd employees who innovate, share ideas, and take initiative.
When organizations base hiring decisions on qualities like decision-making and 
teamwork skills, training may be required to teach employees the specifi c skills 
they need to perform the duties of their job. Extensive training and development 
also are part of a learning organization, described earlier in this chapter. And when 
organizations delegate many decisions to work teams, the members of those teams 
likely will benefi t from participating in team development activities that prepare 
them for their roles as team members. In addition, high-performance organiza-
tions are developing their talent to move into positions with greater responsi-
bility—something that the “HR Oops!” box suggests is happening at very few 
organizations.
Performance management, introduced in Chapter 1 and explored in Chapter 10, 
ensures that employees’ work contributes to achieving the organization’s goals. In 
a high-performance organization, this requires making sure that employees know 
the organization’s goals and what they must do to contribute to goal achievement. 
A performance management system that meets those requirements applies the pro-
cess of employee performance, diagrammed in Figure 9.3. Individuals bring a set 
of skills and abilities to the job, and by applying a set of behaviors to the skills and 
abilities, they achieve results. The organization’s goals should infl uence each step 
of that process. The situation also has an infl uence on every step. For example, an 
Compared with organizations that 
lag behind them, high-performance 
organizations prioritize succession 
planning and leadership develop-
ment, according to the Institute 
for Corporate Productivity (i4cp). 
A survey by i4cp ranked compa-
nies in terms of scores based on 
their market share, revenue growth, 
profi tability, and customer satisfac-
tion. The survey found that the top-
ranked companies outperformed 
the low performers most dramati-
cally when it came to preparing for 
their future talent needs.
However, behind that informa-
tion is shocking news: less than 
one-third of respondents say their 
company is prepared for the future. 
Even among the top companies, 
only 27% say they have employ-
ees prepared for openings in the 
executive ranks, and only 18% are 
ready to fi ll management positions 
at lower levels. About one-third 
(34%) say their organization devel-
ops leaders effectively.
If these are the best companies, 
imagine the room for improvement 
at the low performers. And imagine 
the competitive advantage a skilled 
HR manager could deliver at an or-
ganization committed to improving 
its talent management. For example, 
i4cp has identifi ed two activities 
strongly associated with high perfor-
mance but rarely used: (1) identifying 
future leaders based on their infl u-
ence rather than their job title, and (2) 
taking a strategic approach to work-
force planning, tailoring develop-
ment programs to the competencies 
forecast to be needed in the future.
Questions
 1. What elements of a high-
performance work system 
(see Figure 9.1) would 
succession planning and 
employee development 
contribute to?
 2. What outcomes of a high-
performance work system 
(see Figure 9.2) would 
succession planning and 
employee development 
contribute to?
Sources: Institute for Corporate Pro-
ductivity, “The Top 10 Critical Human 
Capital Issues: Enabling Sustained 
Growth through Talent Transparency,” 
http://www.i4cp.com; Claudine Kapel, 
“Employers Grappling with Lack of 
Bench Strength,” Canadian HR Re-
porter, March 25, 2014, http://www
.hrreporter.com; Kevin Martin, “i4cp/
AMA Research: Employers Lack Bench 
Strength to Sustain High Performance,” 
i4cp blog, February 11, 2014, http://
www.i4cp.com. 
Few Companies Are Prepared for Future Talent Needs
HR Oops!

282 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
organization’s culture might infl uence how hard individuals try to please customers, 
and economic conditions might infl uence how much a salesperson sells, no matter 
how hard she tries.
This model suggests some guidelines for performance management. First, each 
aspect of performance management should be related to the organization’s goals. 
 Business goals should infl uence the kinds of employees selected and their training, 
the requirements of each job, and the measures used for evaluating results. Gener-
ally, this means the organization identifi es what each department must do to achieve 
the desired results, then defi nes how individual employees should contribute to their 
 department’s goals. More specifi cally, the following guidelines describe how to make 
the performance management system support organizational goals26:
 • Defi ne and measure performance in precise terms—Focus on outcomes that can be 
defi ned in terms of how frequently certain behaviors occur. Include criteria that 
describe ways employees can add value to a product or service (such as through 
quantity, quality, or timeliness). Include behaviors that go beyond the minimum 
required to perform a job (such as helping co-workers).
 • Link performance measures to meeting customer needs—“Customers” may be the or-
ganization’s external customers, or they may be internal customers (employees re-
ceiving services from a co-worker). Service goals for internal customers should be 
related to satisfying external customers.
 • Measure and correct for the effect of situational constraints—Monitor economic condi-
tions, the organization’s culture, and other infl uences on performance. Measures of 
employees’ performance should take these infl uences into account.
Compensation supports high-performance organizations when it is linked in part to 
performance measures. Chapter 13 will describe methods for doing this. An example 
is Intel, where part of employees’ pay (a bonus) is tied to the achievement of corporate 
objectives. The percentage of pay that comes as the bonus is greater for employees 
who hold higher-level positions at Intel, because they have more control over meeting 
the targets.27 Compensation also can be tied to performance-related conditions such 
as successful teamwork or—for a manager—job satisfaction among employees in the 
manager’s department. Furthermore, organizations can increase empowerment and 
Figure 9.3
Employee Performance 
as a Process

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 283
job satisfaction by including employees in decisions about compensation and commu-
nicating the basis for pay decisions.28 Some organizations share fi nancial information 
with employees or have them participate in setting group goals used as the basis for 
paying bonuses.
HRM Technology
Human resource departments can improve their own and their organization’s per-
formance by appropriately using new technology. New technology usually involves 
automation and collaboration—that is, using equipment and information processing 
to perform activities that had been performed by people and facilitating electronic 
communication between people. Over the last few decades, automation has improved 
HRM effi ciency by reducing the number of people needed to perform routine tasks. 
Using automation can free HRM experts to concentrate on ways to determine how 
human resource management can help the organization meet its goals so technology 
also can make this function more valuable.29 For example, information technology 
provides ways to build and improve systems for knowledge generation and sharing, as 
part of a learning organization. Among the applications are databases or networking 
sites where employees can store and share their knowledge, online directories of em-
ployee skills and experiences, and online libraries of learning resources, such as techni-
cal manuals and employees’ reports from seminars and training programs.
HRM Applications
As computers become ever more powerful, new technologies continue to be intro-
duced. In fact, so many HRM applications are developed for use on personal com-
puters that publications serving the profession (such as HR Magazine and Workforce 
Management) devote annual issues to reviewing this software. Some of the technologies 
that have been widely adopted are transaction processing, decision support systems, 
and expert systems.30
Transaction processing refers to computations and calculations involved in re-
viewing and documenting HRM decisions and practices. It includes documenting deci-
sions and actions associated with employee relocation, training expenses, and enrollments 
in courses and benefi t plans. Transaction processing also includes the activities required 
to meet government reporting requirements, such as fi lling out EEO-1 reports, on 
which employers report information about employees’ race and gender by job category. 
Computers enable companies to perform these tasks more effi ciently. Employers can fi ll 
out computerized forms and store HRM information in databases (data stored electroni-
cally in user-specifi ed categories), so that it is easier to fi nd, sort, and report.
Decision support systems are computer software systems designed to help 
managers solve problems. They usually include a “what if?” feature that managers can 
use to enter different assumptions or data and see how the likely outcomes will change. 
By applying internal data or research results, this type of system can help managers 
make decisions for human resource planning. The manager can, for example, try out 
different assumptions about turnover rates to see how those assumptions affect the 
number of new employees needed. Or the manager can test a range of assumptions 
about the availability of a certain skill in the labor market, looking at the impact of the 
assumptions on the success of different recruiting plans. Possible applications for a 
decision support system include forecasting (discussed in Chapter 5) and succession 
planning (discussed in Chapter 8).
LO 9-5 Discuss the role 
of HRM technology in 
high-performance work 
systems.
Transaction Processing
Computations and 
calculations involved 
in reviewing and docu-
menting HRM decisions 
and practices.
Decision Support 
Systems
Computer software sys-
tems designed to help 
managers solve prob-
lems by showing how 
results vary when the 
manager alters assump-
tions or data.

284 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
Expert systems are computer systems that 
incorporate the decision rules used by people 
who are considered to have expertise in a certain 
area. The systems help users make decisions by 
recommending actions based on the decision 
rules and the information provided by the users. 
An expert system is designed to recommend the 
same actions that a human expert would in a sim-
ilar situation. For example, an expert system 
could guide an interviewer during the selection 
process. Some organizations use expert systems 
to help employees decide how to allocate their 
money for benefi ts (when the company offers a 
set of choices) and help managers schedule the 
labor needed to complete projects. Expert sys-
tems can deliver both high quality and lower 
costs. By using the decision processes of experts, an expert system helps many people 
to arrive at decisions that refl ect the expert’s knowledge. An expert system helps 
avoid the errors that can result from fatigue and decision-making biases, such as bi-
ases in appraising employee performance. An expert system can increase effi ciency 
by enabling fewer or less-skilled employees to do work that otherwise would require 
many highly skilled employees.
In modern HR departments, transaction processing, decision support systems, and 
expert systems often are part of a human resource information system. Also, these 
technologies may be linked to employees through a network such as an intranet. Infor-
mation systems and networks have been evolving rapidly; the following descriptions 
provide a basic introduction.
Human Resource Information Systems
A standard feature of a modern HRIS is the use of relational databases, which store data 
in separate fi les that can be linked by common elements. These common elements are 
fi elds identifying the type of data. Commonly used fi elds for an HR database include 
name, Social Security number, job status (full- or part-time), hiring date, position, title, 
rate of pay, citizenship status, job history, job location, mailing address, birth date, and 
emergency contacts. A relational database lets a user sort the data by any of the fi elds. 
For example, depending on how the database is set up, the user might be able to look 
up tables listing employees by location, rates of pay for various jobs, or employees who 
have completed certain training courses. This system is far more sophisticated than the 
old-fashioned method of fi ling employee data by name, with one fi le per employee.
The ability to locate and combine many categories of data has a multitude of uses 
in human resource management. Databases have been developed to track employee 
benefi t costs, training courses, and compensation. The system can meet the needs of 
line managers as well as the HR department. On an oil rig, for example, management 
might look up data listing employee names along with safety equipment issued and 
appropriate skill certifi cation. HR managers at headquarters might look up data on the 
same employees to gather information about wage rates or training programs needed. 
Another popular use of an HRIS is applicant tracking, or maintaining and retrieving 
records of job applicants. This is much faster and easier than trying to sort through 
stacks of résumés. With relational databases, HR staff can retrieve information about 
Expert Systems
Computer systems that 
support decision mak-
ing by incorporating the 
decision rules used by 
people who are consid-
ered to have expertise in 
a certain area.
Expert systems can help with complicated business decisions such as 
scheduling the optimal number of employees for slow and busy work 
periods.

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 285
specifi c applicants or obtain lists of applicants with specifi c skills, career goals, work 
history, and employment background. Such information is useful for HR planning, 
recruitment, succession planning, and career development. Taking the process a step 
further, the system could store information related to hiring and terminations. By ana-
lyzing such data, the HR department could measure the long-term success of its re-
cruiting and selection processes.
One of the most creative developments in HRIS technology is the HR 
 dashboard, a display of a series of HR-related indicators, or measures, showing 
human resource goals and objectives and the progress toward meeting them. Man-
agers with access to the HRIS can look at the HR dashboard for an easy-to-scan 
review of HR performance. For example, at Cisco Systems, employee development 
is a priority, so its HR dashboard includes a measure that tracks how many employ-
ees move and why.31 By looking for divisions in which many employees make many 
lateral and upward moves, Cisco can identify divisions that are actively developing 
new talent.
Human Resource Management Online: E-HRM
During the last decade or so, organizations have seen the advantages of sharing in-
formation in computer networks. At the same time, the widespread adoption of the 
Internet has linked people around the globe. As we discussed in Chapter 2, more and 
more organizations are engaging in e-HRM, providing HR-related information over 
the Internet. Because much human resource information is confi dential, organizations 
may do this with an intranet, which uses Internet technology but allows access only 
to authorized users (such as the organization’s employees). For HR professionals, In-
ternet access also offers a way to research new developments, post job openings, trade 
ideas with colleagues in other organizations, and obtain government documents. In 
this way, e-HRM combines company-specifi c information on a secure intranet with 
links to the resources on the broader Internet. The “Best Practices” box tells how 
global charity Plan International is realizing benefi ts such as these.
As Internet use has increasingly taken the form of social-media applications, 
e-HRM has moved in this direction as well. Generally speaking, social media bring 
networks of people together to collaborate on projects, solve problems, or socialize. 
Social-media applications for human resource management include YouTube access 
to instructional videos, Facebook-style networking sites where employees can share 
project updates and ideas for improvement, web pages where employees can praise 
peers’ accomplishments and deliver rewards, and crowdsourcing tools for perfor-
mance appraisals. In terms of job design, social media can promote teamwork by 
providing an easy means of collaboration, and for recruiting over great distances 
social media allow virtual job fairs and/or selection interviews. As the use of social 
media continues to expand, creative minds will devise many other applications that 
forward-thinking HR professionals can introduce as ways to get employees more 
fully engaged with the organization and one another.
A benefi t of e-HRM is that employees can help themselves to the information 
they need when they need it, instead of contacting an HR staff person. For example, 
employees can go online to enroll in or select benefi ts, submit insurance claims, or 
fi ll out employee satisfaction surveys. This can be more convenient for the employ-
ees, as well as more economical for the HR department. Adding another kind of 
convenience, some companies are offering access to online coaching. Employees can 
look up answers to common problems in databases, post questions for colleagues to 
HR Dashboard
A display of a series of 
HR measures, showing 
human resource goals 
and objectives and 
progress toward meeting 
them.

286
answer, or contact a professional online. Thanks to the versatility and effi ciency of 
this kind of coaching, employers can offer it to employees at all levels, not just execu-
tives or high-potential managers targeted for development.32
Most administrative and information- gathering activities in human resource man-
agement can be part of e-HRM. For example, online recruiting has become a signifi -
cant part of the total recruiting effort, as candidates submit résumés online. Employers 
go online to retrieve suitable résumés from job search sites or retrieve information 
from forms they post at their own websites. For selection decisions, the organization 
may have candidates use one of the online testing services available; these services 
conduct the tests, process the results, and submit reports to employers. Companies 
can automate aspects of job design, such as schedules, delivery routes, and production 
layouts. Online appraisal or talent management systems provide data that can help 
managers spot high performers to reward or types of skills where additional training 
As a nonprofi t aimed to promote 
development worldwide, Plan Inter-
national has some tough challenges 
in talent management. The organi-
zation’s more than 10,000 employ-
ees work throughout the world. Not 
only are they spread out, but much 
activity takes place in 50 develop-
ing nations of Africa, Asia, and the 
Americas. Work on projects to pro-
mote child welfare and bring these 
communities 
better 
education, 
water, sanitation, and health may 
receive funding for a few years, and 
then the organization needs to send 
employees to a different project for 
which donors have provided funds. 
Also, Plan International’s employees 
help rebuild communities after disas-
ters. From an HRM standpoint, that 
means sudden, unexpected staffi ng 
needs under the worst conditions. In 
one case, employees were engaged 
in a disaster recovery and needed 
a French-speaking accountant. The 
organization frantically e-mailed its 
offi ces around the world, looking for 
that particular skill set.
To meet these HRM challenges 
more effi ciently, Plan International 
purchased e-HRM software from a 
company called SuccessFactors. 
The software unites applications for 
recruiting, hiring, training, compen-
sating, evaluating, and promoting 
employees. Because data storage 
and processing are handled re-
motely via cloud computing, with 
information available over the Inter-
net, employees in any location with 
Internet access can use the system. 
For example, an employee can look 
up organizational goals, set indi-
vidual performance goals that align, 
and keep performance records 
where they are easy to retrieve. The 
system also provides a searchable 
database of job candidates, so the 
organization can recruit from the da-
tabase as new needs arise.
One situation where e-HRM 
proved its value to Plan Interna-
tional was the devastation caused 
by Typhoon Haiyan, which recently 
struck the Philippines and destroyed 
the homes of 800,000 people. The 
agency needed to quickly locate the 
employees with the needed com-
bination of language skills and ex-
perience in meeting particular kinds 
of needs, such as education and 
child protection. By searching its 
SuccessFactors HR system, Plan 
International 
located 
employees 
not only by the skills they originally 
brought when hired, but also taking 
into account their learning and de-
velopment during their time with the 
organization.
Questions
 1. Why might e-HRM be 
especially valuable when an 
organization’s employees are 
spread out around the world, 
rather than in one location?
 2. Give an example of how 
e-HRM improves the 
effi ciency of human resource 
management for Plan 
International.
Sources: SAP, “Projects and Solu-
tions: HR Powers Global Growth,” 
SAP Investor, Q1 2014, http://www
.sap-investor.com; Derek Klobucher, 
“HR to the Rescue with a Cloud-Based 
Solution for Speedy Disaster Relief,” 
SAP Business Trends (blog), March 19, 
2014, http://scn.sap.com; Paul Solman, 
“Cloud-Based Systems Enable Perfor-
mance Management,” Financial Times, 
November 6, 2013, http://www.ft.com; 
SuccessFactors, “SuccessFactors So-
lutions Help Plan International Change 
More Lives,” customer case study, 
2013, http://www.successfactors.com. 
How e-HRM Helps Plan International Respond to Crises with Agility
Best Practices

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 287
is a priority. After Comcast installed a computerized 
talent management system, supervisors caught up 
with a backlog of performance appraisals, and man-
agement became able to fi nd the best employees to 
groom for promotions.33 Many types of training can 
be conducted online, as we discussed in Chapter 7. 
Herman Miller, which makes offi ce furniture, set 
up a performance support system that lets its sales-
people use their mobile devices to learn about new 
product features whether they are in the offi ce or out 
with clients.34 Online surveys of employee satisfac-
tion can be quick and easy to fi ll out. Besides pro-
viding a way to administer the survey, an intranet is 
an effective vehicle for communicating the results of 
the survey and management’s planned response.
Not only does e-HRM provide effi cient ways to carry out human resource func-
tions, it also poses new challenges to employees and new issues for HR managers to 
address. The Internet’s ability to link people anytime, anywhere has accelerated such 
trends as globalization, the importance of knowledge sharing, the need for fl exibility, 
and cloud computing. Cloud computing is another recent advance in technology that 
has several implications for HR practices. Cloud computing involves using a  network 
of remote servers hosted on the Internet to store, manage, and process data. These 
services are offered by data centers around the world (and not within an  organization’s 
offi ces) and are collectively called “the cloud.” These services offer the ability to access 
information that’s delivered on demand from any device, anywhere, at any time. Global 
giant Siemens has a massive cloud computing system for its more than 400,000 em-
ployees across 190 countries. In an effort to become more effi cient, the company stan-
dardized its global recruitment and personnel development processes into a single 
system via the cloud.35
These trends change the work environment for employees. For example, employ-
ees in the Internet age are expected to be highly committed but fl exible, able to 
move from job to job. Employees also may be connected to the organization 24/7. 
In the car, on vacation, in airports, and even in the bathroom, employees with hand-
held computers can be interrupted by work demands. Organizations depend on their 
human resource departments to help prepare employees for this changing work 
world through such activities as training, career development, performance manage-
ment, and benefi ts packages that meet the need for fl exibility and help employees 
manage stress.
Effectiveness of Human Resource Management
In recent years, human resource management at some organizations has responded 
to the quest for total quality management by taking a customer-oriented approach. 
For an organization’s human resource division, “customers” are the organization as a 
whole and its other divisions. They are customers of HRM because they depend on 
HRM to provide a variety of services that result in a supply of talented, motivated 
employees. Taking this customer-oriented approach, human resource management 
defi nes its customer groups, customer needs, and the activities required to meet those 
needs, as shown in Table 9.2. These defi nitions give an organization a basis for defi ning 
goals and measures of success.
Cloud Computing
The practice of using 
a network of remote 
servers hosted on the In-
ternet to store, manage, 
and process data.
LO 9-6 Summarize 
ways to measure the 
effectiveness of human 
resource management.
Many companies use social-media applications as part of their e-HRM 
strategies to communicate, coach, and train employees.

288 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
Depending on the situation, a number of techniques are available for measuring 
HRM’s effectiveness in meeting its customers’ needs. These techniques include re-
viewing a set of key indicators, measuring the outcomes of specifi c HRM activity, and 
measuring the economic value of HRM programs.
Human Resource Management Audits
An HRM audit is a formal review of the outcomes of HRM functions. To conduct the 
audit, the HR department identifi es key functions and the key measures of business 
performance and customer satisfaction that would indicate each function is succeed-
ing. Table 9.3 lists examples of these measures for a variety of HRM functions:  staffi ng, 
compensation, benefi ts, training, appraisal and development, and overall effectiveness. 
The audit may also look at any other measure associated with successful management 
of human resources—for instance, compliance with equal employment opportunity 
laws, succession planning, maintaining a safe workplace, and positive labor relations. 
An HRM audit using customer satisfaction measures supports the customer-oriented 
approach to human resource management.
After identifying performance measures for the HRM audit, the staff carries out 
the audit by gathering information. The information for the key business indicators 
is usually available in the organization’s documents. Sometimes the HR department 
has to create new documents for gathering specifi c types of data. The usual way to 
measure customer satisfaction is to conduct surveys. Employee attitude surveys, which 
we will discuss further in Chapter 11, provide information about the satisfaction of 
these internal customers. Many organizations conduct surveys of top line executives 
to get a better view of how HRM practices affect the organization’s business success. 
To benefi t from the HR profession’s best practices, companies also may invite external 
auditing teams to audit specifi c HR functions. In New Hampshire, Claremont Sav-
ings Bank hired an outside specialist to conduct a comprehensive audit of its HRM 
practices, focusing on payroll. The auditor showed the bank’s HR department how to 
ensure that its payroll contractor was submitting all the required taxes, and it verifi ed 
that the correct amounts were being deducted for the benefi ts each employee had 
signed up for. Based on this positive experience, Claremont now conducts an external 
audit every three years, as well as yearly internal audits.36
Analyzing the Effect of HRM Programs
Another way to measure HRM effectiveness is the use of HR analytics. This process 
involves measuring a program’s success in terms of whether it achieved its objectives 
and whether it delivered value in an economic sense. For example, if the organization 
sets up a training program, it should set up goals for that program, such as the train-
ing’s effects on learning, behavior, and performance improvement (results). The 
HRM Audit
A formal review of the 
outcomes of HRM func-
tions, based on identify-
ing key HRM functions 
and measures of busi-
ness performance.
HR Analytics
Type of assessment of 
HRM effectiveness that 
involves determining the 
impact of, or the ﬁ nan-
cial cost and beneﬁ ts of, 
a program or practice.
WHO ARE OUR 
CUSTOMERS?
WHAT DO OUR 
CUSTOMERS NEED?
HOW DO WE MEET 
CUSTOMER NEEDS?
Line managers
Committed employees
Qualiﬁ ed stafﬁ ng
Strategic planners
Competent employees
Performance management
Employees
Rewards
Training and development
Table 9.2
Customer-Oriented 
Perspective of Human 
Resource Management

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 289
analysis would then measure whether the training program achieved the preset goals. 
To learn more about how to make the most of data analytics using today’s powerful 
computers, see the “HR How To” box.
Wincanton, a trucking and logistics company in the United Kingdom, determined 
that it needed a more highly skilled workforce to continue winning the competition 
for customers. For warehouse workers, the company set three levels of learning ob-
jectives (two mandatory levels plus an optional level for employees seeking career 
BUSINESS INDICATORS
CUSTOMER SATISFACTION MEASURES
Stafﬁ ng
Average days taken to ﬁ ll open requisitions
Ratio of acceptances to offers made
Ratio of minority/women applicants to representation in 
local labor market
Per capita requirement costs
Average years of experience/education of hires per job 
family
Anticipation of personnel needs
Timeliness of referring qualiﬁ ed workers to line supervisors
Treatment of applicants
Skill in handling terminations
Adaptability to changing labor market conditions
Compensation
Per capita (average) merit increases
Ratio of recommendations for reclassiﬁ cation to number 
of employees
Percentage of overtime hours to straight time
Ratio of average salary offers to average salary in 
community
Fairness of existing job evaluation system in assigning grades 
and salaries
Competitiveness in local labor market
Relationship between pay and performance
Employee satisfaction with pay
Beneﬁ ts
Average unemployment compensation payment (UCP)
Average workers’ compensation payment (WCP)
Beneﬁ t cost per payroll dollar
Percentage of sick leave to total pay
Promptness in handling claims
Fairness and consistency in the application of beneﬁ t policies
Communication of beneﬁ ts to employees
Assistance provided to line managers in reducing potential 
for unnecessary claims
Training
Percentage of employees participating in training programs 
per job family
Percentage of employees receiving tuition refunds
Training dollars per employee
Extent to which training programs meet the needs of 
employees and the company
Communication to employees about available training 
opportunities
Quality of introduction/orientation programs
Employee appraisal and development
Distribution of performance appraisal ratings
Appropriate psychometric properties of appraisal forms
Assistance in identifying management potential
Organizational development activities provided by HRM 
department
Overall effectiveness
Ratio of personnel staff to employee population
Turnover rate
Absenteeism rate
Ratio of per capita revenues to per capita cost
Net income per employee
Accuracy and clarity of information provided to managers and 
employees
Competence and expertise of staff
Working relationship between organizations and HRM 
department
Source: From Chapter 1.5, “Evaluating Human Resource Effectiveness,” by Anne S. Tsui and Luis R. Gomez-Mejia from Human 
Resource Management: Evolving Roles & Responsibilities, edited by Lee Dyer, 1988. Copyright 1988, Society for Human Resource 
 Management, Alexandria, VA. Used with permission. All rights reserved.
Table 9.3
Key Measures of Success for an HRM Audit

290
development). It also let each warehouse set additional performance measures for serv-
ing its own set of customers. Two years after launching the training program, Wincan-
ton measured its success in terms of 2,500 warehouse workers trained, a decline in time 
lost to accidents (down 7.5% in the fi rst year and another 10.3% in the second year), 
and a 22% increase in the overall score for employee engagement.37
The analysis can take an economic approach that measures the dollar value of the 
program’s costs and benefi ts. Successful programs should deliver value that is greater 
than the programs’ costs. Costs include employees’ compensation as well as the costs 
to administer HRM programs such as training, employee development, or satisfaction 
surveys. Benefi ts could include a reduction in the costs associated with employee ab-
senteeism and turnover, as well as improved productivity associated with better selec-
tion and training programs.
In general, HR departments should be able to improve their performance through 
some combination of greater effi ciency and greater effectiveness. Greater effi ciency 
means the HR department uses fewer and less-costly resources to perform its functions. 
Greater effectiveness means that what the HR department does—for example, selecting 
HR managers can be a valuable part-
ner in decision making if they know 
how to use analytical skills and data. 
Here are some guidelines to follow:
 • Hire HR employees with statisti-
cal knowledge and analytical 
skills. This may require recruiting 
employees who previously spe-
cialized in other functions. At the 
same time, current HR employees 
lacking skill in this area should 
consider additional training.
 • Talk to business leaders about 
the talent challenges they face. 
Identify problems that you could 
help answer if you had more 
information, and determine the 
kinds of data that could give you 
that missing information. These 
are situations where data analyt-
ics can help.
 • Review the assumptions the HR 
department currently makes. 
Test those assumptions to see 
if you can improve your deci-
sions. For example, a fi nancial 
services company tried to recruit 
and select the best salespeople 
by identifying graduates with 
the best grades from the most 
prestigious schools. To check 
its assumption that these were 
the most effective salespeople, 
it compared the sales perfor-
mance of its units with the edu-
cational backgrounds of each 
unit’s salespeople. It learned 
that other factors were more 
important than educational 
background. Then, by shifting 
its hiring decisions, the com-
pany added millions to its sales 
revenue.
 • Make a practice of thinking 
about the business impact of HR 
activities. Frame them in terms 
of questions. For example, what 
is the impact on engineering 
costs and quality if you hire 
temporary (contract) workers in-
stead of permanent employees? 
What is the relationship between 
managers’ participation in lead-
ership training and the perfor-
mance and employee turnover 
of the managers’ departments? 
Investigate such questions, 
implement improvements that 
the results suggest, and then 
measure whether the changes 
are improving the organization’s 
performance. These are steps 
toward creating a high-perfor-
mance organization.
Questions
 1. How might the use of data 
analytics improve the quality of 
decisions that had been based 
on intuition and experience?
 2. What might be the 
consequence of gathering 
data without fi rst developing 
relevant questions to answer 
with the numbers?
Sources: John Boudreau, “What Is the 
Future of HR?” Workforce, March 28, 
2014, http://www.workforce.com; Cliff 
Stevenson, “Four Ways High-Performing 
Organizations Are Adapting to the Age of 
Data,” Institute for Corporate Productivity, 
December 4, 2013, http://www.i4cp.com; 
Institute for Corporate Productivity, “The 
Age of Big Data: A Progress Report for 
Organizations and HR,” 2013 preview edi-
tion, http://www.i4cp.com; David C. For-
man, “Stuck in Neutral,” T+D, November 
2013, pp. 46–50.
Making the Most of HR Analytics
HR How To

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 291
employees or setting up a performance management system—has a more benefi cial ef-
fect on employees’ and the organization’s performance. The computing power available 
to today’s organizations, coupled with people who have skills in HR analytics, enables 
companies to fi nd more ways than ever to identify practices associated with greater 
effi ciency and effectiveness. For example, organizations can measure patterns in em-
ployees’ social networks—who is talking to whom, how often—and combine that with 
performance data. One lesson from such research is that a recruiter’s closest friends and 
colleagues are less useful as a source of leads to qualifi ed job candidates than are people 
the recruiter communicates with only occasionally. These less-close associates are like-
lier to have acquaintances who aren’t already familiar to the recruiter.38
HRM’s potential to affect employees’ well-being and the organization’s per-
formance makes human resource management an exciting fi eld. As we have shown 
throughout the book, every HRM function calls for decisions that have the potential 
to help individuals and organizations achieve their goals. For HR managers to fulfi ll 
that potential, they must ensure that their decisions are well grounded. The fi eld of 
human resource management provides tremendous opportunity to future researchers 
and managers who want to make a difference in many people’s lives.
THINKING ETHICALLY
HOW CAN—AND SHOULD—ORGANIZATIONS 
MEASURE ETHICS PERFORMANCE?
If we accept that ethical conduct is among the condi-
tions that contribute to high performance, then shouldn’t 
organizations be measuring it? Or more broadly, if an 
organization wants employees to achieve something, 
the organization needs to establish goals, allocate re-
sources, measure performance, and make corrections if 
it is falling short. That would apply to ethical conduct as 
well as other goals such as effi ciency and high quality.
An example of this principle contributing to high per-
formance comes from the University of Michigan Health 
Systems. That organization addressed the problem of 
reducing medical mistakes and improving patient safety 
by crafting the Michigan Model, which emphasizes col-
laboration and transparency. The model is best known 
for its idea that doctors should freely admit to patients 
when they have made a mistake and offer an apology. 
The doctors were relieved to be honest, instead of de-
ferring to the legal system, and the patients were grate-
ful for the honesty and less likely to sue. In addition, 
the system promotes a culture of problem solving and 
collaboration instead of blame when mistakes occur, so 
doctors and hospital employees work together on im-
proving outcomes. The program has made the health 
system a more desirable place to work and improved 
the quality of care.
To measure ethics performance, organizations must 
develop and communicate defi nitions of their standards 
for ethical conduct. For example, employees of the Uni-
versity of Michigan Health Systems would need to know 
not only that their institute values patient safety but also 
what they are supposed to do if they see conduct that 
compromises safety. Systems need to be in place for 
reporting a problem without retaliation.
One challenge with measuring ethics performance is 
that some unethical behavior occurs under the radar. For 
example, if a group of employees mislead a customer 
in order to close a sale, it is easier for the company to 
count the value of the sale than to observe the details of 
the conduct leading up to the sale. For ethical conduct, 
the company might need indirect measures, such as 
surveys asking employees whether they have observed 
unethical conduct and whether they feel able to report 
that conduct without being punished for it. A model of 
this type of survey is the National Business Ethics Sur-
vey of the Ethics Resource Center. That survey has been 
observing a declining trend in observed misconduct, but 
its record low of 41% in 2013 still means that four out 
of ten employees are witnessing ethics violations such 
as bribery, health and safety violations, and violations of 
rules related to compensation and overtime.
Questions
 1. How would you expect the measurement of ethi-
cal behavior to affect employees’ conduct on the 
job?

292 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
 2. How could the various HRM practices, such as 
training and performance management, contribute 
to achieving an organization’s goal of measuring 
and maintaining high standards for ethical conduct?
Sources: Dov Seidman, “The Transformative Power of 
Transparency,” The New York Times, May 23, 2014, http://
dealbook.nytimes.com; Ethics Resource Center, National 
Business Ethics Survey of the U.S. Workforce (Arlington, VA: 
Ethics Resource Center, 2014), accessed at http://www.eth-
ics.org; Jeffrey Pfeffer, “Measure (and Reward) Ethical Behav-
ior,” Inc., March 26, 2013, http://www.inc.com.
SUMMARY
LO 9-1 Defi ne high-performance work systems, and 
identify the elements of such a system.
• A high-performance work system is the right 
combination of people, technology, and organiza-
tional structure that makes full use of the organi-
zation’s resources and opportunities in achieving 
its goals.
• The elements of a high-performance work system 
are organizational structure, task design, people, 
reward systems, and information systems. These 
elements must work together in a smoothly func-
tioning whole.
LO 9-2 Summarize the outcomes of a high-performance 
work system.
• A high-performance work system achieves the or-
ganization’s goals, typically including growth, pro-
ductivity, and high profi ts.
• On the way to achieving these overall goals, the 
high-performance work system meets such in-
termediate goals as high quality, innovation, cus-
tomer satisfaction, job satisfaction, and reduced 
absenteeism and turnover.
LO 9-3 Describe the conditions that create a high-per-
formance work system.
• Many conditions contribute to high-performance 
work systems by giving employees skills, incentives, 
knowledge, autonomy, and employee satisfaction.
• Teamwork and empowerment can make work 
more satisfying and provide a means for employ-
ees to improve quality and productivity.
• Organizations can improve performance by creat-
ing a learning organization in which people con-
stantly learn and share knowledge so that they 
continually expand their capacity to achieve the 
results they desire.
• In a high-performance organization, employees 
experience job satisfaction or even “occupational 
intimacy.”
• For long-run high performance, organizations 
and employees must be ethical as well.
LO 9-4 Explain how human resource management can 
contribute to high performance.
• Jobs should be designed to foster teamwork and 
employee empowerment.
• Recruitment and selection should focus on ob-
taining employees who have the qualities neces-
sary for teamwork, empowerment, and knowledge 
sharing.
• When the organization selects for teamwork and de-
cision-making skills, it may have to provide training 
in specifi c job tasks. Training also is important be-
cause of its role in creating a learning organization.
• The performance management system should be 
related to the organization’s goals, with a focus on 
meeting internal and external customers’ needs.
• Compensation should include links to perfor-
mance, and employees should be included in deci-
sions about compensation.
• Research suggests that it is more effective to im-
prove HRM practices as a whole than to focus on 
one or two isolated practices.
LO 9-5 Discuss the role of HRM technology in high-
performance work systems.
• Technology can improve the effi ciency of the 
human resource management functions and sup-
port knowledge sharing.
• HRM applications involve transaction processing, 
decision support systems, and expert systems.
• These often are part of a human resource infor-
mation system using relational databases, which 
can improve the effi ciency of routine tasks and the 
quality of decisions.
• With Internet technology, organizations can use 
e-HRM to let all the organization’s employees 
help themselves to the HR information they need 
whenever they need it.
LO 9-6 Summarize ways to measure the effectiveness of 
human resource management.
• Taking a customer-oriented approach, HRM can 
improve quality by defi ning the internal customers 

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 293
who use its services and determining whether it is 
meeting those customers’ needs.
• One way to do this is with an HRM audit, a formal 
review of the outcomes of HRM functions. The 
audit may look at any measure associated with 
successful management of human resources. Audit 
information may come from the organization’s 
documents and surveys of customer satisfaction.
• Another way to measure HRM effectiveness is to 
analyze specifi c programs or activities. HR analyt-
ics can measure success in terms of whether a pro-
gram met its objectives and whether it delivered 
value in an economic sense, such as by leading to 
productivity improvements.
KEY TERMS
high-performance work system, 
271
learning organization, 275
continuous learning, 275
employee engagement, 277
brand alignment, 278
transaction processing, 283
decision support systems, 283
expert systems, 284
HR dashboard, 285
cloud computing, 287
HRM audit, 288
HR analytics, 288
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. What is a high-performance work system? What 
are its elements? Which of these elements involve 
human resource management? (LO 9-1)
 2. As it has become clear that HRM can help create and 
maintain high-performance work systems, it appears 
that organizations will need two kinds of human re-
source professionals. One kind focuses on identifying 
how HRM can contribute to high performance. The 
other kind develops expertise in particular HRM 
functions, such as how to administer a benefi ts pro-
gram that complies with legal requirements. Which 
aspect of HRM is more interesting to you? Why? 
(LO 9-2)
 3. How can teamwork, empowerment, knowledge shar-
ing, and job satisfaction contribute to high perfor-
mance? (LO 9-3)
 4. If an organization can win customers, employ-
ees, or investors through deception, why would 
ethical behavior contribute to high performance? 
(LO 9-3)
 5. How can an organization promote ethical behavior 
among its employees? (LO 9-3)
 6. Summarize how each of the following HR functions 
can contribute to high performance. (LO 9-4)
 
a. Job design
 
b. Recruitment and selection
 
c. Training and development
 
d. Performance management
 
e. Compensation
 7. How can HRM technology make a human re-
source department more productive? How can 
technology improve the quality of HRM decisions? 
(LO 9-5)
 8. Why should human resource departments measure 
their effectiveness? What are some ways they can go 
about measuring effectiveness? (LO 9-6)
The Container Store Puts Employees First
Kip Tindell, CEO of the Container Store, clearly envi-
sions what makes his company great. “If you take care 
of the employees better than anyone else,” he says, “they 
will take care of the customer better than anyone else.” 
Those happy employees and customers will yield the 
sales and profi ts that make shareholders happy as well.
Selling only containers for people’s belongings 
seemed rather strange in 1978, when the company 
started. Talented salespeople were a practical way to 
make the Container Store exciting and relevant. That 
requires empowerment—what the Container Store 
calls allowing employees to “unleash their creative 
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY

294 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
genius.” Instead of simply closing sales, employees build 
strong connections with customers by helping them 
fi nd solutions to storage problems. In Tindell’s words, 
“We agree on the ends, and then we liberate each em-
ployee to choose their means to the ends.” That model 
has yielded strong sales growth year after year.
Supporting the philosophy of putting employees 
fi rst are several HR practices. The hiring process is 
intense (as many as eight interviews, including with 
groups of co-workers) and selective (about 3% of ap-
plicants are hired). This effort is aimed at getting a 
great employee—one who delivers results equal to 
three employees who are merely good at the job. High 
standards for selection justify high compensation: pay 
for salespeople is between one and a half and two times 
the industry average, and even part-timers are eligible 
for health insurance.
Training also exceeds industry norms. Full-time em-
ployees receive more than 260 hours of training dur-
ing their fi rst year and another 100 hours during their 
second year. That compares with 31 hours of training 
for the average U.S. worker, according to the  American 
Society of Training and Development. Training for 
Container Store salespeople covers the store’s 10,000 
products, the company’s business philosophy, and ways 
to make strong connections with customers.
The employees-fi rst philosophy has built a Great 
Place to Work (designated by the Great Places to Work 
Institute), a Best Retail Brand (according to Interbrand, 
a consulting fi rm in brand management), and one of 
Fortune magazine’s 100 Best Companies to Work For. 
But what about those shareholders? The Container 
Store was privately held until November 2013, so pleas-
ing outside investors is a new challenge. Following its 
fi rst year as a publicly traded company, its stock price 
dropped in response to sales growth failing to gener-
ate profi ts. Investors acknowledge that recent years 
have been hard on all retailers, so the verdict is still out 
on whether the Container Store will be a high-perfor-
mance organization in investors’ eyes.
Questions
 1. Would you describe the Container Store as a high-
performance organization? Why or why not?
 2. How could HR managers at the Container Store 
analyze the effectiveness of HRM to ensure they 
are helping the company become more profi table? 
Would your ideas compromise the employees-fi rst 
policy?
Sources: Susan Thurston, “Indoors or Out, They Excel,” Tampa Bay Times, 
April 13, 2014, Business Insights: Global, http://bi.galegroup.com; In-
terbrand, “Best Retail Brands 2014: The Container Store,” http://www.
interbrand.com, accessed June 11, 2014; Andria Cheng, “Why the Con-
tainer Store Stock Is Tanking,” MarketWatch, January 8, 2014, http://blogs.
marketwatch.com; Jessica Rohman, “With an ‘Employee-First’ Mentality, 
Everyone Wins: The Container Store,” Culture Impact Brief, Great Place 
to Work Institute, 2013, http://www.greatplacetowork.com.
Valuing Labor Drives High Performance at HindlePower
HindlePower is a small company with a big idea for suc-
cess. The Easton, Pennsylvania, manufacturer of battery 
chargers has just 75 employees, most of whom work in the 
factory as assemblers. Its president, Bill Hindle, sees those 
workers not merely as an expense but as a source of value.
That attitude becomes immediately evident when 
prospective customers visit the facility. At most manu-
facturers, a manager or salesperson would conduct a 
factory tour, controlling the experience to present the 
best face of the company. At HindlePower, employees 
are the best face of the company, so Bill Hindle simply 
offers a few safety guidelines and then invites visitors 
to look around on their own, asking any questions of 
the workers. More than once, Hindle says, the trust he 
places in his workers is what seals the deal with custom-
ers. They assume that workers in such an environment 
will be committed to quality.
Another sign of employee empowerment at Hin-
dlePower is the absence of time clocks. Employees do 
not need to punch in and out, and the company has no 
rules for time off. If family needs arise during business 
hours, employees are authorized to leave and tend to 
their families, knowing their colleagues will pitch in to 
accomplish the required work. According to Hindle, 
employees have been responsible about making up their 
time off, to the point that hours in the factory consis-
tently reach 97% to 100% of full-time. In other words, 
there is essentially nothing to gain from establishing 
rules and procedures to ensure that employees are on 
the job for the full 40-hour week.
Seeing workers as a source of value rather than 
merely a cost also helps HindlePower fi ll positions with 
skilled workers. Many manufacturers complain that 
there is a shortage of workers with the skills needed for 
modern production systems. However, Hindle has no 
trouble and says the solution is to be patient and invest 
in training. HindlePower established a program called 
the Professional Manufacturing Team, which couples 
MANAGING TALENT

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 295
training with worker involvement in designing more 
effi cient processes. The training consists of 25 to 30 
courses in a curriculum tailored to each production line. 
Employees are responsible for completing all of the 
courses, and when they do, the company considers each 
one a manufacturing professional. Beyond the training, 
employee involvement in decision making brings mean-
ingful results. In one case, the workers redesigned a pro-
duction line so that instead of making 350,000 units a 
week, it now fi nishes 500,000.
Over the past decade, HindlePower’s well-trained, 
highly engaged workers have enabled the company to 
generate average annual revenue growth of 15%, even 
during the recent recession.
Questions
 1. Would you consider HindlePower a high-perfor-
mance organization? Why or why not?
 2. Besides the methods described here, what is one 
other way an HR manager at HindlePower could 
contribute to making the company a high-perfor-
mance organization? How well does your idea fi t 
with Bill Hindle’s vision for his company?
Sources: HindlePower, corporate website, http://www.hindlepower.com, 
accessed June 11, 2014; Pete Fehrenbach, “HindlePower’s Pro Shop: 
Greatness Within,” Industry Week, June 3, 2014, ProQuest eLibrary, http://
elibrary.bigchalk.com; Jill Jusko, “The Value of Labor,” Industry Week, 
November 2013, pp. 24–26; Ann Wlazelek, “HindlePower Inc.: Manufac-
turing without a Time Clock,” Morning Call (Lehigh Valley, PA), March 4, 
2013, http://articles.mcall.com.
Employees Make a Difference at Amy’s Ice Creams
One of the bright spots for hungry people in Austin, 
Texas, is Amy’s Ice Creams—its factory on Burnet Road 
or one of several Amy’s stores. Founder Amy Miller, 
who dropped out of medical school to start the busi-
ness, fi gures it is just another way to “make a difference 
in people’s lives,” offering customers a fun place to cel-
ebrate or cheer up.
Miller had been paying med school with a job at 
Steve’s Ice Cream, but when the company was sold, she 
thought the new owners were too stodgy, so she opened 
her own ice cream shop. Given the motivation to strike 
out on her own, it’s not surprising that her goal is to 
manage her employees in a different way, one that com-
bines informal fun with care for others.
The spirit of fun is defi ned by the employee selec-
tion process Miller invented. When interviewing can-
didates, Miller hands them a white paper bag with the 
instruction to “make something creative” and show her 
later. One applicant used it to make a hot-air balloon. 
Another put food in a bag, gave it to a homeless person, 
took a photo of the gift, and put the photo in the bag to 
return as the creative offering.
Job design also plays up the fun. Amy’s prized em-
ployees don’t just scoop up ice cream but also come up 
with ways to create a playful atmosphere. The company 
encourages workers to juggle shakers or give away a 
scoop of ice cream to a customer who is willing to sing 
and dance.
While the two painted concrete cows that sit in 
front of the Amy’s factory are an emblem of the com-
pany’s commitment to fun, its commitment to caring 
has a more uplifting sign: Amy’s Ice Creams funded the 
construction of a room in a local children’s cancer care 
center. The room resembles an ice cream shop and in-
cludes freezers stocked with ice cream—a treat that pa-
tients can share with visiting family members.
Service to the community is also connected to em-
ployee engagement. At Amy’s, the employees choose the 
charities the company will support. At a prom hosted by 
Amy’s every year, the company selects a King and Queen 
to honor based on which employees did the most com-
pany-sponsored charitable work. In this way, employee 
rewards are tied to the company’s value.
Fun and community service aren’t just a way to be 
nice; they also have made Amy’s Ice Creams a company 
ice cream lovers care to buy from. The company reaps 
millions of dollars in sales and has expanded the num-
ber of locations to meet growing demand in Austin as 
well as in Houston and San Antonio. Still, it’s not just 
about the revenues. Co-owner (and Amy’s husband) 
Steve  Simmons told a reporter, “We never want to 
be a megacompany. When we don’t know employees’ 
names, there’s a problem.”
Questions
 1. Which elements of a high-performance work 
 system (Figure 9.1) does Amy’s Ice Creams seem 
to have? 
 2. Suppose Amy’s hired you as a consultant to evaluate 
whether the company has an effective HRM func-
tion. Which outcomes would you look for? How 
would you measure them?
 3. Generally, a small ice cream shop such as Amy’s can-
not afford to pay store workers very high wages. How 
well do you think the company can achieve high em-
ployee satisfaction without high pay? What can it 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

296 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
do to foster satisfaction besides the efforts described 
here? How could e-HRM support these efforts?
Sources: Amy’s Ice Creams corporate website, www.amysicecreams.com, 
accessed June 17, 2014; Janine Popick, “GrowCo.: Growth by Involvement 
at Amy’s Ice Creams,” Inc., March 16, 2010, www.inc.com; Renuka 
Rayasam, “Sweet Success,” Ausin American-Stateman, September 29, 2005; 
Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com; 
Michael Malone, “Chain Founder; Amy Miller, Amy’s Ice Creams,” Restau-
rant Business, March 1, 2003, available at All Business.com, www.allbusiness.
com.
 1. Adrienne Selko, “From Chopping Block to Award Banquet,” 
Industry Week, January 2014, pp. 16–17; General Cable, 
“About Us” and careers page, http://www.generalcable.com, 
accessed June 12, 2014.
 2. S. Snell and J. Dean, “Integrated Manufacturing and Human 
Resource Management: A Human Capital Perspective,” 
Academy of Management  Journal 35 (1992), pp. 467–504.
 3. M. A. Huselid, “The Impact of Human Resource Management 
Practices on Turnover, Productivity, and Corporate Financial 
Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 38 (1995), pp. 
635–72; U.S. Department of Labor, High-Performance Work 
Practices and Firm Performance (Washington, DC: U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Offi ce, 1993); J. Combs, Y. Liu, A. Hall, and D. 
Ketchen, “How Much Do High-Performance Work Practices 
Matter? A Meta-Analysis of Their Effects on Organizational 
Performance,” Personnel Psychology 59 (2006), pp. 501–28.
 4. Allison Rimm, “Tips for Energizing Your Exhausted Em-
ployees,” Harvard Business Review, November 26, 2013, 
http://blogs.hbr.org.
 5. J. Arthur, “The Link between Business Strategy and Indus-
trial Relations Systems in American Steel Minimills,” Indus-
trial and Labor Relations Review 45 (1992), pp. 488–506.
 6. J. A. Neal and C. L. Tromley, “From Incremental Change to 
Retrofi t: Creating High-Performance Work Systems,” Acad-
emy of Management Executive 9 (1995), pp. 42–54; Huselid, 
“The Impact of Human Resource Management Practices.” 
For a more recent but similar perspective, see Ehssan Ab-
dallah and Ashish Ahluwalia, “The Keys to Building a High-
Performance Culture,” Gallup Business Journal, December 12, 
2013, Business Insights: Global, http://bi.galegroup.com.
 7. P. Coy, “A Renaissance in U.S. Manufacturing,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, May 9, 2011, pp. 11–12.
 8. D. McCann and C. Margerison, “Managing High-Perfor-
mance Teams,” Training and Development Journal, November 
1989, pp. 52–60.
 9. D. Senge, “The Learning Organization Made Plain and 
Simple,” Training and Development Journal, October 1991, pp. 
37–44.
 10. M. A. Gephart, V. J. Marsick, M. E. Van Buren, and M. S. 
Spiro, “Learning Organizations Come Alive,” Training and 
Development 50 (1996), pp. 34–45.
 11. T. T. Baldwin, C. Danielson, and W. Wiggenhorn, “The 
Evolution of Learning Strategies in Organizations: From 
Employee Development to Business Redefi nition,” Academy 
of Management Executive 11 (1997), pp. 47–58; J. J. Martoc-
chio and T. T. Baldwin, “The Evolution of Strategic Organi-
zational Training,” in Research in Personnel and Human Resource 
Management 15, ed. G. R. Ferris (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 
1997), pp. 1–46; “Leveraging HR and Knowledge Manage-
ment in a Challenging Economy,” HR Magazine, June 2009, 
pp. S1–S9.
 12. H. James Wilson, “Employees, Measure  Yourselves,” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 2, 2012, http://online
.wsj.com.
 13. T. A. Judge, C. J. Thoresen, J. E. Bono, and G. K. Patton, “The 
Job Satisfaction-Job Performance Relationship: A Qualitative 
and Quantitative Review,” Psychological Bulletin 127 (2001), pp. 
376–407; R. A. Katzell, D. E. Thompson, and R. A. Guzzo, 
“How Job Satisfaction and Job  Performance Are and Are Not 
Linked,” Job Satisfaction, eds. C. J. Cranny, P. C. Smith, and E. 
F. Stone (New York: Lexington Books, 1992), pp. 195–217.
 14. Gallup, “State of the American Workplace,” 2013, http://
www.gallup.com.
 15. Aon Hewitt, “2013 Trends in Global Employee Engage-
ment,” 2013, http://www.aon.com.
 16. Kathleen Kindle, “Brand Alignment: Getting It Right,” http://
www.siegelgate.com/blog, accessed May 30, 2012; Aon Hewitt, 
“Trends in Global Employee Engagement,” 2011, http://www 
.aon.com.
 17. P. E. Boverie and M. Kroth, Transforming Work: The Five Keys 
to Achieving Trust, Commitment, and Passion in the Workplace 
(Cambridge, MA: Perseus, 2001), pp. 71–72, 79.
 18. R. P. Gephart Jr., “Introduction to the Brave New Work-
place: Organizational Behavior in the Electronic Age,” Jour-
nal of Organizational Behavior 23 (2002), pp. 327–44.
 19. Kristin Samuelson, “Secrets of Succeeding with Ethics,” Chi-
cago Tribune, April 15, 2012, sec. 2, p. 3.
 20. Ibid.; Max H. Bazerman and Ann E. Tenbrunsel, “Ethical 
Breakdowns,” Harvard Business Review, April 2011, http://
hbr.org; Ethics Resource Center, “Why Have a Code of 
Conduct,” May 29, 2009, http://www.ethics.org.
 21. Amy Fliegelman Olli, “Aligning Ethics and Compliance with 
Business Objectives,” Ethisphere, March 31, 2011, http://ethis-
phere.com.
 22. W. F. Cascio, Costing Human Resources: The Financial Impact of 
Behavior in Organizations, 3rd ed. (Boston: PWS-Kent, 1991); 
Gergana Markova, “Can Human Resource Management 
Make a Big Difference in a Small Company?” International 
Journal of Strategic Management 9, no. 2 (2009), pp. 73–80.
 23. B. Becker and M. A. Huselid, “High-Performance Work Sys-
tems and Firm Performance: A Synthesis of Research and 
Managerial Implications,” in Research in Personnel and Human 
Resource Management 16, ed. G. R. Ferris (Stamford, CT: JAI 
Press, 1998), pp. 53–101.
 24. B. Becker and B. Gerhart, “The Impact of Human Resource Man-
agement on Organizational Performance: Progress and Prospects,” 
Academy of Management Journal 39 (1996), pp. 779–801.
NOTES

CHAPTER 9 
Creating and Maintaining High-Performance Organizations 297
 25. David Hatch, “Can Apple Polish Lowe’s Reputation?” U.S. 
News & World Report, May 15, 2012, http://money.usnews.
com.
 26. H. J. Bernardin, C. M. Hagan, J. S. Kane, and P. Villanova, 
“Effective Performance Management: A Focus on Precision, 
Customers, and Situational Constraints,” in Performance Ap-
praisal: State of the Art in Practice, ed. J. W. Smither (San Fran-
cisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998), p. 56.
 27. Patrick Darling, “Intel Sets 2020 Environmental Goals,” 
Intel newsroom blog, May 17, 2012, http://newsroom.intel.
com; Intel, 2011 Corporate Responsibility Report, http://www.
intel.com, accessed May 18, 2012.
 28. L. R. Gomez-Mejia and D. B. Balkin, Compensation, Organi-
zational Strategy, and Firm Performance (Cincinnati: South-
Western, 1992); G. D. Jenkins and E. E. Lawler III, “Impact 
of Employee Participation in Pay Plan Development,” Or-
ganizational Behavior and Human Performance 28 (1981), 
pp. 111–28.
 29. S. Shrivastava and J. Shaw, “Liberating HR through Tech-
nology,” Human Resource Management 42, no. 3 (2003), pp. 
201–17.
 30. R. Broderick and J. W. Boudreau, “Human Resource Man-
agement, Information Technology, and the Competitive 
Edge,” Academy of Management Executive 6 (1992), pp. 7–17.
 31. N. Lockwood, Maximizing Human Capital: Demonstrating HR 
Value with Key Performance Indicators (Alexandria, VA: SHRM 
Research Quarterly, 2006).
 32. Grace 
Ahrend, 
Fred 
Diamond, 
and 
Pat 
Gill 
Webber, “Virtual Coaching: Using Technology to Boost Per-
formance,” Chief Learning Offi cer, July 2010, pp. 44–47.
 33. Kim Girard, “A Talent for Talent,” CFO, May 2011, pp. 
27–28.
 34. Bob Mosher and Jeremy Smith, “The Case for Performance 
Support,” Training, November– December 2011, Business & 
Company Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 35. Matt Charney, “Five Reasons Why Cloud Computing 
Matters for Recruiting and Hiring,” Monster.com, http://hir-
ing.monster.com/hr, accessed May 30, 2012; Daniel Shane, 
“A Human Giant,” Information Age, http://www.information-
age.com, accessed May 30, 2012.
 36. Eric Krell, “Auditing Your HR Department,” HR Magazine, 
September 2011, http://www.shrm.org.
 37. Sean Cusack, “Train to Gain,” Transport and Logistics, October 
2011, pp. 53–56.
 38. Steve Lohr, “The Age of Big Data,” The New York Times, 
 February 11, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com.

Introduction
Like other companies, Microsoft wants to identify employees who are doing a 
great job and reward them generously. It also wants to help employees recognize 
when they need to improve. For several years, Microsoft did this with a process in 
which managers rated their employees every year on a scale from 1 to 5. Employ-
ees who got the top rating (a 1 on the scale) were in line for extra pay and company 
stock; employees who received a 5 knew they had to shape up if they wanted a 
career with the company. Furthermore, the human resources department estab-
lished a curve. Managers were to place most of their employees near the middle of 
the range, where pay was set to match the local labor market. They also were expected 
to single out a few employees to rank at the top and bottom of the curve.
Recently, Microsoft’s HR department reconsidered whether this process ad-
equately supported the company’s strategic commitment to teamwork and knowl-
edge sharing. In interviews with managers and employees, HR managers found 
that people were in competition with one another to grab the top ratings rather 
than thinking of their colleagues as part of a team. So Microsoft changed its prac-
tices. Now managers rate performance on each employee’s accomplishments, use 
of coworkers’ input, and contribution to coworkers’ success. No curve establishes 
a preset distribution for the ratings. Also, managers provide this feedback more 
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 10-1 Identify the activities involved in performance 
management.
 LO 10-2 Discuss the purposes of performance 
management systems.
 LO 10-3 Deﬁ ne ﬁ ve criteria for measuring the effectiveness of 
a performance management system.
 LO 10-4 Compare the major methods for measuring 
performance.
 LO 10-5 Describe major sources of performance information in 
terms of their advantages and disadvantages.
 LO 10-6 Deﬁ ne types of rating errors, and explain how to 
minimize them.
 LO 10-7 Explain how to provide performance feedback 
effectively.
 LO 10-8 Summarize ways to produce improvement in 
unsatisfactory performance.
 LO 10-9 Discuss legal and ethical issues that affect 
performance management.
Managing Employees’ 
Performance
10

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 299
often than the annual reviews, with schedules varying according to the needs of each 
department. In her announcement of the new methods, the head of human resource 
management at Microsoft, called this change “an important step in continuing to cre-
ate the best possible environment for our world-class talent to take on the toughest 
challenges and do world-changing work.”1
Rating and discussing employees’ performance, as managers do at Microsoft, are 
elements of performance management. Performance management is the process 
through which managers ensure that employees’ activities and outputs contribute to 
the organization’s goals. This process requires knowing what activities and outputs are 
desired, observing whether they occur, and providing feedback to help employees 
meet expectations. In the course of providing feedback, managers and employees may 
identify performance problems and establish ways to resolve those problems.
In this chapter we examine a variety of approaches to performance management. 
We begin by describing the activities involved in managing performance, then discuss 
the purpose of carrying out this process. Next, we discuss specifi c approaches to per-
formance management, including the strengths and weaknesses of each approach. We 
also look at various sources of performance information. The next section explores the 
kinds of errors that commonly occur during the assessment of performance, as well as 
ways to reduce those errors. Then we describe ways of giving performance feedback 
effectively and intervening when performance must improve. Finally, we summarize 
legal and ethical issues affecting performance management.
The Process of Performance Management
Although many employees dread the annual performance appraisal meeting at which 
a boss picks apart the employee’s behaviors from the past year, as we discussed in 
Chapter 9, performance management can potentially deliver many benefi ts—to in-
dividual employees as well as to the organization as a whole. Effective performance 
management can tell top performers they are valued, encourage communication be-
tween managers and their employees, establish consistent standards for evaluating em-
ployees, and help the organization identify its strongest and weakest employees. To 
meet these objectives, companies must think of effective performance management as 
a process, not an event.
Figure 10.1 shows the six steps in the performance management process. As shown 
in the model, feedback and formal performance evaluation are important parts of the 
process; however, they are not the only critical components. An effective performance 
management process contributes to the company’s overall competitive advantage and 
must be given visible support by the CEO and other senior managers. This support 
ensures that the process is consistently used across the company, appraisals are com-
pleted on time, and giving and receiving ongoing performance feedback is recognized 
as an accepted part of the company’s culture.
The fi rst two steps of the process involve identifying what the company is trying
to accomplish (its goals or objectives) and developing employee goals and actions to 
achieve these outcomes. Typically the outcomes benefi t customers, the employee’s 
peers or team members, and the organization itself. The goals, behaviors, and activi-
ties should be measurable and become part of the employee’s job description.
Step three in the process—organizational support—involves providing employees 
with training, necessary resources and tools, and ongoing feedback between the em-
ployee and manager, which focuses on accomplishments as well as issues and challenges 
Performance 
Management
The process through 
which managers ensure 
that employees’ activi-
ties and outputs contrib-
ute to the organization’s 
goals.
LO 10-1 Identify the 
activities involved in per-
formance management.

300 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
that infl uence performance. For effective performance management, both the manager 
and the employee have to value feedback and exchange it on a regular basis—not just 
once or twice a year. Also, the manager needs to make time to provide ongoing feedback 
to the employee and learn how to give and receive it.
Step four involves evaluating performance; that is, when the manager and employee 
discuss and compare targeted goals and supporting behavior with actual results. This 
step includes the annual formal performance review.
The fi nal steps of the performance management process involve both the employee 
and manager identifying what the employee can do to capitalize on performance 
strengths and address weaknesses (step 5) and providing consequences for achieving 
(or failing to achieve) performance outcomes (such as pay increases, bonuses, or action 
plans) (step 6). This includes identifying training needs; adjusting the type or frequency 
of feedback the manager provides to the employee; clarifying, adjusting, or modifying 
performance outcomes; and discussing behaviors or activities that need improvement.
To be effective, the entire performance management process should be reviewed 
each year to ensure that what is being measured at the employee level aligns strategi-
cally with company, division, and departmental goals and objectives.2
Figure 10.1
Steps in the Performance Management Process
Step 2
Develop employee goals,
behavior, and actions to
achieve outcomes
Step 3
Provide support and
ongoing performance 
discussions
Step 4
Evaluate performance
Step 5
Identify improvements
needed
Step 6
Provide consequences
for performance 
results
Step 1
Define performance
outcomes for company
division and department
Sources: Based on E. Pulakos, Performance Management (Oxford, England: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009); H. Aguinis, “An Expanded View of Perfor-
mance Management,” in J. W. Smith and M. London (eds.), Performance Management (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2009), pp. 1–43; 
J. Russell and L. Russell, “Talk Me Through It: The Next Level of Performance Management,” T 1 D, April 2010, pp. 42–48.

301
Purposes of Performance Management
Organizations establish performance management systems to meet three broad pur-
poses: strategic, administrative, and developmental. As you read the “HR Oops!” box 
and the rest of this section, think about which purposes of performance management 
the companies and managers should be meeting more effectively.
Strategic purpose means effective performance management helps the organization 
achieve its business objectives. It does this by helping to link employees’ behavior with 
the organization’s goals. Performance management starts with defi ning what the or-
ganization expects from each employee. It measures each employee’s performance to 
identify where those expectations are and are not being met. This enables the organi-
zation to take corrective action, such as training, incentives, or discipline. Performance 
management can achieve its strategic purpose only when measurements are truly 
linked to the organization’s goals and when the goals and feedback about performance 
are communicated to employees. At wireless provider Sprint, employees are appraised 
in terms of three to fi ve criteria, each linked to one of the company’s strategic objec-
tives for improving the customer experience, strengthening the brand, or increasing 
profi ts. Employees in Sprint’s call centers and retail stores can go online to review their 
individual objectives and check their progress toward achieving them.3
LO 10-2 Discuss the 
purposes of performance 
management systems.
More than four out of ten employees 
hear about the same areas for im-
provement year after year, accord-
ing to a survey by the HR training 
and consulting fi rm VitalSmarts. The 
fi rm asked employees if their latest 
performance review gave them the 
same negative feedback as in pre-
vious years, and 43 percent said 
yes. For these employees, being 
evaluated in prior years was not as-
sociated with any improvement in 
performance.
One explanation may come 
from another survey fi nding. Asked 
whether the review process in-
cluded planning how to improve 
their performance, 87 percent said 
no. They were learning they needed 
to improve, and then managers 
were leaving it up to the employ-
ees to solve performance problems 
on their own. These results sug-
gest that managers can be doing 
much more to develop employees. 
In that context, the employees 
who progress will be those who 
take responsibility for their own 
 development—for example, asking 
for specifi c feedback, looking for a 
mentor, and establishing personal 
goals to improve.
A manager who takes a very dif-
ferent approach is Dharam Singh, 
managing director of VCare Project 
Management in Sydney, Australia. 
When one of Singh’s employees is 
failing to meet job requirements, 
Singh has the employee set specifi c 
goals for improvement in the prob-
lem areas. Singh and the employee 
collaborate on establishing a plan 
for how the employee will achieve 
those goals. Singh also helps the 
employee understand how falling 
short of performance targets affects 
the fi rm as a whole.
Questions
 1. If employees’ poor performance 
is unchanged year after year, 
what does this say about 
how effectively performance 
management is serving its 
strategic and developmental 
purposes? How would the 
administrative purpose of 
performance management 
apply in this situation?
 2. Which purpose(s) of 
performance management is 
Singh fulfi lling, according to 
the description given? Explain 
your choice(s).
Sources: VitalSmarts, “Avoiding a Déjà 
Vu Performance Review,” research 
summary, http://www.vitalsmarts.com, 
accessed June 20, 2014; VitalSmarts, 
“Avoiding a Déjà Vu Performance 
Review,” survey data, http://www
.vitalsmarts.com, accessed June 20, 
2014; Matt Schur, “Upon Further 
Review,” PM Network, March 2014, pp. 
38–43; Ann Pace, “Preventing Poor Per-
formance Déjà Vu,” T + D, April 2013, 
p. 14.
“Where Have I Heard That Before?”
HR Oops!

302 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
The administrative purpose of a performance management system refers to the ways 
in which organizations use the system to provide information for day-to-day decisions 
about salary, benefi ts, and recognition programs. Performance management can also 
support decision making related to employee retention, termination for poor behavior, 
and hiring or layoffs. Because performance management supports these administrative 
decisions, the information in a performance appraisal can have a great impact on the 
future of individual employees. Managers recognize this, which is the reason they may 
feel uncomfortable conducting performance appraisals when the appraisal information 
is negative and, therefore, likely to lead to a layoff, disappointing pay increase, or other 
negative outcome.
Finally, performance management has a developmental purpose, meaning that it 
serves as a basis for developing employees’ knowledge and skills. Even employees who 
are meeting expectations can become more valuable when they hear and discuss per-
formance feedback. Effective performance feedback makes employees aware of their 
strengths and of the areas in which they can improve. For performance feedback to 
serve a developmental purpose, managers should adjust their approach to the level of 
performance. For a high-performing employee, the manager should open up a con-
versation about the employee’s ambitions and the organization’s developmental op-
portunities, so the employee sees an inviting career path. Employees who are falling 
short in some areas will require an effort to uncover the source of poor performance. 
Even among employees meeting standards, managers should identify areas for future 
growth. For this, one employee might need additional training while another needs 
encouragement or more challenging goals.4
Criteria for Effective Performance Management
In Chapter 6, we saw that there are many ways to predict performance of a job candidate. 
Similarly, there are many ways to measure the performance of an employee. For perfor-
mance management to achieve its goals, its methods for measuring performance must be 
good. Selecting these measures is a critical part of planning a performance management 
system. Several criteria determine the effectiveness of performance measures:
 • Fit with strategy—A performance management system should aim at achieving 
employee behavior and attitudes that support the organization’s strategy, goals, 
and culture. If a company emphasizes customer service, then its performance 
management system should defi ne the kinds of behavior that contribute to good 
customer service. Performance appraisals should measure whether employees are 
engaging in those behaviors. Feedback should help employees improve in those 
areas. When an organization’s strategy changes, human resource personnel should 
help managers assess how the performance management system should change to 
serve the new strategy.
 • Validity—As we discussed in Chapter 6, validity is the extent to which a measure-
ment tool actually measures what it is intended to measure. In the case of perfor-
mance appraisal, validity refers to whether the appraisal measures all the relevant 
aspects of performance and omits irrelevant aspects of performance. Figure 10.2 
shows two sets of information. The circle on the left represents all the information 
in a performance appraisal; the circle on the right represents all relevant measures 
of job performance. The overlap of the circles contains the valid information. Infor-
mation that is gathered but irrelevant is “contamination.” Comparing salespeople 
based on how many calls they make to customers could be a contaminated measure. 
Making a lot of calls does not necessarily improve sales or customer satisfaction, 
LO 10-3 Deﬁ ne ﬁ ve 
criteria for measuring 
the effectiveness of a 
performance manage-
ment system.

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 303
unless every salesperson makes only well-planned calls. Information that is not 
gathered but is relevant represents a defi ciency of the performance measure. For 
example, suppose a company measures whether employees have good attendance 
records but not whether they work effi ciently. This limited performance appraisal 
is unlikely to provide a full picture of employees’ contribution to the company. 
Performance measures should minimize both contamination and defi ciency.
 • Reliability—With regard to a performance measure, reliability describes the consis-
tency of the results that the performance measure will deliver. Interrater reliability
is consistency of results when more than one person measures performance. Simply 
asking a supervisor to rate an employee’s performance on a scale of 1 to 5 would 
likely have low interrater reliability; the rating will differ depending on who is scor-
ing the employees. Test-retest reliability refers to consistency of results over time. 
If a performance measure lacks test-retest reliability, determining whether an em-
ployee’s performance has truly changed over time will be impossible.
 • Acceptability—Whether or not a measure is valid and reliable, it must meet the prac-
tical standard of being acceptable to the people who use it. For example, the people 
who use a performance measure must believe that it is not too time consuming. 
Likewise, if employees believe the measure is unfair, they will not use the feedback 
as a basis for improving their performance.
 • Specifi c feedback—A performance measure should specifi cally tell employees what is 
expected of them and how they can meet those expectations. Being specifi c helps 
performance management meet the goals of supporting strategy and developing 
employees. If a measure does not specify what an employee must do to help the or-
ganization achieve its goals, it does not support the strategy. If the measure fails to 
point out employees’ performance problems, they will not know how to improve.
For an example of a company that sets effective standards for performance manage-
ment, see the “Best Practices” box.
Methods for Measuring Performance
Organizations have developed a wide variety of methods for measuring performance. 
Some methods rank each employee to compare employees’ performance. Other meth-
ods break down the evaluation into ratings of individual attributes, behaviors, or re-
sults. Many organizations use a measurement system that includes a variety of the 
preceding measures, as in the case of applying total quality management to perfor-
mance management. Table 10.1 compares these methods in terms of our criteria for 
effective performance management.
LO 10-4 Compare the 
major methods for mea-
suring performance.
Figure 10.2
Contamination and 
 Defi ciency of a Job 
Performance Measure
Contamination Validity
Deficiency
Actual, or “true,”
job
performance
Job
performance
measure

304
Until recently, Minneapolis-based 
Medtronic had a performance man-
agement system with many of the 
features employees complain about. 
Managers assigned each employee 
a rating on a scale of 1 to 5, and a 
company-imposed curve told the 
managers how many employees 
the managers could include in each 
category. Managers spent a lot of 
time trying to fi gure out a fair way to 
decide that some employees were 
a “3” and others a “2,” even if their 
impact on the department was es-
sentially the same. On top of that, 
the performance measurement took 
place in a system separate from the 
company’s efforts at employee de-
velopment and rewards.
In her role as chief talent offi cer 
at Medtronic, Caroline Stockdale 
wanted a system that would bet-
ter support Medtronic’s strategy. 
As a developer and maker of medi-
cal devices, the company needed 
performance 
management 
that 
encouraged innovation and knowl-
edge sharing, not competition for a 
higher rating. Also, in a dynamic in-
dustry, employees needed frequent 
feedback to help them stay on track 
toward goals.
In response to these challenges, 
Stockdale launched a “performance 
acceleration” system in which em-
ployees meet with their manag-
ers four times a year. During these 
feedback sessions, they focus not 
on ratings, but on each employee’s 
performance goals. The manager 
fi lls out a one-page summary of the 
employee’s progress toward the 
goals. They discuss what employ-
ees should start doing, stop doing, 
and continue doing. In addition, 
annual reviews provide the docu-
ments needed to fi ll administrative 
requirements.
Stockdale says focusing on goals 
instead of scores helps employees 
understand what they are doing well 
and need to do better. She also says 
the quarterly meetings force manag-
ers and employees to identify more 
specifi c, practical goals, because 
it is easier to plan activities for just 
12 weeks at a time. Quarterly feed-
back creates more opportunities 
to observe and praise accomplish-
ments. According to surveys of 
employee engagement, Medtronic’s 
employees are more satisfi ed with 
the new system, and HR analytics 
show that managers now are more 
strategic about targeting the biggest 
rewards to those who contribute the 
most.
Questions
 1. Evaluate how well Medtronic’s 
performance acceleration 
system, as it is described here, 
meets the standards for validity 
and reliability.
 2. How does it rate in terms 
of being acceptable and 
delivering specifi c feedback?
Sources: Ladan Nikravan, “Performance 
Reviews Don’t Meet Expectations,” 
Talent Management, October 2013, 
pp. 16–19; Jeri Darling, “Reframing 
Performance Reviews for Greater 
Impact: An Interview with Accretive 
Health Chief People Offi cer, Caroline 
Stockdale,” People and Strategy, June 
2013, Business Insights: Global, http://
bi.galegroup.com; Jena McGregor, “The 
Corporate Kabuki of Performance Re-
views,” Washington Post, February 14, 
2013, http://www.washingtonpost.com. 
A Goal-Oriented System of Performance Management
Best Practices
Making Comparisons
The performance appraisal method may require the rater to compare one individual’s 
performance with that of others. This method involves some form of ranking, in which 
some employees are best, some are average, and others are worst. The usual tech-
niques for making comparisons are simple ranking, forced distribution, and paired 
comparison.
Simple ranking requires managers to rank employees in their group from the 
highest performer to the poorest performer. In a variation of this approach, alternation 
ranking, the manager works from a list of employees. First, the manager decides which 
employee is best and crosses that person’s name off the list. From the remaining names, 
the manager selects the worst employee and crosses off that name. The process con-
tinues with the manager selecting the second best, second worst, third best, and so on, 
until all the employees have been ranked. The major downside of ranking involves 
validity. To state a performance measure as broadly as “best” or “worst” doesn’t defi ne 
Simple Ranking
Method of performance 
measurement that 
requires managers to 
rank employees in their 
group from the highest 
performer to the poorest 
performer.

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 305
what exactly is good or bad about the person’s contribution to the organization. 
Ranking therefore raises questions about fairness.
Another way to compare employees’ performance is with the forced-distribution 
method. This type of performance measurement assigns a certain percentage of em-
ployees to each category in a set of categories. For example, the organization might 
establish the following percentages and categories:
 • Exceptional—5%
 • Exceeds standards—25%
 • Meets standards—55%
 • Room for improvement—10%
 • Not acceptable—5%
The manager completing the performance appraisal would rate 5% of his or her em-
ployees as exceptional, 25% as exceeding standards, and so on. A forced-distribution 
approach works best if the members of a group really do vary this much in terms of 
their performance. It overcomes the temptation to rate everyone high in order to 
avoid confl ict. Research simulating some features of forced rankings found that they 
improved performance when combined with goals and rewards, especially in the fi rst 
few years, when the system eliminated the poorest performers.5 However, a manager 
Forced-Distribution 
Method
Method of performance 
measurement that as-
signs a certain percent-
age of employees to 
each category in a set of 
categories.
CRITERIA
APPROACH
FIT WITH 
STRATEGY
VALIDITY
RELIABILITY
ACCEPTABILITY
SPECIFICITY
Comparative
Poor, unless 
manager takes 
time to make link
Can be high if 
ratings are 
done carefully
Depends on rater, 
but usually no 
measure of 
agreement used
Moderate; easy to 
develop and use 
but resistant to 
normative 
standard
Very low
Attribute
Usually low; 
requires 
manager to 
make link
Usually low; 
can be ﬁ ne 
if developed 
carefully
Usually low; can be 
improved by speciﬁ c 
deﬁ nitions of 
attributes
High; easy to 
develop and use
Very low
Behavioral
Can be quite 
high
Usually high; 
minimizes 
contamination 
and deﬁ ciency
Usually high
Moderate; 
difﬁ cult to 
develop, but 
accepted 
well for use
Very high
Results
Very high
Usually high; 
can be both 
contaminated 
and deﬁ cient
High; main problem 
can be test–retest—
depends on timing of 
measure
High; usually 
developed with 
input from those 
to be evaluated
High regarding 
results, but 
low regarding 
behaviors 
necessary to 
achieve them
Quality
Very high
High, but can 
be both 
contaminated 
and deﬁ cient
High
High; usually 
developed with 
input from those 
to be evaluated
High regarding 
results, but 
low regarding 
behaviors 
necessary to 
achieve them
Table 10.1
Basic Approaches to Performance Measurement

306 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
who does very well at selecting, motivating, and training employees will have a group 
of high performers. This manager would have diffi culty assigning employees to the 
bottom categories. In that situation, saying that some employees require improvement 
or are “not acceptable” not only will be inaccurate, but will hurt morale.
Another variation on rankings is the paired-comparison method. This approach 
involves comparing each employee with each other employee to establish rankings. 
Suppose a manager has fi ve employees, Allen, Barbara, Caitlin, David, and Edgar. The 
manager compares Allen’s performance to Barbara’s and assigns one point to whichever 
employee is the higher performer. Then the manager compares Allen’s performance to 
Caitlin’s, then to David’s, and fi nally to Edgar’s. The manager repeats this process with 
Barbara, comparing her performance to Caitlin’s, David’s, and Edgar’s. When the man-
ager has compared every pair of employees, the manager counts the number of points 
for each employee. The employee with the most points is considered the top-ranked 
employee. Clearly, this method is time consuming if a group has more than a handful of 
employees. For a group of 15, the manager must make 105 comparisons.
In spite of the drawbacks, ranking employees offers some benefi ts. It counteracts 
the tendency to avoid controversy by rating everyone favorably or near the center of 
the scale. Also, if some managers tend to evaluate behavior more strictly (or more leni-
ently) than others, a ranking system can erase that tendency from performance scores. 
Therefore, ranking systems can be useful for supporting decisions about how to dis-
tribute pay raises or layoffs. Some ranking systems are easy to use, which makes them 
acceptable to the managers who use them. A major drawback of rankings is that they 
often are not linked to the organization’s goals. Also, a simple ranking system leaves 
the basis for the ranking open to interpretation. In that case, the rankings are not help-
ful for employee development and may hurt morale or result in legal challenges.
Rating Individuals
Instead of focusing on arranging a group of employees from best to worst, performance 
measurement can look at each employee’s performance relative to a uniform set of stan-
dards. The measurement may evaluate employees in terms of attributes (characteristics 
or traits) believed desirable. Or the measurements may identify whether employees 
have behaved in desirable ways, such as closing sales or completing assignments. For 
both approaches, the performance management system must identify the desired attri-
butes or behaviors, then provide a form on which the manager can rate the employee in 
terms of those attributes or behaviors. Typically, the form includes a rating scale, such 
as a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 is the worst performance and 5 is the best. The “Did You 
Know?” box shows some commonly used performance measures.
Rating Attributes 
The most widely used method for rating attributes is the 
graphic rating scale. This method lists traits and provides a rating scale for each 
trait. The employer uses the scale to indicate the extent to which the employee 
being rated displays the traits. The rating scale may provide points to circle (as on 
a scale going from 1 for poor to 5 for excellent), or it may provide a line represent-
ing a range of scores, with the manager marking a place along the line. Figure 10.3 
shows an example of a graphic rating scale that uses a set of ratings from 1 to 5. A 
drawback of this approach is that it leaves to the particular manager the decisions 
about what is “excellent knowledge” or “commendable judgment” or “poor inter-
personal skills.” The result is low reliability because managers are likely to arrive 
at different judgments.
Paired-Comparison 
Method
Method of performance 
measurement that 
compares each em-
ployee with each other 
employee to establish 
rankings.
Graphic Rating Scale
Method of performance 
measurement that lists 
traits and provides a rat-
ing scale for each trait; 
the employer uses the 
scale to indicate the ex-
tent to which an employee 
displays each trait.

307
Did You Know?
Most companies conduct perfor-
mance appraisals, and the measure 
used most often is quality of work, 
according to an annual survey by 
Business & Legal Resources. Over 
two recent years, the same fi ve 
measures were most common. 
More broadly, in both years, slightly 
more than half of companies said 
they measure goal achievement, 
and less than half said they measure 
individuals’ attributes.
Question
Of the fi ve measurements shown, 
which would you describe as at-
tributes, and which would you de-
scribe as traits? Why?
Sources: Business and Legal Re-
sources, “Results: 2014 Performance 
Management Survey,” Compensa-
tion Management News, June 9, 
2014, http://compensation.blr.com; 
 Stephen Bruce, “Performance Manage-
ment  Survey Results In: How Do You 
 Compare?” HR Daily Advisor, June 13, 
2013, http://hrdailyadvisor.blr.com.
Popular Performance Measures
Figure 10.3
Example of a Graphic Rating Scale
The following areas of performance are signiﬁ cant to most positions. Indicate your assessment of performance on each dimension 
by circling the appropriate rating.
RATING
PERFORMANCE 
DIMENSION
DISTINGUISHED
EXCELLENT
COMMENDABLE
ADEQUATE
POOR
Knowledge
5
4
3
2
1
Communication
5
4
3
2
1
Judgment
5
4
3
2
1
Managerial skill
5
4
3
2
1
Quality performance
5
4
3
2
1
Teamwork
5
4
3
2
1
Interpersonal skills
5
4
3
2
1
Initiative
5
4
3
2
1
Creativity
5
4
3
2
1
Problem solving
5
4
3
2
1
Most Commonly Used Performance Measures
0
40%
80%
100%
2013
2014
60%
20%
Quality
Attitude/
cooperation
Communication
skills
Attendance
and punctuality
Dependability/
reliability

308 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
To get around this problem, some organizations use mixed-standard scales, which 
use several statements describing each trait to produce a fi nal score for that trait. The 
manager scores the employee in terms of how the employee compares to each statement. 
Consider the sample mixed-standard scale in Figure 10.4. To create this scale, the organi-
zation determined that the relevant traits are initiative, intelligence, and relations with 
others. For each trait, sentences were written to describe a person having a high level of 
that trait, a medium level, and a low level. The sentences for the traits were rearranged so 
that the nine statements about the three traits are mixed together. The manager who uses 
this scale reads each sentence, then indicates whether the employee performs above (1), 
at (0), or below (2) the level described. The key in the middle section of Figure 10.4 tells 
how to use the pluses, zeros, and minuses to score performance. Someone who excels at 
every level of performance (pluses for high, medium, and low performance) receives a 
score of 7 for that trait. Someone who fails to live up to every description of performance 
(minuses for high, medium, and low) receives a score of 1 for that trait. The bottom of 
Figure 10.4 calculates the scores for the ratings used in this example.
Rating attributes is the most popular way to measure performance in organizations. 
In general, attribute-based performance methods are easy to develop and can be applied 
to a wide variety of jobs and organizations. If the organization is careful to identify 
which attributes are associated with high performance, and to defi ne them carefully on 
the appraisal form, these methods can be reliable and valid. However, appraisal forms 
often fail to meet this standard. In addition, measurement of attributes is rarely linked 
to the organization’s strategy. Furthermore, employees tend perhaps rightly to be de-
fensive about receiving a mere numerical rating on some attribute. How would you feel 
if you were told you scored 2 on a 5-point scale of initiative or communication skill? 
The number might seem arbitrary, and it doesn’t tell you how to improve.
Rating Behaviors One way to overcome the drawbacks of rating attributes is to 
measure employees’ behavior. To rate behaviors, the organization begins by defi ning 
which behaviors are associated with success on the job. Which kinds of employee be-
havior help the organization achieve its goals? The appraisal form asks the manager to 
rate an employee in terms of each of the identifi ed behaviors.
One way to rate behaviors is with the critical-incident method. This approach 
requires managers to keep a record of specifi c examples of the employee acting in ways 
that are either effective or ineffective. Here’s an example of a critical incident in the 
performance evaluation of an appliance repairperson:
A customer called in about a refrigerator that was not cooling and was making a clicking 
noise every few minutes. The technician prediagnosed the cause of the problem and checked 
his truck for the necessary parts. When he found he did not have them, he checked the parts 
out from inventory so that the customer’s refrigerator would be repaired on his fi rst visit and 
the customer would be satisfi ed promptly.
This incident provides evidence of the employee’s knowledge of refrigerator repair 
and concern for effi ciency and customer satisfaction. Evaluating performance in this 
specifi c way gives employees feedback about what they do well and what they do 
poorly. The manager can also relate the incidents to how the employee is helping the 
company achieve its goals. Keeping a daily or weekly log of critical incidents requires 
signifi cant effort, however, and managers may resist this requirement. Also, critical 
incidents may be unique, so they may not support comparisons among employees.
A behaviorally anchored rating scale (BARS) builds on the critical-incidents 
approach. The BARS method is intended to defi ne performance dimensions 
Mixed-Standard Scales
Method of performance 
measurement that uses 
several statements 
describing each trait to 
produce a ﬁ nal score for 
that trait.
Critical-Incident 
Method
Method of performance 
measurement based on 
managers’ records of 
speciﬁ c examples of the 
employee acting in ways 
that are either effective 
or ineffective.
Behaviorally Anchored 
Rating Scale (BARS)
Method of performance 
measurement that rates 
behavior in terms of a 
scale showing speciﬁ c 
statements of behavior 
that describe different 
levels of performance.

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 309
specifi cally using statements of behavior that describe different levels of performance.6 
(The statements are “anchors” of the performance levels.) For example, consider the 
various levels of behavior associated with a patrol offi cer preparing for duty. The high-
est rating on the 7-point scale could include the following behaviors: early to work; 
gathers all necessary equipment needed for work; and previews previous shift’s activi-
ties and any news/updates before roll call. The lowest statement on the scale (rating 1) 
Figure 10.4
Example of a Mixed-Standard Scale
Instructions: Please indicate next to each statement whether the employee’s performance 
is above (+), equal to (0), or below (−) the statement.
INTV
H
1.  This employee is a real self-starter. The employee always takes the 
initiative and his/her superior never has to prod this individual.
 1 
INTG
M
2.  While perhaps this employee is not a genius, s/he is a lot more intelligent 
than many people I know.
 1 
RWO
L
3.  This employee has a tendency to get into unnecessary conﬂ icts with 
other people.
 0 
INTV
M
4.  While generally this employee shows initiative, occasionally his/her 
superior must prod him/her to complete work.
 1 
INTG
L
5.  Although this employee is slower than some in understanding things, and 
may take a bit longer in learning new things, s/he is of average intelligence.
 1 
RWO
H
6.  This employee is on good terms with everyone. S/he can get along with 
people even when s/he does not agree with them.
 2 
INTV
L
7.  This employee has a bit of a tendency to sit around and wait for directions.
 1 
INTG
H
8.  This employee is extremely intelligent, and s/he learns very rapidly.
 2 
RWO
M
9.  This employee gets along with most people. Only very occasionally does 
s/he have conﬂ icts with others on the job, and these are likely to be minor.
 2 
Example score from preceding ratings:
STATEMENTS
SCORE
HIGH
MEDIUM
LOW
Initiative
1
1
1
7
Intelligence
0
1
1
6
Relations with others
2
2
0
2
Scoring Key:
STATEMENTS
SCORE
HIGH
MEDIUM
LOW
1
1
1
7
0
1
1
6
2
1
1
5
2
0
1
4
2
2
1
3
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
1
Three traits being assessed:
Levels of performance in statements:
 Initiative (INTV)
 High (H)
 Intelligence (INTG)
 Medium (M)
 Relations with others (RWO)
 Low (L)

310 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
describes behavior associated with poor performance (e.g. late for roll call; does not 
check equipment; and not prepared for shift activities). These statements are based on 
data about past performance. The organization gathers many critical incidents repre-
senting effective and ineffective performance, then classifi es them from most to least 
effective. When experts about the job agree the statements clearly represent levels of 
performance, they are used as anchors to guide the rater. Although BARS can improve 
interrater reliability, this method can bias the manager’s memory. The statements used 
as anchors can help managers remember similar behaviors, at the expense of other 
critical incidents.7
A behavioral observation scale (BOS) is a variation of a BARS. Like a BARS, a 
BOS is developed from critical incidents.8 However, while a BARS discards many ex-
amples in creating the rating scale, a BOS uses many of them to defi ne all behaviors 
necessary for effective performance (or behaviors that signal ineffective performance). 
As a result, a BOS may use 15 behaviors to defi ne levels of performance. Also, a BOS 
asks the manager to rate the frequency with which the employee has exhibited the 
behavior during the rating period. These ratings are averaged to compute an overall 
performance rating. Figure 10.5 provides a simplifi ed example of a BOS for measuring 
the behavior “overcoming resistance to change.”
A major drawback of this method is the amount of information required. A BOS can 
have 80 or more behaviors, and the manager must remember how often the employee 
Behavioral Observation 
Scale (BOS)
A variation of a BARS 
which uses all behaviors 
necessary for effective 
performance to rate per-
formance at a task.
Figure 10.5
Example of a Behavioral Observation Scale
Overcoming Resistance to Change
Directions: Rate the frequency of each behavior from 1 (Almost Never) to 5 (Almost Always).
Almost 
Never
Almost 
Always
1. Describes the details of the change to employees.
1
2
3
4
5
2. Explains why the change is necessary.
1
2
3
4
5
3. Discusses how the change will affect the employee.
1
2
3
4
5
4. Listens to the employee’s concerns.
1
2
3
4
5
5. Asks the employee for help in making the change work.
1
2
3
4
5
6.  If necessary, speciﬁ es the date for a follow-up meeting 
to respond to the employee’s concerns.
1
2
3
4
5
Score: Total number of points 5 _______________________
Performance
Points
Performance Rating
6–10
Below adequate
11–15
Adequate
16–20
Full
21–25
Excellent
26–30
Superior
Scores are set by management.

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 311
exhibited each behavior in a 6- to 12-month rating period. This is taxing enough for 
one employee, but managers often must rate 10 or more employees. Even so, com-
pared to BARS and graphic rating scales, managers and employees have said they pre-
fer BOS for ease of use, providing feedback, maintaining objectivity, and suggesting 
training needs.9
Another approach to assessment builds directly on a branch of psychology called 
behaviorism, which holds that individuals’ future behavior is determined by their 
past experiences—specifi cally, the ways in which past behaviors have been rein-
forced. People tend to repeat behaviors that have been rewarded in the past. Provid-
ing feedback and reinforcement can therefore modify individuals’ future behavior. 
Applied to behavior in organizations, organizational behavior modiﬁ cation 
(OBM) is a plan for managing the behavior of employees through a formal system 
of feedback and reinforcement. Specifi c OBM techniques vary, but most have four 
components10:
 1. Defi ne a set of key behaviors necessary for job performance.
 2. Use a measurement system to assess whether the employee exhibits the key 
behaviors.
 3. Inform employees of the key behaviors, perhaps in terms of goals for how often to 
exhibit the behaviors.
 4. Provide feedback and reinforcement based on employees’ behavior.
OBM techniques have been used in a variety of settings. For example, a community 
mental health agency used OBM to increase the rates and timeliness of critical job be-
haviors by showing employees the connection between job behaviors and the agency’s 
accomplishments.11 This process identifi ed job behaviors related to administration, 
record keeping, and service provided to clients. Feedback and reinforcement improved 
staff performance. OBM also increased the frequency of safety behaviors in a process-
ing plant.12
Behavioral approaches such as organizational behavior modifi cation and rating 
scales can be very effective. These methods can link the company’s goals to the spe-
cifi c behavior required to achieve those goals. Behavioral methods also can generate 
specifi c feedback, along with guidance in areas requiring improvements. As a result, 
these methods tend to be valid. The people to be measured often help in developing 
the measures, so acceptance tends to be high as well. When raters are well trained, 
reliability also tends to be high. However, behavioral methods do not work as well for 
complex jobs in which it is diffi cult to see a link between behavior and results or there 
is more than one good way to achieve success.13
Measuring Results
Performance measurement can focus on managing the objective, measurable results 
of a job or work group. Results might include sales, costs, or productivity (output per 
worker or per dollar spent on production), among many possible measures. Two of 
the most popular methods for measuring results are measurement of productivity and 
management by objectives.
Productivity is an important measure of success because getting more done with 
a smaller amount of resources (money or people) increases the company’s profi ts. 
Productivity usually refers to the output of production workers, but it can be used 
more generally as a performance measure. To do this, the organization identifi es the 
products—set of activities or objectives—it expects a group or individual to accomplish. 
Organizational 
Behavior 
Modiﬁ cation (OBM)
A plan for managing the 
behavior of employees 
through a formal sys-
tem of feedback and 
reinforcement.

312 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
At a repair shop, for instance, a product might be something like “quality of repair.” 
The next step is to defi ne how to measure production of these products. For qual-
ity of repair, the repair shop could track the percentage of items returned because 
they still do not work after a repair and the percentage of quality-control inspections 
passed. For each measure, the organization decides what level of performance is de-
sired. Finally, the organization sets up a system for tracking these measures and giving 
employees feedback about their performance in terms of these measures. This type of 
performance measurement can be time consuming to set up, but research suggests it 
can improve productivity.14
Management by objectives (MBO) is a system in which people at each level of 
the organization set goals in a process that fl ows from top to bottom, so employees at 
all levels are contributing to the organization’s overall goals. These goals become the 
standards for evaluating each employee’s performance. An MBO system has three 
components15:
 1. Goals are specifi c, diffi cult, and objective. The goals listed in the second column 
of Table 10.2 provide two examples for a bank.
 2. Managers and their employees work together to set the goals.
 3. The manager gives objective feedback through the rating period to monitor prog-
ress toward the goals. The two right-hand columns in Table 10.2 are examples of 
feedback given after one year.
MBO can have a very positive effect on an organization’s performance. In 70 stud-
ies of MBO’s performance, 68 showed that productivity improved.16 The produc-
tivity gains tended to be greatest when top management was highly committed to 
MBO. Also, because staff members are involved in setting goals, it is likely that MBO 
systems effectively link individual employees’ performance with the organization’s 
overall goals.
In general, evaluation of results can be less subjective than other kinds of per-
formance measurement. This makes measuring results highly acceptable to em-
ployees and managers alike. Results-oriented performance measurement is also 
relatively easy to link to the organization’s goals. However, measuring results has 
problems with validity because results may be affected by circumstances beyond 
each employee’s performance. Also, if the organization measures only fi nal results, 
it may fail to measure signifi cant aspects of performance that are not directly re-
lated to those results. If  individuals focus only on aspects of performance that are 
measured, they may neglect signifi cant skills or behaviors. For example, one com-
pany measured how well  employees in the purchasing department kept costs down 
and how effi ciently people in the manufacturing department made its products. 
Management by 
Objectives (MBO)
A system in which 
people at each level 
of the organization set 
goals in a process that 
ﬂ ows from top to bot-
tom, so employees at all 
levels are contributing 
to the organization’s 
overall goals; these goals 
become the standards 
for evaluating each em-
ployee’s performance.
KEY RESULT AREA
OBJECTIVE
% COMPLETE
ACTUAL 
PERFORMANCE
Loan portfolio 
management
Increase portfolio 
value by 10% over the 
next 12 months
90
Increased portfolio 
value by 9% over 
the past 12 months
Sales
Generate fee income 
of $30,000 over the 
next 12 months
150
Generated fee 
income of $45,000 
over the past 
12 months
Table 10.2
Management by 
Objectives: Two 
Objectives for a Bank

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 313
When the purchasing department kept its costs under control by ordering cheap 
materials, production slowed down, making overall costs higher—but the purchas-
ing manager earned a bonus for high performance.17 A fi nal limitation of evalu-
ation based on results is that these measures do not provide guidance on how to 
improve.
Total Quality Management
The principles of total quality management, introduced in Chapter 2, provide methods 
for performance measurement and management. Total quality management (TQM) 
differs from traditional performance measurement in that it assesses both individual 
performance and the system within which the individual works. This assessment is a 
process through which employees and their customers work together to set standards 
and measure performance, with the overall goal being to improve customer satisfac-
tion. In this sense, an employee’s customers may be inside or outside the organization; 
a “customer” is whoever uses the goods or services produced by the employee. The 
feedback aims at helping employees continuously improve the satisfaction of their 
customers. The focus on continuously improving customer satisfaction is intended to 
avoid the pitfall of rating individuals on outcomes, such as sales or profi ts, over which 
they do not have complete control.
With TQM, performance measurement essentially combines measurements of at-
tributes and results. The feedback in TQM is of two kinds: (1) subjective feedback 
A TQM approach to performance measurement involves employees and their internal and 
external customers working together to improve overall customer satisfaction.
A TQM approach to performance measurement involves employees and their internal and

314 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
from managers, peers, and customers about the employee’s personal qualities such as 
cooperation and initiative; and (2) objective feedback based on the work process. The 
second kind of feedback comes from a variety of methods called statistical quality con-
trol. These methods use charts to detail causes of problems, measures of performance, 
or relationships between work-related variables. Employees are responsible for track-
ing these measures to identify areas where they can avoid or correct problems. Because 
of the focus on systems, this feedback may result in changes to a work process, rather 
than assuming that a performance problem is the fault of an employee. The TQM 
system’s focus has practical benefi ts, but it does not serve as well to support decisions 
about work assignments, training, or compensation.
Sources of Performance Information
All the methods of performance measurement require decisions about who will col-
lect and analyze the performance information. To qualify for this task, a person should 
have an understanding of the job requirements and the opportunity to see the em-
ployee doing the job. The traditional approach is for managers to gather informa-
tion about their employees’ performances and arrive at performance ratings. However, 
many sources are possible. In fact, many employees welcome feedback from multiple 
sources.18 Possibilities of information sources include managers, peers, subordinates, 
self, and customers.
Using just one person as a source of information poses certain problems. People tend 
to like some people more than others, and those feelings can bias how an employee’s ef-
forts are perceived. Also, one person is likely to see an employee in a limited number of 
situations. A supervisor, for example, cannot see how an employee behaves when the su-
pervisor is not watching—for example, when a service technician is at the customer’s facil-
ity. To get as complete an assessment as possible, some organizations combine information 
from most or all of the  possible sources, in what is called a 360-degree  performance 
appraisal.
Managers
The most-used source of performance information is the employee’s manager. It is 
usually safe for organizations to assume that supervisors have extensive knowledge 
of the job requirements and that they have enough opportunity to observe their 
employees. In other words, managers possess the basic qualifi cations for this respon-
sibility. Another advantage of using managers to evaluate performance is that they 
have an incentive to provide accurate and helpful feedback because their own success 
depends so much on their employees’ performance.19 Finally, when managers try to 
observe employee behavior or discuss performance issues in the feedback session, 
their feedback can improve performance, and employees tend to perceive the ap-
praisal as accurate.20
Still, in some situations, problems can occur with using supervisors as the source 
of performance information. For employees in some jobs, the supervisor does not 
have enough opportunity to observe the employee performing job duties. A sales 
manager with many outside salespeople cannot be with the salespeople on many vis-
its to customers. Even if the sales manager does make a point of traveling with sales-
people for a few days, they are likely to be on their best behavior while the manager 
is there. The manager cannot observe how they perform at other times.
LO 10-5 Describe major 
sources of performance 
information in terms of 
their advantages and 
disadvantages.
360-Degree 
Performance Appraisal
Performance measure-
ment that combines 
information from the 
employee’s managers, 
peers, subordinates, self, 
and customers.

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 315
Peers
Another source of performance information is the 
employee’s peers or co-workers. Peers are an excel-
lent source of information about performance in a 
job where the supervisor does not often observe the 
employee. Examples include law enforcement and 
sales. For these and other jobs, peers may have the 
most opportunity to observe the employee in day-
to-day activities. Peers have expert knowledge of job 
requirements. They also bring a different perspective 
to the evaluation and can provide extremely valid as-
sessments of performance.21
Peer evaluations obviously have some potential 
disadvantages. Friendships (or rivalries) have the po-
tential to bias ratings. Research, however, has pro-
vided little evidence that this is a problem.22 Another 
disadvantage is that when the evaluations are done 
to support administrative decisions, peers are uncom-
fortable with rating employees for decisions that may 
affect themselves. Generally, peers are more favor-
able toward participating in reviews to be used for 
employee development.23
Subordinates
For evaluating the performance of managers, subordinates are an especially valuable source 
of information. Subordinates—the people reporting to the manager—often have the best 
chance to see how well a manager treats employees. At HCL Technologies, for example, 
managers not only receive reviews from their employees but are expected to publish the 
reports on the company’s internal website to create a climate that values open communica-
tion and personal development. Sanjeev Nikore, a vice president who did this, learned that 
his employees found him resistant to delegating. He acknowledged he needed to improve 
his people skills, made some changes, and earned a key promotion.24
Subordinate evaluations have some potential problems because of the power rela-
tionships involved. Subordinates are reluctant to say negative things about the person 
to whom they report; they prefer to provide feedback anonymously. Managers, how-
ever, have a more positive reaction to this type of feedback when the subordinates are 
identifi ed. When feedback forms require that the subordinates identify themselves, 
they tend to give the manager higher ratings.25 Another problem is that when manag-
ers receive ratings from their subordinates, the employees have more power, so man-
agers tend to emphasize employee satisfaction, even at the expense of productivity. 
This issue arises primarily when the evaluations are used for administrative decisions. 
Therefore, as with peer evaluations, subordinate evaluations are most appropriate for 
developmental purposes. To protect employees, the process should be anonymous and 
use at least three employees to rate each manager.
Despite these challenges, subordinate ratings of managers could become even more 
widespread for the simple reason that individuals are growing used to the experience 
of using social media to publish online ratings of everything from movies and restau-
rants to professors and doctors. For more on this phenomenon and how it might affect 
performance management, see the “HRM Social” box.
Performance management is critical for executing a talent manage-
ment system and involves one-on-one contact with managers to en-
sure that proper training and development are taking place.

316
Self
No one has a greater chance to observe the employee’s behavior on the job than does 
the employee himself or herself. Self-ratings are rarely used alone, but they can con-
tribute valuable information. A common approach is to have employees evaluate their 
own performance before the feedback session. This activity gets employees thinking 
about their performance. Areas of disagreement between the self-appraisal and other 
evaluations can be fruitful topics for the feedback session. At an Australia-based soft-
ware company called Atlassian, self-appraisals are part of weekly performance feed-
back. Employees use an online app that displays performance-related questions such 
as, “How often have you stretched yourself?” and lets employees move a dot along a 
The collaborative tools of social 
media can allow individuals to 
work together by contributing small 
pieces to a bigger project. Espe-
cially when this is done on a large 
scale, it is known as crowdsourc-
ing. An employer might conduct a 
research project quickly by inviting 
many people to complete small por-
tions of it simultaneously. Or a travel 
website might invite travelers to 
post reviews of hotels and airlines 
to create an online travel guide.
With regard to performance man-
agement, crowdsourcing can apply 
to gathering and using data from all 
of an employee’s coworkers or all of 
a manager’s employees to develop 
an appraisal. One attraction of this 
approach is that the information 
will be more complete. Employees 
might therefore consider the result-
ing appraisal to be fairer than if it 
were based on one or a few people’s 
observations.
Gathering 
performance 
data 
through an online application could 
further improve the accuracy and 
completeness of information by 
inviting employees to post perfor-
mance information whenever they 
observe it. The company might 
even open up the submission of 
feedback to the whole organization. 
Suppose a salesperson is trying to 
solve a customer problem and gets 
valuable help from one of the engi-
neers; the salesperson could visit 
the appraisal site and post an ap-
preciative comment describing the 
situation. Assuming that employees 
can read the feedback about them-
selves as it is posted, this type of 
information gathering also provides 
positive recognition—or in the case 
of negative comments, early warn-
ing of problems to correct.
A growing number of compa-
nies are attracted to the potential 
and beginning to use some form of 
crowdsourced appraisals. However, 
the approach does raise some con-
cerns. One is that employees may 
not be motivated to provide care-
ful feedback about their cowork-
ers. They might, for example, fi nd 
it easier to rate employees based 
on likability. Another is that bringing 
everyone into the appraisal process 
can interfere with legal require-
ments. As described later in the 
chapter, performance appraisals are 
used as evidence to show that em-
ployment decisions have not been 
discriminatory. If courts see ap-
praisals as too subjective, employ-
ers defending a discrimination claim 
could run into trouble.
Still, the idea that more voices 
add more information, and more 
information will increase accuracy 
continues to attract favorable at-
tention. Employers are motivated 
to overcome the concerns about 
fairness and legal requirements, so 
crowdsourcing may indeed be the 
future of appraisals.
Questions
 1. Suppose you work for a 
company that is crowdsourcing 
its appraisals. Would you 
consider the feedback fairer 
if your supervisor’s feedback 
were combined with the 
crowdsourced feedback or if 
it were presented separately? 
Why?
 2. Do you think the advantages 
of crowdsourcing appraisals 
outweigh the disadvantages? 
Why or why not?
Sources: Adam Vaccaro, “Quick Fix for 
Performance Reviews: Crowdsource 
’Em,” Inc., February 4, 2014, http://www.
inc.com; Eric Mosley, “The Power of the 
Crowdsourced Performance Review,” 
Compensation and Beneﬁ ts Review 45, 
no. 6 (November/December 2013): 320–
323; Anne Fisher, “Should Performance 
Reviews Be Crowdsourced?” Fortune, 
October 8, 2013, http://fortune.com; Eric 
Mosley, “Crowdsource Your Performance 
Reviews,” Harvard Business Review, June 
15, 2012, http://blogs.hbr.org.
Crowdsourcing Performance Reviews
HRM Social

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 317
scale with a range of possible answers. The responses then serve 
as a catalyst for discussion in meetings between each employee 
and his or her supervisor.26
The obvious problem with self-ratings is that individuals have 
a tendency to infl ate assessments of their performance. Espe-
cially if the ratings will be used for administrative decisions, ex-
aggerating one’s contributions has practical benefi ts. Also, social 
psychologists have found that, in general, people tend to blame 
outside circumstances for their failures while taking a large part 
of the credit for their successes. Supervisors can soften this ten-
dency by providing frequent feedback, but because people tend 
to perceive situations this way, self-appraisals are not appropri-
ate as the basis for administrative decisions.27
Customers
Services are often produced and consumed on the spot, so the customer is often the 
only person who directly observes the service performance and may be the best source 
of performance information. Many companies in service industries have introduced 
customer evaluations of employee performance. Marriott Corporation provides a 
customer satisfaction card in every room and mails surveys to a random sample of 
its hotel customers. Whirlpool’s Consumer Services Division conducts mail and tele-
phone surveys of customers after factory technicians have serviced their appliances. 
These surveys allow the company to evaluate an individual technician’s customer-
service behaviors while in the customer’s home.
Using customer evaluations of employee performance is appropriate in two situ-
ations.28 The fi rst is when an employee’s job requires direct service to the customer 
or linking the customer to other services within the organization. Second, customer 
evaluations are appropriate when the organization is interested in gathering informa-
tion to determine what products and services the customer wants. That is, customer 
evaluations contribute to the organization’s goals by enabling HRM to support the 
organization’s marketing activities. In this regard, customer evaluations are useful both 
for evaluating an employee’s performance and for helping to determine whether the 
organization can improve customer service by making changes in HRM activities such 
as training or compensation.
The weakness of customer surveys for performance measurement is their expense. 
The expenses of a traditional survey can add up to hundreds of dollars to evaluate 
one individual. Many organizations therefore limit the information gathering to short 
periods once a year.
Errors in Performance Measurement
As we noted in the previous section, one reason for gathering information from several 
sources is that performance measurements are not completely objective and errors 
can occur. People observe behavior, and they have no practical way of knowing all the 
circumstances, intentions, and outcomes related to that behavior, so they interpret 
what they see. In doing so, observers make a number of judgment calls and in some 
situations may even distort information on purpose. Therefore, fairness in rating per-
formance and interpreting performance appraisals requires that managers understand 
the kinds of distortions that commonly occur.
LO 10-6 Deﬁ ne types of 
rating errors, and explain 
how to minimize them.
Customer feedback is one source of information used in 
performance appraisals. Other sources include manag-
ers, peers, subordinates, and employees themselves.

318 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
Types of Rating Errors
Several kinds of errors and biases commonly infl uence performance measurements:
 • People often tend to give a higher evaluation to people they consider similar to 
themselves. Most of us think of ourselves as effective, so if others are like us, they 
must be effective, too. Research has demonstrated that this effect is strong. Unfor-
tunately, it is sometimes wrong, and when similarity is based on characteristics such 
as race or sex, the decisions may be discriminatory.29
 • If the rater compares an individual, not against an objective standard, but against 
other employees, contrast errors occur. A competent performer who works with ex-
ceptional people may be rated lower than competent simply because of the contrast.
 • Raters make distributional errors when they tend to use only one part of a rating 
scale. The error is called leniency when the reviewer rates everyone near the top, 
strictness when the rater favors lower rankings, and central tendency when the rater 
puts everyone near the middle of the scale. Distributional errors make it diffi cult to 
compare employees rated by the same person. Also, if different raters make differ-
ent kinds of distributional errors, scores by these raters cannot be compared.
 • Raters often let their opinion of one quality color their opinion of others. For ex-
ample, someone who speaks well might be seen as helpful or talented in other areas 
simply because of the overall good impression created by this one quality. Or some-
one who is occasionally tardy might be seen as lacking in motivation. When the 
bias is in a favorable direction, this is called the halo error. When it involves negative 
ratings, it is called the horns error. Halo error can mistakenly tell employees they 
don’t need to improve in any area, while horns error can cause employees to feel 
frustrated and defensive.
Ways to Reduce Errors
Usually people make these errors unintentionally, especially when the criteria for 
measuring performance are not very specifi c. Raters can be trained how to avoid 
rating errors.30 Prospective raters watch videos whose scripts or storylines are de-
signed to lead them to make specifi c rating errors. After rating the fi ctional employees 
in the videos, raters discuss their rating decisions and how such errors affected their 
rating decisions. Training programs offer tips for avoiding the errors in the future.
Another training method for raters focuses on the complex nature of employee per-
formance.31 Raters learn to look at many aspects of performance that deserve their at-
tention. Actual examples of performance are studied to bring out various performance 
dimensions and the standards for those dimensions. This training aims to help raters 
evaluate employees’ performance more thoroughly and accurately.
Political Behavior in Performance Appraisals
Unintentional errors are not the only cause of inaccurate performance measurement. 
Sometimes the people rating performance distort an evaluation on purpose to ad-
vance their personal goals. This kind of appraisal politics is unhealthy especially be-
cause the resulting feedback does not focus on helping employees contribute to the 
organization’s goals. High-performing employees who are rated unfairly will become 
frustrated, and low-performing employees who are overrated will be rewarded rather 
than encouraged to improve. Therefore, organizations try to identify and discourage 
appraisal politics.

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 319
Several characteristics of appraisal systems and company culture tend to encour-
age appraisal politics. Appraisal politics are most likely to occur when raters are ac-
countable to the employee being rated, the goals of rating are not compatible with 
one another, performance appraisal is directly linked to highly desirable rewards, top 
executives tolerate or ignore distorted ratings, and senior employees tell newcomers 
company “folklore” that includes stories about distorted ratings.
Political behavior occurs in every organization. Organizations can minimize ap-
praisal politics by establishing an appraisal system that is fair. One technique is to hold 
a calibration meeting, a gathering at which managers discuss employee performance 
ratings and provide evidence supporting their ratings with the goal of eliminating the 
infl uence of rating errors. As they discuss ratings and the ways they arrive at ratings, 
managers may identify undervalued employees, notice whether they are much harsher 
or more lenient than other managers, and help each other focus on how well ratings 
are associated with relevant performance outcomes. Surveys have found a majority of 
organizations holding calibration meetings, with changes to evaluations being a com-
mon result. In a survey by the Society for Human Resource Management, the biggest 
reasons for a change were that managers discovered they weren’t rating their employ-
ees consistently or learned new information about employees.32 The organization can 
also help managers give accurate and fair appraisals by training them to use the ap-
praisal process, encouraging them to recognize accomplishments that the employees 
themselves have not identifi ed, and fostering a climate of openness in which employees 
feel they can be honest about their weaknesses.33
Giving Performance Feedback
Once the manager and others have measured an employee’s performance, this in-
formation must be given to the employee. Only after the employee has received 
feedback can he or she begin to plan how to correct any shortcomings. Although 
the feedback stage of performance management is 
essential, it is uncomfortable to managers and em-
ployees. Delivering feedback feels to the manager 
as if he or she is standing in judgment of others—
a role few people enjoy. Receiving criticism feels 
even worse. Fortunately, managers can do much to 
smooth the feedback process and make it effective.
Scheduling Performance Feedback
Performance feedback should be a regular, expected 
management activity. The custom or policy at many 
organizations is to give formal performance feedback 
once a year. But annual feedback is not enough. One 
reason is that managers are responsible for correct-
ing performance defi ciencies as soon as they occur. 
If the manager notices a problem with an employee’s 
behavior in June, but the annual appraisal is sched-
uled for November, the employee will miss months 
of opportunities for improvement.
Another reason for frequent performance feed-
back is that feedback is most effective when the 
Calibration Meeting
Meeting at which man-
agers discuss employee 
performance ratings and 
provide evidence sup-
porting their ratings with 
the goal of eliminating 
the inﬂ uence of rating 
errors.
LO 10-7 Explain how 
to provide performance 
feedback effectively.
 When giving performance feedback, do it in an appropriate meeting 
place. Meet in a setting that is neutral and free of distractions. What 
other factors are important for a feedback session? 

320 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
information does not surprise the employee. If an employee has to wait for up to a year 
to learn what the manager thinks of his work, the employee will wonder whether he 
is meeting expectations. Employees should instead receive feedback so often that they 
know what the manager will say during their annual performance review.
Finally, employees have indicated that they are motivated and directed by regu-
lar feedback; they want to know if they are on the right track. Managers have found 
that young employees in particular are looking for frequent and candid performance 
feedback from their managers. Across the generations, according to consultant Don 
MacPherson, employees are more engaged when they receive recognition for their 
accomplishments, identify opportunities for career advancement, and see a future role 
for themselves in the company—all of which a manager can address in the context of 
delivering feedback. MacPherson also sees frequent feedback as an opportunity for 
strengthening a relationship of trust between the manager and the employee.34
Preparing for a Feedback Session
Managers should be well prepared for each formal feedback session. The manager 
should create the right context for the meeting. The location should be neutral. If the 
manager’s offi ce is the site of unpleasant conversations, a conference room may be 
more appropriate. In announcing the meeting to an employee, the manager should 
describe it as a chance to discuss the role of the employee, the role of the manager, and 
the relationship between them. Managers should also say (and believe) that they would 
like the meeting to be an open dialogue. The content of the feedback session and the 
type of language used can determine the success of this meeting.
Managers should also enable the employee to be well prepared. The manager should 
ask the employee to complete a self-assessment ahead of time. The self-assessment 
requires employees to think about their performance over the past rating period and 
to be aware of their strengths and weaknesses so they can participate more fully in 
the discussion. Even though employees may tend to overstate their accomplishments, 
the self-assessment can help the manager and employee identify areas for discussion. 
When the purpose of the assessment is to defi ne areas for development, employees may 
actually understate their performance. Also, differences between the manager’s and the 
employee’s rating may be fruitful areas for discussion.
Conducting the Feedback Session
During the feedback session, managers can take any of three approaches. In the “tell-
and-sell” approach, managers tell the employees their ratings and then justify those rat-
ings. In the “tell-and-listen” approach, managers tell employees their ratings and then 
let the employees explain their side of the story. In the “problem-solving” approach, 
managers and employees work together to solve performance problems in an atmo-
sphere of respect and encouragement. Not surprisingly, research demonstrates that the 
problem-solving approach is superior. Perhaps surprisingly, most managers rely on the 
tell-and-sell approach.35 Managers can improve employee satisfaction with the feedback 
process by letting employees voice their opinions and discuss performance goals.36
The content of the feedback should emphasize behavior, not personalities. For exam-
ple, “You did not meet the deadline” can open a conversation about what needs to change, 
but “You’re not motivated” may make the employee feel defensive and angry. The feed-
back session should end with goal setting and a decision about when to follow up. The 
“HR How To” box provides additional guidance on delivering performance feedback.

Employees and managers often 
dread feedback sessions, because 
they expect some level of criticism, 
and criticism feels uncomfortable. 
However, there are ways to structure 
communication about employee per-
formance so that it feels more con-
structive. Here are some ideas for 
talking about employee performance 
in a way that comes across as clear, 
honest, and fair:
 • Use speciﬁ c, concrete exam-
ples. Statements about “attitude” 
or “commitment” require some 
mind-reading, and employees 
may feel misunderstood. In con-
trast, references to specifi c ac-
complishments and examples of 
behavior are more neutral. Even 
if the supervisor is concerned 
about attitude, talking about be-
haviors can open a discussion 
of the real changes that might 
be needed: “Several customers 
commented that you seemed 
angry when you spoke to them. 
Let’s talk about what’s happen-
ing in those conversations so you 
can fi nd a way to come across to 
customers as pleasant.”
 • Listen as well as talk. Especially 
when the reviewer is nervous, the 
instinct is to fi ll up the interview 
time with comments. However, 
this interview is a valuable oppor-
tunity for the supervisor to learn 
about the employee’s expecta-
tions and hopes for learning and 
advancement. Also, ahead of the 
meeting, invite the employee to 
bring a list of his or her proud-
est moments. Open the meeting 
by inviting the employee to talk 
about the items on the list.
 • Be honest. If performance is not 
acceptable, don’t pretend that it 
is. Pretending is disrespectful of 
the employee and could get the 
organization in legal trouble if the 
employee is later let go and be-
lieves the company discriminated. 
If the employee asks a question 
and the supervisor is unsure of the 
answer, honesty is again the wis-
est course. Guessing at an answer 
related to an employee’s future is 
another way to create problems 
for the organization, as well as for 
the supervisor’s relationship with 
the employee.
• Be positive. Within the limits 
of honesty, express yourself as 
positively as you can. Instead 
of negative expressions like 
“You shouldn’t,” use positive 
language such as “What if we 
tried.” Make eye contact, and 
use a pleasant tone of voice. 
Also, recognize that most em-
ployers expect their employees 
to handle heavy workloads. 
Especially if employees are 
shouldering extra duties, take 
time to thank them. 
• Prepare for success. Look 
forward to the future as well as 
backward at past performance. 
For areas where you expect a 
change in performance, help 
the employee arrive at a plan 
for how to make that change. 
Furthermore, either take time to 
discuss goals for career devel-
opment or plan a time to do so. 
Questions
 1. Why would a feedback session 
be more effective if a manager 
followed these guidelines? 
 2. If you were conducting a 
feedback session with an 
employee who reports to you, 
which of these guidelines 
would require you to prepare 
ahead of time? Which are skills 
you already have?
Sources: Scott Halford, “Five Steps 
for Giving Productive Feedback,” En-
trepreneur, http://www.entrepreneur.
com,  accessed June 20, 2014; Bureau 
of  National Affairs, “For Better Reviews, 
Discuss Money First, Avoid ‘Compliment 
Sandwiches,’” HR Focus, June 2013, 
pp. 8–9; Andrea Murad, “How to Deliver 
Feedback to Employees without Squash-
ing  Morale,” Fox Business, May 24, 
2013, http://www.foxbusiness.com; Eric 
 Jackson, “Ten Biggest Mistakes Bosses 
Make in Performance Reviews,” Forbes, 
January 9, 2012, http://www.forbes.com. 
Discussing Employee Performance
HR How To
321
Finding Solutions to Performance Problems
When performance evaluation indicates that an employee’s performance is below stan-
dard, the feedback process should launch an effort to correct the problem. Even when 
the employee is meeting current standards, the feedback session may identify areas in 
which the employee can improve in order to contribute more to the organization in 
a current or future job. In sum, the fi nal feedback stage of performance management 
involves identifying areas for improvement and ways to improve performance in those 
areas.
LO 10-8 Summarize 
ways to produce im-
provement in unsatisfac-
tory performance.

322 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
The most effective way to improve performance varies according to the employee’s 
ability and motivation. In general, when employees have high levels of ability and mo-
tivation, they perform at or above standards. But when they lack ability, motivation, or 
both, corrective action is needed. The type of action called for depends on what the 
employee lacks:
 • Lack of ability—When a motivated employee lacks knowledge, skills, or abili-
ties in some area, the manager may offer coaching, training, and more detailed 
feedback. Sometimes it is appropriate to restructure the job so the employee can 
handle it.
 • Lack of motivation—Managers with an unmotivated employee can explore ways to 
demonstrate that the employee is being treated fairly and rewarded adequately. The 
solution may be as simple as more positive feedback (praise). Employees may need 
a referral for counseling or help with stress management.
 • Lack of both—Performance may improve if the manager directs the employee’s at-
tention to the signifi cance of the problem by withholding rewards or providing spe-
cifi c feedback. If the employee does not respond, the manager may have to demote 
or terminate the employee.
As a rule, employees who combine high ability with high motivation are solid 
performers. However, managers should by no means ignore these employees on the 
grounds of leaving well enough alone. Rather, such employees are likely to appreciate 
opportunities for further development. Rewards and direct feedback help to maintain 
these employees’ high motivation levels.
Legal and Ethical Issues in 
Performance Management
In developing and using performance management systems, human resource profes-
sionals need to ensure that these systems meet legal requirements, such as the avoid-
ance of discrimination. In addition, performance management systems should meet 
ethical standards, such as protection of employees’ privacy.
Legal Requirements for Performance Management
Because performance measures play a central role in decisions about pay, promotions, 
and discipline, employment-related lawsuits often challenge an organization’s perfor-
mance management system. Lawsuits related to performance management usually in-
volve charges of discrimination or unjust dismissal.
Discrimination claims often allege that the performance management system 
discriminated against employees on the basis of their race or sex. Many perfor-
mance measures are subjective, and measurement errors, such as those described 
earlier in the chapter, can easily occur. The Supreme Court has held that the selec-
tion guidelines in the federal government’s Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection 
Procedures also apply to performance measurement.37 In general, these guidelines 
(discussed in Chapters 3 and 6) require that organizations avoid using criteria such 
as race and age as a basis for employment decisions. This requires overcoming 
widespread rating errors. A substantial body of evidence has shown that white and 
black raters tend to give higher ratings to members of their own racial group, even 
after rater training.38 In addition, evidence suggests that this tendency is strongest 
when one group is only a small percentage of the total work group. When the vast 
LO 10-9 Discuss legal 
and ethical issues that 
affect performance 
management.

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 323
majority of the group is male, females receive lower ratings; when the minority is 
male, males receive lower ratings.39
With regard to lawsuits fi led on the grounds of unjust dismissal, the usual claim 
is that the person was dismissed for reasons besides the ones that the employer 
states. Suppose an employee who works for a defense contractor discloses that 
the company defrauded the government. If the company fi res the employee, the 
employee might argue that the fi ring was a way to punish the employee for blow-
ing the whistle. In this type of situation, courts generally focus on the employer’s 
performance management system, looking to see whether the fi ring could have 
been based on poor performance. To defend itself, the employer would need a per-
formance management system that provides evidence to support its employment 
decisions.
To protect against both kinds of lawsuits, it is important to have a legally de-
fensible performance management system.40 Such a system would be based on 
valid job analyses, as described in Chapter 4, with the requirements for job success 
clearly communicated to employees. Performance measurement should evaluate 
behaviors or results rather than traits. The organization should use multiple rat-
ers (including self-appraisals) and train raters in how to use the system. The or-
ganization should provide for a review of all performance ratings by upper-level 
managers and set up a system for employees to appeal when they believe they were 
evaluated unfairly. Along with feedback, the system should include a process for 
coaching or training employees to help them improve, rather than simply dismiss-
ing poor performers.
Electronic Monitoring and Employee Privacy
Computer technology now supports many performance management systems. Orga-
nizations often store records of employees’ performance ratings, disciplinary actions, 
and work-rule violations in electronic databases. Many companies use computers to 
monitor productivity and other performance measures electronically. A company 
called E22 Alloy has developed a service that collects data about employees’ activities 
on their computers, smartphones, and other devices and stores the data in the “cloud” 
(using computer servers accessed online). Employees can visit the service to review 
the data collected about themselves and delete any data they believe to be inaccurate 
or irrelevant. Employers can review the data—including information about what data 
were erased and by whom—to identify employees’ activities. They can combine this 
information with data on business results (say, projects completed or sales closed) to 
inform decisions about which employees are delivering the most value.41
Although electronic monitoring can improve productivity, it also generates pri-
vacy concerns. Critics point out that an employer should not monitor employees 
when it has no reason to believe anything is wrong. They complain that monitoring 
systems threaten to make the workplace an electronic sweatshop in which employ-
ees are treated as robots, robbing them of dignity. Some note that employees’ per-
formances should be measured by accomplishments, not just time spent at a desks 
or workbenches. Electronic systems should not be a substitute for careful manage-
ment. When monitoring is necessary, managers should communicate the reasons 
for using it. Monitoring may be used more positively to gather information for 
coaching employees and helping them develop their skills. Finally,  organizations 
must protect the privacy of performance measurements, as they must do with other 
employee records.

324 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
THINKING ETHICALLY
HOW FAIR ARE FORCED RANKINGS?
Opinions are strong and divided about the practice of 
using forced rankings for identifying the top performers 
to reward and the bottom performers to let go. When 
Jack Welch was CEO of General Electric, he was fa-
mous for using a system that rated employees 1 if they 
ranked in the top 15%, 2 in the middle 75%, and 3 in the 
bottom 10%. Unless the 3s improved, they were asked 
to leave, so Welch’s system acquired the nickname 
“rank and yank.”
That term expresses the feelings of those who 
criticize forced rankings. Critics question whether or-
ganizations are really managing performance if a set 
percentage of people each year perform below the 
standards needed to stay at the company. They espe-
cially criticize performance management systems that 
establish a forced distribution defi ning what percentage 
of employees must fall into each level. If the forced dis-
tribution doesn’t match the actual distribution of perfor-
mance levels, then managers must assign employees to 
categories based on something other than whether they 
are meeting or exceeding standards. 
Not surprisingly, Welch disagrees. He and others 
who favor forced rankings say the system is fair be-
cause it is transparent. People know where they stand 
and what they must achieve to improve in the rankings. 
Advocates of these systems also point to another kind 
of fairness: by defi ning which employees are delivering 
the top performance, organizations can direct the great-
est rewards to the people who contribute the most. 
Those in favor of forced rankings also note that these 
systems benefi t the employer by encouraging the low-
est performers to leave, which opens up those positions 
to new employees who might perform better.
Some companies seek the advantages of forced 
rankings but modify the system to make it fairer. 
Some require rankings without establishing a forced 
distribution. Or a forced distribution can place most 
employees into one middle group, separating out only 
small percentages (say, 10%) at the top and bottom 
who need to be treated differently. Stroll, an online 
marketer of educational products, uses a forced distri-
bution with three performance levels. To keep the rat-
ings fair, the company ties each measure to one of the 
company’s core values, and it defi nes each measure 
in terms of specifi c behaviors and results. Stroll also 
gathers self-ratings and ties feedback to planning for 
improvement.
Questions
 1. Suppose you are an employee who exceeds every 
goal set for you, and you work on a team where 
most people seem not to try very hard and often 
fall short. Would a forced-ranking system seem to 
you like a fair way to measure and reward perfor-
mance? Why or why not?
 2. Suppose you are an employee who exceeds every 
goal set for you, and your employer has challenged 
you to develop by placing you on a team with bril-
liant, extraordinary people who not only meet goals 
but lead the company into great new opportuni-
ties. In this new situation, would a forced-ranking 
system seem to you like a fair way to measure and 
reward performance? Why or why not?
Sources: Laurie Harley, “The Forced Ranking Controversy,” 
HR and Talent Management, November 23, 2013, http://www
.hrtalentmanagement.com; Kristin Cifolelli, “Forced Rank-
ings in Performance Reviews: Good or Bad for Business?” 
 EverythingPeople (American Society of Employers), Novem-
ber 20, 2013, http://www.aseonline.org; Stroll, “Forced Rank-
ing: Doing It Right, Doing It Wrong,” Hypergrowth (Stroll blog), 
February 22, 2013, http://blog.stroll.com; Peter Wright, “Some 
Practical Thoughts on Annual Performance Management Pro-
cess,” People and Strategy 36, no. 2 (2013): 54–57.
SUMMARY
LO 10-1 Identify the activities involved in performance 
management.
• Performance management is the process through 
which managers ensure that employees’ activities 
and outputs contribute to the organization’s goals.
• First, the organization specifi es which aspects of 
performance are relevant to the organization.
• Next, the organization measures the relevant aspects 
of performance through performance appraisal.
• Finally, in performance feedback sessions, man-
agers provide employees with information about 
their performance so they can adjust their behav-
ior to meet the organization’s goals. Feedback in-
cludes efforts to identify and solve problems.
LO 10-2 Discuss the purposes of performance manage-
ment systems.
• Organizations establish performance management 
systems to meet three broad purposes.

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 325
• The strategic purpose is aimed at meeting business 
objectives. The system does this by helping to link 
employees’ behavior with the organization’s goals.
• The administrative purpose of performance man-
agement is to provide information for day-to-day 
decisions about salary, benefi ts, recognition, and 
retention or termination.
• The developmental purpose of performance manage-
ment is using the system as a basis for developing 
employees’ knowledge and skills.
LO 10-3 Defi ne fi ve criteria for measuring the effective-
ness of a performance management system.
• Performance measures should be strategic—fi tting 
with the organization’s strategy by supporting its 
goals and culture.
• Performance measures should be valid, so they 
measure all the relevant aspects of performance and 
do not measure irrelevant aspects of performance.
• These measures should also provide interrater and 
test-retest reliability, so that appraisals are consis-
tent among raters and over time.
• Performance measurement systems should be 
acceptable to the people who use them or receive 
feedback from them.
• A performance measure should be specifi c, telling 
employees what is expected of them and how they 
can meet those expectations.
LO 10-4 Compare the major methods for measuring 
performance.
• Performance measurement may use ranking sys-
tems such as simple ranking, forced distribution, 
or paired comparisons to compare one individual’s 
performance with that of other employees.
• These methods may be time consuming, and they 
will be seen as unfair if actual performance is not 
distributed in the same way as the ranking system 
requires.
• However, ranking counteracts some forms of rater 
bias and helps distinguish employees for adminis-
trative decisions.
• Other approaches involve rating employees’ attri-
butes, behaviors, or outcomes.
• Rating attributes is relatively simple but not always 
valid, unless attributes are specifi cally defi ned.
• Rating behaviors requires a great deal of informa-
tion, but these methods can be very effective. They 
can link behaviors to goals, and ratings by trained 
raters may be highly reliable. Rating results, such 
as productivity or achievement of objectives, tends 
to be less subjective than other kinds of rating, 
making this approach highly acceptable.
• Validity may be a problem because of factors out-
side the employee’s control. This method also 
tends not to provide much basis for determining 
how to improve.
• Focusing on quality can provide practical benefi ts, 
but is not as useful for administrative and develop-
mental decisions.
LO 10-5 Describe major sources of performance infor-
mation in terms of their advantages and disadvantages.
• Performance information may come from an em-
ployee’s self-appraisal and from appraisals by the em-
ployee’s supervisor, employees, peers, and customers.
• Using only one source makes the appraisal more 
subjective. Organizations may combine many 
sources into a 360-degree performance appraisal.
• Gathering information from each employee’s 
manager may produce accurate information, un-
less the supervisor has little opportunity to ob-
serve the employee.
• Peers are an excellent source of information about 
performance in a job where the supervisor does 
not often observe the employee. Disadvantages 
are that friendships (or rivalries) may bias ratings 
and peers may be uncomfortable with the role of 
rating a friend.
• Subordinates often have the best chance to see how a 
manager treats employees. Employees may be reluc-
tant to contribute honest opinions about a supervisor 
unless they can provide information anonymously.
• Self-appraisals may be biased, but they do come 
from the person with the most knowledge of the 
employee’s behavior on the job, and they provide 
a basis for discussion in feedback sessions, opening 
up fruitful comparisons and areas of disagreement 
between the self-appraisal and other appraisals.
• Customers may be an excellent source of perfor-
mance information, although obtaining customer 
feedback tends to be expensive.
LO 10-6 Defi ne types of rating errors, and explain how 
to minimize them.
• People observe behavior often without a practical 
way of knowing all the relevant circumstances and 
outcomes, so they necessarily interpret what they 
see.
• A common tendency is to give higher evaluations 
to people we consider similar to ourselves.
• Other errors involve using only part of the rating 
scale: Giving all employees ratings at the high end 
of the scale is called leniency error. Rating every-
one at the low end of the scale is called strictness 
error. Rating all employees at or near the middle is 
called central tendency.
• The halo error refers to rating employees posi-
tively in all areas because of strong performance 
observed in one area.

326 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
• The horns error is rating employees negatively in 
all areas because of weak performance observed in 
one area.
• Ways to reduce rater error are training raters to be 
aware of their tendencies to make rating errors and 
training them to be sensitive to the complex nature 
of employee performance so they will consider 
many aspects of performance in greater depth.
• Politics also may infl uence ratings. Organizations 
can minimize appraisal politics by establishing a 
fair appraisal system and bringing managers to-
gether to discuss ratings in calibration meetings.
LO 10-7 Explain how to provide performance feedback 
effectively.
• Performance feedback should be a regular, sched-
uled management activity so that employees can 
correct problems as soon as they occur.
• Managers should prepare by establishing a neutral 
location, emphasizing that the feedback session 
will be a chance for discussion, and asking the em-
ployee to prepare a self-assessment.
• During the feedback session, managers should 
strive for a problem-solving approach and encour-
age employees to voice their opinions and discuss 
performance goals.
• The manager should look for opportunities to 
praise and should limit criticism.
• The discussion should focus on behavior and re-
sults rather than on personalities.
LO 10-8 Summarize ways to produce improvement in 
unsatisfactory performance.
• For an employee who is motivated but lacks ability, 
the manager should provide coaching and train-
ing, give detailed feedback about performance, 
and consider restructuring the job.
• For an employee who has ability but lacks moti-
vation, the manager should investigate whether 
outside problems are a distraction and, if so, refer 
the employee for help. If the problem has to do 
with the employee’s not feeling appreciated or 
rewarded, the manager should try to deliver more 
praise and evaluate whether additional pay and 
other rewards are appropriate.
• For an employee lacking both ability and motiva-
tion, the manager should consider whether the 
employee is a good fi t for the position. Specifi c 
feedback or withholding rewards may spur im-
provement, or the employee may have to be de-
moted or terminated.
• Solid employees who are high in ability and moti-
vation will continue so and may be able to contrib-
ute even more if the manager provides appropriate 
direct feedback, rewards, and opportunities for 
development.
LO 10-9 Discuss legal and ethical issues that affect per-
formance management.
• Lawsuits related to performance management 
usually involve charges of discrimination or unjust 
dismissal. Managers must make sure that perfor-
mance management systems and decisions treat 
employees equally, without regard to their race, 
sex, or other protected status.
• Organizations can do this by establishing and 
using valid performance measures and by train-
ing raters to evaluate performance accurately. A 
system is more likely to be legally defensible if it 
is based on behaviors and results, rather than on 
traits, and if multiple raters evaluate each person’s 
performance.
• The system should include a process for coach-
ing or training employees to help them improve, 
rather than simply dismissing poor performers.
• An ethical issue of performance management is 
the use of electronic monitoring. This type of 
performance measurement provides detailed, 
 accurate information, but employees may fi nd it 
demoralizing, degrading, and stressful.
• Employees are more likely to accept electronic 
monitoring if the organization explains its pur-
pose, links it to help in improving performance, 
and keeps the performance data private.
KEY TERMS
performance management, 299
simple ranking, 304
forced-distribution method, 305
paired-comparison method, 306
graphic rating scale, 306
mixed-standard scales, 308
critical-incident method, 308
behaviorally anchored rating scale 
(BARS), 308
behavioral observation 
scale (BOS), 310
organizational behavior 
modifi cation (OBM), 311
management by objectives 
(MBO), 312
360-degree performance 
appraisal, 314
calibration meeting, 319

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 327
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. How does a complete performance management 
system differ from the use of annual performance 
appraisals? (LO 10-1)
 2. Give two examples of an administrative decision that 
would be based on performance management infor-
mation. Give two examples of developmental deci-
sions based on this type of information. (LO 10-2)
 3. How can involving employees in the creation of per-
formance standards improve the effectiveness of a 
performance management system? (Consider the cri-
teria for effectiveness listed in the chapter.) (LO 10-3)
 4. Consider how you might rate the performance of 
three instructors from whom you are currently tak-
ing a course. (If you are currently taking only one 
or two courses, consider this course and two you 
recently completed.) (LO 10-4)
a.  Would it be harder to rate the instructors’ per-
formance or to rank their performance? Why?
b.  Write three items to use in rating the 
instructors—one each to rate them in terms 
of an attribute, a behavior, and an outcome.
c.  Which measure in (b) do you think is most 
valid? Most reliable? Why?
d.  Many colleges use questionnaires to gather data 
from students about their instructors’ perfor-
mance. Would it be appropriate to use the data 
for  administrative decisions? Developmental 
decisions? Other decisions? Why or why not?
 5. Imagine that a pet supply store is establishing a new 
performance management system to help employ-
ees provide better customer service. Management 
needs to decide who should participate in measur-
ing the performance of each of the store’s sales-
people. From what sources should the store gather 
information? Why? (LO 10-5)
 6. Would the same sources be appropriate if the store 
in Question 5 used the performance appraisals to 
support decisions about which employees to pro-
mote? Explain. (LO 10-6)
 7. Suppose you were recently promoted to a super-
visory job in a company where you have worked 
for two years. You genuinely like almost all your 
co-workers, who now report to you. The only ex-
ception is one employee, who dresses more for-
mally than the others and frequently tells jokes that 
embarrass you and the other workers. Given your 
preexisting feelings for the employees, how can you 
measure their performance fairly and effectively? 
(LO 10-7)
 8. Continuing the example in Question 7, imagine that 
you are preparing for your fi rst performance feed-
back session. You want the feedback to be  effective—
that is, you want the feedback to result in improved 
performance. List fi ve or six steps you can take to 
achieve your goal. (LO 10-7)
 9. Besides giving employees feedback, what steps can a 
manager take to improve employees’ performance? 
(LO 10-8)
 10. Suppose you are a human resource professional 
helping to improve the performance management 
system of a company that sells and services offi ce 
equipment. The company operates a call center that 
takes calls from customers who are having prob-
lems with their equipment. Call center employees 
are supposed to verify that the problem is not one 
the customer can easily handle (for example, equip-
ment that will not operate because it has come un-
plugged). Then, if the problem is not resolved over 
the phone, the employees arrange for service techni-
cians to visit the customer. The company can charge 
the customer only if a service technician visits, so 
performance management of the call center employ-
ees focuses on productivity—how quickly they can 
complete a call and move on to the next caller. To 
measure this performance effi ciently and accurately, 
the company uses electronic monitoring. (LO 10-9)
a.   How would you expect the employees to react 
to the electronic monitoring? How might the 
organization address the employees’ concerns?
b.   Besides productivity in terms of number of 
calls, what other performance measures should 
the performance management system include?
c.   How should the organization gather informa-
tion about the other performance measures?
REI’s Purpose Drives Its Performance Management
REI (the letters stand for Recreational Equipment Inc.) 
is not your typical business. The company, which de-
signs and sells equipment for outdoor recreation, is a 
consumer cooperative rather than a publicly traded 
corporation. Anyone can buy from REI, but consumers 
who want to can pay $20 to become lifetime members 
of the co-op. This makes them part-owners, who are 
eligible for a share of the profi ts and other membership 
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY

328 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
Adobe Systems Asks Managers to Check-In
Most people know Adobe Systems for its Photoshop 
software and the Acrobat and Adobe Reader programs 
for creating and viewing its portable document format 
(PDF) fi les. Recently, Adobe has been shifting its focus 
from packaged software programs to online software. 
During that transition, Adobe’s senior vice president of 
people resources, Donna Morris, wondered whether its 
HR systems—particularly performance management—
also needed a new strategy.
Evidence signaled a need for change at the 
11,500- employee company. Adobe was using a process 
of annual reviews that ranked employees. Morris’s team 
calculated that Adobe’s managers spent 80,000 hours per 
year on the process, equivalent to the time of 40 full-time 
employees. Was the effort improving performance? Prob-
ably not. Every year, immediately following the feedback 
sessions, voluntary departures by employees spiked. On 
the corporate blog, Morris wrote a piece about her desire 
to eliminate formal performance appraisals. It became 
one of Adobe’s most popular blog posts, and comments 
poured in from employees who were delighted with 
the idea and disappointed in managers’ apparent lack 
of  recognition of their accomplishments and failure to 
 support their career development.
Morris determined that she had to act. She announced 
that Adobe would go forward with abolishing perfor-
mance appraisals, along with related schedules and forms. 
Instead, the company would prepare managers to carry 
out a practice called the Check-In, through which they 
provide ongoing feedback and coaching. The timing of 
the feedback is up to the managers, consistent with Ado-
be’s strategy of encouraging managers to act as “business 
owners” of the group they lead. Managers were trained 
to focus on goals, objectives, and career development. In-
stead of tying pay increases to rankings, managers relate 
them to employee achievement of their goals.
Instituting a less formal system poses some 
challenges. For example, without a schedule for 
MANAGING TALENT
benefi ts, along with REI’s other 5 million active 
members.
REI is also distinctive in being driven by its mission. 
The co-op was started in 1938 by 23 friends who shared 
a love of hiking. Continuing the founders’ passion, REI 
today states its mission as “inspiring, educating and out-
fi tting its members and the community for a lifetime 
of outdoor adventure and stewardship.” The resulting 
culture is casual, fun, and nontraditional—but also in-
tensely concerned with high performance.
In that context, says Michelle Clements, REI’s senior 
vice president of human resources, executives went on 
a retreat where they were challenged to identify “three 
dead ideas in three minutes.” One of Clements’s ideas 
was to abolish the organization’s annual performance 
appraisals. It drew a standing ovation. With that re-
sponse, Clements couldn’t back down. She interviewed 
employees and managers, studied alternatives that other 
companies were trying, and evaluated the risks and re-
wards of various ideas.
Based on that work, Clements and her team developed 
a new program they call Real Talk, Real Results. Instead 
of emphasizing annual reviews, the new system focuses 
on training managers to give meaningful performance 
feedback. To support that development effort, the team 
defi ned “anchor points,” using the analogy to rock climb-
ing, where anchor points help climbers move to the next 
level. Online training helps managers attain such anchor 
points as mentoring their employees and having diffi cult 
conversations. As far as the feedback process, it no longer 
involves annual ratings of employees. Instead, managers 
are supposed to give ongoing feedback and they meet for 
twice-a-year calibration sessions at which they catego-
rize employees as leading performers, solid performers, 
or still developing. The categories affect compensation 
decisions. In addition, teams are responsible for meeting 
team-level performance targets.
A few years since the launch of that new system, 
REI’s company-level performance appears healthy. In 
2013, REI reported annual sales of $2.0 billion, a re-
cord high. On those earnings, it generated income of 
more than $153 million, most of which it distributed 
to the active members of the co-op. In addition, more 
than 840,000 people became members—and that means 
hundreds of thousands more people participating in the 
mission to inspire, educate, and outfi t people for out-
door adventures.
Questions
 1. How did REI address the strategic, administra-
tive, and developmental purposes of performance 
management?
 2. If REI asked you to evaluate the effectiveness of its per-
formance management, what criteria would you apply?
Sources: REI, “REI Overview,” http://www.rei.com, accessed June 20, 2014; 
“REI Sales Top $2 Billion in 2013,” PR Newswire, March 17, 2014, Busi-
ness Insights: Global, http://bi.galegroup.com; Amy Armitage and Donna 
Parrey, “Reinventing Performance Management: Creating Purpose-Driven 
Practices,” People and Strategy 36, no. 2 (2013): 26–33.

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 329
conducting performance reviews, Adobe needs a 
way to ensure that managers are engaging in perfor-
mance-related discussions. For this, Adobe has em-
ployees meet with managers two levels above (their 
boss’s boss) to discuss whether they have the support 
they need for their team to meet its goals. The HR 
department emphasizes training managers in the 
skills needed for providing feedback.
Reactions to the changes have been overwhelmingly 
positive. In annual surveys, employees say the Check-ins 
are easier and more effective than the old system, and 
that their managers are getting better at helping them 
improve. Also telling are the rates at which employees 
leave. Involuntary departures are more common, sug-
gesting that managers are having franker conversations 
with employees who do not improve. Voluntary depar-
tures have dropped by 30%, and a larger share of these 
are what Adobe calls “non-regrettable” departures.
Questions
 1. How can managers at Adobe ensure that the feed-
back they provide during check-ins is effective?
 2. In terms of the criteria for effective performance 
management, what advantages does Adobe gain and 
lose by shifting its methods from rating individuals 
to measuring results?
Sources: Adobe Systems, “Just Checking In,” Adobe Life (corporate blog), 
http://blogs.adobe.com, accessed June 20, 2014; Bob Sutton, “How Adobe 
Got Rid of Traditional Performance Reviews,” LinkedIn, February 6, 2014, 
http://www.linkedin.com; Peter Cohan, “Adobe’s Stock Up 68% since It 
Dumped Stack Ranking, Will Microsoft’s Follow?” Forbes, November 29, 
2013, http://www.forbes.com; Julie Cook Ramirez, “Rethinking the Re-
view,” HRE Online, July 24, 2013, http://www.hreonline.com; Amy 
Armitage and Donna Parrey, “Reinventing Performance Management: 
Creating Purpose-Driven Practices,” People and Strategy 36, no. 2 (2013): 
26–33.
Appraisals Matter at Meadow Hills Veterinary Center
Brian Conrad, the practice manager of Meadow Hills 
Veterinary Center, makes a claim that sounds a lot like 
statements you often hear in management and HR  circles: 
“The staff is my number one asset in this hospital.” Some-
times statements like that are puffery, but in Conrad’s case, 
he puts the claim into action in the way he handles perfor-
mance management at his two  Washington State facilities.
Because the organization is small, appraisal inter-
views are handled at the highest level: each employee 
being evaluated meets with Conrad and the owners of 
the practice. Conrad wants them to be full participants 
in the process, not nervous subjects under a microscope, 
so he tries to put them at ease by giving employees a few 
months to look over evaluation forms ahead of time so 
they can see what measures will be evaluated. He also 
keeps the meetings regular and predictable by schedul-
ing a meeting with each employee twice a year.
Conrad also tries to dial down the tension by separat-
ing compensation discussions from performance evalu-
ations. In his experience, employees don’t listen well to 
feedback if they’re busy calculating whether the review 
will qualify them for a raise. Instead, Conrad meets twice 
a year with the owners to go over the budget and all the 
employees’ contributions. Raises and bonuses are deter-
mined in those meetings and awarded to employees in 
meetings separate from the appraisal interviews. This 
keeps the appraisals focused on what is getting in the way 
of top performance and how  employees can improve.
Conrad also tries to keep appraisal interviews positive 
by not waiting for appraisal time to address performance 
problems. His understanding of his position is that he is 
responsible for addressing performance problems as they 
arise. When a situation can’t be resolved by a few words 
from a supervisor, Conrad invites the employee and his or 
her supervisor to join him for lunch away from the work-
place. There they discuss the issue and look for a solution.
Conrad doesn’t limit communication and feedback to 
problems. He tries to know employees and their work 
situations better by looking for informal opportunities 
for two-way communication. If he needs to run an er-
rand or attend a community event, he invites one of the 
employees to accompany him and uses that time to ask 
about their career goals and how they feel about their 
work. Often, he uncovers opportunities for employees to 
develop and use untapped skills. In one case, a part-time 
administrative employee indicated she was interested in 
full-time work. Over lunch, Conrad and the employee 
mapped out possible career paths, and she decided to get 
involved in treatment of the animals. She continued to 
apply her administrative skills by coordinating surgeries 
and dentistry, and she enrolled in continuing-education 
classes so she could assist in the treatment area.
This approach to performance management is part of 
a larger objective at Meadow Hills. Conrad says he prom-
ised employees, “No team member will leave the practice 
feeling unchallenged, concede to a lack of direction, or 
have professional growth hindered.” Keeping that promise 
requires a combination of careful hiring, ongoing training, 
and honest review of any mistakes that are made. When 
employees don’t perform up to expectations, managers 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

330 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
evaluate whether changes are needed in training or hiring. 
Conrad expects that employees will keep their part of the 
bargain by showing a willingness to try new opportuni-
ties and participate in problem solving. If employees aren’t 
willing to buy into this culture, Conrad won’t keep them 
on board. But apparently not many want to leave. While 
the rate of employee turnover for the veterinary industry 
is about 30%, turnover of Meadow Hills has fallen from 
25% several years ago to just 10% soon after Conrad made 
his promise to employees.
Questions
 1. Based on the information given, discuss how well 
the performance management at Meadow Hills 
Veterinary Center meets its strategic, administrative, 
and developmental purposes.
 2. What methods for measuring employee performance 
do you think would be most benefi cial for Meadow 
Hills? Why?
 3. Evaluate Brian Conrad’s approach to appraisal inter-
views. Write a paragraph or two summarizing what 
Conrad is doing well and how he might further im-
prove the effort.
Sources: “Four Ways to Add Value to Employee Evaluations,” Veterinary 
Economics, January 2010, Business & Company Resource Center, http:// galenet.
galegroup.com; “Help Me to Help You,” Veterinary Economics, August 2008, 
Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com; Brian 
Conrad, “Make the Promise: Keep Your Team,” Veterinary Economics, May 2008, 
Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 1. Stephen Miller, “‘Stack Ranking’ Ends at Microsoft, Gener-
ating Heated Debate,” HR Disciplines (Society for Human 
Resource Management), November 20, 2013, http://www.
shrm.org; Elizabeth G. Olson, “Microsoft, GE, and the 
 Futility of Ranking Employees,” Fortune, November 18, 
2013, http://fortune.com; Tom Waren, “Microsoft Axes 
Its Controversial Employee-Ranking System,” The Verge, 
 November 12, 2013, http://www.theverge.com; Shira Ovide 
and Rachel Feintzeig, “Microsoft Abandons ‘Stack Ranking’ 
of Employees,” The Wall Street Journal, November 12, 2013, 
http://online.wsj.com.
 2. Discussion based on E. Pulakos, Performance Manage-
ment (Oxford, England: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009); H. Agui-
nis, “An Expanded View of Performance Management,” in 
J. W. Smith and M. London (eds.), Performance Management 
(San  Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2009), pp. 1–43; J. Russell and 
L. Russell, “Talk Me Through It: The Next Level of Perfor-
mance Management,” T 1 D, April 2010, pp. 42–48.
 3. E. Krell, “All for Incentives, Incentives for All,” HR Magazine, 
January 2011, pp. 35–38.
 4. Matt Schur, “Upon Further Review,” PM Network, March 2014, 
pp. 38–43; Bureau of National Affairs, “Turning  Mediocre 
 Employees Great Requires Two-Way Conversation,” HR Focus, 
September 2013, pp. 9–10.
 5. S. Scullen, P. Bergey, and L. Aiman-Smith, “Forced Choice 
Distribution Systems and the Improvement of Workforce 
Potential: A Baseline Simulation,” Personnel Psychology 58 
(2005), pp. 1–32.
 6. P. Smith and L. Kendall, “Retranslation of Expectations: An Ap-
proach to the Construction of Unambiguous Anchors for Rat-
ing Scales,” Journal of Applied Psychology 47 (1963), pp. 149–55.
 7. K. Murphy and J. Constans, “Behavioral Anchors as a Source 
of Bias in Rating,” Journal of Applied Psychology 72 (1987), 
pp. 573–77; M. Piotrowski, J. Barnes-Farrel, and F. Estig, 
“Behaviorally Anchored Bias: A Replication and Extension 
of Murphy and Constans,” Journal of Applied Psychology 74 
(1989), pp. 823–26; R. Harvey, “Job Analysis,” in Handbook 
of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 2nd ed. (Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1991).
 8. G. Latham and K. Wexley, Increasing Productivity through Per-
formance Appraisal (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1981).
 9. U. Wiersma and G. Latham, “The Practicality of Behavioral 
Observation Scales, Behavioral Expectation Scales, and Trait 
Scales,” Personnel Psychology 39 (1986), pp. 619–28.
 10. D. C. Anderson, C. Crowell, J. Sucec, K. Gilligan, and M. 
Wikoff, “Behavior Management of Client Contacts in 
a Real Estate Brokerage: Getting Agents to Sell More,” 
Journal of Organizational Behavior Management 4 (2001), 
pp. 580–90; F. Luthans and R. Kreitner, Organizational 
Behavior Modifi cation and Beyond (Glenview, IL: Scott-
Foresman, 1975).
 11. K. L. Langeland, C. M. Jones, and T. C. Mawhinney, “Im-
proving Staff Performance in a Community Mental Health 
Setting: Job Analysis, Training, Goal Setting, Feedback, and 
Years of Data,” Journal of Organizational Behavior Manage-
ment 18 (1998), pp. 21–43.
 12. J. Komaki, R. Collins, and P. Penn, “The Role of Perfor-
mance Antecedents and Consequences in Work Motivation,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 67 (1982), pp. 334–40.
 13. S. Snell, “Control Theory in Strategic Human Resource Man-
agement: The Mediating Effect of Administrative Informa-
tion,” Academy of Management Journal 35 (1992), pp. 292–327.
 14. R. Pritchard, S. Jones, P. Roth, K. Stuebing, and S. Ekeberg, 
“The Evaluation of an Integrated Approach to Measuring 
Organizational Productivity,” Personnel Psychology 42 (1989), 
pp. 69–115.
 15. G. Odiorne, MOBII: A System of Managerial Leadership for the 
80s (Belmont, CA: Pitman, 1986).
 16. R. Rodgers and J. Hunter, “Impact of Management by Ob-
jectives on Organizational Productivity,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 76 (1991), pp. 322–26.
 17. P. 
Wright, 
J. 
George, 
S. 
Farnsworth, 
and 
G. 
McMahan, “Productivity and Extra-role Behavior: The Ef-
fects of Goals and Incentives on Spontaneous Helping,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 78, no. 3 (1993), pp. 374–81; 
Mike Ledyard and Joseph Tillman, “Do Your Metrics Mea-
sure Up?” Material Handling and Logistics, December 2013, 
pp. 27–29.
NOTES

CHAPTER 10 
Managing Employees’ Performance 331
 18. “U.S. Employees Desire More Sources of Feedback for Per-
formance Reviews,” T + D, February 2012, p. 18; Corner-
stone OnDemand, “Stopping the Exodus: Findings from the 
Cornerstone OnDemand/Harris Employee Performance 
Management Study,” news release, December 6, 2011, http://
www.cornerstoneondemand.com.
 19. R. Heneman, K. Wexley, and M. Moore, “Performance Rat-
ing Accuracy: A Critical Review,” Journal of Business Research 
15 (1987), pp. 431–48.
 20. T. Becker and R. Klimoski, “A Field Study of the Relationship 
between the Organizational Feedback Environment and Per-
formance,” Personnel Psychology 42 (1989), pp. 343–58; H. M. 
Findley, W. F. Giles, and K. W. Mossholder, “Performance Ap-
praisal and Systems Facets: Relationships with Contextual Per-
formance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 85 (2000), pp. 634–40.
 21. K. Wexley and R. Klimoski, “Performance Appraisal: An Up-
date,” in Research in Personnel and Human Resource Manage-
ment, vol. 2, ed. K. Rowland and G. Ferris (Greenwich, CT: 
JAI Press, 1984).
 22. F. Landy and J. Farr, The Measurement of Work Performance: 
Methods, Theory, and Applications (New York: Academic Press, 
1983).
 23. G. McEvoy and P. Buller, “User Acceptance of Peer Apprais-
als in an Industrial Setting,” Personnel Psychology 40 (1987), 
pp. 785–97.
 24. Joann S. Lublin, “Transparency Pays Off in 360-Degree Re-
views,” The Wall Street Journal, December 8, 2011, http://
online.wsj.com.
 25. D. Antonioni, “The Effects of Feedback Accountability on 
Upward Appraisal Ratings,” Personnel Psychology 47 (1994), 
pp. 349–56.
 26. Rachel Emma Silverman, “Performance Reviews Lose 
Steam,” The Wall Street Journal, December 19, 2011, http://
online.wsj.com.
 27. H. Heidemeier and K. Moser, “Self-Other Agreement in 
Job Performance Rating: A Meta-Analytic Test of a Process 
Model,” Journal of Applied Psychology 94 (2008), pp. 353–70.
 28. J. Bernardin, C. Hagan, J. Kane, and P. Villanova, “Effective 
Performance Management: A Focus on Precision, Custom-
ers, and Situational Constraints,” in Performance Appraisal: 
State of the Art in Practice, ed. J. W. Smither (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 1998), pp. 3–48.
 29. K. Wexley and W. Nemeroff, “Effects of Racial Prejudice, 
Race of Applicant, and Biographical Similarity on Inter-
viewer Evaluations of Job Applicants,” Journal of Social and 
Behavioral Sciences 20 (1974), pp. 66–78.
 30. D. Smith, “Training Programs for Performance Appraisal: 
A Review,” Academy of Management Review 11 (1986), 
pp. 22–40; G. Latham, K. Wexley, and E. Pursell, “Training 
Managers to Minimize Rating Errors in the Observation of 
Behavior,” Journal of Applied Psychology 60 (1975), pp. 550–55.
 31. E. Pulakos, “A Comparison of Rater Training Programs: 
Error Training and Accuracy Training,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 69 (1984), pp. 581–88.
 32. Claudine Kapel, “Addressing Consistency in Performance 
Reviews,” HR Reporter, March 5, 2012, http://www.hrre-
porter.com; Ovide and Feintzeig, “Microsoft Abandons 
‘Stack Ranking’ of Employees”; Olson, “Microsoft, GE, and 
the Futility of Ranking Employees.”
 33. S. W. J. Kozlowski, G. T. Chao, and R. F. Morrison, “Games 
Raters Play: Politics, Strategies, and Impression Manage-
ment in Performance Appraisal,” in Performance Appraisal: 
State of the Art in Practice, pp. 163–205; C. Rosen, P. Levy, 
and R. Hall, “Placing Perceptions of Politics in the Context 
of the Feedback Environment, Employee Attitudes, and 
Job Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91 (2006), 
pp. 211–20.
 34. Bureau of National Affairs, “Consultants Explain How to 
 Revamp Performance Appraisals,” Report on Salary Surveys, 
April 2014, pp. 10–11.
 35. K. Wexley, V. Singh, and G. Yukl, “Subordinate Partici-
pation in Three Types of Appraisal Interviews,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 58 (1973), pp. 54–57; K. Wexley, “Ap-
praisal Interview,” in Performance Assessment, ed. R. A. 
Berk (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986), 
pp. 167–85; B. D. Cawley, L. M. Keeping, and P. E. Levy, 
“Participation in the Performance Appraisal Process and 
Employee Reactions: A Meta-analytic Review of Field In-
vestigations,” Journal of Applied Psychology 83, no. 3 (1998), 
pp. 615–63; H. Aguinis, Performance Management (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice-Hall, 2007); C. Lee, 
“Feedback, Not Appraisal,” HR Magazine, November 
2006, pp. 111–14.
 36. D. Cederblom, “The Performance Appraisal Interview: A Re-
view, Implications, and Suggestions,” Academy of Management 
Review 7 (1982), pp. 219–27; B. D. Cawley, L. M. Keeping, 
and P. E. Levy, “Participation in the Performance Appraisal 
Process and Employee Reactions: A Meta-analytic Review of 
Field Investigations,” Journal of Applied Psychology 83, no. 3 
(1998), pp. 615–63; W. Giles and K. Mossholder, “Employee 
Reactions to Contextual and Session Components of Perfor-
mance Appraisal,” Journal of Applied Psychology 75 (1990), pp. 
371–77.
 37. Brito v. Zia Co., 478 F.2d 1200 (10th Cir. 1973).
 38. K. Kraiger and J. Ford, “A Meta-Analysis of Ratee Race Ef-
fects in Performance Rating,” Journal of Applied Psychology 70 
(1985), pp. 56–65.
 39. P. Sackett, C. DuBois, and A. Noe, “Tokenism in Perfor-
mance Evaluation: The Effects of Work Group Repre-
sentation on Male-Female and White-Black Differences 
in Performance Ratings,” Journal of Applied Psychology 76 
(1991), pp. 263–67.
 40. G. Barrett and M. Kernan, “Performance Appraisal and 
Terminations: A Review of Court Decisions since Brito v. 
Zia with Implications for Personnel Practices,” Personnel 
Psychology 40 (1987), pp. 489–503; H. Feild and W. Holley, 
“The Relationship of Performance Appraisal System Char-
acteristics to Verdicts in Selected Employment Discrimi-
nation Cases,” Academy of Management Journal 25 (1982), 
pp. 392–406; J. M. Werner and M. C. Bolino, “Explaining 
U.S. Courts of Appeals Decisions Involving Performance 
Appraisal: Accuracy, Fairness, and Validation,” Person-
nel Psychology 50 (1997), pp. 1–24; J. Segal, “Performance 
Management Blunders,” HR Magazine, November 2010, 
pp. 75–77; Janove, “Reviews—Good for Anything?”
 41. Michael Hugos, “Monitoring Employee Performance in 
Real Time,” CIO, February 29, 2012, http://blogs.cio.com.

Introduction
If you follow news about public schools in the United States, you might assume 
teachers are unhappy and even want to change jobs. Common complaints are that 
standards are rigid, students fail to meet standards, and schools must constantly 
restructure because they fail to improve performance adequately—all while gov-
ernments are cutting funds. These reports, combined with the claim that teacher 
pay is low relative to job requirements, sound like a recipe for employee dissat-
isfaction. Yet according to a survey by the Center for American Progress (CAP), 
teachers’ job satisfaction has been rising, and turnover has been falling. One rea-
son is wide latitude in decision making: 90% of surveyed teachers said they have 
“a good or great deal of control” over teaching methods, and a majority said they 
have freedom to adapt the curriculum to their classroom. Similarly, in a survey by 
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, roughly 90% of U.S. 
teachers reported being highly satisfied with their work, despite challenges such 
as difficulty in motivating students, a heavy workload, lack of incentives, and high 
expenses. And in a Gallup poll of Americans’ well-being, teachers ranked second 
after physicians for overall well-being—reporting stress but also happiness and a 
chance to use their personal strengths at work. Unsurprisingly then, in the CAP 
study, two-thirds of first-year teachers said they would want to keep teaching even 
if they had a chance to switch careers.1
Teachers’ love of teaching is good news for communities that want to keep effec-
tive teachers. But teachers are not all equally effective, so school administrators 
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 11-1 Distinguish between involuntary and voluntary 
turnover, and describe their effects on an 
organization.
 LO 11-2 Discuss how employees determine whether the 
organization treats them fairly.
 LO 11-3 Identify legal requirements for employee 
discipline.
 LO 11-4 Summarize ways in which organizations can 
fairly discipline employees.
 LO 11-5 Explain how job dissatisfaction affects employee 
behavior.
 LO 11-6 Describe how organizations contribute to employees’ 
job satisfaction and retain key employees.
Separating and Retaining 
Employees
11

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 333
also manage those who underperform. Their options are limited in many cases by 
the practice of granting tenure: after a set number of years on the job, a teacher may 
not be fired except for just cause. Establishing just cause is difficult and expensive. 
Therefore, if a teacher is not performing well, administrators either focus on helping 
the teacher improve or accept the poor performance.2 
Although there are specifi c issues of management in the public sector, such as in a 
school district, every organization must meet the challenges of managing high-performing 
and low-performing employees. Organizations want to keep their high-performing em-
ployees. Research provides evidence that retaining employees helps retain customers and 
increase sales.3 Organizations with low turnover and satisfi ed employees tend to perform 
better.4 On the other side of the coin, organizations have to act when an employee’s per-
formance consistently falls short.  Sometimes terminating a poor performer is the only way 
to show fairness, ensure  quality, and maintain customer satisfaction.
This chapter explores the dual challenges of separating and retaining employees. We 
begin by distinguishing involuntary and voluntary turnover, describing how each affects 
the organization. Next we explore the separation process, including ways to manage this 
process fairly. Finally, we discuss measures the organization can take to encourage employ-
ees to stay. These topics provide a transition between Parts 3 and 4. The previous chapters 
considered how to assess and improve performance, and this chapter describes measures to 
take depending on whether performance is high or low. Part 4 discusses pay and benefi ts, 
both of which play an important role in employee retention.
Managing Voluntary and Involuntary Turnover
Organizations must try to ensure that good performers want to stay with the orga-
nization and that employees whose performance is chronically low are  encouraged—
or forced—to leave. Both of these challenges involve employee turnover, that is, 
employees leaving the organization. When the organization initiates the turnover 
(often with employees who would prefer to stay), the result is involuntary turn-
over. Examples include terminating an employee for drug use or laying off em-
ployees during a downturn. Most organizations use the word termination to refer 
only to a discharge related to a discipline problem, but some organizations call any 
involuntary turnover a termination. When the employees initiate the turnover 
(often when the organization would prefer to keep them), it is voluntary turn-
over. Employees may leave to retire or to take a job with a different organization. 
Typically, the employees who leave voluntarily are either the organization’s worst 
performers, who quit before they are fi red, or its best performers, who can most 
easily fi nd attractive new opportunities.5
In general, organizations try to avoid the need for involuntary turnover and to 
minimize voluntary turnover, especially among top performers. Both kinds of turn-
over are costly, as summarized in Table 11.1. Replacing workers is expensive, and new 
employees need time to learn their jobs and build teamwork skills.6 Employees who 
leave voluntarily out of anger and frustration may not be shy about generating unfa-
vorable publicity. People who leave involuntarily are sometimes ready to sue a for-
mer employer if they feel they were unfairly discharged. The prospect of workplace 
violence also raises the risk associated with discharging employees. Effective human 
resource management can help the organization minimize both kinds of turnover, 
as well as carry it out effectively when necessary. Despite a company’s best efforts at 
personnel selection, training, and compensation, some employees will fail to meet 
LO 11-1 Distinguish 
between involuntary and 
voluntary turnover, and 
describe their effects on 
an organization.
Voluntary Turnover
Turnover initiated by 
employees (often when 
the organization would 
prefer to keep them).
Involuntary Turnover
Turnover initiated by an 
employer (often with 
employees who would 
prefer to stay).

334 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
performance requirements or will violate company policies. When this happens, or-
ganizations need to apply a discipline program that could ultimately lead to discharg-
ing the individual.
For a number of reasons, discharging employees can be very diffi cult. First, the 
 decision has legal aspects that can affect the organization. Historically, if the organiza-
tion and employee do not have a specifi c employment contract, the employer or em-
ployee may end the employment relationship at any time. This is the  employment-at-will 
doctrine, described in Chapter 5. This doctrine has eroded signifi cantly, how-
ever. Employees who have been terminated sometimes sue their employers for 
wrongful discharge. Some judges have considered that employment at will is limited 
where managers make statements that amount to an implied contract; a discharge 
also can be found illegal if it violates a law (such as antidiscrimination laws) or public 
policy (for example, fi ring an employee for refusing to do something illegal).7 In a 
typical lawsuit for wrongful discharge, the former employee tries to establish that the 
discharge violated either an implied agreement or public policy. Most employers settle 
these claims out of court. Even though few former employees win wrongful-discharge 
suits, and employers usually win when they appeal, the cost of defending the lawsuit 
can be hundreds of thousands of dollars.8
Along with the fi nancial risks of dismissing an employee, there are issues of per-
sonal safety. Distressing as it is that some former employees go to the courts, far worse 
are the employees who react to a termination decision with violence. Violence in the 
workplace has become a major organizational problem. Although any number of or-
ganizational actions or decisions may incite violence among employees, the “nothing 
else to lose” aspect of an employee’s dismissal makes the situation dangerous, especially 
when the nature of the work adds other risk factors.9
Retaining top performers is not always easy either, 
and recent trends have made this more diffi cult than 
ever. Today’s psychological contract, in which work-
ers feel responsibility for their own careers rather than 
loyalty to a particular employer, makes voluntary turn-
over more likely. Also, competing organizations are 
constantly looking at each other’s top performers. For 
high-demand positions, such as software  engineers, 
“poaching talent” from other companies has  become 
the norm.
Employee Separation
Because of the critical fi nancial and personal risks as-
sociated with employee dismissal, it is easy to see why 
organizations must develop a standardized, systematic 
approach to discipline and discharge. These decisions 
INVOLUNTARY TURNOVER
VOLUNTARY TURNOVER
Recruiting, selecting, and training replacements
Recruiting, selecting, and training replacements
Lost productivity
Lost productivity
Lawsuits
Loss of talented employees
Workplace violence
Table 11.1
Costs Associated with 
Turnover
Competition for qualifi ed, motivated workers in the STEM (scientifi c, 
technology, engineering, and medical) fi elds is intense. Retaining 
these employees is especially critical to an organization’s overall 
success.

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 335
should not be left solely to the discretion of individual managers or supervisors. Poli-
cies that can lead to employee separation should be based on principles of justice and 
law, and they should allow for various ways to intervene.
Principles of Justice
The sensitivity of a system for disciplining and possibly terminating employees is ob-
vious, and it is critical that the system be seen as fair. Employees form conclusions 
about the system’s fairness based on the system’s outcomes and procedures and the way 
managers treat employees when carrying out those procedures. Figure 11.1 summa-
rizes these principles as outcome fairness, procedural justice, and interactional justice. 
Outcome fairness involves the ends of a discipline process, while procedural and inter-
actional justice focus on the means to those ends. Not only is behavior ethical that is in 
accord with these principles, but research has also linked the last two categories of justice 
with employee satisfaction and productivity.10 In considering these principles, however, 
keep in mind that individuals differ in how strongly they react to perceived injustice.11
People’s perception of outcome fairness depends on their judgment that the conse-
quences of a decision to employees are just. As shown in Figure 11.1, one employee’s 
consequences should be consistent with other employees’ consequences. Suppose several 
employees went out to lunch, returned drunk, and were reprimanded. A few weeks later, 
another employee was fi red for being drunk at work. Employees might well conclude that 
outcomes are not fair because they are inconsistent. Another basis for outcome  fairness is 
that everyone should know what to expect. Organizations promote outcome fairness 
when they clearly communicate policies regarding the consequences of inappropriate be-
havior. Finally, the outcome should be proportionate to the behavior. Terminating an 
employee for being late to work, especially if this is the fi rst time the employee is late, 
would seem out of proportion to the offense in most situations. Employees’ sense of out-
come fairness usually would reserve loss of a job for the most serious offenses.
People’s perception of procedural justice is their judgment that fair methods 
were used to determine the consequences an employee receives. Figure 11.1 shows 
LO 11-2 Discuss how 
employees determine 
whether the organization 
treats them fairly.
Outcome Fairness
A judgment that the 
consequences given to 
employees are just.
Procedural Justice
A judgment that fair 
methods were used to 
determine the conse-
quences an employee 
receives.
Figure 11.1
Principles of Justice
Outcome Fairness
Consistent outcomes
Knowledge of outcomes
Outcomes in proportion
  to behaviors
Interactional Justice
Explanation of decision
Respectful treatment
Consideration
Empathy
Procedural Justice
Consistent procedures
Avoidance of bias
Accurate information
Way to correct mistakes
Representation of all
  interests
Ethical standards

336 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
six principles that determine whether people perceive procedures as fair. The proce-
dures should be consistent from one person to another, and the manager using them 
should suppress any personal biases. The procedures should be based on accurate in-
formation, not rumors or falsehoods. The procedures should also be correctable, 
meaning the system includes safeguards, such as channels for appealing a decision or 
correcting errors. The procedures should take into account the concerns of all the 
groups affected—for example, by gathering information from employees, customers, 
and managers. Finally, the procedures should be consistent with prevailing ethical 
standards, such as concerns for privacy and honesty.
A perception of interactional justice is a judgment that the organization carried out 
its actions in a way that took the employee’s feelings into account. It is a judgment about 
the ways that managers interact with their employees. A disciplinary action meets the 
standards of interactional justice if the manager explains to the employee how the action 
is procedurally just. The manager should listen to the employee. The manager should 
also treat the employee with dignity and respect and should empathize with the em-
ployee’s feelings. Even when a manager discharges an employee for doing something 
wrong, the manager can speak politely and state the reasons for the action. These efforts 
to achieve interactional justice are especially important when managing an employee 
who has a high level of hostility and is at greater risk of responding with violence.12
Legal Requirements
The law gives employers wide latitude in hiring and fi ring, but employers must meet cer-
tain requirements. They must avoid wrongful discharge and illegal discrimination. They 
also must meet standards related to employees’ privacy and adequate notice of layoffs.
Wrongful Discharge As we noted earlier in the chapter, discipline practices must 
avoid the charge of wrongful discharge. First, this means the discharge may not violate 
an implied agreement. Terminating an employee may violate an implied agreement if the 
employer had promised the employee job security or if the action is inconsistent with 
company policies. An example might be that an organization has stated that an employee 
with an unexcused absence will receive a warning for the fi rst violation, but an angry 
supervisor fi res an employee for being absent on the day of an important meeting.
Another reason a discharge may be considered wrongful is that it violates public 
policy. Violations of public policy include terminating the employee for refusing to do 
something illegal, unethical, or unsafe. Suppose an employee refuses to dump chemi-
cals into the sewer system; fi ring that employee could be a violation of public policy. 
It is also a violation of public policy to terminate an employee for doing what the law 
requires—for example, cooperating with a government investigation, reporting illegal 
behavior by the employer, or reporting for jury duty.
HR professionals can help organizations avoid (and defend against) charges of 
wrongful discharge by establishing and communicating policies for handling misbe-
havior. They should defi ne unacceptable behaviors and identify how the organization 
will respond to them. Managers should follow these procedures consistently and docu-
ment precisely the reasons for disciplinary action. In addition, the organization should 
train managers to avoid making promises that imply job security (for example, “As long 
as you keep up that level of performance, you’ll have a job with us”). Finally, in writing 
and reviewing employee handbooks, HR professionals should avoid any statements 
that could be interpreted as employment contracts. When there is any doubt about a 
statement, the organization should seek legal advice.
Interactional Justice
A judgment that the 
organization carried out 
its actions in a way that 
took the employee’s 
feelings into account.
LO 11-3 Identify legal 
requirements for 
employee discipline.

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 337
Discrimination 
Another benefi t of a formal discipline policy is that it helps the 
organization comply with equal employment opportunity requirements. As in other 
employment matters, employers must make decisions without regard to individuals’ 
age, sex, race, or other protected status. If two employees steal from the employer 
but one is disciplined more harshly than the other, the employee who receives the 
harsher punishment could look for the cause in his or her being of a particular race, 
country of origin, or some other group. Evenhanded, carefully documented disci-
pline can avoid such claims.
Employees’ Privacy 
The courts also have long protected individuals’ pri-
vacy in many situations. At the same time, employers have legitimate reasons for 
learning about some personal matters, especially when behavior outside the work-
place can affect productivity, workplace safety, and employee morale. Employers 
therefore need to ensure that the information they gather and use is relevant to 
these matters. For example, safety and security make it legitimate to require drug 
testing of all employees holding jobs such as police offi cer, fi refi ghter, and airline 
fl ight crew.13 (Governments at the federal, state, and local levels have many laws 
affecting drug-testing programs, so it is wise to get legal advice before planning 
such tests.) The use of social media is another area where employers have consid-
ered employees’ personal activities to be relevant; for more on this, see the “HRM 
Social” box.
Privacy issues also surface when employers wish to search or monitor employees on 
the job. An employer that suspects theft, drug use, or other misdeeds on the job may 
wish to search employees for evidence. In general, random searches of areas such as 
desks, lockers, toolboxes, and communications such as e-mails are permissible, so long 
as the employer can justify that there is probable cause for the search and the organiza-
tion has work rules that provide for searches.14 Employers can act fairly and minimize 
the likelihood of a lawsuit by publicizing the search policy, applying it consistently, 
asking for the employee’s consent before the search begins, and conducting the search 
discreetly. Also, when a search is a random check, it is important to clarify that no one 
has been accused of misdeeds.15
No matter how sensitively the organization gathers information leading to disci-
plinary actions, it should also consider privacy issues when deciding who will see the 
information.16 In general, it is advisable to share the information only with people 
who have a business need to see it—for example, the employee’s supervisor, union 
offi cials, and in some cases, co-workers. Letting outsiders know the reasons for ter-
minating an employee can embarrass the employee, who might fi le a defamation law-
suit. HR professionals can help organizations avoid such lawsuits by working with 
managers to determine fact-based explanations and to decide who needs to see these 
explanations.
Table 11.2 summarizes these measures for protecting employees’ privacy.
Ensure that information is relevant.
Publicize information-gathering policies and consequences.
Request consent before gathering information.
Treat employees consistently.
Conduct searches discreetly.
Share information only with those who need it.
Table 11.2
Measures for Protecting 
Employees’ Privacy

338
For the most part, what employ-
ees post on Facebook and Pinter-
est or share with their followers on 
Twitter relates only to their personal 
lives and relationships. Occasion-
ally, however, an employee shares 
information that should have been 
confi dential or expresses an opinion 
that could damage the employer’s 
reputation. This possibility leaves 
employers wondering how far they 
should go in monitoring what em-
ployees share on social media.
The chief argument in favor of 
monitoring is that employees have 
occasionally done real damage to 
a company by posting nasty state-
ments about customers or harassing 
their co-workers. If this kind of be-
havior goes far enough, it can dam-
age the company’s reputation and 
even provoke a lawsuit. Hospitals 
have discovered that their employ-
ees discussed patients on Facebook, 
which is illegal as well as unethical.
The major argument against 
monitoring is that unless an em-
ployer has a reason to be suspicious 
of particular employees, it is an in-
vasive overreaction. According to 
this viewpoint, most employees’ 
social-media activities are unre-
lated to work, so employers should 
respect their privacy. In a company 
that makes a habit out of tracking 
employees’ personal use of social 
media, it too easily becomes pos-
sible to weigh every photo and 
statement, looking for supposedly 
offensive behavior until employees 
are penalized for behavior that has 
nothing to do with the employer’s 
well-being. Beyond the justice issue 
is the practical question of whether 
it is even possible to monitor all of 
employees’ social-media activity, 
given that most applications have 
privacy settings.
There is another way to think 
about employees’ use of social 
media: it can also be an asset for 
the employer. At a company where 
people are highly satisfi ed with 
their jobs and engaged in their 
work, employees are likely to say 
positive things about work, thereby 
enhancing the company’s reputa-
tion. Some even go so far as to 
become “employee activists,” who 
defend their company against crit-
ics, promote it as a great place to 
work, and generally advocate for it 
online.
Questions
 1. Under what conditions do 
you think an employer should 
monitor employees’ personal 
use of social media?
 2. Aside from legal requirements, 
how should the principles 
of justice shape any efforts 
by employers to monitor 
employees’ personal use of 
social media?
Sources: “Should Companies Monitor Their 
Employees’ Social Media?” The Wall Street 
Journal, May 11, 2014, http://online.wsj
.com; Karen Higginbottom, “Social Media 
Ignites Employee Activism,” Forbes, April 14,
2014, http://www.forbes.com; Suzanne 
Lucas, “Yes, Your Employees Use Social 
Media. Now Stop Spying on Them,” Inc., 
September 26, 2013, http://www.inc.com.
Employees’ Privacy vs. Employer’s Reputation
HRM Social
Notiﬁ cation of Layoffs Sometimes terminations are necessary not because of in-
dividuals’ misdeeds, but because the organization determines that for economic reasons 
it must close a facility. An organization that plans such broad-scale layoffs may be sub-
ject to the Workers’ Adjustment Retraining and Notifi cation Act. This federal law re-
quires that organizations with more than 100 employees give 60 days’ notice before any 
closing or layoff that will affect at least 50 full-time employees. If employers covered by 
this law do not give notice to the employees (and their union, if applicable), they may 
have to provide back pay and fringe benefi ts and pay penalties as well. Several states and 
cities have similar laws, and the federal law contains a number of exemptions. There-
fore, it is important to seek legal advice before implementing a plant closing.
Progressive Discipline
Organizations look for methods of handling problem behavior that are fair, legal, and ef-
fective. A popular principle for responding effectively is the hot-stove rule. According to 
this principle, discipline should be like a hot stove: The glowing or burning stove gives 
warning not to touch. Anyone who ignores the warning will be burned. The stove has no 
LO 11-4 Summarize 
ways in which organi-
zations can discipline 
employees fairly.
Hot-Stove Rule
Principle of discipline 
that says discipline 
should be like a hot 
stove, giving clear warn-
ing and following up with 
consistent, objective, im-
mediate consequences.

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 339
feelings to infl uence which people it burns, and it delivers the same burn to any touch. 
Finally, the burn is immediate. Like the hot stove, an organization’s discipline should give 
warning and have consequences that are consistent, objective, and immediate.
The principles of justice suggest that the organization prepare for problems by 
 establishing a formal discipline process in which the consequences become more 
 serious if the employee repeats the offense. Such a system is called progressive 
 discipline. A typical progressive discipline system identifi es and communicates unac-
ceptable behaviors and responds to a series of offenses with the actions shown in 
 Figure 11.2—spoken and then written warnings, temporary suspension, and fi nally, 
termination. This process fulfi lls the purpose of discipline by teaching employees what 
is expected of them and creating a situation in which employees must try to do what is 
expected. It seeks to prevent misbehavior (by publishing rules) and to correct, rather 
than merely punish, misbehavior.
Such procedures may seem exasperatingly slow, especially when the employee’s 
misdeeds hurt the team’s performance. In the end, however, if an employee must be 
discharged, careful use of the procedure increases other employees’ belief that the 
organization is fair and reduces the likelihood that the problem employee will sue (or 
at least that the employee will win in court). For situations in which misbehavior is 
dangerous, the organization may establish a stricter policy, even terminating an em-
ployee for the fi rst offense. In that case, it is especially important to communicate the 
procedure—not only to ensure fairness but also to prevent the dangerous misbehavior.
Creating a formal discipline process is a primary responsibility of the human re-
source department. The HR professional should consult with supervisors and man-
agers to identify unacceptable behaviors and establish rules and consequences for 
violating the rules. The rules should cover disciplinary problems such as the following 
behaviors encountered in many organizations:
 • Tardiness
 • Absenteeism
 • Unsafe work practices
 • Poor quantity or quality of work
 • Sexual harassment of co-workers
 • Coming to work impaired by alcohol or drugs
 • Theft of company property
 • Cyberslacking (conducting personal business online during work hours)
For each infraction, the HR professional would identify a series of responses, such 
as those in Figure 11.2. In addition, the organization must communicate these rules 
and consequences in writing to every employee. Ways of publishing rules include 
Progressive Discipline
A formal discipline pro-
cess in which the conse-
quences become more 
serious if the employee 
repeats the offense.
Figure 11.2
Progressive Discipline 
Responses

340 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
presenting them in an employee handbook, posting them on the company’s intranet, 
and displaying them on a bulletin board. Supervisors should be familiar with the rules, 
so that they can discuss them with employees and apply them consistently.
Along with rules and a progression of consequences for violating the rules, a pro-
gressive discipline system should have requirements for documenting the rules, of-
fenses, and responses. For issuing an unoffi cial warning about a less-serious offense, it 
may be enough to have a witness present. Even then, a written record would be helpful 
in case the employee repeats the offense in the future. The organization should pro-
vide a document for managers to fi le, recording the nature and date of the offense, the 
specifi c improvement expected, and the consequences of the offense. It is also helpful 
to indicate how the offense affects the performance of the individual employee, others 
in the group, or the organization as a whole. These documents are important for dem-
onstrating to a problem employee why he or she has been suspended or terminated. 
They also back up the organization’s actions if it should have to defend a lawsuit. 
Following the hot-stove rule, the supervisor should complete and discuss the docu-
mentation immediately after becoming aware of the offense. A copy of the records 
should be placed in the employee’s personnel fi le. The organization may have a policy 
of removing records of warnings after a period such as six months, on the grounds that 
the employee has learned from the experience.
As we noted in the earlier discussion of procedural justice, the discipline system 
should provide an opportunity to hear every point of view and to correct errors, 
following a procedure that is consistent for all employees.17 As soon as possible and 
before discussing and fi ling records of misbehavior, it is important for the supervi-
sor to investigate the incident. The employee should be made aware of what he 
or she is said to have done wrong and should have an opportunity to present his 
or her version of events. Anyone who witnessed the alleged misdeed also should 
have an opportunity to present his or her version of what happened. All the state-
ments should be recorded in writing, signed, and dated. In general, employees who 
belong to a union have a right to the presence of a union representative during a 
formal investigation interview if they request representation. Finally, employers 
can support the discipline system’s fairness by using a performance management 
system that gathers objective performance data.
Besides developing these policies, HR professionals have a role in carrying out pro-
gressive discipline.18 In meetings to announce disciplinary actions, it is wise to include 
two representatives of the organization. Usually, the employee’s supervisor presents the 
information, and a representative from the HR department acts as a witness. This person 
can help the meeting stay on track and, if necessary, can later confi rm what happened 
during the meeting. Especially at the termination stage of the process, the employee may 
be angry, so it is helpful to be straightforward but polite. The supervisor should state the 
reason for the meeting, the nature of the problem behavior, and the consequences. For 
more details on how to conduct the meeting, see “HR How To.”  When an employee is 
suspended or terminated, the organization should designate a person to escort the em-
ployee from the building to protect the organization’s people and property.
Alternative Dispute Resolution
Sometimes problems are easier to solve when an impartial person helps create the 
 solution. Therefore, at various points in the discipline process, the employee or orga-
nization might want to bring in someone to help with problem solving. Rather than 
turning to the courts every time an outsider is desired, more and more organizations 

341
are using alternative dispute resolution (ADR). A variety of ADR techniques show 
promise for resolving disputes in a timely, constructive, cost-effective manner (see 
Figure 11.3):
 1. Open-door policy—Based on the expectation that two people in confl ict should 
fi rst try to arrive at a settlement together, the organization has a policy of making 
managers available to hear complaints. Typically, the fi rst “open door” is that of 
the employee’s immediate supervisor, and if the employee does not get a 
Alternative Dispute 
Resolution (ADR)
Methods of solving a 
problem by bringing in 
an impartial outsider 
but not using the court 
system.
Open-Door Policy
An organization’s policy of 
making managers avail-
able to hear complaints.
No one likes delivering bad news, 
but a few principles help to make 
the process as fair and straightfor-
ward as possible:
 • Plan what to say, and stick to 
the plan. If there is an awkward 
silence, be patient; don’t fi ll it up 
with statements that stray from 
the planned message.
 • Move quickly to the main mes-
sage. Unfortunately, that is eas-
ily identifi ed as the point that is 
the hardest to say—for example, 
“We are suspending you” or 
“We have to end your employ-
ment with us.” Dancing around 
the point will only confuse the 
employee. Starting off with small 
talk will make delivering the 
main point even more awkward.
 • Stay on the main point. Do not 
minimize the problem, which 
could imply that your decision 
is unfair. Do not imply you will 
reconsider a decision or get 
bogged down in arguments or 
explanations. Again, this just 
confuses the employee by sug-
gesting that a fi nal decision is 
actually up for negotiation. 
 • Speak fi rmly, making eye con-
tact, but be compassionate. 
Even in the case of misbehavior, 
the employee is a human being.
 • Listen to the employee with re-
spect but without implying that a 
decision is up for negotiation.
 • Keep the meeting short—no 
more than about 15 minutes. 
The employee should leave with 
information on how to contact 
the HR department with any 
questions that come up later.
Questions
 1. How do these guidelines meet 
the principles of justice?
 2. How can managers respect an 
employee’s privacy in applying 
these guidelines?
Sources: Amy DelPo, “What to Say When 
You Fire an Employee,” Nolo Legal Ency-
clopedia, http://www.nolo.com, accessed 
June 25, 2014; Anne Fisher, “Four Steps 
to Delivering Really Bad News,” Fortune, 
February 6, 2014, http://fortune.com; 
Rich Hein, “Eight Tips for How to Fire an 
Employee,” CIO, January 22, 2013, http://
www.cio.com.
Announcing a Disciplinary Action
HR How To
Figure 11.3
Options for Alternative 
Dispute Resolution
Open-
Door
Policy
Peer
Review
Mediation
Arbitration

342 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
resolution from that person, the employee may appeal to managers at higher lev-
els. This policy works only to the degree that employees trust management and 
managers who hear complaints listen and are able to act.
 2. Peer review—The people in confl ict take their confl ict to a panel composed of 
representatives from the organization at the same levels as the people in the dispute. 
The panel hears the case and tries to help the parties arrive at a settlement. To set 
up a panel to hear disputes as they arise, the organization may assign managers to 
positions on the panel and have employees elect nonmanagement panel members.
 3. Mediation—A neutral party from outside the organization hears the case and 
tries to help the people in confl ict arrive at a settlement. The process is not bind-
ing, meaning the mediator cannot force a solution.
 4. Arbitration—A professional arbitrator from outside the organization hears the 
case and resolves it by making a decision. Most arbitrators are experienced em-
ployment lawyers or retired judges. The employee and employer both have to 
accept this person’s decision.
Typically, an organization’s ADR process begins with an open-door policy, which is the 
simplest, most direct, and least expensive way to settle a dispute. When the parties to a dis-
pute cannot resolve it themselves, the organization can move the dispute to peer review, 
mediation, or arbitration. At some organizations, if mediation fails, the process moves to 
arbitration as a third and fi nal option. Although arbitration is a formal process involving 
an outsider, it tends to be much faster, simpler, and more private than a lawsuit.19
Employee Assistance Programs
While ADR is effective in dealing with problems related to performance and disputes 
between people at work, many of the problems that lead an organization to want to 
terminate an employee involve drug or alcohol abuse. In these cases, the organization’s 
discipline program should also incorporate an employee assistance program 
(EAP). An EAP is a referral service that employees can use to seek professional treat-
ment for emotional problems or substance abuse. EAPs began in the 1950s with a 
focus on treating alcoholism, and in the 1980s they expanded into drug treatment. 
Today, many are now fully integrated into employers’ overall health benefi ts plans, 
where they refer employees to covered mental health services.
EAPs vary widely, but most share some basic elements. First, the programs are 
usually identifi ed in offi cial documents published by the employer, such as employee 
handbooks. Supervisors (and union representatives when workers belong to a union) 
are trained to use the referral service for employees whom they suspect of having 
health-related problems. The organization also trains employees to use the system to 
refer themselves when necessary. The organization regularly evaluates the costs and 
benefi ts of the program, usually once a year.
One source of variation in EAPs involves the options for delivering services. For exam-
ple, some EAP providers offer certain services online. An EAP provider called Compan-
ion Benefi t Alternatives has developed “Beating the Blues,” an online program for coping 
with depression and anxiety. An employee using this program watches videos, maintains a 
diary, and fi lls out assessments that track his or her level of distress. The distress measures 
are displayed in a graph, so employees can see their progress and a nurse or social worker 
from the program can intervene if distress levels get too high. Studies of this program 
report improvement in a majority of participants, as well as faster recovery for patients 
found to need face-to-face therapy. Another option is telepsychiatry, in which the patient 
uses video conferencing equipment to participate in online meetings with a therapist.20
Peer Review
Process for resolving 
disputes by taking them 
to a panel composed of 
representatives from the 
organization at the same 
levels as the people in 
the dispute.
Mediation
Nonbinding process in 
which a neutral party 
from outside the orga-
nization hears the case 
and tries to help the 
people in conﬂ ict arrive 
at a settlement.
Arbitration
Binding process in which 
a professional arbitrator 
from outside the organi-
zation (usually a lawyer 
or judge) hears the case 
and resolves it by 
making a decision.
Employee Assistance 
Program (EAP)
A referral service that 
employees can use 
to seek professional 
treatment for emotional 
problems or substance 
abuse.

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 343
Outplacement Counseling
An employee who has been discharged is likely to feel angry and confused about what 
to do next. If the person feels there is nothing to lose and nowhere else to turn, the 
potential for violence or a lawsuit is greater than most organizations are willing to 
tolerate. This concern is one reason many organizations provide outplacement 
counseling, which tries to help dismissed employees manage the transition from one 
job to another. Organizations also may address ongoing poor performance with dis-
cussion about whether the employee is a good fi t for the current job. Rather than 
simply fi ring the poor performer, the supervisor may encourage this person to think 
about leaving. In this situation, the availability of outplacement counseling may help 
the employee decide to look for another job. This approach may protect the dignity of 
the employee who leaves and promote a sense of fairness.
Some organizations have their own staff for conducting outplacement counseling. 
Other organizations have contracts with outside providers to help with individual 
cases. Either way, the goals for outplacement programs are to help the former em-
ployee address the psychological issues associated with losing a job—grief, depression, 
and fear—while at the same time helping the person fi nd a new job.
The use of outplacement fi rms has become far more common since John  Challenger 
witnessed IBM’s fi rst-ever round of major layoffs in 1993. Challenger’s father, James, 
started the fi rst outplacement fi rm in the United States, when downsizing was not yet 
a part of the business vocabulary. Today fi rms such as Challenger, Gray & Christmas, 
and Lee Hecht Harrison regularly dispatch counselors to help laid-off people recover 
from the shock of joblessness, polish their résumés, conduct job searches, and practice 
interviewing. Challenger’s fi rm has even landed a contract to help with an increasingly 
common form of transition: moving from military service to employment in the civil-
ian sector.21
Whatever the reason for downsizing, asking employees to leave is a setback for the 
employee and for the company. Retaining people who can contribute knowledge and 
talent is essential to business success. Therefore, the remainder of this chapter explores 
issues related to retaining employees.
Employee Engagement
Ideally, an organization does not merely want employees to come to work each day 
but rather wants employees to be fully engaged. As defi ned in Chapter 9, employee 
engagement is the degree to which employees are fully involved in their work 
and the strength of their commitment to their job and company. Employees who 
are engaged in their work and committed to the company they work for provide 
a clear competitive advantage to that fi rm, including higher productivity, better 
customer service, and lower turnover.22 (For some supporting data, see the “Did 
You Know?” box.) Unfortunately, many companies have not given much attention 
to employee engagement in recent years, possibly due to the recession and slow 
recovery. Some survey results suggest that less than one-third of employees con-
sider themselves as engaged. Still, some companies have managed to sustain and 
improve engagement levels during the recession by systematically gathering feed-
back from  employees, analyzing their responses, and implementing changes. In 
these companies,  engagement measures are considered as important as customer 
service or fi nancial data.
Although the types of questions asked in employee engagement surveys may vary, 
some of the common themes generally measured include pride and satisfaction with 
Outplacement 
Counseling
A service in which pro-
fessionals try to help 
dismissed employees 
manage the transition 
from one job to another.

344
Did You Know?
Employees are more likely to be en-
gaged at companies where profi ts 
are rising than at companies with 
fl at or falling profi ts, according to 
research by Quantum Workplace. 
The same research found that in the 
companies with fl at or falling profi ts, 
employees were less likely to feel 
valued, trust senior management, or 
see their work as aligned with cor-
porate strategy.
Question
Based on the information given, 
how might the companies with fall-
ing profi ts address employee en-
gagement? What effect would you 
expect this to have on future profi ts?
Sources: Bureau of National Affairs, 
“Studies Detail the Business Case for 
Employee Engagement,” Report on Sal-
ary Surveys, November 2013, pp. 8–9; 
Hilary Wright, “Employee Engagement 
Continues to Improve: 2013 Trends,” 
Quantum Workplace employee engage-
ment blog, March 27, 2013, http://www.
quantumworkplace.com; Quantum 
Workplace, “2013 Trends Report: The 
State of Employee Engagement,” 2013, 
accessed at http://www.quantumwork-
place.com. 
Where Profi ts Are Growing, More Employees Are Engaged
employer; opportunity to perform challenging work; recognition and positive feed-
back from contributions; personal support from supervisor; and understanding of the 
link between one’s job and the company’s overall mission. At Pitney Bowes, about 
80% of its employees complete an engagement survey each year, which gives them a 
chance to share their feelings and perceptions and help the company address prob-
lems.23 The survey is also used to determine if the company is doing enough to help 
employees reach their career goals. Based on survey results, the company is trying out 
a program that is designed to help managers improve their skills in listening, change 
management, and problem solving. Pitney-Bowes managers are held accountable for 
helping employees with their careers, and this program ensures they have the skills 
necessary for success.
Two other companies that have tackled employee engagement are London-based 
Aegis Media and Vi, which develops and manages retirement communities. Aegis 
Media matches each newly hired employee with a more experienced co-worker so that 
new employees have someone who can help them learn their way around. The HR 
team also checks with employees periodically to make sure they have the resources 
they need to succeed, and it conducts yearly surveys to measure employee engagement. 
Vi is especially concerned with engagement of nurses at its facilities, because employ-
ees in that profession can readily fi nd jobs elsewhere. Its approach is to focus on train-
ing and leadership development, so that staying with Vi enables a rewarding career. 
In annual engagement surveys, nurses for Vi have rated their training and ability to 
achieve career goals higher than employees at other companies in the same industry, 
which bodes well for employee turnover.24
Increasing proﬁts
Stagnant proﬁts
Declining proﬁts
Engaged Employees as a Percentage
of Company Workforce
80.0%
0.0%
20.0%
40.0%
60.0%
s
s
s
0 0%
20 0%
40 0%
60 0%

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 345
Job Withdrawal
A basic but important step on the path toward an engaged workforce is to prevent a 
broad negative condition called job withdrawal—or a set of behaviors with which 
employees try to avoid the work situation physically, mentally, or emotionally. Job 
withdrawal results when circumstances such as the nature of the job, supervisors and 
co-workers, pay levels, or the employee’s own disposition cause the employee to be-
come dissatisfi ed with the job. As shown in Figure 11.4, this job dissatisfaction pro-
duces job withdrawal. Job withdrawal may take the form of behavior change, physical 
job withdrawal, or psychological withdrawal. Some researchers believe employees en-
gage in the three forms of withdrawal behavior in that order, while others think they 
select from these behaviors to address the particular sources of job dissatisfaction they 
experience.25 Although the specifi cs of these models vary, the consensus is that with-
drawal behaviors are related to one another and are at least partially caused by job 
dissatisfaction.26
Job Dissatisfaction
Many aspects of people and organizations can cause job dissatisfaction, and man-
agers and HR professionals need to be aware of them because correcting them can 
increase job satisfaction and prevent job withdrawal. Ideally, managers should catch 
and correct job dissatisfaction early because there is evidence linking changes in 
satisfaction levels to turnover: when satisfaction is falling, employees are far more 
likely to quit.27 The causes of job dissatisfaction identifi ed in Figure 11.4 fall into 
four categories: personal dispositions, tasks and roles, supervisors and co-workers, 
and pay and benefi ts.
Personal Dispositions Job dissatisfaction is a feeling experienced by individu-
als, so it is not surprising that many researchers have studied individual personality 
differences to see if some kinds of people are more disposed to be dissatisfi ed with 
their jobs. In general, job turnover (and presumably dissatisfaction leading up to it) is 
higher among employees who are low in emotional stability, conscientiousness, and 
agreeableness.28 In addition, two other personal qualities associated with job satisfac-
tion are negative affectivity and negative self-evaluations.
Negative affectivity means pervasive low levels of satisfaction with all aspects of life, 
compared with other people’s feelings. People with negative affectivity experience 
Job Withdrawal
A set of behaviors with 
which employees try to 
avoid the work situation 
physically, mentally, or 
emotionally.
LO 11-5 Explain how 
job dissatisfaction af-
fects employee behavior.
Figure 11.4
Job Withdrawal 
Process

346 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
feelings such as anger, contempt, disgust, guilt, fear, and nervousness more than other 
people do, at work and away. They tend to focus on the negative aspects of themselves 
and others.29 Not surprisingly, people with negative affectivity tend to be dissatisfi ed 
with their jobs, even after changing employers or occupations.30
Core self-evaluations are bottom-line opinions individuals have of themselves and 
may be positive or negative. People with a positive core self-evaluation have high self-
esteem, believe in their ability to accomplish their goals, and are emotionally stable. 
They also tend to experience job satisfaction.31 Part of the reason for their satisfaction 
is that they tend to seek out and obtain jobs with desirable characteristics, and when 
they are in a situation they dislike, they are more likely to seek change in socially ac-
ceptable ways.32 In contrast, people with negative core self-evaluations tend to blame 
other people for their problems, including their dissatisfying jobs. They are less likely 
to work toward change; they either do nothing or act aggressively toward the people 
they blame.33
Tasks and Roles As a predictor of job dissatisfaction, nothing surpasses the nature 
of the task itself.34 Many aspects of a task have been linked to dissatisfaction. Of particu-
lar signifi cance are the complexity of the task, the degree of physical strain and exertion 
required, and the value the employee places on the task.35 In general, employees (espe-
cially women) are bored and dissatisfi ed with simple, repetitive jobs.36 People also are 
more dissatisfi ed with jobs requiring a great deal of physical strain and exertion. Because 
automation has removed much of the physical strain associated with jobs, employers 
often overlook this consideration. Still, many jobs remain physically demanding. Finally, 
employees feel dissatisfi ed if their work is not related to something they value.
Employees not only perform specifi c tasks but also have roles within the organiza-
tion.37 A person’s role consists of the set of behaviors that people expect of a person in 
that job. These expected behaviors include the formally defi ned duties of the job but 
also much more. Sometimes things get complicated or confusing. Co-workers, super-
visors, and customers have expectations for how the employee should behave, often 
going far beyond a formal job description and having a large impact on the employee’s 
work satisfaction. Several role-related sources of dissatisfaction are the following:
•  Role ambiguity is uncertainty about what the  organization and others expect from 
the employee in terms of what to do or how to do it. Employees suffer when they are 
unclear about work methods, scheduling, and performance criteria, perhaps  because 
others hold different ideas about these. Employees particularly want to know how 
the  organization will evaluate their performance. When they aren’t sure, they 
 become dissatisfi ed.38
• Role conﬂ ict is an employee’s recognition that demands of the job are incompatible 
or contradictory; a person cannot meet all the demands. For example, a company 
might bring together employees from different functions to work on a team to de-
velop a new product. Team members feel role confl ict when they realize that their 
team leader and functional manager have confl icting expectations of them. Also, 
many employees may feel confl ict between work roles and family roles. A role con-
fl ict may be triggered by an organization’s request that an employee take an assign-
ment overseas. Foreign assignments can be highly disruptive to family members, and 
the resulting role confl ict is the top reason that people quit overseas assignments.39
 • Role overload results when too many expectations or demands are placed on a 
 person. (The opposite situation is role underload.) After an organization downsizes, it 
may expect so much of the remaining employees that they experience role overload.
Role
The set of behaviors that 
people expect of a person 
in a particular job.
Role Ambiguity
Uncertainty about what 
the organization expects 
from the employee in 
terms of what to do or 
how to do it.
Role Conﬂ ict
An employee’s recogni-
tion that demands of the 
job are incompatible or 
contradictory.
Role Overload
A state in which too 
many expectations or 
demands are placed on 
a person.

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 347
Supervisors and Co-workers 
Negative behavior by managers and peers in 
the workplace can produce tremendous dissatisfaction. Often much of the responsi-
bility for positive relationships is placed on direct supervisors. For example, employ-
ees want their supervisors to defi ne expectations clearly, measure progress fairly and 
accurately, and acknowledge their accomplishments.40 Employees want supervisors 
to see them as individuals and help create the conditions in which they can succeed—
for  example, giving assignments suitable for their skills and providing access to the 
necessary  resources. Employees want some evidence that the company’s leaders care 
about them, so they are more likely to be dissatisfi ed if management is distant and 
unresponsive.
In other cases, confl icts between employees left unaddressed by management may 
cause job dissatisfaction severe enough to lead to withdrawal or departure. Research 
suggests that turnover is higher when employees do not feel that their values and 
beliefs fi t with their work group’s values and beliefs.41 Furthermore uncivil behavior 
by co-workers generates unhappiness that manifests in a variety of ways, such as de-
creased commitment, effort, and performance.42
Pay and Beneﬁ ts For all the concern with positive relationships and interest-
ing work, it is important to keep in mind that employees defi nitely care about their 
earnings. A job is the primary source of income and 
fi nancial security for most people. Pay also is an indi-
cator of status within the organization and in society 
at large, so it contributes to some people’s self-worth. 
For all these reasons, satisfaction with pay is signifi -
cant for retaining employees. Decisions about pay 
and benefi ts are so important and complex that the 
chapters of the next part of this book are devoted to 
this topic.
With regard to job satisfaction, the pay level—
that is, the amount of income associated with each 
job—is especially important. Employers seeking to 
lure away another organization’s employees often do 
so by offering higher pay. Benefi ts, such as insurance 
and vacation time, are also important, but employees 
often have diffi culty measuring their worth. There-
fore, although benefi ts infl uence job satisfaction, 
employees may not always consider them as much 
as pay itself.
Behavior Change
A reasonable expectation is that an employee’s fi rst 
response to dissatisfaction would be to try to change 
the conditions that generate the dissatisfaction. As 
the employee tries to bring about changes in policy 
or personnel, the efforts may involve  confrontation 
and confl ict with the employee’s supervisor. In an 
organization where employees are represented 
by a union, as we will discuss in Chapter 15, more 
 grievances may be fi led.
 Military reservists who are sent overseas often experience role confl ict 
among  three roles: soldier, family member, and civilian employee. 
Overseas assignments often intensify role confl icts. 

348 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
From the manager’s point of view, the complaints, confrontations, and grievances 
may feel threatening. On closer inspection, however, this is an opportunity for the 
manager to learn about and solve a potentially important problem. When a secure 
and supportive manager properly channels employees’ expressions of dissatisfaction, 
the results can include greater employee engagement, lower turnover, and substantial 
improvements in the organization’s performance.43
When employees cannot work with management to make changes, they may look 
for help from outside the organization. Some employees may engage in whistle- blowing, 
taking their charges to the media in the hope that if the public learns about the situa-
tion, the organization will be forced to change. From the organization’s point of view, 
whistle-blowing is harmful because of the negative publicity.
Another way employees may go outside the organization for help is to fi le a law-
suit. This way to force change is available if the employee is disputing policies on the 
grounds that they violate state and federal laws, such as those forbidding employment 
discrimination or requiring safe working conditions. Defending a lawsuit is costly, 
both fi nancially and in terms of the employer’s image, whether the organization wins 
or loses. Most employers would prefer to avoid lawsuits and whistle-blowing. Keeping 
employees satisfi ed is one way to do this.
Physical Job Withdrawal
If behavior change has failed or seems impossible, a dissatisfi ed worker may physi-
cally withdraw from the job. Options for physically leaving a job range from arriving 
late to calling in sick, requesting a transfer, or leaving the organization altogether. 
Even while they are on the job, employees may withdraw by not actually working. 
All these options are costly to the employer. The problem is compounded when 
employees offer evasive explanations for their physical withdrawal, as described in 
the “HR Oops!” box.
Finding a new job is rarely easy and can take months, so employees often are 
cautious about quitting. Employees who would like to quit may be late for work. 
Tardiness is costly because late employees are not contributing for part of the day. 
Especially when work is done by teams, the tardiness creates diffi culties that spill 
over and affect the entire team’s ability to work. Absenteeism is even more of a prob-
lem. The U.S. Department of Labor has estimated that on the average workday, 3% 
to 5% of an employer’s workforce is absent, costing the nation’s employers perhaps 
$100 billion annually.44
An employee who is dissatisfi ed because of circumstances related to the specifi c 
job—for example, an unpleasant workplace or unfair supervisor—may be able to re-
solve that problem with a job transfer. If the source of the dissatisfaction is orga-
nizational policies or practices, such as low pay scales, the employee may leave the 
organization altogether. These forms of physical job withdrawal contribute to high 
turnover rates for the department or organization. As a result, the organization faces 
the costs of replacing the employees (often tens of thousands of dollars per employee), 
as well as lost productivity and sometimes lost sales until replacement employees learn 
the jobs.45 
Organizations need to be concerned with their overall turnover rates as well as the na-
ture of the turnover in terms of who is staying and who is leaving. For example, younger 
workers, who are less likely to be tied down by a mortgage or children in local schools, 
are more ready to quit their jobs when they become disengaged. Although the recent 
recession lowered the rate of quitting by limiting opportunities to fi nd a different job, 

349
that trend reverses when the labor market expands, and employers may soon discover 
that their young workers are eager to fi nd jobs that better match their abilities and inter-
ests.46 Also, among managers, women and minorities often have higher turnover rates. 
Many leave because they see little opportunity for promotions. Chapter 8 discussed how 
organizations are addressing this problem through career management and efforts to 
break the glass ceiling.
Psychological Withdrawal
Employees need not leave the company in order to withdraw from their jobs. Espe-
cially if they have been unable to fi nd another job, they may psychologically remove 
themselves. They are physically at work, but their minds are elsewhere.
Psychological withdrawal can take several forms. If an employee is primarily dis-
satisfi ed with the job itself, the employee may display a very low level of job involve-
ment. Job involvement is the degree to which people identify themselves with their 
jobs. People with a high level of job involvement consider their work an important part 
of their life. Doing well at work contributes to their sense of who they are (their self-
concept). For a dissatisfi ed employee with low job involvement, performing well or 
poorly does not affect the person’s self-concept.
When an employee is dissatisfi ed with the organization as a whole, the person’s organi-
zational commitment may be low. Organizational commitment is the degree to which 
an employee identifi es with the organization and is willing to put forth effort on its  behalf.47 
Employees with high organizational commitment will stretch themselves to help the 
 organization through diffi cult times. Employees with low organizational commitment are 
likely to leave at the fi rst opportunity for a better job. They have a strong intention to leave, 
so like employees with low job involvement, they are hard to motivate.
Job Involvement
The degree to which 
people identify them-
selves with their jobs.
Organizational 
Commitment
The degree to which an 
employee identiﬁ es with 
the organization and is 
willing to put forth effort 
on its behalf.
It’s hard to address the source of 
employees’ dissatisfaction if they 
express it indirectly by physically 
withdrawing from the job. It’s even 
harder when employees explain 
their withdrawal by offering strange 
excuses for their absence. Surveys 
of employers and employees in the 
United States and Europe have un-
covered some excuses that would 
leave most supervisors speechless.
Some excuses are so awkward 
that perhaps the employee is telling 
the painful truth. One employee’s 
excuse was not being able to de-
cide what to wear, and another re-
ported pants splitting during the trip 
into work. A U.S. employee was so 
disappointed by a football team’s 
Sunday loss that he or she needed 
a day to recover. Still another re-
ported that efforts to quit smoking 
were making him or her too grouchy 
to go to work.
Other excuses are just bizarre. 
An employee said that after receiv-
ing a threatening phone call from the 
electric company, he or she needed 
to stay home to report the threat to 
the FBI. Another said that someone 
had glued her doors and windows 
shut, so she was unable to leave the 
house.
Questions
 1. Do you think a bizarre excuse 
signals a higher level of 
employee dissatisfaction than 
a believable excuse? Why or 
why not?
 2. How would you advise a 
supervisor to respond to one of 
the excuses described here?
Sources: Elaine Quayle, “What’s the 
Worst Excuse for Missing Work? No 
Outfi t, Swarm of Bees, or Turkey?” HR 
Daily Advisor, November 6, 2013, http://
hrdailyadvisor.blr.com; CareerBuilder, 
“CareerBuilder’s Annual Study Reveals 
Most Outrageous Excuses Workers 
Have Given When Calling in Sick,” news 
release, October 24, 2013, http://www
.careerbuilder.com; Josie Ensor, “Worst 
Excuses for Missing Work Revealed,” 
Telegraph (London), May 16, 2013, 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk.
Bizarre Excuses for Absences
HR Oops!

350 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
Job Satisfaction
Clearly, organizations want to prevent withdrawal behaviors. As we saw in Figure 11.4, 
the driving force behind job withdrawal is dissatisfaction. To prevent job withdrawal, 
organizations therefore need to promote job satisfaction, a pleasant feeling resulting 
from the perception that one’s job fulfi lls or allows for the fulfi llment of one’s impor-
tant job values.48 This defi nition has three components:
 • Job satisfaction is related to a person’s values, defi ned as “what a person consciously 
or unconsciously desires to obtain.”
 • Different employees have different views of which values are important, so the same 
circumstances can produce different levels of job satisfaction.
 • Job satisfaction is based on perception, not always on an objective and complete mea-
surement of the situation. Each person compares the job situation to his or her 
values, and people are likely to differ in what they perceive.
In sum, people will be satisfi ed with their jobs as long as they perceive that their jobs 
meet their important values. As shown in Figure 11.5, organizations can contribute 
to job satisfaction by addressing the four sources of job dissatisfaction we identifi ed 
earlier: personal dispositions, job tasks and roles, supervisors and co-workers, and pay 
and benefi ts.
Personal Dispositions
In our discussion of job withdrawal, we noted that sometimes personal qualities of the 
employee, such as negative affectivity and negative core self-evaluation, are associ-
ated with job dissatisfaction. This linkage suggests employee selection in the fi rst in-
stance plays a role in raising overall levels of employee satisfaction. People making the 
LO 11-6 Describe how 
organizations contribute 
to employees’ job sat-
isfaction and retain key 
employees.
Job Satisfaction
A pleasant feeling result-
ing from the perception 
that one’s job fulﬁ lls or 
allows for the fulﬁ llment 
of one’s important job 
values.
Figure 11.5
Increasing Job Satisfaction

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 351
selection decisions should look for evidence of whether employees are predisposed to 
being satisfi ed.49 Interviews should explore employees’ satisfaction with past jobs. If 
an applicant says he was dissatisfi ed with his past six jobs, what makes the employer 
think the person won’t be dissatisfi ed with the organization’s vacant position?
Psychologists have explored which personal qualities are associated with having a 
positive attitude about work.50 One fi nding is that such people keep their failures in 
perspective by thinking of their career in terms of the big picture, not dwelling too much 
on one victory or disappointment. Also, their commitment to the purpose of their work 
overrides fear of failure, so they are determined to act, even in the face of uncertainty. 
They also express their interest in their work by sharing knowledge and developing less 
experienced employees.
Tasks and Roles
Organizations can improve job satisfaction by making jobs more complex and mean-
ingful, as we discussed in Chapter 4. Some of the methods available for this approach 
to job design are job enrichment and job rotation. Organizations also can increase 
satisfaction by developing clear and appropriate job roles.
Job Complexity Not only can job design add to enriching complexity, but em-
ployees themselves sometimes take measures to make their work more interesting. 
Some employees bring personal music players with headsets to work so they can listen 
to music or radio shows while they are working. Many supervisors disapprove, worrying 
that the headsets will interfere with the employees’ ability to provide good customer 
service. However, in simple jobs with minimal customer contact 
(like processing paperwork or entering data into computers), re-
search suggests that personal headsets can improve performance. 
One study examined the use of stereo headsets by workers in 
32 jobs at a large retailing company. The stereo-using group 
outperformed the no-stereo group on simple jobs (like invoice 
processor), but performed worse than the stereo-free group on 
complex jobs (such as accountant).51
Meaningful Work When it comes to generating satisfac-
tion, the most important aspect of work is the degree to which 
it is meaningfully related to workers’ core values. People sign on 
to help charitable causes for little or no pay simply because of 
the value they place on making a difference in the world. Royal 
DSM has shifted its business strategy from a focus on materials 
petrochemicals, plastics, and base chemicals—to emphasizing 
health-enhancing technologies and products such as nutritional 
supplements, pharmaceutical ingredients, and energy-effi cient 
building materials. This sustainable strategy opens up opportuni-
ties for employees to use the organization’s resources for good 
works. For example, Royal DSM partners with the World Food 
Programme to distribute vitamins and nutrient mixes free to poor 
people in Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Kenya, and Nepal.  Furthering 
employee engagement, Royal DSM invites employees to nomi-
nate projects for the company to fund, and local managers include 
outreach and community engagement in their budgets.52
 Appropriate tasks and roles include safety precautions, 
especially when work could involve risks to workers’ 
health and safety. 

352 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
A similar kind of motivation can drive activities directly related to doing business. 
When Jeffrey Scott owned a landscaping business, he taught his foremen how each 
crew’s output was related to the company’s productivity. He also gave them authority 
to make spending decisions up to a certain dollar level so they could take action on 
the job to satisfy customers who had quality concerns. And Scott authorized them 
to “fi re” clients if that seemed the best course of action. As a result, the foremen 
could see connections between their decisions, the company’s well-being, and the 
customers’ satisfaction. They were no longer just completing projects; they were 
building a business and pleasing customers. Their crews began to deliver better qual-
ity, and customers were happier as well, so the company was retaining clients, not 
fi ring them.53
Clear and Appropriate Roles Organizations can do much to avoid role-related 
sources of dissatisfaction. They can defi ne roles, clearly spelling out work methods, 
schedules, and performance measures. They can be realistic about the number of hours 
required to complete job requirements. When jobs require overtime hours, the em-
ployer must be prepared to comply with laws requiring overtime pay, as well as to 
help employees manage the confl ict between work and family roles.
To help employees manage role confl ict, employers have turned to a number 
of family-friendly policies. These policies may include provisions for child care, 
elder care, fl exible work schedules, job sharing, telecommuting, and extended 
parental leaves. Although these programs create some headaches for managers in 
terms of scheduling work and reporting requirements, they increase employees’ 
satisfaction and commitment to the organization.54 Organizations with family-
friendly policies also have enjoyed improvements in performance, especially at 
companies that employ a large percentage of women.55 Chapter 14 discusses 
such benefi ts in greater detail.
Because role problems rank just behind job problems in creating job dissatis-
faction, some interventions aim directly at role elements. One of these is the role 
 analysis technique, a process of formally identifying expectations associated 
with a role. The technique follows the steps shown in Figure 11.6. The role oc-
cupant (the person who fi lls a role) and each member of the person’s role set 
(people who directly interact with this employee) each write down their expecta-
tions for the role. They meet to discuss their expectations and develop a prelimi-
nary list of the role’s duties and behaviors, trying to resolve any confl icts among 
expectations. Next, the role occupant lists what he or she expects of others in the 
set, and the group meets again to reach a consensus on these expectations. Fi-
nally, the group modifi es its preliminary list and reaches a consensus on the oc-
cupant’s role. This process may uncover instances of overload and underload, 
and the group tries to trade off requirements to develop more balanced roles.
Supervisors and Co-Workers
The two primary sets of people in an organization who affect job satisfaction are 
co-workers and supervisors. A person may be satisfi ed with these people for one 
of three reasons:
1.  The people share the same values, attitudes, and philosophies. Most individu-
als fi nd this very important, and many organizations try to foster a culture of 
shared values. Even when this does not occur across the whole organization, 
values shared between workers and their supervisor can increase satisfaction.56
Role Analysis 
Technique
A process of formally 
identifying expectations 
associated with a role.
Figure 11.6
Steps in the Role 
Analysis Technique

353
 2. The co-workers and supervisor may provide social support, meaning they are sym-
pathetic and caring. Social support greatly increases job satisfaction, whether the 
support comes from supervisors or co-workers.57 Turnover is also lower among 
employees who experience support from other members of the organization.58
 3. The co-workers or supervisor may help the person attain some valued outcome. 
For example, they can help a new employee fi gure out what goals to pursue and 
how to achieve them.59
For an example of an organization where these kinds of relationships contribute to 
satisfaction, see “Best Practices.” 
 
Because a supportive environment reduces dissatisfaction, many organizations  foster 
team building both on and off the job (such as with softball or bowling leagues). The idea 
is that playing together as a team will strengthen ties among group members and de-
velop relationships in which individuals feel supported by one another. DaVita Healthcare 
A lending company based in Detroit 
might not sound like a great place 
to work, but Quicken Loans, head-
quartered in the Motor City, keeps 
landing on Fortune’s list of the Best 
Companies to Work For and Com-
puterworld’s list of Best Places to 
Work in IT (information technology). 
Both honors say something good 
is happening with job satisfaction, 
because employee surveys play 
a large part in determining which 
companies earn the recognition.
One of the main sources of satis-
faction at Quicken Loans is the sup-
portive work relationships and the 
culture that promotes them. One of 
the company’s principles for working 
together is “Yes before no,” promot-
ing an attitude of open-mindedness 
and helpfulness. Anne Way, the 
company’s director of project man-
agement, says that although the cul-
ture is “fast-paced and intensive,” 
employees “are genuinely open and 
available to each other.” Application 
engineer Ian Kwiotek agrees, saying 
the best part of his job is working 
with smart people who are willing to 
help solve problems. 
Another major source of sat-
isfaction at Quicken Loans is 
designing jobs and feedback so 
employees can see the importance 
of what they do. Employees see 
importance in the company’s work 
to help customers buy a home, 
and they take pride in its commit-
ment to help rebuild the troubled 
city where it is located. When 
Linglong He took over as chief in-
formation offi cer in 2010, she re-
structured IT work so that instead 
of everyone working together on the 
one function, IT workers are assigned 
to each business unit. That way 
they can stay on projects through 
the end and see their impact on the 
company. Lisa Phillip, who is the 
architect for the business intel-
ligence team, says she “[gets] to 
see the value of what we provide 
every day.” She also appreciates 
that even though her team’s work 
is highly technical, Quicken Loans’ 
CEO has taken time to praise the 
group’s accomplishments.
CEO Bill Emerson sums up the 
company’s practices by saying, 
“We win when our team members 
[employees] feel connected to the 
company.” He contributes to that 
feeling by holding regular meet-
ings with employees to talk about 
whatever they believe can improve 
the company. His efforts have paid 
off in a high level of commitment; in 
a survey by the Great Place to Work 
Institute, 95% of Quicken Loans 
employees said they feel they are 
“all in it together.”
Questions
 1. What qualities of job 
relationships do Quicken 
Loans’ employees value? How 
does the company promote 
such relationships?
 2. How do tasks and roles 
contribute to job satisfaction at 
Quicken Loans?
Sources: Stephanie Wilkinson, “The 
No. 1 Large Place to Work in IT: Quicken 
Loans,” Computerworld, June 23, 
2014, http://www.computerworld.com; 
Michael Giardina, “Innovative Employ-
ers Abandon Outdated Management 
Structure,” Employee Beneﬁ t News, 
May 2014, p. 25; Great Place to Work 
Institute, “Quicken Loans,” Great Place 
to Work Guide, January 16, 2014, http://
us.greatrated.com; “Best Companies to 
Work For 2014: Quicken Loans,” For-
tune, January 16, 2014, http://fortune
.com/best-companies.
Employees Are Quicken Loans’ Most Valuable Asset
Best Practices

354 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
brought together 3,000 of its employees for a Village Service Day to reinforce their contri-
butions to the company’s strategic goals. Employees worked in teams of three to assemble 
prosthetic hands while developing skills in collaboration and communication. The em-
ployees appreciated the program all the more when they learned that the prostheses would 
be donated to international organizations serving amputees.60 Organizations also create a 
supportive environment by developing their managers’ mentoring skills and helping to set 
up these benefi cial relationships.61 (Mentoring was described in Chapter 8.) 
Employees’ own job satisfaction also interacts with the job satisfaction of co-workers. 
In a study of more than 5,000 employees in 150 businesses, employees with declining 
job satisfaction were more likely to stay on the job if co-workers’ satisfaction was rising. 
For employees experienced rising satisfaction, the employees were more likely to quit if 
their co-workers were growing less satisfi ed. In effect, when employees were out of step 
with their co-workers, their likelihood of quitting was infl uenced by the co-workers’ job 
satisfaction.62
Pay and Benefits
Organizations recognize the importance of pay in their negotiations with job candi-
dates. HR professionals can support their organizations in this area by repeatedly moni-
toring pay levels in their industry and for the professions or trades they employ. As we 
noted in Chapter 5 and will discuss further in Chapter 12, organizations make decisions 
about whether to match or exceed the industry averages. Also, HR professionals can 
increase job satisfaction by communicating to employees the value of their benefi ts.
Two other aspects of pay satisfaction infl uence job satisfaction. One is satisfaction 
with pay structure—the way the organization assigns different pay levels to different 
levels and job categories. A manager of a sales force, for example, might be satisfi ed 
with her pay level until she discovers that some of the sales representatives she super-
vises are earning more than she is. The other important aspect of pay satisfaction is 
pay raises. People generally expect that their pay will increase over time. They will be 
satisfi ed if their expectations are met or dissatisfi ed if raises fall short of expectations. 
HR professionals can contribute to these sources of job satisfaction by helping to com-
municate the reasoning behind the organization’s pay structure and pay raises. For 
example, sometimes economic conditions force an organization to limit pay raises. If 
employees understand the circumstances (and recognize that the same conditions are 
likely to be affecting other employers), they may feel less dissatisfi ed.
Monitoring Job Satisfaction
Employers can better retain employees if they are aware of sat-
isfaction levels, so they can make changes if employees are dis-
satisfi ed. The usual way to measure job satisfaction is with some 
kind of survey. A systematic, ongoing program of employee surveys 
should be part of the organization’s human resource strategy. This 
program allows the organization to monitor trends and prevent 
voluntary turnover. For example, if satisfaction with promotion 
opportunities has been falling over several years, the trend may sig-
nal a need for better career management (a topic of Chapter 8). An 
organizational change, such as a merger, also might have impor-
tant consequences for job satisfaction. In addition, ongoing surveys 
give the organization a way to measure whether policies adopted 
to improve job satisfaction and employee retention are working. 
How can an organization measure whether efforts to 
have fun at work and build positive work relationships 
can actually translate to greater job satisfaction?

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 355
Organizations can also compare results from different departments to identify groups 
with successful practices that may apply elsewhere in the organization. Another benefi t 
is that some scales provide data that organizations can use to compare themselves to 
others in the same industry. This information will be valuable for creating and review-
ing human resource policies that enable organizations to attract and retain employees 
in a competitive job market. Finally, conducting surveys gives employees a chance to be 
heard, so the practice itself can contribute to employee satisfaction.
To obtain a survey instrument, an excellent place to begin is with one of the many es-
tablished scales. The validity and reliability of many satisfaction scales have been tested, 
so it is possible to compare the survey instruments. The main reason for the organization 
to create its own scale would be that it wants to measure satisfaction with aspects of work 
that are specifi c to the organization (such as satisfaction with a particular health plan).
A widely used measure of job satisfaction is the Job Descriptive Index (JDI). The 
JDI emphasizes specifi c aspects of satisfaction—pay, the work itself, supervision, co-
workers, and promotions. Figure 11.7 shows several items from the JDI scale. Other 
scales measure general satisfaction, using broad questions such as “All in all, how sat-
isfi ed are you with your job?”63 Some scales avoid language altogether, relying on 
pictures. The faces scale in Figure 11.8 is an example of this type of measure. Other 
scales exist for measuring more specifi c aspects of satisfaction. For example, the Pay 
Satisfaction Questionnaire (PSQ) measures satisfaction with specifi c aspects of pay, 
such as pay levels, structure, and raises.64
Figure 11.7
Example of Job 
 Descriptive Index (JDI)
Instructions: Think of your present work. What is it like most of the time? In the
blank beside each word given below, write
Work Itself
Y
N
?
Less than I deserve
Highly paid
Insecure
Dead-end job
Unfair policies
Based on ablility
Supervision
Pay
Promotion Opportunities
Co-workers
Intelligent
Responsible
Boring
for “Yes” if it describes your work
for “No” if it does NOT describe your work
if you cannot decide
Routine
Satisfying
Good
Impolite
Praises good work
Doesn’t supervise enough
Source: W. K. Balzar, D. C. Smith, D. E. Kravitz, S. E. Lovell, K. B. Paul, B. A. Reilly, and C. E. Reilly, User’s 
Manual for the Job Descriptive Index (JDI) (Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State University, 1990).
Figure 11.8
Example of a Simplifi ed, 
Nonverbal Measure of 
Job Satisfaction
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
Job Satisfaction from the Faces Scale
Consider all aspects of your job. Circle the face that
best describes your feelings about your job in general.
Source: From R. B. Dunham and J. B. Herman, Journal of Applied Psychology 60 (1975), pp. 629–31. Reprinted 
with permission.

THINKING ETHICALLY
IS IT ETHICAL TO FIRE BY E-MAIL AND 
TEXT?
In an interview, George Zimmer talked about his experi-
ence of learning that the board of directors of Men’s 
Wearhouse had decided that he should no longer be 
the company’s chief executive. He realized what was 
happening when he received an e-mail he described as 
“extremely harsh and mean-spirited.”
Zimmer’s public discussion of the termination 
sparked sympathy on social media, perhaps because 
so many people have experienced or known someone 
who has experienced receiving bad news in an imper-
sonal way. Another example was the closing of Barduc-
ci’s Italian Bistro in Winter Park, Florida. Employees said 
the restaurant’s owner notifi ed them they would no lon-
ger be needed by sending them a text message stating, 
“I have been forced to close Barducci’s immediately” 
because “there were circumstances I was not able to 
address.” The message wished each employee “all the 
best.” More than a week later, employers were not sure 
whether they would receive their fi nal paychecks.
Perhaps the employers that dismiss employees 
through e-mail and text messages believe they are 
356 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
Along with administering surveys, more organizations are analyzing basic HR data 
to look for patterns in employee retention and turnover. The results may confi rm ex-
pectations or generate surprises that merit further investigation. Either way, they can 
help HR departments and managers determine which efforts deliver the best return. 
Rosemont Center, a Columbus, Ohio, social-service agency, analyzed turnover rates 
after government funding cutbacks contributed to stress and soaring employee turn-
over. The industry average turnover is 50% to 60%, but Rosemont Center’s rate shot 
up from 41% in 2007 to 72% three years later. The agency’s HR director reviewed an-
nual turnover rates, exit interviews, and employee satisfaction surveys and determined 
that Rosemont was failing to retain employees because of a lack of career development, 
below-average benefi ts and compensation, a need for better support of managers, poor 
communication, and lack of support for work-life balance. The HR director studied 
how other agencies in the area were handling similar challenges, and she interviewed 
employees to learn which of those actions they thought would help. By implementing 
ideas from this process, Rosemont Center brought employee turnover down to 48% 
in a single year—again below the industry average.65
In spite of surveys and other efforts to retain employees, some employees inevitably 
will leave the organization. This presents another opportunity to gather information 
for retaining employees: the exit interview—a meeting of the departing employee 
with the employee’s supervisor and/or a human resource specialist to discuss the em-
ployee’s reasons for leaving. A well-conducted exit interview can uncover reasons why 
employees leave and perhaps set the stage for some of them to return. HR profession-
als can help make exit interviews more successful by arranging for the employee to talk 
to someone from the HR department (rather than the departing employee’s supervi-
sor) in a neutral location or over the phone.66 Questions should start out open-ended 
and general, giving the employee a chance to name the source of the dissatisfaction or 
explain why leaving is attractive.
A recruiter armed with information about what caused a specifi c person to leave 
may be able to negotiate a return when the situation changes. And when several exiting 
employees give similar reasons for leaving, management should consider whether this 
indicates a need for change. In the war for talent, the best way to manage retention is 
to engage in a battle for every valued employee, even when it looks as if the battle has 
been lost.
Exit Interview
A meeting of a depart-
ing employee with the 
employee’s supervisor 
and/or a human resource 
specialist to discuss the 
employee’s reasons for 
leaving.

sparing the employees an awkward conversation. How-
ever, employees who have had the experience say it is 
impersonal and hurtful.
Questions
 1. How well does employment termination by e-mail 
or text message meet the principles of justice 
 described in this chapter?
 2. How well does it respect the basic human rights 
 described in Chapter 1? 
Sources: Bruce Weinstein, “You’re Fired by E-mail?” 
 Hufﬁ ngton Post, June 25, 2014, http://www.huffi ngtonpost
.com; Dan Primack, “Exclusive: George Zimmer on Being 
Fired by Men’s Wearhouse, and What’s Next,” Fortune, 
December 9, 2013, http://fortune.com; Alan Farnham, “Kicked 
to the Curb by Text: New, Awful Way to Be Fired,” ABC News, 
July 16, 2013, http://abcnews.go.com.
SUMMARY
LO 11-1 Distinguish between involuntary and vol-
untary turnover, and describe their effects on an 
organization.
• Involuntary turnover occurs when the organiza-
tion requires employees to leave, often when they 
would prefer to stay.
• Voluntary turnover occurs when employees ini-
tiate the turnover, often when the organization 
would prefer to keep them.
• Both are costly because of the need to recruit, hire, 
and train replacements. Involuntary turnover can 
also result in lawsuits and even violence.
LO 11-2 Discuss how employees determine whether 
the organization treats them fairly.
• Employees draw conclusions based on the out-
comes of decisions regarding them, the procedures 
applied, and the way managers treat employees 
when carrying out those procedures.
• Outcome fairness is a judgment that the conse-
quences are just. The consequences should be 
consistent, expected, and in proportion to the 
 signifi cance of the behavior.
• Procedural justice is a judgment that fair methods 
were used to determine the consequences. The 
procedures should be consistent, unbiased, based 
on accurate information, and correctable. They 
should take into account the viewpoints of every-
one involved, and they should be consistent with 
prevailing ethical standards.
• Interactional justice is a judgment that the organi-
zation carried out its actions in a way that took the 
employee’s feelings into account—for example, 
by listening to the employee and treating the em-
ployee with dignity.
LO 11-3 Identify legal requirements for employee 
discipline.
• Employee discipline should not result in wrongful 
discharge, such as a termination that violates an 
implied contract or public policy.
• Discipline should be administered evenhandedly, 
without discrimination.
• Discipline should respect individual employees’ 
privacy. Searches and surveillance should be for 
a legitimate business purpose, and employees 
should know about and consent to them. Reasons 
behind disciplinary actions should be shared only 
with those who need to know them.
• When termination is part of a plant closing, em-
ployees should receive the legally required notice, 
if applicable.
LO 11-4 Summarize ways in which organizations can 
discipline employees fairly.
• Discipline should follow the principles of the hot-
stove rule, meaning discipline should give warning 
and have consequences that are consistent, objec-
tive, and immediate.
• A system that can meet these requirements is 
called progressive discipline, in which rules are 
established and communicated, and increasingly 
severe consequences follow each violation of the 
rules. Usually, consequences range from a spoken 
warning through written warnings, suspension, 
and termination. These actions should be docu-
mented in writing.
• Organizations also may resolve problems through 
alternative dispute resolution, including an open-
door policy, peer review, mediation, and arbitration.
• When performance problems seem to result from 
substance abuse or mental illness, the manager 
may refer the employee to an employee assistance 
program.
• When a manager terminates an employee or en-
courages an employee to leave, outplacement 
counseling may smooth the process.
CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 357

LO 11-5  Explain how job dissatisfaction affects em-
ployee behavior.
• Circumstances involving the nature of a job, super-
visors and co-workers, pay levels, or the employee’s 
own disposition may produce job dissatisfaction.
• When employees become dissatisfi ed, they may 
engage in job withdrawal: behavior change, 
physical job withdrawal, or psychological job 
withdrawal.
• Behavior change means employees try to bring 
about changes in policy and personnel through 
inside action or through whistle-blowing or 
lawsuits.
• Physical job withdrawal may range from tardiness 
and absenteeism to job transfer or leaving the or-
ganization altogether.
• Psychological withdrawal involves displaying low 
levels of job involvement and organizational com-
mitment. It is especially likely when employees 
cannot fi nd another job.
LO 11-6 Describe how organizations contribute to em-
ployees’ job satisfaction and retain key employees.
• Organizations can try to identify and select em-
ployees who have personal dispositions associated 
with job satisfaction.
• They can make jobs more complex and 
 meaningful—for example, through job enrich-
ment and job rotation.
• They can use methods such as the role analysis 
technique to make roles clear and appropriate.
• They can reinforce shared values and encourage 
social support among employees.
• They can try to establish satisfactory pay levels and 
communicate with employees about pay structure 
and pay raises.
• Monitoring job satisfaction helps organizations 
identify which of these actions are likely to be 
most benefi cial.
358 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
KEY TERMS
involuntary turnover, 333
voluntary turnover, 333
outcome fairness, 335
procedural justice, 335
interactional justice, 336
hot-stove rule, 338
progressive discipline, 339
alternative dispute resolution 
(ADR), 341
open-door policy, 341
peer review, 342
mediation, 342
arbitration, 342
employee assistance program 
(EAP), 342
outplacement counseling, 343
job withdrawal, 345
role, 346
role ambiguity, 346
role confl ict, 346
role overload, 346
job involvement, 349
organizational commitment, 349
job satisfaction, 350
role analysis technique, 352
exit interview, 356
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. Give an example of voluntary turnover and an 
example of involuntary turnover. Why should or-
ganizations try to reduce both kinds of turnover? 
(LO 11-1)
 2. A member of a restaurant’s serving staff is chroni-
cally late to work. From the organization’s point of 
view, what fairness issues are involved in deciding 
how to handle this situation? In what ways might 
the employee’s and other servers’ ideas of fairness 
be different? (LO 11-2)
 3. For the situation in Question 2, how would a for-
mal discipline policy help the organization address 
issues of fairness? (LO 11-2)
 4. In what type of situation would an employer have 
a legitimate reason for learning about an em-
ployee’s personal matters outside the workplace? 
(LO 11-3)
 5. The progressive discipline process described in 
this chapter is meant to be fair and understand-
able, but it tends to be slow. Try to think of two 
or three offenses that should result in immediate 
discharge, rather than follow all the steps of pro-
gressive discipline. Explain why you selected these 
offenses. If the dismissed employee sued, do you 
think the organization would be able to defend its 
action in court? (LO 11-4)

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 359
 6. A risk of disciplining employees is that some employ-
ees retaliate. To avoid that risk, what organizational 
policies might encourage low-performing employees 
to leave while encouraging high-performing employ-
ees to stay? (Consider the sources of employee satis-
faction and dissatisfaction discussed in this chapter.) 
(LO 11-5)
 7. List forms of behavior that can signal job with-
drawal. Choose one of the behaviors you listed, and 
describe how you would respond if an otherwise 
valuable employee whom you supervised engaged 
in this kind of behavior. (LO 11-5)
 8. What are the four factors that infl uence an em-
ployee’s job dissatisfaction (or satisfaction)? Which 
of these do you think an employer can most eas-
ily change? Which would be the most expensive to 
change? (LO 11-5)
 9. Consider your current job or a job you recently 
held. Overall, were you satisfi ed or dissatisfi ed 
with that job? How did your level of satisfaction 
or dissatisfaction affect your behavior on the job? 
Is your own experience consistent with this chap-
ter’s models of job withdrawal and job satisfaction? 
(LO 11-5)
 10. Suppose you are an HR professional who con-
vinced your company’s management to conduct a 
survey of employee satisfaction. Your budget was 
limited, and you could not afford a test that went 
into great detail. Rather, you investigated overall 
job satisfaction and learned that it is low, especially 
among employees in three departments. You know 
that management is concerned about spending a 
lot for HR programs because sales are in a slump, 
but you want to address the issue of low job sat-
isfaction. Suggest some ways you might begin to 
make a difference, even with a small budget. How 
will you convince management to try your ideas? 
(LO 11-6)
 11. Why are exit interviews important? Should an or-
ganization care about the opinions of people who 
are leaving? How are those opinions relevant to 
employee separation and retention? (LO 11-6)
General Motors Tries to Steer in a New Direction
General Motors drew attention when it chose Mary 
Barra as chief executive, because she is the fi rst female 
CEO of a major automobile corporation. Barra, who 
has spent her entire career at GM, started as an engi-
neering intern, rose through the ranks, and held execu-
tive positions as vice president of human resources and 
senior vice president for global product development. 
Despite her impressive career, Barra shifted the focus 
from the historic nature of her appointment, saying GM 
would remain committed to the profi tability and sales 
goals defi ned by her predecessor. 
However, it quickly became apparent that Barra 
would have to change direction. Months after her ap-
pointment, the company admitted that ignition switches 
on many GM cars were malfunctioning. A nudge on the 
switch would move the key into the off position, shut-
ting down the engine—and the air bag system. Reports 
connected the problem to dozens of crashes and at least 
13 deaths. Worse, GM allegedly knew about the prob-
lem for months or years without recalling the cars. GM 
launched an investigation, as did Congress and the Na-
tional Highway Traffi c Safety Administration.
Meanwhile, GM suspended (with pay) two engi-
neers involved with the development of the ignition 
switch and the small-car line in which it is installed. 
Barra also replaced several executives who left the 
company, though she did not associate their departures 
with the ignition switch. Among those who left was the 
vice president of global vehicle engineering, John Cal-
abrese. Leading up to his retirement, Calabrese worked 
on a restructuring that included splitting his position 
into a head of vehicle development and a vice president 
of global product integrity, responsible for preventing 
safety problems. GM also more than doubled its safety 
investigator positions.
The results of the internal investigation indicated 
that employees throughout GM had failed to notice 
or act on evidence that the ignition switches had a 
potentially dangerous design fl aw. One employee, an 
engineer handling the switch design, came in for the 
most criticism. Evidence showed him being aware that 
the switch failed to meet specifi cations, struggling to 
fi nd a solution, and then signing off on the component. 
Later, when another engineer raised questions about 
the switch’s performance, he started writing replies 
but never sent any. Several years later, he approved a 
design change without following a standard practice: 
changing the part number to create evidence that the 
design had changed and when. Therefore, it was ex-
tremely diffi cult to spot the existence of a problem and 
determine which cars contained which version of the 
switch. GM dismissed the engineer along with 14 other 
employees, the majority of them executives. Five other 
GM employees were disciplined but not terminated. 
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY

360 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
CEO Barra announced that these actions marked the 
beginning of an effort to replace a corporate culture 
tolerant of incompetence with one committed to tak-
ing responsibility.
Questions
 1. Within months of Barra’s appointment as CEO 
and during the time of the internal investigation, 
several executives departed the company. Does this 
suggest that GM was managing turnover effec-
tively? Explain.
 2. What disciplinary steps did GM say it took with 
regard to the engineer responsible for its ignition 
switch? How consistent are these steps with the 
principles of progressive discipline?
Sources: Neal E. Boudette and Mike Ramsey, “GM Report Slams Switch 
Engineer for Actions in Troubled Recall,” The Wall Street Journal, June 5, 
2014, http://online.wsj.com; Jeff Bennett and Mike Ramsey, “GM Fires 
15 Employees over Recall Failures,” The Wall Street Journal, June 5, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com; Jeff Bennett and Katy Stech, “GM Engineering 
Chief to Depart,” Wall Street Journal, April 22, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; 
Jeff Bennett, “GM CEO Shakes Up Senior Staff amid Recall,” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 14, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Nathan Bomey, “New 
GM CEO Mary Barra: No Time to Dwell on Historic Appointment,” 
Detroit Free Press, January 23, 2014, http://www.freep.com; Jeff  Bennett, 
“General Motors Names Mary Barra as CEO,” Wall Street Journal, 
 December 10, 2013, http://online.wsj.com. 
What Makes Genentech So Great for Scientists?
For scientists, Genentech is a dream employer. The 
biotechnology company started in the 1970s to apply 
innovative technology for researching human genetics. 
Genentech’s 12,000 employees use human genetic in-
formation to develop and make medicines for treating 
patients with serious and life-threatening conditions. 
Their accomplishments include more than 11,000 pat-
ents and creation of 35 medicines, with more in the 
pipeline.
Genentech’s mission gives it an advantage in culti-
vating employee satisfaction and engagement. In Science 
magazine’s annual survey, scientists at Genentech rank 
the company especially high for being an innovative 
leader in its industry, having a clear vision, and doing 
important, high-quality research. Employees are well 
aware that they are at the leading edge in their fi elds and 
that their efforts create drugs that improve health and 
save lives. One employee refers to a “proud legacy here 
of doing the right thing,” and another speaks of being 
“seen to be at the forefront of innovative science.” A 
third says, “We all recognize that these products change 
lives—and it could be someone in our own family or 
ourselves.” Recently, when the Food and Drug Admin-
istration approved a drug Genentech had developed to 
fi ght breast cancer, employees in the distribution cen-
ter cut short their celebration to get the drug shipped 
to three women at UCLA Medical Center, where they 
were waiting for the drug’s approval. 
Employees freely say that this ability to use science to 
make a difference is what keeps them committed. Paul 
Bezy, vice president of manufacturing at the South San 
Francisco facility, says, “The thing that really keeps me 
coming to work and coming to work happy is knowing 
that we’re making a difference.” He says a start-up com-
pany approached him about a position, and although he 
would be highly visible there, he wanted to stay with 
Genentech’s “great people.”
Human resource management contributes to main-
taining this culture. To reinforce the sense of purposeful 
work, HR managers invite patients to visit and speak 
about how Genentech medications have helped them. 
Recognizing that staying at the forefront of innovation 
requires intense effort, they also plan fun activities, such 
as an annual Give Back concert and Friday-afternoon 
outings. Benefi ts include a sabbatical—six months of 
paid time off for employees to recharge after every six 
years of service.
In 2009, Genentech was acquired by the pharma-
ceutical giant Roche Group. Some employees wor-
ried that Genentech’s innovative culture would be lost 
within the larger business. So far, however, employees 
continue to praise the meaningfulness of their work and 
vote  Genentech onto lists of best companies to work 
for.  Recently, more than 90% said they feel a sense of 
pride in their accomplishments and that their work has 
special meaning.
Questions
 1. What contributors to job satisfaction does this case 
describe at Genentech?
 2. How else could Genentech retain its qualifi ed 
employees?
Sources: Genentech, “About Us,” http://www.gene.com, accessed June 25, 
2014; “Best Companies to Work For 2014,” Fortune, http://fortune.com/
best-companies, accessed June 25, 2014; Great Place to Work, “Genen-
tech,” Great Rated!, http://us.greatrated.com/genentech, accessed June 
25, 2014; Richard Procter, “Genentech’s Leadership Calls to Employees,” 
San Francisco Business Times, April 11, 2014, http://www.bizjournals.com/
sanfrancisco; Kendall Powell, “Top Employers Survey 2013: Top Firms 
Directed by Data, Led by Scientists,” Science Careers, October 25, 2013, 
http://sciencecareers.sciencemag.org.
MANAGING TALENT

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 361
Learning to Show Appreciation at Datotel
Datotel is a St. Louis company whose name explains 
what it does. The name combines the word data with 
the word hotel, and it uses its computers to safely store 
backups of its client companies’ data. It’s a fast-growing 
business, and for founder David Brown, one important 
challenge has been making sure employees know the 
company appreciates them even as everyone is scram-
bling to keep up with the demands of expanding a small 
business.
With about three dozen people to think about, 
Brown fi rst tried a methodical approach: He created an 
employee-of-the-month program in which the lucky re-
cipient would receive a thank-you e-mail message, a $25 
gift card, and recognition for all employees to see on the 
company’s intranet. Brown saw this program as one he 
could readily fi nd the time to implement, and he hoped 
the reward and recognition would inspire high levels of 
job involvement and organizational commitment.
One advantage of a small company is that you can 
quickly see people’s reactions to your efforts. Un-
fortunately, what Brown saw on people’s faces and 
heard in their conversations was that recipients of 
the employee-of-the-month rewards were not exactly 
excited. The program was just too formulaic and im-
personal. If Datotel was to keep employees engaged, 
it needed a different way to show that their efforts 
mattered.
So Brown tried a different approach, even though it 
requires more effort. He committed his eight managers 
to noticing and reporting employee accomplishments. 
To implement this, he sets aside part of regular man-
agement meetings—part of each daily phone meeting 
and 15 minutes of each weekly in-person meeting—to 
discuss employee accomplishments. Whenever a man-
ager notes that an employee has done something ex-
traordinary, Brown asks for one of the managers besides 
the person’s direct supervisor to thank the employee in 
person. Brown has also made a personal commitment 
to write thank-you notes. In fact, with e-mail the norm 
at his technology company, he makes some of the notes 
stand out by writing them by hand and mailing them to 
the employees at home.
One employee who thinks the extra effort matters 
is engineer Stephanie Lewis. One day Lewis returned 
home to fi nd a note from Brown, observing that he had 
heard during management meetings that Lewis had 
done exceptionally well in working with a customer. 
Brown thanked her for the effort. Lewis’s reaction: “It 
made me feel important to get something so personal 
and unique” from her company’s busy leader.
Just as communicating “thank you” has helped with 
motivation, going the extra mile to communicate has 
helped Datotel’s managers stay connected with one an-
other and the company’s mission. As the company grew 
and jobs became more specialized, Brown recognized 
that he would have to bring people together formally 
to share information about what was happening. He 
began to call meetings once a quarter, and so that the 
environment will be positive, he establishes a theme he 
thinks will get employees thinking and generate some 
fun. When the theme was “Rumble in the Jungle,” the 
company leaders dressed as boxers, and when the theme 
was “Top Gun,” they dressed as aviators and met in an 
airplane hangar.
The effort to allow for fun is interwoven with the 
company’s core values: passion, integrity, fun, team-
work, “superior business value,” and “improving the 
community in which we work.” These aim to unite the 
employees in a commitment to customer service that 
gives the company an edge in the industry. The values 
are also meant to be an advantage for recruiting and re-
taining the best people. On Datotel’s website, the “In-
side Datotel” page lists 10 reasons for wanting to work 
at the company, and the top reason is the core values: 
“Our Core Values represent everything that we stand 
for, and we take pride in them.”
Questions
 1. Based on the information given, which sources of 
job satisfaction has Datotel addressed? What other 
sources might the company address, and how?
 2. Suggest several measures Datotel could use to evalu-
ate the success of its employee retention efforts. Be 
sure these are practical for a company of a few dozen 
employees.
 3. In a company as small as Datotel, losing even one 
employee can present real diffi culties. Suppose one 
of Datotel’s managers begins to have performance 
problems and seems unwilling or unable to improve. 
Suggest how you, as an HR consultant, could help 
David Brown resolve this problem in a way that is 
fair to everyone involved and that keeps the company 
moving forward.
Sources: Datotel corporate website, www.datotel.com, accessed July 6, 2014; 
Nadine Heintz, “Building a Culture of Employee Appreciation,” Inc., 
 September 2009, www.inc.com; Jeremy Nulik, “Never Stop Being a  Student of 
Business,” Small Business Monthly (St. Louis), July 2009, www.sbmon.com; 
Christopher Boyce, “Engineer Finds Solution to Business  Problem,” 
St. Louis Post-Dispatch, June 12, 2009, Business & Company Resource Center, 
http://galenet.galegroup.com. 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

362 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
 1. Maureen Downey, “New Survey: U.S. Teachers Teach More 
Students in Poverty, with Special Needs,” Atlanta Journal-
Constitution, June 25, 2014, http://www.ajc.com; James 
Marshall Crotty, “Report Finds Rising Job Satisfaction and 
Autonomy among Teachers,” Forbes, January 30, 2014, http://
www.forbes.com; Motoko Rich, “Beleaguered? Not Teach-
ers, a Poll on ‘Well-Being’ Finds,” The New York Times, March 
27, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com.
 2. “Teacher Tenure Pros and Cons,” ProCon.org, accessed 
June 25, 2014; “Teacher Tenure: Brown v. Board, the Se-
quel,” The Economist, June 14, 2014, http://www.economist.
com; Jesse Rothstein, “Taking On Teacher Tenure Back-
fi res,” The New York Times, June 12, 2014, http://www.ny-
times.com.
 3. J. D. Shaw, M. K. Duffy, J. L. Johnson, and D. E. Lockhart, 
“Turnover, Social Capital Losses, and Performance,” Acad-
emy of Management Journal 48 (2005), pp. 594–606; R. Batt, 
“Managing Customer Services: Human Resource Practices, 
Quit Rates, and Sales Growth,” Academy of Management Jour-
nal 45 (2002), pp. 587–97.
 4. D. J. Koys, “The Effects of Employee Satisfaction, Organiza-
tional Citizenship Behavior, and Turnover on Organizational 
Effectiveness: A Unit-Level Longitudinal Study,” Personnel 
Psychology 54 (2001), pp. 101–14; Batt, “Managing Customer 
Services”; T. Y. Park and J. D. Shaw, “Turnover Rates and 
Organizational Performance: A Meta-analysis,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 98 (2013): 268–309.
 5. W. J. Becker and R. Cropanzano, “Dynamic Aspects of Vol-
untary Turnover: An Integrated Approach to Curvilinearity 
in the Performance–Turnover Relationship,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 96 (2011): 233–46.
 6. K. M. Kacmer, M. C. Andrews, D. L. Van Rooy, R. C. 
Steilberg, and S. Cerrone, “Sure Everyone Can Be Re-
placed .  .  . but at What Cost? Turnover as a Predictor of 
Unit-Level Performance,” Academy of Management Jour-
nal 49 (2006), pp. 133–44; J. D. Shaw, N. Gupta, and J. E. 
Delery, “Alternative Conceptualizations of the Relation-
ship between Voluntary Turnover and Organizational 
Performance,” Academy of Management Journal 48 (2005), 
pp. 50–68; J. Lublin, “Keeping Clients by Keeping Workers,” 
Wall Street Journal, November 20, 2006, p. B1.
 7. The Lorrie Willey, “The Public Policy Exception to Employ-
ment at Will: Balancing Employer’s Right and the Public In-
terest,” Journal of Legal, Ethical and Regulatory Issues 12, no. 1 
(2009), pp. 55–72; Mitch Baker, “Commentary: ‘At Will’ Firing 
Shouldn’t Lack a Reason,” Daily Journal of Commerce, Portland, 
January 17, 2008, Business & Company Resource Center, 
http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 8. Joel Brockner, “Why It’s So Hard to Be Fair,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, March 2006, http://hbr.org; Cynthia Barnes-
Slater and John Ford, “ Measuring Confl ict: Both the Hidden 
Costs and Benefi ts of Confl ict Management Interventions,” 
LawMemo, http://www.lawmemo.com, accessed April 10, 
2012.
 9. M. M. Le Blanc and K. Kelloway, “Predictors and Outcomes 
of Workplace Violence and Aggression,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 87, 2002, pp. 444–53.
 10. B. J. Tepper, “Relationship among Supervisors’ and Subor-
dinates’ Procedural Justice Perceptions and Organizational 
Citizenship Behaviors,” Academy of Management Journal 46 
(2003), pp. 97–105; T. Simons and Q. Roberson, “Why Man-
agers Should Care about Fairness: The Effects of Aggregate 
 Justice Perception on Organizational Outcomes,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology 88 (2003), pp. 432–43; C. M. Holmvall 
and D. R. Bobocel, “What Fair Procedures Say about Me: 
 Self-Construals and Reactions to Procedural Fairness,” 
 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 105 
(2008), pp. 147–68.
 11. E. C. Bianchi and J. Brockner, “In the Eyes of the Be-
holder: The Role of Dispositional Trust in Judgments of 
Procedural and Interactional Justice,” Organizational Be-
havior and Human Decision Processes 118 (2012): 46–59.
 12. T. A. Judge, B. A. Scott, and R. Ilies, “Hostility, Job Attitudes 
and Workplace Deviance: A Test of a Multilevel Model,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 91 (2006), pp. 126–38.
 13. Harmon v. Thornburgh, CA, DC No. 88-5265 (July 30, 1989); 
Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab, U.S. Sup. Ct. No. 86-
18796 (March 21, 1989); City of Annapolis v. United Food & 
Commercial Workers Local 400, Md. Ct. App. No. 38 (Novem-
ber 6, 1989); Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives Association, 
U.S. Sup. Ct. No. 87-1555 (March 21, 1989); Bluestein v. 
Skinner, 908 F 451, 9th Cir. (1990).
 14. D. J. Hoekstra, “Workplace Searches: A Legal Overview,” 
Labor Law Journal 47, no. 2 (February 1996), pp. 127–38; 
“Workplace Searches and Interrogations,” FindLaw, http://
employment.fi ndlaw.com, accessed April 6, 2012; “Work-
place Searches: Dos and Don’ts,” Nolo.com, http://www
.nolo.com, accessed April 6, 2012.
 15. G. Henshaw and K. Youmans, “Employee Privacy in the 
Workplace and an Employer’s Right to Conduct Workplace 
Searches and Surveillance,” SHRM Legal Report, Spring 1990, 
pp. 1–5; B. K. Repa, Your Rights in the Workplace (Berkeley, 
CA: Nolo Press, 1997).
 16. M. Denis and J. Andes, “Defamation—Do You Tell Employees 
Why a Co-worker Was Discharged?” Employee Relations Law 
Journal 16, no. 4 (Spring 1991), pp. 469–79; R. S.  Soderstrom 
and J. R.  Murray, “Defamation in Employment: Suits by At-
Will Employees,” FICC Quarterly, Summer 1992, pp. 395–426;  
“Keeping Pandora’s Box Closed: Best Practices in Maintaining 
Personnel Records,” Mondaq  Business Briefi ng, June 8, 2009, 
Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.gale-
group.com. “Your Rights in the Workplace: Privacy Rights,” 
Nolo.com, http://www.nolo.com, accessed April 6, 2012.
 17. Business and Legal Resources, “Employee Discipline: Prop-
erly Document Complaints and Investigations,” HR.BLR.
com, December 8, 2011, http://hr.blr.com; Michael S. Lav-
enant, “The Art of Employee Discipline: How to Retain 
Control and Increase Production,” Nonprofi t World, July/
August 2010, pp. 22–23.
 18. K. Karl and C. Sutton, “A Review of Expert Advice on Em-
ployment Termination Practices: The Experts Don’t Always 
Agree,” in Dysfunctional Behavior in Organizations, eds. R. 
Griffi n, A. O’Leary-Kelly, and J. Collins (Stanford, CT: JAI 
Press, 1998).
NOTES

CHAPTER 11 
Separating and Retaining Employees 363
 19. Resolution Systems Institute and Center for Confl ict Reso-
lution, “Why Do Courts Use ADR?” Court ADR Pocket Guide, 
http://courtadr.org, accessed April 6, 2012; Dougas Shontz, 
Fred  Kipperman, and Vanessa Soma, Business-to-Business Ar-
bitration in the United States: Perceptions of Corporate Counsel 
(Rand Institute for Civil Justice, 2011), http://www.rand.org.
 20. Kathleen Koster, “Therapy Goes Digital,” Employee Benefi t 
News, October 2013, pp. 31–32.
 21. Al Lewis, “Challenger Thrives in Challenging Economy,” 
Fox Business, March 16, 2012, http://www.foxbusiness.com; 
Jim Doyle, “Five Questions: Getting Laid Off Workers Back 
on the Job,” St. Louis Post-Dispatch, September 30, 2011, 
http://www.stltoday.com.
 22. For examples see M. Huselid, “The Impact of Human Re-
source Management Practices on Turnover, Productivity, and 
Corporate Financial Performance,” Academy of Management 
Journal 38 (1995), pp. 635–72; S. Payne and S. Webber, “Ef-
fects of Service Provider Attitudes and Employment Status on 
Citizenship Behaviors and Customers’ Attitudes and Loyalty 
Behavior,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91 (2006), pp. 365–68; 
J. Hartner, F. Schmidt, and T. Hayes, “Business-Unit Level 
Relationship between Employee Satisfaction, Employee 
Engagement, and Business Outcomes: A Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 87 (2002), pp. 268–79; I. Fulmer, 
B. Gerhart, and K. Scott, “Are the 100 Best Better? An Em-
pirical Investigation of the Relationship between Being a 
‘Great Place to Work’ and Firm Performance,” Performance 
Psychology 56 (2003), pp. 965–93; “Working Today: Under-
standing What Drives Employee Engagement,” Towers  Perrin 
 Talent Report (2003).
 23. G. Kranz, “Losing Lifeblood,” Workforce Management, June 
2011, pp. 24–28; R. Vance, Employee Engagement and Commit-
ment (Alexandria, VA: Society for Human Resource Manage-
ment, 2006).
 24. Margery Weinstein, “No More Revolving Door,” Training, 
July 2013, http://www.trainingmag.com.
 25. D. W. Baruch, “Why They Terminate,” Journal of Consulting 
Psychology 8 (1944), pp. 35–46; J. G. Rosse, “Relations among 
Lateness, Absence and Turnover: Is There a Progression 
of Withdrawal?” Human Relations 41 (1988), pp. 517–31; 
C. Hulin, “Adaptation, Persistence and Commitment in 
Organizations,” in Handbook of Industrial & Organizational 
Psychology, 2nd ed., eds. M. D. Dunnette and L. M. Hough 
(Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1991), pp. 
443–50; E. R. Burris, J. R. Detert, and D. S. Chiaburu, “Quit-
ting before Leaving: The Mediating Effects of Psychologi-
cal Attachment and Detachment on Voice,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 93 (2008), pp. 912–22.
 26. D. A. Harrison, D. A. Newman, and P. L. Roth, “How Impor-
tant Are Job Attitudes? Meta-analytic Comparisons of Inte-
grative Behavioral Outcomes and Time Sequences,” Academy 
of Management Journal 49 (2006), pp. 305–25.
 27. G. Chen, R. E. Ployhart, H. C. Thomas, N. Anderson, and 
P. D. Bliese, “The Power of Momentum: A New Model of 
Dynamic Relationships between Job Satisfaction Change 
and Turnover Intentions,” Academy of Management Journal, 
54 (2011): 159–81.
 28. R. D. Zimmerman, “Understanding the Impact of Person-
ality Traits on Individuals’ Turnover Decisions: A Meta- 
analysis,” Personnel Psychology 61 (2008), pp. 309–48.
 29. T. A. Judge, E. A. Locke, C. C. Durham, and A. N. Kluger, 
“Dispositional Effects on Job and Life Satisfaction: The Role 
of Core Evaluations,” Journal of Applied Psychology 83 (1998), 
pp. 17–34.
 30. B. M. Staw, N. E. Bell, and J. A. Clausen, “The Dispositional 
Approach to Job Attitudes: A Lifetime Longitudinal Test,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 31 (1986), pp. 56–78; B. M. 
Staw and J. Ross, “Stability in the Midst of Change: A Dispo-
sitional Approach to Job Attitudes,” Journal of  Applied Psychol-
ogy 70 (1985), pp. 469–80; R. P. Steel and J. R. Rentsch, “The 
Dispositional Model of Job Attitudes Revisited:  Findings of 
a 10-Year Study,” Journal of Applied  Psychology 82 (1997), pp. 
873–79.
 31. T. A. Judge and J. E. Bono, “Relationship of Core Self-Evalu-
ation Traits—Self-Esteem, Generalized Self-Effi cacy, Locus 
of Control, and Emotional Stability—with Job Satisfaction 
and Job Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 86 (2001), pp. 80–92.
 32. T. A. Judge, J. E. Bono, and E. A. Locke, “Personality and 
Job Satisfaction: The Mediating Role of Job Characteristics,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 85 (2000), pp. 237–49.
 33. S. C. Douglas and M. J. Martinko, “Exploring the Role of 
Individual Differences in the Prediction of Workplace Ag-
gression,” Journal of Applied Psychology 86 (2001), pp. 547–59.
 34. B. A. Gerhart, “How Important Are Dispositional Factors 
as Determinants of Job Satisfaction? Implications for Job 
Design and Other Personnel Programs,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 72 (1987), pp. 493–502.
 35. E. F. Stone and H. G. Gueutal, “An Empirical Derivation 
of the Dimensions along Which Characteristics of Jobs Are 
Perceived,” Academy of  Management Journal 28 (1985), pp. 
376–96.
 36. L. W. Porter and R. M. Steers, “Organizational Work and 
Personal Factors in Employee Absenteeism and Turnover,” 
Psychological Bulletin 80 (1973), pp. 151–76; S. Melamed, I. 
Ben-Avi, J. Luz, and M. S. Green, “Objective and Subjective 
Work  Monotony: Effects on Job Satisfaction, Psychological 
Distress, and Absenteeism in Blue Collar Workers,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 80 (1995), pp. 29–42.
 37. D. R. Ilgen and J. R. Hollenbeck, “The Structure of Work: 
Job Design and Roles,” in Handbook of Industrial & Organiza-
tional Psychology, 2nd ed.
 38. J. A. Breaugh and J. P. Colihan, “Measuring Facets of Job 
Ambiguity: Construct Validity Evidence,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 79 (1994), pp. 191–201.
 39. M. A. Shaffer and D. A. Harrison, “Expatriates’ Psychological 
Withdrawal from Interpersonal Assignments: Work, Non-
work, and Family Infl uences,” Personnel Psychology 51 (1998), 
pp. 87–118.
 40. Robert J. Keating, Stephen C. Harper, and David J. Glew, 
“Emotional Intelligence Dilutes the Toxins,” Industrial 
Engineer, June 2013, 30–35; Mark C. Crowley, “Gallup’s 
Workplace Jedi on How to Fix Our Employee Engagement 
Problem,” Fast Company, June 4, 2013, http://www.fastcom-
pany.com.
 41. J. M. Sacco and N. Schmitt, “A Dynamic Multilevel Model 
of Demographic Diversity and Misfi t Effects,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 90 (2005), pp. 203–31; R. E. Ployhart, J. A. 
Weekley, and K. Baughman, “The Structure and Function of 
Human Capital Emergence: A Multilevel Examination of the 

364 PART 3 
Assessing and Improving Performance
Attraction–Selection–Attrition Model,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 49 (2006), pp. 661–77.
 42. S. Lim, L. M. Cortina, and V. J. Magley, “Personal and Work-
Group Incivility: Impact on Work and Health Outcomes,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 93 (2008), pp. 95–107.
 43. E. J. McClean, E. R. Burris, and J. R. Detert, “When Does 
Voice Lead to Exit? It Depends on Leadership,” Academy of 
Management Review 56 (2013), pp. 525–48.
 44. Robert 
J. 
Grossman, 
“Gone 
but 
Not 
Forgotten,” 
HR 
Magazine, 
September 
2011, 
http://www.shrm
.org.
 45. Katherine Graham-Leviss, “The High Cost of Sales Team 
Turnover,” Entrepreneur, September 15, 2011, http://www
.entrepreneur.com; Gwen Moran, “The Hidden Costs of 
Employee Turnover,” Entrepreneur, September 10, 2011, 
http://www.entrepreneur.com.
 46. Economic Policy Institute, “Voluntary Quits Barely Budge: 
Critical Loss of Opportunities for Young Workers,” news re-
lease, May 9, 2014, http://www.epi.org; B. Lynn Ware, “Stop 
the Gen Y Revolving Door,” T+D, May 2014, pp. 58–63.
 47. R. T. Mowday, R. M. Steers, and L. W. Porter, “The Mea-
surement of Organizational Commitment,” Journal of Voca-
tional Behavior 14 (1979), pp. 224–47.
 48. E. A. Locke, “The Nature and Causes of Job Dissatisfaction,” 
in The Handbook of Industrial & Organizational Psychology, ed. 
M. D. Dunnette (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1976), pp. 901–69.
 49. N. A. Bowling, T. A. Beehr, S. H. Wagner, and T. M. 
 Libkuman, “Adaptation-Level Theory, Opponent Process 
Theory, and Dispositions: An Integrated Approach to the 
Stability of Job Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied Psychology 90 
(2005), pp. 1044–53.
 50. For these and other examples, see David DiSalvo, “10 Rea-
sons Why Some People Love What They Do,” Psychology 
Today, May/June 2013, pp. 48–50.
 51. G. R. Oldham, A. Cummings, L. J. Mischel, J. M. 
Schmidtke, and J. Zhou, “Listen While You Work? 
Quasi-experimental 
Relations 
between 
Personal-
Stereo Headset Use and Employee Work Responses,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 80 (1995), pp. 547–64.
 52. Alison Beard and Richard Hornik, “It’s Hard to Be Good,” 
Harvard Business Review, November 2011, pp. 88–96.
 53. Jeffrey Scott, “Give Employees Ownership Thinking,” Land-
scape Management, October 2011, EBSCOhost, http://web.
ebscohost.com.
 54. Mary Shapiro, Cynthia Ingols, Stacy Blake-Beard, and 
 Regina O’Neill, “Canaries in the Mine Shaft: Women Sig-
naling a New Career Model,” Alison Greco, “Corporate Cul-
ture: Culture Key to Work-Life Programs,” Employee Benefi t 
News, February 2012, Business & Company Resource Cen-
ter, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 55. J. E. Perry-Smith, “Work Family Human Resource Bundles 
and Perceived Organizational Performance,” Academy of 
Management Journal 43 (2000), pp. 801–15; M. M. Arthur, 
“Share Price Reactions to Work-Family Initiatives: An In-
stitutional Perspective,” Academy of Management Journal 46 
(2003), pp. 497–505.
 56. B. M. Meglino, E. C. Ravlin, and C. L. Adkins, “A Work Val-
ues Approach to Corporate Culture: A Field Test of the Value 
Congruence Process and Its Relationship to Individual Out-
comes,” Journal of Applied Psychology 74 (1989), pp. 424–33.
 57. G. C. Ganster, M. R. Fusilier, and B. T. Mayes, “Role of Social 
Support in the Experience of Stress at Work,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 71 (1986), pp. 102–11.
 58. R. Eisenberger, F. Stinghamber, C. Vandenberghe, I. L. 
Sucharski, and L. Rhoades, “Perceived Supervisor Support: 
Contributions to Perceived Organizational Support and Em-
ployee Retention,” Journal of Applied Psychology 87 (2002), pp. 
565–73.
 59. R. T. Keller, “A Test of the Path-Goal Theory of Leadership 
with Need for Clarity as a Moderator in Research and De-
velopment Organizations,” Journal of Applied Psychology 74 
(1989), pp. 208–12.
 60. Bill John and Jennifer Colosimo, “Lending a Hand,” T+D, 
December 2013, p. 72.
 61. S. C. Payne and A. H. Huffman, “A Longitudinal Examina-
tion of the Infl uence of Mentoring on Organizational Com-
mitment and Turnover,” Academy of Management Journal 48 
(2005), pp. 158–68.
 62. D. Liu, T. R. Mitchell, T. W. Lee, B. C. Holtom, and T. 
R. Hinken, “When Employees Are Out of Step with Co-
workers: How Job Satisfaction Trajectory and Dispersion 
Infl uence Individual and Unit-Level Voluntary Turnover,” 
Academy of Management Journal 55 (2012): 1360–1380.
 63. R. P. Quinn and G. L. Staines, The 1977 Quality of Employ-
ment Survey (Ann Arbor, MI: Survey Research Center, Insti-
tute for Social Research, University of Michigan, 1979).
 64. T. Judge and T. Welbourne, “A Confi rmatory Investigation 
of the Dimensionality of the Pay Satisfaction Questionnaire,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 79 (1994), pp. 461–66.
 65. Sonya M. Latta, “Save Your Staff, Improve Your Business,” 
HR Magazine, January 2012, pp. 30–32.
 66. Patricia M. Buhler, “The Exit Interview: A Goldmine of 
Information,” Supervision, August 2011, pp. 11–13; Chuck 
Schwartau, “Exit Interviews Matter: Feedback to Enhance 
the Work Environment,” Top Producer, February 2012, Busi-
ness & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.gale-
group.com; Robert Half Legal, “Exit Interviews,” http://
www.roberthalfl egal.com, accessed April 6, 2012.

PART FOUR
12
13
14
CHAPTER
Establishing a Pay Structure
CHAPTER 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay
CHAPTER 
Providing Employee Benefi ts
Compensating Human 
Resources

Introduction
As the United States continues its climb out of the Great Recession, people notice 
price increases and greater job opportunities. This creates pressure for higher 
pay. In the political environment affecting organizations, this plays out as efforts 
to raise the minimum wage required by federal, state, and local laws. For example, 
the Illinois legislature recently raised the minimum that employers must pay from 
$7.75 per hour to $8.25, and in California, the city of San Jose raised the minimum 
wage by 25% to $10.15.
As employers respond to this kind of change in the law, they have to consider 
how the wages they pay support the company’s strategy and performance. Two 
White Castle restaurants on either side of the Illinois–Indiana state line charge the 
same prices because they serve the same set of consumers, but the Illinois mini-
mum wage makes the Illinois restaurant more expensive to operate. The company 
has coped by not filling two positions after employees left. In San Jose, a Carl’s 
Jr.  franchise owner was able to keep the same level of profits with a modest price in-
crease and a reduction in workers’ hours. Another San Jose business, Philz  Coffee, 
had already raised employees’ wages to $11 an hour to attract a higher caliber of 
workers. The business has increased hiring and enjoys declining turnover, greater 
job satisfaction, and improved customer service.1
PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 12-1 Identify the kinds of decisions involved in 
establishing a pay structure.
 LO 12-2 Summarize legal requirements for pay policies.
 LO 12-3 Discuss how economic forces inﬂ uence decisions 
about pay.
 LO 12-4 Describe how employees evaluate the fairness of 
a pay structure.
 LO 12-5 Explain how organizations design pay structures 
related to jobs.
 LO 12-6 Describe alternatives to job-based pay.
 LO 12-7 Summarize how to ensure that pay is actually in 
line with the pay structure.
 LO 12-8 Discuss issues related to paying employees 
serving in the military and paying executives.
Establishing a Pay 
Structure
12

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 367
From the employer’s point of view, pay is a powerful tool for meeting the organiza-
tion’s goals. Pay has a large impact on employee attitudes and behaviors. It infl uences 
which kinds of employees are attracted to (and remain with) the organization. By re-
warding certain behaviors, it can align employees’ interests with the organization’s 
goals. Employees care about policies affecting earnings because the policies affect the 
employees’ income and standard of living. Besides the level of pay, employees care 
about the fairness of pay compared with what others earn. Also, employees consider 
pay a sign of status and success. They attach great importance to pay decisions when 
they evaluate their relationship with their employer. For these reasons, organizations 
must carefully manage and communicate decisions about pay.
At the same time, pay is a major cost. Its share of total costs varies widely from one 
industry or company to another. At the low end, the wholesaling industry spends over 
5% of revenues on payroll expenses. At the other extreme, transportation, entertain-
ment, and health care companies spend more than 25% to almost 40% of revenues on 
payroll.2 Managers have to keep this cost reasonable.
This chapter begins a three-chapter exploration of how companies  compensate 
 employees with pay and benefi ts. It describes how managers weigh the importance 
and costs of pay to arrive at a structure for compensation and levels of pay for different 
jobs. We fi rst defi ne the basic decisions in terms of pay structure and pay level. Next, 
we look at several considerations that infl uence these decisions: legal requirements 
related to pay, economic forces, the nature of the organization’s jobs, and employees’ 
judgments about the fairness of pay levels. We describe methods for evaluating jobs and 
market data to arrive at a pay structure. We then summarize alternatives to the usual 
focus on jobs. The chapter closes with a look at two issues of current  importance—pay 
for employees on leave to serve in the military and pay for executives.
Decisions about Pay
Because pay is important both in its effect on employees and on account of its cost, 
organizations need to plan what they will pay employees in each job. An unplanned 
approach, in which each employee’s pay is independently negotiated, will likely result 
in unfairness, dissatisfaction, and rates that are either overly expensive or so low that 
positions are hard to fi ll. Organizations therefore make decisions about two aspects of 
pay structure: job structure and pay level. Job structure consists of the relative pay 
for different jobs within the organization. It establishes relative pay among different 
functions and different levels of responsibility. For example, job structure defi nes the 
difference in pay between an entry-level accountant and an entry-level assembler, as 
well as the difference between an entry-level accountant, the accounting department 
manager, and the organization’s comptroller. Pay level is the average amount (includ-
ing wages, salaries, and bonuses) the organization pays for a particular job. Together, 
job structure and pay levels establish a pay structure that helps the organization 
achieve goals related to employee motivation, cost control, and the ability to attract 
and retain talented human resources.
The organization’s job structure and pay levels are policies of the organization rather 
than the amount a particular employee earns. For example, an organization’s pay struc-
ture could include the range of pay that a person may earn in the job of entry-level ac-
countant. An individual accountant could be earning an amount anywhere within that 
range. Typically, the amount a person earns depends on the individual’s qualifi cations, 
accomplishments, and experience. The individual’s pay may also depend partly on how 
well the organization performs. This chapter focuses on the organization’s decisions 
LO 12-1 Identify the 
kinds of decisions 
involved in establishing 
a pay structure.
Job Structure
The relative pay for dif-
ferent jobs within the 
organization.
Pay Level
The average amount 
(including wages, sala-
ries, and bonuses) the 
organization pays for a 
particular job.
Pay Structure
The pay policy resulting 
from job structure and 
pay-level decisions.

368 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
about pay structure, and the next chapter will explore decisions that affect the amount 
of pay an individual earns.
Especially in an organization with hundreds or thousands of employees, it would 
be impractical for managers and the human resource department to make an entirely 
unique decision about each employee’s pay. The decision would have to weigh so many 
factors that this approach would be expensive, diffi cult, and often unsatisfactory. Es-
tablishing a pay structure simplifi es the process of making decisions about individ-
ual employees’ pay by grouping together employees with similar jobs. As shown in 
Figure 12.1, human resource professionals develop this pay structure based on legal 
requirements, market forces, and the organization’s goals, such as attracting a high-
quality workforce and meeting principles of fairness.
Legal Requirements for Pay
Pay policies and practices in the United States are subject to government laws and 
regulations. For example, just as competing businesses may not conspire to set prices, 
they may not conspire to set wage rates. In addition, government regulation affects 
pay structure in the areas of equal employment opportunity, minimum wages, pay for 
overtime, and prevailing wages for federal contractors. All of an organization’s deci-
sions about pay should comply with the applicable laws.
Equal Employment Opportunity
Under the laws governing equal employment opportunity, described in Chapter 3, 
employers may not base differences in pay on an employee’s age, sex, race, or other 
protected status. Any differences in pay must instead be tied to such business-related 
considerations as job responsibilities or performance. The goal is for employers to 
provide equal pay for equal work. Job descriptions, job structures, and pay structures can 
help organizations demonstrate that they are upholding these laws.
LO 12-2 Summarize 
legal requirements for 
pay policies.
Figure 12.1
Issues in Developing a 
Pay Structure

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 369
These laws do not guarantee equal pay for men and women, 
whites and minorities, or any other groups, because so many le-
gitimate factors, from education to choice of occupation, affect a 
person’s earnings. In fact, numbers show that women and racial 
minorities in the United States tend to earn less than white men. 
Among full-time workers in 2012, women on average earned 73 
cents for every dollar earned by men. Among male employees, 
black workers earned 76 cents for every dollar earned by white 
workers, and Hispanic workers earned just 67 cents (a racial gap 
among black and Hispanic female employees also exists, at 84 and 
73 cents per dollar, respectively).3 Even when these fi gures are 
adjusted to take into account education, experience, and occupa-
tion, the earnings gap does not completely close.4 Among execu-
tives, one cause of lower pay for women appears to be that less of 
their pay is tied to performance (for example, bonuses and stock, 
described in the next chapter).5
One explanation for historical lower pay for women has been that employers have 
undervalued work performed by women—in particular, placing a lower value on occupa-
tions traditionally dominated by women. Some policy makers have proposed a remedy 
for this called equal pay for comparable worth. This policy uses job evaluation (described 
later in the chapter) to establish the worth of an organization’s jobs in terms of such 
criteria as their diffi culty and their importance to the organization. The employer then 
compares the evaluation points awarded to each job with the pay for each job. If jobs have 
the same number of evaluation points, they should be paid equally. If they are not, pay of 
the lower-paid job is raised to meet the goal of comparable worth.
Comparable-worth policies are controversial. From an economic standpoint, the 
obvious drawback of such a policy is that raising pay for some jobs places the employer 
at an economic disadvantage relative to employers that pay the market rate. In addition, 
a free-market economy assumes people will take differences in pay into account when 
they choose a career. The courts allow organizations to defend themselves against 
claims of discrimination by showing that they pay the going market rate.6 Businesses 
are reluctant to place themselves at an economic disadvantage, but many state govern-
ments adjust pay to achieve equal pay for comparable worth. Also, at both private and 
government organizations, policies designed to shatter the “glass ceiling” (discussed in 
Chapter 8) can help to address the problem of unequal pay.
Employers considering how to address equal employment opportunity should bear in 
mind that the consequences of pay discrimination can be far reaching. The Lilly Ledbetter 
Fair Pay Act of 2009, described in Chapter 3, allows employees claiming discrimination to 
treat each receipt of a paycheck as an instance of discrimination for purposes of determin-
ing their eligibility to fi le a complaint.
Minimum Wage
In the United States, employers must pay at least the minimum wage established by 
law. (A wage is the rate of pay per hour.) At the federal level, the 1938 Fair Labor 
Standards Act (FLSA) establishes a minimum wage that is now $7.25 per hour. The 
FLSA also permits a lower “training wage,” which employers may pay to workers 
under the age of 20 for a period of up to 90 days. This subminimum wage is approxi-
mately 85% of the minimum wage. Some states have laws specifying minimum wages; 
in these states, employers must pay whichever rate is higher.
Minimum Wage
The lowest amount that 
employers may pay 
under federal or state 
law, stated as an amount 
of pay per hour.
Fair Labor Standards 
Act (FLSA)
Federal law that estab-
lishes a minimum wage 
and requirements for 
overtime pay and child 
labor.
Two employees who do the same job cannot be paid 
different wages because of gender, race, or age. It 
would be illegal to pay these two employees differently 
because one is male and the other is female. Only if 
there are differences in their experience, skills, seniority, 
or job performance are there legal reasons why their 
pay might be different.

370 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
From the standpoint of social policy, an issue related to the minimum wage is that 
it tends to be lower than the earnings required for a full-time worker to rise above the 
poverty level. A number of cities have therefore passed laws requiring a so-called living 
wage, essentially a minimum wage based on the cost of living in a particular region.
Overtime Pay
Another requirement of the FLSA is that employers must pay higher wages for over-
time, defi ned as hours worked beyond 40 hours per week. The overtime rate under the 
FLSA is one and a half times the employee’s usual hourly rate, including any bonuses 
and piece-rate payments (amounts paid per item produced). The overtime rate applies 
to the hours worked beyond 40 in one week. Time worked includes not only hours 
spent on production or sales but also time on such activities as attending required 
classes, cleaning up the work site, or traveling between work sites. Figure 12.2 shows 
how this applies to an employee who works 50 hours to earn a base rate of $12 per 
hour plus a weekly bonus of $40. The overtime pay is based on the base pay ($480) plus 
the bonus ($40), for a rate of $13.00 per hour. For each of the 10 hours of overtime, 
the employee would earn $19.50, so the overtime pay is $195.00 ($19.50 times 10). 
When employees are paid per unit produced or when they receive a monthly or quar-
terly bonus, those payments must be converted into wages per hour, so that the em-
ployer can include these amounts when fi guring the correct overtime rate.
Overtime pay is required, whether or not the employer specifi cally asked or ex-
pected the employee to work more than 40 hours. In other words, if the employer 
knows the employee is working overtime but does not pay time and a half, the em-
ployer may be violating the FLSA.
Not everyone is eligible for overtime pay. Under the FLSA, executive, professional, 
administrative, and highly compensated white-collar employees are considered exempt 
employees, meaning employers need not pay them one and a half times their regular 
pay for working more than 40 hours per week. Exempt status depends on the employee’s 
job responsibilities, salary level (at least $455 per week), and “salary basis,” meaning that 
the employee is paid a given amount regardless of the number of hours worked or 
Exempt Employees
Managers, outside sales-
people, and any other 
employees not covered 
by the FLSA requirement 
for overtime pay.
Figure 12.2
Computing Overtime 
Pay

371
quality of the work.7 Paying an employee on a salary basis means the organization ex-
pects that this person can manage his or her own time to get the work done, so the em-
ployer may deduct from the employee’s pay only in certain limited circumstances, such 
as disciplinary action or for unpaid leave for personal reasons. Additional exceptions 
apply to certain occupations, including outside salespersons, teachers, and computer 
professionals (if they earn at least $27.63 per hour). Thus, the standards are fairly com-
plicated. For more details about the standards for exempt employees, contact the Labor 
Department’s Wage and Hour Division or refer to its website at www.dol.gov/whd.
Any employee who is not in one of the exempt categories is called a nonexempt 
employee. Most workers paid on an hourly basis are nonexempt and therefore subject 
to the laws governing overtime pay. However, paying a salary does not necessarily 
mean a job is exempt. The “HR Oops!” describes some problems that have arisen 
when employers failed to properly identify and pay workers who should have been 
classifi ed as nonexempt.
Child Labor
In the early years of the Industrial Revolution, employers could pay low wages by hiring 
children. The FLSA now sharply restricts the use of child labor, with the aim of pro-
tecting children’s health, safety, and educational opportunities.8 The restrictions apply 
to children younger than 18. Under the FLSA, children aged 16 and 17 may not be 
Nonexempt Employees
Employees covered by 
the FLSA requirements 
for overtime pay.
The Labor Department recently re-
quired two Texas companies to pay 
workers back wages for overtime. 
An investigation by the Wage and 
Hour Division found that a construc-
tion company had failed to account 
for all of its workers’ hours in deter-
mining their eligibility to be paid at 
one and a half times their regular 
rates. The company was supposed 
to count all of workers’ scheduled 
and unscheduled hours, including 
the time spent traveling to and from 
work sites, between the times they 
started and ended the workday. 
However, when unscheduled hours 
such as travel time exceeded the 
40-hour workweek, the company 
did not count those hours and pay 
the workers at time and a half.
At a fi rm that provides mainte-
nance and construction services to 
an oil and gas refi nery, the problem 
was that the company told managers 
they would be paid a salary, but then 
the company actually paid the man-
agers on an hourly basis, at least 
when it benefi ted the company. If 
a manager worked less than a 40-
hour workweek, the company paid 
the manager at an hourly rate to-
taling less than the full-time salary. 
However, if a manager worked more 
than 50 hours, the company did not 
pay the manager for overtime. The 
managers could have qualifi ed as 
exempt because they were perform-
ing managerial duties, but for the 
company to apply that classifi ca-
tion legally, it had to pay them a fl at 
rather than an hourly amount.
Questions
 1. How could the construction 
company in the fi rst 
example have met the legal 
requirements for overtime pay?
 2. How could the services fi rm in 
the second example have met 
the requirements for overtime 
pay?
Sources: Adair Buckner, “Overtime Pay 
Mistakes Make DOL News Releases 
for Two Texas Panhandle Employers,” 
Adair M. Buckner Attorney at Law Legal 
Blog, March 29, 2013, http://www.
adairbuckner.com; U.S. Department of 
Labor Wage and Hour Division, “Austin 
Industrial Services LP in Borger, Texas, 
Pays More than $214,000 in Overtime 
Back Wages to 13 Employees follow-
ing US Labor Department Investiga-
tion,” news release, February 6, 2013, 
http://www.dol.gov; U.S. Department 
of Labor Wage and Hour Division, “Di-
versifi ed Interiors of Amarillo, Texas, 
Pays 63 Employees More than $76,000 
in Overtime Back Wages following US 
Department of Labor Investigation,” 
news release, January 22, 2013, http://
www.dol.gov.
Overlooking Overtime
HR Oops!

372 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
employed in hazardous occupations defi ned by the Department of Labor, such as min-
ing, meatpacking, and certain kinds of manufacturing using heavy machinery. Children 
aged 14 and 15 may work only outside school hours in jobs defi ned as nonhazardous 
and for limited time periods. A child under age 14 may not be employed in any work 
associated with interstate commerce, except work performed in a nonhazardous job for 
a business entirely owned by the child’s parent or guardian. A few additional exemptions 
from this ban include acting, babysitting, and delivering newspapers to consumers.
Besides the FLSA, state laws also restrict the use of child labor. Many states have 
laws requiring working papers or work permits for minors, and many states restrict the 
number of hours or times of day that minors aged 16 and older may work. Before hir-
ing any workers under the age of 18, employers must ensure they are complying with 
the child labor laws of their state, as well as the FLSA requirements for their industry.
Prevailing Wages
Two additional federal laws, the Davis-Bacon Act of 1931 and the Walsh-Healy Public 
Contracts Act of 1936, govern pay policies of federal contractors. Under these laws, 
federal contractors must pay their employees at rates at least equal to the prevailing 
wages in the area. The calculation of prevailing rates must be based on 30% of the 
local labor force. Typically, the rates are based on relevant union contracts. Pay earned 
by union members tends to be higher than the pay of nonunion workers in similar 
jobs, so the effect of these laws is to raise the lower limit of pay an employer can offer.
These laws do not cover all companies. Davis-Bacon covers construction contrac-
tors that receive more than $2,000 in federal money. Walsh-Healy covers all govern-
ment contractors receiving $10,000 or more in federal funds.
Economic Influences on Pay
An organization cannot make spending decisions independent of the economy. 
 Organizations must keep costs low enough that they can sell their products profi tably, 
yet they must be able to attract workers in a competitive labor market. Decisions about 
how to respond to the economic forces of product markets and labor markets limit an 
organization’s choices about pay structure.
Product Markets
The organization’s product market includes organizations that offer competing goods 
and services. In other words, the organizations in a product market are competing to 
serve the same customers. To succeed in their product markets, organizations must be 
able to sell their goods and services at a quantity and price that will bring them a suf-
fi cient profi t. They may try to win customers by being superior in a number of areas, 
including quality, customer service, and price. An important infl uence on price is the 
cost to produce the goods and services for sale. As we mentioned earlier, the cost of 
labor is a signifi cant part of an organization’s costs.
If an organization’s labor costs are higher than those of its competitors, it will be 
under pressure to charge more than competitors charge for similar products. If one 
company spends $50 in labor costs to make a product and its competitor spends only 
$35, the second company will be more profi table unless the fi rst company can justify a 
higher price to customers. This is one reason U.S. automakers have had diffi culty com-
peting against Japanese companies. The labor-related expenses per vehicle for a U.S. 
company have been $700 higher than for Japanese carmakers operating in the United 
LO 12-3 Discuss how 
economic forces inﬂ u-
ence decisions about 
pay.

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 373
States. Recently, U.S. automakers have been able to reduce labor costs, partly by hiring 
new workers at lower wages, down to an average of $58 per hour. This is still somewhat 
above Toyota and Honda’s $52 per hour and far above the average $27 per hour that 
Volkswagen is paying workers to build Volkswagen Passats at its plant in Tennessee.9
Product markets place an upper limit on the pay an organization will offer. This 
upper limit is most important when labor costs are a large part of an organization’s 
total costs and when the organization’s customers place great importance on price. 
Organizations that want to lure top-quality employees by offering generous salaries 
therefore have to fi nd ways to automate routine activities (so that labor is a smaller part 
of total costs) or to persuade customers that high quality is worth a premium price. 
Organizations under pressure to cut labor costs may respond by reducing staff levels, 
freezing pay levels, postponing hiring decisions, or requiring employees to bear more 
of the cost of benefi ts such as insurance premiums.
Labor Markets
Besides competing to sell their products, organizations must compete to obtain human 
resources in labor markets. In general, workers prefer higher-paying jobs and avoid 
employers that offer less money for the same type of job. In this way, competition for 
labor establishes the minimum an organization must pay to hire an employee for a 
particular job. If an organization pays less than the minimum, employees will look for 
jobs with other organizations.
An organization’s competitors in labor markets typically include companies with 
similar products and companies in other industries that hire similar employees. For 
example, a truck transportation fi rm would want to know the pay earned by truck 
drivers at competing fi rms as well as truck drivers for manufacturers that do their 
own shipping, drivers for moving and storage companies, and drivers for stores that 
provide delivery services. In setting pay levels for its bookkeepers and administra-
tive assistants, the company would probably defi ne its labor market differently be-
cause bookkeepers and administrative assistants work for most kinds of businesses. 
The company would likely look for data on the earnings of bookkeepers and admin-
istrative assistants in the region. For all these jobs, the company wants to know what 
others are paying so that it will pay enough to attract and keep qualifi ed employees. 
The “Did You Know?” box compares average pay 
levels for some broad occupational  categories in 
the United States.
Another infl uence on labor markets is the cost of 
living—the cost of a household’s typical expenses, 
such as house payments, groceries, medical care, 
and gasoline. In some parts of the country, the 
cost of living is higher than in others, so the local 
labor markets there will likely demand higher pay. 
Also, over time, the cost of living tends to rise. 
When the cost of living is rising rapidly, labor 
markets demand pay increases. The federal gov-
ernment tracks trends in the nation’s cost of living 
with a measure called the Consumer Price Index 
(CPI). Following and studying changes in the CPI 
can help employers prepare for changes in the 
 demands of the labor market.
 There is a strong demand for nurses in the labor market. What this 
means for hospitals is that they have to pay competitive wages and 
other perks to attract and retain staff. How does this differ from the 
airline industry’s current labor market? 

374
Pay Level: Deciding What to Pay
Although labor and product markets limit organizations’ choices about pay levels, 
there is a range within which organizations can make decisions.10 The size of this 
range depends on the details of the organization’s competitive environment. If many 
workers are competing for a few jobs, employers will have more choice. Similarly, em-
ployers can be more fl exible about pay policies if they use technology and work design 
to get better results from employees than their competitors do.
When organizations have a broad range in which to make decisions about pay, they 
can choose to pay at, above, or below the rate set by market forces. Economic theory 
Did You Know?
Looking at broad occupational cat-
egories, the highest pay goes to 
managers, followed by experts in 
computers and mathematics. The 
lowest-paid occupational groups in-
volve agriculture and services (per-
sonal care and food preparation and 
service).
The pay rates shown in the graph 
are for the median worker in each 
category (half the workers earn more, 
and half earn less). However, keep in 
mind that the range of earnings for an 
occupational category may be great. 
In sales, for example, median earn-
ings range as low as $9.12 an hour 
for cashiers and as high as $45.14 for 
sales engineers. The overall median 
is low because there are many more 
cashiers than sales engineers.
Question
 If a company were to hire a new 
human resource manager, would 
the $45.96 hourly fi gure shown here 
for management be an appropriate 
rate of pay? Why or why not?
Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
“Occupational Employment and Wages, 
May 2013,” news release, April 1, 2014, 
http://www.bls.gov; Bureau of Labor Sta-
tistics, “May 2013 National Occupational 
Employment and Wage Estimates,” Oc-
cupational Employment Statistics, http://
data.bls.gov.
Management, Professional, Computer Occupations 
Are the Highest Paid
Median Hourly Wages
Management
Computer and
mathematical
Legal
Architecture and
engineering
Sales and related
Personal care
and service
Farming, ﬁshing,
and forestry
Food preparation
and serving
$0
$10.00
$20.00
$30.00
$40.00
$50.00

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 375
holds that the most profi table level, all things being equal, would be at the market 
rate. Often, however, all things are not equal from one employer to another. For 
 instance, an organization may gain an advantage by paying above the market rate if 
it uses the higher pay as one means to attract top talent and then uses these excellent 
employees’ knowledge to be more innovative, produce higher quality, or work more 
effi ciently. For example, in the highly competitive world of information technology, 
Google, Amazon, Microsoft, and Apple try to get and keep the best people by paying 
salaries far above market rates.11 This pay policy leaves smaller high-tech companies 
with less cash to offer at a disadvantage in the competition for talent.
This approach is based on the view of employees as resources. Higher pay may 
be an investment in superior human resources. Having higher labor costs than your 
competitors is not necessarily bad if you also have the best and most effective work-
force, which produces more products of better quality. Pay policies are one of the most 
important human resource tools for encouraging desired employee behaviors and dis-
couraging undesired behaviors. Therefore, organizations must evaluate pay as more 
than a cost—it is an investment that can generate returns in attracting, retaining, and 
motivating a high-quality workforce. For this reason, paying above the going rate may 
be advantageous for an organization that empowers employees or that cannot closely 
watch employees (as with repair technicians who travel to customers). Those employ-
ers might use high pay to attract and retain top candidates and to motivate them to do 
their best because they want to keep their high-paying jobs.12
Gathering Information about Market Pay
To compete for talent, organizations use benchmarking, a procedure in which an 
organization compares its own practices against those of successful competitors. In 
terms of compensation, benchmarking involves the use of pay surveys. These provide 
information about the going rates of pay at competitors in the organization’s product 
and labor markets. An organization can conduct its own surveys, but the federal gov-
ernment and other organizations make a great deal of data available already.
Pay surveys are available for many kinds of industries (product markets) and jobs (labor 
markets). The primary collector of this kind of data in the United States is the Bureau 
of Labor Statistics, which conducts an ongoing National Compensation Survey measur-
ing wages, salaries, and benefi ts paid to the nation’s employees. The “HR How To” box 
provides guidelines for using the BLS website as a source of wage data. Besides the BLS, 
the most widely used sources of compensation information include HR organizations 
such as WorldatWork and the Society for Human Resource Management.13 In addition, 
many organizations, especially large ones, purchase data from consulting groups such as 
Mercer, Towers Watson, and Hewitt. Consulting fi rms charge for the service but can 
tailor data to their clients’ needs. Employers also should investigate what compensation 
surveys are available from any industry or trade groups their company belongs to.
Human resource professionals need to determine whether to gather data focusing on 
particular industries or on job categories. Industry-specifi c data are especially relevant for 
jobs with skills that are specifi c to the type of product. For jobs with skills that can be trans-
ferred to companies in other industries, surveys of job classifi cations will be more relevant.
Employee Judgments about Pay Fairness
In developing a pay structure, it is important to keep in mind employees’ opinions 
about fairness. After all, one of the purposes of pay is to motivate employees, and they 
will not be motivated by pay if they think it is unfair.
Benchmarking
A procedure in which an 
organization compares 
its own practices against 
those of successful 
competitors.
LO 12-4 Describe how 
employees evaluate 
the fairness of a pay 
structure.

376
Judging Fairness
Employees evaluate their pay relative to the pay of other employees. Social scien-
tists have studied this kind of comparison and developed equity theory to describe how 
people make judgments about fairness.14 According to equity theory, people measure 
outcomes such as pay in terms of their inputs. For example, an employee might think 
of her pay in terms of her master’s degree, her 12 years of experience, and her 60-hour 
workweeks. To decide whether a level of pay is equitable, the person compares her 
ratio of outcomes and inputs with other people’s outcome/input ratios, as shown in 
Figure 12.3. The person in the previous example might notice that an employee with 
less education or experience is earning more than she is (unfair) or that an employee 
who works 80 hours a week is earning more (fair). In general, employees compare their 
pay and contributions against several yardsticks:
 • What they think employees in other organizations earn for doing the same job.
 • What they think other employees holding different jobs within the organization 
earn for doing work at the same or different levels.
 • What they think other employees in the organization earn for doing the same job 
as theirs.
A convenient source of data on 
hourly wages is the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics (BLS). This federal agency 
makes data available at its website 
on an interactive basis. The data 
come from the BLS’s National Com-
pensation Survey. The user speci-
fi es the category of data desired, 
and the BLS provides tables of data 
almost instantly. Here’s how to use 
the BLS system.
Visit the Data Tools page of the 
BLS website (www.bls.gov/data/), 
and click on the link to Pay and Ben-
efi ts. Find the options offered for 
the National Compensation Survey 
(NCS). The multiscreen search asks 
you to specify one search category 
at a time, then click to open the next 
screen.
After you select Multi-Screen 
Data Search for NCS, the sys-
tem presents you with a window 
in which to select either the entire 
United States or a single state. Click 
to highlight your choice and then 
click on Next Form. If you choose 
United States, your next choice is a 
Census region of the country; if you 
choose a state, the next option is a 
metropolitan region of the state.
On the next screen, select the 
occupation you wish to research. 
The survey data cover hundreds 
of occupations, grouped into more 
general categories. For example, at 
the most specifi c level, you could 
look at civil engineers. More broadly, 
you could look at all engineers, or 
at the larger grouping of architec-
ture and engineering occupations. 
You should select the most specifi c 
grouping that covers the occupation 
you want to investigate.
After selecting an occupation, 
select a work level. This describes 
the level of such work features as 
knowledge required and the scope, 
complexity, and demands of the 
job. For instance, you could look 
only at data for entry-level or se-
nior accountants, rather than all 
accountants. Some occupations, 
including artists, athletes, and an-
nouncers, are not classifi ed by work 
level.
Click on the Retrieve Data link to 
submit the request to the BLS. The 
system immediately processes the 
request and presents the table (or 
tables) on your computer screen.
Questions
 1. If you wanted to hire an 
accountant to work in New 
York City, would you search the 
database for wages in the New 
York City metropolitan area or 
for the whole state? Why?
 2. Why might your employer 
decide to pay the accountant 
it hires a different amount 
than the median pay reported 
for accountants in the BLS 
database?
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Data-
bases, Tables and Calculators by Subject,” 
http://data.bls.gov, accessed July 1, 2014.
Gathering Wage Data at the BLS Website
HR How To

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 377
Employees’ conclusions about equity depend on what they choose as a standard of 
comparison. The results can be surprising. For example, some organizations have set 
up two-tier wage systems as a way to cut labor costs without cutting employees’ exist-
ing salaries. Typically, employers announce these programs as a way to avoid moving 
jobs out of the country or closing down altogether. In a two-tier wage system, existing 
employees continue on at their current (upper-tier) pay rate while new employees 
sign on for less pay (the lower tier). One might expect reaction among employees in 
the lower tier that the pay structure is unfair. But a study of these employees found 
that they were more satisfi ed than the top-tier employees.15 The lower-tier employees 
were not comparing their pay with that of the upper-tier employees but with the other 
alternatives they saw for themselves: lower-paying jobs or unemployment.
The ways employees respond to their impressions about equity can have a great 
impact on the organization. Typically, if employees see their pay as equitable, their 
attitudes and behavior continue unchanged. If employees see themselves as receiving 
an advantage, they usually rethink the situation to see it as merely equitable. But if 
employees conclude that they are underrewarded, they are likely to make up the dif-
ference in one of three ways. They might put forth less effort (reducing their inputs), 
fi nd a way to increase their outcomes (for example, stealing), or withdraw by leaving 
the organization or refusing to cooperate. Employees’ beliefs about fairness also infl u-
ence their willingness to accept transfers or promotions. For example, if a job change 
involves more work, employees will expect higher pay.
Communicating Fairness
Equity theory tells organizations that employees care about their pay relative to what 
others are earning and that these feelings are based on what the employees perceive
(what they notice and form judgments about). An organization can do much to con-
tribute to what employees know and, as a result, what they perceive. If the organiza-
tion researches salary levels and concludes that it is paying its employees generously, it 
should communicate this. If the employees do not know what the organization learned 
from its research, they may reach an entirely different conclusion about their pay. 
Conversely, a female nurse who is satisfi ed with earning $50,000 a year—the average 
for a woman in nursing in 2011—might change her mind if she learns that a male 
coworker earns $60,000, the average for a male in the same position that year.16 Em-
ployers should recognize that as work becomes more collaborative and the emphasis 
on knowledge sharing increases, it grows ever more likely that the shared knowledge 
Figure 12.3
Opinions about 
Fairness: Pay Equity
My
outcomes/inputs
Your
outcomes/inputs
Equity: Pay Seems Fair
My
outcomes/inputs
Inequity: Pay Seems Unfair
Your
outcomes/inputs

378
includes information about pay. The “HRM Social” box discusses how social media is 
contributing to this trend.
Employers must also recognize that employees know much more about what other 
employers pay now than they did before the Internet became popular. In the past, 
when gathering wage and salary data was expensive and diffi cult, employers had more 
leeway in negotiating with individual employees. Today’s employees can go to websites 
like jobstar.org or salary.com to fi nd hundreds of links to wage and salary data. For a 
fee, executive search fi rms such as Korn/Ferry provide data. Resources like these give 
employees information about what other workers are earning, along with the expecta-
tion that information will be shared. This means employers will face increased pres-
sure to clearly explain their pay policies.
Managers play the most signifi cant role in communication because they interact 
with their employees each day. The HR department should prepare them to explain 
why the organization’s pay structure is designed as it is and to judge whether employee 
concerns about the structure indicate a need for change. A common issue is whether 
to reclassify a job because its content has changed. If an employee takes on more re-
sponsibility, the employee will often ask the manager for help in seeking more pay for 
the job.
Young workers especially are used 
to the idea of sharing details about 
their lives on social media. For 
someone who has that comfort level 
with sharing, it makes no sense to 
keep quiet about earnings. Some 
people remain concerned that talk-
ing about money is impolite and can 
cause envy, but others have been 
revealing their pay. They get encour-
agement to do that—anonymously, 
for now—on job-reviewing websites 
such as Glassdoor.
Most employers prefer the long-
standing taboo against discussing 
pay. Many point to concern that 
employees whose pay is at or below 
coworkers’ earnings will become 
dissatisfi ed. Some think it strength-
ens their hand in negotiations with 
employees.
Despite these concerns, em-
ployers are limited in what they can 
do about the trend toward sharing 
pay information. Under the National 
Labor Relations Act, discussed in 
Chapter 15, employers may not 
forbid non-management employ-
ees from talking to each other about 
their earnings. That right does not 
extend to conversations with peo-
ple outside the company. But as a 
practical matter, it is diffi cult and 
perhaps impossible or unethical to 
police everything employees post 
on their personal social networks.
Therefore, companies are tol-
erating the sharing of pay informa-
tion. Some are even jumping on 
the transparency bandwagon. For 
example, SumAll, a New York fi rm 
that provides clients with data ana-
lytics services, freely discloses pay 
scales and individual salaries, on 
the grounds that it creates a more 
open, effi cient culture. Another ap-
proach, of course, is to offer at-
tractive levels of pay and enjoy the 
positive attention. For example, 
Glassdoor recently reported that 
Google and Costco employees rate 
their satisfaction with pay higher 
than employees at other compa-
nies. Although Google pays much 
more than Costco, both companies 
pay generously for their respective 
industry.
Questions
 1. How would a trend toward 
sharing salary information on 
social media affect a company 
that has a below-market 
strategy for setting pay levels?
 2. How would this trend affect a 
company that has a strategy of 
setting pay levels at the market 
rate?
Sources: Katie Roof, “Employees Satis-
fi ed with Pay at Google and Costco,” Fox 
Business, May 23, 2014, http://www.fox-
business.com; Lauren Weber and Rachel 
Emma Silverman, “Workers Share Their 
Salary Secrets,” The Wall Street Journal, 
April 16, 2013, http://online.wsj.com; 
Rachel Cromidas, “The Thing We’re Still 
Uncomfortable Sharing Online,” RedEye, 
March 3, 2014, http://articles.redeyechi-
cago.com; Jenny Tsay, “Legal to Prohibit 
Employees from Discussing Salary?” Free 
Enterprise (FindLaw blog), December 19, 
2013, http://blogs.fi ndlaw.com. 
Salary Talk Is Trending
HRM Social

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 379
Job Structure: Relative Value of Jobs
Along with market forces and principles of fairness, organizations consider the rela-
tive contribution each job should make to the organization’s overall performance. In 
general, an organization’s top executives have a great impact on the organization’s 
performance, so they tend to be paid much more than entry-level workers. Executives 
at the same level of the organization—for example, the vice president of marketing and 
the vice president of information systems—tend to be paid similar amounts. Creation 
of a pay structure requires that the organization develop an internal structure showing 
the relative contribution of its various jobs.
One typical way of doing this is with a job evaluation, an administrative procedure 
for measuring the relative worth of the organization’s jobs. Usually, the organization 
does this by assembling and training a job evaluation committee, consisting of people 
familiar with the jobs to be evaluated. The committee often includes a human resource 
specialist and, if its budget permits, may hire an outside consultant.
To conduct a job evaluation, the committee identifi es each job’s compensable factors, 
meaning the characteristics of a job that the organization values and chooses to pay 
for. As shown in Table 12.1, an organization might value the experience and educa-
tion of people performing computer-related jobs, as well as the complexity of those 
jobs. Other compensable factors might include working conditions and responsibility. 
Based on the job attributes defi ned by job analysis (discussed in Chapter 4), the jobs 
are rated for each factor. The rater assigns each factor a certain 
number of points, giving more points to factors when they are 
considered more important and when the job requires a high 
level of that factor. Often the number of points comes from one 
of the point manuals published by trade groups and management 
consultants. If necessary, the organization can adapt the scores 
in the point manual to the organization’s situation or even de-
velop its own point manual. As in the example in Table 12.1, the 
scores for each factor are totaled to arrive at an overall evalua-
tion for each job.
Job evaluations provide the basis for decisions about rela-
tive internal worth. According to the sample assessments in 
Table  12.1, the job of systems analyst is worth almost twice 
as much to this organization as the job of computer operator. 
Therefore, the organization would be willing to pay almost twice 
as much for the work of a systems analyst as it would for the 
work of a computer operator.
The organization may limit its pay survey to jobs evaluated as 
key jobs. These are jobs that have relatively stable content and are 
common among many organizations, so it is possible to obtain 
survey data about what people earn in these jobs. Organizations 
LO 12-5 Explain how 
organizations design pay 
structures related to jobs.
Job Evaluation
An administrative proce-
dure for measuring the 
relative internal worth of 
the organization’s jobs.
COMPENSABLE FACTORS
JOB TITLE
EXPERIENCE
EDUCATION
COMPLEXITY
TOTAL
Computer operator
40
30
40
110
Computer programmer
40
50
65
155
Systems analyst
65
60
85
210
Table 12.1
Job Evaluation of Three 
Jobs with Three Factors
Popular actors, such as Leonardo DiCaprio, are evalu-
ated by their impact on box offi ce receipts and other 
revenues and then compensated based on these 
evaluations.

380 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
can make the process of creating a pay structure more practical by defi ning key jobs. 
Research for creating the pay structure is limited to the key jobs that play a signifi cant 
role in the organization. Pay for the key jobs can be based on survey data, and pay for 
the organization’s other jobs can be based on the organization’s job structure. A job 
with a higher evaluation score than a particular key job would receive higher pay than 
that key job.
Pay Structure: Putting It All Together
As we described in the fi rst section of this chapter, the pay structure refl ects decisions 
about how much to pay (pay level) and the relative value of each job (job structure). 
The organization’s pay structure should refl ect what the organization knows about 
market forces, as well as its own unique goals and the relative contribution of each 
job to achieving the goals. By balancing this external and internal information, the 
organization’s goal is to set levels of pay that employees will consider equitable and 
motivating.
Organizations typically apply the information by establishing some combination 
of pay rates, pay grades, and pay ranges. Within this structure, they may state the pay 
in terms of a rate per hour, commonly called an hourly wage; a rate of pay for each 
unit produced, known as a piecework rate; or a rate of pay per month or year, called 
a salary.
Pay Rates
If the organization’s main concern is to match what people are earning in comparable 
jobs, the organization can base pay directly on market research of as many of its key 
jobs as possible. To do this, the organization looks for survey data for each job title. If it 
fi nds data from more than one survey, it must weight the results based on their quality 
and relevance. The fi nal number represents what the competition pays. In light of that 
knowledge, the organization decides what it will pay for the job.
The next step is to determine salaries for the nonkey jobs, for which the organiza-
tion has no survey data. Instead, the person developing the pay structure creates a 
graph like the one in Figure 12.4. The vertical axis shows a range of possible pay rates, 
and the horizontal axis measures the points from the job evaluation. The analyst plots 
points according to the job evaluation and pay rate for each key job. Finally, the  analyst 
fi ts a line, called a pay policy line, to the points plotted. (This can be done  statistically 
on a computer, using a procedure called regression analysis.) Mathematically, this line 
shows the relationship between job evaluation and rate of pay. Thus, the line slopes 
upward from left to right, and if higher-level jobs are especially valuable to the organi-
zation, the line may curve upward to indicate even greater pay for high-level jobs. 
Using this line, the analyst can estimate the market pay level for a given job evaluation. 
Looking at the graph will give approximate numbers, or the regression analysis will 
provide an equation for calculating the rate of pay. For example, using the pay policy 
line in Figure 12.4, a job with 315 evaluation points would have a predicted salary of 
$6,486 per month.
The pay policy line refl ects the pay structure in the market, which does not always 
match rates in the organization (see key job F in Figure 12.4). Survey data may show 
that people in certain jobs are actually earning signifi cantly more or less than the 
amount shown on the pay policy line. For example, some kinds of expertise are in short 
supply. People with that expertise can command higher salaries because they can easily 
Hourly Wage
Rate of pay for each hour 
worked.
Piecework Rate
Rate of pay for each unit 
produced.
Salary
Rate of pay for each 
week, month, or year 
worked.
Pay Policy Line
A graphed line show-
ing the mathematical 
relationship between job 
evaluation points and 
pay rate.

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 381
leave one employer to get higher pay somewhere else. Suppose, in contrast, that local 
businesses have laid off many warehouse employees. Because so many of these workers 
are looking for jobs, organizations may be able to pay them less than the rate that job 
evaluation points would suggest.
When job structure and market data confl ict in these ways, organizations have to de-
cide on a way to resolve the two. One approach is to stick to the job evaluations and pay 
according to the employees’ worth to the organization. Organizations that do so will be 
paying more or less than they have to, so they will likely have more diffi culty competing 
for customers or employees. A way to moderate this approach is to consider the impor-
tance of each position to the organization’s goals.17 If a position is critical for meeting 
the organization’s goals, paying more than competitors pay may be worthwhile.
At the other extreme, the organization could base pay entirely on market forces. 
However, this approach also has some practical drawbacks. One is that employees may 
conclude that pay rates are unfair. Two vice presidents or two supervisors will expect to 
receive similar pay because their responsibilities are similar. If the differences between 
their pay are large, because of different market rates, the lower-paid employee will likely 
be dissatisfi ed. Also, if the organization’s development plans include rotating managers 
through different assignments, the managers will be reluctant to participate if managers 
in some departments receive lower pay. Organizations therefore must weigh all the objec-
tives of their pay structure to arrive at suitable rates. For an example of a company that 
balanced fairness and market forces in making pay decisions, see the “Best Practices” box.
Pay Grades
A large organization could have hundreds or even thousands of different jobs. Setting 
a pay rate for each job would be extremely complex. Therefore, many organizations 
group jobs into pay grades—sets of jobs having similar worth or content, grouped 
together to establish rates of pay. For example, the organization could establish fi ve 
pay grades, with the same pay available to employees holding any job within the same 
grade.
Pay Grades
Sets of jobs having 
similar worth or content, 
grouped together to es-
tablish rates of pay.
Figure 12.4
Pay Policy Lines
Job Evaluation Points
Monthly Salary

382
A drawback of pay grades is that grouping jobs will result in rates of pay for individual 
jobs that do not precisely match the levels specifi ed by the market and the organization’s 
job structure. Suppose, for example, that the organization groups together its senior ac-
countants (with a job evaluation of 255 points) and its senior systems analysts (with a job 
evaluation of 270 points). Surveys might show that the market rate of pay for systems 
analysts is higher than that for accountants. In addition, the job evaluations give more 
points to systems analysts. Even so, for simplicity’s sake, the organization pays the same 
rate for the two jobs because they are in the same pay grade. The organization would have 
to pay more than the market requires for accountants or pay less than the market rate for 
systems analysts (so it would probably have diffi culty recruiting and retaining them).
Pay Ranges
Usually, organizations want some fl exibility in setting pay for individual jobs. They 
want to be able to pay the most valuable employees the highest amounts and to give 
rewards for performance, as described in the next chapter. Flexibility also helps the 
organization balance confl icting information from market surveys and job evaluations. 
Therefore, pay structure usually includes a pay range for each job or pay grade. In 
other words, the organization establishes a minimum, maximum, and midpoint of pay 
Pay Range
A set of possible pay 
rates deﬁ ned by a mini-
mum, maximum, and 
midpoint of pay for em-
ployees holding a par-
ticular job or a job within 
a particular pay grade.
Parkland Health and Hospital Sys-
tem, located in Dallas, has about 
230 employees earning its lowest 
rate of pay. Most of these employ-
ees hold positions in dietary, envi-
ronmental, and linen services. Until 
recently, they were earning $8.78 an 
hour, which is above the Texas mini-
mum wage of $7.25 per hour (equal 
to the federal minimum wage).
Parkland Health has a new top-
management team, which has been 
leading a turnaround since a manage-
ment shakeup in response to federal 
government criticism of quality and 
safety at its facilities. As part of that 
effort, Parkland’s leaders considered 
how they could improve employee 
morale. They identifi ed entry-level 
wages as a place to start because 
$8.78 is less than a “living wage.” The 
executives decided to raise the low-
est pay rate to $10.25 per hour. Em-
ployees already earning more than 
$8.78 would see their wages boosted 
so they continue making more than 
the lowest rate at Parkland.
Parkland estimated that the 
wage increase in the fi rst year 
would cost $350,000. To fi nd the 
money to cover this, the execu-
tive team looked at the funds bud-
geted for their bonuses, to be paid 
if they met specifi c goals. Parkland 
expected that in the next quarter, 
its top 60 executives would divide 
up $750,000 to $1.2 million among 
themselves. The executives agreed 
that the additional entry-level pay 
could be taken from those funds. 
They would accept smaller  bonuses 
as a way to motivate their entry-
level workers. Jim Dunn, Parkland’s 
chief talent offi cer, said the deci-
sion is a way to “break down any 
gaps or anything between the top 
leaders and those who are closest 
to our patients,” adding, “We feel 
like it’s the right thing to do.”
Questions
 1. How do you predict these 
pay rate changes at 
Parkland Health will affect its 
performance?
 2. Do you agree with Jim Dunn’s 
assertion that these pay 
decisions were “the right thing 
to do”? Why or why not?
Sources: Bryce Covert, “Hospital Uses 
Executive Bonus Money to Give Its Work-
ers a Raise,” Think Progress, June 16, 
2014, http://thinkprogress.org; Bob 
Herman, “Parkland Health to Boost Its 
Minimum Wage, Funded by Exec Bonus 
Pool,” Modern Healthcare, June 12, 
2014, http://www.modernhealthcare
.com; Sherry Jacobson, “Parkland 
Offi cials Recommend Entry-Level Pay 
Boost to $10.25 an Hour,” Dallas News, 
June 11, 2014, http://thecoopblog
.dallasnews.com.
Parkland Health Rethinks Entry-Level Pay Rates
Best Practices

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 383
for employees holding a particular job or a job within a particular pay grade.  Employees 
holding the same job may receive somewhat different pay, depending on where their 
pay falls within the range.
A typical approach is to use the market rate or the pay policy line as the midpoint 
of a range for the job or pay grade. The minimum and maximum values for the range 
may also be based on market surveys of those amounts. Pay ranges are most common 
for white-collar jobs and for jobs that are not covered by union contracts. Figure 12.5 
shows an example of pay ranges based on the pay policy line in Figure 12.4. Notice 
that the jobs are grouped into fi ve pay grades, each with its own pay range. In this ex-
ample, the range is widest for employees who are at higher levels in terms of their job 
evaluation points. That is because the performance of these higher-level employees 
will likely have more effect on the organization’s performance, so the organization 
needs more latitude to reward them. For instance, as discussed earlier, the organiza-
tion may want to select a higher point in the range to attract an employee who is more 
critical to achieving the organization’s goals.
Usually pay ranges overlap somewhat, so that the highest pay in one grade is somewhat 
higher than the lowest pay in the next grade. Overlapping ranges gives the organization 
more fl exibility in transferring employees among jobs, because transfers need not always 
involve a change in pay. On the other hand, the less overlap, the more important it is to 
earn promotions in order to keep getting raises. Assuming the organization wants to mo-
tivate employees through promotions (and assuming enough opportunities for promotion 
are available), the organization will want to limit the overlap from one level to the next.
Pay Differentials
In some situations organizations adjust pay to refl ect differences in working conditions or 
labor markets. For example, an organization may pay extra to employees who work the 
night shift because night hours are less desirable for most workers. Similarly, organizations 
may pay extra to employees in locations where living expenses are higher. These adjust-
ments are called pay differentials.
Pay Differential
Adjustment to a pay rate 
to reﬂ ect differences in 
working conditions or 
labor markets.
Figure 12.5
Sample Pay Grade 
Structure
Job Evaluation Points
Monthly Salary
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
$9,000
1,000
110
130
Current pay for job
Pay policy line
150
170
190
210
230
250
270
290
310
A B
C
F
G
I
J
L
K
N

384 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
A survey of businesses in the United States found that almost 
three-quarters have a policy of providing pay differentials based 
on geographic location.18 These differentials are intended as a 
way to treat employees fairly without regard to where they work. 
The most common approach is to move an employee higher in 
the pay structure to compensate for higher living costs. For in-
stance, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average 
human resource manager earns $100,780 in Huntsville, Alabama, 
and $122,010 in the Boston area. One reason could be a higher 
cost of living in Boston. This pay policy can become expensive 
for organizations that must operate in high-cost locations. Also, 
organizations need to handle the delicate issue of how to pay em-
ployees transferred to lower-cost areas.
Alternatives to Job-Based Pay
The traditional and most widely used approach to developing a pay structure focuses 
on setting pay for jobs or groups of jobs.19 This emphasis on jobs has some limita-
tions. The precise defi nition of a job’s responsibilities can contribute to an attitude that 
some activities “are not in my job description,” at the expense of fl exibility, innovation, 
quality, and customer service. Also, the job structure’s focus on higher pay for higher 
status can work against an effort at empowerment. Organizations may avoid change 
because it requires repeating the time-consuming process of creating job descriptions 
and related paperwork. Another change-related problem is that when the organization 
needs a new set of knowledge, skills, and abilities, the existing pay structure may be 
rewarding the wrong behaviors. Finally, a pay structure that rewards employees for 
winning promotions may discourage them from gaining valuable experience through 
lateral career moves.
Organizations have responded to these problems with a number of alternatives to 
job-based pay structures. Some organizations have found greater fl exibility through 
delayering, or reducing the number of levels in the organization’s job structure. By 
combining more assignments into a single layer, organizations give managers more 
fl exibility in making assignments and awarding pay increases. These broader group-
ings often are called broad bands. In the 1990s, IBM changed from a pay structure with 
5,000 job titles and 24 salary grades to one with 1,200 jobs and 10 bands. When IBM 
began using broad bands, it replaced its point-factor job evaluation system with an 
 approach based on matching jobs to descriptions. Job descriptions are assigned to the 
band whose characteristics best match those in the job description. Broad bands  reduce 
the opportunities for promoting employees, so organizations that eliminate layers in 
their job descriptions must fi nd other ways to reward employees.
Another way organizations have responded to the limitations of job-based pay has 
been to move away from the link to jobs and toward pay structures that reward employ-
ees based on their knowledge and skills.20 Skill-based pay systems are pay structures 
that set pay according to the employees’ level of skill or knowledge and what they are 
capable of doing. Paying for skills makes sense at organizations where changing technol-
ogy requires employees to continually widen and deepen their knowledge. For example, 
modern machinery often requires that operators know how to program and monitor 
computers to perform a variety of tasks. Skill-based pay also supports efforts to empower 
employees and enrich jobs because it encourages employees to add to their knowledge 
so they can make decisions in many areas. In this way, skill-based pay helps organizations 
LO 12-6 Describe 
 alternatives to job-based 
pay.
Delayering
Reducing the number of 
levels in the organiza-
tion’s job structure.
Skill-Based Pay 
Systems
Pay structures that set 
pay according to the 
employees’ levels of 
skill or knowledge and 
what they are capable 
of doing.
Night hours are less desirable for most workers. There-
fore, some companies pay a differential for night work 
to compensate them.

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 385
become more fl exible and innovative. More generally, skill-based pay can encourage a 
climate of learning and adaptability and give employees a broader view of how the orga-
nization functions. These changes should help employees use their knowledge and ideas 
more productively. A fi eld study of a manufacturing plant found that changing to a skill-
based pay structure led to better quality and lower labor costs.21
Of course, skill-based pay has its own disadvantages.22 It rewards employees for ac-
quiring skills but does not provide a way to ensure that employees can use their new skills. 
The result may be that the organization is paying employees more for learning skills that 
the employer is not benefi ting from. The challenge for HRM is to design work so that 
the work design and pay structure support each other. Also, if employees learn skills very 
quickly, they may reach the maximum pay level so quickly that it will become diffi cult to 
reward them appropriately. Skill-based pay does not necessarily provide an alternative to 
the bureaucracy and paperwork of traditional pay structures because it requires records 
related to skills, training, and knowledge acquired. Finally, gathering market data about 
skill-based pay is diffi cult because most wage and salary surveys are job-based.
Pay Structure and Actual Pay
Usually, the human resource department is responsible for establishing the organiza-
tion’s pay structure. But building a structure is not the end of the organization’s deci-
sions about pay structure. The structure represents the organization’s policy, but what 
the organization actually does may be different. As part of its management responsi-
bility, the HR department therefore should compare actual pay to the pay structure, 
making sure that policies and practices match.
A common way to do this is to measure a compa-ratio, the ratio of average pay to the 
midpoint of the pay range. Figure 12.6 shows an example. Assuming the organization 
has pay grades, the organization would fi nd a compa-ratio for each pay grade: the aver-
age paid to all employees in the pay grade divided by the midpoint for the pay grade. If 
the average equals the midpoint, the compa-ratio is 1. More often, the compa-ratio is 
somewhat above 1 (meaning the average pay is above the midpoint for the pay grade) 
or below 1 (meaning the average pay is below the midpoint).
Assuming that the pay structure is well planned to support the organization’s goals, 
the compa-ratios should be close to 1. A compa-ratio greater than 1 suggests that the 
organization is paying more than planned for human resources and may have diffi culty 
keeping costs under control. A compa-ratio less than 1 suggests that the organization is 
LO 12-7 Summarize 
how to ensure that pay is 
actually in line with the 
pay structure.
Figure 12.6
Finding a Compa-Ratio
Pay Grade: 1
Midpoint of Range: $2,175 per month
Salaries of Employees in Pay Grade
Employee 1
Employee 2
Employee 3
Employee 4
Average Salary of Employees
$2,306 + $2,066 + $2,523 + $2,414 = $9,309
$9,309 4 4 = $2,327.25
$2,306
$2,066
$2,523
$2,414
Average
Midpoint
$2,327.25
$2,175.00
=
= 1.07
Compa-Ratio

386 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
underpaying for human resources relative to its target and may have diffi culty  attracting 
and keeping qualifi ed employees. When compa-ratios are more or less than 1, the num-
bers signal a need for the HR department to work with managers to identify whether 
to adjust the pay structure or the organization’s pay practices. The compa-ratios may 
indicate that the pay structure no longer refl ects market rates of pay. Or maybe perfor-
mance appraisals need to be more accurate, as discussed in Chapter 10.
Current Issues Involving Pay Structure
An organization’s policies regarding pay structure greatly infl uence employees’ and 
even the general public’s opinions about the organization. Issues affecting pay struc-
ture therefore can hurt or help the organization’s reputation and ability to recruit, 
motivate, and keep employees. Recent issues related to pay structure include decisions 
about paying employees on active military duty and decisions about how much to pay 
the organization’s top executives.
Pay during Military Duty
As we noted in Chapter 3, the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment 
Rights Act (USERRA) requires employers to make jobs available to their workers 
when they return after fulfi lling military duties for up to fi ve years. During the time 
these employees are performing their military service, the employer faces decisions 
related to paying these people. The armed services pay service members during their 
time of duty, but military pay often falls short of what they would earn in their civilian 
jobs. Some employers have chosen to support their employees by paying the differ-
ence between their military and civilian earnings for extended periods. Sears Holdings 
provides a pay differential for up to 60 months and also makes reservists on active duty 
eligible for annual raises and bonuses. In addition, these employees have the option to 
continue their medical, dental, and life insurance benefi ts while on duty.23
Policies to make up the difference between military pay and civilian pay are costly. 
The employer is paying employees while they are not working for the organization, 
and it may have to hire temporary employees as well. This challenge has posed a sig-
nifi cant hardship on some employers since 2002, as hundreds of thousands of Reserv-
ists and National Guard members have been mobilized. Even so, as the nation copes 
with this challenge, hundreds of employers have decided that maintaining positive 
relations with employees—and the goodwill of the American public—makes the ex-
pense worthwhile.
Pay for Executives
The media have drawn public attention to the issue of executive pay. The issue attracts 
notice because of the very high pay that the top executives of major U.S. companies 
have received in recent years. For example, recent reviews of executive compensation 
at the largest publicly owned companies in the United States found that median com-
pensation of chief executive offi ces has surpassed $9 million. However, most CEOs 
do not run a Fortune 500 or S&P 500 company, and broader studies have found more 
 modest—though still high—executive pay. A study by Chief Executive Group found 
that CEOs at private companies received median compensation of $362,900.24 Notice 
also that as shown in Figure 12.7, only a small share of the average compensation 
paid to CEOs is in the form of a salary. Most CEO compensation takes the form of 
LO 12-8 Discuss 
 issues related to paying 
employees serving in 
the military and paying 
executives.

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 387
performance-related pay, such as bonuses and stock. This variable pay, discussed in 
the next chapter, causes the pay of executives to vary much more widely than other 
employees’ earnings.
Although these high amounts apply to only a small proportion of the total workforce, 
the issue of executive pay is relevant to pay structure in terms of equity theory. As we 
discussed earlier in the chapter, employees draw conclusions about the fairness of pay 
by making comparisons among employees’ inputs and outcomes. By many comparisons, 
U.S. CEOs’ pay is high. Data from the Associated Press and Equilar compare average 
CEO compensation with the compensation of the average U.S. worker. According to 
the data, median CEO compensation in 2012 was at 257 times the pay of an average 
worker, up from 181 times in 2009. In a separate study by the Hay Group, CEO pay in-
creased at a rate of 5.5%, compared with a 1.8% increase in private-sector workers’ pay.25
To assess the fairness of this ratio, equity theory would consider not only the size of execu-
tive pay relative to pay for other employees but also the amount the CEOs contribute. 
An organization’s executives potentially have a much greater effect on the organization’s 
performance than its lowest-paid employees have. But if they do not seem to contribute 
257 times more, employees will see the compensation as unfair. Likewise, if CEOs in the 
United States don’t contribute more to their organization than CEOs in other countries 
do, the difference would be perceived as unfair.
Top executives help to set the tone or culture of the organization, and employees at all 
levels are affected by behavior at the top. As a result, the equity of executive pay can affect 
more employees than, say, equity among warehouse workers or salesclerks. Recognizing 
this issue, Warren Buffett takes home a modest salary—for example, total compensation 
of $423,923 in 2012, when his company was valued at more than $288 billion. Some 
CEOs, including Google’s Larry Page and Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg, have taken the 
symbolic compensation of just $1.26 These executives are hardly poor, of course; most of 
their wealth comes from their stock holdings.
One study that investigated this issue compared the pay of rank-and-fi le employees 
and executives in various business units.27 In business units where the difference in pay 
was greater, customer satisfaction was lower. The researchers speculated that employ-
ees thought pay was inequitable and adjusted their behavior to provide lower inputs by 
putting forth less effort to satisfy customers. To avoid this type of situation, organiza-
tions need to plan not only how much to pay managers and executives, but also how to 
pay them. In the next chapter, we will explore many of the options available.
Figure 12.7
Average CEO Pay 
at 300 Largest U.S. 
Companies
68.3%
11.2%
Salary
Bonuses
Stock and
stock options
20.5%
Source: Hay Group, “The Wall Street Journal/Hay Group CEO Compensation Study Finds Pay Levels Increased 
Slightly in 2012, as Companies Continue to Navigate Say-on-Pay Era,” news release, May 16, 2013, http://www
.haygroup.com.

388 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
THINKING ETHICALLY
IS PAY DISPARITY IN THE FAST-FOOD 
BUSINESS ETHICAL?
As you saw in this chapter’s “Did You Know?” box, food 
preparation and service jobs are among the lowest-paid 
occupations in the United States. Many of these posi-
tions are entry-level jobs in fast-food restaurants. The 
concentration of low-paid occupations may explain why 
a study found that the fast-food industry has the greatest 
pay disparity, or difference between pay for the lowest- 
and highest-paid positions.
At the bottom end of the range are the workers who 
cook and serve the food in fast-food restaurants. The me-
dian wage for front-line workers in the fast-food industry 
is $8.69 an hour, and the mean is $9.09. At these rates, 
even some full-time employees are qualifying for govern-
ment assistance. For example, a recent study found that 
more than half of fast-food workers enrolled themselves 
or their families for benefi ts such as SNAP (formerly called 
food stamps) and Medicaid, at a cost of about $7 billion.
At the other extreme are fast-food chief executives. 
Analysis of pay reported for executives of the large fast-
food chains found that their compensation between 
2000 and 2013 quadrupled. In 2013, total compensa-
tion (including bonuses and stock, as well as salary) 
was $7.7 million for the CEO of McDonald’s, $13.8 mil-
lion for Chipotle’s CEO, and $22 million for the CEO of 
Yum, which owns KFC, Pizza Hut, and Taco Bell. On 
average, according to the public policy group Demos, 
the ratio of a fast-food CEO’s pay to an average fast-
food worker’s pay exceeds a thousand to one.
Questions
 1. Under what conditions, if any, is it ethical for an 
employer to pay employees a wage low enough 
that full-time workers are eligible for public 
assistance?
 2. Under what conditions, if any, is it ethical for a 
CEO to make a thousand times more than a front-
line worker in the same organization?
Sources: Allison Aubrey, “Fast-Food CEOs Earn Supersize 
Salaries; Workers Earn Small Potatoes,” The Salt (NPR blog), 
April 22, 2014, http://www.npr.org; Catherine Ruetschlin, 
“Fast Food Failure: How CEO-to-Worker Pay Disparity Under-
mines the Industry and the Overall Economy,” Demos, April 
22, 2014, http://www.demos.org; Kathleen Maclay, “Low-
Wage Fast-Food Jobs Leave Hefty Tax Bill, Report Says,” 
news release, University of California at Berkeley, October 15, 
2013, http://newscenter.berkeley.edu.
SUMMARY
LO 12-1 Identify the kinds of decisions involved in 
 establishing a pay structure.
• A job structure establishes relative pay for differ-
ent jobs within the organization.
• Organizations establish relative pay for different 
functions and different levels of responsibility for 
each function.
• They also must establish pay levels, or the average 
paid for the different jobs.
• These decisions are based on the organization’s 
goals, market data, legal requirements, and prin-
ciples of fairness.
• Together, job structure and pay level establish a 
pay structure policy.
LO 12-2 Summarize legal requirements for pay policies.
• To meet the standard of equal employment oppor-
tunity, employers must provide equal pay for equal 
work, regardless of an employee’s age, race, sex, 
or other protected status. Differences in pay must 
relate to factors such as a person’s qualifi cations or 
market levels of pay.
• Under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the 
employer must pay at least the minimum wage 
established by law. Some state and local govern-
ments have established higher minimum wages.
• The FLSA also requires overtime pay—at one and 
a half times the employee’s regular pay rate, includ-
ing bonuses—for hours worked beyond 40 in each 
week. Managers, professionals, and outside salesper-
sons are exempt from the overtime pay requirement.
• Employers must meet FLSA requirements 
 concerning child labor.
• Federal contractors also must meet requirements 
to pay at least the prevailing wage in the area 
where their employees work.
LO 12-3 Discuss how economic forces infl uence deci-
sions about pay.
• To remain competitive, employers must meet the 
demands of product and labor markets.

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 389
• Product markets seek to buy at the lowest price, 
so organizations must limit their costs as much 
as possible. In this way, product markets place an 
upper limit on the pay an employer can  afford to 
offer.
• Labor markets consist of workers who want to earn 
as much as possible. To attract and keep workers, 
employers must pay at least the going rate in their 
labor markets.
• Organizations make decisions about whether to 
pay at, above, or below the pay rate set by these 
market forces.
• Paying above the market rate may make the orga-
nization less competitive in product markets but 
give it an advantage in labor markets. The organi-
zation benefi ts only if it can attract the best can-
didates and provide the systems that motivate and 
enable them to do their best work.
• Organizations that pay below the market rate need 
creative practices for recruiting and training work-
ers so that they can fi nd and keep enough qualifi ed 
people.
LO 12-4 Describe how employees evaluate the fairness 
of a pay structure.
• According to equity theory, employees think of 
their pay relative to their inputs, such as train-
ing, experience, and effort. To decide whether 
their pay is equitable, they compare their outcome 
(pay)/input ratio with other people’s outcome/
input ratios.
• Employees make these comparisons with people 
doing the same job in other organizations and 
with people doing the same or different jobs in the 
same organization.
• If employees conclude that their outcome/input 
ratio is less than the comparison person’s, they 
conclude that their pay is unfair and may engage 
in behaviors to create a situation they think is fair.
LO 12-5 Explain how organizations design pay struc-
tures related to jobs.
• Organizations typically begin with a job evalua-
tion to measure the relative worth of their jobs. 
A job evaluation committee identifi es each job’s 
compensable factors and rates each factor.
• The committee may use a point manual to assign 
an appropriate number of points to each job.
• The committee can research market pay levels for 
key jobs and then identify appropriate rates of pay for 
other jobs based on their number of points relative to 
the key jobs. The organization can do this with a pay 
policy line, which plots a salary for each job.
• The organization can combine jobs into several 
groups, called pay grades.
• For each pay grade or job, the organization typi-
cally establishes a pay range, using the market rate 
or pay policy line as the midpoint.
• Differences in working conditions or labor mar-
kets sometimes call for the use of pay differentials 
to adjust pay levels.
LO 12-6 Describe alternatives to job-based pay.
• To obtain more fl exibility, organizations may use 
delayering. They reduce the levels in the organi-
zation’s job structure, creating broad bands of jobs 
with a pay range for each.
• Organizations may use skill-based pay. They re-
ward employees according to their knowledge 
and skills by establishing skill-based pay systems. 
These are structures that set pay according to the 
employees’ level of knowledge and capabilities.
• Skill-based pay encourages employees to be more 
fl exible and adapt to changing technology. However, 
if the organization does not also provide systems in 
which employees can apply new skills, it may be pay-
ing them for skills they do not actually use.
LO 12-7 Summarize how to ensure that pay is actually 
in line with the pay structure.
• The human resource department should routinely 
compare actual pay with the pay structure to see 
that policies and practices match.
• A common way to do this is to measure a compa-
ratio for each job or pay grade. The compa-ratio is 
the ratio of average pay to the midpoint of the pay 
range.
• Assuming the pay structure supports the organiza-
tion’s goals, the compa-ratios should be close to 1.
• When compa-ratios are more or less than 1, the 
HR department should work with managers to 
identify whether to adjust the pay structure or the 
organization’s pay practices.
LO 12-8 Discuss issues related to paying employees 
serving in the military and paying executives.
• The Uniformed Services Employment and Reem-
ployment Rights Act requires employers to make 
jobs available to any of their employees who leave 
to fulfi ll military duties for up to fi ve years.
• While these employees are performing their 
military service, many are earning far less. To 
demonstrate their commitment to these employ-
ees and to earn the public’s goodwill, many com-
panies pay the difference between their military 
and civilian earnings, even though this policy is 
costly.
• Executive pay has drawn public scrutiny because 
top executive pay is much higher than average 
workers’ pay.

390 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
• The great difference is an issue in terms of equity 
theory. Chief executive offi cers have an extremely 
large impact on the organization’s performance, 
but critics complain that when performance fal-
ters, executive pay does not decline as fast as the 
organization’s profi ts or stock price.
• Top executives help set the organization’s tone or 
culture, and employees at all levels are affected by 
the behavior of the people at the top. Therefore, 
employees’ opinions about the equity of executive 
pay can have a large effect on the organization’s 
performance.
KEY TERMS
job structure, 367
pay level, 367
pay structure, 367
minimum wage, 369
Fair Labor Standards 
Act (FLSA), 369
exempt employees, 370
nonexempt employees, 371
benchmarking, 375
job evaluation, 379
hourly wage, 380
piecework rate, 380
salary, 380
pay policy line, 380
pay grades, 381
pay range, 382
pay differential, 383
delayering, 384
skill-based pay systems, 384
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. In setting up a pay structure, what legal require-
ments must an organization meet? Which of these 
do you think would be most challenging for a small 
start-up business? Why? (LO 12-1)
 2. In gathering data for its pay policies, what product 
markets would a city’s hospital want to use as a basis 
for comparison? What labor markets would be rele-
vant? How might the labor markets for surgeons be 
different from the labor markets for nursing aides? 
(LO 12-1)
 3. Why might an organization choose to pay em-
ployees more than the market rate? Why might 
it choose to pay less? What are the consequences 
of paying more or less than the market rate? 
(LO 12-3)
 4. Suppose you work in the HR department of a manufac-
turing company that is planning to enrich jobs by having 
production workers work in teams and rotate through 
various jobs. The pay structure will have to be adjusted 
to fi t this new work design. How would you expect the 
employees to evaluate the fairness of their pay in their 
redesigned jobs? In terms of equity theory, what com-
parisons would they be likely to make? (LO 12-4)
 5. Summarize the way organizations use information 
about jobs as a basis for a pay structure. (LO 12-5)
 6. Imagine that you manage human resources for a 
small business. You have recently prepared a report 
on the market rate of pay for salespeople, and the 
company’s owner says the market rate is too high. 
The company cannot afford this level of pay, and fur-
thermore, paying that much would cause salespeople 
to earn more than most of the company’s managers. 
Suggest three possible measures the company might 
take to help resolve this confl ict. (LO 12-5)
 7. What are the advantages of establishing pay ranges, 
rather than specifi c pay levels, for each job? What 
are the drawbacks of this approach? (LO 12-5)
 8. Suppose the company in Question 1 wants to es-
tablish a skills-based pay structure. What would be 
some advantages of this approach? List the issues 
the company should be prepared to address in set-
ting up this system. Consider the kinds of infor-
mation you will need and the ways employees may 
react to the new pay structure. (LO 12-6)
 9. Why do some employers subsidize the pay of military 
reserve members called up to active duty? If the military 
instead paid these people the wage they command in 
the civilian market (that is, the salary they earn at their 
regular jobs), who would bear the cost? When neither 
the reserve members’ employers nor the military pays 
reserve members their civilian wage, reserve members 
and their families bear the cost. In your opinion, who 
should bear this cost—employers, taxpayers, or service 
members (or someone else)? (LO 12-8)
 10. Do you think U.S. companies pay their chief 
 executives too much? Why or why not? (LO 12-8)

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 391
IKEA Aims to Pay a Living Wage
Along with a legal requirement to pay at least the mini-
mum wage, some employers also see a social respon-
sibility requirement to pay workers at least a living 
wage—that is, enough to provide themselves and their 
families with the basics of daily life. Paying a living wage 
is one way to treat employees with dignity.
Sweden-based furniture and home furnishings re-
tailer IKEA is among the companies that have commit-
ted to paying a living wage. IKEA recently announced 
that in the United States it would raise the lowest hourly 
wage it pays, going from $9.17 per hour to a nation-
wide average of $10.76. The change affects about half of 
the employees in its 38 existing stores and will apply to 
those hired at new locations.
The $10.76 fi gure is not a set amount that will 
apply nationwide, but an average across facilities. IKEA 
 intends to calculate a minimum for each store based on 
the local cost of living. It uses the MIT Living Wage 
Calculator, which factors in the costs of food, housing, 
taxes, and transportation. IKEA’s wages will be based 
on the amounts calculated for a single person with-
out children. In Pittsburgh and West Chester, Ohio, 
the minimum will be just $8.69; at the other extreme, 
 workers in Woodbridge, Virginia, will receive wages 
starting at $13.22 per hour. Thus, wages are infl uenced 
by  employee needs, not solely based on market rates. 
IKEA also said it would review wages every year but 
did not commit to raising rates every time the calculator 
shows a higher cost of living.
Before the wage increase, IKEA already exceeded the 
federal minimum wage of $7.25. And even if the presi-
dent can convince Congress to accept his idea of raising 
the minimum to $10.10 per hour, IKEA’s minimum will 
continue exceeding the national requirement. IKEA 
also is generous relative to competitors. Gap, whose 
stores include Banana Republic and Old Navy, recently 
announced it would phase in an increase to $9 in 2014 
and then to $10 in 2015. Following IKEA’s announce-
ment of the new $10.76 minimum wage, Walmart’s 
Twitter account sent a tweet saying its “average hourly 
wage for full and part time associates is $11.81.” How-
ever, Walmart did not draw a comparison with its hourly 
minimum. 
IKEA sees the establishment of a living wage as sup-
porting its mission of creating a better everyday life for 
people—in this case, its employees. Rob Olson, IKEA’s 
chief fi nancial offi cer, indicated that the company does 
not intend to raise prices to make up for the added ex-
pense of higher wages. Rather, it hopes that because 
the company “invests in” its employees, they in turn 
will invest more of themselves in the stores and their 
customers.
Questions
 1. What are some risks and challenges that IKEA is 
likely to face as a result of basing its minimum pay 
on the living-wage formula, rather than just legal 
 requirements and the market rate?
 2. Given that IKEA’s management considers the living 
wage to be consistent with the company’s mission, 
what advice would you give the company for imple-
menting it successfully?
Sources: Anna Prior, “IKEA to Raise Minimum Wage at U.S. Stores,” The Wall 
Street Journal, June 26, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Steven Greenhouse, “Ikea 
to Increase Minimum Hourly Pay,” The New York Times, June 26, 2014, http://
www.nytimes.com; Jena McGregor, “Ikea to Raise Workers’ Pay to a ‘Living 
Wage,’” The Washington Post, June 26, 2014, http://www.washingtonpost.com; 
Mark Lennihan, “IKEA Gets Flexible with Minimum Worker Pay,” Christian 
Science Monitor, June 26, 2014, http://www.csmonitor.com.
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY
Twitter Tries to Be an Employer You’d Tweet About
Twitter spent much of 2013 preparing for its  November 
initial public offering, meaning it became a publicly 
traded company, selling stock to investors. That change 
had some big HRM implications. First, the infl ux of in-
vestment money enables a company to grow, and in the 
months leading up to the IPO, Twitter hired 300 em-
ployees, bringing its workforce to 2,300. Also, engineers 
and other employees who received shares of stock as 
part of their compensation could suddenly become rich 
if the stock value rose signifi cantly, as expected. They 
could become millionaires, and if they did, would they 
stay with the company? The HR challenge would be to 
keep attracting and retaining hard-to-replace talent. 
Pay levels have played an important part in meet-
ing the challenge. Based on salaries employees share 
on the Glassdoor website, Twitter has been generous. 
Among companies where 50 or more software engi-
neers told Glassdoor their salary, Twitter had the fi fth-
highest pay, averaging $124,863. At the top of the list 
was Juniper Networks, paying $159, 990, followed by 
MANAGING TALENT

392 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
LinkedIn,  Yahoo, and Google. Other big names paid 
less; the average at Apple was $124,630, and Facebook 
paid $121,507. They still outspent the average of around 
$100,000 to $112,000 paid to software engineers in San 
Francisco, where Twitter is located.
Twitter is operating in an expensive labor market. 
Software engineers are in general a high-demand, high-
pay occupation. The number of Bay Area start-ups 
and growing complexity of technology have been fuel-
ing demand. Also, according to Glassdoor’s data, San 
 Francisco is the high-paid location in the United States. 
That situation is unlikely to change as long as the cost 
of living in San Francisco remains high; that $124,000 
salary buys very modest housing in the area.
Along with these challenges for paying software 
engineers, Twitter faces the struggle to fi nd and keep 
top executives. It paid Christopher Fry, the senior vice 
president in charge of Twitter’s engineers, $10.3 million 
in the year of its IPO, close to the earnings of CEO 
Dick Costolo. Most of that compensation was in the 
value of stock awards; Fry’s salary was $145,513, and he 
received bonus pay of $100,000. Other high-level ex-
ecutives at Twitter received similar compensation. Chief 
fi nancial offi cer Mike Gupta earned the most, receiving 
$24.6 million (including a salary of $250,000) for lead-
ing the organization through the IPO. For his part, Fry 
was considered invaluable because Twitter’s survival 
requires that the site operate reliably, especially during 
this time of expansion.
Questions
 1. Do you think the levels of pay described in this case 
contribute to Twitter’s business success? Why or why 
not?
 2. Suppose you work in Twitter’s HR department, and 
the company’s executives ask you to try reining in the 
spending on salaries. What would you recommend?
Sources: Yoree Koh, “In IPO Year, Twitter CEO Dick Costolo’s Pay 
Plunged to $130,250,” The Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2014, http://blogs
.wsj.com; J. P. Mangalindan, “Twitter’s Highest-Paid Starting Salaries,” 
Fortune, November 8, 2013, http://fortune.com; Sarah Frier, “Twitter 
Ranks Fifth in Engineer Pay behind Google and Yahoo,” Bloomberg News, 
 October 17, 2013, http://go.bloomberg.com; Ray Hennessey, “Because 
Twitter Isn’t a Bank, Big Pay Packages Are OK,” Entrepreneur, October 14, 
2013, http://www.entrepreneur.com; Sarah McBride, “Twitter Pays Engineer 
$10 Million as Silicon Valley Tussles for Talent,” Reuters, October 13, 2013, 
http://www.reuters.com.
Changing the Pay Level at Eight Crossings
Based in Sacramento, California, Eight Crossings pro-
vides medical transcription services for physicians and 
hospitals. Its employees also answer phones, edit docu-
ments, and transcribe legal documents. The compa-
ny’s 85 employees work either at the service center in 
 Sacramento or in their homes, where they receive audio 
or text fi les via the Internet. In this way, Eight Crossings 
employees can work in their specialty as needed without 
tying up a doctor’s or attorney’s offi ce space.
Initially, the ease of sending fi les electronically was 
an advantage that enabled Eight Crossings to grow at 
a tremendous pace. But it has also opened up the com-
pany to competition from similar services provided 
from low-wage locations such as India. In addition, as 
voice recognition software has improved, automation 
could take over some of the processes that have been 
handled by skilled, experienced transcribers.
In that situation, Eight Crossings CEO Patrick 
Maher felt the pressure when clients began to ask him 
for a lower rate. Most of the costs of running Eight 
Crossings are related to labor. Overhead and materi-
als are minimal for this type of work. Consequently, 
for Maher to offer his clients a better price, he would 
have to cut what he paid employees or stop earning 
a profi t.
The pay level at Eight Crossings had been about 
5% above the average for the industry. Maher believed 
that this pay strategy gave his company an advantage 
in recruiting and keeping the best transcribers. Pay was 
calculated per line of text at a rate that varied accord-
ing to the complexity of the material being transcribed. 
Depending on how many hours they worked and how 
complex the jobs they took, each transcriber earned be-
tween $20,000 and $70,000 a year.
In looking for ways to trim expenses, Maher consid-
ered that part of most documents included sections of 
boilerplate text. These are generated automatically by 
transcribers’ software but were included in the number 
of lines for which the transcribers were paid. Maher con-
cluded these amounted to a 5% bonus paid for each as-
signment. Maher decided he could cut transcribers’ pay 
by 5% and in effect still pay them the same rate for what 
they were actually transcribing (but without the “bonus”).
That pay cut would bring pay levels at Eight Cross-
ings down to the market rate. Would that mean employ-
ees would leave for greener pastures? Maher guessed 
not, considering that his company was receiving résu-
més from experienced transcribers looking for work.
Maher’s next challenge was how to communicate 
the pay cut to employees working in 22 locations, many 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

CHAPTER 12 
Establishing a Pay Structure 393
working from home and communicating with the of-
fi ce electronically. He began by discussing the situation 
with the company’s eight supervisors, who check the 
transcribers’ work for quality. This prepared them to 
address employees’ concerns. Next, he sent an e-mail to 
the transcribers, explaining the reasons for the change 
and inviting questions.
Maher’s fears about the pay cut were not realized. 
Employees expressed understanding of the move and 
appreciation for his commitment to continue sending 
work to U.S. workers. And because Eight Crossings is 
paying the market rate, moving to another company 
would not offer employees an advantage in terms of pay.
Questions
 1. How did the change in pay level at Eight Crossings 
affect its ability to attract and retain a high-quality 
workforce?
 2. Do you think the company’s pay structure was better 
suited to its objectives before or after the reduction 
in pay level? Why?
 3. How would you evaluate the company’s method of 
communicating the change in pay level? What im-
provements to that process can you suggest?
Sources: Darren Dahl, “Special Financial Report: Employee Compensa-
tion,” Inc., July 2009, www.inc.com; Eight Crossings, corporate website, 
www.eightcrossings.com, accessed July 8, 2014; “Company Profile: No. 
609, Eight Crossings,” Inc. 500/5000 (2000), www.inc.com.
 1. Julie Jargon and Eric Morath, “As Wage Debate Rages, Some 
Have Made the Shift,” The Wall Street Journal, April 8, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com.
 2. U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 
2012, Table 756, p. 499, accessed at https: www.census.gov.
 3. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Labor Force Characteristics by 
Race and Ethnicity, 2012,” BLS Reports, Report 1044, October 
2013, http://www.bls.gov.
 4. B. Gerhart, “Gender Differences in Current and Starting Sala-
ries: The Role of Performance, College Major, and Job Title,” 
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43 (1990), pp. 418–33; 
G. G. Cain, “The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Dis-
crimination: A Survey,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, eds. 
O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard (New York: North-Holland, 
1986), pp. 694–785; F. D. Blau and L. M. Kahn, “The Gender 
Pay Gap: Have Women Gone as Far as They Can?” Academy of 
Management Perspectives, February 2007, pp. 7–23.
 5. C. Kulich, G. Trojanowski, M. K. Ryan, S. A. Haslam, and 
L. R. R. Renneboog, “Who Gets the Carrot and Who Gets 
the Stick? Evidence of Gender Disparities in Executive Remu-
neration,” Strategic Management Journal 32 (2011): 301–321; 
F. Muñoz-Bullón, “Gender-Level Differences among High-
Level Executives,” Industrial Relations 49 (2010): 346–70.
 6. S. L. Rynes and G. T. Milkovich, “Wage Surveys: Dispelling 
Some Myths about the ‘Market Wage,’” Personnel Psychology 
39 (1986), pp. 71–90; G. T. Milkovich, J. M. Newman, and B. 
 Gerhart, Compensation, 10th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill/
Irwin, 2010).
 7. U.S. Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “Ex-
emption for Executive, Administrative, Professional, Com-
puter and Outside Sales Employees under the Fair Labor 
Standards Act (FLSA),” Face Sheet 17A, http://www.dol.gov/
whd, accessed July 1, 2014.
 8. U.S. Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “What 
Do I Need to Know about Workplace Hazards?” Youth Rules, 
http://www.youthrules.dol.gov, accessed July 1, 2014; U.S. 
Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, “Frequently 
Asked Questions,” Youth Rules, http://www.youthrules.dol
.gov, accessed July 1, 2014; U.S. Department of Labor, Wage 
and Hour Division, “Basic Information,” June 2012, http://
www.dol.gov.
 9. Mike Ramsey, “VW Chops Labor Costs in U.S.,” The Wall 
Street Journal, May 23, 2011, http://online.wsj.com; Bill 
Poovey, “Volkswagen’s New Passat Makes Hometown Debut,” 
Yahoo Finance, January 13, 2011, http://fi nance.yahoo.com.
 10. B. Gerhart and G. T. Milkovich, “Organizational Differences 
in Managerial Compensation and Financial Performance,” 
Academy of Management Journal 33 (1990), pp. 663–91; E. L. 
Groshen, “Why Do Wages Vary among Employers?” Eco-
nomic Review 24 (1988), pp. 19–38.
 11. Nathan Eddy, “IT Management: Google, Intel, Microsoft 
among Top-Paying IT Firms,” eWeek, June 9, 2011, http://
www.eweek.com.
 12. G. A. Akerlof, “Gift Exchange and Effi ciency-Wage Theory: 
Four Views,” American Economic Review 74 (1984), pp. 79–83; 
J. L. Yellen, “Effi ciency Wage Models of Unemployment,” 
American Economic Review 74 (1984), pp. 200–5; B. Klaas and 
J. A. McClendon, “To Lead, Lag, or Match: Estimating the 
Financial Impact of Pay Level Policies,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy 49 (1996): 121–141; S. C. Currall, A. J. Towler, T. A. 
Judge, and L. Kohn, “Pay Satisfaction and Organizational 
Outcomes,” Personnel Psychology 58 (2005): 613–640; A. L. 
Heavey, J. A. Holwerda, and J. P. Hausknecht, “Causes and 
Consequences of Collective Turnover: A Meta-analytic Re-
view,” Journal of Applied Psychology 98 (2013): 412–453.
 13. IOMA, “Salary Data Sources Critical to Compensation Plan-
ning,” Report on Salary Surveys, January 2012, pp. 11–13.
 14. J. S. Adams, “Inequity in Social Exchange,” in Advances in 
Experimental Social Psychology, ed. L. Berkowitz (New York: 
Academic Press, 1965); P. S. Goodman, “An Examination 
of Referents Used in the Evaluation of Pay,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Performance 12 (1974), pp. 170–95; 
C. O. Trevor and D. L. Wazeter, “A Contingent View of 
Reactions to Objective Pay Conditions: Interdependence 
among Pay Structure Characteristics and Pay Relative to 
Internal and External Referents,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology 91 (2006): 1260–75; M. M. Harris, F. Anseel, and 
F. Lievens, “Keeping Up with the Joneses: A Field Study of 
NOTES

394 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
the Relationships among Upward, Lateral, and Downward 
Comparisons and Pay Level Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 93, no. 3 (May 2008), pp. 665–73; Gordon D. 
A. Brown, Jonathan Gardner, Andrew J. Oswald, and Jing 
Qian, “Does Wage Rank Affect Employees’ Well-Being?” 
Industrial Relations 47, no. 3 (July 2008), p. 355.
 15. P. Capelli and P. D. Sherer, “Assessing Worker Attitudes 
under a Two-Tier Wage Plan,” Industrial and Labor Relations 
Review 43 (1990), pp. 225–44.
 16. B. Casselman, “Male Nurses Make More Money,” The Wall 
Street Journal, February 25, 2013, http://online.wsj.com; R. E. 
 Silverman, “Psst . . . This Is What Your Co-worker Is Paid,” The 
Wall Street Journal, January 29, 2013, http://online.wsj.com.
 17. J. P. Pfeffer and A. Davis-Blake, “Understanding Organiza-
tional Wage Structures: A Resource Dependence Approach,” 
Academy of Management Journal 30 (1987), pp. 437–55.
 18. Culpepper, “Geographic Pay Differentials: Practices in Man-
aging Pay between Locations,” Culpepper eBulletin, March 
2011, http://www.culpepper.com; Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
Occupational Employment Statistics Query System, http://
data.bls.gov, accessed July 1, 2014.
 19. This section draws freely on B. Gerhart and R. D. Bretz, 
“Employee Compensation,” in Organization and Manage-
ment of Advanced Manufacturing, eds. W. Karwowski and G. 
 Salvendy (New York: Wiley, 1994), pp. 81–101.
 20. E. E. Lawler III, Strategic Pay (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
1990); G. E. Ledford, “Paying for the Skills, Knowledge, 
Competencies of Knowledge Workers,” Compensation and 
Benefi ts Review, July–August 1995, p. 55; G. Ledford, “Fac-
tors Affecting the Long-Term Success of Skill-Based Pay,” 
WorldatWork Journal, First Quarter 2008, pp. 6–18; E. C. 
 Dierdorff and E. A. Surface, “If You Pay for Skills, Will They 
Learn? Skill Change and Maintenance under a Skill-Based 
Pay System,” Journal of Management 34 (2008), pp. 721–43.
 21. B. C. Murray and B. Gerhart, “An Empirical Analysis of a 
Skill-Based Pay Program and Plant Performance Outcomes,” 
Academy of Management Journal 41, no. 1 (1998), pp. 68–78.
 22. Ibid.; N. Gupta, D. Jenkins, and W. Curington, “Paying for 
Knowledge: Myths and Realities,” National Productivity Re-
view, Spring 1986, pp. 107–23; J. D. Shaw, N. Gupta, A. Mitra, 
and G. E. Ledford, “Success and Survival of Skill-Based Pay 
Plans,” Journal of Management 31 (2005), pp. 28–49.
 23. Sears Holdings Corporation, “Sears Holdings Increases Com-
mitment to Providing Jobs and Support to Military Person-
nel,” PR Newswire, December 1, 2011, http://www.prnewswire
.com; Sears Holdings, “Community Relations: Military Sup-
port,” http://www.searsholdings.com, accessed April 12, 2012.
24. Ken Sweet, “Median CEO Pay Crosses $10 Million in 2013,” 
Associated Press, May 27, 2014, http://hosted.ap.org; Michael 
Bamberger, “How Much Does the Average CEO Really 
Earn?” CEO Briefi ng, November 16, 2012.
25. Sweet, “Median CEO Pay Crosses $10 Million”; Theo Fran-
cis and Joann S. Lublin, “CEO Pay Rises Moderately; a Few 
Reap Huge Rewards,” The Wall Street Journal, May 27, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com.
26. Bloomberg Best (and Worst): “Lowest Paid with Strong 
Stock Performance: CEOs,” Bloomberg, last updated 
 October 25, 2013, http://www.bloomberg.com; Juliette 
Garside, “Facebook Founder Mark Zuckerberg’s Base 
 Salary Falls to $1,” Guardian (London), April 1, 2014, 
http://the guardian.com.
 27. D. M. Cowherd and D. I. Levine, “Product Qual-
ity and Pay Equity between Lower-Level Employees 
and Top Management: An Investigation of Distributive 
Justice Theory,” Administrative Science Quarterly 37 (1992), 
pp. 302–20.

 
Recognizing Employee 
Contributions with Pay
13
Introduction
Selling cars is a far different job today. Just a few years ago, salespeople 
would wander the dealership lot, pointing out features and using their inside 
knowledge of the industry to close profitable sales. Today’s car buyers visit 
a dealership only after going online to compare models and makes, find the 
best prices, and determine whether the dealer has what they want. When 
they arrive, most have already made their purchase decision. That means 
most of a dealer’s workday is now spent at a desk, looking for those online 
shoppers and answering questions.
With the changing style of work comes a changing method of paying sales-
people. A dealership used to focus on what would motivate employees to close 
profitable deals in face-to-face negotiations. That usually meant paying a com-
mission, that is, a percentage of the profit on each car sold. The way to make 
more money was to sell more cars at a higher profit. But in today’s era of 
informed customers, there is little room for dealers to negotiate prices; buy-
ers know they can find a dealer who will accept the best price shown online. 
Some will even stand in the showroom and call a competitor to compare prices. 
Spitzer Auto Group in Elyria, Ohio, now pays salespeople a flat amount for each 
car they sell plus bonuses twice a month if they achieve a goal for sales volume. 
The revised pay scheme rewards Spitzer’s salespeople for connecting with 
prospects, delivering great service, and completing sales rather than focusing 
What Do I Need to Know? 
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 13-1 Discuss the connection between incentive pay 
and employee performance.
 LO 13-2 Describe how organizations recognize individual 
performance.
 LO 13-3 Identify ways to recognize group performance.
 LO 13-4 Explain how organizations link pay to their overall 
performance.
 LO 13-5 Describe how organizations combine incentive 
plans in a “balanced scorecard.”
 LO 13-6 Summarize processes that can contribute to the 
success of incentive programs.
 LO 13-7 Discuss issues related to performance-based pay 
for executives.

396 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
on price. Nissan of Manhattan dropped commissions altogether and pays its staff 
a salary. Many of its salespeople quit following that change; a salary means a limit 
on how much you can earn even with exceptional performance. The dealership 
had to bring in new salespeople, some from other lines of work. However, custom-
ers love the idea of no pressure from commissioned salespeople, and the dealer-
ship is closing more sales faster than under the old system.1
The auto dealerships changed the way they pay employees when they wanted 
to change the kinds of behavior they reward. In this chapter we focus on using pay 
to recognize and reward employees’ contributions to the organization’s success. 
 Employees’ pay does not depend solely on the jobs they hold. Instead, organizations 
vary the amount paid according to differences in performance of the individual, 
group, or whole organization, as well as differences in employee qualities such as 
seniority and skills.2
In contrast to decisions about pay structure, organizations have wide discretion in 
setting performance-related pay, called incentive pay. Organizations can tie incen-
tive pay to individual performance, profi ts, or many other measures of success. They 
select incentives based on their costs, expected infl uence on performance, and fi t with 
the organization’s broader HR and company policies and goals. These decisions are 
signifi cant. A study of 150 organizations found that the way organizations paid em-
ployees was strongly associated with their level of profi tability.3
This chapter explores the choices available to organizations with regard to incen-
tive pay. First, the chapter describes the link between pay and employee performance. 
Next, we discuss ways organizations provide a variety of pay incentives to individuals. 
The following two sections describe pay related to group and organizational perfor-
mance. We then explore the organization’s processes that can support the use of incen-
tive pay. Finally, we discuss incentive pay for the organization’s executives.
Incentive Pay
Along with wages and salaries, many organizations offer incentive pay—that is, pay 
specifi cally designed to energize, direct, or maintain employees’ behavior. Incentive 
pay is infl uential because the amount paid is linked to certain predefi ned behaviors or 
outcomes. For example, as we will see in this chapter, an organization can pay a sales-
person a commission for closing a sale, or the members of a production department can 
earn a bonus for meeting a monthly production goal. Usually, these payments are in 
addition to wages and salaries. Knowing they can earn extra money for closing sales or 
meeting departmental goals, the employees often try harder or get more creative than 
they might without the incentive pay. In addition, the policy of offering higher pay for 
higher performance may make an organization attractive to high performers when it 
is trying to recruit and retain these valuable employees.4 For reasons such as these, the 
share of companies offering variable pay rose from 78% of employers in 2005 to 92% 
in 2011.5
For incentive pay to motivate employees to contribute to the organization’s success, 
the pay plans must be well designed. In particular, effective plans meet the following 
requirements:
 • Performance measures are linked to the organization’s goals.
 • Employees believe they can meet performance standards.
 • The organization gives employees the resources they need to meet their goals.
Incentive Pay
Forms of pay linked to an 
employee’s performance 
as an individual, group 
member, or organization 
member.
LO 13-1 Discuss the 
connection between 
incentive pay and em-
ployee performance.

CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 397
 • Employees value the rewards given.
 • Employees believe the reward system is fair.
 • The pay plan takes into account that employees may ignore any goals that are not 
rewarded.
Since incentive pay is linked to particular outcomes or behaviors, the organization 
is encouraging employees to demonstrate those chosen outcomes and behaviors. As 
obvious as that may sound, the implications are more complicated. If incentive pay 
is extremely rewarding, employees may focus on only the performance measures re-
warded under the plan and ignore measures that are not rewarded. Suppose an organi-
zation pays managers a bonus when employees are satisfi ed; this policy may interfere 
with other management goals. A manager who doesn’t quite know how to inspire em-
ployees to do their best might be tempted to fall back on overly positive performance 
appraisals, letting work slide to keep everyone happy. Similarly, many call centers pay 
employees based on how many calls they handle, as an incentive to work quickly and 
effi ciently. However, speedy call handling does not necessarily foster good customer 
relationships. As we will see in this chapter, organizations may combine a number of 
incentives so employees do not focus on one measure to the exclusion of others.
Attitudes that infl uence the success of incentive pay include whether employees value 
the rewards and think the pay plan is fair. One idea for promoting a sense of fairness is to 
give employees a say in allocating incentives. Often, co-workers are in the best position 
to see individuals’ performances. Four times a year, Coffee & Power, a San Francisco 
start-up company, gives each of its employees the authority to distribute stock options 
among their co-workers. Only a few restrictions apply: employees may not reward them-
selves or give the options to the company’s founders. In one 
quarter, workers had 1,200 apiece to distribute. That quarter, 
the largest bonus was 2,530 shares, and the smallest was 855. 
One of the biggest rewards went to a developer who works in 
a remote location and devotes much of her time to helping 
her colleagues—someone the founders did not know well and 
might have neglected with a traditional reward system.6
Although most, if not all, employees value pay, it is 
 important to remember that earning money is not the only 
reason people try to do a good job. As we discuss in other 
chapters (see Chapters 4, 10, and 14), people also want in-
teresting work, appreciation for their efforts, fl exibility, and 
a sense of belonging to the work group—not to mention the 
inner satisfaction of work well done. Therefore, a complete 
plan for motivating and compensating employees has many 
components, from pay to work design to developing manag-
ers so they can exercise positive leadership.
With regard to the fairness of incentive pay, the preceding 
chapter described equity theory, which explains how employ-
ees form judgments about the fairness of a pay structure. The 
same process applies to judgments about incentive pay. In gen-
eral, employees compare their efforts and rewards with those of 
other employees, considering a plan to be fair when the rewards 
are distributed according to what the employees contribute.
The remainder of this chapter identifi es elements of in-
centive pay systems. We consider each option’s strengths 
Paying call center workers based on the number of calls 
they handle rewards effi ciency but does not necessarily 
promote great customer service.

398
and limitations with regard to these principles. The many kinds of incentive pay 
fall into three broad categories: incentives linked to individual, group, or orga-
nizational performance. Choices from these categories should consider not only 
their strengths and weaknesses, but also their fi t with the organization’s goals. 
The choice of incentive pay may affect not only the level of motivation but also 
the kinds of employees who are attracted to and stay with the organization. For 
example, there is some evidence that organizations with team-based rewards will 
tend to attract employees who are more team-oriented, while rewards tied to in-
dividual performance make an organization more attractive to those who think 
and act independently, as individuals.7 Given the potential impact, organizations 
not only should weigh the strengths and weaknesses in selecting types of incentive 
pay but also should measure the results of these programs. For examples of what 
organizations are doing in practice, see the “Did You Know” box.
Pay for Individual Performance
Organizations may reward individual performance with a variety of incentives:
 • Piecework rates 
•  Merit pay 
•  Sales commissions
 •  Standard hour plans 
•  Individual bonuses
LO 13-2 Describe how 
organizations recognize 
individual performance.
Did You Know?
A majority of companies consider 
employee retention to be a major 
concern, according to a survey by 
PayScale, a specialist in compen-
sation data and software. The way 
companies are using compensation 
to attract and retain high-performing 
employees is with merit-based pay. 
Fewer are relying on bonuses (dis-
cretionary or nondiscretionary in-
centives) or grants of stock or stock 
options. 
Beside 
compensation, 
about one-third of companies said 
they are relying on training and de-
velopment to attract and keep talent.
Question
If your goal is to keep and engage 
high-performing employees, would 
you expect incentive pay to be more 
effective than simply increasing pay 
equally for all workers? Why or why 
not?
Sources: Bureau of National Affairs, 
“Surveys Examine 2014 Compensation 
Trends in U.S., Globally,” Report on Sal-
ary Surveys, April 2014, pp. 5–8; Pay-
Scale, “The Year of the Great Balancing 
Act,” Compensation Best Practice Re-
port 2014, http://resources.payscale
.com; PayScale, “New PayScale Report 
Warns Businesses They May Lose Top 
Talent,” news release, February 11, 
2014, http://www.payscale.com.
Employers Stress Merit Pay to Retain Workers
Compensation Plans for Attracting and Keeping Talent
Discretionary incentives
Merit-based pay
Nondiscretionary incentives
Stock options or grants
0
5
10
Percentage
20
30
15
25
35
s
y
s
s

CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 399
Piecework Rates
As an incentive to work effi ciently, some organizations pay production workers a 
 piecework rate, a wage based on the amount they produce. The amount paid per 
unit is set at a level that rewards employees for above-average production volume. 
For example, suppose that, on average, assemblers can fi nish 10 components in an 
hour. If the organization wants to pay its average assemblers $8 per hour, it can pay a 
piecework rate of $8/hour divided by 10 components/hour, or $.80 per component. 
An assembler who produces the average of 10 components per hour earns an amount 
equal to $8 per hour. An assembler who produces 12 components in an hour would 
earn $.80 3 12, or $9.60 each hour. This is an example of a straight piecework 
plan because the employer pays the same rate per piece no matter how much the 
worker produces.
A variation on straight piecework is differential piece rates (also called rising 
and falling differentials), in which the piece rate depends on the amount produced. If 
the worker produces more than the standard output, the piece rate is higher. If the 
worker produces at or below the standard, the amount paid per piece is lower. In the 
preceding example, the differential piece rate could be $1 per component for com-
ponents exceeding 12 per hour and $.80 per component for up to 12 components 
per hour.
In one study, the use of piece rates increased production output by 30%—more 
than any other motivational device evaluated.8 An obvious advantage of piece rates 
is the direct link between how much work the employee does and the amount the 
employee earns. This type of pay is easy to understand and seems fair to many 
people, if they think the production standard is reasonable. In spite of their ad-
vantages, piece rates are relatively rare for several reasons.9 Most jobs, including 
those of managers, have no physical output, so it is hard to develop an appropriate 
performance measure. This type of incentive is most suited for very routine, stan-
dardized jobs with output that is easy to measure. For complex jobs or jobs with 
hard-to-measure outputs, piecework plans do not apply very well. Also, unless a 
plan is well designed to include performance standards, it may not reward employ-
ees for focusing on quality or customer satisfaction if it interferes with the day’s 
output. In Figure 13.1, the employees quickly realize they can earn huge bonuses 
by writing software “bugs” and then fi xing them, while writing bug-free software 
Piecework Rate
A wage based on 
the amount workers 
produce.
Straight Piecework 
Plan
Incentive pay in which 
the employer pays the 
same rate per piece, no 
matter how much the 
worker produces.
Differential Piece Rates
Incentive pay in which 
the piece rate is higher 
when a greater amount 
is produced.
Figure 13 .1
How Incentives Sometimes “Work”
Source: DILBERT (c) 1995 Scott Adams. Used by permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved.

400 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
affords no chance to earn bonuses. More seriously, a bonus based on number of 
faucets produced gives production workers no incentive to stop a manufacturing 
line to correct a quality-control problem. Production- oriented goals may do noth-
ing to encourage employees to learn new skills or cooperate with others. There-
fore, individual incentives such as these may be a poor incentive in an organization 
that wants to encourage teamwork. They may not be helpful in an  organization 
with complex jobs, employee empowerment, and team-based problem solving.
Standard Hour Plans
Another quantity-oriented incentive for production workers is the standard hour 
plan, an incentive plan that pays workers extra for work done in less than a preset 
“standard time.” The organization determines a standard time to complete a task, 
such as tuning up a car engine. If the mechanic completes the work in less than the 
standard time, the mechanic receives an amount of pay equal to the wage for the full 
standard time. Suppose the standard time for tuning up an engine is 2 hours. If the 
mechanic fi nishes a tune-up in 1½ hours, the mechanic earns 2 hours’ worth of pay in 
1½ hours. Working that fast over the course of a week could add signifi cantly to the 
mechanic’s pay.
In terms of their pros and cons, standard hour plans are much like piecework plans. 
They encourage employees to work as fast as they can, but not necessarily to care 
about quality or customer service. Also, they only succeed if employees want the extra 
money more than they want to work at a pace that feels comfortable.
Merit Pay
Almost all organizations have established some program of merit pay—a system of 
linking pay increases to ratings on performance appraisals. (Chapter 10 described the 
content and use of performance appraisals.) To make the merit increases consistent, 
so they will be seen as fair, many merit pay programs use a merit increase grid, such as 
the sample in Table 13.1. As the table shows, the decisions about merit pay are based 
on two factors: the individual’s performance rating and the individual’s compa-ratio 
(pay relative to average pay, as defi ned in Chapter 12). This system gives the biggest 
pay increases to the best performers and to those whose pay is relatively low for their 
job. At the highest extreme, an exceptional employee earning 80% of the average pay 
for his job could receive a 7% merit raise. An employee rated as “below expectations” 
would receive a raise only if that employee was earning relatively low pay for the job 
(compa-ratio of 90% or less).
 
Organizations establish and revise merit increase grids in light of changing 
 economic conditions. When organizations revise pay ranges, employees have new 
Standard Hour Plan
An incentive plan that 
pays workers extra for 
work done in less than a 
preset “standard time.”
Merit Pay
A system of linking pay 
increases to ratings on 
performance appraisals.
aCompa-ratio is the employee’s salary divided by the midpoint of his or her salary range.
COMPA-RATIOa
PERFORMANCE RATING
80%–90%
91%–110%
111%–120%
Exceeds expectations
7%
5%
3%
Meets expectations
4%
3%
2%
Below expectations
2%
—
—
Table 13.1
Sample Merit Increase 
Grid: Recommended 
Salary Increase

CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 401
compa-ratios. A higher pay range would result in lower compa-ratios, causing 
employees to become eligible for bigger merit increases. An advantage of merit 
pay is therefore that it makes the reward more valuable by relating it to economic 
conditions.
A drawback is that conditions can shrink the available range of increases. Dur-
ing recent years, budgets for pay increases were about 2% to 4% of pay, so average 
performers could receive a 3% raise, and top performers perhaps as much as 5%. 
The 2-percentage-point difference, after taxes and other deductions, would amount 
to only a few dollars a week on a salary of $40,000 per year. Over an entire career, the 
bigger increases for top performers can grow into a major change, but viewed on a 
year-by-year basis, they are not much of an incentive to excel.10 As Figure 13.2 shows, 
companies typically spread merit raises fairly evenly across all employees. However, 
experts advise making pay increases far greater for top performers than for average 
employees—and not rewarding the poor performers with a raise at all.11 Imagine if 
the raises given to the bottom two categories in Figure 13.2 instead went toward 7% 
or greater raises for the one-quarter of employees who are high performers. This type 
of decision signals that excellence is rewarded. As the unemployment rate continues to 
fall, upward pressure on wages may increase the possible range for merit increases. If 
average pay rises by 4% or more, there are more dollars to distribute among high- and 
middle-performing employees.
Another advantage of merit pay is that it provides a method for rewarding perfor-
mance in all of the dimensions measured in the organization’s performance manage-
ment system. If that system is appropriately designed to measure all the important job 
behaviors, then the merit pay is linked to the behaviors the organization desires. This 
link seems logical, although so far there is little research showing the effectiveness of 
merit pay.12
A drawback of merit pay, from the employer’s standpoint, is that it can quickly 
become expensive. Managers at a majority of organizations rate most employees’ per-
formance in the top two categories (out of four or fi ve).13 Therefore, the majority 
of employees are eligible for the biggest merit increases, and their pay rises  rapidly. 
This cost is one reason that some organizations have established guidelines about the 
percentage of employees that may receive the top rating, as discussed in  Chapter 10. 
Figure 13.2
Ratings and Raises: 
Under-Rewarding the 
Best
Middle performers
High performers
Low performers
0
1
2
Average Pay Increase (%)
4
3
5
s
s
s
Source: Bureau of National Affairs, “Salary Budgets for 2014 May Top 3 Percent, WorldatWork Survey Reports,” 
Report on Salary Surveys, September 2013, pp. 1–4.

402 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
Another correction might be to use 360-degree performance feedback (discussed in 
Chapter 8), but so far, organizations have not used multisource data for pay decisions.14
Another drawback of merit pay is that it makes assumptions that may be mislead-
ing. Rewarding employees for superior performance ratings assumes that those ratings 
 depend on employees’ ability and motivation. But performance may actually depend 
on forces outside the employee’s control, such as managers’ rating biases, the level of 
cooperation from co-workers, or the degree to which the organization gives  employees 
the authority, training, and resources they need. Under these conditions, employees 
will likely conclude that the merit pay system is unfair.
Quality guru W. Edwards Deming also criticizes merit pay for discouraging teamwork. 
In Deming’s words, “Everyone propels himself forward, or tries to, for his own good, 
on his own life preserver. The organization is the loser.”15 For example, if employees in 
the purchasing department are evaluated based on the number or cost of contracts they 
negotiate, they may have little interest in the quality of the materials they buy, even when 
the manufacturing department is having quality problems. In reaction to such problems, 
Deming advocated the use of group incentives. Another alternative is for merit pay to 
include ratings of teamwork and cooperation. Some employers ask co-workers to provide 
such ratings.
Performance Bonuses
Like merit pay, performance bonuses reward individual performance, but bonuses are 
not rolled into base pay. The employee must re-earn them during each performance 
period. In some cases, the bonus is a one-time reward. Bonuses may also be linked to 
objective performance measures, rather than subjective ratings. In a recent survey, per-
formance bonuses ranged from an average 3.3% paid to hourly wage earners to 6.9% 
for salaried workers exempt from overtime pay (top executives received much higher 
bonuses, as described later in the chapter).16
Bonuses for individual performance can be extremely effective and give the orga-
nization great fl exibility in deciding what kinds of behavior to reward. In many cases, 
employees receive bonuses for meeting such routine targets as sales or production 
numbers. Airlines can reward good customer service with bonuses for meeting goals 
for on-time performance, and trucking fi rms can reward safe practices with bonuses 
for accident-free driving. Companies can award bonuses for learning, innovation, or 
any other behavior they associate with success. Savant Capital Management wanted its 
fi nancial advisers to take more responsibility for bringing in new clients and helping to 
grow a fi rm that will remain strong after its founders retire. So the Rockford, Illinois, 
fi nancial planning fi rm shifted part of advisers’ pay from salary to a potentially larger 
set of bonuses. Each adviser may earn a bonus based on a percentage of revenue from 
each of his or her clients and additional bonuses for each new client brought in. Be-
sides these individual bonuses, Savant pays bonuses linked to the fi rm’s overall achieve-
ment of goals for profi t, revenues, and new assets (clients’ investments).17
All this fl exibility makes it essential to be sure bonuses are tied to behavior that 
makes a difference to the organization’s overall performance. Also, employees have 
to have some control over whether they can meet the bonus requirements. For an 
example of why these conditions are important, see the “HR Oops!” box.
Adding to the fl exibility of annual or more frequent bonuses, organizations also 
may motivate employees with one-time bonuses. For example, when one organization 
acquires another, it usually wants to retain certain valuable employees in the organiza-
tion it is buying. Therefore, it is common for organizations involved in an acquisition 

403
to pay retention bonuses—one-time incentives paid in exchange for remaining with the 
 company—to top managers, engineers, top-performing  salespeople, and information 
technology  specialists. When Cisco Systems acquired Sourcefi re, it paid retention 
 bonuses to the executives of that company, which specializes in cybersecurity. When 
Offi ce Depot merged with Offi ceMax, it paid top executives bonuses of up to $500,000 
a year over a three-year period so they would stay through the transition.18
Sales Commissions
A variation on piece rates and bonuses is the payment of commissions, or pay calculated 
as a percentage of sales. For instance, a furniture salesperson might earn commissions 
equaling 6% times the price of the furniture the person sells during the period. Selling 
a $2,000 couch would add $120 to the salesperson’s commissions for the period. Com-
mission rates vary tremendously from one industry and company to another. Examples 
reported include an average rate between 5.0% and 5.5% for real estate, 15% to 20% of 
the annual premium for car insurance (paid to an independent insurance agent), and 22% 
to 30% of profi ts for auto sales.19
Some salespeople earn a commission in addition to a base salary; others earn only 
commissions—a pay arrangement called a straight commission plan. Straight commis-
sions are common among insurance and real estate agents and car salespeople. Other 
salespeople earn no commissions at all, but a straight salary. Paying most or all of 
a salesperson’s compensation in the form of salary frees the salesperson to focus on 
developing customer goodwill. Paying most or all of a salesperson’s compensation in 
Commissions
Incentive pay calculated 
as a percentage of sales.
Josh Patrick is now a successful ad-
viser to business owners, and many 
of his lessons are ones he learned 
from personal experience. He started 
his business career by building a 
food service and vending company. 
In that role, he wanted to reward his 
employees for doing their jobs well, 
so he set up a program for paying 
bonuses. At the beginning of this 
program, the company had about 
40 employees, and Patrick tried to 
evaluate whether each employee 
had performed well enough to earn a 
bonus. However, the decisions were 
not always tied to an objective mea-
surement or to the company’s prof-
itability. In some cases, employees 
were rewarded for individual suc-
cesses that did not contribute to the 
company’s overall success.
So Patrick decided to discard 
the individual bonus plan and start 
over. Initially, employees were upset 
about the change, but Patrick ad-
dressed their resistance through 
communication. He explained that 
the company would pay bonuses 
for group success, and he began 
to teach them about the company’s 
fi nances. When employees under-
stood how their actions contributed 
to profi ts, they began working to-
gether to build a stronger company.
Patrick’s move toward group 
bonuses was a response to some 
problems that can arise with poorly 
constructed 
individual 
bonuses. 
Employees may not understand 
what they need to do to earn a 
bonus and why those goals mat-
ter. Further, employees who do not 
understand the bonus requirements 
may resent any occasion when their 
bonus is smaller than it has been 
previously.
Questions
 1. What problems do you see 
in the way Patrick set up his 
original bonus program?
 2. How might Patrick have 
improved his system for 
awarding individual bonuses 
without switching to awards 
for group performance? That 
is, how could he continue to 
reward individual performance 
but do it more effectively?
Sources: Purposeful Planning Institute, 
“Josh Patrick,” collaborators, accessed 
July 9, 2014; Robert Moskowitz, “Using 
Group instead of Individual Bonuses to 
Reward Employees,” Intuit Small Busi-
ness Blog, April 8, 2013, http://blog
.intuit.com; Josh Patrick, “Do You Pay 
Employees to Exist or to Produce?” The 
New York Times, March 14, 2013, http://
boss.blogs.nytimes.com.
Giving Arbitrary Bonuses to Employees
HR Oops!

404 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
the form of commissions encourages the salesperson 
to focus on closing sales. In this way, differences in 
salespeople’s compensation directly infl uence how 
they spend their time, how they treat customers, and 
how much the organization sells.
The nature of salespeople’s compensation also af-
fects the kinds of people who will want to take and 
keep sales jobs with the organization. Hard-driving, 
ambitious, risk-taking salespeople might enjoy the 
potential rewards of a straight commission plan. An 
organization that wants salespeople to concentrate 
on listening to customers and building relationships 
might want to attract a different kind of salesperson by 
offering more of the pay in the form of a salary. Bas-
ing part or all of a salesperson’s pay on commissions 
assumes that the organization wants to attract people 
with some willingness to take risks—probably a reasonable assumption about people 
whose job includes talking to strangers and encouraging them to spend money.
Pay for Group Performance
Employers may address the drawbacks of individual incentives by including group in-
centives in the organization’s compensation plan. To win group incentives, employees 
must cooperate and share knowledge so that the entire group can meet its performance 
targets. Common group incentives include gainsharing, bonuses, and team awards.
Gainsharing
Organizations that want employees to focus on effi ciency may adopt a gainsharing 
program, which measures increases in productivity and effectiveness and distributes a 
portion of each gain to employees. For example, if a factory enjoys a productivity gain 
worth $30,000, half the gain might be the company’s share. The other $15,000 would 
be distributed among the employees in the factory. Knowing that they can enjoy a fi -
nancial benefi t from helping the company be more productive, employees supposedly 
will look for ways to work more effi ciently and improve the way the factory operates.
Gainsharing addresses the challenge of identifying appropriate performance mea-
sures for complex jobs. For example, how would a hospital measure the production of its 
nurses—in terms of satisfying patients, keeping costs down, or completing a number of 
tasks? Each of these measures oversimplifi es the complex responsibilities involved in nurs-
ing care. Even for simpler jobs, setting acceptable standards and measuring performance 
can be complicated. Gainsharing frees employees to determine how to improve their own 
and their group’s performance. It also broadens employees’ focus beyond their individual 
interests. But in contrast to profi t sharing, discussed later, it keeps the performance mea-
sures within a range of activity that most employees believe they can infl uence. Organiza-
tions can enhance the likelihood of a gain by providing a means for employees to share 
knowledge and make suggestions, as we will discuss in the last section of this chapter.
Gainsharing is most likely to succeed when organizations provide the right condi-
tions. Among the conditions identifi ed, the following are among the most common20:
 • Management commitment.
 • Need for change or strong commitment to continuous improvement.
 • Management acceptance and encouragement of employee input.
LO 13-3 Identify ways 
to recognize group 
performance.
Gainsharing
Group incentive program 
that measures improve-
ments in productivity and 
effectiveness and dis-
tributes a portion of each 
gain to employees.
Real estate agents typically earn a straight commission, meaning that 
100% of their pay comes from commission instead of salary. What 
type of individual might enjoy a job like this?

CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 405
 • High levels of cooperation and interaction.
 • Employment security.
 • Information sharing on productivity and costs.
 • Goal setting.
 • Commitment of all involved parties to the process of 
change and improvement.
 • Performance standard and calculation that employees 
 understand and consider fair and that is closely related to 
managerial objectives.
 • Employees who value working in groups.
A popular form of gainsharing is the Scanlon plan, 
 developed in the 1930s by Joseph N. Scanlon, president of a 
union local at Empire Steel and Tin Plant in Mans fi eld, Ohio. 
The Scanlon plan gives employees a bonus if the ratio of labor 
costs to the sales value of production is below a set standard. 
To keep this ratio low enough to earn the bonus, workers have 
to keep labor costs to a minimum and produce as much as possible with that amount of 
labor. Figure 13.3 provides an example. In this example, the standard is a ratio of 20/100, or 
20% and the workers produced parts worth $1.2 million. To meet the standard, the labor 
costs should be less than 20% of $1.2 million, or $240,000. Since the actual labor costs 
were $210,000, the workers will get a gainsharing bonus based on the $30,000 difference 
between the $240,000 target and the actual cost.
Typically, an organization does not pay workers all of the gain immediately. First, 
the organization keeps a share of the gain to improve its own bottom line. A portion of 
the remainder goes into a reserve account. This account offsets losses in any months 
when the gain is negative (that is, when costs rise or production falls). At the end of the 
year, the organization closes out the account and distributes any remaining surplus. If 
there were a loss at the end of the year, the organization would absorb it.
Group Bonuses and Team Awards
In contrast to gainsharing plans, which typically reward the 
 performance of all employees at a facility, bonuses for group per-
formance tend to be for smaller work groups.21 These bonuses re-
ward the members of a group for attaining a specifi c goal, usually 
measured in terms of physical output. Team awards are similar to 
group bonuses, but they are more likely to use a broad range of per-
formance measures, such as cost savings, successful completion of a 
project, or even meeting deadlines.
Both types of incentives have the advantage that they en-
courage group or team members to cooperate so that they can 
achieve their goal. However, depending on the reward system, 
competition among  individuals may be replaced by competition 
among groups. Competition may be healthy in some situations, 
as when groups try to outdo one another in satisfying customers. 
On the downside, competition may also prevent necessary co-
operation among groups. To avoid this, the organization should 
carefully set the performance goals for these  incentives so that 
concern for costs or sales does not obscure other objectives, such 
as quality, customer service, and ethical behavior.
Scanlon Plan
A gainsharing program in 
which employees receive 
a bonus if the ratio of 
labor costs to the sales 
value of production is 
below a set standard.
Target Ratio:
Sales Value of Production: $1,200,000
=
Labor Costs
Sales Value of Production
20
100
Goal:
Actual: $210,000
Gain: $240,000 – $210,000 = $30,000
3 $1,200,000 = $240,000
20
100
Figure 13.3
Finding the Gain in a Scanlon Plan
Source: Example adapted from B. Graham-Moore and 
 Timothy L. Ross, Gainsharing: Plans for Improving 
 Performance (Washington, DC: Bureau of National Affairs, 
1990), p. 57.
 Group members that meet a sales goal or a product 
development team that meets a deadline or success-
fully launches a product may be rewarded with a bonus 
for group performance. What are some advantages and 
disadvantages of group bonuses? 

406 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
Pay for Organizational Performance
Two important ways organizations measure their performance are in terms of their 
profi ts and their stock price. In a competitive marketplace, profi ts result when an 
 organization is effi ciently providing products that customers want at a price they are 
willing to pay. Stock is the owners’ investment in a corporation; when the stock price 
is rising, the value of that investment is growing. Rather than trying to fi gure out what 
performance measures will motivate employees to do the things that generate high 
profi ts and a rising stock price, many organizations offer incentive pay tied to those 
organizational performance measures. The expectation is that employees will focus on 
what is best for the organization.
These organization-level incentives can motivate employees to align their activities 
with the organization’s goals. At the same time, linking incentives to the organization’s 
profi ts or stock price exposes employees to a high degree of risk. Profi ts and stock 
price can soar very high very fast, but they can also fall. The result is a great deal of un-
certainty about the amount of incentive pay each employee will receive in each period. 
Therefore, these kinds of incentive pay are likely to be most effective in organizations 
that emphasize growth and innovation, which tend to need employees who thrive in a 
risk-taking environment.22
Profit Sharing
Under proﬁ t sharing, payments are a percentage of the organization’s profi ts and do 
not become part of the employees’ base salary. For example, General Motors provides 
for profi t sharing in its contract with its workers’ union, the United Auto Workers. 
Depending on how large GM’s profi ts are in relation to its total sales for the year, at 
least 6% of the company’s profi ts are divided among the workers according to how 
many hours they worked during the year.23 The formula for computing and dividing 
the profi t-sharing bonus is included in the union contract.
Organizations use profi t sharing for a number of reasons. It may encourage em-
ployees to think more like owners, taking a broad view of what they need to do in order 
to make the organization more effective. They are more likely to cooperate and less 
likely to focus on narrow self-interests. Also, profi t sharing has the practical advantage 
of costing less when the organization is experiencing fi nancial diffi culties. If the orga-
nization has little or no profi t, this incentive pay is small or nonexistent, so employers 
may not need to rely as much on layoffs to reduce costs.24
Does profi t sharing help organizations perform better? The evidence is not yet 
clear. Although research supports a link between profi t-sharing payments and profi ts, 
researchers have questioned which of these causes the other.25 For example, Ford, 
Chrysler, and GM have similar profi t-sharing plans in their contracts with the United 
Auto Workers, but the payouts are not always similar. In one year, the average worker 
received $4,000 from Ford, $550 from GM, and $8,000 from Chrysler. Since the plans 
are similar, something other than the profi t sharing must have made Ford and  Chrysler 
more profi table than GM.
Differences in payouts, as in the preceding example, raise questions not only about 
the effectiveness of the plans, but about equity. Assuming workers at Ford, Chrysler, 
and GM have similar jobs, they would expect to receive similar profi t-sharing checks. 
In the year of this example, GM workers might have seen their incentive pay as highly 
inequitable unless GM could show how Chrysler workers did more to earn their big 
checks. Employees also may feel that small profi t-sharing checks are unfair because 
LO 13-4 Explain how 
organizations link 
pay to their overall 
performance.
Proﬁ t Sharing
Incentive pay in which 
payments are a percent-
age of the organiza-
tion’s proﬁ ts and do not 
become part of the em-
ployees’ base salary.

CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 407
they have little control over profi ts. If profi t sharing is offered to all employees but 
most employees think only management decisions about products, price, and market-
ing have much impact on profi ts, they will conclude that there is little connection be-
tween their actions and their rewards. In that case, profi t-sharing plans will have little 
impact on employee behavior. This problem is even greater when employees have to 
wait months before profi ts are distributed. The time lag between high-performance 
behavior and fi nancial rewards is simply too long to be motivating.
Adequate communication is essential for addressing issues related to equity, es-
pecially since profi ts can shrivel for reasons beyond employees’ control. At Jim’s 
Formal Wear, a tuxedo wholesaler, workers at each warehouse split 3% of the facil-
ity’s profi ts in the second, third, and fourth quarter of each year. Employees also 
can earn up to $1,200 per year in bonuses if the company meets goals for customer 
satisfaction. Every month, managers at each warehouse review the facility’s busi-
ness performance, comparing the current year with the previous year and with the 
year’s goals. Every week, employees gather in team meetings to discuss ways to im-
prove the next week’s performance, such as reducing costs or errors.26 The weekly 
and monthly meetings provide opportunities to educate employees and involve 
them in decision making. For another example of a profi t-sharing plan that met 
expectations, see the “Best Practices” box.
Given the limitations of profi t-sharing plans, one strategy is to use them as a com-
ponent of a pay system that includes other kinds of pay more directly linked to indi-
vidual behavior. This increases employees’ commitment to organizational goals while 
addressing concerns about fairness.
Stock Ownership
While profi t-sharing plans are intended to encourage employees to “think like own-
ers,” a stock ownership plan actually makes employees part owners of the organiza-
tion. Like profi t sharing, employee ownership is intended as a way to encourage 
employees to focus on the success of the organization as a whole. The drawbacks of 
stock ownership as a form of incentive pay are similar to those of profi t sharing. Spe-
cifi cally, it may not have a strong effect on individuals’ motivation. Employees may 
not see a strong link between their actions and the company’s stock price, especially 
in larger organizations. The link between pay and performance is even harder to ap-
preciate because the fi nancial benefi ts mostly come when the stock is sold—typically 
when the employee leaves the organization.
Ownership programs usually take the form of stock options or employee stock ownership 
plans. These are illustrated in Figure 13.4.
Figure 13.4
Types of Pay for 
 Organizational 
Performance
Proﬁt
Sharing
Stock
Options
Employee
Stock
Ownership Plans
(ESOPs)
Stock Ownership

408
Paul Downs Cabinetmakers is a cus-
tomer furniture shop specializing in 
large conference and boardroom ta-
bles. Its skilled craftspeople work in 
a facility in Bridgeport, Pennsylvania. 
The company’s owner, Paul Downs, 
was concerned that the business did 
not always operate profi tably. Orders 
were growing faster than production 
output. The greater effi ciency needed 
to generate stronger profi ts might in-
volve changes that would be unwel-
come to employees more interested 
in craftsmanship. To encourage them 
to care more about the business im-
pact of their work, Downs introduced 
a profi t-sharing plan.
Downs assembled his 17 workers 
and explained the plan. In any prof-
itable quarter, 15% of the compa-
ny’s profi ts would be divided among 
all the workers. If they also met that 
month’s target for dollar volume 
shipped, another 15% of the prof-
its would be divided among them. 
The workers were unenthusiastic 
until the fi nal month of the quarter, 
when Downs realized they had the 
potential to earn a solid profi t. He 
explained to the workers what they 
had to do to earn bonuses of more 
than $1,000 each, and the workers 
pushed hard to meet the goals.
In the following year, it appeared 
that the incentive was working. Out 
of four quarters, the company re-
ported profi ts and paid bonuses in 
three, totaling $3,122 per worker. 
During the one unprofi table quarter, 
employees were not upset because 
ongoing communication showed 
them that shipments were behind 
and would take place in the following 
quarter. Revenues for the fi rst year 
of the profi t-sharing program were 
up more than 43% over the previous 
year, and profi ts rose substantially. 
All this growth came without a price 
increase, so Downs concluded that 
his production workers had chosen 
to operate more effi ciently.
Questions
 1. What evidence suggests 
that profi t sharing was 
successful at Paul Downs 
Cabinetmakers?
 2. Do you think the workers are 
likely to see this profi t-sharing 
program as equitable? Why or 
why not?
Sources: Paul Downs Cabinetmakers, 
“About Paul Downs,” http://www
. custom-conference-tables.com, ac-
cessed July 7, 2014; Paul Downs, “As-
sessing the Impact of a Profi t-Sharing 
Plan,” The New York Times, April 21, 
2014, http://boss.blogs.nytimes.com; 
Paul Downs, “Debating the Merits of 
a Profi t-Sharing Plan,” The New York 
Times, September 17, 2013, http://boss
.blogs.nytimes.com; Paul Downs, 
“Here’s What Happened When I Intro-
duced Profi t Sharing,” The New York 
Times, September 9, 2013, http://boss
.blogs.nytimes.com.
Profi t Sharing at Paul Downs Cabinetmakers
Best Practices
Stock Options One way to distribute stock to employees is to grant them stock 
options—the right to buy a certain number of shares of stock at a specifi ed price. 
(Purchasing the stock is called exercising the option.) Suppose that in 2012 a company’s 
employees received options to purchase the company’s stock at $10 per share. The 
employees will benefi t if the stock price rises above $10 per share because they can pay 
$10 for something (a share of stock) that is worth more than $10. If in 2017 the stock 
is worth $30, they can exercise their options and buy stock for $10 a share. If they want 
to, they can sell their stock for the market price of $30, receiving a gain of $20 for each 
share of stock. Of course, stock prices can also fall. If the 2017 stock price is only $8, 
the employees would not bother to exercise the options.
Traditionally, organizations have granted stock options to their executives. During 
the 1990s, many organizations pushed eligibility for options further down in the or-
ganization’s structure. Walmart and PepsiCo are among the large companies that have 
granted stock options to employees at all levels. Stock values were rising so fast during 
the 1990s that options were extremely rewarding for a time.
Some studies suggest that organizations perform better when a large percentage of 
top and middle managers are eligible for long-term incentives such as stock options. 
Stock Options
Rights to buy a certain 
number of shares of 
stock at a speciﬁ ed 
price.

CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 409
This evidence is consistent with the idea of encouraging employees to think like own-
ers.27 It is not clear whether these fi ndings would hold up for lower-level employees. 
They may see much less opportunity to infl uence the company’s performance in the 
stock market.
Recent scandals have drawn attention to another challenge of using stock op-
tions as incentive pay. As with other performance measures, employees may focus 
so much on stock price that they lose sight of other goals, including ethical behav-
ior. Ideally, managers would bring about an increase in stock price by adding value 
in terms of  effi ciency, innovation, and customer satisfaction. But there are other, 
unethical ways to increase stock price by tricking investors into thinking the orga-
nization is more  valuable and more profi table than it actually is. Hiding losses and 
infl ating the  recorded value of revenues are just two of the ways some companies 
have boosted stock prices, enriching managers until these misdeeds come to light. 
Several years ago, when stock prices tended to be high, some companies “back-
dated” options, meaning they changed the date or price in the option agreement 
so that the option holder could buy shares at a bargain price (this practice may be 
illegal if done secretly).
Employee Stock Ownership Plans While stock options are most often used 
with top management, a broader arrangement is the employee stock ownership 
plan (ESOP). In an ESOP, the organization distributes shares of stock to its employ-
ees by placing the stock into a trust managed on the employees’ behalf. Employees 
receive regular reports on the value of their stock, and when they leave the organiza-
tion, they may sell the stock to the organization or (if it is a publicly traded company) 
on the open market.
ESOPs are the most common form of employee ownership, with the number of 
employees in such plans increasing from approximately 250,000 in 1975 to more than 
10 million active participants (those who are currently employed and earning ben-
efi ts).28 The number of participants has grown even while the number of companies 
offering ESOPs has shrunk somewhat, as shown in Figure 13.5.
Employee Stock 
 Ownership Plan (ESOP)
An arrangement in which 
the organization dis-
tributes shares of stock 
to all its employees by 
placing it in a trust.
Figure 13.5
Number of Companies 
with ESOPs
Source: National Center for Employee Ownership, “A Statistical Profi le of Employee Ownership,” updated June 
2014, http://www.nceo.org.
10,000
8,000
9,000
7,000
6,000
4,000
5,000
1,000
2,000
3,000
0
1975
Number of
ESOPs
2002
2006
2011

410 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
ESOPs raise a number of issues. On the negative side, they carry a signifi cant 
risk for employees. By law, an ESOP must invest at least 51% of its assets in the 
company’s own stock (in contrast to other kinds of stock funds that hold a wide 
diversity of companies). Problems with the company’s performance therefore can 
take away signifi cant value from the ESOP. Many companies set up ESOPs to hold 
retirement funds, so these risks directly affect employees’ retirement income. Add-
ing to the risk, funds in an ESOP are not guaranteed by the Pension Benefi t Guar-
antee Corporation (described in Chapter 14). Sometimes employees use an ESOP 
to buy their company when it is experiencing fi nancial problems; this is a highly 
risky investment.
Still, ESOPs can be attractive to employers. Along with tax and fi nancing  advantages, 
ESOPs give employers a way to build pride in and commitment to the  organization. 
Employees have a right to participate in votes by shareholders (if the stock is regis-
tered on a national exchange, such as the New York Stock Exchange).29 This means 
employees participate somewhat in corporate-level decision making. Still, the overall 
level of participation in decisions appears to vary signifi cantly among organizations 
with ESOPs. Some research suggests that the benefi ts of ESOPs are greatest when 
employee participation is greatest.30
Balanced Scorecard
As the preceding descriptions indicate, any form of incentive pay has advantages and 
disadvantages. For example, relying exclusively on merit pay or other individual in-
centives may produce a workforce that cares greatly about meeting those objectives 
but competes to achieve them at the expense of cooperating to achieve organizational 
goals. Relying heavily on profi t sharing or stock ownership may increase coopera-
tion but do little to motivate day-to-day effort or to attract and retain top individual 
performers. Because of this, many organizations design a mix of pay programs. The 
aim is to balance the disadvantages of one type of incentive pay with the advantages 
of another type.
One way of accomplishing this goal is to design a balanced scorecard—a 
combination of performance measures directed toward the company’s long- and 
short-term goals and used as the basis for awarding incentive pay. A corporation 
would have fi nancial goals to satisfy its stockholders (owners), quality- and price-
related goals to satisfy its customers, effi ciency goals to ensure better operations, 
and goals related to acquiring skills and knowledge for the future to fully tap into 
employees’ potential. Different jobs would contribute to those goals in different 
ways. For example, an engineer could develop products that better meet customer 
needs and can be produced more effi ciently. The engineer could also develop 
knowledge of new technologies in order to contribute more to the organization in 
the future. A salesperson’s goals would include measures related to sales  volume, 
customer service, and learning about product markets and customer needs. Orga-
nizations customize their balanced scorecards according to their markets, prod-
ucts, and objectives. The scorecards of a company that is emphasizing low costs 
and prices would be different from the scorecards of a company emphasizing in-
novative use of new technology. Table 13.2 shows the kinds of information that 
go into a balanced scorecard. The “HRM Social” box explores another kind of 
 information that could be added to balanced scorecards in the information age.
Not only does the balanced scorecard combine the advantages of different 
 incentive-pay plans, it helps employees understand the organization’s goals. By 
LO 13-5 Describe how 
organizations combine 
incentive plans in a 
“balanced scorecard.”
Balanced Scorecard
A combination of per-
formance measures 
directed toward the 
company’s long- and 
short-term goals and 
used as the basis for 
awarding incentive pay.

CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 411
Table 13.2
Sample Balanced Scorecard for an Electric Cooperative
GOALS
PERFORMANCE 
CATEGORY
CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS
BASE 
(2%)
TARGET 
(3%)
STRETCH 
(5%)
Member service (40% 
of incentive pay)
Reliability (average 
interruption duration)
Customer satisfaction 
(index from quarterly 
survey)
140 min.
9.0
130 min.
9.1
120 min.
9.2
Financial performance 
(25% of incentive pay)
Total operating expenses 
(¢/kilowatt-hour)
Cash ﬂ ow (% of 
investment)
4.03¢
75%
3.99¢
80%
3.95¢
85%
Internal processes (20% 
of incentive pay)
Safety (safety index 
based on injury rate and 
severity)
4.6
3.6
2.6
Innovation and 
learning (15% of 
incentive pay)
Member value 
(revenue/kWh sold)
Efﬁ ciency and 
effectiveness (total 
margins/no. employees)
Budget
$534,400
210% state 
median
$37,200
213% state 
median
$40,000
Source: Adapted from Tim Sullivan and Henry Cano, “Introducing a Balanced Scorecard for Electric Cooperatives: A Tool for Measuring 
and Improving Results,” Management Quarterly, Winter 2009, Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
communicating the balanced scorecard to employees, the organization shows employ-
ees information about what its goals are and what it expects employees to accom-
plish. At ConocoPhillips, top executives have a scorecard that includes costs, health 
and safety, production, and resource replacement. In addition, the energy company 
has developed scorecards for operations-level activities such as safety measures.31 In 
Table 13.2, the organization indicates not only that the manager should meet the four 
performance objectives but also that it is especially concerned with the fi nancial target 
because half the incentive is based on this one target.
Processes That Make Incentives Work
As we explained in Chapter 12, communication and employee participation can con-
tribute to a belief that the organization’s pay structure is fair. In the same way, the 
process by which the organization creates and administers incentive pay can help it 
use incentives to achieve the goal of motivating employees. The monetary rewards of 
gainsharing, for example, can substantially improve productivity,32 but the organiza-
tion can set up the process to be even more effective. In a study of an automotive parts 
plant, productivity rose when the gainsharing plan added employee participation in the 
form of monthly meetings with managers to discuss the gainsharing plan and ways to 
increase productivity. A related study asked employees what motivated them to partici-
pate actively in the plan (for example, by making suggestions for improvement). Ac-
cording to employees, other factors besides the pay itself were important— especially 
the ability to infl uence and control the way their work was done.33 Considerations 
LO 13-6 Summarize 
processes that can con-
tribute to the success of 
incentive programs.

412
such as these are especially important in today’s economic environment, where com-
pensation budgets tend to be limited (see “HR How To”).
Participation in Decisions
Employee participation in pay-related decisions can be part of a general move toward 
employee empowerment. If employees are involved in decisions about incentive pay plans 
and employees’ eligibility for incentives, the process of creating and administering these 
plans can be more complex.34 There is also a risk that employees will make decisions that 
are in their interests at the expense of the organization’s interests. However, employees 
have hands-on knowledge about the kinds of behavior that can help the organization per-
form well, and they can see whether individuals are displaying that behavior.35 Therefore, 
in spite of the potential risks, employee participation can contribute to the success of an 
incentive plan. This is especially true when monetary incentives encourage the monitoring 
of performance and when the organization fosters a spirit of trust and cooperation.
Communication
Along with empowerment, communicating with employees is important. It demon-
strates to employees that the pay plan is fair. Also, when employees understand the 
requirements of the incentive pay plan, the plan is more likely to infl uence their be-
havior as desired.
A social-media service may shine 
a light on the future of balanced 
scorecards. Klout tracks social-
media activity to compute a user’s 
infl uence in terms of the number of 
people reached and the user’s repu-
tation as trustworthy and expert 
in some area. For example, many 
retweets of a person’s Twitter posts 
would suggest that the person is 
infl uential. For a time, Klout scores 
drew attention as a way to compare 
famous individuals. Then some re-
sults (for example, pop star Justin 
Bieber being more infl uential than 
the president of the United States) 
drew scorn, and the idea that Klout 
will defi nitively measure infl uence 
may have faded.
Despite Klout’s limitations, it 
suggests an interesting social mea-
sure for organizations. Employees 
are especially valuable if they work 
effectively in a network of col-
leagues who share knowledge and 
infl uence one another construc-
tively. Organizations are already in-
vestigating ways to measure social 
infl uence among employees. In a 
few cases, companies have report-
edly used Klout scores to select 
infl uential people for jobs that in-
volve promoting the company to the 
general public. They also could use 
something like a Klout score to di-
rect incentive pay toward their most 
infl uential people.
In practice, this could be part of 
a balanced scorecard. Along with 
contributing to fi nancial and qual-
ity goals, an employee could have 
a target for infl uence, perhaps listed 
among other skills the employer val-
ues. Employees who score higher 
on infl uence could earn a larger 
bonus.
Questions
 1. Suppose a manufacturing fi rm 
decided to add social infl uence 
to a balanced scorecard for 
its engineers and marketing 
staff. What percentage of the 
total incentive pay do you 
think should be based on the 
infl uence score? Why?
 2. How fair do you think it would 
be to use social infl uence as a 
basis for incentive pay?
Sources: Jon Nathanson, “How Klout Fi-
nally Matters,” Slate, May 1, 2014, http:
//www.slate.com; Jeanne Meister, “2014: 
The Year Social HR Matters,” Forbes, 
January 6, 2014, http://www.forbes.com; 
Sharon Horrigan, “Is Social Media Clout a 
New Job Criteria?” Society for Human Re-
source Management, April 24, 2013, http://
www.shrm.org; Will Oremus, “Could Your 
Crummy Klout Score Keep You from Get-
ting a Job?” Slate, October 3, 2012, http://
www.slate.com.
Scoring Social Infl uence
HRM Social

413
It is particularly important to communicate with employees when changing the 
plan. Employees tend to feel concerned about changes. Pay is a frequent topic of 
rumors and assumptions based on incomplete information, partly because of pay’s 
importance to employees. When making any changes, the human resource depart-
ment should determine the best ways to communicate the reasons for the change. 
Some organizations rely heavily on videos, played at meetings or posted on the 
company’s intranet (internal website). The company can also publish descriptions 
and scenarios in brochures or post them on its intranet. Most pay-related commu-
nications, however, come through individual discussions between employees and 
their supervisor.36
You want to reward good per-
formance, but there’s hardly any 
money in the budget for raises and 
bonuses. That’s the situation fac-
ing many HR managers in today’s 
business climate. Here are some 
suggestions for making the most of 
whatever you can spend:
 • Make sure that merit pay is 
truly related to performance 
gains. Raises are expensive and 
widely used, so high-performing 
employees expect to earn sig-
nifi cantly more than average. 
Therefore, it is essential to be 
sure that performance measures 
used as the basis for raises are 
tied to business success and 
that the organization measures 
performance accurately.
 • Offer modest but frequent incen-
tives as quick rewards for ac-
complishments. An unexpected 
$100 one-time award for delight-
ing a customer can have more 
impact than a $100 per month 
raise, at a lower cost.
 • Implement other strategies to re-
ward performance that can also 
serve as employee incentives, 
such as fl exible schedules, inter-
esting and unique projects, and 
formal recognition. These are 
particularly useful for companies 
that don’t have large budgets to 
provide meaningful year-end or 
spot bonuses.
 • If the organization cannot afford 
to give everyone—or even all the 
above-average performers—a 
raise, it should target pay in-
creases to the best of the best. 
Explain that merit pay is for 
doing something exceptional, 
not just performing one’s job. 
When expressed clearly, this 
message actually can strengthen 
employees’ understanding of 
the connection between perfor-
mance and incentive pay.
 • Set and communicate clear, 
measurable targets for earning 
incentive pay. Employees want 
to understand what they have 
to do to be eligible for a raise 
or bonus. They also appreciate 
knowing the size of the incentive 
they are eligible to earn.
 • Accept that employees who do 
not achieve the requirements for 
earning incentive pay may leave. 
If the system is working prop-
erly, the employees who leave 
should be the ones who contrib-
ute the least. If good perform-
ers also are leaving, make sure 
the organization is providing 
employees with the resources 
they  need—including training 
and  empowerment—for meeting 
 performance targets.
Questions
 1. Suppose employees complain 
to HR managers that bonuses 
are meaningless because no 
one understands how to earn 
them. What measures should 
the company take to make 
incentive pay more effective?
 2. Suppose a manager has 
enough money to give one 
employee a 4% raise and 
another employee no raise, or 
else the manager can give both 
employees a 2% raise. What 
would you recommend to the 
manager, and why?
Sources: Juan Pablo Gonzalez, Kate 
Richardson, and Hemali Desai, “Get 
More Bang for Your Comp Program 
Buck  Despite Stagnant Salary Bud-
get Increases,”  Compensation Focus 
(WorldatWork),  October 2013, http://
www.worldatwork.org; Radek Knesl, Sal 
DiFonzo, and Philip E. Warner,  “Incentive 
Compensation Effectiveness Study: The 
2013 U.S.  Construction Industry Incentive 
 Compensation Survey,” FMI Corp., 2013, 
http://www.forconstructionpros.com; Bu-
reau of National Affairs, “Consultant  Details 
Advantages of Pay for Performance,” 
Report on Salary Surveys,  October 2013, 
pp. 8–9; Bloomberg BNA, “Pay for Per-
formance to Retain and Engage, Speaker 
Says,” Report on Salary Surveys, March 1, 
2013, http://news.bna.com.
Getting the Most from a Limited Compensation Budget
HR How To

414 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
Incentive Pay for Executives
Because executives have a much stronger infl uence over the organization’s performance 
than other employees do, incentive pay for executives warrants special attention. As-
suming that incentives infl uence performance, decisions about incentives for executives 
should have a great impact on how well the executives and the organization perform. 
Along with overall pay levels for executives (discussed in Chapter 12), organizations 
need to create incentive plans for this small but important group of employees.
To encourage executives to develop a commitment to the organization’s long-term 
success, executive compensation often combines short-term and long-term incentives. 
Short-term incentives include bonuses based on the year’s profi ts, return on investment, 
or other measures related to the organization’s goals. Sometimes, to gain tax advan-
tages, the actual payment of the bonus is deferred (for example, by making it part of a 
retirement plan). Long-term incentives include stock options and stock purchase plans. 
The rationale for these long-term incentives is that executives will want to do what is 
best for the organization because that will cause the value of their stock to grow.
Researchers have tried in vain to fi nd a link between the size of CEOs’ incentive 
pay and companies’ performance in terms of profi ts or other fi nancial measures.37 In 
an analysis of CEO pay at 300 large U.S.-traded companies, none of the 10 top-paid 
CEOs worked for companies that attained the top 10% in terms of performance, even 
though their pay far exceeded the median. And in a study that compared historical 
CEO pay with the companies’ performance over the following three years, CEOs who 
earned in the top 10% saw their companies do increasingly worse than others over the 
three years that followed. Of course, incentive pay is generally tied to one’s past ac-
complishments, not (formally) to expectations. However, the highly paid executives in 
the study took more risks that did not pay off, so if the incentives made them overcon-
fi dent, this type of pay was not meeting long-range objectives.
A corporation’s shareholders—its owners—want the corporation to encourage 
managers to act in the owners’ best interests. They want managers to care about 
the company’s profi ts and stock price, and incentive pay can encourage this interest. 
One study has found that relying on such long-term incentives is associated with 
greater profi tability.38
Performance Measures for Executives
The balanced-scorecard approach is useful in designing executive pay. Merck, for 
 example, has used a balanced scorecard that combines measures of whether the organi-
zation is delivering value to shareholders, customers, and employees. These measures 
are listed in Table 13.3. Rewarding achievement of a variety of goals in a balanced 
scorecard reduces the temptation to win bonuses by manipulating fi nancial data.
Regulators and shareholders have pressured companies to do a better job of linking 
executive pay and performance. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has re-
quired companies to more clearly report executive compensation levels and the company’s 
performance relative to that of competitors. These reporting requirements shine a light on 
situations where executives of poorly performing companies receive high pay, so compa-
nies feel more pressure to link pay to performance. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform 
and Consumer Protection Act, passed in 2010, requires that public companies report the 
ratio of median compensation of all its employees to the CEO’s total compensation. Dodd-
Frank also gives shareholders a “say on pay,” meaning shareholders may vote to indicate 
their approval or disapproval of the company’s executive pay plans.
LO 13-7 Discuss issues 
related to performance-
based pay for executives.

CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 415
Ethical Issues
Incentive pay for executives lays the groundwork for signifi cant ethical issues. When 
an organization links pay to its stock performance, executives need the ethical back-
bone to be honest about their company’s performance even when dishonesty or clever 
shading of the truth offers the tempting potential for large earnings. As scandals in-
volving WorldCom, Enron, Global Crossing, and other companies have shown, the 
results can be disastrous when unethical behavior comes to light.
Among these issues is one we have already touched on in this chapter: the diffi -
culty of setting performance measures that encourage precisely the behavior desired. 
In the case of incentives tied to stock performance, executives may be tempted to in-
fl ate the stock price in order to enjoy bonuses and valuable stock options. The intent 
is for the executive to boost stock value through effi cient operations, technological 
innovation, effective leadership, and so on. Unfortunately, individuals at some com-
panies determined that they could obtain faster results through accounting practices 
that stretched the norms in order to present the company’s performance in the best 
light. When such practices are discovered to be misleading, stock prices plunge and 
the  company’s reputation is damaged, sometimes beyond repair.
A related issue when executive pay includes stock 
or stock options is insider trading. When execu-
tives are stockholders, they have a dual role as own-
ers and managers. This places them at an advantage 
over others who want to invest in the company. An 
individual, a pension fund, or other investors have 
less information about the company than its manag-
ers do—for example, whether product development 
is proceeding on schedule, whether a fi nancing deal 
is in the works, and so on. An executive who knows 
about these activities could therefore reap a windfall 
in the stock market by buying or selling stock based 
on knowledge about the company’s future. The SEC 
places strict limits on this “insider trading,” but some 
executives have  violated these limits. In the worst 
Table 13.3
Balanced Scorecard for 
Merck Executives
PERFORMANCE MEASURE
TARGET POINTS
Financial
 Revenue
 Earnings per share
 Value of growth (e.g., return on investment)
60
Customer
 Percent of orders delivered on time
 Customer survey score
14
Key Business Drivers
 Operating expense
 Revenue growth (high-priority areas)
16
Culture (High Performance, Sustainable)
 Employee survey score
10
Total
100
Source: Merck & Co., Proxy Statement, April 15, 2013, http://www.merck.com, accessed May 14, 2013.
Whole Foods Markets limits cash salary and bonuses for top execu-
tives to 19 times the average pay of its full-time workers.

THINKING ETHICALLY
CAN INCENTIVES PROMOTE ETHICS?
In recent years, the federal government has investi-
gated allegations that Walmart had engaged in brib-
ery in  Mexico, China, and Brazil. Walmart reacted with 
changes aimed at promoting legal, ethical conduct— 
efforts costing hundreds of millions of dollars. It 
launched an internal investigation and linked a portion 
of executives’ pay to meeting standards for compliance 
with legal requirements. The expectation for the compli-
ance-related incentive pay was that if corporate execu-
tives are rewarded for the company behaving ethically, 
they will be more careful to ensure that it does so.
In 2014, Walmart issued a Global Compliance Pro-
gram Report. According to the report, the compliance 
objectives fall into three categories: people, policies and 
processes, and systems. The people objective includes 
a company reorganization that brings together employ-
ees responsible for ethics and the law into one group 
reporting to a global chief compliance offi cer, increas-
ing the number of employees charged with monitoring 
compliance, and training employees in ethical stan-
dards. The policies and processes objective focuses on 
establishing clear standards of conduct that apply glob-
ally. The systems objective is a plan for using technol-
ogy to support efforts at maintaining compliance.
At the end of the year, the corporate audit 
 committee determined that Walmart had “achieved 
substantial progress” on these objectives. Corporate 
executives were able to receive their bonuses without 
any compliance-related cuts.
Questions
 1. Do you think Walmart’s compliance-related per-
formance standards, as described here, would 
ensure ethical conduct? Why or why not?
 2. Review the principles for incentive pay described 
in the fi rst section of this chapter. How, if at all, 
could Walmart apply these principles to strengthen 
its effort to promote compliance with legal and 
ethical standards?
Sources: Walmart, “Global Compliance Program Report on 
Fiscal Year 2014,” http://corporate.walmart.com, accessed 
July 7, 2014; Paul Hodgson, “Wal-Mart: Have Any Execu-
tives Been Penalized for Recent Scandals?” Fortune, May 15, 
2014, http://fortune.com; Emily Chasan and Joel Schectman, 
“Wal-Mart Set to Reveal How Compliance Moved Executives’ 
Pay,” The Wall Street Journal, April 22, 2014, http://blogs.
wsj.com; Susan Berfi eld, “Wal-Mart Pays—and Pays—in 
 Response to the Bribery Probe,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
April 25, 2014, http://www.businessweek.com.
SUMMARY
LO 13-1 Discuss the connection between incentive pay 
and employee performance.
• Incentive pay is pay tied to individual perfor-
mance, profi ts, or other measures of success.
• Organizations select forms of incentive pay to en-
ergize, direct, or control employees’ behavior.
• It is infl uential because the amount paid is linked 
to predefi ned behaviors or outcomes.
• To be effective, incentive pay should encourage 
the kinds of behavior that are most needed, and 
employees must believe they have the ability to 
meet the performance standards. Employees must 
416 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
cases executives have sold stock, secretly knowing their company was failing, before 
the stock price collapsed. The losers are the employees, retirees, and other investors 
who hold the now-worthless stock.
As recent news stories have reminded us, linking pay to stock price can reward 
unethical behavior, at least in the short term and at least in the minds of a handful of 
executives. Yet, given the motivational power of incentive pay, organizations cannot 
afford to abandon incentives for their executives. These temptations are among the 
reasons that executive positions demand individuals who maintain the highest ethical 
standards.

value the rewards, have the resources they need to 
meet the standards, and believe the pay plan is fair.
LO 13-2 Describe how organizations recognize indi-
vidual performance.
• Organizations may recognize individual perfor-
mance through such incentives as piecework rates, 
standard hour plans, merit pay, sales commissions, 
and bonuses for meeting individual performance 
objectives.
• Piecework rates pay employees according to the 
amount they produce.
• Standard hour plans pay workers extra for work 
done in less than a preset “standard time.”
• Merit pay links increases in wages or salaries to 
ratings on performance appraisals.
• Bonuses are similar to merit pay, because they are 
paid for meeting individual goals, but they are not 
rolled into base pay, and they usually are based on 
achieving a specifi c output rather than subjective 
performance ratings.
• A sales commission is incentive pay calculated as a 
percentage of sales closed by a salesperson.
LO 13-3 Identify ways to recognize group performance.
• Common group incentives include gainsharing, 
bonuses, and team awards.
• Gainsharing programs, such as Scanlon plans, 
measure increases in productivity and distribute a 
portion of each gain to employees.
• Group bonuses reward the members of a group 
for attaining a specifi c goal, usually measured in 
terms of physical output.
• Team awards are more likely to use a broad range 
of performance measures, such as cost savings, 
successful completion of a project, or meeting a 
deadline.
LO 13-4 Explain how organizations link pay to their 
overall performance.
• Incentives for meeting organizational objectives 
include profi t sharing and stock ownership.
• Profi t-sharing plans pay workers a percentage of 
the organization’s profi ts; these payments do not 
become part of the employees’ base salary.
• Stock ownership incentives may take the form of 
stock options or employee stock ownership plans.
• A stock option is the right to buy a certain number 
of shares at a specifi ed price. The employee ben-
efi ts by exercising the option at a price lower than 
the market price, so the employee benefi ts when 
the company’s stock price rises.
• An employee stock ownership plan (ESOP) is an 
arrangement in which the organization distributes 
shares of its stock to employees by placing the 
stock in a trust managed on the employees’ behalf. 
When employees leave the organization, they may 
sell their shares of the stock.
LO 13-5 Describe how organizations combine incentive 
plans in a “balanced scorecard.”
• A balanced scorecard is a combination of perfor-
mance measures directed toward the company’s 
long- and short-term goals and used as the basis 
for awarding incentive pay.
• Typically, it includes fi nancial goals to satisfy 
stockholders, quality- and price-related goals for 
customer satisfaction, effi ciency goals for im-
proved operations, and goals related to acquiring 
skills and knowledge for the future.
• The mix of pay programs is intended to balance 
the disadvantages of one type of incentive with the 
advantages of another type.
• The balanced scorecard also helps employees to 
understand and care about the organization’s goals.
LO 13-6 Summarize processes that can contribute to 
the success of incentive programs.
• Communication and participation in decisions can 
contribute to employees’ feeling that the organi-
zation’s incentive pay plans are fair.
• Employee participation in pay-related decisions 
can be part of a general move toward employee 
empowerment. Employees may put their own in-
terests fi rst in developing the plan, but they also 
have fi rsthand insight into the kinds of behavior 
that can contribute to organizational goals.
• Communicating with employees is important be-
cause it demonstrates that the pay plan is fair and 
helps them understand what is expected of them. 
Communication is especially important when the 
organization is changing its pay plan.
LO 13-7 Discuss issues related to performance-based 
pay for executives.
• Because executives have such a strong infl uence 
over the organization’s performance, incentive pay 
for them receives special attention.
• Executive pay usually combines long-term and 
short-term incentives. By motivating executives, 
these incentives can signifi cantly affect the orga-
nization’s performance.
• The size of incentives should be motivating but 
also meet standards for equity.
• Performance measures should encourage behav-
ior that is in the organization’s best interests, in-
cluding ethical behavior. Executives need ethical 
standards that keep them from insider trading or 
deceptive practices designed to manipulate the or-
ganization’s stock price.
CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 417

KEY TERMS
incentive pay, 396
piecework rate, 399
straight piecework plan, 399
differential piece rates, 399
standard hour plan, 400
merit pay, 400
commissions, 403
gainsharing, 404
Scanlon plan, 405
profi t sharing, 406
stock options, 408
employee stock ownership plan 
(ESOP), 409
balanced scoreboard, 410
418 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. With some organizations and jobs, pay is primar-
ily wages or salaries, and with others, incentive pay 
is more important. For each of the following jobs, 
state whether you think the pay should emphasize 
base pay (wages and salaries) or incentive pay (bo-
nuses, profi t sharing, and so on). Give a reason for 
each. (LO 13-1)
a. An accountant at a manufacturing company.
b. A salesperson for a software company.
c. A chief executive officer.
d. A physician in a health clinic.
 2. Consider your current job or a job that you have 
recently held. Would you be most motivated in 
response to incentives based on your individual 
performance, your group’s performance, or the or-
ganization’s overall performance (profi ts or stock 
price)? Why? (LO 13-2)
 3. What are the pros and cons of linking incentive pay 
to individual performance? How can organizations 
address the negatives? (LO 13-2)
 4. Suppose you are a human resource professional at 
a company that is setting up work teams for pro-
duction and sales. What group incentives would 
you recommend to support this new work arrange-
ment? (LO 13-3)
 5. Why do some organizations link incentive pay to 
the organization’s overall performance? Is it appro-
priate to use stock performance as an incentive for 
employees at all levels? Why or why not? (LO 13-4)
 6. Stock options have been called the pay program 
that “built Silicon Valley” because of their key role 
as incentive pay for employees in high-tech com-
panies. They were popular during the 1990s, when 
the stock market was rising rapidly. Since then, 
stock prices have fallen. (LO 13-4)
a.  How would you expect this change to affect 
employees’ attitudes toward stock options as 
incentive pay?
b.  How would you expect this change to affect the 
effectiveness of stock options as an incentive?
 7. Based on the balanced scorecard in Table 13.2, fi nd 
the incentive pay for an employee earning a salary 
of $4,000 a month in each of the following situa-
tions. (LO 13-5)
a.  The company met all of its target goals for the 
year. (Multiply the percentage at the top of the 
table by the employee’s salary.)
b.  The company met only its target goals for 
financial performance (25% of the total incen-
tive pay) but none of the other goals.
c.  The company met its stretch goals for finan-
cial performance and its base goals in the other 
areas. (For each category of goals, multiply the 
percentages by the employee’s salary, and then 
add the amounts together.)
 8. Why might a balanced scorecard like the one in 
Question 7 be more effective than simply using 
merit pay for a manager? (LO 13-5)
 9. How can the way an organization creates and car-
ries out its incentive plan improve the effectiveness 
of that plan? (LO 13-6)
 10. In a typical large corporation, the majority of the 
chief executive’s pay is tied to the company’s stock 
price. What are some benefi ts of this pay strategy? 
Some risks? How can organizations address the risks? 
(LO 13-7)
At Rhino Foods, Incentive Pay Is an Expression of Respect
Rhino Foods, which operates a production facility and 
warehouse in Burlington, Vermont, is a small business 
with big ideas for how to treat employees. The company 
produces handmade ice-cream sandwiches, and its bak-
ery turns out cheesecakes, brownies, and cake pieces. It 
also developed the cookie dough used as a mix-in for 
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY

CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 419
Ben & Jerry’s ice cream. Rhino’s two production shifts 
make products to order, with product lines changing 
from day to day, so workers have to be fl exible. Rhino 
cross-trains its employees to handle baking, ice-cream 
processing, and cookie dough extrusion.
Management at Rhino Foods is focused on goals. 
When workers arrive each day, they pass by a bulletin 
board displaying the day’s key performance indicators—
measurements identifi ed as important to business success 
that day. These performance indicators might include 
costs, sales volume, safety measures, or adherence to the 
schedule. Ted Castle, Rhino’s founder and president, has 
observed that employees work on the areas of perfor-
mance the company highlights. For example, when the 
company introduced safety targets, the number of injuries 
fell from triple the industry average to less than average.
This manner of operating is based on Rhino Foods’ 
purpose and principles, which are posted on the compa-
ny’s website and in its lobby. Its purpose is “to impact the 
manner in which business is done.” That impact comes 
from living up to principles in four categories: fi nances, 
employees, customers and suppliers, and community. 
The Employee Principle at Rhino Foods says, “We es-
tablish relationships with our employees and their fami-
lies founded upon a climate of mutual trust and respect 
within an environment for listening and personal expres-
sion. We provide a vehicle for our people to develop and 
achieve their personal and professional aspirations.”
That high-minded language is behind the company’s 
use of goals and rewards. Posting business goals as key 
performance indicators treats employees with respect 
by being transparent about the connection between 
what they do each day and how well the business suc-
ceeds. Management practices open-book management 
and teaches employees to understand the fi nancial mea-
sures of the company’s success. By focusing on one to 
three critical measures at a time, the company makes 
fi nancial literacy more achievable. The effort equips 
employees to contribute more at work and gives them 
fi nancial skills they can transfer to their personal lives as 
well as to broader roles in their community.
Employees receive daily, weekly, and monthly reports 
of their progress. When the company meets its goals, 
employees receive a bonus. Use of bonuses in conjunc-
tion with open-book management has led to increases 
in production effi ciency, customer service, and product 
quality. It also has lowered costs associated with work-
place injuries, prompted innovation, and developed em-
ployees’ leadership skills.
Questions
1. What form of incentive pay is described in this case? 
What are the pros and cons of this kind of incentive?
2. What additional types of incentive pay, if any, would 
you recommend for Rhino Foods?
Sources: Rhino Foods, “The Rhino Way,” http://www.rhinofoods.com, ac-
cessed July 7, 2014; B Corporation, “Rhino Foods,” http://www.bcorpora-
tion.net, accessed July 7, 2014; Rhino Foods, “Open Book Management/
Bonus on Goals at Rhino Foods,” May 2013, http://www.rhinofoods.com; 
Ted Castle, “Be the Best at Asset Management,” Dairy Foods, April 2013, 
p. 94; Jim Carper, “Made to Measure,” Dairy Foods, February 2013, pp. 54–56. 
Making Hilcorp Energy’s Employees Feel (and Act) like Owners
Hilcorp Energy Company’s vision is to be “America’s 
premier private energy company.” Founded by Jeffrey 
Hildebrand in 1989, Hilcorp already ranks as one of the 
biggest privately held oil and natural gas exploration 
and production companies in the United States. The 
company is based in Houston and operates in Texas, 
Louisiana, Alaska, and the northeastern United States. 
It has grown mainly by purchasing energy fi elds from 
bigger companies and then using new technology to 
make them profi table.
Hilcorp attributes its success to living out fi ve core 
values. The fi rst, ownership, means employees approach 
their jobs with the attitude that they own the company—
that is, they are committed to its success. The second 
value, urgency, is a bias toward action. Alignment means 
working together as a team, because individual success 
is associated with the company’s success. The fi nal two 
values, innovation and integrity, are self-explanatory.
These values have created a culture of ownership 
and high performance. The culture is expressed in the 
transparency with which management shares fi nancial 
information with its employees. Employees meet once a 
month to review performance and discuss concerns such 
as safety and training. The meetings also cover forecasts 
of the numbers the company needs to meet—for ex-
ample, production volume, revenues, and net income, 
as well as division-specifi c numbers such as labor hours. 
During the meeting, employees learn how performance 
on these measures contributes to the company’s profi t-
ability, so everyone understands the goals. Hilcorp then 
keeps the employees abreast of their progress by provid-
ing daily updates.
Hilcorp rewards high performance with annual and 
fi ve-year bonuses. The annual bonus for meeting tar-
gets has averaged 35% of employees’ base pay. Perhaps 
the most unusual incentive pay at Hilcorp is its Double 
MANAGING TALENT

420 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
Drive bonus. The company gave employees fi ve years 
to double the company’s value, production rate, and re-
serves by 2010. If the company met those targets, they 
would all earn their choice of $35,000 or a new SUV. 
The company did—and spent more than $31 million to 
award those bonuses to the nearly 700 employees then 
working at Hilcorp. Now the second Double Drive 
bonus period is under way, with higher stakes. If the 
company against doubles in size, its 1,100 employees 
will be eligible for $100,000 bonuses.
Creating a sense of ownership is a remarkable ac-
complishment at a company with only one shareholder, 
Jeffrey Hildebrand. However, Hildebrand has accom-
plished this with his willingness to share information 
through open-book management and to share prof-
its through the bonus programs. In addition, Hilcorp 
gives employees an allowance to invest in their choice 
of particular Hilcorp projects. With these investments, 
employees experience fi rsthand how success on a proj-
ect translates into greater wealth for the investor.
Questions
 1. How well would individual incentives align with Hil-
corp’s core values?
 2. What advice would you give Hilcorp’s management 
for adding merit pay (an individual incentive) to its 
current forms of incentive pay?
Sources: Hilcorp Energy Company, “About Us,” http://www.hilcorp.com, 
accessed July 7, 2014; “Top Workplaces 2013: Hilcorp,” Houston Chronicle, 
accessed at http://www.topworkplaces.com, July 7, 2014; Great Game of 
Business, “Playing the Game at Hilcorp Energy Company,” January 21, 
2014, http://www.greatgame.com; Erika Fry, “100 Best Companies to 
Work For: Hilcorp Energy,” Fortune, August 12, 2013, EBSCOhost, http://
web.a.ebscohost.com; Christopher Helman, “Secretive Oil Billionaire 
Scores New $550M Payday,” Forbes, September 17, 2012, http://www.
forbes.com.
Employees Own Bob’s Red Mill
Headquartered in Portland, Oregon, Bob’s Red Mill 
Natural Foods sells a variety of whole-grain fl ours and 
mixes, specializing in gluten-free products. The “Bob” 
of the company’s name is Bob Moore, the founder and 
president. In 2010, more than 30 years after he started 
the business, Moore called his 200 employees together 
and announced that he was giving them the company. As 
a retirement plan for them, he had set up an employee 
stock ownership plan, placing the company’s stock in a 
trust fund. All employees who had been with the com-
pany at least three years were immediately fully vested 
in the plan. As employees retire, they will receive cash 
for their shares.
Watching the company’s stock rise in their retire-
ment plan is not the only fi nancial incentive for employ-
ees of Bob’s Red Mill. Fifteen years ago, the company 
established a profi t-sharing plan. Chief fi nancial offi cer 
John Wagner gives employees a weekly sales update, 
which they can use to estimate profi ts and determine 
their share.
The numbers have been mostly good during the past 
two decades. When Wagner joined the company in 1993, 
there were just 28 employees generating sales of $3.2 mil-
lion. Under Wagner’s guidance, the company began par-
ticipating in trade shows, attracting the interest of health 
food stores, food distributors, and later on, supermarket 
chains. The company’s market expanded from a few states 
to cover North America and some international markets. 
The company reports that its revenues have grown at 
rates between 20% and 30% in the years since 2004.
Along the way, Moore and his employees have been 
unwavering in their dedication to the company and its 
mission of providing foods that make America healthier. 
Ten years after the business started, a fi re caused by 
arson destroyed the mill, but Moore had it rebuilt, and 
the company now runs a 15-acre production facility, op-
erating in three shifts, six days a week.
Why did Moore give his company to his employees 
on his 81st birthday rather than selling it to one of the 
many parties who have expressed an interest in buying? 
For Moore, the answer is all about his employees and 
their commitment to the company. He told a reporter, 
“These people are far too good at their jobs for me to 
just sell [the business].” Employees return the praise. 
For example, Bo Thomas, maintenance superintendent, 
said, “It just shows how much faith and trust Bob has in 
us. For all of us, it’s more than just a job.”
Questions
 1. Which types of incentive pay are described in this 
case? Are these based on individual, group, or com-
pany performance?
 2. Would you expect the motivational impact of stock 
ownership or profi t sharing to be different at a small 
company like Bob’s Red Mill than in a large corpora-
tion? Explain.
 3. Suppose Bob’s Red Mill brought you in as a con-
sultant to review the company’s total compensation. 
Explain why you would or would not recommend 
that the company add other forms of incentive pay, 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

CHAPTER 13 
Recognizing Employee Contributions with Pay 421
 1. Christina Rogers, “Say Goodbye to the Car Salesman,” The 
Wall Street Journal, November 20, 2013, http://online.wsj.
com.
 2. This chapter draws freely on several literature reviews: B. 
Gerhart and G. T. Milkovich, “Employee Compensation: 
Research and Practice,” in Handbook of Industrial and Or-
ganizational Psychology, 2nd ed., eds. M. D. Dunnette and 
L. M. Hough (Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists 
Press, 1992), vol. 3; B. Gerhart and S. L. Rynes, Compen-
sation: Theory, Evidence, and Strategic Implications (Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2003); B. Gerhart, “Compensation 
Strategy and Organization Performance,” in Compensation 
in Organizations: Current Research and Practice, eds. S. L. 
Rynes and B.  Gerhart (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2000), 
pp. 151–94; B. Gerhart, S. L. Rynes, and I. S. Fulmer, 
“Compensation,” Academy of Management Annals 3 (2009); 
Barry Gerhart and Meiyu Fang, “Pay for (Individual) 
Performance: Issues, Claims, Evidence and the Role of 
Sorting Effects,” Human Resource Management Review 24 
(2014): 41–52.
 3. B. Gerhart and G. T. Milkovich, “Organizational Differences 
in Managerial Compensation and Financial Performance,” 
Academy of Management Journal 33 (1990), pp. 663–91.
 4. G. T. Milkovich and A. K. Wigdor, Pay for Performance 
(Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1991); Ger-
hart and Milkovich, “Employee Compensation”; Gerhart 
and Rynes, Compensation; A. Nyberg, “Retaining Your 
High Performers: Moderators of the Performance–Job 
Satisfaction– Voluntary Turnover Relationship,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology 95, no. 3 (2010): 440–53; C. O. Trevor, G. 
Reilly, and B. Gerhart, “Reconsidering Pay Dispersion’s Ef-
fect on the Performance of Interdependent Work: Recon-
ciling Sorting and Pay Inequality,” Academy of Management 
Journal (forthcoming).
 5. Aon Corporation, “Salary Increases Stay Consistent with Re-
cent Trends, as the Focus Remains on Variable Pay, accord-
ing to Aon Hewitt,” news release, September 1, 2011, http://
aon.mediaroom .com.
 6. Rachel Emma Silverman, “My Colleague, My Paymaster,” 
The Wall Street Journal, April 3, 2012, http://online.wsj.
com.
 7. R. D. Bretz, R. A. Ash, and G. F. Dreher, “Do People Make the 
Place? An Examination of the  Attraction-Selection-Attrition 
Hypothesis,” Personnel Psychology 42 (1989), pp. 561–81; 
T. A. Judge and R. D. Bretz, “Effect of Values on Job Choice 
Decisions,” Journal of Applied Psychology 77 (1992), pp. 261–
71; D. M. Cable and T. A. Judge, “Pay Performance and Job 
Search Decisions: A Person-Organization Fit Perspective,” 
Personnel Psychology 47 (1994), pp. 317–48.
 8. E. A. Locke, D. B. Feren, V. M. McCaleb, K. N. Shaw, and A. T. 
Denny, “The Relative Effectiveness of Four Methods of Moti-
vating Employee Performance,” in Changes in Working Life, eds. 
K. D.  Duncan, M. M. Gruenberg, and D. Wallis (New York: 
Wiley, 1980), pp. 363–88.
 9. Gerhart and Milkovich, “Employee Compensation.”
 10. E. E. Lawler III, “Pay for Performance: A Strategic Analysis,” 
in Compensation and Benefi ts, ed. L. R. Gomez-Mejia (Wash-
ington, DC: Bureau of National Affairs, 1989); Bureau of 
National Affairs, “Salary Budgets for 2014 May Top 3 Per-
cent, WorldatWork Survey Reports,” Report on Salary Sur-
veys, September 2013, pp. 1–4; Steve Goldstein, “Will Wage 
Growth Accelearte? Economists Are Divided,” MarketWatch, 
June 10, 2014, http://blogs.marketwatch.com; Bloomberg 
BNA, “WTI Continues to Signal Pickup in Wage Growth,” 
Wage Trend Indicator, June 17, 2014, http://www.bna.com/
wage-trend-indicator; Marilyn Geewax, “Hiring Looks 
Good Now, but Wage Growth Lags,” NPR, July 3, 2014, 
http://www.npr.org.
 11. Lyle Leritz, “Principles of Merit Pay,” Economic Research 
Institute, 2012, http://www.erieri.com; Joanne Dahm and 
Pete Sanborn, “Addressing Talent and Rewards in ‘The New 
Normal,’” Aon Hewitt, 2010, http://aonhewitt.com; Stephen 
Miller, “Pay for Performance: Make It More than a Catch-
phrase,” SHRM Online Compensation Discipline, May 30, 
2011, http://www.shrm.org.
 12. R. D. Bretz, G. T. Milkovich, and W. Read, “The Current 
State of Performance Appraisal Research and Practice,” Jour-
nal of Management 18 (1992), pp. 321–52; R. L. Heneman, 
“Merit Pay Research,” Research in Personnel and Human 
Resource Management 8 (1990), pp. 203–63; Milkovich and 
 Wigdor, Pay for Performance.
 13. Bretz et al., “Current State of Performance Appraisal 
Research.”
 14. S. L. Rynes, B. Gerhart, and L. Parks, “Personnel Psychol-
ogy: Performance Evaluation and Compensation,” Annual 
Review of Psychology (2005).
 15. W. E. Deming, Out of the Crisis (Cambridge, MA: Center 
for Advanced Engineering Study, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 1986), p. 110.
 16. Gerhart and Fang, “Pay for (Individual) Performance”; 
WorldatWork, “Compensation Programs and Practices 
2012,” Scottsdale, AZ, October 2012.
 17. Charles Paikert, “How Advisors Get Paid Now,” Financial 
Planning, March 2014, pp. 46–53.
 18. Marcia Heroux, “Offi ce Depot Execs Get Bonuses to 
Stay,” Sun Sentinel (Fort Lauderdale, FL), March 26, 2014, 
http://articles.sun-sentinel.com; Gwen Moran, “When Are 
NOTES
and identify any additional forms of compensation 
you would recommend for the company’s employees.
Sources: Karen E. Klein, “ESOPs on the Rise among Small Businesses,”
Bloomberg Businessweek, April 26, 2010, www.businessweek.com; Dana Tims, 
“Founder of Bob’s Red Mill Natural Foods Transfers Business to Employ-
ees,” Oregon Live, February 16, 2010, http://blog.oregonlive.com; Christine 
Brozyna, “American Heart: Owner of Multi-Million Dollar Company Hands 
Over Business to Employees,” ABC News, February 18, 2010, http://abcnews.
go.com.

422 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
 Pay-to-Stay Bonuses a Good Idea?” Entrepreneur, July 23, 
2013, http://www.entrepreneur.com.
 19. U.S. Department of Justice, Antitrust Division, “Competi-
tion and Real Estate: Home Prices and Commissions over 
Time,” http://www.justice.gov, accessed April 19, 2012; Les-
lie Scism, “Insurance Fees, Revealed,” The Wall Street Journal, 
March 30, 2012, http://online.wsj.com; Anonymous, “Con-
fessions of a Car Salesman,” Popular Mechanics, May 4, 2011, 
http://www.popularmechanics.com.
 20. T. L. Ross and R. A. Ross, “Gainsharing: Sharing Improved 
Performance,” in The Compensation Handbook, 3rd ed., eds. M. 
L. Rock and L. A. Berger (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991).
 21. T. M. Welbourne and L. R. Gomez-Mejia, “Team Incentives 
in the Workplace,” in The Compensation Handbook, 3rd ed.
 22. L. R. Gomez-Mejia and D. B. Balkin, Compensation, Organi-
zational Strategy, and Firm Performance (Cincinnati: South-
Western, 1992).
 23. J. A. Fossum, Labor Relations (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2002).
 24. This idea has been referred to as the “share economy.” See 
M. L. Weitzman, “The Simple Macroeconomics of Profi t 
Sharing,” American Economic Review 75 (1985), pp. 937–53. 
For supportive research, see the following studies: J. Che-
lius and R. S. Smith, “Profi t Sharing and Employment Sta-
bility,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43 (1990), pp. 
256S–73S; B. Gerhart and L. O. Trevor, “Employment Sta-
bility under Different Managerial Compensation Systems,” 
working paper (Cornell University Center for Advanced 
Human Resource Studies, 1995); D. L. Kruse, “Profi t Shar-
ing and Employment Variability: Microeconomic Evidence 
on the Weitzman Theory,” Industrial and Labor Relations Re-
view 44 (1991), pp. 437–53.
 25. Gerhart and Milkovich, “Employee Compensation”; M. L. 
Weitzman and D. L. Kruse, “Profi t Sharing and Productiv-
ity,” in Paying for Productivity, ed. A. S. Blinder (Washing-
ton, DC: Brookings Institution, 1990); D. L. Kruse, Profi t 
Sharing: Does It Make a Difference? (Kalamazoo, MI: Up-
john Institute, 1993); M. Magnan and S. St.-Onge, “The 
Impact of Profi t Sharing on the Performance of Financial 
Services Firms,” Journal of Management Studies 42 (2005), 
pp. 761–91.
 26. Dori Meinert, “An Open Book,” HR Magazine, April 2013, 
http://www.shrm.org.
 27. Gerhart and Milkovich, “Organizational Differences in 
Managerial Compensation.”
 28. National Center for Employee Ownership, “A Statistical 
Profi le of Employee Ownership,” updated June 2014, http://
www.nceo.org.
 29. M. A. Conte and J. Svejnar, “The Performance Effects of 
Employee Ownership Plans,” in Paying for Productivity, pp. 
245–94.
 30. Ibid.; T. H. Hammer, “New Developments in Profi t Shar-
ing, Gainsharing, and Employee Ownership,” in Productiv-
ity in Organizations, eds. J. P. Campbell, R. J. Campbell, 
et al. (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1988); K. J. Klein, 
 “Employee Stock Ownership and Employee Attitudes: 
A Test of Three Models,” Journal of Applied Psychology 72 
(1987), pp. 319–32.
 31. SAS Institute, “SAS Helps ConocoPhillips Norway Fucus on 
Performance and Control Costs,” Customer Success, http://
www.sas.com, accessed April 24, 2012.
 32. R. T. Kaufman, “The Effects of Improshare on Productivity,” 
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 45 (1992), pp. 311–22; 
M. H. Schuster, “The Scanlon Plan: A Longitudinal Analy-
sis,” Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 20 (1984), pp. 23–28; 
J. A. Wagner III, P. Rubin, and T. J. Callahan, “Incentive Pay-
ment and Nonmanagerial Productivity: An Interrupted Time 
Series Analysis of Magnitude and Trend,” Organizational Be-
havior and Human Decision Processes 42 (1988), pp. 47–74.
 33. C. R. Gowen III and S. A. Jennings, “The Effects of Changes 
in Participation and Group Size on Gainsharing Success: A 
Case Study,” Journal of Organizational Behavior Management 
11 (1991), pp. 147–69.
 34. D. I. Levine and L. D. Tyson, “Participation, Productivity, 
and the Firm’s Environment,” in Paying for Productivity.
 35. T. Welbourne, D. Balkin, and L. Gomez-Mejia, “Gainsharing 
and Mutual Monitoring: A Combined Agency–Organizational 
Justice Interpretation,” Academy of Management Journal 38 
(1995), pp. 881–99.
 36. WorldatWork, “Compensation Programs and Practices 
2012.”
 37. Theo Francis and Joann S. Lublin, “CEO Pay Rises Mod-
erately; A Few Reap Huge Rewards,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, May 27, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Michael J. Cooper, 
Huseyin Gulen, and P. Raghavendra Rau, “Performance for 
Pay? The Relation between CEO Incentive Compensation 
and Future Stock Price Performance” (January 30, 2013), 
available at Social Science Research Network, http://ssrn.com.
 38. Gerhart and Milkovich, “Organizational Differences in 
Managerial Compensation”; B. Gerhart, S. L. Rynes, and 
I. S. Fulmer, “Pay and Performance: Individuals, Groups, 
and  Executives,” Academy of Management Annals 3 (2009), 
pp. 251–315.

 
Providing Employee 
Beneﬁ ts
14
Introduction
Recently, the Connecticut legislature passed a law requiring organizations 
with more than 50 employees to provide an hour of paid sick leave for every 
40 hours they work. For up to five days a year, employees—unless they are 
temporary workers or employed by a manufacturer—can call in sick and 
be paid for the time off. Some managers worried about the expense, but 
not Tom McDonald, president of NSI, a provider of information technology 
services. To McDonald, paying employees to stay home when sick is a way 
to “do what’s right for your employees,” which is simply “good business.” At 
NSI, employees earn between 15 and 25 days off with pay each year, and they 
can use the time to recover from an illness, take a vacation, or do whatever they 
prefer. When his business reaches the 50-employee mark, McDonald will not have 
to change his time-off policy, because he already meets the legal requirements. He 
is not alone in that regard; a survey of Connecticut businesses found that only a 
tenth of them saw their compensation costs rise by more than 3% when sick leave 
became mandatory.
Other state and local governments have addressed whether to require paid 
sick leave. Wisconsin and Florida have forbidden their cities from requiring it. 
What Do I Need to Know? 
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 14-1 Discuss the importance of beneﬁ ts as a part of 
employee compensation.
 LO 14-2 Summarize the types of employee beneﬁ ts 
required by law.
 LO 14-3 Describe the most common forms of paid leave.
 LO 14-4 Identify the kinds of insurance beneﬁ ts offered by 
employers.
 LO 14-5 Deﬁ ne the types of retirement plans offered 
by employers.
 LO 14-6 Describe how organizations use other beneﬁ ts to 
match employees’ wants and needs.
 LO 14-7 Explain how to choose the contents of an 
employee beneﬁ ts package.
 LO 14-8 Summarize the regulations affecting how employers 
design and administer beneﬁ ts programs.
 LO 14-9 Discuss the importance of effectively 
communicating the nature and value of beneﬁ ts to 
employees.

424 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
In contrast, Jersey City, New Jersey, requires employers with at least 10 workers to 
provide employees with up to five paid sick days each year. There, Karen Davis-Farage, 
co-owner of a go-kart racing business, sees the law as harmful to her company. Most 
of her employees are part-timers—students earning minimum wage. She suspects 
they are not “loyal” enough to limit their use of sick days. If they abuse the benefit, 
she might reduce the money spent on quarterly bonuses so she can afford to pay for 
workers to come in when others call in sick.1
Whether or not the law requires it, many companies offer employees some paid time 
off. Employees earn this privilege along with their pay. It is a part of the employ-
ees’ total compensation package, which includes some combination of wages or salary, 
incentive pay, and benefi ts. The term for compensation in forms other than cash is 
employee beneﬁ ts. Along with paid sick leave, examples of benefi ts include em-
ployer-paid health insurance, retirement savings plans, and paid vacations, among a 
wide range of possibilities.
This chapter describes the contents of an employee benefi ts package and the way 
organizations administer employee benefi ts. We begin by discussing the important 
role of benefi ts as a part of employee compensation. The following sections defi ne 
major types of employee benefi ts: benefi ts required by law, paid leave, insurance 
policies, retirement plans, and other benefi ts. We then discuss how to choose which 
of these alternatives to include in an employee benefi ts package so that it contributes 
to meeting the organization’s goals. The next section summarizes the regulations af-
fecting how employers design and administer benefi ts programs. Finally, we explain 
why and how organizations should effectively communicate with employees about 
their benefi ts.
The Role of Employee Benefits
As a part of the total compensation paid to employees, benefi ts serve functions sim-
ilar to pay. Benefi ts contribute to attracting, retaining, and motivating employees. 
The variety of possible benefi ts also helps employers tailor their compensation to the 
kinds of employees they need. Different employees look for different types of ben-
efi ts. Employers need to examine their benefi ts package regularly to see whether they 
meet the needs of today. At the same time, benefi ts packages are more complex than 
pay structures, so benefi ts are harder for employees to understand and appreciate. 
Even if employers spend large sums on benefi ts, if employees do not understand how 
to use them or why they are valuable, the cost of the benefi ts will be largely wasted.2 
Employers need to communicate effectively so that the benefi ts succeed in motivat-
ing employees.
Employees have come to expect that benefi ts will help them maintain economic 
security. Social Security contributions, pensions, and retirement savings plans help 
employees prepare for their retirement. Insurance plans help to protect employees 
from unexpected costs such as hospital bills. This important role of benefi ts is one rea-
son that benefi ts are subject to government regulation. Some benefi ts, such as Social 
Security, are required by law. Other regulations establish requirements that benefi ts 
must meet to obtain the most favorable tax treatment. Later in the chapter, we will 
describe some of the most signifi cant regulations affecting benefi ts.
Even though many kinds of benefi ts are not required by law, they have become so 
common that today’s employees expect them. Many employers fi nd that attracting 
Employee Beneﬁ ts
Compensation in forms 
other than cash.
LO 14-1 Discuss the 
importance of beneﬁ ts 
as a part of employee 
compensation.

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 425
qualifi ed workers requires them to provide medical and retirement benefi ts of some 
sort. A large employer without such benefi ts would be highly unusual and would have 
diffi culty competing in the labor market. Still, the nature of the benefi ts package 
changes over time, as we will discuss at various points throughout the chapter.
Like other forms of compensation, benefi ts impose signifi cant costs. On average, 
out of every dollar spent on compensation, more than 30 cents goes to benefi ts. As 
Figure 14.1 shows, this share has grown over the past decades. These numbers indicate 
that an organization managing its labor costs must pay careful attention to the cost of 
its employee benefi ts.
Why do organizations pay a growing share of compensation in the form of benefi ts? 
It would be simpler to pay all compensation in cash and let employees buy their own 
insurance and contribute to their own savings plans. That arrangement would also 
give employees greater control over what their compensation buys. However, several 
forces have made benefi ts a signifi cant part of compensation packages. One is that laws 
require employers to provide certain benefi ts, such as contributions to Social Security 
and unemployment insurance. Also, tax laws can make benefi ts favorable to employees. 
For example, employees do not pay income taxes on most benefi ts they receive, but 
they pay income taxes on cash compensation. Therefore, an employee who receives a 
$1,000 raise “takes home” less than the full $1,000, but an employee who receives an 
additional $1,000 worth of benefi ts receives the full benefi ts. Another cost advantage 
of paying benefi ts is that employers, especially large ones, often can get a better deal 
on insurance or other programs than employees can obtain on their own. Finally, some 
employers assemble creative benefi ts packages that set them apart in the competition 
for talent. For example, Netfl ix lets people take off as much time as they want and 
doesn’t keep track. This policy is in keeping with its HR strategy of “hiring adults”—
experts who already have a history of success, love movies, and can manage their time. 
Since the company’s success comes from people driven by a passion for what they do 
and what they can accomplish, offering freedom as a benefi t contributes to attracting 
and keeping the right talent.3
Figure 14.1
Benefi ts as a 
Percentage of Total 
Compensation
40
Percentage
30
20
10
0
2.9
1928
23.1
Year
1975
1955
14.5
1965
17.7
1986
26.2
1995
28.8
2010
30.3
2005
29.8
2013
31.0
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employer Costs for Employee Compensation,” http://data.bls.gov, accessed 
July 11, 2014.

426 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
Benefits Required by Law
The federal and state governments require various forms of social insurance to protect 
workers from the fi nancial hardships of being out of work. In general, Social Security 
provides support for retired workers, unemployment insurance assists laid-off workers, 
and workers’ compensation insurance provides benefi ts and services to workers injured 
on the job. Employers must also provide unpaid leave for certain family and medical 
needs. Because these benefi ts are required by law, employers cannot gain an advantage 
in the labor market by offering them, nor can they design the nature of these benefi ts. 
Rather, the emphasis must be on complying with the details of the law. Table 14.1 sum-
marizes legally required benefi ts.
Social Security
In 1935 the federal Social Security Act established old-age insurance and unemploy-
ment insurance. Congress later amended the act to add survivor’s insurance (1939), 
disability insurance (1956), hospital insurance (Medicare Part A, 1965), and supple-
mentary medical insurance (Medicare Part B, 1965) for the elderly. Together, the law 
and its amendments created what is now the Old Age, Survivors, Disability, and Health 
Insurance (OASDHI) program, informally known as Social Security. This program 
covers over 90% of U.S. employees. The main exceptions are railroad and federal, 
state, and local government employees, who often have their own plans.
Workers who meet eligibility requirements receive the retirement benefi ts according 
to their age and earnings history. If they elect to begin receiving benefi ts at full retire-
ment age, they can receive full benefi ts, or if they elect to begin receiving benefi ts at 
age 62, they receive benefi ts at a permanently reduced level. The full retirement age 
rises with birth year: a person born in 1940 reaches full retirement age at 65 years and 
6 months, and a person born in 1960 or later reaches full retirement age at 67. The ben-
efi t amount rises with the person’s past earnings, but the level goes up very little after a 
certain level. In 2014, the maximum benefi t for a worker who retires at age 65 is more 
than $2,400, and it is above $3,400 for a worker who delays retirement until age 70. 
The government increases the payments each year according to the growth in the con-
sumer price index. Also, spouses of covered earners receive benefi ts, even if they have no 
 covered earnings. They receive either the benefi t associated with their own earnings or 
one-half of the amount received by the covered earner, whichever is greater.
Benefi ts may be reduced if the worker is still earning wages above a maximum, called 
the exempt amount. In 2014, the exempt amount was $15,480 for benefi ciaries under the full 
LO 14-2 Summarize 
the types of employee 
beneﬁ ts required by law.
Social Security
The federal Old Age, Survi-
vors, Disability, and Health 
Insurance (OASDHI) pro-
gram, which combines old 
age (retirement) insurance, 
survivor’s insurance, dis-
ability insurance, hospital 
insurance (Medicare Part 
A), and supplementary 
medical insurance 
(Medicare Part B) for the 
elderly.
Table 14.1
Beneﬁ ts Required by Law
BENEFIT
EMPLOYER REQUIREMENT
Social Security
Flat payroll tax on employees and employers
Unemployment insurance
Payroll tax on employers that depends on state 
requirements and experience rating
Workers’ compensation 
insurance
Provide coverage according to state requirements
Premiums depend on experience rating
Family and medical leave
Up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for childbirth, 
adoption, or serious illness
Health care
For employers with at least 50 employees, payment of a 
fee to the federal government if the employer does not 
meet conditions for providing health insurance beneﬁ ts

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 427
retirement age. A benefi ciary in that age range who earns more than the exempt amount 
sees a reduction in his or her benefi t. The amount of the reduction is $1 for every $2 the 
person earns above the exempt amount. For example a 63-year-old who earned $17,480 
would have earned $2,000 above the exempt amount, so the person’s Social  Security 
 benefi ts would be reduced by $1,000. During the year a worker reaches full retirement 
age, the maximum untaxed earnings are $41,400 (in 2014) and benefi ts are reduced $1 for 
every $3 in earnings. Beginning in the month they reach full retirement age, workers face 
no reduction in benefi ts for earning above the exempt amount. For workers below that 
age, the penalty increases the incentive to retire or at least reduce the number of hours 
worked. Adding to this incentive, Social Security benefi ts are free from federal income 
taxes and free from state taxes in about half the states.
Employers and employees share the cost of Social Security through a payroll tax. 
The percentage is set by law and has changed from time to time. In 2014, employ-
ers and employees each paid a tax of 7.65% on the fi rst $117,000 of the employee’s 
earnings. Of that, the majority goes to OASDI, and 2.9% of earnings go to Medi-
care (Part A). For earnings above $117,000, only the 2.9% for Medicare is assessed, 
with half paid by the employer and half paid by the employee. For earnings above 
$200,000, the employer must withhold an additional Medicare tax of 0.9% from the 
employee’s pay.
Unemployment Insurance
Along with OASDHI, the Social Security Act of 1935 established a program of 
unemployment insurance. This program has four objectives related to minimizing 
the hardships of unemployment. It provides payments to offset lost income during in-
voluntary unemployment, and it helps unemployed workers fi nd new jobs. The payment 
of unemployment insurance taxes gives employers an incentive to stabilize employment. 
And providing workers with income during short-term layoffs preserves investments in 
worker skills because workers can afford to wait to return to their employer, rather than 
start over with another organization. Technically, the federal government left it to each 
state’s discretion to establish an unemployment insurance program. At the same time, 
the Social Security Act created a tax incentive structure that quickly led every state to 
establish the program.
Most of the funding for unemployment insurance comes from federal and state taxes 
on employers. Employers who pay their state taxes currently pay a federal tax that 
after tax credits generally equals 0.6% of the fi rst $7,000 of each employee’s wages. 
The state tax rate varies from less than 1% to more than 15%, and the taxable wage 
base ranges from $7,000 to $41,300, so the amount paid depends a great deal on where 
the company is located.4 Also, some states charge new employers whatever rate is the 
average for their industry, so the amount of tax paid in those states also depends on the 
type of business. In the severe recession of 2008–2009, layoffs were so widespread that 
unemployment insurance funds were drained and many states dramatically hiked pre-
miums for unemployment insurance. Companies have therefore redoubled efforts to 
improve their experience ratings and control future costs for unemployment insurance. 
For example, helping laid-off workers fi nd a new job can shorten the time in which they 
are receiving benefi ts. Some states allow short-time compensation, also called work 
sharing, in which companies reduce wages and hours, and employees receive partial 
unemployment benefi ts, rather than laying off workers.5
No state imposes the same tax rate on every employer in the state. The size of the 
unemployment insurance tax imposed on each employer depends on the employer’s 
Unemployment 
Insurance
A federally mandated 
program to minimize 
the hardships of un-
employment through 
payments to unemployed 
workers, help in ﬁ nding 
new jobs, and incentives 
to stabilize employment.

428 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
experience  rating—the number of employees the company laid off in the past and 
the cost of providing them with unemployment benefi ts. Employers with a history of 
laying off a large share of their workforces pay higher taxes than those with few layoffs. 
In some states, an employer with very few layoffs may pay no state tax. In contrast, an 
employer with a poor experience rating could pay a tax as high as 5.4% to 15.4%, de-
pending on the state. The use of experience ratings gives employers some control over 
the cost of unemployment insurance. Careful human resource planning can minimize 
layoffs and keep their experience rating favorable.
To receive benefi ts, workers must meet four conditions:
 1. They meet requirements demonstrating they had been employed (often 52 weeks 
or four quarters of work at a minimum level of pay).
 2. They are available for work.
 3. They are actively seeking work. This requirement includes registering at the local 
unemployment offi ce.
 4. They were not discharged for cause (such as willful misconduct), did not quit 
voluntarily, and are not out of work because of a labor dispute (such as a union 
member on strike).
Workers who meet these conditions receive benefi ts at the level set by the state—
typically about half the person’s previous earnings—for a period of 26 weeks. States 
with a sustained unemployment rate above a particular threshold or signifi cantly above 
recent levels also offer extended benefi ts for up to 13 weeks. Sometimes Congress 
funds emergency extended benefi ts. All states have minimum and maximum weekly 
benefi t levels.
Workers’ Compensation
Decades ago, workers who suffered work-related injury or illness had to bear the 
cost unless they won a lawsuit against their employer. Those who sued often lost the 
case because of the defenses available to employers. Today, the states have passed 
workers’ compensation laws, which help workers with the expenses resulting from 
job-related accidents and illnesses.6 These laws operate under a principle of no-fault li-
ability, meaning that an employee does not need to show that the employer was grossly 
negligent in order to receive compensation, and the employer is protected from law-
suits. The employer loses this protection if it intentionally contributes to a dangerous 
workplace. Employees are not eligible if their injuries are self-infl icted or if they result 
from intoxication or “willful disregard of safety rules.”7
About 9 out of 10 U.S. workers are covered by state workers’ compensation laws, 
with the level of coverage varying from state to state. The benefi ts fall into four major 
categories: (1) disability income, (2) medical care, (3) death benefi ts, and (4) rehabili-
tative services. The amount of income varies from state to state but is typically two-
thirds of the worker’s earnings before the disability. The benefi ts are tax free.
The states differ in terms of how they fund workers’ compensation insurance. Some 
states have a single state fund. Most states allow employers to purchase coverage from 
private insurance companies. Most also permit self-funding by employers. The cost of 
the workers’ compensation insurance depends on the kinds of occupations involved, 
the state where the company is located, and the employer’s experience rating. Premi-
ums for low-risk occupations may be less than 1% of payroll. For some of the most 
hazardous occupations, the cost may be as high as 100% of payroll. Costs also vary 
from state to state, so that one state’s program requires higher premiums than another 
Experience Rating
The number of employees 
a company has laid off in 
the past and the cost of 
providing them with un-
employment beneﬁ ts.
Workers’ 
Compensation
State programs that 
provide beneﬁ ts to 
workers who suffer 
work-related injuries 
or illnesses, or to their 
survivors.

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 429
state’s program. As with unemployment insurance, unfavorable 
experience ratings lead to higher premiums. Organizations can 
minimize the cost of this benefi t by keeping workplaces safe and 
making employees and their managers conscious of safety issues, 
as discussed in Chapter 3.
Unpaid Family and Medical Leave
In the United States, unpaid leave is required by law for certain 
family needs. Specifi cally, the Family and Medical Leave Act 
(FMLA) of 1993 requires organizations with 50 or more employ-
ees within a 75-mile radius to provide as much as 12 weeks of 
unpaid leave after childbirth or adoption; to care for a seriously 
ill child, spouse, or parent, for an employee’s own serious illness; 
or to take care of urgent needs that arise when a spouse, child, 
or parent in the National Guard or Reserve is called to active 
duty. In addition, if a family member (child, spouse, parent, or 
next of kin) is injured while serving on active military duty, the 
employee may take up to 26 weeks of unpaid leave under FMLA. 
Employers must also guarantee these employees the same or a 
comparable job when they return to work. The law does not 
cover employees who have less than one year of service, work 
fewer than 25 hours per week, or are among the organization’s 
10% highest paid. The 12 weeks of unpaid leave amount to a smaller benefi t than is 
typical of Japan and most countries in Western Europe. Japan and West European na-
tions typically require paid family leave.
Experience with the Family and Medical Leave Act suggests that a majority of those 
opting for this benefi t fail to take the full 12 weeks. According to one report, about half 
took 10 days or fewer, and 80% took no more than 40 days of leave. The most common 
reason for taking a leave was the employee’s own serious illness.8 An obvious reason for 
not taking the full 12 weeks is that not everyone can afford three months without pay, es-
pecially when responsible for the expenses that accompany childbirth, adoption, or serious 
illness. Nevertheless, employers do need to keep track of leave requests to prevent abuse 
of the policy. In a recent case, the court upheld a Ford Motor Company decision to fi re 
an employee for excessive absences. Ford had approved 68  workdays of medical leave, but 
on 10 occasions, the employee failed to meet the company’s stated policies for providing 
 documentation of her need for time off.9
When employees experience pregnancy and childbirth, employers must also com-
ply with the Pregnancy Discrimination Act, described in Chapter 3. If an employee 
is temporarily unable to perform her job due to pregnancy, the employer must treat 
her in the same way as any other temporarily disabled employee. For example, the 
employer may provide modifi ed tasks, alternative assignments, disability leave, or leave 
without pay.
Health Care Benefits
In 2010, Congress passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, a com-
plex package of changes in how health care is to be paid for, including requirements 
for insurance companies, incentives and penalties for employers providing health in-
surance as a benefi t, expansion of public funding, and creation of health insurance 
Family and Medical 
Leave Act (FMLA)
Federal law requiring 
organizations with 50 
or more employees to 
provide up to 12 weeks 
of unpaid leave after 
childbirth or adoption; 
to care for a seriously ill 
family member or for an 
employee’s own serious 
illness; or to take care of 
urgent needs that arise 
when a spouse, child, 
or parent in the National 
Guard or Reserve is 
called to active duty.
Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act
Health care reform law 
passed in 2010 that 
includes incentives and 
penalties for employ-
ers providing health 
 insurance as a beneﬁ t.
The Family and Medical Leave Act requires companies 
with 50 or more employees to provide up to 12 weeks 
of unpaid leave after childbirth or adoption.

430
exchanges as an option for the sale of health insurance. The law does not require 
companies to offer health insurance benefi ts, but it does require medium-sized and 
large companies to choose between offering health insurance that meets its standards 
or paying a penalty, beginning in 2015. It also includes requirements for providing 
information to employees.
Whether an organization must make the choice to cover employees or pay a pen-
alty depends on the number of full-time employees. In general, to avoid a penalty, an 
organization with at least 50 full-time employees (or full- and part-time employees 
equivalent to 50 or more) must offer affordable health care coverage of at least mini-
mum value. For organizations with 50 to 99 full-time employees, this requirement 
takes effect in 2016. Organizations with at least 100 full-time employees must provide 
For employers, most of the require-
ments under the Affordable Care 
Act (ACA) involve either provid-
ing insurance that meets minimum 
standards or else paying the Em-
ployer Shared Responsibility Pay-
ment. Here are some guidelines for 
getting started:
• Keep track of the requirements 
on the HealthCare.gov website, 
especially its Small Business 
page. The site provides updates 
as regulations are developed 
and various requirements are 
phased in. It also offers links to 
information about tax credits, 
insurance exchanges, and other 
resources aimed at helping small 
businesses afford this benefi t.
• Determine the number of full-
time employees. Employers with 
fewer than 50 full-time workers 
are exempt from paying the 
Employer Shared Responsibility 
Payment, and employers with 50 
to 99 employees may face less-
stringent requirements. If some 
employees work part-time, 
count their hours to fi nd the 
fraction equivalent to a full-time 
employee. Do not count vol-
unteers (for example, at a non-
profi t) or seasonal workers who 
work up to 120 days or only dur-
ing holiday seasons. Workers in 
educational institutions who are 
off during the summer are not 
considered seasonal workers.
• Compare the cost of health 
insurance (taking into account 
any tax credits) with the cost of 
the penalty. Basically, the annual 
penalty is $2,000 times the num-
ber of full-time employees after 
the fi rst 30. So for an employer 
with 60 full-time employees, 
the penalty would be $2,000 
times 30 (that is 60 minus 30), 
or $60,000. If offering health 
insurance would cost more 
than the penalty, some employ-
ers are considering that paying 
the penalty would be better for 
business than raising prices, 
accepting lower profi ts, or cut-
ting other costs to afford adding 
or continuing health insurance 
benefi ts.
• Consider the purpose of offering 
health insurance. For some em-
ployers, health insurance is an 
important part of a compensa-
tion strategy; others emphasize 
costs. Decisions about this em-
ployee benefi t should support 
the organization’s strategy. This 
may explain why, in spite of pre-
dictions that employers would 
shift work to part-time jobs to 
avoid the 50-employee thresh-
old, the trend has been toward 
more full-time workers as the 
economy strengthens.
Questions
 1. A company has 120 
employees, but they all 
work half time. Does this 
company meet the threshold 
of employing 50 full-time 
workers? Why or why not?
 2. Why might an employer offer 
employees health insurance 
even if paying the Employer 
Shared Responsibility Payment 
would cost less?
Sources: “How Small-Business Owners 
Are Coping with the Health Law (So Far),” 
The Wall Street Journal, May 7, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com; Employee Benefi t 
Research Institute, “Trends in Health Cov-
erage for Part-Time Workers, 1999–2012,” 
EBRI Notes, May 2014, pp. 2–9; Sarah 
E. Needleman and Angus Loten, “Small 
Businesses Find Benefi ts, Costs as They 
Navigate Affordable Care Act,” The Wall 
Street Journal, April 23, 2014, http://online 
.wsj.com; Bureau of National Affairs, “Final 
ACA Shared-Responsibility Rules Offer 
Transitional Relief, Clarifi cation,” Payroll 
Manager’s Report, March 2014, pp. 1–2.
Complying with the Affordable Care Act
HR How To

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 431
this coverage to at least 70% of full-time employees in 2015 and at least 95% starting 
in 2016. Organizations with at least 50 employees that do not meet these requirements 
must pay an Employer Shared Responsibility Payment; generally, the payment for a 
year is $2,000 times the number of full-time employees after the fi rst 30.
Employers with fewer than 50 employees are not subject to the Employer Shared 
Responsibility Payment. However, the Affordable Care Act tries to encourage these 
small employers to offer health coverage. They may buy health insurance at the Small 
Business Health Options Program (SHOP) Marketplace (https://www.healthcare.gov
/small- businesses/), state-level exchanges where employers may select a level of coverage 
or allow employees to choose from a set of options. In addition, organizations with fewer 
than 25 employees may qualify for tax credits. If they buy insurance through the SHOP 
 Marketplace, they may be eligible for a credit of up to 50% of the insurance premiums.
Employers that provide health coverage to at least 250 employees must also meet 
reporting requirements. On the W-2 forms that report employees’ earnings, they must 
indicate the value of the health benefi ts in terms of the cost paid by employer and 
employee. Organizations with fewer employees also may report this information—and 
may want to, as a way to show employees the value of the benefi ts they receive.
Because the law is complex, HR professionals must continue to educate themselves 
about the requirements and communicate often with employees, many of whom may 
be worried about how the law affects their health care benefi ts. A useful source of 
information continues to be the government’s website at www.healthcare.gov. For 
more guidance on complying with the Affordable Care Act, see “HR How To.”
Optional Benefits Programs
Other types of benefi ts are optional. These include various kinds of insurance, retire-
ment plans, and paid leave. Figure 14.2 shows the percentage of full-time workers  having 
access to the most common employee benefi ts. (Part-time workers often have access to 
Type of Beneﬁt
Medical care
Life insurance
Retirement plans
Paid vacation
Sick leave
Paid holidays
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
90%
80%
Figure 14.2
Percentage of Full-Time 
Workers with Access 
to Selected Benefi t 
Programs
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employee Benefi ts in the United States, March 2013,” news release, July 17, 
2013, http://www.bls.gov.

432 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
and receive fewer benefi ts.) The most widely offered benefi ts are paid leave for vacations 
and holidays, life and medical insurance, and retirement plans. In general, benefi ts pack-
ages at smaller companies tend to be more limited than at larger companies.
Benefi ts such as health insurance often extend to employees’ dependents. Tradition-
ally, these benefi ts have covered employees, their spouses, and dependent children. Today, 
many employers also cover domestic partners, defi ned either by local law or by the compa-
nies themselves. Typically, a domestic partner is an adult nonrelative who lives with the 
employee in a relationship defi ned as permanent and fi nancially interdependent. Some 
local governments provide for registration of domestic partners. Organizations offering 
coverage to domestic partners generally require that the partners sign a document stating 
they meet the requirements for a domestic partnership. Benefi ts provided to domestic 
partners do not have the same tax advantages as benefi ts provided to spouses. The part-
ner’s benefi ts are taxed as wages of the employee receiving the benefi ts.
Paid Leave
The major categories of paid leave are vacations, holidays, and sick leave. Employers 
also should establish policies for other situations that may require time off. Organiza-
tions often provide for paid leave for jury duty, funerals of family members, and mili-
tary duty. Some organizations provide for other paid leave, such as time off to vote or 
to donate blood. Establishing policies communicates the organization’s values, clarifi es 
what employees can expect, and prevents situations in which unequal treatment leads 
to claims of unfairness.
At fi rst blush, paid vacation, holidays, sick leave, and other paid leave may not seem 
to make economic sense. The employer pays the employee for time spent not working, 
so the employer receives nothing in return for the pay. Some employers may see little 
direct advantage. This may be the reason that Western European countries require a 
minimum number of paid vacation days, with new employees receiving 30 days off in 
many countries. The United States, in contrast, has no such legal requirement. It is up 
to U.S. employers to decide whether paid leave has a payoff in recruiting and retaining 
employees. At U.S. companies, paid vacation is typically two weeks or less a year for 
the fi rst few years. To receive as much vacation as European employees, U.S. workers 
must typically stay with an employer for 15 or 20 years.10
Paid holidays are time off on specifi ed days in addition to vacation time. In Western 
Europe and the United States, employees typically have about 10 paid holidays each 
year, regardless of length of service. The most common paid 
holidays in the United States are New Year’s Day, Memorial 
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and 
Christmas Day.
Sick leave programs pay employees for days not worked 
because of illness. The amount of sick leave is often based 
on length of service, so that it accumulates over time—for 
example, one day added to sick leave for each month of ser-
vice. Employers must decide how many sick days to grant 
and whether to let them continue accumulating year after 
year. If sick days accumulate without limit, employees can 
“save” them in case of disability. If an employee becomes 
disabled, the employee can use up the accumulated sick 
days, receiving full pay rather than smaller payments from 
disability insurance, discussed later. Some employers let 
LO 14-3 Describe the 
most common forms of 
paid leave.
Paid time off is a way for employees to enjoy time with their 
families and to refresh their bodies and spirits. Is paid time 
off an important factor for you when  accepting a position?

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 433
sick days accumulate for only a year, and unused sick days “disappear” at year-end. 
This may provide an unintended incentive to use up sick days. Some healthy em-
ployees may call in sick near the end of the year so that they can obtain the benefi t 
of the paid leave before it disappears. Employers may counter this tendency by 
paying employees for some or all of their unused sick days at year-end or when the 
employees retire or resign.
An organization’s policies for time off may include other forms of paid and unpaid 
leave. For a workforce that values fl exibility, the organization may offer paid personal 
days, days off that employees may schedule according to their personal needs, with the 
supervisor’s approval. Typically, organizations offer a few personal days in addition to 
sick leave. Floating holidays are paid holidays that vary from year to year. The organiza-
tion may schedule fl oating holidays so that they extend a Tuesday or Thursday holi-
day into a long weekend. Organizations may also give employees discretion over the 
scheduling of fl oating holidays.
The most fl exible approach to time off is to grant each employee a bank of paid time 
off, in which the employer pools personal days, sick days, and vacation days for employ-
ees to use as the need or desire arises. This fl exibility is especially attractive to younger 
workers, who tend to rate work/life balance as one of the most important sources of 
job satisfaction. The fl exibility also fi ts with the U.S. trend toward more frequent but 
shorter vacations. With these advantages, paid time off has become available at a siz-
able share of companies, according to a recent survey.11
Employers should also establish policies for leaves without pay—for example, leaves 
of absence to pursue nonwork goals or to meet family needs. Unpaid leave is an employee 
benefi t because the employee usually retains seniority and benefi ts during the leave.
Group Insurance
As we noted earlier, rates for group insurance are typically lower than for individual 
policies. Also, insurance benefi ts are not subject to income tax, unlike wages and sala-
ries. When employees receive insurance as a benefi t, rather than higher pay so they 
can buy their own insurance, employees can get more for their money. Because of this, 
most employees value group insurance. The most common types of insurance offered 
as employee benefi ts are medical, life, and disability insurance. As noted in the earlier 
discussion of benefi ts required under law, the U.S. government will require medium-
sized and large businesses to offer health insurance or pay a penalty beginning in 2014. 
But until then, medical insurance is an optional benefi t, and businesses continue to 
have many choices in the types of coverage they offer.
Medical Insurance 
Although few employees fully appreciate what health 
insurance costs the employer, most value this benefi t and look for it when they 
are contemplating a job offer.12 As Figure 14.2 shows, almost 90% of full-time 
employees receive medical benefi ts. The policies typically cover three basic types 
of medical expenses: hospital expenses, surgical expenses, and visits to physicians. 
Some employers offer additional coverage, such as dental care, vision care, birth-
ing centers, and prescription drug programs. Under the Mental Health Parity and 
Addiction Equity Act of 2008, if health insurance plans for employees include cov-
erage for mental health care, that care must include the same scope of fi nancial 
and treatment coverage as treatment for other illnesses. That means deductibles, 
copayments, coinsurance, and the number of covered days for hospitalization 
must be the same for treating mental illness and other illnesses. This law exempts 
LO 14-4 Identify the 
kinds of insurance 
beneﬁ ts offered by 
employers.

434 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
companies with fewer than 50 employees. Companies in states with stricter re-
quirements must also meet the state requirements. In the past, many health insur-
ance policies limited payments for treating mental illness, so the law could have 
the effect of making health insurance a more expensive benefi t. However, a recent 
survey of employers found that most companies providing health insurance in-
cluded coverage for mental illness.13
Employers that offer medical insurance must meet the requirements of the 
 Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of 1985. This fed-
eral law requires employers to permit employees to extend their health insurance cov-
erage at group rates for up to 36 months following a “qualifying event.” Qualifying 
events include termination (except for gross misconduct), a reduction in hours that 
leads to loss of health insurance, and the employee’s death (in which case the surviving 
spouse or dependent child would extend the coverage). To extend the coverage, the 
employee or the surviving spouse or dependent must pay for the insurance, but the 
payments are at the group rate. These employees and their families must have access 
to the same services as those who did not lose their health insurance.
As we will discuss later in the chapter, health insurance is a signifi cant and fast-
growing share of benefi ts costs at U.S. organizations, far outpacing the infl ation 
rate.14 Figure 14.3 shows that the United States spends much more of its total 
wealth on health care than other countries do. Most Western European countries 
have nationalized health systems, but the majority of Americans with coverage 
for health care expenses get it through their own or a family member’s employer. 
Growth in the  number of employees who lacked insurance because their employ-
ers could not afford this  benefi t was a major reason cited for passage of the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act.
Consolidated Omnibus 
Budget Reconciliation 
Act (COBRA)
Federal law that requires 
employers to permit 
employees or their de-
pendents to extend their 
health insurance cover-
age at group rates for up 
to 36 months following 
a qualifying event, such 
as a layoff, reduction in 
hours, or the employee’s 
death.
Mexico
Chile
Korea
United Kingdom
Canada
Germany
France
United States
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
Expenditures as a Percentage of Gross Domestic Product
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
Figure 14.3
Health Care Costs in 
Various Countries
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “Health Expenditures and Financing,” OECD 
StatExtracts, http://stats.oecd.org, accessed July 11, 2014.

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 435
Employers have looked for ways to control the cost of health care coverage while 
keeping this valuable benefi t. They have used variations of managed care, employee-
driven savings, and promotion of employee wellness:
 • With managed care, the insurer plays a role in decisions about health care, aimed at 
avoiding unnecessary procedures. The insurer may conduct claims review, study-
ing claims to determine whether procedures are effective for the type of illness or 
injury. Patients may be required to obtain approval before hospital admissions, and 
the insurer may require alternatives to hospital stays—for example, outpatient sur-
gery or home health care.
 • A health maintenance organization (HMO) is a health care plan that requires 
patients to receive their medical care from the HMO’s health care professionals, 
who are often paid a fl at salary, and provides all services on a prepaid basis. In other 
words, the premiums paid for the HMO cover all the patient’s visits and proce-
dures, without an additional payment from the patient. By paying physicians a sal-
ary, rather than a fee for each service, the HMO hopes to remove any incentive to 
provide more services than the patients really need. HMO coverage tends to cost 
less than traditional health insurance. The downside is that employees sometimes 
complain cost-control incentives work so well that they are denied access to services 
they actually need.
 • A preferred provider organization (PPO) is a health care plan that contracts 
with health care professionals to provide services at a reduced fee. Often, the 
PPO does not require employees to use providers in the network, but it pays 
a larger share of the cost of services from PPO providers. For example, the 
employee might pay 10% of the cost of a test by an in-network provider and 
20% if the employee goes out of the PPO network. PPOs have quickly grown 
to  become the most widely used health plan among U.S. employers. A recent 
survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that 57% of workers were en-
rolled in PPOs, compared with just 14% in HMOs, down from a peak of 31% 
in 1996.15
 • With a ﬂ exible spending account, employees set aside a portion of pretax 
earnings to pay for eligible expenses. In particular, a medical savings account lets 
employees use their pretax savings to pay for qualifi ed health care expenses (for 
example, payment of premiums). To avoid taxation, the money in the account 
must meet IRS requirements. Contributions to this account may not exceed 
$5,000 per year and must be designated in advance. The money in the account 
may be spent on health care expenses of the employee and employee’s depen-
dents during the plan year. At the end of the year, any remaining funds in the 
account revert to the employer. The major advantage of fl exible spending ac-
counts is that the money in the account is not taxed, so employees will have 
more take-home pay. But if they do not use all the money in the fl exible spend-
ing account, they lose the amount they do not spend. Therefore, employees are 
most likely to benefi t from a fl exible spending account if they have predictable 
health care expenses, such as insurance premiums.
 • Consumer-driven health plans (CDHPs) are intended to provide health coverage in a 
way that gets employees involved as consumers making decisions to lower costs. A 
CDHP typically brings together three elements: insurance with a high deductible, a 
medical savings account in which the employer contributes to employee-controlled 
accounts for paying expenses below the deductible, and health education aimed 
at helping employees improve their health and thus lower their need for health 
Health Maintenance 
Organization (HMO)
A health care plan that re-
quires patients to receive 
their medical care from 
the HMO’s health care 
professionals, who are 
often paid a ﬂ at salary, 
and provides all services 
on a prepaid basis.
Preferred Provider 
Organization (PPO)
A health care plan that 
contracts with health 
care professionals to 
provide services at a 
reduced fee and gives 
patients ﬁ nancial 
incentives to use 
network providers.
Flexible Spending 
Account
Employee-controlled 
pretax earnings set aside 
to pay for certain eligible 
expenses, such as health 
care expenses, during 
the same year.

436 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
care. Surveys of insured workers have found slow but steady 
growth in the share of employees who enroll in these plans. 
Compared with employees who have traditional insurance 
coverage, CDHP enrollees are more likely to be unmarried, 
to have a college education, and to rate their health as excel-
lent or very good.16 Perhaps these workers feel more confi -
dent in their ability to limit their own health care costs.
• 
An employee wellness program (EWP) is a set of 
 communications, activities, and facilities designed to 
change health-related behaviors in ways that reduce health 
risks. Typically, an EWP aims at specifi c health risks, such 
as high blood pressure, high cholesterol levels, smoking, 
and obesity, by encouraging preventive measures such as 
exercise and good nutrition. Passive programs provide in-
formation and services, but no formal support or motiva-
tion to use the program. Examples include health education 
(such as lunchtime courses) and fi tness facilities. Active wellness programs assume 
that behavior change requires support and reinforcement along with awareness 
and opportunity. Such a program may include counselors who tailor programs 
to individual employees’ needs, take baseline measurements (for example, blood 
pressure and weight), and take follow-up measures for comparison to the baseline. 
The “HRM Social” box describes how social-media tools can help EWPs succeed. 
In general, passive health education programs cost less than fi tness facilities and 
active wellness programs.17 All these variations have had success in reducing risk 
factors associated with cardiovascular disease (obesity, high blood pressure, smok-
ing, lack of exercise), but the follow-up method is most successful.
Life Insurance Employers may provide life insurance to employees or offer the 
opportunity to buy coverage at low group rates. With a term life insurance policy, if the 
employee dies during the term of the policy, the employee’s benefi ciaries receive a pay-
ment called the death benefi t. In policies purchased as an employee benefi t, the usual 
death benefi t is twice the employee’s yearly pay. The policies may provide additional 
benefi ts for accidental death and dismemberment (loss of a body part such as a hand 
or foot). Along with a basic policy, the employer may give employees the option of 
purchasing additional coverage, usually at a nominal cost.
Disability Insurance 
Employees risk losing their incomes if a disability 
makes them unable to work. Disability insurance provides protection against this 
loss of income. Typically, short-term disability insurance provides benefi ts for 
six months or less. Long-term disability insurance provides benefi ts after that 
initial period, potentially for the rest of the disabled employee’s life. Disability 
payments are a percentage of the employee’s salary—typically 50% to 70%. Pay-
ments under short-term plans may be higher. Often the policy sets a maximum 
amount that may be paid each month. Because its limits make it more affordable, 
short-term disability coverage is offered by more employers. Fewer than half of 
employers offer long-term plans.
In planning an employee benefi ts package, the organization should keep in mind 
that Social Security includes some long-term disability benefi ts. To manage benefi ts 
costs, the employer should ensure that the disability insurance is coordinated with So-
cial Security and any other programs that help workers who become disabled.
Employee Wellness 
Program (EWP)
A set of communications, 
activities, and facilities 
designed to change 
health-related behaviors 
in ways that reduce 
health risks.
Short-Term Disability 
Insurance
Insurance that pays a 
percentage of a disabled 
employee’s salary as 
beneﬁ ts to the employee 
for six months or less.
Long-Term Disability 
Insurance
Insurance that pays a 
percentage of a disabled 
employee’s salary after 
an initial period and 
potentially for the rest of 
the employee’s life.
Tom Johnson runs on a treadmill at the Western & 
Southern Financial Group headquarters building in 
Cincinnati. The company is encouraging employees to 
reduce their health risks as insurance costs climb. Can 
you think of fi rms that offer other unique benefi ts to 
reduce health risks?

437
Long-Term Care Insurance The cost of long-term care, such as care in a nurs-
ing home, can be devastating. Today, with more people living to an advanced age, many 
people are concerned about affording long-term care. Some employers address this 
concern by offering long-term care insurance. These policies provide benefi ts toward 
the cost of long-term care and related medical expenses.
Retirement Plans
Despite the image of retired people living on their Social Security checks, Figure 14.4 
shows that those checks amount to less than half of a retired person’s income. Among 
persons over age 65, pensions and retirement savings provided a signifi cant share of 
income in 2012. Employers have no obligation to offer retirement plans beyond the 
protection of Social Security, but most offer some form of pension or retirement sav-
ings plan. About half of employees working for private businesses (that is, nongovern-
ment jobs) have employer- sponsored retirement plans. These plans are most common 
for higher-earning employees. Among employees earning the top one-fourth of in-
comes, 80% participate in a retirement plan, and less than one out of four employees 
in the bottom one-fourth have such plans.18 Retirement plans may be contributory 
plans, meaning they are funded by contributions from the employer and employee, 
or  noncontributory plans, meaning all the contributions come from the employer.
LO 14-5 Deﬁ ne the 
types of retirement plans 
offered by employers.
Contributory Plan
Retirement plan funded 
by contributions from the 
employer and employee.
Noncontributory Plan
Retirement plan funded 
entirely by contributions 
from the employer.
One of the big challenges with a 
wellness program is motivation—
especially 
motivating 
employ-
ees who would benefi t the most. 
 Typically, many employees never 
complete the health assessment 
used for entering these programs 
and then even fewer sign up for 
activities that would improve the 
health issues identifi ed in the as-
sessment. An important consid-
eration is that wellness programs 
work best when they are part of an 
integrated strategy that combines 
realistic goals with incentives, 
clear communication, and a sup-
portive culture.
Some of that education and sup-
port can come through social-media 
tools. The knowledge-sharing func-
tion of social media readily lends it-
self to educating employees about 
health. For example, the site could 
feature low-fat and low-carb items 
on the cafeteria menu each week or 
a page to share ideas for managing 
stress or working exercise into one’s 
daily routine.
In the area of support, just as 
employees might use the com-
pany’s computer network to fi nd 
colleagues with knowledge, the 
company could set up Web pages 
or a Twitter feed for groups with 
health-related interests such as 
a group that walks during lunch 
breaks or a weight-loss challenge 
group. While the company cannot 
disclose personal health informa-
tion, it could reward team suc-
cesses. For example, employees 
could form teams and see which 
team walks the most miles dur-
ing a challenge period. (For such 
activities, 
employers 
must 
be 
sure to offer alternative activities 
to accommodate employees with 
disabilities.)
Questions
 1. Would you expect participation 
in wellness programs to be 
greater if they have a social-
media component? Why or 
why not?
 2. How might the ideas described 
here be applied to a stop-
smoking program for an 
organization’s employees?
Sources: Rhonda Willingham, “Using 
Incentives within the New Regulatory 
World of the ACA to Improve Employee 
Wellness and Productivity,” Employee 
Beneﬁ t Plan Review, October 2013, 
pp. 7–11; Barb Hendrickson, “ Increasing 
Employee Participation in Corporate 
Wellness Programs,” Occupational 
Health and Safety, September 1, 2013, 
http://ohsonline.com; David Roddenberry, 
“Six Keys to Maximize the Value of Well-
ness Incentive Programs,” EHS Today, 
February 2013, pp. 37–38.
Social Support for Getting Healthy
HRM Social

438 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
Deﬁ ned-Beneﬁ t Plans Employers have a choice of 
using retirement plans that defi ne the amount to be paid out 
after retirement or plans that defi ne the amount the employer 
will invest each year. A deﬁ ned-benefit plan guarantees a 
specifi ed level of retirement income. Usually the amount of 
this defi ned benefi t is calculated for each  employee based on 
the employee’s years of service, age, and earnings level (for 
example, the average of the employee’s fi ve highest-earnings 
years). Using years of service as part of the basis for calcu-
lating benefi ts gives employees an incentive to stay with the 
 organization as long as they can, so it can help to reduce 
 voluntary turnover.
Defi ned-benefi t plans must meet the funding require-
ments of the Employee Retirement Income  Security Act 
(ERISA) of 1974. This law increased the responsibility of 
pension plan trustees to protect retirees, established certain 
rights related to vesting (earning a right to receive the pen-
sion) and portability (being able to move retirement savings 
when changing  employers), and created the  Pension Ben-
eﬁ t  Guarantee Corporation (PBGC). The PBGC is the 
federal agency that insures retirement benefi ts and guarantees  retirees a basic benefi t 
if the employer experiences fi nancial diffi culties. To fund the PBGC, employers must 
make annual contributions of $35 per fund participant. Plans that are  underfunded—
meaning the employer does not contribute enough to the plan each year to meet fu-
ture obligations—must pay an additional premium tied to the amount by which the 
plan is underfunded.19 The PBGC’s protection applies to the pensions of more than 
44 million workers.
With a defi ned-benefi t plan, the employer sets up a pension fund to invest the 
contributions. As required by ERISA, the employer must contribute enough for the 
plan to cover all the benefi ts to be paid out to retirees. If the pension fund earns less 
than expected, the employer makes up the difference from other sources. If the em-
ployer experiences fi nancial diffi culties so that it must end or reduce employee pension 
benefi ts, the PBGC provides a basic benefi t, which does not necessarily cover the full 
amount promised by the employer’s pension plan.
Deﬁ ned-Contribution Plans An alternative to defi ned benefi ts is a deﬁ ned-
contribution plan, which sets up an individual account for each employee and speci-
fi es the size of the investment into that account, rather than the amount to be paid 
out upon retirement. The amount the retiree receives will depend on the account’s 
performance. Many kinds of defi ned-contribution plans are available, including the 
following:
 • Money purchase plan—The employer specifi es a level of annual contributions (for 
example, 10% of salary). The contributions are invested, and when the employee 
retires, he or she is entitled to receive the amount of the contributions plus the 
investment earnings. (“Money purchase” refers to the fact that when employees 
retire, they often buy an annuity with the money, rather than taking it as a lump 
sum.)
 • Profi t-sharing and employee stock ownership plans—As we saw in Chapter 13, incen-
tive pay may take the form of profi t sharing and employee stock ownership plans 
Deﬁ ned-Beneﬁ t Plan
Pension plan that 
guarantees a speciﬁ ed 
level of retirement income.
Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act 
(ERISA)
Federal law that  increased 
the responsibility of pen-
sion plan trustees to pro-
tect retirees, established 
certain rights related to 
vesting and portability, and 
created the  Pension Bene-
ﬁ t Guarantee Corporation.
Pension Beneﬁ t 
Guarantee Corporation 
(PBGC)
Federal agency that 
 insures retirement 
beneﬁ ts and guarantees 
retirees a basic beneﬁ t if 
the employer experiences 
ﬁ nancial difﬁ culties.
Deﬁ ned-Contribution 
Plan
Retirement plan in which 
the employer sets up an 
individual account for each 
employee and speciﬁ es 
the size of the  investment 
into that account.
Other (2%)
Social
Security
(38%)
Pension,
retirement
savings
(19%)
Earnings
(30%)
Investments
(11%)
Source: Ke Bin Wu, “Sources of Income for Older 
 Americans, 2012,” AARP Public Policy Institute, fact sheet 
296, December 2013, accessed at http://www.aarp.org.
Figure 14.4
Sources of Income for Persons 65 and Older

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 439
(ESOPs). These payments may be set up so that the money goes into retirement 
plans. By defi ning its contributions in terms of stock or a share of profi ts, the orga-
nization has more fl exibility to contribute less dollar value in lean years and more in 
good years.
 • Section 401(k) plans—Employees contribute a percentage of their earnings, and 
employers may make matching contributions. The amount employees contribute 
is not taxed as part of their income until they receive it from the plan. The fed-
eral government limits the amount that may be contributed each year. The limit is 
$17,500 in 2014 and is subject to cost-of-living increases in years after 2014. The 
contribution limits are higher for persons 50 and older.20
These plans free employers from the risks that investments will not perform as well 
as expected. They put the responsibility for wise investing squarely on the shoulders of 
each employee (see the “HR Oops!” box). A defi ned-contribution plan is also easier to 
administer. The employer need not calculate payments based on age and service, and 
payments to the PBGC are not required. Considering the advantages to employers, 
it is not surprising that a growing share of retirement plans are defi ned-contribution 
plans. Since the 1980s, the share of employees participating in defi ned-benefi t plans 
has been steadily falling, and the share participating in defi ned-contribution plans 
has risen. By 2012, just 21% of workers with a retirement plan had defi ned-benefi t 
plans, while 78% percent of workers with a retirement plan participated in defi ned- 
contribution plans.21
When retirement plans make individual employees responsible for investment 
decisions, the employees need information about retirement planning. Retirement 
savings plans often give employees much control 
over decisions about when and how much to in-
vest. Many employees do not appreciate the impor-
tance of beginning to save early in their careers. As 
 Figure 14.5 shows, an employee who invests $3,000 
a year ($250 a month) between the ages of 21 and 
29 will have far more at age 65 than an employee 
who invests the same amount between ages 31 and 
39. Another important lesson is to diversify invest-
ments. Based on investment performance between 
1928 and 2012, stocks earned an average of 9.31% 
per year, bonds earned 5.11%, and low-risk (cash) 
investments earned less than 4%. But in any given 
year, one of these types of investments might outper-
form the other. And within the categories of stocks 
and bonds, it is important to invest in a wide vari-
ety of companies. If one company performs poorly, 
the investments in other companies might perform 
better. However, studies of investment decisions by 
employees have found that few employees have fol-
lowed basic guidelines for diversifying investments 
among stocks, bonds, and savings accounts according 
to their age and investment needs.22 To help employ-
ees handle such risks, some organizations provide fi -
nancial planning as a separate benefi t, offer an option 
to have a professional invest the funds in a 401(k) 
plan, or direct funds into default investments called 
Figure 14.5
Value of Retirement Savings Invested at Different Ages
1.0
0.9
0.6
0.3
0.8
0.5
0.2
0.7
0.4
0.1
0
21–29
31–39
$437,405
$218,993
Ages when $3,000 Is Saved Annually
Value of Savings at Age 65
(millions of dollars)
Note: Investment portfolio consists of 60% stocks, 30% bonds, and 
10% cash (e.g., money-market funds, bank savings accounts), assum-
ing average rates of return based on historical rates from 1928 to 2012.
Source: Data from Aswath Damodaran, “Annual Returns on Stocks, 
T. Bonds and T. Bills: 1928–Current,” http://people.stern.nyu.edu
/adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafi le/histretSP.html, accessed May 
20, 2014.

440
target date funds (TDFs), which are geared toward the needs of employees at different 
life stages. Also, under the Pension Protection Act of 2006, defi ned-contribution plans 
that hold publicly traded securities must give employees the option to sell stock in the 
company they work for and must offer them at least three investment options other 
than the company’s own stock. The law also allows employers to promote retirement 
saving by enrolling workers automatically and having their contributions automati-
cally increase along with wages (employees can opt out). Since the law was enacted, 
automatic enrollment has become widespread.
In spite of these challenges, defi ned-contribution plans also offer an advantage to em-
ployees in today’s highly mobile workforce. They do not penalize employees for chang-
ing jobs. With these plans, retirement earnings are less related to the number of years an 
employee stays with a company.
Cash Balance Plans An increasingly popular way to combine the advantages of 
defi ned-benefi t plans and defi ned-contribution plans is to use a cash balance plan. 
This type of retirement plan consists of individual accounts, as in a 401(k) plan. But in 
Cash Balance Plan
Retirement plan in which 
the employer sets up 
an individual account 
for each employee and 
contributes a percentage 
of the employee’s salary; 
the account earns inter-
est at a predeﬁ ned rate.
At organizations that offer employees 
a chance to save for retirement with a 
401(k) plan, about three out of every 
ten employees do not participate. 
Even those who do participate typi-
cally contribute less than the amount 
their employer will match. That 
means employees are leaving money 
on the table, and employers are not 
getting the full motivational potential 
out of their compensation package.
Employers can address the en-
rollment problem by setting up a 
plan that automatically enrolls em-
ployees unless they opt out. Studies 
suggest that automatic enrollment 
can cut in half the share of employ-
ees who do not participate. With 
automatic enrollment, the employer 
must notify eligible employees about 
their benefi ts and rights, communi-
cating before the automatic enroll-
ment and once a year afterwards.
Even with automatic enrollment, 
employees fail to make the most of 
401(k) plans. One study found that 
when enrollment was automatic, the 
average employee saved a smaller 
percentage of his or her income. 
Logically, employees who make an 
effort to enroll would also prioritize 
saving more for retirement. Fur-
thermore, organizations with auto-
matic enrollment match on average 
a smaller percentage of workers’ 
contributions than other employ-
ers offering 401(k) plans. Automatic 
enrollment evidently boosts over-
all participation at the expense of 
participants’ individual retirement 
savings. Thus, to prepare for their 
eventual 
retirement, 
employees 
need information and motivation to 
save, not just access to a plan.
Another way employers are ad-
dressing low enrollment rates is by 
offering the benefi t without the per-
mitted waiting period. Employers 
may require employees to work for 
a set period—typically six months, 
but up to a year is allowed—before 
enrolling in a 401(k) plan. This saves 
the cost of administering plans for 
high-turnover workers, but it also 
makes saving enough more diffi cult 
and lowers enrollment rates. Em-
ployees seem to forget about enroll-
ing after they join a company, sign 
up for other benefi ts, and get busy 
with their jobs. Some employers, in-
cluding Massachusetts Mutual Life 
Insurance and Biogen Idec, there-
fore let employees enroll immedi-
ately, saying it helps them attract 
and keep talent.
Questions
 1. Why should an employer be 
concerned if enrollment in 
401(k) plans is low?
 2.  How might an HR department 
encourage higher rates of 
enrollment and saving?
Sources: U.S. Department of Labor, 
Employee Benefi ts Security Administra-
tion, “Automatic Enrollment 401(k) Plans 
for Small Businesses,” http://www.dol 
.gov, accessed July 14, 2014; Emily 
Brandon, “The Downside of 401(k) 
Automatic Enrollment,” U.S. News and 
World Report, November 18, 2013, 
http://money. usnews.com; Beth Healy, 
“Waiting Periods on 401(k) Plans Can 
Be Costly for Workers,” Boston Globe, 
March 30, 2013, http://www.boston.
com.
401(k) Plans Are a Missed Opportunity for Many
HR Oops!

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 441
contrast to a 401(k), all the contributions come from the employer. Usually, the em-
ployer contributes a percentage of the employee’s salary, say, 4% or 5%. The money 
in the cash balance plan earns interest according to a predetermined rate, such as the 
rate paid on U.S. Treasury bills. Employers guarantee this rate as in a defi ned-benefi t 
plan. This arrangement helps employers plan their contributions and helps employees 
predict their retirement benefi ts. If employees change jobs, they generally can roll 
over the balance into an individual retirement account.
A switch from traditional defi ned-benefi t plans to cash balance plans, like any 
major change, requires employers to consider the effects on employees as well 
as on the organization’s bottom line. Defi ned-benefi t plans are most generous to 
older employees with many years of service, and cash balance plans are most gen-
erous to young employees who will have many years ahead in which to earn in-
terest. For an organization with many experienced employees, switching from a 
defi ned-benefi t plan can produce great savings in pension benefi ts. In that case, 
the older workers are the greatest losers, unless the organization adjusts the pro-
gram to retain their benefi ts. After IBM switched to a cash-benefi t plan, a group of 
employees fi led an age discrimination lawsuit. IBM won the lawsuit on appeal, and 
the Pension Protection Act of 2006 seeks to clarify the legal requirements of such 
plans. As a result, some companies may renew their interest in cash balance plans, 
but IBM has decided to focus on its 401(k) plan.
Government Requirements for Vesting and Communication Along 
with requirements for funding defi ned-benefi t plans, ERISA specifi es a number of 
requirements related to eligibility for benefi ts and communication with employees. 
ERISA guarantees employees that when they become participants in a pension plan 
and work a specifi ed number of years, they earn a right to a pension upon retirement. 
These rights are called vesting rights. Employees whose contributions are vested 
have met the requirements (enrolling and length of service) to receive a pension at 
retirement age, regardless of whether they remained with the employer until that time. 
Employees’ own contributions to their pension plans are always completely vested. In 
most cases, the vesting of employer-funded pension benefi ts must take place under one 
of two schedules selected by the employer:
 1. The employer may vest employees after fi ve years and may provide zero vesting 
until that time.
 2. The employer may vest employees over a three- to seven-year period, with at least 
20% vesting in the third year and at least an additional 20% in each year after the 
third year.
These two schedules represent minimum requirements. Employers may vest 
employees more quickly if they wish. Two less common situations have different 
vesting requirements. One is a “top-heavy” pension plan, meaning pension ben-
efi ts for key employees (such as highly paid top managers) exceed a government-
specifi ed share of total pension benefi ts. A top-heavy plan requires faster vesting 
for nonkey employees. Another exception from the usual schedule involves multi-
employer pension plans. These plans need not provide vesting until after 10 years 
of employment.
The intent of vesting requirements is to protect employees by preventing em-
ployers from terminating them before they meet retirement age in order to avoid 
paying pension benefi ts. In addition, it is illegal for employers to transfer or lay off 
Vesting Rights
Guarantee that when 
employees become 
participants in a pension 
plan and work a 
speciﬁ ed number of 
years, they will receive 
a pension at retirement 
age, regardless of 
whether they remained 
with the employer.

442 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
employees as a way to avoid pension obligations, even if these changes are motivated 
partly by business need.23 One way employers may legally try to minimize pension 
costs is in choosing a vesting schedule. For example, if many employees leave after 
three or four years of employment, the fi ve-year vesting schedule would minimize 
pension costs.
ERISA’s reporting and disclosure requirements involve the Internal Revenue 
 Service, the Department of Labor, and employees.24 Within 90 days after employees 
enter a plan, they must receive a summary plan description (SPD), a report that 
describes the plan’s funding, eligibility requirements, risks, and other details. If the 
employee requests one, the employer must also make available an individual benefi t 
statement, which describes the employee’s vested and unvested benefi ts. Many em-
ployers provide such information regularly, without waiting for employee requests. 
This type of communication helps employees understand and value their retirement 
benefi ts.
“Family-Friendly” Benefits
As employers have recognized the signifi cance of employees’ need to manage confl icts 
between their work and family roles, many have added “family-friendly” benefi ts to 
their employee benefi ts. These benefi ts include family leave policies and child care. 
The programs discussed here apply directly to the subset of employees with family 
responsibilities. However, family-friendly benefi ts often have spillover effects in the 
form of loyalty because employees see the benefi ts as evidence that the organization 
cares about its people.25 The following types of benefi ts are typical:
 • Family leave—Family or parental leave grants employees time off to care for 
children and other dependents. As discussed earlier in the chapter, federal law 
requires 12 weeks of unpaid leave. Companies may choose to offer more gener-
ous leave policies, and California requires 6 weeks of leave at up to 55% of pay. 
Recent data from the Census Bureau show only 12% of workers having paid 
family leave, so employees wanting paid time off to care for a child most often 
have to make do with paid vacation or sick days. In contrast, most industrialized 
nations provide paid maternal leave and often paternal leave as well. Companies 
offering paternity as well as maternity leave include Yahoo, Bank of America, 
and Ernst and Young. However, fathers tend to take short leaves of no more 
than a week or two, perhaps out of fear that they will seem less dedicated to 
their jobs.26
 • Child care—Child care benefi ts may take several forms, requiring different levels of 
organizational involvement. The lowest level of involvement is for the  organization 
to supply and help employees collect information about the cost and quality of avail-
able child care. At the next level, organizations provide vouchers or discounts for 
employees to use at existing child care facilities. At the highest level of  involvement, 
the employer provides child care at or near the work site. Staffi ng a child care 
 facility is costly and involves important liability concerns. At the same time, the 
results of this type of benefi t, in terms of reducing absenteeism and enhancing pro-
ductivity, have been mixed.27 In a recent survey of employers by the Families and 
Work Institute, the most common form of child-care benefi ts (offered by 61%) was 
a dependent care assistance plan, which lets employees set aside pretax income to 
pay for child care. A resource and referral program was the second most common 
benefi t, offered by 37%.28
Summary Plan 
Description (SPD)
Report that describes a 
pension plan’s funding, 
eligibility requirements, 
risks, and other details.
LO 14-6 Describe 
how organizations use 
other beneﬁ ts to match 
employees’ wants and 
needs.

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 443
 • College savings—As workers’ children grow up, their needs shift from maternity 
leave and child care to college tuition. Some organizations have supported this 
concern by sponsoring tax-favored 529 savings plans. These plans, named after the 
section of the Internal Revenue Code that regulates them, let parents and other 
family members defer taxes on the earnings of their deposits into the 529 account. 
Some states also provide a (limited) tax deduction for these contributions. As an 
employee benefi t, organizations can arrange with a broker to offer direct deposit 
of a portion of employees’ paychecks into their accounts. Besides offering the con-
venience of direct deposit, employers can negotiate lower management fees. At 
Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, all employees are eligible to participate 
in a college savings plan that deducts contributions from employees’ paychecks. 
This benefi t is part of a compensation package designed to promote employees’ 
personal and professional growth; related benefi ts include tuition reimburse-
ment for employees (up to full tuition) and their dependent children (up to 50% 
reimbursement).29
 • Elder care—As the population of the nation’s elderly grows, so do the demands 
on adult children to care for elderly parents, aunts, and uncles. When these 
people become ill or disabled, they rely on family or professional caregivers. 
Responsibilities such as providing assistance, paying for professional caregivers, 
and locating services can be expensive, time consuming, and exhausting, often 
distracting employees from their work roles. In response, many employers have 
added elder care benefi ts. These programs often started by offering employees 
information and referrals; today these resources are often made available online. 
More recent enhancements of elder care benefi ts include 
referrals to decision support from experts in geriatric care, 
insurance, and the law, as well as fl exible hours and paid 
time off. Employees at Johnson & Johnson have free use 
of a service that assesses elderly relatives’ needs, helps the 
employee plan and coordinate services, reviews care facili-
ties, helps employees select caregivers, assists with paper-
work, and provides referrals to community services.30 Even 
companies that cannot afford to offer counseling or referral 
services can use intranets to provide links to helpful web-
sites such as the National Alliance for Caregiving (www.
caregiving.org), the National Council on Aging (www 
.beneﬁ tscheckup.org), and the federal government’s ben-
efi ts information site (www.beneﬁ ts.gov).
Other Benefits
The scope of possible employee benefi ts is limited only by the 
imagination of the organization’s decision makers. Organiza-
tions have developed a wide variety of benefi ts to meet the needs 
of employees and to attract and keep the kinds of workers who 
will be of value to the organization. Traditional extras include 
subsidized cafeterias, on-site health care for minor injuries or 
illnesses, and moving expenses for newly hired or relocating em-
ployees. Stores and manufacturers may offer employee discounts 
on their products.
In order to provide a relaxed environment for their 
 employees, some companies allow employees to 
bring their pets to work. What other unique benefi ts 
do  companies offer their employees?

444 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
To encourage learning and attract the kinds of employees who wish to develop 
their knowledge and skills, many organizations offer tuition reimbursement programs. 
A typical program covers tuition and related expenses for courses that are relevant 
to the employee’s current job or future career at the organization. Employees are 
 reimbursed for these expenses after they demonstrate they have completed an 
 approved course.
Especially for demanding, high-stress jobs, organizations may look for benefi ts that 
help employees put in the necessary long hours and alleviate stress. Recreational activi-
ties such as on-site basketball courts or company-sponsored softball teams provide for 
social interaction as well as physical activity. Employers may reward hard-working groups 
or individuals with a trip for a weekend, a meal, or any activity employees are likely to 
enjoy. Employees at Yelp, which runs the user review website of the same name, can visit 
the company’s pub, and at Etsy, which runs an online marketplace, employees get special 
weekly meals created from locally sourced ingredients. Busy employees of S. C. Johnson 
can take advantage of a concierge service, which will run errands for them.31
Selecting Employee Benefits
Although the government requires certain benefi ts, employers have wide latitude in 
creating the total benefi ts package they offer employees.32 Decisions about which ben-
efi ts to include should take into account the organization’s goals, its budget, and the 
expectations of the organization’s current employees and those it wishes to recruit in 
the future. Employees have come to expect certain things from employers. An organi-
zation that does not offer the expected benefi ts will have more diffi culty attracting and 
keeping talented workers. Also, if employees believe their employer feels no commit-
ment to their welfare, they are less likely to feel committed to their employer.
The Organization’s Objectives
A logical place to begin selecting employee benefi ts is to establish objectives for the 
benefi ts package. This helps an organization select the most effective benefi ts and 
monitor whether the benefi ts are doing what they should. Table 14.2 is an example 
of one organization’s benefi ts objectives. Unfortunately, research suggests that most 
organizations do not have written benefi ts objectives.
Among companies that do set goals, common objectives include controlling the cost 
of health care benefi ts and retaining employees.33 The fi rst goal explains the growing 
use of wellness programs and consumer-directed health plans. For the second goal, 
employees do say that valued benefi ts keep them from walking away, but employers 
need to learn what employees care about. To fi nd out what its young, predominately 
male workforce values, British mobile-phone service Three got its staff involved in 
designing the benefi ts package. The result was a set of fl exible benefi ts that is heavy 
on communication and personal control. Employees can “buy” or “sell” time off if the 
basic package is too little or too much, and they can buy into health benefi ts over and 
above those provided through the government. An online pension calculator shows 
them how their retirement savings are expected to grow, given their current or pos-
sible rates of contribution to the plan.34
Employees’ Expectations and Values
Employees expect to receive benefi ts that are legally required and widely available, 
and they value benefi ts they are likely to use. To meet employee expectations about 
LO 14-7 Explain how 
to choose the contents 
of an employee beneﬁ ts 
package.

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 445
benefi ts, it can be helpful to see what other organizations offer. Employers can pur-
chase survey information about benefi ts packages from private consultants. In addi-
tion, the Bureau of Labor Statistics gathers benefi ts data. The BLS website (www.bls
.gov) is therefore a good place to check for free information about employee benefi ts 
in the United States. With regard to value, medical insurance is a high-value benefi t 
because employees usually realize that surgery or a major illness can be fi nancially dev-
astating. Vision and dental care tend to be much less expensive, but many employees 
appreciate this type of coverage because so many people receive dental or vision care 
in the course of a year. Therefore, employers tend to try to maintain basic health insur-
ance coverage, and if they must cut benefi ts to save money, they more often eliminate 
long-term care insurance and health coverage for retirees.35
Employers should also consider that the value employees place on various benefi ts 
is likely to differ from one employee to another. At a broad level, basic demographic 
factors such as age and sex can infl uence the kinds of benefi ts employees want. An 
older workforce is more likely to be concerned about (and use) medical coverage, life 
insurance, and pensions. A workforce with a high percentage of women of childbear-
ing age may care more about disability or family leave. Young, unmarried men and 
women often place more value on pay than on benefi ts. However, these are only gen-
eral observations; organizations should check which considerations apply to their own 
employees and identify more specifi c needs and differences. One approach is to use 
surveys to ask employees about the kinds of benefi ts they value. The survey should be 
carefully worded so as not to raise employees’ expectations by seeming to promise all 
the benefi ts asked about at no cost to the employee.
The choice of benefi ts may infl uence current employees’ satisfaction and may also 
affect the organization’s recruiting, in terms of both the ease of recruiting and the 
Table 14.2
An Organization’s 
Beneﬁ ts Objectives
•  To establish and maintain an employee beneﬁ t program that is based primarily on the 
employees’ needs for leisure time and on protection against the risks of old age, loss of health, 
and loss of life.
•  To establish and maintain an employee beneﬁ t program that complements the efforts of 
employees on their own behalf.
•  To evaluate the employee beneﬁ t plan annually for its effect on employee morale and productivity, 
giving consideration to turnover, unﬁ lled positions, attendance, employees’ complaints, and 
employees’ opinions.
•  To compare the employee beneﬁ t plan annually with that of other leading companies in the same 
ﬁ eld and to maintain a beneﬁ t plan with an overall level of beneﬁ ts based on cost per employee 
that falls within the second quintile of these companies.
•  To maintain a level of beneﬁ ts for nonunion employees that represents the same level of 
expenditures per employee as for union employees.
•  To determine annually the costs of new, changed, and existing programs as percentages of 
salaries and wages and to maintain these percentages as much as possible.
•  To self-fund beneﬁ ts to the extent that a long-run cost savings can be expected for the ﬁ rm and 
catastrophic losses can be avoided.
•  To coordinate all beneﬁ ts with social insurance programs to which the company makes 
payments.
•  To provide beneﬁ ts on a noncontributory basis except for dependent coverage, for which 
employees should pay a portion of the cost.
•  To maintain continual communications with all employees concerning beneﬁ t programs.
Source: Adapted from B. T. Beam Jr. and J. J. McFadden, Employee Beneﬁ ts, 3rd ed. Copyright © 1992 
by Dearborn Financial Publishing, Inc. Published by Dearborn Financial Publishing, Inc., Chicago. All rights 
reserved.

446 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
kinds of employees attracted to the organization. For example, a benefi ts  package that 
has strong medical benefi ts and pensions may be particularly attractive to older people 
or to those with many dependents. Such benefi ts may attract people with extensive 
experience and those who wish to make a long-term commitment to the organization. 
This strategy may be especially benefi cial when turnover costs are very high. On the 
other hand, offering generous health care benefi ts may attract and  retain people with 
high health care costs. Thus, organizations need to consider the signals sent by their 
benefi ts package as they set goals for benefi ts and select benefi ts to offer.
Organizations can address differences in employees’ needs and empower their em-
ployees by offering fl exible benefi ts plans in place of a single benefi ts package for all 
employees. These plans, often called cafeteria-style plans, offer employees a set of 
alternatives from which they can choose the types and amounts of benefi ts they want. 
The plans vary. Some impose minimum levels for certain benefi ts, such as health care 
coverage; some allow better employees to receive money in exchange for choosing a 
“light” package; and some let employees pay extra for the privilege of receiving more 
benefi ts. For example, some plans let employees give up vacation days for more pay or 
to purchase extra vacation days in exchange for a reduction in pay.
Cafeteria-style plans have a number of advantages.36 The selection process can 
make employees more aware of the value of the benefi ts, particularly when the plan as-
signs each employee a sum of money to allocate to benefi ts. Also, the individual choice 
in a cafeteria plan enables each employee to match his or her needs to the company’s 
benefi ts, increasing the plan’s actual value to the employee. And because employees 
would not select benefi ts they don’t want, the company avoids the cost of providing 
employees with benefi ts they don’t value. Another way to control costs is to give em-
ployees incentives to choose lower-cost options. For example, the  employee’s deduct-
ible on a higher-cost health plan could be larger than on a relatively low-cost HMO.
A drawback of cafeteria-style plans is that they have a higher administrative cost, espe-
cially in the design and start-up stages. Organizations can avoid some of the higher cost, 
however, by using software packages and standardized plans that have been developed 
for employers wishing to offer cafeteria-style benefi ts. Another possible drawback is that 
employee selection of benefi ts will increase rather than decrease costs because employees 
will select the kinds of benefi ts they expect to need the most. For example, an employee 
expecting to need a lot of dental work is more likely to sign up for a dental plan. The 
heavy use of the dental coverage would then drive up the employer’s premiums for that 
coverage. Costs can also be diffi cult to estimate when employees select their benefi ts.
Benefits’ Costs
Employers also need to consider benefi ts costs. One place to start is with general infor-
mation about the average costs of various benefi ts types. Widely used sources of cost 
data include the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), Employee Benefi t Research Insti-
tute, and U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Annual surveys by the Chamber of Commerce 
state the cost of benefi ts as a percentage of total payroll costs and in dollar terms. 
In addition, the ability to process “big data” is enabling more employers to identify 
specifi c areas where they can rein in benefi ts costs without reducing the value of their 
compensation packages to employees. See the “Best Practices” box for an example.
Employers can use data about costs to help them select the kinds of benefi ts to offer. 
But in balancing these decisions against organizational goals and employee benefi ts, 
the organization may decide to offer certain high-cost benefi ts while also looking for 
ways to control the cost of those benefi ts. The highest-cost items tend to offer the 
Cafeteria-Style Plan
A beneﬁ ts plan that of-
fers employees a set of 
alternatives from which 
they can choose the 
types and amounts of 
beneﬁ ts they want.

447
most room for savings, but only if the items permit choice or negotiation. Also, as we 
noted earlier, organizations can control certain costs such as workers’ compensation 
by improving their experience ratings. Cost control is especially important—and dif-
fi cult—when  economic growth slows or declines.
In recent years, benefi ts related to health care have attracted particular attention 
because these costs have risen very rapidly and because employers have a number of 
options. Concern over costs has prompted many employers to shift from traditional 
health insurance to PPOs and CDHPs. Some employers shift more of the cost to 
employees. They may lower the employer’s payments by increasing the amounts em-
ployees pay for deductibles and coinsurance (the employee’s share of the payment for 
services). Or they may require employees to pay some or all of the difference in cost 
between traditional insurance and a lower-cost plan. Excluding or limiting coverage 
for certain types of claims also can slow the increase in health insurance costs. Em-
ployee wellness programs, especially when they are targeted to employees with risk 
factors and include follow-up and encouragement, can reduce risk factors for disease.37
Companies have much more data 
available to them than they used 
to. If used properly, this “big data” 
can be a path to better spending on 
employee benefi ts. More and more 
managers are improving decisions 
by basing them on data instead of 
HIPPO (the highest-paid person’s 
opinion) or intuition alone.
Caesars Entertainment is an ex-
ample of a company using big data 
to improve its spending on health 
insurance. The company analyzes 
patterns in its employees’ health in-
surance claims. They track variables 
such as the usage of particular medi-
cal services, the degree to which 
employees and their dependents use 
name-brand instead of generic drugs, 
and the number of emergency room 
visits (especially costly, at an average 
$1,200 for an outpatient visit).
Of course, sometimes an expen-
sive procedure is necessary to pro-
tect a patient’s health or life. But in 
the case of emergency rooms, pa-
tients sometimes use these facilities 
for nonemergency conditions that 
could be treated elsewhere at a far 
lower cost. A visit to an urgent-care 
center, for example, costs around 
$100 to $200. So when Caesars’ 
analysis showed that employees of 
its Harrah’s property in Philadelphia 
were far more likely to visit hospital 
emergency rooms than employees 
company-wide, it investigated.
The data showed that the Phila-
delphia workers and dependents 
sought immediate care at urgent-
care centers only 11% of the time, 
versus 34% company-wide. The 
cost of that care would be far less 
if more of those Harrah’s workers 
would choose urgent-care centers 
instead of emergency rooms. So 
Harrah’s conducted an information 
campaign to remind employees of 
the high cost of ER visits and to pro-
vide them with a list of alternative 
facilities. Two years later, the use of 
urgent-care facilities had risen from 
11% of emergencies to 17%, and 
employees were less likely to make 
multiple trips to the emergency 
room. Overall, since Caesars started 
monitoring the data about emer-
gency room use, it has reduced the 
number of visits by 10,000, and the 
use of less expensive facilities has 
cut health care spending by $4.5 
million. That kind of savings should 
translate into lower premiums for 
health benefi ts.
Questions
 1. Given that the insurance 
company and employees are 
the ones paying the bills for 
emergency room visits, how 
does encouraging employees 
to use lower-cost facilities help 
Caesars reduce its costs?
 2. How can a company such as 
Caesars benefi t from using 
big data about health care 
spending without violating 
individual employees’ privacy?
Sources: Steven Rosenbush and 
 Michael Totty, “How Big Data Is Chang-
ing the Whole Equation for Business,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 8, 2013, 
http://online.wsj.com; Sarah Kliff, “An 
Average ER Visit Costs More Than the 
Average Month’s Rent,” Washington 
Post, March 2, 2013, http://www.wash-
ingtonpost.com; Anna Wilde Mathews, 
“Same Doctor Visit, Double the Cost,” 
The Wall Street Journal, August 27, 
2012, http://online.wsj.com.
Big Data Looks Like a Sure Bet for Caesars Entertainment
Best Practices

448 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
Legal Requirements for Employee Benefits
As we discussed earlier in this chapter, some benefi ts are required by law. This re-
quirement adds to the cost of compensating employees. Organizations looking for 
ways to control staffi ng costs may look for ways to structure the workforce so as 
to minimize the expense of benefi ts. They may require overtime rather than add-
ing new employees, hire part-time rather than full-time workers (because part-time 
employees generally receive much smaller benefi ts packages), and use independent 
contractors rather than hire employees. Some of these choices are limited by legal 
requirements, however. For example, the Fair Labor Standards Act requires overtime 
pay for nonexempt workers, as discussed in Chapter 12. Also, the Internal Revenue 
Service strictly limits the defi nition of “independent contractors,” so that employ-
ers cannot avoid legal obligations by classifying workers as self-employed when the 
organization receives the benefi ts of a permanent employee. Other legal require-
ments involve tax treatment of benefi ts, antidiscrimination laws, and accounting for 
benefi ts.
Tax Treatment of Benefits
The IRS provides more favorable tax treatment of benefi ts classifi ed as qualifi ed plans. 
The details vary from one type of benefi t to another. In the case of retirement plans, 
the advantages include the ability for employees to immediately take a tax deduction 
for the funds they contribute to the plans, no immediate tax on employees for the 
amount the employer contributes, and tax-free earnings on the money in the retire-
ment fund.38
To obtain status as a qualifi ed plan, a benefi t plan must meet certain require-
ments.39 In the case of pensions, these involve vesting and nondiscrimination rules. 
The nondiscrimination rules provide tax benefi ts to plans that do not discrimi-
nate in favor of the organization’s “highly compensated employees.” To receive the 
benefi ts, the organization cannot set up a retirement plan that provides benefi ts 
exclusively to the organization’s owners and top managers. The requirements en-
courage employers to provide important benefi ts such as pensions to a broad spec-
trum of employees. Before offering pension plans and other benefi ts, organizations 
should have them reviewed by an expert who can advise on whether the benefi ts are 
 qualifi ed plans.
Antidiscrimination Laws
As we discussed in Chapter 3, a number of laws are intended to provide equal employ-
ment opportunity without regard to race, sex, age, disability, and several other protected 
categories. Some of these laws apply to the organization’s benefi ts policies.
Legal treatment of men and women includes equal access to benefi ts, so the 
organization may not use the employee’s gender as the basis for providing more 
limited benefi ts. That is the rationale for the Pregnancy Discrimination Act, which 
requires that employers treat pregnancy as it treats any disability. If an employee 
needs time off for conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth, the employee 
would receive whatever disability benefi ts the organization offers to employees 
who take disability leave for other reasons. Another area of concern in the treat-
ment of male and female employees is pension benefi ts. On average, women live 
longer than men, so on average, pension benefi ts for female employees are more 
LO 14-8 Summarize 
the regulations affecting 
how employers design 
and administer beneﬁ ts 
programs.

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 449
expensive (because the organization pays the pension longer), other things being 
equal. Some organizations have used this difference as a basis for requiring that 
female employees contribute more than male employees to defi ned benefi t plans. 
The Supreme Court in 1978 determined that such a requirement is illegal.40 Ac-
cording to the Supreme Court, the law is intended to protect individuals, and when 
women are considered on an individual basis (not as averages), not every woman 
outlives every man.
Age discrimination is also relevant to benefi ts policies. Two major issues have 
received attention under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) and 
amendments. First, employers must take care not to discriminate against workers 
over age 40 in providing pay or benefi ts. For example, employers may not set an 
age at which retirement benefi ts stop growing as a way to pressure older workers to 
retire.41 Also, early-retirement incentive programs need to meet certain standards. 
The programs may not coerce employees to retire, they must provide accurate 
 information about the options available, and they must give employees enough time 
to make a decision. In effect, employees must really have a choice about whether 
they retire.
When employers offer early retirement, they often ask employees to sign waiv-
ers saying they will not pursue claims under the ADEA. The Older Workers Benefi t 
Protection Act of 1990 set guidelines for using these waivers. The waivers must be 
voluntary and understandable to the employee and employer, and they must spell out 
the employee’s rights under the ADEA. Also, in exchange for signing the waiver, the 
employee must receive “compensation,” that is, greater benefi ts than he or she would 
otherwise receive upon retirement. The employer must inform employees that they 
may consult a lawyer before signing, and employees must have time to make a decision 
about signing—21 days before signing plus 7 days afterward in which they can revoke 
the agreement.
The Americans with Disabilities Act imposes requirements related to health insur-
ance. Under the ADA, employees with disabilities must have “equal access to whatever 
health insurance coverage the employer provides other employees.” Even so, the terms 
and conditions of health insurance may be based on risk factors—as long as the em-
ployer does not use this basis as a way to escape offering health insurance to someone 
with a disability. From the standpoint of avoiding legal challenges, an employer who 
has risk-based insurance and then hires an employee with a disability is in a stronger 
position than an employer who switches to a risk-based policy after hiring a disabled 
employee.42
Accounting Requirements
Companies’ fi nancial statements must meet the many requirements of the Financial 
Accounting Standards Board (FASB). These accounting requirements are intended 
to ensure that fi nancial statements are a true picture of the company’s fi nancial status 
and that outsiders, including potential lenders and investors, can understand and com-
pare fi nancial statements. Under FASB standards, employers must set aside the funds 
they expect to need for benefi ts to be paid after retirement, rather than funding those 
benefi ts on a pay-as-you-go basis. On fi nancial statements, those funds must appear as 
future cost obligations. For companies with substantial retirement benefi ts, reporting 
those benefi ts as future cost obligations greatly lowers income each year. Along with 
rising benefi ts costs, this reporting requirement has encouraged many companies to 
scale back benefi ts to retirees.

450
Communicating Benefits to Employees
Organizations must communicate benefi ts information to employees so that they will 
appreciate the value of their benefi ts. This is essential so that benefi ts can achieve their 
objective of attracting, motivating, and retaining employees. Employees are interested 
in their benefi ts, as detailed in the “Did You Know?” box. Also, they need a great deal 
of detailed information to take advantage of benefi ts such as health insurance and 
401(k) plans. It follows that electronic technology such as the Internet and supporting 
databases can play a signifi cant role in modern benefi t systems.
LO 14-9 Discuss the 
importance of effectively 
communicating the na-
ture and value of 
beneﬁ ts to employees.
Did You Know?
In employee satisfaction surveys 
conducted since 2002, the Society 
of Human Resource Management 
has found that benefi ts ranked in 
the top fi ve contributors to job sat-
isfaction every year except 2012. 
Among the aspects of benefi ts that 
employees consider important or 
very important, paid time off and 
health insurance take the top spots. 
At the same time, the HR managers 
surveyed were more likely than the 
employees to say employees are 
satisfi ed with each aspect of the 
benefi ts.
Question
How do the data shown here sup-
port an argument that HR managers 
should actively communicate with 
employees about their benefi ts?
Sources: Society for Human Resource 
Management, “Employee Job Satisfac-
tion and Engagement: The Road to 
Economic Recovery,” research report, 
May 2014, http://www.shrm.org; Debra 
Cohen, “Employee Engagement,” 
People and Strategy 36, no. 4 (2014): 
13–14; Frank Giancola, “How Important 
Are Benefi t Plans to Your Employees 
and How Satisfi ed Are They with Your 
Offerings?” Employee Beneﬁ t Plan 
 Review, July 2013, pp. 27–30.
Employees Say Benefi ts Matter
Employees Rating Beneﬁt Important or Very Important 
Paid time off
Health care/medical beneﬁts
Overall beneﬁts package
Deﬁned-contribution retirement plan
Work/life ﬂexibility
Deﬁned-beneﬁt retirement plan
Family-friendly beneﬁts
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%

THINKING ETHICALLY
SHOULD ALL EMPLOYEES PAY THE SAME 
AMOUNT FOR HEALTH INSURANCE?
With health care costs rising faster than infl ation, em-
ployers look for ways to cut the cost or at least slow 
the increase. Employees with unhealthy lifestyles need 
more health care, so coverage for an unhealthy work-
force costs more. Therefore, and perhaps also out of 
concern for employees’ well-being, employers want to 
motivate employees to take better care of their health.
One idea is to offer discounts or penalties on the em-
ployee’s share of health insurance premiums. Michelin 
North America tried awarding a $600 credit to employ-
ees who completed a health assessment or participated 
in creating an action plan to improve wellness. Health 
costs rose anyway, so Michelin limits the credit to em-
ployees who meet health standards in three or more 
categories, such as blood pressure, cholesterol levels, 
and waist size. Employees who do not qualify may earn 
a smaller credit by signing up for health coaching.
The Affordable Care Act encourages employers to 
reward health-promoting behavior. Rewards and penal-
ties may not exceed 30% of the employee’s costs for 
the health insurance (50% for participation in a stop-
smoking program). The typical amount of the incentives 
is 5% to 10% of an employee’s share of the premium. 
To avoid discrimination under the Americans with Dis-
abilities Act, employers must reward behaviors em-
ployees are able to do and must provide alternatives to 
accommodate people with disabilities. Thus, instead of 
having a goal to walk a given number of miles, employ-
ees might wear a fi tness tracking device such as Fit-
bit or Jawbone Up and measure their progress toward 
individual goals or measure a group’s overall progress 
toward a shared goal. Also, a doctor can exempt an 
employee from a program; you would not, for example, 
want employees with anorexia or bulimia to enroll in a 
weight-loss rewards program.
Even when a company’s incentives meet legal re-
quirements, people question whether they are fair and 
respect employees’ privacy. Some question whether 
employees will actually change their behavior—and im-
prove their health—in exchange for a few hundred dol-
lars. Perhaps the programs will simply reward people 
who are already taking good care of their health. Others 
feel it is unkind or unfair to penalize less healthy people, 
who already have higher bills for health care because 
they need more services. On the privacy question, CVS 
and other companies using incentives say they do not 
see individuals’ health information. Rather, their insur-
ance companies see the data and may report the overall 
costs and benefi ts of the program.
CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 451
In actuality, employees and job applicants often have a poor idea of what ben-
efi ts they have and what the market value of their benefi ts is. Research asking 
employees about their benefi ts has shown that employees signifi cantly underes-
timate the cost and value of their benefi ts.43 Probably a major reason for their 
lack of knowledge is a lack of communications from employers. Employees don’t 
know what employers are spending for benefi ts, so many of them doubt  employers’ 
complaints about soaring costs and their impact on the company’s future.44 In 
one study, employees said their company neglected to tell them how to be better 
 consumers of health care, and they would be willing to make changes in their life-
style if they had a fi nancial incentive to do so. Such research suggests to employers 
that better communication, coupled with well-designed benefi ts plans, will pay off 
in practical terms.
Employers have many options for communicating information about benefi ts. To 
increase the likelihood that employees will receive and understand the messages, em-
ployers can combine several media, such as brochures, question-and-answer meetings, 
intranet pages, memos, and e-mail. Some other possible media include paycheck in-
serts, retirement or health coaching, training programs, and benefi ts fairs. An invest-
ment of creativity in communications to employees can reap great returns in the form 
of committed, satisfi ed employees.

Questions
 1. Suppose an employer gives employees an in-
surance discount based on number of hours of 
physical fi tness activities. Who benefi ts from the 
program? Who is harmed? Is this ethical?
 2. Suppose an employer charges all employees the 
same premium, regardless of their health habits. 
Who benefi ts? Who is harmed? Is this ethical?
Sources: Parmy Olson, “Wearable Tech Is Plugging into 
Health Insurance,” Forbes, June 19, 2014, http://www.forbes 
.com; Rhonda Willingham, “Using Incentives within the New 
 Regulatory World of the ACA to Improve Employee Wellness and 
 Productivity,” Employee Beneﬁ t Plan Review, October 2013, pp. 
7–11; Leslie Kwoh, “When Your Boss Makes You Pay for Being 
Fat,” The Wall Street Journal, April 5, 2013, http://online.wsj.com; 
Katie Thomas, “Companies Get Strict on Health of Workers,” The 
New York Times, March 25, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com.
452 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
SUMMARY
LO 14-1 Discuss the importance of benefi ts as a part of 
employee compensation.
• Compensation includes wages and salaries, incen-
tive pay, and benefi ts.
• Like other forms of compensation, benefi ts help 
employers attract, retain, and motivate employees.
• The variety of possible benefi ts helps employers 
tailor compensation packages to attract the right 
kinds of employees.
• Employees expect at least a minimum level of ben-
efi ts, and providing more than the minimum helps 
an organization compete in the labor market.
• Benefi ts are also a signifi cant expense.
• Employers provide benefi ts because employees 
value them, and many benefi ts are required by law.
LO 14-2 Summarize the types of employee benefi ts re-
quired by law.
• Employers must contribute to the Old Age, Sur-
vivors, Disability, and Health Insurance program 
known as Social Security through a payroll tax 
shared by employers and employees.
• Employers must pay federal and state taxes for un-
employment insurance, based on each employer’s 
experience rating, or percentage of employees a 
company has laid off in the past.
• State laws require that employers purchase work-
ers’ compensation insurance.
• Under the Family and Medical Leave Act, em-
ployees who need to care for a baby following 
birth or adoption or for an ill family member must 
be granted unpaid leave of up to 12 weeks.
• Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act, organizations with 50 or more employees 
must choose between providing employees with 
health insurance or paying an Employer Shared 
Responsibility Payment.
LO 14-3 Describe the most common forms of paid leave.
• The major categories of paid leave are vacations, 
holidays, and sick leave.
• At large U.S. companies, paid vacation is typically 
10 days—much less than is common in Western 
Europe. 
• The typical number of paid holidays is 10 in both 
Western Europe and the United States.
• Sick leave programs often provide full salary replace-
ment for a limited period of time, with the amount 
of sick leave usually based on length of service. Poli-
cies are needed to determine how the organization 
will handle unused sick days at the end of each year. 
Some organizations let employees roll over some or 
all of the unused sick days into the next year, and 
others let unused days expire at the end of the year.
• Other forms of paid leave include personal days 
and fl oating holidays.
LO 14-4 Identify the kinds of insurance benefi ts offered 
by employers.
• Medical insurance is one of the most valued em-
ployee benefi ts. Such policies typically cover 
hospital expenses, surgical expenses, and visits to 
physicians. Some employers offer additional cov-
erage, such as dental care, vision care, birthing 
centers, and prescription drug programs.
• Under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Recon-
ciliation Act of 1985, employees must be permit-
ted to extend their health insurance coverage at 
group rates for up to 36 months after they leave 
the organization.
• To manage the costs of health insurance, many 
organizations offer coverage through a health 
maintenance organization or preferred provider 
organization, or they may offer fl exible spend-
ing accounts. Some encourage healthy behaviors 
through an employee wellness program.
• Life insurance usually takes the form of group 
term life insurance, with the usual benefi t being 
two times the employee’s yearly pay.
• Employers may also offer short-term and/or long-
term disability insurance, with disability payments 
being a percentage of the employee’s salary.

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 453
• Some employers provide long-term care insur-
ance to pay the costs associated with long-term 
care such as nursing home care.
LO 14-5 Defi ne the types of retirement plans offered by 
employers.
• Retirement plans may be contributory, meaning 
funded by contributions from employer and em-
ployee, or noncontributory, meaning funded only 
by the employer.
• These plans may be defi ned-benefi t plans or 
 defi ned-contribution plans.
• Defi ned-benefi t plans guarantee a specifi ed level 
of retirement income, usually based on the em-
ployee’s years of service, age, and earnings level. 
Benefi ts under these plans are protected by the 
Pension Benefi t Guarantee Corporation.
• In a defi ned-contribution plan, such as a 401(k) 
plan, the employer sets up an individual account 
for each employee and guarantees the size of the 
investment into that account, rather than the 
amount to be paid out on retirement. Because em-
ployees have control over investment decisions, 
the organization may also offer fi nancial planning 
services as an employee benefi t.
• A cash balance plan combines some advantages of de-
fi ned-benefi t plans and defi ned-contribution plans. 
The employer sets up individual accounts and con-
tributes a percentage of each employee’s salary. The 
account earns interest at a predetermined rate, so the 
contributions and benefi ts are easier to predict.
LO 14-6 Describe how organizations use other benefi ts 
to match employees’ wants and needs.
• Employers have responded to work-family role 
confl icts by offering family-friendly benefi ts, in-
cluding paid family leave, child care services or 
referrals, college savings plans, and elder care in-
formation and support.
• Other employee benefi ts have traditionally in-
cluded subsidized cafeterias, on-site health clinics, 
and reimbursement of moving expenses.
• Stores and manufacturers may offer discounts on 
their products.
• Tuition reimbursement encourages employees to 
continue learning.
• Recreational services and employee outings pro-
vide social interaction as well as stress relief.
LO 14-7 Explain how to choose the contents of an em-
ployee benefi ts package.
• A logical place to begin is to establish organiza-
tional objectives and select benefi ts that support 
those objectives.
• Organizations should also consider employees’ 
expectations and values. At a minimum, organi-
zations offer the benefi ts employees have come 
to view as basic; some organizations go so far as 
to match extra benefi ts to individual employees’ 
needs and interests.
• Cafeteria-style plans are an intermediate step that 
gives employees control over the benefi ts they 
receive.
• Employers must also weigh the costs of benefi ts, 
which are signifi cant.
LO 14-8 Summarize the regulations affecting how em-
ployers design and administer benefi ts programs.
• Employers must provide the benefi ts that are re-
quired by law, and they may not improperly clas-
sify employees as “independent contractors” to 
avoid paying benefi ts.
• Tax treatment of qualifi ed plans is favorable, so orga-
nizations need to learn the requirements for setting 
up benefi ts as qualifi ed plans—for example, ensuring 
that pension plans do not discriminate in favor of the 
organization’s highly compensated employees.
• Employers may not use employees’ gender as the 
basis for discriminating against anyone, as in pen-
sion benefi ts on the basis that women as a group 
may live longer. Nor may employers discriminate 
against workers over age 40 in providing pay or 
benefi ts, such as pressuring older workers to retire 
by limiting retirement benefi ts.
• When employers offer early retirement, they must 
meet the requirements of the Older Workers Ben-
efi t Protection Act of 1990.
• Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, em-
ployers must give disabled employees equal access 
to health insurance.
• To meet the requirements of the Financial Ac-
counting Standards Board, employers must set 
aside the funds they expect to need for retirement 
benefi ts ahead of time, rather than funding the 
benefi ts on a pay-as-you-go basis.
LO 14-9 Discuss the importance of effectively com-
municating the nature and value of benefi ts to 
employees.
• Communicating information about benefi ts is im-
portant so that employees will appreciate the value 
of their benefi ts.
• Communicating their value is the main way ben-
efi ts attract, motivate, and retain employees.
• Employers have many options for communicating in-
formation about benefi ts, such as brochures, meetings, 
intranets, memos, and e-mail. Using a combination of 
such methods increases employees’ understanding.

454 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
KEY TERMS
employee benefi ts, 424
Social Security, 426
unemployment insurance, 427
experience rating, 428
workers’ compensation, 428
Family and Medical Leave Act 
(FMLA), 429
Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act, 429
Consolidated Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act (COBRA), 
434
health maintenance organization 
(HMO), 435
preferred provider organization 
(PPO), 435
fl exible spending account, 435
employee wellness program 
(EWP), 436
short-term disability insurance, 436
long-term disability insurance, 436
contributory plan, 437
noncontributory plan, 437
defi ned-benefi t plan, 438
Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act (ERISA), 438
Pension Benefi t Guarantee 
Corporation (PBGC), 438
defi ned-contribution plan, 438
cash balance plan, 440
vesting rights, 441
summary plan description (SPD), 
442
cafeteria-style plan, 446
The Starbucks Way to Get an Education
Starbucks recently made headlines by announcing a 
program for helping employees earn college degrees. 
Starbucks employees who work at least 20 hours a week 
and enroll in Arizona State University’s online bachelor’s 
degree program are eligible for partial tuition reim-
bursements during their freshman and sophomore years. 
During their junior and senior years, Starbucks will pay 
full tuition. Employees can choose from among ASU’s 
degree programs; courses need not be job related, and 
employees need not stay at the company after graduating.
This employee benefi t may be costly. Tuition for 
ASU’s online program can run from $3,000 to $10,000. 
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. Why do employers provide employee benefi ts, rather 
than providing all compensation in the form of pay 
and letting employees buy the services they want? 
(LO 14-1)
 2. Of the benefi ts discussed in this chapter, list the 
ones you consider essential—that is, the benefi ts 
you would require in any job offer. Why are these 
benefi ts important to you? (LO 14-1)
 3. Defi ne the types of benefi ts required by law. How 
can organizations minimize the cost of these ben-
efi ts while complying with the relevant laws? 
(LO 14-2)
 4. What are some advantages of offering a gener-
ous package of insurance benefi ts? What are some 
 drawbacks of generous insurance benefi ts? (LO 14-3)
 5. Imagine that you are the human resource man-
ager of a small architectural fi rm. You learn that 
the monthly premiums for the company’s existing 
health insurance policy will rise by 15% next year. 
What can you suggest to help your company man-
age this rising cost? (LO 14-4)
 6. In principle, health insurance would be most attrac-
tive to employees with large medical expenses, and 
retirement benefi ts would be most attractive to older 
employees. What else might a company include in 
its benefi ts package to appeal to young, healthy em-
ployees? How might the company structure its ben-
efi ts so these employees can take advantage of the 
benefi ts they care about most? (LO 14-6)
 7. What issues should an organization consider in 
selecting a package of employee benefi ts? How 
should an employer manage the trade-offs among 
these considerations? (LO 14-7)
 8. How do tax laws and accounting regulations affect 
benefi ts packages? (LO 14-8)
 9. What legal requirements might apply to a family 
leave policy? Suggest how this type of policy should 
be set up to meet those requirements. (LO 14-8)
 10. Why is it important to communicate information 
about employee benefi ts? Suppose you work in the 
HR department of a company that has decided to 
add new benefi ts—dental and vision insurance plus 
an additional two days of paid time off for “personal 
days.” How would you recommend communicating 
this change? What information should your mes-
sages include? (LO 14-9)

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 455
Starbucks estimates that of its 135,000 part-time and 
full-time employees in the United States, about 70% 
are enrolled in college or want to pursue a degree. (An-
other one-fourth already have a degree.) Before the an-
nouncement, Starbucks had offered eligible employees 
about $1,000 a year in tuition assistance.
Starbucks believes the expense is worthwhile because 
this benefi t supports a strategy of employee retention. 
The greater value of the benefi t in the third and fourth 
years of school entices employees to stay, and the com-
pany hopes that even graduates who move to jobs else-
where will promote Starbucks as a great place to work. 
The benefi t differentiates Starbucks from its competitors. 
In a recent survey by the Society of Human Resource 
Management, just 54% of employers offer undergradu-
ate tuition assistance. Furthermore, many of those pro-
grams require that employees take job-related courses. 
Retaining good employees is practical, potentially saving 
more than Starbucks spends on tuition reimbursement, 
but it may also refl ect a sense of social responsibility. 
CEO Howard Schultz has expressed concern about “the 
fracturing of the American dream” and positioned tuition 
reimbursement as a way of taking action.
Reactions to the program included praise for a benefi t 
that is both important and fl exible in that employees can 
fi t online courses around their work schedules. Some note 
that completion rates for online courses are not very high, 
but Starbucks’s arrangement with ASU includes access to 
coaches, academic advisers, and fi nancial-aid counselors. 
One downside is that ASU’s online tuition is high relative 
to national averages for in-state college tuition. Employ-
ees, at least in the fi rst two years, might be better off skip-
ping this benefi t and attending a community college.
Tuition reimbursement is just one component of 
Starbucks’ benefi ts package designed to build employee 
loyalty. After three months, employees become eligible 
to enroll in health insurance, dental and vision plans, 
and a 401(k) retirement plan. Hourly workers start 
earning paid vacation after a year of continuous em-
ployment. More unusual benefi ts include free beverages 
during breaks, a pound of coffee beans (or the equiva-
lent in other beverages) to take home each week, and 
annual stock options.
Questions
 1. Discuss how well you think Starbucks’s tuition reim-
bursement program meets the criteria for selecting 
employee benefi ts (organizational objectives, em-
ployees’ expectations and values, and benefi t costs).
 2. If you had been advising Starbucks, would you have 
recommended that it introduce the tuition reim-
bursement plan or instead use the same budget to 
raise hourly workers’ wages? Why?
Sources: Starbucks, “Working at Starbucks,” http://www.starbucks.com, ac-
cessed July 11, 2014; Julie Jargon and Douglas Belkin, “Starbucks to Sub-
sidize Workers’ College Degrees,” The Wall Street Journal, June 16, 2014, 
http://online.wsj.com; Victor Luckerson, “These Are All the Awesome 
Benefi ts Starbucks Baristas Get,” Time, June 16, 2014, http://time.com; 
Ángel González, “Starbucks Will Pay Tuition for Many Employees to Fin-
ish College,” Seattle Times, June 15, 2014 (modifi ed June 19, 2014), http://
seattletimes.com; Jena McGregor, “What Makes the Starbucks Tuition 
Perk Unusual among Companies,” Washington Post, June 16, 2014, http://
www.washingtonpost.com; Richard Feloni, “How the Starbucks Free Col-
lege Plan Could Save It Millions of Dollars per Year,” Business Insider, June 
16, 2014, http://www.businessinsider.com; Quentin Fottrell, “The Venti 
Problem with Starbucks’s Education Plan,” MarketWatch, June 16, 2014, 
http://www.marketwatch.com.
Sodexo’s Stumble on Benefits for Workers at Colleges
Sodexo USA provides food, health, and other services to 
client organizations. A school or hospital’s cashiers and 
cafeteria workers may work for Sodexo under a contract 
with the institution. Sodexo needs dedicated workers 
but has to keep an eye on costs so it can win business 
from organizations watching their own bottom lines.
Cost is therefore among Sodexo’s considerations in 
complying with the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (ACA). Sodexo must determine which workers 
are considered full-time, because full-time workers must 
receive health insurance benefi ts if the employer wants 
to avoid paying a fi ne. The ACA defi nition of “full-time” 
means the employee works on average at least 30 hours 
a week; the employer has some latitude in deciding the 
period over which it calculates the average.
In the past, Sodexo considered an employee full-time 
if he or she worked at least 30 hours a week for six or more 
weeks out of a quarter (12 weeks). In 2013, the company 
announced it would begin determining full-time status 
by averaging employees’ hours over a one-year period.
Some employees who met the quarterly requirement 
no longer qualifi ed as full-time and lost their eligibil-
ity for health insurance and other benefi ts available to 
full-time workers, such as disability insurance and paid 
vacation and sick time. Employees in schools were hit 
particularly hard. Some worked full-time or more dur-
ing the academic year but little during the summer. The 
ACA requires that employers count only the academic 
year in fi guring the full-time status of teachers, but the 
rule does not mention contract workers. According to 
MANAGING TALENT

456 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
Babies Welcomed at T3
T3 is an independent advertising agency launched 
by Gay Warren Gaddis in Austin, Texas, in 1989. It 
has grown rapidly, thanks to Gaddis’s ability to stay 
in front of tumultuous change in the advertising and 
marketing industry. Traditional agencies have ap-
proached their work by thinking about ads to be 
placed on the air or in newspapers and magazines. 
In contrast, Gaddis and her staff have specialized in 
developing integrated campaigns that harness all the 
ways to communicate about a brand, including com-
munication via the Internet.
Innovation continues to be a company value. The 
company’s careers web page says T3 looks for “Great 
thinkers. Individuals with curious, open minds. Relent-
less problem-solvers constantly looking for new, often 
uncon-ventional, solutions.” The company is structured 
without the boundaries that have traditionally separated 
functions in the advertising world, so that employees 
can bring their perspectives together to solve client 
problems.
That innovative spirit hasn’t been limited to adver-
tising. Gaddis also thinks creatively about managing 
her fi rm’s human resources. Six years after starting T3, 
Gaddis observed that four of her key employees were all 
pregnant at about the same time. If they all proceeded 
in the traditional way, taking a few months’ leave, Gad-
dis would be scrambling to keep her agency running 
without them. So Gaddis decided to try something un-
usual: she told the four employees they were welcome 
to bring their babies to work. While some big compa-
nies establish on-site day care, Gaddis simply counted 
on the employees to work fl exibly in the presence of 
their children.
Many people would assume that babies at work 
would create a distracting environment, but in fact, 
the new program was a success. T3 kept the policy in 
place and even gave it a name: T3 and Under. So far, 
80 babies have come to work at one point or another. 
Gaddis says parents are so appreciative that they try 
extra hard to make the arrangement work. One such 
parent, Emily Dalton, feels reassured by being able 
to just swivel her chair when she wants to check on 
her baby: “You’re not worrying,” she told a news-
paper reporter, “You’re being spit up on, but you’re 
not . . . calling somewhere to check on your child.” She 
admits that she has to be extra fl exible when her baby, 
Annie, is awake but adds, “I powerhouse when she 
sleeps.” When the babies reach nine months or start to 
crawl, the parents are expected to make arrangements 
for day care.
Bringing babies to work is, of course, only one em-
ployee benefi t. T3, which now has offi ces in New York 
and San Francisco as well as the one in Austin, of-
fers medical, dental, and vision insurance; various life 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS
Sodexo, about 4,000 employees who had company-pro-
vided insurance lost it under the new formula.
Julie Peterson, Sodexo’s vice president of compensa-
tion and benefi ts, explained that in planning its benefi ts 
package, Sodexo must balance “the most economically 
feasible model” against concern for employees’ needs. 
She pointed out that part-time employees could “get 
access to benefi ts on the public [health insurance] ex-
changes in ways they couldn’t have before.” Peterson 
also noted that because the ACA requires individuals 
to have insurance, more employees were signing up for 
Sodexo’s health insurance options, driving up total ben-
efi ts costs.
Despite these explanations, Sodexo’s decision caused 
a backlash. Backed by the Unite Here union, Sodexo 
workers launched protests and generated negative pub-
licity. One school, Earlham College, insisted that its 
contract with Sodexo specify its workers be considered 
full-time. Peterson later announced that in a regular 
review, Sodexo had decided to revise its policy again. 
For school workers, its formula will use workers’ aver-
age hours during the academic year as their hours for 
the summer months. Most workers who had lost ben-
efi ts coverage would regain it. Peterson said Sodexo 
could make the change and “remain competitive in the 
market.”
Questions
 1. Which method of calculating full-time status do you 
think best supports Sodexo’s strategy? Why?
 2. What else could Sodexo do to promote employee 
satisfaction while managing benefi ts costs?
Sources: Sodexo, careers page, http://sodexousa.com, accessed July 14, 2014; 
Ricardo Alonso-Zaldivar, “Sodexo Cafeteria Workers Regain Health Cov-
erage,” Associated Press, June 26, 2014, http://bigstory.ap.org; Unite Here, 
“Sodexo Workers Demand Closure of Obamacare Loophole,” June 12, 
2014, http://unitehere.org; Lauren Weber, “Odd-Hour Workers Face Loss 
of Employer Health Plans,” The Wall Street Journal, April 13, 2014, http://
online.wsj.com. 

CHAPTER 14 
Providing Employee Benefits 457
insurance policies; disability insurance; a 401(k) plan; 
paid time for vacations, holidays, and sick leave; and 
discounts on gym memberships and cell phone plans. 
There are also some other unusual benefi ts: breakfast 
on Mondays, candy on Fridays, a book club, and a 
“bring your dog to work” policy. As for this last pol-
icy, the T3 website comments, “While we don’t have 
hard metrics on what [dogs] do for our creativity or 
productivity, we do believe they play a part in adding 
balance to what can be a very unbalanced business.”
Advertising may be an “unbalanced” business, but 
so far, T3 seems to be coping well enough. And T3’s 
fearless leader, Gay Warren Gaddis, was recently named 
Ernst and Young’s Entrepreneur of the Year for central 
Texas.
Questions
 1. Of the employee benefi ts mentioned in this case, 
which of them do you think are important for keep-
ing a creative workforce engaged at T3?
 2. What are some of the advantages of the agency’s T3 
and Under policy? What are some of the risks? How 
can the company address those risks?
 3. At what other kinds of companies, if any, do you 
think a “bring your baby to work” policy might be 
effective as an employee benefi t? Why?
Sources: Josh Spiro, “Where Every Day Is Take Your Baby to Work Day,” 
Inc., December 9, 2009, www.inc.com; Eric Aasen, “Babies-at-Work 
Programs Let New Parents Stay Close to Their Kids,” Dallas Morning 
News, March 26, 2008, Business & Company Resource Center, http://
galenet.galegroup.com; T3, “Careers” and “Company,” corporate  website, 
www.t-3.com, accessed July 21, 2014.
 1. Angus Loten and Sarah E. Needleman, “Laws on Paid Sick 
Leave Divide Businesses,” The Wall Street Journal, February 
5, 2014, http://online.wsj.com.
 2. B. Gerhart and G. T. Milkovich, “Employee Compensation: Re-
search and Practice,” in Handbook of Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology, 2nd ed., eds. M. D. Dunnette and L. M. Hough (Palo 
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1992), vol. 3; J. Swist, 
“Benefi ts Communications: Measuring Impact and Values,” 
Employee Benefi t Plan Review, September 2002, pp. 24–26.
 3. Erik Sherman, “Four Perks Employees Love,” Inc., April 11, 
2012, http://www.inc.com; Robert J. Grossman, “Tough Love 
at Netfl ix,” HR Magazine, April 2010, http://www.shrm.org.
 4. U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Ad-
ministration, “Comparison of State Unemployment Laws,” 
chapter 2, http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov, last updated 
June 23, 2014.
 5. Julie M. Whittaker, “Expediting the Return to Work: Ap-
proaches in the Unemployment Compensation Program,” 
Congressional Research Service Report for Congress, May 
1, 2013, http://www.crs.gov.
 6. J. V. Nackley, Primer on Workers’ Compensation (Washington, 
DC: Bureau of National Affairs, 1989); T. Thomason, T. P. 
Schmidle, and J. F. Burton, Workers’ Compensation (Kalama-
zoo, MI: Upjohn Institute, 2001).
 7. B. T. Beam Jr. and J. J. McFadden, Employee Benefi ts, 6th ed. 
(Chicago: Dearborn Financial Publishing, 2000).
 8. AAUW, “The Family and Medical Leave Act: Facts and Sta-
tistics,” http://www.aauw.org, accessed April 27, 2012.
 9. Scott M. Wich, “With FMLA Leave Claims, Attention to De-
tail—Not Timing—Counts,” HR Magazine,  February 2012, p. 77.
 10. A. Pawlowski, “Why Is America the ‘No- Vacation Nation’?” 
CNNTravel, May 23, 2011, http://articles.cnn.com.
 11. “Survey: Formal Paid Time-Off Programs Gaining Steam,” 
Talent Management, July 6, 2011, http://talentmgt.com.
 12. Employee Benefi t Research Institute, “The Most Valued 
Benefi t Is . . . ,” Fast Facts no. 256, November 21, 2013, http://
www.ebri.org.
 13. U.S. Government Accountability Offi ce, “Mental Health 
and Substance Abuse: Employers’ Insurance Coverage 
Maintained or Enhanced Since Parity Act,” Medical Benefi ts, 
January 15, 2012, pp. 6, 8; National Conference of State 
Legislatures, “State Laws Mandating or Regulating Mental 
Health Benefi ts,” Issues and Research: Health, updated De-
cember 2011, http://www.ncsl.org.
 14. Reed Abelson, “Health Insurance Costs Rising Sharply This 
Year, Study Shows,” The New York Times, September 27, 2011, 
http://www.nytimes.com; Deborah Brunswick, “Health 
Insurance Costs to Rise Again Next Year,” CNNMoney, 
 September 22, 2011, http://money.cnn.com.
 15. Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educa-
tional Trust, “Summary of Findings,” 2013 Employer Health 
Benefi ts Survey, August 20, 2013, accessed at http://kff.org.
 16. Paul Fronstin, “Characteristics of the Population with Con-
sumer-Driven and High-Deductible Health Plans, 2005–
2011,” Notes (Employee Benefi t Research Institute), April 
2012, pp. 2–9.
 17. J. C. Erfurt, A. Foote, and M. A. Heirich, “The Cost-Effec-
tiveness of Worksite Wellness Programs for Hypertension 
Control, Weight Loss, Smoking Cessation and Exercise,” 
Personnel Psychology 45 (1992), pp. 5–27.
 18. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employee Benefi ts in the United 
States, March 2013,” news release, July 17, 2013, http://www.
bls.gov.
 19. Pension Benefi t Guaranty Corporation, “Pension Insurance 
Premiums Fact Sheet,” Resources: Fact Sheets, http://www.
pbgc.gov, accessed April 26, 2012.
 20. Stephen Miller, “For 2014, IRS Issues 401(k) and Pension 
Plan Limits,” HR Topics and Strategy: Benefi ts, November 
1, 2013, http://www.shrm.org.
 21. Employee Benefi t Research Institute, “Retirement Plan 
Participation: Survey of Income and Program Participation 
(SIPP) Data, 2012,” EBRI Notes, August 2013, pp. 2–13; Em-
ployee Benefi t Research Institute, “FAQs about Benefi ts: Re-
tirement Issues,” http://www.ebri.org, accessed July 11, 2014.
NOTES

458 PART 4 
Compensating Human Resources
 22. BNA, “Employers Offer Too Much Information, Too Little 
Guidance about 401(k) Options,” Managing 401(k) Plans, De-
cember 2011, pp. 1–4; Janet Levaux, “Target-Date Funds 
Dominate 401(k) Plans,” Research, April 25, 2012, http://www
.advisorone.com; Plan Sponsor Council of America, “PSCA’s 
55th Annual Survey,” http://www.psca.org, accessed July 15, 2014.
 23. “Supreme Court Lets Stand Third Circuit Ruling That Pen-
sion Avoidance Scheme Is ERISA Violation,” Daily Labor 
Report, no. 234 (December 8, 1987), p. A-14, summarizing 
Continental Can Company v. Gavalik.
 24. Beam and McFadden, Employee Benefi ts.
 25. S. L. Grover and K. J. Crooker, “Who Appreciates Fam-
ily Responsive Human Resource Policies: The Impact of 
Family-Friendly Policies on the Organizational Attachment 
of Parents and Non-parents,” Personnel Psychology 48 (1995), 
pp. 271–88; M. A. Arthur, “Share Price Reactions to Work-
Family Initiatives: An Institutional Perspective,” Academy of 
Management Journal 46 (2003), p. 497; J. E. Perry-Smith and 
T. Blum, “Work-Family Human Resource Bundles and Per-
ceived Organizational Performance,” Academy of Management 
Journal 43 (2000), pp. 1107–17.
 26. Kasia Klimasinska and Sandrine Rastello, “Moms in ‘Sur-
vival Mode’ as U.S. Trails World on Benefi ts,” Bloomberg 
News, January 15, 2014, http://www.bloomberg.com; Lauren 
Weber, “Why Dads Don’t Take Paternity Leave,” The Wall 
Street Journal, June 12, 2013, http://online.wsj.com.
 27. E. E. Kossek, “Diversity in Child Care Assistance Needs: 
Employee Problems, Preferences, and Work-Related Out-
comes,” Personnel Psychology 43 (1990), pp. 769–91.
 28. Kenneth Matos and Ellen Galinsky, “2014 National Study of 
Employers,” Families and Work Institute, 2014, http://www.
familiesandwork.org.
 29. Johns Hopkins Medicine, “Employee Benefi ts: Tuition Reim-
bursement/College Savings Plan,” Bayview Jobs, http://www.
bayviewjobs.org, accessed April 27, 2012.
 30. National Alliance for Caregiving, Best Practices in Workplace 
Eldercare, March 2012, http://www.caregiving.org.
 31. Colleen Kane, “Outrageous Workplace Perks,” CNBC.com, 
August 4, 2011, http://www.cnbc.com; Sherman, “Four Perks 
Employees Love.”
 32. R. Broderick and B. Gerhart, “Nonwage Compensation,” in 
The Human Resource Management Handbook, eds. D. Lewin, 
D. J. B. Mitchell, and M. A. Zadi (San Francisco: JAI Press, 
1996).
 33. Lauren Weber, “Benefi ts Matter,” The Wall Street Journal, 
April 3, 2012, http://online.wsj.com.
 34. Tynan Barton, “Sociable Network,” Employee Benefi ts, 
 September 2011, pp. 50–53.
 35. “SHRM Report Says Economy Forced Benefi t Cuts.”
 36. Beam and McFadden, Employee Benefi ts.
 37. D. A. Harrison and L. Z. Liska, “Promoting Regular Exercise 
in Organizational Fitness Programs: Health-Related Differ-
ences in Motivational Building Blocks,” Personnel Psychology 
47 (1994), pp. 47–71; Erfurt et al., “The Cost-Effectiveness 
of Worksite Wellness Programs.”
 38. Beam and McFadden, Employee Benefi ts, p. 359.
 39. For a description of these rules, see M. M. Sarli, “Nondis-
crimination Rules for Qualifi ed Plans: The General Test,” 
Compensation and Benefi ts Review 23, no. 5 (September– 
October 1991), pp. 56–67.
 40. Los Angeles Department of Water & Power v. Manhart, 435 U.S. 
S. Ct. 702 (1978), 16 E.P.D. 8250.
 41. S. K. Hoffman, “Discrimination Litigation Relating to Em-
ployee Benefi ts,” Labor Law Journal, June 1992, pp. 362–81.
 42. Ibid., p. 375.
 43. M. Wilson, G. B. Northcraft, and M. A. Neale, “The Per-
ceived Value of Fringe Benefi ts,” Personnel Psychology 38 
(1985), pp. 309–20; H. W. Hennessey, P. L. Perrewe, and W. 
A. Hochwarter, “Impact of Benefi t Awareness on Employee 
and Organizational Outcomes: A Longitudinal Field Experi-
ment,” Benefi ts Quarterly 8, no. 2 (1992), pp. 90–96; MetLife, 
Employee Benefi ts Benchmarking Report, www.metlife.com, ac-
cessed June 24, 2007.
 44. M. C. Giallourakis and G. S. Taylor, “An Evaluation of Benefi t 
Communication Strategy,” Employee Benefi ts Journal 15, no. 4 
(1991), pp. 14–18; Employee Benefi t Research Institute, “How 
Readable Are Summary Plan Descriptions for Health Care 
Plans?” EBRI Notes, October 2006, www.ebri.org.

CHAPTER 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations
CHAPTER 
Managing Human Resources Globally
Meeting Other HR Goals
PART FIVE
15
16

Introduction
Recently, the football players at Northwestern University participated in a different 
kind of contest: one between their school and the College Athletes Players Association, 
which has financial backing from the United Steelworkers union. Some of the players 
had insisted that because the school granted them scholarships, it was in effect pay-
ing them for training and playing on Northwestern’s football team. As employees, they 
said, they wanted the right to form a union. The school disputed the argument, but 
the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) ruled that 76 football players did have the 
status of employees and could proceed with a vote on whether to form a union.
Northwestern continued to insist that the players were students first, not pri-
marily employees, but it had to allow the election to go forward. In the days leading 
up to the vote, the administration continued to discourage the idea of forming a 
players’ union. Northwestern gave all the players new iPads, and a coach told them 
that a union would interfere with relationships between players and their coaches. 
School officials also e-mailed players’ parents, encouraging them to speak to their 
sons about the disadvantages of a union. Meanwhile, the players who wanted a 
union talked about how it could protect them from the consequences of being 
injured during games. These players wanted more power in obtaining coverage of 
sports-related medical bills, stricter rules to protect them from brain injuries, and a 
requirement that scholarships continue after players were injured on the field. The 
players voted for or against the union, but the election results were then sealed 
while the NLRB reviewed the university’s request to overturn the decision.1
PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 15-1 Deﬁ ne unions and labor relations and their role in 
organizations.
 LO 15-2 Identify the labor relations goals of management, 
labor unions, and society.
 LO 15-3 Summarize laws and regulations that affect labor 
relations.
 LO 15-4 Describe the union organizing process.
 LO 15-5 Explain how management and unions negotiate 
contracts.
 LO 15-6 Summarize the practice of contract 
administration.
 LO 15-7 Describe new approaches to labor-management 
relations.
Collective Bargaining 
and Labor Relations
15

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  461
As in the case of the football players at Northwestern University, concerns about 
fi nancial security and physical safety are common reasons for trying to form a union. 
When workers succeed and unions become a presence in an organization, human re-
source management must direct more attention to the interests of employees as a 
group. In general, employees and employers share the same interests. They both ben-
efi t when the organization is strong and growing, providing employees with jobs and 
employers with profi ts. But although the interests of employers and employees over-
lap, they obviously are not identical. In the case of pay, workers benefi t from higher 
pay, but high pay cuts into the organization’s profi ts, unless pay increases are associ-
ated with higher productivity or better customer service. Workers may negotiate dif-
ferences with their employers individually, or they may form unions to negotiate on 
their behalf. This chapter explores human resource activities in organizations where 
employees belong to unions or where employees are seeking to organize unions.
We begin by formally defi ning unions and labor relations, and then describe the 
scope and impact of union activity. We next summarize government laws and regula-
tions affecting unions and labor relations. The following three sections detail types 
of activities involving unions: union organizing, contract negotiation, and contract 
administration. Finally, we identify ways in which unions and management are work-
ing together in arrangements that are more cooperative than the traditional labor-
management relationship.
Role of Unions and Labor Relations
In the United States today, most workers act as individuals to select jobs that are ac-
ceptable to them and to negotiate pay, benefi ts, fl exible hours, and other work condi-
tions. Especially when there is stiff competition for labor and employees have 
hard-to-replace skills, this arrangement produces satisfactory results for most em-
ployees. At times, however, workers have believed their needs and interests do not 
receive enough consideration from management. One response by workers is to act 
collectively by forming and joining labor unions, organizations formed for the pur-
pose of representing their members’ interests and resolving confl icts with 
employers.
Unions have a role because some degree of confl ict is inevitable between work-
ers and management.2 As we commented earlier, for example, managers can increase 
profi ts by lowering workers’ pay, but workers benefi t in the short term if lower profi ts 
result because their pay is higher. Still, this type of confl ict is more complex than a 
simple trade-off, such as wages versus profi ts. Rising profi ts can help employees by 
driving up profi t sharing or other benefi ts, and falling profi ts can result in layoffs and 
a lack of investment. Although employers can use programs like profi t sharing to help 
align employee interests with their own, some remaining divergence of interests is in-
evitable. Labor unions represent worker interests and the collective bargaining process 
provides a way to manage the confl ict. In other words, through systems for hearing 
complaints and negotiating labor contracts, unions and managers resolve confl icts be-
tween employers and employees.
As unionization of workers became more common, universities developed training 
in how to manage union-management interactions. This specialty, called labor 
 relations, emphasizes skills that managers and union leaders can use to foster effec-
tive labor-management cooperation, minimize costly forms of confl ict (such as 
strikes), and seek win-win solutions to disagreements. Labor relations involves three 
levels of decisions3:
LO 15-1 Deﬁ ne 
unions and labor rela-
tions and their role in 
organizations.
Unions
Organizations formed 
for the purpose of repre-
senting their members’ 
interests in dealing with 
employers.
Labor Relations
Field that emphasizes 
skills that managers and 
union leaders can use to 
minimize costly forms of 
conﬂ ict (such as strikes) 
and seek win-win solu-
tions to disagreements.

462 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
 1.  Labor relations strategy—For management, the decision in-
volves whether the organization will work with unions or 
develop (or maintain) nonunion operations. This decision 
is infl uenced by outside forces such as public opinion and 
competition. For unions, the decision involves whether to 
fi ght changes in how unions relate to the organization or 
accept new kinds of labor-management relationships.
 2.  Negotiating contracts—As we will describe later in the 
 chapter, contract negotiations in a union setting involve 
decisions about pay structure, job security, work rules, 
workplace safety, and many other issues. These decisions 
affect workers’ and the employer’s situation for the term 
of the contract.
 3.  Administering contracts—These decisions involve day-to-
day activities in which union members and the organiza-
tion’s managers may have disagreements. Issues include 
complaints of work rules being violated or workers being 
treated unfairly in particular situations. A formal grievance 
procedure is typically used to resolve these issues.
Later sections in this chapter describe how managers and unions carry out the ac-
tivities connected with these levels of decisions, as well as the goals and legal con-
straints affecting these activities.
National and International Unions
Most union members belong to a national or international union. In the United States, 
the largest unions are the National Education Association and the Service  Employees 
International Union, each with several million members. Globally, even the  largest U.S. 
unions are dwarfed by the All-China Federation of Trade Unions, a state- controlled 
union with more than 200 million members.4
Labor unions may be either craft or industrial unions. The members of a craft 
union all have a particular skill or occupation. Examples include the International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers for electricians and the National Education 
 Association for teachers. Craft unions are often responsible for training their members 
through apprenticeships and for supplying craft workers to employers. For example, an 
employer would send requests for carpenters to the union hiring hall, which would 
decide which carpenters to send out. In this way, craft workers may work for many em-
ployers over time but have a constant link to the union. A craft union’s bargaining 
power depends greatly on its control over the supply of its workers.
In contrast, industrial unions consist of members who are linked by their work in 
a particular industry. Examples include the Communication Workers of America and 
the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees. Typically, an 
industrial union represents many different occupations. Membership in the union is 
the result of working for a particular employer in the industry. Changing  employers is less 
common than it is among craft workers, and employees who change employers remain 
members of the same union only if they happen to move to other employers covered 
by that union. Another difference is that whereas a craft union may restrict the number 
of skilled craftsmen—say, carpenters—to maintain higher wages, industrial unions try 
to organize as many employees in as wide a range of skills as possible.
Craft Union
Labor union whose 
members all have 
a particular skill or 
occupation.
Industrial Union
Labor union whose 
members are linked by 
their work in a particular 
industry.
The largest union in the United States is the National 
Education  Association with 3 million members.

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  463
Most national unions in the United States are affi liated with the American Federa-
tion of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO). The AFL-
CIO is not a labor union but an association that seeks to advance the shared interests of 
its member unions at the national level, much as the Chamber of Commerce and the 
National Association of Manufacturers do for their member employers. Approximately 
55 national and international unions are affi liated with the AFL-CIO. An important 
responsibility of the AFL-CIO is to represent labor’s interests in public policy issues, 
such as labor law, economic policy, and occupational safety and health. The organiza-
tion also provides information and analysis that member unions can use in their activi-
ties. In 2005, several unions broke away from the AFL-CIO to form an alliance called 
Change to Win, which is focused on innovative organizing campaigns. This group in-
cludes four unions representing a membership of more than 5 million workers.
Local Unions
Most national unions consist of multiple local units. Even when a national union plays the 
most critical role in negotiating the terms of a collective bargaining contract, negotiation 
occurs at the local level for work rules and other issues that are locally determined. In ad-
dition, administration of the contract largely takes place at the local union level. As a result, 
most day-to-day interaction between labor and management involves the local union.
Membership in the local union depends on the type of union. For an industrial 
union, the local may correspond to a single large facility or to a number of small 
 facilities. In a craft union, the local may cover a city or a region.
Typically, the local union elects offi cers, such as president, vice president, and trea-
surer. The offi cers may be responsible for contract negotiation, or the local may form 
a bargaining committee for that purpose. When the union is engaged in bargaining, 
the national union provides help, including background data about other settlements, 
technical advice, and the leadership of a representative from the national offi ce.
Individual members participate in local unions in various ways. At meetings of the 
local union, they elect offi cials and vote on resolutions to strike. Most of workers’ 
contact is with the union steward, an employee elected by union members to repre-
sent them in ensuring that the terms of the contract are enforced. The union steward 
helps investigate complaints and represents employees to supervisors and other man-
agers when employees fi le grievances alleging contract violations.5 When the union 
deals with several employers, as in the case of a craft union, a business representative 
performs some of the same functions as a union steward. Because of union  stewards’ 
and business representatives’ close involvement with employees, it is to management’s 
advantage to cultivate positive working relationships with them.
Trends in Union Membership
Union membership in the United States peaked in the 1950s, reaching over one-third 
of employees. Since then, the share of employees who belong to unions has fallen. It 
now stands at 11.3% overall and 6.7% of private-sector employment.6 As Figure 15.1 
indicates, union membership has fallen steadily since the 1980s. The decline has been 
driven by falling union membership in the private sector, while the share of govern-
ment workers in unions has mostly held steady.
The decline in union membership has been attributed to several factors7:
 • Change in the structure of the economy—Much recent job growth has occurred in the 
service sector of the economy, while union strength has traditionally been among 
American Federation 
of Labor and Congress 
of Industrial 
 Organizations 
(AFL-CIO)
An association that 
seeks to advance the 
shared interests of its 
member unions at the 
national level.
Union Steward
An employee elected 
by union members 
to represent them in 
 ensuring that the terms 
of the labor contract are 
enforced.

464 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
urban blue-collar workers. Services industries such as fi nance, insurance, and real 
estate have lower union representation than manufacturing. Also, much business 
growth has been in the South, where workers are less likely to join unions.
 • Management efforts to control costs—On average, unionized workers receive higher 
pay than their nonunionized counterparts, and the pressure is greater because of 
international competition. In the past, union membership across an industry such as 
automobiles or steel resulted in similar wages and work requirements for all com-
petitors. Today, U.S. producers must compete with companies that have entirely dif-
ferent pay scales and work rules, often placing the U.S. companies at a disadvantage.
 • Human resource practices—Competition for scarce human resources can lead employ-
ers to offer much of what employees traditionally sought through union membership.
 • Government regulation—Stricter regulation in such areas as workplace safety and 
equal employment opportunity leaves fewer areas in which unions can show an 
advantage over what employers must already offer.
As Figure 15.2 indicates, the percentage of U.S. workers who belong to unions is lower 
than in many other countries. More dramatic is the difference in “ coverage”—the per-
centage of employees whose terms and conditions of employment are governed by a 
union contract, whether or not the employees are technically union members. In Western 
Europe, it is common to have coverage rates of 80% to 90%, so the infl uence of labor 
unions far outstrips what membership levels would imply.8 Also, employees in Western 
a Percentage of total, private-sector, and public-sector wage and salary workers who are union members. Beginning in 1977, workers belonging 
to “an employee association similar to a union” are included as members.
Source: Data for 1973–2001 from B. T. Hirsch and D. A. MacPherson, Union Membership and Earnings Data Book 2001 (Washington, DC: Bureau 
of National Affairs, 2002), using data from U.S. Current Population Surveys. Data for 2002 through 2013 from Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Union 
Affi liation Data from the Current Population Survey,” http://data.bls.gov, accessed July 21, 2014.
40
25
35
30
20
15
10
5
0
73
Year
78
83
88
93
98
03
13
08
Percentage Union Membership
Public
Total
Private
Figure 15.1
Union Membership Density among U.S. Wage and Salary Workers, 1973–2013

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  465
Europe tend to have a larger formal role in decision making than in the United States. 
This role, including worker representatives on boards of directors, is often mandated by 
the government. But as markets become more and more global, pressure to cut labor 
costs and increase productivity is likely to be stronger in every country. Unless unions 
can help companies improve productivity or organize new production facilities opened 
in lower-wage countries, union infl uence may decline in countries where it is now strong.
Although union members are a smaller share of the U.S. workforce, they are a sig-
nifi cant part of many industries’ labor markets. Along with strength in numbers, large 
unions have strength in dollars. Union retirement funds, taken together, are huge. 
Unions try to use their investment decisions in ways that infl uence businesses. The 
“Did You Know?” box presents some statistics on union members.
Unions in Government
Unlike union membership for workers in businesses, union membership among govern-
ment workers has remained strong. Union membership in the public sector grew during 
the 1960s and 1970s and has remained steady ever since. Over one-third of government 
employees are union members, and a larger share are covered by collective bargaining 
agreements. Among them are nurses, park rangers, school librarians, corrections offi cers, 
and many workers in clerical and other white-collar occupations. One reason for this 
strength is that government regulations and laws support the right of government work-
ers to organize. In 1962 Executive Order 10988 established collective bargaining rights 
for federal employees. By the end of the 1960s, most states had passed similar laws.
Labor relations with government workers are different in some respects, such as 
regarding the right to strike. Strikes are illegal for federal workers and for state work-
ers in most states. At the local level, all states prohibit strikes by police (Hawaii being 
Note: Data for 2011.
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, StatExtracts, http://stats.oecd.org, accessed 
July 21, 2014.
Australia
Canada
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Figure 15.2
Union Membership 
Rates in Selected 
Countries

466
a partial exception) and fi refi ghters (Idaho being the exception). Teachers and state 
employees are somewhat more likely to have the right to strike, depending on the state.
Impact of Unions on Company Performance
Organizations are concerned about whether union organizing and bargaining will 
hurt their performance, in particular, unions’ impact on productivity, profi ts, and stock 
performance. Researchers have studied the general relationship between unionization 
and these performance measures. Through skillful labor relations, organizations can 
positively infl uence outcomes.
There has been much debate regarding the effects of unions on productivity.9 One 
view is that unions decrease productivity because of work rules and limits on workloads 
set by union contracts and production lost to such union actions as strikes and work slow-
downs. At the same time, unions can have positive effects on productivity.10 They can re-
duce turnover by giving employees a route for resolving problems.11 Unions emphasize 
Did You Know?
In the United States today, a worker 
55 or older is far more likely to be a 
union member than a young worker 
is. Men are slightly more likely to be 
union members than women. Workers 
in education and protective services 
jobs—that is, teachers, police offi cers, 
and fi refi ghters—are most likely to be 
in a union. In contrast, only 2.9% of 
salespeople are members of unions.
Question
What trend shown in  Figure  15.1 
helps to explain why jobs in edu -
cation and protective services have 
the highest rates of unionization?
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
“Union Members, 2013,” news release, 
January 24, 2014, http://www.bls.gov.
Profi le of a Typical Union Worker
0
5
10
15
Percentage of Workers in Category
20
25
30
35
40
Age:
Sex:
Occupation:
16–24
Male
Female
Education, training, library
Protective services
Construction, extraction
Transportation, material moving
55–64

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  467
pay systems based on seniority, which remove incentives for em-
ployees to compete rather than cooperate. The introduction of 
a union also may force an employer to improve its management 
practices and pay greater attention to employee ideas.
Although there is evidence that unions have both positive 
and negative effects on productivity, most studies have found 
that union workers are more productive than nonunion work-
ers. Still, questions remain. Are highly productive workers more 
likely to form unions, or does a union make workers more 
productive? The answer is unclear. In theory, if unions caused 
greater productivity, we would expect union membership to be 
rising, not falling as it has been.12
Even if unions do raise productivity, a company’s profi ts and 
stock performance may still suffer if unions raise wage and bene-
fi ts costs by more than the productivity gain. On average, union members receive higher 
wages and more generous benefi ts than nonunion workers, and evidence shows that 
unions have a large negative effect on profi ts. Also, union coverage tends to decline faster 
in companies with a lower return to shareholders.13 In summary, companies wishing to 
become more competitive must continually monitor their labor relations strategy.
The studies tend to look at the average effects of unions, not at individual com-
panies or innovative labor relations. Some organizations excel at labor relations, and 
some have worked with unions to meet business needs. For example, even when the 
economy has slowed in recent years, manufacturers have reported that it is diffi cult to 
fi nd enough skilled labor. Many companies depend on unions to recruit and train new 
workers through apprenticeship programs. In Alaska, more than half of the registered 
apprenticeship programs are partnerships between employers and unions or employee 
associations. For example, construction businesses, unions, and government organiza-
tions banded together to form the Construction Education Foundation, which spon-
sors training programs that prepare workers to enter the construction industry.14
Goals of Management, Labor 
Unions, and Society
Resolving confl icts in a positive way is usually easiest when the parties involved un-
derstand each other’s goals. Although individual cases vary, we can draw some general 
conclusions about the goals of labor unions and management. Society, too, has goals 
for labor and business, given form in the laws regulating labor relations.
Management Goals
Management goals are to increase the organization’s profi ts. Managers tend to pre-
fer options that lower costs and raise output. When deciding whether to discourage 
employees from forming a union, a concern is that a union will create higher costs in 
wages and benefi ts, as well as raise the risk of work stoppages. Managers may also fear 
that a union will make managers and workers into adversaries or limit management’s 
discretion in making business and employment decisions.
When an employer has recognized a union, management’s goals continue to em-
phasize restraining costs and improving output. Managers continue to prefer to keep 
the organization’s operations fl exible, so they can adjust activities to meet competitive 
challenges and customer demands. Therefore, in their labor relations managers prefer 
LO 15-2 Identify the 
labor relations goals 
of management, labor 
unions, and society.
Harley-Davidson and the International Association of 
Machinists and Aerospace Workers have cooperated 
to produce good results. In general, though, companies 
wishing to become more competitive need to 
continually monitor their labor relations strategies.

468 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
to limit increases in wages and benefi ts and to retain as much control as they can over 
work rules and schedules.
Labor Union Goals
In general, labor unions have the goals of obtaining pay and working conditions that 
satisfy their members and of giving members a voice in decisions that affect them. 
Traditionally, they obtain these goals by gaining power in numbers. The more workers 
who belong to a union, the greater the union’s power. More members translates into 
greater ability to halt or disrupt production. Larger unions also have greater fi nancial 
resources for continuing a strike; the union can help to make up for the wages the 
workers lose during a strike. The threat of a long strike—stated or implied—can make 
an employer more willing to meet the union’s demands.
As we noted earlier, union membership is indeed linked to better compensation. 
In 2013, private-sector unionized workers received, on average, wages 21% higher 
than nonunion workers.15 Benefi ts packages also tend to be more generous for union 
members. However, union goals related to compensation have become more complex 
since globalization’s downward pressure on wages. Especially in manufacturing, some 
unions have accepted two-tier wage systems in which existing workers’ wage rates 
are protected while new workers are hired at a lower tier. The United Auto Workers’ 
recently elected president, Dennis Williams, has said that one of his goals is to end the 
two-tier system, which causes some resentment among the newer, younger workers.16
As in the case of two-tier wage structures, unions typically want to infl uence the way 
pay and promotions are determined. Unlike management, which tries to consider em-
ployees as individuals so that pay and promotion decisions relate to performance dif-
ferences, unions try to build group solidarity and avoid possible arbitrary treatment of 
employees. To do so, unions focus on equal pay for equal work. They try to have any pay 
differences based on seniority, on the grounds that this measure is more objective than 
performance evaluations. As a result, where workers are represented by a union, it is com-
mon for all employees in a particular job classifi cation to be paid at the same rate.
Along with compensation, union members often are concerned about working con-
ditions. For example, unsafe conditions are one motivation to form a union. Unions 
may conduct safety training for their members. They may partner with management 
to identify ways of getting work done more effi ciently as well as more safely. For an 
example of this partnership approach, see the “Best Practices” box.
The survival and security of a union depend on its ability to ensure a regular fl ow of 
new members and member dues to support the services it provides. Therefore, unions 
typically place high priority on negotiating two types of contract provisions with an 
employer that are critical to a union’s security and viability: checkoff provisions and 
provisions relating to union membership or contribution.
Under a checkoff provision, the employer, on behalf of the union, automatically 
deducts union dues from employees’ paychecks. Security provisions related to union 
membership are closed shop, union shop, agency shop, and maintenance of membership.
The strongest union security arrangement is a closed shop, under which a person 
must be a union member before being hired. Under the National Labor Relations Act, 
discussed later in this chapter, closed shops are illegal. A legal membership arrangement 
that supports the goals of labor unions is the union shop, an arrangement that requires an 
employee to join the union within a certain time (30 days) after beginning employment. A 
similar alternative is the agency shop, which requires the payment of union dues but not 
union membership. Maintenance of membership rules do not require union member-
Checkoff Provision
Contract provision 
under which the em-
ployer, on behalf of the 
union,  automatically 
deducts union dues from 
 employees’ paychecks.
Closed Shop
Union security 
 arrangement under which 
a person must be a union 
member before being 
hired; illegal for those 
covered by the National 
Labor Relations Act.
Union Shop
Union security 
 arrangement that re-
quires employees to 
join the union within a 
certain amount of time 
(30 days) after beginning 
employment.
Agency Shop
Union security 
 arrangement that re-
quires the payment of 
union dues but not union 
membership.
Maintenance of 
Membership
Union security rules 
not requiring union 
 membership but  requiring 
that employees who 
join the union remain 
 members for a certain 
period of time.

469
ship but do require that employees who join the union remain members for a certain pe-
riod of time, such as the length of the contract. As we will discuss later in the chapter, some 
states forbid union shops, agency shops, and maintenance of membership.
All these provisions are ways to address unions’ concern about “free riders”—em-
ployees who benefi t from union activities without belonging to a union. By law, all 
members of a bargaining unit, whether union members or not, must be represented by 
the union. If the union must offer services to all bargaining unit members but some of 
them are not dues-paying union members, the union may not have enough fi nancial 
resources to operate successfully.
Societal Goals
The activities of unions and management take place within the context of society, 
with society’s values driving the laws and regulations that affect labor relations. As 
For years, Harley-Davidson got by 
without worrying too much about ef-
fi ciency at its factory in York, Penn-
sylvania. High rates of absenteeism 
and a slow pace didn’t matter much 
when customers were willing to 
wait months for their motorcycle 
and pay a premium for the brand. 
But when the Great Recession hit, 
sales slumped, and the company’s 
stock price plunged from $75 to $8 
per share. Management realized 
the company had to change, or it 
wouldn’t survive.
 
Many businesses in this situation 
have closed their unionized factories 
and moved production overseas or 
to southern states where unions are 
unpopular. Harley’s managers investi-
gated new locations for a more effi cient 
plant and selected Shelbyville, Ken-
tucky. Then they notifi ed the unions 
representing the workers inYork—the 
International Association of Machin-
ists and the United Steelworkers. 
Management explained that the plant 
would close unless the union workers 
would make concessions so the com-
pany would be more effi cient. The 
workers voted to make the changes.
 
Harley tore down the old factory 
and built a more effi cient one in York. 
The machinists’ union agreed to lay-
offs of 1,000 plant workers and a pay 
freeze for several years to save the 
jobs of the remaining workers. The re-
sult was that when Harley opened its 
new factory, it had dedicated, experi-
enced workers who skillfully work in 
teams of fi ve or six to build each mo-
torcycle. The union workers agreed 
to a more fl exible arrangement, which 
replaced more than 60 job classifi ca-
tions with just fi ve classifi cations in-
volving broader responsibilities.
 
Furthermore, 150 workers are 
charged with monitoring an area 
of production with the aim of con-
tinuously improving quality and effi -
ciency. For example, one such worker 
noticed that it took a few extra sec-
onds to tap in a plastic piece that 
didn’t fi t exactly. Multiplied by all 
the motorcycles using that part, the 
extra time would cost millions of dol-
lars in lost production. The worker 
identifi ed an adjustment to the part’s 
design that would eliminate the 
problem. He and others making im-
provements have helped to increase 
quality while bringing down costs at 
the York facility by $100 million.
 
Harley’s production workers 
say they understand the need for a 
change. They have to work at a faster 
pace, but the jobs offer more vari-
ety. Some also see more respect 
between workers and management.
Questions
 1. In this example, what were 
management’s goals?
 2. What were the union’s goals?
Sources: Kenneth Quinnell, “How Union 
Members Saved Harley-Davidson,” 
AFL-CIO blog, February 4, 2014, http://
www.afl cio.org; Adam Davidson, “The 
Reward for Working with Unions,” The 
New York Times, February 1, 2014, 
Business Insights: Global, http://
bi.galegroup.com; Adam Davidson, 
“Building a Harley Faster,” The New 
York Times, January 28, 2014, www.
nytimes.com; Ginger Christ-Martin, 
“ Driving a Future of Excellence,” 
 Industry Week, January 2014, pp. 
17–18; James R. Hagerty, “Harley Goes 
Lean to Build Hogs,” The Wall Street 
Journal,  September 21, 2012, http://
online.wsj.com.
Machinists and Steelworkers Unions Help Harley-Davidson Get Lean 
Best Practices

470 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
long ago as the late 1800s and early 1900s, industrial relations scholars saw unions as 
a way to make up for individual employees’ limited bargaining power.17 At that time, 
clashes between workers and management could be violent, and many people hoped 
that unions would replace the violence with negotiation. Since then, observers have 
expressed concern that unions in certain industries have become too strong, achieving 
their goals at the expense of employers’ ability to compete or meet other objectives. 
But even former Senator Orrin Hatch, described by BusinessWeek as “labor’s archrival 
on Capitol Hill,” has spoken of a need for unions:
There are always going to be people who take advantage of workers. Unions even that 
out, to their credit. We need them to level the fi eld between labor and management. If 
you didn’t have unions, it would be very diffi cult for even enlightened employers not to 
take advantage of workers on wages and working conditions, because of [competition 
from less-enlightened] rivals. I’m among the fi rst to say I believe in unions.18
Senator Hatch’s statement implies that society’s goal for unions is to ensure that 
workers have a voice in how they are treated by their employers. As we will see in 
the next section, this view has produced a set of laws and regulations intended to give 
workers the right to join unions if they so wish.
Laws and Regulations Affecting 
Labor Relations
The laws and regulations pertaining to labor relations affect unions’ size and bar-
gaining power, so they signifi cantly affect the degree to which unions, management, 
and society achieve their varied goals. These laws and regulations set limits on union 
structure and administration and the ways in which unions and management interact.
National Labor Relations Act (NLRA)
Perhaps the most dramatic example of labor laws’ infl uence is the 1935 passage of the 
Wagner Act (also known as the National Labor Relations Act, or NLRA), which 
actively supported collective bargaining. After Congress passed the NLRA, union 
membership in the United States nearly tripled, from 3 million in 1933 to 8.8 million 
(19.2% of employment) in 1939.19
Before the 1930s, the U.S. legal system was generally hostile to unions. The courts 
tended to view unions as coercive organizations that hindered free trade. Unions’ 
focus on collective voice and collective action (such as strikes and boycotts) did not 
fi t well with the U.S. emphasis on capitalism, individualism, freedom of contract, 
and property rights.20 Then the Great Depression of the 1930s shifted public atti-
tudes toward business and the free-enterprise system. Unemployment rates as high 
as 25% and a steep fall in production between 1929 and 1933 focused attention on 
employee rights and the shortcomings of the economic system of the time. The na-
tion was in crisis, and President Franklin Roosevelt responded dramatically with the 
New Deal. On the labor front, the 1935 NLRA ushered in an era of public policy for 
labor unions, enshrining collective bargaining as the preferred way to settle labor-
management disputes.
Section 7 of the NLRA sets out the rights of employees, including the “right to 
self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively 
through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted ac-
tivities for the purpose of collective bargaining.”21 Employees also have the right to 
LO 15-3 Summarize 
laws and regulations that 
affect labor relations.
National Labor 
 Relations Act (NLRA)
Federal law that 
 supports collective 
 bargaining and sets out 
the rights of employees 
to form unions.

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  471
refrain from these activities, unless union membership is a condition of employment. 
The following activities are among those protected under the NLRA:
 • Union organizing.
 • Joining a union, whether recognized by the employer or not.
 • Going out on strike to secure better working conditions.
 • Refraining from activity on behalf of the union.
Most employees in the private sector are covered by the NLRA. However, workers 
employed under the following conditions are not covered22:
 • Employed as a supervisor.
 • Employed by a parent or spouse.
 • Employed as an independent contractor.
 • Employed in the domestic service of any person or family in a home.
 • Employed as agricultural laborers.
 • Employed by an employer subject to the Railway Labor Act.
 • Employed by a federal, state, or local government.
 • Employed by any other person who is not an employer as defi ned in the NLRA.
State or local laws may provide additional coverage. For example, California’s 1975 
Agricultural Labor Relations Act covers agricultural workers in that state.
In Section 8(a), the NLRA prohibits certain activities by employers as unfair labor 
practices. In general, employers may not interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees 
in exercising their rights to join or assist a labor organization or to refrain from such 
activities. Employers may not dominate or interfere with the formation or activities of 
a labor union. They may not discriminate in any aspect of employment that attempts 
to encourage or discourage union activity, nor may they discriminate against employ-
ees for providing testimony related to enforcement of the NLRA. Finally, employ-
ers may not refuse to bargain collectively with a labor organization that has standing 
under the act. For more guidance in complying with the NLRA, see the examples in 
the “HR How To” box.
When employers or unions violate the NLRA, remedies typically include order-
ing that unfair labor practices stop. Employers may be required to rehire workers, 
with or without back pay. The NLRA is not a criminal law, and violators may not 
be assigned punitive damages (fi nes to punish rather than merely make up for the 
harm done).
Laws Amending the NLRA
Originally, the NLRA did not list any unfair labor practices by unions. In later amend-
ments to the NLRA—the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 and the Landrum-Griffi n Act of 
1959—Congress established some restrictions on union practices deemed unfair to 
employers and union members.
Under the Taft-Hartley Act, unions may not restrain employers through actions 
such as the following23:
 • Mass picketing in such numbers that nonstriking employees physically cannot enter 
the workplace.
 • Engaging in violent acts in connection with a strike.
 • Threatening employees with physical injury or job loss if they do not support union 
activities.

472
 • During contract negotiations, insisting on illegal provisions, provisions that the 
employer may hire only workers who are union members or “satisfactory” to the 
union, or working conditions to be determined by a group to which the employer 
does not belong.
 • Terminating an existing contract and striking for a new one without notifying the 
employer, the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, and the state mediation 
service (where one exists).
The Taft-Hartley Act also allows the states to pass so-called right-to-work 
laws, which make union shops, maintenance of membership, and agency shops il-
legal. The idea behind such laws is that requiring union membership or the pay-
ment of union dues restricts the employees’ right to freedom of association. In 
other words, employees should be free to choose whether they join a union or 
other group. Of course, unions have a different point of view. The union perspec-
tive is that unions provide services to all members of a bargaining unit (such as all 
of a company’s workers), and all members who receive the benefi ts of a union 
Right-to-Work Laws
State laws that make 
union shops, mainte-
nance of membership, 
and agency shops illegal.
The National Labor Relations Act 
prohibits employers and unions from 
engaging in unfair labor  practices. 
For employers, this means they 
must not interfere with employees’ 
decisions about whether to join a 
union and engage in union-related 
activities. Employers may not dis-
criminate against employees for 
being involved in union activities 
or testifying in court about actions 
under the NLRA. Here are some 
specifi c examples of unfair labor 
practices 
that 
employers 
must 
avoid:
 • Threatening employees with loss 
of their jobs or benefi ts if they 
join or vote for a union.
 • Threatening to close down a 
plant if it is organized by a union.
 • Questioning employees about 
their union membership or ac-
tivities in a way that restrains or 
coerces them.
 • Taking an active part in organiz-
ing a union or committee to 
represent employees.
 • Discharging employees for urging 
other employees to join a union.
 • Promising benefi ts, such as 
a holiday or better working 
 conditions, to employees if they 
don’t support a union.
 • Asking employees or job 
 applicants about any union- 
organizing activities they might 
have engaged in.
 • Preventing employees from 
 promoting a union—for example, 
 distributing literature—during 
breaks and other nonworking 
hours.
 • Discouraging employees from 
conversations or other activi-
ties aimed at improving working 
conditions.
 • Spying on employee activities to 
determine workers’ views about 
a union.
 • Forbidding employees from 
wearing union logos on shirts or 
jackets.
 • Failing to bargain about the 
 effects of a decision to close 
one of the employer’s facilities.
Questions
1. Suppose you are an HR 
manager. You walk into the 
company lunchroom and 
notice several employees 
talking quietly but intensely. 
You think you hear the words 
“safety” and “organize,” and 
you are concerned. What should 
you do?
2. A supervisor notices an 
employee distributing union 
literature during working hours. 
What should the supervisor do?
Sources: National Labor Relations Board, 
“Employer/Union Rights and Obligations,” 
Rights We Protect, http://www.nlrb.gov, 
accessed July 22, 2014; National Labor 
Relations Board, “Protected Concerted 
Activity,” Rights We Protect, http://www 
.nlrb.gov, accessed July 22, 2014; HR 
Specialist, “Unions in t he Spotlight: What 
Employers Can and Can’t Do,” white 
paper, http://www.thehrspecialist.com, 
accessed July 22, 2014; Gary S. Fealk, 
“NLRA Covers Nonunion Employers, Too,” 
HR Hero, December 4, 2013, http://www 
.hrhero.com.
Avoiding Unfair Labor Practices
HR How To

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  473
should pay union dues. Figure 15.3 indicates which states currently have right-to-
work laws.
The Landrum-Griffi n Act regulates unions’ actions with regard to their members, 
including fi nancial disclosure and the conduct of elections. This law establishes and 
protects rights of union members. These include the right to nominate candidates for 
union offi ce, participate in union meetings and secret-ballot elections, and examine 
unions’ fi nancial records.
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB)
Enforcement of the NLRA rests with the National Labor Relations Board 
(NLRB). This federal government agency consists of a fi ve-member board, the gen-
eral counsel, and 52 regional and other fi eld offi ces. Because the NLRB is a federal 
agency, its enforcement actions are limited to companies that have an impact on in-
terstate commerce, but as a practical matter, this extends to all but purely local busi-
nesses. For federal government workers under the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, 
Title VII, the Federal Labor Relations Authority has a role similar to that of the 
NLRB. Many states have similar agencies to administer their laws governing state 
and local government workers.
The NLRB has two major functions: to conduct and certify representation elec-
tions and to prevent unfair labor practices. It does not initiate either of these actions 
but responds to requests for action.
Representation Elections The NLRB is responsible for ensuring that the or-
ganizing process follows certain steps, described in the next section. Depending on 
the response to organizing efforts, the NLRB conducts elections. When a majority of 
National Labor 
 Relations Board (NLRB)
Federal government 
agency that enforces 
the NLRA by conducting 
and certifying repre-
sentation elections and 
investigating unfair labor 
practices.
Ind.
Mich.
Source: National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation, “Right to Work States,” http://nrtw.org, accessed 
July 21, 2014.
Figure 15.3
States with Right-to-Work Laws

474 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
workers vote in favor of a union, the NLRB certifi es it as the exclusive representative 
of a group of employees. The NLRB also conducts elections to decertify unions, fol-
lowing the same process as for representation elections.
The NLRB is also responsible for determining the appropriate bargaining unit 
and the employees who are eligible to participate in organizing activities. As we 
stated earlier, bargaining units may not include certain types of employees, such as 
agricultural laborers, independent contractors, supervisors, and managers. Beyond 
this, the NLRB attempts to group together employees who have a community of 
interest in their wages, hours, and working conditions. A unit may cover employees 
in one facility or multiple facilities within a single employer, or the unit may cover 
multiple employers. In general, employees on the payroll just before the ordering 
of an election are eligible to vote, although this rule is modifi ed in some cases, for 
example, when employment in the industry is irregular. Most employees who are 
on strike and who have been replaced by other employees are eligible to vote in an 
election (such as a decertifi cation election) that occurs within 12 months of the onset 
of the strike.
Prevention of Unfair Labor Practices The NLRB prevents unfair labor 
practices by educating employers and employees about their rights and responsibili-
ties under the National Labor Relations Act and by responding to complaints. The 
handling of complaints regarding unfair labor practices begins when someone fi les 
a charge. The deadline for fi ling a charge is six months after the alleged unfair prac-
tice. All parties must be served with a copy of the charge. (Registered mail is recom-
mended.) The charge is investigated by a regional offi ce. If, after investigating, the 
NLRB fi nds the charge has merit and issues a complaint, two actions are possible. The 
NLRB may defer to a grievance procedure agreed on by the employer and the union; 
grievances are discussed later in this chapter. Or a hearing may be held before an ad-
ministrative law judge. The judge makes a recommendation, which either party may 
appeal. For example, the “HRM Social” box describes rulings related to employees’ 
activities on social media.
The NLRB has the authority to issue cease-and-desist orders to halt unfair labor 
practices. It also can order the employer to reinstate workers, with or without back 
pay. The NLRB can set aside the results of an election if it believes either the union 
or the employer has created “an atmosphere of confusion or fear of reprisals.”24 If 
an employer or union refuses to comply with an NLRB order, the board has the 
authority to petition the U.S. Court of Appeals. The court may enforce the order, 
recommend it to the NLRB for modifi cation, change the order itself, or set it aside 
altogether.
Union Organizing
Unions begin their involvement with an organization’s employees by conducting an 
organizing campaign. To meet its objectives, a union needs to convince a majority of 
workers that they should receive better pay or other employment conditions and that 
the union will help them do so. The employer’s objectives will depend on its strategy—
whether it seeks to work with a union or convince employees that they are better off 
without union representation.
LO 15-4 Describe 
the union organizing 
process.

475
The Process of Organizing
The organizing process begins when union representatives make contact with em-
ployees, present their message about the union, and invite them to sign an authoriza-
tion card. For the organization process to continue, at least 30% of the employees 
must sign an authorization card.
If over half the employees sign an authorization card, the union may request that 
the employer voluntarily recognize the union. If the employer agrees, the NLRB cer-
tifi es the union as the exclusive representative of employees. If the employer refuses, 
or if only 30% to 50% of employees signed cards, the NLRB conducts a secret-ballot 
election. The arrangements are made in one of two ways:
 1. For a consent election, the employer and the union seeking representation arrive at 
an agreement stating the time and place of the election, the choices included on 
the ballot, and a way to determine who is eligible to vote.
In recent years, employees have 
complained to the National Labor 
Relations Board that employers 
have penalized them for engag-
ing in concerted activity on social 
media. And increasingly, the NLRB 
is agreeing with them.
 
The issue is when employees’ 
postings about work amount to 
concerted action, protected by the 
National Labor Relations Act. In one 
case, for example, an employee of 
Hispanics United of Buffalo grum-
bled on Facebook about a co-worker 
who criticized her efforts at work. 
The original post asked “my fellow 
co-workers” for their opinions, and 
four of them provided comments re-
ferring to the employee and working 
conditions. When the employee who 
was the subject of the original post 
saw the comments, she complained 
to the supervisor, and the supervisor 
fi red all of the co-workers involved 
on the grounds that they had been 
harassing that employee. An ad-
ministrative law judge held that the 
supervisor had wrongfully termi-
nated the employees, and the NLRB 
agreed. The NLRB’s ruling was 
based on the interpretation that the 
original Facebook post was solicit-
ing co-workers’ views and the oth-
ers were “making common cause 
with her,” and that the posts could 
be seen as steps toward taking a 
group action to protect themselves 
if the employee complained about 
them to management. The NLRB re-
quired the employer to pay the em-
ployees back wages and let them 
return to work.
 
Some principles emerge from 
the ruling. First, an employee who 
merely posts a negative statement 
concerning matters that affect only 
him- or herself is not seen as en-
gaged in concerted activity and 
therefore is not protected by the 
NLRA. However, posts that imply 
an objective of group action aimed 
at mutual aid or protection may be 
treated as concerted activity. Be-
cause the interpretation of whether 
social-media posts are aimed at 
encouraging some kind of group 
action and mutual aid is subjective, 
employers have to tread carefully.
 
Despite this, employers can 
continue to set certain kinds of 
limits on employees’ social- media 
conduct. For example, they can ask 
employees not to disclose confi -
dential information. However, so-
cial-media policies must be specifi c 
enough that employees do not feel 
forbidden from taking the kinds of 
actions protected by the NLRA.
Questions
 1. Would an employee who posts, 
“I hate my job!” be protected, 
according to the principles 
cited here? Why or why not?
 2. How would you have advised 
the supervisor at Hispanics 
United of Buffalo to handle 
the situation in the case 
described?
Sources: Martin Berman-Gorvine, “Em-
ployer Ability to Silence Employee Speech 
May Be Narrowing,” HR Focus, July 
2014, Business Insights: Global, http://
bi.galegroup.com; Andrew O. Metcalf, 
“‘Concert’ or Solo Gig? Where the NLRB 
Went Wrong When It Linked in to Social 
Networks,” Washington University Law 
 Review, July 2013, Business Insights: 
Global, http://bi.galegroup.com; Josh 
 Eidelson, “Go Ahead, Complain about 
Your Job on Facebook,” Slate, January 3, 
2013, http://www.slate.com.
Protected Social Activity
HRM Social

476 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
2. 
For a stipulation election, the parties can-
not agree on all of these terms, so the NLRB 
dictates the time and place, ballot choices, and 
method of determining eligibility. 
On the ballot, workers vote for or against 
union representation, and they may also have 
a choice from among more than one union. If 
the union (or one of the unions on the ballot) 
wins a majority of votes, the NLRB certifi es 
the union. If the ballot includes more than one 
union and neither gains a simple majority, the 
NLRB holds a runoff election.
As noted earlier, if the NLRB fi nds the elec-
tion was not conducted fairly, it may set aside the 
results and call for a new election. Conduct that may lead to an election result’s being set 
aside includes the following examples25:
 • Threats of loss of jobs or benefi ts by an employer or union to infl uence votes or 
organizing activities.
 • A grant of benefi ts or a promise of benefi ts as a means of infl uencing votes or 
 organizing activities.
 • Campaign speeches by management or union representatives to assembled groups 
of employees on company time less than 24 hours before an election.
 • The actual use or threat of physical force or violence to infl uence votes or organiz-
ing activities.
The “HR Oops!” box describes another situation in which a union has contested elec-
tion results. 
After certifi cation, there are limits on future elections. Once the NLRB has certi-
fi ed a union as the exclusive representative of a group of employees, it will not permit 
additional elections for one year. Also, after the union and employer have fi nished 
negotiating a contract, an election cannot be held for the time of the contract period 
or for three years, whichever comes fi rst. The parties to the contract may agree not to 
hold an election for longer than three years, but an outside party (another union) can-
not be barred for more than three years. Note that both union certifi cations and union 
elections can be conducted online.
Management Strategies
Sometimes an employer will recognize a union after a majority of employees have 
signed authorization cards. More often, there is a hotly contested election campaign. 
During the campaign, unions try to persuade employees that their wages, benefi ts, 
treatment by employers, and chances to infl uence workplace decisions are too poor or 
small and that the union will be able to obtain improvements in these areas. Manage-
ment typically responds with its own messages providing an opposite point of view. 
Management messages say the organization has provided a valuable package of wages 
and benefi ts and has treated employees well. Management also argues that the union 
will not be able to keep its promises but will instead create costs for employees, such 
as union dues and lost income during strikes.
Employers use a variety of methods to oppose unions in organizing campaigns.26 Their 
efforts range from hiring consultants to distributing leafl ets and letters to presenting the 
The services sector, including janitorial workers, continues to be an area in 
which unions are actively organizing. Here union members march in support of 
contracted janitors who might lose their jobs due to budget cutbacks in Boston.

477
company’s viewpoint at meetings of employees. Some management efforts go beyond 
what the law permits, especially in the eyes of union organizers. Why would employers 
break the law? One explanation is that the consequences, such as reinstating workers 
with back pay, are small compared to the benefi ts.27 If coercing workers away from join-
ing a union saves the company the higher wages, benefi ts, and other costs of a unionized 
workforce, management may feel an incentive to accept costs like back pay.
Supervisors have the most direct contact with employees. Thus, as Table 15.1 in-
dicates, it is critical that they establish good relationships with employees even before 
there is any attempt at union organizing. Supervisors also must know what not to do 
if a union drive takes place. They should be trained in the legal principles discussed 
earlier in this chapter.
Union Strategies
The traditional union organizing strategy has been for organizers to call or visit em-
ployees at home, when possible, to talk about issues like pay and job security. Local 130 
UA of the Chicago Journeymen Plumbers Association forms a committee of volun-
teers to comb through lists of journeyman plumbers within the local’s jurisdiction. The 
committee members cross off the names of union members to create a list of plumbers 
Art handlers are typically highly edu-
cated artists with a deep appreciation 
for the chance to work with valuable 
art pieces. They work for auction 
houses and art-handling services, 
carefully packing items and trans-
porting them to museums, homes, 
businesses, and auction houses. 
Customers may pay hundreds of 
dollars for a shipment. However, the 
art handlers’ work is not necessarily 
well paid. A worker at Terry Dowd, 
Chicago’s largest art-handling com-
pany, said he earns $14 an hour with 
variable hours—not enough to pay 
back his student loans and barely 
enough to pay his other bills. 
With these conditions, the Team-
sters saw an opportunity to organize 
art handlers. In 2011, they negotiated 
higher starting salaries for workers 
at Christie’s auction house. In 2012, 
they successfully organized the art 
handlers for Sotheby’s and negoti-
ated a contract that provides for 
higher starting salaries, annual raises, 
and continuance of the existing ben-
efi ts package. With these victories 
behind them, the Teamsters turned to 
organizing workers at Terry Dowd.
The art handlers at Terry Dowd 
recently voted on whether to be rep-
resented by Teamsters Local 705. 
The initial count was close, and the 
Teamsters challenged the vote on the 
grounds that fi ve management em-
ployees of Terry Dowd had voted in 
the election. Managers are not eligible 
to vote for union representation. Terry 
Dowd agreed to remove two of the 
ballots as ineligible, and the National 
Labor Relations Board must now 
consider the eligibility of the other 
three challenged votes. Ahead of their 
decision, the outcome is close: 14 
voting yes and 12 voting no.
Questions
 1. If the NLRB rules that the 
three remaining contested 
votes are eligible, how many of 
these must be “no” votes for 
the union organizing effort to 
lose its majority and lose the 
election?
 2. What can the NLRB do if it 
fi nds that the election at Terry 
Dowd was not conducted 
fairly?
Sources: Terry Dowd, website, http://
www.terrydowd.com, accessed July 21, 
2014; Matt Morris, “News: Vote for Art 
Handler Unionization Still Undecided,” 
Newcity Art, June 13, 2014, http://art 
.newcity.com; Henry Kaye, “Chicago 
Art Handlers and Teamsters Fight over 
Results of Unionization Vote,” Art F 
City, June 3, 2014, http://artfcity.com; 
 Alejandra Cancino, “Art Handlers to Vote 
on Joining Teamsters,” Chicago Tribune, 
April 25, 2014, http://articles .chicago-
tribune.com; Teamsters Joint Council 
25, “Chicago Art Handlers Bidding to 
Become Teamsters,” news release, April 
15, 2014, http://www .teamstersjc25.
com; Daniel Massey, “Sotheby’s, Team-
sters Hammer Out a Deal,” Crain’s New 
York Business, May 31, 2012, http://
www.crainsnewyork .com.
Did Too Many Voters Spoil the Election?
HR Oops!

478 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
who are not represented by a union. The local mails organizing kits to these individu-
als, and then the volunteers follow up to arrange visits with interested individuals in 
their homes.28
Beyond encouraging workers to sign authorization cards and vote for the union, 
organizers use some creative alternatives to traditional organizing activities. They 
sometimes offer workers associate union membership, which is not linked to an 
employee’s workplace and does not provide representation in collective bargaining. 
Rather, an associate member receives other services, such as discounts on health and 
life insurance or credit cards.29 In return for these benefi ts, the union receives mem-
bership dues and a broader base of support for its activities. Associate membership may 
be attractive to employees who wish to join a union but cannot because their work-
place is not organized by a union.
Another alternative to traditional organizing is to conduct corporate campaigns—
bringing public, fi nancial, or political pressure on employers during union organization 
and contract negotiation.30 The Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union 
(ACTWU) corporate campaign against textile maker J. P. Stevens during the late 1970s 
was one of the fi rst successful corporate campaigns and served as a model for those that 
followed. The ACTWU organized a boycott of J. P. Stevens products and threatened to 
withdraw its pension funds from fi nancial institutions where J. P. Stevens offi cers acted 
as directors. The company eventually agreed to a contract with ACTWU.31
Another winning union organizing strategy is to negotiate employer neutrality 
and card-check provisions into a contract. Under a neutrality provision, the employer 
pledges not to oppose organizing attempts elsewhere in the company. A card-check 
Associate Union 
Membership
Alternative form of 
union membership in 
which members receive 
 discounts on insurance 
and credit cards rather 
than representation in 
collective bargaining.
Corporate Campaigns
Bringing public, ﬁ nancial, 
or political pressure 
on employers during 
union organization and 
 contract negotiation.
WHAT TO DO:
Report any direct or indirect signs of union activity to a core management group.
Deal with employees by carefully stating the company’s response to pro-union arguments. 
These responses should be coordinated by the company to maintain consistency and to 
avoid threats or promises. Take away union issues by following effective management 
practices all the time:
 Deliver recognition and appreciation.
 Solve employee problems.
 Protect employees from harassment or humiliation.
 Provide business-related information.
 Be consistent in treatment of different employees.
 Accommodate special circumstances where appropriate.
 Ensure due process in performance management.
 Treat all employees with dignity and respect.
WHAT TO AVOID:
Threatening employees with harsher terms and conditions of employment or employment 
loss if they engage in union activity.
Interrogating employees about pro-union or anti-union sentiments that they or others may 
have or reviewing union authorization cards or pro-union petitions.
Promising employees that they will receive favorable terms or conditions of employment if 
they forgo union activity.
Spying on employees known to be, or suspected of being, engaged in pro-union activities.
Source: Excerpted from J. A. Segal, “Unshackle Your Supervisors to Stay Union Free,” in HR  Magazine, 
June 1998. Copyright © 1998, Society for Human Resource Management, Alexandria, VA. Used with 
 permission. All rights reserved.
Table 15.1
What Supervisors Should 
and Should Not Do to 
 Discourage Unions

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  479
provision is an agreement that if a certain percentage—by law, at least a majority—of 
employees sign an authorization card, the employer will recognize their union rep-
resentation. An impartial outside agency, such as the American Arbitration Associa-
tion, counts the cards. Evidence suggests that this strategy can be very effective for 
unions.32
Decertifying a Union
The Taft-Hartley Act expanded union members’ right to be represented by leaders of 
their own choosing to include the right to vote out an existing union. This action is 
called decertifying the union. Decertifi cation follows the same process as a representa-
tion election. An election to decertify a union may not take place when a contract is 
in effect.
The number of decertifi cation elections has increased from about 5% of all elec-
tions in the 1950s and 1960s to more than double that rate in recent years. In fi scal 
year 2013, the NLRB reported that 13% of elections were decertifi cation elections.33
Collective Bargaining
When the NLRB has certifi ed a union, that union represents employees during con-
tract negotiations. In collective bargaining, a union negotiates on behalf of its mem-
bers with management representatives to arrive at a contract defi ning conditions of 
employment for the term of the contract and to resolve differences in the way they 
interpret the contract. Typical contracts include provisions for pay, benefi ts, work 
rules, and resolution of workers’ grievances. Table 15.2 shows typical provisions nego-
tiated in collective bargaining contracts.
Collective bargaining differs from one situation to another in terms of bargaining 
structure—that is, the range of employees and employers covered by the contract. A 
contract may involve a narrow group of employees in a craft union or a broad group in 
an industrial union. Contracts may cover one or several facilities of the same employer, 
or the bargaining structure may involve several employers. Many more interests must 
be considered in collective bargaining for an industrial union with a bargaining struc-
ture that includes several employers than in collective bargaining for a craft union in 
a single facility.
The majority of contract negotiations take place between unions and employers that 
have been through the process before. In the typical situation, management has come to 
accept the union as an organization it must work with. The situation can be very differ-
ent when a union has just been certifi ed and is negotiating its fi rst contract. In over one-
fourth of negotiations for a fi rst contract, the parties are unable to reach an agreement.34
Bargaining over New Contracts
Clearly, the outcome of contract negotiations can have important consequences for 
labor costs, productivity, and the organization’s ability to compete. Therefore, unions 
and management need to prepare carefully for collective bargaining. Preparation in-
cludes establishing objectives for the contract, reviewing the old contract, gathering 
data (such as compensation paid by competitors and the company’s ability to survive 
a strike), predicting the likely demands to be made, and establishing the cost of meet-
ing the demands.35 This preparation can help negotiators develop a plan for how to 
negotiate. 
LO 15-5 Explain how 
management and unions 
negotiate contracts.
Collective Bargaining
Negotiation between 
union representatives 
and management repre-
sentatives to arrive at a 
contract deﬁ ning condi-
tions of employment for 
the term of the contract 
and to administer that 
contract.

480 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
Establishment 
and administration of the 
agreement
Contract duration and reopening and renegotiation provisions
Grievance procedures
Arbitration and mediation
Strikes and lockouts
Contract enforcement
Functions, 
rights, and responsibilities
Management rights clauses
Subcontracting
Union activities on company time and premises
Union–management cooperation
Regulation of technological change
Advance notice and consultation
Wage 
determination 
and administration
Rate structure and wage differentials
Incentive systems and production bonus plans
Production standards and time studies
Job classiﬁ cation and job evaluation
Wage adjustments—individual and general
Job or income 
security
Hiring and transfer arrangements
Employment and income guarantees
Supplemental unemployment beneﬁ t plans
Regulation of overtime, shift work, etc.
Reduction of hours to forestall layoffs
Layoff procedures; seniority; recall
Promotion practices
Training and retraining
Relocation allowances
Severance pay and layoff beneﬁ t plans
Plant operations
Work and shop rules
Rest periods and other in-plant time allowances
Safety and health
Hours of work and premium pay practices
Shift operations
Hazardous work
Discipline and discharge
Paid and unpaid leave
Vacations holidays, sick leave
Funeral and personal leave
Military leave and jury duty
Employee 
beneﬁ t plans
Health and insurance plans
Pension plans
Proﬁ t-sharing, stock purchase, and thrift plans
Bonus plans
Special groups
Apprentices and learners
Workers with disabilities
Veterans
Union representatives
Table 15.2
 Typical Provisions in 
Collective Bargaining 
Contracts 
Source: Adapted from T. A. Kochan, Collective Bargaining and Industrial Relations (Homewood, IL: Richard 
D. Irwin, 1980), p. 29. Original data from J. W. Bloch, “Union Contracts—A New Series of Studies,” Monthly 
Labor Review 87 (October 1964), pp. 1184–85.

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  481
Negotiations go through various stages.36 In the earliest stages, many more people 
are often present than in later stages. On the union side, this may give all the vari-
ous internal interest groups a chance to participate and voice their goals. Their input 
helps communicate to management what will satisfy union members and may help 
the union achieve greater solidarity. At this stage, union negotiators often present a 
long list of proposals, partly to satisfy members and partly to introduce enough is-
sues that they will have fl exibility later in the process. Management may or may not 
present proposals of its own. Sometimes management prefers to react to the union’s 
proposals.
During the middle stages of the process, each side must make a series of decisions, 
even though the outcome is uncertain. How important is each issue to the other side? 
How likely is it that disagreement on particular issues will result in a strike? When and 
to what extent should one side signal its willingness to compromise?
In the fi nal stage of negotiations, pressure for an agreement increases. Public negotiations 
may be only part of the process. Negotiators from each side may hold one-on-one meetings 
or small-group meetings where they escape some public relations pressures. A neutral third 
party may act as a go-between or facilitator. In some cases, bargaining breaks down as the 
two sides fi nd they cannot reach a mutually acceptable agreement. The outcome depends 
partly on the relative bargaining power of each party. That power, in turn, depends on each 
party’s ability to withstand a strike, which costs the workers their pay during the strike and 
costs the employer lost production and possibly lost customers.
When Bargaining Breaks Down
The intended outcome of collective bargaining is a contract with terms acceptable to 
both parties. If one or both sides determine that negotiation alone will not produce 
such an agreement, bargaining breaks down. To bring this impasse to an end, work 
may stop, or the parties may bring in outside help to resolve their differences.
Work Stoppages In the past, a breakdown in bargaining often led union mem-
bers to stop working, a practice called a strike. Management also can initiate a type of 
work stoppage known as a lockout. However, the number of work stoppages (strikes 
and lockouts) has plunged since the 1950s, as shown in Figure 15.4.
A strike is a collective decision of the union members not to work until certain 
demands or conditions are met. The union members vote, and if the majority favors a 
strike, they all go on strike at that time or when union leaders believe the time is right. 
Strikes are typically accompanied by picketing—the union stations members near the 
worksite with signs indicating the union is on strike. During the strike, the union 
members do not receive pay from their employer, but the union may be able to make 
up for some of the lost pay. The employer loses production unless it can hire replace-
ment workers, and even then, productivity may be reduced. Often, other unions sup-
port striking workers by refusing to cross their picket line—for example, refusing to 
make deliveries to a company during a strike.
A primary reason strikes are rare is that a strike is seldom in the best interests of 
either party. Not only do workers lose wages and employers lose production, but the 
negative experience of a strike can make future interactions more diffi cult. When 
strikes do occur, the conduct of each party during the strike can do lasting harm to 
labor-management relations. Violence by either side or threats of job loss or actual 
job loss because jobs went to replacement workers can make future relations dif-
fi cult. Finally, many government employees do not have a right to strike, and their 
 Strike 
 A collective decision 
by union members not 
to work until certain 
demands or conditions 
are met. 

482 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
percentage among unionized employees overall has risen in recent decades, as we 
discussed earlier.
In a lockout, the employer excludes workers from the workplace until they meet 
certain conditions. During the 1990s and 2000s, lockouts accounted for less than 5% of 
work stoppages, but they have become a larger share, mainly because unions are much 
more reluctant to strike. In other words, the rate of lockouts has been falling, but the 
rate of strikes has been falling faster.37 Some 
of the most widely noticed lockouts are those 
involving sports leagues, including the Na-
tional Hockey League and National Football 
League. During a lockout, an employer may 
hire replacement workers, which makes the 
tactic powerful in bargaining with a union.
Alternatives to Work Stoppages Be-
cause work stoppages are so costly and risky, 
unions and employers generally prefer other 
methods for resolving confl icts. Three com-
mon alternatives rely on a neutral third party, 
usually provided by the Federal Mediation 
and Conciliation Service (FMCS):
• Mediation is the least formal and most 
widely used of these procedures. A mediator 
Lockout
An employer’s exclusion 
of workers from a work-
place until they meet 
certain conditions.
Mediation
Conﬂ ict resolution proce-
dure in which a mediator 
hears the views of both 
sides and facilitates the 
negotiation process but 
has no formal authority 
to dictate a resolution.
Note: Because strikes are most likely in large bargaining units, these numbers represent most lost working time in 
the United States.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Work Stoppage Data,” http://data.bls.gov, accessed July 21, 2014.
500
400
300
200
100
0
1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
2013
2010
Year
Number of Work Stoppages
Figure 15.4
Work Stoppages 
 Involving 1,000 or More 
Workers
Lockouts are not limited to workers in the manufacturing and construction 
trades. Recently, the Metropolitan Opera in New York City threatened to lock out 
the musicians’ unions if agreements couldn’t be reached on new contracts.

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  483
hears the views of both sides and facilitates the negotiation process. The mediator 
has no formal authority to dictate a resolution, so a strike remains a possibility. In a 
survey studying negotiations between unions and large businesses, mediation was 
used in almost 4 out of 10 negotiation efforts.38
• A fact ﬁ nder, most often used for negotiations with governmental bodies, typically 
reports on the reasons for the dispute, the views and arguments of both sides, and 
(sometimes) a recommended settlement, which the parties may decline. The public 
nature of these recommendations may pressure the parties to settle. Even if they do 
not accept the fact fi nder’s recommended settlement, the fact fi nder may identify or 
frame issues in a way that makes agreement easier. 
 • Under arbitration, the most formal type of outside intervention, an arbitrator or 
arbitration board determines a settlement that is binding, meaning the parties 
have to accept it. In conventional arbitration, the arbitrator fashions the solution. 
In “fi nal-offer arbitration,” the arbitrator must choose either management’s or 
the union’s fi nal offer for each issue or for the contract as a whole. “Rights arbi-
tration” focuses on enforcing or interpreting contract terms. Arbitration in the 
writing of contracts or setting of contract terms has traditionally been reserved 
for special circumstances such as negotiations between unions and government 
agencies, where strikes may be illegal or especially costly. 
Contract Administration
Although the process of negotiating a labor agreement (including the occasional 
strike) receives the most publicity, other union-management activities occur far more 
often. Bargaining over a new contract typically occurs only about every three years, 
but administering labor contracts goes on day after day, year after year. The two ac-
tivities are linked, of course. Vague or inconsistent language in the contract can make 
administering the contract more diffi cult. The diffi culties can create confl ict that spills 
over into the next round of negotiations.39 Events during negotiations—strikes, the 
use of replacement workers, or violence by either side—also can lead to diffi culties in 
working successfully under a confl ict.
Contract administration includes carrying out the terms of the agreement and re-
solving confl icts over interpretation or violation of the agreement. Under a labor con-
tract, the process for resolving these confl icts is called a grievance procedure. This 
procedure has a key infl uence on success in contract administration. A grievance pro-
cedure may be started by an employee or discharged employee who believes the em-
ployer violated the contract or by a union representative on behalf of a group of 
workers or union representatives.
For grievances launched by an employee, a typical grievance procedure follows 
the steps shown in Figure 15.5. The grievance may be settled during any of the 
four steps. In the fi rst step, the employee talks to his or her supervisor about the 
problem. If this conversation is unsatisfactory, the employee may involve the union 
steward in further discussion. The union steward and employee decide whether 
the problem has been resolved and, if not, whether it is a contract violation. If 
the problem was not resolved and does seem to be a contract violation, the union 
moves to step 2, putting the grievance in writing and submitting it to a line man-
ager. The union steward meets with a management representative to try to resolve 
the problem. Management consults with the industrial relations staff and puts its 
response in writing too at this second stage. If step 2 fails to resolve the problem, 
the union appeals the grievance to top line management and representatives of the 
Fact Finder
Third party to  collective 
bargaining who reports 
the reasons for a  dispute, 
the views and  arguments 
of both sides, and 
 possibly a  recommended 
 settlement, which the 
parties may decline.
Arbitration
Conﬂ ict resolution 
 procedure in which an 
arbitrator or arbitration 
board determines a 
binding settlement.
LO 15-6 Summarize 
the practice of contract 
administration.
Grievance Procedure
The process for  resolving 
union-management 
conﬂ icts over interpre-
tation or violation of a 
collective bargaining 
agreement.

484 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
industrial relations staff. The union may involve more local or international offi cers 
in discussions at this stage (see step 3 in Figure 15.5). The decision resulting from 
the appeal is put into writing. If the grievance is still not resolved, the union may 
decide (step 4) to appeal the grievance to an arbitrator. If the grievance involves a 
discharged employee, the process may begin at step 2 or 3, however, and the time 
limits between steps may be shorter. Grievances fi led by the union on behalf of a 
group may begin at step 1 or step 2.
The majority of grievances are settled during the earlier steps of the process. This 
reduces delays and avoids the costs of arbitration. If a grievance does reach arbitra-
tion, the arbitrator makes the fi nal ruling in the matter. Based on a series of Supreme 
Court decisions, courts generally avoid reviewing arbitrators’ decisions and focus only 
on whether the grievance involved an issue that is subject to arbitration under the 
contract.40
Employers can judge a grievance procedure in terms of various criteria.41 One 
consideration is effectiveness: how well the procedure resolves day-to-day contract 
Sources: Adapted from T. A. Kochan, Collective Bargaining and Industrial Relations (Homewood, IL: Richard D. 
Irwin, 1980), p. 395; and J. A. Fossum, Labor Relations (Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2002), pp. 448–52.
Figure 15.5
Steps in an Employee-
Initiated Grievance 
Procedure

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  485
questions. A second basic consideration is effi ciency: whether it resolves issues at a 
reasonable cost and without major delays. The company also should consider how 
well the grievance procedure adapts to changing circumstances. For example, if sales 
drop off and the company needs to cut costs, how clear are the provisions related to 
layoffs and subcontracting of work? In the case of contracts covering multiple busi-
ness units, the procedure should allow for resolving local contract issues, such as work 
rules at a particular facility. Companies also should consider whether the grievance 
procedure is fair—whether it treats employees equitably and gives them a voice in 
the process.
From the point of view of employees, the grievance procedure is an important 
means of getting fair treatment in the workplace. Its success depends on whether it 
provides for all the kinds of problems that are likely to arise (such as how to handle a 
business slowdown), whether employees feel they can fi le a grievance without being 
punished for it, and whether employees believe their union representatives will follow 
through. Under the National Labor Relations Act, the union has a duty of fair repre-
sentation, which means the union must give equal representation to all members of the 
bargaining unit, whether or not they actually belong to the union. 
New Approaches to Labor Relations
The growing role of employee empowerment and the shrinking size of union mem-
bership have helped to establish new approaches to labor relations. Among these de-
velopments are an emphasis on cooperation between unions and management and the 
use of nonunion systems for employee representation.
Labor-Management Cooperation
The traditional understanding of union-management relations is that the two parties 
are adversaries, meaning each side is competing to win at the expense of the other. 
There have always been exceptions to this approach. And since at least the 1980s, 
there seems to be wider acceptance of the view that greater cooperation can increase 
employee commitment and motivation while making the workplace more fl exible.42 
Also, evidence suggests that employees who worked under traditional labor relations 
systems and then under the new, more cooperative systems prefer the cooperative 
approach.43
Cooperation between labor and management may feature employee involvement 
in decision making, self-managing employee teams, labor-management problem-
solving teams, broadly defi ned jobs, and sharing of fi nancial gains and business infor-
mation with employees.44 The search for a win-win solution requires that unions and 
their members understand the limits on what an employer can afford in a competitive 
marketplace.
Without the union’s support, efforts at employee empowerment are less likely to 
survive and less likely to be effective if they do survive.45 Unions have often resisted 
employee empowerment programs, precisely because the programs try to change 
workplace relations and the role that unions play. Union leaders have feared that such 
programs will weaken unions’ role as independent representatives of employee inter-
ests. Indeed, the National Labor Relations Act makes it an unfair labor practice for an 
employer to “dominate or interfere with the formation or administration of any labor 
organization or contribute fi nancial or other support to it.”
LO 15-7 Describe new 
approaches to labor-
management relations.

486 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
Although employers must be careful to meet legal requirements, the NLRB has 
clearly supported employee involvement in work teams and decision making. For ex-
ample, in a 2001 ruling, the NLRB found that employee participation committees at 
Crown Cork & Seal’s aluminum-can factory did not violate federal labor law.46 Those 
committees make and carry out decisions regarding a wide range of issues, including 
production, quality, training, safety, and certain types of discipline. The NLRB deter-
mined that the committees were not employer dominated. Instead of “dealing with” 
management, where employees make proposals for management to accept or reject, 
the committees exercise authority within boundaries set by management, similar to 
the authority of a fi rst-line supervisor. 
In spite of the legal concerns, cooperative approaches to labor relations likely 
contribute to an organization’s success.47 Southwest Airlines’ management would 
agree with that view. The airline’s management training incorporates lessons and 
experience in working constructively with union representatives. With the highest 
share of union employees in the airline industry (85%), Southwest has among the 
fewest grievances per employee and has avoided many of the fi nancial woes that 
have plagued the industry.48
Nonunion Representation Systems
Given that only about 11% of workers are now represented by unions, what re-
course do the other 89% have if they want someone to represent their interests to 
management? Employees want some form of representation, which often involves 
“substitutes” for unions. A recent survey of hundreds of U.S. workers found that 
17% were covered by a collective bargaining agreement, and another 28% said 
they had some form of management-established system to represent them.49 The 
management-established system involved representatives of the employees meet-
ing with management to discuss working conditions including wages and benefi ts. 
Both groups of workers were equally likely to say the employee representatives 
could be “counted on to stand up for workers.” It is important to note that these 
“substitutes” may violate the NLRA. However, they exist because the legal guide-
lines covering these systems are ambiguous. It is diffi cult for unions to make the 
case that a company illegally organizes its employees into “company unions” unless 
the union has previously tried to organize the employees. Moreover, the punish-
ments that companies can receive from the NLRB for these types of violations are 
limited. 
Another nonunion approach is the worker center, a nonprofi t organization offer-
ing its members services such as training, legal advice, lobbying, and worker advo-
cacy.50 For example, the Coalition of Immokalee Workers in Florida provides services 
to immigrant laborers who harvest tomatoes. A few worker centers are affi liated with 
unions; for example, Justice for Janitors is part of the Service Employees Interna-
tional Union. Most are not part of unions, so they are not constrained by some of the 
requirements on unions. For example, they can engage in secondary boycotts (boy-
cotting one company so it will pressure another to make a change), and they do not 
have to win an election before they can confront management on behalf of workers. 
Instead of negotiating contracts with management, worker centers pressure employ-
ers through publicity campaigns, and they lobby legislators to pass laws favorable to 
their members. They may lack the fi nancial resources of a major union, but they can 
be a powerful force when they rally community support around a cause such as wages, 
workplace safety, and fair treatment of workers.

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  487
SUMMARY
LO 15-1 Defi ne unions and labor relations and their 
role in organizations.
• A union is an organization formed for the purpose 
of representing its members in resolving confl icts 
with employers.
• Labor relations is the management specialty em-
phasizing skills that managers and union leaders 
can use to minimize costly forms of confl ict and to 
seek win-win solutions to disagreements.
• Unions—often locals belonging to national and in-
ternational organizations—engage in organizing, 
collective bargaining, and contract administration 
with businesses and government organizations.
• In the United States, union membership has been 
declining among businesses but has held steady 
with government employees.
• Unionization is associated with more generous 
compensation and higher productivity but lower 
profi ts. Unions may reduce a business’s fl exibility 
and economic performance, but some companies 
rely on union expertise—for example, to train 
skilled workers.
THINKING ETHICALLY
FREE RIDE OR FREE SPEECH?
As the chapter explains, union goals include security 
provisions, such as agency shops, to ensure a regular 
fl ow of union dues. Right-to-work states forbid these 
provisions, but in Illinois (which is not a right-to-work 
state), personal care assistants providing services 
through the state-run programs serving people with dis-
abilities or in rehabilitation were required to pay union 
dues, whether or not they wanted to join the union. A 
majority of the personal care assistants had voted to 
make the Service Employees International Union (SEIU) 
their representative in 2003. The collective bargaining 
agreement included a “fair share” provision that required 
nonmembers of the union to pay not the full amount of 
dues, but a proportionate share of union costs for col-
lective bargaining and contract administration.
Several of the personal care assistants sued the state 
government, saying the “fair share” provision violated 
their rights to freedom of speech and freedom of as-
sociation. They lost the case in district court and in the 
appellate court, but the U.S. Supreme Court disagreed 
in a 5–4 vote. According to the majority, the concern 
that workers should not get a free ride does not over-
ride concern for workers’ First Amendment rights. Their 
ruling applied to the particular case of “quasi-public” 
workers who are paid by but not directly supervised by 
the government. When a person’s employer is a gov-
ernment entity, the union’s stance in bargaining with 
that government could confl ict with a worker’s political 
views. The court saw the requirement to support the 
union by paying dues as potentially forcing people to 
support the union’s political message over the work-
ers’ own views. The dissenting view emphasized the 
fairness and protection provided by a system in which 
a single body representing workers’ interests bargains 
with the government entity and no workers can take 
 advantage of the resulting benefi ts for free.
According to the SEIU, it could lose up to one-third 
of the revenue from the affected personal care work-
ers. Given that these workers can continue to enjoy any 
benefi ts that the SEIU negotiates on their behalf with-
out paying (their wages have almost doubled since the 
SEIU started representing them), the union anticipates 
that it will have many free riders. Some union work-
ers believe that organizing is actually easier without an 
agency shop, because organizers can point out that no 
one will be forced to join the union or pay dues. The 
SEIU’s challenge now is to persuade these workers that 
union dues are worth the cost.
Questions
 1. What issues of fairness and equity come into play 
in this case?
 2. How well does the outcome of this case represent 
respect for basic human rights? How well does it 
do the greatest good for the greatest number?
Sources: Oyez Project, “Harris v. Quinn,” IIT Chicago–Kent 
College of Law, July 19, 2014, http://www.oyez.org; Cynthia 
Estlund and William E. Forbath, “The War on Workers,” The 
New York Times, July 2, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com; 
Lydia DePillis, “Why Harris v. Quinn Isn’t as Bad for Workers 
as It Sounds,” Washington Post, July 1, 2014, http://www 
. washingtonpost.com; Daniel Fisher, “Public-Sector Unions 
Survive Supreme Court Review, Barely,” Forbes, June 30, 
2014, http://www.forbes.com. 

488 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
LO 15-2 Identify the labor relations goals of manage-
ment, labor unions, and society.
• Management goals are to increase the organiza-
tion’s profi ts. Managers generally expect that 
unions will make these goals harder to achieve.
• Labor unions have the goal of obtaining pay and 
working conditions that satisfy their members. They 
obtain these results by gaining power in numbers.
• Society’s values have included the hope that the 
existence of unions will replace confl ict or vio-
lence between workers and employers with fruit-
ful negotiation.
LO 15-3 Summarize laws and regulations that affect 
labor relations.
• The National Labor Relations Act supports the use 
of collective bargaining and sets out the rights of 
employees, including the right to organize, join a 
union, and go on strike. The NLRA prohibits unfair 
labor practices by employers, including interference 
with efforts to form a labor union and discrimination 
against employees who engage in union activities.
• The Taft-Hartley Act and Landrum-Griffi n Act 
establish restrictions on union practices that re-
strain workers, such as their preventing employ-
ees from working during a strike or determining 
whom an employer may hire.
• The Taft-Hartley Act also permits state right-to-
work laws.
LO 15-4 Describe the union organizing process.
• Organizing begins when union representatives 
contact employees and invite them to sign an au-
thorization card.
• If over half the employees sign a card, the union 
may request that the employer voluntarily recog-
nize the union.
• If the employer refuses or if 30% to 50% of em-
ployees signed authorization cards, the NLRB 
conducts a secret-ballot election.
• If the union wins, the NLRB certifi es the union.
• If the union loses but the NLRB fi nds that the 
election was not conducted fairly, it may set aside 
the results and call a new election.
LO 15-5 Explain how management and unions negoti-
ate contracts.
• Negotiations take place between representatives 
of the union and the management bargaining unit. 
The majority of negotiations involve parties that 
have been through the process before.
• The process begins with preparation, includ-
ing research into the other side’s strengths and 
demands. In the early stages of negotiation, many 
more people are present than at later stages.
• The union presents its demands, and management 
sometimes presents demands as well.
• Then the sides evaluate the demands and the like-
lihood of a strike.
• In the fi nal stages, pressure for an agreement in-
creases and a neutral third party may be called on 
to help reach a resolution.
• If bargaining breaks down, the impasse may be 
broken with a strike, lockout, mediation, fact 
fi nder, or arbitration.
LO 15-6 Summarize 
the 
practice 
of 
contract 
administration.
• Contract administration is a daily activity under 
the labor agreement. It includes carrying out the 
terms of the agreement and resolving confl icts 
over interpretation or violation of the contract.
• Confl icts are resolved through a grievance pro-
cedure. Typically, the grievance procedure begins 
with an employee talking to his or her supervi-
sor about the problem and possibly involving the 
union steward in the discussion.
• If this does not resolve the confl ict, the union fi les 
a written grievance with a line manager, and union 
and management representatives meet to discuss 
the problem.
• If this effort fails, the union appeals the grievance 
to top line management and the industrial rela-
tions staff.
• If the appeal fails, the union may appeal the griev-
ance to an arbitrator.
LO 15-7 Describe new approaches to labor- management 
relations.
• The growing role of employee empowerment 
and the shrinking size of union membership have 
helped to propel new approaches to labor rela-
tions, including an emphasis on cooperation be-
tween unions and management and the use of 
nonunion systems for employee representation.
• In contrast to the traditional view that labor and 
management are adversaries, some organizations 
and unions work more cooperatively. Cooperation 
may feature employee involvement in decision 
making, self-managing employee teams, labor-
management problem-solving teams, broadly 
defi ned jobs, and sharing of fi nancial gains and 
business information with employees.
• If such cooperation is tainted by attempts of the 
employer to dominate or interfere with labor 
organizations, however, such as by dealing with 

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  489
wages, grievances, or working conditions, it may 
be illegal under the NLRA.
• In spite of such legal concerns, cooperative labor 
relations seem to contribute to an organization’s 
success.
• In some organizations without a union, there is 
a management-established system to represent 
workers.
• Another nonunion approach is the worker cen-
ter, a nonprofi t organization offering its members 
services such as training, legal advice, lobbying, 
and worker advocacy.
• Most worker centers are not part of unions, so 
they are not constrained by some of the require-
ments on unions. Instead of negotiating contracts 
with management, worker centers pressure em-
ployers through publicity campaigns, and they 
lobby legislators to pass laws favorable to their 
members.
KEY TERMS
unions, 461
labor relations, 461
craft union, 462
industrial union, 462
American Federation of Labor 
and Congress of Industrial 
Organizations (AFL-CIO), 463
union steward, 463
checkoff provision, 468
closed shop, 468
union shop, 468
agency shop, 468
maintenance of membership, 468
National Labor Relations Act 
(NLRA), 470
right-to-work laws, 472
National Labor Relations Board 
(NLRB), 473
associate union membership, 478
corporate campaigns, 478
collective bargaining, 479
strike, 481
lockout, 482
mediation, 482
fact fi nder, 483
arbitration, 483
grievance procedure, 483
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. Why do employees join labor unions? Did you ever 
belong to a labor union? If you did, do you think 
union membership benefi ted you? If you did not, 
do you think a union would have benefi ted you? 
Why or why not? (LO 15-1)
 2. Why do managers at most companies prefer that 
unions not represent their employees? Can unions 
provide benefi ts to an employer? Explain. (LO 15-2)
 3. How has union membership in the United States 
changed over the past few decades? How does 
union membership in the United States compare 
with union membership in other countries? How 
might these patterns in union membership affect 
the HR decisions of an international company?
  (LO 15-2)
 4. What legal responsibilities do employers have re-
garding unions? What are the legal requirements 
affecting unions? (LO 15-3)
 5. Suppose you are the HR manager for a chain of 
clothing stores. You learn that union representatives 
have been encouraging the stores’ employees to 
sign authorization cards. What events can follow in 
this process of organizing? Suggest some ways that 
you might respond in your role as HR manager. 
(LO 15-4)
 6. If the parties negotiating a labor contract are un-
able to reach an agreement, what actions can re-
solve the situation? (LO 15-5)
 7. Why are strikes uncommon? Under what con-
ditions might management choose to accept a 
strike?
 8. What are the usual steps in a grievance procedure? 
What are the advantages of resolving a grievance 
in the fi rst step? What skills would a supervisor 
need so grievances can be resolved in the fi rst 
step? (LO 15-5)
 9. What can a company gain from union-management 
cooperation? What can workers gain? (LO 15-7)
 10. What are the legal restrictions on labor- 
management cooperation? (LO 15-7)

490 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
Volkswagen wants the United Auto Workers 
The United Auto Workers’ failure in organizing the 
workers of Volkswagen’s Chattanooga, Tennessee, plant 
was surprising because the election campaign had been 
so unusual. It is typical for management to discourage a 
union, but Volkswagen seemed to welcome the UAW to 
the plant, where 2,400 workers assemble Passat sedans. 
The union had partnered with the IG Metall union in 
Germany, where VW is headquartered and where union 
membership is an accepted part of business. There, VW 
and IG Metall had a cooperative relationship in which 
MANAGING TALENT
The SEIU’s “Fight for 15” Campaign
An important way unions are making an impact is 
through shaping public opinion and lobbying for gov-
ernment action. Unions present issues as a matter of so-
cial responsibility, hoping legislators and managers will 
take the actions unions once sought through collective 
bargaining. The Fight for 15 campaign, supported by 
the Service Employees International Union (SEIU), is 
a case in point. The campaign seeks an increase in the 
minimum wage to $15 an hour. That would more than 
double the federal minimum, and it would be about 
two-thirds more than the $9 per hour earned by the av-
erage fast-food worker in the United States.
Fast-food workers are the face of the SEIU-backed 
campaign. Protesters have rallied in front of  McDonald’s 
headquarters in Oak Brook, Illinois, and at restaurants 
in more than 100 cities. As these protests have drawn 
media attention, the union has coordinated interna-
tional protests by workers in 30 countries. Global pres-
sure could be important, since international markets are 
important sources of corporate growth.
The SEIU’s objectives in backing the campaign focus 
on fairness, not membership growth. Whereas fast-food 
restaurants once employed mainly young people, the 
Great Recession drove more adults to take those jobs. 
With more people trying to support families on fast-food 
pay, governments are spending billions of dollars on pub-
lic assistance to working people. The SEIU’s president, 
Mary Kay Henry, has expressed the issue in ethical terms: 
“Americans know that it’s wrong that so many families 
have no fi nancial security, no matter how hard they 
work.” She also expresses a broader social benefi t from 
raising the minimum wage: “more money in the pockets 
of workers” will help “get our economy moving again.”
The fast-food industry as a whole is among the nation’s 
largest and fastest-growing employers, with roughly 4 
million workers, but it has been a diffi cult one for unions 
to organize. Most workers are not employed by large 
corporations but by franchisees serving local markets. 
The franchisees point out that their profi t margins are so 
small that they cannot afford higher wages without major 
price increases. A $15 minimum wage would force them 
to replace workers with automation, slowing job growth 
in one of the few industries where it is strong.
With these obstacles, why is the SEIU bothering to 
rally fast-food workers? One reason is that it positions 
the union as relevant to today’s workers. The SEIU has 
made a point of experimenting with new tactics, and at a 
time when overall union membership is falling, the SEIU’s 
membership is growing. In addition, some collective bar-
gaining agreements set wages relative to the minimum 
wage, so some members could see direct benefi ts from this 
activity. And a recent NLRB ruling that McDonald’s could 
be treated as a joint employer with its franchisees in labor 
complaints could have huge implications for how restau-
rant companies deal with their employees in the future. 
Questions
 1. What are the goals of management, unions, and soci-
ety in this situation?
 2. How might fast-food companies and their franchi-
sees approach the minimum-wage issue through 
union-management collaboration? Would you rec-
ommend this approach? Why or why not?
Sources: Julie Jargon, “McDonald’s Ruling Sets Ominous Tone for Franchis-
ers,” The Wall Street Journal, July 29, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Alejandra 
Cancino, “Union Spent at Least $2 Million Last Year on Fight for $15 
Movement,” Chicago Tribune, May 29, 2014, http://www.chicagotribune.
com; Eric Morath, “Workers Try a New Tactic in Minimum-Wage Fight,” 
The Wall Street Journal, May 20, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Barbara Tasch, 
“Fast Food Workers to Protest Wages in 80 Cities across the World,” Time, 
May 16, 2014, EBSCOhost, http://web.a.ebscohost.com; Service Employ-
ees International Union, “SEIU’s Henry: Fast Food Strikers Fighting for 
Economy That Works for All of Us,” news release, May 15, 2014, http://
www.seiu.org; Susan Berfi eld, “Fast-Food Workers of the World, Unite!” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, December 9, 2013, pp. 20, 22; Claire Zillman, “Fast-
Food Workers: Labor Movement’s New Lease on Life,” Fortune, December 
6, 2013, EBSCOhost, http://web.a.ebscohost.com; Richard Berman, “Why 
Unions Like Minimum Wage,” Investor’s Business Daily, August 26, 2013, 
Business Insights: Global, http://bi.galegroup.com; Venessa Wong, “This Is 
What Would Happen If Fast-Food Workers Got Raises,” Bloomberg Busi-
nessweek, August 2, 2013, http://www.businessweek.com. 
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY 

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  491
the workers served on a works council, a formal com-
mittee that negotiates with management about how to 
handle production issues. VW has similar arrangements 
in its other international facilities and hoped to set up 
a works council in Chattanooga. Management believed 
this would require that workers fi rst belong to a union. 
In an unusual move, the company allowed UAW orga-
nizers to campaign inside the factory.
In spite of this favorable context, the workers voted 
712 to 626 against the union in February 2014. While 
some workers were attracted to the idea of a works 
council, others worried that the UAW’s presence would 
create confl ict and divisions. Some said they disliked 
the union’s support for political candidates whose views 
they disagreed with.
The UAW’s initial response was to appeal the vote to 
the National Labor Relations Board, citing interference 
from outsiders. The governor had said he doubted the 
state would go ahead with plans to offer VW incentives 
for locating in Chattanooga if the plant became union-
ized. Senator Bob Corker had said he had information 
that VW would not build a second production line in 
Chattanooga if the union vote passed. Conservative 
political groups posted anti-union billboards around 
Chattanooga. Believing these actions made the vote un-
fair, the union asked the NLRB to order a new election.
But in another surprise, the UAW dropped the ap-
peal two months later. The union’s president at that 
time, Bob King, said he feared the appeal process “could 
drag on for months or even years.” Ordering a new 
election could take two years, whereas accepting the 
election’s results would allow the union to campaign 
again in another year.
More surprises followed in July. The UAW an-
nounced that it had reached a consensus with Volkswa-
gen. The company invited UAW Local 42 to sign up 
workers voluntarily, and the union would partner with 
management to set up a works council. Local 42 would 
prioritize ensuring the company’s growth and devel-
oping a training program for employees. That same 
month, VW announced that it would expand the Chat-
tanooga plant to build midsized SUVs, adding about 
2,000 new jobs.
Questions
 1. What objectives were Volkswagen managers trying 
to meet in allowing the UAW to organize its work-
force in Chattanooga?
 2. Assuming that Local 42 succeeds in signing up work-
ers, do you expect that VW’s management will need 
to prepare for problems in collective bargaining with 
the union? Why or why not?
Sources: Kathleen Foody, “Tenn. Leaders Downplay Union Debate at VW 
Plant,” ABC News, July 15, 2014, http://abcnews.go.com; Justin  Bachman, 
“As Union Moves In, Volkswagen Will Build Its SUV in  Tennessee,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, July 14, 2014, http://www.businessweek.com; 
United Auto Workers, “UAW Charters Local 42 at Volkswagen in 
 Chattanooga,” news release, July 10, 2014, http://uaw.org; Steven Green-
house, “UAW Drops Appeal of VW Vote in Tennessee,” The New York 
Times, April 21, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com; Neal E. Boudette, “Union 
Suffers Big Loss at Tennessee VW Plant,” The Wall Street Journal, February 
15, 2014, http://online.wsj.com.
Republic Gets Serious
When Serious Materials acquired Republic Windows 
and Doors, union–management relations got a much-
needed breath of fresh air. Republic had nearly vanished 
amidst economic meltdown and accusations of misman-
agement and corruption. Serious Materials, by contrast, 
is a fi rm with a high-minded business strategy and a 
commitment to fair-mindedness.
The problems became public when workers at Re-
public staged a six-day sit-in at the Chicago factory, 
which had been one of the largest window-glass fac-
tories in the United States. When orders from con-
struction companies stopped coming in, management, 
after just three days’ warning, closed the plant without 
granting workers any severance pay or giving the legally 
required 60 days’ notice, and fi led for bankruptcy. Bow-
ing to public pressure, the company’s lenders, includ-
ing Bank of America, reached an agreement to give the 
workers $6,000 apiece in severance pay.
But that wasn’t the end. The workers turned to the 
National Labor Relations Board with another com-
plaint. They said Republic’s owner, Richard Gillman, 
had secretly begun transferring the company’s machin-
ery to a (non-union) window-manufacturing facility he 
bought in Iowa just before closing the Chicago factory. 
In fact, all the equipment would have been gone, they 
said, except that their six-day occupation of the factory 
interfered with the plan—they wouldn’t allow Gillman 
to enter. Employees also followed trucks carrying ma-
chinery to learn where it was being taken. The union 
demanded that the machinery be returned to the Chi-
cago plant, so a new owner could operate it.
Meanwhile, a hero arrived on the scene: Kevin 
Surace, founder and chief executive of Serious Materi-
als, a maker of eco-friendly building products, including 
energy- effi cient windows. Surace saw acquisition of the 
Republic facility as a chance to expand into the Chicago 
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

492 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
region with a ready-made plant and equipment, not to 
mention trained people eager to work.
When he decided to make an offer, Surace did some-
thing unusual: instead of talking fi rst to the fi rms’ main 
creditors, he made his fi rst visit to the employees’ union, 
the United Electrical, Radio, and Machine Workers of 
America. He met with the union’s president, Carl Rosen, 
as well as several Republic workers. Rosen recalled that 
Surace’s reasoning was that for the deal to work, he 
needed a skilled workforce. The parties agreed that Se-
rious Materials would make the facility a union shop, 
and employees would be paid their former salaries and 
receive credit for their seniority at Republic. Only then 
did Surace approach Bank of America. The bank ini-
tially wasn’t interested, so Surace went to General Elec-
tric, owner of the lease on the equipment, and bought 
out the lease, a coup that convinced the bank to sell. 
Surace announced plans to reopen the plant and rehire 
all the 300 employees who had been laid off when Re-
public closed its doors. The resulting publicity quickly 
brought in inquiries and even some paying customers.
Since the acquisition, the Republic story may be 
nearing its end. County prosecutors brought charges 
against Gillman for looting the business and stealing 
machinery for the Iowa enterprise (which also failed, 
less than two months after it launched). Because Repub-
lic had been in bankruptcy, the equipment was not Gill-
man’s but belonged to his creditor, GE. State’s Attorney 
Anita  Alvarez said, “Just two weeks before Christmas, 
in a dire economy, the company shut the doors of their 
business and deserted their workers and all of their fam-
ilies.”  Gillman denied the charges.
A sign of Surace’s very different attitude toward 
his workforce came a few months after the acquisition 
by Serious Materials, when Vice President Joe Biden 
came to visit the Chicago facility. Biden was there to 
represent how the Obama administration’s economic 
stimulus plan was supporting “green” initiatives. Surace 
noticed that onstage for the press conference were vari-
ous dignitaries but no representatives of the workers. 
In spite of the Secret Service’s reluctance to add last-
minute guests, Surace insisted that workers have a face 
at the press conference. By the time the TV cameras 
were rolling, the cast of dignitaries included Armando 
Robles, a maintenance worker and the president of the 
employees’ union.
Questions
 1. Richard Gillman attempted to stay in business by 
transferring work to a nonunion facility, and Kevin 
Surace plans to make the operation profi table as a 
union shop. Do you think the decision to rely on 
union or non-union labor spells the difference be-
tween the success and failure of this enterprise? Why 
or why not?
 2. How (if at all) do you think Kevin Surace’s initial 
approach to the union when acquiring the company 
will infl uence the business success of the window 
factory?
 3. Imagine that Serious Materials has hired you as an 
HR consultant for the Chicago window factory. Sug-
gest how the company can build on its initial good-
will with workers to create positive labor relations 
and a highly motivated workforce for the long run.
Sources: Robert Mitchum, “Republic Workers File Labor Charges,” Chi-
cago Tribune, January 7, 2009, NewsBank, http://infoweb.newsbank.com; 
Robert Mitchum, “Former Republic Workers Find Hope,” Chicago Tribune, 
January 15, 2009, NewsBank, http://infoweb.newsbank.com; Annie Swee-
ney and Matthew Walberg, “Tables Turn on Man Who Shut Republic 
Windows,” Chicago Tribune, September 11, 2009, NewsBank, http://
infoweb.newsbank.com; Leigh Buchanan, ”Entrepreneur of the Year: 
Kevin Surace of  Serious Materials,” Inc., December 2009, www.inc.com.
NOTES
 1. Alan K. Cubbage, “Northwestern Asks National Labor Rela-
tions Board to Overturn Regional Director’s Ruling on Foot-
ball Players Unionization,” Northwestern University news 
page, July 3, 2014, http://www.northwestern.edu; Ira Boud-
way, “With Union Ballots Cast by Northwestern Football 
Team, Real Contest Is Just Beginning,” Bloomberg Business-
week, April 25, 2014, http://www.businessweek.com; Alejan-
dra Cancino and Teddy Greenstein, “Northwestern Football 
Players Cast Ballots in Union Vote,” Chicago Tribune, April 
25, 2014, http://articles.chicagotribune.com; Melanie Trott-
man, “NLRB to Review Northwestern’s Appeal of Student-
Athletes’ Union Decision,” The Wall Street Journal, April 24, 
2014, http://online.wsj.com.
 2. J. T. Dunlop, Industrial Relations Systems (New York: Holt, 
1958); C. Kerr, “Industrial Confl ict and Its Mediation,” 
American Journal of Sociology 60 (1954), pp. 230–45.
 3. T. A. Kochan, Collective Bargaining and Industrial Relations 
(Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, 1980), p. 25; H. C. Katz 
and T. A. Kochan, An Introduction to Collective Bargaining and 
Industrial  Relations, 3rd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004).
 4. Tom Raum, “Unions Representing Government Workers 
Are Gaining,” Minneapolis Star Tribune, July 4, 2014, http://
www.startribune.com; Elias Groll, “The World’s Most Pow-
erful Labor Unions,” Foreign Policy, September 2, 2013, 
http://www.foreignpolicy.com.
 5. Whether the time the union steward spends on union busi-
ness is paid for by the employer, the union, or a combina-
tion is a matter of negotiation between the employer and the 
union.
 6. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Union Members, 2013,” news 
release, January 24, 2014, http://www.bls.gov.
 7. Katz and Kochan, An Introduction to Collective Bargain-
ing, building on J. Fiorito and C. L. Maranto, “The 

CHAPTER 15 
Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations  493
Contemporary Decline of Union Strength,” Contemporary 
Policy Issues 3 (1987), pp. 12–27; G. N. Chaison and J. Rose, 
“The  Macrodeterminants of Union Growth and Decline,” in 
The State of the Unions, ed. G. Strauss et al. (Madison, WI: 
Industrial Relations Research Association, 1991).
 8. C. Brewster, “Levels of Analysis in Strategic HRM: Ques-
tions Raised by Comparative Research,” Conference on Re-
search and Theory in HRM, Cornell University, October 
1997.
 9. J. T. Addison and B. T. Hirsch, “Union Effects on Productiv-
ity, Profi ts, and Growth: Has the Long Run Arrived?” Journal 
of Labor Economics 7 (1989), pp. 72–105; R. B. Freeman and 
J. L. Medoff, “The Two Faces of Unionism,” Public Interest 57 
(Fall 1979), pp. 69–93.
 10. L. Mishel and P. Voos, Unions and Economic Competitiveness 
(Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1991); Freeman and Medoff, 
“Two Faces”; S. Slichter, J. Healy, and E. R. Livernash, The 
Impact of Collective Bargaining on Management (Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution, 1960).
 11. A. O. Hirschman, Exit, Voice, and Loyalty (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1970); R. Batt, A. J. S. Colvin, 
and J. Keefe, “Employee Voice, Human Resource Practices, 
and Quit Rates: Evidence from the Telecommunications In-
dustry,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55 (1970), pp. 
573–94.
 12. R. B. Freeman and J. L. Medoff, What Do Unions Do? (New 
York: Basic Books, 1984); Addison and Hirsch, “Union Ef-
fects on Productivity”; M. Ash and J. A. Seago, “The Effect 
of Registered Nurses’ Unions on Heart-Attack Mortality,” 
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 57 (2004), p. 422; C. 
Doucouliagos and P. Laroche, “What Do Unions Do to Pro-
ductivity? A Meta-Analysis,” Industrial Relations 42 (2003), pp. 
650–91.
 13. B. E. Becker and C. A. Olson, “Unions and Firm Profi ts,” 
Industrial Relations 31, no. 3 (1992), pp. 395–415; B. T. Hirsch 
and B. A. Morgan, “Shareholder Risks and Returns in Union 
and Nonunion Firms,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 
47, no. 2 (1994), pp. 302–18; Hristos Doucouliagos and 
 Patrice Laroche, “Unions and Profi ts: A Meta-Regression 
Analysis,” Industrial Relations 48, no. 1 (January 2008), p. 146.
 14. Nicole A. Bonham Colby, “Labor and Management: Working 
Together for a Stable Future,” Alaska Business Monthly, October 
2011, Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet
.galegroup.com.
 15. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Union Members, 2013.”
 16. Christina Rogers, “Next UAW Chief to Confront Wage Dis-
pute,” The Wall Street Journal, June 2, 2014, http://online.wsj.
com. See also Bradford Wernle, “Why Mess with Two-Tier 
Wage Success?” Automotive News, May 26, 2014, http://www.
autonews.com.
 17. S. Webb and B. Webb, Industrial Democracy (London: Long-
mans, Green, 1897); J. R. Commons, Institutional Economics 
(New York: Macmillan, 1934).
 18. “Why America Needs Unions, but Not the Kind It 
Has 
Now,” 
Bloomberg 
Businessweek, 
May 
23, 
1994, 
p. 70.
 19. E. E. Herman, J. L. Schwatz, and A. Kuhn, Collective Bargain-
ing and Labor Relations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
1992).
 20. Kochan, Collective Bargaining and Industrial Relations, p. 61.
 21. National Labor Relations Board, Basic Guide to the National 
Labor Relations Act (Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Offi ce, 1997).
 22. National Labor Relations Board, “Who Is Covered by the 
National Labor Relations Act?” Frequently Asked Ques-
tions, http://www.nlrb.gov, accessed May 4, 2012; U.S. De-
partment of Labor, Offi ce of Labor-Management Standards, 
“Employee Rights under the National Labor Relations Act,” 
poster, http://www.dol.gov/olms/, accessed May 8, 2012.
 23. National Labor Relations Board, Basic Guide.
 24. Ibid.
 25. Ibid.
 26. R. B. Freeman and M. M. Kleiner, “Employer Behavior in 
the Face of Union Organizing Drives,” Industrial and Labor 
Relations Review 43, no. 4 (April 1990), pp. 351–65.
 27. J. A. Fossum, Labor Relations, 8th ed. (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2002), p. 149.
 28. Local Union 130 UA, Chicago Journeymen  Plumbers, 
“ Organizing,” http://www.plumberslu130ua.org, accessed 
May 4, 2012.
 29. Herman et al., Collective Bargaining; P. Jarley and J. Fiorito, 
“Associate Membership: Unionism or Consumerism?” Indus-
trial and Labor Relations Review 43 (1990), pp. 209–24.
 30. Katz and Kochan, An Introduction to Collective Bargaining.
 31. Katz and Kochan, An Introduction to Collective Bargaining.
 32. A. E. Eaton and J. Kriesky, “Union Organizing under Neutral-
ity and Card Check Agreements,” Industrial and Labor Relations 
Review 55 (2001), pp. 42–59.
 33. National Labor Relations Board, “Election Data, FY 2011,” 
Election Reports, http://www.nlrb.gov/election-reports, ac-
cessed May 7, 2012.
 34. Chaison and Rose, “The Macrodeterminants of Union 
Growth and Decline.”
 35. Fossum, Labor Relations, p. 262.
 36. C. M. Steven, Strategy and Collective Bargaining Negotiations 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963); Katz and Kochan, An In-
troduction to Collective Bargaining.
 37. Kochan, Collective Bargaining and Industrial Relations, p. 272.
 38. Robert Combs, “Labor Stats and Facts: Lockout Rates Con-
tinue to Surge,” Bloomberg BNA, October 17, 2012, http://
www.bna.com.
 39. Katz and Kochan, An Introduction to Collective Bargaining.
 40. United Steelworkers v. American Manufacturing Company, 363 
U.S. 564 (1960); United Steelworkers v. Warrior Gulf and Navi-
gation Company, 363 U.S. 574 (1960); United Steelworkers v. 
Enterprise Wheel and Car Corporation, 363 U.S. 593 (1960).
 41. Kochan, Collective Bargaining and Industrial Relations, p. 386; 
John W. Budd and Alexander J. S. Colvin, “Improved Metrics 
for Workplace Dispute Resolution Procedures: Effi ciency, 
Equity, and Voice,” Industrial Relations 47, no. 3 (July 2008), 
p. 460.
 42. T. A. Kochan, H. C. Katz, and R. B. McKersie, The Trans-
formation of American Industrial Relations (New York: Basic 
Books, 1986), chap. 6; E. Appelbaum, T. Bailey, and P. Berg, 
Manufacturing Advantage: Why High-Performance Work Sys-
tems Pay Off (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000).

494 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
 43. L. W. Hunter, J. P. MacDuffi e, and L. Doucet, “What Makes 
Teams Take? Employee Reactions to Work Reforms,” Indus-
trial and Labor Relations Review 55 (2002), pp. 448–72.
 44. J. B. Arthur, “The Link between Business Strategy and In-
dustrial Relations Systems in American Steel Minimills,” In-
dustrial and Labor Relations Review 45 (1992), pp. 488–506; 
M. Schuster, “Union Management Cooperation,” in Employee 
and Labor  Relations, ed. J. A. Fossum (Washington, DC: Bu-
reau of National Affairs, 1990); E. Cohen-Rosenthal and C. 
Burton, Mutual Gains: A Guide to Union-Management Coop-
eration, 2nd ed. (Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, 1993); T. A. Kochan 
and P. Osterman, The Mutual Gains Enterprise (Boston: Har-
vard Business School Press, 1994); E. Applebaum and R. Batt, 
The New American Workplace (Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, 1994).
 45. A. E. Eaton, “Factors Contributing to the Survival of Em-
ployee Participation Programs in Unionized Settings,” Indus-
trial and Labor Relations Review 47, no. 3 (1994), pp. 371–89.
 46. “NLRB 4–0 Approves Crown Cork & Seal’s Use of Seven 
Employee Participation Committees,” HR News, September 
3, 2001.
 47. Kochan and Osterman, The Mutual Gains Enterprise; W. N. 
Cooke, “Employee Participation  Programs, Group-Based 
Incentives, and Company Performance: A Union-Nonunion 
Comparison,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47, no. 4 
(1994), pp. 594–609; C. Doucouliagos, “Worker Participa-
tion and Productivity in Labor-Managed and Participatory 
Capitalist Firms: A Meta- Analysis,” Industrial and Labor 
Relations Review 49, no. 1 (1995), pp. 58–77; S. J. Deery and R. 
D. Iverson, “Labor-Management Cooperation: Antecedents 
and Impact on Organizational Performance,” Industrial and 
Labor Relations Review 58 (2005), pp. 588–609; James Combs, 
 Yongmei Liu, Angela Hall, and David Ketchen, “How Much 
Do High- Performance Work Practices Matter? A Meta-
analysis of Their Effects on Organizational Performance,” 
Personnel Psychology 59, no. 3 (2006), pp. 501–28; Robert D. 
Mohr and Cindy Zoghi, “High-Involvement Work Design 
and Job Satisfaction,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 
61, no. 3 (April 2008), pp. 275–96; T. Rabl, M. Jayasinghe, B. 
Gerhart, and T. M. Köhlmann, “How Much Does Country 
Matter? A Meta-analysis of the HPWP Systems–Business 
Performance Relationship,” Academy of Management Annual 
Meeting Proceedings, August 2011.
 48. Kate Everson, “Learning to Work with Unions,” Chief Learn-
ing Offi cer, July 2014, pp. 26–29.
 49. John Godard and Carola Frege, “Labor Unions, Alterna-
tive Forms of Representation, and the Exercise of Authority 
Relations in U.S. Workplaces,” Industrial and Labor Relations 
Review 6 (2013): 142–168.
 50. Robert J. Grossman, “Leading from Behind?” HR Maga-
zine, December 2013, Business Insights: Global, http://
bi.galegroup.com.

What Do I Need to Know?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
 LO 16-1 Summarize how the growth in international 
business activity affects human resource 
management.
 LO 16-2 Identify the factors that most strongly inﬂ uence 
HRM in international markets.
 LO 16-3 Discuss how differences among countries affect 
HR planning at organizations with international 
operations.
 LO 16-4 Describe how companies select and train human 
resources in a global labor market.
 LO 16-5 Discuss challenges related to managing 
performance and compensating employees from 
other countries.
 LO 16-6 Explain how employers prepare managers for 
international assignments and for their return 
home.
Managing Human 
Resources Globally
16
Introduction
HR professionals in the United States are still trying to figure out the best 
ways to encourage their employees to be as healthy as possible. Some 
offer access to an onsite fitness center, and others offer financial incen-
tives for joining a weight loss program, but the financial return on this 
spending is not always obvious. The choices become even more complex 
at organizations with operations in several countries. One reason is that 
the main health issues differ from one region to another. For example, in 
sub-Saharan Africa, infectious diseases are more of a problem even as 
chronic conditions such as diabetes are becoming more common. At the 
same time, cultural and economic issues come into play. In countries where 
HIV/AIDS is a major problem, there also may be a stigma attached to being 
HIV-positive. That makes it harder to set up a program for screening and 
education in managing the infection. Furthermore, employees in some parts 
of the world have little access to health care. In contrast, in the United 
Kingdom, a major concern is that such a program not seem to intrude into 
employees’ personal lives.
 One way around the complexity is for an employer to address issues of 
shared concern around the world. In particular, lifestyles that include physi-
cal activity and healthy eating will strengthen employees to prevent or cope 
with a wide variety of health problems. American Express offers a program 

496 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
called Healthy Living in 16 of the 45 countries where it operates. The program has 
internationally relevant content: nutrition, exercise, health care, and emotional well-
being. The company launched Healthy Living in the United States and then expanded 
it to employees in India, the United Kingdom, Mexico, and elsewhere. As it extends 
the program to each country, it sets objectives relevant to the country and tailors the 
program to each set of employees. In the United Kingdom, Healthy Living aims to boost 
employee engagement and productivity, while in India, it is meant to help attract and 
retain workers.1
Like American Express, many companies have operations in foreign countries. 
Therefore, human resource management truly takes place on an international scale. 
This chapter discusses the HR issues that organizations must address in a world of 
global competition. We begin by describing how the global nature of business is af-
fecting human resource management in modern organizations. Next, we identify how 
global differences among countries affect the organization’s decisions about human 
resources. In the following sections we explore HR planning, selection, training, and 
compensation practices in international settings. Finally, we examine guidelines for 
managing employees sent on international assignments.
HRM in a Global Environment
The environment in which organizations operate is rapidly becoming a global one. 
More and more companies are entering international markets by exporting their 
products, building facilities in other countries, and entering into alliances with foreign 
companies. At the same time, companies based in other countries are investing and 
setting up operations in the United States. Indeed, most organizations now function 
in the global economy.
What is behind the trend toward expansion into global markets? Foreign countries 
can provide a business with new markets in which there are millions or billions of new 
customers; developing countries often provide such markets, but developed countries do 
so as well. In addition, companies set up operations overseas because they can operate 
with lower labor costs—for example, video game developers that pay $12,000 to $15,000 
per month for U.S. employees can hire Indian workers at monthly pay scales in the range 
of $4,000 to $5,000.2 Finally, thanks to advances in telecommunications and information 
technology, companies can more easily spread work around the globe, wherever they 
fi nd the right mix of labor costs and abilities. Teams with members in different time 
zones can keep projects moving around the clock, or projects can be assigned according 
to regions with particular areas of expertise. Once organizations have taken advantage of 
these opportunities, they sometimes fi nd themselves locked into overseas arrangements. 
In the consumer electronics industry, for example, so much of the manufacturing has 
shifted to China and other low-wage countries that U.S. companies no longer would 
have suppliers nearby if they tried to build a factory in North America.3
Global activities are simplifi ed and encouraged by trade agreements among na-
tions. For example, most countries in Western Europe belong to the European Union 
and share a common currency, the euro. Canada, Mexico, and the United States have 
encouraged trade among themselves with the North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA). The World Trade Organization (WTO) resolves trade disputes among 
more than 100 participating nations.
LO 16-1 Summarize 
how the growth in inter-
national business activity 
affects human resource 
management.

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 497
As these trends and arrangements encourage inter-
national trade, they increase and change the demands 
on human resource management. Organizations with 
customers or suppliers in other countries need em-
ployees who understand those customers or suppli-
ers. Organizations that operate facilities in foreign 
countries need to understand the laws and customs 
that apply to employees in those countries. They 
may have to prepare managers and other personnel 
to take international assignments. They have to adapt 
their human resource plans and policies to different 
settings. Even if some practices are the same world-
wide, the company now has to communicate them to 
its international workforce. A variety of international 
activities require managers to understand HRM prin-
ciples and practices prevalent in global markets.
Employees in an International 
Workforce
When organizations operate globally, their em-
ployees are very likely to be citizens of more than 
one country. Employees may come from the em-
ployer’s parent country, a host country, or a third 
country. The parent country is the country in 
which the organization’s headquarters is located. 
For example, the United States is the parent coun-
try of General Motors, because GM’s headquarters 
is in Michigan. A GM employee who was born in 
the United States and works at GM’s headquarters 
or one of its U.S. factories is  therefore a parent-country national.
A host country is a country (other than the parent country) in which an organiza-
tion operates a facility. Great Britain is a host country of General Motors because GM 
has operations there. Any British workers hired to work at GM’s British facility would 
be host-country nationals, that is, employees who are citizens of the host country.
A third country refers to a country that is neither the parent country nor the host 
country. (The organization may or may not have a facility in the third country.) In the 
example of GM’s operations in Great Britain, the company could hire an Australian 
manager to work there. The Australian manager would be a third-country national be-
cause the manager is neither from the parent country (the United States) nor from the 
host country (Great Britain).
When organizations operate overseas, they must decide whether to hire parent- country 
nationals, host-country nationals, or third-country nationals for the overseas operations. 
Usually, they hire a combination of these. In general, employees assigned to work in an-
other country are called expatriates. In the GM example, the U.S. and Australian manag-
ers working in Great Britain would be expatriates during those assignments.
The extent to which organizations use parent-country, host-country, or  third-country 
nationals varies. Until recently, Western companies tended to use parent company na-
tionals to manage operations in China, where employers found a shortage of manage-
ment skills. Today, however, those skills are more widely available, and at multinational 
Parent Country
The country in which 
an organization’s 
headquarters is located.
Host Country
A country (other than the 
parent country) in which 
an organization operates 
a facility.
Third Country
A country that is neither 
the parent country nor 
the host country of an 
employer.
Expatriates
Employees assigned to 
work in another country.
As companies in the United States and Britain cut software jobs and 
outsource to other countries in order to drive down costs, countries 
such as India continue to see employment rates rise.

498 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
companies, three-fourths of senior executives are now host country nationals. Em-
ployers prefer these leaders because they understand the culture of their customers, 
governments, and business partners. Competition is stiffest for hiring Asian managers 
who lived in the host country but were educated in the United States or  Europe. An 
example is Mei-Wei Cheng, who was born in China and educated at  Cornell Univer-
sity. Siemens, based in Germany, hired Cheng to lead its Chinese  operations, formerly 
headed by a European executive.4
Employers in the Global Marketplace
Just as there are different ways for employees to participate in international business—
as parent-country, host-country, or third-county nationals—so there are different ways 
for employers to do business globally, ranging from simply shipping products to cus-
tomers in other countries to transforming the organization into a truly global one, 
with operations, employees, and customers in many countries. Figure 16.1 shows the 
major levels of global participation.
Most organizations begin by serving customers and clients within a domestic market-
place. Typically, a company’s founder has an idea for serving a local, regional, or national 
market. The business must recruit, hire, train, and compensate employees to produce 
the product, and these people usually come from the business owner’s local labor mar-
ket. Selection and training focus on employees’ technical abilities and, to some extent, 
on interpersonal skills. Pay levels refl ect local labor conditions. If the product succeeds, 
the company might expand operations to other domestic locations, and HRM decisions 
become more complex as the organization draws from a larger labor market and needs 
systems for training and motivating employees in several locations. As the employer’s 
workforce grows, it is also likely to become more diverse. Even in small domestic orga-
nizations, a signifi cant share of workers may be immigrants. In this way, even domestic 
companies are affected by issues related to the global economy.
As organizations grow, they often begin to meet demand from customers in other 
countries. The usual way that a company begins to enter foreign markets is by export-
ing, or shipping domestically produced items to other countries to be sold there. Even-
tually, it may become economically desirable to set up operations in one or more 
Figure 16.1
Levels of Global Participation
Corporate
headquarters
Domestic
Parent
country
Host
countries
International
Multinational
Global
Foreign
subsidiary
Increasing participation in global markets
Foreign
subsidiary
Foreign
subsidiary
Foreign
subsidiary
Foreign
subsidiary
Corporate
headquarters
Corporate
headquarters
Corporate
headquarters

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 499
foreign countries. An organization that does so becomes an international organiza-
tion. The decision to participate in international activities raises a host of HR issues, 
including the basic question of whether a particular location provides an environment 
where the organization can successfully acquire and manage human resources.
While international companies build one or a few facilities in another country, 
 multinational companies go overseas on a broader scale. They build facilities in a 
number of different countries as a way to keep production and distribution costs to a 
minimum. In general, when organizations become multinationals, they move produc-
tion facilities from relatively high-cost locations to lower-cost locations. The lower-
cost locations may have lower average wage rates, or they may reduce distribution 
costs by being nearer to customers. The HRM challenges faced by a multinational 
company are similar to but larger than those of an international organization because 
more countries are involved. More than ever, the organization needs to hire managers 
who can function in a variety of settings, give them necessary training, and provide 
fl exible compensation systems that take into account the different pay rates, tax sys-
tems, and costs of living from one country to another.
At the highest level of involvement in the global marketplace are global 
organizations.  These fl exible organizations compete by offering top products tai-
lored to segments of the market while keeping costs as low as possible. A global orga-
nization locates each facility based on the ability to effectively, effi ciently, and fl exibly 
produce a product or service, using cultural differences as an advantage. Rather than 
treating differences in other countries as a challenge to overcome, a global organiza-
tion treats different cultures as equals. It may have multiple headquarters spread across 
the globe, so decisions are more decentralized. This type of organization needs HRM 
practices that encourage fl exibility and are based on an in-depth knowledge of differ-
ences among countries. Global organizations must be able to recruit, develop, retain, 
and use managers who can get results across national boundaries.
A global organization needs a transnational HRM system5 that features decision 
making from a global perspective, managers from many countries, and ideas contrib-
uted by people from a variety of cultures. Decisions that are the outcome of a transna-
tional HRM system balance uniformity (for fairness) with fl exibility (to account for 
cultural and legal differences). This balance and the variety of perspectives should 
work together to improve the quality of decision making. The participants from vari-
ous countries and cultures contribute ideas from a position of equality, rather than the 
parent country’s culture dominating.
Factors Affecting HRM in International Markets
Whatever their level of global participation, organizations that operate in more than 
one country must recognize that the countries are not identical and differ in terms of 
many factors. To simplify this discussion, we focus on four major factors:
 • Culture
 • Education
 • Economic systems
 • Political-legal systems
Culture
By far the most important infl uence on international HRM is the culture of the coun-
try in which a facility is located. Culture is a community’s set of shared assumptions 
International 
Organization
An organization that sets 
up one or a few facilities 
in one or a few foreign 
countries.
Multinational Company
An organization that 
builds facilities in a num-
ber of different countries 
in an effort to minimize 
production and distribu-
tion costs.
Global Organization
An organization that 
chooses to locate a facil-
ity based on the ability 
to effectively, efﬁ ciently, 
and ﬂ exibly produce a 
product or service, using 
cultural differences as 
an advantage.
Transnational HRM 
System
Type of HRM system that 
makes decisions from 
a global perspective, 
includes managers from 
many countries, and is 
based on ideas contrib-
uted by people represent-
ing a variety of cultures.
LO 16-2 Identify the 
factors that most 
strongly inﬂ uence HRM 
in international markets.

500 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
about how the world works and what ideals are worth striving 
for.6 Cultural infl uences may be expressed through customs, 
languages, religions, and so on.
Culture is important to HRM for two reasons. First, it often 
determines the other three international infl uences. Culture 
can greatly affect a country’s laws because laws often are based 
on the culture’s defi nitions of right and wrong. Culture also 
infl uences what people value, so it affects people’s economic 
systems and efforts to invest in education.
Even more important for understanding human resource 
management, culture often determines the effectiveness of vari-
ous HRM practices. Practices that are effective in the United 
States, for example, may fail or even backfi re in a country with 
different beliefs and values.7 Consider the fi ve dimensions of cul-
ture that Geert Hofstede identifi ed in his classic study of culture8:
 1. Individualism/collectivism describes the strength of the rela-
tion between an individual and other individuals in the society. 
In cultures that are high in individualism, such as the United 
States, Great Britain, and the Netherlands, people tend to 
think and act as individuals rather than as members of a group. 
People in these countries are expected to stand on their own 
two feet, rather than be protected by the group. In cultures 
that are high in collectivism, such as Colombia, Pakistan, and 
Taiwan, people think of themselves mainly as group members. 
They are expected to devote themselves to the interests of the community, and the 
community is expected to protect them when they are in trouble.
 2. Power distance concerns the way the culture deals with unequal distribution of 
power and defi nes the amount of inequality that is normal. In countries with 
large power distances, including India and the Philippines, the culture defi nes it 
as  normal to maintain large differences in power. In countries with small power 
 distances, such as Denmark and Israel, people try to eliminate inequalities. One 
way to see differences in power distance is in the way people talk to one another. 
In the high-power-distance countries of Mexico and Japan, people address one 
another with titles (Señor Smith, Smith-san). At the other extreme, in the United 
States, in most situations people use one another’s fi rst names— behavior that 
would be disrespectful in other cultures.
 3.  Uncertainty avoidance describes how cultures handle the fact that the future is un-
predictable. High uncertainty avoidance refers to a strong cultural preference for 
structured situations. In countries such as Greece and Portugal, people tend to 
rely heavily on religion, law, and technology to give them a degree of security 
and clear rules about how to behave. In countries with low uncertainty avoidance, 
including Singapore and Jamaica, people seem to take each day as it comes.
 4.  Masculinity/femininity is the emphasis a culture places on practices or qualities that 
have traditionally been considered masculine or feminine. A “masculine” culture 
is a culture that values achievement, money making, assertiveness, and competi-
tion. A “feminine” culture is one that places a high value on relationships, service, 
care for the weak, and preserving the environment. In this model, Germany and 
Japan are examples of masculine cultures, and Sweden and Norway are examples 
of feminine cultures.
In Taiwan, a country that is high in collectivism, 
co-workers consider themselves more as group 
members instead of individuals.

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 501
 5. Long-term/short-term orientation suggests whether the focus of cultural values is on 
the future (long term) or the past and present (short term). Cultures with a long-
term orientation value saving and persistence, which tend to pay off in the future. 
Many Asian countries, including Japan and China, have a long-term orientation. 
Short-term orientations, as in the cultures of the United States, Russia, and West 
Africa, promote respect for past tradition and for fulfi lling social obligations in the 
present.
Such cultural characteristics as these infl uence the ways members of an organi-
zation behave toward one another, as well as their attitudes toward various HRM 
practices. For instance, cultures differ strongly in their opinions about how manag-
ers should lead, how decisions should be handled, and what motivates employees. 
In  Germany, managers achieve their status by demonstrating technical skills, and 
employees look to managers to assign tasks and resolve technical problems. In the 
Netherlands, managers focus on seeking agreement, exchanging views, and balanc-
ing the interests of the people affected by a decision.9 Clearly, differences like these 
would affect how an organization selects and trains its managers and measures their 
performance.
Cultures strongly infl uence the appropriateness of HRM practices. For example, 
the extent to which a culture is individualist or collectivist will affect the success of a 
compensation program. Compensation tied to individual performance may be seen as 
fairer and more motivating by members of an individualist culture; a culture favoring 
individualism will be more accepting of great differences in pay between the organi-
zation’s highest- and lowest-paid employees. Collectivist cultures tend to have much 
fl atter pay structures.
The success of HRM decisions related to job design, benefi ts, performance manage-
ment, and other systems related to employee motivation also will be shaped by culture. 
In an interesting study comparing call center workers in India (a collectivist culture) and 
the United States (an individualistic culture), researchers found that in the United States, 
employee turnover depended more on person–job fi t than on  person–organization fi t. 
In the United States, employees were less likely to quit if they felt that they had the right 
skills, resources, and personality to succeed on the job. In India, what mattered more was 
for employees to feel they fi t in well with the organization and were well connected to 
the organization and the community.10 In some organizations, managers stumble on 
the way to learning how to apply HRM decisions in another culture. For examples, see 
the “HR Oops!” box.
Finally, cultural differences can affect how people communicate and how they co-
ordinate their activities. In collectivist cultures, people tend to value group decision 
making, as in the previous example. When a person raised in an individualistic culture 
must work closely with people from a collectivist culture, communication problems 
and confl icts often occur. People from the collectivist culture tend to collaborate heav-
ily and may evaluate the individualistic person as unwilling to cooperate and share in-
formation with them. Cultural differences in communication affected the way a North 
American agricultural company embarked on employee empowerment at its facilities 
in the United States and Brazil.11 Empowerment requires information sharing, but in 
Brazil, high power distance leads employees to expect managers to make decisions, so 
they do not desire information that is appropriately held by managers. Empowering 
the Brazilian employees required involving managers directly in giving and sharing 
information to show that this practice was in keeping with the traditional chain of 
command. Also, because uncertainty avoidance is another aspect of Brazilian culture, 

502
managers explained that greater information sharing would reduce uncertainty about 
their work. At the same time, greater collectivism in Brazil made employees comfort-
able with the day-to-day communication of teamwork. The individualistic U.S. em-
ployees needed to be sold more on this aspect of empowerment.
Because of these challenges, organizations must prepare managers to recognize 
and handle cultural differences. They may recruit managers with knowledge of other 
cultures or provide training, as described later in the chapter. For expatriate assign-
ments, organizations may need to conduct an extensive selection process to identify 
individuals who can adapt to new environments. At the same time, it is important to 
be wary of stereotypes and avoid exaggerating the importance of cultural differences. 
Recent research that examined Hofstede’s model of cultural differences found that dif-
ferences among organizations within a particular culture were sometimes larger than 
differences from country to country.12 This fi nding suggests that it is important for an 
organization to match its HR practices to its values; individuals who share those values 
are likely to be interested in working for the organization. When Sony  Corporation 
wanted to reinvigorate innovation, it shifted away from Japan’s traditional hiring 
practices for entry-level positions. Instead of administering formulaic interviews to a 
stream of college students attired in suits and prepared with rehearsed answers, Sony 
announced that it was looking for individuality and had set up a selection process that 
included more natural conversations in discussion groups.13
HR Oops!
Cross-Cultural Management Mishaps
When Andrew Pickup left his home 
country of the United Kingdom to 
take a management position in Sing -
apore, he did not expect to have to 
adjust his style of gathering perfor-
mance information. As Pickup ana-
lyzed the situation, he was traveling 
to a former British colony, where 
people spoke English and had 
grown used to British ways of doing 
business. He assumed his direct 
style of getting and sharing informa-
tion would work well. Instead, when 
he invited feedback, employees 
were startled and were quiet. In Sin-
gapore, people consider it polite to 
be subtle. Pickup learned to take his 
time and develop relationships, and 
eventually he was better able to get 
the information he needed.
Debbie Nicol, an Australian, has 
a job that involves training others. 
When she arrived in Dubai for a six-
year assignment, she experienced 
an embarrassment in the middle of a 
training session. One of the attend-
ees suddenly stood up and headed 
for the door, and she felt she had 
failed to hold his interest in the sub-
ject. She asked why he was leaving. 
He said he was going to pray. After 
that, Nicol learned to build prayer 
breaks into training schedules at the 
appropriate times of the day.
Pickup and Nicol quickly learned 
from their experiences. Manag-
ers and employees can succeed in 
cross-cultural situations if they are 
fl exible. Like Nicol, they may change 
their practices to suit an important 
cultural norm. Or like Pickup, they 
may persevere in demonstrating 
their own practices when these 
are most benefi cial. Either way, it 
is important to behave respectfully 
and with an effort at genuine un-
derstanding. Success also is more 
likely for a person who is aware of 
and honest about his or her own 
cultural norms and values.
Questions
 1. Based on the information 
given, how respectfully and 
effectively did Andrew Pickup 
handle his mistake in seeking 
feedback?
 2. How respectfully and 
effectively did Debbie Nicol 
handle her mistake in the 
training schedule?
Sources: Culture Crossing, “Singapore: 
Culture, Customs and Etiquette,” http://
www.culturecrossing.net, accessed 
July 28, 2014; Andrea Murad, “Expat 
Angst: Four Expats Reveal Cultural 
Surprises,” BBC, September 4, 2013, 
http://www.bbc.com; Paula Caligiuri, 
“Develop Your Cultural Agility,” T+D, 
March 2013, pp. 70–72.

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 503
Education and Skill Levels
Countries also differ in the degree to which their labor markets include people with 
education and skills of value to employers. As discussed in Chapter 1, the United States 
suffers from a shortage of skilled workers in many occupations, and the problem is ex-
pected to increase. For example, the need for knowledge workers (engineers, teachers, 
scientists, health care workers) is expected to grow almost twice as fast as the overall 
rate of job growth in the United States.14 On the other hand, the labor markets in 
many countries are very attractive because they offer high skills and low wages.
Educational opportunities also vary from one country to another. In general, spend-
ing on education is greater per pupil in high-income countries than in poorer coun-
tries.15 Poverty, diseases such as AIDS, and political turmoil keep children away from 
school in some areas. A concerted international effort to provide universal access to 
primary education has dramatically reduced the number and proportion of children 
without access to schooling. However, progress stalled during the global recesssion, 
and the problem persists in sub-Saharan Africa.16
Companies with foreign operations locate in countries where they can fi nd suitable 
employees. The education and skill levels of a country’s labor force affect how and the 
extent to which companies want to operate there. In countries with a poorly educated 
population, companies will limit their activities to low-skill, low-wage jobs. In contrast, 
India’s large pool of well-trained technical workers is one reason that the country has 
become a popular location for outsourcing computer programming jobs.
Economic System
A country’s economic system, whether capitalist or 
socialist, as well as the government’s involvement in 
the economy through taxes or compensation, price 
controls, and other activities, infl uences human re-
source management practices in a number of ways.
As with all aspects of a region’s or country’s life, 
the economic system and culture are likely to be 
closely tied, providing many of the incentives or 
disincentives for developing the value of the labor 
force. Socialist economic systems provide ample 
opportunities for educational development be-
cause the education system is free to students. At 
the same time, socialism may not provide economic 
rewards (higher pay) for increasing one’s education. 
In capitalist systems, students bear more of the cost 
of their education, but employers reward those who 
invest in education.
The health of an economic system affects human 
resource management. In developed countries with 
great wealth, labor costs are relatively high. Such 
differences show up in compensation systems and 
in recruiting and selection decisions.
In general, socialist systems take a higher percent-
age of each worker’s income as the worker’s income 
increases. Capitalist systems tend to let workers 
keep more of their earnings. In this way, socialism 
Students at the University of Warsaw in Poland are provided with a 
 government-supported education. In general, former Soviet bloc countries 
tend to be generous in funding education, so they tend to have highly 
educated and skilled labor forces. Capitalist countries such as the United 
States generally leave higher education up to individual students to pay 
for, but the labor market rewards students who earn a college degree.

504 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
redistributes wealth from high earners to the poor, while capitalism apparently rewards 
individual accomplishments. In any case, since the amount of take-home pay a worker 
receives after taxes may thus differ from country to country, in an organization that pays 
two managers in two countries $100,000 each, the manager in one country might take 
home more than the manager in the other country. Such differences make pay structures 
more complicated when they cross national boundaries, and they can affect recruiting of 
candidates from more than one country.
Political-Legal System
A country’s political-legal system—its  government, laws, and regulations—strongly im-
pinges on human resource management. The country’s laws often dictate the require-
ments for certain HRM practices, such as training, compensation, hiring, fi ring, and 
layoffs. As we noted in the discussion of culture, the political-legal system arises to a large 
degree from the culture in which it exists, so laws and regulations refl ect cultural values.
For example, the United States has led the world in eliminating discrimination in 
the workplace. Because this value is important in U.S. culture, the nation has legal 
safeguards such as the equal employment opportunity laws discussed in Chapter 3, 
which affect hiring and other HRM decisions. As a society, the United States also has 
strong beliefs regarding the fairness of pay systems. Thus, the Fair Labor Standards 
Act (discussed in Chapter 12), among other laws and regulations, sets a minimum wage 
for a variety of jobs. Other laws and regulations dictate much of the process of negotia-
tion between unions and management. All these are examples of laws and regulations 
that affect the practice of HRM in the United States.
Similarly, laws and regulations in other countries refl ect the norms of their cultures. 
In Western Europe, where many countries have had strong socialist parties, some laws 
have been aimed at protecting the rights and benefi ts of workers. The European Union 
has agreed that employers in member nations must respect certain rights of workers, 
including workplace health and safety; equal opportunities for men and women; pro-
tection against discrimination based on sex, race, religion, age, disability, and sexual 
orientation; and labor laws that set standards for work hours and other conditions of 
work. In Canada, the province of Quebec has an action plan for promoting gender 
equality. Montreal’s McGill University has participated by reviewing its pay structure 
to ensure that pay for female-dominated occupations does not fall short of pay for 
equally important occupations dominated by men. The process required extensive job 
analysis and pay raises for some occupations.17
An organization that expands internationally must gain expertise in the host country’s 
legal requirements and ways of dealing with its legal system, often leading organizations 
to hire one or more host-country nationals to help in the process. Some countries have 
laws requiring that a certain percentage of the employees of any foreign-owned sub-
sidiary be host-country nationals, and in the context of our discussion here, this legal 
challenge to an organization’s HRM may hold an advantage if handled creatively.
Human Resource Planning in a Global Economy
As economic and technological change creates a global environment for organizations, 
human resource planning is involved in decisions about participating as an exporter 
or as an international, multinational, or global company. Even purely domestic com-
panies may draw talent from the international labor market. As organizations consider 
decisions about their level of international activity, HR professionals should provide 
information about the relevant human resource issues, such as local market pay rates 
LO 16-3 Discuss how 
differences among coun-
tries affect HR planning 
at organizations with 
international operations.

505
and labor laws. When organizations decide to operate internationally or globally, 
human resource planning involves decisions about where and how many employees 
are needed for each international facility. For guidelines on how to conduct this plan-
ning strategically, see “HR How To.”
Decisions about where to locate include HR considerations such as the cost and avail-
ability of qualifi ed workers. In addition, HR specialists must work with other members of 
the organization to weigh these considerations against fi nancial and operational require-
ments. As discussed earlier, India and China have been popular locations because of low 
labor costs. But as the job creation has driven up living standards and demand for labor, it 
has driven up the price of labor in those countries. Cost-oriented call centers are looking 
to locations such as the Philippines and Eastern Europe. In response, Indian contractors 
have started up companies that offer more specialized skills, such as engineering, bio-
technology, and computer animation. In China, where pay for factory workers has risen 
considerably, the reasons for operating there today have less to do with pay and more to 
do with the country’s vast number of consumers and network of now-skilled suppliers.18
Other location decisions involve outsourcing, described in Chapter 2. Many com-
panies have boosted effi ciency by arranging to have specifi c functions performed by 
outside contractors. Many—but not all—of these arrangements involve workers out-
side the United States in lower-wage countries.
When organizations are making de-
cisions about where and how to op-
erate, HR professionals should help 
to ensure that decisions about hir-
ing, training, rewarding, and so on 
are aligned with their organization’s 
strategy. Here are some ideas for 
managing global human resources:
• Develop a “global mind-set.” 
Learn about the global business 
environment, including the legal, 
economic, and cultural issues 
affecting the various locations 
where the organization operates 
or may decide to operate. Prac-
tice empathy and diplomacy, 
and think of differences as 
something interesting to explore.
• Build an HR department that 
refl ects the organization’s global 
diversity. Ensure that the people 
in HR represent the people in 
the organization.
• Build a network of relation-
ships with co-workers in other 
locations. Use the resources 
available, such as the corporate 
intranet, company meetings, 
and if possible, travel to other 
facilities.
• Learn what the HR best prac-
tices are in other countries. 
Instead of assuming that HR 
practices used in headquarters 
will work as well in all loca-
tions, weigh the pros and cons 
of different approaches in each 
context.
• Be sure training and develop-
ment programs address talent 
needs globally. Identify and de-
velop high-potential employees 
in all the locations where the 
organization operates. Review 
training materials to fi nd and 
correct cultural assumptions 
that may not apply to all trainees 
or situations.
• Use company databases to cre-
ate, analyze, and make available 
information about employees’ 
skills, including international ex-
perience and languages spoken, 
so the best individuals can be 
tapped as positions open up.
Questions
 1. Do you think you already 
have a global mind-set, as 
described in the fi rst bullet 
point? Why or why not?
 2. How might a global mind-set 
help an HR manager follow the 
other guidelines listed?
Sources: David Gartside and Colin 
 Sloman, “Adapting to a Workforce without 
 Borders,” T+D, April 2014, pp. 37–40; 
 Fernando Sanchez-Arias, Hannelore 
 Calmeyn, Ger Driesen, and Evert Pruis, 
“Human Capital Realities Pose Challenges 
across the Globe,” T+D, February 2013, 
pp. 32–35; Mansour Javidan, Jennie L. 
Walker, and Amanda Bullough, “Behind 
the Global Curve,” People & Strategy 36, 
no. 3 (2013): 42–47.
Supporting a Multinational Strategy
HR How To

506 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
In Chapter 5, we saw that human resource planning includes decisions to hire and 
lay off workers to prepare for the organization’s expected needs. Compared with other 
countries, the United States allows employers wide latitude in reducing their workforce, 
giving U.S. employers the option of hiring for peak needs, then laying off employees 
if needs decline. Other governments place more emphasis on protecting workers’ jobs. 
European countries, and France in particular, tend to be very strict in this regard.
Selecting Employees in a Global Labor Market
Many companies such as Microsoft have headquarters in the United States plus facili-
ties in locations around the world. To be effective, employees in the Microsoft Mexico 
operations in Mexico City must understand that region’s business and social culture. 
Organizations often meet this need by hiring host-country nationals to fi ll most of 
their foreign positions. A key reason is that a host-country national can more easily 
understand the values and customs of the local workforce than someone from another 
part of the world can. Also, training for and transporting families to foreign assign-
ments is more expensive than hiring people in the foreign country. Employees may 
be reluctant to take a foreign assignment because of the diffi culty of moving overseas. 
Sometimes the move requires the employee’s spouse to quit a job, and some countries 
will not allow the employee’s spouse to seek work, even if jobs might be available.
Even so, organizations fi ll many key foreign positions with parent-country or third-
country nationals. Sometimes a person’s technical and human relations skills outweigh 
the advantages of hiring locally. In other situations, the local labor market simply does 
not offer enough qualifi ed people. For example, seafood processors and farmers in Ala-
bama have reported diffi culty in fi nding people willing to do demanding physical labor 
for long hours to gut catfi sh and pick tomatoes. Whether the problem is that Americans 
aren’t willing to work that hard or that they expect higher pay and generous benefi ts in 
exchange for their efforts, these employers have for years turned to immigrant labor to 
fi ll the positions.19 In recent years, immigrant workers in the United States have been 
most common in jobs where the demand for labor is highest—
in the nation’s fastest-growing occupations, both those at the 
low end of the pay scale, such as agriculture and food services, 
and in jobs requiring a technical education, such as high-tech 
manufacturing and information technology.20 The ability to 
tap this labor supply is limited by government paperwork and 
delays. An international survey of HR professionals found that 
the United States ranked among the most challenging destina-
tions for expatriate assignments, and respondents most often 
blamed the legal requirements for immigration.21 In addition, 
as described in Chapter 6, U.S. employers must take care to hire 
employees who are eligible to work in the United States. 
Whether the organization is hiring immigrants or selecting 
parent-country or third-country nationals for foreign assign-
ments, some basic principles of selection apply. Selection of 
employees for foreign assignments should refl ect criteria that 
have been associated with success in working overseas:
 • Competency in the employee’s area of expertise.
 •  Ability to communicate verbally and nonverbally in the 
 foreign country.
LO 16-4 Describe how 
companies select and 
train human resources in 
a global labor market.
Qualities associated with success in foreign assign-
ments are the ability to communicate in the foreign 
country, fl exibility, enjoying a challenging situation, and 
support from family members. What would persuade 
you to take a foreign assignment?

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 507
 • Flexibility, tolerance of ambiguity, and sensitivity to cultural differences.
 • Motivation to succeed and enjoyment of challenges.
 • Willingness to learn about the foreign country’s culture, language, and customs.
 • Support from family members.22
In research conducted a number of years ago, the factor most strongly infl uencing 
whether an employee completed a foreign assignment was the comfort of the em-
ployee’s spouse and family.23 Personality may also be important. Research has found 
successful completion of overseas assignments to be most likely among employees 
who are extroverted (outgoing), agreeable (cooperative and tolerant), and conscien-
tious (dependable and achievement oriented).24
Qualities of fl exibility, motivation, agreeableness, and conscientiousness are so impor-
tant because of the challenges involved in entering another culture. The emotions that 
accompany an overseas assignment tend to follow stages like those in  Figure 16.2.25 For 
a month or so after arriving, the foreign worker enjoys a “honeymoon” of fascination and 
euphoria as the employee enjoys the novelty of the new culture and compares its inter-
esting similarities to or differences from the employee’s own culture. Before long, the 
employee’s mood declines as he or she notices more unpleasant differences and experi-
ences feelings of isolation, criticism, stereotyping, and even hostility. As the mood reaches 
bottom, the employee is experiencing culture shock, the disillusionment and discom-
fort that occur during the process of adjusting to a new culture and its norms, values, and 
perspectives. Eventually, if employees persist and continue learning about their host 
country’s culture, they begin to recover from culture shock as they develop a greater 
understanding and a support network. As the employee’s language skills and comfort 
increase, the employee’s mood should improve as well. Eventually, the employee reaches 
a stage of adjustment in which he or she accepts and enjoys the host country’s culture.
Training and Developing a Global Workforce
In an organization whose employees come from more than one country, some special 
challenges arise with regard to training and development: (1) Training and development 
programs should be effective for all participating employees, regardless of their country of 
origin; and (2) When organizations hire employees to work in a foreign country or trans-
fer them to another country, the employer needs to provide the employees with training 
in how to handle the challenges associated with working in the foreign country.
Training Programs for an International Workforce
Developers of effective training programs for an international workforce must ask cer-
tain questions.26 The fi rst is to establish the objectives for the training and its content. 
Decisions about the training should support those objectives. The developers should 
next ask what training techniques, strategies, and media to use. Some will be more 
Culture Shock
Disillusionment and 
discomfort that occur 
during the process of ad-
justing to a new culture.
Figure 16.2
Emotional Stages 
 Associated with a 
 Foreign Assignment
Sources: Deborah de Cerff, “Returning from an Overseas Assignment? There’s No Place Like Home,” HC Online, 
October 28, 2013, http://www.hcmag.com; Delia Flanja, “Culture Shock in Intercultural Communication,” Studia 
Europaea (October 2009), Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.

508 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
effective than others, depending on the learners’ language and culture, as well as the 
content of the training. For example, in preparation U.S. employees might expect to 
discuss and ask questions about the training content, whereas employees from other 
cultures might consider this level of participation to be disrespectful, so for them some 
additional support might be called for. Language differences will require translations 
and perhaps a translator at training activities. Next, the developers should identify 
any other interventions and conditions that must be in place for the training to meet 
its objectives. For example, training is more likely to meet its objectives if it is linked 
to performance management and has the full support of management. Finally, the 
developers of a training program should identify who in the organization should be 
involved in reviewing and approving the training program.
The plan for the training program must consider international differences among 
trainees. For example, economic and educational differences might infl uence employees’ 
access to and ability to use web-based training. Cultural differences may infl uence whether 
they will consider it appropriate to ask questions and whether they expect the trainer to 
spend time becoming acquainted with employees or to get down to business immediately. 
Table 16.1 provides examples of how cultural characteristics can affect training design.
Cross-Cultural Preparation
When an organization selects an employee for a position in a foreign country, it must 
prepare the employee for the foreign assignment. This kind of training is called 
 cross-cultural preparation, preparing employees to work across national and 
 cultural boundaries, and it often includes family members who will accompany the 
employee on the assignment. The training is necessary for all three phases of an inter-
national assignment:
 1. Preparation for departure—language instruction and an orientation to the foreign 
country’s culture.
 2. The assignment itself—some combination of a formal program and mentoring rela-
tionship to provide ongoing further information about the foreign country’s culture.
Cross-Cultural 
Preparation
Training to prepare 
employees and their 
family members for an 
assignment in a foreign 
country.
CULTURAL DIMENSION
IMPACT ON TRAINING
Individualism
Culture high in individualism expects participation in 
exercises and questioning to be determined by status 
in the company or culture.
Uncertainty avoidance
Culture high in uncertainty avoidance expects formal 
instructional environments. There is less tolerance for 
impromptu style.
Masculinity
Culture low in masculinity values relationships with 
fellow trainees. Female trainers are less likely to be 
resisted in low-masculinity cultures.
Power distance
Culture high in power distance expects trainers to be 
experts. Trainers are expected to be authoritarian and 
controlling of session.
Time orientation
Culture with a long-term orientation will have 
trainees who are likely to accept development 
plans and assignments.
Source: Based on B. Filipczak, “Think Locally, Act Globally,” Training, January 1997, pp. 41–48.
Table 16.1
Effects of Culture on 
Training Design

509
 3. Preparation for the return home—providing information about the employee’s 
community and home-country workplace (from company newsletters, local news-
papers, and so on).
For an example of an organization that takes this broad approach to preparation, see 
“Best Practices.”
Methods for providing this training may range from lectures for employees and 
their families to visits to culturally diverse communities.27 Employees and their fami-
lies may also spend time visiting a local family from the country where they will be 
working. In the later section on managing expatriates, we provide more detail about 
cross-cultural preparation.
Despite the importance of preparation, the 2014 Global Mobility Trends Survey 
found that only 39% of companies offer it for all expatriate assignments. Another 45% 
offer training for some assignments, based on considerations such as the challenges of 
the host location, the employee’s familiarity with the location, and the type of assign-
ment.28 However, most of the companies offered repatriation discussions for returning 
With branches in 70 countries and 
nine-tenths of its income coming 
from Africa, Asia, and the Middle 
East, London-based Standard Char-
tered Bank often uses expatriates. 
When it needs someone to start 
up a new line of business or fi ll an 
opening on a project, the bank eval-
uates the existing skills throughout 
the organization. It has a workforce 
of 86,000 people of more than 130 
nationalities, so Standard Chartered 
often can fi ll a need through internal 
recruitment.
At this point, the bank’s staff 
responsible for talent acquisition, 
international mobility (relocation), 
and training and development work 
together closely. If the best candi-
date will have to relocate to another 
country, the international mobility 
team goes to work on estimating 
costs, and the training and develop-
ment team begins to identify needs.
For any international assignment, 
Standard Chartered plans for em-
ployee development and leadership 
skills, regardless of the employee’s 
level in the organization. Throughout 
the assignment, the expatriate em-
ployee stays connected with the 
bank’s international talent deploy-
ment and talent acquisition group at 
a single location. Standard Chartered 
evaluates and coaches expatriates 
not only in whether they are adjust-
ing to the new culture but also in how 
well expatriate managers are devel-
oping local talent to fi ll future roles. 
HR staffers participate in discus-
sions about how each assignment 
will contribute to possible career 
paths for the expatriate. These dis-
cussions are particularly important 
in the last months of an assignment, 
so that returning employees see they 
are valued and are more likely to stay 
with Standard Chartered.
In India, the focus on training 
and development has been valuable 
as a way for Standard Chartered 
to compete in a tough labor mar-
ket. Growth in the Indian economy 
has made retention of talented em-
ployees more diffi cult. The chance 
to take on interesting and impor-
tant international assignments has 
been attractive to India’s educated 
workers. Ensuring that these em-
ployees are well supported and de-
veloped means they can succeed 
at meeting the challenges of those 
assignments and thus build a career 
with the bank.
Questions
 1. How might careful preparation 
for departure help Standard 
Chartered develop and retain 
talented employees?
 2. How might thorough planning 
for the return home help 
Standard Chartered retain 
talent?
Sources: Standard Chartered Bank, 
“About Us,” https://www.sc.com, 
accessed July 28, 2014; Charlene 
Solomon, “The Passport to Better 
Expatriate Experiences,” Chief Learn-
ing Ofﬁ cer, March 2014, pp. 26, 28, 
32; Anita Bhoir, “Banks Like Standard 
Chartered, JP Morgan and Others 
Offering Foreign Postings to Retain 
Staff,” The Economic Times, March 25, 
2013, http://articles.economictimes.
indiatimes.com.
Standard Chartered Bank Invests in Its Expatriates
Best Practices

510 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
employees. It is important for employers to remember that returning home is also a 
challenge when employees have been away for months or years. Returning employees 
often fi nd that life at home seems boring, relative to the excitement of learning a new 
culture, and family members and colleagues at home may fi nd it hard to relate to their 
recent experiences. Employers should be ready for employees who want to share what 
they learned and put their recently acquired skills to work in new assignments.29
Global Employee Development
At global organizations, international assignments are a part of many career paths. 
The organization benefi ts most if it applies the principles of employee development in 
deciding which employees should be offered jobs in other countries. Career develop-
ment helps expatriate and inpatriate employees make the transitions to and from their 
assignments and helps the organization apply the knowledge the employees obtain 
from these assignments.
Performance Management across 
National Boundaries
The general principles of performance management may apply in most countries, but 
the specifi c methods that work in one country may fail in another. Therefore, orga-
nizations have to consider legal requirements, local business practices, and national 
cultures when they establish performance management methods in other countries. 
Differences may include which behaviors are rated, how and the extent to which per-
formance is measured, who performs the rating, and how feedback is provided.30
For example, National Rental Car uses a behaviorally based rating scale for customer 
service representatives. To measure the extent to which customer service representatives’ 
behaviors contribute to the company’s goal of improving customer service, the scale 
measures behaviors such as smiling, making eye contact, greeting customers, and solving 
customer problems. Depending on the country, different behaviors may be appropriate. 
In Japan, culturally defi ned standards for polite behavior include the angle of bowing as 
well as proper back alignment and eye contact. In Ghana and many other African na-
tions, appropriate measures would include behaviors that refl ect loyalty and repaying of 
obligations as well as behaviors related to following regulations and procedures.
The extent to which managers measure performance may also vary from one coun-
try to another. In rapidly changing regions, such as Southeast Asia, the organization 
may have to update its performance plans more often than once a year.
Feedback is another area in which differences can occur. Employees around the world 
appreciate positive feedback, but U.S. employees are much more used to direct feedback 
than are employees in other countries. In Mexico managers are expected to provide 
positive feedback before focusing the discussion on behaviors the employee needs to 
improve.31 At the Thai offi ce of Singapore Airlines, managers resisted giving negative 
feedback to employees because they feared this would cause them to have bad karma, 
contributing to their reincarnation at a lower level in their next life.32 The airlines there-
fore allowed the managers to adapt their feedback process to fi t local cultures.
Compensating an International Workforce
The chapters in Part 4 explained that compensation includes decisions about pay structure, 
incentive pay, and employee benefi ts. All these decisions become more complex when an 
organization has an international workforce. Johnson & Johnson meets the challenge by 
LO 16-5 Discuss 
 challenges related to 
managing performance 
and compensating 
employees from other 
countries.

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 511
creating a global compensation strategy for its 250 pharmaceutical, consumer, and medical-
device businesses with employees in 70 countries. J&J developed the strategy at its U.S. 
headquarters because compensation expertise at the company varied from one region to 
another. However, it had representatives from each region serve on the project teams so the 
company would be familiar with local issues, such as the need for frequent salary reviews in 
Venezuela and Argentina, where high infl ation rates take a toll on buying power.33
Pay Structure
As Figure 16.3 shows, market pay structures can differ substantially across countries in 
terms of both pay level and the relative worth of jobs. For example, compared with the 
labor market in Germany, the market in Mexico provides much lower pay levels overall. 
In Germany, the pay differences between jobs are less dramatic than in South Korea; 
for example, the relative pay of teachers is much higher in South Korea. One reason 
for big pay differences in some countries is a shortage of talent in local labor markets. 
In Brazil, for example, companies have trouble fi nding enough managers with technical 
expertise, because big construction projects and oil drilling are driving heavy demand 
for those positions. In addition, the fast-growing Brazilian economy has drawn many 
multinationals to locate facilities in Brazil, further increasing the demand for managers 
there. Finally, Brazilian managers tend to be loyal employees, so recruiters need to offer 
especially tempting compensation packages to lure them away.34
Figure 16.3
Earnings in Selected Occupations in Three Countries
60
70
80
Thousands of Dollars
per Year
50
40
30
20
10
0
Germany
South Korea
Mexico
Bus driver
Kindergarten teacher
Electronic equipment assembler
Plumber
Source: Wage and hour data from International Labour Organization, LABORSTA Internet, http://laborsta.ilo.org, accessed July, 28, 2014.

512 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
Differences such as these create a dilemma for global companies: Should pay levels 
and differences refl ect what workers are used to in their own countries? Or should they 
refl ect the earnings of colleagues in the country of the facility, or earnings at the com-
pany headquarters? For example, should a German engineer posted to Mumbai be paid 
according to the standard in Frankfurt or the standard in Mumbai? If the standard is 
Frankfurt, the engineers in Mumbai will likely see the German engineer’s pay as unfair. 
If the standard is Mumbai, the company will likely fi nd it impossible to persuade a Ger-
man engineer to take an assignment in Mumbai. Dilemmas such as these make a global 
compensation strategy important as a way to show employees that the pay structure is 
designed to be fair and related to the value that employees bring to the organization.
These decisions affect a company’s costs and ability to compete. The average hourly 
labor costs in industrialized countries such as the United States, Germany, and Japan 
are far higher than these costs in newly industrialized countries such as Mexico, Brazil, 
and the Philippines.35 As a result, we often hear that U.S. labor costs are too high to 
allow U.S. companies to compete effectively unless the companies shift operations to 
low-cost foreign subsidiaries. That conclusion oversimplifi es the situation for many 
companies. Merely comparing wages ignores differences in education, skills, and pro-
ductivity.36 If an organization gets more or higher-quality output from a higher-wage 
workforce, the higher wages may be worth the cost. Besides this, if the organization 
has many positions requiring highly skilled workers, it may need to operate in (or hire 
immigrants from) a country with a strong educational system, regardless of labor costs. 
Finally, labor costs may be outweighed by other factors, such as transportation costs 
or access to resources or customers. When a production process is highly automated, 
differences in labor costs may not be signifi cant.
Cultural and legal differences also can affect pay structure. Some countries, includ-
ing Colombia, Greece, and Malaysia, require that companies provide salary increases 
to employees earning minimum wage. In Venezuela, employers must provide employ-
ees with a meal allowance. In Mexico and Puerto Rico, employers must pay holiday 
bonuses. Organizations with a global pay strategy must adjust the strategy to account 
for local requirements and determine how pay decisions for optional practices will af-
fect their competitive standing in local labor markets.37
Incentive Pay
Besides setting a pay structure, the organization must make decisions with regard to 
incentive pay, such as bonuses and stock options. Although stock options became a 
common form of incentive pay in the United States during the 1990s, European busi-
nesses did not begin to embrace this type of compensation until the end of that decade.
However, the United States and Europe differ in the way they award stock options. 
European companies usually link the options to specifi c performance goals, such as the 
increase in a company’s share price compared with that of its competitors.
Employee Benefits
As in the United States, compensation packages in other countries include benefi ts. 
Decisions about benefi ts must take into account the laws of each country involved, as 
well as employees’ expectations and values in those countries. Some countries require 
paid maternity leave, and some countries have nationalized health care systems, which 
would affect the value of private health insurance in a compensation package. Pension 
plans are more widespread in parts of Western Europe than in the United States and 

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 513
Japan. Over 90% of workers in Switzerland have pension plans, as do all workers in 
France. Among workers with pension plans, U.S. workers are signifi cantly less likely to 
have defi ned benefi t plans than workers in Japan or Germany.
Paid vacation, discussed in Chapter 14, tends to be more generous in Western Eu-
rope than in the United States. Figure 16.4 compares the number of hours the average 
employee works in various countries. Of these countries, only in Mexico, South Korea,  
and Chile do workers put in more hours than U.S. workers. In the other countries, the 
norm is to work fewer hours than a U.S. worker over the course of a year.
International Labor Relations
Companies that operate across national boundaries often need to work with unions in 
more than one country. Organizations establish policies and goals for labor relations, 
for overseeing labor agreements, and for monitoring labor performance (for example, 
output and productivity).38 The day-to-day decisions about labor relations are usually 
handled by each foreign subsidiary. The reason is that labor relations on an interna-
tional scale involve differences in laws, attitudes, and economic systems, as well as dif-
ferences in negotiation styles.
At least in comparison with European organizations, U.S. organizations exert more 
centralized control over labor relations in the various countries where they operate.39
U.S. management therefore must recognize differences in how various countries un-
derstand and regulate labor relations. For example, in the United States, collective 
bargaining usually involves negotiations between a union local and an organization’s 
management, but in Sweden and Germany, collective bargaining generally involves 
negotiations between an employer’s organization and a union representing an entire in-
dustry’s employees.40 China’s only legal labor union—and the world’s largest union—is 
the All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU), which is controlled by the gov-
ernment. The Chinese government limits the workers’ rights to collective bargaining 
and striking, and it appoints leaders of the ACFTU. At some companies in recent years, 
workers have begun to conduct strikes and protests seeking greater rights.41
Legal differences range from who may form a union to how much latitude an orga-
nization is allowed in laying off workers. In some situations, governments get involved 
Figure 16.4
Average Hours Worked 
in Selected Countries
Mexico
South Korea
Chile
United States
Japan
United Kingdom
Norway
Netherlands
0
500
1,000
1,500
Average Hours Worked per Year
2,000
2,500
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “Average Annual Hours Actually Worked per 
Worker,” OECD StatExtracts, http://stats.oecd.org, accessed July 28, 2014.

514 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
to protect workers. After an eight-story factory collapsed in Dhaka, Bangladesh, killing 
more than 1,100 people, the government of Bangladesh relaxed rules that had made 
it diffi cult for the country’s workers to unionize. Until then, workers had to obtain 
permission from factory owners before forming trade unions.42
International labor relations must also take into account that negotiations between 
labor and management take place in a different social context, not just different eco-
nomic and legal contexts. Cultural differences that affect other interactions come into 
play in labor negotiations as well. Negotiators will approach the process differently 
depending on whether the culture views the process as primarily cooperative or com-
petitive and whether it is local practice to negotiate a deal by starting with the specif-
ics or agreeing on overall principles.43 Working with host-country nationals can help 
organizations navigate such differences in negotiation style.
Managing Expatriates
At some point, most international and global organizations assign managers to foreign 
posts. These assignments give rise to signifi cant human resource challenges, from se-
lecting managers for these assignments to preparing them, compensating them, and 
helping them adjust to a return home. The same kinds of HRM principles that apply 
to domestic positions can help organizations avoid mistakes in managing expatriates: 
planning and goal setting, selection aimed at achieving the HR goals, and performance 
management that includes evaluation of whether the overseas assignment delivered 
value relative to the costs involved.44 Employers also can increase the likelihood of a 
successful assignment by ensuring that employees and their families have the resources 
they need. The “HRM Social” box offers examples of one kind of support.
Selecting Expatriate Managers
The challenge of managing expatriate managers begins with determining which 
individuals in the organization are most capable of handling an assignment in an-
other country. Expatriate managers need technical competence in the area of op-
erations, in part to help them earn the respect of subordinates. Of course, many 
other skills are also necessary for success in any management job, especially one 
that involves working overseas. Depending on the nature of the assignment and the 
culture where it is located, the organization should consider each candidate’s skills, 
learning style, and approach to problem solving. Each of these should be related 
to achievement of the organization’s goals, such as solving a particular problem, 
transferring knowledge to host-country employees, or developing future leaders for 
the organization.45
A successful expatriate manager must be sensitive to the host country’s cultural 
norms, fl exible enough to adapt to those norms, and strong enough to survive the 
culture shock of living in another culture. In addition, if the manager has a family, 
the family members must be able to adapt to a new culture. Adaptation requires three 
kinds of skills46:
 1. Ability to maintain a positive self-image and feeling of well-being.
 2. Ability to foster relationships with the host-country nationals.
 3. Ability to perceive and evaluate the host country’s environment accurately.
In a study that drew on the experience of people holding international assignments, 
expatriates told researchers that the most important qualities for an expatriate manager 

515
are, in order of importance, family situation, fl exibility and adaptability, job knowledge 
and motivation, relational skills, and openness to other cultures.47 To assess candidates’ 
ability to adapt to a new environment, interviews should address topics such as the 
ones listed in Table 16.2. The interviewer should be certain to give candidates a clear 
and complete preview of the assignment and the host-country culture. This helps the 
candidate evaluate the assignment and consider it in terms of his or her family situa-
tion, so the employer does not violate the employee’s privacy.48
Preparing Expatriates
Once the organization has selected a manager for an overseas assignment, it is neces-
sary to prepare that person through training and development. Because expatriate suc-
cess depends so much on the entire family’s adjustment, the employee’s spouse should 
be included in the preparation activities. Employees selected for expatriate assignments 
already have job-related skills, so preparation for expatriate assignments often focuses 
on cross-cultural training—that is, training in what to expect from the host country’s 
culture. The general purpose of cross-cultural training is to create an appreciation of 
LO 16-6 Explain how 
employers prepare 
 managers for interna-
tional assignments and 
for their return home.
A common reason cited for the fail-
ure of an international assignment is 
that the expatriate’s spouse was dis-
satisfi ed. The role of an accompany-
ing spouse is diffi cult. Often, this 
person is not legally allowed to work 
in the host country, so it is more diffi -
cult for him or her to fi nd new friends 
and meaningful activities.
Employers can help the accom-
panying spouse make connections. 
An employer, especially one with a 
lot of expatriate employees, might 
set up its own spouses’ network. In 
The Netherlands, Eindhoven Univer-
sity of Technology recruits one-third 
of its employees from other coun-
tries but found that many left after a 
short period because spouses were 
unhappy there. It began offering 
spouses a “Get in Touch” program 
of weekly meetings to exchange in-
formation and visit places of inter-
est. Between meetings, the spouses 
can keep in contact by joining the 
group’s Facebook community. After 
the three-month program ended, 
many of the participants didn’t want 
to stop participating, so the univer-
sity added a Stay in Touch program.
Another approach is to provide 
information about non-company- 
related social networks for ex-
patriate spouses. Spouses may 
appreciate the chance to build their 
own circle of friends. One example 
is the Trailing Spouse Network, a 
LinkedIn group where people can 
share ideas, advice, and support. 
The Trailing Spouse Network also 
has a page on Facebook.
Increasingly often, the accompa-
nying spouse is a husband. Some 
men have had an especially hard 
time making connections, because 
support services have been geared 
to women. These spouses might es-
pecially welcome information about 
social networks for men. In Belgium, 
for instance, a group of men set up 
a group called STUDS (for Spouses 
Trailing under Duress Successfully), 
which offers activities and keeps 
members connected online with a 
blog. Even after leaving Belgium, 
friends who met in STUDS can keep 
in touch by posting news and ques-
tions on the blog’s website.
Questions
 1. What pros and cons do you 
see in having an organization 
set up its own social network 
for accompanying spouses?
 2. What pros and cons do 
you see in referring an 
accompanying spouse to an 
outside social network?
Sources: Brookfi eld Global Relocation 
 Services, 2014 Global Mobility Trends 
 Survey, 2014, http://knowledge.brook-
fi eldgrs.com; Willem G. van Hoorn and 
Carola L. Eijsenring, “Setting Up a Social 
Support Program for Accompanying 
Spouses of  International Knowledge Work-
ers,” People & Strategy 36, no. 4 (2014): 
60–61, 64;  Kendra Mirasol, “Following Her 
Job to Tokyo? Challenges Facing the Expat 
Male Trailing Spouse,” IOR Global Ser-
vices, http://www .iorworld.com, accessed 
July 28, 2014; Portable Career Network, 
“Trailing Spouse Network,” http://www. 
portablecareer.net, accessed July 28, 2014; 
“STUDS (Spouses Trailing under Duress 
Successfully),” (A)way Magazine, http://www 
. awaymagazine.be, accessed July 28, 2014.
Online Communities to Support Expatriates’ Spouses
HRM Social

516 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
Motivation
 • What are the candidate’s reasons and degree of interest in wanting an overseas assignment?
 • Does the candidate have a realistic understanding of what is required in working and living overseas?
 • What is the spouse’s attitude toward an overseas assignment?
Health
 • Are there any health issues with the candidate or family members that might impact the success of the overseas assignment?
Language ability
 • Does the candidate have the potential to learn a new language?
 • Does the candidate’s spouse have the ability to learn a new language?
Family considerations
 • How many moves has the family made among different cities or parts of the United States? What problems were encountered?
 • What is the spouse’s goal in this move overseas?
 • How many children are in the family and what are their ages? Will all the children move as part of the overseas assignment?
 • Has divorce or its potential, or the death of a family member had a negative effect on the family’s cohesiveness?
 • Are there any adjustment problems the candidate would expect should the family move overseas?
Resourcefulness and initiative
 • Is the candidate independent and capable of standing by his or her decisions?
 • Is the candidate able to meet objectives and produce positive results with whatever human resources and facilities are available 
regardless of challenges that might arise in a foreign business environment?
 • Can the candidate operate without a clear definition of responsibility and authority?
 • Will the candidate be able to explain the goals of the company and its mission to local managers and workers?
 • Does the candidate possess sufficient self-discipline and self-confidence to handle complex problems?
 • Can the candidate operate effectively in a foreign country without normal communications and supporting services?
Adaptability
 • Is the candidate cooperative, open to the opinions of others, and able to compromise?
 • How does the candidate react to new situations and efforts to understand and appreciate cultural differences?
• How does the candidate react to criticism, constructive or otherwise?
 • Will the candidate be able to make and develop contacts with peers in a foreign country?
 • Does the candidate demonstrate patience when dealing with problems? Is he or she resilient and able to move forward after 
setbacks?
Career planning
 • Does the candidate consider the assignment more than a temporary overseas trip?
 • Is the overseas assignment consistent with the candidate’s career development and one that was planned by the company?
 • What is the candidate’s overall attitude toward the company?
 • Is there any history or indication of interpersonal problems with this candidate?
Financial
 • Are there any current financial and/or legal considerations that might affect the assignment (e.g., house or car purchase, college 
expenses)?
 • Will undue financial pressures be put upon the candidate and his or her family as a result of an overseas assignment?
Sources: P. Caligiuri, Cultural Agility: Building a Pipeline of Successful Global Professionals (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2012); P. 
 Caligiuri, D. Lepak, and J. Bonache, Managing the Global Workforce (West Sussex, United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons, 2010); M. 
Shaffer, D. Harrison, H. Gregersen, S. Black, and L. Ferzandi, “You Can Take It with You: Individual Differences and Expatriate Effective-
ness,” Journal of Applied Psychology 91(2006): 109–125; P. Caligiuri, “Developing Global Leaders,” Human Resource Management 
Review 16 (2006): 219–228; P. Caligiuri, M. Hyland, A. Joshi, and A. Bross, “Testing a Theoretical Model for Examining the Relationship 
between Family Adjustment and Expatriates’ Work Adjustment,” Journal of Applied Psychology 83(1998): 598–614; David M. Noer, 
 Multinational People Management: A Guide for Organizations and Employees (Arlington, VA: Bureau of National Affairs, 1975).
Table 16.2
Selected Topics for Assessing Candidates for Overseas Assignments

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 517
the host country’s culture so expatriates can behave appropriately.49 Paradoxically, this 
requires developing a greater awareness of one’s own culture so that the expatriate 
manager can recognize differences and similarities between the cultures and, perhaps, 
home-culture biases. Consider, for example, the statements in Figure 16.5, which are 
comments made by visitors to the United States. Do you think these observations ac-
curately describe U.S. culture?
On a more specifi c level, cross-cultural training for foreign assignments includes 
the details of how to behave in business settings in another country—the ways people 
behave in meetings, how employees expect managers to treat them, and so on. As 
an example, Germans value promptness for meetings to a much greater extent than 
do Latin Americans—and so on. How should one behave when fi rst meeting one’s 
business counterparts in another culture? The “outgoing” personality style so valued 
in the United States may seem quite rude in other parts of the world.50 Ideally, the 
company also provides training for an expatriate manager’s team in the host country, 
Figure 16.5
Impressions of 
 Americans: Comments 
by Visitors to the United 
States
Source: J. Feig and G. Blair, There Is a Difference, 2nd ed. (Washington, DC: Meridian House International, 1980), 
cited in N. Adler, International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior, 2nd ed. ( Boston: PWS-Kent, 1991).

518 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
so that manager and employees can all learn about one another’s cultural practices and 
values.51
Employees preparing for a foreign assignment also need information about such 
practical matters as housing, schools, recreation, shopping, and health care facilities in 
the country where they will be living. This is a crucial part of the preparation.
Communication in another country often requires a determined attempt to learn a 
new language. Some employers try to select managers who speak the language of the 
host country, and a few provide language training. Most companies assume that employ-
ees in the host country will be able to speak the host country’s language. Even if this is 
true, host country nationals are not likely to be fl uent in the home country’s language, 
so language barriers remain. 
Along with cross-cultural training, preparation of the expatriate should include ca-
reer development activities. Before leaving for a foreign assignment, expatriates should 
discuss with their managers how the foreign assignment fi ts into their career plans and 
what types of positions they can expect upon their return. This prepares the expatriate 
to develop valuable skills during the overseas assignment and eases the return home 
when the assignment is complete. Coaching during the assignment also can improve 
the likelihood that the expatriate will succeed.
When the employee leaves for the assignment, the preparation process should con-
tinue. Expatriate colleagues, coaches, and mentors can help the employee learn to 
navigate challenges as they arise. For example, workers in a new culture sometimes 
experience internal confl ict when the culture where they are working expects them 
to behave in a way that confl icts with values they learned from their own culture. For 
example, an Italian manager had diffi culty motivating an Indian workforce because the 
employees were used to authoritarian leadership, and the manager felt as if that style 
was harsh and disempowering. By talking over the problem with experienced expatri-
ates, the manager came to understand why the situation was so awkward and frustrat-
ing. He identifi ed specifi c ways in which he could be more assertive without losing 
his temper, so that his Indian employees would better understand what was expected 
of them. Practicing a new style of leadership became more satisfying as the manager 
realized that the employees valued his style and that he was becoming a more capable 
cross-cultural leader.52
Managing Expatriates’ Performance
Performance management of expatriates requires clear goals for the overseas assignment 
and frequent evaluation of whether the expatriate employee is on track to meet those 
goals. Communication technology including e-mail and teleconferencing provides a va-
riety of ways for expats’ managers to keep in touch with these employees to discuss and 
diagnose issues before they can interfere with performance. In addition, before employ-
ees leave for an overseas assignment, HR should work with managers to develop criteria 
measuring the success of the assignment.53 Measures such as productivity should take 
into account any local factors that could make expected performance different in the host 
country than in the company’s home country. For example, a country’s labor laws or the 
reliability of the electrical supply could affect the facility’s output and effi ciency.
Compensating Expatriates
One of the greatest challenges of managing expatriates is determining the compensa-
tion package. Most organizations use a balance sheet approach to determine the total 

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 519
amount of the package. This approach adjusts the manager’s compensation so that 
it gives the manager the same standard of living as in the home country plus extra 
pay for the inconvenience of locating overseas. As shown in Figure 16.6, the balance 
sheet approach begins by determining the purchasing power of compensation for the 
same type of job in the manager’s own country—that is, how much a person can buy, 
after taxes, in terms of housing, goods and services, and a reserve for savings. Next, 
this amount is compared with the cost (in dollars, for a U.S. company) of these same 
expenses in the foreign country. In Figure 16.6, the greater size of the second column 
means the costs for a similar standard of living in the foreign country are much higher 
in every category except the reserve amount. This situation would be likely in one of 
the cities identifi ed in the “Did You Know?” box. For the expatriate in this situation, 
the employer would pay the additional costs, as shown by the third column. Finally, 
the expatriate receives additional purchasing power from premiums and incentives. 
Because of these added incentives, the expatriate’s purchasing power is more than what 
the manager could buy at home with the salary for an equivalent job. (Compare the 
fourth column with the fi rst.) Expatriates sent to expensive destinations such as Singa-
pore and Hong Kong can receive $200,000 a year in subsidies to cover the expenses of 
housing, transportation, and schools for their children—plus an additional $100,000 to 
cover the cost of taxes on these benefi ts. Adding in the costs to relocate the employee 
and his or her family can send the total bill for the assignment up to $1 million.54 That 
Figure 16.6
The Balance Sheet for 
Determining Expatriate 
Compensation
Income
taxes
Housing
Reserve
Home-country
salary
Goods
and
services
Home-
and
host-
country
income
taxes
Housing
Reserve
Host-country
costs
Goods
and
services
Income
taxes
Housing
Reserve
Host-country
costs paid by
company and
from salary
Additional costs
paid by company
Goods
and
services
Income
taxes
Premiums
and
incentives
Housing
Reserve
Home-country
equivalent
purchasing
power
Goods
and
services
Source: From C. Reynolds, “Compensation of Overseas Personnel,” in Handbook of Human Resource Adminis-
tration, 2nd ed., ed. by J. J. Famularo, McGraw-Hill, 1986, p. 51. Reprinted with permission of The McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc.

520
high cost is one of the reasons employers are investing more in recruiting and training 
local talent.
After setting the total pay, the organization divides this amount into the four 
 components of a total pay package:
 1. Base salary—Determining the base salary is complex because different countries 
use different currencies (dollars, yen, euros, and so on). The exchange rate—the 
rate at which one currency may be exchanged for another—constantly shifts in re-
sponse to a host of economic forces, so the real value of a salary in terms of dollars 
is constantly changing. Also, as discussed earlier, the base salary may be compara-
ble to the pay of other managers at headquarters or comparable to other managers 
at the foreign subsidiary. Because many organizations pay a salary premium as an 
Did You Know?
Expatriates spend more for hous-
ing, transportation, food, cloth-
ing, and other living expenses in 
Luanda, Angola, than in any other 
major city, according to a survey 
by Mercer Human Resources Con-
sulting. The capital cities of Angola 
and Chad are in the two top spots 
because they are rich sources of oil, 
so they are drawing in a stream of 
oil companies and their employees, 
increasing the demand for safe local 
housing and imported goods.
Rankings are infl uenced by the 
relative value of national  currencies, 
as well as by political strife and 
natural disasters. The least expen-
sive city among those studied was 
 Karachi, Pakistan, where security 
concerns have reduced the demand 
for housing.
The only U.S. city in Mercer’s top 
50 is New York, which ranks 16th. 
Other U.S. cities are in the top 100: 
Los Angeles (62), San Francisco (74), 
Honolulu (97), and Miami (98).
Question
Why might an organization choose 
to locate a facility in one of the most 
expensive cities, in spite of the higher 
costs?
Sources: Roff Smith, “Move Over Tokyo: 
The World’s Priciest Cities Are in Angola 
and Chad,” KPBS, July 16, 2014, http://
www.kpbs.org; Mercer, “2014 Cost of 
Living Rankings,” news release, July 
10, 2014, http://www.mercer.com; Ruth 
Holmes, “Housing Puts African Cities 
Top of Expat Cost-of-Living League,” 
Relocate, July 10, 2014, http://www.
relocatemagazine.com. 
Priciest Cities Are Spread over Three Continents
1
1
2
4
5
3
Luanda, Angola
2
N’Djamena, Chad
3
Hong Kong
4
Singapore
5
Zurich, Switzerland

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 521
incentive to accept an overseas assignment, expatriates’ salaries are often higher 
than pay for staying at headquarters.
 2. Tax equalization allowance—Companies have different systems for taxing income, 
and in many countries, tax rates are much higher than in the United States. Usu-
ally, the employer of an expatriate withholds the amount of tax to be paid in the 
parent country, then pays all of the taxes due in the country where the expatriate 
is working.
 3. Benefi ts—Most benefi ts issues have to do with whether an employee can use the 
same benefi ts in the foreign country. For example, if an expatriate has been con-
tributing to a pension plan in the United States, does this person have a new pen-
sion in the foreign country? Or can the expatriate continue to contribute to the 
U.S. pension plan? Similarly, health benefi ts may involve receiving care at certain 
health facilities. While the person is abroad, does the same health plan cover ser-
vices received in the foreign country? In one case, fl ying a manager back to the 
United States for certain procedures actually would have cost less than having the 
procedures done in the country where the person was working. But the company’s 
health plans did not permit this alternative. An employer may offer expatriates ad-
ditional benefi ts to address the problem of uprooting the spouse when assigning 
an employee overseas.
 4. Allowances to make a foreign assignment more attractive—Cost-of-living allowances 
make up the differences in expenses for day-to-day needs. Housing allowances en-
sure that the expatriate can maintain the same standard of living as in the United 
States. Education allowances reimburse expatriates who pay tuition for their chil-
dren to attend private English-speaking schools. Relocation allowances cover the 
expenses of making the move to the foreign country, including transportation, 
shipping or storage of possessions, and expenses for temporary housing until the 
employee can rent or purchase a home.
Figure 16.7 is an example of a summary sheet for an expatriate manager’s compen-
sation package, showing a variety of allowances.
Helping Expatriates Return Home
As the expatriate’s assignment nears its end, the human resource department faces a 
fi nal challenge: helping the expatriate make the transition back to his or her home 
country. The process of preparing expatriates to return home from a foreign assign-
ment is called repatriation. Reentry is not as simple as it might sound. Culture shock 
takes place in reverse. The experience has changed the expatriate, and the company’s 
and expatriate’s home cultures have changed as well. Also, because of differences in 
economies and compensation levels, a returning expatriate may experience a decline in 
living standards. The standard of living for an expatriate in many countries includes 
maid service, a limousine, private schools, and clubs.
Companies are increasingly making efforts to help expatriates through this transi-
tion. Two activities help the process along: communication and validation.55 Commu-
nication refers to the expatriate receiving information and recognizing changes while 
abroad. The more the organization keeps in contact with the expatriate, the more 
effective and satisfi ed the person will be upon return. The expatriate plays a role in 
this process as well. Expatriates should work at maintaining important contacts in the 
company and industry. Communication related to career development before and dur-
ing the overseas assignment also should help the employee return to a position that is 
Repatriation
The process of  preparing 
expatriates to return 
home from a foreign 
assignment.

522 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
challenging and interesting. Validation means giving the expatriate recognition for the 
overseas service when this person returns home. Expatriates who receive praise and 
recognition from colleagues and top managers for their overseas service and future 
contribution have fewer troubles with reentry than those whose contributions are dis-
regarded. Validation should also include planning for how the returning employee will 
contribute to the organization. What skills will this person bring back? What position 
will he or she fi ll?
Guardian Industries, a glass manufacturer based in Auburn Hills, Michigan, treats 
its returning expatriates as valuable employees who have made a sacrifi ce for the com-
pany. They are therefore placed fi rst in line for key assignments. After Dana Partridge 
worked for Guardian in Saudi Arabia and Thailand for a total of 13 years, the company 
couldn’t immediately give him the job he was prepared for, plant manager, but as soon 
as a position became available, Partridge was selected.56
Figure 16.7
International Assignment 
Allowance Form
John H. Doe
Name
1 October 2015
Effective date
Singapore
Location of assignment
Manager, SLS./Serv. AP/ME
Title
Houston, Texas
Home base
Reason for Change:
Monthly base salary
Old
New
$5,000.00
International Assignment
Prepared by
Vice President, Human Resources
Date
Date 
1234
Emp. no.
202
LCA code
Living cost allowance
$1,291.00
Foreign service premium
$   750.00
Area allowance
-0-
Gross monthly salary
$7,041.00
Housing deduction
$   500.00
Hypothetical tax
$   570.00
Other
Net monthly salary
$5,971.00
202
Tax code

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 523
THINKING ETHICALLY
CAN OFFSHORING BE DONE MORE 
ETHICALLY?
As we saw in Chapter 5, human resource planning in-
volves several options to meet an organization’s needs 
for talent. One option is to outsource activities that can be 
performed more effectively and effi ciently by a contrac-
tor. In today’s global marketplace, outsourcing decisions 
frequently involve offshoring activities to companies in 
lower-wage locations. However, the reasons why labor 
costs are lower in another country include lower stan-
dards for working conditions—even conditions that 
would be considered unethical in the parent country.
This kind of decision can open up a company to criti-
cism and may confl ict with its own values related to so-
cial responsibility—a set of problems that Nike has been 
wrestling with for two decades. When the company was 
founded, in 1964, the idea of importing shoes from low-
wage countries was an innovation. By the 1990s, re-
ports of working conditions put Nike on the defensive, 
and it argued that it didn’t own the factories, so it wasn’t 
responsible. However, as negative publicity mounted, 
Nike began to share information openly and engage di-
rectly with factories to improve working conditions. In 
2004, the company appointed Hannah Jones, a former 
reporter, to serve as its head of sustainable business.
Jones was especially concerned about working con-
ditions in Bangladesh, but managers in the production 
division were drawn to the opportunity to buy shoes 
made at the lowest available cost. They believed that 
if they negotiated safety standards as part of their con-
tracts, the suppliers would comply, but Jones had her 
doubts. To gather information and reach an agreement, 
Jones and the production managers visited one of the 
company’s suppliers in Bangladesh. They saw safety 
hazards throughout the building and decided to stop 
buying from that supplier, even though the decision 
contributed to shrinking profi t margins.
At Nike, decisions such as these have mostly elimi-
nated purchases from suppliers that use certain haz-
ardous materials and where workers have died. Still, 
organizations that investigate working conditions have 
found abuse of workers and violations of overtime and 
minimum-wage requirements at companies that sell to 
Nike. The company continues to set and monitor social 
responsibility goals such as buying from companies that 
have eliminated excessive overtime and that protect 
worker health and safety.
Questions
 1. In deciding whether to outsource functions, does 
an organization such as Nike have an ethical obli-
gation to consider how workers will be treated by 
the contractor that hires those workers? Why or 
why not?
 2. What ethical standards for human resource man-
agement do you think a company should require 
from all its operations worldwide? In what areas of 
HRM, if any, should ethical standards be relaxed 
to match the prevailing norms of a particular 
country?
Sources: Shelly Banjo, “Inside Nike’s Struggle to Balance 
Cost and Worker Safety in Bangladesh,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, April 21, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Nike, Sustainable 
Business Performance Summary, FY 2012–2013, http://www 
.nikeresponsibility.com; Scott Cendrowski, “Can Outsourcing 
Be Improved?” Fortune, June 10, 2013, EBSCOhost, http://
web.a.ebscohost.com.
SUMMARY
LO 16-1 Summarize how the growth in international 
business activity affects human resource management.
• More and more companies are entering interna-
tional markets by exporting and operating foreign 
facilities.
• Organizations therefore need employees who un-
derstand customers and suppliers in other countries. 
They need to understand local laws and customs 
and be able to adapt their plans to local situations.
• Organizations may hire a combination of parent-
country, host-country, and third-country nationals.
• They may operate on the scale of an exporter 
or an international, global, or multinational 
organization.
• A global organization needs a transnational HRM 
system, which makes decisions from a global per-
spective, includes managers from many countries, 
and is based on ideas contributed by people repre-
senting a variety of cultures.
LO1 6-2 Identify the factors that most strongly infl u-
ence HRM in international markets.

524 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
• Culture is by far the most important infl uence. 
Each market’s culture is its set of shared assump-
tions about how the world works and what ideals 
are worth striving for.
• A culture has the dimensions of individualism/col-
lectivism, high or low power distance, high or low 
uncertainty avoidance, masculinity/ femininity, and 
long-term or short-term orientation.
• Education is a second infl uence. Countries differ 
in the degree to which their labor markets in-
clude people with education and skills of value to 
employers.
• Another infl uence is the foreign country’s 
 political-legal system—its government, laws, and 
regulations.
• A fi nal infl uence is a country’s economic system. 
The system may be capitalist or socialist. The 
government’s involvement in the country’s econ-
omy, such as through taxes and price controls, is a 
strong factor determining HRM practices.
LO 16-3 Discuss how differences among countries af-
fect HR planning at organizations with international 
operations.
• As organizations consider decisions about their 
level of international activity, HR professionals 
should provide information about the relevant 
human resource issues.
• When organizations decide to operate interna-
tionally or globally, HR planning involves deci-
sions about where and how many employees are 
needed for each international facility.
• Some countries limit employers’ ability to lay 
off workers, so organizations would be less likely 
to staff for peak periods. Other countries allow 
employers more fl exibility in meeting human re-
source needs. HRM professionals need to be con-
versant with such differences.
LO 16-4 Describe how companies select and train 
human resources in a global labor market.
• Many organizations with foreign operations fi ll 
most positions with host-country nationals. These 
employees can more easily understand the values 
and customs of the local workforce, and hiring lo-
cally tends to be less expensive than moving em-
ployees to new locations.
• Organizations also fi ll foreign positions with 
 parent-country and third-country nationals who 
have human relations skills associated with success 
in foreign assignments.
• When sending employees on foreign assignments, 
organizations prepare the employees (and often 
their families) through cross-cultural training.
• Before the assignment, the training provides in-
struction in the foreign country’s language and 
culture.
• During the assignment, there is communication 
with the home country and mentoring.
• For the return home, the employer provides fur-
ther training and development to aid retention.
LO 16-5 Discuss challenges related to managing per-
formance and compensating employees from other 
countries.
• Pay structures can differ substantially among 
countries in terms of pay level and the relative 
worth of jobs.
• Organizations must decide whether to set pay lev-
els and differences in terms of what workers are 
used to in their own countries or in terms of what 
employees’ colleagues earn at headquarters. Typi-
cally, companies have resolved this dilemma by 
linking pay and benefi ts more closely to those of 
the employee’s country, but this practice may be 
weakening so that it depends more on the nature 
and length of the foreign assignment.
• These decisions affect the organization’s costs and 
ability to compete, so organizations consider local 
labor costs in their location decisions.
• Along with the basic pay structure, organizations 
must make decisions regarding incentive pay, such 
as bonuses and stock options.
• Laws may dictate differences in benefi t packages, 
and the value of benefi ts will differ if a coun-
try requires them or makes them a government 
service.
LO 16-6 Explain how employers prepare managers for 
international assignments and for their return home.
• When an organization has selected a manager for 
an overseas assignment, it must prepare the per-
son for the experience. In cross-cultural training, 
the soon-to-be expatriate learns about the for-
eign culture he or she is heading to, and studies 
her or his own home-country culture as well for 
insight. The trainee is given a detailed briefi ng 
on how to behave in business settings in the new 
country.
• Along with cross-cultural training, preparation of 
the expatriate should include career development 
activities to help the individual acquire valuable 
career skills during the foreign assignment and at 
the end of the assignment to handle repatriation 
successfully.
• Communication of changes at home and valida-
tion of a job well done abroad help the expatriate 
through the repatriation process.

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 525
KEY TERMS
parent country, 497
host country, 497
third country, 497
expatriates, 497
international organization, 499
multinational company, 499
global organization, 499
transnational HRM system, 499
culture shock, 507
cross-cultural preparation, 508
repatriation, 521
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
 1. Identify the parent country, host country(ies), and 
third country(ies) in the following example: A 
global soft-drink company called Cold Cola has 
headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia. It operates pro-
duction facilities in Athens, Greece, and in Jakarta, 
 Indonesia. The company has assigned a manager 
from Boston to head the Athens facility and a 
manager from Hong Kong to manage the Jakarta 
 facility. (LO 16.1)
 2. What are some HRM challenges that arise when a 
U.S. company expands from domestic markets by 
exporting? When it changes from simply exporting 
to operating as an international company? When an 
international company becomes a global company? 
(LO 16.2)
 3. In recent years, many U.S. companies have invested 
in Russia and sent U.S. managers there in an attempt 
to transplant U.S.-style management. According to 
Hofstede, U.S. culture has low power distance, un-
certainty avoidance, and long-term orientation and 
high individuality and masculinity. Russia’s culture 
has high power distance and uncertainty avoidance, 
low masculinity and long-term orientation, and 
moderate individuality. In light of what you know 
about cultural differences, how well do you think 
U.S. managers can succeed in each of the following 
U.S.-style HRM practices? (Explain your reasons.) 
(LO 16.2)
a.  Selection decisions based on extensive 
 assessment of individual abilities.
b. Appraisals based on individual performance.
c.  Systems for gathering suggestions from 
workers.
d. Self-managing work teams.
 4. Besides cultural differences, what other factors af-
fect human resource management in an organiza-
tion with international operations? (LO 16.2)
 5. Suppose you work in the HR department of a com-
pany that is expanding into a country where the 
law and culture make it diffi cult to lay off employ-
ees. How should your knowledge of that diffi culty 
 affect human resource planning for the overseas 
operations? (LO 16.3)
 6. Why do multinational organizations hire host-
country nationals to fi ll most of their foreign posi-
tions, rather than sending expatriates for most jobs? 
(LO 16.4)
 7. Suppose an organization decides to improve col-
laboration and knowledge sharing by developing 
an intranet to link its global workforce. It needs to 
train employees in several different countries to use 
this system. List the possible cultural issues you can 
think of that the training program should take into 
account. (LO 16.4)
 8. For an organization with operations in three differ-
ent countries, what are some advantages and disad-
vantages of setting compensation according to the 
labor markets in the countries where the employ-
ees live and work? What are some advantages and 
disadvantages of setting compensation according to 
the labor market in the company’s headquarters? 
Would the best arrangement be different for the 
company’s top executives and its production work-
ers? Explain. (LO 16.5)
 9. What abilities make a candidate more likely to suc-
ceed in an assignment as an expatriate? Which of 
these abilities do you have? How might a person 
acquire these abilities? (LO 16.6)
 10. In the past, a large share of expatriate managers 
from the United States have returned home before 
successfully completing their foreign assignments. 
Suggest some possible reasons for the high failure 
rate. What can HR departments do to increase the 
success of expatriates? (LO 16.6)

526 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
Coping with Pollution in Beijing 
Beijing, China’s capital city, has been plagued with seri-
ous air pollution. Of particular concern is a pollutant 
called fi ne particulate matter (PM), composed of a mix 
of solid and liquid particles, including sulfate, nitrates, 
ammonia, sodium chloride, carbon, mineral dust, and 
water. When people inhale PM that is 2.5 micrometers 
or smaller (called PM 2.5), it interferes with gas ex-
change in the lungs and contributes to development of 
lung cancer and cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. 
The standard of the World Health Organization is that 
PM 2.5 should not average more than 25 micrograms 
per cubic meter over a 24-hour period. But in a recent 
winter, PM 2.5 was measured at 755—a level at which 
people can see, feel, and taste the grit in the air. Along 
with increasing the risk of disease and premature death, 
that kind of pollution causes daily problems such as 
itchy throat and chronic cough. 
Pollution that bad raises HRM challenges for organi-
zations that operate in Beijing. A fundamental problem is 
that talented people in other countries do not want to relo-
cate to the area. At BMW, several candidates for midlevel 
management positions withdrew their applications be-
cause of concerns about their families living in unhealthy 
conditions. A doctor at Beijing Family Hospital said he 
had heard from many expatriates that they intend not to 
renew their employment contracts to work in Beijing.
 
Some actions employers have taken involve mak-
ing workers safer and more comfortable. Employers 
have purchased air purifi ers and face masks for em-
ployees and have brought in experts to teach employees 
and their families how to stay healthy. They also have 
increased hardship allowances for employees working in 
the area. 
Employers also can point to community efforts to 
make living in Beijing healthier. For example, interna-
tional schools that teach the children of expatriates have 
taken actions to protect students. Dulwich College Bei-
jing installed a huge dome over an outside play area, so 
students can leave the building to play basketball and 
other games when the PM 2.5 index is 250 or more.
 
The problem in Beijing also has become an opportu-
nity for employers located away from the worst pollution. 
One Chinese company launched a “Blue Sky Recruitment” 
campaign in Beijing to lure young information technology 
engineers to the south of the country, where the air is bet-
ter. The company’s ads, posted in elevators, asked, “Do you 
dare to pursue a life with blue sky and white clouds?”
Questions
 1. What would it take for you to accept an assignment 
in a location such as Beijing with extremely bad air 
pollution?
2. What should a socially responsible employer do to 
protect its employees in conditions such as these?
Sources: Laurie Burkitt and Brian Spegele, “Why Leave Job in Beijing? To 
Breathe,” The Wall Street Journal, April 14, 2013; Jamil Anderlini and Leslie 
Hook, “Smog Dents Beijing’s Expat Appeal,” Financial Times, April 5, 2013; 
Peter Ford, “Beijing Is Booming, but Talent Is Leaving Due to Bad Air,” 
Christian Science Monitor, April 4, 2013; Daryl Loo, “Beijing Air Akin to 
Living in Smoking Lounge: Chart of the Day,” Bloomberg News, January 30, 
2013, http://www.bloomberg.com; Jaime FlorCruz, “Living with Beijing’s 
‘Air-pocalypse,’” CNN, January 19, 2013, http://www.cnn.com; World 
Health Organization, “Air Quality and Health,” Media Center Fact Sheet 
313, September 2011, http://www.who.int.
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY 
Global Mindset Gives Renault-Nissan a Strategic Edge
Carlos Ghosn’s outlook is extraordinarily global. The 
chief executive of the Renault-Nissan Alliance was born 
in Brazil to Lebanese parents, spent most of his child-
hood in Lebanon, and earned engineering degrees in 
France. He went to work for Michelin, rose to manage-
ment positions, led a turnaround of Michelin’s South 
American division, and then moved again to head Mi-
chelin’s North American division. His career caught 
the attention of French automaker Renault, which was 
looking for someone to lead a turnaround of Nissan 
after Renault had acquired a large stake in the struggling 
Japanese business. Ghosn returned Nissan to profi tabil-
ity and later became head of both automakers as well as 
the alliance they founded. He works in both Paris and 
Tokyo, also traveling to facilities in other countries.
Ghosn’s global outlook has strengthened the alliance 
between Renault and Nissan, which has lasted longer 
than other such attempts in the industry. The companies 
share designs and hold ownership stakes in each other. 
Ghosn sees not only cultural barriers to overcome but 
also opportunities for applying each culture’s strengths. 
For example, in Japan, Ghosn discovered a concept 
called monozukuri, which literally means making things 
but also implies a spirit of working together creatively 
over time to make improvements that result in excellent 
products. Ghosn found that monozukuri enables higher 
MANAGING TALENT 

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 527
quality and lower costs by uniting employees across job 
categories in a common cause. So Renault-Nissan has 
taught the concept in its operations outside of Japan as 
a way to stimulate improvement.
Applying such lessons requires certain qualities. Two 
that Ghosn has identifi ed include a thirst for learning and 
a humble attitude. These qualities promote learning from 
others. Another is what Ghosn calls “common” sense, by 
which he means a perspective that people share common 
ground, which helps them understand and listen to one 
another. Yet another important quality is mutual respect. 
According to Ghosn, the best way to acquire such skills 
and attitudes is to make a point of working with people 
from other cultures—say, by seeking out foreign assign-
ments or collaborating with others from a position in 
one’s home country. Nissan, for example, promotes this 
kind of communication by setting up leadership develop-
ment programs in which employees from different coun-
tries participate in virtual classrooms online.
The global mindset remains important for Renault-
Nissan’s strategy of becoming one of the world’s top 
three automakers. The alliance partners are deepen-
ing their relationship, with the goal of developing 70% 
of their vehicles jointly. The alliance also has set up a 
technology-sharing partnership with Daimler, based 
in Germany. Among other projects, they will produce 
luxury cars in Mexico. Daimler’s Mercedes and Nissan’s 
Infi niti will share engines and other parts with a com-
mon design.
Questions
 1. Would you categorize the Renault-Nissan alliance as 
an international, multinational, or global organiza-
tion? Why?
 2. Suppose you work in the HR function at Nissan 
when it is identifying employees to work on the joint 
manufacturing project in Mexico. Briefl y advise the 
company on how to prepare these employees to suc-
ceed as expatriates.
Sources: Eric Pfanner, “Nissan Reports Hefty Profi t Rise,” The Wall Street 
Journal, July 28, 2014, http://online.wsj.com; Lindsay Chappell, “Daim-
ler and Nissan Hit the Gas; Partners to Build Luxury Vehicles, Engines, 
Parts,” Automotive News, June 30, 2014, Business Insights: Global, http://
bi.galegroup.com; Paul McVeigh and Bruce Gain, “How Ghosn Aims to 
Catch Toyota, GM, VW; Renault Rebound, Growth in China and Russia 
Are Keys,” Automotive News, June 9, 2014, Business Insights: Global, http://
bi.galegroup.com; Doron Levin, “Renault-Nissan Alliance Pushes Econo-
mies of Scale to New Level,” Fortune, March 7, 2014, EBSCOhost, http://
web.a.ebscohost.com; Günter K. Stahl, “Building Cross-Cultural Leader-
ship Competence: An Interview with Carlos Ghosn,” Academy of Manage-
ment Learning and Education 12, no. 3 (2013): 494–502.
Is Translating a Global Business?
One fi eld in which small businesses have recently en-
joyed rapid growth is in the business of providing trans-
lations. As barriers to international business continue to 
fall, more and more people are encountering language 
differences in the people they work with, sell to, and 
buy from. At the same time, advances in technology are 
providing avenues to deliver translations over the phone 
and over the Internet.
TransPerfect is one of the success stories. The com-
pany, based in New York, started out when founder 
Steve Iverson, a French teacher, began translating docu-
ments for clients. Satisfi ed customers returned, looking 
for translations of patents and annual reports—even for 
court reporting in foreign languages. The company now 
provides translations in over 170 languages. It has of-
fi ces in more than 85 cities spread over six continents.
CETRA Language Solutions is headquartered in El-
kins Park, Pennsylvania. It started with a lawsuit: while 
founder Jiri Stejskal was working on his doctorate de-
gree in Slavic languages and literature, a Philadelphia 
law fi rm asked him to translate thousands of pages of 
documents related to a case. Stejskal brought in all the 
Czech translators he could fi nd, and his company was 
born. Now CETRA’s employees and hundreds of con-
sultants serve the federal government plus companies 
involved in law, marketing research, and life sciences. 
The company’s freelance translators and interpreters 
are located throughout the world.
LinguaLinx, based in Troy, New York, handles more 
than words. It converts documents, websites, and mul-
timedia into almost 150 languages. The company not 
only has to fi nd qualifi ed translators, it needs experts 
in technology to make state-of-the-art presentations. To 
recruit employees, LinguaLinx emphasizes interesting 
work experiences, rather than fancy perks. The com-
pany’s careers website describes opportunities to work 
with a diverse, multicultural group, including clients at 
leading corporations and nonprofi t organizations.
Questions
 1. What kinds of challenges would be involved in re-
cruiting and selecting people to translate documents 
from Spanish, Polish, and French into English?
 2. Would those challenges be easier to meet by recruit-
ing within the United States or by looking for talent 
overseas? Explain.
HR IN SMALL BUSINESS

528 PART 5 
Meeting Other HR Goals
 3. Suppose a small translation business asked you to 
advise the company on how to overcome cultural 
barriers among a staff drawn from three countries. 
Suggest a few ways the company could use training 
and performance management to achieve this goal.
Sources: Tanisha A. Sykes, “Growth in Translation,” Inc., August 4, 2009, 
www.inc.com; Joel Dresang, “Iverson Language Associates Acquired by 
N.Y. Firm,” Millwaukee Journal Sentinel, December 2, 2008, Business & 
 Company Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com; TransPer-
fect corporate website, www.transperfect.com, accessed August 5, 2014; 
CETRA Language Solutions corporate website, www.cetra.com, accessed 
August 5, 2014, and  LinguaLinx corporate website, www.lingualinx.com, 
accessed August 5, 2014.
 1. Jennifer Paterson, “Is It Possible to Implement a Global 
Health and Wellbeing Programme?” Employee Benefi ts, Sep-
tember 3, 2013, EBSCOhost, http://web.a.ebscohost.com; 
Sloan Center on Aging and Work, Boston College, “The 
MetLife Study of Global Health and Wellness: A Look at 
How Multinational Companies Are Responding to the Need 
for a Healthier Workforce,” MetLife, 2013, http://www 
.metlife.com.
 2. Raju Gopalakrishnan, “Bangalore Software Industry Trying 
to Avoid an Ironic Fate,” Chicago Tribune, April 17, 2012, sec. 
2, p. 3.
 3. “Moving Back to America,” The Economist, May 14, 2011, EB-
SCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 4. Kwoh, “Asia’s Endangered Species.”
 5. N. Adler and S. Bartholomew, “Managing Globally Compe-
tent People,” The Executive 6 (1992), pp. 52–65.
 6. V. Sathe, Culture and Related Corporate Realities (Homewood, 
IL: Richard D. Irwin, 1985); M. Rokeach, Beliefs, Attitudes, and 
Values (San  Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1968).
 7. N. Adler, International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior, 
2nd ed. (Boston: PWS-Kent, 1991).
 8. G. Hofstede, “Dimensions of National  Cultures in Fifty 
Countries and Three Regions,” in Expectations in Cross-
Cultural Psychology, eds. J. Deregowski, S. Dziurawiec, and 
R. C. Annis (Lisse,  Netherlands: Swets and Zeitlinger, 
1983); G. Hofstede, “Cultural Constraints in Manage-
ment Theories,” Academy of Management Executive 7 (1993), 
pp. 81–90.
 9. Hofstede, “Cultural Constraints in Management Theories.”
 10. A Ramesh and M. Gelfl and, “Will They Stay or Will They 
Go? The Role of Job Embeddedness in Predicting Turnover 
in Individualistic and Collectivistic Cultures,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology 95, no. 5 (2010), pp. 807–823.
 11. W. A. Randolph and M. Sashkin, “Can Organizational Em-
powerment Work in Multinational Settings?” Academy of 
Management Executive 16, no. 1 (2002), pp. 102–15.
 12. B. Gerhart and M. Fang, “National Culture and Human Re-
source Management: Assumptions and Evidence,” Interna-
tional Journal of Human Resource Management 16, no. 6 (June 
2005), pp. 971–86.
 13. Yoree Koh, “Sony Throws Away Japan Recruitment Rule-
book,” The Wall Street Journal, January 7, 2012, http://blogs 
.wsj.com.
 14. L. A. West Jr. and W. A. Bogumil Jr., “Foreign Knowledge 
Workers as a Strategic Staffi ng Option,” Academy of Manage-
ment Executive 14, no. 4 (2000), pp. 71–83.
 15. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
“How Much Is Spent per Student?” in Education at a Glance 
2013: Highlights, 2013, http://www.oecd.org.
 16. World Bank, “The State of Education,” Education Statistics, 
http://datatopics.worldbank.org, accessed July 29, 2014.
 17. Sara Murray, “Mind the Gap: How One Employer Tackled 
Pay Equity,” The Wall Street Journal, July 8, 2014, http://online 
.wsj.com.
 18. Gopalakrishnan, “Bangalore Software Industry”; James 
T. Areddy and Tom Orlik, “Slower China Growth Signals 
Days of Miracles Are Waning,” The Wall Street Journal, 
April  15, 2013, http://online.wsj.com; PricewaterhouseC-
oopers, “Going beyond Reshoring to Right-Shoring,” Sep-
tember 2013, http://www.pwc.com.
 19. Elizabeth Dwoskin, “Do You Want This Job?” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, November 14, 2011, EBSCOhost, http://web 
.ebscohost.com.
 20. Brookings Institution, “Immigrant Workers in the U.S. 
Labor Force,” research paper, March 15, 2012, http://www 
.brookings.edu.
21. Brookfi eld Global Relocation Services, 2014 Global Mobility 
Trends Survey, 2014, http://knowledge.brookfi eldgrs.com.
 22. W. A. Arthur Jr. and W. Bennett Jr., “The International 
Assignee: The Relative Importance of Factors Per-
ceived to Contribute to Success,” Personnel Psychology 48 
(1995), pp. 99–114; G. M. Spreitzer, M. W. McCall Jr., and 
J. D. Mahoney, “Early Identifi cation of International Executive 
Potential,” Journal of Applied Psychology 82 (1997), pp. 6–29.
 23. J. S. Black and J. K. Stephens, “The Infl uence of the Spouse on 
American Expatriate  Adjustment and Intent to Stay in Pacifi c 
Rim Overseas Assignments,” Journal of Management 15 (1989), 
pp. 529–44.
 24. P. Caligiuri, “The Big Five Personality Characteristics as 
Predictors of Expatriates’ Desire to Terminate the Assign-
ment and Supervisor-Rated Performance,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy 53 (2000), pp. 67–88.
 25. Delia Flanja, “Culture Shockin Intercultural Communica-
tion,” Studia Europaea (October 2009), Business & Company 
Resource Center, http://galenet.galegroup.com.
 26. D. M. Gayeski, C. Sanchirico, and J. Anderson, “Design-
ing Training for Global Environments: Knowing What 
NOTES

CHAPTER 16 
Managing Human Resources Globally 529
Questions to Ask,” Performance Improvement Quarterly 15, 
no. 2 (2002), pp. 15–31.
 27. J. S. Black and M. Mendenhall, “A Practical but Theory-
Based Framework for Selecting Cross-Cultural Training 
Methods,” in Readings and Cases in International Human 
Resource Management, eds. M. Mendenhall and G. Oddou 
( Boston:  PWS-Kent, 1991), pp. 177–204.
 28. Brookfi eld Global Relocation Services, 2014 Global Mobil-
ity Trends Survey.
 29. Jordan Burchette, “Ultimate Checklist for Returning U.S. 
Expats,” CNNGo.com, February 21, 2012, http://www.cnngo 
.com.
 30. D. D. Davis, “International Performance Measurement and 
Management,” in Performance Appraisal: State of the Art in 
Practice, ed. J. W. Smither (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998), 
pp. 95–131.
 31. M. Gowan, S. Ibarreche, and C. Lackey, “Doing the Right 
Things in Mexico,” Academy of Management Executive 10 
(1996), pp. 74–81.
 32. L. S. Chee, “Singapore Airlines: Strategic Human Resource 
Initiatives,” in International Human Resource Management: 
Think Globally, Act Locally, ed. D. Torrington (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1994), pp. 143–59.
 33. “Johnson & Johnson Takes World View on Compensation,” 
Employee Benefi ts, June 2011, p. 7.
 34. “Top Whack: Big Country, Big Pay Cheques,” The Economist, 
January 29, 2011, EBSCOhost, http://web.ebscohost.com.
 35. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “International Comparisons 
of Hourly Compensation Costs in Manufacturing, 2012,” 
 August 9, 2013, http://www.bls.gov.
 36. See, for example, A. E. Cobet and G. A. Wilson, “Comparing 
50 Years of Labor Productivity in U.S. and Foreign Manufac-
turing,” Monthly Labor Review, June 2002, pp. 51–63; Bureau of 
Labor Statistics, “International Comparisons of Manufactur-
ing Productivity and Labor Cost Trends, 2008,” news release, 
October 22, 2009, www.bls.gov; Daron Acemoglu and Melissa 
Dell, “Productivity Differences between and within Countries,” 
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2010 2, no. 1 (2010), 
pp. 169–88.
 37. Stephen Miller, “Grasp Country Difference to Manage 
Global Pay,” Compensation Discipline, March 30, 2010, 
http://www.shrm.org.
 38. P. J. Dowling, D. E. Welch, and R. S. Schuler,  International 
Human Resource Management, 3rd ed. (Cincinnati: South-
Western, 1999), pp. 235–36.
 39. Ibid.; J. La Palombara and S. Blank, Multinational Corpora-
tions and National Elites: A Study of Tensions (New York: Con-
ference Board, 1976); A. B. Sim, “Decentralized Management 
of Subsidiaries and Their Performance: A Comparative Study 
of American, British and Japanese Subsidiaries in Malaysia,” 
Management International Review 17, no. 2 (1977), pp. 45–51; 
Y. K. Shetty, “Managing the Multinational Corporation: 
European and American Styles,” Management International Re-
view 19, no. 3 (1979), pp. 39–48; J. Hamill, “Labor Relations 
Decision-Making within Multinational Corporations,” Indus-
trial Relations Journal 15, no. 2 (1984), pp. 30–34.
 40. Dowling, Welch, and Schuler, International Human Resource 
Management, p. 231.
 41. Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian, “The World’s Largest Union: 
A ‘Capitalist Running Dog,’” Foreign Policy, April 23, 2014, 
http://www.foreignpolicy.com; International Trade Union 
Confederation, “Internationally Recognised Core Labour 
Standards in the People’s Republic of China,” Report for the 
WTO General Council Review of the Trade Policies of the 
People’s Republic of China (Geneva, May 10 and 12, 2010), 
http://www.ituc-csi.org.
 42. Syed Zain Al-Mahmood and Tripti Lahri, “Bangladesh Opens 
Door to More Unions,” The Wall Street Journal, May  13, 
2013; Jason Burke, “Bangladesh Eases Trade Union Laws 
after Factory Building Collapse,” Guardian, May 13, 2013.
 43. J. K. Sebenius, “The Hidden Challenge of Cross-Border Ne-
gotiations,” Harvard Business Review, March 2002, pp. 76–85.
 44. E. Krell, “Evaluating Returns on Expatriates,” HRMaga-
zine, March 2005, downloaded from Infotrac at http://web5 
. infotrac.galegroup.com.
 45. Ibid.; M. Harvey and M. M. Novicevic, “Selecting Expatri-
ates for Increasingly Complex Global Assignments,” Career 
Development International 6, no. 2 (2001), pp. 69–86.
 46. M. Mendenhall and G. Oddou, “The Dimensions of Expatri-
ate Acculturation,” Academy of Management Review 10 (1985), 
pp. 39–47.
 47. Arthur and Bennett , “The International Assignee.”
 48. J. I. Sanchez, P. E. Spector, and C. L. Cooper, “Adapting to 
a Boundaryless World: A Developmental Expatriate Model,” 
Academy of Management Executive 14, no. 2 (2000), pp. 96–106.
 49. P. Dowling and R. Schuler, International Dimensions of Human 
Resource Management (Boston: PWS-Kent, 1990).
 50. Sanchez, Spector, and Cooper, “Adapting to a Boundaryless 
World.”
 51. Neal Goodman, “Helping Trainees Succeed Overseas,” 
Training, March 2014, EBSCOhost, http://web.b.ebscohost 
.com.
 52. Andrew L. Molinsky, “Code Switching between Cultures,” 
 Harvard Business Review, January–February 2012, pp. 140–41.
 53. “How Can a Company Manage an Expatriate Employee’s 
Performance?” SHRM India, www.shrmindia.org, accessed 
May 6, 2010.
 54. Kwoh, “Asia’s Endangered Species.”
 55. Adler, International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior.
 56. Alice Andors, “Happy Returns,” HR Magazine, March 2010, 
Business & Company Resource Center, http://galenet
.galegroup.com.

530
Achievement Tests: Tests that measure a person’s 
existing knowledge and skills.
Action Learning: Training in which teams get 
an actual problem, work on solving it and commit 
to an action plan, and are accountable for carrying 
it out.
Adventure Learning: A teamwork and leadership 
training program based on the use of challenging, 
structured outdoor activities.
Affirmative Action: An organization’s active effort 
to find opportunities to hire or promote people in a 
particular group.
Agency Shop: Union security arrangement that 
requires the payment of union dues but not union 
membership.
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR): Methods 
of solving a problem by bringing in an impartial out-
sider but not using the court system.
Alternative Work Arrangements: Methods of 
staffing other than the traditional hiring of full-time 
employees (for example, use of independent contrac-
tors, on-call workers, temporary workers, and contract 
company workers).
American Federation of Labor and Congress of 
Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO): An associa-
tion that seeks to advance the shared interests of its 
member unions at the national level.
Apprenticeship: A work-study training method that 
teaches job skills through a combination of on-the-job 
training and classroom training.
Aptitude Tests: Tests that assess how well a person 
can learn or acquire skills and abilities.
Arbitration: Conflict resolution procedure in which 
an arbitrator or arbitration board determines a binding 
settlement.
Assessment: Collecting information and providing 
feedback to employees about their behavior, communi-
cation style, or skills.
Assessment Center: A wide variety of specific selec-
tion programs that use multiple selection methods to 
rate applicants or job incumbents on their management 
potential.
Associate Union Membership: Alternative form 
of union membership in which members receive 
discounts on insurance and credit cards rather than 
 representation in collective bargaining.
Avatars: Computer depictions of trainees, which the 
trainees manipulate in an online role-play.
Balanced Scorecard: A combination of performance 
measures directed toward the company’s long- and 
short-term goals and used as the basis for awarding 
incentive pay.
Behavior Description Interview (BDI): A struc-
tured interview in which the interviewer asks the 
candidate to describe how he or she handled a type of 
situation in the past.
Behavioral Observation Scale (BOS): A variation 
of a BARS which uses all behaviors necessary for effec-
tive performance to rate performance at a task.
Behaviorally Anchored Rating Scale 
(BARS): Method of performance measurement that 
rates behavior in terms of a scale showing specific 
statements of behavior that describe different levels of 
performance.
Benchmarking: A procedure in which an organiza-
tion compares its own practices against those of suc-
cessful competitors.
Benchmarks: A measurement tool that gathers rat-
ings of a manager’s use of skills associated with success 
in managing.
Bona Fide Occupational Qualification (BFOQ): 
A necessary (not merely preferred) qualification for 
performing a job.
Brand Alignment: The process of ensuring that 
HR policies, practices, and programs support or are 
congruent with an organization’s overall culture (or 
brand), products, and services.
Cafeteria-Style Plan: A benefits plan that offers 
employees a set of alternatives from which they can 
choose the types and amounts of benefits they want.
Calibration Meeting: Meeting at which managers 
discuss employee performance ratings and provide 
evidence supporting their ratings with the goal of 
eliminating the influence of rating errors.
Glossary

Glossary 531
Content Validity: Consistency between the test 
items or problems and the kinds of situations or prob-
lems that occur on the job.
Continuous Learning: Each employee’s and each 
group’s ongoing efforts to gather information and 
apply the information to their decisions in a learning 
organization.
Contributory Plan: Retirement plan funded by con-
tributions from the employer and employee.
Coordination Training: Team training that teaches 
the team how to share information and make decisions 
to obtain the best team performance.
Core Competency: A set of knowledges and skills 
that make the organization superior to competitors and 
create value for customers.
Corporate Campaigns: Bringing public, financial, 
or political pressure on employers during union orga-
nization and contract negotiation.
Cost per Hire: The total amount of money spent to 
fill a vacancy. The number is computed by finding the 
cost of using a particular recruitment source and divid-
ing that cost by the number of people hired to fill that 
type of vacancy.
Craft Union: Labor union whose members all have a 
particular skill or occupation.
Criterion-Related Validity: A measure of validity 
based on showing a substantial correlation between test 
scores and job performance scores.
Critical-Incident Method: Method of performance 
measurement based on managers’ records of specific 
examples of the employee acting in ways that are either 
effective or ineffective.
Cross-Cultural Preparation: Training to prepare 
employees and their family members for an assignment 
in a foreign country.
Cross-Training: Team training in which team mem-
bers understand and practice each other’s skills so that 
they are prepared to step in and take another member’s 
place.
Culture Shock: Disillusionment and discomfort that 
occur during the process of adjusting to a new culture.
Decision Support Systems: Computer software 
systems designed to help managers solve problems 
by showing how results vary when the manager alters 
assumptions or data.
Defined Benefit Plan: Pension plan that guarantees 
a specified level of retirement income.
Cash Balance Plan: Retirement plan in which 
the employer sets up an individual account for each 
employee and contributes a percentage of the employee’s 
salary; the account earns interest at a predefined rate.
Checkoff Provision: Contract provision under 
which the employer, on behalf of the union, automati-
cally deducts union dues from employees’ paychecks.
Closed Shop: Union security arrangement under which 
a person must be a union member before being hired; ille-
gal for those covered by the National Labor Relations Act.
Cloud Computing: The practice of using a network 
of remote servers hosted on the Internet to store, man-
age, and process data.
Coach: A peer or manager who works with an 
employee to motivate the employee, help him or her 
develop skills, and provide reinforcement and feedback.
Cognitive Ability Tests: Tests designed to measure 
such mental abilities as verbal skills, quantitative skills, 
and reasoning ability.
Collective Bargaining: Negotiation between union 
representatives and management representatives to arrive 
at a contract defining conditions of employment for the 
term of the contract and to administer that contract.
Commissions: Incentive pay calculated as a percent-
age of sales.
Communities of Practice: Groups of employees who 
work together, learn from each other, and develop a com-
mon understanding of how to get work accomplished.
Compensatory Model: Process of arriving at a selec-
tion decision in which a very high score on one type of 
assessment can make up for a low score on another.
Competency: An area of personal capability that 
enables employees to perform their work successfully.
Concurrent Validation: Research that consists of 
administering a test to people who currently hold a job, 
then comparing their scores to existing measures of job 
performance.
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act 
(COBRA): Federal law that requires employers to 
permit employees or their dependents to extend their 
health insurance coverage at group rates for up to 36 
months following a qualifying event, such as a layoff, 
reduction in hours, or the employee’s death.
Construct Validity: Consistency between a high score 
on a test and high level of a construct such as intelligence 
or leadership ability, as well as between mastery of this 
construct and successful performance of the job.

532 
Glossary
Defined Contribution Plan: Retirement plan in 
which the employer sets up an individual account for 
each employee and specifies the size of the investment 
into that account.
Delayering: Reducing the number of levels in the 
organization’s job structure.
Development: The acquisition of knowledge, skills, 
and behaviors that improve an employee’s ability to meet 
changes in job requirements and in customer demands.
Differential Piece Rates: Incentive pay in which the 
piece rate is higher when a greater amount is produced.
Direct Applicants: People who apply for a vacancy 
without prompting from the organization.
Disability: Under the Americans with Disabilities 
Act, a physical or mental impairment that substantially 
limits one or more major life activities, a record of hav-
ing such an impairment, or being regarded as having 
such an impairment.
DiSC: Brand of assessment tool that identifies indi-
viduals’ behavioral patterns in terms of dominance, 
influence, steadiness, and conscientiousness.
Disparate Impact: A condition in which employ-
ment practices are seemingly neutral yet dispropor-
tionately exclude a protected group from employment 
opportunities.
Disparate Treatment: Differing treatment of indi-
viduals, where the differences are based on the indi-
viduals’ race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, 
or disability status.
Diversity Training: Training designed to change 
employee attitudes about diversity and/or develop 
skills needed to work with a diverse workforce.
Downsizing: The planned elimination of large 
numbers of personnel with the goal of enhancing the 
organization’s competitiveness.
Downward Move: Assignment of an employee to a 
position with less responsibility and authority.
Due-Process Policies: Policies that formally lay out 
the steps an employee may take to appeal the employ-
er’s decision to terminate that employee.
EEO-1 Report: The EEOC’s Employer Informa-
tion Report, which details the number of women and 
minorities employed in nine different job categories.
E-Learning: Receiving training via the Internet or 
the organization’s intranet.
Electronic Human Resource Management 
(e-HRM): The processing and transmission of digi-
tized HR information, especially using computer net-
working and the Internet.
Electronic Performance Support System 
(EPSS): Computer application that provides access to 
skills training, information, and expert advice as needed.
Employee Assistance Program (EAP): A referral 
service that employees can use to seek professional 
treatment for emotional problems or substance abuse.
Employee Benefits: Compensation in forms other 
than cash.
Employee Development: The combination of 
formal education, job experiences, relationships, and 
assessment of personality and abilities to help employ-
ees prepare for the future of their careers.
Employee Empowerment: Giving employees 
responsibility and authority to make decisions regarding 
all aspects of product development or customer service.
Employee Engagement: The degree to which 
employees are fully involved in their work and the 
strength of their job and company commitment.
Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
(ERISA): Federal law that increased the respon-
sibility of pension plan trustees to protect retirees, 
established certain rights related to vesting and por-
tability, and created the Pension Benefit Guarantee 
Corporation.
Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP): An 
arrangement in which the organization distributes shares 
of stock to all its employees by placing it in a trust.
Employee Wellness Program (EWP): A set of com-
munications, activities, and facilities designed to change 
health-related behaviors in ways that reduce health risks.
Employment at Will: Employment principle that if 
there is no specific employment contract saying other-
wise, the employer or employee may end an employ-
ment relationship at any time, regardless of cause.
Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO): The con-
dition in which all individuals have an equal chance for 
employment, regardless of their race, color, religion, 
sex, age, disability, or national origin.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC): Agency of the Department of Justice 
charged with enforcing Title VII of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1964 and other antidiscrimination laws.

Glossary 533
Fleishman Job Analysis System: Job analysis tech-
nique that asks subject-matter experts to evaluate a job 
in terms of the abilities required to perform the job.
Flexible Spending Account: Employee-controlled 
pretax earnings set aside to pay for certain eligible 
expenses, such as health care expenses, during the same 
year.
Flextime: A scheduling policy in which full-time 
employees may choose starting and ending times 
within guidelines specified by the organization.
Forced-Distribution Method: Method of perfor-
mance measurement that assigns a certain percentage 
of employees to each category in a set of categories.
Forecasting: The attempts to determine the supply 
of and demand for various types of human resources to 
predict areas within the organization where there will 
be labor shortages or surpluses.
Four-Fifths Rule: Rule of thumb that provides (or 
shows) evidence of potential discrimination if an orga-
nization’s hiring rate for a minority group is less than 
four-fifths the hiring rate for the majority group.
Gainsharing: Group incentive program that mea-
sures improvements in productivity and effectiveness 
objectives and distributes a portion of each gain to 
employees.
Generalizable: Valid in other contexts beyond the 
context in which the selection method was developed.
Glass Ceiling: Circumstances resembling an invis-
ible barrier that keep most women and minorities from 
attaining the top jobs in organizations.
Global Organization: An organization that chooses 
to locate a facility based on the ability to effectively, 
efficiently, and flexibly produce a product or service, 
using cultural differences as an advantage.
Graphic Rating Scale: Method of performance 
measurement that lists traits and provides a rating scale 
for each trait; the employer uses the scale to indicate 
the extent to which an employee displays each trait.
Grievance Procedure: The process for resolving 
union-management conflicts over interpretation or 
violation of a collective bargaining agreement.
Health Maintenance Organization (HMO): A 
health care plan that requires patients to receive their 
medical care from the HMO’s health care profession-
als, who are often paid a flat salary, and provides all 
services on a prepaid basis.
Ergonomics: The study of the interface between 
individuals’ physiology and the characteristics of the 
physical work environment.
Ethics: The fundamental principles of right and wrong.
Evidence-Based HR: Collecting and using data 
to show that human resource practices have a posi-
tive influence on the company’s bottom line or key 
stakeholders.
Exempt Employees: Managers, outside salespeople, 
and any other employees not covered by the FLSA 
requirement for overtime pay.
Exit Interview: A meeting of a departing employee 
with the employee’s supervisor and/or a human resource 
specialist to discuss the employee’s reasons for leaving.
Expatriates: Employees assigned to work in another 
country.
Experience Rating: The number of employees a 
company has laid off in the past and the cost of provid-
ing them with unemployment benefits.
Experiential Programs: Training programs in which 
participants learn concepts and apply them by simulat-
ing behaviors involved and analyzing the activity, con-
necting it with real-life situations.
Expert Systems: Computer systems that support 
decision making by incorporating the decision rules 
used by people who are considered to have expertise in 
a certain area.
External Labor Market: Individuals who are 
actively seeking employment.
Externship: Employee development through a full-
time temporary position at another organization.
Fact Finder: Third party to collective bargaining 
who reports the reasons for a dispute, the views and 
arguments of both sides, and possibly a recommended 
settlement, which the parties may decline.
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA): Federal law that 
establishes a minimum wage and requirements for 
overtime pay and child labor.
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA): Federal 
law requiring organizations with 50 or more employ-
ees to provide up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave after 
childbirth or adoption, to care for a seriously ill family 
member, or for an employee’s own serious illness.
Feedback: Information employers give employees 
about their skills and knowledge and where these assets 
fit into the organization’s plans.

534 
Glossary
Instructional Design: A process of systematically 
developing training to meet specified needs.
Interactional Justice: A judgment that the orga-
nization carried out its actions in a way that took the 
employee’s feelings into account.
Internal Labor Force: An organization’s workers (its 
employees and the people who have contracts to work 
at the organization).
International Organization: An organization that 
sets up one or a few facilities in one or a few foreign 
countries.
Internship: On-the-job learning sponsored by an 
educational institution as a component of an academic 
program.
Involuntary Turnover: Turnover initiated by an 
employer (often with employees who would prefer to 
stay).
Job: A set of related duties.
Job Analysis: The process of getting detailed infor-
mation about jobs.
Job Description: A list of the tasks, duties, and 
responsibilities (TDRs) that a particular job entails.
Job Design: The process of defining how work will be 
performed and what tasks will be required in a given job.
Job Enlargement: Broadening the types of tasks 
performed in a job.
Job Enrichment: Empowering workers by adding 
more decision-making authority to jobs.
Job Evaluation: An administrative procedure for 
measuring the relative internal worth of the organiza-
tion’s jobs.
Job Experiences: The combination of relationships, 
problems, demands, tasks, and other features of an 
employee’s job.
Job Extension: Enlarging jobs by combining several 
relatively simple jobs to form a job with a wider range of 
tasks.
Job Hazard Analysis Technique: Safety promotion 
technique that involves breaking down a job into basic 
elements, then rating each element for its potential for 
harm or injury.
Job Involvement: The degree to which people iden-
tify themselves with their jobs.
Job Posting: The process of communicating infor-
mation about a job vacancy on company bulletin 
High-Performance Work System: An organiza-
tion in which technology, organizational structure, 
people, and processes work together seamlessly to 
give an organization an advantage in the competitive 
environment.
Host Country: A country (other than the parent 
country) in which an organization operates a facility.
Hot-Stove Rule: Principle of discipline that says dis-
cipline should be like a hot stove, giving clear warning 
and following up with consistent, objective, immediate 
consequences.
Hourly Wage: Rate of pay for each hour worked.
HR Analytics: Type of assessment of HRM effec-
tiveness that involves determining the impact of, 
or the financial cost and benefits of, a program or 
practice.
HR Dashboard: A display of a series of HR measures, 
showing the measure and progress toward meeting it.
HRM Audit: A formal review of the outcomes of 
HRM functions, based on identifying key HRM func-
tions and measures of business performance.
Human Capital: An organization’s employees, 
described in terms of their training, experience, judg-
ment, intelligence, relationships, and insight.
Human Resource Information System (HRIS): 
A computer system used to acquire, store, manipulate, 
analyze, retrieve, and distribute information related to 
an organization’s human resources.
Human Resource Management (HRM): The poli-
cies, practices, and systems that influence employees’ 
behavior, attitudes, and performance.
Human Resource Planning: Identifying the num-
bers and types of employees the organization will 
require in order to meet its objectives.
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986: 
Federal law requiring employers to verify and main-
tain records on applicants’ legal rights to work in the 
United States.
Incentive Pay: Forms of pay linked to an employee’s 
performance as an individual, group member, or orga-
nization member.
Industrial Engineering: The study of jobs to find 
the simplest way to structure work in order to maxi-
mize efficiency.
Industrial Union: Labor union whose members are 
linked by their work in a particular industry.

Glossary 535
employees who join the union remain members for a 
certain period of time.
Management by Objectives (MBO): A system in 
which people at each level of the organization set goals 
in a process that flows from top to bottom, so employ-
ees at all levels are contributing to the organization’s 
overall goals; these goals become the standards for 
evaluating each employee’s performance.
Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs): Forms on 
which chemical manufacturers and importers identify 
the hazards of their chemicals.
Mediation: Conflict resolution procedure in which 
a mediator hears the views of both sides and facilitates 
the negotiation process but has no formal authority to 
dictate a resolution.
Mentor: An experienced, productive senior 
employee who helps develop a less experienced 
employee (a protégé).
Merit Pay: A system of linking pay increases to rat-
ings on performance appraisals.
Minimum Wage: The lowest amount that employ-
ers may pay under federal or state law, stated as an 
amount of pay per hour.
Mixed-Standard Scales: Method of performance 
measurement that uses several statements describing 
each trait to produce a final score for that trait.
Multinational Company: An organization that 
builds facilities in a number of different countries in an 
effort to minimize production and distribution costs.
Multiple-Hurdle Model: Process of arriving at a 
selection decision by eliminating some candidates at 
each stage of the selection process.
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI): Psycho-
logical inventory that identifies individuals’ prefer-
ences for source of energy, means of information 
gathering, way of decision making, and lifestyle, pro-
viding information for team building and leadership 
development.
National Labor Relations Act (NLRA): Federal 
law that supports collective bargaining and sets out the 
rights of employees to form unions.
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB): Fed-
eral government agency that enforces the NLRA by 
conducting and certifying representation elections and 
investigating unfair labor practices.
Needs Assessment: The process of evaluating the 
organization, individual employees, and employees’ 
boards, in employee publications, on corporate 
intranets, and anywhere else the organization commu-
nicates with employees.
Job Rotation: Enlarging jobs by moving employees 
among several different jobs.
Job Satisfaction: A pleasant feeling resulting from 
the perception that one’s job fulfills or allows for the 
fulfillment of one’s important job values.
Job Sharing: A work option in which two part-time 
employees carry out the tasks associated with a single job.
Job Specification: A list of the knowledge, skills, 
abilities, and other characteristics (KSAOs) that an 
individual must have to perform a particular job.
Job Structure: The relative pay for different jobs 
within the organization.
Job Withdrawal: A set of behaviors with which 
employees try to avoid the work situation physically, 
mentally, or emotionally.
Knowledge Workers: Employees whose main 
contribution to the organization is specialized knowl-
edge, such as knowledge of customers, a process, or a 
profession.
Labor Relations: Field that emphasizes skills that 
managers and union leaders can use to minimize costly 
forms of conflict (such as strikes) and seek win-win 
solutions to disagreements.
Leaderless Group Discussion: An assessment cen-
ter exercise in which a team of five to seven employees 
is assigned a problem and must work together to solve 
it within a certain time period.
Leading Indicators: Objective measures that accu-
rately predict future labor demand.
Learning Management System (LMS): A com-
puter application that automates the administration, 
development, and delivery of training programs.
Learning Organization: An organization that sup-
ports lifelong learning by enabling all employees to 
acquire and share knowledge.
Lockout: An employer’s exclusion of workers from a 
workplace until they meet certain conditions.
Long-Term Disability Insurance: Insurance that 
pays a percentage of a disabled employee’s salary after 
an initial period and potentially for the rest of the 
employee’s life.
Maintenance of Membership: Union security rules 
not requiring union membership but requiring that 

536 
Glossary
Outplacement Counseling: A service in which pro-
fessionals try to help dismissed employees manage the 
transition from one job to another.
Outsourcing: Contracting with another organiza-
tion (vendor, third-party provider, or consultant) to 
provide services.
Paired-Comparison Method: Method of perfor-
mance measurement that compares each employee 
with each other employee to establish rankings.
Panel Interview: Selection interview in which sev-
eral members of the organization meet to interview 
each candidate.
Parent Country: The country in which an organiza-
tion’s headquarters is located.
Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act: Health care reform law passed in 2010 that 
includes incentives and penalties for employers provid-
ing health insurance as a benefit.
Pay Differential: Adjustment to a pay rate to 
reflect differences in working conditions or labor 
markets.
Pay Grades: Sets of jobs having similar worth or 
content, grouped together to establish rates of pay.
Pay Level: The average amount (including wages, 
salaries, and bonuses) the organization pays for a par-
ticular job.
Pay Policy Line: A graphed line showing the math-
ematical relationship between job evaluation points 
and pay rate.
Pay Ranges: A set of possible pay rates defined 
by a minimum, maximum, and midpoint of pay for 
employees holding a particular job or a job within a 
particular pay grade.
Pay Structure: The pay policy resulting from job 
structure and pay level decisions.
Peer Review: Process for resolving disputes by 
 taking them to a panel composed of representatives 
from the organization at the same levels as the people 
in the dispute.
Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation 
(PBGC): Federal agency that insures retirement 
benefits and guarantees retirees a basic benefit if the 
employer experiences financial difficulties.
Performance Management: The process through 
which managers ensure that employees’ activities and 
outputs contribute to the organization’s goals.
tasks to determine what kinds of training, if any, 
are necessary.
Nepotism: The practice of hiring relatives.
Noncontributory Plan: Retirement plan funded 
entirely by contributions from the employer.
Nondirective Interview: A selection interview in 
which the interviewer has great discretion in choosing 
questions to ask each candidate.
Nonexempt Employees: Employees covered by the 
FLSA requirements for overtime pay.
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH 
Act): U.S. law authorizing the federal government 
to establish and enforce occupational safety and health 
standards for all places of employment engaging in 
interstate commerce.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA): Labor Department agency responsible for 
inspecting employers, applying safety and health stan-
dards, and levying fines for violation.
Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs 
(OFCCP): The agency responsible for enforcing the 
executive orders that cover companies doing business 
with the federal government.
Offshoring: Moving operations from the country 
where a company is headquartered to a country where 
pay rates are lower but the necessary skills are available.
On-the-Job Training (OJT): Training meth-
ods in which a person with job experience and 
skill guides trainees in practicing job skills at the 
workplace.
Open-Door Policy: An organization’s policy of mak-
ing managers available to hear complaints.
Organization Analysis: A process for determining 
the appropriateness of training by evaluating the char-
acteristics of the organization.
Organizational Behavior Modification (OBM): A 
plan for managing the behavior of employees through 
a formal system of feedback and reinforcement.
Organizational Commitment: The degree to which 
an employee identifies with the organization and is 
willing to put forth effort on its behalf.
Orientation: Training designed to prepare employ-
ees to perform their jobs effectively, learn about their 
organization, and establish work relationships.
Outcome Fairness: A judgment that the conse-
quences given to employees are just.

Glossary 537
Realistic Job Preview: Background information 
about a job’s positive and negative qualities.
Reasonable Accommodation: An employer’s obli-
gation to do something to enable an otherwise quali-
fied person to perform a job.
Recruiting: Any activity carried on by the organi-
zation with the primary purpose of identifying and 
attracting potential employees.
Recruitment: The process through which the orga-
nization seeks applicants for potential employment.
Reengineering: A complete review of the organiza-
tion’s critical work processes to make them more effi-
cient and able to deliver higher quality.
Referrals: People who apply for a vacancy because 
someone in the organization prompted them to do so.
Reliability: The extent to which a measurement is 
from random error.
Repatriation: The process of preparing expatriates 
to return home from a foreign assignment.
Right-to-Know Laws: State laws that require 
employers to provide employees with information 
about the health risks associated with exposure to 
 substances considered hazardous.
Right-to-Work Laws: State laws that make union 
shops, maintenance of membership, and agency shops 
illegal.
Role: The set of behaviors that people expect of a 
person in a particular job.
Role Ambiguity: Uncertainty about what the orga-
nization expects from the employee in terms of what to 
do or how to do it.
Role Analysis Technique: A process of formally 
identifying expectations associated with a role.
Role Conflict: An employee’s recognition 
that demands of the job are incompatible or 
contradictory.
Role Overload: A state in which too many expecta-
tions or demands are placed on a person.
Sabbatical: A leave of absence from an organization 
to renew or develop skills.
Salary: Rate of pay for each week, month, or year 
worked.
Scanlon Plan: A gainsharing program in which 
employees receive a bonus if the ratio of labor costs to 
the sales value of production is below a set standard.
Person Analysis: A process for determining indi-
viduals’ needs and readiness for training.
Personnel Selection: The process through which 
organizations make decisions about who will or will 
not be allowed to join the organization.
Piecework Rate: Rate of pay for each unit produced.
Position: The set of duties (job) performed by a par-
ticular person.
Position Analysis Questionnaire (PAQ): A stan-
dardized job analysis questionnaire containing 
194 questions about work behaviors, work condi-
tions, and job characteristics that apply to a wide 
variety of jobs.
Predictive Validation: Research that uses the test 
scores of all applicants and looks for a relationship 
between the scores and future performance of the 
applicants who were hired.
Preferred Provider Organization (PPO): A health 
care plan that contracts with health care professionals 
to provide services at a reduced fee and gives patients 
financial incentives to use network providers.
Procedural Justice: A judgment that fair methods 
were used to determine the consequences an employee 
receives.
Profit Sharing: Incentive pay in which payments are 
a percentage of the organization’s profits and do not 
become part of the employees’ base salary.
Progressive Discipline: A formal discipline process 
in which the consequences become more serious if the 
employee repeats the offense.
Promotion: Assignment of an employee to a position 
with greater challenges, more responsibility, and more 
authority than in the previous job, usually accompanied 
by a pay increase.
Protean Career: A career that frequently changes 
based on changes in the person’s interests, abilities, and 
values and in the work environment.
Psychological Contract: A description of what an 
employee expects to contribute in an employment 
relationship and what the employer will provide the 
employee in exchange for those contributions.
Readability: The difficulty level of written 
materials.
Readiness for Training: A combination of employee 
characteristics and positive work environment that per-
mit training.

538 
Glossary
Strike: A collective decision by union members not 
to work until certain demands or conditions are met.
Structured Interview: A selection interview that 
consists of a predetermined set of questions for the 
interviewer to ask.
Succession Planning: The process of  identifying 
and tracking high-potential employees who will be 
able to fill top management positions when they 
become vacant.
Summary Plan Description: Report that describes 
a pension plan’s funding, eligibility requirements, risks, 
and other details.
Sustainability: An organization’s ability to profit 
without depleting its resources, including employees, 
natural resources, and the support of the surrounding 
community.
Talent Management: A systematic, planned effort 
to attract, retain, develop, and motivate highly skilled 
employees and managers.
Task Analysis: The process of identifying and ana-
lyzing tasks to be trained for.
Team Leader Training: Training in the skills neces-
sary for effectively leading the organization’s teams.
Teamwork: The assignment of work to groups of 
employees with various skills who interact to assemble 
a product or provide a service.
Technic of Operations Review (TOR): Method of 
promoting safety by determining which specific ele-
ment of a job led to a past accident.
Third Country: A country that is neither the parent 
country nor the host country of an employer.
360-Degree Performance Appraisal: Performance 
measurement that combines information from the 
employee’s managers, peers, subordinates, self, and 
customers.
Total Quality Management (TQM): A company-
wide effort to continuously improve the ways people, 
machines, and systems accomplish work.
Training: An organization’s planned efforts to help 
employees acquire job-related knowledge, skills, abilities, 
and behaviors, with the goal of applying these on the job.
Transaction Processing: Computations and calcula-
tions involved in reviewing and documenting HRM 
decisions and practices.
Transfer: Assignment of an employee to a position in 
a different area of the company, usually in a lateral move.
Selection: The process by which the organization 
attempts to identify applicants with the necessary 
knowledge, skills, abilities, and other characteristics 
that will help the organization achieve its goals.
Self-Assessment: The use of information by 
employees to determine their career interests, values, 
aptitudes, and behavioral tendencies.
Self-Service: System in which employees have 
online access to information about HR issues and go 
online to enroll themselves in programs and provide 
feedback through surveys.
Sexual Harassment: Unwelcome sexual advances as 
defined by the EEOC.
Short-Term Disability Insurance: Insurance that 
pays a percentage of a disabled employee’s salary as 
benefits to the employee for six months or less.
Simple Ranking: Method of performance measure-
ment that requires managers to rank employees in 
their group from the highest performer to the poorest 
performer.
Simulation: A training method that represents a real-
life situation, with trainees making decisions resulting 
in outcomes that mirror what would happen on the job.
Situational Interviews: A structured interview in 
which the interviewer describes a situation likely to 
arise on the job, then asks the candidate what he or she 
would do in that situation.
Skill-Based Pay Systems: Pay structures that set pay 
according to the employees’ levels of skill or knowl-
edge and what they are capable of doing.
Social Security: The federal Old Age, Survivors, 
Disability, and Health Insurance (OASDHI) program, 
which combines old age (retirement) insurance, survi-
vor’s insurance, disability insurance, hospital insurance 
(Medicare Part A), and supplementary medical insur-
ance (Medicare Part B) for the elderly.
Stakeholders: The parties with an interest in the 
company’s success (typically, shareholders, the commu-
nity, customers, and employees).
Standard Hour Plan: An incentive plan that pays 
workers extra for work done in less than a preset 
 “standard time.”
Stock Options: Rights to buy a certain number of 
shares of stock at a specified price.
Straight Piecework Plan: Incentive pay in which 
the employer pays the same rate per piece, no matter 
how much the worker produces.

Glossary 539
Utility: The extent to which something provides 
economic value greater than its cost.
Validity: The extent to which performance on a mea-
sure (such as a test score) is related to what the mea-
sure is designed to assess (such as job performance).
Vesting Rights: Guarantee that when employees 
become participants in a pension plan and work a 
specified number of years, they will receive a pension 
at retirement age, regardless of whether they remained 
with the employer.
Virtual Reality: A computer-based technology that 
provides an interactive, three-dimensional learning 
experience.
Voluntary Turnover: Turnover initiated by employ-
ees (often when the organization would prefer to keep 
them).
Work Flow Design: The process of analyzing the 
tasks necessary for the production of a product or 
service.
Workers’ Compensation: State programs that 
provide benefits to workers who suffer work-related 
injuries or illnesses, or to their survivors.
Workforce Analytics: The use of quantitative tools 
and scientific methods to analyze data from human 
resource databases and other sources to make  evidence-
based decisions that support business goals.
Workforce Utilization Review: A comparison 
of the proportion of employees in protected groups 
with the proportion that each group represents in 
the relevant labor market.
Yield Ratio: A ratio that expresses the percentage of 
applicants who successfully move from one stage of the 
recruitment and selection process to the next.
Transfer of Training: On-the-job use of knowledge, 
skills, and behaviors learned in training.
Transitional Matrix: A chart that lists job categories 
held in one period and shows the proportion of employ-
ees in each of those job categories in a future period.
Transnational HRM System: Type of HRM sys-
tem that makes decisions from a global perspective, 
includes managers from many countries, and is based 
on ideas contributed by people representing a variety 
of cultures.
Trend Analysis: Constructing and applying statistical 
models that predict labor demand for the next year, given 
relatively objective statistics from the previous year.
Unemployment Insurance: A federally mandated 
program to minimize the hardships of unemploy-
ment through payments to unemployed workers, 
help in finding new jobs, and incentives to stabilize 
employment.
Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection 
Procedures: Guidelines issued by the EEOC 
and other agencies to identify how an organization 
should develop and administer its system for selecting 
 employees so as not to violate antidiscrimination laws.
Union Shop: Union security arrangement that 
requires employees to join the union within a 
certain amount of time (30 days) after beginning 
employment.
Union Steward: An employee elected by union 
members to represent them in ensuring that the terms 
of the labor contract are enforced.
Unions: Organizations formed for the purpose of 
representing their members’ interests in dealing with 
employers.

540
Text Credits
Chapter 4 
Figure 4.2: Union Pacific, “Union Pacific Careers: Train Crew,” https://
up.jobs/train-crew.html, accessed May 7, 2014. Used with permission;  4.3: 
Union Pacific, “Union Pacific Careers: Train Crew,” https://up.jobs/train-
crew.html, accessed May 7, 2014. Used with permission.
Chapter 9 
Table 9.3: From Chapter 1.5, “Evaluating Human Resource Effective-
ness,” by Anne S. Tsui and Luis R. Gomez-Mejia from Human Resource 
Management: Evolving Roles & Responsibilities, edited by Lee Dyer, 
1988. Copyright 1988, Society for Human Resource Management, 
 Alexandria, VA. Used with permission. All rights reserved.
Chapter 11 
Figure 11.7: Brodke, M. R., Sliter, M. T., Balzer, W. K.,  Gillespie, J. Z., 
Gillespie, M. A., Gopalkrishnan, P., Lake, C. J., Oyer, B., Withrow, S., & 
 Yankelevich, M. (2009). The Job Descriptive Index and Job in General 
(2009 Revision): Quick Reference Guide. Bowling Green, OH: Bowling 
Green State University. Used with permission.
Chapter 13 
Figure 13.1: DILBERT (c) 1995 Scott Adams. Used by permission of 
UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved.
Chapter 15 
Table 15.1: Excerpted from J. A. Segal, “Unshackle Your Supervisors to 
Stay Union Free,” in HR Magazine, June 1998. Copyright © 1998, Society 
for Human Resource Management, Alexandria, VA. Used with permission. 
All rights reserved.
Chapter 16 
Figure 16.6: From C. Reynolds, “Compensation of Overseas Personnel,” 
in Handbook of Human Resource Administration, 2nd ed., ed. by 
J. J. Famularo, McGraw-Hill, 1986, p. 51. Reprinted with permission of 
The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
Photo Credits
Chapter 1
Page 2: © John A Rizzo/Pixtal/SuperStock RF; p. 5: © Justin Sullivan/
Getty Images; p. 7: © Lars A. Niki RF; p. 10: © PR NEWSWIRE/AP 
Images.
Chapter 2
Page 29: © Image Source, all rights reserved. RF; p. 31: © Jose Luis 
Pelaez, Inc./Corbis; p. 39: © Pixtal/AGE Fotostock RF; p. 48: 
© Comstock/PunchStock RF; p. 53: © Â© Redlink/Corbis RF.
Chapter 3
Page 62: © Associated Press; p. 63: Courtesy U. S. Department of 
Labor; p. 71: © AP Images/The Free-Lance Star, Mike Morones; p. 84: 
© Purestock/SuperStock RF; p. 85: Courtesy of OSHA/U.S. Department 
of Labor.
Chapter 4
Page 101: © Image Source, all rights reserved. RF; p. 105: © Stockbyte/
Getty Images RF; p. 109: © Courtesy U.S. Department of Labor; p. 118: 
© AP Images/Elaine Thompson; p. 123: © Javier Pierini/Getty Images RF.
Chapter 5
Page 132: © Associated Press; p. 135: © Royalty-Free/Corbis RF; 
p. 137: Courtesy of Cold Stone Creamery; p. 151: © NetPhotos/Alamy; 
p. 155: © Neville Elder/Corbis.
Chapter 6
Page 167: © AP Images for U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation; 
p. 169: © Image Source/age fotostock RF; p. 178: © Brand X Pictures/
PunchStock RF; p. 184: © AP Photo/Mark Lennihan; p. 187: © Phil 
 Boorman/Cultura/Getty Images RF.
Chapter 7
Page 200: © Anton Vengo/Purestock/Superstock RF; p. 204: © Najlah 
Feanny/Corbis; p. 215: © Associated Press; p. 217: © David Pu’u/Corbis; 
p. 226: © Corbis.
Chapter 8
Page 236: © Press Association via AP Images; p. 243: © Karen 
 Moskowitz/The Image Bank/Getty Images; p. 248: © Jacobs Stock 
 Photography/Getty Images/RF; p. 251: © Jacobs Stock Photography/Getty 
Images/RF.
Chapter 9
Page 270: © Kali Nine LLC/Getty Images RF; p. 273: © Peter Beck/
Corbis; p. 275: © Hero Images/Fancy/Corbis RF; p. 284: © B.O’Kane/
Alamy; p. 287: © Lars Niki RF.
Chapter 10
Page 298: © iStockphoto.com/alynst RF; p. 313: © iStockphoto.com/
dashadima RF; p. 315: © Ryan McVay/Photodisc/Getty Images RF; p. 317: 
© Ronnie Kaufman/Corbis; p. 319: © Ryan McVay/Getty Images RF.
Chapter 11
Page 332: © Image Source/Getty Images RF; p. 334: © Klaus Tiedge/
Blend Images LLC RF; p. 346: © Sandy Huffaker/Getty Images; p. 351: 
© Kim Steele/Getty Images RF; p. 354: © Steve Chenn/Corbis.
Chapter 12
Page 366: © Bob Pardue—Signs/Alamy; p. 369: © Walter Hodges/
Getty Images; p. 373: © Royalty-Free/Corbis RF; p. 379: © Jeff Vespa/
Wire Images/Getty Images; p. 384: © John Boykin/PhotoEdit—All rights 
reserved.
Chapter 13
Page 395: Clerkenwell/Getty Images RF; p. 397: ©  Purestock/Super-
Stock RF; p. 403: © Ariel Skelley/Blend Images LLC RF; p. 405: © 
Kwame Zikomo/SuperStock; p. 415: © The McGraw-Hill Companies, 
Inc./Andrew Resek, photographer RF.
Chapter 14
Page 423: © Sergey Mironov/Alamy RF; p. 429: © Chris Ryan/age 
fotostock RF; p. 432: © Flying Colours Ltd/Getty Images RF; p. 436: 
© AP Images/Tom Uhlman; p. 443: © Stuart O’Sullivan/Getty Images.
Chapter 15
Page 460: © Associated Press; p. 462: © Tim Pannell/SuperStock RF; 
p. 467: © Steven Rubin/The Image Works; p. 476: © Boston Globe via 
Getty Images; p. 482: © AP Photo/John Minchillo.
Chapter 16
Page 495: © JGI/Blend Images LLC RF; p. 497: © Sherwin Crasto/
Corbis; p. 500: © IMAGEMORE CO., LTD/Imagemore Co., Ltd./
Corbis RF; p. 503: © Paul Alamy/Corbis; p. 506: © Rob Brimson/The 
Image Bank/Getty Images.
Credits

541
Name and Company Index
AARP, 59
Abbott Laboratories, 9
Abdallah, E., 296
Abelson, R., 457
ACT, 107, 108
Adamopoulos, A., 60
Adams, J., 267
Adams, J. S., 393
Addison, J. T., 493
Adecco, 173
Adkins, C. L., 364
Adler, N., 517, 528
Adobe Systems, 159, 328–329
ADP (Automatic Data 
Processing), 218
Advanced Technology Services 
(ATS), 149
Aegis Media, 344
Agile Alliance, 60
Aguinis, H., 300, 330, 331
Ahluwalia, A., 296
Ahrend, G., 297
AIG, 18
Aiman-Smith, L., 330
Akerlof, G. A., 393
Al-Mahmood, S. Z., 529
Albertsons, 260
All-China Federation of Trade 
Unions, 462
Allen, D. G., 166
Allen, M., 100
Allen, T. D., 268
Allen-Ebrahimian, B., 529
Alliger, G. M., 233
Alonso-Zaldivar, R., 456
Alsever, J., 50
Amalgamated Clothing and 
Textile Workers Union 
(ACTWU), 478
Amazon, 128, 188–189, 375
American Express, 495–496
American Federation of Labor 
and Congress of Industrial 
Organizations (AFL-CIO), 
463
American Federation of State 
County, and Municipal 
Employees (AFSCME), 462
Amoco Oil, 40
Amy’s Ice Creams, 295
Anand, R., 235
Anderlini, J., 526
Anders, G., 197, 198
Anderson, C., 224
Anderson, D. C., 330
Anderson, J., 528
Anderson, L. E., 129
Anderson, N., 197, 363
Andes, J., 362
Andors, A., 529
Andrews, M. C., 362
Annis, R. C., 528
Anseel, F., 393
Antonioni, D., 331
Aon Corporation, 421
Aon Hewitt, 277, 278, 296, 421
Apple Computer, 159, 375
Applebaum, E., 493, 494
Archer, S., 250
Areddy, J. T., 528
Armitage, A., 328, 329
Arthur, J., 296
Arthur, J. B., 494
Arthur, M. A., 458
Arthur, M. B., 266
Arthur, M. M., 364
Arthur, W., 198
Arthur, W. A., 199
Arthur, W. A., Jr., 528, 529
Arthur J. Gallagher & 
Company, 279
Arvey, R. D., 197
Asay, J. C., 228
Ash, M., 493
Ash, R., 130
Ash, R. A., 421
Ashenfelter, O., 393
Ashforth, B. E., 164
Ashworth, S. D., 165
AT&T, 21, 152
Atchison, T. J., 60
Atlantic Health System, 31
Atlassian, 316–317
AtTask, 104
Atwater, L., 267
Atwater, L. E., 266
Aubrey, A., 388
Auriemma, A., 190
Avery, D. R., 165
Avila, J., 125
Azulay, H., 245
Bachman, J., 491
Bahree, M., 60
Bailey, C., 234
Bailey, S. P., 23
Bailey, T., 493
Bain & Co., 154
Baker, M., 221, 362
Bakke, A., 64, 66
Bakken, R., 60
Baldwin, T. T., 207, 234, 296
Balkin, D., 422
Balkin, D. B., 297, 422
Ballance, C., 232
Balzar, W. K., 355
Bamberger, M., 394
Banana Republic, 391
Banas, J. T., 165
Banjo, S., 523
Baranowski, L. E., 129
Barber, A. E., 165, 267
Barducci’s Italian Bistro, 356
Barnes-Farrel, J., 330
Barnes-Slater, C., 362
Barnett, R., 259
Barrett, G., 331
Barrett, P. M., 125
Barrick, M. R., 130, 198
Bartholomew, S., 528
Barton, T., 458
Baruch, D. W., 363
Basex, 124
Bates, R., 207
Bates, S., 180
Batt, R., 362, 493, 494
Battipede, C., 232
Battista, M., 130
Bauer, T. N., 198
Baughman, K., 363
Baumgartel, H., 233
Bazerman, M. H., 296
BB&T, 169
Beam, Inc., 29
Beam, B. T., Jr., 445, 457, 458
Beard, A., 364
Beauregard, M., 235

542 
Name and Company Index
Becker, B., 296
Becker, B. E., 493
Becker, T., 331
Becker, W. J., 362
Becker, W. S., 27
Beehr, T. A., 364
Beersma, B., 130
Beijing Family Hospital, 526
Belk, 81
Belkin, D., 455
Bell, D., 265
Bell, N. E., 363
Ben-Avi, I., 363
Bennett, J., 360
Bennett, S., 32
Bennett, W., 233
Bennett, W., Jr., 528, 529
Bensinger, G., 199
Berfield, S., 416, 490
Berg, T., 493–494
Berger, L. A., 422
Bergeron, C., 59
Bergey, P., 330
Bergman, T. J., 165
Berinato, S., 130
Berk, R. A., 331
Berkman, R., 57
Berkowitz, L., 393
Berman, R., 490
Berman-Gorvine, M., 475
Bernardin, H. J., 198, 297
Bernardin, J., 331
Berner, J. G., 198
Bertuas, C., 197
Berzukova, K., 235
Bhoir, A., 509
Bianchi, E. C., 362
Bingham, T., 49
Biogen Idec, 440
Birkland, S. A., 198
Biro, M. M., 113
Bischoff, G., 97
Bjork, R. A., 266
Black, J. S., 528, 529
Black, S., 515
Blackstone, J., 128
Blair, G., 517
Blake, S., 59
Blake-Beard, S., 364
Blank, S., 529
Blau, F. D., 393
Bliese, P. D., 363
Blinder, A. S., 422
Bloch, J. W., 480
Bloomberg BNA, 13
Blum, T., 458
Bobocel, D. R., 362
Bob’s Red Mill, 420–421
Boehle, S., 234
Boeing, 162–163, 214
Bogumil, W. A., Jr., 528
Bolch, B., 99
Bolino, M. C., 331
Bolt, J., 266
Bonache, J., 515
Bond, F. W., 130
Bono, J. E., 296, 363
Borman, W. C., 130
Borney, N., 360
Boudette, N. E., 360, 491
Boudreau, J., 290
Boudreau, J. W., 297
Boudway, I., 492
Boverie, P. E., 296
Bowers, C., 234
Bowling, C., 60
Bowling, N. A., 364
Boyce, C., 361
Bracker, J. S., 165
Brandenberger, A., 188
Brandon, E., 440
Brandt, C. J., 130
Brannick, M. T., 198
BraunAbility, 128–129
Braverman, E. P., 199
Bray, D. W., 266
Breaugh, J. A., 165, 363
Bregman, P., 235
Brett, J. F., 266
Brett, J. M., 100, 267
Bretz, R. D., 166, 394, 421
Bridgeway Federal Credit 
Union, 34
Briggs, G. D., 235
Brin, D. W., 52
British Petroleum, 40
Brockner, J., 362
Broderick, R., 297, 458
Brooks, A., 235
Brooks, C., 188
Bross, A., 515
Brotherson, P., 49
Brown, A., 130
Brown, D., 234
Brown, G. D. A., 394
Brozyna, C., 421
Bruce, S., 307
Brunswick, D., 457
Brynjolfsson, E., 164
Buchanan, L., 492
Buckner, A., 371
Budd, J. W., 493
Buffardi, L. C., 197
Buhler, P. M., 364
Buller, P. F., 331
Bullock, R., 245
Bullough, A., 505
Bunce, D., 130
Burchette, J., 529
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 
6, 30, 31, 33, 36, 43, 52, 59, 
60, 61, 89, 99, 100, 374, 375, 
376, 384, 393, 394, 425, 431, 
445, 446, 457, 464, 466, 482, 
492, 529
Bureau of National Affairs, 59, 60, 
99, 164, 197, 267, 321, 330, 
344, 398, 401, 413, 430
Burke, B., 113
Burke, J., 529
Burke, K., 99, 100
Burkitt, L., 60, 526
Burlingham, B., 233
Burris, E. R., 363, 364
Burton, C., 494
Burton, J. F., 457
Business & Legal Resources, 307
Butts, M., 267
Byham, W. C., 266
Byron, E., 265
CA Technologies, 279–280
Cable, D. M., 421
Caesars Entertainment, 447
Cain, G. G., 393
Caldbeck, R., 190
Calia, M., 139
Caligiuri, P., 502, 516, 528
Callahan, T. J., 422
Callanan, G. A., 266
Callender, J. C., 197
Calmeyn, H., 505
Cameron, D., 234
Campbell, D. R., 264
Campbell, J. P., 422
Campbell, R. J., 422
Campion, J. E., 199
Campion, M., 130
Campion, M. A., 130, 198, 199, 267
Cancino, A., 477, 490, 492
Cannon, M. D., 422
Cannon-Bowers, J. A., 234

Name and Company Index 543
Cano, H., 411
Caplan, A., 192
Cappelli, P., 394
CareerBuilder, 48, 151, 153, 164, 
173, 180, 190, 349
Cargill, 134
Carl’s Jr., 366
Carper, J., 419
Carr, L., 130
Carroll, S. A., 165
Carter, N., 268
Cascio, W., 130
Cascio, W. F., 27, 164, 166, 296
Casselman, B., 394
Castle, T., 419
Cavanaugh, G. F., 28
Cawley, B. D., 331
Cederblom, D., 331
Cendrowski, S., 523
Ceniceros, R., 182
Center for American Progress, 332
Center for Construction Research 
and Training, 87
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 91, 100
Cerff, D. de, 507
Cerrone, S., 362
CETRA Language Solutions, 527
Chaison, G. N., 493
Challenger, Gray & Christmas, 343
Chan, D., 266
Chao, G. T., 267, 331
Chapman, D. S., 165
Chappell, L., 527
Charney, M., 297
Chasan, E., 60, 416
Chattanooga State Community 
College, 214, 234
Chaudhuri, S., 98
Chee, L. S., 529
Chen, G., 363
Cheng, A., 294
Cheraskin, L., 267
Chiaburu, D. S., 363
Chicago Journeymen Plumbers 
Association, 477–478
Chief Executive Group, 386
Chipotle Mexican Grill, 388
Chishti, M., 59
Chowdhry, A., 149
Christ-Martin, G., 469
Christal, R., 129
Christie’s, 477
Chrysler Corporation, 406
Church, A., 60
Cifolelli, K., 324
Circuit City, 43
Cisco Systems, 49, 57, 285, 403
Citicorp, 41
Citigroup, 41
Claman, P. H., 266
Claremont Savings Bank, 288
Clarence Davids & Co., 140
Clark, K. E., 266
Clark, M. B., 266
Clause, C. S., 130
Clausen, J. A., 363
Clavenger, J., 199
Coalition of Immokalee 
Workers, 486
Cobet, A. E., 529
Coca-Cola, 258
Coffee & Power, 397
Cohan, P., 329
Cohen, D., 450
Cohen, G., 245
Cohen, J., 234
Cohen-Rosenthal, E., 494
Colby, N. A. B., 493
Cold Stone Creamery, 137
Coleman, C., 128
Coleman-Lochner, L., 265
Colihan, J. P., 363
College Athletes Players 
Association, 460
Collins, C., 165
Collins, J., 362
Collins, R., 330
Colosimo, J., 364
Colquitt, J. A., 198
Colvin, A., 493
Colvin, A. J. S., 493
Colvin, R., 145
Combs, J., 296, 494
Combs, R., 493
Comcast, 287
Communication Workers of 
America, 462
ConAgra Foods, 202, 251
Coné, J., 212
Congemi, J., 231
Connelly, J., 23
Connor, M., 49
ConocoPhillips, 411
Conrad, B., 330
Conrad, M. A., 165
Conroy, D., 268
Constans, J., 330
Container Store, 293–294
Conte, M. A., 422
Conway, J. M., 198
Cooke, D. K., 198
Cooper, C. L., 529
Cooper, M. J., 422
Cornell, C., 234
Corrigan, M. M., 108
Cortina, J. M., 198, 364
Costco, 4, 25, 378
Cotton, J. L., 268
Covert, B., 382
Cowherd, D. M., 394
Cox, T. H., 59
Coy, P., 296
Crabtree, S., 278
Craig, R. L., 235, 254
Crandell, St., 245
Cranny, C. J., 296
Crispin, G., 165
Cromidas, R., 378
Crooker, K. J., 458
Cropanzano, R. S., 362
Crotty, J. M., 362
Crowell, C., 330
Crowley, M. C., 128, 363
Crown Cork & Seal, 486
Ctrip, 121
Cubbage, A. K., 492
Cucina, J. M., 198
Culpepper, 394
Cummings, A., 364
Cummings, O. W., 129
Cummins, 247
Curington, W., 394
Currall, S. C., 393
Cusack, S., 297
Dahl, D., 393
Dahm, J., 421
Damodaran, A., 439
Damouni, N., 265
Danielson, C., 296
Dao, J., 98
Darden Business School, 215, 
240, 266
Darling, J., 304
Darling, P., 297
Dartmouth’s Tuck School of 
Business, 240
Datotel, 361
Davenport, T. H., 116
Davidson, A., 469
Davis, A., 74

544 
Name and Company Index
Davis, D. D., 529
Davis, M., 128
Davis, S., 259
Davis-Blake, A., 394
DaVita Healthcare, 353–354
Day, D., 266
Day, E. A., 198
Day, L., 97
De Fruyt, F., 197
Deaconness Health System, 220
Dean, J., 296
Dean, J. W., 27
Dean, J. W., Jr., 27
DeBord, D. G., 100
Decker, J. A., 100
Deery, S. J., 494
DeFillippi, R. J., 266
Delaheye, B. L., 234, 235
Delaney, J. T., 27
Deleeuw, K., 198
Delery, J. E., 362
Delise, L., 235
DelPo, A., 341
Delsohn, S., 125
DeMarie, S. M., 27
Dement, L., 92
Deming, W. E., 402, 421
Demos, 388
Denis, M., 362
Denny, A. T., 421
DePillis, L., 487
Deregowski, J., 528
Derr, C. B., 268
DeRue, D. S., 130
Derven, M., 49
Desai, H., 413
DeShon, R. P., 199
DeSmet, A., 235
Detert, J. F., 363, 364
DeTuncq, T. H., 13
Diamond, F., 297
Dice.com, 151
Dienhart, J., 28
Dierdorff, E. C., 130, 394
DiFonzo, S., 413
Dineen, B., 165
DiSalvo, D., 364
Dizik, A., 61, 130
Doe, L., 40
DoubleTree by Hilton, 211
Doucet, L., 494
Doucouliagos, C., 493, 494
Doucouliagos, H., 493
Dougherty, C., 99
Dougherty, T. W., 197, 267
Douglas, S. C., 363
Dowd, T., 477
Dowell, B., 259
Dowell, B. E., 268
Dowling, P. J., 529
Downey, M., 362
Downs, Paul, 408
Doyle, J., 363
Dreher, G. F., 421
Dresang, J., 528
Drexler, P., 261
Driesen, G., 505
Druckman, D., 266
DSI Work Solutions, 182
Dubin, S., 27
DuBois, C., 331
Dudley, N. M., 198
Dudley, R., 139
Duffy, M. K., 362
Dugoni, B. L., 199
Dulwich College Beijing, 526
Duncan, K. D., 421
Dunham, R. B., 355
Dunlop, J. T., 492
Dunn, C., 235
Dunn, K. H., 100
Dunn, L. E., 233
Dunn, W. S., 198
Dunnette, M. D., 268, 363, 364, 
421, 457
Durham, C. C., 363
Dwoskin, E., 528
Dyer, L., 289
Dzieza, J., 268
Dziurawiec, S., 528
E22 Alloy, 323
Earles, J. A., 197
Earnest, J. R., 166
EastBay Works, 154, 165
Eaton, A. E., 493, 494
Eby, L., 267
Eby, L. T., 268
Eddy, N., 393
Edens, P. S., 198
Eidelson, J., 475
Eight Crossings, 392–393
Eijsenring, C. L., 515
Eisenberger, R., 364
Ekeberg, S., 330
Elder, J., 159
Ellis, A., 129
Ellis, A. P. J., 199
Ellis, J. E., 129
Ellis, R. K., 233
Elmer, D., 268
Ely, R., 235
Embassy Suites, 155
Emelo, R., 267
Employee Benefit Research 
Institute, 446, 457, 458
Enron Corporation, 415
Ensor, J., 349
Erenkranz, B., 234
Erez, A., 198
Erfurt, J. C., 457, 458
Ernst & Young LLC, 151, 214
ESPN, 236–237
Essilor International, 50
Estig, F., 330
Estlund, C., 487
Estman, L. J., 267
Etsy, 444
Eulberg, J. R., 234
Everson, K., 238, 494
Eyde, L., 130
Facebook, 152, 159, 387, 475
Factory VFX, 179
Fagenson, E. A., 267
Fainaru, S., 125
Fainaru-Wade, M., 125
Fairchild, C., 25
Fang, M., 421, 528
Farnham, A., 357
Farnsworth, S., 330
Farr, J. L., 234, 331
Fealk, G. S., 472
Federal Mediation and 
Conciliation Service 
(FMCS), 482
Fehrenbach, P., 61
Feife, J., 517
Feild, H., 331
Feintzeig, R., 27, 59, 228, 330, 331
Feldman, D., 164, 266
Feloni, R., 455
Fenzi, F., 58
Feren, D. B., 421
Ferris, G., 267
Ferris, G. R., 198, 234, 266, 296
Ferzandi, L., 515
Fiester, M., 267
Filipczak, B., 508
Findley, H. M., 331
Fink, A., 130
Finkel, E., 61

Name and Company Index 545
Finnegan, E. B., 199
Fiorito, J., 493
Fischthal, A., 267
Fisher, A., 25, 27, 80, 99, 316, 341
Fisher, C. D., 165
Fisher, D., 487
Fitzgerald, W., 266
Flanja, D., 507, 528
Flautt, R., 268
Flaxman, P. E., 130
Fleishman, E., 130
Fleishman, E. A., 111, 197
FlorCruz, J., 526
Floro, N., 212
Foody, K., 491
Foote, A., 457
Forbath, W. E., 487
Ford, J., 331, 362
Ford, J. K., 234, 266
Ford, P., 526
Ford Motor Co., 406, 429
Foremski, T., 195
Forman, D. C., 290
Fossum, J. A., 422, 484, 493
Fottrell, Q., 455
Fox, A., 27, 28, 59, 60, 266, 267
Francis, T., 394, 422
Frankel, B., 261
Frasch, K., 60
Frauenheim, E., 61
Frayne, C. A., 235
Freeman, R. B., 493
Frege, C., 494
Freifeld, L., 60, 202, 238
Friedman, T. L., 108
Frier, S., 392
Fronstin, P., 457
Fry, E., 420
Fulmer, I., 363
Fulmer, I. S., 198, 421, 422
Funk, R., 100
Fusiler, M. R., 364
Gagne, R. M., 219, 235
Gain, B., 527
Galagan, P., 266
Galinsky, E., 122, 130, 458
Gallup, 277, 278, 296
Ganster, G. C., 364
Ganzach, Y., 199
Gap, 391
Gardner, P. D., 267
Garside, J., 394
Gartside, D., 505
Gasparro, A., 164
Gayeski, D. M., 528
Geewax, M., 421
Geiger, A. H., 267
Geise, A., 100
Gelfland, M., 528
Genentech, 360
General Accounting Office, 85
General Cable, 270–271, 296
General Electric, 240, 260, 275, 324
General Motors (GM), 359–360, 
406, 497
George, J., 330
Gephart, M. A., 296
Gephart, R. P., Jr., 296
Gerhart, B., 166, 296, 363, 393, 
394, 421, 422, 457, 458, 
494, 528
Gerhart, B. A., 363
Gewin, A. G., 198
Ghosh, S., 9
Giallourakis, M. C., 458
Giancola, F., 450
Giardina, M., 353
Gibson, S. G., 233
Gild, 194–195
Giles, W. F., 331
Gillespie, M. A., 199
Gillett, R., 173
Gilligan, K., 330
Girard, K., 297
Glassdoor, 378, 391
Glazer, E., 265
Glew, D. J., 363
Global Crossing, 415
Godard, J., 494
Gogus, C. I., 235
Goldstein, I. L., 233
Goldstein, P., 97
Goldstein, S., 421
Goltz, J., 197
Gomez-Mejia, L. R., 27, 289, 297, 
421, 422
González, Á., 455
Gonzalez, J. P., 413
Gonzalez, K., 234
Good Samaritan Hospital, 220
Gooding, R. Z., 197
Goodman, N., 529
Goodman, P. S., 393
Goodyear Tire and Rubber 
Company, 44
Google Inc., 40, 108, 127–128, 155, 
159, 184, 375, 378, 387
Gopalakrishnan, R., 528
Gorman, C., 235
Gottfredson, L. S., 197
Gough, H., 266
Gould, S., 267
Gowan, M., 529
Gowen, C. R., III, 422
Graham-Leviss, K., 364
Graham-Moore, B., 405
Graham-Rowe, D., 100
Grainger, 200
Graves, L. M., 165
Greco, A., 364
Greco, S., 197
Green, J., 165
Green, M. S., 363
Greenberger, D. B., 267
Greenhaus, J. H., 266
Greenhouse, S., 391, 491
Greenstein, T., 492
Gregersen, H., 515
Griffeth, R. W., 165
Griffin, R., 362
Grobart, S., 129
Groll, E., 492
Groshen, E. L., 393
Grossman, R. J., 27, 58, 268, 364, 
457, 494
Grover, S. L., 458
Groysberg, B., 265
Gruenberg, M. M., 421
Guardian Industries, 522
Guerin, L., 94, 175
Gueutal, H. G., 60, 363
Gulen, H., 422
Gupta, N., 362, 394
Gutenberg, R. L., 197, 198
Guthrie, J. P., 164
Gutner, T., 235
Guzzo, R. A., 296
H. J. Heinz, 138
Hackman, R., 117, 130
Hagan, C., 331
Hagan, C. M., 297
Hagerdoorn, M., 130
Hagerty, J. R., 60, 100, 149, 164, 
469
Halford, S., 321
Hall, A., 296, 494
Hall, D., 266
Hall, R., 331
Hallock, R. G., 100
Halzack, S., 122, 152

546 
Name and Company Index
Hamburger University, 240
Hamill, J., 529
Hammer, T. H., 267, 422
Hansen, F., 235
Hargreaves, S., 234
Harley, L., 324
Harley-Davidson, 467, 469
Harper, S. C., 363
Harris, E. A., 25
Harris, M. M., 393
Harris, P., 234
Harrison, D., 515
Harrison, D. A., 363, 458
Hartner, J., 60, 363
Harvard Business School, 215, 240
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, 226
Harvey, D., 234
Harvey, M., 529
Harvey, R., 330
Harvey, V. S., 199
Hasbro, 240
Haslam, S. A., 393
Hatch, D., 297
Hausknecht, J. P., 393
Hawk, R., 165
Hay Group, 40, 387
Hayes, T., 60, 363
Hazel, J., 129
Hazucha, J. F., 267, 268
HCL Technologies, 315
Healy, B., 440
Healy, J., 493
Heathfield, S. M., 11
Heavey, A. L., 393
Hedge, J., 259, 268
Heggestad, E. D., 198
Heidemeier, H., 331
Hein, R., 250, 341
Heintz, N., 361
Heirich, M. A., 457
Hellervik, L. W., 268
Helman, C., 420
Heneman, R., 331
Heneman, R. L., 421
Henneman, T., 235
Hennessey, H. W., 458
Hennessey, K., 94
Hennessey, R., 392
Henshaw, G., 362
Herbeck, D., 197
Herbers, A., 164
Herman, B., 382
Herman, E. E., 493
Herman, J. B., 355
Herman Miller, 287
Heroux, M., 421
Herzberg, F., 118
Hesketh, B., 130
Hess, M., 60
Hewlett-Packard, 232, 249
Hezlett, S., 267
Hezlett, S. A., 267
Hicks, M. D., 268
Higgs, A. C., 130
Highhouse, S., 165
Hilcorp Energy Company, 
419–420
Hill, C., 180
Hill, L., 197
Hilton, M., 60
HindlePower, 294–295
Hinken, T. R., 364
Hinrichs, J. R., 266
Hirsch, B. T., 464, 493
Hirsch, M. L., 267
Hirshman, A. O., 493
Hite, B., 59
Hitt, M. A., 27
Hobson, K., 235
Hochwarter, W. A., 458
Hodgetts, R., 60
Hodgson, P., 416
Hoekstra, D. J., 362
Hoffman, S. K., 458
Hofschneider, A., 129
Hofstede, G., 500, 528
Hogan, J., 197
Holdman, J., 196
Holland, E., 198
Hollenbeck, G. P., 266
Hollenbeck, J. R., 129, 130, 165, 
363
Holley, W., 331
Holmes, R., 520
Holmvall, C. M., 362
Holtom, B. C., 364
Holton, E. F., III, 207, 234
Holwerda, J. A., 393
Hom, P., 165
Home Depot, 7
Hook, L., 526
Hornik, R., 364
Horrigan, S., 412
Hough, L. M., 268, 363, 421, 457
Howard, A., 266
Hox, J. J., 130
Hoyer, W. D., 165
Hudson, J. P., 199
Huffcutt, A. I., 199
Huffman, A. H., 364
Hugos, M., 331
Hulin, C., 363
Humana, 215–216
Hunter, J., 330
Hunter, J. E., 197, 198, 199
Hunter, J. H., 198, 199
Hunter, L. W., 494
Huselid, M., 60, 363
Huselid, M. A., 27, 296
Hutchinson Sealing Systems, 67
Hyatt Hotels, 225
Hyland, M., 515
Hyman, J., 78
Hymowitz, C., 165, 265
Ibarra, H., 253
Ibarreche, S., 529
IBM, 14, 16, 143, 343, 384
Idaho State University, 249
IKEA, 391
Ilgen, D. R., 130, 165, 363
Ilies, R., 198, 362
Imperial Security, 81
Ingersoll Rand, 26
Ingols, C., 364
Inscape Publishing, 266
INSEAD, 253
Intel, 5, 282
Intel Corporation, 159
Intercontinental Hotels 
Group, 148–149
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 
142
International Association of 
Machinists and Aerospace 
Workers, 467, 469
International Brotherhood of 
Electrical Workers, 462
International Labour Organization, 
511
Internet Identity (IID), 117–118
Iverson, R. D., 164, 494
J. P. Stevens, 478
Jablonski, J. R., 60
Jackson, E., 321
Jackson, H. G., 22
Jackson, S. E., 165, 235
Jacobs, D., 164
Jacobson, S., 382
Janove, J., 331
Jansen, P. G. W., 266

Name and Company Index 547
Janssen, O., 130
Janssens, M., 100
Jargon, J., 393, 455, 490
Jass, B., 212
Javidan, M., 505
Jayasinghe, M., 494
Jeannerette, R. P., 197
Jehn, K., 235
Jenkins, D., 394
Jenkins, G. D., 297
Jennings, S. A., 422
Jentsch, F. G., 235
Jim’s Formal Wear, 407
Jobvite, 52
Joel, L., 198
Jõgi, L., 234
John, B., 364
Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical 
Center, 443
Johns Hopkins Medicine, 458
Johnson, E., 198
Johnson, J. L., 362
Johnson, L. B., 66, 72
Johnson, M. D., 130
Johnson, S. A., 164
Johnson & Johnson, 443, 510–511
Johnson Controls, 77
Jones, A., 99
Jones, C., 268
Jones, C. M., 330
Jones, D. A., 165
Jones, J. M., 27
Jones, R. G., 266
Jones, S., 330
Joshi, A., 235, 515
Judge, T., 364
Judge, T. A., 165, 296, 362, 363, 
393, 421
Jundt, D. K., 130
Jusko, J., 100, 267, 295
Justice for Janitors, 486
Kacmar, K. M., 198, 362
Kadet, A., 130
Kahn, L. M., 393
Kaiser Family Foundation, 457
Kalman, F., 266
Kane, C., 458
Kane, J., 331
Kane, J. S., 297
Kant, I., 18
Kanter, R. M., 250
Kanzanas, H. C., 234
Kapel, C., 281, 331
Kappos, D. J., 264
Karl, K., 362
Katz, H. C., 492, 493
Katzell, R. A., 296
Kaufman, R. T., 422
Kaufman, W., 27
Kavanaugh, M. J., 60, 234
Kaye, B., 267
Kaye, H., 477
Keating, R. J., 363
Keats, B. W., 27
Keebler, T., 50
Keefe, J., 493
Keeping, L. M., 331
Kehow, J., 130
Keirn, J., 238
Keller, R. T., 364
Kelloway, K., 362
Kendall, L., 330
Kernan, M., 331
Kerr, C., 492
Kerwin, D. M., 59
Ketchen, D., 296, 494
KFC, 45
Kim, B. H., 199
Kim, S., 164
Kinaxis, 196–197
Kindle, K., 296
King, M. L., Jr., 66
King, R., 130, 152
Kipperman, F., 363
Kirkpatrick, J. D., 224
Kirkpatrick, W. K., 224
Kirsch, M., 197
Kirsner, S., 164
Kisamore, J. L., 198
Klarna, 152
Klass, B., 393
Klayman, N., 199
Klein, K. E., 421
Klein, K. J., 422
Kleiner, M. M., 493
Kleinmann, M., 199
Kliff, S., 447
Klimasinska, K., 458
Klimoski, R., 331
Klineberg, S. L., 198
Klobucher, D., 286
Klout, 412
Kluger, A. N., 199, 363
Knesl, R., 413
Knight, V., 198
Knowles, M., 235
Knutson, R., 97
Kochan, I. A., 484
Kochan, T. A., 235, 480, 492, 493, 
494
Koh, Y., 392, 528
Köhlmann, T. M., 494
Kohn, L., 393
Komaki, J., 330
Korn, M., 99, 165, 197, 228
Korn Ferry, 80, 378
Korney, A., 266
Kossek, E. E., 458
Koster, K., 163, 363
Kowitt, B., 266
Kowske, B., 164
Koys, D. J., 362
Kozlowski, S. W. J., 332
KPMG LLP, 238
Kraiger, K., 331
Kram, K. E., 267
Kranz, G., 363
Kravitz, D., 99
Kravitz, D. A., 198
Kravitz, S. E., 355
Kreitner, R., 330
Krell, E., 59, 297, 330, 529
Kriesky, J., 493
Kroth, M., 296
Kruse, D. L., 422
Kucine, L., 268
Kuehner-Hebert, K., 234, 235
Kuhn, A., 493
Kulich, C., 393
Kunce, C., 199
Kursmark, L., 175
Kwoh, L., 452, 528, 529
La Palombara, J., 529
LaBlanc, L. E., 130
Lackey, C., 529
Lahri, T., 529
Lambert, T. A., 198
Lance, C. E., 198
Land O’Lakes, 45
Landau, J., 267
Landis, R. S., 130, 166
Landy, F., 331
Langeland, K. L., 330
Lapin, A., 164
Laroche, P., 493
Lasek, M., 197
Latham, G., 330, 331
Latham, G. P., 234, 235
Latimer, S., 268
Latta, S. M., 364

548 
Name and Company Index
Lavenant, M. S., 362
Lawler, E. E., 27
Lawler, E. E., III, 58, 61, 297, 
394, 421
Layard, R., 393
Lazarova, M., 266
Le, H., 198
Le Blanc, M. M., 362
Lebiecki, J. E., 198
Ledford, G. E., 394
Ledyard, M., 330
Lee, C., 331
Lee, S., 60
Lee, T. W., 364
Lee Hecht Harrison, 343
Lehmann Brothers, 18
Leipold, J. D., 197
Lejeune, T., 233
Lennihan, M., 391
Lentz, E., 268
Leo, M. C., 198
Leonard, B., 94
Leonard, G., 233
Leonard, J., 235
Leonard, M., 165
Lepak, D., 515
Lepak, D. P., 27
LePine, J. A., 198
Lepsinger, R., 130
Leritz, L., 421
Leslie, J. B., 268
Levaux, J., 458
Levin, D., 527
Levine, D. I., 394, 422
Levine, J., 235
Levy, P. E., 331
Lewis, A., 363
Lewis, K. R., 197
Li, N., 130
Li, W. D., 130
Liberty Mutual, 92, 93
Libkuman, T. M., 364
Liden, R. C., 165
Lienhardt, N., 199
Lievens, F., 198, 393
Lim, S., 364
Lima, L., 268
Lindell, M. K., 130
LinguaLinx, 527
LinkedIn, 152
Linnell, D. S., 266
Lipman, V., 278
Liska, L. Z., 458
Lister, K., 61
Little Tokyo Service Center 
(LTSC), 265–266
Liu, D., 364
Liu, Y., 494
Livernash, E. R., 493
Locke, E. A., 363, 364, 421
Lockhart, D. E., 362
Lockwood, A., 267
Lockwood, N., 61, 297
Loden, M., 34
Loher, B. T., 234
Lohr, S., 297
Lombardo, M. M., 267, 268
London, M., 266, 267, 268, 300, 
330
Long, A., 197
Loo, D., 526
Loten, A., 430, 457
Louis, M. R., 235
Lovell, S. E., 355
Lowe’s, 280
LRN Corporation, 29
Lublin, J., 362
Lublin, J. S., 99, 261, 265, 268, 331, 
394, 422
Lucas, S., 11
Lucia, A., 130
Luckerson, V., 455
Lundby, K., 164
Luthans, F., 60, 330
Luz, J., 363
Lynch, S., 159
McAfee, A., 164
Macan, T. H., 199
McBride, S., 392
McCafferty, D., 80, 104
McCaleb, V. M., 421
McCall, M., 267
McCall, M. W., Jr., 267, 268, 528
McCann, D., 296
McCarthy, P. M., 197
McCauley, C. D., 267, 268
McCaulley, M. H., 266
McClean, E. J., 364
McClendon, J. A., 393
McCrea, B., 165
McCurdy, C., 235
McDaniel, M. A., 199
McDonald, M. P., 276
McDonald’s, 240, 284, 388, 487
MacDuffie, J. P., 494
McElreath, J. M., 198
McEvoy, G. M., 166, 331
McFadden, J. J., 445, 457, 458
McGehee, W., 235
McGill University, 504
McGraw-Hill publishing 
company, 215
McGregor, J., 304, 391, 455
McGuinness, K., 98
McGurk, M., 235
McIlvaine, A., 80
McKendrick, J., 60
McKersie, R. B., 493
Maclay, K., 388
McMahan, G., 330
McMahan, G. C., 198
McMahon, J. E., 254
McNelly, T. L., 198
MacPherson, D. A., 464
McShane Construction 
Company, 90
McVeigh, P., 527
McWhirter, C., 198
Madden, J., 129
Madler, M. R., 27
Mager, B., 234
Magjuka, R. T., 234
Magley, V. J., 364
Magnan, M., 422
Mahoney, J. D., 528
Mainiero, L. A., 268
Major, M., 26
Malone, M., 296
Mangalindan, J. P., 392
Manjoo, F., 113
Manpower Group, 109
Mansfield Sales Partners, 143, 165
Manson, T. M., 198
Maranto, C. L., 493
Margerison, C., 296
Markova, G., 296
Marriott Corporation, 317
Marsick, V. J., 296
Marston, W., 242
Martin, K., 281
Martin, L., 267
Martinko, M. J., 363
Martocchio, J. J., 296
Marvin Windows, 43
Marx, R. D., 235
Massachusetts General Hospital, 
271–272
Massachusetts Mutual Life 
Insurance, 440
Massey, D., 477
MasTec Utility Services Group, 231

Name and Company Index 549
Mathews, A. W., 447
Mathieu, J. E., 234
Matos, K., 122, 130, 458
Matrocchio, J., 267, 268
Matthews, C., 98
Mattioli, D., 99
Maurer, S. D., 199
Mawhinney, T. C., 330
May, D., 130
Mayes, B. T., 364
Mayo Clinic, 223
McCord, P., 58
Meadow Hills Veterinary Center, 
329–330
Medoff, J. L., 493
Medsker, G. J., 130
Medsker, K. L., 235
Medtronic, 304
Meglino, B. M., 364
Mehler, M., 165
Meinert, D., 60, 196, 197, 422
Meissner, D., 59
Meister, J., 412
Melamed, S., 363
Melchers, K. G., 199
Mendenhall, M., 529
Men’s Wearhouse, 356
Mercer Human Resources 
Consulting, 520
Merck & Co., 21, 414, 415
Mercy Health Systems, 58
Merman, S. K., 254
Metcalf, A. O., 475
Metro Guide Publishing, 101–102
Michaels, D., 97
Michelin North America, 451, 526
Microsoft Corporation, 200–201, 
298–299, 375
Middendorf, C. H., 199
Milkovich, G. T., 393, 421, 422, 457
Miller, A., 71
Miller, S., 330, 421, 457, 529
Mills, G. E., 266
Millsap, R. E., 267
Milton, N., 276
Minor, F. J., 267
Mirabile, R. J., 114
Mirasol, K., 515
Mischel, L., 493
Mischel, L. J., 364
Mitchell, T. R., 364
Mitchum, R., 492
Mitra, A., 394
Moberg, D., 28
Mohr, D. C., 165
Mohr, R. D., 494
Moisse, K., 162
Molinsky, A. L., 529
Monger, R., 59, 60
Monster, 48, 151, 153
Montage Insurance Solutions, 26–27
Moon, H., 129
Moore, M., 331
Moran, G., 364, 421
Morath, E., 393, 490
Morath, R. A., 197
Morgan, B. A., 493
Morgenson, F. P., 198, 199
Morning Star, 50
Morris, M., 477
Morrison, A., 235, 267
Morrison, R. F., 267, 331
Morrow, J. E., 267
Morton Salt, 90
Moscoso, S., 197
Moser, K., 331
Mosher, B., 297
Moskowitz, R., 403
Mosley, E., 316
Mossholder, K. W., 331
Mount, M., 130, 198
Mount, M. K., 198
Mowday, R. T., 364
Mueller-Hanson, R., 198
Mullen, E. J., 266
Mullen, S., 128
Mulvey, T. A., 233
Mumford, M., 130
Mumford, M. D., 111
Mundy, C., 26
Muñoz-Bullón, F., 393
Murad, A., 321, 502
Murphy, K., 330
Murphy, K. R., 198
Murray, B. C., 394
Murray, J. R., 362
Murray, S., 528
Mutikani, L., 60, 234
Myers, R. A., 267
Nackley, J. V., 457
Nathanson, J., 412
National Association of Colleges 
and Employers, 8, 227
National Association of 
Manufacturers, 35
National Association of Tower 
Erectors (NATE), 97
National Bureau of Economic 
Research, 198
National Education Association, 
462
National Football League (NFL), 
124–125
National Hospitality Services 
(NHS), 2
National Labor Relations Board 
(NLRB), 472
National Public Radio (NPR), 
132–133
National Rental Car, 510
Naylor, J. C., 235
NBA, 62, 63
Neal, J. A., 60, 296
Neale, M. A., 458
Needleman, S. E., 197, 430, 
457
Nemeroff, W., 331
Netflix, 58, 425
Newman, D. A., 363
Newman, J. M., 393
Ng, T., 266
Nick’s Pizza and Pub, 232–233
Nike, 523
Nikravan, L., 57, 234, 265, 
304
Nissan of Manhattan, 396
Nixon, R. M., 72
Noe, A., 331
Noe, R., 233, 266
Noe, R. A., 165, 197, 234, 266, 267, 
268
Noer, D. M., 515
Nordstrom, 4, 119
Northcraft, G. B., 458
Northwestern University, 460–461
Novicevic, M. M., 529
Nowack, K. M., 268
NSI, 423
Nulik, J., 361
Nunnally, J. C., 197
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA), 
122–123
O’Connor, E. J., 234
Oddou, G., 529
Odiorne, G., 330
Odle-Dusseau, H. N., 198
Odman, R., 130
Office Depot, 403
Oh, S. B., 198

550 
Name and Company Index
Ohlott, P. J., 267, 268
Old Navy, 391
Oldham, G., 117, 130
Oldham, G. R., 364
O’Leary-Kelly, A. M., 362
Olian, J. D., 165
Olli, A. F., 296
Olson, C. A., 493
Olson, E. G., 330
Olson, P., 452
Oncor, 255
O’Neill, R., 364
Ones, D. S., 198
Opus Productivity Solutions, 196
Oracle, 16
Oran, O., 265
Oregon Center for Nursing, 227
O’Reilly, A., 129
Oremus, W., 412
Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and 
Development, 332, 434, 465, 
513, 528
Orion International, 167
Orlik, T., 528
Orvis, K. A., 198
Osburn, H. G., 197
Osterman, P., 494
Oswald, A. J., 394
Oswald, F. L., 198, 199
O’Toole, J., 61
Outsourcing USA, 143
Ovide, S., 330, 331
Oyez Project, 487
Pace, A., 301
Pace, R. W., 266
Paikert, C., 422
Palich, L. E., 165
Palm, 159
Park, T. Y., 362
Parkland Health and Hospital 
System, 382
Parks, L., 421
Paronto, M. E., 198
Parrey, D., 328, 329
Pastin, M., 28
Paterson, J., 528
Patrick, J., 403
Patton, G. K., 296
Paul, K. B., 28, 355
Paul Downs Cabinetmakers, 408
Pauly, M., 192
Pawlowski, A., 457
Payne, S., 60, 363
Payne, S. C., 235, 364
PayScale, 398
Pearlman, K., 130, 197
Pease, G. A., 235
Peck, D., 195
Pendaran, 216
Penley, L. E., 267
Penn, P., 330
PepsiCo, 408
Perreira, G. M., 199
Perrewe, P. L., 458
Perry-Smith, J. E., 364, 458
Personal Financial Advisors LLC, 
163–164
Peters, L. H., 234
Peters, M., 94
Peters, M. C. W., 130
Peterson, D. B., 268
Peterson, K., 128
Pfanner, E., 527
Pfeffer, J. P., 394
Pfizer, 204
Philips Healthcare, 255
Phillips, G., 130
Phillips, J. M., 165
Phillips, M., 164
Phillips-Jones, L. L., 267
Philz Coffee, 366
Piasentin, K. A., 165
Piedmont Natural Gas, 109
Pinder, C. C., 267
Pingitore, R., 199
Pinterest, 221
Piotrowski, M., 330
Pitney Bowes, 344
Pizza Hut, 45
Plan International, 286
Platania, J., 99
Ployhart, R. E., 363
Poovey, B., 393
Pooyan, A., 234
Popick, J., 296
Porter, L. W., 363, 364
Postlewaite, J. E., 198
Poteet, M. L., 268
Powell, G. N., 165
Powell, K., 360
Power, B., 27
Powers, M. L., 233, 234
PPD, 215
Premack, S. L., 166
Preston, R., 162
Prevent Blindness America, 91
Price, K. B., 221
Price, K. F., 235
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 163
Primack, D., 357
Prior, A., 391
Pritchard, R., 330
Procter & Gamble, 104, 264–265
Proctor, R., 360
Professional Neurological Services 
(PNS), 98–99
Pruis, E., 505
Pulakos, E., 259, 268, 300, 330, 331
Pulakos, E. D., 299
Pursell, E., 331
Qian, J., 394
Quayle, E., 349
Quicken Loans, 212, 353
Quik Trip, 4–5
Quinn, R. P., 364
Quinn, T. M., 268
Quinnell, K., 469
Quinones, M. A., 234
Rabl, T., 494
Radio Flyer, 58–59
Ragain, P., 100
Ragain, R., 100
Ragins, B. R., 268
Ramesh, A., 528
Ramirez, J. C., 329
Ramsey, L. J., 199
Ramsey, M., 360, 393
Rand Corporation, 85
Randolph, W. A., 528
Rasch, R., 164
Rastello, S., 458
Rau, P. R., 422
Raum, T., 492
Ravindranath, M., 195
Ravlin, E. C., 364
Rayasam, R., 296
Raymark, P. H., 198
Read, W., 421
Ree, M. J., 197
REI (Recreational Equipment Inc.), 
327–328
Reilly, A. H., 267
Reilly, B. A., 355
Reilly, C. E., 355
Reilly, G., 421
Reilly, M., 130
Reilly, R., 267
Reilly, R. R., 267

Name and Company Index 551
Remillard, B., 108
Renault-Nissan Alliance, 526–527
Renneboog, L. R. R., 393
Rentsch, J. R., 235, 363
Repa, B. K., 362
Republic Windows and Doors, 
491–492
Research by The Ladders, 151
Reynolds, C., 519
Reynolds, D. H., 198
Reynolds, M., 234
Rhino Foods, 418–419
Rhoades, L., 364
Rich, M., 362
Richardson, K., 413
Richtel, M., 195
Rimm, A., 296
Ritson, M., 165
Robbins, S. B., 198
Roberson, Q., 362
Robert Half Legal, 364
Robinson, D. D., 197
Robinson, T., 267
Rock, M. L., 422
Rodgers, R., 330
Rogers, C., 421, 493
Rohman, J., 294
Rokeach, M., 528
Roof, K., 378
Roosevelt, F. D., 470
Rosato, D., 164
Rose, J., 493
Rosen, B., 165
Rosen, C., 331
Rosen, E., 60
Rosen, R. J., 198
Rosenbush, S., 447
Rosener, J. B., 34
Rosette, A. S., 76
Ross, J., 363
Ross, R. A., 422
Ross, T. L., 405, 422
Rosse, J. G., 363
Rossett, A., 207
Roth, P., 330
Roth, P. L., 198, 363
Rothschild, R., 234
Rothstein, J., 362
Rothwell, W. J., 234, 268
Roughton, J., 100
Rouillier, J. Z., 233
Roush, P., 267
Rousseau, D. M., 61
Rowland, K. N., 234, 266
Royal DSM, 351
Rubin, C., 99
Rubin, P., 422
Ruderman, M. N., 267, 268
Ruetschlin, C., 388
Ruggeberg, B., 130
Rusli, E. M., 152
Russell, J., 300, 330
Russell, J. S., 233, 234
Russell, L., 300, 330
Rusty George Creative, 17
Ryan, A., 197
Ryan, A. M., 199
Ryan, M. K., 393
Rynes, S. L., 165, 166, 393, 421, 
422
S. C. Johnson, 444
Saari, L. M., 234
Sacco, J. M., 363
Sachdev, A., 99
Sackett, P., 331
St. Joseph Health, 182
Saint-Gobain, 140
Salagado, J. F., 197
Salas, E., 234, 235
Saleem, N., 74
Salopek, J., 234
Salvemini, N., 267
Sammer, J., 27
Sam’s Club, 4
Samuelson, K., 296
Sanborn, P., 421
Sanchez, J., 130
Sanchez, J. I., 529
Sanchez-Arias, F., 505
Sanchirico, C., 528
Sanghavi, D., 130
SAP, 162
Saporito, B., 139, 164
Saran, C., 113
Sarli, M. M., 458
Sashkin, M., 528
SatCom Marketing, 2
Sathe, V., 528
Savant Capital Management, 402
Scanlon, J., 59
Scanlon, J. N., 405
Schaufell, W. B., 130
Schawbel, D., 61
Schectman, J., 165, 416
Schermerhorn, J., Jr., 28
Schlangenstein, M., 116
Schleiger, D. J., 198
Schmidle, T. P., 457
Schmidt, F., 60, 363
Schmidt, F. L., 197, 198, 199
Schmidt, L., 13
Schmidtke, J. M., 364
Schmitt, N., 197, 198, 199, 363
Schneider, B., 28
Schneider, R. J., 267, 268
Schneier, C. E., 235
Schoenfeldt, L. F., 266
Schouten, M. E., 130
Schow, A., 196
Schowerer, C., 165
Schramm, J., 233
Schreiber, C. T., 235
Schroeder, K. G., 267
Schuler, R. S., 165, 529
Schur, M., 301, 330
Schuster, M. H., 422, 494
Schwartau, C., 364
Schwartz, E., 235
Schwartz, N. D., 165
Schwarz, J. L., 225, 493
Scism, L., 422
Scivicque, C., 61
Scorza, J., 57
Scott, B. A., 362
Scott, G., 228
Scott, J., 364
Scott, K., 363
Scripps Health, 31
Scullen, S., 330
Seago, J. A., 493
Sears Holdings, 386, 394
Sebenius, J. K., 529
Segal, J., 331
Segal, J. A., 478
Sego, D. J., 234
Seidman, D., 292
Selko, A., 296
Senge, D., 296
Serious Materials, 491–492
Serna, J., 125
Service Employees International 
Union, 462, 486, 487, 490
Shaffer, J. A., 198
Shaffer, M., 515
Shaffer, M. A., 363
Shah, N., 130
Shane, D., 297
Shapiro, M., 364
Shaw, B. M., 363
Shaw, J., 297
Shaw, J. D., 362, 394, 421

552 
Name and Company Index
Shaw, P. P., 164
Shellenbarger, S., 129, 197
Shenandoah University, 249
Sherer, P. D., 394
Sherlock, P. M., 197
Sherman, A., 59
Sherman, E., 457, 458
Shetty, Y. K., 529
Shi, K., 130
Shippmann, J., 130
Shontz, D., 363
Shrivastava, S., 297
Shropshire, C., 60
Siemens, 141, 287, 498
Silva, C., 268
Silverman, R. E., 235, 331, 378, 
394, 421
Silverman, S. B., 266
Sim, A. B., 529
Simon, A., 267
Simons, T., 362
Singapore Airlines, 510
Singer, A., 60
Singh, S., 164
Singh, V., 331
Sitzmann, T., 219, 234, 235
Slade, L. A., 267
Slichter, S., 493
Sloman, C., 505
Smith, B. J., 234, 235
Smith, D., 162, 331
Smith, D. C., 355
Smith, F. J., 100
Smith, J., 297
Smith, J. W., 300, 330
Smith, M. A., 198
Smith, P., 330
Smith, P. C., 266, 296
Smith, R., 520
Smith, R. S., 422
Smith-Jentsch, K. A., 235
Smithe, J., 268
Smither, J. W., 267
Snell, R. S., 267
Snell, S., 27, 296, 330
Snell, S. A., 27
Society for Human Resource 
Management (SHRM), 14, 
15, 21, 22, 27, 54, 121, 167, 
319, 450
Soderstrom, R. S., 362
Sodexo USA, 152, 455–456
Sohn, T., 164
Solman, P., 286
Solomon, C., 509
Soma, V., 363
Sonnentag, S., 130
Sony Corporation, 502
Sorra, J. S., 234
Sotheby’s, 477
Sourcefire, 403
Southwest Airlines, 43, 486
Souza, K., 98
Specialisterne, 162
Spector, P. E., 529
Spegele, B., 526
Spell, C., 235
Spiegel, E., 234
Spira, J., 130
Spiro, J., 457
Spiro, M. S., 296
Spitzer Auto Group, 395
Spreitzer, G. M., 528
Spriet, P., 40
Spring, B., 199
Sprint, 96–97, 301
St-Onge, S., 422
Stahl, G. K., 527
Staines, G. L., 364
Standard Chartered Bank, 509
Starbucks, 152, 454–455
Stasser, G., 199
Stech, K., 360
Steel, R. P., 363
Steelcase, 210–211
Steele-Johnson, D., 235
Steers, R. M., 363, 364
Steffy, B. D., 267
Steger, J. A., 266
Steilberg, R. C., 362
Stephens, J. K., 528
Sterling, D., 62–63
Steven, C. M., 493
Stevens, C. K., 165
Stevens, M. J., 267
Stevenson, C., 290
Steverman, B., 198
Steward, G. L., 198
Stewart, J. B., 128
Stillman, J., 60
Stinghamber, F., 364
Stone, B., 25, 27
Stone, E. F., 296, 363
Stoop, B. A. M., 266
Strauss, G., 493
Strauss, J. P., 198
Streitfeld, D., 159
Stroll, 324
Stuebing, K., 330
Sucec, J., 330
Suddath, C., 197
Sullivan, G. J., 233
Sullivan, T., 411
SumAll, 378
Surface, E. A., 233, 394
Sussman, D., 235
Sutton, B., 329
Sutton, C., 362
Svejnar, J., 422
Sweeney, A., 492
Sweet, K., 394
Sykes, T. A., 528
T3, 456–457
Talent Board, 169
Taleo Corporation, 152, 165
Tannenbaum, S. I., 60, 234
Taris, T. W., 130
Tasch, B., 490
Taylor, G. S., 458
Taylor, M. S., 165
Taylor, P. J., 130
Taylor, S., 266
Teachout, M. S., 197
Teamsters, 477
Tenbrunsel, A. E., 296
Tepper, B. J., 362
Terborg, J. R., 233, 234
Terry Dowd, 477
Tesluk, P. E., 234
Tharenov, P., 268
Thayer, P. W., 235
Thermo Fisher Scientific, 218
Thomas, D., 235
Thomas, H. C., 363
Thomas, K., 452
Thomas, T., 28
Thomason, T., 457
Thompson, D. E., 296
Thompson, M., 268
Thomson Reuters, 32
Thoresen, C. J., 296
Thorne, A., 266
Thornton, G. C., III, 198, 266
Three (mobile phone service), 444
3M, 19
Thurm, S., 197
Thurston, S., 294
Tigges, L. M., 164
Tillman, J., 330
Tims, D., 421
Tindal, J., 264

Name and Company Index 553
Walmart, 21, 97–98, 139, 196, 391, 
408, 416
Walter, L., 100
Walters, R. W., 166
Walz, P. M., 267
Wanberg, C. R., 165, 267
Wanek, J. E., 266
Wang, S., 267
Wang, S. S., 162
Wanous, J. P., 166
Ware, B. L., 364
Waren, T., 330
Warner, B., 32
Warner, D., 192
Warner, P. E., 413
Waters, R., 116
Wazeter, D. L., 393
Weatherby Healthcare, 54, 61
Weaver, D. A., 100
Webb, B., 493
Webb, S., 493
Webber, P. G., 297
Webber, S., 60, 363
Weber, L., 27, 54, 59, 122, 130, 165, 
188, 197, 234, 378, 456, 458
Weekley, J. A., 234, 363
Weichmann, D., 199
Weinbaum, W., 125
Weinstein, B., 357
Weinstein, M., 49, 267, 363
Weiss, R., 180
Weitzman, M. L., 422
Welbourne, T., 364
Welbourne, T. M., 422
Welch, D. E., 529
Welch, T. A., 268
Wells, S. J., 45
Welsh, E., 267
Werner, J. M., 331
Wernle, B., 493
Weslowski, M. A., 225
Wessel, D., 60, 94
Wesson, M. J., 235
West, B. J., 199
West, L. A., Jr., 528
Western & Southern Financial 
Group, 436
Westpac, 68
Westrick, P., 198
Wexler, S., 27
Wexley, K., 130, 330, 331
Wexley, K. N., 266
Weyman, 129
Wharton School of Business, 240
U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security, 46, 59
U.S. Department of Justice, 422
U.S. Department of Labor, 30, 70, 
85, 109, 136, 231, 234, 296, 
348, 371, 393, 440, 457
U.S. Department of State, 59
U.S. Employment Service 
(USES), 154
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office 
(USPTO), 263–264
Vaccaro, A., 316
Valentino-DeVries, J., 78
Van Buren, M. E., 296
Van Dyk, Deirdre, 164
van Hoorn, W. G., 515
Van Iddekinge, C. H., 198
Van Rooy, D. L., 362
Van Yperen, N. W., 130
Vance, A., 234
Vance, R., 60
Vance, R. J., 234
Vandenberghe, C., 364
Vargas, Y., 268
Vascellaro, J. E., 165
Vasilopoulos, N. L., 198, 237
VCare Project Management, 301
Velasquez, M., 28
Venkataramani, V., 198
Veslo, E. V., 268
Vi, 344
viaLearning, 232
Vidal, M., 164
Villanova, P., 297, 331
Vince, R., 234
Vistage, 145
Viswesvaran, C., 198
VitalSmarts, 301
Volkswagen AG, 214, 490–491
Von Aartburg, M., 199
Voos, P., 493
Vorro, A., 268
Vranica, S., 129
W. L. Gore, 10
W. W. Grainger, 37
Waddoups, C. J., 234
Wagner, J. A., III, 422
Wagner, S. H., 364
Wahba, P., 265
Walker, A., 267
Walker, J. L., 505
Wallis, D., 421
Tindale, R. S., 199
Titus, W., 199
Tiwana, A., 164
Tokar, J., 264
Ton, Z., 4, 27
Toomey, E. L., 268
Topf, M., 91
Topmiller, J. L., 100
Totty, M., 447
Tower, S. L., 165
Towler, A. J., 393
Tracey, J. B., 234
TransPerfect, 527
Trees, L., 276
Tretz, R. D., 165
Trevor, C. O., 393, 421, 422
Trojanowski, G., 393
Tromley, C. L., 60, 296
Trottman, M., 492
Truxillo, D. M., 198
Tsay, J., 378
Tsui, A. S., 27, 289
Tung, R. L., 60
Turban, D. B., 197, 267
Twitter, 152, 391–392
Tyson, L. D., 422
Tyson Foods, Inc., 253
Uggerslev, K. L., 165
UK Department of Work and 
Pensions, 113
Union Carbide, 68
Union Pacific, 106, 107
United Auto Workers (UAW), 406, 
468, 490–491
United Electrical, Radio, and 
Machine Workers of America, 
492
United Health Group, 124
United Steelworkers of America, 
460, 469
United-Health Group, 249
Universal Weather and Aviation, 40
University of Michigan, 240
University of Michigan Health 
Systems, 291
University of Pennsylvania Health 
System, 191
UPS, 116
U.S. Army, 167
U.S. Cellular, 97
U.S. Census Bureau, 121, 393
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 167, 
446

554 
Name and Company Index
Yellen, J. L., 393
Yelp, 444
Yglesias, M., 94
Yoo, T. Y., 199
Youmans, K., 362
Youndt, M. A., 27
Youth Rules!, 63
YouTube, 285
Yukl, G., 331
Yum! Brands, 45, 60, 388
Zahn, D., 224
Zappos, 128
Zatzick, C. D., 164
Zeno Group, 13
Zhao, H., 165
Zhou, J., 364
Zickar, M. J., 165
Zielinski, D., 50, 61
Zijistra, F. R. H., 130
Zilliox, K., 202
Zillman, C., 163, 490
Zimmerman, R. D., 363
Zoghi, C., 494
Zweig, D. I., 165
Witt, L. A., 198
Wittenberg-Cox, A., 257, 268
Wittmer, J. L. S., 99
Wlazelek, A., 295
Woellert, L., 164
Wohsten, M., 159
Wolf, C., 60
Wolfred, T., 266
Wong, V., 128, 490
Workday, 48
World Food Programme, 351
World Health Organization, 526
World Vision, 23
WorldCom, 415
Wozniak, A. K., 198
Wright, H., 344
Wright, P., 130, 324, 330
Wright, P. M., 198
Wu, K. B., 438
Xerox Corporation, 213
Yahoo HotJobs, 153
Yale-New Haven Hospital, 124
Yankay, J., 59, 60
Whetzel, D. L., 199
Whirlpool, 214, 317
White, E., 59
White, M. C., 257
White Castle, 366
Whitmore, M. D., 266
Whittaker, J. M., 457
Whole Foods Markets, 415
Wich, S. M., 457
Wiersma, U., 330
Wigdor, A. K., 421
Wiggenhorn, W., 296
Wikoff, M., 330
Wilk, S. L., 266
Wilkinson, S., 353
Willey, T. L., 362
Willingham, R., 452
Willyerd, K., 235
Wilson, G. A., 529
Wilson, H. J., 296
Wilson, L., 99
Wilson, M., 458
Wilson, M. A., 130, 233
Wincanton, 289–290
Winters, M., 235

555
Ability, 107
performance problems, 322
Acceptability, 303
Achievement tests, 181
Action learning, 218
Action plan/planning, career 
management, 255–256
Action steps, 75
Administrative purpose, of 
performance management, 
302
Adventure learning, 216–217
Advertisements, 153
Affirmative action, reverse 
discrimination and, 80–81
Affirmative action planning, 
145–146
Affordable Care Act (ACA), 
429–431, 434
Age Discrimination in Employment 
Act (ADEA), 65, 67–68, 
174
major issues, 449
Agency shop, 468–469
Agile software development, 39
Alternative dispute resolution 
(ADR), 340–342
arbitration, 342
mediation, 342
open-door policy, 341–342
peer review, 342
Alternative work arrangements, 
52–53
Amalgamated Clothing and 
Textile Workers Union 
(ACTWU), 478
American Federation of Labor and 
Congress of Industrial 
Organizations (AFL-
CIO), 463
Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA) of 1990, 65, 69–70, 
75
health insurance, 449
Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA) of 1991, hiring 
selection, 174
Antidiscrimination laws, 448–449
US as leader, 504
Application forms, 176–178
Apprenticeship, 213
Aptitude tests, 181
Arbitration, 342, 483
Assessment, 240–245; see also Needs 
assessment; Performance 
measurement
assessment center, 243–244
DiSC tool for, 242–243
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
(MBTI), 241–242
performance appraisals, 244
psychological profiles, 241–243
360-degree feedback systems, 244
Assessment center, 183, 243–244
Associate union membership, 478
Audiovisual training, 211
Audits of HRM, 288–289
Avatars, 215
Baby Boomers, 31, 32
Background checks, 179–181
Bakke v. California Board of Regents, 
64, 66
Balance sheet approach, 518–519
Balanced scorecard, 410–411, 412
executive pay, 414
Banding, 183, 384
Bargaining structure, 479
Behavior description interview 
(BDI), 187
Behavioral approach, assessment 
centers, 243–244
Behavioral modeling as training 
approach, 216
Behavioral observation scale (BOS), 
310–311
Behaviorally anchored rating scale 
(BARS), 309–310
Behaviorism, 311
Benchmarking, 375
Benefits, 9–10, 424; see also 
Compensation
accounting requirements, 449
antidiscrimination laws, 448–449
cafeteria-style plans, 446
communicating to employees, 
450–451
costs of, 425, 446–447
expatriate compensation, 518–521
family-friendly policies, 442–443
group insurance, 433–437
health care, 429–431
international workforce, 
512–513
job dissatisfaction and, 347
job satisfaction and, 450
legal requirements for, 
448–449
medical insurance, 433–436
optional programs, 431–444
required by law, 426–431
retirement plans, 437–442
role of, 424–425
selecting, 444–446
Social Security, 426–427
tax treatment of, 448
unemployment insurance, 
427–428
unpaid family and medical leave, 
429
workers’ compensation, 428–429
Benefits management
employee expectations and 
values, 444–445
organizational objectives, 444, 
445
selection of benefits, 444–447
Bill of Rights, 18
Binding arbitration, 483
Bona fide occupational qualification 
(BFOQ), 77
Bonuses, 396
group, 403, 405
one-time retention, 402–403
performance bonuses, 402
Brand alignment, 278
Broad bands, 384
Bureau of Labor Statistics 
(BLS), 30
Business games and case studies, 
215–216
Cafeteria plans, 446
Calibration meetings, 319
Card-check provision, 478–479
Career development, online 
support, 250
Subject Index

556 
Subject Index
Consumer-driven health plans 
(CDHPs), 435–436
Content and construct validity, 172
Continuous learning, knowledge 
sharing and, 275–277
Contract administration
grievance procedure, 483–485
new labor-management 
strategies, 485–486
nonunion representation systems, 
486
Contract company workers, 53
Contract negotiations, 479–481
alternatives to work stoppages, 
482–483
when bargaining breaks down, 
481–483
work stoppages and, 481–482
Contract workers, 140–142
Contrast errors, 318
Contributory retirement plans, 
437
Coordination training, 218
Core competency, 137
Core self-evaluations, 346
Corporate campaigns, 478
Correlation coefficient, 170
Cost control, 42–45
downsizing, 42–44
Cost of living, 373
Craft unions, 462
Criterion-related validity, 
171–172
Critical-incident method, 309
Cross-cultural preparation, 
508–510
Cross-training, 217
Crowdsourcing, as source of 
performance appraisals, 
316
Cultural differences; see Hofstede’s 
cultural dimensions
Culture, 499–502
defined, 499–500
Hofstede’s cultural dimensions, 
500–501
implication for HRM, 501
Culture shock, 507
Customer orientation of HRM, 
287–288
Customer service, HR practices 
that enhance, 34
Customers, performance 
information, 317
Communication
benefits information, 450–451
expatriates, 517–518
incentive pay plans, 412–413
Communities of practice, 220
Community, employee engagement 
and, 295
Compa-ratio, 385–386
merit increase grids, 400–401
Company structure; see 
Organization structure
Company unions, 486
Comparable worth, 369
Compensable factors, 379
Compensation; see also Benefits; 
Pay
balanced scorecard, 410–411, 
412
benefits as part of, 424–425
compensation discrimination, 72
contributing to high 
performance, 282–283
equity theory and fairness, 
376–377
executive pay, 386–387
expatriates and, 518–521
international workforce, 
511–513
limited budget ideas, 413
   managerial and executive pay, 
386–387, 414–416
Compensatory damages, 71
Compensatory model, 190
Competency, defined, 113
Competency models, 112–114
Competitive advantage, cultural 
diversity and, 34
Competitive challenges
competition for labor, 133
labor markets, 373
Compressed workweek, 120
Computer-based training, 211–213
Concurrent validation, 172
Congressional legislation, 66–72
Consolidated Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act 
(COBRA), 434
Constitutional amendments, 64, 66
Fourteenth Amendment, 64, 66
Thirteenth Amendment, 64
Construct validity, 172
Construction Education Foundation, 
467
Consumer Protection Act, 414
Career management
action planning, 255–256
data gathering, 252–254
development for careers, 
238–239
feedback, 254–255
goal setting, 255
steps overview, 252
systems, 251–256
Caregiving for elders plans, 443
Case studies, 215–216
Cash balance plans, 440–441
Change to Win, 463
Checkoff provision, 468
Chief executive officer (CEOs), 
386–387, 388
pay and performance related, 
414
Child care, 442
Child labor, 371–372
Civil Rights Act of 1991, 64, 70–71, 
75, 82, 174
maximum punitive damages 
allowed, 71
race or sex norming, 183
requirements in selection 
methods, 174
Civil Rights Act (CRAs) of 1866 
and 1871, 66
Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, 
473
Closed shop, 468
Cloud computing, 48, 287
Co-workers, 347, 352–354
job satisfaction and, 352–354
Coach and coaching, 251
e-HRM, 285–286
Cognitive ability tests, 182–183
Cognitive ability and training, 206
Collective bargaining, 479, 479–483; 
see also Labor relations
bargaining over new contracts, 
479–481
bargaining structure, 479
“fair share” provision, 487
Fight for 15 campaign, 490
football players, 460–461
typical contract provisions, 480
College savings (529) plans, 443
College and universities, 
154–155
Commissions, 396
sales, 403–404
straight commission plan, 404

Subject Index 557
Economic system, HRM and, 
international, 503–504
Education and skill levels, 503
EEO-1 Report, 75
Elder care plans, 443
Electronic human resource 
management (E-HRM), 
48; see also E-HRM
Electronic performance support 
systems (EPSSs), 213, 
220–221
Electronic recruiting, 151–153
Employability, 51
Employee assistance programs 
(EAPs), 342
Employee benefits; see Benefits
Employee compensation; see 
Compensation; Pay
Employee development, 237; see 
also Career management; 
Development
assessment, 240–245
enlarging the current job, 
246–247
formal education, 239–240
glass ceiling problem, 257–258
interpersonal relationships, 
249–251
leadership training, 263–264
performance appraisals, 244
succession planning, 258
transfers, promotions, and 
downward moves, 247–248
Employee engagement, 343–344
fun and community service, 295
job satisfaction and, 277–279
Employee retention
merit pay and, 398
one-time bonuses, 402–403
tuition reimbursement and, 
454–455
Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act (ERISA), 438, 
442
Employee safety, 84–88
cultural differences, 93
general duty clause, 85
“green” construction, 87
Occupational Safety and Health 
Act (OSH Act), 84–88
OSHA inspections, 87, 88
rights under OSH, 84, 87–88
safety awareness programs, 
88–93
Disparate impact, 77–79
four-fifths rule, 77–78
Disparate treatment, 76
bona fide occupational 
qualification (BFOQ), 77
employer’s intent, 78–79
“fetal protection,” 77
race and, 76
Distance learning, 210–211
Distributional errors, 318
Diverse workforce, 32–35
aging of workforce, 30–32
competitive advantage and, 34
current issues in, 83–84
diversity training programs, 
225–227
image advertising, 148
immigration and, 33
lack of rewards and, 80
safety posters, 90–91
skill deficiencies in, 35
Walmart and safety issues, 
97–98
Diversity training, 225–227
Dodd-Frank Act, 414
Domestic partners, 432
Downsizing, 42–44, 114, 
138–140
defined, 138
reasons for, 138
Downward move, 248
Drug tests, 185–186
Due process policies, 147
Duty of fair representation, 485
Dysfunctional managers, 260
E-HRM, 48, 285–287
E-learning, 212
E-verify, 175
Early retirement programs, 140
Economic changes; see also 
Competitive challenges; 
Globalization
challenges and trends overview, 
30
change in employment 
relationship, 50–54
flexibility, 52
focus on strategy, 39–47
high-performance work systems, 
35–39
labor force changes, 30–35
technological change in HRM, 
47–50
Davis-Bacon Act (1931), 372
Decision support systems, 283
Defamation, 179
Defined-benefit plan, 438
Defined-contribution plans, 438–440
Delayering, 384
Development, 8; see also Career 
management; Employee 
development; Training
approaches to employee 
development, 239–251
careers and, 237, 238–239
challenges, 257–260
future orientation, 237, 238
global employees, 510
individual development plan 
(IDP), 236
leadership skills, 253
stretch assignments, 245
training and, 237–238
Developmental purpose, of 
performance management, 
302
Dictionary of Occupational Titles 
(DOT ), 109
Direct applicants, 150
Disability
accommodation and, 81–82
job design, 128–129
medical examinations, 18
Disability insurance, 436
long-term, 436
short-term, 436
DiSC assessment, 242–243
Discrimination, 72, 504; see also 
Equal Employment 
Opportunity
comparison of theories, 76
compensation discrimination, 72
discipline policy, 337
disparate impact, 77–78
disparate treatment, 76–77
EEO policy, 80
employer’s intent, 78–79
reasonable accommodation, 
81–82
religious discrimination, 81
retaliation and, 74
reverse discrimination, 80–81
risk of using social media in 
hiring, 78
types of, 76–81
unemployed persons and, 93–94
women as parents, 98–99

558 
Subject Index
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay of 
2009, 72, 73
Pregnancy Discrimination Act, 
69
Reconstruction Civil Rights Acts 
(1866 and 1871), 66
Thirteenth Amendment, 64
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act 
of 1964, 66
Uniformed Services 
Employment and 
Reemployment Rights Act 
of 1994, 71
Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 
1973, 68–69
Equal Pay Act of 1963, 66
Equity theory and fairness, 
376–377
Ergonomics, 121–123
Ethical issues
conflicting values, weighing, 23
employee rights, 18–19
firing by e-mail and text, 
356–357
high-performance organizations, 
279–280
incentive pay for executives, 
415–416
incentives to promote ethical 
conduct, 416
measuring performance, 291
not hiring smokers, 191–192
offshoring, 523
performance management and, 
322–323
safety of foreign workers, 93
standards for ethical behavior, 
19–20
Evaluation of training, 222–223
applying the evaluation, 223–224
Evidence-based HR, 13–14
Executive branch, 63, 64
Executive education, 240
Executive Order(s), 72
Executive Order 10988, 465
Executive Order 11246, 64, 72
Executive Order 11478, 72
Executive pay
incentive pay, 414–416
long-term incentives, 414
performance measures, 414
short-term incentives, 414
Executive search firms (ESF), 154
Exempt employees, 370–371
Employer(s); see also Labor 
relations; Managers and 
management
societal trends and, 133
unfair labor practices, 471–472, 
474
Employment agencies, 154
Employment relationship, 50–54
declining union membership, 
51–52
psychological contract, 51
Employment tests, 181–183
Employment-at-will doctrine, 147, 
334
Empowering
high-performance work systems, 
294–295
teamwork and empowerment, 
275
union view, 485
Equal employment opportunity, 
pay differences, 368–369
Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission (EEOC), 64, 
66, 73
EEO-1 Report, 75
information gathering, 75
investigation and resolution, 74
issuance of guidelines, 75
major responsibilities of, 73
right to sue letter, 74
Equal Employment Opportunity 
(EEO), 64–72
congressional legislation, 66–72
constitutional amendments, 64, 
66
enforcement of, 74
executive orders, 72
Office of Federal Contract 
Compliance Programs 
(OFCCP), 75–76
sexual harassment, 82–83
summary of laws and 
regulations, 65
valuing diversity, 83–84
Equal employment opportunity law
Age Discrimination in 
Employment Act (ADEA), 
67–68
Civil Rights Act of 1991, 70–71
Equal Pay Act of 1963, 66
Executive Order 11246, 72
Executive Order 11478, 72
Fourteenth Amendment, 64, 66
Employee safety (continued )
summary of work-related 
injuries and illnesses, 86
top causes of workplace injuries, 
92
training programs for, 231
Walmart, 97–98
Employee separation, 334–335; see 
also Involuntary turnover; 
Voluntary turnover
alternative dispute resolution, 
340–342
firing by e-mail and text, 
356–357
involuntary turnover, 333–335
outplacement counseling, 343
principles of justice, 335–336
progressive discipline, 338–340
retaining top performers, 334
voluntary turnover, 333, 334
wrongful discharge, 334
Employee stock ownership plans 
(ESOPs), 409–410
Bob’s Red Mill, 420
Employee survey research, 355
Employee turnover
involuntary turnover, 333–335
voluntary turnover, 333, 334
Employee wellness programs 
(EWPs), 436
online, 437
reducing medical insurance 
costs, 451
Employee(s); see also Privacy; 
Workforce
basic rights, 18–19
empowerment, 38
engagement, 38
expectations and values about 
benefits, 444–445
international employees, 
497–498
job satisfaction, 2
motivation for learning, 206
as performance information 
source, 316–317
as a resource, 375
rights under OSHA, 84, 
87–88
safety of communication 
tower workers, 96–97
training and, 206
Employees-first philosophy, 
293–294

Subject Index 559
Global markets
expanding into, 45–47
global workforce, 45–46
international assignments, 
46–47
offshoring, 46
Global organizations, 499
multinational strategy for, 505
Global participation, international 
companies, 496, 498–499
Globalization
culture and, 499–502
economic system, 503–504
education and skill levels, 503
European Union (EU), 496
factors affecting HRM and, 
496–499
global activities, 496–497
global mindset, 526–527
Hofstede’s cultural dimensions 
and, 500–501
HRM planning, 504–506
labor costs, 505
North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA), 496
political-legal system, 504
training and developing 
workforce, 507–510
translation services, 527
Goals and goal setting
career management, 255
strategic planning and, 136–138
timetables, 75
Government regulation; see also 
Legal environment
Equal Employment 
Opportunity, 64–72
labor unions and, 464
minimum wage, 369–370
overtime pay, 370–371
prevailing wage laws, 372
Graphic rating scales, 306–307
Grievance procedures, 483–485
Group bonuses, 405
Group insurance, 433–437
Group mentoring programs, 251
Halo error, 318
Headhunters, 154
Health care benefits, employee 
assistance programs 
(EAPs), 342
Health care costs, 342
Health insurance, 429–431
Final-offer arbitration, 483
Financial Accounting Standards 
Board (FASB), employee 
benefits, 449
Financial planning for employees, 
439–440
529 savings plans, 443
Fleishman Job Analysis System, 
110–111
Flexibility, 122
Flexible spending accounts, 435
Flexible work arrangements, 51
telework, 120–121, 122
schedules, 53–54, 119–120
Flextime, 119–120
Floating holidays, 433
Forced distribution, fairness, 324
Forced-distribution method 
of performance 
measurement, 305–306
Forecasting, 133–136
HR planning process and, 
133–136
labor demand forecasting, 
134–135
labor supply forecasting, 
135–136
labor surplus or shortage, 136
transitional matrix, 135–136
Formal education programs, 
239–240
Four-fifths rule, 77–78
401(k) plans, 439
automatic enrollment, 440
Fourteenth Amendment, 64, 66
France, 506
Free riders, 469, 487
Gainsharing, 404–405
General duty clause, 85
Generalizability, 172
Generation X, 32
Generation Y, 32
Genetic Information 
Nondiscrimination Act of 
2008, 71–72
Glass ceiling, 257–258
Global companies, managing 
expatriates in, 514–515
Global environment, 496–497
employees in international 
workforce, 497–498
employers in global marketplace, 
498–499
Exit interview, 356
Expatriates, 47, 497
compensation of, 518–521
cross-cultural preparation, 
508–510
factors for success, 514–515
language barriers, 518
as managers, 514–515
managing, 514–515
most expensive cities, 520
pollution challenges, 526
predeparture phase, 508, 518
repatriation phase, 509–510, 
515, 521–522
selection of managers, 516
trailing spouses, 515
training and development of, 
515–518
Experiential training programs, 
216–217
Expert systems, 284
External labor market, 30
Externship, 248–249
Eye injuries, 91
Fact finder, 483
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)
child labor, 371–372
minimum wage, 369, 504
overtime pay, 370–371
Fairness, employee input, 397
Fairness and equity theory, 
376–377
communicating fairness, 
377–378
incentive pay, 397
Family leave, 442, 429
Family and Medical Leave Act, 429
Family-friendly policies, 442–443
babies at work, 456–457
child care, 442
college savings plans, 443
elder care, 443
Federal Mediation and Conciliation 
Service (FMCS), 482–483
Federal Register, 75
Feedback; see also Performance 
feedback
career management, 254–255
global workforce, 510
performance measures, 303, 319
training sessions, 219–220
Feminine cultures, 500
Fight for 15 campaign, 490

560 
Subject Index
goal setting and strategic 
planning, 136–138
labor demand, 134–135
labor supply, 135–136
labor surplus/shortage, 136–138
outsourcing, 142–143
overtime and expanded hours, 
144
overview of, 133
program implementation and 
evaluation, 144
reducing hours, 140
temporary workers, 140–142
Human resource recruitment 
process; see Recruitment 
process
Image advertising, 147–148
Immigration, 33
immigrant workers, 506
impact by region, 46
Immigration Reform and Control 
Act of 1986, 175–176
In-basket, 243
In-basket tests, 183
Incentive pay, 396–398
balanced scorecard, 410–411
communication with employees, 
412–413
employee participation in 
decisions, 412
employees treated with respect, 
418–419
for executives, 414–416
individual performance, 
398–404
international workforce, 512
processes that make it work, 
411–413
Independent contractors, 53
Individual Coaching for 
Effectiveness, 260
Individualism-collectivism, 500
Industrial engineering, 115–116
Industrial unions, 462
Information systems, 273; see 
also Human resource 
management (HRM) 
information systems
Inputs, 103
Insider trading, 415–416
Instructional design, 201
Interactional justice, 336
Internal labor force, 30
Human resource management 
(HRM)
analyzing and designing jobs, 7
audits, 288
CEO and CFO relationships 
with, 16
culture and, 499–502
defined, 3
education and skill levels, 503
effectiveness, 287–288
establishing and administering 
personnel policies, 10–11
ethics, 18–20
employee rights, 18–19
standards for ethical behavior, 
19–20
expatriation, 518
globalization and, 496–499
labor law compliance, 12
maintaining positive employee 
relations, 10
managing and using human 
resource data, 11–12
as people practices, 3
performance management, 8–9
planning and administering pay 
and benefits, 9–10
practices of, 3
problem-solving approach, 26
recruiting and hiring employees, 
7–8
supporting the organization’s 
strategy, 12–14
talent management, 13
training and developing 
employees, 8
Human resource management 
(HRM) profession; see 
also Human resource 
professionals
median salaries, 20
positions, education, and 
competencies, 20–21
skills of HRM professionals, 
14–16
success competencies, 14
Human resource planning process, 
13, 133–146
affirmative action planning, 
145–146
contract workers, 140–142
downsizing, 138–140
early retirement programs, 140
forecasting, 133–136
Health maintenance organization 
(HMO), 435
Health and safety; see Employee 
safety
High-performance work systems, 
35–39, 271–272
conditions that contribute to high 
performance, 274–280
elements of, 272–273
employee empowerment, 38
employee sense of ownership, 
419–420
empowerment of employees, 
294–295
executive pay, 414
HRM effectiveness, 287–291
HRM technology, 283–287
HRM’s contribution to high 
performance, 280–283
knowledge workers, 36–37
outcomes, 273–274
profit sharing and, 406–407
working in teams, 38–39
High-potential employees, 
258–259
Hofstede’s cultural dimensions, 
500–501
individualism-collectivism, 500
long- vs. short-term orientation, 
501
masculinity-femininity, 500
power distance, 500
uncertainty avoidance, 500
Honesty tests, 185
Horns error, 318
Host country, 497
Host-country nationals, 497
selection, 506
Hot-stove rule, 338–339
Hourly wage, 380
HR analytics, 288–291
HR dashboard, 285
HRM programs
analyzing effect of, 288–291
audits, 288–289
Human capital, 4
Human resource (HR) department
company performance and, 3–5
responsibilities of, 5–7
Human resource information 
system (HRIS), 47
applicant tracking, 284–285
HR dashboard, 285
relational databases, 284

Subject Index 561
personal dispositions, 350–351
supervisors and co-workers, 
352–354
tasks and roles, 351–352
values, 350
Job security, due-process policies, 
147
Job sharing, 120
Job specification, 106–107, 106–108
Job structure, 367
job evaluation and, 379
relative value of jobs, 379–380
Job withdrawal, 345–347, 
345–349
behavior change, 347–348
job dissatisfaction, 345–347
job satisfaction and, 350
physical job withdrawal, 
348–349
psychological withdrawal, 349
Job-based pay structures, 
delayering and banding, 
384
Judicial branch, 64
Justice
interactional justice, 336
outcome fairness, 335
principles of, 335–336
procedural justice, 335–336
Key employees, 441
Key jobs, 379–380
Knowledge, skills, abilities, and 
other characteristics 
(KSAOs), 106–107, 108
Knowledge management systems, 
221
Knowledge sharing, 275–277
social media tools for, 276
Knowledge work/workers, 36–37, 
503
Labor demand, 134–135
trend analysis, 134
Labor force
aging workforce, 30–32
defined, 30
diverse workforce, 32–35
internal and external, 30
Labor markets; see also Workforce
competition in, 133, 373
external labor market, 30
global, 506–507
labor surplus/shortage, 136–138
Position Analysis Questionnaire 
(PAQ), 109–111
Job applications and résumés, 
176–181
Job characteristics model, 117
Job complexity, 351
Job descriptions, 105–106
Job Descriptive Index (JDI), 355
Job design, 7, 105, 115–125
contributing to high 
performance, 280
dangerous jobs, 124–125
ergonomic jobs, 121–123
interruptions, 123–124
meeting mental capabilities and 
limitations, 123–124
motivational approach, 116–121, 
127, 128
“one best way,” 116
Job dissatisfaction
bizarre excuses for absences, 349
pay and benefits, 347
personal dispositions, 345–346
supervisors and co-workers, 347
tasks and roles, 346
Job enlargement, 118, 246–247
Job enrichment, 118–119
Job evaluation, 379
Job experiences, 245–251
downward moves, 248
externship, 248–249
job enlargement, 246–247
job rotation, 247
promotions, 248
sabbaticals, 249
temporary assignments, 248–249
transfers, 247–248
Job extension, 118
Job hazard analysis technique, 89
Job hopping, 51
Job involvement, 349, 361
Job postings, 148
online, 169
Job redesign, 115
Job rotation, 118, 247
Job satisfaction, 2, 350–356
benefits and, 450
employee engagement and, 
277–279
employee surveys, 355
Job Descriptive Index (JDI), 355
job withdrawal and, 350
monitoring of, 354–356
pay and benefits, 354
International employees, 497–498; 
see also Globalization
types of, 497
International markets, factors 
affecting HRM in, 499–504
International organizations, 499
International unions, 462
Internship, 214
apprenticeship compared, 213
opportunity or exploitation, 
227–228
Interpersonal relationships, 249–251
coaching, 251
mentoring, 249–251
Interrater reliability, 303
Interviews, 186–189, 243
advantages and disadvantages, 
187–188
alarm bells, 190
behavior description interview 
(BDI), 187
nondirective, 186
panel, 187
preparation for, 189
situational, 187
structured, 186
tips for effective, 188
Involuntary turnover, 333–335
alternative dispute resolution, 
340–342
employee assistance program 
(EAP), 342
management of, 333–334
outplacement counseling, 343
principles of justice, 335–336
progressive discipline, 338–340
Job, defined, 102
Job analysis, 7, 105, 105–115
importance of, 111–112
job descriptions, 105–106
job specification, 106–108
line managers and, 106
methods of, 109–114
sources of information for, 109
trends, 114–115
trends (gamification), 113
Job analysis methods, 109–114
analyzing teamwork, 110–111
competency models, 112–114
Fleishman Job Analysis System, 
110–111
Occupational Information 
Network (O*NET), 109

562 
Subject Index
Maintenance of membership, 468
Management by objectives (MBO), 
312–313
Managerial pay
incentive pay, 414–416
organization return on 
investment, 414
Managers and management; see also 
Labor relations; Strategic 
management
dysfunctional, 260
executive pay issues, 386–387
expatriate, 514–515
job analysis and line managers, 105
as mentors, 260–261
selection of expatriate managers, 
516
source of performance 
information, 314–315
training activities, 202
unions and, 462, 467–468, 
476–477
Market pay surveys, 375, 376
Market pressures
labor market competition, 376
product market competition, 
372–373
Market survey data, 380–381
Masculine cultures, 500
Masculinity-femininity dimension, 
500
Material safety data sheets 
(MSDSs), 88
Meaningful work, 351–352, 360
Mediation, 342, 482–483
Medical examinations, 186
Medical insurance, 429–431, 433–436
big data on emergency room 
use, 447
COBRA plans, 434
consumer-driven health plans 
(CDHPs), 435–436
cost control, 447
employee wellness program 
(EWP), 436
employees with disabilities, 449
flexible spending account, 435
health maintenance organization 
(HMO), 435
managed care, 435
preferred provider organization 
(PPO), 435
wellness programs to reduce 
costs, 451
Leading indicators, 134
Learning
distance learning, 210–211
employees’ motivation for 
learning, 206
principles of, 218–220
strategic approach to, 202
Learning culture, 277
Learning management system 
(LMS), 202
Learning organization, 275
Legal environment; see also 
Employee safety; Equal 
employment opportunity 
law
benefit packages, 426–431
compliance with labor laws, 12
employee benefits, 448–449
employee separation, 336–338
job analysis, 112
labor relations, 470–474
pay, 368–372
performance management 
systems and, 322–323
requirements for defined-
benefit pension plans, 
441–442
selection method, legality of, 
174–176
Legal system, 63–64
executive branch, 61
judicial branch, 61
legislative branch, 63–64
Legality of selection process, 
174–176
federal legislation, 174–176
immigration requirements, 
175–176
Legislative branch, 63–64
Leniency error, 318
Life insurance, 436
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 
2009, 72
Line managers
HR support to, 40
job analysis and, 105
Living wage, 370, 391
Local unions, 463
Lockout, 482
Long-term care insurance, 437
Long-term disability 
insurance, 436
Long-term-short-term orientation, 
501
Labor relations, 461; See also 
Collective bargaining
enforcement of labor law, 474
international context, 513–514
labor-management cooperation, 
485–486
legal framework for, 470–474
new strategies for, 485–486
societal goals, 469–470
three levels of decisions, 462
unfair labor practices, 471–472, 
474
Labor supply, 135–136
Labor surplus/shortage, 136–138
Labor unions, 461
AFL-CIO, 463
Change to Win, 463
collective bargaining, 479–483
company unions, 486
decertification, 479
enforcement, 474
Fight for 15 campaign, 
490
goals of, 468–469
impact on company 
performance, 466–467
international context, 513–514
largest in China, 462, 513
legal framework for, 470–474
local unions, 463
management goals, 467–468
membership, 51–52
membership trends, 463–465
national and international 
unions, 462–463
nonunion representation 
systems, 486
organizing campaigns, 
474–475
process of organizing, 
474–479
public sector and, 465–466
right to strike, 465–466
role of, 461, 462, 470
service sector, 463–464
“substitutes” for, 486
typical union member, 
466
unfair labor practices, 471–472, 
474
Landrum-Griffin Act (1959), 
471–472, 474
Layoffs, notification of, 338
Leaderless group discussion, 243

Subject Index 563
Older Workers Benefit Protection 
Act (OWBPA), 449
On-call workers, 53
On-the-job training (OJT), 
213–214
Open-door policy, 341–342
Organization analysis, 203–204
Organization strategy
competency models of job 
analysis, 114–115
performance management and, 
302
Organization structure
“project-based,” 115
work-flow analysis and, 103–105
Organizational behavior 
modification (BOM), 311
Organizational commitment, 349, 
360, 361
Organizational structure, 272
Orientation, new employees, 
224–225
Outcome fairness, 335
Outplacement counseling, 343
Outputs, 102
Outsourcing, 44–45, 505
human resource planning, 
142–143
Overtime pay, 370–371
Paid holidays, 432
Paid leave, 432–433
Paid time off, 433
Paired comparison method, 306
Parent country, 497
Parent-country nationals, 497
selection, 506–507
Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (ACA), 429–431, 
434
benefits for workers at colleges, 
455–456
Pay, 9–10, 367; see also 
Compensation 
alternatives to job-based pay, 
384–385
deciding what to pay, 374–375
economic influences on, 
372–375
entry-level rates, 382, 388
equity theory and fairness, 
376–377
executive pay, 386–387
group performance, 404–405
certification, 476
employee participation 
committees, 486
nonunion systems violations, 
486
representation elections, 473–
474, 476
National unions, 462–463
Needs assessment, 203–206
organization analysis, 203–204
person analysis, 204–205
task analysis, 205–206
Nepotism, 151
Neutrality provision, 478
New Deal legislation, 470
New technologies; see Technology
No-fault liability, 428
Noncontributory retirement plans, 
437
Nonexempt employees, 371
Nonkey jobs, 380
North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA), 496
Occupational Information Network 
(O*NET), 109
Occupational intimacy, 279
Occupational Safety and Health 
Act (OSH Act), 64, 84–88
employee rights under, 84, 
87–88
enforcement, 87
ergonomic guidelines, 122–123
general duty clause, 85
impact of, 88
inspections, 87, 88
material safety data sheets, 88
right-to-know laws about 
hazards, 88
workplace illnesses and 
injuries, 88
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA), 
Office of Federal Contract 
Compliance Programs 
(OFCCP), 72, 75–76
action steps, 75
goals and timetables, 75
utilization analysis, 75
Office of Personnel Management, 
72
Offshoring, 46
ethical issues, 523
Older workers, 30–32
Medical leave, 429
Medical savings account, 435
Medicare, 426, 427
Mental capabilities and limitations, 
123–124
Mentors, 249
manager as, 260–261
Mentoring, 249–251
benefits of, 250–251
characteristics of successful 
programs, 250
developing successful programs, 
249–250
group mentoring program, 251
Mergers and acquisitions, 40–41
Merit increase grids, 400–401
Merit increases, 401
Merit pay, 398
basic features of, 400–401
criticism of, 401–402
Military duty, pay during, 386
Millennials, 32
Minimum wage, 369–370
Fight for 15 campaign, 490
Mixed-standard scales, 308–309
Mobile devices
HR services on, 50
repetitive stress injuries, 122
self-service, 49
Mobile technologies
audiovisual training, 211
developing training content for, 
212
recruitment and, 133
Money-purchase plans, 438
Motivation, performance 
improvements and, 322
Motivation to learn, 206
Motivational approach, 116–121
Multinational companies, 499
Multiple-hurdle model, 190
Myers-Briggs Type Inventory 
(MBTI), 241–242
National Institute for Occupa-
tional Safety and Health 
(NIOSH), 85, 87
National Labor Relations Act 
(NLRA), 470–471
duty of fair representation, 485
laws amending, 471–473
unfair labor practices, 485
National Labor Relations Board 
(NLRB), 473–474

564 
Subject Index
Personal days, 433
Personal dispositions
job dissatisfaction, 345–346
job satisfaction, 350–351
Personality inventories, recruiting, 
194–195, 196–197
Personnel policies, 10–11, 147–148
employment-at-will policies, 147
image advertising, 147–148
internal vs. external recruiting, 147
lead-the-market pay strategies, 147
writing effective, 11
Personnel selection, 168; see also 
Selection method standards
Phased-retirement programs, 140
Physical ability tests, 181–182
Physical job withdrawal, 348–349
Picketing, 481
Piecework rate, 380, 399
differential piece rates, 399
straight piecework plan, 399
Planning process; see Forecasting; 
Human resource planning 
process
Point manuals, 379
Political-legal system, 504
Polygraph Act, 185
Position, defined, 102
Position Analysis Questionnaire 
(PAQ), 109–111
Power distance, 500
Predictive validation, 171–172
Preferred provider organization 
(PPO), 435
Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 
1978, 69, 429
rationale, 448
Prevailing wage laws, 372
Prevent Blindness America, 91
Privacy
drug testing, 185
e-HRM, 48
electronic monitoring and, 323
employer’s reputation and, 338
legal environment, 337
selection process, 174–175
Procedural justice, 335–336
Product market competition, 
372–373
Productivity
high-performance work systems, 
273
labor union impact, 466–467
measuring, 311–312
development of, 380–385
international workforce, 
511–512
job-based pay structures, 
383–384
market survey data, 380–381
pay grades, 381–382, 383
pay policy line, 380–381
Peer review, 342
Peers, as source of performance 
information, 315
Pension Benefit Guaranty 
Corporation (PBGC), 438
Pension Protection Act of 2006, 
440
Performance appraisal, 244
Performance feedback, 319–321
conducting, 320–321
preparing for, 320
scheduling, 319–320
Performance management, 8–9, 
298
Check-In system, 328–329
contributing to high 
performance, 281–282
criteria for effective, 302–304
driven by mission, 327–328
errors in performance 
measurement, 317–319
expatriates, 518
finding solutions to performance 
problems, 321–322
giving performance feedback, 
319–321
goal-oriented system, 304
guidelines, 282
international, 510
legal and ethical issues, 322–323
making comparisons, 304–314
methods for measuring 
performance, 303
most popular performance 
appraisals, 307
planning to improve 
performance, 300, 301
political behavior in, 318–319
process of, 298–300
process of, six steps, 298–299
purposes of, 301–302
sources of performance 
information, 314–317
Performance problems, finding 
solutions to, 321–322
Person analysis, 204–205
Pay (continued )
highest paid occupations, 374
international workforce, 
511–512
job dissatisfaction and, 347
job satisfaction and, 354
lead-the-market pay strategies, 
147
legal requirements for, 368–372
market pay surveys, 375, 376
military duty and, 386
organizational performance, 
406–410
overtime and expanded hours, 
144
overtime pay, 370–371
as share of major costs, 367
social media talk, 378
union members, 467
Pay differentials, 383–384
Pay grades, 381–382
job evaluation points, 383
Pay for group performance, 404–405
gainsharing, 404–405
group bonuses, 405
team awards, 405
Pay for individual performance
merit pay, 400–402
performance bonuses, 402–403
piecework rates, 399–400
sales commissions, 403–404
standard hour plans, 400
Pay levels, 367
decisions in, 374–375
employees as a resource, 375
high-tech sector, 391–392
job structure and, 379–380
key jobs, 379–380
market pay surveys, 375, 376
market pressures and, 392–393
product market competition, 
372–373
Pay for organizational performance, 
406–410
stock ownership, 407–409
Pay policy line, 380–381
Pay ranges, 382–383
Pay rates, 380–381
Pay Satisfaction Questionnaire 
(PSQ), 355
Pay structure, 367
actual pay and, 385–386
current issues involving, 
386–387

Subject Index 565
government requirements 
for vesting and 
communication, 441–442
summary plan description 
(SPD), 442
Return on investment (ROI), 
training results, 223
Reverse discrimination, 66, 80–81
affirmative action and, 80–81
Reward systems, and high 
performance, 273
Right to sue letter, 74
Right-to-know laws about safety 
concerns, 88
Right-to-work laws, 472–473
Rights arbitration, 483
Role ambiguity, 346
Role analysis technique, 352
Role conflict, 347
Role overload, 347
Role-plays, 243
Role(s), 346–347
clear and appropriate, 352
Sabbaticals, 249
social service agency, 265–266
Safety awareness programs, 88–93
identifying/communicating job 
hazards, 89–91
job hazard analysis technique, 89
promoting safety internationally, 
93
reinforcing safe practices, 91–92
technic of operations review 
(TOR), 89
Safety and health; see Employee safety
Salary, 380
Scanlon plan, 405
Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), 414
Selection, 7–8
applicant tracking (HRIS), 
284–285
contributing to high 
performance, 280–281
global labor market, 506–507
Selection decisions, 189–191
bottom line and, 173
communicating, 191
compensatory model, 190
how organizations select 
employees, 189–191
importance of, 168
multiple-hurdle model, 190
labor shortages, 195–196
personality inventories, 
194–195
website upgrades for, 132–133
Recruitment process, 146–147
cost per hire, 155–156
image advertising, 147–148
inclusive approach of SAP, 162
internal vs. external recruiting, 
147
lead-the-market pay strategies, 
147
organizational strategy (Boeing), 
162–163
personnel policies, 147–148
recruiters, 156–159
recruitment sources, 148–156
small-scale staffing, 163–164
Recruitment sources, 148–156
advertisements, 153
colleges and universities, 154–155
direct applicants and referrals, 
150, 150–152
electronic recruiting, 151–153
evaluating source quality, 155–156
external sources, 149–150
internal sources, 148–149
public/private employment 
agencies, 154
Reengineering, 44
References, 178–179
Referrals, 150
Reliability
correlation coefficient, 170
defined, 170
of measurement, 170
performance measures, 303
standards for, 170
Religious accommodation, 81
Repatriation, 509–510, 515, 
521
Repetitive-stress injuries (RSIs), 
122
Requests for proposals (RFPs), 
training programs, 
208–209
Reshoring, 46
Résumés, 178
Retaliation, 74, 88
Retirement plans, 437–442
cash balance plans, 440–441
defined-benefit, 438
defined-contribution, 438–440
ERISA, 438
Profit sharing, 406–407, 408
retirement contributions, 
438–439
Progressive discipline, 338–340
announcing a disciplinary action, 
341
Projects, 249
Promotions, 248
Protean career, 239
Protégé, 249
Psychological contract, 51
learning opportunities and, 201
Psychological profiles, 241–243
Psychological withdrawal, 349
Public sector, unionization, 
465–466
Punitive damages, 71
Qualified plans, 448
Quid pro quo harassment, 83
Race norming, 182–183
Ranking
groups of employees, 304–306, 
324
rating individuals, 306–311
simple, 304–305
Rater errors, 317–318
Rating individuals, 306–311
mixed-standard scale, 308–309
rating attributes, 306–309
rating behaviors, 309–311
Readability of training materials, 
220
Readiness for training, 206–207
employee readiness 
characteristics, 206
work environment, 206–207
Reasonable accommodation, 81–82
disability and, 81–82
religion and, 81
training opportunities, 208
Reconstruction Civil Rights Act 
(1866 and 1871), 66
Recruiters, 156–159
behavior of, 157
characteristics, 157
impact of, 157–159
realistic job interviews, 157
traits of, 157–158
Recruitment, 7
contributing to high 
performance, 280
e-HRM, 286

566 
Subject Index
job satisfaction and, 352–354
unions and, 477
Sustainability, 14
Taft-Hartley Act (1947), 471–472, 
479
Talent management, 13
Target date funds (TDFs), 440
Task, 346
job dissatisfaction and, 346–347
Task analysis, 205–206
Task design, 272
Tasks, duties, and responsibilities 
(TDRs), 105
Tax laws, benefits, 425
Taxes, employee benefits, 448
Team leader training, 218
Team(s)
awards for performance, 405
empowerment and, 275
high-performance work systems 
and, 38–39
job analysis, 110–111
merit pay discouraging, 402
personality tests, 185
self-managing, 119
training, 217–218
Teamwork, 38–39
Technic of operations review 
(TOR), 89
Technology; see also Human 
resource management 
(HRM) information 
systems; Mobile 
technologies; Social media
audiovisual training methods, 
211
change in HRM, 47–50
cloud computing, 287
computer-based training, 
211–213
disabled people and, 82
E-HRM, 285–287
e-learning, 212
electronic human resource 
management (e-HRM), 48
electronic performance support 
systems, 213
high tech “stealing” of 
employees, 159
HP University, 232
HR dashboard, 49, 285
HR services on mobile devices, 
50
support for career development, 
250
use in training, 221
wellness programs, 437
Social media policies, 32
Social networking, learning and 
information sharing, 50
Social networking sites, recruiting, 
152
Social Security, 426–427
exempt amount, 426–427
Social Security Act of 1935, 154
Social support, encouraging 
training, 206–207
Society for Human Resource 
Management (SHRM), 14
membership, 21
social media presence, 21, 22
Stakeholders, 14
Standard hour plan, 400
Statistical quality control, 314
Stock options, 408–409
executive incentive pay, 415–416
Stock ownership
employee stock ownership plans 
(ESOPs), 409–410
stock options, 408–409
Stock performance, 406
Strategic planning; see also Human 
resource strategy
goal setting and, 136–138
Strategic purpose, of performance 
management, 301
Strategy formulation, high-
performance work 
systems, 39–47
Strategy implementation, 
supporting the 
organization’s strategy, 
12–14
Stretch assignments, 245
women, 257
Strikes, 481–482
alternatives to, 482–483
Subject-matter experts, 110
Subordinates, performance 
information and, 315
Succession planning, 258–260
slip-up, 264–265
Summary Plan Description (SPD), 
442
Supervisors
HR responsibilities of, 17
job dissatisfaction and, 347
Selection method standards, 
170–175
generalizability, 172
legality, 174–176
reliability, 170
utility, 173
validity, 170–172
Selection method(s)
application forms, 176–178
cognitive ability tests, 182–183
credit checks, 180–181
drug tests, 185–186
employment tests, 181–183
honesty tests, 185
personality in foreign 
assignments, 507
personality inventories, 183–185
physical ability tests, 181–182
references, 178–179
résumés, 178
work samples, 183
Selection process, 168–170
overview of standards, 170
overview of steps, 168
Self-assessment, 252–254
sample exercise, 254
Self-managing work teams, 119
Self-selection, 151
Sexual harassment, 82–83
EEOC definition of, 82
“hostile working environment,” 83
quid pro quo harassment, 83
Short-term disability insurance, 436
Sick days, 432–433
Sick leave programs, 429–430
Silent Generation, 32
Simple ranking, 304–305
Simulations, 214–215
Situational constraints on effective 
training, 206
Situational interviews, 187
Skill, 107
Skill-based pay, 384–385
Small business, HR in, 26–27
Social media
background checks, 180
balanced scorecards, 412
e-HRM, 285
knowledge sharing, 276
Pinterest for training, 221
protected social activity, 475
recruitment, 133
risk of use in hiring, 78
salary talk, 378

Subject Index 567
Transgender employees, 84, 
194–195
Transitional matrix, 135–136
Transnational HRM system, 499
Trend analysis, labor demand, 134
Tuition reimbursement programs, 
444
employee retention, 454–455
Uncertainty avoidance, 500
Unemployment insurance, 427–428
experience rating, 428
Unfair labor practices, 471–472, 474
employers, 471–472
halting, 474
labor unions, 471–472
Uniform Guidelines on Employee 
Selection Procedures, 75
Uniformed Services Employment 
and Reemployment Rights 
Act of 1994, 71
Union organizing
authorization cards, 475
campaigns strategies/tactics, 
477–479
consent elections, 475
process and legal framework of, 
474–479
stipulation elections, 476
Volkswagen auto plant, 490–491
Union shop, 468
Union steward, 463
Union-management interactions; 
see also Collective 
bargaining; Labor 
relations
contract administration, 
483–485
new strategies for, 485–486
organizing, 474–475
Union(s); see Labor unions
United Auto Workers (UAW), 
490–491
United Electrical, Radio, and 
Machine Workers of 
America, 492
Unjust dismissal suits, 323
Upward feedback, 244
U.S. Constitution, 64
basic employee rights, 18
U.S. Department of Justice, 76
U.S. Department of Labor, 109
Employment Standards 
Administration, 69
HR analytics, 288–290
measuring results, 222–224
methods, 210–218
needs assessment, 203–206
new employee orientation as, 
224–225
organizational needs and, 
201–203
planning a program, 207–210
readiness for, 206–207
small business, 232–233
transfer of, 220–222
Training administration, 209
Training design process, 
technological support, 
220–221
Training methods, 210–218
action learning, 218
audiovisual training, 211
behavior modeling, 216
business games and case studies, 
215–216
classroom instruction, 210–211
computer-based training, 
211–213
distance learning, 210–211
experiential programs, 216–217
group-building methods, 209–210
hands-on method, 209
measuring results, 222–224
on-the-job training, 213–214
presentation method, 209
selection of, 209–210
simulations, 214–215
team training, 217–218
use of instructional methods, 210
Training programs, 207–210
choice of methods, 209–210
implementing, 218–222
in-house or contracted out, 
208–209
objectives, 207
outsourcing, 208
readability, 220
requests for proposals (RFPs), 
208–209
who will participate, 207–208
worker safety, 231
Training results, measurement of 
effectiveness, 224
Transaction processing, 283
Transfer, 247–248
Transfer of training, 220–222
evaluation methods, 222
HRM applications, 283–284
job demands increasing, 
123–124
mobile devices for safety 
inspections, 90
new technologies, 47
online job postings, 169
for recruiting, 132–133
recruiting, 149, 151–153
repetitive stress injuries, 122
security policies for employees’ 
devices, 54
self-service, 49
sharing HR information, 49
social networking applications, 
49
telephone use, 101–102
touchscreens, 122
Telework, 120–121, 122
Temporary assignments, with 
organizations, 248–249
Temporary employees, 53, 140–142
Termination, 333
Test-retest reliability, 303
Third country, 497
Third-country nationals, 497
selection, 506–507
Thirteenth Amendment, 64
360-degree appraisal, pay decisions, 
402
360-degree feedback systems, 244, 
255
360-degree performance appraisal, 
314
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, 
64, 66, 82
Total quality management (TQM), 
41–42
performance measurement and 
management, 313–314
Trailing spouse, 515
Training, 8; see also Employee 
development
applications of, 224–227
contributing to high 
performance, 281
defined, 201
development compared, 
237–238
diversity training, 225–227
expatriates, 515–518
global workforce, 507–510
high-tech sector, 200
HP University, 232

568 
Subject Index
Worker centers, 486
Workers Adjustment and 
Retraining Notification 
Act, 338
Workers’ compensation, 428–429
no-fault liability, 428
Workforce
aging of, 30–32
changing demographics of, 
30–35
diversity of, 32–35
external labor market, 30
flexible staffing levels, 52–53
global, 45–46, 506–507
immigration and, 33
internal labor force, 30
international, training for, 
507–508
veterans in, 35, 81
Workforce analytics, 12
Workforce utilization review, 
145–146
World Trade Organization (WTO), 
496
Wrongful discharge suit, 334
legal requirements, 336
Yield ratios, 155
physical job withdrawal, 
348–349
psychological withdrawal, 349
Volunteer work/volunteerism, 249
Wagner Act, 470
Walsh-Healy Public Contracts Act 
(1936), 372
Wellness programs (EWPs), 
495–496
Western Europe, unions compared, 
464–465
Work environment and effective 
training, 206–207
Work outputs, 102
Work processes, 102–103
Work samples, 183
Work stoppages, 481–482
alternatives to, 482–483
sit-in, 491–492
Work-flow analysis, 102–105; 
see also Job analysis; Job 
design
organization structure and, 
103–105
work outputs, 102
work processes, 102–103
Work-flow design, 103–104
U.S. Employment Service (USES), 
154
U.S. Supreme Court, 64, 72
Utility, of selection methods, 173
Utilization analysis, 75
Vacation days, 432
Validity, 170–172
content validation, 172
criterion-related validation, 
171–172
defined, 171
performance measures, 302–303
Validity generalization, 172
Values, 350
Vesting requirements, 441–442
Vesting rights, 441
Veterans, hesitance in hiring, 
167–168
Vietnam Era Veteran’s 
Readjustment Act of 1974, 
69
Virtual reality, 215
Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 
1973, 68–69
Voluntary turnover, 333, 334; see 
also Job dissatisfaction
job withdrawal process, 345–349

