
Critical Thinking
MyManagementLab
®:  Improves Student 
Engagement Before, During, and After Class
Decision Making
BREAKTHROUGH
Prep and 
Engagement
BREAKTHROUGH
To better results
To better results
• Problem-Based Learning Projects (PBLs) – NEW! Projects where students work through a guided 
decision-making process so they learn how to problem solve through application and practice. Each 
project is easily assigned through the Assignment Manager and includes full instructions and background 
information for both students and instructors.
• NEW! VIDEO LIBRARY – Robust video library with over 100 new book-specific videos that include 
easy-to-assign assessments, the ability for instructors to add YouTube or other sources, the ability for 
students to upload video submissions, and the ability for polling and teamwork.
• Decision-making simulations – NEW and improved feedback for students. Place your students 
in the role of a key decision-maker! Simulations branch based on the decisions students make, providing  
a variation of scenario paths. Upon completion students receive a grade, as well as a detailed report of 
the choices and the associated consequences of those decisions.
• Video exercises – UPDATED with new exercises. 
Engaging videos that bring business concepts to life and 
explore business topics related to the theory students 
are learning in class. Quizzes then assess students’ 
comprehension of the concepts covered in each video.
• Learning Catalytics – A “bring your own device” 
student engagement, assessment, and classroom 
intelligence system helps instructors analyze students’ 
critical-thinking skills during lecture.
• Dynamic Study Modules (DSMs) – UPDATED 
with additional questions. Through adaptive learning, students get personalized guidance  
where and when they need it most, creating greater engagement, improving knowledge retention,  
and supporting subject-matter mastery.  Also available on mobile devices.
• Writing Space – UPDATED with new commenting tabs, new prompts, and a new tool 
for students called Pearson Writer. A single location to develop and assess concept mastery and 
critical thinking, the Writing Space offers assisted graded and create-your-own writing assignments, 
allowing you to exchange personalized feedback with students quickly and easily.
Writing Space can also check students’ work for improper citation or plagiarism by comparing it 
against the world’s most accurate text comparison database available from Turnitin.
http://www.pearsonmylabandmastering.com

This page intentionally left blank 

Fundamentals  
of Management
TenTh ediTion
GLoBAL ediTion
Stephen p. RobbinS
San Diego State University
MaRy CoulteR
Missouri State University
DaviD a. DeCenzo
Coastal Carolina University
Boston Columbus Indianapolis New York San Francisco Amsterdam  
Cape Town Dubai London Madrid Milan Munich Paris Montreal Toronto  
Delhi Mexico City São Paulo Sydney Hong Kong Seoul Singapore Taipei Tokyo

Vice President, Business Publishing: Donna Battista
Editor-in-Chief: Stephanie Wall
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Kris Ellis-Levy
Acquisitions Editor, Global Edition: Alice Dazeley
Associate Editor, Global Edition: Paromita Banerjee
Editorial Assistant: Lauren Russell
Vice President, Product Marketing: Maggie Moylan
Director of Marketing, Digital Services and  
 Products: Jeanette Koskinas
Executive Field Marketing Manager: Adam Goldstein
Field Marketing Manager: Lenny Ann Kucenski
Product Marketing Assistant: Jessica Quazza
Team Lead, Program Management: Ashley Santora
Program Manager: Sarah Holle
Project Manager, Global Edition: Nitin Shankar
Team Lead, Project Management: Jeff Holcomb
Project Manager: Kelly Warsak
Senior Manufacturing Controller, Global Edition:  
 Trudy Kimber
Senior Operations Specialist: Diane Peirano
Creative Director: Blair Brown
Art Director: Janet Slowik
Cover Image: © ConstantinosZ/Shutterstock
Vice President, Director of Digital Strategy  
 and Assessment: Paul Gentile
Manager of Learning Applications: Paul DeLuca
Digital Editor: Brian Surette
Director, Digital Studio: Sacha Laustsen
Digital Studio Manager: Diane Lombardo
Digital Studio Project Manager: Monique Lawrence
Digital Studio Project Manager: Alana Coles
Digital Studio Project Manager: Robin Lazrus
Media Production Manager, Global Edition:  
 Vikram Kumar
Assistant Media Producer, Global Edition:  
 Naina Singh
Full-Service Project Management, Composition,  
 Interior Design: Integra
Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers make no representations about the suitability of the information contained 
in the documents and related graphics published as part of the services for any purpose. All such documents and 
related graphics are provided “as is” without warranty of any kind. Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers hereby 
disclaim all warranties and conditions with regard to this information, including all warranties and conditions of 
 merchantability, whether express, implied or statutory, fitness for a particular purpose, title and non-infringement. In no 
event shall Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers be liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any 
damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits, whether in an action of contract, negligence or other 
tortious action, arising out of or in connection with the use or performance of information available from the services.
The documents and related graphics contained herein could include technical inaccuracies or typographical errors. 
Changes are periodically added to the information herein. Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers may make 
 improvements and/or changes in the product(s) and/or the program(s) described herein at any time. Partial screen 
shots may be viewed in full within the software version specified.
Microsoft® and Windows® are registered trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation in the U.S.A. and other 
 countries. This book is not sponsored or endorsed by or affiliated with the Microsoft Corporation.
Acknowledgments of third-party content appear on the appropriate page within the text.
Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England
and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com
© Pearson Education Limited 2017
The rights of Stephen P. Robbins, Mary Coulter, and David A. Decenzo to be identified as the authors of this work 
have been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
Authorized adaptation from the United States edition, entitled Fundamentals of Management, 10th Edition, 
ISBN 978-0-13-423747-3 by Stephen P. Robbins, Mary Coulter, and David A. DeCenzo, published by Pearson  
Education © 2017.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the prior 
written permission of the publisher or a license permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the 
Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark in this text does 
not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such trademarks, nor does the use of such 
trademarks imply any affiliation with or endorsement of this book by such owners.
ISBN 10: 1-29-214694-X
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-14694-2
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Typeset in Times LT Pro by Integra
Printed and bound by Vivar in Malaysia

To my wife, Laura
Steve
To Brooklynn and Blake . . . with much love, Grandma.
Mary
To my family who stands by me through thick and thin;  
whose unwavering support is the best gift anyone could receive.  
Thanks for all you do to support me.
Dave

This page intentionally left blank 

7
Brief Contents
 
Part 1 Introduction 24
 
Chapter 1 
Managers and Management 24
 
History  
 
Module 
A Brief History of Management’s Roots 49
 
Chapter 2 
The Management Environment 56
 
Chapter 3 
Integrative Managerial Issues 80
 
Part 2 Planning 110
 
Chapter 4 
Foundations of Decision Making 110
 
Quantitative  
 
Module 
Quantitative Decision-Making Aids 141
 
Chapter 5 
Foundations of Planning 152
 
Part 3 Organizing 182
 
Chapter 6 
Organizational Structure and Design 182
 
Chapter 7 
Managing Human Resources 218
 
Career  
 
Module 
Building Your Career 254
 
Chapter 8 
Managing Change and Innovation 258
 
Part 4 Leading 286
 
Chapter 9 
Foundations of Individual Behavior 286
 
Chapter 10 
Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams 320
 
Chapter 11 
Motivating and Rewarding Employees 350
 
Chapter 12 
Leadership and Trust 382
 
Chapter 13 
Managing Communication and Information 414
 
Part 5 Controlling 442
 
Chapter 14 
Foundations of Control 442
 
Chapter 15 
Operations Management 472
 
Entrepreneurship  
 
Module 
Managing Entrepreneurial Ventures 503
 
Glossary 513
 
Index 519

This page intentionally left blank 

9
Contents
Preface 16
Instructor Resources 19
About the Authors 22
Part 1 Introduction 24
 Chapter 1 Managers and Management 24
Who Are Managers and Where Do They Work? 27
What Three Characteristics Do All Organizations  
Share? 27
How Are Managers Different from Nonmanagerial  
Employees? 28
What Titles Do Managers Have? 28
From the Past to the Present 29
What Is Management? 29
3 WAys To Look AT WhAT MAnAGers do 31
4 Functions approach 31
Management Roles approach 32
Skills and Competencies 33
Is the Manager’s Job Universal? 33
Why Study Management? 36
A Question of Ethics 36
What Factors Are Reshaping and Redefining  
Management? 37
Why Are Customers Important to the Manager’s Job? 38
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Is It Still  
Managing When What You’re Managing  
Are Robots? 38
Why Is Innovation Important to the Manager’s Job? 39
Importance of Social Media to the Manager’s Job 39
Importance of Sustainability to the Manager’s Job 40
Wrapping It Up . . . 40
Review
Chapter Summary 41  •  Discussion Questions 41 •   
Management Skill Builder | Becoming Politically Adept 42 •   
Experiential Exercise 43 •  Case Application 1—Managing 
Without Managers 43 •  Case Application 2—Building  
a Better Boss 44 •  Case Application 3—Saving the 
World 45 •  Endnotes 47
History Module: A Brief History  
of Management’s Roots 49
Early Management 49
Classical Approaches 50
Behavioral Approach 51
Quantitative Approach 52
Contemporary Approaches 53
Endnotes 55
 Chapter 2 The Management Environment 56
What Is the External Environment and Why Is It  
Important? 59
What Is the Economy Like Today? 59
From the Past to the Present 61
What Role Do Demographics Play? 62
How Does the External Environment Affect Managers? 63
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Can Technology 
Improve the Way Managers Manage? 63
A Question of Ethics 65
WhAT is orGAnizATionAL CuLTure? 67
How Does Organizational Culture Affect Managers? 69
How Does Culture Affect What Employees Do? 69
How Does Culture Affect What Managers Do? 70
Review
Chapter Summary 72 •  Discussion Questions 72 •   
Management Skill Builder | Understanding Culture 73 •   
Experiential Exercise 74 •  Case Application 1—Getting  
Back on Target 74 •  Case Application 2—Not Sold 
Out 75 •  Case Application 3—China Zhongwang 76 •   
Endnotes 78
 Chapter 3 Integrative Managerial Issues 80
What Is Globalization and How Does It Affect  
Organizations? 83
What Does It Mean to Be “Global”? 83
How Do Organizations Go Global? 84
WhAT Are The diFFerenT Types oF GLoBAL  
orGAnizATions? 85
Content highlighted in green indicates that it is presented via a visual spread.

10    Contents
What Do Managers Need to Know about Managing in a 
Global Organization? 86
From the Past to the Present 87
What Does Society Expect from Organizations and  
Managers? 89
How Can Organizations Demonstrate Socially Responsible 
Actions? 89
Should Organizations Be Socially Involved? 90
What Is Sustainability and Why Is It Important? 92
What Factors Determine Ethical and Unethical  
Behavior? 92
In What Ways Can Ethics Be Viewed? 93
How Can Managers Encourage Ethical Behavior? 93
Technology and the Manager’s Job | The Ethics  
of Data Analytics 94
What Is Today’s Workforce Like and How Does It Affect 
the Way Organizations Are Managed? 96
What Is Workplace Diversity? 96
What Types of Diversity Are Found in Workplaces? 97
A Question of Ethics 98
How Are Organizations and Managers Adapting to  
a Changing Workforce? 99
Review
Chapter Summary 102 •  Discussion Questions 102 •   
Management Skill Builder | Building High Ethical  
Standards 103 •  Experiential Exercise 104 •  Case  
Application 1—Global Stumble 104 •  Case Application 2— 
Serious about Sustainability? 105 •  Case Application 3—
From Top to Bottom 106 •  Endnotes 107
Part 2 Planning 110
 Chapter 4 Foundations of Decision  
Making 110
How Do Managers Make Decisions? 113
What Defines a Decision Problem? 113
What Is Relevant in the Decision-Making  
Process? 114
How Does the Decision Maker Weight the Criteria and 
Analyze Alternatives? 114
What Determines the Best Choice? 116
What Happens in Decision Implementation? 116
What Is the Last Step in the Decision Process? 116
What Common Errors Are Committed in the Decision-
Making Process? 116
WhAT Are The 3 ApproAChes MAnAGers  
CAn use To MAke deCisions? 118
Rational Model 118
bounded Rationality 119
From the Past to the Present 120
Intuition and Managerial Decision Making 120
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Making Better 
Decisions with Technology 121
What Types of Decisions and Decision-Making Conditions 
Do Managers Face? 122
How Do Problems Differ? 122
How Does a Manager Make Programmed  
Decisions? 123
How Do Nonprogrammed Decisions Differ from  
Programmed Decisions? 124
How Are Problems, Types of Decisions, and Organizational 
Level Integrated? 124
What Decision-Making Conditions Do Managers 
Face? 125
How Do Groups Make Decisions? 125
What Are the Advantages and Disadvantages of Group 
Decision Making? 126
When Are Groups Most Effective? 127
A Question of Ethics 127
How Can You Improve Group Decision Making? 127
What Contemporary Decision-Making Issues  
Do Managers Face? 128
How Does National Culture Affect Managers’ Decision 
Making? 128
Why Are Creativity and Design Thinking Important in  
Decision Making? 129
Review 
Chapter Summary 133 •  Discussion Questions 134 •   
Management Skill Builder | Being a Creative Decision  
Maker 134 •  Experiential Exercise 136 •  Case  
Application 1—Big Brown Numbers 136 •  Case  
Application 2—Galloping to the Right Decision 137 •  Case  
Application 3—Tasting Success 138 •  Endnotes 139
Quantitative Module: Quantitative  
Decision-Making Aids 141
Payoff Matrices 141
Decision Trees 142
Break-Even Analysis 143
Ratio Analysis 144
Linear Programming 146
Queuing Theory 148
Economic Order Quantity Model 148
Endnotes 151
 Chapter 5 Foundations of Planning 152
What Is Planning and Why Do Managers Need to 
Plan? 155
Why Should Managers Formally Plan? 155
What Are Some Criticisms of Formal Planning and How 
Should Managers Respond? 156
Does Formal Planning Improve Organizational 
 Performance? 157
What Do Managers Need To Know About Strategic  
Management? 157
What Is Strategic Management? 157
Why Is Strategic Management Important? 158

Contents    11
What Are the Steps in the Strategic Management  
Process? 158
What Strategic Weapons Do Managers Have? 160
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Innovative IT  
and Strategy 161
WhAT sTrATeGies do MAnAGers use? 162
Corporate Strategy 162
Competitive Strategy 163
Functional Strategy 163
A Question of Ethics 165
How Do Managers Set Goals and Develop  
Plans? 165
What Types of Goals Do Organizations Have and How  
Do They Set Those Goals? 165
From the Past to the Present 167
What Types of Plans Do Managers Use and How Do They 
Develop Those Plans? 168
What Contemporary Planning Issues Do  
Managers Face? 171
How Can Managers Plan Effectively in Dynamic  
Environments? 172
How Can Managers Use Environmental Scanning? 173
Review
Chapter Summary 174 •  Discussion Questions 174 •   
Management Skill Builder | Being a Good Goal Setter 175 •   
Experiential Exercise 176 •  Case Application 1—Primark 
Takes on Burberry and Alexander McQueen 177 •  Case  
Application 2—Crisis Planning at Livestrong Foundation 178 •  
Case Application 3—Eyeing the Future 179 •  Endnotes 180
Part 3 Organizing 182
 Chapter 6  Organizational Structure and  
Design 182
What Are the Six Key Elements in Organizational  
Design? 185
(1) What Is Work Specialization? 185
(2) What Is Departmentalization? 186
(3) What Are Authority and Responsibility? 188
(4) What Is Span of Control? 192
A Question of Ethics 193
(5) How Do Centralization and Decentralization Differ? 193
(6) What Is Formalization? 193
WhAT ConTinGenCy VAriABLes AFFeCT  
sTruCTurAL ChoiCe? 194
Mechanistic or organic 195
Strategy → Structure 195
Size → Structure 196
technology → Structure 196
environment → Structure 196
From the Past to the Present 197
What Are Some Common Organizational Designs? 198
What Traditional Organizational Designs Can  
Managers Use? 198
What Contemporary Organizational Designs Can  
Managers Use? 199
What Are Today’s Organizational Design Challenges? 203
How Do You Keep Employees Connected? 203
How Do Global Differences Affect Organizational  
Structure? 203
How Do You Build a Learning Organization? 204
Technology and the Manager’s Job | The Changing 
World of Work 204
How Can Managers Design Efficient and Effective Flexible 
Work Arrangements? 206
Review
Chapter Summary 209 •  Discussion Questions 209 •   
Management Skill Builder | Increasing Your Power 210 •   
Experiential Exercise 211 •  Case Application 1—You Work 
Where? 212 •  Case Application 2—Lift Off 213 •   
Case Application 3—A New Kind of Structure 214 •   
Endnotes 215
 Chapter 7 Managing Human Resources 218
What Is the Human Resource Management Process and 
What Influences It? 221
What Is the Legal Environment of HRM? 222
From the Past to the Present 224
A Question of Ethics 225
How Do Managers Identify and Select Competent  
Employees? 225
1 What Is Employment Planning? 225
2A How Do Organizations Recruit Employees? 227
2B How Does a Manager Handle Layoffs? 228
3 How Do Managers Select Job Applicants? 228
How Are Employees Provided with Needed Skills  
and Knowledge? 232
How Are New Hires Introduced to the  
Organization? 232
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Social and  
Digital HR 233
What Is Employee Training? 234
keepinG GreAT peopLe: TWo WAys  
orGAnizATions do This 236
performance Management System 236
Compensating employees: pay and benefits 238
What Contemporary HRM Issues Face Managers? 241
How Can Managers Manage Downsizing? 241
How Can Workforce Diversity Be Managed? 242
What Is Sexual Harassment? 242
How and Why Are Organizations Controlling HR Costs? 243
Review
Chapter Summary 245 •  Discussion Questions 245 •   
Management Skill Builder | Providing Good Feedback 246 •   

12    Contents
Experiential Exercise 247 •  Case Application 1— 
Candidate Selection Dilemma 248 •  Case Application 2— 
Brunello Cucinelli: Humanistic Approach to Luxury 249 •   
Case Application 3—HRM in the Hong Kong Police Force 250 •  
Endnotes 251
Career Module: Building Your Career 254
What Was Career Development Like, Historically? 254
What Is Career Development Like, Now? 254
How Can I Have a Successful Career? 255
Assess Your Personal Strengths and Weaknesses 255
Identify Market Opportunities 255
Take Responsibility for Managing Your Own Career 255
Develop Your Interpersonal Skills 255
Practice Makes Perfect 255
Stay Up to Date 256
Network 256
Stay Visible 256
Seek a Mentor 256
Leverage Your Competitive Advantage 256
Don’t Shun Risks 256
It’s OK to Change Jobs 257
Opportunities, Preparation, and Luck = Success 257
Endnotes 257
 Chapter 8  Managing Change and  
Innovation 258
What Is Change and How Do Managers Deal  
with It? 261
Why Do Organizations Need to Change? 262
Who Initiates Organizational Change? 263
How Does Organizational Change Happen? 263
From the Past to the Present 264
How Do Managers Manage Resistance to Change? 266
Why Do People Resist Organizational Change? 267
What Are Some Techniques for Reducing Resistance to 
Organizational Change? 267
WhAT reACTion do eMpLoyees hAVe To  
orGAnizATionAL ChAnGe? 268
What is Stress? 268
What Causes Stress? 269
A Question of Ethics 270
How Can Managers Encourage Innovation in an  
Organization? 272
How Are Creativity and Innovation Related? 273
What’s Involved in Innovation? 273
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Helping  
Innovation Flourish 274
How Can a Manager Foster Innovation? 274
How Does Design Thinking Influence Innovation? 277
Review
Chapter Summary 278 •  Discussion Questions 278 •   
Management Skill Builder | Stress Management 279 •   
Experiential Exercise 280 •  Case Application 1— 
Compartmentalizing Departments: Split and Merger 280 •   
Case Application 2—Making Over Avon 281 •  Case  
Application 3—Stress Kills 282 •  Endnotes 284
Part 4 Leading 286
 Chapter 9  Foundations of Individual  
Behavior 286
What Are the Focus and Goals of Organizational  
Behavior? 289
What Is the Focus of OB? 289
What Are the Goals of Organizational Behavior? 290
What Role Do Attitudes Play in Job Performance? 291
What Are the Three Components of an Attitude? 291
What Attitudes Might Employees Hold? 291
Do Individuals’ Attitudes and Behaviors Need to Be  
Consistent? 292
What Is Cognitive Dissonance Theory? 292
A Question of Ethics 293
How Can an Understanding of Attitudes Help Managers  
Be More Effective? 293
What Do Managers Need to Know About Personality? 294
How Can We Best Describe Personality? 294
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Increased  
Reliance on Emotional Intelligence 296
Can Personality Traits Predict Practical Work-Related  
Behaviors? 297
How Do We Match Personalities and Jobs? 298
Do Personality Attributes Differ Across Cultures? 299
How Can an Understanding of Personality Help Managers 
Be More Effective? 300
What Is Perception and What Influences It? 301
What Influences Perception? 301
How Do Managers Judge Employees? 302
From the Past to the Present 304
hoW do LeArninG Theories expLAin  
BehAVior? 305
operant Conditioning 305
Social learning theory 306
Shaping behavior 306
How Can an Understanding of Perception Help Managers Be 
More Effective? 308
What Contemporary OB Issues Face Managers? 308
How Do Generational Differences Affect the  
Workplace? 308
How Do Managers Deal with Negative Behavior in the 
Workplace? 309

Contents    13
Review
Chapter Summary 311 •  Discussion Questions 312 •   
Management Skill Builder | Understanding Employee  
Emotions 312 •  Experiential Exercise 314 •  Case 
Application 1—Getting All Emotional at Google 314 •  Case 
Application 2—Odd Couples 315 •  Case Application 3—
Employees First 316 •  Endnotes 317
 Chapter 10  Understanding Groups and  
Managing Work Teams 320
What Is a Group and What Stages of Development  
Do Groups Go Through? 323
What Is a Group? 323
What Are the Stages of Group Development? 323
A Question of Ethics 325
5 MAjor ConCepTs oF Group BehAVior 326
1 Roles 326
2a norms 326
2b Conformity 327
3 Status Systems 327
4 Group Size 328
5 Group Cohesiveness 328
From the Past to the Present 330
How Are Groups Turned into Effective Teams? 331
Are Work Groups and Work Teams the Same? 331
What Are the Different Types of Work Teams? 332
What Makes a Team Effective? 333
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Keeping  
Connected: IT and Teams 333
How Can a Manager Shape Team Behavior? 337
What Current Issues Do Managers Face in Managing 
Teams? 338
What’s Involved with Managing Global Teams? 338
When Are Teams Not the Answer? 340
Review
Chapter Summary 341 •  Discussion Questions 341 •   
Management Skill Builder | Developing Your Coaching 
Skills 342 •  Experiential Exercise 343 •  Case  
Application 1—Rx: Teamwork 344 •  Case Application 2—
The Cardinal Way 345 •  Case Application 3—Teaming Up 
for Take Off 346 •  Endnotes 347
 Chapter 11  Motivating and Rewarding  
Employees 350
What Is Motivation? 353
4 eArLy Theories oF MoTiVATion  
(1950s & 1960s) 354
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs theory 354
McGregor’s theory X and theory y 355
herzberg’s two-Factor theory 355
McClelland’s three-needs theory 357
How Do the Contemporary Theories Explain  
Motivation? 358
What Is Goal-Setting Theory? 358
How Does Job Design Influence Motivation? 359
From the Past to the Present 360
What Is Equity Theory? 362
How Does Expectancy Theory Explain Motivation? 363
How Can We Integrate Contemporary Motivation  
Theories? 364
What Current Motivation Issues Do Managers 
Face? 365
How Can Managers Motivate Employees When the 
Economy Stinks? 366
How Does Country Culture Affect Motivation  
Efforts? 366
A Question of Ethics 367
How Can Managers Motivate Unique Groups of  
Workers? 367
How Can Managers Design Appropriate Rewards  
Programs? 369
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Individualized 
Rewards 369
Review
Chapter Summary 372 •  Discussion Questions 373 •   
Management Skill Builder | Being a Good Motivator 373 •   
Experiential Exercise 375 •  Case Application 1—One for 
the Money . . . 375 •  Case Application 2—Alibaba:  
Motivation for the Long Haul 376 •  Case Application 3—
Discretionary Time Off Policy 377 •  Endnotes 378
 Chapter 12 Leadership and Trust 382
Who Are Leaders, and What Is Leadership? 385
From the Past to the Present 385
WhAT do eArLy LeAdership Theories TeLL us 
ABouT LeAdership? 386
the leader: What traits Do leaders have? 386
the behaviors: What behaviors Do leaders exhibit? 388
university of iowa studies 388
ohio State studies 388
university of Michigan studies 388
Managerial Grid 388
What Do the Contingency Theories of Leadership  
Tell Us? 389
What Was the First Comprehensive Contingency  
Model? 389
How Do Followers’ Willingness and Ability Influence  
Leaders? 390
How Participative Should a Leader Be? 392
How Do Leaders Help Followers? 393
What Is Leadership Like Today? 394
What Do the Four Contemporary Views of Leadership  
Tell Us? 394

14    Contents
A Question of Ethics 397
What Issues Do Today’s Leaders Face? 397
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Virtual  
Leadership 400
Why Is Trust the Essence of Leadership? 401
A Final Thought Regarding Leadership 403
Review
Chapter Summary 404 •  Discussion Questions 405 •   
Management Skill Builder | Being a Good Leader 405 •   
Experiential Exercise 406 •  Case Application 1— 
Developing Gen Y Leaders 407 •  Case Application 2— 
Serving Up Leaders 408 •  Case Application 3—Leading 
Without Intervention 409 •  Endnotes 410
 Chapter 13  Managing Communication and  
Information 414
How Do Managers Communicate Effectively? 417
How Does the Communication Process Work? 417
Are Written Communications More Effective Than  
Verbal Ones? 418
Is the Grapevine an Effective Way to  
Communicate? 419
How Do Nonverbal Cues Affect Communication? 419
From the Past to the Present 420
What Barriers Keep Communication from Being  
Effective? 420
How Can Managers Overcome Communication  
Barriers? 423
TeChnoLoGy And MAnAGeriAL  
CoMMuniCATion 425
networked Communication 425
Wireless Communication 427
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Office of  
Tomorrow 428
What Communication Issues Do Managers  
Face Today? 428
How Do We Manage Communication in an Internet 
World? 429
How Does Knowledge Management Affect  
Communication? 430
What’s Involved with Managing the Organization’s  
Knowledge Resources? 430
What Role Does Communication Play in Customer  
Service? 431
A Question of Ethics 432
How Can We Get Employee Input and Why Should We? 432
Why Should Managers Be Concerned with Communicating 
Ethically? 432
Review
Chapter Summary 434 •  Discussion Questions 434 •   
Management Skill Builder | Being a Good Listener 435 •   
Experiential Exercise 436 •  Case Application 1—Social 
Benefit or Social Disaster? 436 •  Case Application 2— 
Banning E-Mail Banning Voice Mail 438 •  Case  
Application 3—Using Social Media for Workplace  
Communication 439 •  Endnotes 440
Part 5 Controlling 442
 Chapter 14 Foundations of Control 442
What Is Control and Why Is It Important? 445
What Is Control? 445
Why Is Control Important? 445
A Question of Ethics 445
What Takes Place as Managers Control? 447
1 What Is Measuring? 447
From the Past to the Present 450
2 How Do Managers Compare Actual Performance  
to Planned Goals? 450
3 What Managerial Action Can Be Taken? 451
What Should Managers Control? 452
When Does Control Take Place? 452
keepinG TrACk: WhAT GeTs ConTroLLed? 454
Keeping track of an organization’s Finances 454
Keeping track of organization’s information 455
Keeping track of employee performance 456
Keeping track using a balanced Scorecard approach 457
What Contemporary Control Issues Do Managers  
Confront? 458
Do Controls Need to Be Adjusted for Cultural  
Differences? 458
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Monitoring  
Employees 459
What Challenges Do Managers Face in Controlling the 
Workplace? 459
Review
Chapter Summary 464 •  Discussion Questions 464 •   
Management Skill Builder | Disciplining Difficult  
Employees 465 •  Experiential Exercise 466 •   
Case Application 1—Top Secret 467 •  Case  
Application 2—If You Can’t Say Something Nice, Don’t Say  
Anything at All 468 •  Case Application 3—Too  
Relaxed 468 •  Endnotes 470
 Chapter 15 Operations Management 472
Why Is Operations Management Important to  
Organizations? 475
What Is Operations Management? 475
1 How Do Service and Manufacturing Firms  
Differ? 475
2 How Do Businesses Improve Productivity? 476
3 What Role Does Operations Management Play  
in a  Company’s Strategy? 477
WhAT is VALue ChAin MAnAGeMenT And Why 
is iT iMporTAnT? 478
What is value Chain Management? 478
how Does value Chain Management benefit  businesses? 480
From the Past to the Present 481
How Is Value Chain Management Done? 481

Contents    15
What Are the Requirements for Successful Value Chain 
Management? 482
What Are the Obstacles to Value Chain Management? 485
A Question of Ethics 486
What Contemporary Issues Do Managers Face in  
Managing Operations? 486
1 What Role Does Technology Play in Operations  
Management? 486
Technology and the Manager’s Job | Welcome to the 
Factory of the Future! 487
2 How Do Managers Control Quality? 488
3 How Are Projects Managed? 490
Review
Chapter Summary 495 •  Discussion Questions 495 •   
Management Skill Builder | Being a Good Conflict  
Manager 496 •  Experiential Exercise 497 •  Case  
Application 1—Tragedy in Fashion 497 •  Case Application 2— 
Dreamliner Nightmare 499 •  Case Application 3—Stirring 
Things Up 500 •  Endnotes 501
Entrepreneurship Module: Managing  
Entrepreneurial Ventures 503
What Is Entrepreneurship? 503
Who’s Starting Entrepreneurial Ventures? 503
What Do Entrepreneurs Do? 504
What Planning Do Entrepreneurs Need to Do? 504
What’s in a Full Business Plan? 505
What Issues Are Involved in Organizing an Entrepreneurial 
Venture? 506
What Are the Legal Forms of Organization for Entrepreneurial 
Ventures? 506
What Type of Organizational Structure Should Entrepreneurial  
Ventures Use? 506
What Human Resource Management (HRM) Issues Do  
Entrepreneurs Face? 507
What Issues Do Entrepreneurs Face in Leading an  
Entrepreneurial Venture? 507
What Type of Personality Do Entrepreneurs Have? 508
How Can Entrepreneurs Motivate Employees? 508
How Can Entrepreneurs Be Leaders? 509
What Controlling Issues Do Entrepreneurs Face? 510
How Is Growth Managed? 510
How Are Downturns Managed? 510
What’s Involved with Exiting the Venture? 510
Why Is It Important to Think About Managing Personal  
Challenges as an Entrepreneur? 511
Endnotes 512
Glossary 513
Index 519

16
preface
Welcome to the Tenth Edition of Fundamentals of Management! Although much has changed 
in the world since FOM was first published over twenty years ago, we haven’t changed our 
commitment to providing you with the most engaging and up-to-date introduction to manage-
ment paperback on the market. And how do we do this? By covering the essential concepts 
of management; providing a sound foundation for understanding the key issues; offering a 
strong, practical focus, including the latest research on what works for managers and what 
doesn’t; and doing these with a writing style that you and your students will find interesting 
and straightforward.
This edition continues our exciting design. We love the way it looks and the way manage-
ment concepts are presented! And we hope you do, too! It’s a self-contained learning package. 
In addition to the end-of-chapter summaries and review questions, you can choose from the 
chapter self-assessments, skills modules, hands-on manager’s inbox exercises, and case appli-
cations. In addition, the text is supported by the most comprehensive Web site and supplement 
package, although your students will find the essential elements they need to understand and 
apply management concepts within the text itself. You have the choice about how best to use 
the materials: text only, online only, or text and online. It’s your decision!
What Key Changes Have We Made in the Tenth Edition?
You might think that there wouldn’t be much new information to put in a book . . . especially 
a Tenth Edition! But that’s the great thing about a book that discusses managers and manage-
ment! It’s always easy to find new material just by paying attention to what’s happening in 
the news! New issues and ideas are always confronting managers and we’ve made sure to 
cover hot topics such as holacracy, the sharing economy, gamification, data analytics/big data, 
BYOD (bring your own device), and wearable technology, to name a few. In addition to new 
topics, we’ve done some other BIG things!
book-Specific videos (available on MyManagementlab® only)
Today’s students have “grown up” in a visual-based learning environment. They’re comfort-
able with and enjoy video clips, and even expect them as part of their learning. That’s why we 
created a series of videos for this tenth edition.
Our Bust This Myth videos reinforce and expand upon the chapter-opening Management 
Myth and Debunking the Myth. We debuted the “Myth” openers in the previous edition and 
have had positive feedback from them. This was…and is…a unique feature among manage-
ment texts and was created as an answer to one of the most vexing problems that instructors 
face: unmotivated students who think there is nothing for them to learn in this course. Now, 
we’ve taken it a step further by creating fun videos that highlight the myths and why they are 
just that…a myth…and then explaining why.
Sustainability emphasized
Sustainability is an important topic and it’s critical for our students…our future business 
 leaders…to be familiar with it. So we added an icon 
 to help you and your students recog-
nize how pervasive sustainability is. Throughout the book, you’ll find this sustainability icon 

Preface    17
used wherever chapter discussion, a photo example, or an end-of-chapter exercise covers an 
aspect of sustainability. You yourself may be surprised at how much sustainability permeates 
what we’re teaching in management.
MyManagementlab
® Suggested activities
The final change in this edition we want you to know about is that we’ve fully integrated 
Pearson’s MyManagementLab into the text. The new features are outlined below. Making 
assessment activities available online for students to complete before coming to class will al-
low you, the professor, more discussion time during class to review areas students are having 
difficulty comprehending.
WATCH IT Recommends a video clip that can be assigned to students for outside classroom 
viewing or that can be watched in the classroom. The video corresponds to the chapter mate-
rial and is accompanied by multiple-choice questions that reinforce students’ comprehension 
of chapter content.
TRY IT Recommends a mini simulation that can be assigned to students as an outside activ-
ity or be done in the classroom. As students watch the simulation, they will be asked to make 
choices based on the scenario presented in the simulation. At the end of the simulation, the 
student will receive immediate feedback based on the answers they gave. These simulations 
reinforce chapter concepts and students’ comprehension of those concepts.
TALK ABOuT IT Students can be assigned these broad-based, critical-thinking discus-
sion questions that will challenge them to assimilate information that they’ve read in the 
 chapter.
WRITE IT: ASSISTED GRADED WRITInG QuESTIOnS These are short essay questions that 
students can complete as an assignment and submit to the professor for grading.
PERSOnAL InVEnTORY ASSESSMEnTS (PIA) Students learn better when they can con-
nect what they’re learning to their personal experience. PIA (Personal Inventory Assessments) 
is a collection of online exercises designed to promote self-reflection and student engagement, 
enhancing their ability to connect with concepts taught in principles of management, orga-
nizational behavior, and human resource management classes. Assessments are assignable 
by instructors who can then track students’ completions. Student results include a written 
explanation along with a graphic display that shows how their results compare to the class as 
a whole. Instructors will also have access to this graphic representation of results to promote 
classroom discussion.
Continued and improved Features
The exciting and innovative chapter openers—a common Management Myth and how this 
myth is just that . . . a myth—have been updated and we’ve replaced a few. We’ve found 
that students often think that they already know a lot about management . . . after all, it’s 
just common sense, right? But management isn’t just common sense! When it comes to 
 managing, much of what passes for common sense is just plain wrong…a myth! So we 
kept and improved these chapter openers! We think you’ll like the student discussion these 
“myths” and “debunking” generate!
We also kept the three (yes, you read that right, THREE!) Case Applications, many 
of which are new or updated. These Case Applications are a great way to tell a current 
story about managers, management, and organizations and to involve students in assess-
ing a situation and answering questions about “how” and “why” and “what would you 
do.” These Case Applications cover the gamut from Manchester United Football Club to 
Brunello Cucinelli.
Also, we retained our complete, self-contained section on developing management skills 
in each chapter and tried to make them more practical. It’s one thing to know something. It’s 

18    Preface
Chapter 1
• Statistics tied to chapter material
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab Assignments
• New PIA Assessment titled Using Influence Strategies
• Revised Management Skill Builder to make it more 
applications-oriented
• New Case Application—Managing Without Managers
Chapter 2
• New Management Myth
• New statistics on economy
• New discussion on sharing economy
• New discussion on Internet of Things
• Expanded discussion on Gen Z
• New ethics dilemma
• Revised Content for Learning Objective 2-3
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New PIA Assessment titled Company Culture Assessment
• Revised Management Skill Builder to make it more 
applications-oriented.
• New Case Application—Target Corp.
• Updated Case Application—China Zhongwang
Chapter 3
• Updated Management Myth opener
• Updated statistics
• New Technology and the Manager’s Job box on  
“The Ethics of Data Analysis”
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New PIA Assessment titled Ethical Leadership Assessment
• Revised Management Skill Builder to make it more 
applications-oriented.
• New Case Application—Nomura Holdings and Lehman
• New Case Application—Keurig K-cups (Sustainability)
Chapter 4
• New Management Myth
• New statistic
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New Ethics box
• New PIA Assessment titled Problem Solving, Creativity, 
and Innovation
• Revised Management Skill Builder to make it more 
applications-oriented.
• New Case Application—UPS
• New Case Application—Galloping to the Right Decision
Chapter 5
• New examples in strategic management introductory  
section
• Updated other examples, as needed
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New Ethics box
• New PIA Assessment titled Tolerance of Ambiguity Scale
• New Case Application—LiveStrong Foundation
• New Case Application—Warby Parker
• Updated Case Application—Primark
Chapter 6
• Updated Management Myth opener
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New PIA Assessment titled Gaining Power and Influence
• New Case Application—NASA
Chapter 7
• Revised chapter-opening Debunked Management Myth.
• Updated statistics/information throughout chapter.
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New Ethics box
• New Skill Builder—Providing Good Feedback
• New PIA Assessment titled Work Performance Assessment
• New Case Application—Candidate Selection Dilemma.
• New Case Application—Brunello Cucinelli
• Updated Case Application—HRM in the Hong Kong 
Police Force
another to be able to use that knowledge. The skill-building exercises included at the end of 
each chapter help you apply and use management concepts. We chose these 18 skills (some 
chapters have more than one) because of their relevance to developing management compe-
tence and their linkage to one or more of the topic areas in this book.
Finally, we kept our one section in each chapter that has a contemporary and visually 
appealing look. The design of this selected material helps reinforce key topics and ideas and 
makes it easy for students to read and to know what’s important from that particular chapter 
section. Also, because today’s students are accustomed to visually rich environments, we’ve 
kept additional visual presentations of material throughout the chapters to help engage stu-
dents with the material.
In addition to all these major changes, here is a chapter-by-chapter list of the topic addi-
tions and changes in the Tenth Edition:

Preface    19
Chapter 8
• Revised chapter-opening Debunked Management Myth.
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New Technology and the Manager’s Job box
• New PIA Assessment titled Controlling  
Workplace Stress
• Updated cases
• New Case Application—Making Over Avon
• New Case Application—Compartmentalizing  
Departments: Split and Merger
Chapter 9
• New Management Myth
• New ethics box
• New Technology and the Manager’s Job box
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New PIA Assessment titled Understanding Employee 
Emotions
• Update cases
• New Case Application—Getting Emotional at Google
Chapter 10
• Updated Management Myth opener
• Updated technology box
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New Skill Builder—Developing Your Coaching Skills
• New PIA Assessment titled Diagnosing the Need for  
Team Building
• New Case Application—Rx: Teamwork
• New Case Application—The Cardinal Way
Chapter 11
• Updated Management Myth opener
• New ethics box
• New technology box
• Introduced concept of gamification
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New PIA Assessment titled Work Motivation  
Indicator
• New Case Application—One for the Money
• New Case Application—Alibaba
• New Case Application—Discretionary Time Off Policy
Chapter 12
• Tightened up Management Myth/Debunked
• Added new statistics
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New PIA Assessment titled Leadership Style Indicator
• New Case Application—Developing Gen Y Leaders
• New Case Application—Manchester United FC
• New Case Application—Leading Without Intervention
Chapter 13
• Added new statistics
• Updated Technology box
• New ethics box
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New PIA Assessment titled Communication Styles
• New Case Application—Using Social Media for  
Workplace Communication
• Updated other two Case Applications
Chapter 14
• New Management Myth/Debunked
• New ethics box
• Added new statistics
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New PIA Assessment titled Workplace Discipline Indicator
• New Case Application—If You Can’t Say Something Nice, 
Don’t Say Anything At All
• New Case Application—Too Relaxed
• Updated other Case Application
Chapter 15
• Tightened up Management Myth/Debunked.
• Added author recommended MyManagementLab  
Assignments
• New Management Skill—Being A Good Conflict Manager
• New PIA Assessment titled Strategies for Handling  
Conflict
• Updated Case Applications
Instructor Resources
At the Instructor Resource Center, www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/Robbins, instructors can 
easily register to gain access to a variety of instructor resources available with this text in 
downloadable format. If assistance is needed, our dedicated technical support team is ready to 
help with the media supplements that accompany this text. Visit http://247.pearsoned.com for 
answers to frequently asked questions and toll-free user support phone numbers.

20    Preface
The following supplements are available with this text:
• Instructor’s Resource Manual 
• Test Bank 
• TestGen® Computerized Test Bank 
• PowerPoint Presentation 
video library
Videos illustrating the most important subject topics are available in MyManagementLab.
Contact your local Pearson representative to request access.
aaCSb learning Standards tags in the test item File
Questions that test skills relevant to AACSB standards are tagged with the appropriate  standard. 
For example, a question testing the moral issues associated with externalities would receive 
the ethical understanding and reasoning abilities tag from the AACSB categories. In addition, 
the tagged questions may help to identify potential applications of these skills. This, in turn, 
may suggest enrichment activities or other educational experiences to help students achieve 
these goals.
Acknowledgments
Writing and publishing a textbook requires the talents of a number of people whose names 
never appear on the cover. We’d like to recognize and thank a phenomenal team of talented 
people who provided their skills and abilities in making this book a reality. This team includes 
Kris Ellis-Levy, our senior acquisitions editor; Sarah Holle, our program manager; Kelly 
 Warsak, our project manager; Lenny Ann Kucenski, our senior marketing manager; Stephanie 
Wall, our editor in chief; Nancy Moudry, our highly talented and gifted photo researcher; 
 Lauren Cook, our talented digital media whiz who co-created the “Bust The Myth” videos, and 
Allison Campbell, Associate Managing Editor, Integra-Chicago.
We also want to thank our reviewers—past and present—for the insights they have pro-
vided us:
David Adams, Manhattanville College
Lorraine P. Anderson, Marshall University
Maria Aria, Camden Community College
Marcia Marie Bear, University of Tampa
Barbara Ann Boyington, Brookdale Community College
Reginald Bruce, University of Louisville
Jon Bryan, Bridgewater State University
Elena Capella, University of San Francisco
James Carlson, Manatee Community College
Pam Carstens, Coe College
Casey Cegielski, Auburn University
Michael Cicero, Highline Community College
Evelyn Delanee, Daytona Beach Community College
Kathleen DeNisco, Erie Community College, South Campus
Jack Dilbeck, Ivy Tech State College
Fred J. Dorn, University of Mississippi
Michael Drafke, College of DuPage
Myra Ellen Edelstein, Salve Regina University
Deborah Gilliard, Metropolitan State College, Denver
Robert Girling, Sonoma State University
Patricia Green, Nassau Community College
Gary Greene, Manatee Community College, Venice Campus
Kenneth Gross, The University of Oklahoma
Jamey Halleck, Marshall University
Aaron Hines, SUNY New Paltz
Robyn Hulsart, Austin Peavy State University
Todd E. Jamison, Chadron State College
Edward A. Johnson, University of North Florida
Kayvan Miri Lavassani, North Carolina Central
Kim Lukaszewski, SUNY New Paltz
Brian Maruffi, Fordham University
Mantha Vlahos Mehallis, Florida Atlantic University
Christine Miller, Tennessee Technological University
Diane Minger, Cedar Valley College
Kimberly K. Montney, Kellogg Community College
James H. Moore, Arizona State University
Dr. Clara Munson, Albertus Magnus College
Jane Murtaugh, College of DuPage
Francine Newth, Providence College
Leroy Plumlee, Western Washington University
Pollis Robertson, Kellogg Community College
Cynthia Ruszkowski, Illinois State University
Thomas J. Shaughnessy, Illinois Central College
Andrea Smith-Hunter, Siena College

Preface    21
Martha Spears, Winthrop University
Jeff Stauffer, Ventura College
Kenneth R. Tillery, Middle Tennessee State University
Robert Trumble, Virginia Commonwealth University
Philip Varca, University of Wyoming
Margaret Viets, University of Vermont
Brad Ward, Kellogg Community College
Lucia Worthington, University of Maryland University  
 College
Seokhwa Yun, Montclair State University
thank you!
Steve, Dave, and I would like to thank you for considering and choosing our book for your 
management course. All of us have several years of teaching under our belt, and we know how 
challenging yet rewarding it can be. Our goal is to provide you with the best resources avail-
able to help you excel in the classroom!
Pearson would like to thank the following people for their efforts and contributions for this Global Edition:
Kate Barnett-Richards, Coventry University 
Marcello Russo, Kedge Business School
Yong Wooi Keong, Sunway University 
Andrew Richardson, University of Leeds
Ken Wong, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Ken Ward, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Arif Malik, Sultan Qaboos University
Shadhaa Al Maskari, Protiviti
Joseph Santora, International School  
 of Management
Pearson would also like to thank Humphrey Hung, Tung Wah College; Andrea Rumler,  
Berlin School of Economics and Law; Anita Pesa, University of Zadar; Kenny Teoh Guan 
Cheng, Universiti Putra Malaysia; and Michael Grund, HWZ University of Applied Sciences 
in Business Administration; for reviewing the global content and sharing their valuable feed-
back to help improve the content.

22
About the Authors
STEPhEn P. ROBBInS received his Ph.D. from the University of Arizona. He previously 
worked for the Shell Oil Company and Reynolds Metals Company and has taught at the 
University of Nebraska at Omaha, Concordia University in Montreal, the University of 
Baltimore, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville, and San Diego State Univer-
sity. He is currently professor emeritus in management at San Diego State.
Dr. Robbins’s research interests have focused on conflict, power, and politics in 
organizations, behavioral decision making, and the development of effective inter-
personal skills. His articles on these and other topics have appeared in such journals 
as Business Horizons, the California Management Review, Business and Economic 
Perspectives, International Management, Management Review, Canadian Personnel 
and Industrial Relations, and The Journal of Management Education.
Dr. Robbins is the world’s best-selling textbook author in the areas of management 
and organizational behavior. His books have sold more than 7 million copies and have 
been translated into 20 languages. His books are currently used at more than 1,500 U.S. 
colleges and universities, as well as hundreds of schools throughout Canada, Latin America, 
Australia, New Zealand, Asia, and Europe.
Dr. Robbins also participates in masters track competition. Since turning 50 in 1993, he’s 
won 23 national championships and 14 world titles. He was inducted into the U.S. Masters 
Track & Field Hall of Fame in 2005.
MARy COuLTER (Ph.D., University of Arkansas) held different jobs including high 
school teacher, legal assistant, and city government program planner before completing 
her graduate work. She has taught at Drury University, the University of Arkansas, 
Trinity University, and Missouri State University. She is currently professor emeritus 
of management at Missouri State University. In addition to Fundamentals of Man-
agement, Dr. Coulter has published other books with Pearson including Management 
(with Stephen P. Robbins), Strategic Management in Action, and Entrepreneurship 
in Action.
When she’s not busy writing, Dr. Coulter enjoys puttering around in her flower 
gardens, trying new recipes, reading all different types of books, and enjoying many 
different activities with husband Ron, daughters and sons-in-law Sarah and James, and 
Katie and Matt, and most especially with her two grandkids, Brooklynn and Blake, who 
are the delights of her life!

About the Authors    23
DAVID A. DECEnzO (Ph.D., West Virginia University) is  president 
of Coastal Carolina University in Conway, South Carolina. He 
has been at Coastal since 2002 when he took over leadership 
of the E. Craig Wall Sr. College of Business. As president, 
Dr. DeCenzo has implemented a comprehensive strategic 
planning process, ensured fiscal accountability through 
policy and practice, and promoted assessment and trans-
parency throughout the University. Before joining the 
Coastal  faculty in 2002, he served as director of partner-
ship development in the College of Business and Econom-
ics at  Towson University in Maryland. He is an experienced 
industry consultant, corporate trainer, public speaker, and 
board member. Dr. DeCenzo is the author of numerous text-
books that are used widely at colleges and universities throughout 
the United States and the world. Dr. DeCenzo and his wife, Terri, 
have four children: Mark, Meredith, Gabriella, and Natalie, and reside in 
Pawleys Island, South Carolina.

Managers and 
Management
Andres Rodriguez/Alamy
1
            Only those who  
want to be managers  
need to take a  
course in management.

Anyone who works  
in an organization 
—not just managers— 
can gain insight into how 
 organizations work and the 
 behaviors of their boss and 
 coworkers by taking a course  
in management.
25

for a moment that 
it’s your first day 
in an introductory 
physics class. Your instructor asks you to take 
out a piece of paper and “describe Newton’s 
second law of motion.” How would you re-
act? I expect most students would respond 
with something like “How would I know? 
That’s why I’m taking this course!”
Now let’s change the situation to the first 
day in an introductory management class. 
Your instructor asks you to write an answer 
to the question: “What traits does one need 
to be an effective leader?” When we’ve done 
this on the first day, we find that students 
always have an answer. Everyone seems to 
think they know what makes a good leader.
This example illustrates a popular myth 
about the study of management: It’s just 
common sense. Well, we can assure you . . . 
it’s not! When it comes to managing, much 
of what passes for common sense is just 
plain wrong. You might be surprised to know 
that the academic study of management 
is filled with insights, based on extensive 
research, which often run counter to what 
seems to be common sense. That’s why we 
decided to tackle head-on this common-
sense perception by opening each chapter 
with a particular “management myth” and 
then “debunking” this myth by explaining 
how it is just a common-sense myth.
Take a minute to re-look at this chap-
ter’s “management myth” and “management 
myth debunked.” This “debunked” myth of-
ten surprises students majoring in subjects 
like accounting, finance, statistics, information 
technology, or advertising. Since they don’t 
expect to be managers, they see spending a 
semester studying management as a waste of 
time and irrelevant to their career goals. Later 
in this chapter, we’ll explain why the study of 
management is valuable to every student, no 
matter what you’re majoring in or whether you 
are a manager or aspire to be a manager. •
Learning Outcomes
1-1 Tell who managers are and where they work. p. 27
1-2 Define management. p. 29
1-3 Describe what managers do. p. 31
1-4 Explain why it’s important to study management. p. 36
1-5 Describe the factors that are reshaping and redefining management. p. 37
Assume
26

CHAPTER 1  •  Managers and Management    27
Although we’d like to think that all managers are good at what they do, you may have dis-
covered through jobs you’ve had that managers can be good at what they do or maybe not so 
good, or even good one day and not so good the next! One thing you need to understand is 
that all managers—good or not so good—have important jobs to do. And this book is about 
the work managers do. In this chapter, we introduce you to managers and management: who 
they are, where they work, what management is, what they do, and why you should spend 
your time studying management. Finally, we’ll wrap up the chapter by looking at some key 
factors reshaping and redefining organizations and the way managers manage.
Who Are Managers and Where Do They Work?
There’s no pattern or prototype or standard criteria as 
to who can be a manager. Managers today can be under 
age 18 or over age 80. They may be women as well as 
men, and they can be found in all industries and in all 
countries. They manage entrepreneurial businesses, large 
 corporations, government agencies, hospitals, museums, 
schools, and not-for-profit enterprises. Some hold top-level management jobs while others are 
supervisors or team leaders. However, all managers share one common element: They work in an 
organizational setting. An  organization is a deliberate arrangement of people brought together to 
accomplish some specific purpose. For instance, your college or university is an organization, as 
are the United Way, your neighborhood convenience store, the New Orleans Saints football team, 
fraternities and sororities, the Cleveland Clinic, and global companies such as Nestlé, Lego, and 
Samsung. These and all organizations share three common characteristics. (See Exhibit 1–1.)
What Three Characteristics Do All Organizations Share?
The first characteristic of an organization is that it has a distinct purpose, which is typically 
expressed as a goal or set of goals. For example, Bob Iger, Walt Disney Company’s presi-
dent and CEO, has said his company’s goal is to create amazing family entertainment and 
to provide customers extraordinary experiences, which will lead to increasing shareholder 
value.1 The second characteristic is that people in an organization work to achieve those 
goals. How? By making decisions and engaging in work activities to make the desired 
goal(s) a reality. For instance, at Disney, many employees work to create the content and 
experiences that are so important to the company’s businesses. Others provide support-
ing services or interact with guests (customers) directly. Finally, the third characteristic is 
that an organization is structured in some way that defines and limits the behavior of its 
members. Disney, like most large organizations, has a fairly complex structure with differ-
ent businesses, departments, and functional areas. Within that structure, rules, regulations, 
and policies might guide what people can or cannot do; some members will supervise other 
members; work teams might be formed or disbanded; or job descriptions might be created or 
changed so organizational members know what they’re supposed to do. That structure is the 
setting within which managers manage.
1-1  Tell who  
managers are and 
where they work.
People
Goals
A
B
Structure
Exhibit 1–1 Three Characteristics of Organizations
organization
A systematic arrangement of people brought 
together to accomplish some specific purpose

28    Part 1  •  Introduction
How Are Managers Different from Nonmanagerial Employees?
Although managers work in organizations, not everyone who works in an organization is 
a manager. For simplicity’s sake, we’ll  divide organizational members into two categories: 
nonmanagerial  employees and managers. Nonmanagerial employees are people who work 
directly on a job or task and have no responsibility for overseeing the work of others. The 
 employees who ring up your sale at Home Depot, take your order at the Starbucks drive-
through, or process your class registration forms are all nonmanagerial employees. These 
nonmanagerial employees may be called  associates, team members, contributors, or even 
employee partners. Managers, on the other hand, are individuals in an organization who 
direct and oversee the activities of other people in the organization so organizational goals 
can be  accomplished. A manager’s job isn’t about personal  achievement—it’s about helping 
others do their work. That may mean coordinating the work of a departmental group, leading 
an entire organization, or supervising a single person. It could involve coordinating the work 
activities of a team with people from different departments or even people outside the organi-
zation, such as temporary employees or individuals who work for the organization’s suppli-
ers. This distinction doesn’t mean, however, that managers don’t ever work directly on tasks. 
Some managers do have work duties not directly related to overseeing the activities of others. 
For example, an insurance claims supervisor might process claims in addition to coordinating 
the work activities of other claims employees.
What Titles Do Managers Have?
Although they can have a variety of titles, identifying exactly who 
the managers are in an organization shouldn’t be difficult. In a broad 
sense, managers can be classified as top, middle, first-line, or 
team leaders. (See Exhibit 1–2.) Top managers are those at or 
near the top of an organization. They’re usually responsible 
for making decisions about the direction of the organiza-
tion and defining policies and values that affect all orga-
nizational members. Top managers typically have titles 
such as vice president, president, chancellor, managing 
director, chief operating officer, chief executive officer, 
or chairperson of the board. Middle  managers are those 
managers found between the lowest and top levels of 
the organization. These individuals often man-
age other managers and maybe some nonmana-
gerial employees and are typically responsible 
for translating the goals set by top managers 
nonmanagerial employees
People who work directly on a job or task and have 
no responsibility for overseeing the work of others
managers
Individuals in an organization who direct the activi-
ties of others
top managers
Individuals who are responsible for making deci-
sions about the direction of the organization and 
establishing policies that affect all organizational 
members
middle managers
Individuals who are typically responsible for 
translating goals set by top managers into specific 
details that lower-level managers will see get done
Top
Managers
Middle
Managers
First-Line
Managers
Team Leaders
Exhibit 1–2 Management Levels
Stephen Lam/Reuters
Ajiti Banga is an associate product manager 
at Pocket Gems, a firm in San Francisco that 
makes and publishes mobile games such as 
Pet Tap Hotel and Paradise Cove. Collaborating 
with multiple teams of engineers and design-
ers, she manages games from initial concept 
through development to product launch.

CHAPTER 1  •  Managers and Management    29
The terms management and manager are actually  centuries 
old.2 One source says that the word manager originated in 
1588 to describe one who manages. The specific use of 
the word as a person who oversees a business or public 
organization is believed to have originated in the early part 
of the 18th century. However, used in the way we’re defin-
ing it in terms of overseeing and directing organizational 
members, management and manager are more appropriate 
to the early-twentieth-century time period. The word man-
agement was first popularized by Frederick Winslow Taylor. 
Taylor is a “biggie” in management history, so let’s look 
at his contributions to how manage-
ment is practiced today.
• In 1911, Taylor’s book Principles 
of Scientific Management took 
the business world by storm—
his ideas spread in the United 
States and to other countries and 
inspired others.
• Why? His theory of scientific management: the use of 
 scientific methods to define the “one best way” for a job 
to be done.
• Taylor, a mechanical engineer in Pennsylvania steel com-
panies, observed workers and was continually shocked 
by how inefficient they were:
 
— Employees used vastly different techniques to do the 
same job and often “took it easy” on the job.
 
— Few, if any, work standards existed.
 
— Workers were placed in jobs with little or no concern 
for matching their abilities and aptitudes with the 
tasks they were required to do.
• The result was worker output only about one-third 
of what was possible.
• Taylor’s remedy? Apply scientific management to these 
manual shop-floor jobs.
• The result was phenomenal increases in worker 
output and efficiency—in the range of 200 percent 
or more!
• Because of his work, Taylor is 
known as the “father” of scien-
tific management.
Want to try your hand at using scientific 
management principles to be more ef-
ficient? Choose a task you do regularly 
(think . . . laundry, grocery shopping, stu-
dying for exams, cooking  dinner, etc.). 
Analyze that task by writing down the steps involved in com-
pleting it. What activities could be combined or eliminated? Find 
the “one best way” to do this task. See if you can become more 
efficient—keeping in mind that changing habits isn’t easy to do.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these 
 discussion questions.
  Talk About It 1: What would a “Taylor” workplace be 
like?
   Talk About It 2: How do Taylor’s views contribute to 
how management is practiced today?
scientific management
The use of scientific methods to define the “one 
best way” for a job to be done
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
Management:  
Finding one best  
way to do a job?
into specific details that lower-level managers will see get done. Middle managers may have 
such titles as department or agency head, project leader, unit chief, district manager, division 
manager, or store manager. First-line managers are those individuals responsible for directing 
the day-to-day activities of nonmanagerial employees. First-line managers are often called 
supervisors, shift managers, office managers, department managers, or unit coordinators. We 
want to point out a special type of manager that has become more common as organizations 
use employee work teams. These managers, or team leaders, are individuals who are respon-
sible for managing and facilitating the activities of a work team.
first-line managers
Supervisors responsible for directing the day-to-day 
activities of nonmanagerial employees
team leaders
Individuals who are responsible for managing and 
facilitating the activities of a work team
What Is Management?
Simply speaking, management is what managers do. 
But that simple statement doesn’t tell us much. A better 
explanation is that management is the process of getting 
things done, effectively and efficiently, with and through 
other people. We need to look closer at some key words 
in this definition.
management
The process of getting things done, effectively and 
efficiently, through and with other people
1-2  Define  
management.

30    Part 1  •  Introduction
A process refers to a set of ongoing and interrelated activities. In our definition of man-
agement, it refers to the primary activities or functions that managers perform—functions 
that we’ll discuss in more detail in the next section.
Talk about new ways to be efficient!
ROWE—or results-only work environment—was a radical experiment tried at Best Buy head-
quarters. In this flexible work program, employees were judged only on tasks completed or 
results, not on how many hours they spent at work. Employees couldn’t say whether they 
worked fewer hours because they stopped counting, BUT employee productivity jumped 
41 percent!3
A quick overview of managers and efficiency  
& effectiveness
• The concepts are different, but interrelated.
• It’s easier to be effective if you ignore efficiency.
• Poor managers often allow
 
— both inefficiency and ineffectiveness OR effectiveness achieved without regard 
for efficiency.
• Good managers are concerned with
 
— both attaining goals (effectiveness) and doing so as efficiently as possible.
Efficiency and effectiveness have to do with the work being done and how it’s being 
done. Efficiency means doing a task correctly (“doing things right”) and getting the most 
output from the least amount of inputs. Because managers deal with scarce inputs—including 
resources such as people, money, and equipment—they’re concerned with the efficient use of 
those resources. Managers want to minimize resource usage and costs.
It’s not enough, however, just to be efficient. Managers are also concerned with com-
pleting important activities. In management terms, we call this effectiveness. Effectiveness 
means “doing the right things” by doing those work tasks that help the organization reach its 
goals. Whereas efficiency is concerned with the means of getting things done, effectiveness is 
concerned with the ends, or attainment of organizational goals. (See Exhibit 1–3.)
efficiency
Doing things right, or getting the most output from 
the least amount of inputs
effectiveness
Doing the right things, or completing activities so 
that organizational goals are attained
R
E
S
O
U
R
C
E
U
S
A
G
E
G
O
A
L
A
T
T
A
I
N
M
E
N
T
Means
Eﬃciency
Ends
Eﬀectiveness
Low 
waste
High
attainment
Goals
Exhibit 1–3 Efficiency and Effectiveness
  Write It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com 
to complete MGMT 1: Management Skills.

NO TWO ORGANIZATIONs ARe ALIKe, and neither are managers’ 
jobs. But their jobs do share some common elements, as you’ll see in 
these three approaches to describing what managers do.
1-3 Describe what managers do.
Ways to Look at  
         What managers Do
3
P O C C C
P O L C
plan          organize    command    coordinate      control
planning    organizing     leading     controlling
THEN
NOW
• Says that managers perform certain activities, tasks, or functions 
as they direct and oversee others’ work.
• WHAT Fayol said managers do: First person to identify five com-
mon activities managers engage in: plan, organize, command, 
coordinate, and control (POCCC).4
• Today, the management functions have been condensed to four: 
planning, organizing, leading, and controlling.
• See Exhibit 1–4 for what managers do when they P-O-L-C.
leading
Directing and coordinating the work  
activities of an organization’s people
controlling
Monitoring activities to ensure that they 
are accomplished as planned
planning
Defining goals, establishing strategy, and 
developing plans to coordinate activities
organizing
Determining what needs to be done, how it 
will be done, and who is to do it
4 Functions Approach
Who: Henri Fayol—an engineer/executive  
at a large French mining company
When: Early 1900s
How: Personal experience and observations.
  Try It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of  
mymanagementlab.com to complete the Simulation: What Is Management?
Jacques Boyer/Roger-Violiet/ 
The Image Works
1 
31
Achieving the
organization's
stated purpose
  
a
n
d 
w
h
o 
wi
ll 
m
a
k
e 
d
e
ci
si
o
n
s
to
 b
e 
gr
ou
pe
d,
 w
h
o 
re
p
or
ts
 t
o 
w
ho
m,
do
ne
, 
w
ho
 is
 t
o 
do
 t
he
m,
 h
o
w 
th
e 
ta
sk
s 
ar
e
In
cl
ud
es
 d
et
er
mi
ni
ng
 w
ha
t t
as
ks
 a
re
 t
o 
be
 
O
R
G
A
NI
ZI
N
G
c
o
or
di
n
at
e 
a
ct
iv
it
ie
s
d
ev
el
o
pi
n
g 
pl
an
s 
to
es
ta
bl
is
hi
ng
 s
tr
at
eg
y,
 a
nd
In
cl
ud
es
 d
eﬁ
ni
ng
 g
oa
ls
, 
P
L
A
N
NI
N
G 
d
e
vi
at
io
n
s
an
d 
c
or
re
ct
in
g 
an
y 
si
g
ni
ﬁc
an
t
co
m
pa
ri
ng
 it
 w
ith
 g
oa
ls
,
In
cl
ud
es
 m
on
it
or
in
g 
pe
rf
or
m
an
ce
,
C
O
N
T
R
O
L
LI
N
G 
L
E
A
D
I
N
G
In
cl
u
d
es
 
m
ot
iv
at
in
g 
e
m
pl
oy
ee
s,
 
di
re
ct
in
g 
th
e 
ac
ti
vi
ti
es
 o
f 
ot
he
rs
,
se
le
ct
in
g 
th
e 
m
os
t 
eﬀ
ec
tiv
e 
co
m
m
u-
ni
ca
tio
n  
ch
an
ne
l, 
an
d 
re
so
lv
in
g 
co
nﬂ
ic
ts
Exhibit 1–4 Four Management Functions

• Says that managers engage in certain “roles” as they manage others.
• WHAT Mintzberg said managers do: He identified and defined managerial roles—specific 
categories of managerial actions or behaviors expected of a manager. (Not sure what a “role” 
is? Think of the different roles you play—such 
as student, employee, volunteer, bowling team 
member, boyfriend/girlfriend, sibling, and so 
forth—and the different things you’re expected  
to do in those roles.)
• Exhibit 1–5 shows Mintzberg’s ten separate, but 
interrelated roles.
interpersonal roles
Involving people (subordinates and persons 
outside the organization) and other duties that 
are ceremonial and symbolic in nature
managerial roles
Specific categories of managerial  behavior; 
 often grouped around interpersonal 
 relationships, information transfer, and  
decision making
informational roles
Involving collecting, receiving, and 
 disseminating information
decisional roles
Entailing making decisions or choices
Management Roles Approach
 I
N
F
O
R
M
A
T
I
O
N
A
L 
R
O
L
E
S
 
D
E
C
I
S
I
O
N
A
L 
R
O
L
E
S
 I
N
T
E
R
P
E
R
S
O
N
A
L
 
R
O
L
E
S
I
N
F
O
R
M
A
T
A
I
O
N
A
S
N
A
L
R
O
L
E
S
I
N
T
E
R
R
O
L
E
S
Figurehead
Leader
Liaison
Disseminator
Spokesperson
Negotiator
Resource
 Allocator
Disturbance
 Handler
Entrepreneur
Monitor
Mintzberg’s 
Managerial 
Roles
Exhibit 1–5 Mintzberg’s Managerial Roles
Source: Based on Mintzberg, Henry, The Nature of Managerial 
Work, 1st edition, © 1973.
Which Approach—Functions or Roles—Is Better at Defining 
What managers Do?
 
— Both approaches appear to do a good job of describing what managers do.
 
— However, the functions approach stands out! It continues to be popular due to its clarity and 
simplicity.6 But, don’t disregard the roles approach; it offers another way to understand and 
 appreciate what managers do.
Who: Henry Mintzberg
When: late 1960s
How: Empirical study  
of five chief executives 
at work.5
32 Muschi/Getty Images
2 
32

33
Skills and Competencies
• Says that managers need certain skills and competencies as they manage others.
• WHAT these researchers say managers do: Identified four general management skills including:7
 
— CONCepTuAL sKILLs: Analyzing and diagnosing complex situations to see how things 
fit together and to facilitate making good decisions.
 
— INTeRpeRsONAL sKILLs: Working well with other people both individually and in 
groups by communicating, motivating, mentoring, delegating, etc.
 
— TeChNICAL sKILLs: Job-specific knowledge, expertise, and techniques needed to 
perform work tasks. (For top-level managers—knowledge of the industry and a general 
understanding of the organization’s processes and products; For middle- and lower-level 
managers—specialized knowledge required in the areas where they work—finance, 
human resources, marketing, computer systems, manufacturing, information technology.)
 
— pOLITICAL sKILLs: Building a power base and establishing the right connections to 
get needed resources for their groups. Want to learn more? Assess and develop your 
political skill by completing the PIA and the Management Skill Builder found at the end 
of the chapter on p. 42.
• Other important managerial competencies:8 decision making, team  
building, decisiveness, assertiveness, politeness, personal  
responsibility, trustworthiness, loyalty, professionalism,  
tolerance, adaptability, creative thinking, resilience, listening,  
self-development.
conceptual skills
A manager’s ability to analyze and diagnose 
complex situations
interpersonal skills
A manager’s ability to work with, understand, mentor, 
and motivate others, both individually and in groups
technical skills
Job-specific knowledge and techniques needed to 
perform work tasks
political skills
A manager’s ability to build a power base and 
establish the right connections
Political adeptness
Possessing expert job  
knowledge
Working well with others
Analyze and diagnose
Who: Robert Katz and others
When: 1970s to present
How: Studies by various researchers
Is the Manager’s Job Universal?
So far, we’ve discussed the manager’s job as if it were a generic activity. If management is 
truly a generic discipline, then what a manager does should be the same whether he or she is 
a top-level executive or a first-line supervisor; in a business firm or a government agency; in 
a large corporation or a small business; or located in Paris, Texas, or Paris, France. Is that the 
case? Let’s take a closer look.
Is a manager a manager no matter where  
or what he or she manages?
LeveL in the OrganizatiOn. Although a supervisor of the Genius Bar in an Apple Store 
may not do exactly the same things that Apple’s CEO Tim Cook does, it doesn’t mean that their 
jobs are inherently different. The differences are of degree and emphasis but not of activity.
As managers move up in the organization, they do more planning and less direct over-
seeing of others. (See Exhibit 1–6.) All managers, regardless of level, make decisions. They 
plan, organize, lead, and control, but the amount of time they spend on each activity is not 
3 
Source: Simon/Fotolia

34    Part 1  •  Introduction
necessarily constant. In addition, “what” they plan, organize, lead, and control changes with 
the manager’s level. For example, as we’ll demonstrate in Chapter 6, top managers are con-
cerned with designing the overall organization’s structure, whereas lower-level managers 
focus on designing the jobs of individuals and work groups.
PrOfit versus nOt-fOr-PrOfit. Does a manager who works for the U.S. Postal Service, 
the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, or the Red Cross do the same things that a man-
ager at Amazon or Symantec does? That is, is the manager’s job the same in both profit and 
not-for-profit organizations? The answer, for the most part, is yes. All managers make deci-
sions, set goals, create workable organization structures, hire and motivate  employees, secure 
legitimacy for their organization’s existence, and develop internal political support in order to 
implement programs. Of course, the most important difference between the two is how per-
formance is measured. Profit—the “bottom line”—is an unambiguous measure of a business 
organization’s effectiveness. Not-for-profit organiza-
tions don’t have such a universal measure, which 
makes performance measurement more difficult. But 
don’t think this means that managers in those organi-
zations can  ignore finances. Even not-for-profit orga-
nizations need to make money to continue operating. 
However, in not-for-profit organizations, “making a 
profit” for the “owners” is not the primary focus.
size Of OrganizatiOn. Would you expect the 
job of a manager in a local FedEx store that employs 
12 people to be different from that of a manager 
who runs the FedEx global distribution center in 
Memphis? This question is best answered by looking 
at the jobs of managers in small businesses and com-
paring them with our previous discussion of manage-
rial roles. First, however, let’s define a small business.
No commonly agreed-upon definition of a small 
business is available because different criteria are used 
to define small. For example, an organization can be 
classified as a small business using such  criteria as 
number of employees, annual sales, or total assets. For 
our purposes, we’ll describe a small  business as an 
independent business having fewer than 500 employ-
ees that doesn’t necessarily engage in any new or in-
novative practices and has relatively little impact on its 
industry.9 So, is the job of managing a small business 
different from that of managing a large one? Yes, some 
small business
An independent business having fewer than 500 
employees that doesn’t necessarily engage in any 
new or innovative practices and has relatively little 
impact on its industry
Organizing
36%
Leading
22%
Controlling
14%
Planning
28%
Top Managers
Organizing
24%
Controlling
10%
Planning
15%
First-Level Managers
Leading
51%
C
Organizing
33%
Controlling
13%
Planning
18%
Middle Managers
Leading
36%
Exhibit 1–6 Management Activities by Organizational Level
Source: Based on T. A. Mahoney, T. H. Jerdee, and S. J. Carroll, “The Job(s) of Management,” 
Industrial Relations 4, no. 2 (1965), p. 103.
This first-grader participates in a 10-week 
circus arts program offered by Marquis 
Studios, a not-for-profit group that offers arts-
in-education services to New York City public 
schools. Managed in much the same way as 
for-profit firms, Marquis provides programs 
that encourage students to explore visual 
arts, theater, music, dance, architecture, circus 
arts, and puppetry.
Staten Island Advance/Landov

CHAPTER 1  •  Managers and Management    35
differences appear to exist. As Exhibit 1–7 shows, the small business manager’s most important 
role is that of spokesperson. He or she spends a great deal of time performing outwardly directed 
actions such as meeting with customers, arranging financing with bankers, searching for new 
 opportunities, and stimulating change. In contrast, the most important concerns of a manager in a 
large organization are directed internally—deciding which organizational units get what available 
resources and how much of them. Accordingly, the entrepreneurial role—looking for business 
 opportunities and planning activities for performance  improvement—appears to be least impor-
tant to managers in large firms, especially among first-level and middle managers.
Compared with a manager in a large organization, a small business manager is more 
likely to be a generalist. His or her job will combine the activities of a large corporation’s 
chief  executive with many of the day-to-day activities undertaken by a first-line supervisor. 
Moreover, the structure and formality that characterize a manager’s job in a large organization 
tend to give way to informality in small firms. Planning is less likely to be a carefully orches-
trated ritual. The organization’s design will be less complex and structured, and control in the 
small business will rely more on direct observation than on sophisticated, computerized moni-
toring systems. Again, as with organizational level, we see differences in degree and emphasis 
but not in the activities that managers do. Managers in both small and large organizations 
 perform essentially the same activities, but how they go about those activities and the propor-
tion of time they spend on each are different. (You can find more information on managing 
small, entrepreneurial organizations in the Entrepreneurship Module at the end of the book.)
ManageMent COnCePts and natiOnaL BOrders. The last generic issue concerns 
whether management concepts are transferable across national borders. If managerial concepts 
were completely generic, they would also apply universally in any country in the world, regard-
less of economic, social, political, or cultural differences. Studies that have compared managerial 
practices among countries have not generally supported the universality of management con-
cepts. In Chapter 3, we’ll examine some specific differences between countries and describe their 
effect on managing. At this point, it’s important for you to understand that most of the concepts 
discussed in the rest of the book primarily apply to the United States, Canada, Great Britain, 
Australia, and other English-speaking countries. Managers likely will have to modify these con-
cepts if they want to apply them in India, China, Chile, or other countries whose economic, po-
litical, social, or cultural environments differ from that of the so-called free-market democracies.
High
Moderate
Low
Spokesperson
Disseminator
Entrepreneur
Resource allocator
Entrepreneur
Figurehead
Leader
Liaison
Monitor
Disturbance handler
Negotiator
IMPORTANCE OF ROLES
Roles Played by Managers
in Small Firms
Roles Played by Managers
in Large Firms
Exhibit 1–7 Managerial Roles in Small and Large Businesses
Source: Based on J. G. P. Paolillo, “The Manager’s Self-Assessments of Managerial Roles: Small vs. 
Large Firms,” American Journal of Small Business (January–March 1984), pp. 61–62.

36    Part 1  •  Introduction
Why Study Management?
Good managers are important because:
• Organizations need their skills and abilities,  especially in today’s uncertain, 
 complex, and  chaotic environment.
• They’re critical to getting things done.
• They play a crucial role in employee satisfaction and engagement.
1-4  Explain why it’s 
important to study 
 management.
Well . . . we’re finally at the point where we’re going to address the chapter-opening 
myth! You may still be wondering why you need to take a management class. 
Especially if you’re majoring in accounting or marketing or information technology 
and may not see how studying management is going to help you in your career. Let’s 
look at some reasons why you may want to understand more about management.
A Question of Ethics
 ▸
of new managers feel 
they’re unprepared to transi-
tion into management roles.
26%
58%
 ▸
of new managers don’t re-
ceive any training to help 
them make the transition.
 ▸
of first-time managers fail 
in that transition.
Moving to a management position isn’t easy, 
as these statistics indicate.10
If your professor has assigned this, go to the 
Assignments section of mymanagementlab.
com to complete these discussion  questions.
  Talk About It 3: Does an organization 
have an ethical responsibility to assist its new 
managers in their new positions? Why or why 
not?
  Talk About It 4: What could organiza-
tions do to make this transition easier?
48%
Eighty-two percent of Millennials  
surveyed by a staffing firm expressed  
an interest in being a manager.11
First, all of us have a vested interest in improving the way organizations 
are managed. Why? Because we interact with them every day of our lives and 
an understanding of management offers insights into many organizational as-
pects. When you renew your driver’s license or get your car tags, are you frus-
trated that a seemingly simple task takes so long? Were you surprised when 
well-known businesses you thought would never fail went bankrupt or were 
you angry when entire industries had to rely on government bailout money 
to survive declining economic conditions? Are you annoyed when you use a 
drive-through and get ready to enjoy your food or drink and realize something 
is missing or that it’s not what you ordered? Such problems are mostly the re-
sult of managers doing a poor job of managing.
Organizations that are well managed—such as Apple, Tata, Starbucks, 
Nike, Singapore Airlines, and Google—develop a loyal following and find 
ways to prosper even when the economy stinks. Poorly managed organizations 
may find themselves with a declining customer base and reduced revenues 
and may have to file for bankruptcy protection even in a strong economy. For 
instance, Gimbel’s, W. T. Grant, Hollywood Video, Dave & Barry’s, Circuit City, Eastern 
Airlines, and Enron were once thriving corporations. They employed tens of thousands of 
people and provided goods and services on a daily basis to hundreds of thousands of cus-
tomers. You may not recognize some of these names because these companies no longer 
exist. Poor management did them in. You can begin to recognize poor management and 
know what good managers should be doing by studying management.
What can a great boss do?
• Inspire you professionally and personally
• Energize you and your coworkers to do things together that you couldn’t do alone
• Provide you feedback on how you’re doing
• Provide coaching and guidance with problems
• Change your life12
The second reason for studying management is the reality that for most of you, once you 
graduate from college and begin your career, you will either manage or be managed. For those 

CHAPTER 1  •  Managers and Management    37
who plan to be managers, an understanding of management forms the foundation on which 
to build your own management skills and abilities. For those of you who don’t see yourself 
managing, you’re still likely to have to work with managers. Also, assuming that you’ll have 
to work for a living and recognizing that you’re likely to work in an organization, you’re likely 
to have some managerial responsibilities even if you’re not a manager. Our experience tells us 
that you can gain a great deal of insight into the way your boss (and coworkers) behave and 
how organizations function by studying management. Our point is that you don’t have to as-
pire to be a manager to gain valuable information from a course in management.
In today’s world, managers are dealing with changing workplaces, a changing workforce, 
changing technology, and global uncertainties. For example, grocery stores continue to struggle 
to retain their customer base and to keep costs down. At Publix Super Markets, the large grocery 
chain in the southeastern United States, everyone, including managers, is looking for ways to 
better serve customers. The company’s president, Todd Jones, who started his career bagging 
groceries at a Publix in New Smyrna Beach, Florida, is guiding the company through these 
challenges by keeping everyone’s focus—from 
baggers to checkers to stockers—on exceptional 
customer service.17 Or consider the management 
challenges faced by the Seattle Post-Intelligencer 
(P-I) when it, like many other newspapers, struggled 
to find a way to be successful in an industry that 
was losing readers and revenues at an alarming 
rate. Managers made the decision to go all-digital 
and the P-I became an Internet-only news source. 
Difficult actions followed as the news staff was 
reduced from 165 to less than 20 people. In its new 
“life” as a digital news source, the organization 
faces other challenges—challenges for the manager 
who needs to plan, organize, lead, and control in 
this changed environment.18 Managers everywhere 
are likely to have to manage in changing circum-
stances, and the fact is that how managers manage is 
changing. Throughout the rest of this book, we’ll be 
What Factors Are Reshaping and Redefining Management?
Welcome to the new world  
of management!
Changing Workplaces + Changing Workforce
1-5  Describe the 
 factors that are 
 reshaping and  
redefining 
 management.
• Not surprisingly, every business is now a tech-
nology business. Technology is changing the 
way we work and play.
• As mobile and social technologies continue to proliferate, more organizations are 
using apps and mobile-enhanced Web sites for managing their workforces and for 
other organizational work.
• Distributed labor companies like Uber, TaskRabbit, Gigwalk, and IAmExec are 
changing the face of temporary work.
• About 58 percent of workers ages 60 and older are currently delaying retirement.13
• Some 30 to 45 percent of employees work from home or are virtual employees.14 
The CEO of a New Jersey–based social media management company never sees 
her team members because they’re part of a virtual workforce.15
• About 3 percent of U.S. businesses currently offer unlimited vacation time  
to employees—a percentage that’s likely to grow.16
Claire Hobean, operations manager for  
Re-Time Pty. Ltd., models the Australian 
firm’s innovative Re-Timer glasses at a  
consumer electronics show. The medical 
device innovation uses bright light therapy 
to assist in the treatment of insomnia, jet lag, 
and Seasonal Affective Disorder by helping 
reset a person’s natural body clock.
Steve Marcus/Reuters

38    Part 1  •  Introduction
The office of tomorrow is likely to include workers that are faster, 
smarter, more responsible—and who just happen to be robots.22 
Surprised? Although robots have been used in factory and industrial set-
tings for a long time, it’s becoming more common to find robots in the 
office and it’s bringing about new ways of looking at how work is done 
and at what and how managers manage. So what would a manager’s 
job be like managing robots? And even more intriguing is how these 
“workers” might affect how human coworkers interact with them.
As machines have become smarter and smarter, researchers 
have been exploring the human-machine interaction and how people 
interact with the smart devices that are now such an integral part of 
our professional and personal lives. One insight is that people find 
it easy to bond with a robot, even one that doesn’t look or sound 
anything like a real person. In a workplace setting, if a robot moves 
around in a “purposeful way,” people tend to view it, in some ways, 
as a coworker. People name their robots and can even describe 
the robot’s moods and tendencies. As telepresence robots become 
more common, the humanness becomes even more evident. For 
example, when Erwin Deininger, the electrical engineer at Reimers 
Electra Steam, a small company in Clear Brook, Virginia, moved to 
the Dominican Republic when his wife’s job transferred her there, he 
was able to still be “present” at the company via his VGo robot. Now 
“robot” Deininger moves easily around the office and shop floor, 
 allowing the “real” Deininger to do his job just as if he were there in 
person. The company’s president, satisfied with how the robot solu-
tion has worked out, has been surprised at how he acts around it, 
feeling at times that he’s interacting with Deininger himself.
There’s no doubt that robotic technology will continue to 
be incorporated into organizational settings. The manager’s job 
will  become even more exciting and challenging as humans and 
 machines work together to accomplish the organization’s goals.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments  section 
of mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion 
questions.
  TALK ABOuT IT 5: What’s your response to the title of this box: 
Is it still managing when what you’re managing are robots? Discuss.
  TALK ABOuT IT 6: If you had to manage people and robots, how do 
you think your job as manager might be different than what the chapter 
describes? (Think in terms of functions, roles, and skills/competencies.)
IS IT STILL MANAgINg WHEN WHAT YOU’RE MANAgINg ARE ROBOTS?
::::::: Technology and the Manager’s Job   ::::::: 
discussing these changes and how they’re affecting the way managers plan, organize, lead, and 
control. We want to highlight four specific changes that are increasingly important to organiza-
tions and managers everywhere: customers, innovation, social media, and sustainability.
Why Are Customers Important to the Manager’s Job?
John Chambers, CEO of Cisco Systems, likes to listen to voice mails forwarded to him from 
dissatisfied customers because he wants to hear firsthand the emotions and frustrations they’re 
experiencing. He can’t get that type of insight by reading an  e-mail.19 This is a manager who 
understands the importance of customers. Organizations need  customers. Without them, most 
organizations would cease to exist. Yet, focusing on the customer has long been thought by 
many managers to be the responsibility of the marketers. We’re discovering, however, that 
employee attitudes and behaviors play a big role in customer satisfaction. Think of the times 
you’ve been treated poorly (or superbly) by an employee during a service encounter and how 
that affected the way you felt about the situation.
Managers are recognizing that delivering consistent high-quality customer service is 
 essential for survival and success in today’s competitive environment and that  employees 
are an important part of that equation.20 The implication is clear—they must create a 
customer-responsive organization where employees are friendly and courteous, accessible, 
 knowledgeable, prompt in responding to customer needs, and willing to do what’s necessary 
to please the customer.21
 Watch It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled Zane’s Cycles: The Management Environment.

CHAPTER 1  •  Managers and Management    39
Why Is Innovation Important to the Manager’s Job?
Success in business today demands innovation. Innovation means doing things differently, 
exploring new territory, and taking risks. And innovation isn’t just for high-tech or other tech-
nologically sophisticated organizations; innovative efforts are needed in all types, all levels, 
all areas, and all sizes of organizations. You’d expect companies like Apple, Google, Toyota, 
and Instagram to be on a list of the world’s 50 most innovative companies.23 But what about 
the likes of Panera Bread? Here’s a company that’s using technology to improve everything it 
does. It’s installing a new master system across its North American locations (over 1,800) that 
will provide customers with new ways to order their food (and even entertain themselves) and 
kitchen staff with capabilities to better handle custom orders. Or how about Kickstarter, which 
created the crowdfunding phenomenon? Now, it’s looking at ways to better encourage creativ-
ity among potential projects and startups and is also expanding its business beyond fundraising 
into publishing and distribution. In today’s challenging environment, innovation is critical and 
managers need to understand what, when, where, how, and why innovation can be fostered and 
encouraged throughout an organization. In a presentation a few years ago, a manager in charge 
of Walmart’s global business explained his recipe for success (personal and organizational): 
continually look for new ways to do your job better; that is, be innovative. Managers not only 
need to be innovative personally, but also encourage their employees to be innovative. We’ll 
share stories of innovative practices and approaches throughout the book.
Importance of Social Media to the Manager’s Job
You probably can’t imagine a time when employees did their work without e-mail or Internet 
access. Yet, some 20 years ago, as these communication tools were becoming more com-
mon in workplaces, managers struggled with the challenges of providing guidelines for 
using them. Today, it’s all about social media, which are forms of electronic communica-
tion through which users create online communities to share ideas, information, personal 
messages, and other content. Social platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Tumblr, 
Instagram, and others are used by more than a billion people.24 And employees don’t just 
use these on their personal time, but also for work purposes. That’s why managers again 
are struggling with guidelines for employee use as they attempt to navigate the power and 
peril of social media. For example, at grocery chain SuperValu, managers realized that keep-
ing 135,000-plus employees connected and engaged 
was imperative to continued success.25 They decided 
to adopt an internal social media tool to foster coop-
eration and collaboration among its 10 distinct store 
brands operating in 44 states. And they’re not alone. 
More and more businesses are turning to social 
media not just as a way to connect with customers, 
but also as a way to manage their human resources 
and tap into their innovation and talent. That’s the 
potential power of social media. But the potential 
peril is in how it’s used. When the social media plat-
form becomes a way for boastful employees to brag 
about their accomplishments, for managers to pub-
lish one-way messages to employees, or for employ-
ees to argue or gripe about something or someone 
they don’t like at work, then it’s lost its usefulness. 
To avoid this, managers need to remember that 
social media is a tool that needs to be managed to be 
beneficial. At SuperValu, about 9,000 store manag-
ers and assistant managers use the social media sys-
tem. Although sources say it’s too early to draw any 
conclusions, it appears that managers who actively 
make use of the system are having better store sales 
revenues than those who don’t. In the remainder of 
social media
Forms of electronic communication through which 
users create online communities to share ideas, 
information, personal messages, and other content
Managing in a sustainable way is important 
to Kim Marotta, Director of Sustainability at 
MillerCoors. As part of her role in achieving 
the company’s water conservation goals, 
she manages initiatives to reduce water 
usage throughout MillerCoors’ brewery 
processes and supply chain and to include 
water  stewardship messages in the firm’s 
marketing campaigns.
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel/MCT/Landov

40    Part 1  •  Introduction
the book, we’ll look at how social media is impacting how managers manage, especially in 
the areas of human resource management, communication, teams, and strategy.
Importance of Sustainability to the Manager’s Job
BMW is probably not a company that would come to mind in a section describing sustain-
ability. Yet, BMW, the iconic German manufacturer of high-performance luxury autos, 
is making a huge bet on green, wired cars for those who reside in cities.26 Its all-electric 
car, called the i3, is unlike anything that BMW—or any other car manufacturer—has 
made. The car’s weight-saving, carbon-fiber body is layered with electronic services and 
smartphone apps ready to make life simpler and more efficient for the owner and better 
for the planet. Company executives recognized that it had to add products that would 
meet the challenges of a changing world. This corporate action by a well-known global 
company affirms that sustainability and green management have become mainstream is-
sues for managers.
What’s emerging in the twenty-first century is the concept of managing in a sustain-
able way, which has had the effect of widening corporate responsibility not only to manag-
ing in an efficient and effective way, but also to responding strategically to a wide range 
of  environmental and societal challenges.27 Although “sustainability” may mean differ-
ent things to different people, the World Business Council for Sustainable Development 
 describes a scenario where all earth’s inhabitants can live well with adequate resources.28 
From a business perspective, sustainability has been defined as a company’s ability to 
achieve its business goals and increase long-term shareholder value by integrating eco-
nomic, environmental, and social opportunities into its business strategies.29 Sustainability 
issues are now moving up the business agenda. Managers at BMW, Walmart, and other 
global businesses are discovering that running an organization in a more sustainable way 
will mean making informed business decisions based on (1) communicating openly with 
various stakeholders and understanding their requirements, and (2) factoring economic, 
environmental, and social aspects into how they pursue their business goals. Throughout the 
rest of the book, we’ll explore sustainability as it relates to various aspects of managing. Just 
look for this 
 for those conversations.
sustainability
A company’s ability to achieve its business goals 
and increase long-term shareholder value by 
integrating economic, environmental, and social 
opportunities into its business strategies
Managers Matter! 
Wrapping It Up . . .
As you can see, being a manager is both challenging and exciting! One thing we know for 
sure is that managers do matter to organizations. The Gallup Organization, which has polled 
millions of employees and tens of thousands of managers, has found that the single most 
important variable in employee productivity and loyalty isn’t pay or benefits or workplace 
environment; it’s the quality of the relationship between employees and their direct supervi-
sors. Gallup also found that employees’ relationship with their manager is the largest factor 
in employee engagement—which is when employees are connected to, satisfied with, and 
enthusiastic about their jobs—accounting for at least 70 percent of an employee’s level of 
engagement.30 And Gallup found that when companies increase their number of talented 
managers and double the rate of engaged employees, their EPS (earnings per share) is 147 
percent higher than their competitors.31 That’s significant! This same research also showed 
that talented managers contribute about 48 percent higher profit to their companies than 
do average managers.32 Finally, a different study found that when a poor manager was 
replaced with a great one, employee productivity increased by 12 percent.33 What can we 
conclude from such reports? That talented managers do matter and will continue to matter 
to organizations!
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.
employee engagement
When employees are connected to, satisfied with, 
and enthusiastic about their jobs

1 Review 
CHAPTER SuMMARY
DIsCussION QuesTIONs
1-1 What is an organization and what characteristics do orga-
nizations share?
1-2 Duties define the manager. Do you agree or disagree with 
this statement? Discuss the role of managers.
1-3 In today’s environment, which is more important to 
organizations—efficiency or effectiveness? Explain your 
choice.
1-4 Are there any differences between the managerial func-
tions in a profit organization and a non-profit organiza-
tion? Explain.
1-5 Using any of the popular business periodicals (such as 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, Fortune, Wall Street Jour-
nal, Fast Company), find examples of managers doing 
each of the four management functions. Write up a 
description and explain how these are examples of that 
 function.
1-6 Consider your local greengrocer. Discuss how manag-
ers of such small businesses can adopt Mintzberg’s ten 
managerial roles to run their business.
1-7 Business is changing over time, which requires manage-
ment methods to evolve. What are the factors that contrib-
ute to management changes?
1-8 Is there one best “style” of management? Why or why 
not?
1-9 In what ways can managers at each of the four levels of 
management contribute to efficiency and effectiveness?
 1-1 Tell who managers are and where they work.
Managers are individuals who work in an organization direct-
ing and overseeing the activities of other people. Managers 
are usually classified as top, middle, first-line, or team leader. 
 Organizations, which are where managers work, have three 
characteristics: goals, people, and a deliberate structure.
 1-2 Define management.
Management is the process of getting things done, effective-
ly and efficiently, with and through other people. Efficiency 
means doing a task correctly (“doing things right”) and getting 
the most output from the least amount of inputs. Effectiveness 
means “doing the right things” by doing those work tasks that 
help the organization reach its goals.
 1-3 Describe what managers do.
What managers do can be described using three approaches: 
functions, roles, and skills/competencies. The functions ap-
proach says that managers perform four functions: planning, 
organizing, leading, and controlling. Mintzberg’s roles approach 
says that what managers do is based on the 10 roles they use 
at work, which are grouped around interpersonal relationships, 
the transfer of information, and decision making. The skills/
competencies approach looks at what managers do in terms 
of the skills and competencies they need and use. Four critical 
management skills are conceptual, interpersonal, technical, and 
political. Additional managerial competencies include aspects 
such as dependability, personal orientation, emotional control, 
communication, and so forth. All managers plan, organize, lead, 
and control although how they do these activities and how often 
they do them may vary according to level in the organization, 
whether the organization is profit or not-for-profit, the size of the 
organization, and the geographic location of the organization.
  1-4 Explain why it’s important to study 
 management.
One reason it’s important to study management is that all of us 
interact with organizations daily so we have a vested interest in 
seeing that organizations are well managed. Another reason is 
the reality that in your career you will either manage or be man-
aged. By studying management you can gain insights into the 
way your boss and fellow employees behave and how organiza-
tions function.
  1-5 Describe the factors that are reshaping  
and redefining management.
In today’s world, managers are dealing with changing work-
places, a changing workforce, global economic and political 
uncertainties, and changing technology. Four areas of critical 
importance to managers are delivering high-quality customer 
service, encouraging innovative efforts, using social media 
 efficiently and effectively, and recognizing how sustainability 
contributes to an organization’s effectiveness.
41

42    Part 1  •  Introduction
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions.
1-10 Do all organizations need managers? Explain.
1-11  Explain how the 4 functions approach is better than 
the roles approach and the skills and competencies 
approach for describing what managers do.
1-12  MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
 assignment for this chapter.
Management Skill Builder  |   BeCOmING pOLITICALLy 
ADepT
Anyone who has had much work experience knows that organizational politics exists everywhere. That is, 
people try to influence the distribution of advantages and disadvantages within the organization in their  favor. 
Those who understand organizational politics typically thrive. Those who don’t, regardless of how good 
their actual job skills are, often suffer by receiving less positive performance reviews, fewer promotions, and 
smaller salary increases. If you want to succeed as a manager, it helps to be politically adept. Research has 
shown that people differ in their political skills.34 Those who are politically skilled are more effective in their 
use of influence tactics. Political skill also appears to be more effective when the stakes are high. Finally, 
 politically skilled individuals are able to exert their influence without others detecting it, which is important 
in being  effective so that you’re not labeled as playing politics. A person’s political skill is determined by 
(1) his or her networking ability, (2) interpersonal influence, (3) social astuteness, and (4) apparent sincerity.
Skill Basics
Forget, for a moment, the ethics of politicking and any negative 
impressions you might have of people who engage in organiza-
tional politics. If you want to become more politically adept in 
your organization, follow these steps:
• 
Develop your networking ability. A good network can 
be a powerful tool. You can begin building a network 
by getting to know important people in your work area 
and the organization and then developing relationships 
with individuals in positions of power. Volunteer for 
committees or offer your help on projects that will be 
noticed by those in positions of power. Attend important 
organizational functions so that you can be seen as a 
team player and someone who’s interested in the organi-
zation’s success. Start a file list of individuals that you 
meet, even if for a brief moment. Then, when you need 
advice on work, use your connections and network with 
others throughout the  organization.
 PERSONAL INvENTORY ASSESSMENT 
using Influence strategies
Take a look at how well you use influence strategies. This PIA will help you determine how 
skillfully you do that and what you need to work on.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
• 
Work on gaining interpersonal influence. People will listen 
to you when they’re comfortable and feel at ease around 
you. Work on your communication skills so that you can 
communicate easily and effectively with others. Work on 
developing a good rapport with people in all areas and at all 
levels of your organization. Be open, friendly, and willing 
to pitch in. The amount of interpersonal influence you have 
will be affected by how well people like you.
• 
Develop your social astuteness. Some people have an 
 innate ability to understand people and sense what they’re 
thinking. If you don’t have that ability, you’ll have to work 
at developing your social astuteness by doing things such 
as saying the right things at the right time, paying close 
attention to people’s facial expressions, and trying to deter-
mine whether others have hidden agendas.
• 
Be sincere. Sincerity is important to getting people to want 
to associate with you. Be genuine in what you say and do. 
And show a genuine interest in others and their situations.

CHAPTER 1  •  Managers and Management    43
Practicing the Skill
Take each of the components of political skill and spend one 
week working on it as you navigate your school life and work 
life. Keep a brief set of notes describing your experiences—
good and bad. Were you able to begin developing a network of 
people you could rely on or connect with for school or work 
commitments? How did you try to become better at influencing 
those around you? Did you work at communicating better or at 
developing a good rapport with coworkers or class project team 
members? Did you work at developing your social astuteness, 
maybe by starting to recognize and interpret people’s facial 
expressions and the meaning behind those expressions? Did you 
make a conscious effort to be more sincere in your relationships 
with others, especially those that are not close friends? What 
could you have done differently to be more politically skilled? 
Once you begin to recognize what’s involved with political 
skills, you should find yourself becoming more connected and 
better able to influence others—that is, more politically adept.
Heartland’s Traditional Fragrances
To: Eric Kim, Training Coordinator
From: Helen Merkin, Human Resources Director
Re: Supervisory Training and Management Certification Program
The good news: our sales numbers continue to grow. The bad 
news: it’s putting a strain on our manufacturing supervisors. 
They’re finding it difficult to keep our line employees motivated. 
We need to get some training in place to help them deal with 
this demanding pace or our line employees are likely to get 
even more stressed and we may see product quality go down.
I need you to look into two issues for me. One is a training 
program that focuses on important supervisory skills. Do some 
research and put together a list of the skills you think are most 
important for our supervisors to have, together with a justifica-
tion for why you think these skills are important.
The second issue is how we could help our supervisors 
achieve certification that verifies their skills, knowledge, and 
professionalism. One certification program that I’m aware of is 
the Certified Professional Manager. Please research this pro-
gram and prepare a brief (no more than half a page) bulleted 
list of what’s involved. And get me the information as soon as 
possible. Thnx!
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 
CAse AppLICATION #1
S
potify, a Swedish commercial music service, is syn-
onymous with dramatically changing the way consumers 
access and use music on a day-to-day basis. They have 
succeeded in moving consumers away from buying music 
and, instead, moving them towards a model of renting the 
music they enjoy for a monthly fee. The Swedish music giant, 
launched in 2008, was developed into the business we know 
today by Swedish entrepreneur Daniel Ek, who was inspired to 
create a service that would be easier and more convenient for 
customers to use than the now-illegal file sharing websites that 
were popular at the time.35
Like many technology 
companies, Spotify has a 
flat organizational structure 
as opposed to complex hier-
archies of management. For 
Managing Without Managers
companies like Spotify it is imperative that they can work in 
a fast moving way that allows changes in content to get to 
the customer as quickly as possible. In order to work as ef-
ficiently as possible Spotify have adopted a management and 
organizational structure based upon squads, chapters, tribes, 
and guilds. Although you won’t find theory talking about or-
ganizational tribes or chapters, it does provide a useful way 
for Spotify to organize their staff and reporting structures 
in an industry where many are trying to remove mangers 
entirely.36
‘Squads’ are the building 
blocks of organizational struc-
ture at Spotify. These small 
teams work in a way that is 
similar to a small start up busi-
ness. These squads sit together 
Spotify shows that it is  
possible to thrive without  
traditional managers!

44    Part 1  •  Introduction
in one shared space in order to work as effectively as possible on 
one long term mission; usually improving a specific area or part 
of the Spotify experience. Squads do not have a manager and in-
stead work together to ensure the overall problem is solved. Each 
squad does however have a ‘Product Owner’, and it is their job 
to ensure that work is prioritized across the whole squad. Within 
each squad you will find employees with different skills that can 
contribute towards the squad achieving their goal.37
‘Tribes’ are groups of squads that work in similar areas. 
This means that all the squads who are working on web 
based services are part of the same tribe; and squads who 
work on the mobile Spotify application will be part of a dif-
ferent tribe. Each tribe, like the individual squads, is able to 
work autonomously with very little traditional management 
taking place. Within the Spotify offices the multiple squads 
that make up each tribe sit close together to allow collabora-
tion between squads as needed, however the ethos of Spotify 
aims to discourage squads and tribes being dependent on one 
another so that change can happen as quickly as possible, 
something that is incredibly important in the ever changing 
technology markets.38
In order to be able to manage the staff and structure 
throughout the organization Spotify utilizes what they term 
‘Chapters’. These chapters are collections of people who have 
similar skills but who work in various squads; for example a 
chapter may be comprised of all of the programmers in the 
various squads within one tribe. It is within these chapters that 
we see more of a link to traditional management theory with 
clearer lines of management and responsibility for staff mem-
bers, their development, pay and progression. The only time 
people tend to work outside their tribe is when taking part in 
‘Guild’ activities. The guilds are cross tribe groups of people 
who have similar interests but again do not have any formal 
management, and are instead autonomous and self managed, 
working on projects or problems that interest them.39
As a fast-moving technology company it is of course es-
sential for Spotify to be able to react, change, and adapt their 
online content quickly.40  In approaching management in a non-
traditional manner they have allowed individuals to be more 
creative whilst still meeting the overall goals of the business. 
There are however potential difficulties with adopting this more 
relaxed attitude to management, as there is an overall lack of 
control and there are opportunities for the freedom offered to 
staff to be misused. The increase in technology companies such 
as Spotify is changing the landscape of management, with many 
trying to avoid traditional management practices altogether. 
Spotify is somewhat unique in its field as they have recognized 
the need for management within the organization, however they 
have attempted to find a unique way of balancing the need for 
freedom and creativity in the workforce whilst still undertaking 
basic management activities. As Spotify grows in size they may 
need to reflect upon their approach to management.41
Discussion Questions
1-13 Who undertakes management at Spotify?
1-14  How could Spotify manage poor performing individuals or teams? 
Do you think this is a problem at Spotify? Why or why not?
1-15 Are there any similarities to traditional management at Spotify?
1-16  Do you think that this approach to management would be  
effective within another company?
CAse AppLICATION
Building a Better Boss
G
oogle doesn’t do anything halfway. So when it de-
cided to “build a better boss,” it did what it does best: 
look at data.42 Using data from performance reviews, 
feedback surveys, and supporting papers turned in for individu-
als being nominated for top-manager awards, Google tried to 
find what a great boss is and does. The project, dubbed Project 
Oxygen, examined some 100 variables and ultimately identi-
fied eight characteristics or habits of Google’s most effective 
managers. Here are the “big eight”:
• Provide an unambiguous vision of the future;
• Help individuals to reach their long-term work goals;
• Express interest in employees’ well-being;
• Ensure you have the necessary technical abilities to support 
employee efforts;
• Display effective communication skills, especially listening;
• Provide coaching support when needed;
• Focus on being productive and on end results; and
• Avoid over-managing; let your team be responsible.
At first glance, you’re probably thinking that these eight 
attributes seem pretty simplistic and obvious and you may be 
wondering why Google spent all this time and effort to uncover 
these. Even Google’s vice president for people operations, 
#2

CHAPTER 1  •  Managers and Management    45
Laszlo Bock, said, “My first reaction was, that’s it?” Another 
writer described it as “reading like a whiteboard gag from an 
episode of The Office.” But, as the old saying goes, there was 
more to this list than meets the eye.
When Bock and his team began looking closer and rank 
ordering the eight items by importance, Project Oxygen got 
interesting—a lot more interesting! And to understand this, 
you have to understand something about Google’s  approach 
to management since its founding in 1999. Plain and simple, 
managers were encouraged to “leave people alone. Let the 
engineers do their stuff. If they become stuck, they’ll ask 
their bosses, whose deep technical expertise propelled them 
to management in the first place.” It’s not hard to see what 
Google wanted its managers to be—outstanding technical 
specialists. Mr. Bock explains, “In the Google context, we’d 
always believed that to be a 
manager, particularly on the 
engineering side, you need to 
be as deep or deeper a tech-
nical expert than the people 
who work for you.” However, 
Project Oxygen revealed that 
technical expertise was ranked 
number eight (very last) on the list. So, here’s the complete list 
from most important to least important, along with what each 
characteristic entails:
• Provide coaching support when needed (provide specific 
feedback and have regular one-on-one meetings with 
employees; offer solutions tailored to each employee’s 
strengths)
• Avoid over-managing; let your team be responsible (give 
employees space to tackle problems themselves, but be avail-
able to offer advice)
• Express interest in employees’ well-being (make new team 
members feel welcome and get to know your employees as 
people)
• Focus on being productive and on end results (focus on help-
ing the team achieve its goals by prioritizing work and get-
ting rid of obstacles)
• Display good communication skills, especially listening 
(learn to listen and to share information; encourage open 
dialogue and pay attention to the team’s concerns)
• Help individuals to reach their long-term work goals (notice 
employees’ efforts so they can see how their hard work is 
furthering their careers; appreciate employees’ efforts and 
make that appreciation known)
• Provide an unambiguous vision of the future (lead the team 
but keep everyone involved in developing and working 
 toward the team’s vision)
• Ensure you have the  necessary technical abilities to support 
employee efforts (understand the challenges facing the team 
and be able to help team members solve problems)
Now, managers at Google aren’t just encouraged to be great 
managers, they know what being a great manager  involves. And 
the company is doing its part, as well. Using the list, Google 
started training managers, as 
well as providing  individual 
coaching 
and 
performance 
 review sessions. You can say 
that Project Oxygen breathed 
new life into Google’s man-
agers. Bock says the compa-
ny’s efforts paid off quickly. 
“We were able to have a statistically significant improvement 
in manager quality for 75 percent of our worst-performing 
managers.”
Discussion Questions
1-17  Describe the findings of Project Oxygen using the  functions 
approach, Mintzberg’s roles approach, and the skills  approach.
1-18  Are you surprised at what Google found out about “building a 
better boss?” Explain your answer.
1-19  What’s the difference between encouraging managers to be 
great managers and knowing what being a great manager 
 involves?
1-20  What could other companies learn from Google’s  experiences?
1-21  Would you want to work for a company like Google? Why or 
why not?
Data cruncher Google 
crunched data to find out 
what being a great manager 
involves.
CAse AppLICATION
Saving the World
Y
ou used to be able to tell who the bad guys were. But 
in our digital online world, those days are long gone.43 
Now, the bad guys are faceless and anonymous. And 
they can and do inflict all kinds of damage on individuals, 
businesses, governments, and other organizations. Surveys 
show that data breach attacks are happening with alarming 
regularity. And while your home and school PCs are hope-
fully well protected from data theft and viruses, don’t think 
#3

46    Part 1  •  Introduction
that you’re in the clear. The newest targets for data thieves are 
smartphones and other mobile devices. However, the good 
guys are fighting back. For instance, security technology com-
pany Symantec Corporation set up a sting called Operation 
HoneyStick, in which it distributed 50 smartphones in Silicon 
Valley; Washington, DC; New York; Los Angeles; and Ottawa, 
Canada. The phones were loaded with a lot of important but 
fake data and left in locations where thieves would be tempted 
to pick them up, such as restaurants, elevators, convenience 
stores, and college student 
gathering places. Oh, and one 
other thing: the smartphones 
were equipped with monitor-
ing software so the security 
experts could track where the 
devices were taken once found 
and what type of information 
was accessed by the finders. This is just one example of how 
Symantec’s employees are  trying to “save the world” one step 
at a time—not an easy thing to do.
“Imagine what life would be like if your product were 
never finished, if your work were never done, if your mar-
ket shifted 30 times a day.” Sounds pretty crazy, doesn’t it? 
However, the computer-virus hunters and security experts at 
Symantec don’t have to imagine—that’s the reality of their 
daily work. For instance, at the company’s well-obscured 
Dublin facility (one of three around the globe), operations 
manager Patrick Fitzgerald must keep his engineers and re-
searchers focused 24/7 on identifying and combating what the 
bad guys are throwing out there. Right now, they’re trying to 
stay ahead of a big virus threat, Stuxnet, which targets com-
puter systems running the environmental controls in industrial 
facilities, such as temperature in power plants, pressure in 
pipelines, automated timing, and so forth. The consequences of 
someone intent on doing evil getting control over such critical 
functions could be disastrous.
Symantec, which designs content and network  security 
software for both consumers and businesses, reflects the 
 realities facing many organizations today—quickly shifting 
customer expectations and continuously emerging global com-
petitors and global threats. Managing talented people in such 
an environment can be quite challenging.
Symantec’s virus hunters around the world deal with some 
20,000 virus samples each month, not all of which are unique, 
stand-alone viruses. To make the hunters’ jobs even more inter-
esting is that computer attacks are increasingly being spread by 
criminals around the world wanting to steal information, whether 
corporate data or personal user account information that can be 
used in fraud. Dealing with these critical and time-sensitive 
issues requires special talents. The response-center team is a 
diverse group whose members weren’t easy to find. “It’s not as 
if colleges are creating thousands of anti-malware or security 
experts every year that we can hire. If you find them in any part 
of the world, you just go after them.” The response-center team’s 
makeup reflects that. For instance, one senior researcher is from 
Hungary; another is from Iceland; and another works out of her 
home in Melbourne, Florida. But they all share something in 
common: They’re all motivated by solving problems.
The 
launch 
of 
the 
Blaster-B worm, a particularly 
nasty virus, in late summer 
2003 changed the company’s 
approach to dealing with vi-
ruses. The domino effect of 
Blaster-B and other viruses 
spawned by it meant that 
frontline software analysts were working around the clock for 
almost two weeks. The “employee burn-out” potential made 
the company realize that its virus-hunting team would now 
have to be much deeper talent-wise. Now, the response cen-
ter’s team numbers in the hundreds and managers can rotate 
people from the front lines—where they’re responsible for 
responding to new security threats that crop up—into groups 
where they can help with new-product development. Others 
write internal research papers. Still others are assigned to 
 develop new tools that will help their colleagues battle the 
next wave of threats. There’s even an individual who tries 
to figure out what makes the virus writers tick—and the day 
never ends for these virus hunters. When Dublin’s team fin-
ishes its day, colleagues in Santa Monica take over. When the 
U.S. team finishes its day, it hands off to the team in Tokyo, 
who then hands back to Dublin for the new day. It’s a frenetic, 
chaotic, challenging work environment that spans the entire 
globe. But the goals for managing the virus hunters are to “try 
to take the chaos out, to make the exciting boring,” to have a 
predictable and well-defined process for dealing with the virus 
threats, and to spread work evenly to the company’s facilities 
around the world. It’s a managerial challenge that company 
managers have embraced.
Discussion Questions
1-22  Keeping professionals excited about work that is  routine, 
standardized, and chaotic is a major challenge for  Symantec’s 
managers. How could they use technical,  human, and con-
ceptual skills to maintain an environment that encourages 
innovation and professionalism among the virus hunters?
1-23  What managerial competencies might be important for these 
managers and why are these important?
Managing talented people in 
a work environment that’s 
quickly shifting can be quite 
challenging!

CHAPTER 1  •  Managers and Management    47
1-24  What management roles would operations manager Patrick 
Fitzgerald be playing as he (a) held weekly security briefing con-
ference calls with coworkers around the globe, (b) assessed the 
feasibility of adding a new network security consulting service, 
and (c) kept employees focused on the company’s commitments 
to customers?
1-25  Go to Symantec’s Web site (www.symantec.com) and look up 
information about the company. What can you tell about its 
emphasis on customer service and innovation? In what ways 
does the organization support its employees in servicing cus-
tomers and in being  innovative?
Endnotes
 1. The Walt Disney Company, Letter 
to Shareholders, 2012 Annual Re-
port, 1–3.
 2. From the Past to the Present 
box based on Dictionary.com 
Unabridged, based on the Ran-
dom House Dictionary, © Ran-
dom House, Inc. 2009, http:// 
dictionary.reference.com/browse/
manage; Online Etymology Dic-
tionary, 
www.etymonline.com 
(June 5, 2009); P. F. Drucker, 
Management: Revised Edition 
(New York: HarperCollins Pub-
lishers, 2008); and F. W. Taylor, 
Principles of Scientific Manage-
ment (New York: Harper, 1911), 
44. For other information on Tay-
lor, see S. Wagner-Tsukamoto, 
“An Institutional Economic Re-
construction of Scientific Man-
agement: On the Lost Theoretical 
Logic of Taylorism,” Academy 
of Management Review, January 
2007, 105–17; R. Kanigel, The 
One Best Way: Frederick Winslow 
Taylor and the Enigma of Effi-
ciency (New York: Viking, 1997); 
and M. Banta, Taylored Lives: 
Narrative Productions in the 
Age of Taylor, Veblen, and Ford 
(Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1993).
 3. S. Stevenson, “Don’t Go to 
Work,” 
http://www.slate.com/ 
articles/business/psychology_of_ 
management/2014/05/best_
buy_s_rowe_experiment_can_ 
results_only_work_environments_ 
actually_be.html, May 11, 2014; 
S. Miller, “Study: Flexible Sched-
ules Reduce Conflict, Lower 
Turnover,” www.shrm.org, April 
13, 2011; K. M. Butler, “We Can 
ROWE Our Way to a Better Work 
Environment,” EBN.BenefitNews.
com, April 1, 2011, p. 8; P. Moen, 
E. L. Kelly, and R. Hill, “Does En-
hancing Work-Time Control and 
Flexibility Reduce Turnover? A 
Naturally Occurring Experiment,” 
Social Problems, February 2011, 
69–98; and R. J. Erickson, “Task, 
Not Time: Profile of a Gen Y Job,” 
Harvard Business Review, Febru-
ary 2008, 19.
 4. H. Fayol, Industrial and General 
Administration 
(Paris: 
Dunod, 
1916).
 5. H. Mintzberg, The Nature of Man-
agerial Work (New York: Harper 
& Row, 1973).
 6. S. J. Carroll and D. A. Gillen, “Are 
the Classical Management Func-
tions Useful in Describing Mana-
gerial Work?” Academy of Man-
agement Review, January 1987, 
48.
 7. See, for example, J. G. Harris, 
D. W. DeLong, and A. Donnel-
lon, “Do You Have What It Takes 
to Be an E-Manager?” Strategy 
and Leadership (August 2001): 
10–14; C. Fletcher and C. Baldry, 
“A Study of Individual Differ-
ences and Self-Awareness in the 
Context of Multi-Source Feed-
back,” Journal of Occupational 
and Organizational Psychology 
(September 2000): 303–19; and 
R. L. Katz, “Skills of an Effective 
Administrator,” Harvard Business 
Review, September–October 1974, 
90–102.
 8. R. P. Tett, H. A. Guterman, A. Ble-
ier, and P. J. Murphy, “Develop-
ment and Content Validation of a 
‘Hyperdimensional’ Taxonomy of 
Managerial Competence,” Human 
Performance 13, no. 3 (2000): 
205–51.
 9. “Frequently Asked Questions,” 
U.S. Small Business Administra-
tion, 
www.sba.gov/advo 
(Sep-
tember 2008); T. L. Hatten, Small 
Business: Entrepreneurship and 
Beyond (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1997), 5; L. W. 
Busenitz, “Research on Entre-
preneurial Alertness,” Journal of 
Small Business Management (Oc-
tober 1996): 35–44; and J. W. Car-
land, F. Hoy, W. R. Boulton, and 
J. C. Carland, “Differentiating En-
trepreneurs from Small Business 
Owners: A Conceptualization,” 
Academy of Management Review 
9, no. 2 (1984): 354–59.
 10. A Question of Ethics box based on 
M. S. Plakhotnik and T. S. Rocco, 
“A Succession Plan for First-Time 
Managers,” 
T&D, 
December 
2011, 42–45; P. Brotherton, “New 
Managers Feeling Lost at Sea,” 
T&D, June 2011, 25; and “How 
Do We Help a New Manager Man-
age?” Workforce Management On-
line, June 16, 2011.
 11. “A New Millennium of Manag-
ers,” TD, February 2015, 19.
 12. J. Welch and S. Welch, “An Em-
ployee Bill of Rights,” Bloom-
berg BusinessWeek, March 16, 
2009, 72.
 13. N. 
Hellmich, 
“Many 
Delay 
 Retiring: Need More Money, 
Enjoy Their Jobs,” http://www. 
usatoday.com/story/money/ 
personalfinance/2014/02/27/ 
d e l a y - r e t i r e m e n t - m o n e y / 
5785373/, February 27, 2014.
 14. M. M. Biro, “Telecommuting Is 
the Future of Work,” www.forbes.
com, January 12, 2014.
 15. L. Vankam, “Virtual Workforce 
Stands Ready,” USA Today, Janu-
ary 8, 2013, 11A.
 16. The Muse, “Could Unlimited 
Vacation Time Work for Your 
Company?” 
http://www.forbes.
com/sites/dailymuse/2014/10/29/
could-unlimited-vacation-time-
work-for-your-company/, October 
29, 2014.
 17. T. W. Martin, “May I Help You?” 
Wall Street Journal, April 23, 
2009, R4.
 18. “Contact the Staff of seattlepi.
com,” 
http://www.seattlepi.com/
pistaff/; and W. Yardley and R. 
Perez-Peña, “Seattle Paper Shifts 
Entirely to the Web,” New York 
Times Online (March 17, 2009).
 19. F. F. Reichheld, “Lead for Loy-
alty,” Harvard Business Review, 
July–August 2001, 76.
 20. See, for instance, H. Ernst, W. D. 
Hoyer, M. Krafft, and K. Krieger, 
“Customer 
Relationship 
Man-
agement and Company Perfor-
mance—The Mediating Role of 
New Product Performance,” Jour-
nal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science (April 2011): 290–306; 
J. P. Dotson and G. M. Allenby, 
“Investigating the Strategic Influ-
ence of Customer and Employee 
Satisfaction on Firm Financial 
Performance,” Marketing Science 
 (September–October 2010): 895–
908; R. Grewal, M. Chandrashek-
aran, and A. V. Citrin, “Customer 
Satisfaction Heterogeneity and 
Shareholder Value,” Journal of 
Marketing 
Research 
(August 
2010): 612–26; M. Riemann, O. 
Schilke, and J. S. Thomas, “Cus-
tomer Relationship Management 
and Firm Performance: The Me-
diating Role of Business Strategy,” 
Journal of the Academy of Market-
ing Science (Summer 2010): 326–
46; and K. A. Eddleston, D. L. 
Kidder, and B. E. Litzky, “Who’s 
the 
Boss? 
Contending 
with 
 Competing 
 Expectations 
from 
Customers 
and 
Management,” 
Academy of Management Execu-
tive (November 2002): 85–95.
 21. See, for instance, C. B. Blocker, 
D. J. Flint, M. B. Myers, and S. F. 
Slater, “Proactive Customer Ori-
entation and Its Role for Creating 
Customer Value in Global Mar-
kets,” Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science (April 2011): 
216–33; G. A. Gorry and R. A. 
Westbrook, “Once More, with 
Feeling: Empathy and Technology 
in Customer Care,” Business Ho-
rizons (March–April 2011): 125–
34; M. Dixon, K. Freeman, and N. 
Toman, “Stop Trying to Delight 
Your Customers,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, July–August 2010, 
116–22; D. M. Mayer, M. G. Eh-
rhart, and B. Schneider, “Service 
Attribute Boundary Conditions 
of the Service Climate-Customer 
Satisfaction Link,” Academy of 
Management Journal (October 
2009): 1034–50; B. A. Gutek, M. 
Groth, and B. Cherry, “Achiev-
ing Service Success Through 
Relationships and Enhanced En-
counters,” Academy of Manage-
ment Executive (November 2002): 
132–44; Eddleston, Kidder, and 
Litzky, “Who’s the Boss? Con-
tending with Competing Expecta-
tions from Customers and Man-
agement”; S. D. Pugh, J. Dietz, 
J. W. Wiley, and S. M. Brooks, 
“Driving Service Effectiveness 
Through 
Employee-Customer 
Linkages,” Academy of Manage-
ment Executive (November 2002): 
73–84; S. D. Pugh, “Service with 
a Smile: Emotional Contagion in 
the Service Encounter,” Academy 
of Management Journal (Octo-
ber 2001): 1018–27; W. C. Tsai, 
“Determinants and Consequences 
of Employee Displayed Positive 
Emotions,” Journal of Manage-
ment 27, no. 4 (2001): 497–512; 
Naumann and Jackson, Jr., “One 
More Time: How Do You Satisfy 
Customers?”; and M. D. Hartline 
and O. C. Ferrell, “The Manage-
ment of Customer-Contact Service 
Employees: An Empirical Inves-
tigation,” Journal of Marketing 
(October 1996): 52–70.
 22. Technology and the Manager’s 
Job box based on D. Bennett, “I’ll 
Have My Robots Talk to Your 
 Robots,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek 

48    Part 1  •  Introduction
(February 21–27, 2011): 52–62; E. 
Spitznagel, “The Robot Revolu-
tion Is Coming,” Bloomberg Busi-
nessWeek, January 17–23, 2011, 
69–71; G. A. Fowler, “Holiday 
Hiring Call: People vs. Robots,” 
Wall Street Journal, December 20, 
2010, B1+; A. Schwartz, “Bring 
Your Robot to Work Day,” Fast 
Company.com (November 2010): 
72–74; and P. J. Hinds, T. L. Rob-
erts, and H. Jones, “Whose Job Is 
It Anyway? A Study of Human-
Robot Interaction in a Collabora-
tive Task,” Human-Computer In-
teraction (March 2004): 151–81.
 23. Fast Company Staff, “World’s 50 
Most Innovative Companies,” Fast 
Company, March 2015, 66+.
 24. “Top 15 Most Popular  Social 
Networking Sites,” http://www.
ebizmba.com/articles/social- 
networking-websites, 
 February 
2015; 
and 
“Social 
Media 
 Update 2014,” Pew Research 
 Center, http://www.pewinternet.
org/2015/01/09/social-media-
update-2014/, January 9, 2015.
 25. D. Ferris, “Social Studies: How to 
Use Social Media to Build a Better 
Organization,” Workforce Online, 
February 12, 2012.
 26. A. Taylor 
III, 
“BMW 
Gets 
Plugged In,” Fortune, March 18, 
2013, 150–56.
 27. KPMG 
Global 
Sustainability 
 Services, Sustainability Insights, 
October 2007.
 28. Vision 2050 Report, Overview, 
www.wbcsd.org/vision2050.aspx.
 29. Symposium on Sustainability—
Profiles in Leadership, New York, 
October 2001.
 30. J. 
Harter 
and 
A. 
Adkins, 
 “Employees Want a Lot More 
From Their Managers,” www 
.gallup.com/businessjournal, April 
8, 2015.
 31. R. Beck and J. Harter, “Why Great 
Managers Are So Rare,” www 
.gallup.com/businessjournal, 
March 26, 2014.
 32. Ibid.
 33. S. Bailey, “No Manager Left 
 Behind,” Chief Learning Officer, 
February 2015, 30.
 34. S. Y. Todd, K. J. Harris, R. B. Har-
ris, and A. R. Wheeler, “Career 
Success Implications of Political 
Skill,” Journal of Social Psycholo-
gy, June 2009, 179–204; G. R. Fer-
ris, D. C. Treadway, P. L. Perrewé, 
R. L. Brouer, C. Douglas, and S. 
Lux, “Political Skill in Organiza-
tions,” Journal of Management, 
June 2007, 290–329; K. J. Har-
ris, K. M. Kacmar, S. Zivnuska, 
and J. D. Shaw, “The Impact of 
Political Skill on Impression Man-
agement Effectiveness,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology, January 
2007, 278–85; and G. R. Ferris, 
D. C. Treadway, R. W. Kolodin-
sky, W. A. Hochwarter, C. J. Kac-
mar, C. Douglas, and D. D. Frink, 
 “Development 
and 
Validation 
of the Political Skill Inventory,” 
Journal of Management, February 
2005, 126–52.
 35. H. 
Kniberg, 
(2014) 
“Spotify  
engineering culture (part 1),” www 
.labs.spotify.com/2014/03/27/ 
spotify-engineering-culture-
part-1/, March 27, 2014.
 36. Kniberg, 
H. 
(2014). 
Spotify 
engineering culture (part 2). 
Available: 
https://labs.spotify 
. c o m / 2 0 1 4 / 0 9 / 2 0 / s p o t if y - 
engineering-culture-part-2/. Last 
accessed 21 October 2015.
 37. Lynskey, D. (2013). Is  Daniel 
Ek, Spotify founder, going to 
save the music industry . . . or 
 destroy it?. Available: http://www 
.theguardian.com/technology/ 
2013/nov/10/daniel-ek-spotify-
streaming-music. Last accessed 21 
October 2015.
 38. D. Richards, “At Zappos, Culture 
Pays,” www.strategy-business.com/ 
article, August 24, 2010.
 39. A. Groth, “Zappos Is Going Hola-
cratic: No Job Titles, No Manag-
ers, No Hierarchy.”
 40. G. Anders, “No More Bosses for 
Zappos (A Cautionary Tale).”
 41. R. E. Silverman, “At Zappos, Some 
Employees Find Offer to Leave 
Too Good to Refuse,” Wall Street 
Journal Online, May 7, 2015.
 42. R. D’Aprix, “A Simple Effective 
Formula for Leadership,” Stra-
tegic Communication Manage-
ment, May 2011, 14; R. Jaish, 
“Pieces of Eight,” e-learning 
age, May 2011, 6; M. L. Stallard, 
“Google’s Project Oxygen: A 
Case-Study in Connection Cul-
ture,” 
www.humanresourcesiq.
com, March 25, 2011; J. Aquino, 
“8 Traits of Stellar Managers, 
Defined by Googlers,” www.
businessinsider.com, March 15, 
2011; and A. Bryant, “Google’s 
Quest to Build a Better Boss,” 
New 
York 
Times 
Online, 
March 12, 2011.
 43. N. 
Perlroth, 
“Outmaneuvered 
at Their Own Game, Anti-Virus 
Makers Struggle to Adapt,” New 
York Times Online, December 
31, 2012; A. Vance, “Have You 
Seen This Android?” Bloomberg 
BusinessWeek, 
March 
12–18, 
2012, 37–38; “Are We Winning 
the Cybersecurity War?” www. 
networkworld.com, February 13, 
2012, 19–20; “Symantec Corpo-
ration: Company Profile,” Data-
monitor, February 10, 2012; A. 
Greenberg, “As Hackers Leak 
Symantec’s Source Code, Firm 
Says Cops Set Up Extortion Sting 
Operation,” Forbes.com, Febru-
ary 7, 2012, 8; “Under Siege,” 
Best’s Review, January 2012, 77; 
E.  Savits and A. K. Ghosh, “Cy-
ber Spies Are Winning: Time to 
Reinvent Online Security,” Forbes.
com, November 18, 2011, 3; and 
“The Virus Hunters,” Management 
Today, December 2010, 98.

49
 Early Management 
Classical Approaches 
Behavioral Approach 
Quantitative Approach 
Contemporary Approaches
• 3000 BCE–1776 
1911–1947 
Late 1700s–1950s 
1940s–1950s 
1960s–present
History Module
A Brief History of MAnAgeMent’s roots
early Management
Management has been practiced a long time. Organized endeavors directed by people responsible 
for planning, organizing, leading, and controlling activities have existed for thousands of years. 
Regardless of what these individuals were called, someone had to perform those functions.
Henry Ford once said, “History is more or less bunk.” Well . . . Henry Ford was wrong! History 
is  important because it can put current activities in perspective. We propose that you need to know 
 management  history because it can help you understand what today’s managers do. In this module, 
you’ll find an  annotated timeline that discusses key milestones in management theory. Check out each 
chapter’s “From the Past to the Present” box feature where we highlight a key person and his or her 
contributions or a key historical factor and its effect on contemporary management concepts. We believe 
this approach will help you better understand the origins of many contemporary management concepts.
3000–2500 BCE
The Egyptian pyramids are proof that projects of tremendous scope, employing tens of  thousands 
of people, were completed in ancient times.1 It took more than 100,000 workers some 20 years 
to construct a single pyramid. Someone had to plan what was to be done, organize people and 
materials to do it, make sure those workers got the work done, and impose some controls to 
ensure that everything was done as planned. That someone was managers.
Stephen Studd/Getty Images
1400s
At the arsenal of Venice, warships were floated along the canals, and at each stop, materials 
and riggings were added to the ship.2 Sounds a lot like a car “floating” along an  assembly 
line, doesn’t it? In addition, the Venetians used warehouse and inventory systems to 
keep track of materials, human resource management functions to manage the labor 
force  (including wine breaks), and an accounting system to keep track of revenues 
and costs.
Antonio Natale/Getty Images
1776
Although this is an important date in U.S. history, it’s also important because it’s the 
year Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations was published. In it, he argued the economic 
advantages of the division of labor (or job specialization)—that is, breaking 
down jobs into narrow, repetitive tasks. Using division of labor, individual productiv-
ity could be increased dramatically. Job specialization continues to be a popular 
way to determine how work gets done in organizations. As you’ll see in Chapter 6, 
it does have its drawbacks.
Transcendental Graphics/Getty Images
1780s–Mid-1800s
The Industrial Revolution may be the most important pre-twentieth-century influence 
on management. Why? Because with the industrial age came the birth of the  corporation. 
With large, efficient factories pumping out products, someone needed to forecast demand, 
make sure adequate supplies of materials were available, assign tasks to workers, and so 
forth. Again, that someone was managers! It was indeed a historic event for two reasons: 
(1) because of all the organizational aspects (hierarchy, control, job specialization, and so forth) 
that became a part of the way work was done, and (2) because management had become a 
necessary component to ensure the success of the enterprise.
Fotosearch/Getty Images

50    Part 1  •  Introduction
Classical Approaches
Beginning around the turn of the twentieth century, the discipline of management began 
to evolve as a unified body of knowledge. Rules and principles were developed that could 
be taught and used in a variety of settings. These early management proponents were 
called classical theorists.
 Early Management 
Classical Approaches 
Behavioral Approach 
Quantitative Approach 
Contemporary Approaches
 3000 BCE–1776 
1911–1947 
Late 1700s–1950s 
1940s–1950s 
1960s–present
1911
That’s the year Frederick W. Taylor’s Principles of Scientific Management was published. His groundbreak-
ing book described a theory of scientific management—the use of scientific methods to determine the 
“one best way” for a job to be done. His theories were widely accepted and used by managers around the 
world, and Taylor became known as the “father” of scientific management.3 (Taylor’s work is profiled in 
Chapter 1’s “From the Past to the Present” box.) Other major contributors to scientific management were 
Frank and Lillian Gilbreth (early proponents of time-and-motion studies and parents of the large family 
described in the original book Cheaper by the Dozen) and Henry Gantt (whose work on scheduling charts 
was the foundation for today’s project management).
Bettmann/CORBIS
1916–1947
Unlike Taylor, who focused on an individual production worker’s job, Henri Fayol and Max Weber (depicted 
in the photo) looked at organizational practices by focusing on what managers do and what constituted 
good management. This approach is known as general administrative theory. Fayol was introduced in 
Chapter 1 as the person who first identified five management functions. He also identified 14 principles 
of management— fundamental rules of management that could be applied to all organizations.4 (See 
Exhibit HM–1 for a list of these 14 principles.) Weber is known for his description and analysis of  bureaucracy, 
which he believed was an ideal, rational form of organization structure, especially for large organizations. In 
Chapter 6, we elaborate on these two important management pioneers.
Hulton Archive/Getty Images
•
Exhibit HM–1 Fayol’s 14 Principles of Management
1 Division of Work. This principle is the same as Adam Smith’s “divi-
sion of labor.” Specialization increases output by making employees 
more efficient.
2 Authority. Managers must be able to give orders. Authority gives 
them this right. Along with authority, however, goes responsibility. 
Whenever authority is exercised, responsibility arises.
3 Discipline. Employees must obey and respect the rules that govern 
the organization. Good discipline is the result of effective leadership, 
a clear understanding between management and workers regarding 
the organization’s rules, and the judicious use of penalties for infrac-
tions of the rules.
4 Unity of Command. Every employee should receive orders from 
only one superior.
5 Unity of Direction. Each group of organizational activities that have 
the same objective should be directed by one manager using one plan.
6 subordination of individual interests to the general interest. The 
interests of any one employee or group of employees should not 
take precedence over the interests of the organization as a whole.
7 remuneration. Workers must be paid a fair wage for their services.
8 Centralization. Centralization refers to the degree to which subor-
dinates are involved in decision making. Whether decision making is 
centralized (to management) or decentralized (to subordinates) is a 
question of proper proportion. The task is to find the optimum degree 
of centralization for each situation.
9 scalar Chain. The line of authority from top management to the low-
est ranks represents the scalar chain. Communications should follow 
this chain. However, if following the chain creates delays, cross-com-
munications can be allowed if agreed to by all parties and if superiors 
are kept informed. Also called chain of command.
10 order. People and materials should be in the right place at the right time.
11 equity. Managers should be kind and fair to their subordinates.
12 stability of tenure of Personnel. High employee turnover is inef-
ficient. Management should provide orderly personnel planning and 
ensure that replacements are available to fill vacancies.
13 initiative. Employees who are allowed to originate and carry out 
plans will exert high levels of effort.
14 esprit de Corps. Promoting team spirit will build harmony and unity 
within the organization.

History Module   51
Behavioral Approach
The behavioral approach to management focused on the actions of workers. How 
do you motivate and lead employees in order to get high levels of performance?
Late 1700s–Early 1900s
Managers get things done by working with people. Several early management writers recognized 
how important people are to an organization’s success.5 For instance, Robert Owen, who was con-
cerned about deplorable working conditions, proposed an idealistic workplace. Hugo Munsterberg, 
a pioneer in the field of industrial psychology, suggested using psychological tests for employee 
selection, learning theory concepts for employee training, and studies of human behavior for 
employee motivation. Mary Parker Follett was one of the first to recognize that organizations could 
be viewed from both individual and group behavior. She thought that organizations should be based 
on a group ethic rather than on individualism.
Ken Welsh/Newscom
1960s–Today
An organization’s people continue to be an important focus of management research. The field of 
study that researches the actions (behaviors) of people at work is called organizational behavior 
(OB). OB researchers do empirical research on human behavior in organizations. Much of what 
managers do today when managing people—motivating, leading, building trust, working with a 
team, managing conflict, and so forth—has come out of OB research. These topics are explored in 
depth in Chapters 9–13.
1924–Mid-1930s
The Hawthorne studies, a series of studies that provided new insights into individual and group 
behavior, were without question the most important contribution to the behavioral approach to 
management.6 Conducted at the Hawthorne (Cicero, Illinois) Works of the Western Electric Com-
pany, the studies were initially designed as a scientific management experiment. Company engi-
neers wanted to see the effect of various lighting levels on worker productivity. Using control and 
experimental groups of workers, they expected to find that individual output in the experimental 
group would be directly related to the intensity of the light. However, much to their surprise, they 
found that productivity in both groups varied with the level of lighting. Not able to explain it, the 
engineers called in Harvard professor Elton Mayo. Thus began a relationship that lasted until 1932 
and encompassed numerous experiments in the behavior of people at work. What were some of 
their conclusions? Group pressures can significantly affect individual productivity, and people 
behave differently when they’re being observed. Scholars generally agree that the Hawthorne stud-
ies had a dramatic impact on management beliefs about the role of people in organizations and led 
to a new emphasis on the human behavior factor in managing organizations.
1930s–1950s
The human relations movement is important to management history because its supporters never 
wavered from their commitment to making management practices more humane. Proponents of 
this movement uniformly believed in the importance of employee satisfaction—a satisfied worker 
was believed to be a productive worker.7 So they offered suggestions like employee participation, 
praise, and being nice to people to increase employee satisfaction. For instance, Abraham Maslow, 
a humanistic psychologist, who’s best known for his description of a hierarchy of five needs (a 
well-known theory of employee motivation), said that once a need was substantially satisfied, it no 
longer served to motivate behavior. Douglas McGregor developed Theory X and Theory Y assump-
tions, which related to a manager’s beliefs about an employee’s motivation to work. Even though 
both Maslow’s and McGregor’s theories were never fully supported by research, they’re important 
because they represent the foundation from which contemporary motivation theories were devel-
oped. Both are described more fully in Chapter 11.
Hawthorne Works Factory of Morton 
College
Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock
 Early Management 
Classical Approaches 
Behavioral Approach 
Quantitative Approach 
Contemporary Approaches
 3000 BCE–1776 
1911–1947 
Late 1700s–1950s 
1940s–1950s 
1960s–present
•

52    Part 1  •  Introduction
Quantitative Approach
The quantitative approach, which focuses on the application of statistics, optimi-
zation models, information models, computer simulations, and other quantitative 
techniques to management activities, provided tools for managers to make their 
jobs easier.
 Early Management 
Classical Approaches 
Behavioral Approach 
Quantitative Approach 
Contemporary Approaches
 3000 BCE–1776 
1911–1947 
Late 1700s–1950s 
1940s–1950s 
1960s–present
•
1940s
The quantitative approach to management—which is the use of 
quantitative techniques to improve decision making—evolved from 
mathematical and statistical solutions developed for military problems 
during World War II. After the war was over, many of these techniques 
used for military problems were applied to businesses.8 For instance, 
one group of military officers, dubbed the “Whiz Kids,” joined Ford Motor 
Company in the mid-1940s and immediately began using statistical 
methods to improve decision making at Ford. You’ll find more informa-
tion on these quantitative applications in Chapter 15.
Bert Hardy/Getty Images
1950s
After World War II, Japanese organizations enthusiastically embraced 
the concepts espoused by a small group of quality experts, the most 
famous being W. Edwards Deming (photo below) and Joseph M. Juran. 
As these Japanese manufacturers began beating U.S. competitors in 
quality comparisons, Western managers soon took a more serious look 
at Deming’s and Juran’s ideas.9 Their ideas became the basis for total 
quality management (TQM), which is a management philosophy 
devoted to continual improvement and responding to customer needs 
and expectations. We’ll look more closely at Deming and his beliefs 
about TQM in Chapter 15.
Richard Drew/AP Images

History Module   53
Contemporary Approaches
Most of the early approaches to management focused on managers’ 
concerns inside the organization. Starting in the 1960s, management 
researchers began to look at what was happening in the external 
 environment outside the organization.
 Early Management 
Classical Approaches 
Behavioral Approach 
Quantitative Approach 
Contemporary Approaches
 3000 BCE–1776 
1911–1947 
Late 1700s–1950s 
1940s–1950s 
1960s–present
1960s
Although Chester Barnard, a telephone company executive, 
wrote in his 1938 book The Functions of the Executive that an 
organization functioned as a cooperative system, it wasn’t until 
the 1960s that management researchers began to look more care-
fully at systems theory and how it related to organizations.10 The 
idea of a system is a basic concept in the physical sciences. As 
related to organizations, the systems approach views systems 
as a set of interrelated and interdependent parts arranged in a 
manner that produces a unified whole. Organizations function as 
open systems, which means they are influenced by and interact 
with their environment. Exhibit HM–2 illustrates an organization 
as an open system. A manager has to efficiently and effectively 
manage all parts of the system in order to achieve established 
goals. See Chapter 2 for additional information on the external 
and internal factors that affect how organizations are managed.
Frederic J. Brown/Newscom
Employees’ Work
    Activities
Management Activities
Technology and
    Operations Methods
Transformation
Process
Organization
Raw Materials
Human Resources
Capital
Technology
Information
Inputs
Products and Services
Financial Results
Information
Human Results
Outputs
En
vir
on
me
nt
 
En
vir
on
me
nt 
Feedback
Exhibit HM–2 Organization as an Open System
•

54    Part 1  •  Introduction
1980s–Present
Although the dawn of the information age is said to have begun with Samuel 
Morse’s telegraph in 1837, the most dramatic changes in information technol-
ogy have occurred in the latter part of the twentieth century and have directly 
affected the manager’s job.12 Managers now may manage employees who are 
working from home or working halfway around the world. An organization’s 
computing resources used to be mainframe computers locked away in tem-
perature-controlled rooms and only accessed by the experts. Now, practically 
everyone in an organization is connected—wired or wireless—with devices 
no larger than the palm of the hand. Just like the impact of the Industrial Revo-
lution in the 1700s on the emergence of management, the information age has 
brought dramatic changes that continue to influence the way organizations 
are managed. The impact of information technology on how managers do their 
work is so profound that we’ve included in several chapters a boxed feature on 
“Technology and the Manager’s Job.”
Contemporary Approaches
systems approach
An approach to management that views 
an organization as a system, which is a 
set of interrelated and interdependent 
parts arranged in a manner that produces a 
unified whole
open systems
Systems that dynamically interact with their 
environment
1960s
Early management theorists proposed management principles that they gen-
erally assumed to be universally applicable. Later research found exceptions 
to many of these principles. The contingency approach (or situational 
approach) says that organizations, employees, and situations are different 
and require different ways of managing. A good way to describe contingency 
is “if…then.” If this is the way my situation is, then this is the best way for 
me to manage in this situation. One of the earliest contingency studies was 
done by Fred Fiedler and looked at what style of leadership was most effec-
tive in what situation.11 Popular contingency variables have been found to 
include organization size, the routineness of task technology, environmental 
uncertainty, and individual differences.
contingency approach 
(or situational approach)
An approach to management that says that 
individual organizations, employees, and 
situations are different and require different 
ways of managing
Image Source/Getty Images
•­
•­
organizational behavior 
(OB)
The field of study that researches the 
 actions (behaviors) of people at work
Hawthorne studies
Research done in the late 1920s and early 
1930s devised by Western Electric industrial 
engineers to examine the effect of different 
work environment changes on worker 
productivity, which led to a new emphasis 
on the human factor in the functioning 
of organizations and the attainment of 
their goals
quantitative approach
The use of quantitative techniques to 
improve decision making
total quality  
management (TQM)
A managerial philosophy devoted to 
continual improvement and responding to 
customer needs and expectations
Industrial Revolution
The advent of machine power, mass 
production, and efficient transportation 
beginning in the late eighteenth century in 
Great Britain
division of labor (or job 
specialization)
The breakdown of jobs into narrow  
repetitive tasks
scientific management
The use of the scientific method to define 
the one best way for a job to be done
general administrative 
theory
Descriptions of what managers do and what 
constitutes good management practice
principles of  
management
Fayol’s fundamental or universal principles 
of management practice

History Module   55
Endnotes
 1. C. S. George, Jr., The History 
of Management Thought, 2d ed. 
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1972), p. 4.
 2. Ibid., pp. 35–41.
 3. F. W. Taylor, Principles of Scientific 
Management (New York: Harper, 
1911), p. 44. For other information 
on Taylor, see S. Wagner-Tsuka-
moto, “An Institutional Economic 
Reconstruction of Scientific Man-
agement: On the Lost Theoretical 
Logic of Taylorism,” Academy 
of Management Review, January 
2007, pp. 105–117; R. Kanigel, 
The One Best Way: Frederick Win-
slow Taylor and the Enigma of Ef-
ficiency (New York: Viking, 1997); 
and M. Banta, Taylored Lives: Nar-
rative Productions in the Age of 
Taylor, Veblen, and Ford (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1993).
 4. H. Fayol, Industrial and Gen-
eral Administration (Paris: Dunod, 
1916); M. Weber, The Theory of So-
cial and Economic Organizations, 
ed. T. Parsons, trans. A. M. Hender-
son and T. Parsons (New York: Free 
Press, 1947); and M. Lounsbury 
and E. J. Carberry, “From King to 
Court Jester? Weber’s Fall from 
Grace in Organizational Theory,” 
Organization Studies, vol. 26, no. 4 
(2005), pp. 501–525.
 5. R. A. Owen, A New View of Soci-
ety (New York: E. Bliss and White, 
1825); H. Munsterberg, Psychol-
ogy and Industrial Efficiency 
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1913); 
and M. P. Follett, The New State: 
Group Organization the Solution 
of Popular Government (London: 
Longmans, Green, 1918).
 6. E. Mayo, The Human Problems 
of an Industrial Civilization (New 
York: Macmillan, 1933); and F. J. 
Roethlisberger and W. J. Dickson, 
Management and the Worker (Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1939). Also see G. W. Yunk-
er, “An Explanation of Positive 
and Negative Hawthorne Effects: 
Evidence from the Relay Assembly 
Test Room and Bank Wiring Obser-
vation Room Studies,” paper pre-
sented, Academy of Management 
Annual Meeting, August 1993, 
Atlanta, Georgia; S. R. Jones, “Was 
There a Hawthorne Effect?” Ameri-
can Sociological Review, Novem-
ber 1992, pp. 451–468; and S. R. 
G. Jones, “Worker Interdependence 
and Output: The Hawthorne Studies 
Reevaluated,” American Sociologi-
cal Review, April 1990, pp. 176–
190; J. A. Sonnenfeld, “Shedding 
Light on the Hawthorne Studies,” 
Journal of Occupational Behavior 
(April 1985), pp. 111–130; B. Rice, 
“The Hawthorne Defect: Persis-
tence of a Flawed Theory,” Psy-
chology Today, February 1982, pp. 
70–74; R. H. Franke and J. Kaul, 
“The Hawthorne Experiments: First 
Statistical Interpretations,” Ameri-
can Sociological Review, October 
1978, pp. 623–643; and A. Carey, 
“The Hawthorne Studies: A Radical 
Criticism,” American Sociological 
Review, June 1967, pp. 403–416.
 7. A. Maslow, “A Theory of Human 
Motivation,” Psychological Re-
view, July 1943, pp. 370–396; see 
also A. Maslow, Motivation and 
Personality (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1954); and D. McGregor, 
The Human Side of Enterprise 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960).
 8. P. Rosenzweig, “Robert S. McNa-
mara and the Evolution of Manage-
ment,” Harvard Business Review, 
December 2010, pp. 86–93; and 
C. C. Holt, “Learning How to Plan 
Production, Inventories, and Work 
Force,” 
Operations 
Research, 
 January–February 2002, pp. 96–99.
 9. T. A. Stewart, “A Conversation with 
Joseph Juran,” Fortune, January 11, 
1999, pp. 168–170; J. R. Hackman 
and R. Wageman, “Total Quality 
Management: Empirical, Concep-
tual, and Practical Issues,” Admin-
istrative Science Quarterly, June 
1995, pp. 309–342; B. Krone, “To-
tal Quality Management: An Amer-
ican Odyssey,” The Bureaucrat, Fall 
1990, pp. 35–38; and A. Gabor, The 
Man Who Discovered Quality (New 
York: Random House, 1990).
 10. C. I. Barnard, The Functions of the 
Executive (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1938); and K. B. 
DeGreene, Sociotechnical Systems: 
Factors in Analysis, Design, and 
Management (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1973), p. 13.
 11. F. E. Fiedler, A Theory of Lead-
ership Effectiveness (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1967).
 12. “Information Age: People, Infor-
mation & Technology—An Exhi-
bition at the National Museum of 
American History,” Smithsonian 
Institution,http://photo2.si.edu/
infoage/infoage.html (June 11, 
2009); and P. F. Drucker, Manage-
ment, Revised Edition (New York: 
HarperCollins Publishers, 2008).

The Management 
Environment
It doesn’t 
matter what an 
organization’s culture is  
like. I can be happy  
working anywhere.
2
S L/Shutterstock

57
 Anyone who thinks they can be 
happy working in any type of  
organizational setting might be in 
for a big surprise! Even  
working at a company rated as “a 
best company to work for” won’t be 
for everyone. To be happy, don’t just 
“settle” for a job . . . find a workplace 
and a culture that “fit” you!

 it be nice 
to one day 
find a job you enjoy in an organization 
you’re excited to go to every day (or at 
least most days!)? Although other fac-
tors influence job choice, an organization’s 
culture can be an important indicator of 
“fit”—will I like working here and does 
this seem like a place where I can fit in and 
contribute? Organizational cultures differ 
and so do people. In the second part of this 
chapter, we’ll look at what  organizational 
culture is and what elements make up an 
organization’s culture. Before that, how-
ever, we need to look at the  external envi-
ronment organizations face.
“Dynamic forces are sweeping across 
the globe, reshaping our lives and  creating 
a wave of opportunities….”1 No  successful 
organization, or its managers, can operate 
without understanding the  dynamic exter-
nal environment that surrounds it. To bet-
ter understand this  external environment, 
we need to look at the important forces 
that are affecting the  way organizations 
are managed today. •
Learning Outcomes
2-1 Explain what the external environment is and why it’s important. p. 59
2-2 Discuss how the external environment affects managers. p. 63
2-3 Define what organizational culture is and explain why it’s important. p. 67
2-4 Describe how organizational culture affects managers. p. 69
Wouldn’t
58

CHAPTER 2  •  The Management Environment    59
What Is the External Environment and Why Is It Important?
One of the biggest mistakes 
managers make today  
is failing to adapt to the  
changing world.
When the Eyjafjallajökull volcano erupted in Iceland, who would have thought that it would 
lead to a shutdown at the BMW plant in Spartanburg, South Carolina, or the Nissan Motor 
auto assembly facility in Japan?2 Yet, in our globalized and interconnected world, such an oc-
currence shouldn’t be surprising at all. As volcanic ash grounded planes across Europe, sup-
plies of tire-pressure sensors from a company in Ireland couldn’t be delivered on time to the 
BMW plant or to the Nissan plant. Because we live in a “connected” world, managers need to 
be aware of the impact of the external environment on their organization.
The term external environment refers to factors, forces, situations, and events outside the 
organization that affect its performance. As shown in Exhibit 2–1, it includes several different 
components. The economic component encompasses factors such as interest rates, inflation, 
 employment/unemployment rates, disposable income levels, stock market fluctuations, and busi-
ness cycle stages. The demographic component is concerned with trends in population character-
istics such as age, race, gender, education level, geographic location, and family composition. The 
technological component is concerned with scientific or industrial innovations. The sociocultural 
component is concerned with societal and cultural factors such as values, attitudes, trends, tradi-
tions, lifestyles, beliefs, tastes, and patterns of behavior. The political/legal component looks at 
federal, state, and local laws, as well as laws of other countries and global laws. It also includes a 
country’s political conditions and stability. And the global component encompasses those issues 
(like a volcano eruption, political instability, terrorist attack, etc.) associated with globalization 
and a world economy. Although all these components potentially constrain managers’ decisions 
and actions, we’re going to take a more in-depth look at just two—economic and demographic.
What Is the Economy Like Today?
Snapshots of the economic context:
• A blue-ribbon company like General Motors goes bankrupt and then new 
 management leads it back to profitability.
• Global news stories are reporting signs that deflation might be making a return in 
some countries.
• Entry-level jobs now are more “thinking” oriented and include more sophisticated 
responsibilities.
• Climate change is reshaping supply networks, manufacturing processes, and 
 resource availability.
2-1  Explain what the 
external environ-
ment is and why 
it’s important.
THE 
ORGANIZATION
Economic
Demographics
Political/Legal
Sociocultural
Technological
Global
Exhibit 2–1 Components of the External Environment
external environment
Factors, forces, situations, and events outside the 
organization that affect its performance
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 73. Reprinted and 
electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

60    Part 1  •  Introduction
After several years in crisis mode, the U.S. economy and other global economies seem 
to have turned the corner. However, it’s not now, nor will it ever be, smooth sailing in the 
 economic arena for managers. After all, when you’re dealing with important factors such 
as jobs, incomes, prices of natural resources and consumer goods, stock market valuations, 
and business cycle stages, managers have to pay attention to those that could constrain 
 organizational decisions and actions. Here’s a quick overview of some of the more interesting 
characteristics of today’s economy that have the potential to influence a manager’s planning, 
organizing, leading, and controlling:
• The slowdown in productivity has moderated globally although it continues to lag in the 
United States. Productivity (how much a worker produces in a hour) is an important mea-
sure of how well an economy is doing. Factors that affect productivity include types and 
pace of innovation, changes in work practices, technology, levels of workforce education/
training/skill, etc.3
• Global trade, which grew strongly from the late 1970s through 2008, collapsed during the 
last global recession and has continued to be sluggish. Some analysts are wondering if this 
is an indicator of a potentially major macroeconomic change where the world economy is 
becoming less connected.4
• Total U.S. employment is up. The 5.5 percent unemployment rate was the lowest level in 
over seven years. However, the downside is that the strongest employment growth has been 
in low-wage jobs.5
• Many U.S. workers (nearly seven million) are trapped in part-time jobs, unable to find full-
time work.6
• Many businesses in low-wage industries (restaurants, retail, warehousing, and  other 
 services) are using part-time workers to soften the impact of health-care law  mandates.7
• According to a New York Times poll, only 64 percent of Americans state that they still 
 believe in the American dream—work hard and you can achieve success and riches. This is 
the lowest number in two decades.8
These low poll numbers possibly reflect a significant risk identified by the World Economic 
Forum facing business leaders and policy makers over the next decade:  “severe income 
 disparity.”9 Let’s briefly look at this issue to show that managers are  constrained not just by 
the actual economic numbers, but also by societal attitudes about the economy.
Economic inEquality and thE Economic contExt. A Harris Interactive Poll 
found that only 10 percent of adults think that economic inequality is “not a problem at all.” 
Most survey respondents believed that it is either a major problem (57 percent) or a minor 
problem (23 percent).10 Why has this issue become so sensitive? After all, individuals who 
worked hard, took risks, and were rewarded because of their hard work or creativity have 
long been admired. And yes, an income gap has always existed. In the United States, that 
gap between the rich and the rest has been much wider than in other developed nations for 
decades and was accepted as part of our country’s values and way of doing things. However, 
our acceptance of an ever-increasing income gap may be diminishing.11 As economic 
growth languished and sputtered, and as people’s belief that anyone could grab hold of an 
opportunity and have a decent shot at prosperity wavered, social discontent over growing 
income gaps increased. The bottom line is that business leaders need to  recognize how soci-
etal attitudes in the economic context also may create constraints as they make decisions and 
manage their businesses.
Lastly, in this section on the economy, we want to take a look at an interesting phenom-
enon taking place in the United States and around the globe—the sharing economy.
thE Sharing Economy. Have you heard of Airbnb, Uber, Zipcar, SnapGoods? 
These are just a few of the companies—maybe you’ve used one—that are part of a fast-
growing phenomenon called the “sharing economy.” What is the sharing economy? It’s 
an  economic environment in which asset owners share with other individuals through 
a peer-to-peer service, for a fee, their underutilized physical assets (such as a home, 
sharing economy
An economic environment in which asset owners 
share with other individuals through a peer-to-peer 
service, for a set fee, their underutilized physical 
assets or their knowledge, expertise, skills, or time

CHAPTER 2  •  The Management Environment    61
car, clothing, tools, or other physical assets). Some analysts have included the shar-
ing of knowledge, expertise, skills, or time, as well.12 The concept behind the sharing 
economy (or collaborative consumption) is putting underutilized assets to good use. 
Asset owners “rent out” assets they’re not using to consumers who need those assets but 
who don’t want to or who can’t afford to purchase them. For instance, SnapGoods is a 
service through which  individuals lend and borrow expensive household items, such as 
cameras, musical instruments, kitchenware, etc., for a fee.13 A new startup called Kitsplit 
has set up a  sharing arrangement between customers looking for sophisticated, high-end, 
creative-type  equipment such as drones, Google Glass headsets, Oculus Rift systems, or 
expensive cameras and production companies, studios, and individuals looking to lease 
their unused equipment for short time periods.14 Some economics experts have said 
that these  arrangements aren’t really “sharing” but better described as market-mediated, 
since there’s a service or company that mediates the exchange between consumers. They 
 suggest that the  arrangement is more like an “access economy,” because what consum-
ers are  looking for is convenient access to assets they need but don’t have and they’re 
not  concerned with  developing a business or social relationship with the asset owner.15 
Whatever form or  definition it takes, the concept is likely to remain a component of our 
economic system.
The other external component we want to specifically look at is demographics. Why? 
Changes and trends in this component tend to be closely linked to the workplace and 
managing.
Management theory proposes two perspectives in answering 
this question: the omnipotent view and the symbolic view.
Omnipotent view of management:
• Managers are directly responsible for an organization’s 
success or failure.
• Differences in performance are due to decisions and 
 actions of managers.
• Good managers: anticipate change, exploit opportunities, 
correct poor performance, lead their organizations.
• Profits c. Managers get the credit and rewards.
Profits T. Managers often get fired.
• Someone—the manager—is held accountable for poor 
performance.
• This view helps explain turnover among college and pro-
fessional sports coaches.
Symbolic view of management:
• Manager’s ability to affect performance outcomes is con-
strained by external factors.
• Managers don’t have a significant effect on organization’s 
performance.
• Performance is influenced by factors over which manag-
ers have little control (economy, customers, governmen-
tal policies, competitors’ actions, etc.).
• Managers symbolize control and influence by developing 
plans, making decisions, and engaging in other manage-
rial activities to make sense out of random, confusing, 
and ambiguous situations.
• Manager’s part in organizational success or failure is 
limited. 
In reality, managers are neither all-powerful nor help-
less. But their  decisions and  actions are constrained. Ex-
ternal  constraints come from the  organization’s  external 
environment and internal constraints come from the 
 organization’s culture.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these dis-
cussion questions.
  Talk About It 1: Why do you think these two perspec-
tives on management are important?
  Talk About It 2: How are these views similar?  Different?
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
Managers:  
All-powerful  
or helpless?
Just how much difference does  
a manager make in how an 
organization performs?
omnipotent view  
of  management
The view that managers are directly responsible for 
an organization’s success or failure
symbolic view  
of management
The view that much of an organization’s success or 
failure is due to external forces outside managers’ 
control

62    Part 1  •  Introduction
What Role Do Demographics Play?
Demography is destiny. Have you ever heard this phrase? 
What it means is that the size and characteristics of a 
 country’s population can have a significant effect on what 
it’s able to achieve. For instance, experts say that by 2050, 
“emerging economies led by India and China will collectively 
be larger than the developed economies. Small European 
 nations with low birthrates such as Austria, Belgium, 
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden will drop off the list of the 
30 biggest  economies.”16 Demographics—the characteristics 
of a  population used for purposes of social studies—can and 
do have a significant impact on how managers manage. Those 
population characteristics include things such as age, income, 
sex, race, education level, ethnic makeup, employment status, 
geographic location, and so forth—pretty much the types of 
information collected on governmental census surveys.
Age is a particularly important demographic  
for managers.
Age is a particularly important demographic since the workplace often has different age 
groups all working together. Baby Boomers. Gen X. Gen Y. Gen Z. Ever heard or seen these 
terms? They’re names given by population researchers to four well-known age groups found in 
the U.S. population. Baby Boomers are those individuals born between 1946 and 1964. You’ve 
heard so much about “boomers” because there are so many of them. The sheer number of people 
in that cohort has meant they’ve had a significant impact on every aspect of the external envi-
ronment (from the educational system and entertainment/lifestyle choices to the Social Security 
system, health care choices, and so forth) as they’ve gone through various life cycle stages. 
Gen X is used to describe those individuals born between 1965 and 1977. This age group has 
been called the baby bust generation since it followed the baby boom and is one of the smaller 
age cohorts. Gen Y (or the “Millennials”) is an age group typically considered to encompass 
those individuals born between 1978 and 1994. As the children of the Baby Boomers, this age 
group is also large in number and making its imprint on external environmental conditions as 
well. From technology to clothing styles to work attitudes, Gen Y, now the majority age group 
in the workforce, is helping shape today’s workplaces.17 Then, we have Gen Z—the youngest 
identified age group. Although demographers don’t agree on the exact range of birth years for 
Gen Z, most group them as being born between 1995 and 2010. Gen Z is huge; those under age 
20 represent 25.9 percent of the U.S. population.18 One thing that characterizes Gen Z is that 
it is the most diverse and multicultural of any generation in the United States.19 Another thing 
that characterizes this group is that their primary means of social interaction is online, where 
they freely express their opinions and attitudes. It’s the first group whose only reality revolves 
around the “Internet, mobile devices, and social networking.”20
Demographic age cohorts are important to our study of management because large 
numbers of people at certain stages in the life cycle can constrain decisions and actions 
taken by managers of businesses, governments, educational institutions, and other organiza-
tions. Studying demographics involves looking not only at current statistics but also at future 
trends. What are some future trends?
• Recent analysis of birth rates shows that more than 80 percent of babies being born world-
wide are from Africa and Asia.21
• India will be the youngest country by 2020; the median age will be 29 years.22
• By 2050, it’s predicted that China will have more people age 65 and older than the rest of 
the world combined.23
• For most of human history, individuals over the age of 65 have never exceeded 3 or 4 percent 
of a country’s population. By 2050, however, this number could potentially reach 25 percent, 
on average.24
Age is an important demographic for manag-
ers of Apple retail stores. The company values 
its Gen Y employees, such as the young men 
and women shown here greeting custom-
ers at a store in Oberhausen, Germany, who 
are passionate about sharing their technical 
knowledge of Apple products with customers.
demographics
The characteristics of a population used for 
purposes of social studies
Martin Meissner/AP Images

CHAPTER 2  •  The Management Environment    63
How Does the External Environment Affect Managers?
Knowing what the various components of the  external 
environment are and examining certain  aspects of that 
environment are important for managers. However, un-
derstanding how the environment affects managers is 
equally as important. We’re going to look at three ways 
the external environment constrains and challenges man-
agers: (1) through its impact on jobs and employment, 
(2) through the environmental uncertainty that is present, 
and (3) through the various stakeholder relationships that exist between an organization and 
its external constituencies.
JobS and EmploymEnt. As any or all of the external environmental conditions 
change, one of the most powerful constraints managers face is the impact of such changes 
on jobs and employment—both in poor conditions and in good conditions. The power 
2-2  Discuss how 
the  external 
 environment  
affects managers.
Continuing advancements in technology offer many exciting possi-
bilities for how workers work and managers manage. Technology 
includes any equipment, tools, or operating methods that are 
 designed to make work more 
 efficient. One area where technol-
ogy has had an impact is in the 
process where inputs (labor, raw 
materials, and the like) are trans-
formed into outputs (goods and 
services to be sold). In years past, 
this transformation was usually 
performed by human labor. With 
technology, however, human labor 
has been replaced with electronic 
and computer equipment. From 
robots in offices to online banking 
systems to social networks where 
employees interact with customers, 
technology has made the work of creating and delivering goods and 
services more efficient and effective.
Another area where technology has had a major impact is in 
information. Information technology (IT) has created the ability to 
circumvent the physical confines of working only in a specified orga-
nizational location. With notebook and desktop computers, tablets, 
smartphones, organizational intranets, and other IT tools, organiza-
tional members who work mainly with information can do that work 
from any place at any time.
Finally, technology is also changing the 
way managers manage, especially in terms of 
how they interact with employees who may 
be working anywhere and anytime. Effectively 
communicating with telecommuting individu-
als who may simply be working from home or 
who may be working halfway around the world 
and ensuring that work goals are being met 
are challenges that managers must  address. 
Throughout the rest of the book, we’ll look at 
how managers are meeting those challenges 
in the ways they plan, organize, lead, and 
control.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the 
Assignments section of mymanagementlab.
com to complete these discussion questions.
  talk about It 3: Is management easier or harder with all the 
available technology? Explain your position.
 talk about It 4: What benefits does technology provide 
and what problems does technology pose for (a) employees and (b) 
managers?
Can TEChnoLogy ImPRovE ThE Way managERs managE?
:::::::  Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::
Twenty-five billion. That’s 
the number of “things” 
(smartphones, smartwatches, 
climate-control system 
sensors, kitchen refrigerators, 
cars, etc.) Gartner Inc. 
predicts will be connected to 
the Internet by 2020. This 
Internet of Things (IoT) 
is transforming businesses 
and disrupting industries and 
societies around the world.25
technology
Any equipment, tools, or operating methods that 
are designed to make work more efficient
Just imagine how these population trends are likely to impact global organizations and the 
way managers manage.

64    Part 1  •  Introduction
of this constraint became painfully obvious during the past global recession as millions 
of jobs were eliminated and unemployment rates rose to levels not seen in many years. 
Although things have improved, economists predict that about a quarter of the 8.4 million 
jobs eliminated in the United States during this last economic downturn won’t come back 
and have been replaced by other types of work in growing industries.26 Other countries 
face the same issues. Although such readjustments aren’t bad in and of themselves, they 
do create challenges for managers who must balance work demands and having enough 
people with the right skills to do an organization’s work.
Flex Work Success Story: Verizon’s experiment with 
organizational “volunteers” who answer customers’ 
technical questions on a company-sponsored customer 
service Web site has been a success.
Not only do changes in external conditions affect the types of jobs that are available, 
they affect how those jobs are created and managed. For instance, many employers are using 
flexible work arrangements with tasks done by freelancers hired on an as-needed basis, or by 
temporary workers who work full-time but are not permanent employees, or by individuals 
who share jobs. Some organizations, like Verizon, are even using organizational “volunteers” 
to do work.27 Keep in mind that these approaches are used because of the constraints from 
the external environment. As a manager, you’ll need to recognize how such work arrange-
ments affect the way you plan, organize, lead, and control. Flexible work arrangements have 
become so prevalent and such an important management approach today that we’ll discuss 
them in other chapters as well.
aSSESSing EnvironmEntal uncErtainty. Another constraint posed by external 
environments is the amount of uncertainty found in that environment, which can affect 
organizational outcomes. Environmental uncertainty refers to the degree of change and 
complexity in an organization’s environment. The matrix in Exhibit 2–2 shows these two 
aspects.
The first dimension of uncertainty is the degree of unpredictable change. If the com-
ponents in an organization’s environment change frequently, it’s a dynamic environment. If 
change is minimal, it’s a stable one. A stable environment might be one in which there are 
no new competitors, few technological breakthroughs by current competitors, little  activity 
environmental complexity
The number of components in an organization’s 
environment and the extent of knowledge that the 
organization has about those components
stakeholders
Any constituencies in an organization’s  environment 
that are affected by that  organization’s decisions 
and actions
Cell 1
Stable and predictable environment
Few components in environment
Components are somewhat similar
    and remain basically the same
Minimal need for sophisticated
    knowledge of components
Cell 2
Degree of Change
Dynamic
Stable
Simple
Complex
Degree of Complexity
Dynamic and unpredictable environment
Few components in environment
Components are somewhat similar but
    are continually changing
Minimal need for sophisticated
    knowledge of components
Cell 3
Stable and predictable environment
Many components in environment
Components are not similar to one
    another and remain basically the same
High need for sophisticated
    knowledge of components
Cell 4
Dynamic and unpredictable environment
Many components in environment
Components are not similar to one another
    and are continually changing
High need for sophisticated
    knowledge of components
Exhibit 2–2 Environmental Uncertainty matrix
environmental uncertainty
The degree of change and complexity in an 
 organization’s environment

CHAPTER 2  •  The Management Environment    65
by pressure groups to influence the organization, 
and so forth. For instance, Zippo  Manufacturing, 
best known for its Zippo lighters, faces a relatively 
stable environment. There are few competitors and 
little technological change. The main external con-
cern for the  company is probably the declining 
trend in tobacco usage. In contrast, the recorded 
music industry faces a dynamic (highly uncertain 
and unpredictable) environment. Digital formats, 
apps, music-streaming sites, and artists  releasing 
selected songs on their personal  social  media ac-
counts have turned the industry upside down and 
brought high levels of uncertainty.
The other dimension of uncertainty describes 
the degree of environmental  complexity, which 
looks at the number of components in an or-
ganization’s  environment and the extent of the 
knowledge that the organization has about those components. An organization that has 
few  competitors, customers, suppliers, or government agencies to deal with, or that 
needs little information about its  environment, has a less complex and thus less uncertain 
environment.
How does the concept of environmental  uncertainty influence managers? Looking again 
at Exhibit 2–2, each of the four cells represents different combinations of degree of complex-
ity and degree of change. Cell 1 (stable-simple environment) 
represents the lowest level of environmental uncertainty and cell 
4 (dynamic and complex environment) the highest. Not surpris-
ingly, managers have the greatest influence on organizational 
outcomes in cell 1 and the least in cell 4. Because uncertainty is 
a threat to an organization’s effectiveness,  managers try to mini-
mize it. Given a choice, managers would prefer to operate in the 
least uncertain environments, but they rarely control that choice. 
In addition, the nature of the external  environment today is that 
most industries are facing more dynamic change, making their 
 environments more uncertain.
managing StakEholdEr rElationShipS. What has 
made MTV a popular TV channel for young adults year after 
year? One reason for its popularity is that MTV  understands 
the importance of building relationships with its various 
stakeholders: viewers (the network is relentless in monitor-
ing its target- audience preferences), reality show participants, 
celebrities, advertisers, affiliate TV stations, public service 
groups, and others.28 The nature of stakeholder relation-
ships is another way in which the environment influences 
managers. The more obvious and secure these relationships, 
the more influence managers will have over organizational 
outcomes.
Stakeholders are any constituencies in an organization’s 
environment that are  affected by that organization’s decisions 
and actions. These groups have a stake in or are significantly 
influenced by what the organization does. In turn, these groups 
can influence the  organization. For example, think of the 
groups that might be affected by the decisions and actions of 
Starbucks—coffee bean farmers, employees, specialty coffee 
competitors, local  communities, and so forth. Some of these 
stakeholders, in turn, may impact the decisions and actions of 
A Question of Ethics
Ever heard of Waze? It’s an extremely popular mobile traffic 
software app by Google that provides real-time traffic guidance 
and warnings about traffic congestion, construction zones, speed 
traps, stalled vehicles, unsafe weather conditions, etc. However, 
there’s one feature that has law enforcement officers across the 
United States very worried.29 Police are pleading with Google to 
turn off the feature that warns drivers when police are nearby, 
fearing that making their location known is an officer-safety threat 
and possibly even a public-safety threat. Although there are no 
known connections between any attacks on police and the use of 
Waze, law enforcement trade groups are concerned that it’s only 
a matter of time before a would-be terrorist or cop killer uses the 
app to find where a police officer target is parked. A Waze spokes-
person said that the company is very conscious of safety and 
security concerns and has worked with the New York City Police 
Department and others by sharing information.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the  Assignments sec-
tion of mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion 
 questions.
  Talk About It 5: Is there an ethical issue here? Why or 
why not?
  Talk About It 6: What stakeholders might have a vested 
interest in this issue and what do you think their position might 
be? How can identifying stakeholders help a manager  decide the 
most responsible approach?
Software developers and designers from 
 communities throughout the world are 
 valuable stakeholders for Yahoo. The  company 
builds relationships with these computer 
experts by staging hacking events, like the 
one shown here in Bangalore, India, that may 
result in technological innovations.
Manjunath Kiran/Getty Images

66    Part 1  •  Introduction
Starbucks’ managers. The idea that organizations have stakeholders is now widely  accepted 
by both management academics and practicing managers.30
Exhibit 2–3 identifies the most common stakeholders that an organization might have to 
deal with. Note that these stakeholders include internal and external groups. Why? Because 
both can affect what an organization does and how it operates.
Why should managers even care about managing stakeholder relationships? For one thing, it 
can lead to desirable organizational outcomes such as improved predictability of  environmental 
changes, more successful innovations, greater degree of trust among  stakeholders, and greater 
organizational flexibility to reduce the impact of change. For  instance, social media company 
Facebook is spending more on lobbying and meeting with government officials as lawmakers 
and regulators look at sweeping changes to online privacy law. The company is “working to 
shape its image on Capitol Hill and avert measures potentially  damaging to its information-
sharing business.”31
Can stakeholder management affect organizational performance? The answer is yes! 
Management researchers who have looked at this issue are finding that managers of high-
performing companies tend to consider the interests of all major stakeholder groups as they 
make decisions.32
Another reason for managing external stakeholder relationships is that it’s the “right” 
thing to do. Because an organization depends on these external groups as sources of inputs 
(resources) and as outlets for outputs (goods and services), managers should consider the 
interests of stakeholders as they make decisions. We’ll address this issue in more detail in the 
next chapter when we look at corporate social responsibility.
As we’ve tried to make clear throughout this section, it’s not going to be “business as 
usual” for organizations or for managers. Managers will always have hard decisions to make 
about how they do business and about their people. It’s important that you understand how 
changes in the external environment will affect your organizational and management experi-
ences. Now, we need to switch gears and look at the internal aspects of the organization—
specifically, its culture.
Media
Governments
Suppliers
Trade and Industry
Associations
Communities
Competitors
Shareholders
Social and Political
Action Groups
Unions
Customers
Employees
Organization
Exhibit 2–3 organizational stakeholders
  Watch It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of www.mymanagementlab.com 
to complete the video exercise titled Rudi’s Bakery: Organizational Culture.

     What Is  
organizational Culture?
EaCh of us has a unIquE pErsonalIty that influences the way we 
act and interact. An organization has a personality too—we call it CulturE. 
Here’s what you need to know about organizational culture!
2-3  Define what organizational  culture 
is and explain why it’s important.
SiliconValleyStock/Alamy
Lynn Johnson/Alamy
Google has created a  
creative and innovative 
culture at their headquarters 
in California with an android 
googleplex, bikes, and  
bringing your dog to work.
1 Culture is perceived. It’s not some-
thing that can be physically touched or 
seen, but employees perceive it on the 
basis of what they experience within the 
organization.
2 Culture is descriptive. It’s concerned 
with how members perceive or describe 
the culture, not with whether they like it.
3 Culture is shared. Even though indi-
viduals may have different backgrounds 
or work at different organizational levels, 
they tend to describe the organization’s 
culture in similar terms.
organizational culture
The shared values, principles, traditions, and ways of doing 
things that influence the way organizational members act
Kristoffer Tripplaar/Alamy
67

Dimensions of Organizational Culture
how Can Culture Be Described?
The seven dimensions (shown in Exhibit 2–4):33
• 
Range from low (not typical of the culture) to high (especially typical of the culture).
• 
Provide a composite picture of the organization’s culture.
An organization’s culture may be shaped by one particular cultural dimension more than the others, thus influencing the 
organization’s personality and the way organizational members work. For example:
—Apple’s focus is product innovation (innovation and risk taking). The company “lives and breathes” new 
product development and employees’ work behaviors support that goal.
—Southwest Airlines has made its employees a central part of its culture (people orientation) and shows this 
through the way it treats them.
Organizational
Culture
Outcome
Orientation
Attention to
Detail
People
Orientation
Team
Orientation
Aggressiveness
Stability
Innovation and
Risk Taking
Degree to which
employees are aggressive
and competitive rather
than cooperative
Degree to which
work is organized
around teams rather
than individuals
Degree to which
organizational
decisions and actions
emphasize maintaining
the status quo
Degree to which
management decisions
take into account the
eﬀects on people in
the organization
Degree to which
employees are
encouraged to be
innovative and
to take risks
Degree to which
employees are expected
to exhibit precision,
analysis, and attention
to detail
Degree to which
managers focus on results
or outcomes rather than
on how these outcomes
are achieved
Exhibit 2–4
Where does culture come From?
how do Employees learn the culture?
Usually reflects the vision or mission of founders.
Organizational stories: narrative tales of significant 
events or people.
Founders project an image of what the organization 
should be and what its values are.
Corporate rituals: repetitive sequences of activities 
that express and reinforce important organizational 
values and goals.
Founders can “impose” their vision on employees 
because of new organization’s small size.
Material symbols or artifacts: layout of facilities, 
how employees dress, size of offices, material perks 
provided to executives, furnishings, and so forth.
Organizational members create a shared history 
that binds them into a community and reminds 
them of “who we are.”
language: special acronyms; unique terms to 
describe equipment, key personnel, customers, 
suppliers, processes, products.
7 
68

CHAPTER 2  •  The Management Environment    69
How Does Organizational Culture Affect Managers?
Ambrosia Humphrey, vice president of talent at 
Hootsuite, understands the power of organizational cul-
ture and how it affects her as a manager. Nurturing and 
nourishing the company’s culture is one of her top priori-
ties. And she does this by continually creating employee 
experiences that reflect an important company value—
transparency. For  instance, she’s organized all-staff “Ask 
Me Anything” discussions with the company’s CEO. 
Another tactic she’s used is employee “hackathons” in which staff members get together to 
tackle problems. And, of course, she embraces social media as part of her commitment to 
transparency to employees, customers, and the community. Employees are encouraged to 
tweet about their perspectives on what it’s like to work at Hootsuite. Those postings have 
ranged from pictures taken at rooftop meetings to employees complimenting other employees 
for their hard work to links to media reports about the company as a great place to work.34
The two main ways that an organization’s culture affects managers are (1) its effect on 
what employees do and how they behave, and (2) its effect on what managers do.
2-4  Describe how 
 organizational 
culture  affects 
managers.
  Watch It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2M Hill: Organizational Culture.
strong cultures
Cultures in which the key values are deeply held 
and widely shared
Twitter employees give their company high 
marks for a strong culture of collaboration, 
learning, and open communication that 
 allows them to share ideas and information in 
solving difficult problems. Employees value a 
work environment, including a rooftop garden 
at Twitter headquarters in San Francisco, 
where they can easily connect and work 
closely with colleagues.
how Does Culture affect What Employees Do?
“I think of culture as guardrails . . . what you stand  
for, essentially the ground rules so that people know  
how to operate.”35
An organization’s culture has an effect on what employees do, depending on how strong, or 
weak, the culture is. Strong cultures—those in which the key values are deeply held and 
widely shared—have a greater influence on employees than do weaker cultures. The more 
 employees accept the organization’s key values and the greater their commitment to those 
values, the stronger the culture is. Most organizations have moderate to strong cultures; that 
is, there is relatively high agreement on what’s important, what defines “good” employee 
 behavior, what it takes to get ahead, and so forth. The 
stronger a culture becomes, the more it affects what 
employees do and the way managers plan, organize, 
lead, and control.36
Also, in organizations with a strong culture, 
that culture can substitute for the rules and regula-
tions that formally guide employees. In essence, 
strong cultures can create  predictability, orderliness, 
and consistency without the need for written docu-
mentation. Therefore, the stronger an organization’s 
culture, the less managers need to be concerned with 
developing formal rules and regulations. Instead, 
those guides will be internalized in employees when 
they accept the organization’s culture. If, on the 
other hand, an organization’s culture is weak—if no 
dominant shared values are present—its effect on 
employee behavior is less clear.
Noah Berger/Reuters

70    Part 1  •  Introduction
how Does Culture affect What managers Do?
Say What? Ten percent of executives say they  
have not identified or communicated an  
organizational culture.37
Houston-based Apache Corp. has become one of the best performers in the indepen-
dent oil drilling business because it has fashioned a culture that values risk taking and quick 
 decision making. Potential hires are judged on how much initiative they’ve shown in getting 
projects done at other companies. And company employees are handsomely rewarded if 
they meet profit and production goals.38 Because an organization’s culture constrains what 
they can and cannot do and how they manage, it’s particularly relevant to managers. Such 
constraints are rarely explicit. They’re not written down. It’s unlikely they’ll even be spoken. 
But they’re there, and all managers quickly learn what to do and not do in their organization. 
For instance, you won’t find the following values written down, but each comes from a real 
organization:
• Look busy even if you’re not.
• If you take risks and fail around here, you’ll pay dearly for it.
• Before you make a decision, run it by your boss so that he or she is never surprised.
• We make our product only as good as the competition forces us to.
• What made us successful in the past will make us successful in the future.
• If you want to get to the top here, you have to be a team player.
The link between values such as these and managerial behavior is fairly straightforward. 
Take, for example, a so-called “ready-aim-fire” culture. In such an organization, managers 
will study and analyze proposed projects endlessly before committing to them. However, in a 
“ready-fire-aim” culture, managers take action and then analyze what has been done. Or, say 
an organization’s culture supports the belief that profits can be increased by cost cutting and 
that the company’s best interests are served by achieving slow but steady increases in quar-
terly earnings. In that culture, managers are unlikely to pursue programs that are innovative, 
risky, long term, or expansionary. In an organization whose culture conveys a basic distrust 
of employees, managers are more likely to use an authoritarian leadership style than a demo-
cratic one. Why? The culture establishes for managers appropriate and expected behavior. 
You can see this in action at Winegardner & Hammons, a hotel management firm, where 
company leaders have built a “Winning Workplace Culture” with four characteristics: a posi-
tive work environment in which managers are encouraged to make employees feel cared for 
and valued; an employee selection process that encourages managers to focus on selecting 
the “right” employees; an employee engagement program that’s based on training managers 
so they have the right skills, knowledge, and experience to nurture an engaging work environ-
ment; and a strengths-based workplace in which managers continually reinforce employees’ 
strengths. What has this cultural focus led to? Thirty-four percent lower employee turnover 
and 11 percent higher profitability.39 That’s the kind of outcomes that can be achieved if 
you pay attention to your organizational culture and if managers recognize appropriate and 
 expected behavior in that culture.
  try It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
 complete the Simulation: Organizational Culture.

CHAPTER 2  •  The Management Environment    71
As shown in Exhibit 2–5, a manager’s decisions are influenced by the culture in which 
he or she operates. An organization’s culture, especially a strong one, influences and con-
strains the way managers plan, organize, lead, and control.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.
Culture
Planning
Culture
Culture
Culture
The degree of risk that plans 
should contain
Whether plans should be 
developed by individuals
or teams
The degree of environmental
scanning in which
management will engage
How much autonomy
should be designed into 
employees’ jobs
Whether tasks should be 
done by individuals or
in teams
The degree to which
department managers
interact with each other
The degree to which
managers are concerned
with increasing employee
job satisfaction
What leadership styles
are appropriate
Whether all disagreements—
even constructive ones—
should be eliminated
Whether to impose external 
controls or to allow 
employees to control their
own actions
What criteria should be 
emphasized in employee
performance evaluations
What repercussions will occur
from exceeding one’s budget
Controlling
Organizing
Leading
Exhibit 2–5 managerial Decisions affected by Culture
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 86. Reprinted  
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

2 Review 
CHAPTER SUMMARY
  2-1 Explain what the external environment is  
and why it’s important.
The external environment refers to factors, forces, situations, 
and events outside the organization that affect its performance. It 
includes economic, demographic, political/legal,  sociocultural, 
technological, and global components. The external environ-
ment is important because it poses constraints and challenges 
to managers.
  2-2 Discuss how the external environment  
affects managers.
There are three ways that the external environment affects manag-
ers: its impact on jobs and employment, the amount of environ-
mental uncertainty, and the nature of stakeholder relationships.
  2-3 Define what organizational culture is and 
 explain why it’s important.
Organizational culture is the shared values, principles, tradi-
tions, and ways of doing things that influence the way orga-
nizational members act. It’s important because of the impact 
it has on decisions, behaviors, and actions of organizational 
employees.
  2-4 Describe how organizational culture  
affects managers.
Organizational culture affects managers in two ways: through 
its effect on what employees do and how they behave, and 
through its effect on what managers do as they plan, organize, 
lead, and control.
dIsCussIon quEstIons
 2-1 How much impact do managers actually have on an 
organization’s success or failure?
 2-2 Why do managers need an understanding of what hap-
pens outside their organizations? Give examples of how 
changes in the external environment affect their job.
 2-3 How has the changed economy affected what  managers 
do? Find two or three examples in current business 
periodicals of activities and practices that organiza-
tions are using. Discuss them in light of the changed 
 environment.
 2-4 Why is it important for managers to pay attention to 
demographic trends and shifts?
 2-5 Businesses operate in the external environment. Discuss 
whether managers experience environmental stability in 
their business operations. In this context, provide local 
examples of environmental stability and environmental 
uncertainty.
 2-6 “Businesses are built on relationships.” What do you 
think this statement means? What are the implications 
for managing the external environment?
 2-7 Discuss why organizational culture plays a major role in 
business operations and employee behaviors. Explain its 
impact on CEOs, managers, and employees.
 2-8 What are the steps by which organizational culture 
evolves over time?
 2-9 Discuss the impact of a strong culture on organizations 
and managers.
2-10 Pick two organizations that you interact with frequently 
(as an employee or as a customer) and assess their cul-
ture according to the dimensions shown in Exhibit 2–4.
MyManagementLab
If your professor has assigned these, go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing 
questions:
2-11 How can managers best deal with environmental 
uncertainty?
2-12 Explain how an organization’s culture can help it be suc-
cessful AND how it can keep it from being successful.
2-13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
 assignment for this chapter.
72

CHAPTER 2  •  The Management Environment    73
Management Skill Builder  |  undErstandIng CulturE
An organization’s culture is a system of shared meaning. When you understand your organization’s culture, 
you know, for example, whether it encourages teamwork, rewards innovation, or stifles initiative. When 
 interviewing for a job, the more accurate you are at assessing the culture, the more likely you are to find a 
good person-organization fit. And once inside an organization, understanding the culture allows you to know 
what behaviors are likely to be rewarded and which are likely to be punished.40
 PERsonaL InvEnToRy assEssmEnT
Company Culture assessment
Want to know what a company’s culture is like? This PIA will show you what’s involved with 
assessing a company’s culture.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
skill Basics
Organizational cultures differ. So do individuals. The better 
you’re able to match your personal preferences to an organi-
zation’s culture, the more likely you are to find satisfaction in 
your work, the less likely you are to leave, and the greater the 
probability that you’ll receive positive performance evaluations.
The ability to read an organization’s culture can be a 
valuable skill. For instance, if you’re looking for a job, you’ll 
want to choose an employer whose culture is compatible with 
your values and in which you’ll feel comfortable. If you can 
accurately assess a potential employer’s culture before you 
make your job decision, you may be able to save yourself a 
lot of grief and reduce the likelihood of making a poor choice. 
Similarly, you’ll undoubtedly have business transactions with 
numerous organizations during your professional career, such 
as selling a product or service, negotiating a contract, arranging 
a joint work project, or merely seeking out who controls cer-
tain decisions in an organization. The ability to assess another 
organization’s culture can be a definite plus in successfully 
performing those pursuits.
For the sake of simplicity, we’re going to look at this skill 
from the perspective of a job applicant. We’ll assume you’re 
interviewing for a job, although these skills are generalizable to 
many situations. Here’s a list of things you can do to help learn 
about an organization’s culture:
• 
Do background work. Get the names of former employees 
from friends or acquaintances, and talk with them. Also 
talk with members of professional trade associations to 
which the organization’s employees belong and executive 
recruiters who deal with the organization. Look for clues in 
stories told in annual reports and other organizational lit-
erature, and check out the organization’s Web sites for evi-
dence of high turnover or recent management shake-ups.
• 
Observe the physical surroundings. Pay attention to signs, 
posters, pictures, photos, style of dress, length of hair, de-
gree of openness between offices, and office furnishings 
and arrangements.
• 
Make note about those with whom you met. Whom did you 
meet? How did they expect to be addressed?
• 
How would you characterize the style of the people you 
met? Are they formal? Casual? Serious? Jovial? Open? 
Reticent about providing information?
• 
Look at the organization’s human resources manual. Are 
there formal rules and regulations printed there? If so, how 
detailed are they? What do they cover?
• 
Ask questions of the people with whom you meet. The 
most valid and reliable information tends to come from 
asking the same questions of many people (to see how 
closely their responses align). Questions that will give you 
 insights into organizational processes and practices might 
include: What’s the background of the founders? What’s 
the background of current senior managers? What are 
these managers’ functional specialties, and were they pro-
moted from within or hired from outside? How does the 
organization integrate new employees? Is there a formal 
orientation program? Are there formal employee training 
programs and, if so, how are they structured? How does 
your boss define his or her job success? How would you 
define fairness in terms of reward allocations? Can you 
identify some people here who are on the “fast track”? 
What do you think has put them on the fast track? Can you 
identify someone in the organization who seems to be con-
sidered a deviant, and how has the organization responded 
to this person? Can you describe a decision that someone 
made that was well received? Can you describe a decision 
that didn’t work out well, and what were the consequences 
for that decision maker? Could you describe a crisis or 
critical event that has occurred recently in the organiza-
tion, and how did top management respond?

74    Part 1  •  Introduction
Practicing the skill
After spending your first three years after college graduation 
as a freelance graphic designer, you’re looking at pursuing 
a job as an account executive at a graphic design firm. You 
feel that the scope of assignments and potential for technical 
training far exceed what you’d be able to do on your own, and 
you’re looking to expand your skills and meet a brand-new set 
of  challenges. However, you want to make sure you “fit” into 
the organization where you’re going to be spending more than 
eight hours every workday. Write a brief paper describing how 
you would find a place where you’ll be happy and where your 
style and personality will be appreciated.
Speedy Car Wash Services, Inc.
To: Michelle Bradley, Employee Care Manager
From: Alex Bilyeu, President
Re: Creating a Fun Workplace
Michelle, I saw an article the other day explaining the results of 
a survey that said only 8 percent of employers use fun to reduce 
employee stress at work. That same article said that research 
has shown that people who have fun at work are more cre-
ative, more productive, work better with others, and call in sick 
less often. I’m sold! So how and where do we start? Get me a 
 bulleted list of ideas on how we can create a workplace here at 
Speedy that’s both fun and yet still focused on work. I’m sure 
you’ll have to do some research on this. And have fun with it!
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and are not meant to reflect positively or negatively on man-
agement practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 
CasE applICatIon #1
Y
ou could say the tipping point for Target Corp. was the 
 massive credit-card hack in November.
• The biggest retail breach in U.S. history.
• Some 110 million customer records compromised.41
Even before this major fiasco, however, things were not 
good at Target, the nation’s second-largest retailer. The company 
had lost its way under the leadership of former CEO Gregg 
Steinhafel. Target, a superb marketing machine, had  always 
been viewed as hip and “fun, fresh, and energetic.”42 But that 
wasn’t who Steinhafel was. As the former chief  financial officer, 
Steinhafel’s skills, personality, and demeanor set a tone that was 
numbers-driven, not people-driven. 
The culture he fostered at Target 
was one oriented around rigid per-
formance measures. Creativity and 
quirkiness (remember the fun Target ads with the company’s 
mascot dog) were no longer rewarded or encouraged. Instead, 
company buyers were less willing to take risks on the newest and 
most unique merchandise items, product vendors were pressured 
on costs, and things that used to make the company one of the 
Getting Back on Target
most exciting merchandisers were downplayed or ignored. For 
example, a plan to use mannequins in stores for the first time 
ever stalled after months of testing and review.43 Then came 
the data breach, which affected both employee and customer 
morale. The workplace culture at the company’s Minneapolis 
headquarters, already struggling, deteriorated even further.
In early May 2014, an anonymous mid-level employee 
at headquarters let loose a rant on Gawker that was aimed 
at the company’s leadership (Steinhafel) and the company’s 
future.44 The employee rant also described a culture that was 
very insular and resistant to change.45 Target’s chief market-
ing officer, Jeff Jones, responded to the post. Although initially 
quite outraged, Jones responded 
with honesty and openness. He 
acknowledged that a lot of work 
needed to be done on the com-
pany’s cultural approach and a new truth created about what 
Target is and what it stands for. Not long after, Target’s board 
fired Steinhafel. Although the company’s cultural issues and 
the massive data breach were partly the reason, there was 
other ample evidence that the organization’s performance was 
Bull’s-eye—Target’s Culture

CHAPTER 2  •  The Management Environment    75
suffering, especially in its Canadian division. But when a com-
pany’s top leader is viewed so negatively, it’s next to impos-
sible for needed changes to take place. Those changes would 
have to come from new leadership.
Target Corp.’s new CEO, Brian Cornell, took over in 
August 2014. Since his arrival, there appears to have been a 
significant shift in culture. A company that was once described 
as very insular and resistant to change is now embracing trans-
parency, openness, and change. Cornell has been described as 
very  enthusiastic about customers and Target’s businesses.46 
That type of enthusiasm is contagious for not only headquarter 
employees but  employees throughout the organization. Other 
cultural changes are happening in the expectations for Target’s 
employees. Innovation is accelerating, decision making is 
being simplified, and old “cultural symbols of unacceptable 
behavior”47 are being obliterated. Target executives aren’t 
underestimating the hard work that’s ahead of them. But by 
staying focused on the bull’s-eye—Target’s “guests” (cus-
tomers)—they intend to be united in their return to Target’s 
“cheap-chic roots.”48
Discussion Questions
2-14 What role does a CEO play in an organization’s culture? What 
role do other leaders/managers play?
2-15 Describe Target’s culture under its previous CEO.  Describe 
 Target’s culture under its current CEO.
2-16 What are the benefits and challenges of social media in 
 managing organizational culture?
2-17 Which view of management do you see played out here? The 
omnipotent or the symbolic? Explain.
2-18 What advice about organizational culture would you give the 
new CEO?
CasE applICatIon
Not Sold Out
C
ompetitors in the movie theater industry had hoped that 
they were through the challenges they’d faced during 
the economic downturn.49 Ticket sales revenue has 
been on a roller coaster: 2011, it fell 4 percent from the previ-
ous year; 2012, it was up 6.1 percent; 2013, it was up, but just 
barely, by not even 1 percent; and 2014, it was down about 5 
percent. The numbers of people going to see a movie continue 
to stall. So, the  industry has tried to pump up revenue with high-
profile movies, higher ticket prices, and premium amenities.
The number of movie screens in the United States to-
tals almost 40,000. Together, the four largest movie theater 
chains in the United States have a little over 20,100 screens—
and a lot of seats to fill. The 
largest, Regal Entertainment 
Group (based in Knoxville, 
Tennessee), has almost 7,400 
screens. AMC Entertainment 
(based 
in 
Kansas 
City, 
Missouri) has 5,000 screens. The other two major competitors 
are Cinemark (based in Plano, Texas—about 5,200 screens) 
and Carmike Cinemas (based in Columbus, Georgia—more 
than 2,500 screens). The challenge for these companies is get-
ting people to watch movies on all those screens; a decision 
that encompasses many factors.
One important factor, according to industry analysts, is 
the uncertainty over how people want their movies delivered, 
which is largely a trade-off between convenience and quality 
(or what the experts call fidelity experience). Will consumers 
choose convenience over quality and use mobile devices such 
as iPads? Will they trade some quality for convenience and 
watch at home using streaming services on surround-sound, 
flat-screen, high-definition home theater systems? Or will 
they go to a movie theater with wide screens, high-quality 
sound systems, and the social experience of being with other 
moviegoers and enjoy the highest-fidelity experience—even 
with the inconveniences? Movie theater managers believe that 
mobile devices aren’t much of a 
threat, even though they may be 
convenient. On the other hand, 
home theater systems may be 
more of a threat as they’ve 
 become extremely affordable 
and have “acceptable” quality. Although not likely to replace 
any of these higher-quality offerings, drive-in theaters, analysts 
note, are experiencing a resurgence, especially in geographic 
locations where they can be open year-round. The movie the-
ater chains are also battling IMAX Corporation for customers 
as movie screens get bigger and bigger. The number of these 
#2
What WILL get customers  
into movie theaters?

76    Part 1  •  Introduction
oversized screens built by the five largest theater companies 
has grown to the point where it almost equals the number of 
IMAX locations. The movie theater chains have invested in 
these formats because it can add several extra dollars to the 
ticket price, resulting in increased revenues.
Another factor managers need to wrestle with is the 
 impression consumers have of the movie-going experience. A 
consumer lifestyle poll showed that the major dislike about go-
ing to the movies was the cost, a drawback cited by 36 percent 
of the respondents. Other factors noted included the noise, 
uncomfortable seats, the inconvenience, the crowds, and too 
many previews/commercials before the movie.
A final question facing the movie theater industry and the 
major film studios is how to be proactive in avoiding the prob-
lems that the recorded music industry faced with the illegal 
downloading of songs. The amount of entertainment streamed 
online (which includes both music and video) continues to 
experience double-digit growth. The biggest threat so far has 
been YouTube, which has become a powerful force in the 
media world with owner Google’s backing. But now Amazon, 
Netflix, and other competitors are flexing their movie muscles 
as well. To counter that threat, industry executives have asked 
for filtering mechanisms to keep unlawful material off these 
sites and to develop some type of licensing arrangements 
whereby the industry has some protection over its copyrighted 
film content.
Given these factors, what are the movie theater chains 
 doing? They’re finding ways to make the movie-going experience 
something special by providing expensive presentation formats 
that can’t be replicated or accessed in the home, comfortable sur-
roundings (think reclining seats and blankets plus gourmet food 
brought to you), valet parking, babysitting, beefed-up concession 
stands, and so forth. These are just some of the ways that movie 
theaters are working to keep their seats filled.
Discussion Questions
2-19 Using Exhibit 2–1, what external components might be most 
 important for managers in movie theater chains to know about? 
Why?
2-20 According to the case, what external trends do managers at the 
movie theater chains have to deal with?
2-21 How do you think these trends might constrain decisions made 
by managers at the movie theater chains?
2-22 What stakeholders do you think might be most important to 
movie theater chains? What interests might these stakehold-
ers have?
CasE applICatIon
China Zhongwang
W
hat could be more self-explanatory about corpo-
rate values than naming your business “China 
Zhongwang?” Zhong and Wang are Chinese char-
acters for loyalty, dedication, and prosperity. It certainly 
worked out for the Liaoning Province–based Chinese alumi-
num developer and manufacturer. 
Founded in 1993, it had total assets of US$3.9 billion. In 
2014, the company’s revenue 
was around 16 billion RMB 
($2.5 billion). The company 
is the largest producer of ex-
truded aluminum in Asia and 
the second largest in the world, 
with its product being used in many industries—from rail car-
riages to power plants. From the outset the business sought to be 
sustainable, prosperous, and contribute to society.50 
The aluminum industry is highly competitive, and China 
Zhongwang is not only interested in value creation, but also 
in encouraging its customers to expand their businesses. The 
company is looking to expand their operations in Europe 
and the U.S., with Lu Changqing, the executive director and 
vice president saying, “We’re actively seeking cooperation in 
Europe and the U.S., including potential acquisitions.” 
Employee contribution and a commitment to excellence 
have been key to the company’s success. Certain elements—
like responsible corporate citi-
zenship and operation manage-
ment with integrity—are built 
into corporate values. The trick 
was transforming a corporate 
slogan into a corporate reality. 
In 2012 the Chinese government certified China Zhongwang as 
a “State Accredited Enterprise Technology Centre. 
China Zhongwang was recognized not only for its tech-
nology, leadership, and strategy, but also for the fact that its 
management practices were inspirational to other companies 
#3
China Zhongwang . . . 
investing in corporate  
values.

CHAPTER 2  •  The Management Environment    77
in China. Li Beibei, the director of public affairs of China 
Zhongwang, believed the award showed that the company’s 
achievements went beyond its production and technology. It 
was recognized for its innovative business culture, management 
practices, and broad vision. 
The 
company’s 
single 
principal 
shareholder, 
Liu 
Zhongtian—a self-made billionaire, who according to Forbes 
had a net worth of US$3.2 billion as of May 2015—said the 
company’s rapid growth has been a result of “perseverance and 
determination.” 
As a result of its long-held desire for the business to become 
a world-class international producer, the company has initiated a 
shift toward high-end, high-value-added products. The business 
has expanded not only by increasing its production capabilities, 
but also through horizontal expansion. This expansion has al-
lowed it greater dominance in the domestic Chinese market, as 
well as the export market. 
China Zhongwang’s core values are fivefold. First, it tries to 
add value and grow alongside its customers; second, it develops 
its own talent, particularly in relation to innovation, teamwork, 
and pursuit of excellence. Third, China Zhongwang wants to 
create sustainable earnings growth and reward investors and 
shareholders. The fourth core value is to be a responsible cor-
porate citizen and to do business with integrity, which includes 
supporting charities and community events. Finally, it is to es-
tablish a business that is trusted by customers and to retain and 
develop key employees to push the business forward into the fu-
ture. The company also professes a “customers first” philosophy. 
Employee training focuses on responding to customer require-
ments and changing market needs in order to achieve high levels 
of customer satisfaction.
The aluminum business had to position itself carefully, 
responding to the demands of the external environment. Rather 
than react to environmental issues, organizations like Zhongwang 
have taken immediate steps to cut down on energy use and reduce 
waste. Globally, the industry can boast that aluminum is the most 
commonly recycled metal in the world. Clearly, this approach 
permeates enterprises such as Zhongwang as part of its overall 
commitment to social responsibility. 
Zhongwang is committed to the lifelong learning and career 
development of the employees, helping each person to effectively 
combine their talent development goals with corporate develop-
ment. The company conducted operational and theoretical skill 
training for specialized operational personnel; they also worked 
with local government bodies to offer Pre-appointment Bridge-up 
Training,” a training program for laid-off workers to help develop 
their professional skills and operation capabilities. Training pro-
grams were organized with a total participation of 27,470 indi-
viduals, with all staff members having enrolled. To acknowledge 
the achievements of the employees, Zhongwang awarded titles 
of “May Day” medal and “Workers’ Vanguard” for excellent 
performance.
As a member of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, China 
Zhongwang continues to have great access to potential invest-
ment. The company is ranked first among the major Chinese alu-
minum companies and continues to expand. In retaining its core 
values of commitment, diligence, responsibility, and innovation, 
the business has become a major developer and manufacturer of 
high-quality aluminum products in the world, and at the same 
time reflects thoughtful response to demands from the external 
environment.
Discussion Questions
2-23 What are China Zhongwang’s corporate values? How do you 
think these values influence the way employees do their work?
2-24 Using the company’s corporate values (from Exhibit 2–4), 
 describe the organizational culture. In which areas would you 
say that the company’s culture is very high (or typical)? Explain.
2-25 How is China Zhongwang’s corporate culture maintained?
2-26 “The right culture with the right values will always produce the 
best organizational performance.” What do you think of this 
statement? Do you agree? Why or why not?

78    Part 1  •  Introduction
Endnotes
 1. “A Transforming World,” Report 
by Merrill Lynch Wealth Manage-
ment, http://www.ml.com/publish/
content/application/pdf/GWMOL/
AR9D50CF-MLWM.pdf, 
May 
2014.
 2. C. Matlack, “The Growing Peril of 
a Connected World,” Bloomberg 
BusinessWeek, December 6–12, 
2010, 63–64.
 3. G. Ip, “Sluggish Productivity 
Hampers Wage Gains,” Wall Street 
Journal, March 7–8, 2015, A1+; 
R. Miller, “How Productive Is the 
U.S.?” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 
March 2, 2015, 16–17; and “Glob-
al Productivity Slowdown Moder-
ated in 2013—2014 May See Bet-
ter Performance,” The Conference 
Board, 
https://www.conference-
board.org/pdf_free/economics/
TED3.pdf, 2014.
 4. D. Weldon, “Has the Global 
 Economy Slowed Down?” BBC 
News, http://www.bbc.com/news/
explainers-31661078, March 1, 
2015; and P. Davidson, “Global 
Growth Appears Stunted, IMF 
Chief Says,” USA Today, April 3, 
2014, 2B.
 5. E. Morath, “Brisk Jobs Growth 
Puts Fed on Notice,” Wall Street 
Journal, March 7–8, 2015, A1+; 
“United States Unemployment 
Rate,” Trading Economics, http://
www.tradingeconomics.com/
united-states/unemployment-rate, 
January 2015; and A. Lowrey, 
“Recovery Has Created Far More 
Low-Wage Jobs Than Better-Paid 
Ones,” New York Times Online, 
April 27, 2014.
 6. N. Timiraos, “Many Face New 
Normal: Part-Time Pay, Full-Time 
Bills,” Wall Street Journal, No-
vember 13, 2014, A1+.
 7. P. Davidson, “Firms Go with Part-
Timers to Get around Health Law,” 
USA Today, December 31, 2014, 
3B.
 8. A. R. Sorkin and M. Thee-Brenan, 
“Many Feel the American Dream 
Is out of Reach, Poll Shows,” New 
York Times Online, December 10, 
2014.
 9. E. Pfanner, “Economic Troubles 
Cited as the Top Risks in 2012,” 
New York Times Online, January 
11, 2012; and E. Pfanner, “Di-
vining the Business and Political 
Risks of 2012,” New York Times 
Online, January 11, 2012.
 10. C. Hausman, “Americans See In-
equality as a Major Problem,” Eth-
ics Newsline, www.globalethics.
org/news-line, April 9, 2012.
 11. E. Porter, “Inequality Undermines 
Democracy,” New York Times On-
line, March 20, 2012.
 12. T. Meelen and K. Frenken, “Stop 
Saying Uber Is Part of the Sharing 
Economy,” http://www.fastcoexist.
com/3040863/stop-saying-uber-
is-part-of-the-sharing-economy, 
January 14, 2015; and “The Rise 
of the Sharing Economy,” The 
Economist, http://www.economist.
com/news/leaders/21573104- 
internet-everything-hire-rise- 
sharing-economy, March 9, 2013.
 13. “Airbnb, 
Snapgoods 
and 
12 
More Pioneers of the ‘Share 
Economy,’“http://www.forbes.
com/pictures/eeji45emgkh/
airbnb-snapgoods-and-12-more-
pioneers-of-the-share-economy/, 
2015.
 14. N. Ungerleider, “This ‘Airbnb for 
Creative Equipment’ Will Rent 
You Drones, Oculus Rifts, Google 
Glass, More,” Fast Company, http://
www.fastcompany.com/3043160/
tech-forecast/this-airbnb-for- 
creative-equipment-will-rent- 
you-drones-oculus-rifts-google-gl, 
March 6, 2015.
 15. G. M. Eckhardt and F. Bardhi, 
“The Sharing Economy Isn’t about 
Sharing at All,” Harvard Business 
Review, 
https://hbr.org/2015/01/
the-sharing-economy-isnt-about-
sharing-at-all, January 28, 2015.
 16. P. Coy, “If Demography Is Des-
tiny, Then India Has the Edge,” 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, January 
17–23, 2011, 9–10.
 17. S. Brownstone, “Millennials Will 
Become the Majority in the Work-
force in 2015. Is Your Company 
Ready?” 
http://www.fastcoexist.
com/3037823/millennials-will-
become-the-majority-in-the- 
workforce-in-2015-is-your- 
company-ready, November 4, 2014.
 18. J. Villa, “How Hispanic Gen Z 
Will Change Everything,” www.
media.post, March 4, 2015.
 19. R. Bernstein, “Move over Mil-
lennials—Here Comes Gen Z,” 
Ad Age, http://adage.com/article/
cmo-strategy/move-millennials-
gen-z/296577/, January 21, 2015.
 20. R. Friedrich, M. Peterson, and 
A.  Koster, “The Rise of Genera-
tion C,” Strategy+Business, Spring 
2011, 1–8.
 21. S. Cardwell, “Where Do Babies 
Come From?” Newsweek, October 
19, 2009, 56.
 22. G. Shivakumar, “India Is Set to 
Become the Youngest Country by 
2020,” The Hindu, http://www.
thehindu.com/news/national/india-
is-set-to-become-the-youngest-
country-by-2020/article4624347.
ece, April 17, 2013.
 23. Y. Hori, J-P. Lehmann, T. Ma Kam 
Wah, and V. Wang, “Facing up 
to the Demographic Dilemma,” 
Strategy+Business Online, Spring 
2010; and E. E. Gordon, “Job 
Meltdown or Talent Crunch?” 
Training (January 2010): 10.
 24. M. Chand and R. L. Tung, “The 
Aging of the World’s Population 
and Its Effects on Global Business,” 
Academy of Management Perspec-
tives, November 2014. 409–29.
 25. R. Hampson, “The Changing Face 
of American Jobs,” USA Today, 
January 13, 2011, 1A+; P. Izzo, 
“Economists 
Expect 
Shifting 
Work Force,” Wall Street Journal 
Online, February 11, 2010; and 
J. Lanhart, “Even in a Recov-
ery, Some Jobs Won’t  Return,” 
Wall Street Journal, January 12, 
2010, A15.
 26. “Gartner Says 4.9 Billion Con-
nected ‘Things’ Will Be in Use in 
2015,” Press Release, www.gartner.
com/newsroom/id/2905717, 
No-
vember 11, 2014.
 27. E. Frauenheim, “Companies Fo-
cus Their Attention on Flexibil-
ity,” Workforce Management On-
line, February 2011; P. Davidson, 
“Companies Do More with Fewer 
Workers,” USA Today, Febru-
ary 23, 2011, 1B+; K. Bennhold, 
“Working Part-Time in the 21st 
Century,” New York Times Online, 
December 29, 2010; M. Rich, 
“Weighing Costs, Companies Fa-
vor Temporary Help,” New York 
Times Online, December 19, 2010; 
P. Davidson, “Temporary Work-
ers Reshape Companies, Jobs,” 
USA Today, October 13, 2010, 
1A+; A. Fox, “Pave the Way for 
Volunteers,” HR Magazine, June 
2010, 70–74; P. Davidson, “More 
Temp Workers Are Getting Hired,” 
USA Today, March 8, 2010, 1B; 
S. Reddy, “Wary Companies Rely 
on Temporary Workers,” Wall 
Street Journal, March 6–7, 2010, 
A4; P. Davidson, “Cuts in Hours 
versus Cuts in Jobs,” USA Today, 
February 25, 2010, 1B; and S. A. 
Hewlett, L. Sherbin, and K. Sum-
berg, “How Gen Y and Boom-
ers Will Reshape Your Agenda,” 
Harvard Business Review, July– 
August 2009, 71–76; and S. Lohr, 
“Customer Service? Ask a Vol-
unteer,” New York Times Online, 
April 26, 2009.
 28. D. Bauder, Associated Press, “Pro-
gramming Vet Guiding Changes 
at MTV,” Springfield, Missouri 
News-Leader, May 7, 2014, 5C.
 29. A Question of Ethics box based 
on “Police Are Pleading with 
Google to Ditch a Feature in Its 
Waze App That Could Help Ter-
rorists,” Business Insider, http://
www.businessinsider.com/police-
google-change-waze-app-2015-2, 
February 7, 2015; The Associ-
ated Press, “Police Say Waze 
Cop-Tracker Is Threat to Of-
ficers,” CBS News.com, http://
www.cbsnews.com/news/police- 
say-waze-cop-tracker-is-threat-to-
officers/, January 26, 2015; and J. 
Wells, “LA Residents Complain 
about ‘Waze Craze’,” www.cnbc.
co/id/102261534, December 11, 
2014.
 30. J. S. Harrison and C. H. St. John, 
“Managing and Partnering with 
External Stakeholders,” Academy 
of Management Executive, May 
1996, 46–60.
 31. J. Swartz, “Facebook Changes 
Its Status in Washington,” USA 
 Today, January 13, 2011, 1B+.
 32. S. L. Berman, R. A. Phillips, and 
A. C. Wicks, “Resource Depen-
dence, Managerial Discretion, and 
Stakeholder Performance,” Acad-
emy of Management Proceedings 
Best Conference Paper, August 
2005; A. J. Hillman and G. D. 
Keim, “Shareholder Value, Stake-
holder Management, and Social 
Issues: What’s the Bottom Line?” 
Strategic Management Journal 
(March 2001): 125–39; J. S. Har-
rison and R. E. Freeman, “Stake-
holders, Social Responsibility, and 
Performance: Empirical Evidence 
and 
Theoretical 
Perspectives,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(July 1999): 479–87; and J. Kotter 
and J. Heskett, Corporate Culture 
and Performance (New York: The 
Free Press, 1992).
 33. J. A. Chatman and K. A. Jehn, 
“Assessing the Relationship be-
tween Industry Characteristics and 
Organizational Culture: How Dif-
ferent Can You Be?” Academy of 
Management Journal (June 1994): 
522–53; and C. A. O’Reilly III, 
J. Chatman, and D. F. Caldwell, 
“People 
and 
Organizational 
Culture: A Profile Comparison 
Approach to Assessing Person-
Organization Fit,” Academy of 
Management Journal (September 
1991): 487–516.
 34. T. Lytle, “Social Work,” HR Mag-
azine, August 2014, 40–42.
 35. A. Bryant, “On a Busy Road, 
a Company Needs Guardrails, 
an interview with Christopher 
J. Nassetta, president and chief 
executive of Hilton Worldwide,” 
New York Times Online, October 
13, 2012.
 36. E. H. Schein, Organizational Cul-
ture and Leadership (San Francis-
co: Jossey-Bass, 1985), 314–15.
 37. “Executive Views on Organiza-
tional Culture,” T&D, November 
2014, 19.
 38. C. Palmeri, “The Fastest Drill in 
the West,” BusinessWeek, October 
24, 2005, 86–88.
 39. C. Kenkel and S. Sorenson, 
“How Winegardner & Hammons 
Built a Winning Culture,” Gal-
lup  Business Journal, http://www. 
gallup.com/businessjournal/ 
175394/winegardner-hammons-
built-winning-workplace-culture.
aspx, September 18, 2014.
 40. Based on A. L. Wilkins, “The 
Culture Audit: A Tool for Un-
derstanding Organizations,” Or-
ganizational Dynamics, Autumn 
1983, 24–38; H. M. Trice and J. 
M. Beyer, The Culture of Work Or-
ganizations (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1993), 358–62; 
and D. M. Cable, L. Aiman-Smith, 
P. W. Mulvey, and J. R. Edwards, 
“The Sources and Accuracy of Job 
Applicants’ Beliefs about Orga-
nizational Culture,” Academy of 
Management Journal (December 
2000): 1076–85.

CHAPTER 2  •  The Management Environment    79
 41. E. Palermo, “10 Worst Data 
Breaches of All Time,” http://
www.tomsguide.com/us/biggest-
data-breaches,news-19083.html, 
February 6, 2015.
 42. T. Lee, “Target’s Culture Con-
tributed to Gregg Steinhafel’s 
Downfall,” SFGate, http://www.
sfgate.com/business/article/
Target-s-culture-contributed-to-
Gregg-5458122.php, May 7, 2014.
 43. P. Ziobro and S. Ng, “Retailer 
Target Lost Its Way under Ousted 
CEO Gregg Steinhafel,” Wall 
Street Journal, http://www.wsj.
com/articles/retailer-target-lost-its-
way-under-ousted-ceo-gregg-stein-
hafel-1403577233, June 23, 2014.
 44. “Target 
CMO 
Acknowledges 
Culture Crisis after Employee 
Rant Posted on Gawker,” http://
www.buzzfeed.com/sapna/target- 
cmo-acknowledges-culture-crisis-
after-employee-rant-p.tvox6lwle4, 
May 14, 2014.
 45. H. Malcolm and B. Horovitz, 
“Target CMO Responds to Em-
ployee Rant over Culture,” http://
www.usatoday.com/story/money/
business/2014/05/14/target-cmo-
response-employee-rant/9075327/, 
May 14, 2014.
 46. J. Reingold, “What’s behind Tar-
get’s New Openness?” http://
fortune.com/2014/11/21/whats-
behind-targets-new-openness/, 
November 22, 2014.
 47. “Target CMO Acknowledges Cul-
ture Crisis after Employee Rant 
Posted on Gawker.”
 48. P. Ziobro, “Target to Cut Several 
Thousand Jobs,” Wall Street Journal, 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/target-
ceo-plans-digital-small-store-invest-
ments-to-fuel-growth-1425416165, 
March 4, 2015.
 49. E. Schwartzel, “Crowds Return to 
Movie Theaters,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, February 28, 2015, B2; “Year-
ly Box Office,” boxofficemojo 
.com/yearly/, 
March 
7, 
2014; 
E. 
Schwartzel, 
“Movie-Theater 
Chains Take on IMAX,” Wall Street 
Journal, December 13, 2013, B6; 
A. Sharma, “Hollywood Feels Net-
flix’s Influence,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, July 8, 2013, B1+; C. Bialik, 
“Studios Struggle for Focus on Film 
Pirates’ Booty,” Wall Street Journal, 
April 6–7, 2013, A2; M. Rosen-
baum, “Box Office Bust: Movie At-
tendance Hits 16-Year Low,” ABC-
News.com, December 28, 2011; M. 
Cieply, “Charging a Premium for 
Movies, at a Cost,” New York Times 
Online, July 31, 2011; B. Barnes 
and M. Cieply, “Graying Audi-
ence Returns to Movies,” New York 
Times Online, February 25, 2011; 
L. A. E. Schuker, “Double Feature: 
Dinner and a Movie,” Wall Street 
Journal, January 5, 2011, D1+; J. 
O’Donnell, “Going to the Movies 
at Home,” USA Today, January 5, 
2011, 3B; M. DeCuir, “Some Food 
and Alcohol with Your Flick? Cin-
emas Hope So,” USA Today, March 
27, 2008, 3A; B. Barnes, “At Cin-
eplexes, Sports, Opera, Maybe a 
Movie,” New York Times Online, 
March 23, 2008; D. Stuckey and 
K. Gelles, “Entertainment Sold 
Online,” USA Today, February 26, 
2008; and J. Carroll, “Americans 
Dislike the Cost of Going to the 
Movies,” Gallup News Service, 
 December 22, 2006.
 50. China 
Zhongwang, 
www 
.zhongwang.com, September 14, 
2009; “China Zhongwang Wins 
2011 Top 10 Influential Enter-
prises on Chinese Management,” 
China Zhongwang Holdings Lim-
ited, 
www.world.einnews .com, 
October 3, 2011; “China Zhong-
wang 2014 Net Profit Grows 
16.5% 
to 
RMB2.48 
 Billion,” 
China 
Zhongwang 
Holdings 
Limited, PR NewsWire, March 
17, 2015; and China Rich List, 
Forbes 
www.forbes.com/profile/ 
liu-zhongtian/?list=china- 
billionaires, November 27, 2015; 
M. Ritchie and C. Chen, “China 
Zhongwang Seeks to Expand in 
Europe, U.S. Amid Profit Gain,” 
Bloomberg Business, http://www 
.bloomberg.com/news/articles/ 
2015-08-20/china-zhongwang-
profit-rises-as-costs-decline-and-
margins-expand, August 20, 2015; 
“A Leading Aluminium Processed 
Product Developer and Manu-
facturer in Asia,” 2014 Annual 
 Report, China Zhongwang Hold-
ings  Limited.

Integrative 
Managerial Issues
Daniel Kaesler/Alamy
          Employees are 
less ethical today  
than in the past.
3

81
The reality is that the percentage of employees 
who witnessed ethical misconduct at work  
is at an all-time low—41 percent.1  
Organizations have been quick to penalize or 
even fire employees (including managers) who 
have been found to act unethically,  
demonstrating that such practices won’t be  
tolerated. And large companies have been  
particularly conscientious about improving  
their ethical standards—97 percent have  
codes of ethics.

you relied on TV, newspapers, and other 
media to shape your perceptions, you 
might rightly assume that today’s executives 
are far more unethical than their peers of 
20 or 30 years ago. For instance, in one 
 recent six-month period we found media cov-
erage of a wide range of unethical business 
 practices—including insider trading, lying, 
bribery, conflicts of interest, sexual harass-
ment, product deficiency cover-ups, expense 
account abuses, and environmental violations.
But don’t confuse publicity with actual 
practices. Although it seems that unethical 
practices are increasing, the reason may 
be that there are vastly more media outlets 
today—online and physical—and they’re 
actively competing for your attention. The 
media give their readers what they want, 
which seems to be the “juicy,” negative 
stuff. So, networks, cable, online news 
sites, blogs, and newspapers highlight 
stories of managers who lied, cheated, or 
rigged the system.
However, the issue of employees be-
having ethically is an important one for 
today’s managers. And managers also face 
other important issues associated with glo-
balization and with employing and engaging 
a diverse global workforce. Because each of 
these topics—diversity, globalization, and 
ethics/social responsibility—are integrated 
throughout many aspects of what managers 
do and how they manage, we’re going to 
look at each in this chapter. •
Learning Outcomes
3-1 Explain globalization and its impact on organizations. p. 83
3-2  Discuss how society’s expectations are influencing managers and organizations.  
p. 89
3-3 Discuss the factors that lead to ethical and unethical behavior in organizations. p. 92
3-4  Describe how the workforce is changing and its impact on the way organizations 
are managed. p. 96
IF 
82

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    83
What Is Globalization and How Does It Affect 
Organizations?
“It’s like being in an emergency 
room, doing triage.”
3-1  Explain  
globalization and  
its impact on  
organizations.
Global Sales (outside the United States) for:
Avon—89 percent
McDonald’s—63 percent
IBM—58 percent
Coke—56 percent
GE—52 percent
Apple—52 percent4
That was the reaction of Hewlett-Packard’s senior vice 
president for operations after learning that a catastrophic 
earthquake and tsunami had hit Japan.2 Not long after 
getting the news, company managers in Japan, Taiwan, and the United States gathered in a 
“virtual situation room” to instantly share information. This analogy of an emergency room 
is very apt, according to experts, because today’s global supply chains are like intricate in-
terconnected biological systems. They can respond and self-heal as needed, but they’re also 
susceptible to weaknesses. Normally, the global flow of goods will adapt, day in and day out, 
to all kinds of glitches and setbacks. However, when a disaster strikes (for instance, an earth-
quake, a volcano eruption, labor unrest, political upheavals, floods or hurricanes or tornadoes 
or blizzards anywhere in the world), you really grasp the fragility of the global supply chain.3
An important issue that managers must deal with is globalization. (Remember our discus-
sion of the global arena in Chapter 2 as one component of the external environment.) Major 
events such as catastrophic natural disasters, global economic meltdowns, or terrorist threats 
have created challenges for managers doing business globally. Despite such challenges, 
globalization isn’t about to disappear. Nations and businesses have been trading with each 
other for centuries through all kinds of disasters and economic ups and downs. Over the last 
couple of decades, we’ve seen an explosion of companies—big and small—operating almost 
anywhere in the world. Geographic borders mean little when it comes to doing business. For 
instance, BMW, a German firm, builds cars in South Carolina. McDonald’s sells hamburgers 
in China. Tata, an Indian company, purchased the Jaguar brand—which started as a British 
company—from Ford Motor Company, a U.S. company. And look at these so-called American 
companies that get well over half of their annual revenues from sales outside the United States.
Although the world is still a global village—that is, a boundaryless world where goods 
and services are produced and marketed worldwide—how managers do business in that 
global village is changing. To be effective in this boundaryless world, managers need to adapt 
to this changed environment, as well as be more understanding of cultures, systems, and tech-
niques that are different from their own.
What Does It Mean to Be “Global”?
There are three different ways for organizations to be considered “global.” For instance, orga-
nizations are considered global if they exchange goods and services with consumers in other 
countries. Such ❶ marketplace globalization is the most common approach to being global. 
However, many organizations, especially high-tech organizations, are considered global be-
cause they ❷ use managerial and technical employee talent from other countries. One factor 
global village
A boundaryless world where goods and services 
are produced and marketed worldwide

84    Part 1  •  Introduction
that affects talent globalization is immigration laws and regulations. Managers must be alert 
to changes in those laws. Finally, an organization can be considered global if it ❸ uses finan-
cial sources and resources outside its home country, which is known as financial globaliza-
tion.5 As might be expected, the global economic slowdown severely affected the availability 
of financial resources globally. And even as countries’ economies began the slow process of 
recovery, the impact continued to be felt globally.
How Do Organizations Go Global?
As organizations go global, they often use different approaches. (See Exhibit 3–1.) At first, man-
agers may want to get into a global market with minimal investment. At this stage, they may start 
with global sourcing (also called global outsourcing), which is purchasing materials or labor 
from around the world wherever it is cheapest. The goal: take advantage of lower costs in order 
to be more competitive. For instance, Massachusetts General Hospital uses radiologists in India 
to interpret CT scans.6 Although global sourcing may be the first step to going international for 
many companies, they often continue using this approach because of the competitive advantages 
it offers. However, during the last economic crisis, many  organizations reconsidered their deci-
sions to source globally. For instance, Dell, Apple, and American Express were just a few U.S. 
companies that scaled back some of their offshore customer service operations. Others brought 
manufacturing back home. For instance, Apple decided to build some Mac computers in the 
United States for the first time in about a decade. The company had faced political pressure to hire 
U.S. workers and to “reduce its reliance on foreign subcontractors whose treatment of workers” 
has been strongly criticized.7 As companies think about the best places to do business, they face 
choices of offshore (in another global location), onshore (at home), or nearshore (in countries 
close to home).8 Then, as a company takes that next step in going global, each successive stage 
beyond global sourcing requires more investment and thus entails more risk for the organization.
The next step in going global may involve exporting the organization’s products to other 
countries—that is, making products domestically and selling them abroad. In addition, an 
organization might do importing, which involves acquiring products made abroad and sell-
ing them domestically. Both usually entail minimal investment and risk, which is why many 
small businesses often use these approaches to doing business globally.
Finally, managers might use licensing or franchising, which are similar approaches 
involving one organization giving another organization the right to use its brand name, 
technology, or product specifications in return for a lump-sum payment or a fee that is usu-
ally based on sales. The only difference is that licensing is primarily used by manufacturing 
organizations that make or sell another company’s products, and franchising is primar-
ily used by service organizations that want to use another company’s name and operating 
Global
Investment
Minimal
Signiﬁcant 
Foreign Subsidiary
Strategic Alliance – Joint Venture
Franchising
Licensing
Exporting and Importing
Global Sourcing
Exhibit 3–1 How Organizations Go Global
global sourcing
Purchasing materials or labor from around the 
world, wherever it is cheapest
exporting
Making products domestically and selling them 
abroad
importing
Acquiring products made abroad and selling them 
domestically
licensing
An agreement in which an organization gives 
another the right, for a fee, to make or sell its prod-
ucts, using its technology or product specifications
franchising
An agreement in which an organization gives 
another organization the right, for a fee, to use its 
name and operating methods
global corporation
An MNC that centralizes management and other 
decisions in the home country
transnational (borderless) 
organization
An MNC where artificial geographic boundaries  
are eliminated
MNC (multinational  
corporation)
Any type of international company that maintains 
operations in multiple countries.
multidomestic corporation
An MNC that decentralizes management and other 
decisions to the local country where it’s doing 
business
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 106. Reprinted  
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

     What Are the Different  
Types of Global Organizations?
“We don’t want  
people to think we’re 
based in any one 
place.”
Transnational (borderless) 
organization:
An MNC where artificial geograph-
ical boundaries are eliminated.
• Country of origin or where 
business is conducted becomes 
irrelevant.
• Increases efficiency and effec-
tiveness in a competitive global 
marketplace.
Lyroky/Alamy
John Deere’s green-and-yellow 
tractors are a familiar sight in 
farm country. Although John 
Deere once struggled selling 
its farm equipment overseas, 
its line of highly customizable 
products has made the  
company a ton of profits.
Oleksiy Maksymenko Photography/Alamy
A sport utility vehicle has 
changed the way Ford develops 
and makes cars. Ford’s Escape 
is made from a common set of 
components that are used in 
Ford cars around the world.
Sony Corporation’s strengths 
in product innovation are 
legendary: the Walkman, the 
Handycam, the PlayStation. 
New products are developed 
and launched globally under 
the guidance and oversight of 
corporate headquarters.
85
MNC  
(multinational corporation)
Any type of international company that maintains  
operations in multiple countries
“Which product is  
right for you?”
Multidomestic corporation:
An MNC in which management 
and other decisions are decentral-
ized to the local country in which it 
is operating.
• Rely on local employees to 
 manage the business.
• Tailor strategies to each coun-
try’s unique characteristics.
• Used by many consumer product 
companies.
“This decision we’re  
making at headquarters 
has company-wide,  
world-wide  
implications.”
Global corporation:
An MNC in which management and 
other decisions are centralized in 
the home country.
• World market is treated as an 
integrated whole.
• Focus is on control and global 
 efficiency.
Mouse in the House/Alamy

86    Part 1  •  Introduction
methods. For example, New Delhi consumers can 
enjoy Subway sandwiches, Namibians can dine on 
KFC fried chicken, and Russians can consume Dunkin’ 
Donuts—all  because of franchises in these countries. 
On the other hand, Anheuser-Busch InBev licensed the 
right to brew and market its Budweiser beer to brew-
ers such as Labatt in Canada, Modelo in Mexico, and 
Kirin in Japan.
Once an organization has been doing business 
 internationally for a while and has gained experi-
ence in international markets, managers may decide 
to make more of a direct investment. One way to do 
this is through a global strategic alliance, which is a 
partnership between an organization and a foreign com-
pany partner or partners in which both share resources 
and knowledge in developing new products or build-
ing production facilities. For example, Honda Motor 
and General Electric teamed up to produce a new jet 
 engine. A specific type of strategic alliance in which 
the partners form a separate, independent organization 
for some business purpose is called a joint venture. For 
example, Hewlett-Packard—the company we mentioned at the beginning of this section—has 
had numerous joint ventures with various suppliers around the globe to develop different 
components for its computer equipment. These partnerships provide a relatively easy way for 
companies to compete globally.
Finally, managers may choose to directly invest in a foreign country by setting up a 
foreign subsidiary as a separate and independent facility or office. This subsidiary can be 
managed as a multidomestic organization (local control) or as a global organization (central-
ized control). As you can probably guess, this arrangement involves the greatest commitment 
of resources and poses the greatest amount of risk. For instance, United Plastics Group of 
Westmont, Illinois, built three injection-molding facilities in Suzhou, China. The company’s 
executive vice president for business development says that level of investment was necessary 
because “it fulfilled our mission of being a global supplier to our global accounts.”9
Top managers of India’s Tata Global Bever-
ages and Starbucks Coffee Company, shown 
here, announced a joint venture that will own 
and operate Starbucks cafes in cities through-
out India. The new organization, TATA 
Starbucks Ltd., will give Indian consumers an 
expanded range of coffee, tea, and innovative 
beverages.
Danish Siddiqui/Reuters
 Write It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete MGMT 5: The Global Marketplace.
What Do Managers Need to Know About Managing  
in a Global Organization?
A global world brings new challenges for managers, especially in managing in a country with 
a different national culture.10 A specific challenge comes from the need to recognize the dif-
ferences that might exist and then find ways to make interactions effective.
U.S. managers once held (and some still hold) a rather parochial view of the world of 
business. Parochialism is a narrow focus in which managers see things only through their 
own eyes and from their own perspectives; they don’t recognize that people from other coun-
tries have different ways of doing things or that they live differently from Americans. This 
view can’t succeed in a global village—nor is it the dominant view held today. Changing such 
perceptions requires understanding that countries have different cultures and environments.
A person with a parochial attitude  
cannot succeed in today’s world.
foreign subsidiary
A direct investment in a foreign country that 
involves setting up a separate and independent 
facility or office
global strategic alliance
A partnership between an organization and foreign 
company partner(s) in which both share resources 
and knowledge in developing new products or 
building production facilities
joint venture
A specific type of strategic alliance in which the 
partners agree to form a separate, independent 
organization for some business purpose
parochialism
A narrow focus in which managers see things 
only through their own eyes and from their own 
perspective

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    87
Hofstede’s 5 Dimensions  
of National Culture
An illuminating study of the differences in cultural environments 
was conducted by Geert Hofstede in the 1970s and 1980s.11 
He surveyed more than 116,000 IBM employees in 40 countries 
about their work-related values and found that managers and 
employees vary on five dimensions of national culture:
• Power distance. The degree to which people in a coun-
try accept that power in institutions and organizations 
is distributed unequally. It ranges from relatively equal 
(low power distance) to extremely unequal (high power 
distance).
• Individualism versus collectivism. 
Individualism is the degree to which 
people in a country prefer to act as 
individuals rather than as members of 
groups. Collectivism is the equivalent 
of low individualism.
• Achievement 
versus 
nurturing. 
Quantity of life is the degree to which 
values such as assertiveness, the 
acquisition of money and material 
goods, and  competition are important. Quality of life is 
the degree to which people value relationships and show 
sensitivity and concern for the welfare of others.
• Uncertainty avoidance. This dimension assesses the 
degree to which people in a country prefer structured 
over unstructured situations and whether people are will-
ing to take risks.
• Long-term versus short-term orientation. People in 
cultures with long-term orientations look to the future 
and value thrift and persistence. A short-term orientation 
values the past and present and emphasizes respect for 
tradition and fulfilling social obligations.
The table below shows a few highlights of four of 
 Hofstede’s cultural dimensions and how different countries 
rank on those dimensions.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these dis-
cussion questions.
 Talk About It 1: Using Hof-
stede’s data for Mexico and the 
United States, how do you think 
employees in each country (a) 
might react to a team-based re-
wards program; (b) would be like-
ly to view their relationship with 
their boss; and (c) might react to 
a change in work processes?
   Talk About It 2: What does this example tell you about 
the importance of understanding cultural  differences?
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
Here’s one way  
to UNDERSTAND 
CULTURAL  
DIFFERENCES!
aA weak achievement score is equivalent to high nurturing.
Source: Based on G. Hofstede, “Motivation, Leadership, and Organization: Do American Theories 
Apply Abroad?” Organizational Dynamics (Summer 1980): 42–63.
Country
Individualism/
Collectivism
Power  
Distance
Uncertainty 
Avoidance
Achievement/
Nurturinga
Australia
Individual
Small
Moderate
Strong
Canada
Individual
Moderate
Low
Moderate
England
Individual
Small
Moderate
Strong
France
Individual
Large
High
Weak
Greece
Collective
Large
High
Moderate
Italy
Individual
Moderate
High
Strong
Japan
Collective
Moderate
High
Strong
Mexico
Collective
Large
High
Strong
Singapore
Collective
Large
Low
Moderate
Sweden
Individual
Small
Low
Weak
United States
Individual
Small
Low
Strong
Venezuela
Collective
Large
High
Strong

88    Part 1  •  Introduction
All countries have different values, morals, customs, political and economic systems, and 
laws, all of which can affect how a business is managed. For instance, in the United States, 
laws guard against employers taking action against employees solely on the basis of their age. 
Similar laws can’t be found in all other countries. Thus, managers must be aware of a coun-
try’s laws when doing business there.
The most important and challenging differences for managers to understand, however, 
are those related to a country’s social context or culture. For example, status is perceived 
differently in different countries. In France, status is often the result of factors important 
to the organization, such as seniority, education, and the like. In the United States, status is 
more a function of what individuals have accomplished personally. Managers need to under-
stand societal issues (such as status) that might affect business operations in another country 
and recognize that organizational success can come from a variety of managerial practices. 
Fortunately, managers have help in this regard by turning to the research that is being done on 
the differences in cultural environments.
HofsteDe’s frAmework. Geert Hofstede’s framework is one of the most widely ref-
erenced approaches for analyzing cultural variations. His work has had a major impact on 
what we know about cultural differences among countries and is highlighted in our “From 
the Past to the Present” box.
GLoBe fINDINGs. Although Hofstede’s work has provided the basic framework for 
differentiating among national cultures, most of the data are over 30 years old. Another 
more recent research program, called Global Leadership and Organizational Behavior 
Effectiveness (GLOBE), is an ongoing cross-cultural investigation of leadership and national 
culture. Using data from more than 17,000 managers in 62 societies around the world, the 
GLOBE research team (led by Robert House) has identified nine dimensions on which 
national cultures differ.12 For each of these dimensions, we have indicated which countries 
rated high, which rated moderate, and which rated low.
• Assertiveness. The extent to which a society encourages people to be tough, confronta-
tional, assertive, and competitive versus modest and tender. (High: Spain, United States, 
and Greece. Moderate: Egypt, Ireland, and Philippines. Low: Sweden, New Zealand, and 
Switzerland.)
• Future orientation. The extent to which a society encourages and rewards future-oriented 
 behavior such as planning, investing in the future, and delaying gratification. (High:  Denmark, 
Canada, and Netherlands. Moderate: Slovenia, Egypt, and Ireland. Low: Russia, Argentina, 
and Poland.)
• Gender differentiation. The extent to which a society maximizes gender role differences. 
(High: South Korea, Egypt, and Morocco. Moderate: Italy, Brazil, and Argentina. Low: 
Sweden, Denmark, and Slovenia.)
• Uncertainty avoidance. As defined in Hofstede’s landmark research, the GLOBE team 
 defined this term as a society’s reliance on social norms and procedures to alleviate the 
unpredictability of future events. (High: Austria, Denmark, and Germany. Moderate: Israel, 
United States, and Mexico. Low: Russia, Hungary, and Bolivia.)
• Power distance. As in the original research, the GLOBE team defined this as the degree to 
which members of a society expect power to be unequally shared. (High: Russia, Spain, 
and Thailand. Moderate: England, France, and Brazil. Low: Denmark, Netherlands, and 
South Africa.)
• Individualism/collectivism. Again, this term was defined similarly to the original research 
as the degree to which individuals are encouraged by societal institutions to be integrated 
into groups within organizations and society. A low score is synonymous with collectivism. 
(High: Greece, Hungary, and Germany. Moderate: Hong Kong, United States, and Egypt. 
Low: Denmark, Singapore, and Japan.)
• In-group collectivism. In contrast to focusing on societal institutions, this dimension 
 encompasses the extent to which members of a society take pride in membership in small 
groups such as their family and circle of close friends and the organizations in which they 
GLOBE
The Global Leadership and Organizational Behavior 
Effectiveness research program, a program that 
studies cross-cultural leadership behaviors

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    89
are employed. (High: Egypt, China, and Morocco. Moderate: Japan, Israel, and Qatar. Low: 
Denmark, Sweden, and New Zealand.)
• Performance orientation. This dimension refers to the degree to which a society encourages 
and rewards group members for performance improvement and excellence. (High:  United 
States, Taiwan, and New Zealand. Moderate: Sweden, Israel, and Spain. Low:  Russia, 
 Argentina, and Greece.)
• Humane orientation. This cultural aspect is the degree to which a society encourages and 
rewards individuals for being fair, altruistic, generous, caring, and kind to others. (High: 
 Indonesia, Egypt, and Malaysia. Moderate: Hong Kong, Sweden, and Taiwan. Low: 
 Germany, Spain, and France.)
The GLOBE studies confirm the validity of Hofstede’s dimensions and extend his 
 research rather than replace it. GLOBE’s added dimensions provide an expanded and updated 
measure of countries’ cultural differences. It’s likely that cross-cultural studies of human 
behavior and organizational practices will increasingly use the GLOBE dimensions to assess 
differences between countries.
  Try It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
 complete the Simulation: Managing in the Global Environment.
What Does Society Expect from  
Organizations and Managers?
It’s an incredibly simple but 
potentially world-changing idea.
What is it? The business model followed by TOMS 
shoes: For each pair of shoes sold, a pair is donated to 
a child in need. As a contestant on the CBS reality show 
The Amazing Race, Blake Mycoskie, founder of TOMS, 
visited Argentina and “saw lots of kids with no shoes 
who were suffering from injuries to their feet.” He was 
so moved by the experience that he wanted to do something. That something is what TOMS 
Shoes does now by blending charity with commerce. Those shoe donations—now over 
35 million pairs—have been central to the success of the TOMS brand.
What does society expect from organizations and managers? That may seem like a hard 
question to answer, but not for Blake Mycoskie. He believes that society expects organiza-
tions and managers to be responsible and ethical and to give something back. However, as 
we saw in the highly publicized stories of notorious financial scandals at Enron, Bernard 
Madoff Investment Securities, HealthSouth, and others, some managers don’t act responsibly 
or ethically.
How Can Organizations Demonstrate Socially  
Responsible Actions?
Few terms have been defined in as many different ways as social responsibility—profit maxi-
mization, going beyond profit making, voluntary activities, and concern for the broader social 
system are but a few.13 These descriptions fall into two camps. On one side is the  classical—or 
purely economic—view that management’s only social responsibility is to maximize profits.14 
3-2  Discuss how  
society’s  
expectations are 
influencing  
managers and 
organizations.

90    Part 1  •  Introduction
On the other side is the socioeconomic  position, which 
holds that management’s responsibility goes beyond 
making profits to include protecting and improving 
 society’s welfare.15
When we talk about social responsibility (also 
known as corporate social responsibility, or CSR), we 
mean a business firm’s intention, beyond its legal and 
economic obligations, to do the right things and act in 
ways that are good for society. Note that this definition 
assumes that a business ❶ obeys the law and ❷ pur-
sues economic interests. But also note that this defini-
tion ❸ views a business as a moral agent. In its effort 
to do good for society, it must differentiate between 
right and wrong.
We can understand social responsibility better if we 
compare it to two similar concepts. Social obligations 
are those activities a business firm engages in to meet 
certain economic and legal responsibilities. It does the 
minimum that the law requires and only pursues social 
goals to the extent that they contribute to its economic 
goals. Social responsiveness is characteristic of the 
business firm that engages in social actions in response 
to some popular social need. Managers in these compa-
nies are guided by social norms and values and make 
practical, market-oriented decisions about their actions.16 A U.S. business that meets federal 
pollution standards or safe packaging regulations is meeting its social obligation because laws 
mandate these actions. However, when it provides on-site child-care facilities for employees 
or packages products using recycled paper, it’s being socially responsive to working parents 
and environmentalists who have voiced these social concerns and demanded such actions. For 
many businesses, their social actions are probably better viewed as being socially responsive 
rather than socially responsible, at least according to our definitions. However, such actions 
are still good for society. Social responsibility adds an ethical imperative to do those things 
that make society better and to not do those that could make it worse.
PRNewsFoto/Chicco USA/AP Images
Artsana, the Italian maker of Chicco baby 
care products, invests in social responsibility 
initiatives that help children in need both in 
Italy and in the poorest regions of the world. 
Chicco’s global “Happiness Goes from Heart 
to Heart” project is aimed at treating  
childhood heart disease and supports the 
brand’s mission of “making children happy 
and giving them something to smile about”.
 Watch It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled Honest Tea: Corporate Social Responsibility.
Should Organizations Be Socially Involved?
Managers regularly confront decisions where social 
responsibility is a factor.
The importance of corporate social responsibility surfaced in the 1960s when social activists 
questioned the singular economic objective of business. Even today, good arguments can be 
made for and against businesses being socially responsible. (See Exhibit 3–2.) Yet, arguments 
aside, times have changed. Managers regularly confront decisions that have a dimension 
of social responsibility: philanthropy, pricing, employee relations, resource conservation, 
 product quality, and doing business in countries with oppressive governments are just a few. 
To address these issues, managers may reassess packaging design, recyclability of products, 
environmental safety practices, outsourcing decisions, foreign supplier practices, employee 
policies, and the like.
social obligation
When a business firm engages in social actions 
because of its obligation to meet certain economic 
and legal responsibilities
social responsiveness
When a business firm engages in social actions in 
response to some popular social need
social responsibility  
(corporate social  
responsibility, or CSR)
A business firm’s intention, beyond its legal and 
economic obligations, to do the right things and act 
in ways that are good for society

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    91
Another way to look at this issue is whether social involvement affects a company’s 
 economic performance, which numerous studies have done.17 Although most found a small 
positive relationship between social involvement and economic performance, no general-
izable conclusions can be made because these studies have shown that the relationship is 
 affected by various contextual factors such as firm size, industry, economic conditions, and 
regulatory environment.18 Other researchers have questioned causation. If a study showed 
that social involvement and economic performance were positively related, this didn’t neces-
sarily mean that social involvement caused higher economic performance. It could simply 
mean that high profits afforded companies the “luxury” of being socially involved.19 Such 
concerns can’t be taken lightly. In fact, one study found that if the flawed empirical analyses 
in these studies were “corrected,” social responsibility had a neutral impact on a company’s 
financial performance.20 Another found that participating in social issues not related to the 
AGAINST
Dilution
of purpose
Pursuing social 
goals dilutes 
business’s primary 
purpose—economic 
productivity.
Costs
Many socially 
responsible actions do 
not cover their costs 
and someone must 
pay those costs.
Too much power
Businesses have a lot 
of power already; 
if they pursue social 
goals, they will have 
even more.
Lack of skills
Business leaders lack 
the necessary skills to 
address social issues.
Lack of accountability
There are no direct 
lines of accountability 
for social actions.
Public expectations
Public opinion now supports businesses pursuing 
economic and social goals.
Long-run proﬁts
Socially responsible companies tend to have 
more secure long-run proﬁts.
Ethical obligation
Businesses should be socially responsible because 
responsible actions are the right thing to do.
Public image
Businesses can create a favorable public image 
by pursuing social goals.
Better environment
Business involvement can help solve difﬁcult 
social problems.
Discouragement of further 
governmental regulation
By becoming socially responsible, businesses 
can expect less government regulation.
Balance of responsibility and power
Businesses have a lot of power and an equally 
large amount of responsibility is needed to 
balance against that power.
Stockholder interests
Social responsibility will improve a business’s 
stock price in the long run.
Possession of resources
Businesses have the resources to support public 
and charitable projects that need assistance.
Superiority of prevention over cures
Businesses should address social problems 
before they become serious and costly to correct.
FOR
Violation of
proﬁt maximization
Business is being socially
responsible only when 
it pursues its economic
interests.
Exhibit 3–2 Arguments For and Against Social Responsibility
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 154. Reprinted 
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

92    Part 1  •  Introduction
organization’s primary stakeholders had a negative effect on shareholder value.21 Despite 
all these concerns, after reanalyzing several studies, other researchers have concluded that 
 managers can afford to be (and should be) socially responsible.22
What Is Sustainability and Why Is It Important?
Being green at the world’s largest retailer
• $482.2 billion in revenues
• 2.2 million employees
• 11,400+ stores
sustainability goal:
 Remove 20 million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions from supply chains—the 
 equivalent of removing more than 3.8 million cars from the road for a year.
Yes, we’re talking about Walmart. And considering its size, Walmart is probably the last com-
pany you’d think of for being highlighted in a section describing sustainability. However, Walmart 
has committed to improving its sustainability efforts. In fact, it now reuses or  recycles more than 
80 percent of the waste produced in its domestic stores and in other U.S. operations.23 This cor-
porate action affirms that sustainability has definitely become a mainstream issue for managers.
We introduced you to sustainability in Chapter 1 as we discussed factors reshaping manage-
ment in today’s organizations. Just a refresher: We defined sustainability as a company’s ability 
to achieve its business goals and increase long-term shareholder value by integrating economic, 
environmental, and social opportunities into its business strategies.24 Organizations are widening 
their responsibility not just to managing in an efficient and effective way, but also to responding 
strategically to a wide range of environmental and societal challenges.25 Like the managers at 
Walmart (and others committed to being sustainable) are discovering, running an organization in 
a more sustainable way means making informed business decisions based on thorough and ongo-
ing communication with various stakeholders, understanding their requirements, and factoring 
economic, environmental, and social aspects into how they pursue their business goals.
Seventy-five percent of workplaces have at least  
one green technology practice.26
The idea of practicing sustainability affects many aspects of business, from the creation 
of products and services to their use and subsequent disposal by consumers. (Check out Case 
Application #2 on Keurig Green Mountain Inc. at the end of the chapter.) Following sustainability 
practices is one way in which organizations can show their commitment to being responsible. In 
today’s world where many individuals have diminishing respect for businesses, few organizations 
can afford the bad press or potential economic ramifications of being seen as socially irrespon-
sible. Managers also want to be seen as ethical, which is the topic we’re going to look at next.
What Factors Determine Ethical and Unethical Behavior?
• Employees at a law firm in Florida that handled foreclosures for Freddie Mac and Fannie 
Mae changed thousands of documents and hid them when company officials came to con-
duct audits.27
• A Paris court found Jérôme Kerviel, a former financial trader at French bank  Société 
 Générale, guilty of triggering a massive trading scandal that created severe financial 
 problems for his employer. Mr. Kerviel claims that the company turned a blind eye to his 
questionable but hugely profitable methods.28
3-3  Discuss the 
factors that lead 
to ethical and 
unethical behavior 
in organizations.
sustainability
A company’s ability to achieve its business goals 
and increase long-term shareholder value by 
integrating economic, environmental, and social 
opportunities into its business strategies

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    93
• The National Football League finally admitted recently in federal court documents that it 
“expects nearly a third of retired players to develop long-term cognitive problems” and that 
players may see the problems happening at noticeably younger ages.29
You might be wondering about the connection among these three unrelated stories. When you 
read about these decisions, behaviors, and outcomes, you might be tempted to conclude that 
businesses just aren’t ethical. Although that isn’t the case, managers do face ethical issues, as 
the above examples show.
Ethics commonly refers to a set of rules or principles that defines right and wrong 
 conduct.30 Right or wrong behavior, though, may at times be difficult to determine. Most recog-
nize that something illegal is also unethical. But what about questionable “legal” areas or strict 
organizational policies? For instance, what if you managed an employee who worked all week-
end on a rush project and you told him to take off two days sometime later and mark it down as 
“sick days” because your company had a clear policy that overtime would not be compensated 
for any reason?31 Would that be wrong? As a manager, how will you handle such situations?
In What Ways Can Ethics Be Viewed?
To better understand what’s involved with managerial ethics, we need to first look at three 
 different perspectives on how managers make ethical decisions.32 The utilitarian view of 
 ethics says that ethical decisions are made solely on the basis of their outcomes or conse-
quences. The goal of utilitarianism is to provide the greatest good for the greatest number. 
In the rights view of ethics, individuals are concerned with respecting and protecting 
individual liberties and privileges such as the right of free consent, the right to privacy, the 
right of free speech, and so forth. Making ethical decisions under this view is fairly simple 
because the goal is to avoid interfering with the rights of others who might be affected by 
the decision. Finally, under the theory of justice view of ethics, an individual imposes and 
enforces rules fairly and impartially. For instance, a manager would be using the theory of 
justice perspective by deciding to pay individuals who are similar in their levels of skills, 
performance, or responsibility the same and not base that decision on arbitrary differences 
such as gender, personality, or personal favorites. The goal of this approach is to be equi-
table, fair, and impartial in making decisions.
Whether a manager (or any employee, for that  
matter) acts ethically or unethically will depend  
on several factors.
These factors include an individual’s morality, values, personality, and experiences; the 
organization’s culture; and the ethical issue being faced.33 People who lack a strong moral 
sense are much less likely to do the wrong things if they are constrained by rules, policies, 
job descriptions, or strong cultural norms that discourage such behaviors. For example, sup-
pose that someone in your class stole the final exam and is selling a copy for $50. You need to 
do well on the exam or risk failing the course. You suspect that some classmates have bought 
copies, which could affect any results because your professor grades on a curve. Do you buy a 
copy because you fear that without it you’ll be disadvantaged, do you refuse to buy a copy and 
try your best, or do you report your knowledge to your instructor? This example of the stolen 
final exam illustrates how ambiguity over what is ethical can be a problem for managers.
How Can Managers Encourage Ethical Behavior?
At a Senate hearing exploring the accusations that Wall Street firm Goldman Sachs  deceived 
its clients during the housing-market meltdown, Arizona senator John McCain said, “I don’t 
know if Goldman has done anything illegal, but there’s no doubt their behavior was 
 unethical.”34 You have to wonder what the firm’s managers were thinking or doing while 
such ethically questionable decisions and actions were occurring. It’s pretty obvious that they 
weren’t encouraging ethical behaviors!
ethics
A set of rules or principles that defines right and 
wrong conduct
rights view of ethics
View that says ethical decisions are made in order 
to respect and protect individual liberties and 
privileges
theory of justice view  
of ethics
View that says ethical decisions are made in order 
to enforce rules fairly and impartially
utilitarian view of ethics
View that says ethical decisions are made solely on 
the basis of their outcomes or consequences

94    Part 1  •  Introduction
If managers are serious about encouraging ethical 
behaviors, there are a number of things they can do.
Like what? Hire employees with high ethical standards, establish codes of  ethics, 
lead by example, link job goals and performance appraisal, provide ethics training, 
and  implement protective mechanisms for employees who face ethical dilemmas. By 
 themselves, such  actions won’t have much of an impact. But if an organization has a com-
prehensive  ethics  program in place, it can potentially improve an organization’s ethical 
climate. The key  variable, however, is potentially. A well-designed ethics program does 
not guarantee the desired outcome. Sometimes corporate ethics programs are mostly public 
relations gestures that do little to influence managers and employees. For instance, even 
Enron, often thought of as the “poster child” of corporate wrongdoing, outlined values in 
its final annual report that most would consider ethical—communication, respect, integrity, 
and excellence. Yet the way top managers behaved didn’t reflect those values at all.37 We 
want to look at three ways that managers can encourage ethical behavior and create a com-
prehensive ethics program.
CoDes of etHICs. Codes of ethics are popular tools for attempting to reduce employee 
ambiguity about what’s ethical and what’s not.38 A code of ethics is a formal document 
that states an organization’s primary values and the ethical rules it expects managers and 
nonmanagerial employees to follow. Ideally, these codes should be specific enough to 
guide organizational members in what they’re supposed to do yet loose enough to allow 
for freedom of judgment. Research shows that 97 percent of organizations with more than 
10,000 employees have written codes of ethics. Even in smaller organizations, nearly 93 
percent have them.39 And codes of ethics are becoming more popular globally. Research 
by the Institute for Global Ethics says that shared values such as honesty, fairness, respect, 
responsibility, and caring are embraced worldwide.40
Every time you click on anything in Facebook or do a search in 
Google or purchase anything on Amazon or post anything on 
Instagram, data is being collected about you. Technology has 
evolved to the point where companies can capture data about 
 consumer habits anytime they access a Web site, post on social 
media, do a search, or purchase something online. But it’s not just 
on external Web sites that data is being collected and analyzed. 
A recent article in the Wall Street Journal discussed how certain 
companies have been analyzing a wide variety of data points on 
 employees to try to pinpoint who is likely to leave the organiza-
tion.35 Since employee turnover costs money and time, companies 
want to try to get an early handle on it so managers can take 
 action before an employee—and especially a good employee—
decides to leave.
Statisticians and data scientists have expressed misgivings 
about the lack of ethical guidelines for big data research and 
 analytics, especially online. Just because we have the  technology 
to collect these vast amounts of quantifiable information that can 
be analyzed by highly sophisticated data processing, should we? 
And should organizations (managers) be using it? When it was 
discovered that Facebook had manipulated news feeds  either posi-
tively or negatively of more than half a million randomly  selected 
users to see how emotions spread on social media, people were 
outraged. But Facebook isn’t the only one that manipulates and 
 analyzes user data. Google, Yahoo, Amazon, and others also 
 manipulate and analyze this data, all under the guise of “improving 
the user experience.”36 The technology of data analytics itself is 
ethics-free; it’s neither good nor bad. But it’s in how the technology 
is used that ethical concerns can arise.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments  section 
of mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion 
questions.
   TAlk AbOuT IT 3: What does it mean that the technology of 
data analytics is ethics-free?
   TAlk AbOuT IT 4: How could managers ethically use big data?
THE ETHICS OF DATA ANAlyTICS
:::::::  Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::
code of ethics
A formal document that states an organization’s 
primary values and the ethical rules it expects 
managers and nonmanagerial employees to follow

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    95
The effectiveness of such codes depends  heavily on whether management supports them 
and ingrains them into the corporate culture, and how individuals who break the codes are 
treated.41 If management considers them to be important, regularly reaffirms their content, 
follows the rules itself, and publicly reprimands rule breakers, ethics codes can be a strong 
foundation for an effective corporate ethics program.42
etHICAL LeADersHIP. In 2011, Tim Cook was named CEO of Apple Inc. Although it’s an 
 extremely successful company, Apple is viewed by some as the epitome of greedy capitalism 
with no concern for how its products are manufactured. Cook, who was named one of the 100 
Most Influential People in Business Ethics by Ethisphere, has increased the company’s focus 
on supply chain ethics and compliance issues. It was the first technology company to join the 
Fair Labor Association, which means that organization can now review the company’s labor 
practices within the supply chain. In addition, at a recent annual stockholders’ meeting with 
investors and journalists, Cook, who was challenged by a spokesperson from a conservative 
think tank to explain how the company’s sustainability efforts were in the best interests of 
shareholders, bluntly and clearly said that Apple wasn’t just about making a profit and that 
“We want to leave the world better than we found it.”43
Doing business ethically requires a commitment from managers. Why? Because they’re 
the ones who uphold the shared values and set the cultural tone. Managers must be good 
 ethical role models both in words and, more importantly, in  actions. For example, if managers 
take company resources for their personal use, inflate their expense accounts, or give favored 
treatment to friends, they imply that such behavior is acceptable for all employees.
What you DO is far more important than what you  
SAY in getting employees to act ethically!
Managers also set the tone through their  reward 
and punishment practices. The choices of when to 
reward with pay increases and promotions send a 
strong signal to employees. As we said earlier, when 
an employee is rewarded for achieving impressive 
results in an  ethically questionable manner, it indi-
cates to others that those ways are acceptable. When 
an employee does something unethical, managers 
must punish the offender and publicize the fact by 
making the outcome visible to everyone in the orga-
nization. This practice sends a message that doing 
wrong has a price and it’s not in employees’ best 
interests to act unethically! (See Exhibit 3–3 for 
 suggestions on being an ethical leader.)
etHICs trAINING. Yahoo! used an off-the-shelf 
online ethics training package, but employees said 
Through his words and actions, L’Oreal’s 
CEO and chairman Jean-Paul Agon is  
committed to doing business ethically.  
Leading by example, he expects all managers 
and employees to model ethical behavior 
and integrates ethical principles into all 
of L’Oreal’s business practices that build 
relationships of trust with the company’s 
customers.
Charles Platiau/Reuters
Exhibit 3–3 Being an Ethical leader
• Be a good role model by being ethical and honest.
• Tell the truth always.
• Don’t hide or manipulate information.
• Be willing to admit your failures.
• Share your personal values by regularly communicating them to employees.
• Stress the organization’s or team’s important shared values.
• Use the reward system to hold everyone accountable to the values.

96    Part 1  •  Introduction
that the scenarios used to demonstrate different concepts didn’t resemble those that might 
come up at Yahoo! and were too middle-American and middle-aged for the global company 
with a youthful workforce. So the company changed its ethics training! The new ethics 
training package is more animated and interactive and has more realistic storylines for the 
industry. The 45-minute training module covers the company’s code of conduct and re-
sources available to help employees understand it.44
Like Yahoo!, more and more organizations are setting up seminars, workshops, and 
similar ethics training programs to encourage ethical behavior. Such training programs aren’t 
without controversy; the primary concern is whether ethics can be taught. Critics stress that 
the effort is pointless because people establish their individual value systems when they’re 
young. Proponents note, however, that several studies have shown that values can be learned 
after early childhood. In addition, they cite evidence that shows that teaching ethical prob-
lem solving can make an actual difference in ethical behaviors;45 that training has increased 
individuals’ level of moral development;46 and that, if nothing else, ethics training increases 
awareness of ethical issues in business.47
 Write It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com  
to complete MGMT 4: Ethics.
  Try It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Management Ethics.
What Is Today’s Workforce Like and How Does It Affect the 
Way Organizations Are Managed?
It’s amazing all the different languages you can hear in  
the lobby of one of MGM Mirage’s hotels. Because 
guests come from all over the world, the company is 
committed to reflecting that diversity in its workplace.
MGM Mirage has implemented a program that is devoted to making sure that everyone in 
the organization feels included.48 Such diversity can be found in many organizational work-
places domestically and globally, and managers in those workplaces are looking for ways to 
value and develop that diversity.
What Is Workplace Diversity?
Look around your classroom (or your workplace). You’re likely to see young/old, male/
female, tall/short, blonde/brunette, blue-eyed/brown-eyed, any number of races, and any vari-
ety of dress styles. You’ll see people who speak up in class and others who are content to keep 
their attention on taking notes or daydreaming. Have you ever noticed your own little world 
of diversity where you are right now? Many of you may have grown up in an environment 
that included diverse individuals, while others may have not had that experience. We want to 
focus on workplace diversity, so let’s look at what it is.
3-4  Describe how 
the workforce  
is changing  
and its impact  
on the way  
organizations 
are managed.

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    97
Diversity has been “one of the most popular business topics over the last two decades. 
It ranks with modern business disciplines such as quality, leadership, and ethics. Despite this 
popularity, it’s also one of the most controversial and least understood topics.”49 With its 
basis in civil rights legislation and social justice, the word “diversity” often invokes a variety 
of attitudes and emotional responses in people. Diversity has traditionally been considered a 
term used by human resources departments, associated with fair hiring practices, discrimina-
tion, and inequality. But diversity today is considered to be so much more.
We’re defining workforce diversity as the ways in which people in an organization are 
different from and similar to one another. Notice that our definition not only focuses on the 
differences but also the similarities of employees, reinforcing our belief that managers and 
organizations should view employees as having qualities in common as well as differences 
that separate them. It doesn’t mean that those differences are any less important, but rather 
that our focus as managers is in finding ways to develop strong relationships with and engage 
our entire workforce.
 Watch It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Diversity.
What Types of Diversity Are Found in Workplaces?
Diversity is a big issue, and an important issue, in today’s workplaces. What types of diver-
sity do we find in those workplaces? Exhibit 3–4 lists several types of workplace diversity.
AGe. The aging of the population is a major critical shift taking place in the workforce. 
With many of the nearly 85 million baby boomers still employed and active in the work-
force, managers must ensure that those employees are not discriminated against because 
of age. Both Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Age Discrimination in 
Employment Act of 1967 prohibit age discrimination. The Age Discrimination Act also 
restricts mandatory retirement at specific ages. In addition to complying with these laws, 
organizations need programs and policies in place that provide for fair and equal treatment 
of their older employees.
Age
Gender
Race and
Ethnicity
Disability/
Abilities
Religion
GLBT
Other
Exhibit 3–4 Types of Diversity Found in Workplaces
workforce diversity
Ways in which people in a workforce are similar 
and different from one another in terms of gender, 
age, race, sexual orientation, ethnicity, cultural 
background, and physical abilities and disabilities

98    Part 1  •  Introduction
GeNDer. Women (49.8 percent) and men (50.2 percent) now each make up almost half 
of the workforce.50 However, gender diversity issues are still quite prevalent in organiza-
tions. These issues include the gender pay gap, career start and progress, and miscon-
ceptions about whether women perform their jobs as well as men do. It’s important for 
managers and organizations to explore the strengths that both women and men bring to an 
organization and the barriers they face in contributing fully to organizational efforts.
rACe AND etHNICIty. There’s a long and controversial history in the United States and 
in other parts of the world over race and, as recent events have shown, how people react 
to and treat others of a different race. Race and ethnicity are important types of diversity 
in organizations. We’re going to define race as the biological heritage (including physical 
characteristics such as one’s skin color and associated traits) that people use to identify 
themselves. Most people identify themselves as part of a racial group, and such  racial 
classifications are an integral part of a country’s cultural, social, and legal environments. 
Ethnicity is related to race, but it refers to social traits—such as one’s cultural background 
or allegiance—that are shared by a human population.
The racial and ethnic diversity of the U.S. population is increasing and at an  exponential 
rate. We’re also seeing this same effect in the composition of the workforce. Most of the 
 research on race and ethnicity as they relate to the workplace has looked at hiring  decisions, 
performance evaluations, pay, and workplace discrimination. Managers and organizations 
need to make race and ethnicity issues a key focus in effectively managing workforce 
diversity.
DIsABILIty/ABILItIes. For persons with disabilities, 1990 was a watershed year—the 
year the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) became law. ADA prohibits discrimination 
against persons with disabilities and also requires employers to make reasonable accom-
modations so their workplaces are accessible to people with physical or mental disabilities 
and enable them to effectively perform their jobs. With the law’s enactment, 
individuals with disabilities became a more representative and integral part of 
the U.S. workforce.
In effectively managing a workforce with disabled employees, managers 
need to create and maintain an environment in which employees feel comfort-
able disclosing their need for accommodation. Those accommodations, by law, 
enable individuals with disabilities to perform their jobs, but they also need 
to be perceived as equitable by those not disabled. It’s the balancing act that 
 managers face.
reLIGIoN. Hani Khan, a college sophomore, had worked for three months as 
a stock clerk at a Hollister clothing store in San Francisco.51 One day, she was 
told by her supervisors to remove the head scarf that she wears in observance of 
Islam (known as a hijab) because it violated the company’s “look policy” (which 
instructs employees on clothing, hair styles, makeup, and accessories they may 
wear to work). She refused on religious grounds and was fired one week later. 
Like a number of other Muslim women, she filed a federal job discrimination 
complaint. A spokesperson for Abercrombie & Fitch (Hollister’s parent com-
pany) said that, “If any Abercrombie associate identifies a religious conflict 
with an Abercrombie policy . . . the company will work with the associate in an 
attempt to find an accommodation.”
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of reli-
gion (as well as race/ethnicity, country of origin, and sex). However, you’d proba-
bly not be surprised to find out that the number of religious discrimination claims 
has been growing in the United States.52 In accommodating religious diversity, 
managers need to recognize and be aware of different religions and their beliefs, 
paying special attention to when certain religious holidays fall. Businesses benefit 
when they can accommodate, if possible, employees who have special needs or 
requests in a way that other employees don’t view it as “special treatment.”
race
The biological heritage (including physical charac-
teristics, such as one’s skin color and associated 
traits) that people use to identify themselves
ethnicity
Social traits, such as one’s cultural background or 
allegiance, that are shared by a human population
A Question of Ethics
Smokers. Overweight individuals. Two groups 
about whom much has been written and much 
has been discussed, especially when it comes 
to workplaces. A Gallup poll found that most 
Americans said that if they were in a position 
to hire someone, it would make no differ-
ence to them if that person were overweight 
(79 percent) or smoked (74 percent). However, 
the majority of Americans (60 percent) said it is 
justified to set higher health insurance rates for 
smokers. A majority (57 percent) said it is un-
justified to set higher insurance rates because 
someone is very overweight.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the 
 Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete these discussion questions.
  Talk About It 5: What ethical issues 
might arise in workplaces with employees who 
fit into these two groups?
  Talk About It 6: As a manager, how 
would you handle such issues?

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    99
Increasing gender diversity in senior manage-
ment is a top priority of Sodexo, a global food 
and facilities management services firm. 
Sodexo nurtures high-potential talent like 
Debbie White, CEO of Sodexo in the United 
Kingdom and Ireland, through initiatives 
that include training, mentoring, women’s 
networks, and visible job assignments.
  Try It 3!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
 complete the Simulation: HR and Diversity.
Challenge for Managers: Blurred lines between 
employees’ work and personal lives.
How Are Organizations and Managers Adapting  
to a Changing Workforce?
Since organizations wouldn’t be able to do what they’re in business to do without employees, 
managers have to adapt to the changes taking place in the workforce. They’re responding 
with diversity initiatives such as work-life balance programs, contingent jobs, and recognition 
of generational differences.
work-LIfe BALANCe ProGrAms. The typical employee in the 1960s or 1970s 
showed up at the workplace Monday through Friday and did his or her job in eight- or 
nine-hour chunks of time. The workplace and hours were clearly specified. That’s not 
GLBt—sexUAL orIeNtAtIoN AND GeNDer IDeNtIty. The acronym GLBT—which 
refers to gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender people—is being used more frequently 
and relates to the diversity of sexual orientation and gender identity.53 Sexual orientation 
has been called the “last acceptable bias.”54 We want to emphasize that we’re not condon-
ing this perspective; what this comment refers to is that most people understand that racial 
and ethnic stereotypes are “off-limits.” Unfortunately, it’s not unusual to hear derogatory 
 comments about gays or lesbians. U.S. federal law does not prohibit discrimination against 
employees on the basis of sexual orientation, although many states and  municipalities 
do. However, in Europe, the Employment Equality Directive required all European 
Union member states to introduce legislation making it unlawful to discriminate 
on grounds of sexual orientation.55 Despite the progress that’s been made in 
making workplaces more accommodating of gays and lesbians, obviously much 
more needs to be done. One study found that more than 40 percent of gay and 
lesbian employees indicated they had been unfairly treated, denied a promo-
tion, or pushed to quit their job because of their sexual orientation.56
As with most of the types of diversity we’ve discussed in this  section, 
managers need to look at how best to meet the needs of their GLBT 
employees. They need to respond to  employees’ concerns 
while also creating a safe and productive work environ-
ment for all.
otHer tyPes of DIversIty. As we said earlier, diversity refers to any dissimilarities 
or differences that might be present in a workplace.
Other types of workplace diversity that managers might confront and have to deal 
with include socioeconomic background (social class and income-related factors), team 
members from different functional areas or organizational units, physical attractiveness, 
obesity/ thinness, job seniority, or intellectual abilities. Each of these types of diversity also 
can affect how employees are treated in the workplace. Again, managers need to ensure that 
all  employees—no matter the similarities or dissimilarities—are treated fairly and given the 
opportunity and support to do their jobs to the best of their abilities.
Jane Hobson/Alamy

100    Part 1  •  Introduction
the case anymore for a large segment of the work-
force. Employees are increasingly complaining 
that the line between work and nonwork time has 
blurred, creating personal conflicts and stress.57 
Several factors have contributed to this blurring 
between work and personal life. One is that in 
a world of global business, work never ends. At 
any time and on any day, for instance, thousands 
of Caterpillar employees are working somewhere 
in the company’s facilities. The need to consult 
with colleagues or customers 8 or 10 time zones 
away means that many employees of global com-
panies are “on call” 24 hours a day. Another 
factor is that communication technology allows 
 employees to do their work at home, in their cars, 
or on the beach in Tahiti. Although this capability 
 allows those in technical and professional jobs to 
do their work anywhere and at any time, it also 
means there’s no escaping from work. Another 
factor is that as organizations have had to lay off 
 employees during the economic downturn, “surviving” employees find themselves work-
ing longer hours. It’s not unusual for employees to work more than 45 hours a week, 
and some work more than 50. Finally, fewer families today have a single wage earner. 
Today’s married employee is  typically part of a dual-career couple, which makes it in-
creasingly difficult for married employees to find time to fulfill commitments to home, 
spouse, children, parents, and friends.58
More and more, employees recognize that work is squeezing out their personal lives, and 
they’re not happy about it. Today’s progressive workplaces must accommodate the varied 
needs of a diverse workforce. In response, many organizations are offering family-friendly 
benefits: benefits that provide a wide range of scheduling options that allow employees more 
flexibility at work, accommodating their need for work-life balance. They’ve introduced 
programs such as on-site child care, summer day camps, flextime, job sharing, time off for 
school functions, telecommuting, and part-time employment. Younger people, particularly, 
put a higher priority on family and a lower priority on jobs and are looking for organizations 
that give them more work flexibility.59
CoNtINGeNt joBs. “Companies want a workforce they can switch on and off as 
needed.”60 Although this quote may shock you, the truth is that the labor force already has 
begun shifting away from traditional full-time jobs toward a contingent workforce—part-
time, temporary, and contract workers who are available for hire on an as-needed basis. In 
today’s economy, many organizations have responded by converting full-time permanent 
jobs into contingent jobs. It’s predicted that by the end of the next decade the number of 
contingent employees will have grown to about 40 percent of the workforce. (It’s at 30 
percent today.)61 In fact, one compensation and benefits expert says that “a growing a num-
ber of workers will need to structure their careers around this model,” which could likely 
include you!62
What are the implications for managers and organizations? Because contingent 
 employees are not “employees” in the traditional sense of the word, managing them has its 
own set of challenges and expectations. Managers must recognize that because contingent 
workers lack the stability and security of permanent employees, they may not identify with 
the organization or be as committed or motivated. Managers may need to treat contingent 
workers differently in terms of practices and policies. However, with good communication 
and leadership, an organization’s contingent employees can be just as valuable a resource to 
an organization as permanent employees are. Today’s managers must recognize that it will be 
their responsibility to motivate their entire workforce, full-time and contingent, and to build 
their commitment to doing good work!
Employees at Citrix, a cloud computing 
company that enables mobile work styles, 
enjoy flexible work schedules that help them 
balance their work and home life. Citrix gives 
them the freedom to determine how, when, 
and where their work gets done and allows 
them to use their own devices for working  
at home or at the office, with Windows or 
Mac OS X.
Charles Trainor Jr./MCT/Newscom
family-friendly benefits
Benefits that provide a wide range of scheduling 
options and allow employees more flexibility at 
work, accommodating their needs for work-life 
balance
contingent workforce
Part-time, temporary, and contract workers who are 
available for hire on an as-needed basis

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    101
GeNerAtIoNAL DIffereNCes. Managing generational differences presents some 
unique challenges, especially for baby boomers and Gen Y. Conflicts and resentment can 
arise over issues ranging from appearance to technology and management style.
What is appropriate office attire? That answer may depend on who you ask, but more 
importantly, it depends on the type of work being done and the size of the organization. To 
accommodate generational differences in what is considered appropriate, the key is flexibil-
ity. For instance, a guideline might be that when an employee is not interacting with someone 
outside the organization, more casual wear (with some restrictions) is acceptable.
What about technology? Gen Y has grown up with ATMs, DVDs, cell phones, e-mail, 
texting, laptops, and the Internet. When they don’t have information they need, they just enter 
a few keystrokes to get it. They’re content to meet virtually to solve problems, while baby 
boomers expect important problems to be solved with in-person meetings. Baby boomers 
complain about Gen Y’s inability to focus on one task, while Gen Y’ers see nothing wrong 
with multitasking. Again, flexibility and understanding from both are the key to working 
 together effectively and efficiently.
Finally, what about management style? Gen Y employees want bosses who are open-
minded; experts in their field, even if they aren’t tech savvy; organized; teachers, trainers, 
and mentors; not authoritarian or paternalistic; respectful of their generation; understanding 
of their need for work-life balance; providing constant feedback; communicating in vivid and 
compelling ways; and providing stimulating and novel learning experiences.63
Because Gen Y employees have a lot to offer organizations in terms of their knowledge, 
passion, and abilities, managers have to recognize and understand the behaviors of this group 
in order to create an environment in which work can be done efficiently, effectively, and with-
out disruptive conflict.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.

3 Review 
102
CHAPTER SUMMARY
DIsCussION QuesTIONs
 3-1  How does the concept of a global village affect 
 organizations and managers?
 3-2 How do companies take advantage of local and global 
opportunities by building suitable organizations? Pro-
vide an example from your country.
 3-3 What are the managerial implications of Hofstede’s re-
search on cultural environments? The GLOBE study?
 3-4  Using clear-cut examples, illustrate three ways in which 
a business serves society. 
 3-5 The marketplace is competitive. In this context, 
explain business sustainability in the current market 
environment.
 3-6 Describe how a manager would approach ethical 
 decisions according to each of the three views on 
 ethics.
 3-7 How can organizations encourage ethical behavior?
 3-8 What is workforce diversity, and why is it an important 
issue for managers?
 3-9 Describe the six types of diversity found in  
workplaces.
3-10 Describe and discuss the three ways that organi-
zations and managers are adapting to a changing 
 workforce.
  3-1 Explain globalization and its impact on  
organizations.
Organizations are considered global if they exchange goods 
and services with consumers in other countries, if they use 
managerial and technical employee talent from other  countries, 
or if they use financial sources and resources outside their 
home country. Businesses going global are usually referred to 
as  multinational corporations (MNCs). As an MNC, they may 
operate as a multidomestic corporation, a global corporation, 
or a transnational or borderless organization. When a busi-
ness goes global, it may start with global sourcing, move to 
exporting or importing, use licensing or franchising, pursue 
a global strategic alliance, or set up a foreign subsidiary. In 
doing business globally, managers need to be aware of differ-
ent laws and political and economic systems. But the biggest 
challenge is in understanding the different country cultures. 
Two  cross-cultural frameworks that managers can use are 
Hofstede’s and GLOBE.
  3-2 Discuss how society’s expectations are  
influencing managers and organizations.
Society expects organizations and managers to be responsible 
and ethical. An organization’s social involvement can be from 
the perspective of social obligation, social responsiveness, or 
social responsibility. After much analysis, researchers have 
 concluded that managers can afford to be (and should be) 
 socially responsible. Sustainability has become an important 
societal  issue for managers and organizations.
  3-3 Discuss the factors that lead to ethical  
and unethical behavior in organizations.
Ethics can be viewed from the utilitarian view, the rights view, 
or the theory of justice view. Whether a manager acts ethically 
or unethically depends on his or her morality, values, personal-
ity, and experiences; the organization’s culture; and the ethical 
issue being faced. Managers can encourage ethical behavior 
by hiring employees with high ethical standards, establishing a 
code of ethics, leading by example, linking ethical behavior to 
job goals and performance appraisal, providing ethics training, 
and implementing protective mechanisms for employees who 
face ethical dilemmas.
  3-4 Describe how the workforce is changing  
and its impact on the way organizations  
are managed.
The workforce continues to reflect increasing diversity. 
Types of workforce diversity include age, gender, race and 
 ethnicity, disability/abilities, religion, and sexual orienta-
tion and  gender identity. Organizations and managers are 
 responding to the changing workforce with work-life balance 
programs, contingent jobs, and recognition of generational 
differences.

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    103
Management Skill Builder  |   buIlDING HIGH eTHICAl 
sTANDArDs
Ethics encompasses the rules and principles we use to define right and wrong conduct. Many organizations 
have formally written ethical codes to guide managers and employees in their decisions and actions. But 
 individuals need to establish their own personal ethical standards. If managers are to successfully lead others, 
they need to be seen as trustworthy and ethical.
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
3-11 Why is it important for an organization to have a clear 
definition of diversity?
3-12 Which do you think would be a manager’s best choice 
for shaping long-term ethical behavior: a written code 
of ethics combined with ethics training OR strong  
ethical leadership? Support your position.
3-13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
 assignment for this chapter.
 PERSONAl INVENTORy ASSESSMENT
ethical leadership Assessment
Organizations need ethical leadership from all employees, but especially from managers. 
In this PIA, you’ll see how much thought and effort goes into your being ethical in your 
workplace behavior.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
Skill Basics
To be more ethical in your leadership, focus on what you can 
do and what your organization can do. Here are some sugges-
tions on how to do this:
What You Can Do:
• 
Know your values. What’s important to you? Where do you 
draw the line?
• 
Think before you act. Will your actions injure someone? 
What are your ulterior motives? Will your actions jeopar-
dize your reputation?
• 
Consider all consequences. If you make the wrong 
 decision, what will happen? Every decision comes with 
consequences and you should be sure you’ve considered 
their implications.
• 
Apply the “publicity test.” What would your family and 
friends think if your actions were described in detail on the 
front page of your local newspaper or on the local TV news?
• 
Seek opinions from others. Ask advice from others you 
 respect. Use their experience and listen to their perspectives.
What Your Organization Can Do:
• 
Create a formal ethics code. Organizations should set down 
their ethical standards and policies in a formal ethical code. 
The code should be widely distributed to all employees.
• 
Set an ethical culture. Visibly reward employees who set a 
high ethical standard and visibly punish those who engage 
in unethical practices.
• 
Ensure managers are role models. Employees look to their 
immediate superior and upper management for cues as to 
what is or is not acceptable behavior. Managers need to be 
positive ethical role models.
• 
Offer ethics workshops. Employees should participate in reg-
ular ethics training to reinforce the importance of high ethical 
standards, to interpret the organization’s ethical code, and to 
allow employees to clarify what they may see as “gray areas.”

104    Part 1  •  Introduction
• 
Appoint an ethics “advisor.” A senior executive should be 
available for employees to meet and confer with to confi-
dentially discuss ethical concerns.
• 
Protect employees who report unethical practices. Mecha-
nisms need to be put in place that protect employees from 
retributions or other negative consequences should they re-
veal unethical practices that are a threat to others.
Based on L. Nash, “Ethics without the Sermon,” Harvard Business Review (November–
December 1981): 78–92; W. D. Hall, Making the Right Decision: Ethics for Managers 
(New York: John Wiley, 1993); and L. K. Trevino and K. A. Nelson, Managing Business 
Ethics: Straight Talk about How to Do It Right (New York: John Wiley, 1995).
Practicing the Skill
We’re taking a little different approach with this chapter’s 
skill practice. Form into teams of four or five people. Using a 
copy of your college’s code of conduct, answer the following 
questions: How many of the team members were aware of the 
code? How many had read it? Evaluate the code’s provisions 
and policies. Are you uncomfortable with any of the code’s 
provisions? Why? How effective do you think they have been 
in shaping student and faculty behavior? If they haven’t been 
effective, what could be done to improve them?
Be prepared to present your team’s findings to the class.
Delaney Environmental Services
To: Sandy Burk, Director of Operations
From: J. Delaney, Managing Director
Subject: Global Expansion
Sandy, we need to start looking at expanding our global mar-
ket opportunities. We’ve had a successful track record here 
in San Antonio providing environmental consulting and design 
services, and I believe that with our experience we have a lot to 
offer the Latin American market, particularly in Mexico.
Please research the potential problems we might face 
in moving into the Mexican market. Focus on: (1) cultural 
 differences; (2) the current currency rate of exchange and how 
it’s changed over the last three years; and (3) any legal or po-
litical situations we need to be aware of. Because this is just 
an initial analysis, please keep your report to one page or less.
This fictionalized company and message were created for  educational 
purposes only, and are not meant to reflect positively or negatively on 
 management practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 
CAse ApplICATION #1 
I
t’s not always easy to do business globally, as executives 
at Japanese brokerage firm Nomura Holdings Inc. have 
discovered.64 Nomura acquired Lehman’s international 
 operations after Lehman’s parent company sought Chapter 11 
bankruptcy protection—an action that added about 8,000 non-
Japanese workers. For Nomura, the time seemed right to 
strengthen its global expansion 
strategy. However, since the ac-
quisition, cultural and business 
differences between the two or-
ganizations have been a major 
stumbling block. Although blending two diverse cultures re-
quires intentional efforts when different organizations merge or 
are acquired, it’s particularly challenging when the key assets 
in the cross-border acquisition are the people employed by the 
organization being acquired.
Workplace tensions arose over executive compensation, 
how quickly decisions were made, and how women were 
Global Stumble
treated. For instance, during Nomura’s initial training ses-
sion for new hires, the men and women were separated. The 
women—many of whom had earned prestigious degrees from 
the likes of Harvard—were taught how to wear their hair, 
serve tea, and choose their clothing according to the sea-
son. The company’s dress code for women was also strictly 
interpreted. Women from 
Lehman were told to remove 
highlights from their hair, 
to wear sleeves no shorter 
than mid-bicep, and to avoid 
brightly colored clothing. Several women were sent home 
from the trading floor for dressing “inappropriately.” One 
said, “I was sent home for wearing a short-sleeve dress, even 
though I was wearing a jacket.” A Nomura spokesperson said, 
“The dress code is displayed on the company’s intranet and 
is intended to ensure that clients and colleagues don’t feel 
uncomfortable.”
The challenges of BLENDING 
TWO CULTURES

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    105
Lehman bankers also said they found the process for 
 getting approval on deals was “slower and more difficult than 
it was at Lehman.” Also, at Lehman, clients were  categorized, 
in large part, by the fees they paid. At Nomura, more  emphasis 
was placed on other factors, such as the length of the relation-
ship. The bankers at Nomura said that “their new colleagues 
were too willing to dump loyal clients for a quick profit.”
In its defense, Nomura has tried to blend the two cultures. 
In offices in Europe and in Asia outside of Japan, there’s a mix 
of nationalities. Also, the company has promoted a handful of 
non-Japanese employees to high-ranking positions. “To  reduce 
the Tokyo-centric nature of the company, Hiromi Yamaji, 
head of global investment banking, moved to London, and 
Naoki Matsuba, global head of equities, moved to New York.” 
Until March 2010, Nomura’s executive committee was all 
Japanese men. However, in an attempt to make the company 
more globally oriented, an ex-Lehman executive and foreigner, 
Jasjit “Jesse” Bhattal, a native of India, was promoted to the 
committee. Nomura’s deputy president and chief operating 
officer, Takumi Shibata, said, “When your business is global, 
management needs to be global.” Two years later, however, 
 unable to garner support from Tokyo for an overhaul of 
the global wholesale-banking operations, Bhattal resigned as 
Nomura’s highest-ranking foreign executive.
Discussion Questions
3-14 What obvious cultural differences between Nomura and 
 Lehman do you see in this situation?
3-15 What global attitude do you think characterizes Nomura? Be 
specific in your description. Do you see any evidence of that 
changing?
3-16 Do some cultural research on Japan and the United States. 
Compare those cultural characteristics. What similarities and 
differences exist? How might these cultural differences be 
 affecting the situation at Nomura?
3-17 What could Nomura managers do to support, promote, and 
 encourage cultural awareness among employees? Explain.
3-18 What do you think the statement, “When your business is 
 global, management needs to be global,” is saying? In your 
opinion, is Nomura doing this? Explain.
CAse ApplICATION
 
  Serious about Sustainability?
I
t’s got to be one of the most convenient products ever—
especially for consumers who want their coffee (or tea or 
other hot beverage) efficiently delivered without much 
hassle. The Keurig K-Cups® were invented in 1992 by John 
Sylvan. Like any innovator, Sylvan was looking for a better 
way. For him, it was finding a better way to provide his 30–40 
daily cups of coffee in a way that was customizable and easy.65 
The single-serve brewing pod he created became the Keurig 
K-Cup. Interesting note: Keurig translates to “neat” in Dutch, 
and the Keurig machine and its ubiquitous K-Cup are quite 
neat. The single-brew machine is a very efficient and conve-
nient alternative to the traditional coffee pot or to stopping and 
picking up drive-through coffee every morning.66 However, 
what Sylvan didn’t anticipate was (1) the overwhelming popu-
larity of the approach and (2) the amount of waste the single-
serve pods would create because of that popularity.
Today, almost one in three homes has a pod-based cof-
fee machine. And the sales of those pods accounted for a 
vast majority of the revenues of the company that makes 
them—Keurig Green Mountain. The company’s mission is “A 
Keurig brewer on every counter and a beverage for every oc-
casion.”67 And the company is taking another step toward that 
goal of a beverage for every occasion through its partnership 
with Coca-Cola Company. It will begin selling, at the end of 
2015, a machine called “Keurig Cold,” which will be used 
to dispense Coke’s various brands. The Dr Pepper Snapple 
group also recently signed on to allow its flavor options for 
the new machine.68 Although the Keurig machine is popular 
and a convenience, it also has a more troubling characteristic: 
the constant need to buy more K-Cups. They’re designed as 
single-serve, and with 9.8 billion of them sold in 2014, that’s 
a lot of K-Cups hitting landfills, because they are not recy-
clable. Those 9.8 billion K-Cups would circle the globe more 
than 12 times.69
Environmentalists have criticized the company for its slow 
response to creating and selling a recyclable version of the pod. 
And it’s not that it can’t be done. For instance, when the K-Cup 
design patent expired in 2012, other companies brought out sin-
gle-serve cups that are completely biodegradable and recycla-
ble. To further highlight the sustainability issue, an anonymous 
#2 

106    Part 1  •  Introduction
YouTube video called “Kill the K-Cup” hit the Internet in early 
2015. The apocalyptic nature of the video highlighted the ex-
treme waste and irresponsibility of continuing to make coffee 
in a way “that simply cannot be sustained.”70 It was eventually 
revealed that the creator of the video was a production com-
pany in Halifax, Nova Scotia, whose employees loved their 
Keurig until they began to  notice the growing pile of discarded 
K-Cups that, despite great Canadian recycling programs, could 
not easily be recycled.
So what does the company say? Keurig’s chief sustainabil-
ity officer, Monique Oxender, says that the company isn’t happy 
with its track record either. In 2014, the company pledged to 
create a fully recyclable version of the K-Cup by 2020. Of 
course, the critics have jumped all over the 2020 goal saying 
that five years is a long time to continue to fill up landfills and 
pointing out that the plastic used in the K-Cups will never be 
able to be fully recyclable because of the type of plastic it is. 
In its annual sustainability report, Keurig Green Mountain 
describes its efforts to strengthen its global citizenship and sus-
tainability leadership.71 Others have said that despite the outcry 
against the K-Cups, there are some sustainability benefits to the 
Keurig machine and its single-serve pods. For instance, they’re 
likely to save electricity over a coffee pot that’s constantly 
“on” to keep the coffee warm. Also, the pods have been shown 
to be a more efficient way of extracting coffee from grounds, 
thus saving resources. And other approaches to coffee making 
likely use more water in brewing coffee that may not actually 
be consumed and then dumped down the drain. So, although 
“environmental awareness is never a bad thing,”72 are the critics 
overreacting to the situation?
Discussion Questions
3-19 What global issues do you see here? What ethical/social 
 responsibility issues do you see here?
3-20 Are the critics overreacting to the situation? Do you think Keurig 
Green Mountain’s managers are handling this situation in the 
best way, ethically and responsibly? What else could they do to 
be more ethical and responsible?
3-21 Are Keurig’s proposed actions best described as social obliga-
tion, social responsiveness, or social responsibility? Explain.
3-22 What do you think the statement “environmental awareness is 
never a bad thing” means?
3-23 What lesson(s) about sustainability and business did you learn 
from this case application?
CAse ApplICATION #3
D
iversity management is the bottom line at profes-
sional services company PricewaterhouseCoopers 
(PwC).73 And the company’s commitment to diver-
sity puts them at the top of the list for Top Companies for 
Diversity as determined by DiversityInc. So what does a com-
pany do to be recognized as 
the number one company for 
diversity management? Well, 
it starts at the top.
PwC’s 
chairman 
and 
 senior partner Bob Moritz is a 
vocal advocate of diversity and 
inclusion and says that “it’s 
also the key to sustainable global growth for an organization.” 
Moritz’s commitment to diversity stems from his personal 
 experiences. As a young professional, he lived in Japan for three 
years where he was a minority. He recalls, “If you’re overseas 
or in a country where no one speaks your language—or the cab 
refuses to pick you up in the middle of the night because you’re 
From Top to Bottom
a foreigner—you get a different perspective.” In addition, his 
work team included individuals from France, Australia, and the 
United Kingdom, as well as from Japan. He soon recognized 
that people from different cultures approach problems with dif-
fering perspectives—that his way wasn’t necessarily the right 
way and certainly not the only 
way. That’s why now, as the 
company’s top executive, he 
realizes that to help his com-
pany succeed in today’s global 
economy, an  inclusive culture 
that attracts and retains diverse 
talent is critical.
PwC also has several diversity programs and initiatives in 
place. The company’s first chief diversity officer (CDO) was 
appointed in 2003 and, like at many organizations, was first 
“housed” in the human resources department. Now, however, 
the CDO reports directly to Moritz, giving the position credibil-
ity and, more importantly, accountability. Another interesting 
Professional service  
companies prosper or  
fail because of their  
human talent.

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    107
thing about PwC’s CDO position is that it is  rotating—that 
is, partners are rotated in and out of the role every two years. 
Currently, that position belongs to Maria Castanón Moats, an 
audit partner who recently was named CDO.
Another diversity commitment that PwC has made is 
to talent development. Professional services companies, like 
PwC, prosper or fail because of their human talent. PwC has 
made it a priority to “find, engage, and promote the best and 
brightest employees, especially those from underrepresented 
groups.” To attract such outstanding, diverse talent, the com-
pany offers employees an enviable array of benefits. Because 
work at professional services companies can be arduous and 
demanding, PwC has looked for ways to offer its employees 
work/life flexibility to deal with personal and professional 
challenges. Some of the benefits it offers include backup child-
care assistance, paid paternity leave, nanny resources and refer-
rals, onsite religious accommodations, well-being rewards, and 
tax equalization for all domestic partners.
Finally, a major key to PwC’s diversity management is 
its mentoring program, which has been described as “world 
class.” A mentor is a senior employee who sponsors and sup-
ports a less-experienced employee, called a protégé. Although 
half of the company’s mentoring pairings are cross-cultural, 
Moritz has asked each of PwC’s 2,500 partners to “consciously 
diversify their pool of protégés.” Part of the partners’ evalua-
tions will be based on their advocacy and investment in these 
individuals. But PwC doesn’t just expect its employees to 
know what to do in mentoring. A toolkit for successful advo-
cacy was created that includes guidelines, suggested readings, 
and other internal resources. And the most important part of 
that toolkit? Videos showing real-life examples of partners 
and staff members sharing their personal experiences with 
mentoring.
Discussion Questions
3-24 How might population trends affect a professional services 
 organization like PwC? What might it have to do to adapt to 
these trends?
3-25 What challenges might PwC face in adapting to a more diverse 
applicant pool of college graduates?
3-26 Businesses often face the dilemma of retaining diverse 
 employees once they’re trained. What can PwC do to retain its 
diverse employees?
3-27 What advantages do you think PwC’s mentoring program 
 provides? What potential drawbacks might there be?
3-28 PwC’s “rotating” chief diversity officer is an unusual  approach. 
What advantages do you see to such an arrangement? 
 Drawbacks?
Endnotes
 1. “National Business Ethics Sur-
vey® 2013,” Ethics Resource 
Center, 
http://www.ethics.org/
downloads/2013NBESFinalWeb.
pdf, 12.
 2. S. Lohr, “Stress Test for the Global 
Supply Chain,” New York Times 
Online, March 19, 2011.
 3. S. Lohr, “Stress Test for the Global 
Supply Chain,” New York Times 
Online, March 19, 2011; D. Jolly, 
“Long Pause for Japanese Indus-
try Raises Concerns about Supply 
Chain,” New York Times Online, 
March 16, 2011; and M. Helft 
and N. Bunkley, “Disaster in Ja-
pan Batters Suppliers,” New York 
Times Online, March 14, 2011.
 4. Percentages based on Securities 
and Exchange Commission 10-K 
filings, Hoovers.com, March 14, 
2015.
 5. E. Beinhocker, I. Davis, and L. 
Mendonca, “The 10 Trends You 
Have to Watch,” Harvard Business 
Review, July–August 2009, 55–60.
 6. B. Davis, “Migration of Skilled 
Jobs Abroad Unsettles Global-
Economy Fans,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, January 26, 2004, A1.
 7. E. Frauenheim, “Bringing the 
Jobs Back Home: How ‘Reshor-
ing’ Is Coming to America,” www.
workforce.com, February 7, 2013; 
J. E. Lessin and J. R. Hagerty, “A 
Mac That’s ‘Made in U.S.A.’,” 
Wall Street Journal, December 
7, 2012, B1+; and V. Shannon, 
“Apple to Resume U.S. Manufac-
turing,” New York Times Online, 
December 6, 2012.
 8. A. Pande, “How to Make Onshor-
ing Work,” Harvard Business Re-
view, March 2011, 30; P. David-
son, “Some Manufacturing Heads 
Back to USA,” USA Today, August 
6, 2010, 1B+; and V. Couto, A. Di-
vakaran, and M. Mani, “Is Back-
shoring the New Offshoring?” 
Strategy & Business, October 21, 
2008, 1–3.
 9. J. Teresko, “United Plastics Picks 
China’s Silicon Valley,” Industry 
Week, January 2003, 58.
 10. “Global Business: Getting the 
Frameworks Right,” Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, April 2000, 20.
 11. From the Past to the Present box 
based on D. Holtbrügge and A. 
T. Mohr, “Cultural Determinants 
of Learning Style Preferences,” 
Academy of Management Learn-
ing & Education, December 
2010, 622–37; G. Hofstede, 
“The GLOBE Debate: Back to 
Relevance,” Journal of Inter-
national Business Studies (No-
vember 2010): 1339–46; G. A. 
Gelade, P. Dobson, and K. Auer, 
“Individualism, Masculinity, and 
the Sources of Organizational 
Commitment,” Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology (September 
2008): 599–617; G. Hofstede, 
“The Cultural Relativity of Or-
ganizational Practices and Theo-
ries,” Journal of International 
Business Studies (Fall 1983): 
75–89; and G. Hofstede, Culture 
Consequences: International Dif-
ferences in Work-Related Values 
(Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Pub-
lications, 1980), 25–26. For an 
interesting discussion of collec-
tivism and teams, see C. Gomez, 
B. L. Kirkman, and D. Shapiro, 
“The Impact of Collectivism and 
In-Group Membership on the 
Evaluation Generosity of Team 
Members,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal (December 2000): 
1097–106. Hofstede’s term for 
what we’ve called quantity of 
life and quality of life was actu-
ally “masculinity versus feminin-
ity,” but we’ve changed his terms 
 because of their strong sexist 
connotation.
 12. R. J. House, N. R. Quigley, and 
M. S. deLuque, “Insights from 
Project 
GLOBE: 
Extending 
Advertising Research Through 
a Contemporary Framework,” 
International Journal of Adver-
tising 29, no. 1 (2010): 111–39; 
R. R. McRae, A. Terracciano, 
A. Realo, and J. Allik, “Inter-
preting GLOBE Societal Prac-
tices Scale,” Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology (November 
2008): 805–10; J. S. Chhokar, 
F. C. Brodbeck, and R. J. House, 
Culture and Leadership across 
the World: The GLOBE Book of 
In-Depth Studies of 25 Societies 
(Philadelphia: 
Lawrence 
Erl-
baum Associates, 2007); and R. J. 
House, P. J. Hanges, M. Javidan, 
P. W. Dorfman, and V. Gupta, 
Culture, Leadership, and Organi-
zations: The GLOBE Study of 62 
Societies (Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications, 2004).
 13. D. Dearlove and S. Crainer, “En-
terprise Goes Social,” Chief Ex-
ecutive, March 2002, 18; and 
“Bronze Winner: Ben & Jerry’s 
Citizen Cool,” Brandweek, March 
18, 2002, R-24.
 14. M. Friedman, Capitalism and 
Freedom 
(Chicago: 
University 

108    Part 1  •  Introduction
of Chicago Press, 1962); and M. 
Friedman, “The Social Respon-
sibility of Business Is to Increase 
Profits,” New York Times Maga-
zine, September 13, 1970, 33.
 15. See, for instance, N. A. Ibrahim, 
J. P. Angelidis, and D. P. Howell, 
“The Corporate Social Respon-
siveness Orientation of Hospital 
Directors: 
Does 
Occupational 
Background Make a Difference?” 
Health Care Management Review, 
Spring 2000, 85–92.
 16. See, for example, D. J. Wood, 
“Corporate Social Performance 
Revisited,” Academy of Man-
agement Review, October 1991, 
703–08; and S. L. Wartick and P. 
L. Cochran, “The Evolution of 
the Corporate Social Performance 
Model,” Academy of Management 
Review, October 1985, 763.
 17. See, for instance, R. Lacy and P. 
A. Kennett-Hensel, “Longitudi-
nal Effects of Corporate Social 
Responsibility on Customer Re-
lationships,” Journal of Busi-
ness Ethics (December 2010): 
581–97; S. Arendt and M. Brettel, 
“Understanding the Influence of 
Corporate 
Social 
Responsibil-
ity on Corporate Identity, Im-
age, and Firm Performance,” 
Management Decision 48, no. 10 
(2010): 1469–92; J. Peloza, “The 
Challenge of Measuring Finan-
cial Impacts from Investments in 
Corporate Social Performance,” 
Journal of Management (Decem-
ber 2009): 1518–41; J. D. Mar-
golis and H. Anger Elfenbein, 
“Do Well by Doing Good? Don’t 
Count on It,” Harvard Business 
Review, January 2008, 19–20; M. 
L. Barnett, “Stakeholder Influ-
ence Capacity and the Variability 
of Financial Returns to  Corporate 
Social  Responsibility,” 2007; D. 
O. Neubaum and S. A. Zahra, 
“Institutional Ownership and Cor-
porate Social Performance: The 
Moderating Effects of Investment 
Horizon, Activism, and Coordi-
nation,” Journal of Management 
(February 2006): 108–31; B. A. 
Waddock and S. B. Graves, “The 
Corporate Social Performance– 
Financial 
Performance 
Link,” 
Strategic Management Journal 
(April 1997): 303–319; J. B. 
McGuire, A. Sundgren, and T. 
Schneeweis, “Corporate Social 
Responsibility and Firm Finan-
cial Performance,” Academy of 
Management Journal (December 
1988): 854–72; K. Aupperle, A. 
B. Carroll, and J. D. Hatfield, 
“An Empirical Examination of the 
Relationship between Corporate 
Social Responsibility and Profit-
ability,” Academy of Management 
Journal (June 1985): 446–63; and 
P. Cochran and R. A. Wood, “Cor-
porate Social Responsibility and 
Financial Performance,” Academy 
of Management Journal (March 
1984): 42–56.
 18. Peloza, “The Challenge of Mea-
suring Financial Impacts from 
Investments in Corporate Social 
Performance.”
 19. B. Seifert, S. A. Morris, and B. 
R. Bartkus, “Having, Giving, and 
Getting: Slack Resources, Cor-
porate Philanthropy, and Firm 
Financial Performance,” Business 
& Society, June 2004, 135–61; 
and McGuire, Sundgren, and 
Schneeweis, “Corporate Social 
Responsibility and Firm Financial 
Performance.”
 20. A. McWilliams and D. Siegel, 
“Corporate Social Responsibil-
ity and Financial Performance: 
 Correlation or Misspecification?” 
Strategic Management Journal 
(June 2000): 603–09.
 21. A. J. Hillman and G. D. Keim, 
“Shareholder Value, Stakeholder 
Management, and Social Issues: 
What’s the Bottom Line?” Stra-
tegic Management Journal 22 
(2001): 125–39.
 22. M. Orlitzky, F. L. Schmidt, and S. 
L. Rynes, “Corporate Social and 
Financial Performance,” Organi-
zation Studies 24, no. 3 (2003): 
403–41.
 23. S. Clifford, “Unexpected Ally 
Helps Wal-Mart Cut Waste,” New 
York Times Online, April 13, 2012; 
and S. Rosenbloom, “Wal-Mart 
Unveils Plan to Make Supply 
Chain Greener,” New York Times 
Online, February 26, 2010.
 24. Symposium 
on 
Sustainability: 
Profiles in Leadership, New York, 
October 2001.
 25. G. Unruh and R. Ettenson, “Grow-
ing Green,” Harvard Business 
Review, June 2010, 94–100; G. 
Zoppo, “Corporate Sustainability,” 
DiversityInc, May 2010, 76–80; 
and KPMG Global Sustainability 
Services, Sustainability Insights, 
October 2007.
 26. J. Yang and P. Trap, “Applying 
Green Tech at Work,” USA Today, 
May 13, 2013, 1B.
 27. S. 
Armour 
and 
T. 
Frank, 
 “Ex-Worker: 
Law 
Firm 
Ran 
 ‘Foreclosure Mill’,” USA Today, 
October 19, 2010, 3B.
 28. N. Clark, “Rogue Trader at  Societe 
Generale Gets Jail Term,” New 
York Times Online, October 5, 
2010.
 29. K. Belson, “Brain Trauma to 
 Affect One in Three Players, NFL 
Agrees,” New York Times Online, 
September 12, 2014.
 30. S. A. DiPiazza, “Ethics in Action,” 
Executive 
Excellence, 
January 
2002, 15–16.
 31. This example is based on J. F. 
Viega, T. D. Golden, and K. 
Dechant, “Why Managers Bend 
Company Rules,” Academy of 
Management 
Executive 
(May 
2004): 84–90.
 32. G. F. Cavanaugh, D. J. Moberg, 
and M. Valasquez, “The Ethics 
of Organizational Politics,” Acad-
emy of Management Journal (June 
1981): 363–74.
 33. J. Liedtka, “Ethics and the New 
Economy,” Business and Society 
Review, Spring 2002, 1.
 34. R. M. Kidder, “Can Disobedi-
ence Save Wall Street?” Ethics 
 Newsline, www.globalethics.org, 
May 3, 2010.
 35. R. E. Silverman and N. Waller, 
“Thinking of Quitting? The Boss 
Knows,” Wall Street Journal, 
March 14, 2015, A1+.
 36. V. Goel, “Facebook Tinkers with 
Users’ Emotions in News Feed 
Experiment, 
Stirring 
Outcry,” 
New York Times Online, June 29, 
2014.
 37. P. M. Lencioni, “Make Your Val-
ues Mean Something,” Harvard 
Business Review, July 2002, 113.
 38. D. H. Schepers, “Setting Global 
Standards: Guidelines for Creat-
ing Codes of Conduct in Multina-
tional Corporations,” Business and 
 Society, December 2003, 496; and 
B. R. Gaummitz and J. C. Lere, 
“Contents of Codes of Ethics of 
Professional Business Organiza-
tions in the United States,” Journal 
of Business Ethics (January 2002): 
35–49.
 39. M. Weinstein, “Survey Says: 
 Ethics Training Works,” Training 
(November 2005): 15.
 40. J. E. Fleming, “Codes of Ethics for 
Global Corporations,” Academy of 
Management News, June 2005, 4.
 41. T. F. Shea, “Employees’ Report 
Card on Supervisors’ Ethics: No 
Improvement,” 
HR 
Magazine, 
April 2002, 29.
 42. See also A. G. Peace, J. Weber, 
K. S. Hartzel, and J. Nightingale, 
“Ethical Issues in eBusiness: A 
Proposal for Creating the eBusi-
ness Principles,” Business and 
Society Review, Spring 2002, 
41–60.
 43. L-M. Eleftheriou-Smith, “Apple’s 
Tim Cook: ‘Business Isn’t Just 
about Making Profit’“; and P. 
Elmer-Dewitt, “Apple’s Tim Cook 
Picks a Fight with Climate Change 
Deniers,” tech.fortune.com, March 
1, 2014.
 44. E. Finkel, “Yahoo Takes New 
‘Road’ on Ethics Training,” Work-
force Management Online, July 
2010.
 45. T. A. Gavin, “Ethics Education,” In-
ternal Auditor, April 1989, 54–57.
 46. L. Myyry and K. Helkama, “The 
Role of Value Priorities and Pro-
fessional Ethics Training in Moral 
Sensitivity,” Journal of Moral 
 Education 31, no. 1 (2002): 35–50; 
W. Penn and B. D. Collier, “Current 
Research in Moral  Development as 
a Decision  Support System,” Jour-
nal of Business Ethics (January 
1985): 131–36.
 47. J. A. Byrne, “After Enron: The 
Ideal Corporation,” BusinessWeek, 
August 19, 2002, 68–71; D. Rice 
and C. Dreilinger, “Rights and 
Wrongs of Ethics Training,” Train-
ing & Development Journal (May 
1990): 103–09; and J. Weber, 
“Measuring the Impact of Teach-
ing Ethics to Future Managers: A 
Review, Assessment, and Recom-
mendations,” Journal of Business 
Ethics (April 1990): 182–90.
 48. S. Caminiti, “The Diversity Fac-
tor,” Fortune, October 19, 2007, 
95–105; and B. Velez, “People and 
Places,” DiversityInc Online, www.
diversityinc.com, October 2006.
 49. R. Anand and M. Frances Winters, 
“A Retrospective View of Corpo-
rate Diversity Training from 1964 
to the Present,” Academy of Man-
agement Learning & Education, 
September 2008, 356–72.
 50. N. Gibbs, “What Women Want 
Now,” Time, October 26, 2009, 
24–33.
 51. M. Bello, USA Today, “Controver-
sy Shrouds Scarves,” Springfield, 
Missouri News-Leader, April 17, 
2010, 8A.
 52. “Facts & Figures: Number of Re-
ligious Discrimination Complaints 
Received,” DiversityInc, Novem-
ber–December 2009, 52.
 53. P. Wang and J. L. Schwartz, “Stock 
Price Reactions to GLBT Nondis-
crimination Policies,” Human Re-
source Management, March–April 
2010, 195–216.
 54. L. Sullivan, “Sexual Orientation—
The Last ‘Acceptable’ Bias,” Ca-
nadian HR Reporter, December 
20, 2004, 9–11.
 55. F. Colgan, T. Wright, C. Creegan, 
and A. McKearney, “Equality and 
Diversity in the Public Services: 
Moving Forward on Lesbian, Gay 
and Bisexual Equality?” Human 
Resource Management Journal 
19, no. 3 (2009): 280–301.
 56. J. Hempel, “Coming Out in Cor-
porate America,” BusinessWeek, 
December 15, 2003, 64–72.
 57. See, for instance, P. Cappelli, J. 
Constantine, and C. Chadwick, “It 
Pays to Value Family: Work and 
Family Trade-Offs Reconsidered,” 
Industrial Relations, April 2000, 
175–198; R. C. Barnett and D. T. 
Hall, “How to Use Reduced Hours 
to Win the War for Talent,” Orga-
nizational Dynamics, March 2001, 
42; and M. A. Verespej, “Balanc-
ing Act,” Industry Week, May 15, 
2000, 81–85.
 58. M. Conlin, “The New Debate over 
Working Moms,” BusinessWeek, 
November 18, 2000, 102–03.
 59. M. Elias, “The Family-First Gen-
eration,” USA Today, December 
13, 2004, 5D.
 60. J. Revell, C. Bigda, and D. Rosato, 
“The Rise of Freelance Nation,” 
CNNMoney, cnnmoney.com, June 
12, 2009.
 61. Ibid.
 62. Ibid.
 63. S. Armour, “Generation Y: They’ve 
Arrived at Work with a New Atti-
tude,” USA Today, November 6, 
2005, 1B+; B. Moses, “The Chal-
lenges of Managing Gen Y,” Globe 
and Mail, March 11 2005, C1; and 
C. A. Martin, Managing Genera-
tion Y (Amherst, MA: HRD Press, 
2001).
 64. “Nomura Falls Out of Love 
with Lehman Dream Team,” Eu-
roweek, January 13, 2012, 108; 
A. House and K. Johnson, “De-
livering Integrated Global Train-

CHAPTER 3  •  Integrative Managerial Issues    109
ing,” Chief Learning Officer, De-
cember 2011, 68–72; A. Tudor, 
“Bhattal’s Goal; Keep Lehman 
Talent,” Wall Street Journal, 
April 19, 2010, C5; A. Tudor, 
“Lehman Defections Continue 
at Nomura,” Wall Street Journal, 
March 23, 2010, C5; A. Tudor, 
“Nomura Turns to a Foreigner 
from Lehman,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, March 18, 2010, C1; A. Or, 
“More Quit Nomura as Bonuses 
Lapse,” Wall Street Journal, 
March 12, 2010, C2; A. Rozens, 
“The Return of Nomura,” Invest-
ment Dealers’ Digest, February 
12, 2010, 1+; “Nomura Set for 
Fight on All Fronts,” Euroweek, 
December 4, 2009, 49; L. Pea-
cock, untitled, Personnel Today, 
November 10, 2009, 25; and A. 
Tudor, “Nomura Stumbles in 
New Global Push,” Wall Street 
Journal, July 29, 2009, A1+.
 65. J. Hamblin, “A Brewing Problem,” 
The Atlantic, http://www.theatlantic.
com/technology/archive/2015/03/
the-abominable-k-cup-coffee-pod-
environment-problem/386501/, 
March 2015.
 66. G. Wallace, “Inventor of K-Cups 
Regrets the Idea,” http://money.
cnn.com/2015/03/04/news/ 
k-cups-keurig-inventor-regrets/, 
March 4, 2015.
 67. Hamblin, “A Brewing Problem.”
 68. R. A. Munarriz, “Keurig Cold 
Heats Up with Dr Pepper Snapple 
Deal,” 
http://www.dailyfinance.
com/2015/01/13/keurig-dr-pepper-
snapple-deal/, January 13, 2015.
 69. Hamblin, “A Brewing Problem.”
 70. Ibid.
 71. “Keurig Green Mountain, Inc. 
Releases 
2014 
Sustainability 
 Report, ‘Beyond the Cup’,” http://
investor.keuriggreenmountain. 
com/releasedetail.cfm?releaseid= 
897260, February 19, 2015.
 72. Hamblin, “A Brewing Problem.”
 73. “No. 
1: 
PricewaterhouseCoo-
pers,” DiversityInc Online, April 
24, 2012; L. Kwor, “Firms Hail 
Chiefs (of Diversity),” Wall Street 
Journal, January 5, 2012, B10; S. 
Ali, “PWC Chairman Bob Moritz 
Makes Diversity Personal,” Diver-
sityInc, Fall 2011, 42–43; “PwC 
Tops Global Ranking of Firms,” 
Accountancy, November 2011, 10.

Foundations 
of Decision Making
4 
A good  
decision  
should be  
defined by its 
outcome.
lenetstan/Shutterstock

111
A good decision should be judged by  
the process used, not the results 
achieved. In some cases, a good decision 
results in an undesirable outcome.  
As a decision maker, you can control the 
process. But in the real world, factors  
outside your control can adversely affect 
the outcome. Using the right process may 
not always result in a desirable outcome, 
but it increases the probability!

at all 
organ-
izational levels and in all areas make a lot 
of decisions—routine and non-routine; mi-
nor and major. The overall quality of those 
decisions goes a long way in determining 
an organization’s success or failure. To be 
a successful manager—and to be a valued 
employee—you need to know about deci-
sion making. In this chapter, we’ll look at 
types of decisions and how decisions should 
be made. But we’ll also consider some com-
mon biases and errors that can undermine 
the quality of decisions and discuss contem-
porary issues facing managerial decision 
makers. •
Learning Outcomes
4-1 Describe the decision-making process. p. 113
4-2 Explain the three approaches managers can use to make decisions. p. 118
4-3  Describe the types of decisions and decision-making conditions managers face. 
p. 122
4-4 Discuss group decision making. p. 125
4-5 Discuss contemporary issues in managerial decision making. p. 128
Managers 
112

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    113
How Do Managers Make Decisions?
How do businesses put new ideas into action? Through 
lots of decisions, that’s how. When Bertucci’s, a 
 shopping-mall restaurant chain in New England and the 
mid-Atlantic region, wanted to create a spin-off chain 
with a more contemporary, “hipper” appeal, manag-
ers had lots of decisions to make over a nine-month 
 period from concept to opening. Managers hope, of course, that those decisions prove to be 
good ones.1
Forty hours a week: how often companies expect people  
to be strong decision makers.2
Decision making is typically described as choosing among alternatives, but this view is 
overly simplistic. Why? Because decision making is a process, not a simple act of choosing 
among alternatives. Exhibit 4–1 illustrates the decision-making process as a set of eight steps 
that begins with identifying a problem; it moves through selecting an alternative that can 
 alleviate the problem and concludes with evaluating the decision’s effectiveness. This process 
is as applicable to your decision about what you’re going to do on spring break as it is to the 
decisions UPS executives are making as they deal with issues that could affect the organiza-
tion’s future profitability (see Case Application #1 on p. 136). The process can also be used to 
describe both individual and group decisions. Let’s take a closer look at the process in order 
to understand what each step entails by using a simple example most of us can relate to—the 
decision to buy a car.
What Defines a Decision Problem?
Step 1. The decision-making process begins with the identification of a problem or, more 
specifically, a discrepancy between an existing and a desired state of affairs.3 Take the case of 
a sales manager for Pfizer. The manager is on the road a lot and spent nearly $6,000 on auto 
repairs over the past few years. Now her car has a blown engine and cost estimates indicate 
it’s not economical to repair. Furthermore, convenient public transportation is unavailable. 
So, we have a problem—a discrepancy between the manager’s need to have a car that works 
and the fact that her current one doesn’t.
Identifying problems is IMPORTANT . . .  
and CHALLENGING!4
In our example, a blown engine is a clear signal to the manager that she needs a new car, 
but few problems are that obvious. In the real world, most problems don’t come with neon 
signs identifying them as such. And problem identification is subjective. A manager who mis-
takenly solves the wrong problem perfectly is just as likely to perform poorly as the manager 
4-1  Describe the 
decision-making 
process.
Identiﬁcation
of a
Problem
Identiﬁcation
of Decision
Criteria
Allocation
of Weights
to Criteria
Development
of
Alternatives
Analysis
of
Alternatives
Selection
of an
Alternative
Implementation
of the
Alternative
Evaluation
of
Decision
Eﬀectiveness
Exhibit 4–1 The Decision-Making Process
decision-making process
A set of eight steps that includes identifying  
a problem, selecting a solution, and evaluating  
the effectiveness of the solution
problem
A discrepancy between an existing and a desired 
state of affairs

114    Part 2  •  Planning
who fails to identify the right problem and does nothing. 
So, how do managers become aware they have a prob-
lem? They have to make a comparison between current 
reality and some standard, which can be (1) past perfor-
mance, (2) previously set goals, or (3) the performance 
of some other unit within the organization or in other 
organizations. In our car-buying  example, the standard is 
past performance—a car that runs.
What Is Relevant in the  
Decision-Making Process?
Step 2. Once a manager has identified a problem 
that needs attention, the decision criteria that will be 
 important in solving the problem must be identified. In 
our vehicle-buying example, the sales manager  assesses 
the factors that are relevant in her decision, which 
might include criteria such as price, model (two-door or 
four-door), size (compact or intermediate), manufacturer 
(French, Japanese, South Korean, German, American), 
optional equipment (navigation system, side-impact 
 protection, leather interior), and repair records. These 
criteria reflect what she thinks is relevant in her decision. Every decision maker has criteria—
whether explicitly stated or not—that guide his or her decision making. Note that in this step 
in the decision-making process, what’s not identified can be as important as what is because 
it’s still guiding the decision. For instance, although the sales manager didn’t consider fuel 
economy to be a criterion and won’t use it to influence her choice of car, she had to assess 
that criteria before choosing to include or not include it in her relevant criteria.
How Does the Decision Maker Weight the Criteria  
and Analyze Alternatives?
Steps 3, 4, and 5. In many decision-making situations, the criteria are not all equally impor-
tant.5 So, the decision maker has to allocate weights to the items listed in step 2 in order to 
give them their relative priority in the decision (step 3). A simple approach is to give the most 
important criterion a weight of 10 and then assign weights to the rest against that standard. 
Thus, in contrast to a criterion that you gave a 5, the highest-rated factor is twice as impor-
tant. The idea is to use your personal preferences to assign priorities to the relevant criteria 
in your decision and indicate their degree of importance by assigning a weight to each. 
Exhibit 4–2 lists the criteria and weights that our manager developed for her vehicle replace-
ment  decision. What is the most important criterion in her decision? Price. What has low 
importance? Performance and handling.
The steps involved in buying a vehicle  
provide a good example of the decision-
making process. For this young woman, the 
process starts with the first step of identifying 
the problem of needing a car so she can drive 
to her new job and ends with the last step in 
the process of evaluating the results of her 
decision.
Mark Richards/PhotoEdit, Inc.
Exhibit 4–2 Important Criteria and Weights in a Car-Buying Decision
Criterion
Weight
Price
10
Interior comfort
8
Durability
5
Repair record
5
Performance
3
Handling
1
decision criteria
Factors that are relevant in a decision

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    115
Then the decision maker lists the alternatives that could successfully resolve the problem 
(step 4). No attempt is made in this step to evaluate these alternatives, only to list them.6 Let’s 
assume that our manager identifies 12 cars as viable choices: Jeep Compass, Ford Focus, 
Hyundai Elantra, Ford Fiesta SES, Volkswagen Golf, Toyota Prius, Mazda 3 MT, Kia Soul, 
BMW i3, Nissan Cube, Toyota Camry, and Honda Fit Sport MT.
Once the alternatives have been identified, the decision maker critically analyzes each 
one (step 5). How? By evaluating it against the criteria. The strengths and weaknesses of 
each alternative become evident as they’re compared with the criteria and weights established 
in steps 2 and 3. Exhibit 4–3 shows the assessed values that the manager assigned each of 
her 12 alternatives after she had test-driven each car. Keep in mind that the ratings shown 
in Exhibit 4–3 are based on the assessment made by the sales manager. Again, we’re using 
a scale of 1 to 10. Some assessments can be achieved in a relatively objective fashion. For 
instance, the purchase price represents the best price the manager can get online or from local 
dealers, and consumer magazines report data from owners on frequency of repairs. Others, 
like how well the car handles, are clearly personal judgments.
Most decisions involve judgments.
Personal judgments by a decision maker are reflected in (1) the criteria chosen in step 2, 
(2) the weights given to the criteria, and (3) the evaluation of alternatives. The influence of 
personal judgment explains why two car buyers with the same amount of money may look 
at two totally distinct sets of alternatives or even look at the same alternatives and rate them 
differently.
Exhibit 4–3 shows only an assessment of the 12 alternatives against the decision criteria; 
it does not reflect the weighting done in step 3. If one choice had scored 10 on every crite-
rion, obviously you wouldn’t need to consider the weights. Similarly, if all the weights were 
equal—that is, all the criteria were equally important to you—each alternative would be evalu-
ated merely by summing up the appropriate lines in Exhibit 4–3. For instance, the Ford Fiesta 
SES would have a score of 38, and the Toyota Camry a score of 43. But if you multiply each 
alternative assessment against its weight, you get the figures in Exhibit 4–4. For instance, the 
Kia Soul scored a 40 on durability, which was determined by multiplying the weight given 
to durability [5] by the manager’s appraisal of the car on this criterion [8]. The sum of these 
scores represents an evaluation of each alternative against the previously established criteria 
and weights. Notice that the weighting of the criteria has changed the ranking of alternatives in 
Exhibit 4–3 Assessment of Possible Car Alternatives
alternatives
initial 
PriCe
interior 
CoMfort
Durability
rePair 
reCorD
PerforManCe
hanDling
total
Jeep Compass
 2
10
 8
 7
 5
 5
37
Ford Focus
 9
 6
 5
 6
 8
 6
40
Hyundai Elantra
 8
 5
 6
 6
 4
 6
35
Ford Fiesta SES
 9
 5
 6
 7
 6
 5
38
Volkswagen Golf
 5
 6
 9
10
 7
 7
44
Toyota Prius
10
 5
 6
 4
 3
 3
31
Mazda 3 MT
 4
 8
 7
 6
 8
 9
42
Kia Soul
 7
 6
 8
 6
 5
 6
38
BMW i3
 9
 7
 6
 4
 4
 7
37
Nissan Cube
 5
 8
 5
 4
10
10
42
Toyota Camry
 6
 5
10
10
 6
 6
43
Honda Fit Sport MT
 8
 6
 6
 5
 7
 8
40

116    Part 2  •  Planning
our example. The Volkswagen Golf, for example, has gone from first to third. Looking at the 
analysis, both initial price and interior comfort worked against the Volkswagen.
What Determines the Best Choice?
Step 6. Now it’s time to choose the best alternative from among those assessed. Because 
we determined all the pertinent factors in the decision, weighted them appropriately, and 
 identified and assessed the viable alternatives, this step is fairly simple. We merely choose the 
alternative that generated the highest score in step 5. In our vehicle example (Exhibit 4–4), 
the manager would choose the Toyota Camry. On the basis of the criteria identified, the 
weights given to the criteria, and her assessment of each car on the criteria, the Toyota scored 
highest [224 points] and, thus, became the best alternative.
What Happens in Decision Implementation?
Step 7. Although the choice process is completed in the previous step, the decision may still 
fail if it’s not implemented properly (step 7). Therefore, this step, decision implementation, 
involves putting the decision into action. If others will be affected by the decision, implemen-
tation also includes conveying the decision to those affected and getting their commitment to 
it.7 Want people to be committed to a decision? Let them participate in the decision-making 
process. We’ll discuss later in the chapter how groups can help a manager do this.
What Is the Last Step in the Decision Process?
Step 8. In the last step in the decision-making process, managers appraise the outcome of the 
decision to see whether the problem was resolved. Did the alternative chosen in step 6 and 
implemented in step 7 accomplish the desired result? For our sales manager, that means does 
she have a car that reliably works? Evaluating the results of a decision is part of the manage-
rial control process, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 14.
What Common Errors Are Committed in the Decision-Making 
Process?
When managers make decisions, they use their own particular style, and may use “rules of 
thumb,” or heuristics, to simplify their decision making.8 Rules of thumb can be useful  because 
they help make sense of complex, uncertain, and ambiguous information. However, even though 
Exhibit 4–4 Evaluation of Car Alternatives: Assessment Criteria * Criteria Weight
decision implementation
Putting a decision into action
heuristics
Judgmental shortcuts or “rules of thumb” used to 
simplify decision making
alternatives
initial PriCe 
[10]
interior 
CoMfort [8]
Durability  
[5]
rePair  
reCorD [5]
PerforManCe  
[3]
hanDling  
[1]
total
Jeep Compass
2
20
10
80
8
40
7
35
5
15
5
5
195
Ford Focus
9
90
6
48
5
25
6
30
8
24
6
6
223
Hyundai Elantra
8
80
5
40
6
30
6
30
4
12
6
6
198
Ford Fiesta SES
9
90
5
40
6
30
7
35
6
18
5
5
218
Volkswagen Golf
5
50
6
48
9
45
10
50
7
21
7
7
221
Toyota Prius
10
100
5
40
6
30
4
20
3
9
3
3
202
Mazda 3 MT
4
40
8
64
7
35
6
30
8
24
9
9
202
Kia Soul
7
70
6
48
8
40
6
30
5
15
6
6
209
BMW i3
9
90
7
56
6
30
4
20
4
12
7
7
215
Nissan Cube
5
50
8
64
5
25
4
20
10
30
10
10
199
Toyota Camry
6
60
5
40
10
50
10
50
6
18
6
6
224
Honda Fit Sport MT
8
80
6
48
6
30
5
25
7
21
8
8
212

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    117
managers may use rules of thumb, that doesn’t mean those rules are reliable. Why? Because they 
may lead to errors and biases in processing and evaluating information. Exhibit 4–5 identifies 12 
common decision errors and biases that managers make. Let’s look briefly at each.9
Which of these are YOU guilty of when making decisions?
When decision makers tend to think they know more than they do or hold unrealistically 
positive views of themselves and their performance, they’re exhibiting the over-confidence 
bias. The immediate gratification bias describes decision makers who tend to want immedi-
ate rewards and to avoid immediate costs. For these individuals, decision choices that provide 
quick payoffs are more appealing than those in the future. The anchoring effect describes 
when decision makers fixate on initial information as a starting point and then, once set, fail to 
adequately adjust for subsequent information. First impressions, ideas, prices, and estimates 
carry unwarranted weight relative to information received later. When decision makers selec-
tively organize and interpret events based on their biased perceptions, they’re using the selec-
tive perception bias. This influences the information they pay attention to, the problems they 
identify, and the alternatives they develop. Decision makers who seek out information that 
reaffirms their past choices and discount information that contradicts past judgments exhibit 
the confirmation bias. These people tend to accept at face value information that confirms 
their preconceived views and are critical and skeptical of information that challenges these 
views. The framing bias happens when decision makers select and highlight certain aspects 
of a situation while excluding others. By drawing attention to specific aspects of a situation 
and highlighting them, while at the same time downplaying or omitting other aspects, they 
distort what they see and create incorrect reference points. The availability bias occurs when 
decision makers tend to remember events that are the most recent and vivid in their memory. 
The result? It distorts their ability to recall events in an objective manner and results in 
Overconﬁdence
Availability
Framing
Representation
Conﬁrmation
Randomness
Selective Perception
Sunk Costs
Anchoring Effect
Self-Serving
Immediate Gratiﬁcation
Hindsight
Decision-Making
Errors and Biases
Exhibit 4–5 Common Decision-Making Errors and Biases
 Watch it 1! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled Rudi’s Bakery: Decision Making.
(continues on p. 122)

What are the          approaches  
Managers Can use to Make Decisions?
Decision making is the essence of management.10
Planning
Organizing
Leading
Controlling
What are the organization’s long-term objectives?
What strategies will best achieve those objectives?
What should the organization’s short-term
objectives be?
How difﬁcult should individual goals be?
How many employees should I have report directly to me?
How much centralization should there be in an
organization?
How should jobs be designed?
When should the organization implement a different
structure?
How do I handle unmotivated employees?
What is the most effective leadership style in a given
situation?
How will a speciﬁc change affect worker productivity?
When is the right time to stimulate conﬂict?
What activities in the organization need to be
controlled?
How should those activities be controlled?
When is a performance deviation signiﬁcant?
What type of management information system
should the organization have?
3         
4-2 Explain the three approaches managers can use to make decisions.
• Everyone in an organization makes decisions, but it’s  
particularly important to managers.
• Managers make decisions—mostly routine ones like which  
employee will work what shift, what information to include in  
a report, how to resolve a customer’s complaint, etc.—as they 
plan, organize, lead, and control. See Exhibit 4–6. 
© mihaela19750405/Fotolia
  Rational Model
Exhibit 4–6 Decisions Managers May Make
McCarony/Fotolia
rational decision making
Describes choices that are consistent and value-
maximizing within specified constraints
• Managers want to be good decision makers and exhibit good decision-making behaviors 
so they appear competent and intelligent to their boss, employees, and coworkers.
• This approach assumes: Decision makers MUST ACT RATIONALLY.11  
How? Use rational decision making; that is, make logical  
and consistent choices to maximize value.12
(Check out the two decision-making tools described in the Technology and the Manager’s Job box on p. 121.)
118
1  
source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 45. Reprinted and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

119
• A “rational” decision maker . . . 
Rationality is not a very realistic approach.
Should Be:
Can Ever Be?
Fully objective and logical
Can we ever be fully objective and logical?
Problem is clear and  
unambiguous
Can problems ever be totally clear  
and unambiguous?
Clear and specific goal  
regarding decision
Can a goal ever be made that clear  
and specific?
All possible alternatives  
and consequences known
Can all possible alternatives and  
consequences ever be known?
Alternative selected maximizes  
likelihood of achieving goal
Can any alternative ever really do that?
Organization’s best interests  
are considered
Managers should do this but may face 
factors beyond their control.
Bounded Rationality
2  
“A. More. Realistic. Approach.”
• bounded rationality: Managers make rational decisions, but are limited (bounded) by 
their ability to process information.13
• Most decisions managers make don’t fit the assumption of perfect rationality.
• No one can possibly analyze all information on all alternatives so they . . . 
• satisfice—that is, accept solutions that are “good enough,” rather than spend time and 
other resources trying to maximize. (See From Past to Present box on p. 120.)
Example: As a newly graduated finance major, you look for a job as a 
 financial  planner—minimum salary of $55k, and within 
100 miles of your hometown. After searching  several 
 different options, you accept a job as a business credit an-
alyst at a bank 50 miles away at a starting salary of $52k. 
HOORAY! If, however, you’d maximized—that is, con-
tinued to search all possible alternatives—you’d have 
eventually found this financial planning job at a trust 
company 25 miles away with a starting salary of $57k. 
However, the first job offer was satisfactory—“good 
enough”—and you took it! Your decision making was still rational . . . but 
within the bounds of your abilities to process information!
iQoncept/Fotolia
satisfice
Accepting solutions that are “good enough”
bounded rationality
Making decisions that are rational within the limits 
of a manager’s ability to process information

Who: Bounded rationality and satisficing 
are the work of Herbert A. Simon, who won 
a Nobel Prize in economics for his work on 
 decision making.
What: His primary concern was how people 
use logic and psychology to make choices and proposed that 
individuals were limited in their ability to “grasp the present 
and anticipate the future.” This bounded rationality made it 
difficult for them to “achieve the best possible decisions,” but 
they made “good enough” or “satisficing” choices.14
How: Simon’s important contributions to management think-
ing stemmed from his belief that understanding organizations 
meant studying the complex network of decisional processes 
that were inherent.
Why: His work in bounded rationality helps 
us make sense of how managers can behave 
rationally and still make satisfactory decisions, 
even given the limits of their capacity to pro-
cess information.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these dis-
cussion questions.
  Talk About It 1: Is satisficing settling for second best? 
Discuss.
  Talk About It 2: How does knowing about bounded 
 rationality help managers be better decision makers?
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
When faced with too 
many choices, we  
SATISFICE!
• Most managerial decisions don’t fit the assumptions of perfect rationality, but can still be 
influenced by (1) the organization’s culture, (2) internal politics, (3) power considerations, 
and (4) a phenomenon called:
escalation of commitment An increased commitment to a  
previous decision despite evidence that it may have been wrong.15
• Why would anyone—especially managers—escalate commitment to a bad decision?
 
— Hate to admit that initial decision may have been flawed.
 
— Don’t want to search for new alternatives.
Intuition and Managerial Decision Making
When deciding yay or nay on new shoe styles, Diego Della Valle, chairman of Tod’s luxury  
shoe empire, doesn’t use common decision-making tools like focus groups or poll test-
ing. Nope . . . he wears the shoes for a few days. If they’re not to his liking, his verdict:  
No! His intuitive decision approach has helped make  
Tod’s a successful multinational company.16
• intuitive decision making—making decisions on the basis of experience, feelings, and 
accumulated judgment
 
— Described as “unconscious reasoning.”17
 
— Five different aspects of intuition: See Exhibit 4–7.18
Smalik/Fotolia
Almost half of managers rely on intuition more often than 
formal analysis to make decisions about their companies.19
120
3 

121
Intuition
Experience-Based
Decisions
Subconscious
Mental Processing
Values or Ethics-
Based Decisions
Cognitive-Based
Decisions
Affect-Initiated
Decisions
Managers make
decisions based on 
ethical values or culture 
Managers use data from
subconscious mind to
help them make decisions
Managers make
decisions based on
feelings or emotions
Managers make
decisions based on skills,
knowledge, and training
Managers make
decisions based on
their past experiences
Exhibit 4–7 What Is Intuition?
sources: Based on J. Evans, “Intuition and Reasoning: A Dual-Process Perspective,” Psychological Inquiry, October–December 2010, pp. 313–326; T. Betsch and A. 
Blockner, “Intuition in Judgment and Decision Making: Extensive Thinking Without Effort,” Psychological Inquiry, October–December 2010, pp. 279–294; R. Lange and  
J. Houran, “A Transliminal View of Intuitions in the Workplace,” North American Journal of Psychology, 12, no. 3 (2010), pp. 501–516; E. Dane and M. G. Pratt, 
“Exploring Intuition and Its Role in Managerial Decision Making,” Academy of Management Review, January 2007, pp. 33–54; M. H. Bazerman and D. Chugh, 
“Decisions Without Blinders,” Harvard Business Review, January 2006, pp. 88–97; C. C. Miller and R. D. Ireland, “Intuition in Strategic Decision Making: Friend or Foe 
in the Fast-Paced 21st Century,” Academy of Management Executive, February 2005, pp. 19–30; E. Sadler-Smith and E. Shefy, “The Intuitive Executive: Understanding 
and Applying ‘Gut Feel’ in Decision-Making,” Academy of Management Executive, November 2004, pp. 76–91; and L. A. Burke and M. K. Miller, “Taking the Mystery 
Out of Intuitive Decision Making,” Academy of Management Executive, October 1999, pp. 91–99.
• Suggestions for using intuitive decision making:
— Use it to complement, not replace, other decision-making approaches.20
—  Look to act quickly with limited information because of past experience with a similar problem.
—  Pay attention to the intense feelings and emotions experienced when making decisions.  
The payoff? Better decisions!21
Information technology is providing managers with a wealth of 
decision-making support.22 Two decision-making tools include: 
Expert systems and Neural networks.
exPert systeMs:
• Encode relevant expert experience using software programs.
• Act as that expert in analyzing and solving unstructured 
problems.
• Guide users through problems by asking sequential questions about 
the situation and drawing conclusions based on answers given.
• Make decisions easier for users through programmed rules 
modeled on actual reasoning processes of experts.
• Allow employees and lower-level managers to make high-
quality decisions normally made only by upper-level managers.
neural netWorks:
• Use computer software to imitate the structure of brain cells 
and connections among them.
• Can distinguish patterns and trends too subtle or complex for 
human beings.
• Can perceive correlations among hundreds of variables, unlike 
our limited human brain capacity, which can only easily assimi-
late no more than two or three variables at once.
• Can perform many operations simultaneously, recognizing 
patterns, making associations, generalizing about problems not 
exposed to before, and learning through experience.
• Example: banks using neural network systems to catch fraudu-
lent credit card activities in a matter of hours, not days.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
  talk about it 3: Can a manager ever have too much data 
when making decisions? Explain.
  talk about it 4: How can technology help managers make 
better decisions?
MAkIng BETTER DECISIonS WITH TECHnoLogy
:::::::  Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::

122    Part 2  •  Planning
distorted judgments and probability estimates. When decision makers assess the likelihood of 
an event based on how closely it resembles other events or sets of events, that’s the represen-
tation bias. Managers exhibiting this bias draw analogies and see identical situations where 
they don’t exist. The randomness bias describes when decision makers try to create meaning 
out of random events. They do this because most decision makers have difficulty dealing with 
chance even though random events happen to everyone and there’s nothing that can be done 
to predict them. The sunk costs error takes place when decision makers forget that current 
choices can’t correct the past. They incorrectly fixate on past expenditures of time, money, or 
effort in assessing choices rather than on future consequences. Instead of ignoring sunk costs, 
they can’t forget them. Decision makers who are quick to take credit for their successes and 
to blame failure on outside factors are exhibiting the self-serving bias. Finally, the hindsight 
bias is the tendency for decision makers to falsely believe that they would have accurately 
predicted the outcome of an event once that outcome is actually known.
How can managers avoid the negative effects of these decision errors and biases? ❶ Be 
aware of them and then don’t use them! ❷ Pay attention to “how” decisions are made, try 
to identify heuristics being used, and critically evaluate how appropriate those are. ❸ Ask 
colleagues to help identify weaknesses in decision-making style and then work on improving 
those weaknesses.
 Watch it 2! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Decision Making.
What Types of Decisions and Decision-Making Conditions 
Do Managers Face?
Laura Ipsen is a senior vice president and general manager at Smart Grid, a business unit 
of Cisco Systems, which is working on helping utility companies find ways to build open, 
interconnected systems. She describes her job as “like having to put together a 1,000-piece 
puzzle, but with no box top with the picture of what it looks like and with some pieces 
 missing.”23 Decision making in that type of environment is quite different from decision 
making done by a manager of a local Gap store.
The types of problems managers face in decision-making situations often determine 
how it’s handled. In this section, we describe a categorization scheme for problems and types 
of decisions and then show how the type of decision making a manager uses should reflect 
the characteristics of the problem.
How Do Problems Differ?
Some problems are straightforward. The goal of the decision maker is clear, the problem 
familiar, and information about the problem easily defined and complete. Examples might 
include a supplier who is late with an important delivery, a customer who wants to return an 
Internet purchase, a TV news team that has to respond to an unexpected and fast-breaking 
event, or a university that must help a student who is applying for financial aid. Such situa-
tions are called structured problems.
Many situations faced by managers, however, are unstructured problems. They are new 
or unusual. Information about such problems is ambiguous or incomplete. Examples of un-
structured problems include the decision to enter a new market segment, to hire an architect 
to design a new office park, or to merge two organizations. So, too, is the  decision to invest 
in a new, unproven technology. For instance, when Takeshi Idezawa founded his mobile mes-
saging app LINE, he faced a situation best described as an unstructured problem.24
4-3  Describe the 
types of  
decisions and 
decision-making 
conditions  
managers face.
intuitive decision making
Making decisions on the basis of experience, feel-
ings, and accumulated judgment
escalation of commitment
An increased commitment to a previous decision 
despite evidence that it may have been a poor 
decision
unstructured problem
A problem that is new or unusual for which  
information is ambiguous or incomplete
structured problem
A straightforward, familiar, and easily defined 
problem

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    123
How Does a Manager Make Programmed Decisions?
Decisions are also divided into two categories: programmed and nonprogrammed (described 
in the next section). Programmed, or routine, decisions are the most efficient way to handle 
structured problems.
An auto mechanic damages a customer’s rim while changing a tire. What does the shop 
manager do? Because the company probably has a standardized method for handling this 
type of problem, it’s considered a programmed decision. For example, the manager may 
replace the rim at the company’s expense. Decisions are programmed to the extent that (1) 
they are repetitive and routine and (2) a specific approach has been worked out for handling 
them. Because the problem is well structured, the manager does not have to go to the trouble 
and expense of an involved decision process. Programmed decision making is relatively 
simple and tends to rely heavily on previous solutions. The develop-the-alternatives stage 
in the decision-making process is either nonexistent or given little attention. Why? Because 
once the structured  problem is defined, its solution is usually self-evident or at least re-
duced to only a few alternatives that are familiar and that have proved successful in the 
past. In many cases, programmed decision making becomes decision making by precedent. 
Managers simply do what they and others have done previously in the same situation. The 
damaged rim does not require the manager to identify and weight decision criteria or de-
velop a long list of possible solutions.
For structured problems, use: — Procedures
 
— Rules
 
— Policies
ProCEdurES. A procedure is a series of interrelated sequential steps that a manager 
can use when responding to a well-structured problem. The only real difficulty is identify-
ing the problem. Once the problem is clear, so is the procedure. For instance, a purchasing 
manager receives a request from computing services for licensing arrangements to install 
250 copies of Norton Antivirus Software. The purchasing manager knows that a definite 
procedure is in place for handling this deci-
sion. Has the requisition been properly filled 
out and approved? If not, he can send the 
requisition back with a note explaining what 
is deficient. If the request is complete, the 
approximate costs are estimated. If the total 
exceeds $8,500, three bids must be obtained. 
If the total is $8,500 or less, only one vendor 
need be identified and the order placed. The 
decision-making process is merely executing a 
simple series of sequential steps.
rulES. A rule is an explicit statement that 
tells a manager what he or she must—or 
must not—do. Rules are frequently used by 
managers who confront a structured problem 
because they’re simple to follow and ensure 
consistency. In the preceding example, the 
$8,500 cutoff rule simplifies the purchasing 
manager’s decision about when to use mul-
tiple bids.
PolICIES. A third guide for making pro-
grammed decisions is a policy. It provides 
guidelines to channel a manager’s thinking in 
Top managers of Mars Chocolate North 
America decided to build a new plant for 
making its M&M brand and other candy in 
Topeka, Kansas, the first new chocolate  
facility built by Mars in 35 years. The  
nonprogrammed decision involved gathering 
and analyzing demographic and other data 
for 82 possible locations in 13 states.
Thad ALLTON/AP Images
programmed decision
A repetitive decision that can be handled using a 
routine approach
procedure
A series of interrelated, sequential steps used to 
respond to a structured problem
rule
An explicit statement that tells employees what can 
or cannot be done
policy
A guideline for making decisions

124    Part 2  •  Planning
a specific direction. The statement that “we promote from within, whenever possible” is an 
example of a policy. In contrast to a rule, a policy establishes parameters for the decision 
maker rather than specifically stating what should or should not be done. Policies often 
leave interpretation up to the decision maker. It’s in such instances that ethical standards 
may come into play.
How Do nonprogrammed Decisions Differ  
from Programmed Decisions?
When problems are unstructured, managers must rely on nonprogrammed decisions in 
order to develop unique solutions. Examples of nonprogrammed decisions include deciding 
whether to acquire another organization, deciding which global markets offer the most poten-
tial, or deciding whether to sell off an unprofitable division. Such decisions are unique and 
nonrecurring. When a manager confronts an unstructured problem, no cut-and-dried solution 
is available. A custom-made, nonprogrammed response is required.
The creation of a new organizational strategy is a nonprogrammed decision. This deci-
sion is different from previous organizational decisions because the issue is new; a differ-
ent set of environmental factors exists, and other conditions have changed. For example, 
Amazon’s strategy to “get big fast” helped the company grow tremendously. But this strategy 
came at a cost—perennial financial losses. To turn a profit, CEO Jeff Bezos made decisions 
regarding how to organize orders, anticipate demand, ship more efficiently, establish foreign 
partnerships, and create a marketplace for other sellers to sell their books on Amazon. As a 
result, Amazon has moved towards profitability.25
How Are Problems, Types of Decisions, and organizational Level 
Integrated?
Exhibit 4–8 describes the relationship among types of problems, types of decisions, 
and level in the organization. Structured problems? Use programmed decision  making. 
Unstructured problems? Use nonprogrammed decision making. Lower-level manag-
ers essentially confront familiar and repetitive problems so they most typically rely on 
 programmed decisions such as standard operating procedures. However, as  managers 
move up the organizational hierarchy, the problems they confront are likely to  become 
less  structured. Why? Because lower-level managers handle the routine decisions 
 themselves and only pass upward decisions that they find unique or difficult. Similarly, 
managers pass down routine decisions to their employees so they can spend their time on 
more problematic issues.
MANAGERIAL DECISIONS: Real World—Real Advice
• Few managerial decisions are either fully programmed or fully nonprogrammed. 
Most fall somewhere in between.
• At the top level, most problems that managers face are unique—that is, 
 nonprogrammed.
• Programmed routines may help even in situations requiring a nonprogrammed 
decision.
• Top-level managers often create policies, standard operating procedures, and 
rules—that is, programmed decision making—for lower-level managers in order to 
control costs and other variables.
• Programmed decision making can facilitate organizational efficiency—maybe 
that’s why it’s so popular!
• Programmed decisions minimize the need for managers to exercise discretion.
• Discretion—the ability to make sound judgments—costs money because it’s an 
uncommon and valuable quality and managers who have it are paid more.
• Even in some programmed decisions, individual judgment may be needed.
nonprogrammed decision
A unique and nonrecurring decision that requires  
a custom-made solution

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    125
What Decision-Making Conditions Do Managers Face?
When making decisions, managers face three different conditions: certainty, risk, and uncer-
tainty. Let’s look at each.
The ideal situation for making decisions is one of certainty, which is a situation where a 
manager can make accurate decisions because the outcome of every alternative is known. For 
example, when South Dakota’s state treasurer decides where to deposit excess state funds, he 
knows exactly the interest rate being offered by each bank and the amount that will be earned 
on the funds. He is certain about the outcomes of each alternative. As you might expect, most 
managerial decisions aren’t like this.
Far more common is a situation of risk, conditions in which the decision maker is able to 
estimate the likelihood of certain outcomes. Under risk, managers have historical data from 
past personal experiences or secondary information that lets them assign probabilities to dif-
ferent alternatives.
What happens if you face a decision where you’re not certain about the outcomes 
and can’t even make reasonable probability estimates? We call this condition uncertainty. 
Managers do face decision-making situations of uncertainty. Under these conditions, the 
choice of alternative is influenced by the limited amount of available information and by the 
psychological orientation of the decision maker.
  Write it! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete MGMT 8: Decision Making.
How Do Groups Make Decisions?
Work teams are common  
at Amazon. Jeff Bezos, 
founder and CEO, 
uses a “two-pizza” 
philosophy—that is, a team 
should be small enough that it can be 
fed with two pizzas.26
Do managers make a lot of decisions in groups? You bet they do! Many decisions in organiza-
tions, especially important decisions that have far-reaching effects on organizational activities 
and people, are typically made in groups. It’s a rare organization that doesn’t at some time 
use committees, task forces, review panels, work teams, or similar groups as vehicles for 
4-4  Discuss group 
decision making.
certainty
A situation in which a decision maker can make 
 accurate decisions because all outcomes are known
risk
A situation in which a decision maker is able to 
estimate the likelihood of certain outcomes
uncertainty
A situation in which a decision maker has neither 
certainty nor reasonable probability estimates 
available
Programmed
Decisions
Nonprogrammed
Decisions
Unstructured
Type of
Problem
Structured
Top
Level in
Organization
Lower
Exhibit 4–8 Types of Problems, Types of Decisions, and organizational Level

126    Part 2  •  Planning
making decisions. Why? In many cases, these groups represent the people who will be most 
affected by the decisions being made. Because of their expertise, these people are often best 
qualified to make decisions that affect them.
Studies tell us that managers spend a significant portion of their time in meetings. 
Undoubtedly, a large portion of that time is involved with defining problems, arriving at solu-
tions to those problems, and determining the means for implementing the solutions. It’s pos-
sible, in fact, for groups to be assigned any of the eight steps in the decision-making process.
What Are the Advantages and Disadvantages of group  
Decision Making?
Decisions can be made by individuals or by groups—each approach has its own set of 
strengths and neither is ideal for all situations.
Advantages of Group Decisions 
• More complete information.27
• Diversity of experiences and perspectives 
brought to the decision process.28
• More alternatives generated due to great-
er quantity and diversity of information, 
especially when group members represent 
different specialties.
• Increased acceptance of a solution 
by having people who will be affect-
ed by a certain solution and who will 
help  implement it participate in the  
 decision.29
• Increased legitimacy because the group 
decision-making process is consistent 
with democratic ideals, and decisions 
made by groups may be perceived as more 
legitimate than those made by a single 
person, which can appear autocratic and 
arbitrary.
Disadvantages of Group Decisions 
• Time-consuming—assembling the group, 
getting decisions made.
• Minority domination can unduly influence 
final decision because group members are 
never perfectly equal—they differ in rank, 
experience, knowledge about the problem, 
influence on other members, verbal skills, 
assertiveness, etc.30
• Ambiguous responsibility. Group mem-
bers share responsibility, BUT who is 
actually responsible for final outcome?31 
Individual decision—it’s clear. Group de-
cision—it’s not.
• Pressures to conform. Have you ever been in 
a group where your views didn’t match the 
group’s consensus views and you remained 
silent? Maybe others felt the same way and 
also remained silent. This is what Irving Ja-
nis called groupthink, a form of conformity 
in which group members withhold deviant, 
minority, or unpopular views in order to 
give the appearance of agreement.32
The Tragedy of Groupthink 
What It Does
Hinders decision making, possibly jeopardizing the quality of the decision by:
• Undermining critical thinking in the group.
• Affecting a group’s ability to objectively appraise alternatives.
• Deterring individuals from critically appraising unusual, minority, or unpopular 
views.
How Does It Occur? Here are some things to watch out for:
• Group members rationalize resistance to assumptions.
• Members directly pressure those who express doubts or question the majority’s 
views and arguments.
• Members who have doubts or differing points of view avoid deviating from what 
appears to be group consensus.
• An illusion of unanimity prevails. Full agreement is assumed if no one speaks up.
groupthink
When a group exerts extensive pressure on an 
individual to withhold his or her different views in 
order to appear to be in agreement

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    127
What Can Be Done to Minimize Groupthink?
• Encourage cohesiveness.
• Foster open discussion.
• Have an impartial leader who seeks input from all  
members.33
When Are groups Most Effective?
Well, that depends on the criteria you use for defining effectiveness, 
such as accuracy, speed, creativity, and acceptance. Group deci-
sions tend to be more accurate. On average, groups tend to make 
better  decisions than individuals, although groupthink may occur.34 
However, if decision effectiveness is defined in terms of speed, 
individuals are superior. If creativity is important, groups tend to 
be more effective than individuals. And if effectiveness means the 
degree of acceptance the final solution achieves, the nod again goes 
to the group.
The effectiveness of group decision making is also influ-
enced by the size of the group. The larger the group, the greater 
the opportunity for heterogeneous representation. On the other 
hand, a larger group requires more coordination and more time 
to allow all members to contribute. This means that groups prob-
ably shouldn’t be too large: A minimum of five to a maximum of 
about fifteen members is best. Groups of five to seven individuals 
appear to be the most effective (remember Amazon’s “two-pizza” 
rule!). Because five and seven are odd numbers, decision dead-
locks are avoided. You can’t consider effectiveness without also 
assessing efficiency. Groups almost always stack up as a poor 
second in efficiency to the individual decision maker. Yet, with 
few exceptions, group decision making consumes more work 
hours than does individual decision making.
Bottom Line on Groups or Individuals: Do increases  
in effectiveness offset losses in efficiency?
How Can you Improve group Decision Making?
Use these techniques to make group decisions more creative: (1) brainstorming, (2) the nomi-
nal group technique, and (3) electronic meetings.
WhAT IS BrAInSTormIng? 
Brainstorming is a relatively simple idea-generating process 
that specifically encourages any and all alternatives while withholding criticism of those alterna-
tives.36 In a typical brainstorming session, a half-dozen to a dozen people sit around a table. Of 
course, technology is changing where that “table” is. The group leader states the problem in a 
clear manner that is understood by all participants. Members then shout out, offer up, fire off, 
“freewheel” as many alternatives as they can in a given time. No criticism is  allowed, and all the 
alternatives are recorded for later discussion and analysis.37
hoW doES ThE nomInAl grouP TEChnIquE Work? The nominal group technique 
helps groups arrive at a preferred solution by restricting discussion during the decision-
making process.38 Group members must be present, as in a traditional committee meeting, 
but they’re required to operate independently. They secretly write a list of general problem 
areas or potential solutions to a problem. The chief advantage of this technique is that it 
permits the group to meet formally but does not restrict independent thinking or lead to 
groupthink, as can often happen in a traditional interacting group.39
A Question of Ethics
There’s no doubt that American college sports is a big busi-
ness, generating billions for colleges and universities and for 
the NCAA (National Collegiate Athletic Association), the um-
brella organization that monitors, oversees, and supports these 
sports programs.35 The NCAA, which brought in over a billion 
dollars in revenue last year, recently reached a $20 million 
settlement with ex-football and basketball players who had 
sued about their likenesses being used in videogames made 
by Electronic Arts. This was hailed as a landmark settlement 
because it’s the first time the NCAA will pay college athletes 
for their playing a sport. This reflects an ongoing issue: should 
college athletes be paid? Not surprisingly, there are pros and 
cons to this decision. And not surprisingly, there are ethical is-
sues associated with the decision.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments sec-
tion of mymanagementlab.com to complete these  discussion 
questions.
   Talk About It 5: Paying college athletes: Who are the 
stakeholders in this situation and what stake do they have?
   Talk About It 6: How do ethical issues affect decision 
making and what ethical issues do you see in the decision about 
whether to pay college athletes for their time and work?
nominal group technique
A decision-making technique in which group 
members are physically present but operate 
independently
brainstorming
An idea-generating process that encourages 
alternatives while withholding criticism

128    Part 2  •  Planning
hoW CAn ElECTronIC mEETIngS EnhAnCE 
grouP dECISIon mAkIng? Another approach 
to group decision making blends the nominal group 
technique with information technology and is 
called the electronic meeting.
Once the technology is in place, the concept is 
simple. Numerous people sit around a table with lap-
tops or tablets. Participants are presented issues and 
type their responses onto their computers. Individual 
comments, as well as aggregate votes, are displayed 
on a projection screen in the room.
The major advantages of electronic meetings 
are anonymity, honesty, and speed.40 Participants 
can anonymously type any message they want, and 
it will flash on the screen for all to see with a key-
stroke. It allows people to be brutally honest with no 
penalty. And it’s fast—chitchat is eliminated, dis-
cussions do not digress, and many participants can 
“talk” at once without interrupting the others.
Electronic meetings are significantly faster and much cheaper than traditional face-to-
face meetings.41 Nestlé, for instance, uses the approach for many of its meetings, especially 
globally focused meetings.42 However, as with all other forms of group activities, electronic 
meetings have some drawbacks. Those who type quickly can outshine those who may be 
verbally eloquent but lousy typists; those with the best ideas don’t get credit for them; and the 
process lacks the informational richness of face-to-face oral communication. However, group 
decision making is likely to include extensive usage of electronic meetings.43
A variation of the electronic meeting is the videoconference. Using technology to link 
different locations, people can have face-to-face meetings even when they’re thousands 
of miles apart. This capability has enhanced feedback among the members, saved count-
less hours of business travel, and ultimately saved companies such as Nestlé and Logitech 
hundreds of thousands of dollars, especially during the recent global recession. As a  result, 
they’re more effective in their meetings and have increased the efficiency with which 
 decisions are made.44
What Contemporary Decision-Making Issues  
Do Managers Face?
Bad decisions can cost millions.
Today’s business world revolves around making decisions, often risky ones, usually with 
 incomplete or inadequate information, and under intense time pressure. Most managers 
make one decision after another; and as if that weren’t challenging enough, more is at stake 
than ever before since bad decisions can cost millions. We’re going to look at three  important 
issues—❶ national culture, ❷ creativity and design thinking, and ❸ big data—that 
 managers face in today’s fast-moving and global world.
How Does national Culture Affect Managers’ Decision Making?
Research shows that, to some extent, decision-making practices differ from country to coun-
try.45 The way decisions are made—whether by group, by team members, participatively, or 
autocratically by an individual manager—and the degree of risk a decision maker is willing to 
take are just two examples of decision variables that reflect a country’s cultural environment. 
4-5  Discuss  
contemporary 
issues in  
managerial  
decision making.
Brainstorming is an important way of  
improving group decision making at SAP AG, 
a provider of enterprise software. Employees 
working at SAP headquarters in Walldorf,  
Germany, use white boards during a  
brainstorming session to develop product  
and service innovations following the  
company’s decision to target the growing 
online software market.
Bloomberg/Getty Images
electronic meeting
A type of nominal group technique in which  
participants are linked by computer

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    129
For example, in India, power distance and uncertainty avoidance 
(see Chapter 3) are high. There, only very senior-level managers 
make decisions, and they’re likely to make safe 
 decisions. In contrast, in Sweden, power 
distance and uncertainty avoidance 
are low. Swedish managers are not 
afraid to make risky decisions. Senior 
managers in Sweden also push de-
cisions down to lower levels. They 
encourage lower-level managers and 
employees to take part in decisions 
that affect them. In countries such as 
Egypt, where time pressures are low, 
managers make decisions at a slower and 
more deliberate pace than managers do in 
the United States. And in Italy, where  history 
and traditions are valued, managers tend to rely 
on tried and proven alternatives to resolve 
problems.
Decision making in Japan is much 
more group oriented than in the United 
States.46 The Japanese value conformity 
and cooperation. Before making decisions, 
Japanese CEOs collect a large amount of information, which is then used in consensus-
forming group decisions called ringisei. Because employees in Japanese organizations have 
high job security, managerial decisions take a long-term perspective rather than focusing on 
short-term profits, as is often the practice in the United States.
Senior managers in France and Germany also adapt their decision styles to their coun-
tries’ cultures. In France, for instance, autocratic decision making is widely practiced, and 
managers avoid risks. Managerial styles in Germany reflect the German culture’s concern for 
structure and order. Consequently, German organizations generally operate under extensive 
rules and regulations. Managers have well-defined responsibilities and accept that decisions 
must go through channels.
As managers deal with employees from diverse cultures, they need to recognize com-
mon and accepted behavior when asking them to make decisions. Some individuals may not 
be as comfortable as others with being closely involved in decision making, or they may not 
be willing to experiment with something radically different. Managers who accommodate 
the diversity in decision-making philosophies and practices can expect a high payoff if they 
 capture the perspectives and strengths that a diverse workforce offers.
Why Are Creativity and Design Thinking Important  
in Decision Making?
How do most of you take and save photos today? It’s highly unlikely that you’ve ever had 
to insert film into a camera, shoot the photos you wanted while hoping you “got the shot,” 
remove the film from the camera, take the film to be processed, and then pick up your photos 
later. When Apple, Facebook, and Instagram wanted to make this process easier and  better, 
someone making decisions about future products had to be creative and they had to use 
 design thinking. Both are important to decision makers today.
undErSTAndIng CrEATIvITy. A decision maker needs creativity: the ability to 
 produce novel and useful ideas. These ideas are different from what’s been done before but 
are also appropriate to the problem or opportunity presented. Why is creativity important 
to decision making? It allows the decision maker to appraise and understand the  problem 
more fully, including “seeing” problems others can’t see. However, creativity’s most 
 obvious value is in helping the decision maker identify all viable alternatives.
These senior managers of Mitsubishi Motors, 
a multinational automaker based in Tokyo, 
Japan, take a long-term perspective in  
making decisions rather than focusing on 
short-term results. In Japan, where  
conformity and cooperation are valued,  
managers adapt their decisions to their  
country’s group-oriented culture.
Bloomberg/Getty Images
ringisei
Japanese consensus-forming group decisions
creativity
The ability to produce novel and useful ideas

130    Part 2  •  Planning
Most people have creative potential that they can use when confronted with a decision-
making problem. But to unleash that potential, they have to get out of the psychological ruts 
most of us get into and learn how to think about a problem in divergent ways.
Learn to unleash YOUR creativity.
We can start with the obvious. People differ in their inherent creativity. Einstein, Edison, 
Dali, and Mozart were individuals of exceptional creativity. Not surprisingly, exceptional 
creativity is scarce.
A study of lifetime creativity of 461 men and women found that:
• Fewer than 1 percent were exceptionally creative
• 10 percent were highly creative
• About 60 percent were somewhat creative.
These findings suggest that most of us have some creative potential, if we can learn to unleash it.
Given that most people have the capacity to be at least moderately creative, what can 
individuals and organizations do to stimulate employee creativity? The best answer to this 
question lies in the three-component model of creativity based on an extensive body of 
 research.47 This model proposes that individual creativity essentially requires ❶ expertise, 
❷ creative-thinking skills, and ❸ intrinsic task motivation. Studies confirm that the higher 
the level of each of these three components, the higher the creativity.
Expertise is the foundation of all creative work. Dali’s understanding of art and 
Einstein’s knowledge of physics were necessary conditions for them to be able to make 
 creative contributions to their fields. And you wouldn’t expect someone with a minimal 
knowledge of programming to be highly creative as a software engineer. The potential for 
creativity is enhanced when individuals have abilities, knowledge, proficiencies, and similar 
expertise in their fields of endeavor.
The second component is creative-thinking skills. It encompasses personality characteristics 
associated with creativity, the ability to use analogies, as well as the talent to see the familiar in a 
different light. For instance, the following individual traits have been found to be associated with 
the development of creative ideas: intelligence, independence, self-confidence, risk taking, inter-
nal locus of control, tolerance for ambiguity, and perseverance in the face of frustration. The ef-
fective use of analogies allows decision makers to apply an idea from one context to another. One 
of the most famous examples in which analogy resulted in a creative breakthrough was Alexander 
Graham Bell’s observation that it might be possible to take concepts that operate in the ear and 
apply them to his “talking box.” He noticed that the bones in the ear are operated by a delicate, 
thin membrane. He wondered why, then, a thicker and stronger piece of membrane shouldn’t be 
able to move a piece of steel. Out of that analogy the telephone was conceived. Of course, some 
people have developed their skill at being able to see problems in a new way. They’re able to 
make the strange familiar and the familiar strange. For instance, most of us think of hens laying 
eggs. But how many of us have considered that a hen is only an egg’s way of making another egg?
The final component in our model is intrinsic task motivation—the desire to work on 
something because it’s interesting, involving, exciting, satisfying, or personally challenging. 
This motivational component is what turns creative potential into actual creative ideas. It 
determines the extent to which individuals fully engage their expertise and creative skills. 
So creative people often love their work, to the point of seeming obsessed. Importantly, 
an individual’s work environment and the organization’s culture (which we discussed in 
Chapter 2) can have a significant effect on intrinsic motivation. Five organizational factors 
have been found that can impede your creativity:
• expected evaluation—focusing on how your work is going to be evaluated
• surveillance—being watched while you’re working
• external motivators—emphasizing external, tangible rewards
• competition—facing win–lose situations with your peers
• constrained choices—being given limits on how you can do your work.

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    131
Design thinking leads the strategic decisions 
of Jack Dorsey, co-founder of Twitter and 
CEO of Square, a mobile payments processor 
for smartphones and tablets. Dorsey used 
observation and inquiry in deciding to  
start a company based on the idea that 
people needed an easy way to make  
payments in person.
  try it! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Decision Making.
undErSTAndIng dESIgn ThInkIng. The way managers approach decision  making—
using a rational and analytical mindset in identifying problems, coming up with alterna-
tives, evaluating alternatives, and choosing one of those alternatives—may not be the best 
and certainly not the only choice in today’s environment. That’s where design thinking 
comes in. Design thinking has been described as “approaching management problems as 
designers approach design problems.”48 More organizations are beginning to recognize 
how design thinking can benefit them.49 For instance, Apple has long been celebrated for 
its design thinking. The company’s lead designer, Jonathan “Jony” Ive (who was behind 
some of Apple’s most successful products including the iPod and iPhone) had this to say 
about Apple’s design approach, “We try to develop products that seem somehow inevitable. 
That leave you with the sense that that’s the only possible solution that makes sense.”50
While many managers don’t deal specifically with product or process design decisions, 
they still make decisions about work issues that arise, and design thinking can help them be 
better decision makers. What can the design thinking approach teach managers about making 
better decisions? Well, it begins with (1) the first step in the decision-making process of iden-
tifying problems. Design thinking says that managers should look at problem identification 
collaboratively and integratively with the goal of gaining a deep understanding of the situ-
ation. They should look not only at the rational aspects, but also at the emotional elements. 
Then invariably, of course, design thinking would (2) influence how managers identify 
and evaluate alternatives—steps 2 through 5 in the decision-making process. A traditional 
manager (educated in a business school, of course) would look at the alternatives, rationally 
evaluate them, and select the one with the highest payoff. However, using design thinking, a 
manager would say, “What is something completely new that would be lovely if it existed but 
doesn’t now?”51 Design thinking means opening up your perspective and gaining insights by 
using observation and inquiry skills, and not relying simply on rational analysis. We’re not 
saying that rational analysis isn’t needed; we are saying that there’s more needed in making 
effective decisions, especially in today’s world.
Big data is changing the way 
managers make decisions.
Big Data Understood. 
• Amazon.com, Earth’s biggest online retailer, earns 
billions of dollars of revenue each year—estimat-
ed at one-third of sales—from its “personalization 
technologies” such as product recommendations 
and computer-generated e-mails.52
• At AutoZone, decision makers are using new soft-
ware that gleans information from a variety of 
databases and allows its 5,000-plus local stores to 
target deals and hopefully reduce the chance that 
customers will walk away without making a pur-
chase. AutoZone’s chief information officer says, 
“We think this is the direction of the future.”53
Bloomberg/Getty Images
design thinking
Approaching management problems as designers 
approach design problems
Apple—a great example of how design thinking 
benefits an organization.
Prisma Bildagentur 
AG/Alamy

132    Part 2  •  Planning
• It’s not just businesses that are exploiting big data. A team of San Francisco researchers was 
able to predict the magnitude of a disease outbreak halfway around the world by analyzing 
phone patterns from mobile phone usage.54
Yes, there’s a ton of information out there—100 petabytes here in the decade of the 
2010s, according to experts. (In bytes, that translates to 1 plus 17 zeroes, in case you were 
wondering!)55 And businesses—and other organizations—are finally figuring out how to use 
it. So what is big data? It’s the vast amount of quantifiable information that can be analyzed 
by highly sophisticated data processing. One IT expert described big data with “3V’s: high 
volume, high velocity, and/or high variety information assets.”56
What does big data have to do with decision making? A lot, as you can imagine. With this 
type of data at hand, decision makers have very powerful tools to help them make  decisions. 
However, experts caution that collecting and analyzing data for data’s sake is wasted effort. 
Goals are needed when collecting and using this type of information. As one individual said, 
“Big data is a descendant of Taylor’s ‘scientific management’ of more than a century ago.”57 
While Taylor used a stopwatch to time and monitor a worker’s every movement, big data is 
using math modeling, predictive algorithms, and artificial intelligence software to measure 
and monitor people and machines like never before. (See Case Applications #2 and #3 on 
pp. 137 and 138.) But managers need to really examine and evaluate how big data might 
 contribute to their decision making before jumping in with both feet.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.
big data
The vast amount of quantifiable information that 
can be analyzed by highly sophisticated data 
processing

4 Review
133
CHAPTER SUMMARY
 4-1  Describe the decision-making process.
The decision-making process consists of eight steps: (1) iden-
tify a problem, (2) identify decision criteria, (3) weight the 
criteria, (4) develop alternatives, (5) analyze alternatives, (6) 
select alternative, (7) implement alternative, and (8) evaluate 
decision effectiveness. As managers make decisions, they may 
use heuristics to simplify the process, which can lead to errors 
and biases in their decision making. The 12 common decision-
making errors and biases include overconfidence, immediate 
gratification, anchoring, selective perception, confirmation, 
framing, availability, representation, randomness, sunk costs, 
self-serving bias, and hindsight.
  4-2 Explain the three approaches managers can 
use to make decisions.
The first approach is the rational model. The assumptions of ra-
tionality are as follows: the problem is clear and unambiguous; 
a single, well-defined goal is to be achieved; all alternatives and 
consequences are known; and the final choice will maximize 
the payoff. The second approach, bounded rationality, says that 
managers make rational decisions but are bounded (limited) by 
their ability to process information. In this approach, managers 
satisfice, which is when decision makers accept solutions that 
are good enough. Finally, intuitive decision making is making 
decisions on the basis of experience, feelings, and accumulated 
judgment.
  4-3 Describe the types of decisions and  
decision-making conditions managers face.
Programmed decisions are repetitive decisions that can be 
handled by a routine approach and are used when the problem 
being resolved is straightforward, familiar, and easily defined 
(structured). Nonprogrammed decisions are unique decisions 
that  require a custom-made solution and are used when the 
problems are new or unusual (unstructured) and for which 
 information is ambiguous or incomplete. Certainty involves 
a situation in which a manager can make accurate decisions 
because all outcomes are known. With risk, a manager can 
estimate the likelihood of certain outcomes in a situation. 
Uncertainty is a situation in which a manager is not certain 
about the outcomes and can’t even make reasonable prob-
ability estimates.
 4-4 Discuss group decision making.
Groups offer certain advantages when making decisions—more 
complete information, more alternatives, increased acceptance 
of a solution, and greater legitimacy. On the other hand, groups 
are time-consuming, can be dominated by a minority, create 
pressures to conform, and cloud responsibility. Three ways of 
improving group decision making are brainstorming (utilizing 
an idea-generating process that specifically encourages any and 
all alternatives while withholding any criticism of those alterna-
tives), the nominal group technique (a technique that restricts 
discussion during the decision-making process), and electronic 
meetings (the most recent approach to group decision making, 
which blends the nominal group technique with sophisticated 
computer technology).
  4-5 Discuss contemporary issues in managerial 
decision making.
As managers deal with employees from diverse cultures, 
they need to recognize common and accepted behavior when 
 asking them to make decisions. Some individuals may not 
be as comfortable as others with being closely involved in 
 decision making, or they may not be willing to experiment 
with something radically different. Also, managers need to 
be creative in their decision making because creativity allows 
them to appraise and understand the problem more fully, 
including “seeing” problems that others can’t see. Design 
thinking also influences the way that managers approach de-
cision making, especially in terms of identifying problems 
and how they identify and evaluate alternatives. Finally, big 
data is changing what and how decisions are made, but man-
agers need to evaluate how big data might contribute to their 
decision making.

134    Part 2  •  Planning
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
4-11 Today’s world is chaotic and fast-paced. How does 
time pressure affect managerial decision making? 
What can managers do to still be good decision mak-
ers under such conditions?
4-12 Discuss the pros and cons of managers using technology 
to help make decisions.
4-13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing  
assignment for this chapter.
Management Skill Builder  |   being a Creative 
DeCision Maker
Many decisions that managers make are routine, so they can fall back on experience and “what’s worked 
in the past.” But other decisions—especially those made by upper-level managers—are unique and haven’t 
been confronted before. The uniqueness and variety of problems that managers face demand creativity—the 
ability to produce novel and useful ideas. If managers are to successfully progress upward in an organization, 
they’ll find an increasing need to develop creative decisions. Creativity is partly a frame of mind. You need 
to expand your mind’s capabilities—that is, open yourself up to new ideas. Every individual has the ability to 
improve his or her creativity, but many people simply don’t try to develop that ability.
DisCussion Questions
 4-1 Why is decision making often described as the essence 
of a manager’s job?
 4-2 Provide an eight-step illustration of any decision- 
making process undertaken by you.
 4-3 Since decision making is personalized, do you think 
bias plays an important role for a CEO or a first-line 
manager in a developing country? Explain the poten-
tial daily bias that managers may encounter.
 4-4 Managers make decisions by planning, organizing, 
leading, and controlling. Which of these skills is more 
important for a manager to master in order to be a com-
petent manager?
 4-5 What is intuitive decision making? In your opinion, 
when is this method best used? What are the major 
drawbacks of this managerial decision-making style?
 4-6 Herbert A. Simon started work on bounded rational-
ity and satisficing because of his hypothesis, which 
indicated that people had limited ability to grasp the 
present and anticipate the future. Discuss the problems 
associated with making decisions using the rational 
model.
 4-7 Explain how a manager might deal with making 
 decisions under conditions of uncertainty.
 4-8 Why do companies invest in nurturing group deci-
sion making rather than individual decision making? 
Explain the advantages and disadvantages of both 
techniques.
 4-9 Find two examples each of procedures, rules, and 
 policies. Bring your examples to class and be prepared 
to share them.
4-10 Do a Web search on the phrase “dumbest moments 
in business” and get the most current version of this 
list. Choose three of the examples and describe what 
 happened. What’s your reaction to each example? 
How could the managers in each have made better 
decisions?

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    135
 PERSonAL InvEnToRy ASSESSMEnT 
Problem solving, Creativity, and innovation
Making decisions is all about solving problems. Do this PIA and find out about your level  
of creativity and innovation in problem solving.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
Skill Basics
Creativity is a skill you can develop. Here are some sugges-
tions on how you can do this:
• 
Think of yourself as creative. Research shows that if you 
think you can’t be creative, you won’t be. Believing in 
your ability to be creative is the first step in becoming more 
 creative.
• 
Pay attention to your intuition. Every individual has a 
subconscious mind that works well. Sometimes answers 
will come to you when you least expect them. Listen to 
that  “inner voice.” In fact, most creative people will keep 
a notepad near their bed and write down ideas when the 
thoughts come to them.
• 
Move away from your comfort zone. Every individual has a 
comfort zone in which certainty exists. But creativity and 
the known often do not mix. To be creative, you need to 
move away from the status quo and focus your mind on 
something new.
• 
Determine what you want to do. This includes such things 
as taking time to understand a problem before beginning to 
try to resolve it, getting all the facts in mind, and trying to 
identify the most important facts.
• 
Think outside the box. Use analogies whenever possible 
(for example, could you approach your problem like a fish 
out of water and look at what the fish does to cope? Or 
can you use the things you have to do to find your way 
when it’s foggy to help you solve your problem?). Use dif-
ferent problem-solving strategies such as verbal, visual, 
mathematical, or theatrical. Look at your problem from a 
different perspective or ask yourself what someone else, 
like your grandmother, might do if faced with the same 
situation.
• 
Look for ways to do things better. This may involve  trying 
consciously to be original, not worrying about look-
ing foolish, keeping an open mind, being alert to odd or 
 puzzling facts, thinking of unconventional ways to use 
objects and the environment, discarding usual or habitual 
ways of doing things, and striving for objectivity by  being 
as critical of your own ideas as you would those of some-
one else.
• 
Find several right answers. Being creative means continu-
ing to look for other solutions even when you think you 
have solved the problem. A better, more creative solution 
just might be found.
• 
Believe in finding a workable solution. Like believing in 
yourself, you also need to believe in your ideas. If you 
don’t think you can find a solution, you probably won’t.
• 
Brainstorm with others. Creativity is not an isolated activi-
ty. Bouncing ideas off of others creates a synergistic effect.
• 
Turn creative ideas into action. Coming up with cre-
ative ideas is only part of the process. Once the ideas are 
 generated, they must be implemented. Keeping great ideas 
in your mind, or on papers that no one will read, does little 
to expand your creative abilities.
Based on J. V. Anderson, “Mind Mapping: A Tool for Creative Thinking,” Business 
 Horizons, January–February 1993, 42–46; and T. Proctor, Creative Problem Solving for 
Managers (New York: Routledge, 2005).
Practicing the Skill
Read through this scenario and follow the directions at the 
end of it:
Every time the phone rings, your stomach clenches and your 
palms start to sweat. And it’s no wonder! As sales manager for 
Brinkers, a machine tool parts manufacturer, you’re besieged by 
calls from customers who are upset about late deliveries. Your 
boss, Carter Hererra, acts as both production manager and sched-
uler. Every time your sales representatives negotiate a sale, it’s up 
to Carter to determine whether production can actually meet the 
delivery date the customer specifies. And Carter invariably says, 
“No problem.” The good thing about this is that you make a lot 
of initial sales. The bad news is that production hardly ever meets 
the shipment dates that Carter authorizes. And he doesn’t seem 
to be all that concerned about the aftermath of late deliveries. He 
says, “Our customers know they’re getting outstanding quality 
at a great price. Just let them try to match that anywhere. It can’t 
be done. So even if they have to wait a couple of extra days or 
weeks, they’re still getting the best deal they can.” Somehow the 
customers don’t see it that way. And they let you know about their 
 unhappiness. Then it’s up to you to try to soothe the relationship. 
You know this problem has to be taken care of, but what possible 
 solutions are there? After all, how are you going to keep from 
making your manager mad or making the customers mad?
Break into groups of three. Assume you’re the sales 
 manager. What creative solutions can your group come up with 
to deal with this problem?

136    Part 2  •  Planning
Magic Carpet Software
To: Rajiv Dutta, Research Manager
From: Amanda Schrenk, Vice President of Operations
Re: Software Design Decisions
Rajiv, we have a problem in our software design unit. Our di-
verse pool of extremely talented and skilled designers is, un-
doubtedly, one of our company’s most important assets. How-
ever, I’m concerned that our designers’ emotional attachment 
to the software they’ve created overshadows other important 
factors that should be considered in the decision whether to 
proceed with the new product design. At this point, I’m not 
sure how to approach this issue. The last thing I want to do is 
stifle their creativity. But I’m afraid if we don’t come up with an 
action plan soon, the problem may get worse.
I need you to research the role of emotions in decision 
making. What do the “experts” say? Is it even an issue that 
we need to be concerned about? What’s the best way to 
deal with it? Please provide me with a one-page bulleted 
list  of the important points you find from your research. 
And be sure to cite your sources in case I need to do some 
 follow-up.
This fictionalized company and message were created for educa-
tional purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on 
 management practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 
Case aPPliCation
 
  Big Brown Numbers
I
t’s the world’s largest package delivery company with the 
 instantly recognizable trucks.58 Every day, United Parcel 
 Service (UPS) transports more than 18 million packages 
and documents throughout the United States and to more 
than 220  countries and territories, including every address 
in North America and Europe. (Total worldwide delivery 
volume was 4.6 billion packages and documents in 2014.) 
Delivering those packages efficiently and on time is what 
UPS gets paid to do, and that takes a massive effort in help-
ing drivers to make decisions about the best routes to follow.
Efficiency and uniformity 
have always been important to 
UPS. The importance of work 
rules, procedures, and analytic 
tools are continually stressed 
to drivers through training and 
 retraining. For instance, drivers are taught to hold their keys 
on a pinky finger so they don’t waste time fumbling in their 
pockets for the keys. And for safety reasons, they’re taught 
no-left turns and no backing up. Now, however, the company 
has been testing and rolling out a quantum leap in its long-
used business model of uniformity and efficiency. It goes 
by the name ORION, which stands for On-Road Integrated 
Optimization and Navigation. What it boils down to is helping 
UPS drivers shave millions of miles off their delivery routes 
using decision algorithms built by a team of mathematicians. 
Consider that each UPS driver makes an average of 120 
stops per day. The efficiency challenge is deciding the best 
order to make all those stops (6,689,502,913,449,135 + 183 
zeroes of possible alternatives)—taking into consideration 
“variables such as special delivery times, road regulations, 
and the existence of private roads that don’t appear on a 
map?”59 Another description of the logistics decision chal-
lenge: There are more ways to deliver packages along an 
average driver’s route “than there are nanoseconds that Earth 
has existed.”60 Any way you look at it, that’s a lot of alter-
natives. The human mind 
can’t even begin to figure 
it out. But the ORION al-
gorithm, which has taken 
10 years and an estimated 
hundreds of millions of 
dollars to build, is the next best thing. IT experts have de-
scribed ORION as the largest investment in operations re-
search ever by any company.
So what does ORION do? Instead of searching for the 
one best answer, ORION is designed to refine itself over 
time, leading to a balance between an optimum result and 
consistency to help drivers make the best possible decisions 
about route delivery. And considering how many miles UPS 
drivers travel every day, saving a dollar or two here and there 
can add up quickly. When a driver “logs on” his delivery 
#1 
UPS has been described as  
an EFFICIENCY FREAK.

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    137
information acquisition device (DIAD) at the beginning of 
his shift each workday, what comes up are two possible ways 
to make the day’s package deliveries: one that uses ORION 
and one that uses the “old” method. The driver can choose 
to use either one but if ORION is not chosen, the driver is 
asked to explain the decision. The roll-out of ORION hasn’t 
been without challenges. Some drivers have been reluctant 
to give up  autonomy; others have had trouble understanding 
ORION’s logic—why deliver a package in one neighborhood 
in the morning and come back to the same neighborhood 
later in the day. But despite the challenges, the company is 
committed to ORION, saying that “a driver  together with 
ORION is better than each alone.”61
Discussion Questions
4-14 Why is efficiency and safety so important to UPS?
4-15 Would you characterize a driver’s route decisions as structured 
or unstructured problems? Programmed or nonprogrammed 
 decisions? Explain.
4-16 How would ORION technology help drivers make better 
 decisions? (Think of the steps in the decision-making process.)
4-17 How is UPS being a sustainable corporation?
Case aPPliCation #2
H
orseracing has rich traditions dating back to the first 
races in 4500 BC and the early civilizations of Central 
Asia, the Mediterranean, and Europe.62 Once consid-
ered the “Sport of Kings”, today’s horse racing has evolved in 
to multi-billion dollar entertainment industry. Owners, jockeys, 
trainers, and horses travel the globe in search for a win. Crossing 
the finish line in one of the top three places can produce signifi-
cant earnings from the modest 
racing circuits in small cities 
to the extravagant payouts of 
the most prestigious venues. In 
the Hong Kong circuit alone, 
winning owners can earn up to 
60% of prize money ranging 
from $100,000 to over $3 million per weekly race over a season. 
A winning jockey and trainer can easily earn 10% each from an 
owner’s winnings. 
Fans from all walks of life share in the enthusiasm as they 
fill massive grand stands and hotel rooms. Hong Kong’s world 
class Happy Valley Racecourse can draw up to 55,000 spectators 
on any given night. The Dubai Cup with the largest purse in all 
of horseracing at a $10,000,000 attracts not only the top horses 
in the world but entices tourists to visit the United Arab Emirates 
eager to experience the spectacular Meydon Hotel overlook-
ing the Dubai racecourse. And the Kentucky Derby continues 
to draw record-breaking crowds to the U.S. city of Louisville 
where ticket prices for this spectacle can range from $43 for gen-
eral admission tickets to $11,000 for an upper clubhouse seat.
As the big business of horse racing continues to grow, risk 
and uncertainty in this high stakes affair looms heavy for its 
Galloping to the Right Decision
decision makers. Each decision can be the difference between 
winning and losing. Not just a sport for pleasure, owners with 
small and large pocketbooks seek returns on their investment. 
And a jockey’s livelihood for the month can be decided in a 
matter of seconds.
An owner must assess whether to invest in the potential 
of young colt or buy an experienced mare. Pedigree, age, and 
past performance are just a few 
factors alongside sentiment. 
Tradition can influence a buyer 
to seek a thoroughbred from 
England’s hallowed breeding 
grounds in Newmarket or to 
lean toward the bloodline of 
an Arabian. Evaluating the return on investment must be weighed 
against the cost of ownership including training and boarding fees. 
Decisions do not just rest in ownership. A jockey makes 
split second decisions during a race while galloping at speeds 
exceeding 35mph. Not knowing a horse’s tendencies or using 
the wrong race strategy could lead to life threatening injury to 
horse or rider. A well prepared jockey studies course dimen-
sions and the patterns of competitors. Horse preparation relies 
on the daily decision of trainer who must decide optimal diets 
and appropriate equipment such as proper fitting horseshoes. 
This extends to exercise routines monitored by data collected 
via smartphone apps and tracking of graphical data. 
The rationality of science continues to permeate the sport. 
Race teams seek competitive advantage via genetic testing and 
aerobic measurements. Yet, at the end of the day, many deci-
sions are still made by one’s love and feel for the horse.
Managing HORSE RACING . . .  
Numbers or Emotion, Which 
Works Better?

138    Part 2  •  Planning
Discussion Questions
4-18 What are some examples of rational and intuitive decision mak-
ing that you may see in horse racing?
4-19 A jockey from Melbourne, Australia is swayed by a friend to 
race at the last minute in Happy Valley, Hong Kong without a 
track preview. How would bounded rationality affect the jockey 
who normally races in Australia?
4-20 What decision-making approaches could an owner use to 
help decide what type of horse to buy?
4-21 Suppose some trainers meet at a conference and view a pre-
sentation about an organic new feed that naturally improves 
muscle development in race horses. A trainer who did not at-
tend the presentation hears each trainer who left the presenta-
tion signed up for a month’s supply. Then the trainer decides to 
follow suit without gathering any evidence. What type of deci-
sion bias would you consider this to be?
Case aPPliCation #3
T
he Coca-Cola Company (Coke) is in a league by it-
self.63 As the world’s largest and number one nonalco-
holic beverage company, Coke makes or licenses more 
than 3,500 drinks in more than 200 countries. Coke has built 15 
billion-dollar brands and also claims four of the top five soft-
drink brands (Coke, Diet Coke, Fanta, and Sprite). Each year 
since 2001, global brand consulting firm Interbrand, in con-
junction with Bloomberg BusinessWeek, has identified Coke as 
the number one best global brand. Coke’s executives and man-
agers are focusing on ambitious, long-term growth for the com-
pany—doubling Coke’s business by 2020. A big part of achiev-
ing this goal is building up its Simply Orange juice business 
into a powerful global juice brand. Decision making is playing 
a crucial role as managers try to 
beat rival PepsiCo, which has a 
40 percent market share in the 
not-from-concentrate juice cate-
gory compared to Coke’s 28 per-
cent share. And those managers 
aren’t leaving anything to chance 
in this hot—umm, cold—pursuit!
You’d think that making orange juice (OJ) would be rela-
tively simple—pick, squeeze, pour. While that would probably 
be the case in your own kitchen, in Coke’s case, that glass of 
100 percent OJ is possible only through the use of satellite im-
ages, complex mathematical algorithms, and a pipeline solely 
for the purpose of transporting juice. The purchasing director 
for Coke’s massive Florida juice packaging facility says that 
when you’re dealing with “Mother Nature,” standardization is 
a huge problem. Yet, standardization is what it takes for Coke 
to make this work profitably. And producing a juice beverage is 
far more complicated than bottling soda.
Using what it calls its “Black Book model,” Coke wants 
to ensure that customers have consistently fresh, tasty OJ 
12  months a year despite a peak growing season that’s only 
Tasting Success
three months long. To help in this, Coke relies on a consultant 
experienced with revenue analytics, who has described OJ as 
“one of the most complex applications of business analytics.” 
How complex? To consistently deliver an optimal blend given 
the challenges of nature requires some 1 quintillion (that’s 1 
followed by 18 zeroes) decisions!
There’s no secret formula to Black Book, it’s simply an 
algorithm. It includes detailed data about the more than 600 
different flavors that make up an orange and about customer 
preferences. This data is correlated to a profile of each batch of 
raw juice. The algorithm then determines how to blend batches to 
match a certain taste and consistency. At the juice bottling plant, 
“blend technicians” carefully follow the Black Book instructions 
before beginning the bot-
tling process. The weekly OJ 
recipe they use is “tweaked” 
constantly. Black Book also 
includes data on external fac-
tors such as weather patterns, 
crop yields, and other cost 
pressures. This is useful for 
Coke’s decision makers as they ensure they’ll have enough sup-
plies for at least 15 months. One Coke executive says the compa-
ny’s mathematical modeling means that if a weather catastrophe 
(hurricane or hard freeze) hits, the business can quickly regroup 
and replan in a very short time frame: as little as 5 or 10 minutes.
Discussion Questions
4-22 Which decisions in this story could be considered unstructured 
problems? Structured problems?
4-23 How does the Black Book help Coke’s managers and other 
 employees in decision making?
4-24 What does Coke’s big data have to do with its goals?
4-25 Do some research on revenue analytics. What is it? How can it 
help managers make better decisions?
Orange Juice and the  
1 Quintillion Decisions  
needed to deliver it!

CHAPTER 4   •  Foundations of Decision Making    139
Endnotes
 1. J. Zucker, “Proof in the Eating,” 
Fast Company, March 2013, 34+.
 2. A. Blackman, “Inside the Execu-
tive Brain,” Wall Street Journal, 
April 28, 2014, R1.
 3. See, for example, A. Nagurney, 
J. Dong, and P. L. Mokhtarian, 
“Multicriteria Network Equilib-
rium Modeling with Variable 
Weights 
for 
Decision-Making 
in the Information Age with Ap-
plications to the Telecommuting 
and Teleshopping,” Journal of 
Economic Dynamics and Control 
(August 2002): 1629–50.
 4. J. Flinchbaugh, “Surfacing Prob-
lems Daily: Advice for Build-
ing a Problem-Solving Culture,” 
Industry Week, April 2011, 12; 
“Business 
Analysis 
Training 
Helps Leaders Achieve an Enter-
prise-Wide Perspective,” Leader 
to Leader, Fall 2010, 63–65; D. 
Okes, “Common Problems with 
Basic Problem Solving,” Quality, 
September 2010, 36–40; J. Saw-
yer, “Problem-Solving Success 
Tips,” Business and Economic Re-
view, April–June 2002, 23–24.
 5. See J. Figueira and B. Ray, “Deter-
mining the Weights of Criteria in 
the Electre Type of Methods with 
a Revised Simons’ Procedure,” 
European Journal of Operational 
Research, June 1, 2002, 317–26.
 6. For instance, see M. Elliott, 
“Breakthrough 
Thinking,” 
IIE 
Solution, October 2001, 22–25; 
and B. Fazlollahi and R. Vahidov, 
“A Method for Generation of Al-
ternatives by Decision Support 
Systems,” Journal of Management 
Information Systems (Fall 2001): 
229–50.
 7. D. Miller, Q. Hope, R. Eisenstat, 
N. Foote, and J. Galbraith, “The 
Problem of Solutions: Balancing 
Clients and Capabilities,” Busi-
ness Horizons, March–April 2002, 
3–12.
 8. E. Teach, “Avoiding Decision 
Traps,” CFO, June 2004, 97–99; 
and D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, 
“Judgment Under Uncertainty: 
Heuristics and Biases,” Science 
185 (1974): 1124–31.
 9. Information for this section taken 
from S. P. Robbins, Decide & 
Conquer (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Financial Times/Prentice Hall, 
2004).
 10. T. A. Stewart, “Did You Ever Have 
to Make Up Your Mind?” Har-
vard Business Review, January 
2006, 12; and E. Pooley, “Editor’s 
Desk,” Fortune, June 27, 2005, 16.
 11. J. G. March, “Decision-Making 
Perspective: Decisions in Organi-
zations and Theories of Choice,” 
in A. H. Van de Ven and W. F. 
Joyce (eds.), Perspectives on 
 Organization Design and Be-
havior (New York: Wiley-Inter-
science, 1981), 232–33.
 12. See T. Shavit and A. M. Adam, 
“A Preliminary Exploration of the 
Effects of Rational Factors and 
Behavioral Biases on the Manage-
rial Choice to Invest in Corporate 
Responsibility,” Managerial and 
Decision Economics, April 2011, 
205–13; A. Langley, “In Search 
of Rationality: The Purposes Be-
hind the Use of Formal Analysis 
in Organizations,” Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, December 
1989, 598–631; and H. A. Simon, 
“Rationality in Psychology and 
Economics,” Journal of Business 
(October 1986), 209–24.
 13. See D. R. A. Skidd, “Revisiting 
Bounded Rationality,” Journal of 
Management Inquiry (December 
1992): 343–47; B. E. Kaufman, 
“A New Theory of Satisficing,” 
Journal of Behavioral Econom-
ics (Spring 1990): 35–51; and N. 
McK. Agnew and J. L. Brown, 
“Bounded Rationality: Fallible 
Decisions in Unbounded Decision 
Space,” Behavioral Science, July 
1986, 148–61.
 14. From the Past to the Present box 
based on M. Ibrahim, “Theory 
of Bounded Rationality,” Public 
Management, June 2009, 3–5; D. 
A. Wren, The Evolution of Man-
agement Thought, Fourth Edition 
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc., 1994), 291; and H. A. Simon, 
Administrative Behavior (New 
York: Macmillan Company, 1945).
 15. See, for example, G. McNamara, 
H. Moon, and P. Bromiley, “Bank-
ing on Commitment: Intended 
and Unintended Consequences 
of an Organization’s Attempt to 
Attenuate Escalation of Commit-
ment,” Academy of Management 
Journal (April 2002): 443–52; V. 
S. Rao and A. Monk, “The Ef-
fects of Individual Differences and 
Anonymity on Commitment to 
Decisions,” Journal of Social Psy-
chology (August 1999): 496–515; 
C. F. Camerer and R. A. Weber, 
“The Econometrics and Behav-
ioral Economics of Escalation of 
Commitment: A Re-examination 
of Staw’s Theory,” Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior and Organization 
(May 1999): 59–82; D. R. Bobo-
cel and J. P. Meyer, “Escalating 
Commitment to a Failing Course 
of Action: Separating the Roles 
of Choice and Justification,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology (June 
1994): 360–63; and B. M. Staw, 
“The Escalation of Commitment 
to a Course of Action,” Academy 
of Management Review, October 
1981, 577–87.
 16. L. Alderman, “A Shoemaker That 
Walks but Never Runs,” New York 
Times Online, October 8, 2010.
 17. C. Flora, “When to Go with Your 
Gut,” Women’s Health, June 2009, 
68–70.
 18. See J. Evans, “Intuition and Rea-
soning: A Dual-Process Perspec-
tive,” Psychological Inquiry, Oc-
tober–December 2010, 313–26; T. 
Betsch and A. Blockner, “Intuition 
in Judgment and Decision Mak-
ing: Extensive Thinking without 
Effort,” Psychological Inquiry, 
October–December 2010, 279–94; 
R. Lange and J. Houran, “A Trans-
liminal View of Intuitions in the 
Workplace,” North American Jour-
nal of Psychology 12, no. 3 (2010): 
501–16; E. Dane and M. G. Pratt, 
“Exploring Intuition and Its Role 
in Managerial Decision Making,” 
Academy of Management Review, 
January 2007, 33–54; M. H. Ba-
zerman and D. Chugh, “Decisions 
without Blinders,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, January 2006, 88–97; 
C. C. Miller and R. D. Ireland, 
“Intuition in Strategic Decision 
Making: Friend or Foe in the Fast-
Paced 21st Century,” Academy of 
Management Executive, February 
2005, 19–30; E. Sadler-Smith and 
E. Shefy, “The Intuitive Executive: 
Understanding and Applying ‘Gut 
Feel’ in Decision-Making,” Acad-
emy of Management Executive, 
November 2004, 76–91; and L. A. 
Burke and M. K. Miller, “Taking 
the Mystery Out of Intuitive Deci-
sion Making,” Academy of Man-
agement Executive, October 1999, 
91–99.
 19. C. C. Miller and R. D. Ireland, “In-
tuition in Strategic Decision Mak-
ing: Friend or Foe,” 20.
 20. E. Sadler-Smith and E. Shefy, 
“Developing Intuitive Awareness 
in Management Education,” Acad-
emy of Management Learning & 
Education, June 2007, 186–205.
 21. M. G. Seo and L. Feldman Barrett, 
“Being Emotional During Deci-
sion Making—Good or Bad? An 
Empirical Investigation,” Academy 
of Management Journal (August 
2007): 923–40.
 22. Technology and the Manager’s 
Job box based on M. Xu, V. Ong, 
Y. Duan, and B. Mathews, “Intelli-
gent Agent Systems for Executive 
Information Scanning, Filtering, 
and Interpretation: Perceptions 
and Challenges,” Information Pro-
cessing & Management, March 
2011, 186–201; J. P. Kallunki, E. 
K. Laitinen, and H. Silvola, “Im-
pact of Enterprise Resource Plan-
ning Systems on Management 
Control Systems and Firm Perfor-
mance,” International Journal of 
 Accounting Information Systems 
(March 2011), 20–39; H. W. K. 
Chia, C. L. Tan, and S. Y. Sung, 
“Enhancing Knowledge Discovery 
via Association-Based Evolution 
of Neural Logic Networks,” IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and 
Data Engineering (July 2006): 
889–901; F. Harvey, “A Key Role 
in Detecting Fraud Patterns: Neu-
ral Networks,” Financial Times, 
January 23, 2002, 3; D. Mitchell 
and R. Pavur, “Using Modular 
Neural Networks for Business De-
cisions,” Management Decision, 
January–February 2002, 58–64; B. 
L. Killingsworth, M. B. Hayden, 
and R. Schellenberger, “A Net-
work Expert System Management 
System of Multiple Domains,” 
Journal of Information Science 
(March–April 2001): 81; and S. 
Balakrishnan, N. Popplewell, and 
M. Thomlinson, “Intelligent Ro-
botic Assembly,” Computers & 
Industrial Engineering, December 
2000, 467.
 23. “Next: Big Idea,” Fast Company, 
December 2010–January 2011, 
39–40.
 24. H. McCracken, “50 Most Inno-
vative Companies: LINE,” Fast 
Company, March 2015, 84+.
 25. And the Survey Says box based on 
D. Kahneman, D. Lovallo, and O. 
Siboney, “Before You Make That 
Big Decision,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, June 2011, 50–60; P. 
Wang, “To Make Better Choices, 
Choose Less,” Money, June 2010, 
111–14; B. Dumaine, “The Trou-
ble with Teams,” Fortune, Septem-
ber 5, 1994, 86–92; A. S. Wellner, 
“A Perfect Brainstorm,” Inc., Oc-
tober 2003, 31–35; “The Poll,” 
BusinessWeek, 
August 
21–28, 
2006, 44; “Hurry Up and Decide,” 
BusinessWeek, May 14, 2001, 16; 
J. MacIntyre, “Bosses and Bureau-
cracy,” Springfield, Missouri Busi-
ness Journal, August 1–7, 2005, 
29; J. Crick, and “On the Road to 
Invention,” Fast Company, Febru-
ary 2005, 16.
 26. A. Deutschman, “Inside the Mind 
of Jeff Bezos,” Fast Company, Au-
gust 2004, 50–58.
 27. See, for instance, S. Schulz-Hardt, 
A. Mojzisch, F. C. Brodbeck, R. 
Kerschreiter, and D. Frey, “Group 
Decision Making in Hidden Profile 
Situations: Dissent as a Facilitator 
for Decision Quality,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy (December 2006), 1080–83; 
and C. K. W. DeDreu and M. A. 
West, “Minority Dissent and Team 
Innovation: The Importance of 
Participation in Decision Making,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(December 2001): 1191–1201.
 28. S. Mohammed, “Toward an Under-
standing of Cognitive Consensus 
in a Group Decision-Making Con-
text,” Journal of Applied Behavior-
al Science (December 2001): 408.
 29. M. J. Fambrough and S. A. Com-
erford, “The Changing Episte-
mological Assumptions of Group 
Theory,” 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Behavioral Science (September 
2006): 330–49.
 30. R. A. Meyers, D. E. Brashers, and 
J. Hanner, “Majority-Minority In-
fluence: Identifying Argumenta-
tive Patterns and Predicting Argu-
ment-Outcome Links,” Journal of 
Communication (Autumn 2000): 
3–30.
 31. See, for instance, T. Horton, 
“Groupthink in the Boardroom,” 

140    Part 2  •  Planning
Directors and Boards, Winter 
2002, 9.
 32. I. L. Janis, Groupthink (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1982). See also 
J. Chapman, “Anxiety and Defec-
tive Decision Making: An Elabo-
ration of the Groupthink Mode,” 
Management Decision, October 
2006, 1391–1404.
 33. See, for example, T. W. Costello 
and S. S. Zalkind, eds., Psychol-
ogy in Administration: A Research 
Orientation (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1963), 429–30; 
R. A. Cooke and J. A. Kernaghan, 
“Estimating the Difference be-
tween Group versus Individual 
Performance on Problem Solving 
Tasks,” Group and Organization 
Studies, September 1987, 319–42; 
and L. K. Michaelsen, W. E. Wat-
son, and R. H. Black, “A Realistic 
Test of Individual versus Group 
Consensus 
Decision 
Making,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(October 1989): 834–39. See also 
J. Hollenbeck, D. R. Ilgen, J. A. 
Colquitt, and A. Ellis, “Gender 
Composition, Situational Strength, 
and Team Decision-Making Accu-
racy: A Criterion Decomposition 
Approach,” Organizational Be-
havior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses, May 2002, 445–75.
 34. See, for example, L. K. Mi-
chaelsen, W. E. Watson, and R. 
H. Black, “A Realistic Test of In-
dividual versus Group Consensus 
Decision Making,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology (October 1989): 
834–39; and P. W. Pease, M. 
Beiser, and M. E. Tubbs, “Fram-
ing Effects and Choice Shifts in 
Group Decision Making,” Orga-
nizational Behavior and Human 
Decision 
Processes, 
October 
1993, 149–65.
 35. M. Strachan, “NCAA Schools 
Can Absolutely Afford to Pay 
College 
Athletes, 
Economists 
Say,” 
http://www.huffingtonpost.
com/2015/03/27/ncaa-pay-student-
athletes_n_6940836.html, 
March 
27, 2015; A. Zimbalist, “Pay-
ing College Athletes: Take Two,” 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/
andrew-zimbalist/paying-college-
athletes-take-two_b_6961314.
html, March 28, 2015; S.  Terlep, 
“NCAA 
 Reaches 
$20 
Mil-
lion Settlement with Ex-Players 
over Videogames,” Wall Street 
Journal, 
http://www.wsj.com/
articles/ncaa-unveils-20-million-
settlement-with-ex-players-over-
videogames-1402330931, June 9, 
2014; and C. Smith, “The Most 
Valuable Conferences in College 
Sports 2014,” www.forbes.com, 
April 15, 2014.
 36. J. 
Wagstaff, 
“Brainstorming 
Requires Drinks,” Far East-
ern Economic Review, May 2,  
2002, 34.
 37. T. Kelley, “Six Ways to Kill a 
Brainstormer,” Across the Board, 
March–April 2002, 12.
 38. K. L. Dowling and R. D. St. Lou-
is, “Asynchronous Implementa-
tion of the Nominal Group Tech-
nique: Is It Effective,” Decision 
Support Systems, October 2000, 
229–48.
 39. See also B. Andersen and T. Fager-
haug, “The Nominal Group Tech-
nique,” Quality Progress, Febru-
ary 2000, 144.
 40. J. Burdett, “Changing Channels: 
Using the Electronic Meeting Sys-
tem to Increase Equity in Decision 
Making,” Information Technology, 
Learning, and Performance Jour-
nal (Fall 2000): 3–12.
 41. “Fear of Flying,” Business Europe, 
October 3, 2001, 2.
 42. “VC at Nestlé,” Business Europe, 
October 3, 2001, 3.
 43. M. Roberti, “Meet Me on the 
Web,” Fortune: Tech Supplement, 
Winter 2002, 10.
 44. See also, J. A. Hoxmeier and K. A. 
Kozar, “Electronic Meetings and 
Subsequent Meeting Behavior: 
Systems as Agents of Change,” 
Journal of Applied Management 
Studies (December 2000): 177–95.
 45. See, for instance, P. Berthon, L. F. 
Pitt, and M. T. Ewing, “Corollaries 
of the Collective: The Influence 
of Organizational Culture and 
 Memory Development on Per-
ceived Decision-Making Context,” 
Academy of Marketing Science 
Journal (Spring 2001): 135–50.
 46. J. de Haan, M. Yamamoto, and 
G. Lovink, “Production Planning 
in Japan: Rediscovering Lost 
Experiences or New Insights,” 
 International Journal of Produc-
tion Economics (May 6, 2001): 
101–09.
 47. T. M. Amabile, “Motivating Cre-
ativity in Organizations,” Cali-
fornia Management Review (Fall 
1997): 39–58.
 48. D. Dunne and R. Martin, “Design 
Thinking and How It Will Change 
Management Education: An Inter-
view and Discussion,” Academy of 
Management Learning & Educa-
tion, December 2006, 512.
 49. M. Korn and R. E. Silverman, 
“Forget B-School, D-School Is 
Hot,” Wall Street Journal, June 
7, 2012, B1+; R. Martin and J. 
Euchner, “Design Thinking,” Re-
search Technology Management, 
May/June 2012, 10–14; T. Larsen 
and T. Fisher, “Design Thinking: 
A Solution to Fracture-Critical 
Systems,” DMI News & Views, 
May 2012, 31; T. Berno, “De-
sign Thinking versus Creative 
Intelligence,” DMI News & Views, 
May 2012, 28; J. Liedtka and Tim 
 Ogilvie,  “Helping Business Man-
agers Discover Their Appetite for 
Design Thinking,” Design Man-
agement Review, Issue 1, 2012, 
6–13; and T. Brown, “Strategy 
by Design,” Fast Company, June 
2005, 52–54.
 50. C. Guglielmo, “Apple Loop: The 
Week in Review,” Forbes.com, 
May 25, 2012, 2.
 51. D. Dunne and R. Martin, “Design 
Thinking and How It Will Change 
Management Education: An Inter-
view and Discussion,” 514.
 52. K. Cukier and V. Mayer-Schön-
berger, “The Financial Bonanza 
of Big Data,” Wall Street Journal, 
March 8, 2013, A15.
 53. R. King and S. Rosenbush, “Big 
Data Broadens Its Range,” Wall 
Street Journal, March 14, 2013, B5.
 54. “Big Data, Big Impact: New Pos-
sibilities for International Devel-
opment,” World Economic Forum, 
weforum.org, 2012.
 55. M. Kassel, “From a Molehill to a 
Mountain,” Wall Street Journal, 
March 11, 2013, R1.
 56. D. Laney, “The Importance of 
‘Big Data’: A Definition,” www.
gartner.com/it-glossary/big-data/, 
March 22, 2013.
 57. S. Lohr, “Sure, Big Data Is Great. 
But So Is Intuition,” New York 
Times Online, December 29, 2012.
 58. S. Rosenbush and L. Stevens, “At 
UPS, the Algorithm Is the Driver,” 
Wall Street Journal, February 17, 
2015, B1+; D. Zax, “Brown Down: 
UPS Drivers vs. the UPS Algo-
rithm,” 
http://www.fastcompany.
com/3004319/brown-down-ups-
drivers-vs-ups-algorithm, January 
3, 2013; T. Bingham and P. Ga-
lagan, “Delivering ‘On-Time, Ev-
ery Time’ Knowledge and Skills 
to a World of Employees,” T&D, 
July 2012, 32–37; J. Levitz, “UPS 
Thinks Outside the Box on Driver 
Training,” Wall Street Journal, April 
6, 2010, B1+; and K. Kingsbury, 
“Road to Recovery,” Time, March 
8, 2010, Global 14–Global 16.
 59. Rosenbush and Stevens, “At UPS, 
the Algorithm Is the Driver.”
 60. Zax, “Brown Down: UPS Drivers 
vs. the UPS Algorithm.”
 61. Rosenbush and Laura Stevens, “At 
UPS, the Algorithm Is the Driver.”
 62. Hong Kong Jockey Club WebSite; 
P.  Catton and C. Herrings, “Do 
H orses Really Need Jockeys?” The 
Wall Street Journal, www.wsj.com, 
May 3, 2012; McKenzie, “Space-
age skyscrapers and sheiks: Racing’s 
new world order,” CNN Website, 
http://edition.cnn.com/2013/03/29/
sport/dubai-world-cup-horse- 
racing/, March 29, 2013; C. Galo-
faro, “The Latest: Keep black cats 
away from Baffert,” Associated 
Press, http://bigstory.ap.org/article
/7c6d91b3926346b9b8989426a66
6044e/latest-fans-stream-churchill-
downs-derby-day, May 3, 2015; 
A.  Waller, J. Daniels, N. Weaver, 
P. Robinson, 2000. “Jockey inju-
ries in the United States,” Journal 
of the American Medical Associa-
tion, 283(10), 1326–28; J. Roach, 
“The Science of Horse Racing,” 
www.nbcnews.com, 2013.
 63. D. D. Stanford, “Coke Has a Se-
cret Formula for Orange Juice, 
Too,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
February 4–10, 2013, 19–20; P. 
Sellers, “The New Coke,” Fortune, 
May 21, 2012, 138–44; and Adi 
Ignatious, “Shaking Things Up 
at Coca-Cola,” Harvard Business 
 Review, October 2011, 94–99.

141
In this module we’ll look at several decision-making aids and techniques, as well as some 
popular tools for managing projects.1 Specifically, we’ll introduce you to payoff matrices, 
decision trees, break-even analysis, ratio analysis, linear programming, queuing theory, and 
economic order quantity. The purpose of each method is to provide managers with a tool to 
assist in the decision-making process and to provide more complete information to make 
better-informed decisions.
Payoff Matrices
In Chapter 4 we introduced you to the topic of uncertainty and how it can affect decision mak-
ing. Although uncertainty plays a critical role by limiting the amount of information available 
to managers, another factor is their psychological orientation. For instance, the optimistic 
manager will typically follow a maximax choice (maximizing the maximum possible payoff); 
the pessimist will often pursue a maximin choice (maximizing the minimum possible payoff); 
and the manager who desires to minimize his “regret” will opt for a minimax choice. Let’s 
briefly look at these different approaches using an example.
Consider the case of a marketing manager at Visa International in New York. He has 
 determined four possible strategies (we’ll label these S1, S2, S3, and S4) for promoting the 
Visa card throughout the northeastern United States. However, he is also aware that one of his 
major competitors, American Express, has three competitive strategies (CA1, CA2, and CA3) 
for promoting its own card in the same region. In this case, we’ll assume that the Visa execu-
tive has no previous knowledge that would allow him to place probabilities on the success of 
any of his four strategies. With these facts, the Visa card manager formulates the matrix in 
Exhibit QM–1 to show the various Visa strategies and the resulting profit to Visa, depending 
on the competitive action chosen by American Express.
In this example, if our Visa manager is an optimist, he’ll choose S4 because that could 
produce the largest possible gain ($28 million). Note that this choice maximizes the maximum 
Quantitative Module
Quantitative Decision-Making aiDs
Exhibit QM–1 Payoff Matrix for Visa
VISA MARKETING 
STRATEGY
AMERICAN EXPRESS’S  
RESPONSE (in $millions)
CA1
CA2
CA3
S1
13
14
11
S2
 9
15
18
S3
24
21
15
S4
18
14
28

142    Part 2  •  Planning
possible gain (maximax choice). If our manager is a pessimist, he’ll assume only the worst can 
occur. The worst outcome for each strategy is as follows: S1 = $11 million; S2 = $9 million;  
S3 = $15 million; and S4 = $14 million. Following the maximin choice, the pessimistic  manager 
would maximize the minimum payoff—in other words, he’d select S3.
In the third approach, managers recognize that once a decision is made it will not neces-
sarily result in the most profitable payoff. What could occur is a “regret” of profits forgone 
(given up)—regret referring to the amount of money that could have been made had a differ-
ent strategy been used. Managers calculate regret by subtracting all possible payoffs in each 
category from the maximum possible payoff for each given—in this case, for each competi-
tive action. For our Visa manager, the highest payoff, given that American Express engages 
in CA1, CA2, or CA3, is $24 million, $21 million, or $28 million, respectively (the highest 
number in each column). Subtracting the payoffs in Exhibit QM–1 from these figures pro-
duces the results in Exhibit QM–2.
The maximum regrets are S1 = $17 million; S2 = $15 million; S3 = $13 million; and S4 = 
$7 million. The minimax choice minimizes the maximum regret, so our Visa manager would 
choose S4. By making this choice, he’ll never have a regret of profits forgone of more than $7 
million. This result contrasts, for example, with a regret of $15 million had he chosen S2 and 
American Express had taken CA1.
Exhibit QM–2 Regret Matrix for Visa
VISA MARKETING 
STRATEGY
AMERICAN EXPRESS’S  
RESPONSE (in $millions)
CA1
CA2
CA3
S1
11
7
17
S2
15
6
10
S3
 0
0
13
S4
 6
7
 0
Decision Trees
Decision trees are a useful way to analyze hiring, marketing, investment, equipment pur-
chases, pricing, and similar decisions that involve a progression of decisions. They’re called 
decision trees because, when diagrammed, they look a lot like a tree with branches. Typical 
decision trees encompass expected value analysis by assigning probabilities to each possible 
outcome and calculating payoffs for each decision path.
Exhibit QM–3 illustrates a decision facing Becky Harrington, the Midwestern region site 
selection supervisor for Barry’s Brews. Becky supervises a small group of specialists who 
analyze potential locations and make store site recommendations to the Midwestern region’s 
director. The lease on the company’s store in Winter Park, Florida, is expiring, and the prop-
erty owner has decided not to renew it. Becky and her group have to make a relocation recom-
mendation to the regional director. Becky’s group has identified an excellent site in a nearby 
shopping mall in Orlando. The mall owner has offered her two comparable locations: one with 
12,000 square feet (the same as she has now) and the other a larger, 20,000-square-foot space. 
Becky’s initial decision concerns whether to recommend renting the larger or smaller location. 
If she chooses the larger space and the economy is strong, she estimates the store will make a 
$320,000 profit. However, if the economy is poor, the high operating costs of the larger store 
will mean that the profit will be only $50,000. With the smaller store, she estimates the profit 
at $240,000 with a good economy and $130,000 with a poor one.
decision trees
A diagram used to analyze a progression of deci-
sions. When diagrammed, a decision tree looks like 
a tree with branches.

Quantitative Module   143
As you can see from Exhibit QM–3, the expected value for the larger store is $239,000 
[(.70 * 320) + (.30 * 50)]. The expected value for the smaller store is $207,000 [(.70 * 240) 
+ (.30 * 130)]. Given these projections, Becky is planning to recommend the rental of the 
larger store space. What if Becky wants to consider the implications of initially renting the 
smaller space and then expanding if the economy picks up? She can extend the decision tree 
to include this second decision point. She has calculated three options: no expansion, adding 
4,000 square feet, and adding 8,000 square feet. Following the approach used for Decision 
Point 1, she could calculate the profit potential by extending the branches on the tree and cal-
culating expected values for the various options.
Break-Even Analysis
How many units of a product must an organization sell in order to break even—that is, 
to  have neither profit nor loss? A manager might want to know the minimum number 
of units that must be sold to achieve his or her profit objective or whether a current prod-
uct should continue to be sold or should be dropped from the organization’s product 
line. Break-even analysis is a widely used technique for helping managers make profit 
 projections.2
Break-even analysis is a simplistic formulation, yet it is valuable to managers because 
it points out the relationship among revenues, costs, and profits. To compute the break-even 
point (BE), the manager needs to know the unit price of the product being sold (P), the vari-
able cost per unit (VC), and the total fixed costs (TFC).
An organization breaks even when its total revenue is just enough to equal its total costs. 
But total cost has two parts: a fixed component and a variable component. Fixed costs are 
expenses that do not change, regardless of volume, such as insurance premiums and property 
taxes. Fixed costs, of course, are fixed only in the short term because, in the long run, com-
mitments terminate and are, thus, subject to variation. Variable costs change in proportion to 
output and include raw materials, labor costs, and energy costs.
The break-even point can be computed graphically or by using the following formula:
BE = [TFC/(P - VC)]
1
Expected value (in 000s)
.70 [240] + .30 [130] = 207
Expected value (in 000s)
.70 [320] + .30 [50] = 239
2
Add 4,000
No expansion
Add 8,000
$50,000
$320,000
$130,000
= Decision point
= Outcome point
$240,000
Rent
20,000 sq. ft.
Strong
.70
Rent
12,000 sq. ft.
Weak
.30
Strong
.70
Weak
.30
Exhibit QM–3 
break-even analysis
A technique for identifying the point at which total 
revenue is just sufficient to cover total costs

144    Part 2  •  Planning
This formula tells us that (1) total revenue will equal total cost when we sell enough units 
at a price that covers all variable unit costs, and (2) the difference between price and variable 
costs, when multiplied by the number of units sold, equals the fixed costs.
When is break-even analysis useful? To demonstrate, assume that, at Jose’s Bakersfield 
Espresso, Jose charges $1.75 for an average cup of coffee. If his fixed costs (salary, insurance, 
etc.) are $47,000 a year and the variable costs for each cup of espresso are $0.40, Jose can 
compute his break-even point as follows: $47,000/(1.75 - 0.40) = 34,815 (about 670 cups of 
espresso sold each week), or when annual revenues are approximately $60,926. This same 
relationship is shown graphically in Exhibit QM–4.
How can break-even analysis serve as a planning and decision-making tool? As a plan-
ning tool, break-even analysis could help Jose set his sales objective. For example, he could 
establish the profit he wants and then work backward to determine what sales level is needed 
to reach that profit. As a decision-making tool, break-even analysis could also tell Jose how 
much volume has to increase in order to break even if he is currently operating at a loss, or 
how much volume he can afford to lose and still break even if he is currently operating profit-
ably. In some cases, such as the management of professional sports franchises, break-even 
analysis has shown the projected volume of ticket sales required to cover all costs to be so 
unrealistically high that management’s best choice is to sell or close the business.
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Revenues/Costs ($000)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Output (000)
Fixed
costs
Total
cost
Variable
costs
Total
revenue
Break-even point
Loss
area
Proﬁt
area
Exhibit QM–4 
Ratio Analysis
We know that investors and stock analysts make regular use of an organization’s financial 
documents to assess its worth. These documents can be analyzed by managers as planning 
and decision-making aids.
Managers often want to examine their organization’s balance sheet and income state-
ments to analyze key ratios, that is, to compare two significant figures from the financial state-
ments and express them as a percentage or ratio. This practice allows managers to compare 

Quantitative Module   145
current financial performance with that of previous periods and other organizations in the 
same industry. Some of the more useful ratios evaluate liquidity, leverage, operations, and 
profitability. These ratios are summarized in Exhibit QM–5.
What are liquidity ratios? Liquidity is a measure of the organization’s ability to convert 
assets into cash in order to meet its debt obligations. The most popular liquidity ratios are the 
current ratio and the acid test ratio.
The current ratio is defined as the organization’s current assets divided by its current 
liabilities. Although there is no magic number that is considered safe, the accountant’s rule 
of thumb for the current ratio is 2:1. A significantly higher ratio usually suggests that man-
agement is not getting the best return on its assets. A ratio at or below 1:1 indicates potential 
difficulty in meeting short-term obligations (accounts payable, interest payments, salaries, 
taxes, etc.).
The acid test ratio is the same as the current ratio except that current assets are reduced 
by the dollar value of inventory held. When inventories turn slowly or are difficult to sell, the 
acid test ratio may more accurately represent the organization’s true liquidity. That is, a high 
current ratio heavily based on an inventory that is difficult to sell overstates the organiza-
tion’s true liquidity. Accordingly, accountants typically consider an acid test ratio of 1:1 to 
be reasonable.
Leverage ratios refer to the use of borrowed funds to operate and expand an organi-
zation. The advantage of leverage occurs when funds can be used to earn a rate of return 
well above the cost of those funds. For instance, if management can borrow money at 
Exhibit QM–5 Popular Financial Controls
ObjECTIVE
RATIO
CAlCulATION
MEANING
Liquidity test
Current ratio
Current assets
Current liabilities
Tests the organization’s ability to 
meet short-term obligations
Acid test
Current assets less 
inventories
Current liabilities
Tests liquidity more accurately 
when inventories turn over slowly 
or are difficult to sell
Leverage test
Debt to assets
Total debt
Total assets
The higher the ratio, the more 
leveraged the organization
Times interest earned
Profits before interest 
and taxes
Total interest charges
Measures how far profits can 
decline before the organization 
is unable to meet its interest 
expenses
Operations test
Inventory turnover
Cost of sales
Inventory
The higher the ratio, the more 
efficiently inventory assets are 
being used
Total assets turnover
Revenues
Total assets
The fewer assets used to achieve 
a given level of sales, the more 
efficiently management is using 
the organization’s total assets
Profitability
Profit margin on  
revenues
Net profit after taxes
Total revenues
Identifies the profits that various 
products are generating
Return on investment
Net profit after taxes
Total assets
Measures the efficiency of assets 
to generate profits

146    Part 2  •  Planning
8 percent and can earn 12 percent on it internally, it makes good sense to borrow, but there 
are risks to overleveraging. The interest on the debt can be a drain on the organization’s 
cash resources and can, in extreme cases, drive an organization into bankruptcy. The objec-
tive, therefore, is to use debt wisely. Leverage ratios such as debt to assets ratio (computed 
by dividing total debt by total assets) or the times interest earned ratio (computed as prof-
its before interest and taxes divided by total interest charges) can help managers control 
debt levels.
Operating ratios describe how efficiently management is using the organization’s 
resources. The most popular operating ratios are inventory turnover and total assets turn-
over. The inventory turnover ratio is defined as revenue divided by inventory. The higher 
the ratio, the more efficiently inventory assets are being used. Revenue divided by total 
assets represents an organization’s total assets turnover ratio. It measures the level of 
assets needed to generate the organization’s revenue. The fewer the assets used to achieve 
a given level of revenue, the more efficiently management is using the organization’s total 
assets.
Profit-making organizations want to measure their effectiveness and efficiency. Profit-
ability ratios serve such a purpose. The better known of these ratios are profit margin on 
revenues and return on investment.
Managers of organizations that have a variety of products want to put their efforts into 
those products that are most profitable. The profit margin on revenues ratio, computed as net 
profit after taxes divided by total revenues, is a measure of profits per dollar revenues.
One of the most widely used measures of a business firm’s profitability is the return 
on investment ratio. It’s calculated by dividing net profits by total assets. This percentage 
 recognizes that absolute profits must be placed in the context of assets required to generate 
those profits.
Linear Programming
Matt Free owns a software development company. One product line involves designing and 
producing software that detects and removes viruses. The software comes in two formats: 
Windows and Mac versions. He can sell all of these products that he can produce, which is his 
dilemma. The two formats go through the same production departments. How many of each 
type should he make to maximize his profits?
A close look at Free’s operation tells us he can use a mathematical technique called linear 
programming to solve his resource allocation dilemma. As we will show, linear programming 
is applicable to his problem, but it cannot be applied to all resource allocation situations. 
Besides requiring limited resources and the objective of optimization, it requires that there 
be alternative ways of combining resources to produce a number of output mixes. A linear 
relationship between variables is also necessary, which means that a change in one variable 
will be accompanied by an exactly proportional change in the other. For Free’s business, this 
condition would be met if it took exactly twice the time to produce two diskettes—irrespective 
of format—as it took to produce one.
Many different types of problems can be solved with linear programming. Selecting 
transportation routes that minimize shipping costs, allocating a limited advertising budget 
among various product brands, making the optimum assignment of personnel among projects, 
and determining how much of each product to make with a limited number of resources are 
just a few. To give you some idea of how linear programming is useful, let’s return to Free’s 
situation. Fortunately, his problem is relatively simple, so we can solve it rather quickly. For 
complex linear programming problems, computer software has been designed specifically to 
help develop solutions.
First, we need to establish some facts about the business. He has computed the profit 
margins to be $18 for the Windows format and $24 for the Mac. He can, therefore, express his 
objective function as maximum profit = $18R + $24S, where R is the number of  Windows-based 
CDs produced and S is the number of Mac CDs. In addition, he knows how long it takes to 
produce each format and the monthly production capacity for virus software: 2,400 hours 
linear programming
A mathematical technique that solves resource 
allocation problems

Quantitative Module   147
in design and 900 hours in production (see Exhibit QM–6). The  production capacity numbers 
act as constraints on his overall capacity. Now Free can establish his constraint equations:
4R + 6S 6 2,400
2R + 2S 6 900
Of course, because a software format cannot be produced in a volume less than 
zero, Matt can also state that R > 0 and S > 0. He has graphed his solution as shown in 
Exhibit QM–7. The beige shaded area represents the options that do not exceed the capac-
ity of either department. What does the graph mean? We know that total design capacity is 
2,400 hours. So if Matt decides to design only the Windows format, the maximum number 
he can produce is 600 (2,400 hours , 4 hours of design for each Windows version). If he 
decides to produce all Mac versions, the maximum he can produce is 400 (2,400 hours , 
6 hours of design for Mac). This design constraint is shown in Exhibit QM–7 as line BC. 
The other constraint Matt faces is that of production. The maximum of either format he can 
produce is 450, because each takes two hours to copy, verify, and package. This production 
constraint is shown in the exhibit as line DE.
Free’s optimal resource allocation will be defined at one of the corners of this feasibility 
region (area ACFD). Point F provides the maximum profits within the constraints stated. At point 
A, profits would be zero because neither virus software version is being produced. At points 
C and D, profits would be $9,600 (400 units @ $24) and $8,100 (450 units @ $18), respectively. 
At point F profits would be $9,900 (150 Windows units @ $18 + 300 Mac units @ $24).3
Exhibit QM–6 Production Data for Virus Software
NuMbER Of HOuRS REquIREd PER uNIT
dEPARTMENT
WINdOWS 
VERSION
MAC  
VERSION
MONTHlY PROduCT 
CAPACITY (hours)
Design
 4
 6
2,400
Manufacture
   2.0
   2.0
  900
Profit per unit
$18
$24
100
200
300
400
500
600
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
Number of Mac Units
Number of Windows Units
E
F
B
A
C
D
Exhibit QM–7 

148    Part 2  •  Planning
Queuing Theory
You are a supervisor for a branch of Bank of America outside of Cleveland, Ohio. One of the 
decisions you have to make is how many of the six teller stations to keep open at any given 
time. Queuing theory, or what is frequently referred to as waiting line theory, could help 
you decide.
A decision that involves balancing the cost of having a waiting line against the cost of 
service to maintain that line can be made more easily with queuing theory. These types of 
common situations include determining how many gas pumps are needed at gas stations, 
tellers at bank windows, toll takers at toll booths, or check-in lines at airline ticket coun-
ters. In each situation, management wants to minimize cost by having as few stations open 
as possible yet not so few as to test the patience of customers. In our teller example, on 
certain days (such as the first of every month and Fridays) you could open all six windows 
and keep waiting time to a minimum, or you could open only one, minimize staffing costs, 
and risk a riot.
The mathematics underlying queuing theory is beyond the scope of this book, but you 
can see how the theory works in our simple example. You have six tellers working for you, 
but you want to know whether you can get by with only one window open during an average 
morning. You consider 12 minutes to be the longest you would expect any customer to wait 
patiently in line. If it takes 4 minutes, on average, to serve each customer, the line should not 
be permitted to get longer than three deep (12 minutes , 4 minutes per customer = 3 custom-
ers). If you know from past experience that, during the morning, people arrive at the average 
rate of two per minute, you can calculate the probability (P) of customers waiting in line as 
follows:
Pn = c 1 - a Arrival rate
Service rate b d * c  Arrival rate
Service rate d
n
where n = 3 customers, arrival rate = 2 per minute, and service rate = 4 minutes per 
 customer.
Putting these numbers into the foregoing formula generates the following:
Pn = [1 - 2/4] * [2/4]3 = (1/2) * (8/64) = (8/128) = 0.0625
What does a P of 0.0625 mean? It tells you that the likelihood of having more than three 
customers in line during the average morning is 1 chance in 16. Are you willing to live with 
four or more customers in line 6 percent of the time? If so, keeping one teller window open 
will be enough. If not, you will have to assign more tellers to staff more windows.
Economic Order Quantity Model
When you order checks from a bank, have you noticed that the reorder form is placed about 
two-thirds of the way through your supply of checks? This practice is a simple  example of 
a fixed-point reordering system. At some preestablished point in the  process, the system 
is designed to “flag” the fact that the inventory needs to be replenished. The objective 
is to minimize inventory carrying costs while at the same time limiting the  probability 
of  stocking out of the inventory item. In recent years, retail stores have  increasingly 
been  using their computers to perform this reordering activity. Their cash registers are 
 connected to their computers, and each sale automatically adjusts the store’s inventory 
record. When the  inventory of an item hits the critical point, the computer tells manage-
ment to reorder.
queuing theory
Also known as waiting line theory, it is a way of 
balancing the cost of having a waiting line versus 
the cost of maintaining the line. Management wants 
to have as few stations open as possible to minimize 
costs without testing the patience of its customers.
fixed-point reordering  
system
A method for a system to “flag” the need to reorder 
inventory at some preestablished point in the process

Quantitative Module   149
One of the best-known techniques for mathematically deriving the optimum quantity for 
a purchase order is the economic order quantity (EOQ) model (see Exhibit QM–8). The EOQ 
model seeks to balance four costs involved in ordering and carrying inventory: the purchase 
costs (purchase price plus delivery charges less discounts); the ordering costs (paperwork, fol-
low-up, inspection when the item arrives, and other processing costs); carrying costs (money 
tied up in inventory, storage, insurance, taxes, etc.); and stock-out costs (profits forgone from 
orders lost, the cost of reestablishing goodwill, and additional expenses incurred to expedite 
late shipments). When these four costs are known, the model identifies the optimal order size 
for each purchase.
The objective of the economic order quantity (EOQ) model is to minimize the total 
costs associated with the carrying and ordering costs. As the amount ordered gets larger, 
average inventory increases and so do carrying costs. For example, if annual demand for 
an inventory item is 26,000 units, and a firm orders 500 each time, the firm will place 52 
[26,000/500] orders per year. This order frequency gives the organization an average inven-
tory of 250 [500/2] units. If the order quantity is increased to 2,000 units, fewer orders (13) 
[26,000/2,000] will be placed. However, average inventory on hand will increase to 1,000 
[2,000/2] units. Thus, as holding costs go up, ordering costs go down, and vice versa. The 
optimum economic order quantity is reached at the lowest point on the total cost curve. 
That’s the point at which ordering costs equal carrying costs—or the economic order quan-
tity (see point Q in Exhibit QM–8).
To compute this optimal order quantity, you need the following data: forecasted demand 
for the item during the period (D); the cost of placing each order (OC); the value or purchase 
price of the item (V); and the carrying cost (expressed as a percentage) of maintaining the total 
inventory (CC). Given these data, the formula for EOQ is as follows:
EOQ = C
2 * D * OC
V * CC
Let’s work an example of determining the EOQ. Take, for example, Barnes Electron-
ics, a retailer of high-quality sound and video equipment. The owner, Sam Barnes, wishes to 
Total costs
Carrying costs
Ordering costs
Quantity of Order
Q
O
Costs
Most economic
order size
Exhibit QM–8 
economic order quantity 
(EOQ)
A model that seeks to balance the costs involved in 
ordering and carrying inventory, thus minimizing total 
costs associated with carrying and ordering costs

150    Part 2  •  Planning
 determine the company’s economic order quantities of high-quality sound and video equip-
ment. The item in question is a Sony compact voice recorder. Barnes forecasts sales of 4,000 
units a year. He believes that the cost for the sound system should be $50. Estimated costs of 
placing an order for these systems are $35 per order and annual insurance, taxes, and other 
carrying costs at 20 percent of the recorder’s value. Using the EOQ formula, and the preceding 
information, he can calculate the EOQ as follows:
 EOQ = C
2 * 4,000 * 35
50 * .20
 EOQ = 128,000
 EOQ = 167.33   or  168 units
The inventory model suggests that it’s most economical to order in quantities or lots of 
approximately 168 recorders. Stated differently, Barnes should order about 24 [4,000/168] 
times a year. However, what would happen if the supplier offers Barnes a 5 percent discount 
on purchases if he buys in minimum quantities of 250 units? Should he now purchase in quan-
tities of 168 or 250? Without the discount, and ordering 168 each time, the annual costs for 
these recorders would be as follows:
With the 5 percent discount for ordering 250 units, the item cost [$50 * ($50 * 0.05)] 
would be $47.5.
Purchase cost:
   $50 * $4,000      = $200,000
Carrying cost (average number of inventory  
units times value of item times percentage):
168/2 * $50 * 0.2 =     840
Ordering costs (number of orders times cost  
to place order):
     24 * $35           =     840
Total cost:
 
= $201,680
The annual inventory costs would be as follows:
Purchase cost:
$47.50 * $4,000
= $190,000.00
Carrying cost:
 250/2 * $47.50 * 0.2 =
1,187.50
Ordering cost:
    16 * $35
=
560.00
Total cost:
= $191,747.50
These calculations suggest to Barnes that he should take advantage of the 5 percent dis-
count. Even though he now has to stock larger quantities, the annual savings amounts to 
nearly $10,000. A word of caution, however, needs to be added. The EOQ model assumes that 
demand and lead times are known and constant. If these conditions can’t be met, the model 
shouldn’t be used. For example, it generally shouldn’t be used for manufactured component 
inventory because the components are taken out of stock all at once, in lumps, or odd lots, 
rather than at a constant rate. Does this caveat mean that the EOQ model is useless when 
demand is variable? No. The model can still be of some use in demonstrating trade-offs in 
costs and the need to control lot sizes. However, more sophisticated lot sizing models are 
available for handling demand and special situations. The mathematics for EOQ, like the 
mathematics for queuing theory, go far beyond the scope of this text.

Quantitative Module   151
Endnotes
 1. Readers are encouraged to see B. 
Render, R. M. Stair, and M. E. 
Hanna, Quantitative Analysis for 
Management, 9th ed. (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2005).
 2. J. Schmid, “Getting to Breakeven,” 
Catalog Age, November 2001, 
pp. 89–90.
 3. We want to acknowledge and 
thank Professor Jeff Storm of 
Virginia 
Western 
Community 
College for his assistance in this 
example.

Foundations  
of Planning
5
     
Planning  
     is a waste  
of time because  
no one can  
predict the future.
Andresr/Shutterstock

153
 People say that the future is unpredictable.  
No matter how well you plan, there’s always the 
unexpected. For managers it might be a  sudden 
 recession, a new and innovative  product from 
a competitor, the loss of a key customer, the 
loss of a key employee, or the breakdown of a 
 long-established business model. This logic has 
led many to conclude that planning is a waste of 
time. Well, it’s not. Flexible planning that  includes 
 multiple scenarios can prepare managers for 
a  variety of situations, eliminating some of  
the unpredictability.

we learned in Chapter 1, organi-
zations have a purpose, people, 
and a structure to support and enable those 
people in carrying out that purpose. And 
in those organizations, managers must de-
velop goals, plans, and strategies for how 
best to achieve that purpose. However, 
sometimes after evaluating the outcomes of 
those plans and strategies, managers have 
to change direction as conditions change. 
This  chapter  presents the basics of planning. 
You’ll learn what planning is, how managers 
use  strategic management, and how they set 
goals and establish plans. Finally, we’ll look 
at some of the contemporary planning issues 
managers face. •
As 
154
5-1 Discuss the nature and purposes of planning. p. 155
5-2 Explain what managers do in the strategic management process. p. 157
5-3 Compare and contrast approaches to goal setting and planning. p. 165
5-4 Discuss contemporary issues in planning. p. 171
Learning Outcomes

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     155
What Is Planning and Why Do Managers Need to Plan?
All managers plan.
Planning is often called the primary management func-
tion because it establishes the basis for all the other 
things managers do as they organize, lead, and control. 
What is meant by the term planning? As we said in Chapter 1, planning involves defining 
the organization’s objectives or goals, establishing an overall strategy for achieving those 
goals, and developing a comprehensive hierarchy of plans to integrate and coordinate 
 activities. It’s concerned with ends (what is to be done) as well as with means (how it’s to 
be done).
Planning can be further defined in terms of whether it’s formal or informal. All manag-
ers plan, even if it’s only informally. In informal planning, very little, if anything, is written 
down. What is to be accomplished is in the heads of one or a few people. Furthermore, the 
organization’s goals are rarely verbalized. Informal planning generally describes the planning 
that takes place in many smaller businesses. The owner-manager has an idea of where he or 
she wants to go and how he or she expects to get there. The planning is general and lacks 
continuity. Of course, you’ll see informal planning in some large organizations, while some 
small businesses will have sophisticated formal plans.
When we use the term planning in this book, we’re referring to formal planning. Formal 
planning means (1) defining specific goals covering a specific time period, (2) writing down 
these goals and making them available to organization members, and (3) using these goals to 
develop specific plans that clearly define the path the organization will take to get from where 
it is to where it wants to be.
Why Should Managers Formally Plan?
How does McDonald’s—with over 35,000 restaurants in approximately 120 countries serving 
over 68 million customers every day—do what it does? The key is its Plan to Win, which is 
built on three components: operational excellence, being the leader in marketing, and contin-
ual product innovation. McDonald’s managers—from corporate to individual stores—know 
that planning is vital to the company’s continued success. Now, as the company struggles 
with declining global sales, that plan takes on added importance for managers.
Managers should plan for at least four reasons. (See Exhibit 5–1.) First, planning 
 establishes coordinated effort. It gives direction to managers and nonmanagerial employees. 
When all organizational members understand where the organization is going and what they 
must contribute to reach the goals, they can begin to coordinate their activities, thus  fostering 
teamwork and cooperation. On the other hand, not planning can cause organizational 
 members or work units to work against one another and keep the organization from moving 
efficiently toward its goals.
Second, planning reduces uncertainty by forcing managers to look ahead, anticipate 
change, consider the impact of change, and develop appropriate responses. It also clarifies the 
consequences of the actions managers might take in response to change. Planning, then, is 
precisely what managers need in a changing environment.
Third, planning reduces overlapping and wasteful activities. Coordinating efforts and 
responsibilities before the fact is likely to uncover waste and redundancy. Furthermore, when 
means and ends are clear, inefficiencies become obvious.
Finally, planning establishes the goals or standards that facilitate control. If organi-
zational members aren’t sure what they’re working towards, how can they assess whether 
they’ve achieved it? When managers plan, they develop goals and plans. When they 
 control, they see whether the plans have been carried out and the goals met. (We’ll discuss 
controlling in depth in Chapter 14.) If significant deviations are identified, corrective action 
can be taken. Without planning, there are no goals against which to measure or evaluate 
work efforts.
5-1  Discuss the  nature 
and  purposes 
of planning.

156    Part 2  •  Planning
What Are Some Criticisms of Formal Planning and How Should 
Managers Respond?
It makes sense for an organization to establish goals and direction, but critics have challenged 
some of the basic assumptions of planning.1
Criticism: Planning may create rigidity. Formal planning efforts can lock an organiza-
tion into specific goals to be achieved within specific timetables. Such goals may have 
been set under the assumption that the environment wouldn’t change. Forcing a course 
of action when the environment is random and unpredictable can be a recipe for disaster.
Manager’s Response: Managers need to remain flexible and not be tied to a course 
of action simply because it’s the plan.
Criticism: Formal plans can’t replace intuition and creativity. Successful organizations 
are typically the result of someone’s vision, but these visions have a tendency to become 
formalized as they evolve. If formal planning efforts reduce the vision to a programmed 
routine, that too can lead to disaster.
Manager’s Response: Planning should enhance and support intuition and creativity, 
not replace it.
Criticism: Planning focuses managers’ attention on today’s competition, not on tomor-
row’s survival. Formal planning, especially strategic planning (which we’ll discuss shortly), 
has a tendency to focus on how to best capitalize on existing business opportunities within 
the industry. Managers may not look at ways to re-create or reinvent the industry.
Manager’s Response: When managers plan, they should be open to forging into 
uncharted waters if there are untapped opportunities.
Criticism: Formal planning reinforces success, which may lead to failure. The American 
tradition has been that success breeds success. After all, if it’s not broken, don’t fix it. 
Right? Well maybe not! Success may, in fact, breed failure in an uncertain environment. 
It’s hard to change or discard successful plans—to leave the comfort of what works for 
the uncertainty (and anxiety) of the unknown.
Manager’s Response: Managers may need to face that unknown and be open to doing 
things in new ways to be even more successful.
Be
ca
us
e 
of 
Ch
an
ge
s 
in 
th
e 
En
vir
on
me
nt
 
Managers
engage in
planning to:
Set the standards
to facilitate control
Reduce the impact
of change
Minimize waste
and redundancy
Provide 
direction
Exhibit 5–1 Reasons for Planning

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     157
Does Formal Planning Improve Organizational Performance?
DOES it PAY to PLAN?
Does it pay to plan? Or have the critics of planning won the debate? Let’s look at the 
evidence.
Contrary to what the critics of planning say, the evidence generally supports the position 
that organizations should have formal plans. Although most studies that have looked at the 
relationship between planning and performance have shown generally positive relationships, 
we can’t say that organizations that formally plan always outperform those that don’t.2 But 
what can we conclude?
• Formal planning generally means higher profits, higher return on assets, and other positive 
financial results.
• The quality of the planning process and the appropriate implementation of the plan  probably 
contribute more to high performance than does the extent of planning.
• In those organizations where formal planning did not lead to higher performance, 
the  environment—for instance, governmental regulations, unforeseen economic chal-
lenges, and so forth—was often to blame. Why? Because managers have fewer viable 
 alternatives.
One important aspect of an organization’s formal planning is strategic planning, which 
managers do as part of the strategic management process.
What Do Managers Need To Know About Strategic 
Management?
5-2  Explain what  
managers do in 
the strategic  
management  
process.
• The Chicago Cubs have put together a new strategic 
plan that managers hope will help the team achieve 
success after many decades of struggling.3
• IBM reached a deal with The Weather Company to 
exploit opportunities for providing and distributing 
weather data. This type of data partnership is part of 
IBM’s long-term strategy.4
• After a three-year freeze on new plant construction, Toy-
ota announced that it would spend over $1 billion to build 
two new car plants, one in Mexico and one in China.5
• For its 20th anniversary, ESPN.com announced a makeover of its highly popular sports Web 
site and mobile apps. ESPN.com is the most visited sports site, with a record 126.5 million 
people globally logging on the site in early 2015.6
• Taco Bell has fired another volley in its breakfast war against Mickey D’s (McDonald’s): 
the Biscuit Taco. It tastes like a biscuit but is shaped like a taco.7
• Mercedes-Benz announced plans for its first “luxury” pick-up. Executives said the vehicle 
is expected to contribute to the company’s global growth targets.8
These are just a few of the business news stories from a single week, and each one is about a 
company’s strategies. And yes . . . strategic management is very much a part of what managers do.
What Is Strategic Management?
Strategic management is what managers do to develop an organization’s strategies. What 
are an organization’s strategies? They’re the plans for how the organization will do what 
it’s in business to do, how it will compete successfully, and how it will attract and satisfy its 
 customers in order to achieve its goals.
strategic management
What managers do to develop an organization’s 
strategies
strategies
Plans for how the organization will do what it’s in 
business to do, how it will compete successfully, 
and how it will attract its customers in order to 
achieve its goals

158    Part 2  •  Planning
Why Is Strategic Management 
Important?
Unlike many other mall-based clothing chains experienc-
ing disastrous sales declines, retailer The Buckle Inc. 
suffered from weak sales only during the last stages of 
the most recent  economic downturn. And being smart 
about strategies, it didn’t take long for Buckle to  regain its 
footing. One important element was its location strategy. 
Only a few of its 450 stores were located in states that 
suffered the worst from the recession. Another part of 
its strategy was offering customer perks such as custom 
pants fittings and free hemming on its jeans. Focusing on 
customer service enhancements like this helped differen-
tiate The Buckle in an overly crowded teen clothing mar-
ket.9 These managers obviously understood why strategic 
management is important!
Why is strategic management so important? One reason is that it can make a  difference 
in how well an organization performs. Why do some businesses succeed and others fail, even 
when faced with the same environmental conditions? Research has found a generally positive 
relationship between strategic planning and performance.10 Those companies that strategi-
cally plan appear to have better financial results than those  organizations that don’t.
Another reason it’s important has to do with the fact that managers in organizations of all 
types and sizes face continually changing situations (recall our discussion in Chapter 2). They 
cope with this uncertainty by using the strategic management process to examine  relevant 
 factors in planning future actions.
Finally, strategic management is important because organizations are complex and 
 diverse and each part needs to work together to achieve the organization’s goals. Strategic 
management helps do this. For example, with more than 2.2 million employees worldwide 
working in various departments, functional areas, and stores, Walmart uses strategic manage-
ment to help coordinate and focus employees’ efforts on what’s important.
It’s important to note that strategic management isn’t just for business organizations. 
Even organizations such as government agencies, hospitals, educational institutions, and 
 social agencies need it. For example, the skyrocketing costs of a college education, competi-
tion from for-profit companies offering alternative educational environments, state budgets 
being slashed because of declining revenues, and cutbacks in federal aid for students and 
research have led many university administrators to assess their colleges’ aspirations and 
identify a market niche in which they can survive and prosper.
 Watch It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled Rudi’s Bakery: Strategic Management.
What Are the Steps in the Strategic Management Process?
The strategic management process (see Exhibit 5–2) is a six-step process that encompasses 
strategy planning, implementation, and evaluation. The first four steps describe the planning 
that must take place, but implementation and evaluation are just as important! Even the best 
strategies can fail if managers don’t implement or evaluate them properly.
Step 1:  Identifying the organization’s current mission, goals, and strategies. Every 
organization needs a mission—a statement of its purpose. Defining the mission 
forces managers to identify what it’s in business to do. For instance, the mission 
of Avon is “To be the company that best understands and satisfies the product, 
service, and self-fulfillment needs of women on a global level.”11 The mission of 
the National Heart Foundation of Australia is to “reduce suffering and death from 
strategic management 
 process
A six-step process that encompasses strategy 
 planning, implementation, and evaluation
mission
A statement of an organization’s purpose
Zhang Xin, co-founder and CEO of SOHO 
China, poses in front of skyscrapers the firm 
built in Beijing. Xin and her husband started 
SOHO with a narrowly focused and highly 
successful strategy of developing commercial 
real estate in prime locations in Beijing and 
Shanghai that features architecture reflecting 
the spirit of a changing modern China.
Ton Koene/Newscom

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     159
heart, stroke, and blood vessel disease in Australia.” These statements provide 
clues to what these organizations see as their purpose. What should a mission 
statement include? Exhibit 5–3 describes some typical components.
SWOT Analysis
Identify the
organization's
current mission, goals,
and strategies
Internal Analysis
  • Strengths
  • Weaknesses
External Analysis
  • Opportunities
  • Threats
Formulate
Strategies 
Implement
Strategies
Evaluate 
Results
Exhibit 5–2 The Strategic Management Process
 Write It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com 
and complete MGMT 11: Mission Statement.
It’s also important for managers to identify current goals and strategies. Why? 
So managers have a basis for assessing whether they need to be changed.
Step 2:  Doing an external analysis. We discussed the external environment in  Chapter 2. 
Analyzing that environment is a critical step in the strategic management  process. 
Managers do an external analysis so they know, for instance, what the  competition 
is doing, what pending legislation might affect the organization, or what the labor 
supply is like in locations where it operates. In an external  analysis, managers 
should examine all components of the environment  (economic, demographic, politi-
cal/legal, sociocultural, technological, and global) to see the trends and changes.
Once they’ve analyzed the environment, managers need to pinpoint opportu-
nities that the organization can exploit and threats that it must counteract or buffer 
Customers:                               Who are the ﬁrm’s customers?
Markets:
                               Where does the ﬁrm compete geographically?  
Concern for survival,
growth, and proﬁtability:     
     
Philosophy:
                              What are the ﬁrm’s basic beliefs, values, and ethical priorities?
Concern for public image:    
 How responsive is the ﬁrm to societal and
environmental concerns?  
 
 
 
  
Products or services:             What are the ﬁrm’s majorproducts or services?  
Technology:                             Is the ﬁrm technologically current?
Self-concept:
                           What are the ﬁrm’s major competitive advantage and
core competencies? 
 
 
 
  
Concern for employees:        Are employees a valuable asset of the ﬁrm?
Is the ﬁrm committed to growth and ﬁnancial stability?
Exhibit 5–3 Components of a Mission Statement
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 238. Reprinted  
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

160    Part 2  •  Planning
against. Opportunities are positive trends in the external environment; threats are 
negative trends.
Step 3:  Doing an internal analysis. Now we move to the internal analysis, which 
 provides important information about an organization’s specific resources and 
 capabilities. An organization’s resources are its assets—financial,  physical, 
 human, and intangible—that it uses to develop, manufacture, and deliver  products 
to its customers. They’re “what” the organization has. On the other hand, its 
 capabilities are the skills and abilities needed to do the work activities in its 
business—“how” it does its work. The major value-creating capabilities of the 
organization are known as its core competencies.12 Both resources and core 
 competencies determine the organization’s competitive weapons.
After completing an internal analysis, managers should be able to identify 
organizational strengths and weaknesses. Any activities the organization does well 
or any unique resources that it has are called strengths. Weaknesses are activities 
the organization doesn’t do well or resources it needs but doesn’t possess.
The combined external and internal analyses are called the SWOT 
 analysis because it’s an analysis of the organization’s strengths, weaknesses, 
 opportunities, and threats. After completing the SWOT analysis, managers are 
ready to  formulate appropriate strategies—that is, strategies that (1) exploit an 
 organization’s strengths and external opportunities, (2) buffer or protect the 
 organization from external threats, or (3) correct critical weaknesses.
S 
W 
O 
T
 Write It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete MKTG 2: SWOT Analysis.
Step 4:  Formulating strategies. As managers formulate strategies, they should  consider 
the realities of the external environment and their available resources and 
 capabilities and design strategies that will help an organization achieve its goals. 
Managers typically formulate three main types of strategies: corporate, business, 
and functional. We’ll describe each shortly.
Step 5:  Implementing strategies. Once strategies are formulated, they must be 
 implemented. No matter how effectively an organization has planned its  strategies, 
performance will suffer if the strategies aren’t implemented properly.
Step 6:  evaluating results. The final step in the strategic management process is evalu-
ating results. How effective have the strategies been at helping the organization 
reach its goals? What adjustments are necessary: Do assets need to be acquired or 
sold? Does the organization need to be reorganized? and so forth.
 Write It 3!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com 
and complete MGMT 7: Planning (Business Plan Research).
What Strategic Weapons Do Managers Have?
ESPN Digital Media gets some 75.7 million unique users a month on its digital media platforms. 
Just think of that—75.7 million! That’s almost nine times the population of New York City. And its 
popular online platforms are just one component of ESPN’s many businesses. Company  president 
John Skipper “runs one of the most successful and envied franchises in entertainment” and obvi-
ously understands how to successfully manage its various strategies in today’s environment.13
In today’s intensely competitive and chaotic marketplace, organizations are looking for 
whatever “weapons” they can use to do what they’re in business to do and to achieve their goals. 
We think six strategic “weapons” are important in today’s environment: ❶ customer service, 
threats
Negative trends in the external environment
core competencies
The major value-creating capabilities  
of an organization
weaknesses
Activities the organization doesn’t do well or 
resources it needs but doesn’t possess
strengths
Any activities the organization does well or any 
unique resources that it has
resources
An organization’s assets that it uses to develop, 
manufacture, and deliver products to its customers
SWOT analysis
The combined external and internal analyses
capabilities
An organization’s skills and abilities in doing the 
work activities needed in its business
opportunities
Positive trends in the external environment

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     161
❷ employee skills and loyalty, ❸ innovation, ❹ quality, ❺ social media, and ❻ big data. 
We’ve covered customer service in previous chapters and will discuss employee-related matters 
in Chapters 7 and 9 through 13. Look for a discussion related to innovation and strategy in this 
chapter’s Technology and the Manager’s Job box and in Chapter 8. That leaves the last three—
quality, social media, and big data—for us to look at.
Quality as a strategic Weapon. When W. K. Kellogg started manufacturing 
cornflake cereal in 1906, his goal was to provide customers with a high-quality, nutritious 
product that was enjoyable to eat. That emphasis on quality is still important today. Every 
Kellogg employee is responsible for maintaining the high quality of its products.
Many organizations use quality practices to build competitive advantage and attract and 
hold a loyal customer base. If implemented properly, quality can be a way for an organiza-
tion to create a sustainable competitive advantage.14 And if a business is able to continuously 
improve the quality and reliability of its products, it may have a competitive advantage that 
can’t be taken away.15 Incremental improvement is something that becomes an integrated part 
of an organization’s operations and can develop into a considerable advantage.
Benchmark the best!
Managers in such diverse industries as health care, education, and financial services are dis-
covering what manufacturers have long recognized—the benefits of benchmarking, which 
is the search for the best practices among competitors or noncompetitors that lead to their 
superior performance. The basic idea of benchmarking is that managers can improve quality 
by analyzing and then copying the methods of the leaders in various fields.
benchmarking
The search for the best practices among  
competitors or noncompetitors that lead to their 
superior performance
Very  important . . . as two examples will illustrate! Caesars 
Entertainment (formerly Harrah’s Entertainment) is fanatical about 
customer  service, and for good reason. Company research showed 
that customers who were satisfied with the service they received at 
a Harrah’s  casino increased their gaming expenditures by 10 percent, 
and those who were extremely satisfied 
increased their gaming expenditures by 
24 percent. It discovered this  important 
customer service– expenditures con-
nection because of its  incredibly 
 sophisticated information system. But an organization’s IT  investment 
may not always have such a positive payoff, as the next example 
shows! At Prada’s Manhattan flagship store, store designers were 
hoping for a totally different shopping environment that combined 
“ cutting-edge architecture and twenty-first-century customer ser-
vice.” Or at least that was the strategy. Prada invested almost one-
fourth of the new store’s budget into IT, including wireless networks 
linked to an  inventory database. As envisioned, sales staff would 
roam the store armed with PDAs so they could check whether items 
were in stock. Even the dressing rooms would have touch screens 
so customers could do the same. But the strategy didn’t work as 
planned. The equipment malfunctioned and the staff was over-
whelmed with trying to cope with crowds and equipment that didn’t 
work. It’s no wonder the multimillion-dol-
lar investment might not have been the 
best strategy. When an organization’s 
 innovative IT “works,” it can be a very 
powerful strategic tool!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
  TAlk AbouT IT 1: How should managers ensure that their 
 innovative IT efforts contribute to helping strategies succeed?
  TAlk AbouT IT 2: How do your IT applications (smartphone or-
ganizers and calendars, apps, text messaging, etc.) help you be a better 
planner in your personal life?
InnOvATIvE IT AnD STRATEgy
:::::::  Technology and the Manager’s Job    :::::::
How important is innovative 
IT to a company’s strategy?
 Try It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Strategic Management.

What strategies 
Do Managers use?
 
Three main corporate strategies
Corporate Strategy
Specifies what businesses to be in and what to do with those businesses.
Multibusiness
Corporation
Growth strategy. Organization expands the number of markets served or products 
offered, either through its current business(es) or through new business(es).
WAyS to grow:
• Concentration: Growing by focusing on primary line of business and  
increasing the number of products offered or markets served  
in this primary business.
• Vertical integration: Growing by gaining control of inputs or outputs or both.
▪
▪Backward vertical integration—organization gains control of inputs by becoming its own supplier.
▪▪Forward vertical integration—organization gains control of outputs by becoming its own distributor.
• Horizontal integration: Growing by combining with competitors.
• Diversification: Growing by moving into a different industry.
▪
▪Related diversification—different, but related, industries. “Strategic fit.”
▪▪Unrelated diversification—different and unrelated industries. “No strategic fit.”
Jojje11/ Fotolia
The organization doesn’t grow, 
but doesn’t fall behind, either.
1
stability strategy. Organization continues—often during periods of  
uncertainty—to do what it is currently doing; to maintain things as they are.
• Examples: continuing to serve the same clients by offering the same product or service, maintaining  
market share, and sustaining current business operations.
Research and
Development
Manufacturing
Marketing
Human
Resources
Finance
Strategic
Business Unit 1
Strategic
Business Unit 2
Strategic
Business Unit 3
Multibusiness
Corporation
Functional
Competitive
Corporate
Exhibit 5–4 Organizational Strategies
▸▸▸
162
1
2

2
Renewal strategy. Organization is in trouble and needs to  
address declining performance.
• Retrenchment strategy: Minor performance problems—need to stabilize operations, revitalize organiza-
tional resources and capabilities, and prepare organization to compete once again.
• Turnaround strategy: More serious performance problems requiring more drastic action.
In both renewal strategies, managers can (1) cut costs and (2) restructure organizational operations, 
but actions are more extensive in turnaround strategy.
Competitive Strategy
How an organization will compete in its business(es).
• A small organization in only one line of business OR a large organization that has not diversified:
 
Competitive strategy describes how it will compete in its primary or main market.
• Organizations in multiple businesses:
Each business will have its own competitive strategy.
▪
▪Those single businesses that are independent and formulate their own competitive  
strategies are often called strategic business units (sbus).
Important Role of Competitive Advantage:
Developing an effective competitive strategy requires understanding competitive advantage, which is what sets an 
organization apart; that is, its distinctive edge, which comes from:
• The organization’s core competencies—doing something that others cannot do or doing it better than others can do it.
• The company’s resources—having something that its competitors do not.
Types of Competitive Strategies:
▸
▸
Porter’s competitive strategies framework:16
Having the lowest costs in its 
 industry and aimed at broad market.
• Highly efficient.
• Overhead kept to a minimum.
• Does everything it can to cut 
costs.
• Product must be perceived as 
comparable in quality to that 
offered by rivals or at least 
 acceptable to buyers.
Offering unique products that are 
widely valued by customers and 
aimed at broad market.
• Product differences: exception-
ally high quality, extraordinary 
service, innovative design, 
technological capability, or an 
unusually positive brand image.
A cost advantage (cost focus) 
or a differentiation advantage 
(differentiation focus) in a narrow 
segment or niche (which can be 
based on product variety, customer 
type, distribution channel,  
or geographical location).
What happens if an organiza-
tion can’t develop a cost or 
differentiation advantage—bad 
place to be.
2 
Differentiation strategy
3 
Focus strategy
4 
stuck in the middle
 1 Cost leadership strategy
Artursfoto/Fotolia
▸▸▸
Use strategic management to get a  
sustainable competitive advantage.
Functional STRATEGY
Those strategies used by an organization’s various functional departments (marketing, operations, finance/accounting, 
human resources, and so forth) to support the competitive strategy.
3
163
Strategic
Business Unit 1
Strategic
Business Unit 2
Strategic
Business Unit 3
Research and
Development
Manufacturing
Marketing
Human
Resources
Finance
3

164    Part 2  •  Planning
Backstory on BENCHMARKING
•▪ What: First known benchmarking effort by an American company
•▪When: 1979
•▪Who: Xerox
•▪ How: Japanese copier competitors had been traveling around, watching what 
 others were doing and then using that knowledge to aggressively replicate their 
successes. Xerox’s managers couldn’t figure out how Japanese  manufacturers could 
sell copiers in the United States for considerably less than Xerox’s  production costs.
•▪ Xerox’s head of manufacturing took a team to Japan to do a detailed study of its 
competitors’ costs and processes. SPOILER ALERT! The team found their Japanese 
rivals light years ahead of Xerox in efficiency.
•▪Xerox benchmarked those efficiencies and began its strategic turnaround in the 
copier market.
•▪And there you have it, the history behind benchmarking!
Recognized as an innovator in social media 
marketing, KLM Airlines gathers employees at 
Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport to form words 
that give live answers to questions asked 
by followers on Twitter and Facebook. KLM 
uses social media as a strategic weapon in 
achieving its goal of giving customers the 
best service in the airline industry.
EPA/KOEN VAN WEEL/Landov
growth strategy
A corporate strategy in which an organization 
expands the number of markets served or products 
offered either through its current business(es) or 
through new business(es)
stability strategy
A corporate strategy in which an organization 
continues to do what it is currently doing
renewal strategy
A corporate strategy that addresses declining 
organizational performance
strategic business units 
(SBUs)
An organization’s single businesses that are 
independent and formulate their own competitive 
strategies
competitive advantage
What sets an organization apart; its distinctive edge
cost leadership strategy
When an organization competes on the basis of 
having the lowest costs in its industry
differentiation strategy
When an organization competes on the basis of 
having unique products that are widely valued by 
customers
 Write It 4!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete MGMT 13: Strategic Decision Making (Competitive Marketing Strategy).
Today, many organizations use benchmarking practices. For instance, the American Medical 
Association developed more than 100 standard performance measures to improve medical care. 
Nissan benchmarked Walmart’s operations in purchasing, transportation, and logistics. And 
Southwest Airlines studied Indy 500 pit crews, who can change a race car’s tire in under 15 sec-
onds, to see how their gate crews could make their gate turnaround times even faster.17
social Media as a strategic Weapon. When Red Robin Gourmet Burgers 
launched its Tavern Double burger line, everything about the introduction needed to be 
 absolutely on target. So what did company executives do? They utilized social media.18 
Using an internal social network resembling Facebook, managers in the 460-restaurant 
chain were taught everything from the recipes to tips on efficiently making the burgers. 
That same internal network has been a great feedback tool. Company chefs have used tips 
and suggestions from customer feedback and from store managers to tweak the recipe.
Successful social media strategies should (1) help people—inside and outside the 
 organization—connect; and (2) reduce costs or increase revenue possibilities or both. As man-
agers look at how to strategically use social media, it’s important to have goals and a plan. For 
 instance, at global banking firm Wells Fargo & Co., 
executives realized that social media tools could be 
used to support and develop their business strategy 
and looked for ways to do just that.19 Now it’s using 
several social media tools for a variety of specific 
needs that align with company goals.
52 percent of managers say 
social media are important/
somewhat important to their 
business.
It’s not just for the social connections that 
 organizations are employing social media strategies. 
Many are finding that social media tools can boost 
productivity.20 For example, many physicians are 
competitive strategy
An organizational strategy for how an organization 
will compete in its business(es)
corporate strategy
An organizational strategy that specifies what  
businesses a company is in or wants to be in and 
what it wants to do with those businesses

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     165
tapping into online postings and sharing technologies as part of 
their daily routines. Collaborating with colleagues and experts 
allows them to improve the speed and efficiency of patient care. 
At TrunkClub, an online men’s clothes shopping service that 
sends trunks with new clothing items to clients who’ve requested 
them, the CEO uses a  software tool called Chatter to let the 
company’s personal shoppers know about hot new  shipments 
of shoes or clothes. He says that when he “chats” that informa-
tion out to the team, he immediately sees the personal shoppers 
putting the items into customers’ “trunks.”21 When used strategi-
cally, social media can be a powerful weapon, as can big data!
Big data as a strategic Weapon. Big data can be an ef-
fective counterpart to the information exchange generated through 
social media. All the enormous amounts of data collected about 
customers, partners, employees,  markets, and other quantifiables 
can be used to respond to the needs of these same stakeholders. 
With big data, managers can measure and know more about their 
businesses and “translate that knowledge into improved decision 
making and performance.”22 Case in point: When Walmart began 
looking at its enormous database, it noticed that when a hurricane 
was forecasted, not only did sales of flashlights and batteries 
increase, but so did sales of Pop-Tarts. Now, when a hurricane is 
threatening, stores stock Pop-Tarts with other emergency storm 
supplies at the front entrance. This helps them better serve custom-
ers and drive sales.23 By helping a business do what it’s in business 
to do, compete successfully, and attract and satisfy its customers in 
order to achieve its goals, big data is a critical strategic weapon.
Once managers have the organization’s strategies in place, 
it’s time to set goals and  develop plans to pursue those strategies.
A Question of Ethics
Do you shop? Well, you might be saying to yourself, that’s kind of a 
stupid question . . . of course I shop. Well, here’s another question: 
Do you realize the extent to which retail stores are spying on you 
as you shop?24 Although most of us “accept” the fact that when 
we shop online, we’re “allowing” the online retailer to install its 
cookies and to track our every move and click. Now, however, tech-
nology is being used more frequently in the physical retail environ-
ment. And it’s more than cameras watching us. Many retailers are 
using cell phone tracking technology, personalized advertising, and 
super spy cams. Why? To track your behavior and to get you (and 
all those other shoppers) to buy more. Results from a recent survey 
showed that 80 percent of consumers do not want stores to track 
their movements via smartphone. And 44 percent said that a track-
ing program would make them less likely to shop with that store.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
  Talk About It 3: What ethical dilemmas are involved with 
the strategy of retail consumer tracking?
  Talk About It 4: What factors might influence a business’s 
decision to use this strategy? (Think in terms of the various stake-
holders who might be affected by this decision.)
How Do Managers Set Goals and Develop Plans?
Planning = Goals + Plans
Planning involves two important aspects: goals and 
plans. Goals (objectives) are desired outcomes or targets. 
They guide managers’ decisions and form the criteria 
against which work results are measured. Plans are docu-
ments that outline how goals are going to be met. They 
usually include resource  allocations, budgets, schedules, 
and other necessary actions to accomplish the goals. As managers plan, they develop both 
goals and plans.
What Types of goals Do Organizations Have and How Do They Set 
Those goals?
Although it might seem that organizations have a single goal—for businesses, to make a 
profit, and for not-for-profit organizations, to meet the needs of some constituent group(s)—
an organization’s success can’t be determined by a single goal. In reality, all organizations 
have multiple goals. For instance, businesses may want to increase market share, keep 
employees motivated, or work toward more environmentally sustainable practices. And a 
church provides a place for religious practices, but it also assists economically disadvantaged 
 individuals in its community and acts as a social gathering place for church members.
5-3  Compare and 
contrast  
approaches to 
goal setting and 
planning.
plans
Documents that outline how goals are going to 
be met
goals (objectives)
Desired outcomes or targets
focus strategy
When an organization competes in a narrow 
segment or niche with either a cost focus or a 
differentiation focus
functional strategy
Strategy used in an organization’s various  
functional departments to support the  competitive 
strategy

166    Part 2  •  Planning
types of goals. Most company goals can be clas-
sified as either strategic or financial. Financial goals are 
related to the financial performance of the organization, 
while strategic goals are related to all other areas of an 
organization’s performance. For instance, McDonald’s fi-
nancial targets include 3 to 5 percent average annual sales 
and revenue growth, 6 to 7 percent average annual operat-
ing income growth, and returns on invested capital in the 
high teens.25 An example of a strategic goal: Nissan’s 
CEO’s request for the company’s GT-R super sports car: 
match or beat the performance of Porsche’s 911 Turbo.26 
These goals are stated goals—official statements of 
what an organization says, and what it wants its stake-
holders to believe, its goals are. However, stated goals—
which can be found in an organization’s charter, annual 
report, public relations announcements, or in public state-
ments made by managers—are often conflicting and 
influenced by what various stakeholders think organizations should do. Such statements can be 
vague and probably better represent management’s public relations skills instead of being mean-
ingful guides to what the organization is actually trying to accomplish. It shouldn’t be surprising 
then to find that an organization’s stated goals are often irrelevant to what’s actually done.27
Stated vs. Real Goals
If you want to know an organization’s real goals—those goals an organization actu-
ally pursues—observe what organizational members are doing. Actions define priorities. 
Knowing that real and stated goals may differ is important for recognizing what you might 
otherwise think are inconsistencies.
setting goals. As we said earlier, goals provide the direction for all management deci-
sions and actions and form the criterion against which actual accomplishments are measured. 
Everything organizational members do should be oriented toward achieving goals. These goals can 
be set either through a process of traditional goal setting or by using management by objectives.
Traditional Goal Setting. In traditional goal setting, goals set by top managers flow 
down  through the organization and become subgoals for each organizational area. (See 
 Exhibit 5–5.) This traditional perspective assumes that top managers know what’s best  because 
they see the “big picture.” And the goals passed down to each succeeding level guide individual 
employees as they work to achieve those assigned goals. Take a manufacturing business, for ex-
ample. The president tells the vice president of production what he expects manufacturing costs 
to be for the coming year and tells the marketing vice president what level he expects sales to 
reach for the year. These goals are passed to the next organizational level and written to reflect 
Pierre-Andre Senizergues,  
founder and CEO of Sole  
Technology, set a goal for his 
company to be the first action 
sports firm to go carbon neutral by 2020. 
Shown here planting a tree in honor of his 
employees, he devised a six-point plan—from 
reducing water usage to using green  
production materials—to achieve his goal.
Amber Miller/Newscom
Top
Management’s
Objective
Division
Manager’s Objective
Department
Manager’s Objective
Individual
Employee’s Objective
”We need to improve the
company’s performance.”
”Increase proﬁts
regardless of the means.”
”I want to see a
signiﬁcant improvement
in this division’s proﬁts.”
”Don’t worry about
quality; just work fast.”
Exhibit 5–5 Traditional goal Setting
stated goals
Official statements of what an organization says, 
and wants its stakeholders to believe, its goals are
real goals
Those goals an organization actually pursues as 
shown by what the organization’s members are 
doing
traditional goal setting
Goals set by top managers flow down through 
the organization and become subgoals for each 
organizational area

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     167
the responsibilities of that level, passed to the next level, and so forth. Then, at some later time, 
performance is evaluated to determine whether the assigned goals have been achieved. Or that’s 
the way it’s supposed to happen. But in reality, it doesn’t always do so. Turning broad strategic 
goals into departmental, team, and individual goals can be a difficult and frustrating process.
Another problem with traditional goal setting is that when top managers define the organiza-
tion’s goals in broad terms—such as achieving “sufficient” profits or increasing “market leader-
ship”—these ambiguous goals have to be made more specific as they flow down through the 
organization. Managers at each level define the goals and apply their own interpretations and biases 
as they make them more specific. Clarity is often lost as the goals make their way down from the 
top of the organization to lower levels. But it doesn’t have to be that way. For example, at Tijuana-
based dj Orthopedics de Mexico, employee teams see the impact of their daily work output on 
company goals. The company’s human resource manager says, “When people get a close connec-
tion with the result of their work, when they know every day what they are supposed to do and how 
they achieved the goals, that makes a strong connection with the company and their job.”28
When the hierarchy of organizational goals is clearly defined, as it is at dj Orthopedics, 
it forms an integrated network of goals, or a means-ends chain. Higher-level goals (or ends) 
are linked to lower-level goals, which serve as the means for their accomplishment. In other 
words, the goals achieved at lower levels become the means to reach the goals (ends) at the 
next level. And the accomplishment of goals at that level becomes the means to achieve the 
goals (ends) at the next level and on up through the different organizational levels. That’s how 
traditional goal setting is supposed to work.
Management by Objectives. Instead of using traditional goal setting, many organizations use 
management by objectives (MBO), a process of setting mutually agreed-upon goals and using 
those goals to evaluate employee performance. If a manager were to use this approach, he or 
she would sit down with each member of his or her team and set goals and periodically review 
whether progress was being made toward achieving those goals. MBO programs have four 
All you need to know about MBO!
Management by objectives (MBO) isn’t new—it was a popular 
management approach in the 1960s and 1970s. The concept 
can be traced back to Peter Drucker, who first popularized the 
term in his 1954 book The Practice of Management.29 Its appeal 
lies in its emphasis on converting overall objectives into specific 
objectives for organizational units and individual members.
How Is MBO Used?
• MBO makes goals practical and operational as they “cas-
cade” down through the organization.
• Overall broad objectives are translated into specific objec-
tives for each succeeding organizational level—division, 
departmental, and individual.
• Result: a hierarchy that links objectives at one level to 
those at the next level.
• For each individual employee, MBO provides specific per-
sonal performance objectives.
• If all individuals achieve their goals, then the unit’s goals 
will be attained. If all units attain their goals, then the di-
visional goals will be met until . . . BOOM . . . the organiza-
tion’s overall goals are achieved!
Does MBO Work?
• Assessing MBO effectiveness is not easy!
• Research on goal-setting gives us some answers:
 
+ Specific, difficult-to-achieve goals—an important 
part of MBO—produce a higher level of output than 
do no goals or generalized goals such as “do your 
best.”
 
+ Feedback—also an important part of MBO—favorably 
affects performance because it lets a person know 
whether his or her level of effort is sufficient or needs 
to be increased.
 
−Participation—also strongly advocated by MBO—has 
not shown any consistent relationship to performance.
aBsolutely critical to success of MBo program: 
Top management commitment to the process. When top 
managers have a high commitment to MBO and are per-
sonally involved in its implementation, productivity gains are 
higher than without that commitment.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these 
 discussion questions.
  Talk About It 5: Why do you think management com-
mitment is so important to the success of MBO programs?
  Talk About It 6: How could you use MBO for your per-
sonal goals?
◂▪◂▪◂ From the Past to the Present ▸▪▸▪▸
means-ends chain
An integrated network of goals in which higher-
level goals are linked to lower-level goals, which 
serve as the means for their accomplishment
management by objectives 
(MBO)
A process of setting mutually agreed-upon goals 
and using those goals to evaluate employee 
performance

168    Part 2  •  Planning
elements: ❶ goal specificity, ❷ participative decision making, ❸ an explicit time  period, 
and ❹ performance feedback.30 Instead of using goals to make sure employees are doing 
what they’re supposed to be doing, MBO uses goals to motivate them as well. The  appeal is 
that it focuses on employees working to accomplish goals they’ve had a hand in  setting. (See 
the From the Past to the Present box for more information on MBO.)
Studies of actual MBO programs have shown that it can increase employee performance 
and organizational productivity. For example, one review of MBO programs found productiv-
ity gains in almost all of them.31 But is MBO relevant for today’s organizations? Yes, if it’s 
viewed as a way of setting goals, because research shows that goal setting can be an effective 
tool in motivating employees.32
Characteristics of Well-Written Goals. No matter which approach is used, goals have to 
be written, and some goals more clearly indicate what the desired outcomes are. Managers 
should develop well-written goals. Exhibit 5–6 lists the characteristics.33 With these char-
acteristics in mind, managers are now ready to actually set goals.
Steps in Setting Goals. Managers should follow six steps when setting goals.
1. Review the organization’s mission and employees’ key job tasks. The mission statement 
provides an overall guide to what’s important, and goals should reflect that mission. In addi-
tion, it’s important to define what you want employees to accomplish as they do their tasks.
2. Evaluate available resources. Don’t set goals that are impossible to achieve given your 
available resources. Goals should be challenging, but realistic. After all, if the resources 
you have to work with won’t allow you to achieve a goal no matter how hard you try or 
how much effort is exerted, you shouldn’t set that goal.
3. Determine the goals individually or with input from others. Goals reflect desired  outcomes 
and should be congruent with the organizational mission and goals in other  organizational ar-
eas. These goals should be measurable, specific, and include a time frame for accomplishment.
4. Make sure goals are well-written and then communicate them to all who need to know.  
Writing down and communicating goals forces people to think them through. Written 
goals become visible evidence of the importance of working toward something.
5. Build in feedback mechanisms to assess goal progress. If goals aren’t being met, change 
them as needed.
6. Link rewards to goal attainment. Employees want to know “What’s in it for me?” Link-
ing rewards to goal achievement will help answer that question.
Once the goals have been established, written down, and communicated, managers are ready 
to develop plans for pursuing the goals.
What Types of Plans Do Managers Use and How Do  
They Develop Those Plans?
Managers need plans to help them clarify and specify how goals will be met. Let’s look first 
at the types of plans managers use.
types of plans. The most popular ways to describe plans are in terms of their breadth 
(strategic versus tactical), time frame (long term versus short), specificity (directional 
    Written in terms of outcomes rather than actions
    Measurable and quantiﬁable
    Clear as to a time frame
    Challenging yet attainable
    Written down
    Communicated to all necessary organizational members
Exhibit 5–6 Well-Written goals
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 222. Reprinted  
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     169
versus specific), and frequency of use (single-use 
versus standing). As Exhibit 5–7 shows, these types 
of plans aren’t independent. That is, strategic plans 
are usually long term, directional, and single-use. 
Let’s look at each type of plan.
Breadth. 
Strategic plans are those that apply to an 
entire organization and encompass the organization’s 
overall goals. Tactical plans (sometimes referred to 
as operational plans) specify the details of how the 
overall goals are to be achieved. When McDonald’s 
invested in the Redbox kiosk business, it was the 
result of strategic planning. Deciding when, where, 
and how to actually operate the business was the re-
sult of tactical plans in marketing, logistics, finance, 
and so forth.
Time Frame. The number of years used to define 
short-term and long-term plans has declined consid-
erably due to environmental uncertainty. Long term used to mean anything over seven years. 
Try to imagine what you’re likely to be doing in seven years. It seems pretty distant, doesn’t 
it? Now, you can begin to understand how difficult it is for managers to plan that far in the 
future. Thus, long-term plans are now defined as plans with a time frame beyond three years. 
Short-term plans cover one year or less.
Specificity. Intuitively, it would seem that specific plans would be preferable to directional, 
or loosely guided, plans. Specific plans are plans that are clearly defined and leave no room 
for interpretation. For example, a manager who wants to increase his work unit’s output by 8 
percent over the next 12 months might establish specific procedures, budget allocations, and 
work schedules to reach that goal. However, when uncertainty is high and managers must be 
flexible in order to respond to unexpected changes, they’d likely use directional plans, flex-
ible plans that set general guidelines. For example, Sylvia Rhone, president of Motown Re-
cords, had a simple goal—to “sign great artists.”34 She could create a specific plan to produce 
and market 10 albums from new artists this year. Or she might formulate a directional plan to 
use a network of people around the world to alert her to new and promising talent so she can 
increase the number of artists she has under contract. Sylvia, and any manager who engages in 
planning, must keep in mind that you have to weigh the flexibility of directional plans against 
the clarity you can get from specific plans.
Flexibility ↔ Clarity
Frequency of Use. Some plans that managers  develop are ongoing, while others are used 
only once. A single-use plan is a one-time plan specifically designed to meet the needs of a 
unique situation. For instance, when Dell began developing a pocket-sized device for getting 
on the Internet, managers used a single-use plan to guide their decisions. In contrast, stand-
ing plans are ongoing plans that provide guidance for activities performed repeatedly. For 
example, when you register for classes for the upcoming semester, you’re using a standardized 
registration plan at your college or university. The dates change, but the process works the 
same way semester after semester.
Exhibit 5–7 Types of Plans
bREADTH oF usE TIME FRAME
spECIFICITy
FREquEnCy oF usE
Strategic
Long term
Directional
Single-use
Tactical
Short term
Specific
Standing
Nestlé Japan is using a humanoid robot 
capable of reading and responding to human 
emotions to sell its Nescafé coffee machines. 
This tactical promotional plan devised to 
encourage consumers to buy products 
 supports Nestlé’s strategic plan of improving 
the company’s performance and ensuring its 
profitable growth.
REUTERS/ISSEI KATO/Landov
tactical plans
Plans that specify the details of how the overall 
goals are to be achieved
standing plans
Plans that are ongoing and provide guidance for 
activities performed repeatedly
single-use plan
A one-time plan specifically designed to meet the 
needs of a unique situation
directional plans
Plans that are flexible and set general guidelines
specific plans
Plans that are clearly defined and leave no room for 
interpretation
short-term plans
Plans with a time frame of one year or less
long-term plans
Plans with a time frame beyond three years
strategic plans
Plans that apply to the entire organization and 
encompass the organization’s overall goals

170    Part 2  •  Planning
developing plans. The process of developing plans is influenced by three contin-
gency factors and by the planning approach followed.
Contingency Factors in Planning. Three contingency factors affect the choice of plans: 
(1) organizational level, (2) degree of environmental uncertainty, and (3) length of future 
commitments.35
Exhibit 5–8 shows the relationship between a manager’s level in the organization and the 
type of planning done. For the most part, lower-level managers do operational (or tactical) 
planning while upper-level managers do strategic planning.
The second contingency factor is environmental uncertainty. When uncertainty is high, 
plans should be specific, but flexible. Managers must be prepared to change or amend plans 
as they’re implemented. For example, at Continental Airlines (now part of United Airlines), 
the former CEO and his management team established a specific goal of focusing on what 
customers wanted most—on-time flights—to help the company become more competitive 
in the highly uncertain airline industry. Because of that uncertainty, the management team 
identified a “destination, but not a flight plan,” and changed plans as necessary to achieve its 
goal of on-time service.
The last contingency factor also is related to the time frame of plans. The commitment 
concept says that plans should extend far enough to meet those commitments made when 
the plans were developed. Planning for too long or too short a time period is inefficient and 
ineffective. We can see the importance of the commitment concept, for example, with the 
plans that organizations make to increase their computing capabilities. At the data centers 
where companies’ computers are housed, many have found their “power-hungry computers” 
generate so much heat that their electric bills have skyrocketed because of the increased need 
for air conditioning.36 How does this illustrate the commitment concept? As organizations 
expand their computing technology, they’re “committed” to whatever future expenses are 
generated by that plan. They have to live with the plan and its consequences.
38 percent of leaders say planning for next  
year is a challenge.37
Approaches to Planning. Federal, state, and local government officials are working 
 together on a plan to boost populations of wild salmon in the northwestern United States. 
Managers in the Global Fleet Graphics division of the 3M Company are developing detailed 
plans to satisfy increasingly demanding customers and to battle more aggressive competi-
tors. Emilio Azcárraga Jean, chairman, president, and CEO of Grupo Televisa, gets input 
from many different people before setting company goals and then turns over the planning 
for achieving the goals to various executives. In each of these situations, planning is done a 
little differently. How an organization plans can best be understood by looking at who does 
the planning.
Top
Executives
Middle-Level
Managers
First-Level
Managers
Strategic
Planning
Operational
Planning
Exhibit 5–8 Planning and Organizational Level
commitment concept
The idea that plans should extend far enough to 
meet those commitments made when the plans 
were developed

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     171
What Contemporary Planning Issues  
Do Managers Face?
The second floor of the 21-story Hyundai 
Motor headquarters buzzes with data 
24 hours a day. That’s where you’d find 
the company’s Global Command and 
Control Center (GCCC), which is 
modeled after the CNN newsroom 
with numerous “computer screens relaying video and data keeping 
watch on Hyundai operations around the world.” Managers get in-
formation on parts shipments from suppliers to factories. Cameras 
watch assembly lines and closely monitor the company’s massive 
Ulsan, Korea, factory looking for competitors’ spies and any hints 
of labor unrest. The GCCC also keeps tabs on the company’s 
R&D activities in Europe, Japan, and North America. Hyundai can 
identify problems in an instant and react quickly. The company 
is all about aggressiveness and speed and is representative of how 
a successful twenty-first-century company approaches planning.41
5-4  Discuss  
contemporary  
issues in planning.
Virginia Poly, founder and CEO of Poly Place-
ments, a Canadian recruiting firm, manages 
in a dynamic environment where clients 
continue to use more contingent workers. 
To succeed, she plans to keep her employees 
focused on building long-term relationships 
with customers and serving as consultants 
rather than transactional salespeople.
Richard Lautens/Newscom
formal planning department
A group of planning specialists whose sole 
 responsibility is to help write the various 
 organizational plans
In the traditional approach, planning is done entirely by top-level managers who often 
are assisted by a formal planning department, a group of planning specialists whose sole 
responsibility is to help write the various organizational plans. Under this approach, plans 
 developed by top-level managers flow down through other organizational levels, much 
like the traditional approach to goal setting. As they flow down through the organiza-
tion, the plans are tailored to the particular needs of each level. Although this approach 
makes managerial planning thorough, systematic, and coordinated, all too often the focus 
is on developing “the plan,” a thick binder (or binders) full of meaningless informa-
tion that’s stuck away on a shelf and never used by anyone for guiding or coordinating 
work efforts.
In a survey of managers about formal top-down 
organizational planning processes, over 75 percent  
said that their company’s planning approach  
was unsatisfactory.38
A common complaint was that “plans are documents that you prepare for the corporate 
planning staff and later forget.”39 Although this traditional top-down approach to planning 
is used by many organizations, it’s effective only if managers understand the importance 
of  creating documents that organizational members actually use, not documents that look 
 impressive but are never used.
Another approach to planning is to involve more organizational members in the pro-
cess. In this approach, plans aren’t handed down from one level to the next, but instead are 
developed by organizational members at the various levels and in the various work units 
to meet their specific needs. For instance, at Dell, employees from production, supply 
management, and channel management meet weekly to make plans based on current prod-
uct demand and supply. In addition, work teams set their own daily schedules and track 
their progress against those schedules. If a team falls behind, team members develop 
“recovery” plans to try to get back on schedule.40 When organizational members 
are more actively involved in planning, they see that the plans are more than just 
 something written down on paper. They can actually see that the plans are used in 
directing and coordinating work.

172    Part 2  •  Planning
We conclude this chapter by addressing two contemporary issues in planning. 
Specifically, we’re going to look at planning effectively in dynamic environments and then at 
how managers can use environmental scanning, especially competitive intelligence.
 Try It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Planning.
How Can Managers Plan Effectively in Dynamic Environments?
Dynamic Environments = Planning Challenges
As we saw in Chapter 2, the external environment is continually changing. How can 
 managers effectively plan when the external environment is continually changing? We 
 already  discussed uncertain environments as one of the contingency factors that affect the 
types of plans managers develop. Because dynamic environments are more the norm than the 
exception, let’s look at how they can effectively plan in such environments.
In an uncertain environment, managers should develop plans that are specific, but 
 flexible. Although this may seem contradictory, it’s not. To be useful, plans need some speci-
ficity, but the plans should not be set in stone. Managers need to recognize that planning is an 
ongoing process. The plans serve as a road map although the destination may change due to 
dynamic market conditions. They should be ready to change directions if environmental con-
ditions warrant. This flexibility is particularly important as plans are implemented. Managers 
need to stay alert to environmental changes that may impact implementation and respond as 
needed. Keep in mind, also, that even when the environment is highly uncertain, it’s impor-
tant to continue formal planning in order to see any effect on organizational performance. It’s 
the persistence in planning that contributes to significant performance improvement. Why? It 
seems that, as with most activities, managers “learn to plan” and the quality of their planning 
improves when they continue to do it.42 Finally, make the organizational hierarchy flatter to 
effectively plan in dynamic environments. A flatter hierarchy means lower organizational lev-
els can set goals and develop plans because organizations have little time for goals and plans 
to flow down from the top. Managers should teach their employees how to set goals and to 
plan and then trust them to do it. And you need look no further than Bangalore, India, to find 
a company that effectively understands this. Just a decade ago, Wipro Limited was “an anon-
ymous conglomerate selling cooking oil and personal computers, mostly in India.” Today, 
it’s a $6.4 billion-a-year global company with most of its business coming from information-
technology services.43 Accenture, EDS, IBM, and the big U.S. accounting firms know all too 
well the competitive threat Wipro represents. Not only are Wipro’s employees economical, 
they’re knowledgeable and skilled. And they play an important role in the company’s plan-
ning. Since the information services industry is continually changing, employees are taught 
to analyze situations and to define the scale and scope of a client’s problems in order to offer 
the best solutions. These employees are the ones on the front line with the clients and it’s their 
responsibility to establish what to do and how to do it. It’s an approach that positions Wipro 
for success no matter how the industry changes.
 Watch It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Planning.

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     173
How Can Managers Use Environmental Scanning?
A manager’s analysis of the external environment may be improved by environmental 
 scanning, which involves screening large amounts of information to detect emerging trends. 
One of the fastest-growing forms of environmental scanning is competitive intelligence, 
which is accurate information about competitors that allows managers to anticipate competi-
tors’  actions rather than merely react to them.44 It seeks basic information about competitors: 
Who are they? What are they doing? How will what they’re doing affect us?
Many who study competitive intelligence suggest that much of the competitor-related 
information managers need to make crucial strategic decisions is available and acces-
sible to the public.45 In other words, competitive intelligence isn’t organizational espionage. 
Advertisements, promotional materials, press releases, reports filed with government agen-
cies, annual reports, want ads, newspaper reports, information on the Internet, and industry 
studies are readily accessible sources of information. Specific information on an industry and 
associated organizations is increasingly available through electronic databases. Managers can 
literally tap into this wealth of competitive information by purchasing access to  databases. 
Attending trade shows and debriefing your own sales staff also can be good sources of 
information on competitors. In addition, many organizations even regularly buy competi-
tors’ products and ask their own employees to evaluate them to learn about new technical 
innovations.46
In a changing global business environment, environmental scanning and obtaining 
competitive intelligence can be quite complex, especially when information must be gath-
ered from around the world. However, managers could subscribe to news services that 
review newspapers and magazines from around the globe and provide summaries to client 
companies.
Managers do need to be careful about the way information, especially competitive intel-
ligence, is gathered to prevent any concerns about whether it’s legal or ethical. For instance, 
Starwood Hotels sued Hilton Hotels alleging that two former employees stole trade secrets 
and helped Hilton develop a new line of luxury, trendy hotels designed to appeal to a young 
demographic.47 The court filing said, “This is the clearest imaginable case of corporate espio-
nage, theft of trade secrets, unfair competition, and computer fraud.” Competitive intelligence 
becomes illegal corporate spying when it involves the theft of proprietary materials or trade 
secrets by any means. The Economic Espionage Act makes it a crime in the United States to 
engage in economic espionage or to steal a trade secret.48 Difficult decisions about competi-
tive intelligence arise because often there’s a fine line between what’s considered legal and 
ethical and what’s considered legal but unethical. Although the top manager at one competi-
tive intelligence firm contends that 99.9 percent of intelligence gathering is legal, there’s no 
question that some people or companies will go to any lengths—some unethical—to get 
information about competitors.49
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.
environmental scanning
An analysis of the external environment, which 
involves screening large amounts of information to 
detect emerging trends
competitive intelligence
A type of environmental scanning that gives manag-
ers accurate information about competitors

5 Review 
CHAPTER SUMMARY
DIsCussIon quEsTIons
 5-1 Why are formal plans generated?
 5-2 Discuss why planning is beneficial.
 5-3 Describe in detail the six-step strategic management 
process.
 5-4 How would SWOT analysis strengthen the strategic 
management process—externally and internally?
 5-5 “Organizations that fail to plan are planning to fail.” 
Agree or disagree? Explain your position.
 5-6 Managers can’t empower all employees—in this  
context, explain how MBO is effective.
 5-7 Describe how managers can plan in today’s dynamic 
environment.
 5-8 What types of planning do you do in your personal life? 
Describe these plans in terms of being (a) strategic or 
operational, (b) short term or long term, (c) specific or 
directional, and (d) single-use or standing.
 5-9 Do a personal SWOT analysis. Assess your personal 
strengths and weaknesses (skills, talents,). What are you 
good at? What are you not so good at? What do you 
enjoy doing? Not enjoy doing? Then, identify career 
opportunities and threats by researching job prospects 
  5-1 Discuss the nature and purposes  
of planning.
As the primary management function, planning establishes the 
basis for all the other things that managers do. The planning 
we’re concerned with is formal planning; that is, specific goals 
covering a specific time period are defined and written down 
and specific plans are developed to make sure those goals are 
met. There are four reasons why managers should plan: (1) it 
establishes coordinated efforts; (2) it reduces uncertainty; (3) it 
reduces overlapping and wasteful activities; and (4) it estab-
lishes the goals or standards that are used in controlling work. 
 Although criticisms have been directed at planning, the evi-
dence generally supports the position that organizations benefit 
from formal planning.
  5-2 Explain what managers do in the strategic  
management process.
Managers develop the organization’s strategies in the 
 strategic management process, which is a six-step  process 
encompassing strategy planning, implementation, and 
 evaluation. The six steps are as follows: (1) Identify the or-
ganization’s current mission, goals, and strategies; (2) do an 
external analysis; (3) do an internal analysis—steps 2 and 3 
together are called SWOT analysis; (4) formulate strategies; 
(5) implement strategies; and (6) evaluate results. The end 
result of this process is a set of corporate, competitive, and 
functional strategies that allow the organization to do what 
it’s in business to do and to achieve its goals. Six strategic 
weapons are important in today’s environment: customer 
service, employee skills and loyalty, innovation, quality, 
 social media, and big data.
  5-3 Compare and contrast approaches to goal  
setting and planning.
The goals of most companies are classified as either strategic or 
financial. We can also look at goals as either stated or real. In 
traditional goal setting, goals set by top managers flow down 
through the organization and become subgoals for each orga-
nizational area. Organizations could also use management by 
objectives, which is a process of setting mutually agreed-upon 
goals and using those goals to evaluate employee performance. 
Plans can be described in terms of their breadth, time frame, 
specificity, and frequency of use. Plans can be developed by 
a formal planning department or by involving more organiza-
tional members in the process.
 5-4 Discuss contemporary issues in planning.
One contemporary planning issue is planning in dynamic envi-
ronments, which usually means developing plans that are spe-
cific but flexible. Also, it’s important to continue planning even 
when the environment is highly uncertain. Finally, because 
there’s little time in a dynamic environment for goals and plans 
to flow down from the top, lower organizational levels should 
be allowed to set goals and develop plans. Another contempo-
rary planning issue is using environmental scanning to help do 
a better analysis of the external environment. One form of envi-
ronmental scanning, competitive intelligence, can be especially 
helpful in finding out what competitors are doing.
174

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     175
in the industry you’re interested in. Look at trends and 
projections. You might want to check out the informa-
tion the Bureau of Labor Statistics provides on job 
prospects. Once you have all this information, write 
a specific career action plan. Outline five-year career 
goals and what you need to do to achieve those goals.
5-10 “The concept of competitive advantage is as 
 important for not-for-profit organizations as it is for 
for-profit organizations.” Do you agree or disagree 
with this statement? Explain, using examples to make 
your case.
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
5-11 Will planning become more or less important to man-
agers in the future? Why?
5-12 How could the Internet be helpful to managers as they 
follow the steps in the strategic management process?
5-13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
 assignment for this chapter.
Management Skill Builder  |   bEInG A GooD GoAl 
sETTER
It’s been said that if you don’t know where you’re going, any road will get you there. It has also been said that 
the shortest distance between two points is a straight line. These two “adages” emphasize the importance of 
goals. Managers are typically judged on their ability to achieve goals. If individuals or units in the organiza-
tion lack goals, there can be no direction or unity of effort. So successful managers are good at setting their 
own goals and helping others set goals.
 PERSOnAL InvEnTORy ASSESSMEnT 
Tolerance of Ambiguity scale
Managers often have to deal with ambiguous situations, which can make planning very 
challenging. In this PIA, you’ll assess your level of tolerance for ambiguity.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
Skill Basics
In addition to your own focus on goals, employees should 
also have a clear understanding of what they’re attempt-
ing to  accomplish. Managers have the responsibility to help 
 employees with this understanding as they set work goals. You 
can be more effective at helping employees set goals if you use 
the following eight suggestions:
• 
Identify an employee’s key job tasks. Goal setting begins 
by defining what it is that you want your employees to 
 accomplish. The best source for this information is each 
employee’s job description.
• 
Establish measurable, specific, and challenging goals for 
each key task. Identify the level of performance  expected 
of each employee. Specify the target toward which the 
 employee is working.
• 
Specify the deadlines for each goal. Putting deadlines on 
each goal reduces ambiguity. Deadlines, however, should 
not be set arbitrarily. Rather, they need to be realistic given 
the tasks to be completed.
• 
Allow the employee to participate actively. When 
 employees participate in goal setting, they’re more likely to 

176    Part 2  •  Planning
accept the goals. However, it must be sincere participation. 
That is, employees must perceive that you are truly seeking 
their input, not just going through the motions.
• 
Prioritize goals. When you give someone more than one 
goal, it’s important to rank the goals in order of importance. 
The purpose of prioritizing is to encourage the employee to 
take action and expend effort on each goal in proportion to 
its importance.
• 
Rate goals for difficulty and importance. Goal  setting 
should not encourage people to choose easy goals. 
 Instead, goals should be rated for their difficulty and 
 importance. When goals are rated, individuals can be 
given credit for trying difficult goals, even if they don’t 
fully achieve them.
• 
Build in feedback mechanisms to assess goal prog-
ress. Feedback lets employees know whether their level 
of effort is sufficient to attain the goal. Feedback should 
be both self-generated and supervisor-generated. Feedback 
should also be frequent and recurring.
• 
Link rewards to goal attainment. It’s natural for 
 employees to ask, “What’s in it for me?” Linking 
 rewards to the achievement of goals will help answer that 
 question.
Based on E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham, Goal-Setting: A Motivational Technique That 
Works! (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1984); and E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham, 
“Building a Practically Useful Theory of Goal Setting and Task Motivation,” American 
Psychologist, September 2002, 705–17.
Practicing the Skill
Read through this scenario and follow the directions at the end 
of it:
You worked your way through college while holding down a 
part-time job bagging groceries at the Food Town supermarket 
chain. You liked working in the food industry, and when you 
graduated, you accepted a position with Food Town as a man-
agement trainee. Three years have passed and you’ve gained 
experience in the grocery store industry and in operating a 
large supermarket. Several months ago, you received a promo-
tion to store manager at one of the chain’s locations. One of 
the things you’ve liked about Food Town is that it gives store 
managers a great deal of autonomy in running their stores. The 
company provides very general guidelines to its managers. Top 
management is concerned with the bottom line; for the most 
part, how you get there is up to you. Now that you’re finally 
a store manager, you want to establish an MBO-type program 
in your store. You like the idea that everyone should have clear 
goals to work toward and then be evaluated against those goals.
Your store employs 70 people, although except for the 
 managers, most work only 20 to 30 hours per week. You have six 
people reporting to you: an assistant manager; a weekend man-
ager; and grocery, produce, meat, and bakery managers. The only 
highly skilled jobs belong to the butchers, who have strict training 
and regulatory guidelines. Other less-skilled jobs include cashier, 
shelf stocker, maintenance worker, and grocery bagger.
Specifically describe how you would go about setting 
goals in your new position. Include examples of goals for the 
jobs of butcher, cashier, and bakery manager.
Winwood Performance Plus
To: Hannah Paul, Human Resources Manager
From: Eric Winwood, CEO
Subject: Environmental Issues
Hannah, as you know, our entertainment consulting busi-
ness has had a remarkable couple of years. The success 
we’ve achieved wouldn’t be possible without the hard 
work our  associates do, and I’m honored to be surround-
ed by such committed and talented individuals. I feel that 
our next push as a company should be to become more 
 environmentally responsible. All of us (me included) gener-
ate a lot of paper as we do our work, so I think our first step 
(and main focus right now) should be on controlling paper 
waste. I would like you to create a company-wide program 
for controlling paper waste. Before we get our associates 
involved, I’d like you to set some goals and develop some 
plans for this program. Get me your report (keep it to one 
page, please) outlining these goals and plans as soon as 
you can.
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     177
CAsE ApplICATIon
Primark Takes on Burberry and Alexander McQueen
T
he clothing retailer Primark, a value range of products, 
would compete directly with designer labels such as 
Burberry and Alexander McQueen.50 Primark began as 
Penneys in Dublin, the Republic of Ireland in 1969, where it still 
operates under the same name, and by late 1971, there were 11 
stores in the Republic of Ireland. Primark’s base increased rapidly 
when it entered Great Britain in 1973, and by the end of the fol-
lowing year the total number of stores had risen to 22. By 2000, 
with continued expansion and acquisition Primark had a store 
count of 108. The clothing retailer’s presence reached Spain in 
2006; the Netherlands in 2008; Portugal, Germany, and Belgium 
in 2009; Austria in 2012; France 
in 2013; and most recently the 
USA in 2015. 
This was made possible 
with Primark’s considerable 
planning and goal setting. It built on the fast-fashion trend that 
had hit the fashion industry and prided itself on encouraging its 
employees to set their own personal goals and to make use of the 
training programs offered. 
Primark is one of the most sought-after retail employers. 
It has continually had more applicants for jobs than available 
positions. Primark, like other organizations, has a purpose, 
people, and a structure to support and enable those people in 
carrying out that purpose. Primark is one of the fastest-growing 
chains in Europe. The company has 287 stores with nearly 
11 million square feet of retail space and employs more than 
54,000 people in its stores throughout the world. The business, 
which prides itself on customer satisfaction, offers one of the 
best salary structures in retail, but demands the very best; and 
gets the best by hiring the brightest individuals interested in a 
retail career. 
Goal setting by employees is coupled with recognizing strong 
organizational skills by management. Primark’s Management 
Trainee Program is aimed at graduates, with key training related 
to buying because the company sources its products from around 
the world. Interestingly, Primark is one of the few retailers that do 
not have an online presence. The company believes that it does 
not need an e-commerce site. Primark is owned by Associated 
British Foods and it outlined the outlook for its various business 
divisions in its 2014 Annual Report.
In terms of planning and decision making, the decision not 
to set up an e-commerce site makes perfect sense. Given the fact 
that many of its fast fashion clothing products begin at as low as 
US$4, it would take an enormous number of sales to offset the 
setup costs.
Primark also does not advertise. Instead it relies on public 
relations, word of mouth, and the strategic positioning of key 
stores. Planning is focused on the ability to offer fast fashion 
products at the lowest possible price. At the same time, it attempts 
to ensure that it operates within an ethical framework. Primark 
has membership in the Ethical Trading Initiative, and it also sup-
ports local charitable organiza-
tions and community projects. 
It is also going through the pro-
cess of replacing plastic carrier 
bags with paper bags. 
Following criticism in the early 2000s due to its use of Asian 
factories as the primary source of its products, Primark decided 
to attain ethical trading status. Since 2014 Primark continues to 
improve labor standards across its supply chain in China. Goals 
included increasing wages, delivering productivity benefits, and 
creating long-term and lasting improvements. In order to meet 
these goals, Primark hired. Progress has been encouraging, and 
realistic solutions to basic problems have begun to yield major 
successes. 
Primark’s planning approach has clearly been working. 
According to research 75 percent of a consumer’s decisions are 
made in three seconds at the point of sale. Primark focuses on 
this and pays particular attention to instantly hooking consumers 
with its shop fittings, layout, and visual merchandising. Primark’s 
planning for the future is well underway.
Discussion Questions
5-14 Discuss Primark’s decision to bypass e-commerce.
5-15 Differentiate Primark’s marketing effort from other retailers.
5-16 Provide examples of fast fashion chains in your country. How 
would they cope with they cope with competition from an 
 expanding retailer like Primark?
5-17 What types of planning and goal setting are described in this 
case? How would it help Primark’s future operations, and 
 expansion?
#1 
Primark . . .   
Hitting THE MARK

178    Part 2  •  Planning
CAsE ApplICATIon #2 
I
n 1996, Lance Armstrong, the now-disgraced pro cyclist, 
was diagnosed with testicular cancer. Only 25 years old 
when he found out he had cancer, Armstrong chose to focus 
on being a survivor, not a victim. During his personal battle 
with cancer, he soon realized there was a critical lack of re-
sources for individuals facing this disease. He decided to start 
a foundation devoted to helping others manage their lives on 
the cancer journey. Since 1998, the Livestrong Foundation has 
served millions of people affected by cancer. But in October 
2012, everything turned upside down for the organization. 
That’s when the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency released its report 
that “concluded once and for all that Lance Armstrong, the 
cancer charity’s founder and chairman, was guilty of doping 
during his legendary cycling career.”51
Doug Ulman, CEO and president of the Livestrong 
Foundation at the time, said he remembers that day clearly. In 
fact, he had anticipated for months that this day would come. 
As good friends, Ulman had 
believed Armstrong’s state-
ments of innocence over the 
years. But now, “there was 
no more hiding.”52 After the 
news broke, Ulman called a 
meeting of every one of the foundation’s 100-person staff, all 
squeezing into the foundation’s boardroom. There, shoulder 
to shoulder and crammed together, the suspicions and tingling 
uncertainties all of a sudden  became all too real. When Ulman 
announced that the organization could no longer “defend” its 
founder, it was a defining, watershed moment. Livestrong, the 
once highflying charity which had raised half a billion dollars 
over the years, was now facing a crisis—maybe even a life-or-
death crisis—of its own. Now, Livestrong would be operating 
in “life without Lance” mode.
Although it might be tempting to write off Livestrong 
as a hopeless case, Ulman and the rest of Livestrong’s staff 
have worked hard to keep the foundation viable and focused 
on its purpose. It’s not to ignore the challenges facing the 
Crisis Planning at Livestrong Foundation
organization, because those challenges are significant. But in 
managing through the crisis, Ulman had to keep staff morale 
up and make plans to transform and distance itself from Mr. 
Armstrong.53 One piece of advice he received from a crisis-
communications firm was to take the opportunity to get the 
foundation’s message out. Like many of the cancer sufferers 
it helps, Livestrong wanted to come out on the other side 
stronger than ever. It’s not been easy. The foundation has lost 
some of its biggest sponsors, including Nike and RadioShack. 
Revenues fell in 2012 and 2013. But in addition to his “crisis 
management” responsibilities, Ulman has been formulating 
plans and strategies. He says, “It’s so ironic—we are in the 
business of survivorship, that’s what we do. Now we find our-
selves dealing with the same circumstances in a totally differ-
ent place.”54
A new phase in Livestrong’s history began in early 
2015.55 The foundation’s Board of Directors announced a 
new 
president 
and 
CEO, 
Chandini Portteus. She comes 
to Livestrong from Susan 
G. Komen, the most widely-
known, 
largest, 
and 
best-
funded breast cancer organi-
zation in the United States. With her extensive knowledge 
and skills in fundraising, global programming, and advocacy, 
Livestrong has an individual well-versed in the challenges of 
leading this organization into the future.
Discussion Questions
5-19 Could an organization even plan for this type of situation? If yes, 
how? If not, why not?
5-20 How would goals be useful in this type of situation? What types 
of goals might be necessary?
5-21 What types of plans will be useful to Livestrong? Explain why 
you think these plans would be important.
5-22 What lessons about planning can managers learn from what 
Livestrong has endured?
Surviving a Crisis . . . possible 
only with PLANNING

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     179
CAsE ApplICATIon
Eyeing the Future
F
anatically focusing on execution and brand. That’s 
how analysts describe the strategic approach of Warby 
Parker, a New York City eyewear startup that’s quickly 
disrupting the old-fashioned eyewear business. Co-founded in 
2010 by David Gilboa and Neil Blumenthal (who are also now 
co-CEOs), Warby Parker has shown itself to be a fierce and 
successful competitor. Why? “One word, deliberate.”56 They 
are disciplined about their brand, but embrace and exploit tech-
nology in disrupting the staid and conservative way eyewear 
has traditionally been sold. So 
what does Warby Parker do?
To appreciate what Warby 
Parker is doing, we need to 
look back at how the idea for 
the company came about. After leaving a $700 pair of Prada 
frames in a seat-back pocket on a flight while backpacking in 
Southeast Asia, Gilboa began questioning why he had a $200 
iPhone in his pocket that had the technology to do a number 
of really cool things and yet replacing that pair of glasses—
a technology that’s hundreds of years old—would cost way 
more than that $200 iPhone.57 Like many other entrepreneurs, 
he believed there had to be a better way. His research exposed 
an industry that was a virtual monopoly with a very powerful 
eyewear supplier, thus the reason for the high-priced eyewear. 
Gilboa and a friend, who were both in Wharton’s MBA pro-
gram, weren’t even sure they could take on such a powerful 
competitor until they teamed up with Blumenthal (also at 
Wharton). Blumenthal was rumored to know “more than pretty 
much anyone else in the world about how to work outside 
of the traditional eyeglass-supply chains.”58 Well, it didn’t 
take long for the crew to start selling eyewear online from a 
Philadelphia apartment.
Today, Warby Parker designs and manufactures its own 
trendy, stylish frames and sells them directly to consumers over 
the Internet for an affordable $95 a pair. That price also includes 
prescription lenses, shipping, and a donation to VisionSpring, a 
not-for-profit where Blumenthal served as a director. The com-
pany has begun opening brick-and-mortar stores, with 11 open 
currently. Other growth plans include expanding their product 
mix, diversifying their frame selection into areas such as kids’ 
frames and glasses with progressive lenses, and exploring revo-
lutionary technologies that would do eye exams online. Warby 
Parker was named Fast Company’s Most Innovative Company 
of 2015 and was honored as a 
finalist in the 2014 USA Today 
Entrepreneur of the Year.59 
Another thing Warby Parker 
does is its “Buy a Pair, Give 
a Pair” program, which benefits visually-impaired individuals 
in developing countries. Meanwhile, to carry on the company’s 
success, Gilboa and Blumenthal will continue being disciplined 
in all they do, fanatically focusing attention on execution and 
brand. That future vision should help Warby Parker continue on 
its successful journey.
Discussion Questions
5-23 What role do you think goals might play in planning for Warby 
Parker’s future? List some goals you think might be important. 
(Make sure these goals have the characteristics of well-written 
goals.)
5-24 What types of plans would be needed in an industry such as this 
one? (For instance, long-term or short-term, or both?)  Explain 
why you think these plans would be important.
5-25 What contingency factors might affect the planning Warby 
Parker executives do? How might those contingency factors 
 affect the planning?
5-26 What competitive advantage(s) do you think Warby Parker has? 
What competitive challenges do you think the company faces?
#3 
Future Vision

180    Part 2  •  Planning
Endnotes
 1. M. C. Mankins and R. Steele, 
“Stop Making Plans—Start Mak-
ing Decisions,” Harvard Business 
Review, January 2006, 76–84; 
L. Bossidy and R. Charan, Ex-
ecution: The Discipline of Getting 
Things Done (New York: Crown/
Random House, 2002); P. Rob-
erts, “The Art of Getting Things 
Done,” Fast Company, June 2000, 
162; H. Mintzberg, The Rise and 
Fall of Strategic Planning (New 
York: Free Press, 1994); G. Hamel 
and C. K. Prahalad, Competing for 
the Future (Boston: Harvard Busi-
ness School Press, 1994); and D. 
Miller, “The Architecture of Sim-
plicity,” Academy of Management 
Review, January 1993, 116–38.
 2. See, for example, F. Delmar and S. 
Shane, “Does Business Planning 
Facilitate the Development of New 
Ventures?” Strategic Management 
Journal (December 2003): 1165–
85; R. M. Grant, “Strategic Plan-
ning in a Turbulent Environment: 
Evidence from the Oil Majors,” 
Strategic Management Journal 
(June 2003): 491–517; P. J. Brews 
and M. R. Hunt, “Learning to Plan 
and Planning to Learn: Resolv-
ing the Planning School/Learn-
ing School Debate,” Strategic 
Management Journal (December 
1999): 889–913; C. C. Miller and 
L. B. Cardinal, “Strategic Planning 
and Firm Performance: A Synthe-
sis of More Than Two Decades of 
Research,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal (March 1994): 1649–
85; N. Capon, J. U. Farley, and J. 
M. Hulbert, “Strategic Planning 
and Financial Performance: More 
Evidence,” Journal of Manage-
ment Studies (January 1994): 22–
38; D.K. Sinha, “The Contribution 
of Formal Planning to Decisions,” 
Strategic Management Journal 
(October 1990): 479–92; J. A. 
Pearce II, E. B. Freeman, and R. B. 
Robinson Jr., “The Tenuous Link 
between Formal Strategic Planning 
and Financial Performance,” Acad-
emy of Management Review, Oc-
tober 1987, 658–75; L. C. Rhyne, 
“Contrasting Planning Systems 
in High, Medium, and Low Per-
formance Companies,” Journal of 
Management Studies (July 1987): 
363–85; and J. A. Pearce II, K. K. 
Robbins, and R. B. Robinson Jr., 
“The Impact of Grand Strategy and 
Planning Formality on Financial 
Performance,” Strategic Manage-
ment Journal (March–April 1987): 
125–34.
 3. I. Boudway, “Holy Cow! The 
Chicago Cubs Finally Have a 
Winning Business Plan,” http://
www.bloomberg.com/news/ 
articles/2015-04-01/the-chicago-
cubs-finally-have-a-winning- 
business-plan, April 1, 2015.
 4. S. Lohr, “IBM Scores Weather 
Data Deal and Starts Internet of 
Things Unit,” New York Times On-
line, March 31, 2015.
 5. M. Shiraki, “Toyota to End 
 Expansion Freeze, Invest $1.3 
 Billion in Two New Mexico, 
China Plants,” http://www.reuters. 
com/article/2015/04/03/us-
toyota-factory-mexico-china- 
idUSKBN0MU05L20150403, 
April 3, 2015.
 6. M. Snider, “ESPN.com Gets a 
Fresh Look for Its Big 2-0,” USA 
Today, April 1, 2015, 1A.
 7. B. Horovitz, “Breakfast Biscuits 
Take on a New Shape: Biscuit 
Taco,” USA Today, March 25, 
2015, 7B.
 8. C. 
Rauwald, 
“Mercedes-Benz 
Plans First Pickup with Luxury 
Pushing 
Limits,” 
http://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/ 
2015-03-27/mercedes-benz-plans-
first-pickup-truck-as-luxury- 
pushes-limits, March 27, 2015.
 9. A. J. Karr, “December Comp 
Crux,” Women’s Wear Daily, Janu-
ary 7, 2011, 4; A. Steigrad, “Spe-
cialty Retailers Show Weak Spots 
in Quarter,” Women’s Wear Daily, 
August 20, 2010, 14; K. Peterson, 
“Buckle Bends as Claiborne, Or-
bitz Climb, Ambow Sinks,” Wall 
Street Journal, August 6, 2010, 
C6; N. Casey, “Teen Idols: Aero-
postale, Buckle Post Big Gains as 
Rivals Swoon,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, May 22, 2009, B8; V. Dagher, 
“Hot Topic Goes Cold, Buckle 
Wears a Smile,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, May 22, 2009, C6; and J. 
B. Stewart, “A Retailer Bucks a 
Trend with Sales Success in Its 
Jeans,” Wall Street Journal, May 
13, 2009, D1.
 10. M. Gruber, F. Heinemann, M. 
Brettel, and S. Hungeling, “Con-
figurations of Resources and Ca-
pabilities and Their Performance 
Implications: 
An 
Exploratory 
Study on Technology Ventures,” 
Strategic Management Journal 
(December 2010): 1337–56; T. 
H. Poister, “The Future of Strate-
gic Planning in the Public Sector: 
Linking Strategic Management 
and Performance,” Public Admin-
istration Review, December 2010, 
S246–S254; J. González-Benito 
and Isabel Suárez-González, “A 
Study of the Role Played by Manu-
facturing Strategic Objectives and 
Capabilities in Understanding the 
Relationship 
between 
Porter’s 
Generic Strategies and Business 
Performance,” 
British 
Journal 
of Management vol. 21 (2010): 
1027–43; J. A. Parnell and E. B. 
Dent, “The Role of Luck in the 
Strategy-Performance 
Relation-
ship,” Management Decision vol. 
47, no. 6 (2009): 1000–21; H. J. 
Cho and V. Pucik, “Relationship 
between Innovativeness, Quality, 
Growth, Profitability, and Market 
Value,” 
Strategic 
Management 
Journal (June 2005): 555–75; W. F. 
Joyce, “What Really Works,” Or-
ganizational Dynamics, May 2005, 
118–29; M. A. Roberto, “Strategic 
Decision-Making 
Processes,” 
Group & Organization Manage-
ment, December 2004, 625–58; A. 
Carmeli and A. Tischler, “The Re-
lationships between Intangible Or-
ganizational Elements and Orga-
nizational Performance,” Strategic 
Management Journal (December 
2004): 1257–78; D. J. Ketchen, C. 
C. Snow, and V. L. Street, “Improv-
ing Firm Performance by Matching 
Strategic Decision-Making Pro-
cesses to Competitive Dynamics,” 
Academy of Management Execu-
tive, November 2004, 29–43; E. H. 
Bowman and C. E. Helfat, “Does 
Corporate Strategy Matter?” Stra-
tegic Management Journal 22 
(2001): 1–23; P. J. Brews and M. 
R. Hunt, “Learning to Plan and 
Planning to Learn: Resolving the 
Planning School-Learning School 
Debate,” Strategic Management 
Journal 20 (1999): 889–913; D. J. 
Ketchen Jr., J. B. Thomas, and R. 
R. McDaniel Jr., “Process, Content 
and Context; Synergistic Effects 
on Performance,” Journal of Man-
agement 22, no. 2 (1996): 231–57; 
C. C. Miller and L. B. Cardinal, 
“Strategic Planning and Firm Per-
formance: A Synthesis of More 
Than Two Decades of Research,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(December 1994): 1649–65; and 
N. Capon, J. U. Farley, and J. M. 
Hulbert, “Strategic Planning and 
Financial Performance: More Evi-
dence,” Journal of Management 
Studies (January 1994): 105–10.
 11. From vision statement of Avon 
Products Inc. Copyright © by 
Avon Products Inc. Reprinted by 
permission.
 12. C. K. Prahalad and G. Hamel, 
“The Core Competence of the 
Corporation,” Harvard Business 
Review, May–June 1990, 79–91.
 13. M. Snider, “ESPN.com Gets 
a Fresh Look for Its Big 2-0”; 
“ESPN Falls to 3rd in Online 
Sports Site Rankings,” The Wrap 
Media <www.thewrap.com>, Feb-
ruary 8, 2012; B. Barnes, “Across 
U.S., ESPN Aims to Be the Home 
Team,” New York Times Online, 
July 20, 2009; and T. Lowry, “In 
the Zone,” Bloomberg Business-
Week, October 17, 2005, 66–77.
 14. Managers and Technology box 
based on D. McGinn, “From Har-
vard to Las Vegas,” Newsweek, 
April 18, 2005, E8–E14; G. Lind-
say, “Prada’s High-Tech Misstep,” 
Business 2.0, March 2004, 72–75; 
G. Loveman, “Diamonds in the 
Data Mine,” Harvard Business 
Review, May 2003, 109–13; and 
L. Gary, “Simplify and Execute: 
Words to Live by in Times of Tur-
bulence,” Harvard Management 
Update, January 2003, 12.
 15. N. A. Shepherd, “Competitive Ad-
vantage: Mapping Change and the 
Role of the Quality Manager of the 
Future,” Annual Quality Congress, 
May 1998, 53–60; T. C. Powell, 
“Total Quality Management as 
Competitive Advantage: A Review 
and Empirical Study,” Strategic 
Management 
Journal 
(January 
1995): 15–37; and R. D. Spitzer, 
“TQM: The Only Source of Sus-
tainable Competitive Advantage,” 
Quality Progress, June 1993, 59–64.
 16. C. H. Green, “Competitive The-
ory and Business Legitimacy,” 
BusinessWeek Online, June 23, 
2010; S. Parthasarathy, “Business 
Strategy” Financial Management, 
June 2010, 32–33; M. E. Porter, 
On Competition, Updated and Ex-
panded Edition (Boston: Harvard 
Business School, 2008); O. Or-
manidhi and O. Stringa, “Porter’s 
Model of Generic Competitive 
Strategies,” Business Economics, 
July 2008, 55–64; M. E. Porter, 
“The Five Competitive Forces 
That Shape Strategy,” Harvard 
Business  Review, January 2008, 
78–93; N. Argyres and A. M. Mc-
Gahan, “Introduction: Michael 
Porter’s Competitive Strategy,” 
Academy of Management Execu-
tive, May 2002, 41–42; and N. 
Argyres and A. M. McGahan, “An 
Interview with Michael Porter,” 
Academy of Management Execu-
tive, May 2002, 43–52.
 17. R. Pear, “A.M.A. to Develop Mea-
sure of Quality of Medical Care,” 
New York Times Online, February 
21, 2006; and A. Taylor III, “Dou-
ble Duty,” Fortune, March 7, 2005, 
104–10.
 18. T. Mullaney, “‘Social Business’ 
Launched This Burger,” USA To-
day, May 17, 2012, 1A+.
 19. B. Roberts, “Social Media Gets 
Strategic,” HR Magazine, October 
2012, 30.
 20. B. Acohido, “Social-Media Tools 
Boost Productivity,” USA Today, 
August 13, 2012, 1B+.
 21. Ibid.
 22. A. McAfee and E. Brynjolfs-
son, “Big Data: The Management 
Revolution,” Harvard Business 
Review, October 2012, 62.
 23. K. Cukier and V. Mayer-Schön-
berger, “The Financial Bonanza 
of Big Data,” Wall Street Journal, 
March 8, 2013, A15.
 24. “In-Store Cell Phone Tracking 
Pits Consumers against Retailers: 
Transparency Is Vital if Retailers 
Want to Build Trust with Custom-
ers,” adage.com, April 17, 2014; 
“New Study: Consumers Over-
whelmingly Reject In-Store Track-
ing by Retailers,” www.prweb.
com, March 27, 2014; A. Farnham, 
“Retailers Snooping on Holiday 
Shoppers Raises Privacy Con-
cerns,” abcnews.go.com/Business/, 
December 10, 2013; V. Kopytoff, 
“Stores Sniff out Smartphones to 
Follow Shoppers,” MIT Technology 
Review, 
www.technologyreview. 
com, 
November 
12, 
2013; 
“How Stores Spy on You,” www 
.consumerreports.org, March 2013; 
J. O’Donnell and S.  Meehan, 

CHAPTER 5  •  Foundations of Planning     181
 “Retailers Want to Read Your 
Mind,” USA Today, March 2, 2012, 
1B+; and C. Duhigg, “How Compa-
nies Learn Your Secrets,” New York 
Times Online, February 16, 2012.
 25. McDonald’s Annual Report 2007, 
www.mcdonalds.com (April 21, 
2008).
 26. S. Zesiger Callaway, “Mr. Ghosn 
Builds His Dream Car,” Fortune, 
February 4, 2008, 56–58.
 27. See, for instance, J. Pfeffer, Or-
ganizational Design (Arlington 
Heights, IL: AHM Publishing, 
1978), 5–12; and C. K. Warriner, 
“The Problem of Organizational 
Purpose,” Sociological Quarterly 
(Spring 1965): 139–46.
 28. D. Drickhamer, “Braced for the 
Future,” Industry Week, October 
2004, 51–52.
 29. P. N. Romani, “MBO by Any Other 
Name Is Still MBO,” Supervision, 
December 1997, 6–8; and A. W. 
Schrader and G. T. Seward, “MBO 
Makes Dollar Sense,” Personnel 
Journal (July 1989): 32–37.
 30. From the Past to the Present 
box based on P. F. Drucker, The 
Practice of Management (New 
York: Harper & Row, 1954); J. 
F. Castellano and H. A. Roehm, 
“The Problem with Managing by 
Objectives and Results,” Qual-
ity Progress, March 2001, 39–46; 
J. Loehr and T. Schwartz, “The 
Making of a Corporate Athlete,” 
Harvard Business Review, Janu-
ary 2001, 120–28; A. J. Vogl, 
“Drucker, of Course,” Across the 
Board, 
November–December 
2000, 1. For information on goals 
and goal setting, see, for example, 
E. A. Locke, “Toward a Theory of 
Task Motivation and Incentives,” 
Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Performance, May 1968, 
157–89; E. A. Locke, K. N. Shaw, 
L. M. Saari, and G. P. Latham, 
“Goal Setting and Task Perfor-
mance: 1969–1980,” Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, July 1981, 12–52; 
E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham, A 
Theory of Goal Setting and Task 
Performance (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990); P. Ward 
and M. Carnes, “Effects of Post-
ing Self-Set Goals on Collegiate 
Football Players’ Skill Execu-
tion During Practice and Games,” 
Journal of Applied Behavioral 
Analysis, Spring 2002, 1–12; D. 
W. Ray, “Productivity and Prof-
itability,” Executive Excellence, 
October 2001, 14; D. Archer, 
“Evaluating Your Managed Sys-
tem,” CMA Management, Janu-
ary 2000, 12–14; and C. Antoni, 
“Management by Objectives: An 
Effective Tool for Teamwork,” 
International Journal of Human 
Resource Management (February 
2005): 174–84. For information 
on participation in goal setting, 
see, for example, T. D. Ludwig 
and E. S. Geller, “Intervening to 
Improve the Safety of Delivery 
Drivers: A Systematic Behavioral 
Approach,” Journal of Organi-
zational Behavior Management 
(April 4, 2000): 11–24; P. Latham 
and L. M. Saari, “The Effects of 
Holding Goal Difficulty Constant 
on Assigned and Participatively 
Set Goals,” Academy of Man-
agement Journal (March 1979): 
163–68; M. Erez, P. C. Earley, and 
C. L. Hulin, “The Impact of Par-
ticipation on Goal Acceptance and 
Performance: A Two Step Model,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(March 1985): 50–66; and G. P. 
Latham, M. Erez, and E. A. Locke, 
“Resolving Scientific Disputes 
by the Joint Design of Crucial 
Experiments by the Antagonists: 
Application to the Erez Latham 
Dispute Regarding Participation in 
Goal Setting,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology (November 1988): 
753–72. For information on ef-
fectiveness of MBO, see, for ex-
ample, F. Dahlsten, A. Styhre, and 
M. Williander, “The Unintended 
Consequences of Management by 
Objectives: The Volume Growth 
Target at Volvo Cars,” Leader-
ship & Organization Development 
Journal (July 2005): 529–41; J. R. 
Crow, “Crashing with the Nose 
Up: Building a Cooperative Work 
Environment,” Journal for Quality 
and Participation (Spring 2002): 
45–50; and E. C. Hollensbe and J. 
P. Guthrie, “Group Pay-for-Perfor-
mance Plans: The Role of Spon-
taneous Goal Setting,” Academy 
of Management Review, October 
2000, 864–72.
 31. R. Rodgers and J. E. Hunter, “Im-
pact of Management by Objectives 
on Organizational Productivity,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(April 1991): 322–36.
 32. G. P. Latham, “The Motivational 
Benefits of Goal-Setting,” Acad-
emy of Management Executive, 
November 2004, 126–29.
 33. For additional information on 
goals, see, for instance, P. Druck-
er, The Executive in Action (New 
York: HarperCollins Books, 1996), 
207–14; and E. A. Locke and G. P. 
Latham, A Theory of Goal Setting 
and Task Performance (Upper Sad-
dle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990).
 34. J. L. Roberts, “Signed, Sealed, 
Delivered?” Newsweek, June 20, 
2005, 44–46.
 35. Several of these factors were sug-
gested by R. K. Bresser and R. C. 
Bishop, “Dysfunctional Effects of 
Formal Planning: Two Theoretical 
Explanations,” Academy of Man-
agement Review, October 1983, 
588–99; and J. S. Armstrong, “The 
Value of Formal Planning for Stra-
tegic Decisions: Review of Em-
pirical Research,” Strategic Man-
agement Journal (July–September 
1982): 197–211.
 36. K. Garber, “Powering the Infor-
mation Age,” U.S. News & World 
Report, April 2009, 46–48; and S. 
Hamm, “It’s Too Darn Hot,” Busi-
nessWeek, March 31, 2008, 60–63.
 37. “As Q4 Approaches, Which of the 
Following Is Most Challenging 
for You as a Leader?” SmartBrief 
on Leadership, smartbrief.com/ 
leadership, October 15, 2013.
 38. A. 
Campbell, 
“Tailored, 
Not 
Benchmarked: A Fresh Look at 
Corporate 
Planning,” 
Harvard 
Business Review Online, https://
hbr.org/1999/03/tailored-not-
benchmarked-a-fresh-look-at- 
corporate-planning, April 1999.
 39. Ibid.
 40. J. H. Sheridan, “Focused on Flow,” 
IW, October 18, 1999, 46–51.
 41. A. Taylor III, “Hyundai Smokes 
the Competition,” Fortune, Janu-
ary 18, 2010, 62–71.
 42. Brews and Hunt, “Learning to 
Plan and Planning to Learn: Re-
solving the Planning School/
Learning School Debate.”
 43. R. J. Newman, “Coming and Go-
ing,” U.S. News and World Re-
port, January 23, 2006, 50–52; T. 
Atlas, “Bangalore’s Big Dreams,” 
U.S. News and World Report, May 
2, 2005, 50–52; and K. H. Ham-
monds, “Smart, Determined, Am-
bitious, Cheap: The New Face of 
Global Competition,” Fast Com-
pany, February 2003, 90–97.
 44. See, for example, P. Tarraf and R. 
Molz, “Competitive Intelligence,” 
SAM 
Advanced 
Management 
Journal (Autumn 2006): 24–34; 
W. M. Fitzpatrick, “Uncover-
ing Trade Secrets: The Legal and 
Ethical Conundrum of Creative 
Competitive Intelligence,” SAM 
Advanced Management Journal 
(Summer 2003): 4–12; L. Lavelle, 
“The Case of the Corporate Spy,” 
BusinessWeek, 
November 
26, 
2001, 56–58; C. Britton, “Decon-
structing Advertising: What Your 
Competitor’s Advertising Can Tell 
You about Their Strategy,” Com-
petitive Intelligence, January/Feb-
ruary 2002, 15–19; and L. Smith, 
“Business Intelligence Progress 
in Jeopardy,” InformationWeek, 
March 4, 2002, 74.
 45. S. Greenbard, “New Heights in 
Business Intelligence,” Business 
Finance, March 2002, 41–46; K. A. 
Zimmermann, “The Democratiza-
tion of Business Intelligence,” KN 
World, May 2002, 20–21; and C. 
Britton, “Deconstructing Advertis-
ing: What Your Competitor’s Ad-
vertising Can Tell You about Their 
Strategy,” Competitive Intelligence, 
January–February 2002, 15–19.
 46. C. Hausman, “Business-Ethics 
News Featured in World-Press Re-
ports,” Ethics Newsline, March 14, 
2011; and L. Weathersby, “Take 
This Job and ***** It,” Fortune, 
January 7, 2002, 122.
 47. P. Lattiman, “Hilton and Starwood 
Settle Dispute,” New York Times 
Online, December 22, 2010; “Star-
wood vs. Hilton,” Hotels’ Invest-
ment Outlook, June 2009, 14; R. 
Kidder, “Hotel Industry Roiled by 
Corporate Espionage Claim,” Ethics 
Newsline, 
www.globalethicslorg/ 
news-line; Reuters, “Hilton Hotels 
Is Subpoenaed in Espionage Case,” 
New York Times Online, April 22, 
2009; T. Audi, “U.S. Probes Hil-
ton over Theft Claims,” Wall Street 
Journal, April 22, 2009, B1; and T. 
Audi, “Hilton Is Sued over Luxury 
Chain,” Wall Street Journal, April 
17, 2009, B1.
 48. B. Rosner, “HR Should Get a 
Clue: Corporate Spying Is Real,” 
Workforce, April 2001, 72–75.
 49. K. Western, “Ethical Spying,” 
Business Ethics, September–Octo-
ber 1995, 22–23.
 50. Associated British Foods Plc, www 
.abf.co.uk; Primark, www.primark 
.co.uk; R. Baker, “Primark Boldly 
Does Not Go Online,” Market-
ing Week, August 25, 2011, www 
.marketingweek .co.uk; and; M. 
Sheridan, C. Moore, and K. Nobbs, 
“Fast 
Fashion 
Requires 
Fast 
 Marketing: The Role of Category 
Management in Fast Fashion Posi-
tioning,” Journal of Fashion Mar-
keting and Management, 10 (2006).
 51. I. Lapowsky, “Livestrong with-
out Lance,” http://www.inc.com/ 
magazine/201404/issie-lapowsky/
what-livestrong-is-like-without-
lance-armstrong.html, April 1, 2014.
 52. Ibid.
 53. V. O’Connell, “Livestrong Seeks 
Life after Lance Armstrong,” Wall 
Street Journal, March 6, 2013, B7.
 54. Ibid.
 55. “Chandini 
Portteus 
Named 
New President and CEO for 
LIVESTRONG,” LIVESTRONG 
Staff, 
http://blog.livestrong.
org/2015/03/24/chandini-portteus-
named-new-president-and-ceo-
for-livestrong/, March 24, 2015.
 56. K. Weisul, “How Neil Blumen-
thal Took the Risk Out of Warby 
 Parker,” 
http://www.inc.com/
kimberly-weisul/how-warby-
parker-took-the-risk-out-of-its-
business.html, May 28, 2015; 
and M. Chafkin, “Warby Parker 
Sees the Future of Retail,” http://
www.fastcompany.com/3041334/
most-innovative-companies-2015/ 
warby-parker-sees-the-future-of-
retail, February 17, 2015.
 57. M. Diebel, “A Visionary Approach 
to Selling Eyewear,” USA Today, 
December 1, 2014, 3B.
 58. Chafkin, “Warby Parker Sees the 
Future of Retail.”
 59. Chafkin, “Warby Parker Sees the 
Future of Retail”; and Diebel, “A 
Visionary Approach to Selling 
Eyewear.”

Organizational Structure 
and Design
6
    Bureaucracies  
  
    are  
  
    inefficient.
Tom Wang/Alamy

183
People commonly assume that bureaucracies—or  
mechanistic structures—are inefficient. Critics claim these 
organizations are slow, rule-bound, and have too much “red 
tape.” The media makes you think bureaucracies are  
extinct—replaced by empowered teams and loosely  
structured and adaptive organizations. Although many  
organizations today do look like that, the truth is that  
bureaucracies are still alive and well. Most medium-sized 
and large organizations are structured as a bureaucracy  
because its traits—specialization, formal rules and  
regulations, clear chain of command, and  
departmentalization—help efficiently structure  
people and tasks.

to the fasci-
nating world 
of organization structure and design in the 
twenty-first century! In this chapter, we 
present the basics of organizing. We de-
fine the concepts and their key components 
and how managers use these to create a 
structured environment in which organiza-
tional members can do their work efficiently 
and effectively. Once the organization’s 
goals, plans, and strategies are in place, 
managers must develop a structure that 
will best facilitate the attainment of those 
goals. •
Learning Outcomes
6-1 Describe six key elements in organizational design. p. 185
6-2  Identify the contingency factors that favor either the mechanistic model or the 
organic model of organizational design. p. 194
6-3 Compare and contrast traditional and contemporary organizational designs. p. 196
6-4 Discuss the design challenges faced by today’s organizations. p. 203
Welcome 
 
184

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    185
What Are the Six Key Elements in Organizational Design?
A short distance south of McAlester, Oklahoma, 
 employees in a vast factory complex make products 
that must be perfect. These people “are so good at what 
they do and have been doing it for so long that they 
have a 100 percent market share.”1 They make bombs 
for the U.S. military, and doing so requires a work 
environment that’s an interesting mix of the mundane, 
structured, and disciplined, coupled with high levels of 
risk and  emotion. The work gets done efficiently and effectively here. Work also gets done 
efficiently and  effectively at Cisco Systems, although not in such a structured and formal 
way. At Cisco, some 70 percent of the employees work from home at least 20 percent of 
the time.2 Both of these organizations get needed work done, although each does so using 
a different structure.
Getting work done efficiently & effectively.
Organizing is all about that! Recall from Chapter 1 that we defined organizing as the 
function of management that determines what needs to be done, how it will be done, and 
who is to do it; in other words, the function that creates the organization’s structure. When 
managers develop or change the organization’s structure, they’re engaging in organization 
design. This process involves making decisions about how specialized jobs should be, the 
rules to guide employees’ behaviors, and at what level decisions are to be made. Although 
organization design decisions are typically made by top-level managers, it’s important for 
everyone involved to understand the process. Why? Because each of us works in some type 
of organization structure, and we need to know how and why things get done. In addition, 
given the changing environment and the need for organizations to adapt, you should begin 
understanding what tomorrow’s structures may look like—those will be the settings you’ll 
be working in.
Few topics in management have undergone as much change in the past few years 
as that of organizing and organizational structure. Managers are reevaluating tradi-
tional  approaches and exploring new structural designs that best support and facilitate 
 employees doing the  organization’s work—designs that can achieve efficiency but are also 
flexible.
The basic concepts of organization design formulated by management writers such as 
Henri Fayol and Max Weber offered structural principles for managers to follow. (Rewind 
to History Module, p. 49.) Over 90 years have passed since many of those principles were 
originally proposed. Given that length of time and all the changes that have taken place, 
you’d think that those principles would be mostly worthless today. Surprisingly, they’re not. 
They still provide valuable insights into designing effective and efficient organizations. Of 
course, we’ve also gained a great deal of knowledge over the years as to their limitations. In 
the following sections, we discuss the six basic elements of organizational structure: work 
specialization, departmentalization, authority and responsibility, span of control, centraliza-
tion versus decentralization, and formalization.
(1) What Is Work Specialization?
TradiTional View. At the Wilson Sporting Goods factory in Ada, Ohio, workers make 
every football used in the National Football League and most of those used in  college and 
high school football games. To meet daily output goals, the workers specialize in job tasks 
such as molding, stitching and sewing, lacing, and so forth.3 This is an example of work 
specialization, which is dividing work activities into separate job tasks. (That’s why it’s 
also known as division of labor.) Individual employees “specialize” in doing part of an 
 activity rather than the entire activity in order to increase work output.
6-1  Describe six 
key elements in 
organizational 
design.
organization design
When managers develop or change  
the organization’s structure
organizing
The function of management that creates  
the organization’s structure
work specialization
Dividing work activities into separate job tasks;  
also called division of labor

186    Part 3  •  Organizing
Work specialization allows organizations to efficiently use the diversity of skills that 
workers have. In most organizations, some tasks require highly developed skills; others 
can be performed by employees with lower skill levels. If all workers were engaged in all 
the steps of, say, a manufacturing process, all would need the skills necessary to perform 
both the most demanding and the least demanding jobs. Thus, except when performing 
the most highly skilled or highly sophisticated tasks, employees would be working below 
their skill levels. In addition, skilled workers are paid more than unskilled workers, and, 
because wages tend to reflect the highest level of skill, all workers would be paid at highly 
skilled rates to do easy tasks—an inefficient use of resources. This concept explains why 
you rarely find a cardiac surgeon closing up a patient after surgery. Instead, surgical resi-
dents learning the skill usually stitch and staple the patient after the surgeon has finished 
the surgery.
Early proponents of work specialization believed that it could lead to great increases in 
productivity. At the beginning of the twentieth century, that generalization was reasonable. 
Because specialization was not widely practiced, its introduction almost always generated 
higher productivity. But a good thing can be carried too far. At some point, the human dis-
economies—boredom, fatigue, stress, low productivity, poor quality, increased absenteeism, 
and high turnover—outweigh the economic advantages (see Exhibit 6–1).4
Today’s View. Most managers today see work specialization as an important organizing 
mechanism because it helps employees be more efficient. For example, McDonald’s uses high 
specialization to get its products made and delivered to customers efficiently. However, man-
agers also have to recognize its limitations. That’s why companies such as Avery-Dennison, 
Ford Australia, Hallmark, and American Express use minimal work specialization and instead 
give employees a broad range of tasks to do.
(2) What Is Departmentalization?
TradiTional View. Early management writers argued that after deciding what job 
tasks will be done by whom, common work activities needed to be grouped back together 
so work was done in a coordinated and integrated way. How jobs are grouped together is 
called departmentalization. There are five common forms (see Exhibit 6–2), although an or-
ganization may use its own unique classification. No single method of departmentalization 
Impact from
human
diseconomies
Impact from
economies
of specialization
Work Specialization
Low
High
Low
High
Productivity
Exhibit 6–1 Economies and Diseconomies of Work
departmentalization
How jobs are grouped together

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    187
was advocated by the early writers. The method or 
methods used would reflect the grouping that best 
contributed to the attainment of the goals of the 
organization and the individual units.
How are activities grouped?
1. One of the most popular ways to group activities 
is by functions performed, or functional depart-
mentalization. A manager might organize the 
workplace by separating engineering, account-
ing, information systems, human resources, 
and purchasing specialists into departments. 
Functional departmentalization can be used in 
all types of organizations. Only the functions 
change to reflect the organization’s objectives 
and activities. The major advantage to functional 
departmentalization is the achievement of econ-
omies of scale by placing people with common 
skills and specializations into common units.
2. Product departmentalization focuses attention 
on major product areas in the corporation. Each product is under the authority of a senior 
manager who is a specialist in, and is responsible for, everything having to do with his or 
her product line. One company that uses product departmentalization is Nike. Its structure 
is based on its varied product lines, which include athletic and dress/casual footwear, 
sports apparel and accessories, and performance equipment. If an organization’s activi-
ties were service related rather than product related, each service would be autonomously 
grouped. The advantage of product grouping is that it increases accountability for product 
performance, because all activities related to a specific product are under the direction of 
a single manager.
3. The particular type of customer an organization seeks to reach can also dictate employee 
grouping. The sales activities in an office supply firm, for instance, can be divided into 
three departments that serve retail, wholesale, and government customers. A large law 
office can segment its staff on the basis of whether it serves corporate or individual cli-
ents. The assumption underlying customer departmentalization is that customers in each 
department have a common set of problems and needs that can best be met by specialists.
4. Another way to departmentalize is on the basis of geography or territory—geographic 
departmentalization. The sales function might have western, southern, Midwestern, and 
eastern regions. If an organization’s customers are scattered over a large geographic area, 
this form of departmentalization can be valuable. For instance, the organization struc-
ture of Coca-Cola reflects the company’s operations in two broad geographic areas—the 
Lacing is one of 13 separate tasks involved 
in hand-crafting a Wilson Sporting Goods 
football. The company uses work specializa-
tion in dividing job activities as an organizing 
mechanism that helps employees boost their 
productivity and makes efficient use of work-
ers’ diverse skills.
AFP/Newscom
Exhibit 6–2 Types of Departmentalization
•  Functional
Groups employees based on work performed (e.g., engineering,  
accounting, information systems, human resources)
•  Product
Groups employees based on major product areas in the corporation 
(e.g., women’s footwear, men’s footwear, and apparel and accessories)
•  Customer
Groups employees based on customers’ problems and needs  
(e.g., wholesale, retail, government)
•  Geographic
Groups employees based on location served (e.g., North, South,  
Midwest, East)
•  Process
Groups employees based on the basis of work or customer flow  
(e.g., testing, payment)
geographic  
departmentalization
Grouping activities on the basis of geography  
or territory
functional  
departmentalization
Grouping activities by functions performed
product departmentalization
Grouping activities by major product areas
customer  
departmentalization
Grouping activities by customer

188    Part 3  •  Organizing
North American sector and the international sector (which includes the Pacific Rim, the 
European Community, Northeast Europe and Africa, and Latin America).
5. The final form of departmentalization is called process departmentalization, which 
groups activities on the basis of work or customer flow—like that found in many govern-
ment offices or in health care clinics. Units are organized around common skills needed 
to complete a certain process. If you’ve ever been to a state office to get a driver’s license, 
you’ve probably experienced process departmentalization. With separate departments to 
handle applications, testing, information and photo processing, and payment collection, 
customers “flow” through the various departments in sequence to get their licenses.
Today’s View. Most large organizations continue to use most or all of the departmental 
groups suggested by the early management writers. Black & Decker, for instance, orga-
nizes its divisions along functional lines, its manufacturing units around processes, its sales 
around geographic regions, and its sales regions around customer groupings. However, 
many organizations use cross-functional teams, which are teams made up of individuals 
from various departments and that cross traditional departmental lines. These teams have 
been useful especially as tasks have become more complex and diverse skills are needed to 
accomplish those tasks.5
Also, today’s competitive environment has refocused the attention of management on its 
customers. To better monitor the needs of customers and to be able to respond to changes in 
those needs, many organizations are giving greater emphasis to customer departmentalization.
(3) What Are Authority and Responsibility?
TradiTional View. To understand authority and responsibility, you also have to be 
 familiar with the chain of command, the line of authority extending from upper  organizational 
levels to lower levels, which clarifies who reports to whom. Managers need to consider it when 
organizing work because it helps employees with questions such as “Who do I report to?” or 
“Who do I go to if I have a problem?” So, what are authority and responsibility?
Authority comes from the position, not the person.
Authority refers to the rights inherent in a 
managerial position to give orders and expect 
the orders to be obeyed. Authority was a major 
concept discussed by the early management 
writers as they viewed it as the glue that held 
an organization together.6 It was delegated 
downward to lower-level managers, giving 
them certain rights while prescribing certain 
limits within which to operate. Each manage-
ment position had specific inherent rights that 
incumbents acquired from the position’s rank 
or title. Authority, therefore, is related to one’s 
position within an organization and has noth-
ing to do with the personal characteristics of 
an individual manager. When a position of 
authority is vacated, the person who has left 
the position no longer has any authority. The 
authority remains with the position and its new 
incumbent.
When managers delegate authority, they 
must allocate commensurate 
responsibility. 
That is, when employees are given rights, they 
also  assume a corresponding obligation to per-
form. And they’ll be held accountable for their 
Harley-Davidson uses cross-functional 
teams from the conception and design of its 
motorcycles to their production and product 
launch. Harley’s teams of buyers, suppliers, 
marketers, operations personnel, engineers, 
and employees from other departments work 
together to provide customers with quality 
products.
H. Mark Weidman Photography/Alamy
process departmentalization
Grouping activities on the basis of work or 
customer flow
cross-functional teams
Teams made up of individuals from various depart-
ments and that cross traditional departmental lines
chain of command
The line of authority extending from upper organi-
zational levels to lower levels, which clarifies who 
reports to whom
authority
The rights inherent in a managerial position to give 
orders and expect the orders to be obeyed
responsibility
An obligation to perform assigned duties

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    189
performance! Allocating authority without responsibility and accountability creates opportuni-
ties for abuse. Likewise, no one should be held responsible or accountable for something over 
which he or she has no authority.
whaT are The diFFerenT TyPes oF auThoriTy relaTionshiPs? The early man-
agement writers distinguished between two forms of authority: line authority and staff 
authority. Line authority entitles a manager to direct the work of an employee. It is the 
 employer–employee authority relationship that extends from the top of the organization 
to the lowest echelon, according to the chain of command, as shown in Exhibit 6–3. As 
a link in the chain of command, a manager with line authority has the right to direct the 
work of employees and to make certain decisions without consulting anyone. Of course, 
in the chain of command, every manager is also subject to the direction of his or her 
superior.
Keep in mind that sometimes the term line is used to differentiate line managers from 
staff managers. In this context, line refers to managers whose organizational function con-
tributes directly to the achievement of organizational objectives. In a manufacturing firm, line 
managers are typically in the production and sales functions, whereas managers in human 
resources and payroll are considered staff managers with staff authority. Whether a manager’s 
function is classified as line or staff depends on the organization’s objectives. For example, 
at Staff Builders, a supplier of temporary employees, interviewers have a line function. 
Similarly, at the payroll firm of ADP, payroll is a line function.
As organizations get larger and more complex, line managers may find that they don’t 
have the time, expertise, or resources to get their jobs done effectively. In response, they cre-
ate staff authority functions to support, assist, advise, and generally reduce some of their 
informational burdens. The hospital administrator who cannot effectively handle the purchas-
ing of all the supplies the hospital needs creates a purchasing department, a staff department. 
Of course, the head of the purchasing department has line authority over the purchasing 
agents who work for him. The hospital administrator might also find that she is overburdened 
and needs an assistant. In creating the position of her assistant, she has created a staff posi-
tion. Exhibit 6–4 illustrates line and staff authority.
whaT is uniTy oF Command? An employee who has to report to two or more bosses might 
have to cope with conflicting demands or priorities.7 Accordingly, the early writers  believed that 
each employee should report to only one manager, a term called unity of command. In those 
Chief Executive
Oﬃcer
President
Executive
Vice President
Executive
Vice President
Vice
President
Vice
President
Vice
President
Vice
President
Vice
President
Region
1
Region
2
Region
3
Region
4
Region
5
District
A
District
B
District
C
District
D
District
E
District
F
District
G
Exhibit 6–3 Chain of Command and Line Authority
staff authority
Positions with some authority that have been 
 created to support, assist, and advise those  holding 
line authority
unity of command
Structure in which each employee reports to only 
one manager
line authority
Authority that entitles a manager to direct the work 
of an employee

190    Part 3  •  Organizing
rare instances when the unity of command had to be violated, a clear separation of activities and 
a supervisor responsible for each was always explicitly designated.
One boss or more?
Unity of command was logical when organizations were relatively simple. Under some 
circumstances it is still sound advice and organizations continue to adhere to it. But advances 
in technology, for instance, allow access to organizational information that was once acces-
sible only to top managers. And employees can interact with anyone else in the organization 
without going through the formal chain of command. Thus, in some instances, strict adher-
ence to unity of command creates a degree of inflexibility that hinders an organization’s 
performance.
Today’s View. The early management writers loved the idea of authority. They as-
sumed that the rights inherent in one’s formal position in an organization were the sole 
source of influence, and they believed that managers were all-powerful. This assumption 
might have been true 60—even 30—years ago. Organizations were simpler. Staff was less 
important. Managers were only minimally dependent on technical specialists. Under such 
conditions, influence is the same as authority. And the higher a manager’s position in the 
organization, the more influence he or she had. However, those conditions no longer exist. 
Researchers and practitioners of management now recognize that you don’t have to be a 
manager to have power and that power is not perfectly correlated with one’s level in the 
organization.
Authority is an important concept in organizations, but an exclusive focus on authority 
produces a narrow, unrealistic view of influence. Today, we recognize that authority is but 
one element in the larger concept of power.
how do auThoriTy and Power diFFer? Authority and power are often consid-
ered the same thing, but they’re not. Authority is a right. Its legitimacy is based on an 
authority figure’s position in the organization. Authority goes with the job. Power, on 
the other hand, refers to an individual’s capacity to influence decisions. Authority is part 
of the larger concept of power. That is, the formal rights that come with an individual’s 
position in the organization are just one means by which an individual can affect the 
 decision process.
Executive
Director
Assistant to the
Executive Director
Director of
Operations
Director of
Purchasing
Other
Directors
Unit 1
Manager
Unit 2
Manager
Other
Human
Resources
Operations
Purchasing
Human
Resources
Operations
Purchasing
Other
Line authority
Staﬀ authority
Director of
Human
Resources
Exhibit 6–4 Line versus Staff Authority
power
An individual’s capacity to influence decisions

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    191
Exhibit 6–5 visually depicts the difference between authority and power. The two-
dimensional arrangement of boxes in part A portrays authority. The area in which the 
authority  applies is defined by the horizontal dimension. Each horizontal grouping rep-
resents a functional area. The influence one holds in the organization is defined by the 
vertical dimension in the structure. The higher one is in the organization, the greater one’s 
authority.
Power, on the other hand, is a three-dimensional concept (the cone in part B of 
Exhibit 6–5). It includes not only the functional and hierarchical dimensions but also a third 
dimension called centrality. Although authority is defined by one’s vertical position in the 
hierarchy, power is made up of both one’s vertical position and one’s distance from the orga-
nization’s power core or center.
Think of the cone in Exhibit 6–5 as an organization. The center of the cone is the power 
core. The closer you are to the power core, the more influence you have on decisions. The 
existence of a power core is, in fact, the only difference between A and B in Exhibit 6–5. The 
vertical hierarchy dimension in A is merely one’s level on the outer edge of the cone. The top 
of the cone corresponds to the top of the hierarchy, the middle of the cone to the middle of the 
hierarchy, and so on. Similarly, the functional groups in A become wedges in the cone. Each 
wedge represents a functional area.
The cone analogy explicitly acknowledges two facts: (1) The higher one moves in an 
organization (an increase in authority), the closer one moves to the power core; and (2) it is 
not necessary to have authority in order to wield power because one can move horizontally 
inward toward the power core without moving up. For instance, assistants often are powerful 
in a company even though they have little authority. As gatekeepers for their bosses, these 
assistants have considerable influence over whom their bosses see and when they see them. 
Furthermore, because they’re regularly relied upon to pass information on to their bosses, 
Chief Executive
Oﬃcer
Finance
Accounting
Marketing
Production
Research and
Development
Human
Resources
A.  Authority
B.  Power
Production
Function
Authority
level
The power core
Accounting
Marketing
Human
Resources
Finance
Research and
Development
Exhibit 6–5 Authority versus Power

192    Part 3  •  Organizing
they have some control over what their bosses hear. It’s not unusual for a $105,000-a-year 
middle manager to tread carefully in order not to upset the boss’s $45,000-a-year adminis-
trative assistant. Why? Because the assistant has power. This individual may be low in the 
authority hierarchy but close to the power core.
Likewise, low-ranking employees who have relatives, friends, or associates in high 
places might also be close to the power core. So, too, are employees with scarce 
and  important skills. The lowly production engineer with 20  years of 
experience in a company might be the only one in the firm who knows 
the inner workings of all the old production machinery. When pieces 
of this old equipment break down, only this  engineer understands 
how to fix them. Suddenly, the engineer’s influence is much 
greater than it would appear from his or her level in the vertical 
hierarchy. What do these examples tell us about power? They 
indicate that power can come from  different areas. French and 
Raven identified five sources, or bases, of power: coercive, 
reward, legitimate, expert, and referent.8 We summarize 
them in Exhibit 6–6.
(4) What Is Span of Control?
TradiTional View. How many employees can a 
manager efficiently and effectively supervise? This ques-
tion of span of control received a great deal of  attention 
from early management writers. Although they came to no consensus on a specific number, 
most favored small spans—typically no more than six workers—in order to maintain close 
control.9 However, several writers did acknowledge level in the organization as a contingency 
variable. They argued that as a manager rises in an organization, he or she has to deal with 
a greater number of unstructured problems, so top managers need a smaller span than do 
middle managers, and middle managers require a smaller span than do supervisors. Over the 
last decade, however, we’ve seen some change in theories about effective spans of control.10
Today’s View. Many organizations are increasing their spans of control. The span for 
managers at such companies as General Electric and Kaiser Aluminum has expanded sig-
nificantly in the past decade. It has also expanded in the federal government, where efforts 
to increase the span of control are being implemented to save time in making decisions.11 
The span of control is increasingly being determined by looking at contingency variables.
How Many People Can I Effectively and Efficiently Manage?
Most effective and efficient span depends on:
• Employee experience and training (more they have, larger span)
• Similarity of employee tasks (more similarity, larger span)
• Complexity of those tasks (more complex, smaller span)
Melissa Brenner, senior vice president of 
marketing for the National Basketball  
Association, has expert power. Her expertise 
in using Facebook, Instagram, and other 
social media in innovative ways is helping 
the NBA achieve its goal of enhancing fans’ 
engagement and enjoyment of the game 
throughout the world.
Jennifer S. Altman/Getty Images
Exhibit 6–6 Types of Power
Coercive power
Power based on fear.
Reward power
Power based on the ability to distribute something  
that others value.
Legitimate power
Power based on one’s position in the formal hierarchy.
Expert power
Power based on one’s expertise, special skill, or knowledge.
Referent power
Power based on identification with a person who has  
desirable resources or personal traits.
span of control
The number of employees a manager can efficiently 
and effectively supervise

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    193
• Physical proximity of employees (closer proximity, larger span)
• Amount and type of standardized procedures (more 
 standardized, larger span)
• Sophistication of the organization’s management information 
system (more  sophisticated, larger span)
• Strength of the organization’s value system (stronger the 
value system, larger span)
• Preferred managing style of the manager12 (personal 
 preference of more or fewer employees to manage)
(5) How Do Centralization  
and Decentralization Differ?
TradiTional View. One of the questions that needs to be 
 answered when organizing is “At what level are decisions made?” 
Centralization is the  degree to which decision making takes place 
at upper levels of the organization. Decentralization is the degree 
to which lower-level managers provide input or actually make deci-
sions. Centralization-decentralization is not an either-or concept. 
Rather, it’s a matter of degree. What we mean is that no organiza-
tion is completely centralized or completely decentralized. Few, if 
any, organizations could effectively function if all their decisions 
were made by a select few people (centralization) or if all decisions 
were pushed down to the level closest to the problems (decentral-
ization). Let’s look, then, at how the early management writers 
viewed centralization as well as at how it exists today.
Early management writers proposed that centralization in an 
organization depended on the situation.14 Their goal was the opti-
mum and efficient use of  employees. Traditional organizations were 
structured in a pyramid, with power and authority concentrated near 
the top of the organization. Given this structure, historically central-
ized decisions were the most prominent, but organizations today have 
become more complex and responsive to dynamic changes in their 
environments. As such, many managers believe that decisions need to be made by those indi-
viduals closest to the problems, regardless of their organizational level. In fact, the trend over 
the past several decades—at least in U.S. and Canadian organizations—has been a movement 
toward more decentralization in organizations.15
Today’s View. Today, managers often choose the amount of centralization or decentraliza-
tion that will allow them to best implement their decisions and achieve organizational goals.16 
What works in one organization, however, won’t necessarily work in another, so managers must 
 determine the amount of decentralization for each organization and work units within it. When 
managers empower employees and delegate to them the authority to make decisions on those 
things that affect their work and to change the way that they think about work, that’s decentral-
ization. Notice, however, that it doesn’t imply that top-level managers no longer make decisions.
(6) What Is Formalization?
TradiTional View. 
Formalization refers to how standardized an organization’s jobs 
are and the extent to which employee behavior is guided by rules and procedures. Highly 
formalized organizations have explicit job descriptions, numerous organizational rules, 
and clearly defined procedures covering work processes. Employees have little discretion 
over what’s done, when it’s done, and how it’s done. However, where formalization is low, 
employees have more discretion in how they do their work. Early management writers 
expected organizations to be fairly formalized, as formalization went hand-in-hand with 
bureaucratic-style organizations. (Today’s View is on p. 197.)
A Question of Ethics
How would you like to know all the closely held company 
secrets of your employer?13 A small but growing number of 
private-sector businesses are revealing to employees details 
about everything from company financials to staff perfor-
mance reviews to individual pay. Advocates of this approach 
say it’s a good way to build trust among employees and a 
good way to make employees aware of how their individual 
contributions are affecting the overall company as a whole. 
And it can make them more motivated in how they work. 
However, critics say that such open management can be 
expensive and time consuming. For instance, employees may 
need to be “taught” how to read financial statements. And 
employees who have access to all the details may want to 
weigh in on all the decisions, slowing down the decision-
making process. As work becomes collaborative and as 
 office workers become accustomed to sharing details of 
each other’s lives, maybe the move toward greater workplace 
openness is inevitable.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these 
 discussion questions.
  Talk About It 1: What ethical issues might arise in an 
“open” company?
  Talk About It 2: What are the implications for (a) 
managers and (b) employees?
centralization
The degree to which decision making takes place at 
upper levels of the organization
decentralization
The degree to which lower-level managers provide 
input or actually make decisions
formalization
How standardized an organization’s jobs are and 
the extent to which employee behavior is guided by 
rules and procedures

194
What contingency Variables 
Affect Structural choice?
John Cogill/Associated Press
6-2   Identify the contingency factors that 
favor either the mechanistic model or the 
organic model of organizational design.
Top managers typically think long and hard 
about what structure will work best.
IF these are the contingency factors,  
THEN this is the most appropriate structure.
The “THEN”: 
Appropriate 
Organizational 
Structure
ORGANIC
Collaboration (both vertical and horizontal)
Adaptable duties
Few rules
Informal communication
Decentralized decision authority
Flatter structures
Rigid hierarchical relationships
Fixed duties
Many rules
Formalized communication channels
Centralized decision authority
Taller structures
MECHANISTIC
Exhibit 6–7 
Mechanistic versus  
Organic Organizations
mechanistic organization
A bureaucratic organization; a structure that’s high 
in specialization, formalization, and centralization
organic organization
A structure that’s low in specialization, formaliza-
tion, and centralization

195
mechanistic OR organic17
Mechanistic organization (or bureaucracy)
• Rigid and tightly controlled structure
• Combines traditional aspects of all six elements of organization 
structure
• High specialization
• Rigid departmentalization
• Clear chain of command
• Narrow spans of control leading to taller structure
• Centralization
• High formalization
Organic organization 
• Highly adaptive and flexible structure
• Collaboration (both vertical and 
horizontal)
• Adaptable duties
• Few rules
• Informal communication
• Decentralized decision authority
• Wider spans of control leading to flatter  
structures
• Loose structure allows for rapid adjustment to change18
The “IF”:           Contingency Variables
4
Strategy 
 Structure
• Based on work of Alfred Chandler19
• Goals are important part of organization’s strategies; structure  
should facilitate goal achievement
• Simple strategy ➛ simple structure
• Elaborate strategy ➛ more  
complex structure
• Certain structural designs work best 
with different  organizational  
strategies20
— Passionate pursuit of innovation ➛ organic
— Passionate pursuit of cost  
control ➛ mechanistic
1
Coloures-pic/Fotolia
  Watch It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to mymanagementlab.com to watch a video titled Elm 
City Market: Organizational Structure and to respond to questions.
ORGANIC
MECHANISTIC

196
Size 
 Structure
• Considerable evidence that size (number of employees) 
affects structure21
• Magic number seems to be 2,000 employees
• lARGe organizations (> 2,000 employees)—mechanistic
• When an organization reaches this number, size is less 
influential; adding more employees has little impact as 
structure is already fairly mechanistic
A smaller organization with  
a more organic structure 
becomes more mechanistic  
if a significant number of new 
employees are added to it.
ORGANIC
MECHANISTIC
fewer than 2,000 
employees can be organic
more than 2,000 employees forces 
organizations to become more 
mechanicstic
Technology 
 Structure
• Technology is used—by every organization—to convert inputs into outputs  
(See Exhibit 6–8 in the From Past to Present box on p. 197.)
Your smartphone or tablet
standardized assembly line
TAlex/Fotolia
Rvlsoft/Fotolia
Fet/Fotolia
Your résumé
custom design and print
Your bottle of ibuprofen
continuous-flow production process
environment 
 Structure
• Environment is a constraint on managerial discretion
• Environment also has a major effect on an organization’s structure
— Stable environment: Mechanistic structure
— Dynamic/uncertain environment: Organic structure
• Helps explain why so many managers today have restructured their  
organizations to be lean, fast, and flexible.22
2
4
3

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    197
Today’s View. Although some formalization is necessary for consistency and control, 
many organizations today rely less on strict rules and standardization to guide and regulate 
employee behavior. For instance, consider the following situation:
A customer comes into a branch of a large national drug store chain and drops off a roll 
of film for same-day developing 37 minutes after the store’s cut-off time. Although the 
sales clerk knows he’s supposed to follow the rules, he also knows he could get the film 
developed with no problem and wants to accommodate the customer. So he accepts the 
film and hopes that his manager won’t find out.23
Did this employee do something wrong? He did “break” the rule. But by “breaking” the 
rule, he actually brought in revenue and provided good customer service.
  Try It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Organizational Structure.
unit production
The production of items in units or small batches
mass production
Large-batch manufacturing
process production
Continuous flow or process production
• Initial research on Technology S Structure done by Joan 
Woodward.24
• Woodward, a British management scholar, studied small 
manufacturing firms in southern England to determine the 
extent to which structural design elements were  related 
to organizational success.25
• No consistent pattern found UNTIL firms divided into 
three distinct technologies that had increasing levels of 
complexity and sophistication.
•  Least complex and sophisti-
cated: Unit production—the 
production of items in units or 
small batches
•  Mass production—large-batch 
manufacturing
•  Most complex and sophisticated: 
process 
production—continu-
ous-process production
• One of the earliest contingency studies.
• Her answer to the “it depends on” question: Appropriate 
organizational design depends on what the organization’s 
technology is. These design decisions can influence an 
organization’s sustainability efforts.
• More recent studies also have shown that organizations 
adapt their structures to their technology  depending on 
how routine their  technology is for transforming inputs 
into outputs.
•  More routine technology, more likely to have mecha-
nistic structure
•  More nonroutine technology, more likely to have 
 organic structure
If your professor has assigned this, 
go to the Assignments section of  
mymanagementlab.com to com-
plete these discussion questions.
  Talk About It 3: Why is (a) 
mechanistic structure more appropri-
ate for an organization with routine 
technology and (b) organic structure more appropriate for an 
organization with nonroutine technology?
    Talk About It 4: Does Woodward’s framework still 
 apply to today’s organizations? Why or why not?
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
How does technology 
affect organization  
design?
Exhibit 6–8 Woodward’s Findings on Technology and Structure
UnIT PRodUcTIon
mASS PRodUcTIon
PRoceSS PRodUcTIon
Structural characteristics:
Low vertical differentiation
Moderate vertical  
differentiation
High vertical differentiation
Low horizontal differentiation
High horizontal differentiation
Low horizontal differentiation
Low formalization
High formalization
Low formalization
Most effective structure:
Organic
Mechanistic
Organic

198    Part 3  •  Organizing
Considering there are numerous situations where rules may be too restrictive, many 
 organizations have allowed employees some latitude, giving them sufficient autonomy to 
make those decisions that they feel are best under the circumstances. It doesn’t mean throw-
ing out all organizational rules because there always will be rules that are important for 
employees to follow—and these rules should be explained so employees understand why it’s 
important to adhere to them. But for other rules, employees may be given some leeway.26
What Are Some Common Organizational Designs?
In making structural decisions, managers have some common designs from which to choose: 
traditional and more contemporary. Let’s look at some.
What Traditional Organizational Designs Can Managers Use?
When designing a structure, managers may choose one of the traditional organizational 
 designs. These structures—simple, functional, and divisional—tend to be more mechanistic 
in nature. (See Exhibit 6–9 for a summary of the strengths and weaknesses of each.)
whaT is The simPle sTruCTure? Most companies start as entrepreneurial ventures us-
ing a simple structure, which is an organizational design with low departmentalization, wide 
spans of control, authority centralized in a single person, and little  formalization.27 The simple 
structure is most widely used in smaller businesses and its strengths should be obvious. It’s fast, 
flexible, and inexpensive to maintain, and accountability is clear. However, it becomes increas-
ingly inadequate as an organization grows, because its few policies or rules to guide operations 
6-3  Compare and 
contrast  
traditional and 
contemporary 
organizational 
designs.
simple structure
An organizational design with low departmentaliza-
tion, wide spans of control, authority centralized in 
a single person, and little formalization
Cost-saving advantages 
from specialization 
(economies of scale, minimal 
duplication of people and 
equipment); employees are 
grouped with others who 
have similar tasks
Focuses on results—division 
managers are responsible 
for what happens to their 
products and services.
Fast; 
ﬂexible; 
inexpensive to maintain; 
clear accountability.
STRENGTHS
Pursuit of functional goals can 
cause managers to lose sight
of what’s best for the overall 
organization; functional 
specialists become insulated 
and have little understanding 
of what other units are doing.
Duplication of activities and 
resources increases costs and
reduces efﬁciency.
Not appropriate as 
organization grows; 
reliance on one person
is risky.
WEAKNESSES
Simple
Structure
Functional
Structure
Divisional
Structure
Exhibit 6–9 Traditional Organization Designs
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 304. Reprinted  
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    199
and its high centralization result in information overload at the top. As size increases, decision 
making becomes slower and can eventually come to a standstill as the single executive tries to 
continue making all the decisions. If the structure is not changed and adapted to its size, the firm 
can lose momentum and is likely to eventually fail. The simple structure’s other weakness is that 
it’s risky: Everything depends on one person. If anything happens to the owner-manager, the 
organization’s information and decision-making center is lost. As employees are added, however, 
most small businesses don’t remain as simple structures. The structure tends to become more 
specialized and formalized. Rules and regulations are introduced, work becomes specialized, 
departments are created, levels of management are added, and the organization becomes increas-
ingly bureaucratic. Two of the most popular bureaucratic design options grew out of functional 
and product departmentalizations and are called the functional and divisional structures.
whaT is The FunCTional sTruCTure? A functional structure is an organizational 
design that groups similar or related occupational specialties together. You can think of this 
structure as functional departmentalization applied to the entire organization. For example, 
Revlon, Inc., is organized around the functions of operations, finance, human resources, 
and product research and development.
The strength of the functional structure lies in the advantages that accrue from work 
 specialization. Putting like specialties together results in economies of scale, minimizes 
duplication of personnel and equipment, and makes employees comfortable and satisfied 
 because it gives them the opportunity to talk the same language as their peers. The most obvi-
ous weakness of the functional structure, however, is that the organization frequently loses 
sight of its best interests in the pursuit of functional goals. No one function is totally respon-
sible for results, so members within individual functions become insulated and have little 
understanding of what people in other functions are doing.
whaT is The diVisional sTruCTure? The divisional structure is an organizational 
structure made up of separate business units or divisions.28 In this structure, each division 
has limited autonomy, with a division manager who has authority over his or her unit and is 
responsible for performance. In divisional structures, however, the parent corporation typi-
cally acts as an external overseer to coordinate and control the various divisions, and often 
provides support services such as financial and legal. Health care giant Johnson & Johnson, 
for example, has three divisions: pharmaceuticals, medical devices and diagnostics, and 
consumer products. In addition, it has several subsidiaries that also manufacture and market 
diverse health care products.
The chief advantage of the divisional structure is that it focuses on results. Division man-
agers have full responsibility for a product or service. The divisional structure also frees the 
headquarters staff from being concerned with day-to-day operating details so that they can 
pay attention to long-term and strategic planning. The major disadvantage of the divisional 
structure is duplication of activities and resources. Each division, for instance, may have a 
marketing research department. If there weren’t any 
divisions, all of an organization’s marketing research 
might be centralized and done for a fraction of the 
cost that divisionalization requires. Thus, the divi-
sional form’s duplication of functions increases the 
organization’s costs and reduces efficiency.
What Contemporary Organizational 
Designs Can Managers Use?
Lean. Flexible. Innovative.
Managers are finding that the traditional designs often 
aren’t appropriate for today’s increasingly  dynamic 
and complex environment. Instead, organizations 
need to be lean, flexible, and innovative; that is, more 
organic. So managers are finding  creative ways to 
functional structure
An organizational design that groups similar  
or related occupational specialties together
divisional structure
An organizational structure made up of separate 
business units or divisions
A team-based structure at W. L. Gore & As-
sociates is key to the company’s success as 
a technology-driven firm and contributes to 
its high associate satisfaction and retention. 
Bill Gore created work teams when he started 
the company in 1958, and today all 9,000 Gore 
associates located in 30 countries work in 
cross-functional and self-managed teams.
PRNewsFoto/W. L. Gore & Associates/AP Images

200    Part 3  •  Organizing
structure and organize work by using designs such as team-based structures, matrix and project 
structures, and boundaryless structures.29 (See Exhibit 6–10 for a summary of these designs.)
whaT are Team sTruCTures? Larry Page and Sergey Brin, co-founders of Google, 
have created a corporate structure that “tackles most big projects in small, tightly focused 
teams.”30 A team structure is one in which the entire organization is made up of work 
teams that do the organization’s work.31 In this structure, employee empowerment is cru-
cial because there is no line of managerial authority from top to bottom. Rather, employee 
teams design and do work in the way they think is best, but are also held responsible for 
all work performance results in their respective areas. In large organizations, the team 
      Advantages:
Employees are 
more involved and 
empowered. 
Reduced barriers 
among functional 
areas.
areas.
      Advantages:
Fluid and ﬂexible 
design that can 
respond to 
environmental 
changes. 
Faster decision 
making.
      Advantages:
Highly ﬂexible and 
responsive. 
Utilizes talent 
wherever it’s found.
      Advantages:
Sharing of 
knowledge 
throughout 
organization. 
Sustainable source 
of competitive 
advantage.
    Disadvantages: 
Reluctance on part 
of employees to share 
knowledge for fear of 
losing their power.
Large numbers of ex-
perienced employees 
on the verge of 
           retiring.
Disadvantages:
    Disadvantages: 
Lack of control.
Communication 
difﬁculties.
Disadvantages:
    Disadvantages: 
Complexity of 
assigning people 
to projects.
Task and personality 
conﬂicts.
Disadvantages:
    Disadvantages: 
No clear chain 
of command. 
Pressure on teams 
to perform.
        Team Structure
A structure in which the entire 
organization is made up of 
work groups or teams.
   Matrix-Project Structure
Matrix is a structure that assigns 
specialists from different functional 
areas to work on projects who then 
return to their areas when the 
project is completed. 
Project is a structure in which em-
ployees continuously work on 
projects. As one project is com-
pleted, employees move on to the 
next project.
 Boundaryless Structure
A structure not deﬁned by or 
limited to artiﬁcial horizontal, 
vertical, or external boundaries; 
includes virtual and network 
types of organizations.
      Learning Structure
A structure in which employees 
continually acquire and share 
new knowledge and apply 
that knowledge.
Exhibit 6–10 Contemporary Organization Designs
team structure
A structure in which the entire organization is made 
up of work teams
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 315. Reprinted  
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    201
structure complements what is typically a functional or divisional structure. This allows 
the organization to have the efficiency of a bureaucracy while providing the flexibility of 
teams. For instance, companies such as Amazon, Boeing, Hewlett-Packard, Louis Vuitton, 
Motorola, and Xerox extensively use employee teams to improve productivity.
Although team structures have been positive, simply arranging employees into teams 
is not enough. Employees must be trained to work on teams, receive cross-functional skills 
training, and be compensated accordingly. Without a properly implemented team-based 
pay plan, many of the benefits of a team structure may be lost.32 We’ll cover teams more 
 thoroughly in Chapter 10.
whaT are maTrix and ProjeCT sTruCTures? In addition to team-based  structures, 
other popular contemporary designs are the matrix and project structures. The matrix 
 structure assigns specialists from different functional departments to work on projects led 
by a project manager. When employees finish work on an assigned project, they go back to 
their functional departments. One unique aspect of this design is that it creates a dual chain of 
command since employees in a matrix organization have two managers: their functional area 
manager and their product or project manager, who share authority. (See Exhibit 6–11.) The 
project manager has authority over the functional members who are part of his or her project 
team in areas related to the project’s goals. However, any decisions about promotions, salary 
recommendations, and annual reviews typically remain the functional manager’s responsi-
bility. To work effectively, both managers have to communicate regularly, coordinate work 
demands on employees, and resolve conflicts together.
The primary strength of the matrix is that it can facilitate coordination of a multiple set 
of complex and interdependent projects while still retaining the economies that result from 
keeping functional specialists grouped together. The major disadvantages of the matrix are 
the confusion it creates and its propensity to foster power struggles. When you dispense with 
the chain of command and unity of command principles, you significantly increase ambigu-
ity. Confusion can arise over who reports to whom. The confusion and ambiguity, in turn, are 
what trigger the power struggles.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing
Group
Contract
Administration
Accounting
Group
Purchasing
Accounting
Human
Resources
Alpha
Project
Design
Group
Contract
Group
Human
Resources Group
Human
Resources Group
Human
Resources Group
Human
Resources Group
Design
Group
Design
Group
Design
Group
Beta
Project
Gamma
Project
Omega
Project
Manufacturing
Group
Manufacturing
Group
Manufacturing
Group
Contract
Group
Contract
Group
Contract
Group
Purchasing
Group
Purchasing
Group
Purchasing
Group
Purchasing
Group
Accounting
Group
Accounting
Group
Accounting
Group
Design
Engineering
Exhibit 6–11 Sample Matrix Structure
matrix structure
A structure in which specialists from different 
functional departments are assigned to work on 
projects led by a project manager

202    Part 3  •  Organizing
Instead of a matrix structure, many organizations are using a project structure, in which 
employees continuously work on projects. Unlike the matrix structure, a project structure 
has no formal departments where employees return at the completion of a project. Instead, 
employees take their specific skills, abilities, and experiences to other projects. Also, all work 
in project structures is performed by teams of employees. For instance, at design firm IDEO, 
project teams form, disband, and form again as the work requires. Employees “join” project 
teams because they bring needed skills and abilities to that project. Once a project is com-
pleted, however, they move on to the next one.33
Project structures tend to be more flexible organizational designs.
• Advantages:
• Employees can be deployed rapidly to respond to environmental changes.
• No departmentalization or rigid organizational hierarchy to slow down decisions or actions.
• Managers serve as facilitators, mentors, and coaches and work to eliminate or minimize 
organizational obstacles and ensure that teams have the resources they need to effectively 
and efficiently complete their work.
• Disadvantages:
• Complexity of assigning people to projects.
• Inevitable task and personality conflicts that arise.
whaT is a Boundaryless orGanizaTion? Another contemporary organizational 
design is the boundaryless organization, which is an organization whose design is not 
defined by, or limited to, the horizontal, vertical, or external boundaries imposed by a pre-
defined structure.34 Former GE chairman Jack Welch coined the term because he wanted 
to eliminate vertical and horizontal boundaries within GE and break down external barriers 
between the company and its customers and suppliers. Although the idea of eliminating 
boundaries may seem odd, many of today’s most successful organizations are finding that 
they can operate most effectively by remaining flexible and unstructured: that the ideal 
structure for them is not having a rigid, bounded, and predefined structure.35
What do we mean by “boundaries”? There are two types: (1) internal—the horizontal ones 
imposed by work specialization and departmentalization and the vertical ones that separate 
employees into organizational levels and hierarchies; and (2) external—the boundaries that 
separate the organization from its customers, suppliers, and other stakeholders. To minimize or 
eliminate these boundaries, managers might use virtual or network structural designs.
A virtual organization consists of a small core of full-time employees and outside 
specialists temporarily hired as needed to work on projects.36 An example is when Second 
Life, a company creating a virtual world of colorful online avatars, was building its software. 
Founder Philip Rosedale hired programmers from around the world and divided up the work 
into about 1,600 individual tasks, “from setting up databases to fixing bugs.” The process 
worked so well, the company used it for all sorts of work.37 Another example is Nashville-
based Emma Inc., an e-mail marketing firm with 100 employees who work from home or 
offices in Austin, Denver, New York, and Portland.38 The biggest challenge they’ve faced is 
creating a “virtual” culture, a task made more challenging by the fact that the organization 
is virtual. The inspiration for this structural approach comes from the film industry. There, 
people are essentially “free agents” who move from project to project applying their skills—
directing, talent casting, costuming, makeup, set design, and so forth—as needed.
Another structural option for managers wanting to minimize or eliminate organizational 
boundaries is a network organization, which is one that uses its own employees to do some 
work activities and networks of outside suppliers to provide other needed product compo-
nents or work processes.39 This organizational form is sometimes called a modular organiza-
tion by manufacturing firms.40 This structural approach allows organizations to concentrate 
on what they do best by contracting out other activities to companies that do those activities 
best. Many companies are using such an approach for certain organizational work activi-
ties. For instance, the head of development for Boeing’s 787 airplane manages thousands of 
employees and some 100 suppliers at more than 100 sites in different countries.41 Sweden’s 
Ericsson contracts its manufacturing and even some of its research and development to more 
cost-effective contractors in New Delhi, Singapore, California, and other global locations.42 
project structure
A structure in which employees continuously work 
on projects
boundaryless organization
An organization whose design is not defined by, 
or limited to, boundaries imposed by a predefined 
structure
virtual organization
An organization that consists of a small core of full-
time employees and outside specialists temporarily 
hired as needed to work on projects
network organization
An organization that uses its own employees 
to do some work activities and networks of 
outside  suppliers to provide other needed product 
 components or work processes

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    203
And at Penske Truck Leasing, dozens of business processes such as securing permits and 
titles, entering data from drivers’ logs, and processing data for tax filings and accounting have 
been outsourced to Mexico and India.43
Tim Kilroy, a salesman for the online advertis-
ing agency Triggit, works remotely on his 
computer from a Starbucks coffee shop or his 
home in Massachusetts. With almost half of 
his clients located in other countries, Kilroy 
uses mobile computing and communication 
technology to stay connected to his company 
and to his widely dispersed clients.
Melanie Stetson Freeman/AP Images
 Write It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete MGMT 2: Organizational Structures.
What Are Today’s Organizational Design Challenges?
Changing the Way Work Is Done
As managers look for organizational designs that 
will best support and facilitate  employees doing their 
work  efficiently and effectively, there are certain chal-
lenges they must contend with. These include keeping 
 employees connected, managing global structural  issues, building a learning organization, 
and designing flexible work arrangements.
How Do You Keep Employees Connected?
Many organizational design concepts were developed during the twentieth century when 
work tasks were fairly predictable and constant, most jobs were full-time and continued 
indefinitely, and work was done at an employer’s place of business under a manager’s super-
vision.44 That’s not what it’s like in many organizations today, as you saw in our preceding 
discussion of virtual and network organizations. A major structural design challenge for 
managers is finding a way to keep widely dispersed and mobile employees connected to the 
organization. The Technology and the Manager’s Job box describes ways that information 
technology can help.
How Do Global Differences Affect Organizational Structure?
Are there global differences in organizational structures? Are Australian organizations 
structured like those in the United States? Are German organizations structured like those 
in France or Mexico? Given the global nature of 
today’s business environment, this is an issue with 
which managers need to be familiar. Researchers 
have concluded that the structures and strategies 
of organizations worldwide are similar, “while the 
behavior within them is maintaining its cultural 
uniqueness.”45 What does this mean for designing 
effective and efficient structures? When designing 
or changing structure, managers may need to think 
about the cultural implications of certain design ele-
ments. For instance, one study showed that formal-
ization—rules and bureaucratic mechanisms—may 
be more important in less economically developed 
countries and less important in more economically 
developed countries where employees may have 
higher levels of professional education and skills.46 
Other structural design elements may be affected by 
cultural differences as well.
6-4  Discuss the  
design challenges 
faced by today’s 
organizations.

204    Part 3  •  Organizing
How Do You Build a Learning Organization?
Doing business in an intensely competitive global environment, British retailer Tesco real-
ized how important it was for its stores to run well behind the scenes. And it does so using 
a proven “tool” called Tesco in a Box, which promotes consistency in operations as well 
as  being a way to share innovations. Tesco is an example of a learning organization, an 
 organization that has developed the capacity to continuously learn, adapt, and change.47 
The concept of a learning organization doesn’t involve a specific organizational design 
per se, but instead describes an organizational mind-set or philosophy that has significant 
design implications. In a learning organization, employees are practicing knowledge man-
agement by continually acquiring and sharing new knowledge and are willing to apply 
that knowledge in making decisions or performing their work. Some organizational design 
theorists even go so far as to say that an organization’s ability to learn and to apply that 
learning as they perform the organization’s work may be the only sustainable source of 
competitive advantage.
 Watch It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Adaptive Organizational Design.
It’s fair to say that the world of work will never be like it was 
10 years ago.48 IT has opened up new possibilities for employees 
to do their work in locations as remote as Patagonia or in the 
middle of downtown Seattle. Although organizations have always 
had employees who traveled to distant corporate locations to 
take care of business, these employees no longer have to find 
the nearest pay phone or wait to get back to “the office” to see 
what problems have cropped up. Instead, mobile computing and 
communication have given organizations and employees ways to 
stay connected, be more productive, and be more environmentally 
friendly. Let’s look at some of the technologies that are changing 
the way work is done.
• Handheld devices with e-mail, calendars, and contacts can be 
used anywhere there’s a wireless network. And these devices 
can be used to log into corporate databases and company 
intranets.
• Employees can videoconference using broadband networks and 
Web cams.
• Many companies are giving employees key fobs with constantly 
changing encryption codes that allow them to log onto the 
corporate network to access e-mail and company data from any 
computer hooked up to the Internet.
• Cell phones switch seamlessly between cellular networks and 
corporate Wi-Fi connections.
The biggest issue in doing work anywhere, anytime is security. 
Companies must protect their important and sensitive information. 
However, software and other disabling devices have minimized secu-
rity issues considerably. Even insurance providers are more comfort-
able giving their mobile employees access to information. For instance, 
Health Net Inc. gave BlackBerrys to many of its managers so they can 
tap into customer records from anywhere. One tech company CEO said 
that all types of organizations should start thinking about identifying 
and creating innovative apps that their workers could use in doing their 
jobs more efficiently and effectively and get those to them.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
   TAlk AboUT IT 5: What benefits do you see with being able 
to do work anywhere, anytime? (Think in terms of benefits for an 
organization and for its human resources.)
   TAlk AboUT IT 6: What other issues, besides security, do you 
see with being able to do work anywhere, anytime? (Again, think 
about this for an organization and for its employees.)
 THE CHAnGInG WORLD OF WORK
:::::::  Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::
learning organization
An organization that has developed the capacity to 
continuously learn, adapt, and change

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    205
What would a learning organization look like? As you can see in Exhibit 6–12, the 
 important characteristics of a learning organization revolve around (1) organizational design, 
(2) information sharing, (3) leadership, and (4) culture.
(1) What types of organizational design elements would be necessary for learning to take 
place? In a learning organization, it’s critical for members to share information and 
 collaborate on work activities throughout the entire organization—across different 
 functional specialties and even at different organizational levels—through minimizing 
or eliminating the existing structural and physical boundaries. In this type of bound-
aryless environment, employees are free to work together and collaborate in doing 
the organization’s work the best way they can, and to learn from each other. Because 
of this need to collaborate, teams also tend to be an important feature of a learning 
 organization’s structural design.  Employees work in teams on whatever activities need 
to be done, and these employee teams are empowered to make decisions about doing 
their work or resolving issues. Empowered employees and teams have little need for 
“bosses” who direct and control. Instead, managers serve as facilitators, supporters, and 
advocates for employee teams.
(2) Learning can’t take place without information. For a learning organization to “learn,” 
information must be shared among members; that is, organizational employees must 
 engage in knowledge management by sharing information openly, in a timely manner, 
and as accurately as possible. Because few structural and physical barriers exist in a learn-
ing organization, the environment is conducive to open communication and extensive 
information sharing.
(3) Leadership plays an important role as an organization moves toward becoming a learn-
ing organization. What should leaders do in a learning organization? One of their most 
important functions is facilitating the creation of a shared vision for the organization’s 
future and then keeping organizational members working toward that vision. In addition, 
leaders should support and encourage the collaborative environment that’s critical to 
learning. Without strong and committed leadership throughout the organization, it would 
be extremely difficult to be a learning organization.
(4) The organization’s culture is important to being a learning organization. In a learning 
culture, everyone agrees on a shared vision and everyone recognizes the inherent inter-
relationships among the organization’s processes, activities, functions, and external en-
vironment. It also fosters a strong sense of community, caring for each other, and trust. In 
a learning organization, employees feel free to communicate openly, share, experiment, 
and learn without fear of criticism or punishment.
Organizational Design
• Boundaryless
• Teams
• Empowerment
Leadership
• Shared Vision
• Collaboration
Organizational Culture
• Strong Mutual Relationships
• Sense of Community
• Caring
• Trust
Information Sharing
• Open
• Timely
• Accurate
THE LEARNING
ORGANIZATION
Exhibit 6–12 Characteristics of a Learning Organization
Sources: Based on P. M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of Learning Organizations (New 
York: Doubleday, 1990); and R. M. Hodgetts, F. Luthans, and S. M. Lee, “New Paradigm Organizations: 
From Total Quality to Learning to World Class,” Organizational Dynamics, Winter 1994, 4–19.

206    Part 3  •  Organizing
How Can Managers Design Efficient and Effective Flexible Work 
Arrangements?
Accenture consultant Keyur Patel’s job arrangement is becoming the norm, rather than the 
exception.49 During a recent consulting assignment, he had three clocks on his desk: one set 
to Manila time (where his software programmers were), one to Bangalore (where another 
programming support team worked), and the third for San Francisco, where he was spend-
ing four days a week helping a major retailer implement IT systems to track and improve 
sales. And his cell phone kept track of the time in Atlanta, his home, where he headed on 
Thursday evenings.
For this new breed of professionals, life is a blend of home and office, work and leisure. 
Thanks to technology, work can now be done anywhere, anytime. As organizations adapt 
their structural designs to these new realities, we see more of them adopting flexible work-
ing arrangements. Such arrangements not only exploit the power of technology, but also give 
 organizations the flexibility to deploy employees when and where needed. In this section, 
we’re going to take a look at some different types of flexible work arrangements, including 
telecommuting; compressed workweeks, flextime, and job sharing; and contingent work-
force. As with the other structural options we’ve looked at, managers must evaluate these in 
light of the implications for decision making, communication, authority relationships, work 
task accomplishment, and so forth.
whaT’s inVolVed in TeleCommuTinG? Information technology has made telecom-
muting possible and external environmental changes have made it necessary for many 
 organizations. Telecommuting is a work arrangement in which employees work at home 
and are linked to the workplace by computer. Needless to say, not every job is a candidate 
for telecommuting. But many are.
Working from home used to be considered a “cushy perk” for a few lucky employees 
and such an arrangement wasn’t allowed very often. Now, many businesses view telecom-
muting as a business necessity. For instance, at SCAN Health Plan, the company’s chief 
financial officer said that getting more employees to telecommute provided the company 
a way to grow  without having to incur any additional fixed costs such as office buildings, 
equipment, or parking lots.50 In addition, some companies view the arrangement as a way 
to combat high gas prices and to attract talented employees who want more freedom and 
control over their work.
Despite its apparent appeal, many managers are reluctant to have their employees be-
come “laptop hobos.”51 They argue that employees might waste time surfing the Internet or 
playing online games instead of working, ignore clients, and desperately miss the camara-
derie and social exchanges of the workplace. In addition, managers worry about how they’ll 
“manage” these employees. How do you interact 
with an employee and gain his or her trust when 
they’re not physically present? And what if their 
work performance isn’t up to par? How do you make 
suggestions for improvement? Another significant 
challenge is making sure that company information 
is kept safe and secure when employees are working 
from home.
Employees often express the same con-
cerns about working remotely, especially when it 
comes to the isolation of not being “at work.” At 
Accenture, where employees are scattered around 
the world, the chief human resources  officer says 
that it isn’t easy to maintain that esprit de corps.52 
However, the company put in place a number 
of programs and  processes to create that sense 
of belonging for its workforce including Web 
 conferencing tools,  assigning each employee  
telecommuting
A work arrangement in which employees work at 
home and are linked to the workplace by computer
Airbnb, the global travel rental firm, uses 
telecommuters and a contingency workforce 
of part-time, temporary, and freelance work-
ers. Flexible work arrangements, including 
those for employees shown here at Airbnb’s 
office in Dublin, enable the company to con-
nect people in more than 34,000 cities and 
190 countries either online or from a mobile 
phone or tablet.
View Pictures/Newscom

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    207
to a career counselor, and holding quarterly community events at its  offices. In addition, 
the telecommuter employee may find that the line between work and home  becomes even 
more blurred, which can be stressful.53 These are important organizing  issues and ones 
that managers and organizations must address when moving toward having  employees 
telecommute.
how Can orGanizaTions use ComPressed workweeks, FlexTime, and joB 
sharinG? During the most recent economic crisis in the United Kingdom,  accounting 
firm KPMG needed to reduce costs and decided to use flexible work options as a way 
of doing so.54 The company’s program, called Flexible Futures, offered employees 
four  options to choose from: a four-day workweek with a 20  percent salary reduction; 
a two-to-twelve-week sabbatical at 30 percent of pay; both options; or continue with 
their regular schedule. Some 85 percent of the UK employees agreed to the reduced-
work-week plan. “Since so many people agreed to the flexible work plans, KPMG  
was able to cap the salary cut at about 10 percent for the year in most cases.” The best 
thing, though,  was  that as a result of the plan, KPMG didn’t have to do large-scale 
 employee layoffs.
As this example shows, organizations sometimes find they need to restructure work 
using other forms of flexible work arrangements. (1) One approach is a compressed 
workweek in which employees work longer hours per day but fewer days per week. The 
most common arrangement is four 10-hour days (a 4–40 program). (2) Another alternative 
is flextime (also known as flexible work hours), which is a scheduling system in which 
employees are required to work a specific number of hours a week but are free to vary 
those hours within certain limits. In a flextime schedule, most companies designate cer-
tain common core hours when all employees are required to be on the job, but starting, 
ending, and lunch-hour times are flexible. 3. Another type of job scheduling is called job 
sharing—the practice of having two or more people split a full-time job. Organizations 
might offer job sharing to professionals who want to work but don’t want the demands 
and hassles of a full-time position. For instance, at Ernst & Young, employees in many of 
the company’s locations can choose from a variety of flexible work arrangements includ-
ing job sharing. Many companies use job sharing during economic downturns to avoid 
employee layoffs.55
whaT is a ConTinGenT workForCe? “When Julia Lee first heard of Tongal, she 
thought it was a scam. Tongal pays people—anyone with a good idea, really—to create 
online videos for companies such as Mattel, Allstate, and Popchips.”56 Tongal divides proj-
ects into stages and pays cash for the top-five ideas. On Lee’s first submission—which only 
took three hours of work—she got $1,000. On another, she earned $4,000. In a year’s time, 
she’s earned some $6,000 for about 100 hours of work. Tongal isn’t the only business doing 
this. The idea of breaking up a job into small pieces and using the Internet to find workers 
to do those tasks was pioneered by LiveOps and followed by Amazon.com’s Mechanical 
Turk and many others.
Switch on. Switch off.
“Companies want a workforce they can switch on and off as needed.”57 Although 
this quote may shock you, the truth is that the labor force already has begun shifting 
away from traditional full-time jobs toward contingent workers—temporary, freelance, 
or contract workers whose employment is contingent upon demand for their services. In 
today’s economy, many organizations have responded by converting full-time permanent 
jobs into contingent jobs. It’s predicted that by the end of the next decade the number 
of  contingent employees will have grown to about 40 percent of the workforce. (It’s at 
30 percent today.)58 In fact, one compensation and benefits expert says that “a growing 
number of workers will need to structure their careers around this model.”59 That’s likely 
to include you!
compressed workweek
A workweek where employees work longer hours 
per day but fewer days per week
job sharing
When two or more people split a full-time job
flextime (also known as 
 flexible work hours)
A work scheduling system in which employees are 
required to work a specific number of hours per 
week but can vary when they work those hours 
within certain limits
contingent workers
Temporary, freelance, or contract workers whose 
employment is contingent upon demand for their 
services

208    Part 3  •  Organizing
What are the implications for managers and organizations? Since contingent em-
ployees are not “employees” in the traditional sense of the word, managing them has its 
own set of challenges and expectations. Managers must recognize that because contingent 
 workers lack the stability and security of permanent employees, they may not identify with 
the  organization or be as committed or motivated. Managers may need to treat contingent 
 workers  differently in terms of practices and policies. However, with good communication 
and leadership, an organization’s contingent employees can be just as valuable a resource to 
an organization as permanent employees are. Today’s managers must recognize that it will be 
their responsibility to motivate their entire workforce, full-time and contingent, and to build 
their commitment to doing good work!60
No matter what structural design managers choose for their organizations, the design 
should help employees do their work in the best, most efficient and effective way they 
can. The structure needs to help, not hinder, organizational members as they carry out the 
 organization’s work. After all, the structure is simply a means to an end.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.

6 Review
209
CHAPTER SuMMARy
are better matched with mechanistic structures, but dynamic 
ones fit better with organic structures.
  6-3 Compare and contrast traditional and 
 contemporary organizational designs.
Traditional structural designs include simple, functional, and 
divisional. A simple structure is one with low departmental-
ization, wide spans of control, authority centralized in a single 
person, and little formalization. A functional structure is one 
that groups similar or related occupational specialties togeth-
er. A divisional structure is one made up of separate business 
units or divisions. Contemporary structural designs include 
team-based structures (the entire organization is made up of 
work teams); matrix and project structures (where employees 
work on projects for short periods of time or continuously); and 
boundaryless organizations (where the structural design is free 
of  imposed boundaries). A boundaryless organization can either 
be a virtual or a network organization.
  6-4 Discuss the design challenges faced  
by  today’s organizations.
One design challenge lies in keeping employees connected, 
which can be accomplished through using information technol-
ogy. Another challenge is understanding the global differences 
that affect organizational structure. Although structures and 
strategies of organizations worldwide are similar, the behavior 
within them differs, which can influence certain design elements. 
 Another challenge is designing a structure around the mind-set of 
being a learning organization. Finally, managers are looking for 
organizational designs with efficient and effective flexible work 
arrangements. They’re using options such as telecommuting, 
compressed workweeks, flextime, job sharing, and contingent 
workers.
  6-1 Describe six key elements in organizational 
design.
The first element, work specialization, refers to dividing work 
activities into separate job tasks. The second, departmental-
ization, is how jobs are grouped together, which can be one 
of five types: functional, product, customer, geographic, or 
process. The third—authority, responsibility, and power—all 
have to do with getting work done in an organization. Au-
thority refers to the rights inherent in a managerial position 
to give orders and expect those orders to be obeyed. Respon-
sibility refers to the obligation to perform when authority 
has been delegated. Power is the capacity of an individual 
to  influence decisions and is not the same as authority. The 
fourth, span of control, refers to the number of employees 
a manager can efficiently and effectively manage. The fifth, 
centralization and decentralization, deals with where the ma-
jority of decisions are made—at upper organizational levels 
or pushed down to lower-level managers. The sixth, formal-
ization,  describes how standardized an organization’s jobs 
are and the extent to which employees’ behavior is guided by 
rules and procedures.
  6-2 Identify the contingency factors that favor 
either the mechanistic model or the organic  
model of organizational design.
A mechanistic organization design is quite bureaucratic where-
as an organic organization design is more fluid and flexible. 
The strategy-determines-structure factor says that as organiza-
tional strategies move from single product to product diversi-
fication, the structure will move from organic to mechanistic. 
As an organization’s size increases, so does the need for a more 
mechanistic structure. The more nonroutine the technology, the 
more organic a structure should be. Finally, stable environments 
dIScUSSIon QUeSTIonS
 6-1 Discuss the six key concepts defining organization 
 design.
 6-2 Organization design is shaped by management and 
 environment. Illustrate why the design might be 
 traditional or contemporary.
 6-3 Compared to the strengths and weaknesses of a func-
tional structure, what are the strengths and weaknesses 
of a simple structure?
 6-4 Is there any difference between a boundaryless organi-
zation and a structureless organization? Explain with 
examples.
 6-5 Contrast mechanistic and organic organizations.
 6-6 Explain the contingency factors that affect organizational 
design.
 6-7 With the availability of information technology that 
 allows employees to work anywhere, anytime, is 

210    Part 3  •  Organizing
 organizing still an important managerial function? Why 
or why not?
 6-8 You are responsible for identifying the important char-
acteristics of a learning organization. Using examples, 
explain the features you think will allow organizational 
learning to take place.
 6-9 A boundaryless organization has the ability to change 
how employees may do their work. In addition to 
security concerns, what other issues do organizations 
face?
6-10 Draw an organization chart of an organization with which 
you’re familiar (where you work, a student organization 
to which you belong, your college or university, etc.). Be 
very careful in showing the  departments (or groups) and 
especially be careful to get the chain of command correct. 
Be prepared to share your chart with the class.
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded  writing questions:
6-11 It’s stated in the chapter that contemporary organiza-
tion design should be lean, flexible, and innovative. 
What are the implications of those requirements?
6-12 If organizing is about getting work done effi-
ciently and effectively, what organizing challenges 
might lower-level managers have to address? (Hint: 
Think in terms of the six key elements of organization 
design.)
6-13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
 assignment for this chapter.
Management Skill Builder  |  IncReASInG YoUR PoWeR
Managerial jobs come with the power of authority. But sometimes that authority isn’t enough to get things 
done. And other times you may not want to use your formal authority as a means of getting people to do what 
you want. You may, for instance, want to rely more on your persuasive skills than the power of your title. So 
effective managers increase their power by developing multiple sources of influence.
 PERSOnAL InvEnTORY ASSESSMEnT
Gaining Power and Influence
As you saw in this chapter, power is an important component of an organization’s structure. 
Use this PIA to identify ways that you gain power and influence.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
Skill Basics
You can increase the likelihood that you’ll survive and thrive 
in your organization if you learn how to develop a power base. 
Remember, because you have power doesn’t mean you have 
to use it. But it’s nice to be able to call upon it when you do 
need it. Four sources of power can be derived from your job. 
Another three sources are based on your personal unique 
characteristics.
• 
All management jobs come with the power to coerce, 
 reward, and impose authority. Coercive power is based on 
fear. If you can dismiss, suspend, demote, assign  unpleasant 
work tasks, or write a negative performance review on some-
one, you hold coercive power over that person. Conversely, 
if you can give someone something of positive value or re-
move something of negative value—like control pay rates, 
raises, bonuses, promotions, or work assignments—you 
have reward power. And all managerial positions provide 
some degree—though within specific limitations—to exert 
authority over subordinates. If you can tell someone to do 
something and they see this request to be within your for-
mal job description, you have authority power over them.

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    211
• 
In addition to coercive, reward, and authoritative power, 
many managerial positions also possess information  power 
that comes from access to and control over information. If 
you have data or knowledge that others need, and which 
only you have access to, it gives you power. Of course, 
you don’t have to be a manager to have information power. 
Many employees are quite skilled at operating in secrecy, 
hiding technical short-cuts, or avoiding showing others 
 exactly what they do—all with the intention of keeping 
 important knowledge from getting into others’ hands.
• 
You don’t have to be a manager or control information 
to have power in an organization. You can also exert in-
fluence based on your expertise, admiration that others 
might have for you, and through charismatic qualities. If 
you have a special skill or unique knowledge that others in 
the organization depend on, you hold expert power. In our 
current age of specialization, this source of power is in-
creasingly potent. If others identify with you and look up 
to you to the extent that they want to please you, you have 
referent power. It develops out of admiration and the de-
sire to be like someone else. The final source of influence 
is charismatic power, which is an extension of referent 
power. If others will follow you because they admire your 
heroic qualities, you have charismatic power over them.
• 
Based on these sources of power, we can say that you can 
 increase your power in organizations by (1) taking on manage-
rial responsibilities, (2) gaining access to important informa-
tion, (3) developing an expertise that the organization needs, 
or (4) displaying personal characteristics that others admire.
Based on J. R. P. French, Jr. and B. Raven, “The Bases of Social Power,” in D. Cartwright 
(ed.), Studies in Social Power (Ann Arbor: university of Michigan Institute of Social 
Research, 1959), 150–67; B. J. Raven, “The Bases of Power: Origin and Recent 
 Developments,” Journal of Social Issues 49 (1993): 227–51; E. A. Ward, “Social  
Power Bases of Managers: Emergence of a New Factor,” Journal of Social Psychology  
 (February 2001): 144–47; and B. H. Raven, “The Bases of Power and the Power/ 
Interaction Model of Interpersonal Influence,” Analyses of Social Issues and Public 
Policy, December 2008, 1–22.
Practicing the Skill
Read through this scenario and follow the directions at the 
end of it:
Margaret is a supervisor in the online sales division of a large 
clothing retailer. She has let it be known that she is devoted 
to the firm and plans to build her career there. Margaret is 
hard-working and reliable, has volunteered for extra projects, 
has taken in-house development courses, and joined a com-
mittee dedicated to improving employee safety on the job. 
She  undertook an assignment to research ergonomic office 
furniture for the head of the department and gave up several 
lunch hours to consult with the head of human resources 
about her  report. Margaret filed the report late, but she ex-
plained the  delay by saying that her assistant lost several 
pages that she had to redraft over the weekend. The report 
was well received, and several of Margaret’s  colleagues 
think she should be  promoted when the next opening arises.
Evaluate Margaret’s skill in building a power base. 
What  actions has she taken that are helpful to her in reach-
ing  her goal? Is there anything she should have done 
differently?
Ontario Electronics Ltd.
To: Claude Fortier, Special Assistant to the President
From: Ian Campbell, President
Subject: Learning Organizations
First of all, thanks for keeping everything “going” while I  attended 
the annual meeting of the Canadian Electronics Manufacturers 
Industry Association last week. Our luncheon speaker on the 
final day talked about how important it is for organizations to be 
responsive to customer and marketplace needs. One approach 
she discussed for doing this was becoming a learning organi-
zation. I’m now convinced that our company’s future may well 
depend on how well we’re able to “learn.”
I’d like you to find some current information on learning 
 organizations. Although I’m sure you’ll be able to find  numerous 
articles about the topic, limit your report to five of what you 
consider to be the best sources of information on the topic. 
Write a one-paragraph summary for each of these five articles, 
being sure to note all the bibliographic information in case we 
need to find the article later. Since I’d like our executive team to 
move on this idea fairly quickly, please have your report back 
to me by the end of the week.
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 

212    Part 3  •  Organizing
cASe APPlIcATIon #1 
Y
ahoo!, a pioneer in Web search and navigation, strug-
gles to remain relevant in the face of competition from 
the likes of Google, Facebook, and Twitter.61 It missed 
the two biggest Internet trends—social networking and mobile. 
However, in July 2012, after the company did its own search, 
it snagged a gem as the company’s new CEO—Marissa Mayer, 
one of the top executives at Google. Mayer had been one of the 
few public faces of Google and was responsible for the look 
and feel of Google’s most popular products. Guiding Yahoo! 
as it tries to regain its former prominence is proving to be the 
challenge that experts predicted, but they’re also saying that if 
anyone could take on the chal-
lenge of making Yahoo! an 
 innovator once again, Mayer is 
the person.
Two of her initial deci-
sions included free food at the 
office and new smartphones for every employee, something 
that Google does. However, in February 2013, Mayer launched 
an employee initiative that has generated lots of discussion—
positive and negative. She decided that as of June 2013, Yahoo! 
employees who worked remotely had to come back to the 
office. The memo from the vice president of people and de-
velopment (code for head of Human Resources) clarified that 
the new initiative was a response to productivity issues that 
often can arise when employees work from home. With a new 
boss and a renewed commitment to making Yahoo! a strong 
company in a challenging industry, employees were expected 
to be physically present in the workplace, hopefully leading 
to developing a strong common bond and greater productivity. 
The announcement affects not only those who work from home 
full time—mainly customer service reps—but also those em-
ployees who have arranged to work from home one or two days 
a week. Yahoo! isn’t the only company asking  remote workers 
to return. Bank of America, which had a popular  remote work 
program, decided late in 2012 that employees in certain roles 
had to come back to the office.
Before Mayer became CEO at Yahoo!, it was a wonder 
anything ever got done there. What she found wasn’t even 
remotely like the way employees functioned at Google. At 
Yahoo!, few people were physically at work in the office 
 cubicles throughout the building. Few cars or bikes or other 
 vehicles could be found in the facility’s parking lots. Even 
more disturbing: some of the employees who were physically 
You Work Where?
there at work did as little work as needed and then took off 
early. She also discovered that other employees who worked 
from home did little but collect a paycheck or maybe work 
on a sideline business they had started. Even at the office, one 
former manager described morale as being as low as it could 
be because employees thought the company was failing. These 
were some of the reasons that Mayer abolished Yahoo!’s 
work-from-home policy. If Yahoo! was to again become the 
nimble company it had once been, a new culture of innova-
tion, communication, and collaboration was needed. And 
that meant employees had to be at work; physically at work 
together. Restoring Yahoo!’s 
“cool”—from its products to 
its  deteriorating morale and 
culture—would be difficult 
if the organization’s people 
weren’t there. That’s why 
Mayer’s decision at Yahoo! created such an uproar. Yahoo!’s 
only official statement on the new policy said, “This isn’t a 
broad industry view on working from home. This is about 
what is right for Yahoo!, right now.”
Where work is done most efficiently and effectively— 
office, home, combination—is an important workplace issue. 
The three main managerial concerns are productivity, inno-
vation, and collaboration. Do flexible arrangements lead to 
greater productivity or inhibit innovation and collaboration? 
Another concern is that employees, especially younger ones, 
expect to be able to work remotely. Yes, the trend has been 
 toward greater workplace flexibility, but does that flexibility 
lead to a bloated, lazy, and unproductive remote workforce? 
These are the challenges of designing work structures.
Discussion Questions
6-14 Evaluate yahoo!’s new work initiative. Did it have to be an “all 
or nothing” proposition? Discuss.
6-15 What can managers and organizations do to help employees 
who work from home be efficient and effective?
6-16 Take the three main concerns—productivity, innovation, and 
collaboration. From the perspective of management, how do 
you think flexible arrangements stack up? How about from the 
employee’s perspective?
6-17 Is “face-time” (that is, showing up at work to be seen by your 
boss and others) critical to one’s career? Discuss.
6-18 Is being able to work remotely important to you? Why or why not?
Where IS work done most 
 efficiently and effectively?

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    213
cASe APPlIcATIon
Lift Off
O
ver the years, NASA (National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration) has provided us with some spectacu-
lar moments—from Neil Armstrong’s first steps on 
the moon to the Hubble Telescope’s mesmerizing photos of 
distant stars and galaxies.62 As stated in NASA’s Strategic 
Plan 2014, its vision is: “We reach for new heights and reveal 
the unknown for the benefit of humankind.” And its mission 
is: “Drive  advances in science, technology, aeronautics, and 
space exploration to enhance knowledge, education, innova-
tion, economic vitality, and stewardship of Earth.” These 
have guided (and continue to 
guide) its management team 
as decisions are made about 
projects, missions, and pro-
grams. When the space shuttle 
program—NASA’s main proj-
ect mission—ended in 2011, the organization struggled for a 
time with its purpose and identity. In fact, one agency program 
manager at that time described NASA’s future as nothing but 
uncertainty. However, despite the ambiguity, NASA’s lead-
ers have been charting a new trajectory. Possible new goals 
include getting to an asteroid by 2025 and putting astro-
nauts on Mars by 2030. (Here’s a bit of trivia for you: Mars 
is 225,300,000 kilometers—140,000,000 miles—from earth.) 
And critical to achieving these goals is the necessity to guide 
this complex, technical organization and figure out how to 
best manage the vast array of knowledge  resources that are so 
crucial to its future.
NASA, established by the National Aeronautics and Space 
Act on July 29, 1958, has led U.S. efforts in space exploration, 
including the Apollo lunar landing missions, the Skylab space 
station, and the reusable manned spacecraft—which we know 
better as the Space Shuttle. It’s a unique organization where 
equipment costs millions of dollars and where people’s lives 
can be at stake. Over the years, NASA has had many success-
ful endeavors (and some tragic failures). Getting men on the 
moon, not once, but six times, reflects outstanding technologi-
cal prowess, far superior to any other country. Being able to put 
a rocket into space with a shuttle that then comes back to earth 
and lands on its own is a reflection of the incredibly talented 
and knowledgeable employees that NASA has. Now, NASA 
is taking the first steps to develop new technologies and capa-
bilities to send astronauts further into space than ever before. 
It achieved a major milestone in early December 2014 with 
the successful test flight of Orion, a spacecraft designed for 
ultra-long-distance journeys. Accomplishments such as these 
are possible only because of the people in NASA who bring 
their knowledge, talents, skills, and creativity to that organiza-
tion. And “managing” those people requires an “organization” 
structure that allows, enhances, and encourages the sharing of 
knowledge. It’s not an easy thing to design and do.
One word that aptly describes NASA’s organization 
 environment is complexity. Not only is there technical com-
plexity (yes, we are talking 
rocket science, here!), but also 
numerous projects are going 
on, change is an ongoing real-
ity, and demands arise from 
numerous stakeholders both 
inside and outside the organization. And within this complex-
ity, the challenge is finding a way to share the incredible wealth 
of knowledge within project teams and across the entire organi-
zation. How is NASA doing this?
Knowing how important it is to manage the organization’s 
vast knowledge resources, NASA has identified knowledge-
sharing activities currently being used and others that are 
needed. Some of these include: online tools such as collabora-
tion and sharing sites, video libraries, portals, etc.; a search 
engine that allows tagging and classifications (taxonomy); a 
library of searchable case studies and publications; an index of 
defined processes or “lessons learned;” knowledge networks of 
location “experts,” collaboration activities, collaborative work-
spaces, etc.; and forums, workshops and other social exchanges 
that bring people together. Through its knowledge management 
efforts, NASA administrators are showing that they understand 
how important it is for the organization’s structure to con-
tribute to efficiently and effectively managing its knowledge 
resources.
Discussion Questions
6-19 Would you call NASA a learning organization? Why or why not?
6-20 In what ways is NASA’s environment complex?
6-21 How does complexity affect structural choice?
6-22 using Exhibit 6–12, what suggestions would you make to 
 managers at NASA about being a learning organization?
#2
Managing the knowledge  
resources of NASA

214    Part 3  •  Organizing
Wouldn’t you like a MAGIC 
BUTTON 
 you could  
push to get someone else  
to do all your tedious and  
boring work?63
cASe APPlIcATIon #3
A
dmit it. Sometimes the projects you’re working on 
(school, work, or both) can get pretty boring and 
 monotonous. Wouldn’t it be great to have a magic but-
ton you could push to get someone else to do that boring, time-
consuming stuff? At Pfizer, that “magic button” is a reality for 
a large number of employees.
As a global pharmaceutical company, Pfizer is continu-
ally looking for ways to help employees be more efficient and 
effective. The company’s se-
nior director of organizational 
effectiveness found that the 
“Harvard MBA staff we hired 
to develop strategies and in-
novate were instead Googling 
and 
making 
PowerPoints.” 
Indeed, internal studies con-
ducted to find out just how 
much time its valuable talent 
was spending on menial tasks was startling. The average Pfizer 
employee was spending 20 percent to 40 percent of his or her 
time on support work (creating documents, typing notes, do-
ing research, manipulating data, scheduling meetings) and 
only 60 percent to 80 percent on knowledge work (strategy, 
innovation, networking, collaborating, critical thinking). And 
the problem wasn’t just at lower levels. Even the highest-level 
employees were affected. Take, for instance, David Cain, 
an executive director for global engineering. He enjoys his 
job—assessing environmental real estate risks, managing fa-
cilities, and controlling a multimillion-dollar budget. But he 
didn’t so much enjoy having to go through spreadsheets and 
put together PowerPoints. Now, however, with Pfizer’s “magic 
button,” those tasks are passed off to individuals outside the 
organization.
Just what is this “magic button”? Originally called the 
Office of the Future (OOF), the renamed PfizerWorks allows 
employees to shift tedious and time-consuming tasks with 
A New Kind of Structure
the click of a single button on their computer desktop. They 
describe what they need on an online form, which is then sent 
to one of two Indian service-outsourcing firms. When a request 
is received, a team member in India calls the Pfizer employee 
to clarify what’s needed and by when. The team member then 
e-mails back a cost specification for the requested work. If 
the Pfizer employee decides to proceed, the costs involved are 
charged to the employee’s department. About this unique ar-
rangement, Cain said that he 
relishes working with what he 
prefers to call his “personal 
consulting organization.”
The number 66,500 il-
lustrates just how beneficial 
PfizerWorks has been for the 
company. That’s the number 
of work hours estimated to 
have been saved by employ-
ees who’ve used PfizerWorks. What about Joe Cain’s expe-
riences? When he gave the Indian team a complex project 
researching strategic actions that worked when consolidating 
company facilities, the team put the report together in a month, 
something that would have taken him six months to do alone. 
He says, “Pfizer pays me not to work tactically, but to work 
strategically.”
Discussion Questions
6-23 Describe and evaluate what Pfizer is doing with its PfizerWorks.
6-24 What structural implications—good and bad—does this 
 approach have? (Think in terms of the six organizational design 
elements.)
6-25 Do you think this arrangement would work for other types of 
organizations? Why or why not? What types of organizations 
might it also work for?
6-26 What role do you think organizational structure plays in an orga-
nization’s efficiency and effectiveness? Explain.

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    215
Endnotes
 1. B. Fenwick, “Oklahoma Fac-
tory Turns Out US Bombs Used in 
Iraq,” Planet Ark <www. planetark.
com>, November 4, 2003; A. 
Meyer, 
“Peeking 
inside 
the 
 Nation’s Bomb Factory,” KFOR 
TV <www.kfor.com>, February 
27, 2003; G. Tuchman, “Inside 
America’s Bomb Factory,” CNN 
<cnn.usnews.com>, December 5, 
2002; and C. Fishman, “Boom-
town, U.S.A.,” Fast Company, 
June 2002, 106–14.
 2. D. Hudepohl, “Finesse a Flexible 
Work Schedule,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, February 19, 2008, B8.
 3. M. Boyle, “Super Bucks,” For-
tune, February 4, 2008, 8–9; and 
M. Hiestand, “Making a Stamp on 
Football,” USA Today, January 25, 
2005, 1C+.
 4. S. E. Humphrey, J. D. Nahrgang, 
and F. P. Morgeson, “Integrating 
Motivational, Social, and Con-
textual Work Design Features: 
A Meta-Analytic Summary and 
Theoretical Expansion of the 
Work Design Literature,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (September 
2007): 1332–56.
 5. E. Kelly, “Keys to Effective Vir-
tual Global Teams,” Academy 
of Management Executive, May 
2001, 132–33; and D. Ancona, H. 
Bresman, and K. Kaeufer, “The 
Comparative Advantage of X-
Team,” MIT Sloan Management 
Review, Spring 2002, 33–39.
 6. R. S. Benchley, “Following Or-
ders,” Chief Executive, March 
2002, 6.
 7. R. Preston, “Inside Out,” Manage-
ment Today, September 2001, 37; 
and R. D. Clarke, “Over Their 
Heads,” Black Enterprise, Decem-
ber 2000, 79.
 8. See J. R. P. French and B. Raven, 
“The Bases of Social Power,” in D. 
Cartwright and A. F. Zander, eds., 
Group Dynamics: Research and 
Theory (New York: Harper & Row, 
1960), 607–23.
 9. L. Urwick, The Elements of Ad-
ministration (New York: Harper 
& Row, 1944), 52–53. See also, J. 
H. Gittel, “Supervisory Span, Re-
lational Coordination, and Flight 
Departure Performance: A Reas-
sessment 
of 
Post-Bureaucracy 
Theory,” Organizational Science, 
July–August 2001, 468–83.
 10. S. Harrison, “Is There a Right 
Span of Control? Simon Har-
rison Assesses the Relevance of 
the Concept of Span of Control to 
Modern Businesses,” Business Re-
view, February 2004, 10–13.
 11. P. C. Light, “From Pentagon to 
Pyramids: Whacking at Bloat,” 
Government Executive, July 2001, 
100.
 12. See, for instance, D. Van Fleet, 
“Span of Management Research 
and Issues,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, September 1983, 
546–52; and S. H. Cady and P. 
M. Fandt, “Managing Impressions 
with Information: A Field Study of 
Organizational Realities,” Journal 
of Applied Behavioral Science, 
June 2001, 180–204.
 13. Question of Ethics box based on 
R. E. Silverman, “Psst… This Is 
What Your Co-Worker Is Paid,” 
Wall Street Journal, January 30, 
2013, B6.
 14. Henri Fayol, General and Indus-
trial Management, trans. C. Storrs 
(London: 
Pitman 
Publishing, 
1949), 19–42.
 15. J. Zabojnik, “Centralized and De-
centralized Decision Making in 
Organizations,” Journal of Labor 
Economics (January 2002): 1–22.
 16. See P. Kenis and D. Knoke, “How 
Organizational Field Networks 
Shape 
Interorganizational 
Tie-
Formation Rates,” Academy of 
Management Review, April 2002, 
275–93.
 17. T. Burns and G. M. Stalker, The 
Management of Innovation (Lon-
don: Tavistock, 1961).
 18. D. Dougherty, “Re-imagining the 
Differentiation and Integration of 
Work for Sustained Product In-
novation,” Organization Science, 
September–October 2001, 612–31.
 19. A. D. Chandler Jr., Strategy and 
Structure: Chapters in the History 
of the Industrial Enterprise (Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1962).
 20. See, for instance, L. L. Bryan 
and C. I. Joyce, “Better Strategy 
through Organizational Design,” 
McKinsey Quarterly no. 2 (2007): 
21–29; D. Jennings and S. Sea-
man, “High and Low Levels of 
Organizational Adaptation: An 
Empirical Analysis of Strategy, 
Structure, and Performance,” Stra-
tegic Management Journal (July 
1994): 459–75; D. C. Galunic and 
K. M. Eisenhardt, “Renewing the 
Strategy-Structure-Performance 
Paradigm,” in B. M. Staw and L. 
L. Cummings (eds.), Research in 
Organizational Behavior, vol. 16 
(Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1994), 
215–55; R. Parthasarthy and S. 
P. Sethi, “Relating Strategy and 
Structure to Flexible Automation: 
A Test of Fit and Performance Im-
plications,” Strategic Management 
Journal 14, no. 6 (1993): 529–49; 
H. A. Simon, “Strategy and Or-
ganizational Evolution,” Strategic 
Management Journal (January 
1993): 131–42; H. L. Boschken, 
“Strategy and Structure: Re-con-
ceiving the Relationship,” Journal 
of Management (March 1990): 
135–50; D. Miller, “The Structural 
and Environmental Correlates of 
Business Strategy,” Strategic Man-
agement Journal (January–Febru-
ary 1987): 55–76; and R. E. Miles 
and C. C. Snow, Organizational 
Strategy, Structure, and Process 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978).
 21. See, for instance, P. M. Blau and 
R. A. Schoenherr, The Structure of 
Organizations (New York: Basic 
Books, 1971); D. S. Pugh, “The 
Aston Program of Research: Ret-
rospect and Prospect,” in A. H. 
Van de Ven and W. F. Joyce (eds.), 
Perspectives on Organization De-
sign and Behavior (New York: 
John Wiley, 1981), 135–66; and 
R. Z. Gooding and J. A. Wagner 
III, “A Meta-Analytic Review of 
the Relationship between Size and 
Performance: The Productivity 
and Efficiency of Organizations 
and Their Subunits,” Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, December 
1985, 462–81.
 22. See, for example, H. M. O’Neill, 
“Restructuring, Reengineering and 
Rightsizing: Do the Metaphors 
Make Sense?” Academy of Man-
agement Executive 8, no. 4 (1994): 
9–30; R. K. Reger, J. V. Mullane, 
L. T. Gustafson, and S. M. De-
marie, “Creating Earthquakes to 
Change Organizational Mindsets,” 
Academy of Management Execu-
tive 8, no. 4 (1994): 31–41; and J. 
Tan, “Impact of Ownership Type 
on Environment–Strategy Linkage 
and Performance: Evidence from a 
Transitional Company,” Journal of 
Management Studies (May 2002): 
333–54.
 23. E. W. Morrison, “Doing the Job 
Well: An Investigation of Pro-
Social Rule Breaking,” Journal 
of Management (February 2006): 
5–28.
 24. J. Woodward, Industrial Orga-
nization: Theory and Practice 
(London: Oxford University Press, 
1965).
 25. From the Past to the Present box 
based on J. Woodward, Indus-
trial Organization: Theory and 
Practice. Also, see, for instance, 
C. Perrow, “A Framework for the 
Comparative Analysis of Orga-
nizations,” American Sociologi-
cal Review, April 1967, 194–208; 
J. D. Thompson, Organizations 
in Action (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1967); J. Hage and M. Ai-
ken, “Routine Technology, Social 
Structure, 
and 
Organizational 
Goals,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 
September 
1969, 
366–77; C. C. Miller, W. H. Glick, 
Y. D. Wang, and G. Huber, “Un-
derstanding Technology-Structure 
Relationships: Theory Develop-
ment and Meta-Analytic Theory 
Testing,” Academy of Management 
Journal (June 1991): 370–99; D. 
M. Rousseau and R. A. Cooke, 
“Technology and Structure: The 
Concrete, Abstract, and Activity 
Systems of Organizations,” Jour-
nal of Management (Fall–Winter 
1984): 345–61; and D. Gerwin, 
“Relationships between Structure 
and Technology,” in P.C. Nystrom 
and W. H. Starbuck (eds.), Hand-
book of Organizational Design, 
vol. 2 (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1981), 3–38.
 26. Ibid.
 27. H. Mintzberg, Structure in Fives: 
Designing Effective Organizations 
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1983), 157.
 28. D. A. Garvin and L. C. Levesque, 
“The Multiunit Enterprise,” Har-
vard Business Review, June 2008, 
106–17; and R. J. Williams, J. J. 
Hoffman, and B. T. Lamont, “The 
Influence of Top Management 
Team Characteristics on M-Form 
Implementation Time,” Journal of 
Managerial Issues (Winter 1995): 
466–80.
 29. See, for example, R. Greenwood 
and D. Miller, “Tackling Design 
Anew: Getting Back to the Heart 
of Organization Theory,” Acad-
emy of Management Perspec-
tives, November 2010, 78–88; G. 
J. Castrogiovanni, “Organization 
Task Environments: Have They 
Changed 
Fundamentally 
Over 
Time?” Journal of Management 
vol. 28, no. 2 (2002): 129–50; D. 
F. Twomey, “Leadership, Organi-
zational Design, and Competitive-
ness for the 21st Century,” Global 
Competitiveness, Annual 2002, 
S31–S40; M. Hammer, “Pro-
cessed Change: Michael Hammer 
Sees Process as ‘the Clark Kent of 
Business Ideas’—A Concept That 
Has the Power to Change a Com-
pany’s Organizational Design,” 
Journal of Business Strategy (No-
vember–December 2001): 11–15; 
T. Clancy, “Radical Surgery: A 
View from the Operating The-
ater,” Academy of Management 
Executive, February 1994, 73–78; 
I. I. Mitroff, R. O. Mason, and C. 
M. Pearson, “Radical Surgery: 
What Will Tomorrow’s Organi-
zations Look Like?” Academy of 
Management Executive, February 
1994, 11–21; and R. E. Hoskis-
son, C. W. L. Hill, and H. Kim, 
“The Multidivisional Structure: 
Organizational Fossil or Source of 
Value?” Journal of Management 
19, no. 2 (1993): 269–98.
 30. Q. 
Hardy, 
“Google 
Thinks 
Small,” Forbes, November 14, 
2005, 198–202.
 31. See, for example, D. R. Denison, 
S. L. Hart, and J. A. Kahn, “From 
Chimneys to Cross-Functional 
Teams: Developing and Validating 
a Diagnostic Model,” Academy of 
Management Journal (December 
1996): 1005–23; D. Ray and H. 
Bronstein, Teaming Up: Making 
the Transition to a Self-Directed 
Team-Based Organization (New 
York: McGraw Hill, 1995); J. R. 
Katzenbach and D. K. Smith, The 
Wisdom of Teams (Boston: Har-
vard Business School Press, 1993); 
J. A. Byrne, “The Horizontal Cor-
poration,” BusinessWeek, Decem-
ber 20, 1993, 76–81; B. Dumaine, 
“Payoff from the New Manage-
ment,” Fortune, December 13, 
1993, 103–10; and H.  Rothman, 

216    Part 3  •  Organizing
“The Power of  Empowerment,” 
Nation’s Business, June 1993, 
49–52.
 32. C. Garvey, “Steer Teams with the 
Right Pay,” HR Magazine, May 
2002, 70–78.
 33. P. Kaihla, “Best-Kept Secrets of 
the World’s Best Companies,” 
Business 2.0, April 2006, 83; C. 
Taylor, “School of Bright Ideas,” 
Time Inside Business, April 2005, 
A8–A12; and B. Nussbaum, “The 
Power of Design,” BusinessWeek, 
May 17, 2004, 86–94.
 34. See, for example, G. G. Dess, A. 
M. A. Rasheed, K. J. McLaughlin, 
and R. L. Priem, “The New Cor-
porate Architecture,” Academy of 
Management Executive, August 
1995, 7–20.
 35. For 
additional 
readings 
on 
boundaryless organizations, see 
Rausch and Birkinshaw, June 
2008; M. F. R. Kets de Vries, 
“Leadership 
Group 
Coaching 
in Action: The Zen of Creating 
High Performance Teams,” Acad-
emy of Management Executive, 
February 2005, 61–76; J. Child 
and R. G. McGrath, “Organiza-
tions Unfettered: Organizational 
Form in an Information-Intensive 
Economy,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal (December 2001): 
1135–48; M. Hammer and S. 
Stanton, “How Process Enter-
prises Really Work,” Harvard 
Business 
Review, 
November– 
December 1999, 108–18; T. 
Zenger and W. Hesterly, “The 
Disaggregation of Corporations: 
Selective 
Intervention, 
High-
Powered Incentives, and Modular 
Units,” Organization Science vol. 
8 (1997): 209–22; R. Ashkenas, 
D. Ulrich, T. Jick, and S. Kerr, 
The Boundaryless Organization: 
Breaking the Chains of Orga-
nizational Structure (San Fran-
cisco: Jossey-Bass, 1997); R. M. 
Hodgetts, “A Conversation with 
Steve Kerr,” Organizational Dy-
namics, Spring 1996, 68–79; and 
J. Gebhardt, “The Boundaryless 
Organization,” Sloan Manage-
ment Review, Winter 1996, 117–
19. For another view of boundar-
yless organizations, see B. Victor, 
“The Dark Side of the New Or-
ganizational Forms: An Editorial 
Essay,” Organization Science, 
November 1994, 479–82.
 36. See, for instance, Y. Shin, “A 
Person-Environment Fit Model 
for Virtual Organizations,” Jour-
nal of Management (Decem-
ber 2004): 725–43; D. Lyons, 
“Smart and Smarter,” Forbes, 
March 18, 2002, 40–41; W. F. 
Cascio, “Managing a Virtual 
Workplace,” Academy of Man-
agement Executive, August 2000, 
81–90; G. G. Dess, A. M. A. Ra-
sheed, K. J. McLaughlin, and R. 
L. Priem, “The New Corporate 
 Architecture”; H.  Chesbrough 
and D. Teece, “When Is Virtual 
Virtuous: Organizing for Innova-
tion,” Harvard Business Review, 
January–February 1996, 65–73; 
and W. H. Davidow and M. S. 
Malone, The Virtual Corpora-
tion (New York: Harper Collins, 
1992).
 37. Q. Hardy, “Bit by Bit, Work Ex-
change Site Aims to Get Jobs 
Done,” New York Times Online, 
November 6, 2011.
 38. M. V. Rafter, “Cultivating a Virtual 
Culture,” Workforce Management 
Online, April 5, 2012.
 39. R. E. Miles, C. C. Snow, J. A. 
Matthews, G. Miles, and H. J. 
Coleman Jr., “Organizing in the 
Knowledge Age: Anticipating 
the Cellular Form,” Academy 
of Management Executive, No-
vember 1997, 7–24; C. Jones, 
W. Hesterly, and S. Borgatti, 
“A General Theory of Network 
Governance: Exchange Condi-
tions and Social Mechanisms,” 
Academy of Management Re-
view, October 1997, 911–45; R. 
E. Miles and C. C. Snow, “The 
New Network Firm: A Spherical 
Structure Built on Human Invest-
ment Philosophy,” Organization-
al Dynamics, Spring 1995, 5–18; 
and R. E. Miles and C. C. Snow, 
“Causes of Failures in Network 
Organizations,” California Man-
agement Review vol. 34, no. 4 
(1992): 53–72.
 40. G. Hoetker, “Do Modular Products 
Lead to Modular Organizations?” 
Strategic Management Journal 
(June 2006): 501–18; C. H. Fine, 
“Are You Modular or Integral?” 
Strategy & Business, Summer 
2005, 44–51; D. A. Ketchen Jr. 
and G. T. M. Hult, “To Be Modu-
lar or Not to Be? Some Answers 
to the Question,” Academy of 
Management 
Executive, 
May 
2002, 166–67; M. A. Schilling, 
“The Use of Modular Organiza-
tional Forms: An Industry-Level 
Analysis,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal (December 2001): 
1149–68; D. Lei, M. A. Hitt, and J. 
D. Goldhar, “Advanced Manufac-
turing Technology: Organizational 
Design and Strategic Flexibil-
ity,” Organization Studies vol. 17 
(1996): 501–23; R. Sanchez and 
J. Mahoney, “Modularity Flex-
ibility and Knowledge Manage-
ment in Product and Organization 
Design,” Strategic Management 
Journal vol. 17 (1996): 63–76; and 
R. Sanchez, “Strategic Flexibility 
in Product Competition,” Strate-
gic Management Journal vol. 16 
(1995): 135–59.
 41. C. Hymowitz, “Have Advice, Will 
Travel,” Wall Street Journal, June 
5, 2006, B1+.
 42. S. Reed, A. Reinhardt, and 
A. Sains, “Saving Ericsson,” 
 BusinessWeek, 
November 
11, 
2002, 64–68.
 43. P. Engardio, “The Future of Out-
sourcing,” BusinessWeek, January 
30, 2006, 50–58.
 44. C. E. Connelly and D. G. Galla-
gher, “Emerging Trends in Con-
tingent Work Research,” Journal 
of Management (November 2004): 
959–83.
 45. N. M. Adler, International Dimen-
sions of Organizational Behavior, 
5th ed. (Cincinnati, OH: South-
Western, 2008), 62.
 46. Technology and the Manager’s 
Job box based on R. Cheng, “So 
You Want to Use Your iPhone for 
Work? How the Smartest Compa-
nies Are Letting Employees Use 
Their Personal Gadgets to Do 
Their Jobs,” Wall Street Journal, 
April 25, 2011, R1+; B. Rob-
erts, “Mobile Workforce Man-
agement,” HR Magazine, March 
2011, 67–70; D. Darlin, “Software 
That Monitors Your Work, Wher-
ever You Are,” New York Times 
Online 
<www.nytimesonline.
com> (April 12, 2009); D. Pau-
leen and B. Harmer, “Away from 
the Desk…Always,” Wall Street 
Journal, December 15, 2008, R8; 
J. Marquez, “Connecting a Virtual 
Workforce,” Workforce Manage-
ment Online <www.workforce.
com> (September 22, 2008); 
R. Yu, “Work Away from Work 
Gets Easier with Technology,” 
USA Today, November 28, 2006, 
8B; M. Weinstein, “GOing Mo-
bile,” Training, September 2006,  
24–29; C. Cobbs, “Technol-
ogy Helps Boost Multitasking,” 
Springfield, 
Missouri 
News- 
Leader, June 15, 2006, 5B; C. Ed-
wards, “Wherever You Go, You’re 
on the Job,” BusinessWeek, June 
20, 2005, 87–90; and S. E. Ante, 
“The World Wide Work Space,” 
BusinessWeek, June 6, 2005, 
106–08.
 47. P. Olson, “Tesco’s Landing,” 
Forbes, June 4, 2007, 116–18; and 
P. M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline: 
The Art and Practice of Learning 
Organizations (New York: Dou-
bleday, 1990).
 48. P. B. Smith and M. F. Peterson, 
“Demographic Effects on the Use 
of Vertical Sources of Guidance 
by Managers in Widely Differing 
Cultural Contexts,” International 
Journal of Cross Cultural Man-
agement (April 2005): 5–26.
 49. J. Marquez, “Connecting a Virtual 
Workforce,” Workforce Manage-
ment Online, February 3, 2009.
 50. M. Conlin, “Home Offices: The 
New Math,” BusinessWeek, March 
9, 2009, 66–68.
 51. Ibid.
 52. J. Marquez, “Connecting a Virtual 
Workforce.”
 53. S. Jayson, “Working at Home: 
Family-Friendly,” 
USA 
Today, 
April 15, 2010, 1A+; T. D. Hecht 
and N. J. Allen, “A Longitudi-
nal Examination of the Work-
Nonwork 
Boundary 
Strength 
 Construct,” Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior (October 2009): 
839–62; and G. E. Kreiner, E. 
C. Hollensbe, and M. L. Sheep, 
“Balancing Borders and Bridges: 
Negotiating the Work-Home Inter-
face via Boundary Work Tactics,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(August 2009): 704–30.
 54. J. T. Marquez, “The Future of 
Flex,” 
Workforce 
Management 
Online, January 2010.
 55. S. Greenhouse, “Work-Sharing 
May Help Companies Avoid Lay-
offs,” New York Times Online, June 
16, 2009.
 56. R. King, “Meet the Microwork-
ers,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek 
Online, February 1, 2011; and R. 
King, “Mechanical Serfdom Is 
Just That,” Bloomberg Business-
Week Online, February 1, 2011.
 57. K. Bennhold, “Working (Part-
Time) in the 21st Century,” New 
York Times Online, December 29, 
2010; and J. Revell, C. Bigda, and 
D. Rosato, “The Rise of Freelance 
Nation,” CNNMoney, cnnmoney.
com, June 12, 2009.
 58. Revell, Bigda, and Rosato, “The 
Rise of Freelance Nation.”
 59. Ibid.
 60. H. G. Jackson, “Flexible Work-
places: The Next Imperative,” 
HR Magazine, March 2011, 8; E. 
Frauenheim, “Companies Focus 
Their Attention on Flexibility,” 
Workforce Management Online, 
February 2011; P. Davidson, 
“Companies Do More with Fewer 
Workers,” USA Today, February 
23, 2011, 1B+; M. Rich, “Weigh-
ing Costs, Companies Favor Tem-
porary Help,” New York Times 
Online, December 19, 2010; and 
P. Davidson, “Temporary Workers 
Reshape Companies, Jobs,” USA 
Today, October 13, 2010, 1B+.
 61. C. C. Miller and N. Perlroth, “Ya-
hoo Says New Policy Is Meant to 
Raise Morale,” New York Times 
Online, March 5, 2013; C. Sud-
dath, “Work-From-Home Truths, 
Half-Truths, and Myths,” Bloom-
berg BusinessWeek, March 4–10, 
2013, 75; Q. Fottrell, “The Home 
Office in the Spotlight,” Wall 
Street Journal, February 27, 2013, 
B6; E. Weise, “Telecommuters to 
Yahoo: Boo,” USA Today, Febru-
ary 26, 2013, 1A; R. E. Silver-
man and R. Bell, “Examining 
Marissa Mayer’s Out-of-Office 
Message to Yahoo Employees,” 
www.workforce.com, 
February 
26, 2013; C. C. Miller and C. 
Rampell, “Yahoo Orders Home 
Workers Back to the Office,” New 
York Times Online, February 25, 
2013; and K. Swisher, “‘Physical-
ly Together’: Here’s the  Internal 

CHAPTER 6  •  Organizational Structure and Design    217
Yahoo 
No-Work-from-Home 
Memo for Remote Workers and 
Maybe More,” allthingsd.com, 
February 22, 2013.
 62. D. Lumb, “NASA Chief Says Mars 
One Does Not Stand a Chance 
Without 
NASA,” 
http://www. 
fastcompany.com/3045186/fast-
feed/nasa-chief-says-mars-one-
does-not-stand-a-chance-with-
out-nasa, April 17, 2015; NASA 
Strategic Plan 2014, https://www.
nasa.gov/sites/default/files/files/
FY2014_NASA_SP_508c.pdf; S. 
Karlin, “Rebranding NASA for 
a New Space Age,” http://www. 
fastcocreate.com/3034276/ 
re-branding-nasa-for-a-new-space-
age, December 3, 2014; E. J. Hoff-
man and J. Boyle, “Managing Mis-
sion Knowledge at NASA,” T&D, 
July 2014, 50–55; J. Dean, “Bold-
ness of’81 Test Flight Unlikely to 
Be Repeated,” USA Today, April 
11, 2011, 7A; G. Griffin, “As Shut-
tle Retires, a Vote for Commercial 
Space Flight,” USA Today, April 6, 
2011, 9A; A. K. Donahue, “More 
to Learn from NASA about Learn-
ing, Unlearning, and Forgetting,” 
Journal of Public Administration 
Research (April 2011): 391–95; 
and 
“NASA’s 
Space-Shuttle 
 Program Ends,” Fast Company, 
February 2011, 22.
 63. S. Silbermann, “How Culture 
and Regulation Demand New 
Ways to Sell,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, July/August 2012, 
104–05; P. Miller and T. Wedell-
Wedellsborg, “How to Make 
an Offer That Managers Can’t 
Refuse?” IESE Insight, second 
quarter, issue 9 (2011): 66–67; 
S. Hernández, “Prove Its Worth,” 
IESE Insight, second quarter, is-
sue 9 (2011): 68; T. Koulopoulos, 
“Know Thyself,” IESE Insight, 
second quarter, issue 9 (2011): 
69; M. Weinstein, “Retrain and 
Restructure Your Organization,” 
Training, May 2009, 36; J. Mc-
Gregor, “The Chore Goes Off-
shore,” 
BusinessWeek, 
March 
23 & 30, 2009, 50–51; “Pfizer: 
Making It ‘Leaner, Meaner, More 
Efficient,’” BusinessWeek Online, 
March 2, 2009; and A. Cohen, 
“Scuttling Scut Work,” Fast Com-
pany, February 2008, 42–43.

Managing Human 
Resources
7
Image Source Plus/Alamy
   
Managers don’t need  
  
to know about human  
resources because that’s the  
job of the HR department.

219
HR activities like selection and performance 
appraisal are frequently assumed to be the 
responsibility of only those who work in an 
organization’s HR department. The truth is 
that all managers will have some  
responsibilities for staffing, appraising, and 
training people in their work unit. An HR 
department provides much needed advice, 
suggestions, and support activities, but  
managers are involved with human resource 
decisions in their work units.
1

an organization’s structure 
in place, managers have to 
find people to fill the jobs that have been 
created or to remove people from jobs if 
business circumstances require it. That’s 
where human resource management 
(HRM) comes in. It’s an important task 
that involves having the right number 
of the right people in the right place at 
the right time. In this chapter, we’ll look 
at the process managers use to do just 
that—a process that includes finding, 
 interviewing, and assessing job appli-
cants; helping new employees  assimilate; 
recommending training; and assessing 
employee performance. In  addition, we’ll 
look at some contemporary HRM issues 
facing managers. •
Learning Outcomes
7-1  Describe the key components of the human resource management process  
and the important influences on that process. p. 221 
7-2  Discuss the tasks associated with identifying and selecting competent  
employees. p. 225
7-3 Explain how employees are provided with needed skills and knowledge. p. 232
7-4 Describe strategies for retaining competent, high-performing employees. p. 236
7-5 Discuss contemporary issues in managing human resources. p. 241
With 
220

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    221
What Is the Human Resource Management Process  
and What Influences It?
The quality of an organization is to a large degree deter-
mined by the quality of the people it employs. Success 
for most organizations depends on finding the employees 
with the skills to successfully perform the tasks required 
to attain the company’s strategic goals. Staffing and 
HRM decisions and actions are critical to ensuring that 
the organization hires and keeps the right people.
Getting that done is what human resource man-
agement (HRM) is all about. The eight important HRM 
activities (the yellow boxes) are shown in Exhibit 7–1.
After an organization’s strategy has been established 
and the organization structure  designed, it’s time to add 
the people—to acquire the talent! That’s one of the most critical roles for HRM and one that 
has increased the importance of HR managers to the organization. The first three activities in 
7-1  Describe the key 
components of the  
human resource  
management  
process and  
the important  
influences on that 
process.
Recruitment
and
downsizing
Orientation
Identiﬁcation 
and selection
of competent
employees
Adapted and
competent
employees with
up-to-date skills,
knowledge, and 
abilities
Competent and high-
performing employees 
who are capable of 
sustaining high 
performance over the
long term
Safety
and
health
Performance
management
Compensation
and
beneﬁts
Strategic
human
resource
planning
Selection
Training
and
development
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
  L
eg
isl
ati
on 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
  D
ive
rsi
ty 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 W
ork
 Pr
oc
ess
 
Re
str
uct
uri
ng
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Do
wn
siz
ing
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
En
vir
on
me
nt 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Un
ion
s   
    
    
    
    
    
    
                       
Exhibit 7–1 The Human Resource Management Process
human resource  
management (HRM)
The management function concerned with getting, 
training, motivating, and keeping competent 
employees

222    Part 3  •  Organizing
the HRM process represent employment planning: the  addition of staff through recruitment, 
the reduction in staff through downsizing, and selection. When executed properly, these steps 
lead to the identification and selection of competent, talented employees who can assist an 
organization in achieving its strategic goals.
Once you select the people you want, you need to help them adapt to the organization 
and ensure that their job skills and knowledge are kept current. These next two activities in 
the HRM process are accomplished through orientation and training. The last steps in the 
HRM process are designed to identify performance goals, correct performance problems if 
necessary, and help employees sustain a high level of performance over their entire work 
life. The activities involved include performance appraisal, and compensation and benefits. 
(HRM also includes safety and health issues, but we’re not covering those topics in this 
book.) All these activities, if properly executed, will staff an organization with competent, 
high-performing employees who are capable of sustaining their performance levels over 
the long run.
HRM = Right People, Right Place, Right Time
Notice in Exhibit 7–1 that the entire process is influenced by the external environment. 
Many of the factors we discussed in Chapter 2 directly affect all management practices, but 
their effect is keenly felt in managing the organization’s human resources, because what-
ever happens to an organization ultimately influences what happens to its employees. So, 
 before we review the HRM process, let’s examine one external force that affects it—the legal 
environment.
What Is the Legal Environment of HRM?
HRM practices are governed by laws, which vary from country to country. State (or provin-
cial) and local regulations further influence specific practices within countries. Consequently, 
it’s impossible to provide you with all the information you need about the relevant regulatory 
environment. As a manager, it will be important for you to know what you legally can and 
cannot do wherever you’re located.
What are the Primary U.S. LaWS affecting hrm? Since the mid-1960s, 
the federal government in the United States has greatly expanded its influence over 
HRM by enacting a number of laws and regulations (see Exhibit 7–2 for examples). 
Although we’ve not seen many laws enacted recently at the federal level, many states 
have  enacted laws that add to the provisions of the federal laws. Today’s employers 
must ensure that equal  employment opportunities exist for job applicants and current 
 employees. Decisions regarding who will be hired, for example, or which employees will 
be  chosen for a management training program must be made without regard to race, sex, 
 religion, age, color, national origin, or disability. Exceptions can occur only when special 
 circumstances exist. For instance, a community fire department can deny employment 
to a firefighter applicant who is confined to a wheelchair, but if that same individual 
is  applying for a desk job, such as a fire department dispatcher, the disability cannot 
be used as a reason to deny employment. The issues involved, however, are rarely that 
clear-cut. For example, employment laws protect most employees whose religious beliefs 
require a specific style of dress—robes, long shirts, long hair, and the like. However, if 
the specific style of dress may be hazardous or unsafe in the work setting (e.g., when 
operating machinery), a company could refuse to hire a person who would not adopt a 
safer dress code.
Trying to balance the “shoulds and should-nots” of these laws often falls within the 
realm of equal employment opportunity (EEO) initiatives and affirmative action programs. 
EEO strives to ensure that anyone has an equal opportunity based on his or her qualifications. 
And many organizations operating in the United States have affirmative action programs to 
ensure that decisions and practices enhance the employment, upgrading, and retention of 
members from protected groups such as minorities and females.
affirmative action programs
Programs that ensure that decisions and practices 
enhance the employment, upgrading, and retention 
of members of protected groups

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    223
Operating within legal constraints, U.S. managers are not completely free to choose 
whom they hire, promote, or fire. Although laws and regulations have significantly helped to 
reduce employment discrimination and unfair employment practices, they have, at the same 
time, reduced management’s discretion over HR decisions.
are hrm LaWS the Same gLobaLLy? No. As a global manager, you’ll need to know 
 applicable laws and regulations. Here’s a quick overview of some HRM laws in other countries.
Canada:
• HRM laws closely parallel those in the United States. Example: Human Rights Act—a 
law that governs practices throughout the country—prohibits discrimination on the basis 
of race, religion, age, marital status, sex, physical or mental disability, or national origin.
• HRM environment involves more decentralized lawmaking at the provincial level.  Example: 
Discrimination on the basis of language is not prohibited anywhere in Canada except in 
Quebec.
Mexico:
• Although once heavily unionized, unionization rates have been declining.
• Labor issues are governed by the Mexican Federal Labor Law.
1963 
 
 
Prohibits pay differences for equal work based on gender
1964 (amended in 1972) 
Prohibits discrimination based on race, color, religion, 
 
 
 
national origin, or gender
1967 (amended in 1978) 
Prohibits discrimination against employees 40 years and older
1973 
 
 
Prohibits discrimination on the basis of physical or 
 
 
 
mental disabilities  
 
1990 
 
 
Prohibits discrimination against individuals who have disabilities 
 
 
 
or chronic illnesses; also requires reasonable accommodations 
 
 
 
for these individuals 
Equal Employment Opportunity and Discrimination
    Equal Pay Act
    Civil Rights Act, Title VII
    Age Discrimination in
    Employment Act 
    Vocational Rehabilitation Act
    Americans with Disabilities Act
Compensation/Beneﬁts
    Worker Adjustment and
    Retraining Notiﬁcation Act
    Family and Medical Leave Act
 
    Health Insurance Portability and
    Accountability Act
    Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act
    Patient Protection and
    Affordable Care Act
1990 
 
 
Requires employers with more than 100 employees to provide 
 
 
 
60 days’ notice before a mass layoff or facility closing
1993 
 
 
Gives employees in organizations with 50 or more employees up to 
 
 
 
12 weeks of unpaid leave each year for family or medical reasons
1996 
 
 
Permits portability of employees’ insurance from one employer 
 
 
 
to another
2009 
 
 
Changes the statute of limitations on pay discrimination to 
 
 
 
180 days from each paycheck 
 
 
2010 
 
 
Health care legislation that puts in place comprehensive 
 
 
 
health insurance reforms
Health/Safety
    Occupational Safety and Health
    Act (OSHA)
    Privacy Act
 
    Consolidated Omnibus
    Reconciliation Act (COBRA)
1970 
 
 
Establishes mandatory safety and health standards in organizations
1974 
 
 
Gives employees the legal right to examine personnel ﬁles 
 
 
 
and letters of reference
1985 
 
 
Requires continued health coverage following termination 
 
 
 
(paid by employee)
LAW OR RULING  
              YEAR  
 
 
DESCRIPTION
Exhibit 7–2 Major HRM Laws
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 341. Reprinted and electronically reproduced by permission 
of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

224    Part 3  •  Organizing
Hugo Munsterberg, a pioneer in the field of industrial 
 psychology, is “generally credited with creating the field.”2 
As an admirer of Frederick W. Taylor and the scientific man-
agement movement, Munsterberg stated that “Taylor had 
introduced most valuable suggestions which the industrial 
world cannot  ignore.” Drawing on Taylor’s 
works, Munsterberg stressed “the impor-
tance of efficiently using workers to achieve 
economic production.” His research and work 
in showing organizations ways to improve the 
performance and well-being of workers was 
fundamental to the emerging field of manage-
ment in the early 1900s.
Today, industrial-organizational psychology is defined as 
the scientific study of the workplace. Industrial-organizational 
(I/O) psychologists use scientific principles and research-based 
 designs to generate knowledge about workplace  issues. 
(Check out the Society for Industrial and  Organizational Psy-
chology at www.siop.org.) They study organizational topics 
such as job performance, job analysis, performance appraisal, 
compensation, work/life balance, work sample tests, employ-
ee training, employment law, personnel recruitment and se-
lection, and so forth. Their research has contributed much to 
the field that we call human resource man-
agement. And all of this is due to the early 
work done by Hugo Munsterberg.
If your professor has assigned this, go to 
the Assignments section of mymanage 
mentlab.com to complete these discus-
sion questions.
   Talk About It 1: Why is it important to scientifically study 
the workplace?
   Talk About It 2: Do you think it’s easier today to scien-
tifically study the workplace than it was back in Munsterberg’s 
days? Why or why not?
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
Scientifically  
studying the 
WorKPLace
General Electric is a multinational employer 
committed to observing all the different labor 
laws of the 100 countries in which it operates. 
Shown here are employees of GE’s wind 
turbine factory in Vietnam, a country whose 
Labour Code of Vietnam was first passed 
in 1994 and provides strong protections for 
employees.
AFP/Newscom
• Example: One hiring law states that employer has 28 days to evaluate a new employee’s 
work performance; after that period, the employee has job security and termination is 
 difficult and expensive.
• Violators face severe penalties, including criminal action, steep fines, and even jail  sentences 
for employers who fail to pay, for example, the minimum wage.
Australia:
• Discrimination laws not enacted until the 1980s and generally apply to women (who need 
improved opportunities).
• Industrial relations specialists have important organizational roles, reducing the control line 
managers have over workplace labor issues.
• Labor and industrial relations 
laws were overhauled in 1997 
with the goal of increasing pro-
ductivity and reducing union 
power.
• The Workplace Relations Bill 
gives employers greater flex-
ibility to negotiate directly with 
employees on pay, hours, and 
benefits, and also simplifies 
 federal regulation of labor–
management relations.
Germany:
• Similar to most other Western 
European countries when it 
comes to HRM practices.
• Laws require companies to have 
representative 
 participation—
thus redistributing power within 
the  organization and putting 
 labor on a more equal footing 
with the interests of manage-
ment and  stockholders.

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    225
• Two most common forms of representative participation are (1) work councils, which are 
groups of nominated or elected employees who must be consulted when management makes 
decisions involving personnel; and (2) board representatives, who are  employees who sit 
on a company’s board of directors and represent the interests of the firm’s  employees.
A Question of Ethics
Here’s a challenging HR issue for managers: A business model that 
relies heavily on the appearance of employees AND balancing the 
rights of those employees. Hooters, the restaurant chain that hires 
attractive waitresses who are expected to wear (and look good) in 
tight tops and short shorts, uses that business model. However, when 
one of its waitresses in a St. Peters, Missouri, location had brain sur-
gery to remove a tumor, her manager initially said the young woman 
could wear a “chemo cap” to cover her scar and her lack of hair.3 
However, a regional manager later said that was not sufficient and 
a wig was necessary. The employee told both her manager and the 
regional manager that she did not have a wig and could not  afford to 
buy one because of the expense. The employee was able to borrow 
one and tried to wear it at work. However, it was too painful and kept 
her wound from healing, and she chose not to continue wearing it. 
Her manager then significantly reduced her hours, forcing her to quit 
because she could not earn sufficient income. The waitress filed a 
federal discrimination lawsuit against the restaurant chain in federal 
court saying she was forced out of her job for refusing to wear a wig. 
Hooters denies the allegations.
(Update: The young woman, who had worked at Hooters for 
almost eight years to pay for nursing school, is now a registered 
nurse. No information could be found on whether the case was 
settled.)
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
   Talk About It 3: How might this issue—balancing the rights 
of employees against a business model that’s based on  employee 
 appearances—affect HR processes such as recruitment, selection, 
and performance management?
   Talk About It 4: What possible HR ethical issue(s) do you see 
in this story?
How Do Managers Identify and Select Competent 
Employees?
Every organization needs people to do whatever work 
is necessary for doing what the organization is in busi-
ness to do. How do organizations get those people? And 
more importantly, what can they do to ensure they get 
competent, talented people? This first phase of the HRM 
process involves three tasks: 1 employment planning, 
2 recruitment and downsizing, and 3 selection.
1 What Is Employment Planning?
Supply and Demand aren’t just for economics—they’re 
also important to HRM!
• Talent wars have come to Silicon Valley as Internet startups struggle to compete for scarce 
talent even as more-established companies such as Facebook, Twitter, and Google look to 
add employees as their businesses continue to grow.
• During the latest economic downturn, Boeing cut more than 3,000 jobs, mostly from its 
commercial airplanes unit. During the same time, it added 106 employees to its defense unit 
and was looking for several hundred more.4
Juggling the supply of human resources to meet demand is a challenge for many companies.
7-2  Discuss the tasks 
associated with 
identifying and  
selecting  
competent  
employees.
work councils
Groups of nominated or elected employees who 
must be consulted when management makes  
decisions involving personnel
board representatives
Employees who sit on a company’s board of  
directors and represent the interest of employees

226    Part 3  •  Organizing
Employment planning is the process by which managers ensure that they have the right 
number and kinds of people in the right places at the right times, people who are capable of 
effectively and efficiently completing those tasks that will help the organization achieve its 
goals. Employment planning, then, translates the organization’s mission and goals into an HR 
plan that will allow the organization to achieve those goals. The process can be condensed 
into two steps: (1) assessing current human resources and future human resource needs, and 
(2) developing a plan to meet those needs.
(1) hoW doeS an organization do a cUrrent hr aSSeSSment? Managers 
begin by reviewing the current human resource status. This review is typically done by 
 generating a human resource inventory. It’s not difficult to generate an inventory in most 
organizations since the information for it is derived from forms completed by employees. 
Such inventories might list the name, education, training, prior employment, languages 
spoken, capabilities, and specialized skills of each employee in the organization. This 
inventory allows managers to assess what talents and skills are currently available in the 
organization.
Another part of the current assessment is job analysis. Whereas the human resources 
inventory is concerned with telling management what individual employees can do, job 
analysis is more fundamental. It’s typically a lengthy process, one in which workflows 
are analyzed and skills and behaviors that are necessary to perform jobs are identified. For 
instance, what does an international reporter who works for the Wall Street Journal do? 
What minimal knowledge, skills, and abilities are necessary for the adequate performance 
of this job? How do the job requirements for an international reporter compare with those 
for a domestic reporter or for a newspaper editor? Job analysis can answer these questions. 
Ultimately, the purpose of job analysis is to determine the kinds of skills, knowledge, and 
attitudes needed to successfully perform each job. This information is then used to develop 
or revise job descriptions and job specifications.
Why IS JOB ANALYSIS so important?
Job analysis results in: Job description S describes the job
&
Job specification S describes the person
A job description is a written statement that describes the job—what a job holder 
does, how it’s done, and why it’s done. It typically portrays job content, environment, 
and conditions of employment. The job specification states the minimum qualifications 
that a person must possess to perform a given job successfully. It focuses on the person 
and identifies the knowledge, skills, and attitudes needed to do the job effectively. The 
job  description and job specification are important documents when managers begin 
 recruiting and selecting. For instance, the job description can be used to describe the job 
to potential candidates. The job specification keeps the manager’s attention on the list 
of qualifications necessary for an incumbent to perform a job and assists in determin-
ing whether candidates are qualified. Furthermore, hiring individuals on the basis of the 
 information contained in these two documents helps ensure that the hiring process does 
not discriminate.
(2) hoW are fUtUre emPLoyee needS determined? Future human resource 
needs are determined by the organization’s strategic goals and direction. Demand for 
human resources (employees) is a result of demand for the organization’s products or 
services. On the basis of an estimate of total revenue, managers can attempt to establish 
the number and mix of people needed to reach that revenue. In some cases, however, the 
situation may be reversed. When particular skills are necessary and in scarce supply, the 
availability of needed human resources determines revenues. For example, managers of 
an upscale chain of assisted-living retirement facilities who find themselves with abundant 
business opportunities are limited in their ability to grow revenues by whether they can hire 
a qualified nursing staff to fully meet the needs of the residents. In most cases, however, the 
employment planning
The process by which managers ensure they have 
the right numbers and kinds of people in the right 
places at the right time
human resource inventory
A report listing important information about 
employees such as name, education, training, skills, 
languages spoken, and so forth
job analysis
An assessment that defines jobs and the behaviors 
necessary to perform them
job description
A written statement that describes a job
job specification
A written statement of the minimum qualifications 
that a person must possess to perform a given job 
successfully

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    227
overall organizational goals and the resulting revenue forecast provide the major input in 
determining the organization’s HR requirements.
After assessing both current capabilities and future needs, managers can estimate tal-
ent shortages—both in number and in kind—and highlight areas in which the organization 
is overstaffed. They can then develop a plan that matches these estimates with forecasts of 
future labor supply. Employment planning not only guides current staffing needs but also 
projects future employee needs and availability.
2A How Do Organizations Recruit Employees?
Once managers know their current staffing levels—understaffed or overstaffed—they can be-
gin to do something about it. If vacancies exist, they can use the information gathered through 
job analysis to guide them in recruitment—that is, the process of locating, identifying, and 
attracting capable applicants. On the other hand, if employment planning indicates a surplus, 
managers may want to reduce the labor supply within the organization and initiate downsiz-
ing or restructuring activities.
Needed! Outstanding Job Applicants!
Now . . . how do we get those?
Where doeS a manager recrUit aPPLicantS? The Internet has become a popu-
lar approach for recruiting job applicants, although there are other sources to find them. 
Exhibit 7–3 offers some guidance. The source that’s used should reflect the local labor 
market, the type or level of position, and the size of the organization.
Which recruiting sources tend to produce superior applicants? Most studies have found that 
employee referrals generally produce the best applicants.5 Why? First, applicants  referred by 
current employees are prescreened by those employees. Because the recommenders know both 
the job and the person being recommended, they tend to refer well-qualified applicants.6 Second, 
because current employees often feel that their reputation in the organization is at stake with a 
referral, they tend to make referrals only when they are reasonably confident that the referral 
won’t make them look bad. However, managers shouldn’t always opt for the  employee-referred 
applicant; such referrals may not increase the diversity and mix of employees.
Exhibit 7–3 Recruiting Sources
Source
AdvAntAgeS
diSAdvAntAgeS
Internet
Reaches large numbers of  
people; can get immediate  
feedback
Generates many  
unqualified candidates
Employee referrals
Knowledge about the  
organization provided by  
current employee; can  
generate strong candidates  
because a good referral  
reflects on the recommender
May not increase the  
diversity and mix of  
employees
Company Web site
Wide distribution; can be  
targeted to specific groups
Generates many  
unqualified candidates
College recruiting
Large centralized body of  
candidates
Limited to entry-level  
positions
Professional recruiting  
organizations
Good knowledge of industry  
challenges and requirements
Little commitment to  
specific organization
recruitment
Locating, identifying, and attracting capable 
applicants
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 346. Reprinted  
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

228    Part 3  •  Organizing
2B How Does a Manager Handle Layoffs?
Coca-Cola laid off 1,600 to 1,800 of its corporate U.S. and international employees.7 American 
Express cut costs by eliminating 4,000 jobs after failing to meet long-term revenue growth tar-
gets.8 eBay cut 2,400 jobs (7 percent of its workforce) to adapt to changing conditions.9
In the past decade, and especially during the last few years, most global organizations, as 
well as many government agencies and small businesses, have been forced to shrink the size 
of their workforce or restructure their skill composition. Downsizing has become a relevant 
strategy for meeting the demands of a dynamic environment.
What are doWnSizing oPtionS? Obviously, people can be fired, but other 
 restructuring choices may be more beneficial to the organization. Exhibit 7–4 summarizes a 
manager’s major downsizing options. Keep in mind that, regardless of the method chosen, 
employees suffer. We discuss downsizing more fully—for both victims and survivors—later 
in this chapter.
3 How Do Managers Select Job Applicants?
Once the recruiting effort has developed a pool of applicants, the next step in the HRM process 
is to determine who is best qualified for the job. In essence, then, the selection process is a 
prediction exercise: It seeks to predict which applicants will be “successful” if hired; that is, 
who will perform well on the criteria the organization uses to evaluate its employees. In filling 
a network administrator position, for example, the selection process should be able to predict 
which applicants will be capable of properly installing, debugging, managing, and  updating 
the organization’s computer network. For a position as a sales representative, it should predict 
which applicants will be successful at generating high sales volumes. Consider, for a  moment, 
that any selection decision can result in four possible outcomes. As shown in Exhibit 7–5, two 
outcomes would indicate correct decisions, and two would indicate errors.
 Watch it 1! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Human Resource Management.
Exhibit 7–4 Downsizing Options
option
deScription
Firing
Permanent involuntary termination
Layoffs
Temporary involuntary termination; may last only a few 
days or extend to years
Attrition
Not filling openings created by voluntary resignations  
or normal retirements
Transfers
Moving employees either laterally or downward; usually 
does not reduce costs but can reduce intraorganizational 
supply–demand imbalances
Reduced workweeks
Having employees work fewer hours per week, share 
jobs, or through furloughs perform their jobs on  
a part-time basis
Early retirements
Providing incentives to older and more-senior employees 
for retiring before their normal retirement date
Job sharing
Having employees, typically two part-timers, share one 
full-time position
selection process
Screening job applicants to ensure that the most 
appropriate candidates are hired

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    229
A decision is correct when (1) the applicant who was predicted to be successful (was 
 accepted) later proved to be successful on the job, or (2) the applicant who was predicted 
to be unsuccessful (was rejected) would not have been able to do the job if hired. In the 
 former case, we have successfully accepted; in the latter case, we have successfully rejected. 
Problems  occur, however, when we reject applicants who, if hired, would have performed suc-
cessfully on the job (called reject errors) or accept those who subsequently perform poorly 
(accept  errors). These problems are, unfortunately, far from insignificant. A generation ago, 
reject  errors only meant increased selection costs because more applicants would have to be 
screened. Today, selection techniques that result in reject errors can open the  organization to 
charges of  employment discrimination, especially if applicants from protected groups are dis-
proportionately rejected. Accept errors, on the other hand, have obvious costs to the organiza-
tion, including the cost of training the employee, the costs generated or profits forgone because 
of the employee’s incompetence, and the cost of severance and the subsequent costs of addi-
tional recruiting and selection screening. The major intent of any selection activity is to reduce 
the probability of making reject errors or accept errors while increasing the probability of 
making correct decisions. How? By using selection procedures that are both reliable and valid.
What iS reLiabiLity? 
Reliability addresses whether a selection device measures the 
same characteristic consistently. For example, if a test is reliable, any individual’s score 
should remain fairly stable over 
time, assuming that the characteris-
tics it’s measuring are also stable. 
The importance of reliability should 
be self-evident. No selection device 
can be effective if it’s low in reli-
ability. Using such a device would 
be the equivalent of weighing your-
self every day on an erratic scale. If 
the scale is  unreliable—randomly 
fluctuating, say, 10 to 15 pounds 
every time you step on it—the re-
sults will not mean much. To be ef-
fective predictors, selection devices 
must possess an acceptable level of 
consistency.
What iS VaLidity? Any selection 
device that a manager uses—such as 
application forms, tests, interviews, 
or 
physical 
 examinations—must 
also demonstrate validity. Validity 
Reject
error
Correct
decision
Correct
decision
Accept
error
Reject
Selection Decision
Accept
Later Job Performance
Unsuccessful
Successful
Exhibit 7–5 Selection Decision Outcomes
Employees who apply for management  
positions at this Sarku Japan fast-food  
restaurant must take written tests as part of 
the company’s selection process. Properly  
designed written tests for intelligence,  
integrity, personality, and interests are  
popular selection devices that often are valid 
and reliable in helping to predict which  
applicants will be successful on the job.
Michael S. Williamson/The Washington Post/Getty Images
reliability
The degree to which a selection device measures 
the same thing consistently
validity
The proven relationship between a selection device 
and some relevant criterion

230    Part 3  •  Organizing
is based on a proven relationship between the selection device used and some relevant 
measure. For example, we mentioned earlier a firefighter applicant who was wheelchair 
bound. Because of the physical requirements of a firefighter’s job, someone confined to a 
wheelchair would be unable to pass the physical endurance tests. In that case, denying em-
ployment could be considered valid, but requiring the same physical endurance tests for the 
dispatching job would not be job related. Federal law prohibits managers from using any 
selection device that cannot be shown to be directly related to successful job performance. 
That constraint goes for entrance tests, too; managers must be able to demonstrate that, 
once on the job, individuals with high scores on such a test outperform individuals with 
low scores. Consequently, the burden is on the organization to verify that any selection de-
vice it uses to differentiate applicants is related to job performance.
Tests . . . not just for school!
hoW effectiVe are teStS and interVieWS aS SeLection deViceS? Managers 
can use a number of selection devices to reduce accept and reject errors. The best-known 
devices include written and performance-simulation tests and interviews. Let’s briefly 
 review each device, giving particular attention to its validity in predicting job performance.
Typical written tests include tests of intelligence, aptitude, ability, and interest. Such tests 
have long been used as selection devices, although their popularity has run in cycles. Written 
tests were widely used after World War II, but beginning in the late 1960s, fell out of favor. 
They were frequently characterized as discriminatory, and many organizations could not 
validate that their written tests were job related. Today, written tests have made a comeback, 
although most of them are now Internet based.10 Experts estimate that online personality tests 
are used by employers to assess personality, skills, cognitive abilities, and other traits of some 
60 to 70 percent of prospective employees.11 Managers are increasingly aware that poor hir-
ing decisions are costly and that properly designed tests can reduce the likelihood of making 
such decisions. In addition, the cost of developing and validating a set of written tests for a 
specific job has declined significantly.
Research shows that tests of intellectual ability, spatial and mechanical ability, per-
ceptual accuracy, and motor ability are moderately valid predictors for many semiskilled 
and unskilled operative jobs in an industrial organization.12 However, an enduring criti-
cism of written tests is that intelligence and other tested characteristics can be somewhat 
removed from the actual performance of the job itself.13 For example, a high score on an 
intelligence test is not necessarily a good indicator that the applicant will perform well 
as a computer programmer. This criticism has led to an increased use of performance-
simulation tests.
What better way to find out whether an applicant for a technical writing position at Apple 
can write technical manuals than to ask him or her to do it? That’s why there’s an increasing 
interest in performance-simulation tests. Undoubtedly, the enthusiasm for these tests lies in 
the fact that they’re based on job analysis data and, therefore, should more easily meet the re-
quirement of job relatedness than do written tests. Performance-simulation tests are made up 
of actual job behaviors rather than substitutes. The best-known performance-simulation tests 
are work sampling (a miniature replica of the job) and assessment centers (simulating real 
problems one may face on the job). The former is suited to persons applying for routine jobs, 
the latter to managerial personnel.
The advantage of performance simulation over traditional testing methods should be 
obvious. Because its content is essentially identical to job content, performance simulation 
should be a better predictor of short-term job performance and should minimize potential 
employment discrimination allegations. Additionally, because of the nature of their content 
and the methods used to determine content, well-constructed performance-simulation tests 
are valid predictors.
The interview, along with the application form, is an almost universal selection device. 
Few of us have ever gotten a job without undergoing one or more interviews. The irony of 
this is that the value of an interview as a selection device has been the subject of consider-
able debate.14
performance-simulation 
tests
Selection devices based on actual job behaviors

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    231
Interviews can be reliable and valid selection tools, but too often they’re not. To be effec-
tive predictors, interviews need to be:
• structured,
• well organized, and have
• interviewers asking relevant questions.15
But those conditions don’t characterize many interviews. The typical interview in which ap-
plicants are asked a varying set of essentially random questions in an informal setting often 
provides little in the way of valuable information. All kinds of potential biases can creep into 
interviews if they’re not well structured and standardized.
What does research tell us about interviewing?
• Prior knowledge about the applicant biases the interviewer’s evaluation.
• The interviewer tends to hold a stereotype of what represents a good applicant.
• The interviewer tends to favor applicants who share his or her own attitudes.
• The order in which applicants are interviewed will influence evaluations.
• The order in which information is elicited during the interview will influence evaluations.
• Negative information is given unduly high weight.
• The interviewer may make a decision concerning the applicant’s suitability within the first 
four or five minutes of the interview.
• The interviewer may forget much of the interview’s content within minutes after its conclusion.
• The interview is most valid in determining an applicant’s intelligence, level of motivation, 
and interpersonal skills.
• Structured and well-organized interviews are more reliable than unstructured and unorga-
nized ones.16
How Can I Be a GOOD INtervIewer?
TIPS FOR MANAGERS: Make interviews more valid and reliable!
1. Review the job description and job specification to help in assessing the  
 applicant.
2. Prepare a structured set of questions to ask all applicants for the job.
3. Review an applicant’s résumé before meeting him or her.
4. Ask questions and listen carefully to the applicant’s answer.
5. Write your evaluation of the applicant while the interview is still fresh in your mind.
One last popular modification to interviews has been the behavioral or situation 
 interview.17 In this type of interview, applicants are observed not only for what they say, but 
also how they behave. Applicants are presented with situations—often complex problems 
involving role playing—and are asked to “deal” with the situation. This type of interview pro-
vides an opportunity for interviewers to see how a potential employee will behave and how he 
or she will react under stress. Proponents of behavioral interviewing indicate such a process 
is much more indicative of an applicant’s performance than simply having the  individual tell 
the interviewer what he or she has done. In fact, research in this area indicates that behavioral 
interviews are nearly eight times more effective for predicting successful job performance.18
 Watch it 2! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled Rudi’s Bakery: Human Resource Management.
hoW can yoU “cLoSe the deaL”? Interviewers who treat the recruiting and hiring 
of employees as if the applicants must be sold on the job and exposed only to an organiza-
tion’s positive characteristics are likely to have a workforce that is dissatisfied and prone to 
high turnover.19

232    Part 3  •  Organizing
During the hiring process, every job applicant develops a set of expectations about the 
company and about the job for which he or she is interviewing. When the information an 
applicant receives is excessively inflated, a number of things happen that have potentially 
negative effects on the company: (1) Mismatched applicants are less likely to withdraw from 
the search process. (2) Inflated information builds unrealistic expectations so new employees 
are likely to become quickly dissatisfied and to resign prematurely. (3) New hires are prone to 
become disillusioned and less committed to the organization when they face the unexpected 
harsh realities of the job. (4) In many cases, these individuals feel that they were misled dur-
ing the hiring process and may become problem employees.
To increase job satisfaction among employees and reduce turnover, managers should 
consider a realistic job preview (RJP).20 An RJP includes both positive and negative infor-
mation about the job and the company. For example, in addition to the positive comments 
typically expressed in the interview, the applicant is told of the less attractive aspects of 
the job. For instance, he or she might be told that there are limited opportunities to talk to 
coworkers during work hours, that chances of being promoted are slim, or that work hours 
fluctuate so erratically that employees may be required to work during what are usually 
off hours (nights and weekends). Research indicates that applicants who have been given 
a realistic job preview hold lower and more realistic job expectations for the jobs they will 
be performing and are better able to cope with the frustrating elements of the job than are 
applicants who have been given only inflated information. The result is fewer unexpected 
resignations by new employees. For managers, realistic job previews offer a major insight 
into the HRM process.
Presenting only positive job aspects to an applicant may initially entice him or her to join 
the organization, but it may be a decision that both parties quickly regret.
How Are Employees Provided with Needed Skills  
and Knowledge?
If we’ve done our recruiting and selecting properly, we’ve hired competent individuals who 
can perform successfully on the job. But successful performance requires more than pos-
sessing certain skills! New hires must be acclimated to the organization’s culture and be 
trained and given the knowledge to do the job in a manner consistent with the organization’s 
goals. To achieve this, HRM uses orientation and training.
How Are New Hires Introduced to the Organization?
Once a job candidate has been selected, he or she needs to be introduced to the job and orga-
nization. This introduction is called orientation.21 The major goals of orientation are to
• reduce the initial anxiety all new employees feel as they begin a new job;
• familiarize new employees with the job, the work unit, and the organization as a whole; and
• facilitate the outsider–insider transition.
Job orientation: (1) expands on the information the employee obtained during the 
 recruitment and selection stages; (2) clarifies the new employee’s specific duties and 
7-3  Explain how 
employees are 
provided with 
needed skills 
and knowledge.
realistic job preview (RJP)
A preview of a job that provides both positive and 
negative information about the job and the company
orientation
Introducing a new employee to the job and the 
organization
Closing the Deal!
It’s just as important to retain good people as it is to hire 
them in the first place.

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    233
 responsibilities as well as how his or her performance will be evaluated; and (3) corrects any 
unrealistic expectations new employees might hold about the job.
Work unit orientation: (1) Familiarizes an employee with the goals of the work unit; (2) 
clarifies how his or her job contributes to the unit’s goals; and (3) provides an introduction to 
his or her coworkers.
Organization orientation: (1) Informs the new employee about the organization’s goals, 
history, philosophy, procedures, and rules; (2) clarifies relevant HR policies such as work 
hours, pay procedures, overtime requirements, and benefits; and (3) may include a tour of the 
organization’s physical facilities.
Managers have an obligation to make the integration of a new employee into the orga-
nization as smooth and anxiety-free as possible. Successful orientation, whether formal or 
informal:
• Results in an outsider–insider transition that makes the new member feel comfortable and 
fairly well-adjusted.
• Lowers the likelihood of poor work performance.
• Reduces the probability of a surprise resignation by the new employee only a week or two 
into the job.22
HR has gone social and digital.23 Mobile devices are increasingly 
being used to provide training in bite-sized lessons using videos and 
games. For instance, the 75,000-plus associates of realty company 
Keller Williams use their smartphones and tablets to view two- to 
three-minute video lessons on sales and customer service. Then, 
there are the few tech-forward marketing firms that are using 
tweets rather than the conventional résumé/job interview process. 
These “Twitterviews” are used in talent selection. One individual 
said, “The Web is your résumé. Social networks are your mass 
references.” Many other firms are using social media platforms to 
expand their recruiting reach. Not only are social media tools being 
used by corporations to recruit applicants, they’re being used to al-
low employees to collaborate by sharing files, images, documents, 
videos, and other documents.
On the digital side, HR departments using software that 
automates many basic HR processes associated with recruiting, 
selecting, orienting, training, appraising performance, and storing 
and retrieving employee information have cut costs and optimized 
service. One HR area where IT has contributed is in pre-employment 
assessments. For instance, at KeyBank, a Cleveland-based finan-
cial services organization, virtual “job tryout simulations” have 
been used in order to reduce 90-day turnover rates and create 
more consistency in staffing decisions. These simulations create 
an interactive multimedia experience and mimic key job tasks for 
competencies such as providing client service, adapting to change, 
supporting team members, following procedures, and working effi-
ciently. Before using these virtual assessments, the bank was losing 
13 percent of new tellers and call center associates in their first 
90 days. After implementing the virtual assessments, that number 
dropped to 4 percent.
Another area where IT has had a significant impact is in 
training. In a survey by the American Society for Training and 
Development, 95 percent of the responding companies reported 
using some form of e-learning. Using technology to deliver needed 
knowledge, skills, and attitudes has had many benefits. As one 
researcher pointed out, e-learning can reduce the cost of training, 
but more importantly, can improve the way an  organization func-
tions. And in many instances, it seems to do that! For example, 
when Hewlett-Packard looked at how its  customer service was 
affected by a blend of e-learning and other instructional methods, 
rather than just classroom training, it found that its sales repre-
sentatives could answer customer questions more quickly and ac-
curately. And Unilever found that after e-learning training for sales 
employees, sales increased by several million dollars.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
  tAlk About it 5: Does the use of all this technology make 
HR—which is supposed to be a “people-oriented” profession—less 
so? Why or why not?
  tAlk About it 6: You want a job after graduating from col-
lege. Knowing that you’re likely to encounter online recruitment and 
selection procedures, how can you best prepare for making yourself 
stand out in the process?
SOcIAL AND DIgITAL HR
::::::: Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::

234    Part 3  •  Organizing
What Is Employee Training?
On the whole, planes don’t cause airline accidents, 
people do. Most collisions, crashes, and other air-
line mishaps—nearly three-quarters of them—result 
from errors by the pilot or air traffic controller, or 
from inadequate maintenance. Weather and struc-
tural failures typically account for the remaining 
accidents.24 We cite these statistics to illustrate the 
importance of training in the airline industry. Such 
maintenance and human errors could be prevented 
or significantly reduced by better employee training, 
as shown by the unbelievably amazing “landing” 
of US Airways Flight 1549 in the Hudson River 
in January 2009 with no loss of life. Pilot Captain 
Chesley Sullenberger attributed the positive out-
come to the extensive and intensive training that all 
pilots and flight crews undergo.25
Employee training is a learning experi-
ence that seeks a relatively permanent change in 
 employees by improving their ability to perform on the job. Thus, training involves chang-
ing skills, knowledge, attitudes, or behavior.26 This change may involve what employees 
know, how they work, or their attitudes toward their jobs, coworkers, managers, and the 
organization. It’s been estimated, for instance, that U.S. business firms spend billions each 
year on formal courses and training programs to develop workers’ skills.27 Managers, of 
course, are responsible for deciding when employees are in need of training and what form 
that training should take.
Determining training needs typically involves answering several questions. If some of 
these questions sound familiar, you’ve been paying close attention. It’s precisely the type of 
analysis that takes place when managers develop an organizational structure to achieve their 
strategic goals—only now the focus is on the people.28
wHeN is training needed?
The questions in Exhibit 7–6 suggest the kinds of signals that can warn a manager 
when training may be necessary. The more obvious ones are related directly to productivity. 
Employees at Villa Venture senior living  
community participate in a perception 
exercise during the Virtual Dementia Tour, 
a training tool that helps them understand 
Alzheimer’s disease and other forms of 
dementia. The tour is a learning experience 
designed to improve employees’ ability to 
care for victims of dementia.
Fred Blocher/Kansas City Star/Getty Images
What deﬁciencies, if any,
do job holders have in terms
of skills, knowledge, or
abilities required to
exhibit the essential and
necessary job behaviors?
What behaviors are 
necessary for each job holder 
to complete his or her 
job duties?
Is there a need
for training?
What are the
organization's
strategic
goals?
What tasks
must be
completed
to achieve
organizational
goals?
Exhibit 7–6 Determining Whether Training Is Needed
employee training
A learning experience that seeks a relatively 
permanent change in employees by improving their 
ability to perform on the job

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    235
Indications that job performance is declining include decreases in production numbers, lower 
quality, more accidents, and higher scrap or rejection rates. Any of these outcomes might sug-
gest that worker skills need to be fine-tuned. Of course, we’re assuming that an employee’s 
performance decline is in no way related to lack of effort. Managers, too, must also recognize 
that training may be required because the workplace is constantly evolving. Changes imposed 
on employees as a result of job redesign or a technological breakthrough also require training.
hoW are emPLoyeeS trained? Most training takes place on the job. Why? It’s 
simple and it usually costs less. However, on-the-job training can disrupt the workplace and 
result in an increase in errors while learning takes place. Also, some skill training is too 
complex to learn on the job and must take place outside the work setting.
Many different types of training methods are available. For the most part, we can classify 
them as traditional and technology-based. (See Exhibit 7–7.)
hoW can managerS enSUre that training iS WorKing? It’s easy to gener-
ate a new training program, but if training efforts aren’t evaluated, it may be a waste of 
 resources. It would be nice if all companies could boast the returns on investments in train-
ing that Neil Huffman Auto Group executives do; they claim they receive $230 in increased 
productivity for every dollar spent on training.29 But to make such a claim, training must be 
properly evaluated. (continued on p. 240)
  try it!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Human Resource Management.
Exhibit 7–7 Training Methods
traditionaL training methodS
On-the-job—Employees learn how to do tasks simply by performing them, usually after 
an initial introduction to the task.
Job rotation—Employees work at different jobs in a particular area, getting exposure to 
a variety of tasks.
Mentoring and coaching—Employees work with an experienced worker who provides 
information, support, and encouragement; also called apprenticeships in certain  
industries.
Experiential exercises—Employees participate in role-playing, simulations, or other  
face-to-face types of training.
Workbooks/manuals—Employees refer to training workbooks and manuals for  
information.
Classroom lectures—Employees attend lectures designed to convey specific  
information.
technoLogy-baSed training methodS
CD-ROM/DVD/videotapes/audiotapes/podcasts—Employees listen to or watch selected 
media that convey information or demonstrate certain techniques.
Videoconferencing/teleconferencing/satelliteTV—Employees listen to or participate as 
information is conveyed or techniques demonstrated.
E-learning—Employees participate in Internet-based learning, including simulations or 
other interactive modules.
Mobile learning—Employees participate in learning activities delivered via mobile devices.
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 353. Reprinted and 
electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

236
keeping great people: 
two Ways organizations do this
7-4 Describe strategies for retaining competent, high-performing employees.
performance Management System
• Desired employee performance levels determined by organizations 
and managers
• Actual employee performance levels measured/appraised  
by managers
• AKA performance management system
Chris Zuppz/ZUMAPress/Newscom
1
performance management system
A system that establishes performance standards that are 
used to evaluate employee performance
Should people be compared to one another or against  
a set of standards?

237
Exhibit 7–8 Specific Performance Appraisal Methods
method
advantage
disadvantage
(a) Written essay—descriptions of  
employee’s strengths and weaknesses
Simple to use
More a measure of evaluator’s writing ability 
than of employee’s actual performance
(b) critical incidents—examples of critical 
behaviors that were especially effective or 
ineffective
Rich examples; behaviorally based
Time-consuming; lack quantification
(c) Adjective rating scales—lists descrip-
tive performance factors (work quantity and 
quality, knowledge, cooperation, loyalty, 
attendance, honesty, initiative, and so forth) 
with numerical ratings
Provide quantitative data; less time- 
consuming than others
Do not provide depth of job behavior  
assessed
(d) bArS—rating scale + examples of 
actual job behaviors30,31
Focus on specific and measurable job 
behaviors
Time-consuming; difficult to develop  
measures
(e) Mbo—evaluation of accomplishment of 
specific goals
Focuses on end goals; results oriented
Time-consuming
(f) 360-degree appraisal32—feedback 
from full circle of those who interact with 
employee
More thorough
Time-consuming
(g) Multiperson—evaluation comparison of 
work group
Compares employees with one another
Unwieldy with large number of employees
360-degree appraisal
An appraisal device that seeks feedback from a variety of 
sources for the person being rated
• (a) through (f) (see Exhibit 7–8) are ways to evaluate employee performance against a set of established standards  
or absolute criteria.
• (g) (see Exhibit 7–8) is a way to compare one person’s performance with that of one or more individuals and is  
a relative, not absolute, measuring device.
three approaches to multiperson comparison:
1  
group-order ranking
Evaluator places employees into a 
particular classification (“top fifth,” 
“second fifth,” etc.; “top third,” 
“middle third,” “bottom third”; or 
whatever classification is desired). 
Note: Number of employees placed in 
each classification must be as equal 
as possible. 2  
individual ranking approach
Evaluator lists employees in order 
from highest to lowest performance 
levels. Note: Only one can be “best.” 
In the appraisal of whatever number 
of employees, the difference between 
the first and second employee is the 
same as that between any other two 
employees. And no “ties” allowed.3  
paired comparison approach
Each employee is compared with every 
other employee in the comparison 
group and rated as either the superior 
or weaker member of the pair. Note:  
Each employee is assigned a sum- 
mary ranking based on the number  
of superior scores he or she achieved. 
Each employee is compared against 
every other employee—an arduous 
task when assessing large numbers  
of employees.

238
trAditionAl MAnAger-eMployee perforMAnce 
evAluAtion SySteMS MAy be outdAted due to:33
—  downsizing—supervisors may have more  
employees to manage, making it difficult to have  
extensive knowledge of each one’s performance.
Lasse Kristensen/Alamy
—  Project teams and employee involvement—others 
(not managers) may be better able to make  
accurate assessments.34
Trevor Chriss/Alamy
when employee’s Performance Is Not Up to Par . . .
Why?
Job mismatch (hiring error)
Inadequate training
Lack of desire to do job  
(discipline problem)
What to do
Reassign individual to better-matched job
Provide training
Try employee counseling, a process designed to help 
employees overcome performance-related prob-
lems; attempt to uncover why employee has lost 
his/her desire or ability to work productively and find 
ways to fix the problem; or take disciplinary/punitive 
action (verbal and written warnings, suspension, and 
even termination).
compensating employees: Pay and Benefits
Compensation–Pay for doing a job
An effective and appropriate compensation system will:
35
—  Help attract and retain competent and  
talented individuals
—  Impact strategic performance36
—  Keep employees motivated
MOSt of us work 
to have money
artpartner-images.com/Alamy
employee counseling
A process designed to help employees overcome 
performance-related problems
discipline
Actions taken by a manager to enforce an  
organization’s standards and regulations
2

239
Determining Pay Levels
Who gets
$15.85
an hour?
Who gets
$325,000
a year?
A compensation system should reflect the changing nature of 
work and the workplace.
• Determining pay levels isn’t easy, but employees expect 
appropriate compensation.
Different jobs require:
• Different kinds and levels of knowledge, skills, and 
abilities (kSAs) that have varying value to the  
organization
• Different levels of responsibility and authority
The higher the KSAs and the greater the authority 
and responsibility, the higher the pay.
Alternative approaches to determining compensation:
• Skill-based pay systems—reward employees for job skills and competencies they 
have. Job title doesn’t define pay, skills do.37 Usually more successful in manufacturing 
organizations than in service organizations or in  
organizations pursuing technical innovations.38
• variable pay systems—individual’s compensation is  
contingent on performance.
Employee’s Tenure
and Performance
Size of
Company
Level of
Compensation
and
Beneﬁts
Kind of
Job Performed
Company
Proﬁtability
Kind of
Business
Geographical
Location
Unionization
Management
Philosophy
Labor or
Capital Intensive
How long has employee
been with company and
how has he or she performed?
Does job require
high levels of skills?
What industry is job in?
Is business unionized?
Is business labor or
capital intensive?
How large is the
company?
How proﬁtable is the
company?
Where is organization
located?
What is management’s
philosophy toward pay?
Exhibit 7–9 What Determines Pay and Benefits?
90%  
of U.S. organizations 
use variable pay plans39
Other factors influencing compensation and benefit  
packages include:
Primary 
determinant of 
pay: the kind of 
job an employee 
performs
skill-based pay
A pay system that rewards employees for the job 
skills they demonstrate
variable pay
A pay system in which an individual’s compensation 
is contingent on performance

240
How can training programs be evaluated? Usually several managers, representatives 
from HRM, and a group of workers who have recently completed a training program are 
asked for their opinions. If the comments are generally positive, the program may get a favor-
able evaluation and it’s continued until someone decides, for whatever reason, that it should 
be eliminated or replaced.
Such reactions from participants or managers, while easy to acquire, are the least 
valid. Their opinions are heavily influenced by factors that may have little to do with the 
training’s effectiveness, such as difficulty, entertainment value, or the personality charac-
teristics of the instructor. However, trainees’ reactions to the training may, in fact, provide 
feedback on how worthwhile the participants viewed the training to be. Beyond general 
reactions, however, training must also be evaluated in terms of how much the participants 
learned; how well they are using their new skills on the job (did their behavior change?); 
and whether the training program achieved its desired results (reduced turnover, increased 
customer service, etc.).41
 Write it! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete MGMT 9: Management & Human Resources (HR Decision Making).
Compensation–employee Benefits: Non-cash compensation  
from employers
• Compensation package is > just hourly wage or annual salary
• Also includes employee benefits—important and varied nonfinancial  
rewards designed to enrich employees’ lives
• Benefit packages can vary widely and often  
reflect efforts to provide something that each  
employee values
• Some benefits—Social Security, workers’ and 
unemployment compensation—are legally required, 
but organizations may provide others such as paid 
time off from work, life and disability insurance, 
retirement programs, and health insurance.40
J.R. Bale/Alamy
employee benefits
Membership-based rewards designed to enrich employees’ lives

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    241
What Contemporary HRM Issues Face Managers?
HR issues that face today’s managers include downsizing, 
workforce diversity, sexual harassment, and HR costs.
How can Managers Manage 
Downsizing?
Downsizing is the planned elimination of jobs in an orga-
nization. Because downsizing typically involves shrinking 
the organization’s workforce, it’s an important issue in 
HRM. When an organization has too many employees—which may happen when it’s faced 
with an economic crisis, declining market share, overly aggressive growth, or when it’s been 
poorly managed—one option for improving profits is to eliminate excess workers. Over the last 
few years, many well-known companies have gone through several rounds of downsizing—
AmEx, Boeing, McDonald’s, Volkswagen, Microsoft, Dell, General Motors, Unisys, Siemens, 
Merck, and Toyota, among others. How can managers best manage a downsized workforce?
After downsizing, disruptions in the workplace and in employees’ personal lives are to be 
expected. Stress, frustration, anxiety, and anger are typical reactions. And it may surprise you 
to learn that both victims and survivors experience those feelings.42 Many organizations have 
helped layoff victims by offering a variety of job-help services, psychological counseling, sup-
port groups, severance pay, extended health insurance benefits, and detailed communications. 
Although some individuals react negatively to being laid off (the worst cases involve individuals 
returning to their former organization and committing a violent act), offers of assistance reveal 
that an organization does care about its former employees. While those being laid off get to start 
over with a clean slate and a clear conscience, survivors don’t. Unfortunately, the “survivors” 
who retain their jobs and have the task of keeping the organization going or even of revitalizing 
it seldom receive attention. One negative consequence appears to be what is being called layoff-
survivor sickness, a set of attitudes, perceptions, and behaviors of employees who survive 
 involuntary staff reductions.43 Symptoms include job  insecurity, perceptions of unfairness, 
guilt, depression, stress from increased workload, fear of change, loss of loyalty and commit-
ment, reduced effort, and an unwillingness to do anything beyond the required minimum.
To show concern for job survivors, managers may want to provide opportunities for 
employees to talk to counselors about their guilt, anger, and anxiety.44 Group discussions can 
be a way for the survivors to vent their feelings. Some organizations have used downsizing 
as the spark to implement increased employee participation programs such as empowerment 
and self-managed work teams. In short, to keep morale and productivity high, managers 
should make every attempt to ensure that those individuals still working in the organization 
know that they’re valuable and much-needed resources. Exhibit 7–10 summarizes some ways 
that managers can reduce the trauma associated with downsizing.45
7-5  Discuss  
contemporary  
issues in  
managing human 
resources.
Exhibit 7–10 Tips for Managing Downsizing
• Communicate openly and honestly:
• Inform those being let go as soon as possible
• Tell surviving employees the new goals and expectations
• Explain impact of layoffs
• Follow any laws regulating severance pay or benefits
• Provide support/counseling for surviving employees
• Reassign roles according to individuals’ talents and backgrounds
• Focus on boosting morale:
• Offer individualized reassurance
• Continue to communicate, especially one-on-one
• Remain involved and available
downsizing
The planned elimination of jobs in an organization
layoff-survivor sickness
A set of attitudes, perceptions, and behaviors  
of employees who survive layoffs

242    Part 3  •  Organizing
How can Workforce Diversity  
Be Managed?
Although we discussed the changing makeup of the 
workforce in Chapter 3, workforce  diversity also affects 
such basic HRM activities as recruitment, selection, and 
orientation.46
Improving workforce diversity requires managers to 
widen their recruiting net. For  example, the popular practice 
of relying on current employee referrals as a source of new 
job applicants tends to produce candidates who have similar 
characteristics to those of present employees. So managers 
have to look for applicants in places where they haven’t 
typically looked before. To increase diversity, managers are 
increasingly turning to nontraditional  recruitment sources 
such as women’s job networks, over-50 clubs, urban job 
banks, disabled people’s training centers, ethnic newspapers, and gay rights organizations. 
This type of outreach should enable an organization to broaden its pool of applicants.
Once a diverse set of applicants exists, efforts must be made to ensure that the selec-
tion process does not discriminate. Moreover, applicants need to be made comfortable with 
the organization’s culture and be made aware of management’s desire to accommodate their 
needs. For instance, at TGI Friday’s, company managers work diligently to accommodate dif-
ferences and create workplace choices for a diverse workforce; so, too, do companies such as 
Sodexo, Johnson & Johnson, EY, Mastercard Worldwide, and Procter & Gamble.47
Finally, orientation is often difficult for women and minorities. Many organizations, such 
as Lotus Development and Hewlett-Packard, provide special workshops to raise diversity 
consciousness among current employees as well as programs for new employees that focus 
on diversity issues. The thrust of these efforts is to increase individual understanding of the 
differences each of us brings to the workplace. A number of companies also have special 
mentoring programs to deal with the reality that lower-level female and minority managers 
have few role models with whom to identify.48
What Is Sexual Harassment?
Sexual harassment is a serious issue.
This is true in both public and private-sector organizations. Between 7,000 and 8,000 com-
plaints are filed with the EEOC each year,49 with more than 17 percent of those filed by 
males.50 Settlements in some of these cases incurred a substantial cost to the companies in 
terms of litigation. It’s estimated that sexual harassment is the single largest financial risk 
facing companies today—and can result in decreases (sometimes greater than 30 percent) in 
a company’s stock price.51 At Mitsubishi, for example, the company paid out more than $34 
million to 300 women for the rampant sexual harassment to which they were exposed.52 But 
it’s more than just jury awards. Sexual harassment results in millions lost in absenteeism, low 
productivity, and turnover.53 Sexual harassment, furthermore, is not just a U.S. phenomenon. 
It’s a global issue. For instance, nearly 10 percent of workers responding to a global survey 
reported that they had been harassed sexually or physically at work. The survey covered 
countries such as India, China, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, France, Belgium, Germany, Great 
Britain, and Poland, among others.54 Even though discussions of sexual harassment cases 
often focus on the large awards granted by a court, employers face other concerns. Sexual 
 harassment creates an unpleasant work environment for organization members and under-
mines their ability to perform their jobs. But just what is sexual harassment?
Any unwanted action or activity of a sexual nature that explicitly or implicitly affects 
an individual’s employment, performance, or work environment can be regarded as sexual 
harassment. It can occur between members of the opposite or of the same sex—between 
employees of the organization or between employee and nonemployee.55 Although such 
Diversity management at Target includes  
developing employee talent through  
mentoring. Target offers employees, such 
as executive team leader Chenille English-
Boswell, shown here, group, virtual, and peer 
mentoring, as well as skip mentoring,  
whereby a senior leader mentors a team 
member several pay grades below the  
mentor.
Charles Rex Arbogast/Associated Press
sexual harassment
Any unwanted action or activity of a sexual nature 
that explicitly or implicitly affects an individual’s 
employment, performance, or work environment

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    243
an activity has been generally prohibited under Title VII (sex discrimination) in the United 
States, in recent years this problem has gained more recognition. By most accounts, prior to 
the mid-1980s, occurrences were generally viewed as isolated incidents, with the individual 
committing the act being solely responsible (if at all) for his or her actions.56 Today, charges 
of sexual harassment continue to appear in the headlines on an almost regular basis.
Most of the challenges associated with sexual harassment involve determining what 
constitutes this illegal behavior.57 The EEOC explains that it is unlawful to harass a person 
because of that person’s sex. Harassment can include sexual harassment or unwelcome sexual 
advances, requests for sexual behavior, and other verbal or physical harassment of a sexual 
nature. However, harassment does not have to be of a sexual nature and can include offensive 
remarks about a person’s sex. Simple teasing, offhand comments, or isolated incidents that 
are not serious are not prohibited by the law unless it becomes so frequent or so severe that it 
creates a hostile or offensive work environment or it results in an adverse employment deci-
sion (such as being demoted or fired).58
You gotta be attuned to what makes fellow  
employees uncomfortable.
For many organizations, it’s the offensive or hostile environment issue that’s problem-
atic.59 Managers need to know what constitutes such an environment. How do you determine 
whether something is offensive? For instance, do off-color jokes in the office create a hostile 
environment? How about classical artwork that shows nude men or women? The answer is it 
very well could! It depends on the people in the organization and the environment in which 
they work. The key is knowing what makes fellow employees uncomfortable—and if we 
don’t know, we should ask!60 Also, managers must understand that the victim doesn’t neces-
sarily have to be the person harassed but could be anyone affected by the offensive conduct.61
Organizational success will, in part, reflect how sensitive each employee is toward 
 another in the company. At DuPont, for example, the corporate culture and diversity programs 
are designed to eliminate sexual harassment through awareness and respect for all individu-
als.62 It means understanding one another and, most importantly, respecting others’ rights. 
Similar programs exist at FedEx, General Mills, and Levi-Strauss, among other companies.
If sexual harassment carries with it potential costs to the organization, what can a com-
pany do to protect itself?63 The courts want to know two things: (1) Did the organization know 
about, or should it have known about, the alleged behavior? and (2) What did managers do 
to stop it?64 With the number and dollar amounts of the awards today, it’s even more impor-
tant for organizations and managers to educate all employees on sexual harassment matters 
and to have mechanisms available to monitor employees. In addition, organizations need to 
ensure that no retaliatory actions—such as cutting back hours, assigning back-to-back work 
shifts without a rest break, etc.—are taken against a person who has filed harassment charges, 
 especially in light of a U.S. Supreme Court ruling that broadened the definition of retaliation.65
Finally, in a sexual harassment matter, managers must remember that the harasser may 
have rights, too.66 No action should be taken against someone until a thorough investigation 
has been conducted. Furthermore, the results of the investigation should be reviewed by an 
independent and objective individual before any action against the alleged harasser is taken. 
Even then, the harasser should be given an opportunity to respond to the allegation and have 
a disciplinary hearing if desired. Additionally, an avenue for appeal should also exist for the 
alleged harasser—an appeal heard by someone at a higher level of management who is not 
associated with the case.
How and Why Are Organizations controlling HR costs?
HR costs are skyrocketing, especially those associated with employee health care and 
 employee pensions. Organizations are looking for ways to control these costs.
What aboUt emPLoyee heaLth care coStS? Employees at Paychex who undergo 
a confidential health screening and risk assessment, and those who smoke who agree to 

244    Part 3  •  Organizing
enroll in a smoking cessation program, can get free annual physicals, colonoscopies, and 
100 percent coverage of preventive care as well as lower deductibles and costs. At Black 
and Decker Corporation, employees and dependents who certify in an honor system that 
they have been tobacco-free for at least six months pay $75 less per month for their medi-
cal and dental coverage. At Amerigas Propane, employees were given an ultimatum: get 
their medical checkups or lose their health insurance. Some 67 percent of employers are 
concerned about the effects of obesity on medical claims expenses.67
All these examples illustrate how companies are trying to control skyrocketing employee 
health-care costs. Since 2002, health-care costs have risen, hitting $3.8 trillion in 2013. The 
actual dollar amounts for 2014 were not available but increased by 5 percent over the previ-
ous year.68 Two health areas of concern for organizations are employees who smoke and 
obese employees. Smokers cost companies an estimated $6,000 a year, with about a third 
of that being health-care costs.69 The biggest health-care cost for companies, however, is 
 obesity. Morbidly obese individuals cost employers more than $8,000 a year.70 A study of 
manufacturing organizations found that presenteeism, which is defined as employees not 
performing at full capacity, was 1.8 percent higher for workers with moderate to severe 
obesity than for all other employees. The reason for the lost productivity is likely the result 
of  reduced mobility because of body size or pain problems such as arthritis. Another study 
found that injuries sustained by obese workers often require substantially more medical care 
and are more likely to lead to permanent disabilities than similar injuries suffered by employ-
ees who were not obese.71
Is it any wonder that organizations are looking for ways to control their health-care 
costs? How? First, many organizations are providing opportunities for employees to lead 
healthy lifestyles. From financial incentives to company-sponsored health and wellness 
programs, the goal is to limit rising health-care costs. About 43 percent of companies use 
some type of  positive incentives aimed at encouraging healthy behavior, up from 34 percent 
in 1996.72 Another study indicated that nearly 90 percent of companies surveyed planned 
to  aggressively promote healthy lifestyles to their employees during the next three to five 
years.73 Many are starting sooner: Google, Yamaha Corporation of America, Caterpillar, and 
others are putting health food in company break rooms, cafeterias, and vending machines; 
providing deliveries of fresh organic fruit; and putting “calorie taxes” on fatty foods. At 
Wegmans Food Markets, employees are challenged to eat five cups of fruits and vegetables 
and walk 10,000 steps a day. And the “competition” between departments and stores has 
proved to be very popular and effective.74 In the case of smokers, however, some companies 
have taken a more aggressive stance by increasing the amount smokers pay for health insur-
ance or by firing them if they refuse to stop smoking.
What aboUt emPLoyee PenSion PLan coStS? The other area where organiza-
tions are looking to control costs is employee pension plans. Corporate pensions have been 
around since the nineteenth century.75 But the days when companies could afford to give 
employees a broad-based pension that provided them a guaranteed retirement income have 
changed. Pension commitments have become such an enormous burden that companies can 
no longer afford them. In fact, the corporate pension system has been described as “fun-
damentally broken.”76 It’s not just struggling companies that have eliminated  employee 
pension plans. Lots of reasonably sound companies—for instance, NCR, FedEx, Lockheed 
Martin, and Motorola—no longer provide pensions. Only 42 Fortune 100 companies now 
offer pension plans to their new hires. Even IBM, which closed its pension plan to new 
hires in December 2004, told  employees that their pension benefits would be frozen.77 
Obviously, the pension issue is one that directly affects HR decisions. On the one hand, 
 organizations want to attract talented, capable employees by offering them desirable 
 benefits such as pensions. But on the other hand, organizations have to balance that with 
the costs of providing such benefits.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.

7 Review 
245
CHAPTER SUMMARY
New hires must be acclimated to the organization’s culture 
and be trained and given the knowledge to do the job in a 
manner consistent with the organization’s goals. Orienta-
tion—job, work unit, and organizational—provides new 
 employees with information to introduce them to the job. 
Training is used to help employees improve their ability to 
perform on the job.
  7-4 Describe strategies for retaining competent, 
high-performing employees.
Two HRM activities that play a role in this are managing 
 employee performance and developing an appropriate compen-
sation and benefits program. Managing employee performance 
involves establishing performance standards and then apprais-
ing performance to see if those standards have been met. There 
are various performance appraisal techniques managers can 
use. If an employee’s performance is not up to par, managers 
need to assess why and take action. Compensation and benefits 
programs can help attract and retain competent and talented 
 individuals. Managers have to determine who gets paid what 
and what benefits will be offered.
  7-5 Discuss contemporary issues in managing  
human resources.
Downsizing is the planned elimination of jobs and must 
be  managed from the perspective of layoff victims and job 
 survivors. Workforce diversity must be managed through HRM 
activities including recruitment, selection, and orientation. 
Sexual harassment is a significant concern of organizations and 
managers, which means programs and mechanisms must be in 
place to educate all employees about it. Finally, organizations 
are looking for ways to control HR costs, especially health-care 
costs and pension costs.
diScuSSion QueStionS
 7-1 How does HRM affect all managers?
 7-2 Discuss the external environmental factors that most 
directly affect the HRM process.
 7-3 Some critics claim that corporate HR departments 
have outlived their usefulness and are not there to 
help employees but to shield the organization from 
legal problems. What do you think? What benefits are 
there to having a formal HRM process? What are the 
drawbacks?
 7-4 Do you think it’s ethical for a prospective employer to 
delve into an applicant’s life by means of interviews, 
tests, and background investigations? What if those 
  7-1 Describe the key components of the human 
resource management process and the  
important influences on that process.
The HRM process consists of eight activities that will staff an 
organization with competent, high-performing employees who 
are capable of sustaining their performance level over the long 
term. The first three HR activities involve employment plan-
ning and include recruitment, downsizing, and selection. The 
next two steps involve helping employees adapt to the orga-
nization and ensuring that their skills and knowledge are kept 
current, and include the HR activities of orienting and training. 
The last steps involve identifying performance goals, correct-
ing performance problems, and helping  employees sustain high 
levels of performance. These are done using the HR activities of 
performance appraisal, compensation and benefits, and safety 
and health. The main influences on the HRM process are legal, 
although other environmental conditions such as restructuring, 
downsizing, diversity, and so forth can impact it as well.
  7-2 Discuss the tasks associated with  
identifying and selecting competent employees.
The first task is employment planning, which involves job anal-
ysis and the creation of job descriptions and job specifications. 
Then, if job needs are indicated, recruitment involves attempts 
to develop a pool of potential job candidates. Downsizing is 
used to reduce the labor supply. Selection involves determining 
who is best qualified for the job. Selection devices need to be 
both reliable and valid. Managers may want to give potential 
employees a realistic job preview.
  7-3 Explain how employees are provided with 
needed skills and knowledge.

246    Part 3  •  Organizing
 investigations involved looking at your Facebook page 
or personal blogs? Explain your position.
 7-5 Discuss the advantages and drawbacks of the various 
recruiting sources.
 7-6 Are selection devices biased? Explain why or why not. 
Identify the pros and cons of such devices.
 7-7 What are the benefits and drawbacks of realistic job 
previews? (Consider this question from both the 
 perspective of the organization and the perspective of a 
potential employee.)
 7-8 List the factors that influence employee compensation 
and benefits.
 7-9 “I am not comfortable at work.” Does this statement im-
ply harassment? Why or why not? Discuss the elements 
constituting sexual harassment in an organization.
7-10 Research your chosen career by finding out what 
it’s going to take to be successful in this career 
in terms of education, skills, experience, and so 
forth. Write a personal career guide that details this 
 information.
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions.
7-11 How is technology changing how HRM is done?
7-12 How does HRM help achieve the goal of having the 
“the right numbers of the right people in the right 
place at the right time”?
7-13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing  
assignment for this chapter.
Management Skill Builder  |   providing good 
feedbAck
Everyone needs feedback! If you want people to do their best, they need to know what they’re doing well and 
what they can do better. That’s why providing feedback is such an important skill to have. But being  effective 
at giving feedback is tricky! That’s why we often see managers either (a) not wanting to give feedback or 
(b) giving feedback in such a way that it doesn’t result in anything positive.
 PERSONAL INvENTORy ASSESSMENT
Work performance Assessment
As this chapter indicated, performance assessment is an important HR function. Use this PIA 
to assess work performance.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
Skill Basics
You can feel more comfortable with and be more effective at 
providing feedback if you use the following specific suggestions:
1. Be straightforward by focusing on specific behaviors. 
Feedback should be specific rather than general. Avoid 
such statements as “You have a bad attitude” or “I’m 
 really impressed with the good job you did.” They’re 
vague and although they provide information, they don’t 
tell the  recipient enough to correct the “bad attitude” or 
on what basis you concluded that a “good job” had been 
done so the person knows what behaviors to repeat or to 
avoid.
2. 
Be realistic. Focus your feedback on what can be changed. 
When people get comments on things over which they have 
no control, it can be frustrating.

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    247
3. 
Keep feedback impersonal. Feedback, particularly the neg-
ative kind, should be descriptive rather than judgmental or 
evaluative. No matter how upset you are, keep the feedback 
focused on job-related behaviors and never criticize some-
one personally because of an inappropriate action.
4. 
Keep feedback goal oriented. Feedback should not be giv-
en primarily to “blow off steam” or “unload” on another 
 person. If you have to say something negative, make sure 
it’s directed toward the recipient’s goals. Ask yourself 
whom the feedback is supposed to help. If the answer is 
you, bite your tongue and hold the comment. Such feed-
back undermines your credibility and lessens the meaning 
and influence of future feedback.
5. 
Know when to give feedback—make it well timed. Feed-
back is most meaningful to a recipient when there’s a very 
short interval between his or her behavior and the  receipt 
of feedback about that behavior. Moreover, if you’re 
 particularly concerned with changing behavior, delays in 
providing feedback on the undesirable actions lessen the 
likelihood that the feedback will be effective in bringing 
about the  desired change. Of course, making feedback 
prompt merely for the sake of promptness can backfire 
if you have insufficient information, if you’re angry, or 
if you’re otherwise emotionally upset. In such instances, 
“well timed” could mean “somewhat delayed.”
6. 
Ensure understanding. Make sure your feedback is con-
cise and complete so that the recipient clearly and fully 
understands the communication. It may help to have the 
recipient rephrase the content of your feedback to find out 
whether it fully captured the meaning you intended.
7. 
Watch your body language, tone of voice, and facial 
 expressions. Your body language and tone of voice can 
speak louder than words. Think about what you want to 
communicate and make sure your body language supports 
that message.
Based on A. Tugend, “You’ve Been Doing a Fantastic Job. Just One Thing . . .,” New 
York Times Online, April 5, 2013; C. R. Mill, “Feedback: The Art of Giving and Receiving 
Help,” in L. Porter and C. R. Mill (eds.), The Reading Book for Human Relations Training 
(Bethel, ME: NTL Institute for Applied Behavioral Science, 1976), 18–19; and S. Bishop, 
The Complete Feedback Skills Training Book (Aldershot, UK: Gower Publishing, 2000).
Practicing the Skill
Read through this scenario and follow the directions at the end 
of it.
Craig is an excellent employee whose expertise and produc-
tivity have always met or exceeded your expectations. But 
recently he’s been making work difficult for other members of 
your advertising team. Like his coworkers, Craig researches 
and computes the costs of media coverage for your advertis-
ing agency’s clients. The work requires laboriously leafing 
through several large reference books to find the correct base 
price and add-on charges for each radio or television station 
and time slot, calculating each actual cost, and compiling the 
results in a computerized spreadsheet. To make things more 
efficient and convenient, you’ve always allowed your team 
members to bring the reference books they’re using to their 
desks while they’re using them. Lately, however, Craig has 
been piling books around him for days and sometimes weeks 
at a time. The books interfere with the flow of traffic past his 
desk and other people have to go out of their way to retrieve 
the books from Craig’s pile. It’s time for you to have a talk 
with Craig.
Prepare an outline of how you will address this issue with 
Craig. Using the suggestions in the Skill Basics, be as specific 
as possible in terms of what you will say and how you will 
 approach this. If your professor chooses, be prepared to do 
some role-playing in class.
Western Montana Power & Light
To: Sandra Gillies, Director of Human Resources
From: William Mulroney, CEO
Re: Sexual Harassment
Sandra, I think we might have a problem. It appears that some 
of our employees aren’t clear about the practices and ac-
tions that do or do not constitute sexual harassment. We can’t 
have any ambiguity or uncertainty about this, as you know. 
We need to immediately develop a training program for all our 
 employees and develop a workable procedure to handle any 
complaints that might arise.
I want this issue of sexual harassment to be the primary 
topic at next month’s executive board meeting. To facilitate dis-
cussion, please give me a bulleted list describing the content of 
an initial two-hour employee workshop on sexual harassment.
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on management 
practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 

248    Part 3  •  Organizing
cASe ApplicAtion #1 
P
rotiviti is a global business consulting and internal audit 
firm composed of experts specializing in risk, advisory, 
and organizational transformation, and human capital 
consultancy. Protiviti advises its clients in selecting the right 
talent for the right positions as part of its advisory services.78
In one such assignment, the client faced challenges in se-
lecting the right candidate for a key leadership position. The 
client was a newly established insurance company base in 
Oman, and had aggressive growth plans. The client wanted to 
differentiate itself by harnessing technology in order to pro-
vide convenient services to its 
customers to carry out their 
transactions from the comfort 
of their home. Being in the 
nascent stage of evolution, it 
did not have a clearly laid 
out IT strategy to support this 
vision. 
The existing IT Department consisted of a fairly qualified 
team, some of whom had been with the organization since its 
inception 3 year ago; however, the team was driven largely by 
day-to-day operations, fire-fighting, query resolution, and gath-
ering business requirements for system enhancements. There 
was a general perception that the IT function was not responsive 
enough to cater to the dynamic nature of the evolving insurance 
industry landscape and consumer needs. The teams were pro-
cess oriented and felt that requests from customer facing depart-
ments were coming in an ad-hoc manner.
In this context, the client now wanted to fill in a key lead-
ership position—a Chief Information Officer (CIO)—and ap-
pointed Protiviti to assist them in evaluating and identifying 
the best fit candidate for the position; the bank then shortlisted 
four candidates. Protiviti studied the business context, identified 
the job specifications and conducted preliminary assessment 
covering technical and leadership skills. The following were the 
observations of the top two candidates:
Candidate A is a very confident and assertive individual 
currently heading the IT Department of a very large, well 
Candidate Selection Dilemma
established and old insurance company in the country. He led a 
team of more than 100 staff and was actively involved in the de-
velopment of the IT strategy as a mandate from the Board; how-
ever, he had only 3 years of experience in the insurance industry 
while the other 12 years were in telecom and the Oil & Gas 
industries. He looked at the big picture and preferred to delegate 
a lot of tasks to the team. He expressed comfort in stakeholder 
management and confidence in resolving situations where there 
are disagreements. This candidate was very well read and fol-
lowed the latest global trends in insurance, banking, technology, 
and related industries.
Candidate B is an internal 
candidate leading one of the 
teams in the IT Department. 
He was a structured, planned 
and organized individual and 
has been with the company 
since its inception 3 years ago 
and has more than 14 years of experience in the insurance in-
dustry. He is well aware of the work environment, leadership 
expectations, growth plans, and operational aspects of IT in 
an insurance company and also the regulatory and compliance 
requirements. Being an internal candidate, he knew all the chal-
lenges the department is currently facing and had a clear, well 
laid out plan for the IT function if he were offered the CIO posi-
tion. His communication skills were satisfactory and showed 
signs that he requires to polish his capabilities in managing 
stakeholder demands and expectations.
Discussion Questions
7-14 What are some of the technical & leadership skills that you feel 
should be assessed at the recruitment stage and why?
7-15 Which candidate do you think should be offered the position 
and why?
7-16 What impact would candidate A have on the team if selected 
for the position? Please provide reasons.
7-17 What impact would candidate B have on the team if selected 
for the position? Please provide reasons.
Shaping organizations by iden-
tifying the RIGHT TALENT . . . 
How do you minimize the  
errors of judgment?

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    249
cASe ApplicAtion 
Brunello Cucinelli: Humanistic Approach to Luxury
B
runello Cucinelli is the founder and CEO of Brunello 
Cucinelli, a leading luxury clothing line. For nearly 37 
years, it has brought out some of the most sought after 
luxurious clothing in the world, much of it cashmere and all 
of it handmade in Italy, out of Solomeo, a hilltop village in 
Umbria, near Rome.79 During the recent economic crisis, the 
company did very well—the number of shareholders more 
than doubled, from 500 in 2008 to 1,270 in 2014; the turnover 
in 2013 saw a 10.9 percent increase (about €322 million); 
the number of stores globally rose to 90. According to finan-
cial analysts, the company’s 
initial public offering (IPO) 
on the Italian Stock Exchange 
in 2012 was considered to be 
simply “stellar,” increasing by 
40 percent on the first day of 
exchanges.
Considered as a humanist enterprise, the philosophy ad-
opted by the company’s management is “making work more 
human, with people at its core.”80 Brunello believes in con-
scious capitalism and stresses the importance of being aware 
of the effects of their actions on human beings and the environ-
ment in which they operate. In preparation for the IPO and to 
clarify his vision to potential shareholders, he revealed that his 
goal was to create a “humanistic company,” one that pursues 
reasonable profit margins (about 9 percent each year, which is 
considered inferior to the average in the luxury industry), pro-
vides long-term employment perspectives, and ensures sustain-
able workload for all involved. 
What does this company do to stand out among its com-
petitors? Quite a lot, actually! Cucinelli did not appoint a 
formal Human Resource Director. Instead, he had established 
a team of three young managers who would be available at all 
times and for everyone. Ensuring that every employee lives 
to the fullest, they are not required to clock in and are given a 
manageable workload so that everyone can leave the office by 
5:30 p.m. The company has a generous compensation system 
with salaries that are 20 percent higher than average. Their 
performance evaluation system recognizes the value of labor 
intensive jobs—artisans are paid 15 percent more than people 
in administration. The company also has a school that offers a 
9-month paid training to those employees who wish to pursue 
a career in tailoring and designing. In an extra effort to en-
hance social relations, the management encourages long and 
relaxed lunch breaks and makes arrangement for after-hours 
social activities.
The company’s success also comes from a culture that rec-
ognizes and rewards talent, and encourages healthy debates in 
the decision making process. 
It isn’t rare that young employ-
ees in the company are pro-
moted quickly to managerial 
positions, if they show poten-
tial. During business meetings, 
employees, even those recently 
hired, are seen challenging the opinions of others, including 
their CEO’s. As part of this culture, Cucinelli is consistent in 
his strategies and puts into effect what he plans . . . to celebrate 
the success of their IPO in 2012, he decided to give a monetary 
bonus of up to €6,000 to each employee as a sign of human 
“gratitude” for the hard work they offered the company.
Discussion Questions
7-18 What is your impression of this humanistic approach to HRM? 
Do you think that this is something pertinent also to other no-
luxury organizations? As a shareholder, how would you have 
judged this management approach?
7-19 What can managers do to ensure that employees will not take 
advantage of the company’s policy that does not require them to 
clock into at the start of the working day?
7-20 What is your opinion about the decision of the company of not 
having a formalized HR Direction but then require HR skills to be 
widespread across all managerial levels? Is this something you 
will consider in your organization?
7-21 What Brunello Cucinelli could do, in addition to recognize higher 
salary than average market, to convince young people to accept 
taking up manual jobs no longer appreciated by young people?
#2
Putting the employees back at 
THE HEART of the business

250    Part 3  •  Organizing
Hong Kong Police 
Force . . . fighting for TALENT
cASe ApplicAtion #3
T
he Hong Kong Police Force (HKPF), established in 
1841, currently has a workforce of around 40,000 per-
sonnel. While recruiting Europeans had ceased in 1994, 
the organization’s policy continues to focus on recruitment 
throughout the year and looks at hiring “high caliber” individu-
als for the roles of inspectors and constables. The Hong Kong 
Police College, which was established in January 2006, is 
designed to run nine-month courses to provide comprehensive 
training for inspector-level candidates.81
Despite the need for more officers and the continuous 
recruitment, the Force is extremely selective and it isn’t very 
easy to join the force. HKPF believes that the people are its 
greatest asset. While serving in the force, and after receiving 
promotions, an officer’s access 
to professional development 
programs increases. Officers at 
the middle management level 
are trained in leadership and 
commanding critical incidents. 
Officers in the Force are only granted increments if their perfor-
mance is considered satisfactory or better.
Based on its belief that every individual is a big asset to the 
organization, the Hong Kong police force spends considerable 
resources and effort in acquisitioning and training, it adopts 
and implements sophisticated human resources management 
(HRM) practices.
Acquisition of the right people begins with the recruitment 
and selection for entry-level posts, mostly police constables and po-
lice inspectors. The human resources branch, under the personnel 
wing, is actively engaged in publicizing the recruitment program 
with the help of various mediums and organizations, includ-
ing schools and universities. The Hong Kong Police Mentorship 
Program (PMP) seeks to attract interested undergraduate students 
and enroll them in a mentor-mentee program with members of the 
Force; the mentors serve as role models to the prospective recruits. 
The PMP participants usually have a higher success rate in secur-
ing full-time posts in the Force after graduation than those achieved 
through other recruitment channels.
The selection process of the police officers tries to iden-
tify various core competencies in each candidate, like com-
munication, judgment, confidence, and leadership.
Candidates who apply for the post of police inspector 
have to pass a written examination, which includes English 
and Chinese language proficiency tests, an aptitude test, and 
HRM in the Hong Kong Police Force
the Basic Law (BL) test. In 2010, a psychometric test was 
introduced to assess candidates’ personalities. An extended in-
terview (or assessment center) that requires group discussion, 
presentation, and management and leadership exercises is also 
conducted to gauge competencies such as communication, 
judgment, and confidence. Then, a panel interview, physical 
fitness test, an integrity check, and a medical examination are 
organized.
The Police College is responsible for training and develop-
ing the new recruits. Its Foundation Training Centre organizes 
stringent training programs for recruits with a focus on founda-
tional knowledge and skills.
Due to the demanding work, police officers in Hong 
Kong are paid a little more 
than the civil servants in other 
departments. Newly recruited 
constables are paid between 
$31,000–$34,000 HK (around 
US $3,999–4,387) while new 
inspectors and senior inspectors receive between $67,000HK 
–$76,000 HK (around US $8,645–9,806) upon successful 
completion of standardized police examinations.
After graduation, officers are assigned to a specific 
unit or formation for a few years. Then they regularly rotate 
through posts in different units or districts, getting a well-
rounded career development opportunity. Each officer builds 
more relationships, develops greater  confidence in their  
job-performance, and gains a holistic view of the force. This 
also enables the police organization to achieve better coordi-
nation, succession planning, and  suffer less from corruption 
in the local communities.
As a result, a learning culture, which is an important part 
of the HKPF’s strategic HRM framework, is developed.
Discussion Questions
7-22 Identify the environmental forces that affect the current develop-
ment of various HRM activities in the Hong Kong Police Force.
7-23 What are the advantages or disadvantages of the police men-
toring program for the force and the prospective candidates?
7-24 Evaluate the reliability and validity of one of the written tests 
used in the selection of the police officers.
7-25 The Hong Kong Police Force successfully nurtures a learning 
culture in the organization. Identify various training and devel-
opment activities that help to shape the culture.

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    251
Endnotes
 1. Material for this chapter is drawn 
from D. A. DeCenzo and S. P. 
Robbins, Fundamentals of Hu-
man Resources Management, 10th 
ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2010).
 2. From the Past to the Present 
box based on D. A. Wren and 
A. G. Bedeian, The Evolution of 
Management Thought, 6th ed. 
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2009), 198–200; “Building 
Better Organizations: Industrial-
Organizational Psychology in 
the Workplace,” Society for In-
dustrial and Organizational Psy-
chology, www.siop.org (July 13, 
2009); M. Munsterberg, Hugo 
Munsterberg: His Life and Work 
(New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts, 1922); and H. Munster-
berg, Psychology and Industrial 
Efficiency (Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin Company, 1913).
 3. M. Wilson, “Hooters Manager 
Asks Waitress to Wear a Wig af-
ter Brain Surgery,” http://www.
hrcommunication.com/Main/
Articles/Hooters_manager_asks_
waitress_to_wear_a_wig_after_ 
8781.aspx, April 10, 2013; A. 
Langfield, “Hooters Sued by 
Former Waitress in Dispute over 
Wig,” NBC News, http://www.
cnbc.com/id/100627864, April 9, 
2013; and R. Patrick, “Suit Says 
Hooters Waitress Forced out after 
Surgery,” St. Louis Post Dispatch, 
http://www.stltoday.com/news/
local/crime-and-courts/suit-says-
hooters-waitress-forced-out-after-
surgery/article_db861563-d08b-
5cb7-9cc9-91150b39351b.html, 
April 6, 2013.
 4. P. W. Tam and S. Woo, “Talent War 
Crunches Start-Ups,” Wall Street 
Journal, February 28, 2011, B1+; 
and C. Tuna, “Many Companies 
Hire as They Fire,” Wall Street 
Journal, May 11, 2009, B6.
 5. J. J. Salopek, “Employee Refer-
rals Remain a Recruiter’s Best 
Friend,” 
Workforce 
Manage-
ment Online, December 2010; L. 
G. Klaff, “New Internal Hiring 
Systems Reduce Cost and Boost 
Morale,” Workforce Management, 
March 2004, 76–79; M. N. Marti-
nez, “The Headhunter Within,” HR 
Magazine, August 2001, 48–55; 
“Even Non-Recruiting Companies 
Must Maintain Hiring Networks,” 
HR Focus, November 2001, 8; and 
L. Greenhalgh, A. T. Lawrence, 
and R. I. Sutton, “Determinants 
of Work Force Reduction Strate-
gies in Declining Organizations,” 
Academy of Management Review, 
April 1988, 241–54.
 6. J. J. Salopek, “Employee Refer-
rals Remain a Recruiter’s Best 
Friend”; 
“Employee 
Referral 
Programs: Highly Qualified New 
Hires Who Stick Around,” Cana-
dian HR Reporter, June 4, 2001, 
21; and C. Lachnit, “Employee 
Referral Saves Time, Saves Mon-
ey, Delivers Quality,” Workforce, 
June 2001, 66–72.
 7. B. Horovitz, “Layoffs Sting Icons 
Coca-Cola and McDonalds,” USA 
Today, January 9, 2015, 5B.
 8. B. Tuttle, “Why These 5 Compa-
nies Are Laying Off Thousands of 
Workers,” http://time.com/money/ 
3678511/ebay-amex-baker-hughes- 
layoffs/, January 22, 2015.
 9. Ibid.
 10. J. 
Mooney, 
“Pre-Employment 
Testing on the Internet: Put Can-
didates a Click Away and Hire at 
Modem Speed,” Public Personnel 
Management, Spring 2002, 41–52.
 11. L. Weber and E. Dwoskin, “As Per-
sonality Tests Multiply, Employers 
Are Split,” Wall Street Journal, 
September 30, 2014, A1+.
 12. See, for instance, R. D. Arvey and 
J. E. Campion, “The Employment 
Interview: A Summary and Re-
view of Recent Research,” Person-
nel Psychology, Summer 1982, 
281–322; and M. M. Harris, “Re-
considering the Employment In-
terview: A Review of Recent Lit-
erature and Suggestions for Future 
Research,” Personnel Psychology, 
Winter 1989, 691–726; J. H. Prag-
er, “Nasty or Nice: 56-Question 
Quiz,” Wall Street Journal, Febru-
ary 22, 2000, A4; and M. K. Zach-
ary, “Labor Law for Supervisors,” 
Supervision, March 2001, 23–26.
 13. See, for instance, G. Nicholsen, 
“Screen and Glean: Good Screen-
ing and Background Checks Help 
Make the Right Match for Every 
Open Position,” Workforce, Octo-
ber 2000, 70.
 14. R. A. Posthuma, F. P. Morgeson, 
and M. A. Campion, “Beyond 
Employment Interview Validity: A 
Comprehensive Narrative Review 
of Recent Research and Trends 
Over Time,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy, Spring 2002, 1–81.
 15. A. I. Huffcutt, J. M. Conway, P. L. 
Roth, and N. J. Stone, “Identifica-
tion and Meta-Analysis Assess-
ment of Psychological Constructs 
Measured in Employment Inter-
views,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology (October 2001): 897–913; 
and A. I. Huffcutt, J. A. Weekley, 
W. H. Wiesner, T. G. Degroot, and 
C. Jones, “Comparison of Situa-
tional and Behavioral Description 
Interview Questions for Higher-
Level Positions,” Personnel Psy-
chology, Autumn 2001, 619–44.
 16. See C. H. Middendorf and T. H. 
Macan, “Note-Taking in the Em-
ployment Interview: Effects on 
Recall and Judgments,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (April 2002): 
293–303; D. Butcher, “The Inter-
view Rights and Wrongs,” Man-
agement Today, April 2002, 4; P. 
L. Roth, C. H. Can Iddekinge, A. 
I. Huffcutt, C. E. Eidson, and P. 
Bobko, “Corrections for Range 
Restriction in Structured Interview 
Ethnic Group Differences: The Val-
ue May Be Larger Than Research-
ers Thought,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology (April 2002): 369–76; 
and E. Hermelin and I. T. Robert-
son, “A Critique and Standardiza-
tion of Meta-Analytic Coefficients 
in Personnel Selection,” Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology 
(September 
2001): 
253–77.
 17. See J. Merritt, “Improv at the In-
terview,” BusinessWeek, February 
3, 2003, 63; P. J. Taylor and B. 
Small, “Asking Applicants What 
They Would Do versus What 
They Did Do: A Meta-Analysis 
Comparison of Situation and 
Past Behavior Employment In-
terview Questions,” Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology (September 2002): 
277–95; S. D. Mauer, “A Practitio-
ner-Based Analysis of Interviewer 
Job Expertise and Scale Format as 
Contextual Factors in Situational 
Interviews,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy, Summer 2002, 307–28; and 
J. M. Barclay, “Improving Selec-
tion Interviews with Structure: 
Organizations’ Use of Behavioral 
Interviews,” Personnel Review 30, 
no. 1 (2001): 81–95.
 18. J. Merritt, “Improv at the Inter-
view,” 63.
 19. S. H. Applebaum and M. Donia, 
“The Realistic Downsizing Pre-
view: A Management Intervention 
in the Prevention of Survivor Syn-
drome (Part II),” Career Develop-
ment International, January 2001, 
5–19.
 20. D. Zielinski, “Effective Assess-
ments,” 
HRMagazine, 
January 
2011, 61–64; W. L. Gardner, B. J. 
Reithel, R. T. Foley, C. C. Cogliser, 
and F. O. Walumbwa, “Attraction 
to Organizational Culture Profiles: 
Effects of Realistic Recruitment 
and Vertical and Horizontal Indi-
vidualism-Collectivism,” Manage-
ment Communication Quarterly, 
February 2009, 437–72; and S. 
L. Premack and J. P. Wanous, “A 
Meta-Analysis of Realistic Job 
Preview Experiments,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (November 
1985): 706–20.
 21. C. Garvey, “The Whirlwind of a 
New Job,” HR Magazine, June 
2001, 110–18.
 22. B. P. Sunoo, “Results-Oriented 
Customer 
Service 
Training,” 
Workforce (May 2001): 84–90.
 23. Technology and the Manager’s Job 
box based on D. Zielinski, “Refer-
ral Booster,” HR Magazine, March 
2013, 63–65; B. Horovitz, “Tweet 
for This Job—And It Could Be 
Yours,” USA Today, February 18, 
2013, A 4; “Action Items,” HR 
Magazine, January 2013, 33–35; 
B. Roberts, “From E-Learning to 
Mobile Learning,” HR Magazine, 
August 2012, 61–65; D. Zielinski, 
“Effective Assessments”; R. E. 
DeRouin, B. A. Fritzsche, and E. 
Salas, “E-Learning in Organiza-
tions,” Journal of Management 
(December 2005): 920–40; K. 
O’Leonard, HP Case Study: Flex-
ible Solutions for Multi-Cultural 
Learners (Oakland: CA: Bersin 
& Associates, 2004); S. Green-
gard, “The Dawn of Digital HR,” 
Business Finance, October 2003, 
55–59; and J. Hoekstra, “Three 
in One,” Online Learning vol. 5 
(2001): 28–32.
 24. See, for instance, E. G. Tripp, 
 “Aging Aircraft and Coming Regu-
lations: Political and Media Pres-
sures Have Encouraged the FAA to 
Expand Its Pursuit of Real and Per-
ceived Problems of Older Aircraft 
and Their Systems. Operators Will 
Pay,” Business and Commercial 
Aviation, March 2001, 68–75.
 25. “A&S Interview: Sully’s Tale,” 
Air & Space Magazine, www.
airspacemag.com (February 18, 
2009); A. Altman, “Chesley B. 
Sullenberger III,” Time, www.
time.com (January 16, 2009); 
and K. Burke, P. Donohue, and 
C. Siemaszko, “US Airways Air-
plane Crashes in Hudson River—
Hero Pilot Chesley Sullenberger 
III Saves All Aboard,” New York 
Daily News, www.nydailynews.
com (January 16, 2009).
 26. C. S. Duncan, J. D. Selby-Lucas, 
and W. Swart, “Linking Organi-
zational Goals and Objectives to 
Employee Performance: A Quan-
titative Perspective,” Journal of 
American Academy of Business 
(March 2002): 314–18.
 27. “Training Expenditures,” Training 
(November–December 2010): 19.
 28. R. Langlois, “Fairmont Hotels: 
Business Strategy Starts with 
People,” Canadian HR Reporter, 
November 5, 2001, 19.
 29. M. Dalahoussaye, “Show Me 
the Results,” Training (March  
2002): 28.
 30. A. Tziner, C. Joanis, and K. R. 
Murphy, “A Comparison of Three 
Methods of Performance Apprais-
al with Regard to Goal Properties, 
Goal Perception, and Rate Satis-
faction,” Group and Organization 
Management, June 2000, 175–90; 
and T. W. Kent and T. J. Davis, 
“Using Retranslation to Develop 
Operational Anchored Scales to 
Assess the Motivational Context 
of Jobs,” International Journal 
of Management (March 2002): 
10–16.
 31. See also C. A. Ramus and U. 
Steger, “The Roles of Supervi-
sory Support Behaviors and En-
vironmental Policy in Employee 
‘Ecoinitiatives’ at Leading-Edge 
European Companies,” Academy 
of Management Journal (August 
2000): 605–26.
 32. See R. de Andrés, J. L. Garcia-
Lapresta, and J. GonzálezPachón, 
“Performance Appraisal Based 

252    Part 3  •  Organizing
on Distance Function Methods,”  
European Journal of Operation-
al Research (December 2010): 
1599–607; and L. Atwater and J. 
Brett, “Feedback Format: Does It 
Influence Manager’s Reaction to 
Feedback,” Journal of Occupation-
al and Organizational Psychology 
(December 2006): 517–32.
 33. M. A. Peiperl, “Getting 360 Feed-
back Right,” Harvard Business 
Review, January 2001, 142–47.
 34. T. J. Maurer, D. R. D. Mitchell, 
and F. G. Barbeite, “Predictors of 
Attitudes Toward a 360-Degree 
Feedback System and Involvement 
in Post-Feedback Management 
Development Activity,” Journal 
of Occupational and Organiza-
tional Psychology (March 2002): 
87–107.
 35. This section based on R. I. Hender-
son, Compensation Management 
in a Knowledge-Based World, 9th 
ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pren-
tice Hall, 2003).
 36. M. P. Brown, M. C. Sturman, and 
M. J. Simmering, “Compensa-
tion Policy and Organizational 
Performance: 
The 
Efficiency, 
Operational and Financial Im-
plications of Pay Levels and Pay 
Structure,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal (December 2003): 
752–62; J. D. Shaw, N. P. Gupta, 
and J. E. Delery, “Pay Disper-
sion and Workforce Performance: 
Moderating Effects of Incentives 
and 
Interdependence,” 
Strate-
gic Management Journal (June 
2002): 491–512; E. Montemayor, 
“Congruence between Pay Policy 
and Competitive Strategy in High-
Performing Firms,” Journal of 
Management vol. 22, no. 6 (1996): 
889–908; and L. R. Gomez-Mejia, 
“Structure and Process of Diversi-
fication, Compensation Strategy, 
and Firm Performance,” Strategic 
Management Journal 13 (1992): 
381–97.
 37. J. D. Shaw, N. Gupta, A. Mitra, 
and G. E. Ledford Jr., “Success 
and Survival of Skill-Based Pay 
Plans,” Journal of Management 
(February 2005): 28–49; C. Lee, 
K. S. Law, and P. Bobko, “The 
Importance of Justice Perceptions 
on Pay Effectiveness: A Two-
Year Study of a Skill-Based Pay 
Plan,” Journal of Management 
vol. 26, no. 6 (1999): 851–73; G. 
E. Ledford, “Paying for the Skills, 
Knowledge and Competencies of 
Knowledge Workers,” Compensa-
tion and Benefits Review, July–
August 1995, 55–62; and E. E. 
Lawler III, G. E. Ledford Jr., and 
L. Chang, “Who Uses Skill-Based 
Pay and Why,” Compensation and 
Benefits 
Review, 
March–April 
1993, 22.
 38. J. D. Shaw, N. Gupta, A. Mitra, 
and G. E. Ledford Jr., “Success 
and Survival of Skill-Based Pay 
Plans.”
 39. Information from Hewitt Associ-
ates Studies: “As Fixed Costs In-
crease, Employers Turn to Variable 
Pay Programs as Preferred Way to 
Reward Employees,” August 21, 
2007; “Hewitt Study Shows Pay-
for-Performance Plans Replacing 
Holiday Bonuses,” December 6, 
2005; “Salaries Continue to Rise 
in Asia Pacific, Hewitt Annual 
Study Reports,” November 23, 
2005; and “Hewitt Study Shows 
Base Pay Increases Flat for 2006 
with Variable Pay Plans Picking 
up the Slack,” Hewitt Associates, 
LLC, www.hewittassociates.com 
(August 31, 2005).
 40. “Mandated Benefits: 2002 Com-
pliance Guide,” Employee Benefits 
Journal (June 2002): 64; and J. 
J. Kim, “Smaller Firms Augment 
Benefits, Survey Shows,” Wall 
Street Journal, June 6, 2002, D2.
 41. See, for example, R. E. Catalano 
and D. L. Kirkpatrick, “Evaluat-
ing Training Programs: The State 
of the Art,” Training and Develop-
ment Journal (May 1968): 2–9.
 42. P. P. Shah, “Network Destruction: 
The Structural Implications of 
Downsizing,” Academy of Man-
agement Journal (February 2000): 
101–12.
 43. See, for example, K. A. Mollica 
and B. Gray, “When Layoff Sur-
vivors Become Layoff Victims: 
Propensity to Litigate,” Human 
Resource Planning, January 2001, 
22–32.
 44. S. Berfield, “After the Layoff, the 
Redesign,” Business Week, April 
14, 2008, 54–56; L. Uchitelle, 
“Retraining 
Laid-off Workers, 
but for What?” New York Times 
Online, March 26, 2006; D. Tour-
ish, N. Paulsen, E. Hobman, and 
P. Bordia, “The Downsides of 
Downsizing: 
Communication 
Processes and Information Needs 
in the Aftermath of a Workforce 
Reduction Strategy,” Manage-
ment Communication Quarterly, 
May 2004, 485–516; J. Brock-
ner, G. Spreitzer, A. Mishra, W. 
Hochwarter, L. Pepper, and J. 
Weinberg, “Perceived Control as 
an Antidote to the Negative Ef-
fects of Layoffs on Survivors’ 
Organizational Commitment and 
Job Performance,” Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, 49 (2004): 
76–100; and E. Krell, “Defusing 
Downsizing,” Business Finance, 
December 2002, 55–57.
 45. And the Survey Says box based on 
“Find the Sharpest Needle in the 
Stack,” HR Magazine, June 2012, 
16; J. Yang and P. Trap, “If You 
Started a Job and You Didn’t Like 
It, How Long Would You Stay?” 
USA Today, June 11, 2012, 1B; J. 
Yang and P. Trap, “Do You Use 
Social Networking Sites to Re-
search Candidates?” USA Today, 
June 5, 2012, 1B; J. Yang and A. 
Gonzalez, “Top Actions Workers 
Feel Are Grounds for Termina-
tion,” USA Today, May 7, 2012, 
1B; L. Weber,” Little Time for 
Resumes,” Wall Street Journal, 
March 21, 2012, B8; J. Yang and P. 
Trap, “Top Reasons Why  Someone 
Hired Would Not Work Out in the 
Position,” USA Today, October 26, 
2011, 1B; J. Yang and V. Salazar, 
“Are Annual Performance Reviews 
an Accurate Appraisal for Employ-
ees’ Work?” USA Today, Septem-
ber 27, 2011, 1B; J. Yang and S. 
Ward, “What Are the Most Com-
mon Mistakes Candidates Make 
During Job Interviews?” USA To-
day, August 15, 2011, 1B; and P. 
Kujawa, “For Some Workers, the 
Piggy Bank Is Fat for Retirement,” 
Workforce Management Online, 
July 16, 2012.
 46. A. Joshi, “Managing the Organi-
zational Melting Pot: Dilemmas of 
Workplace Diversity,” Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, December 
2001, 783–84.
 47. L. Dishman, “These Are the 
Companies Winning the Race 
to Increase Diversity,” http://
www.fastcompany.com/3045438/
these-are-the-companies-winning- 
the-race-to-increase-diversity, 
April 25, 2015.
 48. See, for instance, K. Iverson, 
“Managing for Effective Work-
force Diversity,” Cornell Hotel 
and Restaurant Administration 
Quarterly, April 2000, 31–38.
 49. U.S. Equal Employment Oppor-
tunity Commission, “Charge Al-
leging Sexual Harassment: FY 
2010–FY 2014,” http://www1.eeoc 
.gov/eeoc/statistics/enforcement/
sexual_harassment_new.cfm? 
renderforprint=1.
 50. Ibid.
 51. N. F. Foy, “Sexual Harassment 
Can Threaten Your Bottom Line,” 
Strategic Finance (August 2000): 
56–57.
 52. “Federal Monitors Find Illinois 
Mitsubishi Unit Eradicating Ha-
rassment,” Wall Street Journal 
(September 7, 2000): A8.
 53. L. J. Munson, C. Hulin, and F. 
Drasgow, “Longitudinal Analysis 
of Dispositional Influences and 
Sexual Harassment: Effects on 
Job and Psychological Outcomes,” 
Personnel 
Psychology 
(Spring 
2000): 21.
 54. B. Leonard, “Survey: 10% of 
Employees Report Harassment 
at Work,” HR Magazine, October 
2010, 18.
 55. “Nichols v. Azteca Restaurant En-
terprises,” Harvard Law Review, 
May 2002, 2074; A. J. Morrell, 
“Non-Employee 
Harassment,” 
Legal Report (January–February 
2000): 1. See also S. Lim and L. 
M. Cortina, “Interpersonal Mis-
treatment in the Workplace: The 
Interface and Impact of General 
Incivility and Sexual Harassment,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(May 2005): 483–96.
 56. Although the male gender is re-
ferred to here, it is important to 
note that sexual harassment may 
involve people of either sex or the 
same sex. (See, for instance, On-
cale v. Sundowner Offshore Ser-
vice, Inc., 118 S. Ct. 998.)
 57. See also A. M. O’Leary-Kelly, 
L. Bowes-Sperry, C. A. Bates, 
and E. R. Lean, “Sexual Harass-
ment at Work: A Decade (Plus) of 
 Progress,” Journal of Management 
(June 2009): 503–36; M. Rotundo, 
D. H. Nguyen, and P. R. Sack-
ett, “A Meta-Analytic Review of  
Gender Differences in Perceptions 
of Sexual Harassment,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (October 
2001): 914–22.
 58. “Sexual 
Harassment,” 
http://
www.eeoc.gov/laws/types/sexual_ 
harassment.cfm, April 24, 2015.
 59. R. L. Wiener and L. E. Hurt, “How 
Do People Evaluate Social Sexual 
Conduct at Work? A Psychologi-
cal Model,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology (February 2000): 75.
 60. A. R. Karr, “Companies Crack 
Down on the Increasing Sexual 
Harassment by E-Mail,” Wall 
Street Journal, September 21, 
1999, A1; and A. Fisher, “After 
All This Time, Why Don’t People 
Know What Sexual Harassment 
Means?” Fortune, January 12, 
1998, 68.
 61. Ibid.
 62. “You and DuPont: Diversity,” Du-
Pont Company Documents (1999–
2000), 
http://www.dupont.com/
careers/you/diverse.html; and “Du-
Pont Announces 2000 Dr. Martin 
Luther King, Days of Celebration,” 
DuPont 
Company 
Documents, 
http://www.dupont.com/corp/
whats-news/releases/00/001111.
html (January 11, 2000).
 63. It should be noted here that under 
the Title VII and the Civil Rights 
Act of 1991, the maximum award 
that can be given, under the Fed-
eral Act, is $300,000. However, 
many cases are tried under state 
laws that permit unlimited punitive 
damages.
 64. J. W. Janove, “Sexual Harassment 
and the Big Three Surprises,” 
HR Magazine, November 2001, 
123–30; and L. A. Baar and J. 
Baar, “Harassment Case Proceeds 
Despite Failure to Report,” HR 
Magazine, June 2005, 159.
 65. S. Shellenbarger, “Supreme Court 
Takes on How Employers Handle 
Worker Harassment Complaints,” 
Wall Street Journal, April 13, 
2006, D1.
 66. See, for instance, P. W. Dorfman, 
A. T. Cobb, and R. Cox, “Inves-
tigations of Sexual Harassment 
 Allegations: Legal Means Fair—
Or Does It?” Human Resources 
Management, Spring 2000, 33–39.
 67. These examples taken from S. 
J. Wells, “Does Work Make You 
Fat?” HR Magazine, October 
2010, 26–32; R. King, “Slim-
ming Down Employees to Cut 
Costs”; C. Tkaczyk, “Lowering 
Health-Care Costs,” Fortune, No-
vember 23, 2009, 16; and A. W. 
Matthews, “When All Else Fails: 
Forcing Workers into Healthy 
Habits,” Wall Street Journal, July 
8, 2009, D1+.
 68. J. 
Tozzi, 
“U.S. 
Health-Care 
Spending Is on the Rise Again,” 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2015-02-18/u-s-health-
care-spending-is-on-the-rise-
again, February 18, 2015; and 

CHAPTER 7  •  Managing Human Resources    253
D.  Munro, “Annual U.S. Health-
care Spending Hits $3.8 Trillion,” 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
danmunro/2014/02/02/annual-u-
s-healthcare-spending-hits-3-8- 
trillion/, February 2, 2014.
 69. S. Adams, “Every Smoker Costs 
an Employer $6,000 a Year. Re-
ally?” http://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
susanadams/2013/06/05/every-
smoker-costs-an-employer-6000- 
a-year-really/print/, June 5, 2013.
 70. K. Kahn, “Obese Employees 
Cost Employers Thousands in 
Extra Medical Costs,” http://
www.cfah.org/hbns/2014/obese-
employees-cost-employers-thou-
sands-in-extra-medical-costs, 
May 13, 2014.
 71. R. Ceniceros, “Obesity Can Exac-
erbate Workplace Injuries, Study 
Notes,” 
Workforce 
Management 
Online, December 15, 2010; and 
“Obesity Weighs Down Production,” 
Industry Week, March 2008, 22–23.
 72. A. R. Carey and P. Trap, “Changes 
in Wellness Programs,” USA To-
day, July 17, 2014, 1A.
 73. G. Kranz, “Prognosis Positive: 
Companies Aim to Get Workers 
Healthy,” Workforce Management, 
www.work-force.com (April 15, 
2008).
 74. S. J. Wells, “Does Work Make 
You Fat?”; and M. Conlin, “Hide 
the Doritos! Here Comes HR,” 
BusinessWeek, April 28, 2008, 
94–96.
 75. J. Fox, “Good Riddance to Pen-
sions,” CNN Money, January 12, 
2006.
 76. M. Adams, “Broken Pension 
System in Crying Need of a 
Fix,” USA Today, November 15, 
2005, 1B+.
 77. “Prevalence of Retirement Plans 
by Type in the Fortune 100,”  
Pension 
Benefits, 
September 
2010, 1–2; D. Kansas, “Has the 
401(k) Failed?” Fortune, June 
22, 2009, 94–98; S. Block, 
 “Company Pensions Are Out 
on a Limb,” USA Today, May 
22, 2009, 1B+; A. Feldman, 
“Retiring the 401(k) Contribu-
tion,” BusinessWeek, November 
24, 2008, 32; J. Appleby, “Tra-
ditional Pensions Are Almost 
Gone. 
Is 
Employer-Provided 
Health Insurance Next?” USA 
Today,  November 13, 2007, 
1A+; S. Kelly, “FedEx, Good-
year Make Big Pension Plan 
 Changes,” Workforce Management, 
 www.workforce.com (March 1, 
2007); G. Colvin, “The End of a 
Dream,” Fortune, www.cnnmon-
ey.com (June 22, 2006); E. Porter 
and M. Williams Nash, “Benefits 
Go the Way of Pensions,” NY 
Times Online,  February 9, 2006; 
and J. Fox, “Good Riddance to 
 Pensions.”
 78. Protiviti Web site, www.protiviti 
.com.
 79. R. Sanderson, “Strong Demand 
for Brunello Cucinelli IPO,” www 
.ft.com, April 22, 2012; J.  Davis, 
“Brunello Cucinelli’s Conscious 
Capitalism,” Esquire, www.esquire 
.co.uk, May 2, 2015;
 80. Brunello Cucinelli website, Philoso-
phy, www.brunellocucinelli .com and 
http://www.brunellocucinelli .com/
en/the-foundation/the- foundation. 
 81. Based on interviews with Hong 
Kong police officers; Hong Kong 
Police Force website; www.police 
.gov.hk; J. Brennan, “HK Police 
Force Seeks Recruits to Rise to  
the Challenge,” http://www.cpjobs 
.com/hk/article/hk-police-force-seeks-
recruits-to-rise-to-the-challenge, 
March 21, 2015; A. Y. Jiao, “The  
Police in Hong Kong: A Contempo-
rary View,” Lanham, University Press 
of America, November 27, 2006; 
Hong Kong Police Force, Police Men-
torship Program, http://www.police 
.gov.hk/ppp_en/15_recruit/pmp.html.

254
The term career has several meanings. In popular usage, it can mean advancement (“she is 
on a management career track”), a profession (“he has chosen a career in accounting”), or a 
lifelong sequence of jobs (“his career has included 12 jobs in six organizations”). For our pur-
poses, we define a career as the sequence of work positions held by a person during his or her 
lifetime. Using this definition, it’s apparent that we all have, or will have, a career. Moreover, 
the concept is as relevant to unskilled laborers as it is to software designers or physicians. But 
career development isn’t what it used to be!
Career Module
Building Your Career
What Was Career Development Like, Historically?
Although career development has been an important topic in management courses for 
years, some dramatic changes have occurred in the concept. Career development programs 
used to be designed to help employees advance their work lives within a specific organiza-
tion. The focus of such programs was to provide employees the information, assessment, 
and training needed to help them realize their career goals. Career development was also 
a way for organizations to attract and retain highly talented people. This approach has all 
but disappeared in today’s workplace. Now, organizations that have such traditional career 
programs are few and far between. Downsizing, restructuring, and other organizational 
 adjustments have brought us to one significant conclusion about career development: 
You—not the organization—will be responsible for designing, guiding, and developing 
your own career.
What Is Career Development Like, Now?
This idea of increased personal responsibility for one’s career has been described as a bound-
aryless career. The challenge is that few hard-and-fast rules are available to guide you.
One of the first decisions you have to make is career choice. The optimum choice is 
one that offers the best match between what you want out of life and your interests, your 
abilities and personality, and market opportunities. Good career choices should result in 
a series of jobs that give you an opportunity to be a good performer, make you want to 
maintain your commitment to your career, lead to highly satisfying work, and give you the 
proper balance between work and personal life. A good career match, then, is one in which 
you are able to develop a positive self-concept, to do work that you think is important, and 
to lead the kind of life you desire. In a recent survey by Capital One Financial Corpora-
tion, 66 percent of college graduates said that a comprehensive benefits package (including, 
for example, health care, 401(k) program, child care, and domestic partner benefits) was 
the most  important factor in their job search. Starting salary ranked second at 64 percent, 
with job location ranked third at 60 percent. Today’s college grads are also looking to be 
rewarded or compensated (with comp time or matching donations, for instance) for their 
volunteer and philanthropic activities.
Once you’ve identified a career choice, it’s time to initiate the job search. However, 
we aren’t going to get into the specifics of job hunting, writing a résumé, or interviewing 
career
The sequence of work positions held by a person 
during his or her lifetime
boundaryless career
When an individual takes personal responsibility for 
his or her own career

Career Module   255
 successfully, although those things are important. Let’s fast-forward through all that and 
assume that your job search was successful. It’s time to go to work! How do you survive and 
excel in your career?
How Can I Have a Successful Career?
What can you do to improve your chances for career success? You’re already doing the most 
important thing: You’re getting a college education! It’s the surest way to increase your life-
time earnings. Currently, the average high school graduate earns $27,915 a year. His or her 
counterpart with a college degree earns $51,206. College graduates earn, on average, $800,000 
more than high school graduates over their working career. Investing in your education and 
training is one of the best investments you’ll make in your lifetime. What else can you do? The 
following suggestions are based on extensive research into career management.
Assess Your Personal Strengths and Weaknesses
Where do your natural talents lie? What can you do, relative to others, that gives you a com-
petitive advantage? Are you particularly good with numbers? Have strong people skills? Good 
with your hands? Write better than most people? Everyone has some things that they do better 
than others and some areas where they’re weak. Play to your strengths.
Identify Market Opportunities
Where are tomorrow’s job opportunities? Regardless of your strengths, certain job catego-
ries are likely to decline in the coming decades—for instance, bank tellers, small farmers, 
movie projectionists, travel agents, and secretaries. In contrast, abundant opportunities are 
more likely to be created by an increasingly aging society, continued emphasis on technology, 
increased spending on education and training, and concern with personal security. These fac-
tors are likely to create excellent opportunities for jobs in gerontological counseling, network 
administration, training consultants, and security-alarm installers.
Take Responsibility for Managing Your Own Career
Historically, companies tended to assume responsibility for their employees’ careers. Today, 
this is the exception rather than the rule. Employees are increasingly expected to take respon-
sibility for their own careers.
Think of your career as your business and you’re its CEO. To survive, you have to monitor 
market forces, head off competitors, and be ready to quickly take advantage of opportunities 
when they surface. You have to protect your career from harm and position yourself to benefit 
from changes in the environment.
Develop Your Interpersonal Skills
Interpersonal skills, especially the ability to communicate, top the list of almost every 
 employer’s “must have” skills. Whether it’s getting a new job or a promotion, strong interper-
sonal skills are likely to give you a competitive edge.
Practice Makes Perfect
There’s an increasing amount of evidence indicating that super-high achievers aren’t funda-
mentally different from the rest of us. They just work harder and smarter. It’s been found, 
based on studies of world-class performers in music, sports, chess, science, and business, that 
people like Tiger Woods, Mozart, and Bill Gates put in about 10,000 hours (or 10 years at 
1,000 hours a year) of persistent, focused training and experience before they hit their peak 
performance level. If you want to excel in any field, you should expect to have to put in a 

256    Part 3  •  Organizing
lot of deliberate practice—consistently engaging in repeated activity specifically designed to 
 improve performance beyond your current comfort and ability level.
Stay Up to Date
In today’s dynamic world, skills can become obsolete quickly. To keep your career on track, 
you need to make learning a lifetime commitment. You should be continually “going to 
school”—if not taking formal courses, then reading books and journals to ensure that you 
don’t get caught with obsolete skills.
Network
Networking refers to creating and maintaining beneficial relationships with others in or-
der to accomplish your goals. It helps to have friends in high places. It also helps to have 
 contacts who can keep you informed of changes that are going on in your organization and in 
your industry. Go to conferences. Maintain contact with former college friends and alumni. 
Get involved in community activities. Cultivate a broad set of relationships. And in today’s 
 increasingly interconnected world, join online business networking groups such as LinkedIn, 
Spoke, and Talkbiznow.
Stay Visible
Networking can increase your visibility. So, too, can writing articles in your professional 
journals, teaching classes or giving talks in your area of expertise, attending conferences and 
professional meetings, and making sure your accomplishments are properly promoted. You 
increase your mobility and value in the marketplace by keeping visible.
Seek a Mentor
Employees with mentors are likely to have enhanced mobility, increased knowledge of the 
organization’s inside workings, greater access to senior executives, increased satisfaction, and 
increased visibility. For women and minorities, having mentors has been shown to be particu-
larly helpful in promoting career advancement and success.
Leverage Your Competitive Advantage
Develop skills that will give you a competitive advantage in the marketplace. Especially focus 
on skills that are important to employers, skills that are scarce, and areas where you have lim-
ited competition. Try to avoid a worst-case scenario: You have a job that anyone can learn in 
30 minutes. Remember that the harder it is for you to learn and develop a highly prized skill, 
the harder it’ll also be for others to acquire it. Generally speaking, the more training necessary 
to do a job and the fewer people who have that training, the greater your security and influence.
Here’s an insight from many years as a student and a professor: To succeed in school, 
you have to be a generalist and excel at everything. For instance, to earn a 4.0 GPA, you need 
to be a star in English, math, science, geography, languages, and so on. The “real world,” on 
the other hand, rewards specialization. You don’t have to be good at everything. You just need 
to be good at something that others aren’t and that society values. You can be lousy in math 
or science and still be a very successful opera singer, artist, salesperson, or writer. You don’t 
have to excel in English to be a computer programmer or electrician. The secret to life suc-
cess is identifying your comparative advantage and then developing it. And as we’ve noted 
previously, you need to invest approximately 10,000 hours in honing your skills to achieve 
optimum proficiency.
Don’t Shun Risks
Don’t be afraid to take risks, especially when you’re young and you don’t have much to 
lose. Going back to school, moving to a new state or country, or quitting a job to start your 
own business can be the decision that will set your life in a completely new direction. Great 

Career Module   257
 accomplishments almost always require taking the path less traveled; and the road to nowhere 
is paved with fears of the unknown.
It’s OK to Change Jobs
Past generations often believed “you don’t leave a good job.” That advice no longer applies. 
In today’s fast-changing job market, staying put often only means that you’re staying behind. 
Employers no longer expect long-term loyalty. And to keep your skills fresh, your income 
increasing, and your job tasks interesting, it will be increasingly likely that you’ll need to 
change employers.
Opportunities, Preparation, and Luck = Success
Successful people are typically ambitious, intelligent, and hardworking. But they are also 
lucky. It’s not by chance that many of the biggest technology success stories—Bill Gates 
and Paul Allen at Microsoft, Steve Jobs at Apple, Scott McNealy at Sun Microsystems, 
Eric Schmidt at Novell and Google—were born in a narrow three-year period between June 
1953 and March 1956. They were smart. They were interested in computers and technology. 
But they were also lucky. They reached their teens and early 20s in 1975—at the dawn of 
the  personal computer age. Those people with similar interests and talents but born in the 
 mid-1940s were likely to have joined a firm like IBM out of college and been enamored with 
mainframe computers. Had they been born in the early 1960s, they would have missed getting 
in on the ground floor of the revolution.
Success is a matter of matching up opportunities, preparation, and luck. It’s been sug-
gested that few of us get more than a couple of special opportunities in our lifetime. If you’re 
lucky, you will recognize those opportunities, have made the proper preparations, and then 
act on them.
You can’t control when you were born, where you were born, your parents’ finances, or 
the like. Those are the luck factors. But what you can control is your preparation and willing-
ness to act when opportunity knocks.
Endnotes
 1. Managing Your Career Module 
based on J. H. Greenhaus, V. 
M. Godstalk, and G. A. Calla-
han,  Career Management, 3rd ed. 
(Cincinnati, OH: South-Western, 
2000); K. A. Ericsson, “Deliber-
ate Practice and the Modifiability 
of Body and Mind,” International 
Journal of Sports Psychology 
(January–March 2007), pp. 4–34; 
J. P. Newport, “Mastery, Just 
10,000 Hours Away,” Wall Street 
 Journal, March 14–15, 2009, p. 
W6; “Capital One Survey High-
lights 
What 
Today’s 
College 
Graduates Want from Employers,” 
www.businesswire.com (June 10, 
2008); M. Gladwell, Outliers: The 
Story of Success (New York: Little, 
Brown, 2008); R. N. Boles, What 
Color Is Your Parachute? 2009: A 
Practical Manual for Job-Hunters 
and Career-Changers (Berkeley, 
CA: Ten Speed Press, 2009); D. 
E. Super and D. T. Hall, “Career 
Development: Exploration and 
Planning,” in M. R. Rosenzweig 
and L.W. Porter (eds.), Annual Re-
view of Psychology, vol. 29 (Palo 
Alto, CA: Annual Reviews, 1978), 
p. 334; and M. B. Arthur and D. 
M. Rousseau, The Boundaryless 
Career: A New Employment Prin-
ciple for a New Organizational 
Era (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1996).

Image Source/Alamy
            There’s nothing 
         managers can  
do to reduce the stress  
inherent in today’s jobs.
8
Managing Change 
and Innovation

259
It’s an unusual employee today who isn’t  
dealing with stress. Cutbacks, increased  
workloads, open workspace designs, work/life 
conflicts, and 24/7 communication access are just 
a few of the things that have increased job stress. 
However, organizations are not ignoring this  
problem. Smart managers are redesigning jobs, 
realigning schedules, and introducing  
employee assistance programs to help employees 
cope with the increasing stresses in their work 
and in balancing their work and personal lives.

can be an unfortu-
nate 
consequence 
of change and anxiety, both at work and 
personally. However, change is a constant 
for organizations and thus for manag-
ers and for employees. Large companies, 
small businesses, entrepreneurial startups, 
universities, hospitals, and even the mili-
tary are changing the way they do things. 
Although change has always been part of 
a manager’s job, it’s become even more so 
in recent years. And because change can’t 
be eliminated, managers must learn how 
to manage it successfully. In this chap-
ter, we’re going to look at organizational 
change efforts and how to manage those, 
the ways that managers can deal with the 
stress that exists in organizations, and how 
managers can stimulate innovation in their 
organizations. •
Learning Outcomes
8-1  Define organizational change and compare and contrast views on the change 
process. p. 261
8-2 Explain how to manage resistance to change. p. 266
8-3 Describe what managers need to know about employee stress. p. 268
8-4 Discuss techniques for stimulating innovation. p. 272
StreSS 
260

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    261
What Is Change and How Do Managers Deal with It?
If it weren’t for change, a manager’s 
job would be relatively easy.
When John Lechleiter assumed the CEO’s job at Eli 
Lilly, he sent each of his senior executives a clock 
 ticking down the hours, minutes, and seconds until 
the day when one of the company’s premier cash- 
generating drugs went off patent. It was a visual 
reminder of some major changes the executives had 
better be prepared for. By the end of 2016, Lilly was 
losing $10 billion in annual revenues as patents on three of its key drugs expired. Needless 
to say, the company has had to make some organizational changes as it picked up the pace 
of drug development.1 Lilly’s managers are doing what managers everywhere must do—
implement change!
Change makes a manager’s job more challenging. Without it, managing would be rela-
tively easy. Planning would be easier because tomorrow would be no different from today. 
The issue of organization design would be solved because the environment would be free 
from uncertainty and there would be no need to adapt. Similarly, decision making would be 
dramatically simplified because the outcome of each alternative could be predicted with near 
pinpoint accuracy. It would also simplify the manager’s job if competitors never introduced 
new products or services, if customers didn’t make new demands, if government regulations 
were never modified, if technology never advanced, or if employees’ needs always remained 
the same. But that’s not the way it is.
Change is an organizational reality. Most managers, at one point or another, will have 
to change some things in their workplace. We call these changes organizational change, 
which is any alteration or adaptation of an organization’s structure, technology, or people. 
(See Exhibit 8–1.) Let’s look more closely at each.
1. Changing structure: Includes any change in authority relationships, coordination mech-
anisms, degree of centralization, job design, or similar organization structure variables. 
Examples might be restructuring work units, empowering employees, decentralizing, 
widening spans of control, reducing work specialization, or creating work teams. All of 
these may involve some type of structural change.
2. Changing technology: Encompasses modifications in the way work is done or the 
 methods and equipment used. Examples might be computerizing work processes and 
procedures, adding robotics to work areas, installing energy usage monitors, equipping 
employees with mobile communication tools, implementing social media tools, or install-
ing a new computer operating system.
3. Changing people: Refers to changes in employee attitudes, expectations, perceptions, or 
behaviors. Examples might be changing employee attitudes and behaviors to better sup-
port a new customer service strategy, using team building efforts to make a team more 
innovative, or training employees to adopt a “safety-first” focus.
8-1  Define  
organizational 
change and  
compare and  
contrast views on 
the change  
process.
Structure
Authority relationships
Coordinating mechanisms
Job redesign
Spans of control
Technology
Work processes
Work methods
Equipment
People
Attitudes
Expectations
Perceptions
Behavior
Exhibit 8–1 Categories of Organizational Change
organizational change
Any alteration of an organization’s people,  
structure, or technology

262    Part 3  •  Organizing
Why Do Organizations Need to Change?
In Chapter 2 we pointed out that both external and internal forces constrain managers. These 
same forces also bring about the need for change. Let’s briefly review these factors.
What ExtErnal ForcEs crEatE a nEEd to changE? The external forces that 
create the need for organizational change come from various sources. In recent years, 
the marketplace has affected firms such as AT&T and Lowe’s because of new competi-
tion. AT&T, for example, faces competition from local cable companies and from Internet 
 services such as Hulu and Skype. Lowe’s, too, must now contend with a host of aggressive 
competitors such as Home Depot and Menard’s. Government laws and regulations are 
also an impetus for change. For example, when the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act was signed into law, thousands of businesses were faced with decisions on how best 
to offer employees health insurance, revamp benefit reporting, and educate employees on 
the new provisions. Even today, organizations continue to deal with the requirements of 
improving health insurance accessibility.
Technology also creates the need for organizational change. The Internet has changed 
pretty much everything—the way we get information, how we buy products, and how we get 
our work done. Technological advancements have created significant economies of scale for 
many organizations. For instance, technology allows Scottrade to offer its clients the oppor-
tunity to make online trades without a broker. The assembly line in many industries has also 
undergone dramatic change as employers replace human labor with technologically advanced 
mechanical robots. Also, the fluctuation in labor markets forces managers to initiate changes. 
For example, the shortage of registered nurses in the United States has led many hospital 
administrators to redesign nursing jobs and to alter their rewards and benefits packages for 
nurses, as well as join forces with local universities to address the nursing shortage.
As the news headlines remind us, economic changes affect almost all organizations. For 
instance, prior to the mortgage market meltdown, low interest rates led to significant growth in 
the housing market. This growth meant more jobs, more employees hired, and significant in-
creases in sales in other businesses that supported the building industry. However, as the econ-
omy soured, it had the opposite effect on the housing industry and other industries as credit 
markets dried up and businesses found it difficult to get the capital they needed to operate.
What IntErnal ForcEs crEatE a nEEd to changE? Internal forces can also cre-
ate the need for organizational change. These internal forces tend to originate primarily 
from the internal operations of the 
organization or from the impact of 
external changes. (It’s also impor-
tant to recognize that such changes 
are a normal part of the organiza-
tional life cycle.)2
When managers redefine or 
modify an organization’s strategy, 
that action often introduces a host of 
changes. For example, Nokia bring-
ing in new equipment is an internal 
force for change. Because of this 
action, employees may face job re-
design, undergo training to operate 
the new equipment, or be required 
to establish new interaction patterns 
within their work groups. Another 
internal force for change is that the 
composition of an organization’s 
workforce changes in terms of age, 
education, gender, nationality, and 
so forth. A stable organization in 
Challenged by changed consumer 
preferences, increased competition, 
and declining revenues, McDonald’s 
has named internal manager Steve 
Easterbrook as its new CEO. As a 
change agent, Easterbrook’s goal is to 
revitalize McDonald’s “as a modern and 
progressive burger company delivering 
a contemporary customer experience.”
Hannelore Foerster/Getty Images

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    263
which managers have been in their positions for years might need to restructure jobs in 
order to retain more ambitious employees by affording them some upward mobility. The 
compensation and benefits systems might also need to be reworked to reflect the needs of 
a diverse workforce and market forces in which certain skills are in short supply. Employee 
attitudes, such as increased job dissatisfaction, may lead to increased absenteeism, resigna-
tions, and even strikes. Such events will, in turn, often lead to changes in organizational 
policies and practices.
Who Initiates Organizational Change?
Organizational changes need a catalyst.
People who act as catalysts and assume the responsibility for managing the change process 
are called change agents.3 WHO can be a change agent?
• Any manager can. We assume organizational change is initiated and carried out by a man-
ager within the organization.
• OR any nonmanager—for example, an internal staff specialist or an outside consultant 
whose expertise is in change implementation—can.
For major systemwide changes, an organization will often hire outside consultants for 
 advice and assistance. Because these consultants come from the outside, they offer an objec-
tive perspective that insiders usually lack. However, the problem is that outside consultants 
may not understand the organization’s history, culture, operating procedures, and personnel. 
They’re also prone to initiating more drastic changes than insiders—which can be either a 
benefit or a disadvantage—because they don’t have to live with the repercussions after the 
change is implemented. In contrast, internal managers who act as change agents may be 
more thoughtful (and possibly more cautious) because they must live with the consequences 
of their actions.
 Watch It 1! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled Rudi’s Bakery: Organizational Change and Development.
How Does Organizational Change Happen?
We often use two metaphors in describing the change process.4 These two metaphors repre-
sent distinctly different approaches to understanding and responding to change. Let’s take a 
closer look at each one.
1 What Is thE “calm WatErs” mEtaphor? The “calm waters” metaphor envisions 
the organization as a large ship crossing a calm sea. The ship’s captain and crew know 
 exactly where they’re going because they’ve made the trip many times before. Change 
 appears as the occasional storm, a brief distraction in an otherwise calm and predictable trip. 
Until recently, the “calm waters” metaphor dominated the thinking of practicing managers 
and academics. The prevailing model for handling change in such circumstances is best 
 illustrated in Kurt Lewin’s three-step description of the change process.5 (See Exhibit 8–2.)
According to Lewin, successful change requires unfreezing the status quo, changing to a 
new state, and freezing the new change to make it permanent. The status quo can be consid-
ered an equilibrium state. Unfreezing is necessary to move from this equilibrium. It can be 
achieved in one of three ways:
• Increase the driving forces, which direct behavior away from the status quo.
• Decrease the restraining forces, which hinder movement from the existing equilibrium.
• Do both.
change agents
People who act as change catalysts and assume the 
responsibility for managing the change process
“calm waters” metaphor
A description of organizational change that likens 
that change to a large ship making a predictable 
trip across a calm sea and experiencing an  
occasional storm

264    Part 3  •  Organizing
Once the situation has been “unfrozen,” the change itself can be implemented. However, 
just introducing change doesn’t mean it’s going to take hold. The new situation needs to be 
 “frozen” so that it can be sustained over time. Unless this last step is done, the change is likely 
to be short-lived, with employees reverting to the previous equilibrium state. The objective, 
then, is to freeze at the new equilibrium state and stabilize the new situation by balancing the 
driving and restraining forces. (Read more about Lewin and his organizational research in the 
From the Past to the Present box.)
Note how Lewin’s three-step process treats change as a break in the organization’s equi-
librium state.6 The status quo has been disturbed, and change is necessary to establish a new 
equilibrium state. Although this view might have been appropriate to the relatively calm envi-
ronment faced by most organizations during the twentieth century, it’s increasingly obsolete 
as a description of the kinds of “seas” that current managers have to navigate.
Unfreezing
Changing
Refreezing
Exhibit 8–2 The Three-Step Change Process
Who Is Kurt Lewin?
• German-American psychologist, known for his research 
on group dynamics
• Often called the father of modern social psychology (an 
academic field of study that uses scientific methods to 
“understand and explain how the 
thought, feeling, and behavior of 
individuals are influenced by the 
actual,  imagined, or implied pres-
ence of other human beings”)7
What Did He Do?
• Described group behavior as an 
intricate set of symbolic interac-
tions and forces that affect group 
structure and also modify indi-
vidual behavior.
• One particular study that looked at modifying family food 
habits during World War II provided new and important 
insights into how best to introduce change.
Major Lessons from His Work:
• Change is more easily introduced through group decision 
making than through lectures and individual appeals
• Change is more readily accepted when people feel they 
have an opportunity to be involved in the change rather 
than being simply asked or told to change
• Use force field analysis to look at the factors (forces) that 
influence a change situation
 
—  Forces either drive or block move-
ment toward a goal
 
—  Make change work and overcome 
resistance by  increasing the driv-
ing forces, decreasing the block-
ing forces, or doing both
If your professor has assigned this, 
go to the Assignments section of 
 mymanagementlab.com to com-
plete these  discussion questions.
  Talk About It 1: Explain force field analysis and how it 
can be used in organizational change.
  Talk About It 2: What advice do you see in this informa-
tion about Lewin’s ideas that managers might use?
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
Lewin’s ideas have 
helped us better  
understand  
organIzatIonal 
changE.

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    265
2 What Is thE “WhItE-WatEr rapIds” mEtaphor? As former chair of Nielsen 
Media Research (the company best known for its TV ratings, which are frequently used to 
determine how much advertisers pay for TV commercials), Susan Whiting had to tackle 
significant industry changes. Video-on-demand services, streaming technologies, smart-
phones, tablet computers, and other changing technologies have made data collection much 
more challenging for the media research business. Here’s what she had to say about the 
business environment: “If you look at a typical week I have, it’s a combination of trying to 
lead a company in change in an industry in change.”8 That’s a pretty accurate description 
of what change is like in our second change metaphor—white-water rapids. It’s also con-
sistent with a world that’s increasingly dominated by information, ideas, and knowledge.9
In the “white-water rapids” metaphor, the organization is seen as a small raft navigating 
a raging river with uninterrupted white-water rapids. Aboard the raft are half a dozen people 
who have never worked together before, who are totally unfamiliar with the river, who are 
unsure of their eventual destination, and who, as if things weren’t bad enough, are traveling at 
night. In the white-water rapids metaphor, change is the status quo and managing change is a 
continual process.
To get a feeling of what managing change might be like in a white-water rapids environ-
ment, consider attending a college that had the following rules: Courses vary in length. When 
you sign up, you don’t know how long a course will run; it might go for 2 weeks or 30 weeks. 
Furthermore, the instructor can end a course at any time with no prior warning. If that isn’t 
challenging enough, the length of the class changes each time it meets: Sometimes the class 
lasts 20 minutes; other times it runs for 3 hours. And the time of the next class meeting is set 
by the instructor during this class. There’s one more thing. All exams are unannounced, so 
you have to be ready for a test at any time. To succeed in this type of environment, you’d have 
to respond quickly to changing conditions. Students who were overly structured or uncom-
fortable with change wouldn’t succeed.
doEs EvEry managEr FacE a World oF constant and chaotIc changE?  
Well, not every manager, but it is becoming more the norm. The stability and predict-
ability of the calm waters metaphor don’t exist. Disruptions in the status quo are not 
 occasional and temporary, and they’re not followed by a return to calm waters. Many 
managers never get out of the rapids. Like Susan Whiting, just described, they face 
constant forces in the environment (external and internal) that bring about the need for 
planned organizational change.
Most organizational changes don’t happen by chance.
hoW do organIzatIons ImplEmEnt 
plannEd changEs? At the Wyndham 
Peachtree Conference Center in Georgia, busi-
nesses bring groups of employees to try their 
hand at the ancient Chinese water sport of 
dragon boat racing. Although the physical 
exercise is an added benefit, it’s the team-
building exercise in which participants learn 
about communication, collaboration, and com-
mitment that’s meant to be the longest-lasting 
benefit.10
Most organizational changes don’t happen 
by chance. Often managers make a concerted 
effort to alter some aspect of the organiza-
tion. Whatever happens—especially in terms 
of structure or technology—ultimately affects 
the organization’s people. Efforts to assist orga-
nizational members with a planned change are 
referred to as organization development (OD).
As president and CEO of DeNA Company,  
a Japanese Internet firm, Isao Moriyasu  
manages in a white-water rapids  
environment where change is the status quo 
and managing change is a continual process. 
Moriyasu is rapidly acquiring firms and  
developing new services as DeNA expands 
from its base in Japan to countries worldwide.
Kiyoshi Ota/Bloomberg/Getty Images
“white-water rapids”  
metaphor
A description of organizational change that likens 
that change to a small raft navigating a raging river
organization development 
(OD)
Efforts that assist organizational members with  
a planned change by focusing on their attitudes 
and values

266    Part 3  •  Organizing
In facilitating long-term, organization-wide changes, managers use OD to constructively 
change the attitudes and values of organization members so they can more readily adapt to 
and be more effective in achieving the new directions of the organization.11 When OD efforts 
are planned, organization leaders are, in essence, attempting to change the organization’s 
culture.12 However, a fundamental issue of OD is its reliance on employee participation to 
foster an environment in which open communication and trust exist.13 Persons involved in 
OD efforts acknowledge that change can create stress for employees. Therefore, OD attempts 
to involve organizational members in changes that will affect their jobs and seeks their input 
about how the change is affecting them (just as Lewin suggested).
Any organizational activity that assists with implementing planned change can be 
viewed as an OD technique. The more popular OD efforts in organizations rely heavily on 
group interactions and cooperation and include:
1. Survey feedback. Employees are asked their attitudes about and perceptions of the 
change they’re encountering. Employees are generally asked to respond to a set of spe-
cific questions regarding how they view such organizational aspects as decision making, 
leadership, communication effectiveness, and satisfaction with their jobs, coworkers, and 
management.14 The data that a change agent obtains are used to clarify problems that 
employees may be facing. As a result of this information, the change agent takes some 
action to remedy the problems.
2. Process consultation. Outside consultants help managers perceive, understand, and act 
on organizational processes they’re facing.15 These elements might include, for exam-
ple, workflow, informal relationships among unit members, and formal communications 
channels. Consultants give managers insight into what is going on. It’s important to rec-
ognize that consultants are not there to solve these problems. Rather, they act as coaches 
to help managers diagnose the interpersonal processes that need improvement. If manag-
ers, with the consultants’ help, cannot solve the problem, the consultants will often help 
managers find experts who can.
3. Team-building. In organizations made up of individuals working together to achieve 
goals, OD helps them become a team. How? By helping them set goals, develop positive 
interpersonal relationships, and clarify the roles and responsibilities of each team mem-
ber. It’s not always necessary to address each area because the group may be in agree-
ment and understand what’s expected. The primary focus of team-building is to increase 
members’ trust and openness toward one another.16
4. Intergroup development. Different groups focus on becoming more cohesive. That is, 
intergroup development attempts to change attitudes, stereotypes, and perceptions that 
one group may have toward another group. The goal? Better coordination among the 
various groups.
How Do Managers Manage Resistance to Change?
We know that it’s better for us to eat healthy and to be physically active, yet few of us 
 actually follow that advice consistently and continually. We resist making lifestyle changes. 
Volkswagen Sweden and ad agency DDB Stockholm did an experiment to see if they could 
get people to change their behavior and take the healthier option of using the stairs instead 
of riding an escalator.17 How? They put a working piano keyboard on stairs in a Stockholm 
subway station (you can see a video of it on YouTube) to see if commuters would use it. The 
experiment was a resounding success as stair traffic rose 66 percent. The lesson: People can 
change if you make the change appealing!
Managers should be motivated to initiate change because they’re concerned with improv-
ing their organization’s effectiveness. But change isn’t easy in any organization. It can be 
 disruptive and scary. And people and organizations can build up inertia and not want to change.
People resist change even if it might be beneficial!
8-2  Explain how  
to manage  
resistance  
to change.
survey feedback
A method of assessing employees’ attitudes toward 
and perceptions of a change
process consultation
Using outside consultants to assess organizational 
processes such as workflow, informal intra-unit 
relationships, and formal communication channels
team-building
Using activities to help work groups set goals, 
develop positive interpersonal relationships, and 
clarify the roles and responsibilities of each team 
member
intergroup development
Activities that attempt to make several work groups 
more cohesive

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    267
Let’s look at why people in organizations resist change and what can be done to lessen that 
resistance.
Why Do People Resist Organizational Change?
It’s often said that most people hate any change that doesn’t jingle in their pockets. Resistance 
to change is well documented.18 Why do people resist organizational change? The main rea-
sons include:19
1. UNCERTAINTY. Change replaces the known with uncertainty and we don’t like uncer-
tainty. No matter how much you may dislike attending college (or certain classes), at least 
you know what’s expected of you. When you leave college for the world of full-time em-
ployment, you’ll trade the known for the unknown. Employees in organizations are faced 
with similar uncertainty. For example, when quality control methods based on statistical 
models are introduced into manufacturing plants, many quality control inspectors have to 
learn the new methods. Some may fear that they’ll be unable to do so and may develop a 
negative attitude toward the change or behave poorly if required to use them.
2. HABIT. We do things out of habit. Every day when you go to school or work you prob-
ably get there the same way, if you’re like most people. We’re creatures of habit. Life 
is complex enough—we don’t want to have to consider the full range of options for the 
hundreds of decisions we make every day. To cope with this complexity, we rely on habits 
or programmed responses. But when confronted with change, our tendency to respond in 
our accustomed ways becomes a source of resistance.
3. CONCERN OVER PERSONAL LOSS. We fear losing something already possessed. 
Change threatens the investment you’ve already made in the status quo. The more that 
people have invested in the current system, the more they resist change. Why? They fear 
losing status, money, authority, friendships, personal convenience, or other economic 
benefits that they value. This helps explain why older workers tend to resist change more 
than younger workers, since they generally have more invested in the current system and 
more to lose by changing.
4. CHANGE IS NOT IN ORGANIzATION’S BEST INTERESTS. We believe that the 
change is incompatible with the goals and interests of the organization. For instance, an 
employee who believes that a proposed new job procedure will reduce product quality can 
be expected to resist the change. Actually, this type of resistance can be beneficial to the 
organization if expressed in a positive way.
What Are Some Techniques for Reducing Resistance  
to Organizational Change?
At an annual 401(k) enrollment meeting, the CEO of North American Tool, frustrated at his 
employees’ disinterest in maxing out their investments, brought in a big bag, unzipped it, 
and upended it over a table.20 Cash poured out—$9,832 to be exact—the amount employees 
had failed to claim the prior year. He gestured at the money and said, “This is your money. It 
should be in your pocket. Next year, do you want it on the table or in your pocket?” When the 
401(k) enrollment forms were distributed, several individuals signed up. Sometimes to get 
people to change, you first have to get their attention.
When managers see resistance to change as dysfunctional, what can they do? Several 
strategies have been suggested in dealing with resistance to change. These approaches 
 include education and communication, participation, facilitation and support, negotiation, 
manipulation and co-optation, and coercion. These tactics are summarized here and described 
in Exhibit 8–4. Managers should view these techniques as tools and use the most appropriate 
one depending on the type and source of the resistance.
• Education and communication can help reduce resistance to change by helping  employees 
see the logic of the change effort. This technique, of course, assumes that much of the 
 resistance lies in misinformation or poor communication.
(list continues on p. 272)

What reaction Do employees  
Have to Organizational Change?
8-3   Describe what managers need  
to know about employee stress.
Change often creates stress for employees!
employee Stress Levels in Six Major economies21
 United Kingdom
35% of employees
 Brazil
34% of employees
 Germany
33% of employees
 United States
32% of employees
 GLOBAL AVERAGE
29% of employees
 China
17% of employees
 India
17% of employees
What Is Stress?
1
• Stress—response to anxiety over intense demands, constraints, or  
opportunities.22, 23
• Not always bad; can be positive, especially when there’s potential gain.
 
— Functional stress—allows a person to perform at his or her highest level at crucial times.
• Often associated with constraints (an obstacle that prevents you from doing what 
you desire), demands (the loss of something desired), and opportunities (the  
possibility of something new, something never done).
 
Examples: Taking a test or having your annual work performance review.
• Although conditions may be right for stress to  
surface that doesn’t mean it will.
stress
Response to anxiety over intense demands, constraints, or  
opportunities
Yuri Arcurs/Alamy
268

269
For potential stress to become actual stress: • there is 
uncertainty over the outcome • the outcome is important.
What Are the Symptoms of Stress?
Exhibit 8–3 Symptoms of Stress
SYMPTOMS
OF 
STRESS
Job-related dissatisfaction,
tension, anxiety, irritability,
boredom, and
procrastination.
Changes in productivity, absenteeism, job
turnover, changes in eating habits, increased
smoking or consumption of alcohol, rapid
speech, ﬁdgeting, and sleep disorders.
Changes in metabolism,
increased heart and
breathing rates, raised
blood pressure, headaches,
and potential of heart
attacks.
Physical
Behavioral
Psychological
Too much stress can also have tragic consequences. In Japan, there’s a 
stress phenomenon called karoshi (pronounced kah-roe-she), which is 
translated as death from overwork.
What Causes Stress? Stressors
  
Job-related factors:
• Examples: Pressures to avoid errors or complete tasks 
in a limited time period; changes in the way reports are 
filed; a demanding supervisor; unpleasant coworkers 52%
of employees say: 
Colleagues are a 
stressful part of 
their jobs.24
1 
task demands: Stress due to an employee’s job—job design (autonomy, task 
variety, degree of automation); working conditions (temperature, noise, etc.); 
physical work layout (overcrowded or in visible location with constant interrup-
tions; work quotas, especially when excessive;25 high level of task interdepen-
dence with others. (FYI: Autonomy lessens stress.)
2 
role demands: Stress due to employee’s particular role.
 ▪
role conflicts: expectations that may be hard to reconcile or satisfy.
 ▪
role overload: created when employee is expected to do more than time permits.
 ▪
role ambiguity: created when role expectations are not clearly  
understood–employee not sure what he or she is to do.
karoshi
A Japanese term that refers to a sudden death 
caused by overworking
role conflicts
Work expectations that are hard to satisfy
role overload
Having more work to accomplish than time permits
role ambiguity
When role expectations are not clearly understood
stressors
Factors that cause stress
2

270
3 Interpersonal demands: Stress due to other employees—little or no social support from colleagues; poor interpersonal 
relationships.
4 Organization structure: Stress due to excessive rules; no opportunity to participate in decisions that affect an employee.
5 Organizational leadership: Stress due to managers’ supervisory style in a culture of tension, fear, anxiety, unrealistic 
pressures to perform in the short run, excessively tight controls, and routine firing of employees who don’t measure up.
Personal factors: 
Life demands, constraints, opportunities of any kind
1  
Family issues, personal  
economic problems, and  
so forth.
• Can’t just ignore! Managers 
need to be understanding of 
these personal factors.26 2
employees’ personalities 
—type A or type B.
• type A personality—chronic sense of 
time urgency, excessive competitive drive, 
and difficulty accepting and enjoying lei-
sure time; more likely to shows symptoms 
of stress.
• type B personality—little to no sense of 
time urgency or impatience.
• Stress comes from the hostility and anger 
associated with Type A behavior. Surpris-
ingly, Type Bs are just as susceptible.
A Question of Ethics
One in five companies offers some form of stress manage-
ment program.27 Although such programs are available, many 
employees may choose not to participate. They may be reluc-
tant to ask for help, especially if a major source of that stress 
is job insecurity. After all, there’s still a stigma associated 
with stress. Employees don’t want to be perceived as being 
unable to handle the demands of their job. Although they may 
need stress management now more than ever, few employees 
want to admit that they’re stressed.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments  
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these 
 discussion questions.
    Talk About It 3: What can be done about this paradox?
    Talk About It 4: Do organizations even have an ethi-
cal responsibility to help employees deal with stress?
Beyond Fotomedia GmbH/Alamy
Type A personality
People who have a chronic sense of urgency and an excessive 
competitive drive
Type B personality
People who are relaxed and easygoing and accept change  
easily

271
1bestofphoto/Alamy
How Can Stress Be reduced?
1 
General guidelines:
• Not all stress is dysfunctional.
• Stress can never be totally eliminated!
• Reduce dysfunctional stress by controlling job-related factors  
and offering help for personal stress.
2 
Job-related factors:
• employee selection—provide a realistic job preview and make  
sure an employee’s abilities match the job requirements.
• On-the-job—improve organizational communications to  
minimize ambiguity; use a performance planning program such as MBO to clarify job 
responsibilities, provide clear performance goals, and reduce ambiguity through feed-
back; redesign job, if possible, especially if stress can be traced to boredom (increase 
challenge) or to work overload (reduce the workload); allow employees to participate 
in decisions and to gain social support, which also lessen stress.28
3 
Personal factors:
• Not easy for manager to control directly
• Ethical considerations
Does a manager have the right to intrude— 
even subtly—in an employee’s personal life?
• If the manager believes it’s ethical and the employee is receptive, consider  
employee assistance and wellness  
programs,29 which are designed to assist  
employees in areas where they might be  
having difficulties (financial planning, legal 
matters, health, fitness, or stress).30
 ▪
employee assistance programs (eAPs)31—
the rationale is to get a productive employee back 
on the job as quickly as possible.
 ▪
Wellness programs—the rationale is to keep 
employees healthy.
Samantha Craddock/Alamy
wellness programs
Programs offered by organizations to help employees prevent 
health problems
employee assistance programs (EAPs)
Programs offered by organizations to help employees overcome 
personal and health-related problems

272    Part 3  •  Organizing
• Participation involves bringing those individuals directly affected by the proposed change 
into the decision-making process. Their participation allows these individuals to express 
their feelings, increase the quality of the process, and increase employee commitment to 
the final decision.
• Facilitation and support involve helping employees deal with the fear and anxiety  associated 
with the change effort. This help may include employee counseling, therapy, new skills 
training, or a short paid leave of absence.
• Negotiation involves exchanging something of value for an agreement to lessen the 
 resistance to the change effort. This resistance technique may be quite useful when the 
resistance comes from a powerful source.
• Manipulation and co-optation refer to covert attempts to influence others about the change. 
They may involve twisting or distorting facts to make the change appear more attractive.
• Coercion involves the use of direct threats or force against those resisting the change.
Exhibit 8–4 Techniques for Reducing Resistance to Change
teCHnIque
WHen uSeD
ADvAntAGe
DISADvAntAGe
Education and  
communication
When resistance is due  
to misinformation
Clear up misunderstandings
May not work when mutual 
trust and credibility are lacking
Participation
When resisters have  
the expertise to make  
a contribution
Increase involvement and  
acceptance
Time-consuming; has potential 
for a poor solution
Facilitation and support
When resisters are fearful  
and anxiety-ridden
Can facilitate needed  
adjustments
Expensive; no guarantee  
of success
Negotiation
When resistance comes  
from a powerful group
Can “buy” commitment
Potentially high cost; opens 
doors for others to apply  
pressure too
Manipulation  
and co-optation
When a powerful group’s  
endorsement is needed
Inexpensive, easy way  
to gain support
Can backfire, causing change 
agent to lose credibility
Coercion
When a powerful group’s  
endorsement is needed
Inexpensive, easy way  
to gain support
May be illegal; may undermine 
change agent’s credibility
  try It! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Change.
How Can Managers Encourage Innovation  
in an Organization?
“Innovation is the key to continued success.”
“We innovate today to secure the future.”
These two quotes (the first by Ajay Banga, the CEO of MasterCard, and the second by Sophie 
Vandebroek, chief technology officer of Xerox Innovation Group) reflect how  important 
innovation is to organizations.32 success in business today demands innovation. In the 
dynamic, chaotic world of global competition, organizations must create new products and 
services and adopt state-of-the-art technology if they’re going to compete successfully.33
8-4  Discuss  
techniques for 
stimulating  
innovation.

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    273
What companies come to mind 
when you think of successful innova-
tors? Maybe Apple with all its cool 
work and entertainment gadgets. 
Maybe Facebook for its 1 billion-plus 
users. Maybe Nissan for creating the 
Leaf, the first mass-market all-elec-
tric car. Or even maybe Foursquare, 
a startup that revved up the social-
local-mobile trend by having users 
“check in” at locations, unlocking 
quirky badges and special offers from 
merchants.34 What’s the secret to the 
success of these innovator champi-
ons? What can other managers do to 
make their organizations more inno-
vative? In the following pages, we’ll 
try to answer those questions as we 
discuss the factors behind innovation.
How Are Creativity  
and Innovation Related?
• Creativity refers to the ability to combine ideas in a unique way or to make unusual as-
sociations between ideas.35 A creative organization develops unique ways of working or 
novel solutions to problems. For instance, at Mattel, company officials introduced “Project 
Platypus,” a special group that brings people from all disciplines—engineering, marketing, 
design, and sales—and tries to get them to “think outside the box” in order to “understand 
the sociology and psychology behind children’s play patterns.” To help make this kind 
of thinking happen, team members embarked on such activities as imagination exercises, 
group crying, and stuffed-bunny throwing. What does throwing stuffed bunnies have to do 
with creativity? It’s part of a juggling lesson where team members tried to learn to juggle 
two balls and a stuffed bunny. Most people can easily learn to juggle two balls but can’t let 
go of that third object. Creativity, like juggling, is learning to let go—that is, to “throw the 
bunny.”36 Creativity by itself isn’t enough, though.
• The outcomes of the creative process need to be turned into useful products or work meth-
ods, which is defined as innovation. Thus, the innovative organization is characterized by 
its ability to channel creativity into useful outcomes. When managers talk about changing 
an organization to make it more creative, they usually mean they want to stimulate and 
nurture innovation.
What’s Involved in Innovation?
Some people believe that creativity is inborn; others believe that with training, anyone can be 
creative. The latter group views creativity as a fourfold process.37
1. Perception involves the way you see things. Being creative means seeing things from a 
unique perspective. One person may see solutions to a problem that others cannot or will 
not see at all. The movement from perception to reality, however, doesn’t occur instan-
taneously.
2. Instead, ideas go through a process of incubation. Sometimes employees need to sit on 
their ideas, which doesn’t mean sitting and doing nothing. Rather, during this incubation 
period, employees should collect massive amounts of data that are stored, retrieved, stud-
ied, reshaped, and finally molded into something new. During this period, it’s common 
for years to pass. Think for a moment about a time you struggled for an answer on a test. 
Although you tried hard to jog your memory, nothing worked. Then suddenly, like a flash 
of light, the answer popped into your head. You found it!
Entrepreneur Nick Woodman channeled his 
creativity into a useful product. As founder 
of GoPro, Inc., Woodman designed a compact 
wearable camera that surfers, skydivers, 
and other sports enthusiasts can use to 
take high-quality photographs and videos. 
Woodman is shown here taking a photo of 
students with his wrist-strap GoPro during  
a college alumni event.
K.C. Alfred/U-T San Diego/ZUMAPRESS/Alamy
creativity
The ability to produce novel and useful ideas
innovation
The process of taking a creative idea and turning  
it into a useful product, service, or method  
of operation

274    Part 3  •  Organizing
3. Inspiration in the creative process is similar. Inspiration is the moment when all your 
efforts successfully come together. Although inspiration leads to euphoria, the creative 
work isn’t complete. It requires an innovative effort.
4. Innovation involves taking that inspiration and turning it into a useful product, service, 
or way of doing things. Thomas Edison is often credited with saying that “Creativity is 
1 percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration.” That 99 percent, or the innovation, 
involves testing, evaluating, and retesting what the inspiration found. It’s usually at this 
stage that an individual involves others more in what he or she has been working on. Such 
involvement is critical because even the greatest invention may be delayed, or lost, if an 
individual cannot effectively deal with others in communicating and achieving what the 
creative idea is supposed to do.
How Can a Manager Foster Innovation?
The systems model (inputs S transformation process S outputs) can help us understand 
how organizations become more innovative.39 If an organization wants innovative prod-
ucts and work methods (outputs), it has to take its inputs and transform them into those 
outputs. Those inputs include creative people and groups within the organization. But as 
we said earlier, having creative people isn’t enough. The transformation process  requires 
having the right environment to turn those inputs into innovative products or work 
 methods. This “right”  environment—that is, an environment that stimulates  innovation—
includes three variables: the organization’s structure, culture, and human resource 
 practices. (See Exhibit 8–5.)
When employees are busy doing their regular job tasks, how can in-
novation ever flourish? When job performance is evaluated by what 
you get done, how you get it done, and when you get it done, how 
can innovation ever happen? This has been a real challenge facing 
organizations wanting to be more innovative. One solution has been 
to give employees mandated time to experiment with their own 
ideas on company-related projects.38 For instance, Google has its 
“20% Time” initiative, which encourages employees to spend 20 per-
cent of their time at work on projects not related to their job descrip-
tions. Other companies—Facebook, Apple, LinkedIn, 3M, Hewlett-
Packard, among others—have similar  initiatives. Hmmm . . . so having 
essentially one day a week to work on company-related ideas you 
have almost seems too good to be true. But, more importantly, does 
it really spark innovation? Well, it can. At Google, it led to the auto-
complete system, Google News, Gmail, and Adsense. However, such 
“company” initiatives do face  tremendous obstacles, despite how 
good they sound on paper. These challenges include:
• Strict employee monitoring in terms of time and resources 
 leading to a reluctance to use this time since most employees 
have enough to do just keeping up with their regular tasks.
• When bonuses/incentives are based on goals achieved, employ-
ees soon figure out what to spend their time on.
• What happens to the ideas that employees do have?
• Unsupportive managers and coworkers who may view this as a 
“goof-around-for-free-day.”
• Obstacles in the corporate bureaucracy.
So, how can companies make it work? Suggestions include: top 
managers need to support the initiatives/projects and make that 
support known; managers need to support employees who have 
that personal passion and drive, that creative spark—clear a path 
for them to pursue their ideas; perhaps allow employees more of 
an incentive to innovate (rights to design, etc.); and last, but not 
least, don’t institutionalize it. Creativity and innovation, by their very 
 nature, involve risk and reward. Give creative individuals the space 
to try and to fail and to try and to fail as needed.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments sec-
tion of mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion 
questions.
  tALk ABOut It 5: What benefits do you see with such man-
dated experiment time for (a) organizations? (b) individuals?
  tALk ABOut It 6: What obstacles do these initiatives face and 
how can managers overcome those obstacles?
HElPINg INNOvATION FlOuRISH
:::::::  Technology and the Manager’s Job  :::::::

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    275
hoW do structural varIablEs aFFEct InnovatIon? Research into the effect of 
structural variables on innovation shows five things.40
1. An organic-type structure positively influences innovation. Because this structure is low 
in formalization, centralization, and work specialization, it facilitates the flexibility and 
sharing of ideas that are critical to innovation.
2. The availability of plentiful resources provides a key building block for innovation. With 
an abundance of resources, managers can afford to purchase innovations, can afford the 
cost of instituting innovations, and can absorb failures.
3. Frequent communication between organizational units helps break down barriers 
to  innovation.41 Cross-functional teams, task forces, and other such organizational 
 designs facilitate interaction across departmental lines and are widely used in innovative 
 organizations.
4. Extreme time pressures on creative activities are minimized despite the demands of 
white-water-rapids-type environments. Although time pressures may spur people to work 
harder and may make them feel more creative, studies show that it actually causes them 
to be less creative.42
5. When an organization’s structure explicitly supports creativity, employees’ creative 
 performance can be enhanced. Beneficial kinds of support include encouragement, open 
communication, readiness to listen, and useful feedback.43
hoW doEs an organIzatIon’s culturE aFFEct InnovatIon? Innovative 
 organizations tend to have similar cultures.44 They encourage experimentation; reward both 
STIMULATE
INNOVATION
Structural Variables
• Organic structures
• Abundant resources
• High interunit
 communication
• Minimal time pressure
• Work and nonwork support
Human Resource Variables
• High commitment to 
 training and development
• High job security
• Creative people
Cultural Variables
• Acceptance of ambiguity
• Tolerance of the impractical
• Low external controls
• Tolerance of risks
• Tolerance of conﬂict
• Focus on ends
• Open-system focus
• Positive feedback
Exhibit 8–5 Innovation variables
 Watch It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Innovation.

276    Part 3  •  Organizing
successes and failures; and celebrate mistakes. An innovative organization is likely to have 
the following characteristics.
• Accepts ambiguity. Too much emphasis on objectivity and specificity constrains creativity.
• Tolerates the impractical. Individuals who offer impractical, even foolish, answers to what-if 
questions are not stifled. What at first seems impractical might lead to innovative solutions.
• Keeps external controls minimal. Rules, regulations, policies, and similar organizational 
controls are kept to a minimum.
• Tolerates risk. Employees are encouraged to experiment without fear of consequences 
should they fail. Mistakes are treated as learning opportunities.
• Tolerates conflict. Diversity of opinions is encouraged. Harmony and agreement between 
individuals or units are not assumed to be evidence of high performance.
• Focuses on ends rather than means. Goals are made clear, and individuals are encouraged 
to consider alternative routes toward meeting the goals. Focusing on ends suggests that 
there might be several right answers to any given problem.
• Uses an open-system focus. Managers closely monitor the environment and respond to 
changes as they occur. For example, at Starbucks, product development depends on 
 “inspiration field trips to view customers and trends.” When Michelle Gass (now Kohl’s 
Corporation’s chief customer officer) was in charge of Starbucks marketing, she had her 
team travel to several trendy global cities to visit local Starbucks and other dining estab-
lishments to “get a better sense of local cultures, behaviors, and fashions.”45 Her rationale? 
Seeing and experiencing firsthand different ideas and different ways to think about things 
can be so much more valuable than reading about them.
• Provides positive feedback. Managers provide positive feedback, encouragement, and 
 support so employees feel that their creative ideas receive attention. For instance, Mike 
Lazaridis, co-founder of Blackberry maker Research in Motion, said “I think we have a 
culture of innovation here, and [engineers] have absolute access to me. I live a life that tries 
to promote innovation.”46
What human rEsourcE varIablEs aFFEct InnovatIon? In this category, we 
find that innovative organizations (1) actively promote the training and development of 
their members so their knowledge remains current, (2) offer their employees high job 
security to reduce the fear of getting fired for making mistakes, and (3) encourage indi-
viduals to  become idea  champions, 
actively and enthusiastically sup-
porting new ideas, building sup-
port, overcoming resistance, and 
ensuring that innovations are imple-
mented. Research finds that idea 
champions have common personal-
ity characteristics: extremely high 
 self-confidence, persistence, energy, 
and a tendency toward risk taking. 
They also  display characteristics 
 associated with dynamic leadership. 
They inspire and energize others 
with their vision of the potential 
of an innovation and through their 
strong personal conviction in their 
mission. They’re also good at gain-
ing the commitment of others to 
support their mission. In addition, 
idea champions have jobs that pro-
vide considerable decision-making 
discretion. This autonomy helps 
them introduce and implement 
 innovations in organizations.47
Netflix founder and CEO Reed Hastings has 
created a culture of innovation that encour-
ages employees to become idea champions. 
Netflix gives employees the freedom to come 
up with new ideas and the responsibility to 
implement them by engaging employees from 
different departments and by forming groups 
to “socialize” their ideas.
Robin Utrecht/ABACAPRESS/Newscom
idea champions
Individuals who actively and enthusiastically 
support new ideas, build support for, overcome 
resistance to, and ensure that innovations are 
implemented

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    277
How Does Design Thinking Influence Innovation?
We introduced you to the concept of design thinking in a previous chapter. Well, undoubtedly, 
there’s a strong connection between design thinking and innovation. “Design thinking can do 
for innovation what TQM did for quality.”48 Just as TQM provides a process for improving 
quality throughout an organization, design thinking can provide a process for coming up with 
things that don’t exist. When a business approaches innovation with a design thinking men-
tality, the emphasis is on getting a deeper understanding of what customers need and want. 
It entails knowing customers as real people with real problems—not just as sales targets or 
 demographic statistics. But it also entails being able to convert those customer insights into 
real and usable products. For instance, at Intuit, the company behind TurboTax software, 
founder Scott Cook felt the company was “lagging behind in innovation.”49 So he decided to 
apply design thinking. He called the initiative “Design for Delight,” and it involved customer 
field research to understand their “pain points”—that is, what most frustrated them as they 
worked in the office and at home. Then, Intuit staffers brainstormed (they nicknamed it “pain-
storm”) a wide array of possible ideas to address customer problems, which they would then 
try out with customers to find ones that worked best. For example, one pain point uncovered 
by an Intuit team was how customers could take pictures of tax forms to reduce typing errors. 
Some younger customers, used to taking photos with their smartphones, were frustrated that 
they couldn’t just complete their taxes on their mobiles. To address this, Intuit developed a 
mobile app called SnapTax, which the company says has been downloaded more than a mil-
lion times since it was introduced in 2010. That’s how design thinking works in innovation.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.

8 Review 
278
CHAPTER SUMMARY
DISCuSSIOn queStIOnS
 8-1 Why is managing change an integral part of every 
 manager’s job?
 8-2 Contrast the calm waters and white-water rapids meta-
phors of change. Which of these would you use to de-
scribe your current life? Why is that one your choice?
 8-3 Describe Lewin’s three-step change process. How 
is it different from the change process needed in the 
 white-water rapids metaphor of change?
 8-4 How are opportunities, constraints, and demands related 
to stress? Give an example of each.
 8-5 Organizations typically have limits to how much change 
they can absorb. As a manager, what signs would you 
look for that might suggest your organization has 
 exceeded its capacity to change?
 8-6 Every manager deals with change. Provide an example 
to illustrate this point. In this context, how do middle 
managers plan organizational development?
 8-7 What can influence innovation in organizations?
 8-8 Research information on how to be a more creative 
person. Write down suggestions in a bulleted list format 
and be prepared to present your information in class.
 8-9 How does an innovative culture make an organization 
more effective? Could an innovative culture ever make 
an organization less effective? Why or why not?
  8-1 Define organizational change and compare  
and contrast views on the change process.
Organizational change is any alteration of an organization’s 
people, structure, or technology. The “calm waters” metaphor of 
change suggests that change is an occasional disruption in the nor-
mal flow of events and can be planned and managed as it happens, 
using Lewin’s three-step change process (unfreezing, changing, 
and freezing). The “white-water rapids” view of change suggests 
that change is ongoing, and managing it is a continual process.
 8-2 Explain how to manage resistance to change.
People resist change because of uncertainty, habit, concern about 
personal loss, and the belief that a change is not in the organiza-
tion’s best interests. Techniques for managing resistance to change 
include education and communication (educating employees 
about and communicating to them the need for the change), partic-
ipation (allowing employees to participate in the change process), 
facilitation and support (giving  employees the support they need 
to implement the change),  negotiation  (exchanging something of 
value to reduce resistance), manipulation and co-optation (using 
negative actions to influence),  selecting people who are open to 
and accept change, and  coercion (using direct threats or force).
  8-3 Describe what managers need to know  
about employee stress.
Stress is the adverse reaction people have to excessive  pressure 
placed on them from extraordinary demands, constraints, or 
opportunities. The symptoms of stress can be physical, psy-
chological, or behavioral. Stress can be caused by personal 
factors and by job-related factors. To help employees deal 
with stress, managers can address job-related factors by mak-
ing sure an employee’s abilities match the job requirements, 
improving organizational communications, using a perfor-
mance planning program, or redesigning jobs. Addressing 
personal stress factors is trickier, but managers could offer 
employee counseling, time management programs, and well-
ness programs.
  8-4 Discuss techniques for stimulating innovation.
Creativity is the ability to combine ideas in a unique way or to 
make unusual associations between ideas. Innovation is turn-
ing the outcomes of the creative process into useful products or 
work methods. An innovative environment encompasses struc-
tural, cultural, and human resource variables.
Important structural variables include an organic-
type structure, abundant resources, frequent communica-
tion  between organizational units, minimal time pressure, 
and support. Important cultural variables include accept-
ing  ambiguity, tolerating the impractical, keeping external 
 controls minimal, tolerating risk, tolerating conflict, focus-
ing on ends not means, using an open-system focus, and 
providing positive feedback. Important human resource vari-
ables include high commitment to training and development, 
high job security, and encouraging individuals to be idea 
champions.
Design thinking can also play a role in innovation. 
It provides a process for coming up with products that 
don’t exist.

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    279
8-10 Increased work load, 24/7 communication  access, 
 cutbacks, and work-life conflict are some of 
the  forces that increase on-the-job stress. Some 
 organizations may have noticed this problem and 
addressed by encouraging managers to reintroduce 
employee-assistance programs, realign schedules, 
and redesign jobs. Having read the chapter, explain 
whether you think that the stress reducers are enough 
to cope with dysfunctional stress that employees face 
every day.
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions.
8-11 Planned change is often thought to be the best 
 approach to take in organizations. Can unplanned 
change ever be effective? Explain.
8-12 Describe the structural, cultural, and human resources 
variables that are necessary for innovation.
8-13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
assignment for this chapter.
Management Skill Builder  |  StreSS MAnAGeMent
It’s no secret that employees, in general, are more stressed out today than previous generations. Heavier 
workloads, longer hours, continual reorganizations, technology that breaks down traditional barriers between 
work and personal life, and reduced job security are among factors that have increased employee stress. This 
stress can lead to lower productivity, increased absenteeism, reduced job satisfaction, and higher quit rates. 
When stress is excessive, managers need to know how to reduce it.
 PERSONAl INvENTORy ASSESSMENT
Controlling Workplace Stress
As our debunked Management Myth pointed out, workplace stress is a reality and managers 
can do something about it. In this PIA, you’ll assess how you control workplace stress.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
Skill Basics
Eliminating all stress at work isn’t going to happen and it 
shouldn’t. Stress is an unavoidable consequence of life. It 
also has a positive side—when it focuses concentration and 
 creativity. But when it brings about anger, frustration, fear, 
sleeplessness, and the like, it needs to be addressed.
Many organizations have introduced stress-reduction inter-
ventions for employees. These include improved employee 
selection and placement, helping employees set realistic goals, 
training in time management, redesign of jobs, increased involve-
ment of employees in decisions that affect them, expanded social 
support networks, improved organizational communications, 
and organizationally supported wellness programs. But what can 
you do, on your own, to reduce stress if your employer doesn’t 
provide such programs or if you need to take additional action? 
The following individual interventions have been suggested:
• 
Implement time-management techniques. Every person can 
improve his or her use of time. Time is a unique resource in 
that, if it’s wasted, it can never be replaced. While people 
talk about saving time, it can never actually be saved. And if 
it’s lost, it can’t be retrieved. The good news is that it’s a re-
source we all have in equal amounts. Everyone gets the same 
24 hours a day, 7 days a week to use. When tasks seem to 
exceed the hours you have available, stress often results. But 
effective management of time can reduce stress. Time-man-
agement training can, for example, teach you how to pri-
oritize tasks by importance and urgency, schedule activities 
according to those priorities, avoid confusing actions with 
accomplishments, and understand your productivity cycle so 
you can handle the most demanding tasks during the high 
part of your cycle when you are most alert and productive.
• 
Create personal goals. Goal setting is designed to help you 
better prioritize your activities and better manage how you di-
rect your efforts. Goals become, in effect, a personal planning 
tool. For instance, setting long-term goals provides general di-
rection; while short-term goals—such as weekly or daily “to 
do” lists—reduce the likelihood that important activities will 
be overlooked and help you to maximize the use of your time.

280    Part 3  •  Organizing
• 
Use physical exercise. A large body of evidence indicates 
that noncompetitive physical exercise can help you to  release 
tension that builds up in stressful situations. These activities 
include aerobics, walking, jogging, swimming, and riding 
a bicycle. Physical exercise increases heart capacity, lowers 
the at-rest heart rate, provides a mental diversion from work 
pressures, and offers a means to “let off steam.”
• 
Practice relaxation training. You can teach yourself to 
 reduce tension through meditation, deep-breathing exercis-
es, and guided imaging. They work by taking your mind off 
the sources of stress, achieving a state of deep relaxation, 
and releasing body tension.
• 
Expand your social support network. Having friends, family, 
or work colleagues to talk to provides an outlet when stress 
levels become excessive. Expanding your  social  support 
 network, therefore, can be a means for  tension reduction. It 
provides you with someone to hear your problems and to 
 offer a more objective perspective on the situation.50
Practicing the Skill
Read through this scenario and follow the directions at the end 
of it:
Dana had become frustrated in her job at Taylor Books—a 
chain of 22 bookstores in Georgia and Florida. After nearly 
13 years as director of marketing, she felt she needed new 
challenges. When she was offered the job as senior account 
supervisor for Dancer Advertising in Tampa, she jumped at the 
opportunity. Now, after four months on the job, she’s not so 
certain she made the right move.
At Taylor, she worked a basic 8-to-5 day. She was easily 
able to balance her work  responsibilities with her personal 
responsibilities as a wife and mother of two children—ages 4 
and 7. But her new job is very different. Clients call anytime—
day, night, and weekends—with demands. People in Dancer’s 
creative department are constantly asking for her input on proj-
ects. And Dana’s boss expects her not only to keep her current 
clients happy, but also to help secure new clients by preparing 
and participating in presentations and working up budgets. Last 
month alone, Dana calculated that she spent 67 hours in the 
office plus another 12 at home working on Dancer projects. 
Short on sleep, frazzled by the hectic pace, having no time for 
her family or chores, she’s lost five pounds and broken out in 
hives. Her doctor told her the hives were stress-induced and she 
needed to sort out her life.
Dana really likes her job as an account executive but feels 
the demands and pulls of the job are overwhelming. Yesterday 
she called her old boss at Taylor Books and inquired about 
coming back. His reply, “Dana, we’d love to have you back 
here but we filled your slot. We could find something for you in 
marketing but you wouldn’t be director and the pay would be at 
least a third less.”
If you were Dana, what would you do? Be specific.
Performance Pros
To: Tina Sanchez, HR Director
From: Aaron Scott, President
Subject: Employee stress management program
Well, Tina, we’ve made it through the initial phases of our 
 restructuring efforts. The changes haven’t been easy on 
any of us. But we’ve still got a long way to go, and that’s 
where I need your assistance. To help minimize the pres-
sures on our software developers and sales staff, I think we 
need to develop an employee stress management program 
that we could implement immediately. Due to finances, 
we don’t have a lot of excess funds to spend on fitness 
equipment, so you’re going to have to work within that 
constraint. Could you put together a brief (no more than 
one page) outline of what you think this program should 
 include? Also, note the benefit(s) you think each  suggestion 
would  provide. I’d like some time to review your sugges-
tions over the weekend, so please get me your report as 
soon as  possible.
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 
CASe APPLICAtIOn 
Compartmentalizing Departments: Split and Merger
S
ultan Qaboos University (SQU) is the oldest and the 
only public university in the Sultanate of Oman. Since its 
 establishment in 1986, it went through a huge expansion. 
The Student enrollment significantly grew from 500 students in 
1986 to about 18,000 students in 2015. Similarly, the university’s 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering (DEEE) 
of College of Engineering went through major expansion and 
several changes.51 
#1

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    281
CHANGE . . . For better  
utilization of resources,  
coordination, and control
The university saw an in-
crease in student enrollment 
and a need for specialization 
in the wide field of EE and 
particularly in IE, which saw 
a boom in the early 2000s. 
This motivated the university to split its departments in two—
Electrical Engineering (EE) and Information Engineering (IE). 
Faculty members belonging to telecommunication and com-
puter streams formed the faculty of the IE department while the 
EE department had only few faculty members having expertise 
in power systems and machines. While the prime objective was 
to take the first step towards establishing a school of electri-
cal and information engineering, certain influential faculty 
members acted as change agents in the university’s innovation 
process.
A year after the split, serious issues surfaced. The restruc-
tured EE department had to give a broad electrical engineering 
education to students. This should include some specializations 
such as telecommunications and signal processing, globally 
recognized as a must in such a field. The two departments 
faced problems in staff hiring and in duplication of core courses 
offered and overlapping of specializations. Therefore, a solu-
tion had to be devised and immediately implemented. Several 
scenarios were discussed in both departments to address the 
situation.
The following key options were considered—first, chang-
ing the name and the curriculum of the Electrical Engineering 
Department to Power Engineering Department; second, mov-
ing the IE staff teaching Telecommunication courses to the EE 
Department and leave the staff teaching computer courses in 
the IE department; third, hosting both IE and EE departments 
within a School as proposed initially (DEEE) before the split. 
Based on this, the Department of EE would offer a degree in 
Power Engineering only; and fourth, to merge the two depart-
ments into a single department of electrical and computer 
engineering. This would also need it to consider restructuring 
its undergraduate program into several specialization tracks, 
such as communications and 
signal processing, computer 
systems and networks, power 
systems and energy, and elec-
tronics instrumentation and 
control.
The advantages and disadvantages of all options were 
discussed. The faculty and staff of both IE and EE supported 
the merger on the basis that it would provide a broader edu-
cation, focusing on different areas of electrical and computer 
engineering. The approach was innovative in streamlin-
ing the courses and ensuring that specialized content and 
instructions were delivered as and when applicable. An 
external examiner of the EE and IE departments also recom-
mended the merger.
The college sought the opinions of experts in the respec-
tive fields, who approved both the merger initiative and the 
proposed new structure. Their views and recommendations 
were considered in preparing the merger proposal. The restruc-
ture was approved by the College Board, University Academic 
Council, and the University Council in 2002. The official 
merger commenced during 2003, leading to the formation 
of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
(DECE).
After the transitional periods, the formation of the DECE 
proved to be a sound decision, showing promising stability and a 
vision aligned to the country’s growth. 
Discussion Questions
8-14 What factors would highlight the need to revise or majorly 
 restructure a department or organization?
8-15 The case mentioned that there were some motivation of change 
agents too in this split and the creation of a School. In your 
view, what do you think could have been the internal factors 
that motivated the change agents?
8-16 Why do you think the third option was rejected?
8-17 In your opinion, why do you think the fourth option was 
 implemented?
CASe APPLICAtIOn #2
H
ave you heard of Avon products? Have you purchased 
Avon products? We’re guessing that you’ve likely 
heard of Avon, but not as likely to have purchased any 
Avon products, especially if you’re young and you live in North 
America.52
Making Over Avon
As the world’s top direct seller of cosmetics and beauty-
related items, Avon Products has built a global brand and a 
portfolio of products that are marketed primarily through 
direct selling. Despite being based in the United States, the 
company’s North American revenues have continued to 

282    Part 3  •  Organizing
Poor performance  
forces change
CASe APPLICAtIOn 
Stress Kills
W
e know that too much stress can be bad for our health 
and well-being. That connection proved itself pain-
fully and tragically at France Télécom.53 Over the 
last seven years, there have been more than 50 suicides of people 
who worked for the company. The situation captured the attention 
of the worldwide media, the public, and the French government 
 because many of the suicides and more than a dozen failed suicide 
attempts were attributed to work-related problems. The masks 
worn by these protesting Telecom employees say “Lombard has 
killed me.” Didier Lombard was the chairman of the board and 
#3
decline. Currently, 86 percent 
of Avon’s sales come from 
other global regions. The com-
pany’s CEO is looking at what 
organizational changes need to 
be made to address the performance problems.
Avon, founded in 1886 (yes, you read that right!), has been 
quite successful, up until the last five years. It was a company 
that got its start by recruiting women as door-to-door sellers 
of perfume and branching out from there. Today, there are 
some 6 million active sales representatives in 60 countries or 
territories around the world. Brazil is the company’s biggest 
market. However, as the industry has changed, as competitors 
have become more aggressive, and as technology has drasti-
cally changed the sales model, Avon has been struggling. One 
sticky problem the company dealt with was an expensive brib-
ery probe centered on the company’s Chinese operations. The 
company voluntarily reported itself in 2008 to the Securities 
and Exchange Commission and the U.S. Justice Department. 
It took some six years for Avon to finally resolve the investiga-
tion into payments and gifts provided to government officials 
in China, and in late 2014 Avon agreed to pay $135 million in 
fines and civil penalties related to violating the Foreign Corrupt 
Practices Act. Another problem concerned the global rollout 
of a sophisticated order management system that had been in 
the works since 2009. Avon had initiated a massive software 
upgrade that would make tracking orders and compensation 
easier for its reps. However, the program was scrapped in 2013 
after a trial rollout in Canada. A filing with the SEC said that 
the pilot program caused “a significant business disruption in 
that market, and did not show a clear return on investment.” 
The issue: the technology worked, but it was so hard for 
Avon’s salespeople to use that many reps left the company. 
Although Avon finally completed the first major overhaul of 
its Web site in 10 years, it now finds itself competing against 
more nimble e-commerce competitors such as Birchbox, Cult 
Beauty, Bliss, Doobop, and 
even Chanel and Clinique. On 
top of struggling to compete 
in online sales and lacking a 
cohesive social media strategy, 
Avon is being pummeled by other industry giants including 
L’Oreal, Unilever, and Coty, all of whom have increased their 
efforts to hold on to market share domestically and have made 
new forays into profitable developing markets where Avon has 
long had its strongest sales.
Changing an organization involves looking at external 
market conditions as well as the internal aspects. Avon’s CEO, 
Sherilyn McCoy, who was brought on board from Johnson & 
Johnson in 2012, has been struggling to find the keys to a suc-
cessful turnaround. Her attempts to shape up things at Avon 
have revolved around overhauling the company’s top manage-
ment through firings, hirings, and reassignments; address-
ing declining sales, especially in the North American market 
through expanding the range of products sold (think colorful 
vegetable peelers) and getting more sales representatives into 
the system quickly; and trying to pinpoint who and what Avon 
wants to be.
The world has changed. Now Avon has to try to find the 
right combination of people, products, and technology to once 
again prosper.
Discussion Questions
8-18 What external forces for change do you see described in this 
case? Would you describe Avon’s environment as more “calm 
waters” or “white-water rapids?” Explain.
8-19 Why would it be important for the CEO to look at those external 
forces when planning organizational change?
8-20 Why might it be difficult to change a company that’s over 
130 years old?
8-21 Avon is truly a global company. How might this affect the CEO’s 
efforts to implement organizational change?

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    283
Change S Stress S Serious 
Effects
chief executive officer of France 
Télécom when the suicides took 
place. Although France has a 
higher suicide rate than any 
other large Western country, this 
scenario was particularly troublesome. The spate of suicides high-
lighted a quirk at the heart of French society: “Even with robust 
labor protection, workers see themselves as profoundly insecure 
in the face of globalization, with many complaining about being 
pushed beyond their limits.” France isn’t the only country dealing 
with worker suicides. Workplace conditions at China’s Foxconn, 
the world’s largest maker of electronic components (including the 
iPhone, iPod, and iPad), were strongly criticized after 11 Foxconn 
employees committed suicide.
Here is what recent surveys are telling us about employee 
stress:
• 75 percent of Americans say their stress levels are high or 
moderate.
• 44 percent of Americans say their stress levels have gone up 
in the last five years.
• 81 percent of HR managers say that employee fatigue is a 
bigger problem than in past years.
• More than 50 percent of U.S. and Canadian workers say that 
they feel fatigued at the end of a workday. At least 40 percent 
of those workers say that their jobs made them depressed.
• 20 percent of UK workers say they have taken sick leave 
brought on by stress, but 90 percent have lied about the real 
reason for staying home.
• 30 percent of managers say they’re more stressed at work 
today than a year ago.
• Reasons employees find work stressful: low pay, commut-
ing, excessive workload, fear of being fired/laid off, annoy-
ing coworkers, and difficult bosses.
As you can see, stress and its effects on workers are (and 
should be) a serious concern for employers. When excessive 
pressure is placed on people from overwhelming demands or 
constraints, they often feel they’ve got no choices or options. 
At France Télécom, the wave of employee suicides was cause 
for concern. Trade union leaders blamed “the allegedly brutal 
management culture of a company which has transformed 
itself over a decade from a ponderous state utility to a leading 
telecommunications company.” However, for months, France 
Télécom management “dismissed the suicides as a contagious 
fad among its workforce.” Unions then criticized the company 
for its poor choice of language.
The Paris prosecutor’s office opened an investigation 
of the company over accusations of psychological harass-
ment. The judicial inquiry stemmed from a complaint by 
the union Solidares Unitaires Démocratiques against France 
Télécom’s former chief ex-
ecutive and two members of 
his top management team. 
The complaint accused man-
agement of conducting a 
“pathogenic restructuring.” Excerpts of the inspector’s re-
port, although not made public, were published in the French 
media. It described a situation in which the company used 
various forms of psychological pressure in an effort to elimi-
nate 22,000 jobs over a two-year period. Company doctors 
alerted management about the possible psychological dan-
gers of the stress that could accompany such drastic change. 
Despite these findings, a company lawyer denied that France 
Télécom had systematically pressured employees to leave.
Company executives realized that they needed to take dras-
tic measures to address the issue. One of the first changes was a 
new CEO, Stéphane Richard, who said his priority “would be to 
rebuild the morale of staff who have been through trauma, suffer-
ing and much worse.” The company also halted some workplace 
practices identified as being particularly disruptive, like involun-
tary transfers. It is also encouraging more supportive practices, 
including working from home. A company spokesperson says 
the company has completed two of six agreements with unions 
that cover a wide range of workplace issues like mobility and 
work/life balance and stress. Despite these measures, another 
France Télécom worker committed suicide. A union official sug-
gested that “the man had struggled with being made to frequently 
change jobs.” The worker had written to management on several 
occasions about the situation and was believed to have had no 
reply. France Télécom’s CEO, Stéphane Richard, promised a 
thorough investigation into the suicide. “We need to analyze in 
great depth and detail what happened. It is my intention that this 
investigation will be particularly painstaking and transparent.”
Discussion Questions
8-22 What is your reaction to the situation described in this case? 
What factors, both inside the company and externally, appear 
to have contributed to this situation?
8-23 What appeared to be happening in France Télécom’s work-
place? What stress symptoms might managers have looked for 
to be alerted to a problem?
8-24 Should managers be free to make decisions that are in the best 
interests of the company without worrying about employee reac-
tions? Discuss. What are the implications for managing change?
8-25 What are France Télécom’s executives doing to address the 
situation? Do you think it’s enough? Are there other actions they 
might take? If so, describe those. If not, why not?
8-26 What could other companies and managers learn from this 
 situation?

284    Part 3  •  Organizing
Endnotes
 1. A. Weintraub and M. Tirrell, “Eli 
Lilly’s Drug Assembly Line,” 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, March 
8, 2010, 56–57.
 2. K. Grzbowska, “The Social As-
pect of Introducing Changes into 
the Organization,” International 
Journals of Human Resources 
Development and Management, 
February 2, 2007, 67; and I. M. 
Jawahar and G. L. McLaughlin, 
“Toward a Descriptive Stakehold-
er Theory: An Organizational Life 
Cycle Approach,” Academy of 
Management Review, July 2001, 
397–415.
 3. E. Shannon, “Agent of Change,” 
Time, March 4, 2002, 17; B. Ken-
ney, “SLA Head Shaffer Resigns 
Abruptly: Did ‘Change Agent’ 
Move Too Fast in Aggressive Re-
structuring?” 
Library 
Journal, 
March 15, 2002, 17–19; and T. 
Mudd, “Rescue Mission,” Industry 
Week, May 1, 2000, 30–37.
 4. The idea for these metaphors 
came from P. Vaill, Managing as 
a Performing Art: New Ideas for 
a World of Chaotic Change (San 
Francisco: Jossey Bass, 1989).
 5. K. Lewin, Field Theory in Social 
Science (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1951).
 6. R. E. Levasseur, “People Skills: 
Change 
Management 
Tools—
Lewin’s Change Model,” Inter-
faces, August 2001, 71–74.
 7. L. S. Lüscher and M. W. Lewis, 
“Organizational 
Change 
and 
Managerial Sensemaking: Work-
ing Through Paradox,” Academy 
of Management Journal (April 
2008), 221–40; F. Buckley and K. 
Monks, “Responding to Manag-
ers’ Learning Needs in an Edge-
of-Chaos Environment: Insights 
from Ireland,” Journal of Manage-
ment (April 2008): 146–63; and G. 
Hamel, “Take It Higher,” Fortune, 
February 5, 2001, 169–70.
 8. D. Lieberman, “Nielsen Media 
Has Cool Head at the Top,” USA 
Today, March 27, 2006, 3B.
 9. From the Past to the Present box 
based on D. A. Wren and A. G. Be-
deian, The Evolution of Manage-
ment Thought, 6th ed. (Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2009); 
“Biography and Quotes of Kurt 
Lewin,” About.com, psychology.
about.com (July 15, 2009); and 
K. T. Lewin, “The Dynamics of 
Group Action,” Educational Lead-
ership, January 1944, 195–200.
 10. L. Freifeld, “Paddle to Collabo-
rate,” Training (November–De-
cember 2010), 6.
 11. S. Hicks, “What Is Organization 
Development?” Training and De-
velopment (August 2000): 65; and 
H. Hornstein, “Organizational De-
velopment and Change Manage-
ment: Don’t Throw the Baby Out 
with the Bath Water,” Journal of 
Applied Behavioral Science (June 
2001): 223–27.
 12. J. Wolfram and S. Minahan, “A 
New Metaphor for Organization 
Development,” Journal of Applied 
Behavioral Science (June 2006): 
227–43.
 13. See, for instance, H. B. Jones, 
“Magic, Meaning, and Leader-
ship: Weber’s Model and the 
 Empirical 
Literature,” 
Human 
 Relations, June 2001, 753.
 14. G. Akin and I. Palmer, “Putting 
Metaphors to Work for a Change 
in Organizations,” Organizational 
Dynamics, Winter 2000, 67–79.
 15. J. Grieves, “Skills, Values or Im-
pression Management: Organi-
zational Change and the Social 
Processes of Leadership, Change 
Agent Practice, and Process Con-
sultation,” Journal of Management 
Development (May 2000): 407.
 16. M. McMaster, “Team Building 
Tips,” Sales & Marketing Man-
agement, January 2002, 140; and 
“How To: Executive Team Build-
ing,” Training and Development 
(January 2002): 16.
 17. S. Shinn, “Stairway to Reinven-
tion,” BizEd, January–February 
2010, 6; M. Scott, “A Stairway to 
Marketing Heaven,” BusinessWeek, 
November 2, 2009, 17; and The 
Fun Theory, http://thefuntheory 
.com (November 10, 2009).
 18. See, for example, J. Robison and 
D. Jones, “Overcoming the Fear 
of Change,” Gallup Management 
Journal Online, January 7, 2011; 
J. D. Ford, L. W. Ford, and A. 
D’Amelio, “Resistance to Change: 
The Rest of the Story,” Academy of 
Management Review, April 2008, 
362–77; A. Deutschman, “Mak-
ing Change: Why Is It So Hard to 
Change Our Ways?” Fast Com-
pany, May 2005, 52–62; S. B. Sil-
verman, C. E. Pogson, and A. B. 
Cober, “When Employees at Work 
Don’t Get It: A Model for Enhanc-
ing Individual Employee Change 
in Response to Performance Feed-
back,” Academy of Management 
Executive, May 2005, 135–47; C. 
E. Cunningham, C. A. Woodward, 
H. S. Shannon, J. MacIntosh, B. 
Lendrum, D. Rosenbloom, and J. 
Brown, “Readiness for Organi-
zational Change: A Longitudinal 
Study of Workplace, Psychologi-
cal and Behavioral Correlates,” 
Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology (De-
cember 2002): 377–92; M. A. 
Korsgaard, H. J. Sapienza, and D. 
M. Schweiger, “Beaten Before Be-
gun: The Role of Procedural Jus-
tice in Planning Change,” Journal 
of Management 28, no. 4 (2002): 
497–516; R. Kegan and L. L. La-
hey, “The Real Reason People 
Won’t Change,” Harvard Business 
Review, November 2001, 85–92; 
S. K. Piderit, “Rethinking Resis-
tance and Recognizing Ambiva-
lence: A Multidimensional View 
of Attitudes Toward an Organiza-
tional Change,” Academy of Man-
agement Review, October 2000, 
783–94; C. R. Wanberg and J. T. 
Banas, “Predictors and Outcomes 
of Openness to Changes in a Re-
organizing Workplace,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (February 
2000): 132–42; A. A. Armenakis 
and A. G. Bedeian, “Organiza-
tional Change: A Review of The-
ory and Research in the 1990s,” 
Journal of Management 25, no. 3 
(1999): 293–315; and B. M. Staw, 
“Counterforces to Change,” in P.S. 
Goodman and Associates (eds.), 
Change in Organizations (San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1982), 
87–121.
 19. A. Reichers, J. P. Wanous, and J. 
T. Austin, “Understanding and 
Managing Cynicism about Orga-
nizational Change,” Academy of 
Management Executive, February 
1997, 48–57; P. Strebel, “Why 
Do Employees Resist Change?” 
Harvard Business Review, May–
June 1996, 86–92; and J. P. Kotter 
and L. A. Schlesinger, “Choosing 
Strategies for Change,” Harvard 
Business Review, March–April 
1979, 107–09.
 20. D. Heath and C. Heath, “Passion 
Provokes Action,” Fast Company, 
February 2011, 28–30.
 21. S. D’Mello, “Stress: The Global 
Economic Downturn Has Taken 
Its Toll on Employees. What’s 
the Impact for Organizations?” A 
2011/2012 Kenexa® High Perfor-
mance Institute Worktrends™ Re-
port, http://khpi.com/documents/
KHPI-WorkTrends-Report-Stress, 
2011/2012; and “Stress: By the 
Numbers,” AARP The Magazine, 
September/October 2011, 30.
 22. Adapted from the UK National 
Work-Stress 
Network, 
www.
workstress.net.
 23. R. S. Schuler, “Definition and 
Conceptualization of Stress in Or-
ganizations,” Organizational Be-
havior and Human Performance, 
April 1980, 191.
 24. J. Yang and S. Ward, “Which Is the 
More-Stress Inducing Aspect of 
Your Job?” USA Today, September 
11, 2011, 1B.
 25. See, for example, “Stressed Out: 
Extreme Job Stress: Survivors’ 
Tales,” Wall Street Journal Janu-
ary 17, 2001, B1.
 26. See, for instance, S. Bates, “Ex-
pert: Don’t Overlook Employee 
Burnout,” HR Magazine, August 
2003, 14.
 27. Question of Ethics box based 
on D. Cole, “The Big Chill,” US 
News & World Report, December 
6, 2004, EE2–EE5.
 28. H. Benson, “Are You Working 
Too Hard?” Harvard Business 
Review, November 2005, 53–58; 
B. Cryer, R. McCraty, and D. 
Childre, “Pull the Plug on Stress,” 
Harvard Business Review, July 
2003, 102–07; C. Daniels, “The 
Last Taboo”; C. L. Cooper and 
S. Cartwright, “Healthy Mind, 
Healthy Organization—A Proac-
tive Approach to Occupational 
Stress,” Human Relations, April 
1994, 455–71; C. A. Heaney et al., 
“Industrial Relations, Worksite 
Stress Reduction and Employee 
Well-Being: A Participatory Ac-
tion 
Research 
Investigation,” 
Journal of Organizational Behav-
ior (September 1993): 495–510; 
C. D. Fisher, “Boredom at Work: 
A Neglected Concept,” Human 
Relations, March 1993, 395–417; 
and S. E. Jackson, “Participation 
in Decision Making as a Strategy 
for Reducing Job-Related Strain,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(February 1983): 3–19.
 29. T. Barton, “Brave Face,” Employee 
Benefits, January 2011, 41; and 
“Employee Assistance Programs,” 
HR Magazine, May 2003, 143.
 30. S. Barrett, “Employee Assistance 
Programs,” Employee Benefits, 
January 2011, 49–52; “EAPs with 
the Most,” Managing Benefits 
Plans, March 2003, 8; and K. 
Tyler, “Helping Employees Cope 
with Grief,” HR Magazine, Sep-
tember 2003, 55–58.
 31. N. Faba, “The EAP Problem,” Ben-
efits Canada, March 2011, 7; D. A. 
Masi, “Redefining the EAP Field,” 
Journal of Workplace Behavioral 
Health 
(January–March 
2011): 
1–9; R. M. Weiss, “Brinksmanship 
Redux: Employee Assistance Pro-
grams’ Precursors and Prospects,” 
Employee 
Responsibilities 
& 
Rights Journal (December 2010): 
325–43; and F. Hansen,  “Employee 
Assistance Programs (EAPs) Grow 
and Expand Their Reach,” Com-
pensation and Benefits Review, 
March–April 2000, 13.
 32. A. Saha-Bubna and M. Jarzemsky, 
“MasterCard President Is Named 
CEO,” Wall Street Journal, April 
13, 2010, C3; and S. Vandebook, 
“Quotable,” IndustryWeek, April 
2010, 18.
 33. R. M. Kanter, “Think Outside the 
Building,” Harvard Business Re-
view, March 2010, 34; T. Brown, 
“Change By Design,” Business-
Week, October 5, 2009, 54–56; J. 
E. Perry-Smith and C. E. Shal-
ley, “The Social Side of Creativ-
ity: A Static and Dynamic Social 
Network Perspective,” Academy 
of Management Review, January 
2003, 89–106; and P. K. Jagersma, 
“Innovate or Die: It’s Not Easy, 
but It Is Possible to Enhance Your 
Organization’s Ability to Inno-
vate,” Journal of Business Strat-
egy 
(January–February 
2003): 
25–28.
 34. Fast Company staff, “The World’s 
50 Most Innovative Companies,” 
Fast Company, March 2011, 66+; 
and G. Colvin, “The World’s Most 
Admired Companies,” Fortune, 
March 21, 2011, 109+.

CHAPTER 8  •  Managing Change and Innovation    285
 35. These definitions are based on T. 
M. Amabile, Creativity in Context 
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 
1996).
 36. C. Salter, “Mattel Learns to 
‘Throw the Bunny,’” Fast Com-
pany, November 2002, 22; and L. 
Bannon, “Think Tank in Toyland,” 
Wall Street Journal, June 6, 2002, 
B1, B3.
 37. C. Vogel and J. Cagan, Creating 
Breakthrough Products: Innova-
tion from Product Planning to 
Program Approval (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002).
 38. R. Tate, “Google Couldn’t Kill 20 
Percent Time Even If It Wanted 
To,” wired.com, August 21, 2013; 
C. Mims, “Google Engineers In-
sist 20% Time Is Not Dead—It’s 
Just Turned into 120% Time,” 
qz.com, August 16, 2013; R. 
Neimi, “Inside the Moonshot Fac-
tory,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 
May 22, 2013, 56–61; and A. 
Foege, “The Trouble with Tinker-
ing Time,” Wall Street Journal, 
January 19/20, 2013, C3.
 39. R. W. Woodman, J. E. Sawyer, and 
R. W. Griffin, “Toward a Theory of 
Organizational Creativity,” Acad-
emy of Management Review, April 
1993, 293–321.
 40. T. M. Egan, “Factors Influenc-
ing Individual Creativity in the 
Workplace: An Examination of 
Quantitative Empirical Research,” 
Advances in Developing Human 
Resources, May 2005, 160–81; 
N. Madjar, G. R. Oldham, and 
M. G. Pratt, “There’s No Place 
Like Home? The Contributions 
of Work and Nonwork Creativ-
ity Support to Employees’ Cre-
ative Performance,” Academy of 
Management 
Journal 
(August 
2002): 757–67; T. M. Amabile, 
C. N. Hadley, and S. J. Kramer, 
“Creativity Under the Gun,” Har-
vard Business Review, August 
2002, 52–61; J. B. Sorensen and 
T. E. Stuart, “Aging, Obsoles-
cence, and Organizational Inno-
vation,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly, March 2000, 81–112; 
G.R. Oldham and A. Cummings, 
“Employee Creativity: Personal 
and Contextual Factors at Work,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(June 1996): 607–34; and F. Da-
manpour, “Organizational Innova-
tion: A Meta-Analysis of Effects 
of Determinants and Moderators,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(September 1991): 555–90.
 41. P. R. Monge, M. D. Cozzens, and 
N. S. Contractor, “Communication 
and Motivational Predictors of the 
Dynamics of Organizational In-
novations,” Organization Science, 
May 1992, 250–74.
 42. T. M. Amabile, C. N. Hadley, and 
S. J. Kramer, “Creativity Under 
the Gun.”
 43. N. Madjar, G. R. Oldham, and 
M. G. Pratt, “There’s No Place 
Like Home? The Contributions 
of Work and Nonwork Creativity 
Support to Employees’ Creative 
 Performance.”
 44. See, for instance, J. E. Perry-
Smith, “Social Yet Creative: The 
Role of Social Relationships 
in Facilitating Individual Cre-
ativity,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal (February 2006): 
85–101; C. E. Shalley, J. zhou, 
and G. R. Oldham, “The Ef-
fects of Personal and Contex-
tual Characteristics on Creativ-
ity: Where Should We Go from 
Here?” Journal of Management 
30, no. 6 (2004): 933–58; J. E. 
Perry-Smith and C. E. Shalley, 
“The Social Side of Creativity: A 
Static and Dynamic Social Net-
work Perspective”; J. M. George 
and J. zhou, “When Openness to 
Experience and Conscientious-
ness Are Related to Creative 
Behavior: An Interactional Ap-
proach,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology (June 2001): 513–24; 
J. zhou, “Feedback Valence, 
Feedback Style, Task Autonomy, 
and Achievement Orientation: 
Interactive Effects on Creative 
Behavior,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 83 (1998): 261–76; 
T. M. Amabile, R. Conti, H. 
Coon, J. Lazenby, and M. Her-
ron, “Assessing the Work Envi-
ronment for Creativity,” Acad-
emy of Management Journal 
(October 1996): 1154–84; S. G. 
Scott and R. A. Bruce, “Deter-
minants of Innovative People: A 
Path Model of Individual Innova-
tion in the Workplace,” Academy 
of Management Journal (June 
1994): 580–607; R. Moss Kant-
er, “When a Thousand Flowers 
Bloom: Structural, Collective, 
and Social Conditions for Inno-
vation in Organization,” in B. M. 
Staw and L. L. Cummings (eds.), 
Research in Organizational Be-
havior, vol. 10 (Greenwich, CT: 
JAI Press, 1988), 169–211; and 
Amabile, Creativity in Context.
 45. J. McGregor, “The World’s Most 
Innovative Companies,” Business-
Week, April 24, 2006, 70.
 46. Ibid.
 47. J. Ramos, “Producing Change 
That Lasts,” Across the Board, 
March 1994, 29–33; T. Stjernberg 
and A. Philips, “Organizational 
Innovations in a Long-Term Per-
spective: Legitimacy and Souls-
of-Fire as Critical Factors of 
Change and Viability,” Human 
Relations, October 1993, 1193–
2023; and J. M. Howell and C. A. 
Higgins, “Champions of Change,” 
Business Quarterly, Spring 1990, 
31–32.
 48. J. Liedtka and T. Ogilvie, Design-
ing for Growth: A Design Thinking 
Tool Kit for Managers, (New York: 
Columbia Business School Press, 
2011).
 49. R. E. Silverman, “Companies 
Change Their Way of Thinking,” 
Wall Street Journal, June 7, 2012, 
B8; and R. L. Martin, “The Inno-
vation Catalysts,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, June 2011, 82–87.
 50. Based on J. E. Newman and T. A. 
Beehr, “Personal and Organiza-
tional Strategies for Handling Job 
Stress,” Personnel Psychology, 
Spring 1979, 1–38; M. T. Matteson 
and J. M. Ivancevich, “Individual 
Stress Management Interventions: 
Evaluation of Techniques,” Jour-
nal of Management Psychology 
(January 1987): 24–30; and K. M. 
Richardson and H. R. Rothstein, 
“Effects of Occupational Stress 
Management Intervention Pro-
grams: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal 
of Occupational Health Psychol-
ogy (January 2008): 69–93.
 51. S. Ember, “Under Armour Is 
Swinging for the Stars,” New 
York Times Online, June 14, 
2015; 2014 Annual Report, “Let-
ter to the Shareholders,” http://
files.shareholder.com/downloads/
UARM/165448209x0x816471/ 
3BEBC664-8584-4F22-AC0B-
844CB2949814/UA_2014_ 
Annual_Report.PDF, January 31, 
2015; B. Horovitz, “In Search of 
Next Big Thing,” USA Today, July 
9, 2012, 1B+; Press Release, “Un-
der Armour Reports Fourth Quar-
ter Net Revenues Growth of 34% 
and Fourth Quarter EPS Growth 
of 40%,” investor.underarmour.
com, January 26, 2012; D. Rob-
erts, “Under Armour Gets Seri-
ous,” Fortune, November 7, 2011, 
153–62; E. Olson, “Under Armour 
Applies Its Muscle to Shoes,” 
New York Times Online, August 
8, 2011; M. Townsend, “Under 
Armour’s 
Daring 
Half-Court 
Shot,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 
November 1–7, 2010, 24–25; and 
E. Olson, “Under Armour Wants 
to Dress Athletic Young Women,” 
New York Times Online, August 
31, 2010.
 52. N. Turner and L. Coleman-Loch-
ner, “Avon Shares Fall on Report 
That Buyers Haven’t Material-
ized,” http://www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/2015-05-05/avon-
shares-plummet-on-report-that-
bidders-haven-t-materialized, May 
5, 2015; L. Rupp and L. Coleman-
Lochner, “Avon Profit Misses Es-
timates as North American Sales 
Suffer,” 
http://www.bloomberg.
com/news/articles/2015-04-30/
avon-misses-earnings-estimates-
as-north-american-sales-suffer, 
April 30, 2015; E. Byron and J. 
S. Lublin, “Lackluster Avon Ex-
plores Makeover,” Wall Street 
Journal, April 28, 2015, A1+; B. 
Sutherland, “Overhaul of Avon 
U.S. May Be Better Than Selling 
the Unit,” http://www.bloomberg.
com/news/articles/2015-04-16/
avon-u-s-overhaul-may-be-better-
path-than-unit-sale-real-m-a, April 
15, 2015; J. S. Lublin and E. By-
ron, “Avon Explores Strategic Al-
ternatives,” Wall Street Journal, 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/avon-
explores-strategic-alternatives- 
1429030371, April 14, 2015; P. 
Wahba, “Avon’s in a Ding-Dong 
Battle to Stay in Business,” http://
fortune.com/tag/avon/, April 14, 
2015; P. J. Henning, “Foreign Brib-
ery Cases That Can Drag on and 
On,” New York Times Online, De-
cember 22, 2014; The Associated 
Press, “Avon Products Announces 
Another Round of Job Cuts,” New 
York Times Online, June 24, 2014; 
D. Henschen, “Avon Pulls Plug on 
$125 Million SAP Project,” http://
www.informationweek.com/
software/enterprise-applications/
avon-pulls-plug-on-125-million-
sap-project/d/d-id/1113061, 
De-
cember 12, 2013; and A. Martin, 
“Avon Chairwoman to Quit Earlier 
Than Expected,” New York Times 
Online, October 5, 2012.
 53. K. Dunn, “Employee Turnover 
and Suicide: It Turns out the Re-
sponse to Either Is the Same,” 
HR Capitalist Online, May 9, 
2011; S. Mahoney, “Stress Less, 
Accomplish More,” Good House-
keeping, May 2010, 57; A. Chri-
safis, “France Telecom Worker 
Kills Himself in Office Car Park,” 
www.guardian.co.uk (April 27, 
2011); Reuters, “France Telecom 
to Probe Employee Suicide by 
Fire,” www.trust.org (April 27, 
2011); A. R. Carey and P. Trap, 
“Aspect of the Job That Workers 
Find the Most Stressful,” USA 
Today, April 20, 2011, 1A; “Sur-
vey,” Shape, April 2011, 48; M. 
V. Rafter, “The Yawning of New 
Era,” 
Workforce 
Management 
Online, December 2010; C. Haus-
man, “Millions of U.K. Work-
ers Lie to Bosses about Stress-
Induced Days,” Global Ethics 
Online, November 8, 2010; E. 
Holbrook, “Beneath the Bell Jar: 
Companies Confront a Rise in 
Workplace Suicides,” Risk Man-
agement, November 2010, 6–8; 
“Survey: 30 Percent of Managers 
under More Stress,” Workforce 
Management Online, September 
22, 2010; M. Colchester, “France 
Télécom Faces Inquiry over Sui-
cides,” New York Times Online, 
April 12, 2010; M. Saltmarsh, 
“France Télécom Suicides Prompt 
an Investigation,” New York Times 
Online, April 9, 2010; E. Frauen-
heim, “Suicides Spur Manage-
ment Shake-Up at France Télé-
com,” Workforce Management, 
March 2010, 6–8; C. Stievenard, 
“France’s Approach to Workplace 
‘Bullying,’” Workforce Manage-
ment Online, www.workforce.
com (March 2010); R. Bender 
and M. Colchester, “Morale Is 
Priority for France Télécom,” 
Wall Street Journal, February 4, 
2010, B2; R. Bender and M. Col-
chester, “France Télécom Focuses 
on Morale,” Wall Street Journal 
Online, online.wsj.com, February 
4, 2010; The Associated Press, 
“Executive Quits after Suicides 
at France Télécom,” New York 
Times Online, October 6, 2009; 
J. Lichfield and A. Mauviel, The 
Independent, www.independent.
co.uk, September 30, 2009; and 
D. Jolly and M. Saltmarsh, “Sui-
cides in France Put Focus on 
Workplace,” New York Times On-
line, September 30, 2009.

Foundations of Individual 
Behavior
9
             A good manager  
treats all  
employees the same.
OJO Images Ltd/Alamy

287
One thing you’ve probably realized over the 
years is how differently you and your friends 
interact with and react to life’s situations. 
Some friends are laid-back; others are more 
anxious. Some are good at reading emotional 
clues; others are, well, clueless. The same is 
true of the people a manager manages. That’s 
why a good manager works to get to know the 
unique individual characteristics of the  
people on his or her team to be able to  
effectively manage each of them.

organizations want to  attract 
and retain employees with 
the right attitudes and personality. They 
want people who show up and work hard, 
get along with coworkers and customers, 
have good attitudes, and exhibit good work 
 behaviors in other ways. But as you’re prob-
ably already aware, people don’t always 
 behave like that “ideal” employee. They 
may job hop at the first opportunity or they 
may post critical comments in blogs. People 
 differ in their behaviors and even the same 
person can behave one way one day and a 
completely different way another day. For 
instance, haven’t you seen family members, 
friends, or coworkers behave in ways that 
prompted you to wonder: Why did they do 
that? In this chapter, we look at four psy-
chological aspects—attitudes, personality, 
 perception, and learning—and how these 
things can help managers understand the 
behavior of those people they work with. We 
conclude the chapter by looking at contempo-
rary  behavioral issues facing managers. •
Learning Outcomes
9-1 Identify the focus and goals of organizational behavior (OB). p. 289
9-2 Explain the role that attitudes play in job performance. p. 291
9-3 Describe different personality theories. p. 294
9-4 Describe perception and the factors that influence it. p. 301
9-5 Discuss learning theories and their relevance in shaping behavior. p. 305
9-6 Discuss contemporary issues in OB. p. 308
Most 
288

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    289
What Are the Focus and Goals  
of Organizational Behavior?
Managers need good  
people skills.
The material in this and the next four chapters draws 
heavily on the field of study that’s known as organiza-
tional behavior (OB). Although it’s concerned with the 
subject of behavior—that is, the actions of people—organizational behavior is the study of 
the actions of people at work.
One of the challenges in understanding organizational behavior is that it addresses issues 
that aren’t obvious. Like an iceberg, OB has a small visible dimension and a much larger hid-
den portion. (See Exhibit 9–1.) What we see when we look at an organization is its visible as-
pects: strategies, objectives, policies and procedures, structure, technology, formal authority 
relationships, and chain of command. But under the surface are other elements that managers 
need to understand—elements that also influence how employees behave at work. As we’ll 
show, OB provides managers with considerable insights into these important, but hidden, 
aspects of the organization.
What Is the Focus of OB?
Organizational behavior focuses on three major areas:
1. Individual behavior. Based predominantly on contributions from psychologists, this area 
includes such topics as attitudes, personality, perception, learning, and motivation.
2. Group behavior, which includes norms, roles, team building, leadership, and conflict. 
Our knowledge about groups comes basically from the work of sociologists and social 
psychologists.
3. Organizational aspects including structure, culture, and human resource policies and 
practices. We’ve addressed organizational aspects in previous chapters. In this  chapter 
we’ll look at individual behavior, and in the following chapter we’ll look at group 
 behavior.
9-1  Identify the focus 
and goals of  
organizational 
behavior (OB).
Visible Aspects
Strategies
Objectives
Policies and procedures
Structure
Technology
Formal authority
Chains of command
Hidden Aspects
Attitudes
Perceptions
Group norms
Informal interactions
Interpersonal and 
intergroup conﬂicts
Exhibit 9–1 Organization as Iceberg
behavior
The actions of people
organizational behavior
The study of the actions of people at work

290    Part 4  •  Leading
What Are the Goals of Organizational Behavior?
The goals of OB are to explain, predict, and  influence behavior. Managers need to be 
able to explain why employees engage in some  behaviors rather than others,  predict how 
 employees will  respond to  various actions and decisions, and influence how employees 
behave.
SIX important employee  behaviors that managers are specifically concerned with 
explaining, predicting, and influencing include the following:
(1) Employee productivity—a performance measure of both work efficiency and 
 effectiveness. Managers want to know what factors will influence the efficiency and 
effectiveness of employees.
(2) Absenteeism—the failure to show up for work. It’s difficult for work to get done 
if  employees don’t show up. Studies have shown that the total of all major types of 
 absences cost organizations an  average 35 percent of payroll, with unscheduled absences 
costing companies around $660 per  employee per year.1 Although absenteeism can’t be 
totally eliminated, excessive levels have a direct and immediate impact on the organiza-
tion’s functioning.
(3) Turnover—the voluntary and involuntary permanent withdrawal from an organiza-
tion. It can be a problem because of increased recruiting, selection, training costs, 
and  work disruptions. Just like absenteeism, managers can never eliminate turn-
over, but it is something they want to minimize, especially among high-performing 
 employees.
(4) Organizational citizenship behavior—discretionary behavior that’s not part of an 
 employee’s formal job requirements, but which promotes the effective functioning of 
the organization.2 Examples of good OCB include helping others on one’s work team, 
volunteering for extended job activities, avoiding unnecessary conflicts, and making 
 constructive statements about one’s work group and the organization. Organizations 
need individuals who will do more than their usual job duties and the evidence indicates 
that organizations that have such employees outperform those that don’t.3 However, 
drawbacks to OCB arise if employees experience work overload, stress, and work-
family conflicts.4
(5) Job satisfaction—an employee’s general attitude toward his or her job. Although job 
satisfaction is an attitude rather than a behavior, it’s an outcome that concerns many 
managers because satisfied employees are more likely to show up for work, have higher 
levels of performance, and stay with an organization.
Job satisfaction is an important concern of 
managers at Gilead Sciences, a biopharma-
ceutical firm that develops new medicines 
for HIV/AIDS and other unmet medical 
needs. Highly satisfied employees like 
research scientist Darryl Kato, shown here, 
are essential to Gilead in achieving its goal of 
improving the lives of people who suffer from 
life-threatening diseases.
David Paul Morris/Bloomberg/Getty Images
employee productivity
A performance measure of both work efficiency  
and effectiveness
absenteeism
The failure to show up for work
turnover
Voluntary and involuntary permanent withdrawal 
from an organization
job satisfaction
An employee’s general attitude toward his or her job
workplace misbehavior
Any intentional employee behavior that is  
potentially harmful to the organization or individuals 
within the organization
organizational citizenship 
behavior
Discretionary behavior that’s not part of an 
 employee’s formal job requirements, but that 
 promotes the effective functioning of the  
organization
(6) Workplace 
misbehavior—any 
intentional employee behavior 
that is potentially harmful to the 
organization or individuals with-
in the organization. Workplace 
misbehavior shows up in organi-
zations in four ways: deviance, 
aggression, antisocial behavior, 
and violence.5 Such behaviors 
can range from playing loud 
music just to irritate coworkers, 
to verbal aggression, to sabotag-
ing work, all of which can create 
havoc in any  organization.
In the following pages, you’ll get 
a better understanding of how four 
psychological  factors—employee at-
titudes, personality, perception, and 
learning—can help managers  predict 
and explain these six employee 
behaviors.

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    291
What Role Do Attitudes Play in Job Performance?
You sure have an attitude!
Attitudes are evaluative statements, either favorable or 
unfavorable, concerning objects, people, or events. They 
reflect how an individual feels about something. When 
a person says, “I like my job,” he or she is expressing an 
attitude about work.
What Are the Three Components of an Attitude?
An attitude is made up of three components: cognition, affect, and behavior.6
• The cognitive component of an attitude is made up of the beliefs, opinions, knowledge, and 
information held by a person. For example, Brad feels strongly that smoking is unhealthy.
• The affective component is the emotional or feeling part of an attitude. This component 
would be reflected in the statement by Brad, “I don’t like Erica because she smokes.” 
 Cognition and affect can lead to behavioral outcomes.
• The behavioral component of an attitude refers to an intention to behave in a certain way 
toward someone or something. So, to continue our example, Brad might choose to avoid 
Erica because of his feelings about her smoking habit.
Looking at attitudes as being made up of three components—cognition, affect, and behavior—
helps to illustrate their complexity and helps us better understand what “precedes” someone’s 
response, reaction, or behavior. But keep in mind that when people use the term “attitude”—as 
in, “that person has a bad attitude” or “I’m glad your attitude towards this is positive”—they’re 
usually referring only to the actual affective (emotional) component. Remember that managers 
are trying to explain, predict, and influence people’s behavior, and knowing that there’s more 
to “attitude” than just the emotional part helps us better know how to do just that.
What Attitudes Might Employees Hold?
Naturally, managers are not interested in every attitude an employee might hold. Rather, 
they’re specifically interested in the following:7
Job-Related Attitudes
• Job satisfaction is an employee’s general attitude toward his or her job. When people speak 
of employee attitudes, more often than not they mean job satisfaction.
• Job involvement is the degree to which an employee identifies with his or her job, actively 
participates in it, and considers his or her job performance important for self-worth.
• Organizational commitment represents an employee’s orientation toward the organization 
in terms of his or her loyalty to, identification with, and involvement in the organization.
A concept associated with job attitudes generating widespread interest is employee 
 engagement, which happens when employees are connected to, satisfied with, and  enthusiastic 
about their jobs.8 Highly engaged employees are passionate about and deeply connected 
to their work. Disengaged employees have essentially “checked out” and don’t care. They 
show up for work, but have no energy or passion for it. A global study of more than 12,000 
 employees found that the top five factors contributing to employee  engagement were:9
1. Respect
2. Type of work
3. Work/life balance
4. Providing good service to customers
5. Base pay
Having highly engaged employees produces both benefits and costs. Highly engaged 
employees are two-and-a-half times more likely to be top performers than their less-engaged 
9-2  Explain the role 
that attitudes  
play in job  
performance.
attitudes
Evaluative statements, either favorable or  
unfavorable, concerning objects, people, or events
cognitive component
The part of an attitude made up of the beliefs, opin-
ions, knowledge, and information held by a person
affective component
The part of an attitude that’s the emotional or 
feeling part
behavioral component
The part of an attitude that refers to an intention 
to behave in a certain way toward someone or 
something
job involvement
The degree to which an employee identifies with 
his or her job, actively participates in it, and 
considers his or her job performance important for 
self-worth
organizational commitment
An employee’s orientation toward the organization 
in terms of his or her loyalty to, identification with, 
and involvement in the organization
employee engagement
When employees are connected to, satisfied with, 
and enthusiastic about their jobs

292    Part 4  •  Leading
coworkers. In addition, companies with highly engaged employees have higher retention 
rates, which help keep recruiting and training costs low. And both of these outcomes—higher 
performance and lower costs—contribute to superior financial performance.10
Do Individuals’ Attitudes and Behaviors Need to Be Consistent?
What I believe is what I do . . . I hope.
Did you ever notice how people change what they say so that it doesn’t contradict what they 
do? Perhaps a friend of yours had consistently argued that American-manufactured cars were 
poorly built and that he’d never own anything but a foreign import. Then his parents gave him 
a late-model American-made car, and suddenly they weren’t so bad. Or when going through 
sorority rush, a new freshman believes that sororities are good and that pledging a sorority is 
important. If she’s not accepted by a sorority, however, she may say, “Sorority life isn’t all it’s 
cracked up to be anyway.”
Research generally concludes that people seek consistency among their attitudes and 
 between their attitudes and their behavior.11 Individuals try to reconcile differing attitudes 
and align their attitudes and behavior so that they appear rational and consistent. How? By 
 altering their attitudes or their behavior, or by developing a rationalization for the discrepancy.
What Is Cognitive Dissonance Theory?
Can we assume from this consistency principle that an individual’s behavior can always be 
predicted if we know his or her attitude on a subject? The answer isn’t a simple “yes” or “no.” 
Why? Cognitive dissonance theory.
Cognitive dissonance theory, proposed by Leon Festinger in the 1950s, sought to explain 
the relationship between attitudes and behavior.12 Cognitive dissonance is any incompatibil-
ity or inconsistency between attitudes or between behavior and attitudes. The theory argued 
that inconsistency is uncomfortable and that individuals will try to reduce the discomfort and, 
thus, the dissonance.
Of course, no one can avoid dissonance. You know you should floss your teeth every day, 
but don’t do it. There’s an inconsistency between attitude and behavior. How do people cope 
with cognitive dissonance? The theory proposed that how hard we try to reduce dissonance is 
 determined by three things: (1) the importance of the factors creating the dissonance, (2) the de-
gree of influence the individual believes he or she has over those factors, and (3) the rewards that 
may be involved in dissonance.
If the factors creating the dissonance are relatively  unimportant, the pressure to correct 
the  inconsistency will be low. However, if those 
factors are  important, individuals may change 
their behavior, conclude that the dissonant be-
havior isn’t so  important, change their attitude, 
or identify compatible factors that outweigh the 
dissonant ones.
How much influence individuals believe they 
have over the factors also affects their reaction to 
the dissonance. If they perceive the dissonance is 
something about which they have no choice, they 
won’t be receptive to attitude change or feel a need 
to do so. If, for example, the dissonance-producing 
behavior was required as a result of a manager’s 
order, the pressure to reduce dissonance would 
be less than if the behavior had been performed 
voluntarily. Although dissonance exists, it can be 
rationalized and justified by the need to follow 
the manager’s orders—that is, the person had no 
choice or control.
People may believe they are safe drivers yet 
create potentially unsafe road conditions 
by driving and texting at the same time. To 
reduce this cognitive dissonance, they may 
stop their habit of driving and texting or they 
may rationalize that it doesn’t pose a threat to 
others’ safety and that they are in control of 
the situation.
Robert Crum/Shutterstock
cognitive dissonance
Any incompatibility or inconsistency between  
attitudes or between behavior and attitudes

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    293
Finally, rewards also influence the degree to which individuals are motivated to reduce 
dissonance. Coupling high dissonance with high rewards tends to reduce the discomfort by 
motivating the individual to believe that there is consistency.
Let’s look at an example. Tracey Ford, a corporate manager, believes strongly that no 
company should lay off employees. Unfortunately, Tracey has to make decisions that trade 
off her company’s strategic direction against her convictions on layoffs. She knows that orga-
nizational restructuring means some jobs may no longer be needed. She also knows layoffs 
are in the best economic interest of her firm. What will she do? Undoubtedly, Tracey is expe-
riencing a high degree of cognitive dissonance. Let’s explain her behavior.
1. IMPORTANCE OF FACTORS: Because of the importance of the issues in this example, 
she can’t ignore the inconsistency. To deal with her dilemma, she can follow several 
steps. She can change her behavior (lay off employees). Or she can reduce dissonance by 
concluding that the dissonant behavior is not so important after all (“I’ve got to make a 
living, and in my role as a decision maker, I often have to place the good of my company 
above that of individual organizational members”). She might also change her attitude 
(“There is nothing wrong in laying off employees”). Finally, another choice would be 
to seek out more consonant elements to outweigh the dissonant ones (“The long-term 
benefits to the surviving employees from our restructuring more than offset the associ-
ated costs”).
2. DEgREE OF INFLUENCE: The degree of influence that Tracey believes she has 
also impacts how she reacts to the dissonance. If she perceives the dissonance to be 
 uncontrollable—something about which she has no choice—she’s less likely to feel she 
needs to change her attitude. If, for example, her boss told her that she had to lay off 
 employees, the pressure to reduce dissonance would be less than if Tracey was perform-
ing the  behavior voluntarily. Dissonance would exist but it could be rationalized and 
justified. This tendency illustrates why it’s critical in today’s organizations for lead-
ers to establish an ethical culture. With the leaders’ influence and support, employees 
won’t feel as much dissonance when faced with decisions of whether to act ethically 
or unethically.13
3. REWARDS: Finally, rewards also influence how likely Tracy is to reduce 
dissonance. High dissonance, when accompanied by high rewards, tends to 
reduce the tension inherent in the dissonance. The reward reduces dissonance 
by adding to the consistency side of the individual’s balance sheet. Tracey 
might feel because she is well compensated in her job that she sometimes has 
to make hard decisions, such as laying off employees.
So, what can we say about dissonance and employee behavior? These 
moderating factors suggest that although individuals experience dissonance, 
they won’t necessarily move toward consistency, that is, toward reducing the 
dissonance. If the issues underlying the dissonance are of minimal impor-
tance, if an individual perceives that the dissonance is externally  imposed and 
is substantially uncontrollable, or if rewards are significant enough to offset 
the dissonance, the individual will not be under great tension to reduce the 
dissonance.14
How Can an Understanding of Attitudes Help Managers  
Be More Effective?
Managers should be interested in their employees’ attitudes because they 
 influence behavior in the following ways:
1. Satisfied and committed employees have lower rates of turnover and 
 absenteeism. If managers want to keep resignations and absences down— 
especially among their more productive employees—they’ll want to do 
things that generate positive job  attitudes.
2. Whether satisfied workers are productive workers is a debate that’s been 
 going on for almost 80 years. After the Hawthorne studies (see p. 51 in the 
A Question of Ethics
Have you ever faked a smile? All of us have 
sometime, somewhere. Now research has 
shown that employees “fake a positive outlook 
when the boss is around.”15 Being ambivalent 
(or even negative) about your work or about 
working for your organization can be a definite 
detriment. Employers want to see passion. They 
want you to love your job and be excited about 
coming to work and about doing your job. And 
when you don’t? If you want to keep your job, 
you fake it. But all that faking takes a toll.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the 
 Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete these discussion questions.
  Talk About It 1: What ethical issues 
might arise under these circumstances for both 
employees and for managers?
  Talk About It 2: Discuss ways that 
managers could create an environment where 
employees don’t have to fake a positive outlook.

294    Part 4  •  Leading
Management History Module), managers believed that happy workers were productive 
workers. Because it’s not easy to determine whether job satisfaction “caused” job pro-
ductivity or vice versa, some management researchers felt that the belief was generally 
wrong. However, we can say with some certainty that the correlation between satisfaction 
and productivity is fairly strong.16 Satisfied employees do perform better on the job. So 
managers should focus on those factors that have been shown to be conducive to high lev-
els of employee job satisfaction: making work challenging and interesting, providing eq-
uitable rewards, and creating supportive working conditions and supportive colleagues.17 
These factors are likely to help employees be more productive.
3. Managers should also survey employees about their attitudes. As one study put it, 
“A sound measurement of overall job attitude is one of the most useful pieces of informa-
tion an organization can have about its employees.”18 However, research has also shown 
that attitude surveys can be more effective at pinpointing employee dissatisfaction if done 
multiple times rather than just at one point in time.19
4. Managers should know that employees will try to reduce dissonance. If employees are 
 required to do things that appear inconsistent to them or that are at odds with their atti-
tudes, managers should remember that pressure to reduce the dissonance is not as strong 
when the employee perceives that the dissonance is externally imposed and uncontrol-
lable. It’s also decreased if rewards are significant enough to offset the dissonance. So the 
manager might point to external forces such as competitors, customers, or other  factors 
when explaining the need to perform some work that the individual may have some 
 dissonance about. Or the manager can provide rewards that an individual desires.
What Do Managers Need to Know About Personality?
Many colleges use roommate compatibility tests to assign rooms in on-campus housing.20 If 
you’ve ever shared a living space with someone else (family or nonfamily), you know how 
important it can be for roommates to be compatible and to get along with each other. This 
compatibility is affected and influenced by our own and by other people’s personalities.
Some of us are quiet and passive; others are loud and aggressive. When we describe 
people using terms such as quiet, passive, loud, aggressive, ambitious, extroverted, loyal, 
tense, or sociable, we’re describing their personalities. An individual’s personality is a 
unique combination of emotional, thought, and behavioral patterns that affect how a person 
reacts to situations and interacts with others. Personality is most often described in terms of 
measurable traits that a person exhibits. We’re interested in looking at personality because 
just like attitudes, it affects how and why people behave the way they do.
78 percent of employers say that personality is the most 
important attribute in a job candidate.21
How Can We Best Describe Personality?
Your personality is your natural way of doing things and relating to others. Your personal-
ity traits influence, among other things, how you interact with others and how you solve 
 problems. Literally dozens of behaviors are attributed to an individual’s personality traits. But 
how can we best describe personality? Over the years, researchers have attempted to focus 
specifically on which personality traits and personality types would describe an individual’s 
personality. Two widely recognized personality research efforts are the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator® and the Big Five model. In addition, we can’t possibly describe personality and 
behavior without looking at emotions.
What is the Myers-Briggs type indicator? One of the more widely used meth-
ods of identifying personalities is the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI). The MBTI® 
9-3  Describe  
different  
personality  
theories.
personality
A unique combination of emotional, thought, and 
behavioral patterns that affect how a person reacts 
to situations and interacts with others
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
(MBTI)
A personality assessment that uses four dimensions 
of personality to identify different personality types

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    295
assessment uses four dimensions of personality to identify 16 different personality types 
based on the responses to an approximately 100-item questionnaire. The MBTI personality 
assessment is used by some 80 percent of Fortune 1000 companies.22
The 16 personality types are based on four dimensions:
• Extraversion versus Introversion (EI)
▪
▪The EI dimension describes an individual’s orientation toward the external world of the 
environment (E) or the inner world of ideas and experiences (I).
• Sensing versus Intuition (SN)
▪
▪The SN dimension indicates an individual’s preference for gathering data while focusing 
on a standard routine based on factual data (S) to focusing on the big picture and making 
connections among the facts (N).
• Thinking versus Feeling (TF)
▪
▪The TF dimension reflects one’s preference for making decisions in a logical and analyti-
cal manner (T) or on the basis of values and beliefs and the effects the decision will have 
on others (F).
• Judging versus Perceiving (JP)
▪▪The JP dimension reflects an attitude toward how one deals with the external world—either 
in a planned and orderly way (J) or preferring to remain flexible and spontaneous (P).23
Let’s give you some examples:
• ISTJ (Introversion - Sensing - Thinking - Judging)—quiet, serious, dependable, practical, 
and matter-of-fact
• ESFP (Extraversion - Sensing - Feeling - Perceiving)—outgoing, friendly, spontaneous, 
enjoys working with others, and learns best by trying a new skill with other people
• INFP (Introversion - Intuition - Feeling - Perceiving)—idealistic, loyal to personal values, 
and seeks to understand people and help them fulfill their potential
• ENTJ (Extraversion - Intuition - Thinking - Judging)—frank, decisive, and will assume leader-
ship roles; also enjoys long-term planning and goal setting and is forceful in presenting ideas24
How can the MBTI assessment help managers? Proponents believe that it’s important to 
know these personality types because they influence the way people interact and solve prob-
lems.25 For example, if your boss prefers Intuition and you’re a Sensing type, you’ll deal with 
information in different ways. An Intuition preference indicates your boss is one who prefers 
gut reactions, whereas you, as a Sensing type, prefer to deal with the facts. To work well with 
your boss, you have to present more than just facts about a situation—you’ll also have to 
discuss your gut feeling about the situation. The MBTI assessment has also been found to be 
useful in focusing on growth orientations for entrepreneurial types as well as profiles support-
ing emotional intelligence (something we’ll look at shortly).26
What is the Big Five Model oF personality? Another way of viewing person-
ality is through a five-factor model of personality—more typically called the Big Five 
model.27 The Big Five factors are:
1 extraversion
A personality dimension that describes the degree to which 
someone is sociable, talkative, and assertive.
2 agreeableness
A personality dimension that describes the degree to which 
someone is good-natured, cooperative, and trusting.
3 conscientiousness
A personality dimension that describes the degree to 
which someone is responsible, dependable, persistent, and 
achievement oriented.
4 emotional stability
A personality dimension that describes the degree to which 
someone is calm, enthusiastic, and secure (positive) or 
tense, nervous, depressed, and insecure (negative).
5 openness to experience
A personality dimension that describes the degree to which 
someone is imaginative, artistically sensitive, and intellectual.
Big Five model
A personality trait model that examines five traits: 
extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness, 
emotional stability, and openness to experience

296    Part 4  •  Leading
emotional intelligence (EI)
The ability to notice and to manage emotional cues 
and information
The Big Five model provides more than just 
a personality framework. Research has shown that 
important relationships exist between these per-
sonality dimensions and job performance.28 For 
example, one study reviewed five categories of 
 occupations: professionals (e.g., engineers, archi-
tects, attorneys), police, managers, sales, and semi-
skilled and skilled employees. Job performance 
was defined in terms of employee performance rat-
ings, training competency, and personnel data such 
as salary level. The results of the study showed 
that conscientiousness predicted job performance 
for all five occupational groups.29 Predictions for 
the other personality dimensions depended on the 
situation and the occupational group. For example, 
extraversion predicted performance in managerial 
and sales positions, in which high social interac-
tion is necessary.30 Openness to experience was 
found to be important in predicting training com-
petency. Ironically, emotional security was not 
positively related to job performance. Although it 
would seem logical that calm and secure workers 
would be better performers, that wasn’t the case. 
Perhaps it’s a function of the likelihood that emotionally stable workers often keep their jobs 
and emotionally unstable people may not. given that all those participating in the study were 
employed, the variance on that dimension was probably small.
What is eMotional intelligence? People who understand their own emotions and 
are good at reading others’ emotions may be more effective in their jobs. That, in essence, 
is the theme of the underlying research on emotional intelligence.31
Emotional intelligence (EI) refers to an assortment of noncognitive skills, capabilities, 
and competencies that influences a person’s ability to cope with environmental demands and 
pressures.32 It’s composed of five dimensions:
• Self-awareness. Being aware of what you’re feeling.
• Self-management. Managing your own emotions and impulses.
The personality dimension of extraversion  
of the Big Five Model applies to  
entrepreneur Sara Blakely, founder of Spanx. 
Being sociable, talkative, and assertive  
contributed to Blakely’s launch and  
development of her enormously successful 
undergarment venture. Blakely (at left) is 
shown here introducing her employee team 
to shoppers at a new Spanx store in Tampa.
Will Vragovic/Tampa Bay Times/ZUMAPRESS/Alamy Live News
Even as technology allows more and more employees to move to 
off-site work arrangements, that doesn’t mean that they won’t be 
interacting with others. Nope . . . they’ll still have ongoing contact 
with colleagues and customers. And whether it goes by the name 
of emotional intelligence, social intelligence, or something else, 
the ability to understand yourself and others will be a skill that 
organizations will seek when hiring employees. In fact, in a survey 
of critical skills for the workforce in 2020, social intelligence ranked 
second on a list of the most critical skills.33 (FYI: the number-one 
skill was sense-making, that is, being able to determine the deeper 
meaning or significance of what’s being expressed.) the ability to 
get along with others—coworkers, colleagues, team mem-
bers, bosses, and customers—will be critical to success in 
most jobs. Those employees who have strong technical skills but 
are weak on emotional intelligence will find it increasingly difficult 
to find and hold a job.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
  talk about It 3: Why do you think the ability to get along 
with others is so critical?
   talk about It 4: How can you develop this ability?
 INCrEAsED rElIANCE ON EMOTIONAl INTEllIGENCE
:::::::  Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    297
• Self-motivation. Persisting in the face of setbacks and failures.
• Empathy. Sensing how others are feeling.
• Social skills. Adapting to and handling the emotions of others.
Several studies suggest that EI may play an important role in job performance.34 For 
instance, one study looked at the characteristics of Bell Lab engineers who were rated as 
stars by their peers. The scientists concluded that these stars were better at relating to others. 
That is, it was EI, not academic IQ, that characterized high performers. A second study of Air 
Force recruiters generated similar findings: Top-performing recruiters exhibited high levels 
of EI. Using these findings, the Air Force revamped its selection criteria. A follow-up inves-
tigation found that future hires who had high EI scores were 2.6 times more successful than 
those with low scores. Organizations such as American Express have found that implement-
ing emotional intelligence programs has helped increase its effectiveness; other organizations 
also found similar results showing that emotional intelligence contributes to team effective-
ness.35 For instance, at Cooperative Printing in Minneapolis, a study of its 45 employees con-
cluded that EI skills were twice as important in “contributing to excellence as intellect and 
expertise alone.”36 A poll of human resources managers asked this question: How important 
is it for your workers to demonstrate EI to move up the corporate ladder? Forty percent of 
the managers replied “very important.” Another 16 percent said moderately important. Other 
studies also indicated that emotional intelligence can be beneficial to quality improvements in 
contemporary organizations.37
The implication is that employers should consider emotional intelligence as a criterion 
in their selection process—especially for those jobs that demand a high degree of social 
interaction.38
Can Personality Traits Predict Practical Work-related  
Behaviors?
In a word, “YES!” Five specific personality traits have proven most powerful in explaining 
individual behavior in organizations. Let’s take a look.
1. Who has control over an individual’s behavior? Some people believe that they control 
their own fate. Others see themselves as pawns of fate, believing that what happens to 
them in their lives is due to luck or chance. The locus of control in the first case is 
internal. In the second case, it is external; these people believe that their lives are con-
trolled by outside forces.39 A manager might also expect to find that externals blame a 
poor performance evaluation on their boss’s prejudice, their coworkers, or other events 
outside their control, whereas “internals” explain the same evaluation in terms of their 
own actions.
2. The second characteristic is called Machiavellianism (“Mach”), after Niccolo Machia-
velli, who provided instruction in the sixteenth century on how to gain and manipulate 
power. An individual who is high in Machiavellianism is pragmatic, maintains emotional 
distance, believes that ends can justify the means,40 and may have beliefs that are less 
ethical.41 The philosophy “if it works, use it” is consistent with a high Mach perspec-
tive. Do high Machs make good employees? That answer depends on the type of job 
and whether you consider ethical implications in evaluating performance. In jobs that 
require bargaining skills (a labor negotiator) or that have substantial rewards for winning 
(a commissioned salesperson), high Machs are productive. In jobs in which ends do not 
justify the means or that lack absolute standards of performance, it’s difficult to predict 
the performance of high Machs.
3. People differ in the degree to which they like or dislike themselves. This trait is called 
self-esteem (SE).42 The research on SE offers some interesting insights into organiza-
tional behavior. For example, SE is directly related to expectations for success. High 
SEs believe that they possess the ability to succeed at work. Individuals with high SE 
will take  more risks in job selection and are more likely to choose unconventional 
jobs than are people with low SE.43 The most common finding on self-esteem is that 
low SEs are more susceptible to external influence than are high SEs. Low SEs are 
Machiavellianism (“Mach”)
A measure of the degree to which people are  
pragmatic, maintain emotional distance, and 
believe that ends justify means
locus of control
The degree to which people believe they control 
their own fate
self-esteem (SE)
An individual’s degree of like or dislike for himself 
or herself

298    Part 4  •  Leading
dependent on positive evaluations from others. As a result, they’re more likely to seek 
approval from others and more prone to conform to the beliefs and behaviors of those 
they respect than are high SEs. In managerial positions, low SEs will tend to be con-
cerned with pleasing others and, therefore, will be less likely to take unpopular stands 
than will high SEs. Not surprisingly, self-esteem has also been found to be related to 
job satisfaction. A number of studies confirm that high SEs are more satisfied with their 
jobs than are low SEs.
4. Another personality trait researchers have identified is called self-monitoring.44 Indi-
viduals high in self-monitoring can show considerable adaptability in adjusting their 
behavior to external, situational factors.45 They’re highly sensitive to external cues and 
can behave differently in different situations. High self-monitors are capable of present-
ing striking contradictions between their public persona and their private selves. Low 
self-monitors can’t alter their behavior. They tend to display their true dispositions and 
attitudes in  every situation; hence, they exhibit high behavioral consistency between 
who they are and what they do. Evidence suggests that high self-monitors tend to pay 
closer attention to the behavior of others and are more capable of conforming than are 
low self-monitors.46 We might also hypothesize that high self-monitors will be more 
successful in managerial  positions that require individuals to play multiple, and even 
contradicting, roles.
5. The final personality trait influencing worker behavior reflects the willingness to take 
chances—the propensity for risk taking. A preference to assume or avoid risk has 
been shown to have an impact on how long it takes individuals to make a decision 
and how much information they require before making their choice. For instance, in 
one classic study, 79 managers worked on a simulated human resources management 
 exercise that  required them to make hiring decisions.47 High-risk-taking managers 
made more rapid decisions and used less information in making their choices than 
did the low-risk-taking managers. Interestingly, the decision accuracy was the same 
for both groups.
Although it’s generally correct to conclude that managers in organizations are risk 
averse, especially in large companies and government agencies,48 individual differences are 
still found on this dimension.49 As a result, it makes sense to recognize these differences and 
even to consider aligning risk-taking propensity with specific job demands. For instance, a 
high-risk-taking propensity may lead to effective performance for a stock trader in a broker-
age firm since this type of job demands rapid decision making. The same holds true for the 
entrepreneur.50 On the other hand, this personality characteristic might prove a major  obstacle 
to accountants performing auditing activities, which might be better done by someone with a 
low-risk-taking propensity.
How Do We Match Personalities and Jobs?
We all want a job that fits our personality.
“What if you’re not happy in your job? Is it possible that you’re in the wrong career 
 entirely?”51 As you do your job day by day, you may realize that your tasks don’t mesh well 
with your personality or talents. Wouldn’t it seem to make more sense to strive for a match 
between your personality and your chosen job or career path?
Obviously, individual personalities differ. So, too, do jobs. How do we match the 
two? The best-documented personality–job fit theory was developed by psychologist John 
Holland.52 His theory states that an employee’s satisfaction with his or her job, as well as 
his or her likelihood of leaving that job, depends on the degree to which the individual’s 
personality matches the job environment. Holland identified six basic personality types, as 
shown in Exhibit 9–2.
Holland’s theory proposes that satisfaction is highest and turnover lowest when person-
ality and occupation are compatible.53 Social individuals should be in “people-type” jobs, 
and so forth. The key points of this theory include the following: (1) there do appear to be 
self-monitoring
A personality trait that measures the ability to 
adjust behavior to external situational factors

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    299
intrinsic differences in personality among individuals; (2) there are different types of jobs; 
and (3) people in job environments compatible with their personality types should be more 
satisfied and less likely to resign voluntarily than people in incongruent jobs.
Do Personality Attributes Differ Across Cultures?
Do personality frameworks, like the Big Five model, transfer across cultures? Are dimensions 
like locus of control relevant in all cultures? Let’s try to answer these questions.
The five personality factors studied in the Big Five model appear in almost all cross-
cultural studies.54 A wide variety of diverse cultures, such as China, Israel, germany, 
Japan, Spain, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, and the United States, have been the setting 
for these studies. Differences are found in the emphasis on dimensions. The Chinese, 
for  example, use the category of conscientiousness more often and use the category of 
agreeableness less often than do Americans. But a surprisingly high amount of agreement 
is found, especially among individuals from developed countries. As a case in point, a 
comprehensive review of studies covering people from the European Community found 
that conscientiousness was a valid predictor of performance across jobs and occupational 
groups.55 U.S. studies found the same results.
We know that there are certainly no common personality types for a given country. You 
can, for instance, find high risk takers and low risk takers in almost any culture. Yet a country’s 
culture influences the dominant personality characteristics of its people. We can see this effect 
of national culture by looking at one of the personality traits we just discussed: locus of control.
National cultures differ in terms of the degree to which people believe they control 
their environment. For instance, North Americans believe that they can dominate their 
Shy, genuine,
persistent, stable,
conforming, practical
Mechanic, drill press
operator, assembly-line
worker, farmer
Analytical, original,
curious, independent
Biologist, economist,
mathematician, news
reporter
Sociable, friendly,
cooperative,
understanding
Social worker, teacher,
counselor, clinical
psychologist
Conforming,
efﬁcient, practical,
unimaginative,
inﬂexible
Accountant, corporate
manager, bank teller, ﬁle
clerk
Self-conﬁdent,
ambitious, energetic,
domineering
Lawyer, real estate
agent, public relations
specialist, small business
manager
Imaginative,
disorderly,
idealistic, emotional,
impractical
Painter, musician, writer,
interior decorator
TYPE
SAMPLE OCCUPATIONS
PERSONALITY CHARACTERISTICS
Realistic. Prefers physical
activities that require skill,
strength, and coordination
Investigative. Prefers
activities involving
thinking, organizing, and
understanding
Social. Prefers activities
that involve helping and
developing others
Conventional. Prefers
rule-regulated, orderly, and
unambiguous activities
Enterprising. Prefers
verbal activities that offer
opportunities to inﬂuence
others and attain power
Artistic. Prefers 
ambiguous and unsystematic 
activities that allow creative
expression
Exhibit 9–2 Holland’s Personality-Job Fit
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 444. Reprinted and 
electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

300    Part 4  •  Leading
environment; other societies, such as those in 
Middle Eastern countries, believe that life is 
 essentially predetermined. Notice how closely 
this distinction parallels the concept of  internal 
and external locus of control. On the basis of 
this particular cultural characteristic, we should 
expect a larger proportion of internals in the U.S. 
and Canadian workforces than in the  workforces 
of Saudi Arabia or Iran.
As we have seen throughout this section, 
 personality traits influence employees’  behavior. 
For 
global 
managers, 
understanding 
how 
 personality traits differ takes on added signifi-
cance when looking at it from the perspective of 
national culture.
How Can an Understanding  
of Personality Help Managers  
Be More Effective?
Managers should be interested in their employees’ personalities because those personalities 
influence their behavior in the following ways:
1. Job-Person Compatibility. Some 62 percent of companies are using personality tests 
when recruiting and hiring.56 And that’s where the major value in understanding 
 personality  differences probably lies. Managers are likely to have higher-performing and 
more- satisfied employees if consideration is given to matching personalities with jobs.
2. Understanding Different Approaches to Work. By recognizing that people approach 
problem solving, decision making, and job interactions differently, a manager can 
better understand why, for instance, an employee is uncomfortable with making quick 
decisions or why an employee insists on gathering as much information as possible 
before addressing a problem. For instance, managers can expect that individuals with 
an external locus of control may be less satisfied with their jobs than those with an 
internal locus and also that they may be less willing to accept responsibility for their 
actions.
3. Being a Better Manager. Being a successful manager and accomplishing goals means 
working well together with others both inside and outside the organization. In order to 
work effectively together, you need to understand each other. This understanding comes, 
at least in part, from an appreciation of personality traits and emotions. Also, one of the 
skills you have to develop as a manager is learning to fine-tune your emotional reactions 
according to the situation. In other words, you have to learn to recognize “when you have 
to smile and when you have to bark.”57
Understanding the differences in the  
emphasis countries place on personality 
dimensions helps managers of global  
companies. For example, knowing that the 
trait of conscientiousness is a valid predictor 
of performance in European Community  
nations helps U.S.-based Burger King  
manage employees such as this BK  
employee in France.
Jean-Paul Pelissier/Thomson Reuters
 Watch It 1! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Ability and Personality.
 Watch It 2! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled Rudi’s Bakery: Ability and Personality.

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    301
What Is Perception and What Influences It?
We interpret what we see and  
call it reality.
“L ke y ur b ain, the n w L nd Rov r autom tic lly adj 
sts to anyth ng.”58 This advertisement for a Land Rover 
SUV illustrates the perceptual process at work. You were 
likely able to read the sentence even with the missing let-
ters  because you recognized the word patterns and organized and interpreted them in a way 
that made sense.
Perception is a process by which we give meaning to our environment by organizing and 
interpreting sensory impressions. Research on perception consistently demonstrates that indi-
viduals may look at the same thing yet perceive it differently. One manager, for instance, can 
interpret the fact that her assistant regularly takes several days to make important decisions 
as evidence that the assistant is slow, disorganized, and afraid to make decisions. Another 
 manager with the same assistant might interpret the same tendency as evidence that the 
 assistant is thoughtful, thorough, and deliberate. The first manager would probably evaluate 
her assistant negatively; the second manager would probably evaluate the person positively. 
The point is that none of us see reality. We interpret what we see and call it reality. And, of 
course, as the example shows, we behave according to our perceptions.
What Influences Perception?
How do we explain the fact that Cathy, a marketing supervisor for a large commercial petro-
leum products organization, age 52, noticed Bill’s nose ring during his employment interview, 
and Sean, a human resources recruiter, age 23, didn’t? A number of factors operate to shape 
and sometimes distort perception. These factors can reside in (1) the perceiver, (2) the object 
or target being perceived, or (3) the context of the situation in which the perception is made.
1. When an individual looks at a target and attempts to interpret what he or she sees, that 
individual’s personal characteristics will heavily influence the interpretation. These 
 personal characteristics include attitudes, personality, motives, interests, past  experiences, 
and expectations.
2. The characteristics of the target being observed can also affect what is perceived. Loud 
people are more likely than quiet people to be noticed in a group. So, too, are extremely 
attractive or unattractive individuals. Because targets are not looked at in isolation, the 
relationship of a target to its background also influences perception (see Exhibit 9–3 for 
an example), as does our tendency to group close things and similar things together.
3. The context in which we see objects or events is also important. The time at which an 
object or event is seen can influence attention, as can location, lighting, temperature, and 
any number of other situational factors.
9-4  Describe  
perception and  
the factors that 
influence it.
Old woman or young woman?
Two faces or an urn?
A knight on a horse?
Exhibit 9–3 Perceptual Challenges—What Do You see?
perception
A process by which we give meaning to our 
environment by organizing and interpreting sensory 
impressions

302    Part 4  •  Leading
How Do Managers Judge Employees?
Much of the research on perception is directed at inanimate objects. Managers, though, are 
more concerned with people. Our perceptions of people differ from our perceptions of such 
inanimate objects as computers, robots, or buildings because we make inferences about the 
actions of people that we don’t, of course, make about inanimate objects. When we observe 
people, we attempt to develop explanations of why they behave in certain ways. Our percep-
tion and judgment of a person’s actions, therefore, will be significantly influenced by the 
assumptions we make about the person’s internal state. Many of these assumptions have led 
researchers to develop attribution theory.
What is attriBution theory? 
Attribution theory has been proposed to explain how 
we judge people differently depending on what meaning we attribute to a given behavior.59 
Basically, the theory suggests that when we observe an individual’s behavior, we attempt to de-
termine whether it was internally or externally caused. Internally caused behavior is believed to 
be under the control of the individual. Externally caused behavior results from outside causes; 
that is, the person is seen as having been forced into the behavior by the situation. That determi-
nation, however, depends on three factors: (1) distinctiveness, (2) consensus, and (3) consistency.
1. Distinctiveness refers to whether an individual displays a behavior in many situations or 
whether it is particular to one situation. Is the employee who arrived late to work today 
also the person coworkers see as a goof-off? What we want to know is whether this be-
havior is unusual. If it is, the observer is likely to give the behavior an external attribution. 
If this action is not unique, it will probably be judged as internal.
2. If everyone who is faced with a similar situation responds in the same way, we can say 
the behavior shows consensus. Our tardy employee’s behavior would meet this criterion 
if all employees who took the same route to work today were also late. If consensus is 
high, you would be expected to give an external attribution to the employee’s tardiness, 
whereas if other employees who took the same route made it to work on time, you would 
conclude the reason to be internal.
3. Finally, a manager looks for consistency in an employee’s actions. Does the individual 
engage in the behaviors regularly and consistently? Does the employee respond the same 
way over time? Coming in 10 minutes late for work is not perceived in the same way if, for 
one employee, it represents an unusual case (she hasn’t been late for several months), but 
for another it is part of a routine pattern (he is late two or three times a week). The more 
consistent the behavior, the more the observer is inclined to attribute it to internal causes.
Exhibit 9–4 summarizes the key elements in attribution theory. It would tell us, for 
 instance, that if an employee, Mr. Flynn, generally performs at about the same level on other 
OBSERVATION
ATTRIBUTION OF CAUSE
INTERPRETATION
YES:  Low distinctiveness
NO:   High distinctiveness
Internal attribution
External attribution
YES:  High consensus
NO:   Low consensus
External attribution
Internal attribution
YES:  High consistency
NO:   Low consistency
Internal attribution
External attribution
Does person behave this
way in other situations?
Do other people behave
the same way in similar
situations?
Does person behave this
way consistently?
Exhibit 9–4 Attribution Theory
attribution theory
A theory used to explain how we judge people 
differently, based on what meaning we attribute to 
a given behavior
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 447. Reprinted  
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    303
related tasks as he does on his current 
task (low distinctiveness), if other em-
ployees frequently perform differently—
better or worse—than Mr. Flynn does on 
that current task (low consensus), and if 
Mr. Flynn’s performance on this current 
task is consistent over time (high consis-
tency), his manager or anyone else who is 
judging Mr. Flynn’s work is likely to hold 
him primarily responsible for his task 
performance (internal attribution).
can attriButions Be distorted?  
One of the more interesting findings 
drawn from attribution theory is that errors 
or biases distort attributions. For instance, 
substantial evidence supports the hypoth-
esis that when we make judgments about 
the behavior of other people, we have a 
tendency to  underestimate the influence 
of external factors and overestimate the in-
fluence of internal or personal factors.60 This fundamental attribution error can explain why 
a sales manager may be prone to attribute the poor performance of her sales agents to laziness 
rather than to the innovative product line  introduced by a competitor. Individuals also tend to 
attribute their own successes to internal factors such as ability or effort while putting the blame 
for failure on external factors such as luck (or an “unfair” test). This self-serving bias suggests 
that feedback provided to employees in performance reviews will be predictably distorted by 
them, whether it is positive or negative.
What perceptual shortcuts do We use? All of us, managers included, use a 
number of shortcuts to judge others. Perceiving and interpreting people’s behavior is a lot 
of work, so we use shortcuts to make the task more manageable.61 Such shortcuts can be 
valuable when they let us make accurate perceptions quickly and provide valid data for 
making predictions. However, they aren’t perfect. They can and do get us into trouble. 
What are these perceptual shortcuts? (See Exhibit 9–5 for a summary.)
Stereotyping generalizes that women lack the 
technical skills and emotional and physical 
strength required to succeed in auto  
racing. In announcing the formation of Grace 
Autosport, the first all-female IndyCar racing 
team, British race car driver Katherine Legge 
(right) purports that gender should not be 
a barrier to pursuing a successful career in 
motorsports.
Michael Conroy/AP Images
Exhibit 9–5 Perceptual shortcuts
shortcut
What It Is
DIstortIon
Selectivity
People assimilate certain bits 
and pieces of what they  
observe depending on their  
interests, background,  
experience, and attitudes
“Speed reading” others may 
result in an inaccurate picture  
of them
Assumed similarity
People assume that others  
are like them
May fail to take into account 
individual differences, resulting 
in incorrect similarities
Stereotyping
People judge others on the  
basis of their perception of 
a group to which the others 
belong
May result in distorted  
judgments because many 
stereotypes have no factual 
foundation
Halo effect
People form an impression of 
others on the basis of a single 
trait
Fails to take into account the 
total picture of what an  
individual has done
fundamental attribution  
error
The tendency to underestimate the influence of 
external factors and overestimate the influence of 
internal factors when making judgments about the 
behavior of others
self-serving bias
The tendency for individuals to attribute their  
successes to internal factors while putting the 
blame for failures on external factors

304    Part 4  •  Leading
Individuals can’t assimilate all they observe, so they’re selective in their perception. 
They absorb bits and pieces. These bits and pieces are not chosen randomly; rather, they’re 
selectively chosen depending on the interests, background, experience, and attitudes of the 
observer. Selective perception allows us to “speed read” others, but not without the risk of 
drawing an inaccurate picture.
It’s easy to judge others if we assume that they’re similar to us. In assumed 
 similarity, or the “like me” effect, the observer’s perception of others is influenced more 
by the observer’s own characteristics than by those of the person observed. For example, 
if you want challenges and responsibility in your job, you’ll assume that others want 
the same. People who assume that others are like them can, of course, be right, but not 
always.
When we judge someone on the basis of our perception of a group he or she is part 
of, we’re using the shortcut called stereotyping. For instance, “Married people are more 
stable employees than single persons” or “Older employees are absent more often from 
work” are examples of stereotyping. To the degree that a stereotype is based on fact, it 
may produce accurate judgments. However, many stereotypes aren’t factual and distort 
our judgment.
When we form a general impression about a person on the basis of a single characteris-
tic, such as intelligence, sociability, or appearance, we’re being influenced by the halo effect. 
This effect frequently occurs when students evaluate their classroom instructor. Students may 
isolate a single trait such as enthusiasm and allow their entire evaluation to be slanted by the 
perception of this one trait. If an instructor who is quiet, assured, knowledgeable, and highly 
qualified has a classroom teaching style that lacks enthusiasm, that instructor might be rated 
lower on a number of other characteristics.
To better understand operant conditioning, we need to first 
look at a different perspective on learning—classical condi-
tioning theory. In classical conditioning, something happens, 
and we react in a specific way. As 
such, it can explain simple reflex-
ive behavior. For instance, classi-
cal conditioning can  explain why a 
scheduled visit by the “top brass” 
brings flurried activities of cleaning, 
straightening, and rearranging at a 
local outlet of a major retail compa-
ny. However, most behavior by people at work is voluntary 
rather than reflexive; that is, employees choose to arrive at 
work on time, ask their boss for help with some problem, or 
“goof off” when no one is watching.
A better explanation for behavior is operant condition-
ing, which says that people behave the way they do so they 
can get something they want or avoid something they don’t 
want. It’s voluntary or learned behavior, not reflexive or un-
learned behavior. Harvard psychologist B. F. Skinner first 
identified the process of operant conditioning and his re-
search widely  expanded our knowledge of it.62 He argued 
that creating pleasing consequences to follow specific forms 
of behavior would increase the frequency of that behavior. 
Skinner demonstrated that people will most likely engage in 
desired  behaviors if they’re  positively reinforced for doing so, 
that rewards are most effective if they immediately follow 
the desired response (behavior), and that behavior that is not 
rewarded or is punished is less likely 
to be repeated. For example, a profes-
sor places a mark by a student’s name 
each time the student makes a con-
tribution to class discussions. Oper-
ant conditioning would argue that this 
practice is motivating because it con-
ditions a student to expect a reward 
(earning class credit) each time she demonstrates a specific 
behavior (speaking up in class). Operant conditioning can be 
seen in work settings as well. And smart managers quickly 
recognize that they can use operant conditioning to shape 
employees’ behaviors to get work done in the most effective 
and efficient manner possible.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these dis-
cussion questions.
  Talk About It 5: How do classical conditioning and 
 operant conditioning differ?
  Talk About It 6: What ethical concerns might arise in 
“shaping” someone’s behavior?
◂▪◂▪◂ From the Past to the Present ▸▪▸▪▸
Learn how to shape 
soMeone’s  
Behavior!
selective perception
The tendency for people to only absorb parts of 
what they observe, which allows us to “speed 
read” others
assumed similarity
An observer’s perception of others influenced more 
by the observer’s own characteristics than by those 
of the person observed
stereotyping
When we judge someone on the basis of our  
perception of a group to which that person belongs
halo effect
When we form a general impression of a person on 
the basis of a single characteristic

305
  how Do learning  
theories Explain behavior?
Almost all behavior is learned.
9-5 Discuss learning theories and their relevance in shaping behavior.
What Is learning?
• Considerably broader than average person’s view that “it’s what you do in school.”
• Occurs all the time as we continually learn from our experiences.
operant conditioning—behavior is a function of  
its consequences.
• People learn to behave to get something they want or to avoid something they don’t want.
• Voluntary or learned behavior, not reflexive or unlearned behavior.
• Tendency to repeat learned behavior is influenced by:
▪ reinforcement S strengthens a behavior and increases the likelihood it will  
be repeated.
▪ lack of reinforcement S weakens a behavior and lessens the likelihood it will be 
repeated.
• Examples of operant conditioning are everywhere—in  
any situation where (explicitly or implicitly) reinforcement 
(rewards) are contingent on some  
action on your part.
▪ (For more information on operant conditioning, see the From the 
Past to the Present box on p. 307).
Andres Rodriguez/Alamy
learning
A relatively permanent change in behavior that 
occurs as a result of experience
operant conditioning
A theory of learning that says behavior is a function 
of its consequences
1

306
social learning theory—learning both through 
observation and direct experience.63
• Influence of models, such as parents, teachers, peers, celebrities, managers, and so 
forth, is central to social learning.
• Four processes determine the amount of influence these models have:
1 
attentional  
processes.
People learn from 
a model when they 
recognize and pay 
attention to its 
critical features.
2 
shaping behavior 
Putting Learning Theory into Practice
Why
• Managers can teach employees to  
behave in ways that most benefit the  
organization.64
hoW
• Guide learning in graduated steps, that is,  
shaping behavior.
retention  
processes. 
A model’s influence 
will depend on how 
well the individual 
remembers the 
model’s action,  
even after the 
model is no longer 
readily available.
3 
Motor  
reproduction  
processes. 
After a person has 
seen a new behavior 
by observing the 
model, the watching 
must become doing.
4 
reinforcement 
processes. 
Individuals will be  
motivated to exhibit 
the modeled behavior 
if positive incentives 
or rewards are  
provided. Reinforced 
behaviors will be 
given more attention, 
learned better, and 
performed more  
often.
Vladimir Nenov/Alamy
social learning theory
A theory of learning that says people can learn 
through observation and direct experience
shaping behavior
The process of guiding learning in graduated steps, 
using reinforcement or lack of reinforcement
2

Four ways to shape behavior:
1
   Positive reinforcement: Follow a desired  
behavior with something pleasant—a manager 
praising an employee for a job well done.
2
   negative reinforcement: Follow a desired  
behavior by terminating or withdrawing  
something unpleasant—a manager telling an  
employee he won’t dock her pay if she starts 
coming to work on time. The only way for the  
employee to not have her pay docked is to  
come to work on time, which is the behavior  
the manager wants.
3
   Punishment penalizes undesirable behavior—
suspending an employee for two days without 
pay for showing up drunk.
4
  Extinction is not reinforcing (ignoring) a  
behavior, making it gradually disappear.
How Can an Understanding of Learning Help  
Managers Be More Effective?
Manage Employees’ Learning
Employees are going to learn on the job. Are managers going 
to manage their learning through (1) the rewards they allocate  
and the examples they set, or (2) allow it to occur haphazardly?
Watch What You Reward:
If managers want behavior A, but reward behavior B, they shouldn’t  
be surprised to find employees learning to engage in behavior B.
Watch What You Do:
Managers should expect that employees will look to them as  
models and do what they do.
Carlos’s Premium Images/Alamy
Both positive and  
negative reinforcement 
result in learning.  
They strengthen a desired 
response and increase the 
probability of repetition.
Both punishment and 
extinction also result  
in learning; however,  
they weaken behavior  
and tend to decrease its 
subsequent frequency.
307

308    Part 4  •  Leading
How Can an Understanding of Perception Help Managers  
Be More Effective?
Managers should be interested in perception because it helps them understand employee  
behavior in the following ways:
1. Managers need to recognize that their employees react to perceptions, not to reality. So 
whether a manager’s appraisal of an employee’s performance is actually objective and 
 unbiased or whether the organization’s wage levels are among the highest in the  community 
is less relevant than what employees perceive them to be. If individuals perceive apprais-
als to be biased or wage levels as low, they’ll behave as if those conditions actually exist.
2. Employees organize and interpret what they see, so there is always the potential for per-
ceptual distortion. The message is clear: Pay close attention to how employees perceive 
both their jobs and management actions. Remember, the valuable employee who quits 
because of an inaccurate perception is just as great a loss to an organization as the valu-
able employee who quits for a valid reason.
What Contemporary OB Issues Face Managers?
By this point, you’re probably well aware of why managers need to understand how and 
why employees behave the way they do. We conclude this chapter by looking at two OB 
 issues having a major influence on managers’ jobs today.
How Do Generational Differences Affect the Workplace?
They’re young, smart, brash. They wear flip-flops to the office or listen to iPods at their 
desk. They want to work, but they don’t want work to be their life. This is generation Y, some 
70 million of them, embarking on their careers, taking their place in an increasingly multi-
generational workplace.65
Just Who is gen y? There’s no consensus about the exact time span that gen Y com-
prises, but most definitions include those individuals born from about 1982 to 1997. One 
thing is for sure—they’re bringing new attitudes with them to the workplace. gen Ys have 
grown up with an amazing array of experiences and opportunities. And they want their work 
life to provide that as well, as shown in Exhibit 9–6. For instance, Stella Kenyi, who is pas-
sionately interested in international development, was sent by her employer, the National 
Rural Electric Cooperative Association, to Yai, Sudan, to survey energy use.66 At Best Buy’s 
corporate offices, a senior scheduling specialist feels that 
as long as the results are there, why should it matter how 
it gets done, even if that involves playing a video game 
while on a phone call.67 An assistant account executive 
from Atlanta described herself and fellow gen Yers as 
tech-savvy risk takers—individuals who are quite willing 
to shake up how things currently stand. And from her per-
spective, appealing work environments are those that offer 
opportunities to work independently and creatively.68
dealing With the Managerial challenges.  
Managing gen Y workers presents some unique chal-
lenges. Conflicts and resentment can arise over issues 
such as appearance, technology, and management style.
How flexible must an organization be in terms of 
 “appropriate” office attire? It may depend on the type 
of work being done and the size of the organization. 
There are many organizations where jeans, T-shirts, and 
9-6  Discuss  
contemporary 
issues in OB.
Fab.com, a shopping portal for design  
products, understands the attitudes of  
Millennials and has created a casual and fun 
environment that appeals to them. Fab offers 
its tech-savvy employees, like those shown 
here at their office in Germany, opportunities 
to develop themselves and their careers in a 
fast-growing e-commerce firm.
Jens Kalaene/dpa/picture-alliance/Newscom

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    309
flip-flops are acceptable. However, in other settings, employees are expected to dress more 
conventionally. But even in those more conservative organizations, one possible solution 
to accommodate the more casual attire preferred by gen Y is to be more flexible in what’s 
 acceptable. For instance, the guideline might be that when the person is not interacting with 
someone outside the organization, more casual wear (with some restrictions) can be worn.
What about technology? This generation has lived much of their lives with ATMs, DVDs, 
cell phones, e-mail, texting, laptops, and the Internet. When they don’t have information they 
need, they just simply enter a few keystrokes to get it. Having grown up with technology, 
gen Ys tend to be totally comfortable with it. They’re quite content to meet virtually to solve 
problems, while bewildered baby boomers expect important problems to be solved with an 
in-person meeting. Baby boomers complain about gen Y’s inability to focus on one task, 
while gen Ys see nothing wrong with multitasking. Again, flexibility from both is the key.
Finally, what about managing gen Ys? Like the old car advertisement that used to say, 
“This isn’t your father’s Oldsmobile,” we can say that “this isn’t your father’s or mother’s 
way of managing.” gen Y employees want bosses who are open minded; experts in their 
field, even if they aren’t tech-savvy; organized; teachers, trainers, and mentors; not authori-
tarian or paternalistic; respectful of their generation; understanding of their need for work/
life balance; providing constant feedback; communicating in vivid and compelling ways; and 
providing stimulating and novel learning experiences.69
gen Y employees have a lot to offer organizations in terms of their knowledge, pas-
sion, and abilities. Managers, however, have to recognize and understand the behaviors of 
this group in order to create an environment in which work can be accomplished efficiently, 
 effectively, and without disruptive conflict.
How Do Managers Deal with Negative Behavior  
in the Workplace?
Jerry notices the oil is low in his forklift but continues to drive it until it overheats and can’t 
be used. After enduring 11 months of repeated insults and mistreatment from her supervisor, 
Immediate Responsibility
They want to make an important impact on Day 1.
Goal Oriented
They want small goals with tight deadlines so they 
can build up ownership of tasks.
High Expectations of Self
They aim to work faster and better than other workers.
Gen Y Workers
High Expectations of Employers
They want fair and direct managers who are highly 
engaged in their professional development.
Ongoing Learning
They seek out creative challenges and view colleagues 
as vast resources from whom to gain knowledge.
Exhibit 9–6 Gen Y Workers
Source: © Rainmaker Thinking, Inc. Reproduced with permission.

310    Part 4  •  Leading
Maria quits her job. An office clerk slams her keyboard and then shouts profanity whenever 
her computer freezes up. Rudeness, hostility, aggression, and other forms of workplace nega-
tivity have become all too common in today’s organizations. In a survey of U.S. employees, 
10 percent said they witnessed rudeness daily within their workplaces and 20 percent said 
that they personally were direct targets of incivility at work at least once a week. In a survey 
of Canadian workers, 25 percent reported seeing incivility daily and 50 percent said they 
were the direct targets at least once per week.70 And it’s been estimated that negativity costs 
the U.S. economy some $300 billion a year.71 What can managers do to manage negative 
behavior in the workplace?
The main thing is to recognize that it’s there. Pretending that negative behavior doesn’t 
exist or ignoring such misbehaviors will only confuse employees about what is expected and 
acceptable behavior. Although researchers continue to debate about the preventive or respon-
sive actions to negative behaviors, in reality, both are needed.72 Preventing negative behav-
iors by carefully screening potential employees for certain personality traits and responding 
immediately and decisively to unacceptable negative behaviors can go a long way toward 
managing negative workplace behaviors. But it’s also important to pay attention to employee 
attitudes, since negativity will show up there as well. As we said earlier, when employees are 
dissatisfied with their jobs, they will respond somehow.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.

9 Review 
311
CHAPTER SUMMARY
  9-1 Identify the focus and goals of organizational 
behavior (OB).
OB focuses on three areas: individual behavior, group behavior, 
and organizational aspects. The goals of OB are to explain, pre-
dict, and influence employee behavior. Six important employee 
behaviors are as follows: Employee productivity is a performance 
measure of both efficiency and effectiveness. Absenteeism is the 
failure to report to work. Turnover is the voluntary and involun-
tary permanent withdrawal from an organization. Organizational 
citizenship behavior (OCB) is  discretionary  behavior that’s not 
part of an employee’s formal job requirements, but it promotes 
the effective functioning of an organization. Job satisfaction is an 
individual’s general attitude toward his or her job. Workplace mis-
behavior is any intentional  employee behavior that’s potentially 
harmful to the organization or individuals within the organization.
  9-2 Explain the role that attitudes play in job  
performance.
Attitudes are evaluative statements concerning people, objects, 
or events. The cognitive component of an attitude refers to the 
beliefs, opinions, knowledge, or information held by a person. 
The affective component is the emotional or feeling part of an 
attitude. The behavioral component refers to an intention to be-
have in a certain way toward someone or something.
Four job-related attitudes include job satisfaction, job 
involvement, organizational commitment, and employee en-
gagement. Job satisfaction refers to a person’s general attitude 
toward his or her job. Job involvement is the degree to which 
an employee identifies with his or her job, actively participates 
in it, and considers his or her job performance to be important 
to his or her self-worth. Organizational commitment is the de-
gree to which an employee identifies with a particular organi-
zation and its goals, and wishes to maintain membership in that 
organization. Employee engagement is when employees are 
connected to, satisfied with, and enthusiastic about their jobs.
According to cognitive dissonance theory, individuals try 
to reconcile attitude and behavior inconsistencies by alter-
ing their attitudes, altering their behavior, or rationalizing the 
inconsistency.
 9-3 Describe different personality theories.
The MBTI measures four dimensions: social interaction, pref-
erence for gathering data, preference for decision making, and 
style of making decisions. The Big Five Model consists of five 
personality traits: extraversion, agreeableness, conscientious-
ness, emotional stability, and openness to experience. Another 
way to view personality is through the five personality traits 
that help explain individual behavior in organizations: locus of 
control, Machiavellianism, self-esteem, self-monitoring, and 
risk taking.
Finally, how a person responds emotionally and how they 
deal with their emotions is a function of personality. A person 
who is emotionally intelligent has the ability to notice and to 
manage emotional cues and information.
  9-4 Describe perception and the factors that  
influence it.
Perception is how we give meaning to our environment by orga-
nizing and interpreting sensory impressions.
Attribution theory helps explain how we judge people dif-
ferently. It depends on three factors. Distinctiveness is whether 
an individual displays different behaviors in different situations 
(that is, is the behavior unusual). Consensus is whether others 
facing a similar situation respond in the same way. Consistency 
is when a person engages in behaviors regularly and consis-
tently. Whether these three factors are high or low helps man-
agers determine whether employee behavior is attributed to 
external or internal causes.
The fundamental attribution error is the tendency to under-
estimate the influence of external factors and overestimate the 
influence of internal factors. The self-serving bias is the ten-
dency to attribute our own successes to internal factors and to 
put the blame for personal failure on external factors. Shortcuts 
used in judging others are selective perception, assumed simi-
larity, stereotyping, and the halo effect.
  9-5 Discuss learning theories and their  
relevance in shaping behavior.
Operant conditioning argues that behavior is a function of its 
consequences. Social learning theory says that individuals learn 
by observing what happens to other people and by directly 
 experiencing something.
Managers can shape behavior by using positive 
 reinforcement (reinforcing a desired behavior by giving some-
thing pleasant), negative reinforcement (reinforcing a desired 
 response by withdrawing something unpleasant), punishment 
(eliminating undesirable behavior by applying penalties), or 
extinction (not reinforcing a behavior to eliminate it).

312    Part 4  •  Leading
Workplace misbehavior can be dealt with by recogniz-
ing that it’s there; carefully screening potential employees for 
possible negative tendencies; and most importantly, by paying 
attention to employee attitudes through surveys about job satis-
faction and dissatisfaction.
 9-6 Discuss contemporary issues in OB.
The challenge of managing gen Y workers is that they bring 
new attitudes to the workplace. The main challenges are over 
issues such as appearance, technology, and management style.
DIscussIon QuEstIons
 9-1 How is an organization like an iceberg? Use 
the  iceberg metaphor to describe the field of 
 organizational behavior.
 9-2 Does the importance of knowledge of OB differ based 
on a manager’s level in the organization? If so, how? If 
not, why not? Be specific.
 9-3 Define the six important employee behaviors.
 9-4 Clarify how individuals reconcile inconsistencies  
between attitudes and behaviors.
 9-5 Describe what is meant by the term emotional 
 intelligence. Provide an example of how it’s used in 
contemporary organizations.
 9-6 “Instead of worrying about job satisfaction, companies 
should be trying to create environments where perfor-
mance is enabled.” What do you think this statement 
means? Explain. What’s your reaction to this statement? 
Do you agree? Disagree? Why?
 9-7 How might a manager use personality traits to improve 
employee selection in his or her department? Emotional 
intelligence? Discuss.
 9-8 Discuss the benefits of using social learning to manage 
a diversified workforce in an organization. 
 9-9 A gallup Organization survey shows that most work-
ers rate having a caring boss even higher than they 
value money or fringe benefits. How should managers 
 interpret this information? What are the implications?
9-10 Identify and discuss the three components of work-
related attitude.
Management Skill Builder  |   unDErstanDIng 
EMPloyEE EMotIons
Employees bring their emotions with them to work every day. Although managers would like to think 
that  employees are always rational, they aren’t. And any manager who deals with people by ignoring how 
 emotions—such as fear, anger, love, hate, joy, and grief—shape employees’ day-to-day behavior isn’t likely 
to be very effective.
MyManagementLab
go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions.
9-11 Why is it important for managers to have an 
 understanding of organizational behavior?
9-12 Describe the key elements of attribution theory. 
Discuss how the fundamental attribution error and 
self-serving bias play a role.
9-13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
 assignment for this chapter.

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    313
skill Basics
Understanding another person’s felt emotions is a difficult task. 
But we can learn to read others’ emotions. How? By focusing 
on actual behaviors as well as verbal, nonverbal, and paralin-
guistic cues.73
• 
Assess others’ emotional intelligence (EI). Some people 
are more in touch with their emotions than others. Those 
who understand and can manage their emotions are said 
to be high in EI. When people exhibit the following be-
haviors, you should find that they have less variance in 
their  emotions and are easier to read. People high in EI 
understand the way they feel (self-aware), are sensitive to 
the feelings of others (empathetic), voluntarily help others 
 (socially responsible), see things the way they are rather 
than the way they wish them to be (reality-oriented), reach 
out to others and show concern for others’ interests (so-
ciable), and manage their frustrations and anger (impulse 
control).
• 
Ask about emotions. The easiest way to find out what 
someone is feeling is to ask them. Saying something 
as simple as “Are you OK? What’s the problem?” can 
 frequently provide you with the information to assess 
an individual’s emotional state. But relying on a ver-
bal  response has two drawbacks. First, almost all of us 
conceal our emotions to some extent for privacy and to 
reflect social expectations. So we might be unwilling 
to share our true feelings.  Second, even if we want to 
convey our feelings verbally, we may be unable to do 
so. Some  people have difficulty  understanding their 
own emotions and, hence, are unable to express them 
 verbally. So, at best, verbal responses  provide only par-
tial  information.
• 
Look for nonverbal cues. You’re talking with a coworker. 
Does the fact that his back is rigid, his teeth clenched, 
and his facial muscles tight tell you something about his 
emotional state? It probably should. Facial expressions, 
gestures, body movements, and physical distance are non-
verbal cues that can provide additional insights into what 
a person is feeling. Facial expressions, for instance, are 
a window into a person’s feelings. Notice differences in 
 facial features: the height of the cheeks, the raising or low-
ering of the brow, the turn of the mouth, the positioning of 
the lips, and the configuration of muscles around the eyes. 
Even something as subtle as the distance at which someone 
chooses to position him- or herself from you can convey 
 PErsONAl INvENTOrY AssEssMENT
understanding Employee Emotions
How emotionally intelligent are you? Take this PIA and find out how good you are at 
 understanding employee emotions.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
their feelings, or lack, of intimacy, aggressiveness, repug-
nance, or withdrawal.
• 
Look for how things are said. As Janet and I talked, I no-
ticed a sharp change in the tone of her voice and the speed 
at which she spoke. I was tapping into the third source of 
information on a person’s emotions—paralanguage. This 
is communication that goes beyond the specific spoken 
words. It includes pitch, amplitude, rate, and voice qual-
ity of speech. Paralanguage reminds us that people convey 
their feelings not only in what they say, but also in how 
they say it.
Practicing the skill
Do the following:
Part A. Form groups of two. Each person is to spend a couple 
of minutes thinking (without sharing with the other person) 
of a time in the past when he or she was emotional about 
something. Examples might include being upset with a parent, 
sibling, or friend; being excited or disappointed about an aca-
demic or athletic achievement; being angry with someone over 
an insult or slight; being disgusted by something someone has 
said or done; or being happy because of something good that 
happened.
Part B. Now you’ll conduct two role plays. Each will be an 
interview. In the first, one person will play the interviewer and 
the other will play the job applicant. The job is for a summer 
management internship with a large retail chain. Each role 
play will last no longer than 10 minutes. The interviewer is to 
conduct a normal job interview, except you are to continually 
rethink the emotional episode you envisioned in Part A. Try 
hard to convey this emotion while, at the same time, being pro-
fessional in interviewing the job applicant.
Part C. Now reverse positions for the second role play. The 
interviewer becomes the job applicant, and vice versa. The new 
interviewer will conduct a normal job interview, except that he 
or she will continually rethink the emotional episode chosen in 
Part A.
Part D. Spend 10 minutes deconstructing the interview, with 
specific attention focused on what emotion(s) you think the 
other was conveying? What cues did you pick up? How accu-
rate were you in reading those cues?
Continue to practice these skills in your everyday interac-
tions with others. Pretty soon, you’ll feel more competent at 
reading others’ emotional cues.

314    Part 4  •  Leading
Wood Designs Plus
To: Ted Sigler, Director of HR
From: Michelle DePriest, President
Re: Hiring
Ted, as we discussed last Friday, our manufacturing opera-
tions have grown to the point where we need to add a couple 
of people to our executive team; specifically, a corporate con-
troller and a national sales director. The controller will be re-
sponsible for establishing operational and financial standards 
(in other words, a lot of number-crunching using financial and 
manufacturing statistics) for our various work units. The na-
tional sales director will be responsible for working closely with 
our sales staff to further develop long-lasting and mutually 
beneficial  relationships with our customers.
I recall something from a management class I took in 
college that certain personality types fit best with certain 
types of jobs. Could you do some research on this topic for 
me? Write up a short report (no more than a page) describ-
ing the personality type that might be an appropriate match 
for each of these new positions. Get this to me by the end 
of the week.
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 
casE aPPlIcatIon #1
A
s the number-one company on Fortune’s Best Company 
to Work For list for six straight years, google must 
be doing something right! Actually, it does many 
things right! One thing that you might be surprised at is a self-
improvement course (one of many) that’s offered to google’s 
employees. The course, first offered in 2007, is called simply 
Search Inside Yourself (SIY). And it’s so popular that thousands 
of googlers are on waiting lists to take the course!
SIY was developed by a google engineer, Chade-Meng 
Tan. Tan has been around google from almost the  beginning—
he was google employee No. 107. His current work position 
carries the title “Jolly good Fellow,” and his job description 
says he wants to, “Enlighten minds, open hearts, create world 
peace.”74 Interesting concepts 
for a highly successful tech 
company, don’t you think! But 
there’s a serious side to what 
might seem to be a “fluff” 
topic. The SIY course was designed to show googlers how to 
be more aware of their emotions, to be more compassionate 
toward others, to be able to build sustainable relationships (in-
ternally and externally), and, of course, to contribute to world 
peace. (We’re not kidding!) SIY is based on the five dimen-
sions of emotional intelligence —here’s a little review for you: 
self-awareness, self-management, self-motivation, empathy, and 
social skills—and is broken into three parts. The first part of 
the course focuses on attention training—being able to center 
Getting All Emotional at Google
yourself calmly and clearly in the midst of whatever is going 
on around you . . . shouting, stress, conflict, or whatever. The 
second part involves self-knowledge—being aware of your 
emotions and eventually being able to master those emotions. 
And the third part is creating mental habits—being in control of 
your emotions and able to naturally think how to relate calmly 
and kindly to others. Although all this sounds very interesting 
and very useful, that isn’t the most fascinating part of the story.
What is most interesting is the fact that this course is 
so popular among people who are extremely intelligent and 
very logical, practical, and straight-forward. After all, google 
hires the best and the brightest engineers—people who have 
a lot of knowledge and training, but who may not always 
have the best social/people 
skills. So how did Tan appeal 
to those individuals? The ap-
peal was that the course was 
designed for the intellectual 
intelligence side (the nerd side) by focusing on the neu-
roscience behind the touchy-feely behavioral self-control 
that is possible through emotional intelligence. And despite 
google’s need for very smart, competent, tech-oriented em-
ployees, the reality is that even its workplace has to be about 
people working together to solve problems and design new 
ways to keep moving the company forward. So, even for 
them, emotional intelligence skills are needed for successful 
collaboration.
Search Inside Yourself

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    315
Discussion Questions
9-14 Why might emotional intelligence be important to Google’s 
 engineers?
9-15 What is the purpose of this Search Inside Yourself course?
9-16 Describe each of the three parts of the SIY course. Which do 
you think would be the hardest to master? Why?
9-17 How has Google made the SIY course appeal to its engineers?
Pairing different  
generations together at 
work . . . and making it work!
casE aPPlIcatIon 
Odd Couples
A 
29-year-old and a 68-year-old. How much could they 
possibly have in common? And what could they learn 
from each other? At Randstad USA’s Manhattan  office, 
such employee pairings are common.75 One such pair of col-
leagues sits inches apart facing each other. “They hear every 
call the other makes. They read every e-mail the other sends or 
receives. Sometimes they fin-
ish each other’s sentences.”
Randstad Holding NV, a 
Dutch company, has been us-
ing this pairing idea since its 
founding more than 40 years 
ago. The founder’s motto was 
“Nobody should be alone.” The original intent was to boost 
productivity by having sales agents share one job and trade 
off job responsibilities. Today, these partners in the home of-
fice have an arrangement where one is in the office one week 
while the other one is out making sales calls, then the next 
week, they switch. The company brought its partner arrange-
ment to the United States in the late 1990s. But when it began 
recruiting new employees, the vast majority of whom were in 
their twenties, it realized the challenges and the potential of 
pairing different generations together. “Knowing that these 
gen Yers need lots of attention in the workplace, Randstad 
executives figured that if they shared a job with someone 
whose own success depended on theirs, they were certain to 
get all the nurturing they required.”
Randstad doesn’t simply pair up people and hope it works. 
There’s more to it than that! The company looks for people 
who will work well with others by conducting extensive in-
terviews and requiring job applicants to shadow a sales agent 
for half a day. “One question Randstad asks is: What’s your 
most memorable moment while being on a team? If they re-
spond ‘When I scored the win-
ning touchdown,’ that’s a deal 
killer. Everything about our 
organization is based on the 
team and group.” When a new 
hire is paired with an experi-
enced agent, both individuals 
have some adjusting. One of the most interesting elements of 
Randstad’s program is that neither person is “the boss.” And 
both are expected to teach the other.
Discussion Questions
9-18 What possible OB topics do you see in this story? Explain.
9-19 What do you think about this pairing-up idea? Would you be 
comfortable with such an arrangement? Why or why not?
9-20 What personality traits would be most needed for this type of 
work arrangement? Why?
9-21 What types of issues might a Gen Y employee and an older, 
more-experienced employee face? How could two people in 
such a close-knit work arrangement deal with those issues? 
That is, how could both make the adjustment easier?
#2

316    Part 4  •  Leading
What would an EMPLOYEES-
FIRST culture look like?
casE aPPlIcatIon 
Employees First
“E
mployees first.” That’s the most important and cru-
cial cultural value that HCL Technologies’ former 
CEO Vineet Nayar believed would help his company 
succeed and take it into the future.76 Although most managers 
think that customers should come first, Nayar’s philosophy was 
that employee satisfaction needed to be the top priority.
As one of the largest 
companies in India, HCL sells 
various information technol-
ogy consulting services, such 
as infrastructure consulting, 
product engineering, custom 
software development, and application and enterprise consult-
ing. Luring and keeping top talent is one of the challenges 
HCL faces. And at its size, it doesn’t have the atmosphere of a 
fun and quirky startup.
Part of that “employee first” philosophy is a no-layoff 
policy, which was difficult to uphold during the pressures of 
the economic downturn. Like its competitors, HCL had excess 
employees and had suspended raises. But HCL kept its prom-
ise and didn’t lay off any HCLites (Nayar’s name for HCL 
employees). As business has picked up, however, employees 
begin looking at competitors’ job offers. During the first quar-
ter alone of 2010, HCL lost 22 percent of its workforce. Maybe 
it’s time to monitor and track employee satisfaction.
HCL Technologies is headquartered in the world’s largest 
democracy, so it’s quite fitting that the New Delhi–based com-
pany is attempting a radical experiment in workplace democ-
racy. Nayar was committed to creating a company where the 
job of company leaders was to enable people to find their own 
destiny by gravitating to their strengths. One thing that Nayar 
did was to pioneer a culture in which employees were first. 
What has he done to put employees first? Part of the cultural 
initiative dealt with the organization’s structure. HCL inverted 
its organizational structure and placed more power in the hands 
of frontline employees, especially those in direct contact with 
customers and clients. It increased its investment in employee 
development and improved communication through greater 
transparency. Employees were encouraged to communicate 
directly with Nayar. Through a forum called U&I (You and I), 
Nayar fielded more than a hundred questions from employees 
every week. “I threw open the door and invited criticism,” he 
said. However, the signature piece of the company’s cultural 
mission is probably what HCL called “trust pay.” In contrast to 
the industry standard in which 
the average employee’s pay is 
30 percent variable, HCL de-
cided to pay higher fixed sala-
ries and reduce the variable 
component.
Does the unique “employees first” culture at HCL 
Technologies attract unique employees? Rajeev Sawhney, 
HCL’s European president, would say yes. He uses Slumdog 
Millionaire, the movie that won an Academy Award for Best 
Picture, as a parallel. “It (the movie) is a reflection of the 
Indian race. It shows the adversity that creates the desire in 
people to reach out and create. . . . With each adversity they 
face, there is a greater desire to reach out and do something 
more.” Sawhney says that entrepreneurialism is a key value 
of the HCL culture. “You can still tell an HCL person from a 
mile off. I think there is a particular DNA for an HCL person. It 
includes a very high need for achievement and very persuasive 
skills. HCL people are very energetic; they want to do lots of 
things and to take risks on behalf of the company.”
Discussion Questions
9-22 What is your impression of an “employees first” culture? Would 
this work in other organizations? Why or why not? What would 
it take to make it work?
9-23 How might an understanding of organizational behavior help 
CEO Vineet Nayar lead his company? Be specific. How about 
first-line company supervisors? Again, be specific.
9-24 What aspects of personality do you see in this story about HCL? 
How have the personality traits of HCL employees contributed 
to make HCL what it is?
9-25 Design an employee attitude survey for HCL’s employees.
#3

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    317
Endnotes
 1. “Survey on the Total Financial 
Impact of Employee Absences,” 
Medical 
Benefits, 
November 
30, 2010, 9; and K. M. Kroll, 
“Absence-Minded,” CFO Human 
Capital, 2006, 12–14.
 2. D. W. Organ, Organizational Citi-
zenship Behavior: The Good Sol-
dier Syndrome (Lexington, MA: 
Lexington Books, 1988), 4. See 
also J. L. Lavell, D. E. Rupp, and 
J. Brockner, “Taking a Multifoci 
Approach to the Study of Justice, 
Social Exchange, and Citizenship 
Behavior: The Target Similarity 
Model,” Journal of Management 
(December 2007): 841–66; and 
J. A. LePine, A. Erez, and D. E. 
Johnson, “The Nature and Dimen-
sionality of Organizational Citi-
zenship Behavior: A Critical Re-
view and Meta-Analysis,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (February 
2002): 52–65.
 3. J. R. Spence, D. L. Ferris, D. J. 
Brown, and D. Heller, “Under-
standing Daily Citizenship Be-
haviors: A Social Comparison Ap-
proach,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior (May 2011): 547–71; L. 
M. Little, D. L. Nelson, J. C. Wal-
lace, and P. D. Johnson, “Inte-
grating Attachment Style, Vigor 
at Work, and Extra-Role Perfor-
mance,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior (April 2011): 464–84; 
N. P. Podsakoff, P. M. Podsakoff, 
S. W. Whiting, and P. Mishra, “Ef-
fects of Organizational Citizenship 
Behavior on Selection Decisions 
in Employment Interviews,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology (March 
2011): 310–26; T. M. glomb, D. P. 
Bhave, A. g. Miner, and M. Wall, 
“Doing good, Feeling good: Ex-
amining the Role of Organizational 
Citizenship Behaviors in Changing 
Mood,” 
Personnel 
Psychology, 
Spring 2011, 191–223; T. P. Mun-
yon, W. A. Hochwarter, P. L. Per-
rewé, and g. R. Ferris, “Optimism 
and the Nonlinear Citizenship Be-
havior—Job Satisfaction Relation-
ship in Three Studies,” Journal of 
Management (November 2010): 
1505–28; R. Ilies, B. A. Scott, and 
T. A. Judge, “The Interactive Ef-
fects of Personal Traits and Expe-
rienced States on Intraindividual 
Patterns of Citizenship Behavior,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(June 2006): 561–75; P. Cardona, 
B. S. Lawrence, and P. M. Bentler, 
“The Influence of Social and Work 
Exchange Relationships on Orga-
nizational Citizenship Behavior,” 
Group & Organization Manage-
ment, April 2004, 219–47; M. C. 
Bolino and W. H. Turnley, “going 
the Extra Mile: Cultivating and 
Managing Employee Citizenship 
Behavior,” Academy of Manage-
ment Executive, August 2003, 
60–73; M. C. Bolino, W. H. Turn-
ley, and J. J. Bloodgood, “Citizen-
ship Behavior and the Creation of 
Social Capital in Organizations,” 
Academy of Management Review, 
October 2002, 505–22; and P. M. 
Podsakoff, S. B. MacKenzie, J. B. 
Paine, and D. g. Bachrach, “Orga-
nizational Citizenship Behaviors: 
A Critical Review of the Theoreti-
cal and Empirical Literature and 
Suggestions for Future Research,” 
Journal of Management 26, no. 3 
(2000): 543–48.
 4. M. C. Bolino and W. H. Turnley, 
“The Personal Costs of Citizen-
ship Behavior: The Relationship 
between Individual Initiative and 
Role Overload, Job Stress, and 
Work-Family Conflict,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (July 2005): 
740–48.
 5. This definition adapted from R. 
W. griffin and Y. P. Lopez, “Bad 
Behavior in Organizations: A Re-
view and Typology for Future Re-
search,” Journal of Management 
(December 2005): 988–1005.
 6. S. J. Becker, “Empirical Validation 
of Affect, Behavior, and Cognition 
as Distinct Components of Behav-
ior,” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology (May 1984): 
1191–1205.
 7. S. P. Robbins and T. A. Judge, Es-
sentials of Organizational Behav-
ior, 11th ed. (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2010).
 8. M. S. Christian, A. S. garza, and J. 
E. Slaughter, “Work Engagement: 
A Quantitative Review and Test of 
Its Relations with Task and Con-
textual Performance,” Personnel 
Psychology, Spring 2011, 89–136; 
V. T. Ho, S-S Wong, and C. H. Lee, 
“A Tale of Passion: Linking Job 
Passion and Cognitive Engagement 
to Employee Work Performance,” 
Journal of Management Studies 
(January 2011): 26–47; D. R. May, 
R. L. gilson, and L. M. Harter, 
“The Psychological Conditions of 
Meaningfulness, Safety and Avail-
ability and the Engagement of the 
Human Spirit at Work,” Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology (March 2004): 11–37; 
R. T. Keller, “Job Involvement 
and Organizational Commitment 
as Longitudinal Predictors of Job 
Performance: A Study of Scientists 
and Engineers,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology (August 1997): 539–
45; W. Kahn, “Psychological Con-
ditions of Personal Engagement 
and Disengagement at Work,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(December 1990): 692–794; and P. 
P. Brooke Jr., D. W. Russell, and J. 
L. Price, “Discriminant Validation 
of Measures of Job Satisfaction, 
Job Involvement, and Organiza-
tional Commitment,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (May 1988): 
139–45. Also, see, for example, 
J. Smythe, “Engaging Employees 
to Drive Performance,” Commu-
nication World, May–June 2008, 
20–22; A. B. Bakker and W. B. 
Schaufeli, “Positive Organizational 
Behavior: Engaged Employees in 
Flourishing Organizations,” Jour-
nal of Organizational Behavior 
(February 2008): 147–54; U. Ag-
garwal, S. Datta, and S. Bhargava, 
“The Relationship between Hu-
man Resource Practices, Psycho-
logical Contract, and Employee 
Engagement—Implications 
for 
Managing Talent,” IIMB Manage-
ment Review, September 2007, 
313–25; M. C. Christian and J. E. 
Slaughter, “Work Engagement: A 
Meta-Analytic Review and Direc-
tions for Research in an Emerging 
Area,” AOM Proceedings, August 
2007, 1–6; C. H. Thomas, “A New 
Measurement Scale for Employee 
Engagement: Scale Development, 
Pilot Test, and Replication,” AOM 
Proceedings, August 2007, 1–6; A. 
M. Saks, “Antecedents and Con-
sequences of Employee Engage-
ment,” Journal of Managerial Psy-
chology 21, no. 7 (2006): 600–19; 
and A. Parsley, “Road Map for Em-
ployee Engagement,” Management 
Services, Spring 2006, 10–11.
 9. Mercer, IndustryWeek, April 2008, 
24.
 10. J. M. george, “The Wider Context, 
Costs, and Benefits of Work En-
gagement,” European Journal of 
Work & Organizational Psychology 
(February 2011): 53–59; and “Em-
ployee Engagement Report 2011,” 
Blessing White Research, http://
www.blessingwhite.com/eee__ 
report.asp (January 2011): 7–8.
 11. A. J. Elliott and P. g. Devine, “On 
the Motivational Nature of Cogni-
tive Dissonance: Dissonance as 
Psychological Discomfort,” Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy (September 1994): 382–94.
 12. L. Festinger, A Theory of Cogni-
tive Dissonance (Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, 1957); 
C. Crossen, “Cognitive Disso-
nance Became a Milestone in 
1950s Psychology,” Wall Street 
Journal, December 4, 2006, B1; 
and Y. “Sally” Kim, “Applica-
tion of the Cognitive Dissonance 
Theory to the Service Industry,” 
Services 
Marketing 
Quarterly, 
April–June 2011, 96–112.
 13. H. C. Koh and E. H. Y. Boo, “The 
Link between Organizational Eth-
ics and Job Satisfaction: A Study 
of Managers in Singapore,” Jour-
nal of Business Ethics, February 
15, 2001, 309.
 14. See, for example, W. D. Crano and 
R. Prislin, “Attitudes and Persua-
sion,” Annual Review of Psychol-
ogy, 2006, 345–74; and J. Jermias, 
“Cognitive Dissonance and Resis-
tance to Change: The Influence of 
Commitment Confirmation and 
Feedback on Judgment Usefulness 
of Accounting Systems,” Account-
ing, Organizations, and Society, 
March 2001, 141.
 15. P. Jaskunas, “The Tyranny of the 
Forced Smile,” New York Times 
Online, February 14, 2015; and R. 
E. Silverman, “Workers Really Do 
Put on a Happy Face for the Boss,” 
Wall Street Journal, January 29, 
2015, D4.
 16. T. A. Judge, C. J. Thoresen, J. 
E. Bono, and g. K. Patton, “The 
Job Satisfaction–Job Performance 
Relationship: A Qualitative and 
Quantitative Review,” Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, May 2001, 376–407.
 17. L. Saari and T. A. Judge, “Employ-
ee Attitudes and Job Satisfaction,” 
Human Resource Management, 
Winter 2004, 395–407; and T. A. 
Judge and A. H. Church, “Job Sat-
isfaction: Research and Practice,” 
in C. L. Cooper and E. A. Locke 
(eds.), Industrial and Organiza-
tional Psychology: Linking Theory 
with Practice (Oxford, UK: Black-
well, 2000).
 18. D. A. Harrison, D. A. Newman, 
and P. L. Roth, “How Important 
Are Job Attitudes?: Meta-Analytic 
Comparisons of Integrative Behav-
ioral Outcomes and Time Sequenc-
es,” Academy of Management 
Journal (April 2006): 305–25.
 19. g. Chen, R. E. Ployhart, H. C. 
Thomas, N. Anderson, and P. D. 
Bliese, “The Power of Momentum: 
A New Model of Dynamic Rela-
tionships between Job Satisfaction 
Change and Turnover Intentions,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(February 2011): 159–81.
 20. I. Arnsdorf, “No More New Kid 
on Campus,” Wall Street Journal, 
August 5, 2010, D1+.
 21. “Personality Is More Important 
Than Hard Skills, Managers Say,” 
T&D, July 2014, 19.
 22. L. Evans, “Do You Have the 
Right Personality to Work from 
Home?” http://www.fastcompany.
com/3046450/how-to-be-a-success-
at-everything/do-you-have-the-
right-personality-to-work-from-
home, May 26, 2015.
 23. CPP, Inc., Myers-Briggs Type In-
dicator® (MBTI®), http://www.
cpp.com/products/mbti/index.asp 
(2011); and J. Llorens, “Taking 
Inventory of Myers-Briggs,” T&D, 
April 2010, 18–19.
 24. Ibid.
 25. See, for instance, J. Overbo, “Us-
ing 
Myers-Briggs 
Personality 
Type to Create a Culture Adapted 
to the New Century,” T&D, Febru-
ary 2010, 70–72; K. garrety, R. 
Badham, V. Morrigan, W. Rifkin, 
and M. Zanko, “The Use of Per-
sonality Typing in Organizational 
Change: Discourse, Emotions, and 
the Reflective Subject,” Human 
Relations, February 2003, 211–35.
 26. P. Moran, “Personality Charac-
teristics and growth-Orientation 
of the Small Business Owner 
Manager,” Journal of Managerial 
Psychology (July 2000): 651; and 
M. Higgs, “Is There a Relationship 
between the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator and Emotional Intel-
ligence?” Journal of Managerial 
Psychology (September–October 
2001): 488–513.

318    Part 4  •  Leading
 27. J. M. Digman, “Personality Struc-
ture: Emergence of the Five Factor 
Model,” in M. R. Rosenweig and L. 
W. Porter, eds., Annual Review of 
Psychology, vol. 41 (Palo Alto, CA: 
Annual Reviews, 1990), 417–40; 
O. P. John, “The Big Five Factor 
Taxonomy: Dimensions of Person-
ality in the Natural Language and 
in Questionnaires,” in L. A. Per-
vin, ed., Handbook of Personality 
Theory and Research (New York: 
guilford Press, 1990), 66–100; and 
M. K. Mount, M. R. Barrick, and 
J. P. Strauss, “Validity of Observer 
Ratings of the Big Five Personality 
Factors,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology (April 1996): 272–80.
 28. See, for example, T. W. Yiu and 
H. K. Lee, “How Do Personality 
Traits Affect Construction Dispute 
Negotiation: Study of Big Five 
Personality Model,” Journal of 
Construction Engineering & Man-
agement (March 2011): 169–78; 
H. J. Kell, A. D. Rittmayer, A. E. 
Crook, and S. J. Motowidlo, “Situ-
ational Content Moderates the 
Association between the Big Five 
Personality Traits and Behavioral 
Effectiveness,” Human Perfor-
mance, February 2010, 213–28; R. 
D. Meyer, R. S. Dalal, and S. Bo-
naccio, “A Meta-Analytic Investi-
gation into the Moderating Effects 
of Situational Strength on the Con-
scientiousness–Performance Rela-
tionship,” Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior (November 2009): 
1077–102; g. Vittorio, C. Barba-
ranelli, and g. guido, “Brand Per-
sonality: How to Make the Meta-
phor Fit,” Journal of Economic 
Psychology (June 2001): 377; g. 
M. Hurtz and J. J. Donovan, “Per-
sonality and Job Performance: 
The Big Five Revisited,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (December 
2000): 869; W. A. Hochwarter, L. 
A. Witt, and K. M. Kacmar, “Per-
ceptions of Organizational Politics 
as a Moderator of the Relation-
ship between Conscientiousness 
and Job Performance,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (June 2000): 
472; and M. R. Barrick and M. K. 
Mount, “The Big Five Personality 
Dimensions and Job Performance: 
A Meta-Analytic Study,” Person-
nel Psychology 44 (1991): 1–26.
 29. Barrick and Mount, “Autonomy as 
a Moderator of the Relationship 
between the Big Five Personality 
Dimensions and Job Performance.”
 30. See also M. R. Furtner and J. F. 
Rauthmann, “Relations between 
Self-Leadership and Scores on the 
Big Five,” Psychological Reports, 
October 2010, 339–53; R. Barrick, 
M. Piotrowski, and g. L. Stewart, 
“Personality and Job Performance: 
Test of the Mediating Effects of 
Motivation Among Sales Repre-
sentatives,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology (February 2002): 43–52; 
and I. T. Robertson, H. Baron, P. 
gibbons, R. Maclver, and g. Ny-
field, “Conscientiousness and Man-
agerial Performance,” Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology (June 2000): 171–78.
 31. See, for example, J. L. Kisamore, 
I. M. Jawahar, E. W. Liguori, T. L. 
Mharapara, and T. H. Stone, “Con-
flict and Abusive Workplace Be-
haviors: The Moderating Effects of 
Social Competencies,” Career De-
velopment International,  October 
2010, 583–600; P. S. Mishra and 
A. K. Das Mohapatra, “Relevance 
of Emotional Intelligence for Effec-
tive Job Performance: An Empirical 
Study,” Vikalpa: The Journal for 
Decision Makers (January–March 
2010): 53–61; T-Y. Kim, D. M. 
Cable, S-P. Kim, and J. Wang, 
“Emotional Competence and Work 
Performance: The Mediating Effect 
of Proactivity and the Moderating 
Effect of Job Autonomy,” Jour-
nal of Organizational Behavior 
(October 2009): 983–1000; J. M. 
Diefendorff and g. J. greguras, 
“Contextualizing Emotional Dis-
play Rules: Examining the Roles 
of Targets and Discrete Emotions in 
Shaping Display Rule Perceptions,” 
Journal of Management (August 
2009): 880–98; J. gooty, M. gavin, 
and N. M. Ashkanasy, “Emotions 
Research in OB: The Challenges 
That Lie Ahead,” Journal of Orga-
nizational Behavior (August 2009): 
833–38; N. M. Ashkanasy and C. S. 
Daus, “Emotion in the Workplace: 
The New Challenge for Managers,” 
Academy of Management Execu-
tive, February 2002, 76–86; N. M. 
Ashkanasy, C. E. J. Hartel, and C. 
S. Daus, “Diversity and Emotions: 
The New Frontiers in Organiza-
tional Behavior Research,” Journal 
of Management 28, no. 3 (2002): 
307–38; S. Fox, “Promoting Emo-
tional Intelligence in Organiza-
tions: Make Training in Emotional 
Intelligence Effective,” Personnel 
Psychology, Spring 2002, 236–40; 
B. E. Ashforth, “The Handbook of 
Emotional Intelligence: Theory, De-
velopment, Assessment, and Appli-
cation at Home, School, and in the 
Work Place: A Review,” Personnel 
Psychology, Autumn 2001, 721–24; 
and R. Bar-On and J. D. A. Parker, 
The Handbook of Emotional Intel-
ligence: Theory, Development, As-
sessment, and Application at Home, 
School, and in the Work Place (San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2000).
 32. See, for instance, C. S. P. Fernan-
dez, “Emotional Intelligence in 
the Workplace,” Journal of Public 
Health Management and Practice 
(February 2007): 80–82.
 33. “Critical Skills for Workforce 
2020,” T&D, September 2011, 19.
 34. R. Pearman, “The Leading Edge: 
Using Emotional Intelligence to 
Enhance 
Performance,” 
T&D, 
March 2011, 68–71; C. Prentice 
and B. King, “The Influence of 
Emotional Intelligence on the 
Service Performance of Casino 
Frontline Employees,” Tourism 
& Hospitality Research, January 
2011, 49–66; E. H. O’Boyle Jr., 
R. H. Humphrey, J. M. Pollack, 
T. H. Hawver, and P. A. Story, 
“The Relation between Emotional 
 Intelligence and Job Performance: 
A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior Online, 
www.interscience.wiley.com, 
June 2010; and P. J. Jordan, N. M. 
Ashkanasy, and C. E. J. Hartel, 
“Emotional Intelligence as a Mod-
erator of Emotional and Behav-
ioral  Reactions to Job Insecurity,” 
Academy of Management Review, 
July 2002, 361–72.
 35. C. Cherniss and R. D. Caplan, 
“A Case Study of Implementing 
Emotional Intelligence Programs 
in Organizations,” Journal of Or-
ganizational Excellence (Winter 
2001): 763–86; and S. B. Vanessa-
Urch and W. Deuskat, “Build-
ing the Emotional Intelligence of 
groups,” Harvard Business Re-
view, March 2001, 81–91.
 36. “Can’t We All Just get Along,” 
BusinessWeek, October 9, 2000, 18.
 37. C. Moller and S. Powell, “Emo-
tional Intelligence and the Chal-
lenges of Quality Management,” 
Leadership and Organizational 
Development 
Journal 
(July– 
August 2001): 341–45.
 38. See L. A. Downey, V. Papageorgiou, 
and C. Stough, “Examining the 
Relationship between Leadership, 
Emotional Intelligence, and Intu-
ition in Female Managers,” Leader-
ship & Organization Development 
Journal (April 2006): 250–64.
 39. See, for instance, J. Silvester, 
F. M. Anderson-gough, N. R. 
Anderson, and A. R. Mohamed, 
“Locus of Control, Attributions 
and Impression Management in 
the Selection Interview,” Journal 
of Occupational and Organiza-
tional Psychology (March 2002): 
59–77; D. W. Organ and C. N. 
greene, “Role Ambiguity, Locus 
of Control, and Work Satisfac-
tion,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy (February 1974): 101–02; and 
T. R. Mitchell, C. M. Smyser, and 
S. E. Weed, “Locus of Control: Su-
pervision and Work Satisfaction,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(September 1975): 623–31.
 40. I. Zettler, N. Friedrich, and B. E. 
Hilbig, “Dissecting Work Com-
mitment: The Role of Machiavel-
lianism,” 
Career 
Development 
International, 
February 
2011, 
20–35; S. R. Kessler, A. C. Ban-
delli, P. E. Spector, W. C. Borman, 
C. E. Nelson, and L. M. Penney, 
“Re-Examining Machiavelli: A 
Three-Dimensional Model of Ma-
chiavellianism in the Workplace,” 
Journal of Applied Social Psychol-
ogy (August 2010): 1868–96; W. 
Amelia, “Anatomy of a Classic: 
Machiavelli’s Daring gift,” Wall 
Street Journal, August 30–31, 
2008, W10; S. A. Snook, “Love 
and Fear and the Modern Boss,” 
Harvard Business Review, January 
2008, 16–17; and R. g. Vleeming, 
“Machiavellianism: A Preliminary 
Review,” 
Psychology 
Reports, 
February 1979, 295–310.
 41. P. Harris, “Machiavelli and the 
global Compass: Ends and Means 
in Ethics and Leadership,” Journal 
of Business Ethics (June 2010): 
131–38; and P. Van Kenhove, I. 
Vermeir, and S. Verniers, “An 
 Empirical Investigation of the Re-
lationship between Ethical Beliefs, 
Ethical Ideology, Political Prefer-
ence and Need for Closure,” Jour-
nal of Business Ethics, August 15, 
2001, 347.
 42. Based on J. Brockner, Self-Esteem 
at Work: Research, Theory, and 
Practice (Lexington, MA: Lexing-
ton Books, 1988), chs. 1–4.
 43. See, for instance, R. Vermunt, D. 
van Knippenberg, B. van Knippen-
berg, and E. Blaauw, “Self-Esteem 
and Outcome Fairness: Differential 
Importance of Procedural and Out-
come Considerations,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (August 2001): 
621; T. A. Judge and J. E. Bono, 
“Relationship of Core Self-Evalua-
tion Traits—Self-Esteem, general-
ized Self Efficacy, Locus of Control, 
and Emotional Stability—With Job 
Satisfaction and Job Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(February 2001): 80; and D. B. 
Fedor, J. M. Maslyn, W. D. Davis, 
and K. Mathieson, “Performance 
Improvement Efforts in Response 
to Negative Feedback: The Roles of 
Source Power and Recipient Self-
Esteem,” Journal of Management 
(January–February 2001): 79–97.
 44. M. Snyder, Public Appearances, 
Private Realities: The Psychology 
of Self-Monitoring (New York: W. 
H. Freeman, 1987).
 45. See, for example, D. U. Bryant, M. 
Mitcham, A. R. Araiza, and W. M. 
Leung, “The Interaction of Self-
Monitoring and Organizational Po-
sition on Perceived Effort,” Journal 
of Managerial Psychology 26, no. 
2 (2011): 138–54; B. B. Vilela and 
J. A. V. gonzález, “Salespersons’ 
Self-Monitoring: Direct, Indirect, 
and Moderating Effects on Sales-
persons’ Organizational Citizen-
ship Behavior,” Psychology & 
Marketing, January 2010, 71–89; 
and P. M. Fandt, “Managing Im-
pressions with Information: A Field 
Study of Organizational Realities,” 
Journal of Applied Behavioral Sci-
ence (June 2001): 180–205.
 46. Ibid.
 47. R. N. Taylor and M. D. Dunnette, 
“Influence of Dogmatism, Risk 
Taking Propensity, and Intelligence 
on Decision Making Strategies for 
a Sample of Industrial Managers,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(August 1974): 420–23.
 48. I. L. Janis and L. Mann, Decision 
Making: A Psychological Analysis 
of Conflict, Choice, and Commit-
ment (New York: Free Press, 1977).
 49. See, for instance, C. P. Cross, L. 
T. Copping, and A. Campbell, 
“Sex Differences in Impulsivity: 
A Meta-Analysis,” Psychological 
Bulletin, January 2011, 97–130; 
A. A. Schooler, K. Fujita, X. Zou, 
and S. J. Stroessner, “When Risk 
Seeking Becomes a Motivational 
Necessity,” Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology (Au-
gust 2010): 215–31; A. Chatterjee 
and D. C. Hambrick, “Executive 
Personality, Capability Cues, and 
Risk-Taking: How Narcissistic 
CEOs React to Their Successes 

CHAPTER 9  •  Foundations of Individual Behavior    319
and Stumbles,” Academy of Man-
agement 
Proceedings, 
www. 
aomonline.org (2010); E. Soane, 
C. Dewberry, and S. Narendran, 
“The Role of Perceived Costs and 
Perceived Benefits in the Rela-
tionship between Personality and 
Risk-Related Choices,” Journal 
of Risk Research (April 2010): 
303–18; and N. Kogan and M. A. 
Wallach, “group Risk Taking as 
a Function of Members’ Anxiety 
and Defensiveness,” Journal of 
Personality (March 1967): 50–63.
 50. H. Zhao, S. E. Seibert, and g. T. 
Lumpkin, “The Relationship of 
Personality 
to 
Entrepreneurial 
Intentions and Performance: A 
Meta-Analytic Review,” Journal 
of Management (March 2010): 
381–404; and K. Hyrshy, “Entre-
preneurial Metaphors and Con-
cepts: An Exploratory Study,” 
Journal of Managerial Psychology 
(July 2000): 653; and B. McCar-
thy, “The Cult of Risk Taking and 
Social Learning: A Study of Irish 
Entrepreneurs,” Management De-
cision, August 2000, 563–75.
 51. M. goldman, “A Journey into Per-
sonality Self-Discovery, Vol. 2,” 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek Online, 
March 22, 2011; M. goldman, 
“A Journey into Personality Self-
Discovery, Vol. 1,” Bloomberg 
BusinessWeek Online, February 
15, 2011; and P. Korkki, “The 
True Calling That Wasn’t,” New 
York Times Online, July 16, 2010.
 52. J. L. Holland, Making Vocational 
Choices: A Theory of Vocational 
Personalities and Work Environ-
ments (Odessa, FL: Psychological 
Assessment Resources, 1997).
 53. S. Bates, “Personality Counts: 
Psychological Tests Can Help Peg 
the Job Applicants Best Suited 
for Certain Jobs,” HR Magazine, 
February 2002, 28–38; and K. J. 
Jansen and A. K. Brown, “Toward 
a Multi-Level Theory of Person 
Environment Fit,” Academy of 
Management Proceedings from 
the Fifty-Eighth Annual Meeting 
of the Academy of Management, 
San Diego, CA (August 7–12, 
1998), HR: FR1–FR8.
 54. See, for instance, g. W. M. Ip and 
M. H. Bond, “Culture, Values, and 
the Spontaneous Self-Concept,” 
Asian Journal of Psychology, vol. 
1 (1995): 30–36; J. E. Williams, J. 
L. Saiz, D. L. FormyDuval, M. L. 
Munick, E. E. Fogle, A. Adom, A. 
Haque, F. Neto, and J. Yu, “Cross-
Cultural Variation in the Impor-
tance of Psychological Charac-
teristics: A Seven-Year Country 
Study,” International Journal of 
Psychology (October 1995): 529–
50; V. Benet and N. g. Walker, 
“The Big Seven Factor Model of 
Personality Description: Evidence 
for Its Cross-Cultural generaliz-
ability in a Spanish Sample,” Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology (October 1995): 701–18; 
R. R. McCrae and P. To. Costa Jr., 
“Personality Trait Structure as a 
Human Universal,” American Psy-
chologist, 1997, 509–16; and M. J. 
Schmit, J. A. Kihm, and C. Robie, 
“Development of a global Mea-
sure of Personality,” Personnel 
Psychology, Spring 2000, 153–93.
 55. J. F. Salgado, “The Five Fac-
tor Model of Personality and Job 
Performance in the European 
Community,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology (February 1997): 30–
43. Note: This study covered the 
15-nation European community 
and did not include the 10 coun-
tries that joined in 2004.
 56. g. Kranz, “Organizations Look 
to get Personal in’07,” Workforce 
Management, 
www.workforce.
com (June 19, 2007).
 57. A. O’Connell, “Smile, Don’t Bark 
in Tough Times,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, November 2009, 27; 
and g. A. Van Kleef et al., “Searing 
Sentiment or Cold Calculation? 
The Effects of Leader Emotional 
Displays on Team Performance 
Depend on Follower Epistemic 
Motivation,” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, June 2009, 562–80.
 58. Reprinted by permission from 
Land Rover North America, LLC.
 59. H. H. Kelley, “Attribution in So-
cial Interaction,” in E. Jones et al. 
(eds.), Behavior (Morristown, NJ: 
general Learning Press, 1972).
 60. g. Miller and T. Lawson, “The Ef-
fect of an Informational Option on 
the Fundamental Attribution Error,” 
Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, June 1989, 194–204. See 
also g. Charness and E. Haruvy, 
“Self-Serving Bias: Evidence from 
a Simulated Labour Relationship,” 
Journal of Managerial Psychology 
(July 2000): 655; and T. J. Elkins, 
J. S. Phillips, and R. Konopaske, 
“gender-Related Biases in Evalua-
tions of Sex Discrimination Allega-
tions: Is Perceived Threat a Key?” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(April 2002): 280–93.
 61. S. T. Fiske, “Social Cognition and 
Social Perception,” Annual Review 
of Psychology, 1993, 155–94; g. N. 
Powell and Y. Kido, “Managerial 
Stereotypes in a global Economy: 
A Comparative Study of Japanese 
and American Business Students’ 
Perspectives,” Psychological Re-
ports, February 1994, 219–26; and 
J. L. Hilton and W. von Hippel, 
“Stereotypes,” in J. T. Spence, J. 
M. Darley, and D. J. Foss (eds.), 
Annual Review of Psychology, vol. 
47 (Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews 
Inc., 1996), 237–71.
 62. B. F. Skinner, Contingencies of 
Reinforcement (East Norwalk, CT: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1971).
 63. A. Bandura, Social Learning 
Theory (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1977).
 64. For an interesting article on the 
subject, see D. Nitsch, M. Baetz, 
and J. C. Hughes, “Why Code 
of Conduct Violations go Unre-
ported: A Conceptual Framework 
to guide Intervention and Future 
Research,” Journal of Business 
Ethics (April 2005): 327–41.
 65. R. J. Alsop, “The Last Word: Youth 
and 
Consequences,” 
Workforce 
Management 
Online, 
February 
2011; M. Fertik, “Managing Em-
ployees in Their Twenties,” Bloom-
berg BusinessWeek Online, January 
19, 2011; M. Richtel, “growing 
Up Digital: Wired for Distraction,” 
New York Times Online, November 
21, 2010; N. Lublin, “In Defense of 
Millennials,” Fast Company, Oc-
tober 2010, 72–74; A. D. Wright 
and T. D. Tapscott, “Millennials: 
Bathed in Bits,” HR Magazine, 
July 2010, 40–41; S. Jayson, “A 
Detailed Look at Millennials”; 
T. Janisch, “Digital Marketplace: 
Welcoming gen Y to the Work-
force”; and S. Armour, “generation 
Y: They’ve Arrived at Work with 
a New Attitude,” USA Today, No-
vember 6, 2005, 1B+.
 66. N. Ramachandran, “New Paths at 
Work,” US News & World Report, 
March 20, 2006, 47.
 67. D. Sacks, “Scenes from the Cul-
ture Clash,” Fast Company, Janu-
ary–February 2006, 75.
 68. S. 
Armour, 
“generation 
Y: 
They’ve Arrived at Work with a 
New Attitude,” 2B.
 69. S. 
Armour, 
“generation 
Y: 
They’ve Arrived at Work with a 
New Attitude”; B. Moses, “The 
Challenges of Managing gen Y,” 
The Globe and Mail, March 11, 
2005, C1; and C. A. Martin, Man-
aging Generation Y (Amherst, 
MA: HRD Press, 2001).
 70. C. M. Pearson and C. L. Porath, 
“On the Nature, Consequences, 
and Remedies of Workplace Inci-
vility: No Time for Nice? Think 
Again,” Academy of Management 
Executive, February 2005, 7–18.
 71. J. Robison, “Be Nice: It’s good 
for 
Business,” 
Gallup 
Brain, 
http://brain.gallup.com 
(August 
12, 2004).
 72. M. Sandy Hershcovis and J. Bar-
ling, “Towards a Multi-Foci Ap-
proach to Workplace Aggression: 
A Meta-Analytic Review of Out-
comes from Different Perpetra-
tors,” Journal of Organizational 
Behavior (January 2010): 24–44; 
R. E. Kidwell and S. R. Valentine, 
“Positive group Context, Work At-
titudes, and Organizational Behav-
ior: The Case of Withholding Job 
Effort,” Journal of Business Eth-
ics (April 2009): 15–28; P. Bordia 
and S. L. D. Resubog, “When Em-
ployees Strike Back: Investigating 
Mediating Mechanisms between 
Psychological Contract Breach and 
Workplace Deviance,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (September 
2008): 1104–17; and Y. Vardi and 
E. Weitz, Misbehavior in Organiza-
tions (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates, 2004), 246–47.
 73. Based on V. P. Richmond, J. C. 
McCroskey, and S. K. Payne, Non-
verbal Behavior in Interpersonal 
Relations, 2nd ed. (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991), 
117–38; R. Bar-On, The Emotional 
Intelligence 
Inventory 
(EQ-I): 
Technical Manual (Toronto: Multi-
Health Systems, 1997); L. A. King, 
“Ambivalence over Emotional Ex-
pression and Reading Emotions in 
Situations and Faces,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy (March 1998): 753–62; and 
M. Lewis, J. M. Haviland-Jones, 
and L. F. Barrett (eds.), Handbook 
of Emotions, 3rd ed. (New York: 
guilford Press, 2011).
 74. V. giang, “Inside google’s Insanely 
Popular 
Emotional 
Intelligence 
Course,” http://www.fastcompany.
com/3044157/the-future-of-work/
inside-googles-insanely-popular-
emotional-intelligence-course, 
March 25, 2015; D. Baer, “Here’s 
What 
google 
Teaches 
Em-
ployees in Its ‘Search Inside 
Yourself’ 
Course,” 
http://www. 
businessinsider.com/search-inside-
yourself-googles-life-changing-
mindfulness-course-2014-8, 
August 5, 2014; g. gregoire, 
“google’s ‘Jolly good Fellow’ on 
the Power of Emotional Intelli-
gence,” http://www.huffingtonpost.
com/2013/09/29/googles-jolly-
good-fellow_n_3975944.html, Sep-
tember 29, 2013; and N. Shachtman, 
“In Silicon Valley, Meditation Is No 
Fad. It Could Make Your Career,” 
http://www.wired.com/2013/06/
meditation-mindfulness-silicon-
valley/, June 18, 2013.
 75. K. J. O’Hara, “Measuring Sticks,” 
Smart Business Atlanta, May 
2010, 14–18; “Working in an Ideal 
World,” T&D, December 2009, 
21; D. Smith, “Surviving a Down 
Economy with an Upbeat Attitude,” 
T&D, November 2009, 16–17; g. 
Mijuk, “Tough Times for Temp 
Agencies Likely to Prompt Con-
solidation,” Wall Street Journal, 
March 17, 2009, B7; M. Laff, “gen 
Y Proves Loyalty in Economic 
Downturn,” T&D, December 2008, 
18; and From “How One Com-
pany Bridges the generation gap,” 
Bloomberg Business. Copyright 
© 2007 by Bloomberg Business. 
 Reprinted with permission.
 76. R. Mobbs, “The Employee Is Al-
ways Right,” In the Black, April 
2011, 12–15; V. Nayar, “Employee 
Happiness: Zappos vs. HCL,” 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, Janu-
ary 5, 2011; g. Hamel, “Extreme 
Makeover,” Leadership Excellence, 
January 2011, 3–4; V. Nayar, “The 
World in 2036: Vineet Nayar En-
visages Bottom-Up Leadership,” 
Economist, November 27, 2010, 
114; V. Nayar, “Employees First, 
Customers Second,” Chief Learn-
ing Officer, October 2010, 20–23; 
V. Nayar, “Back to Front,” People 
Management, August 12, 2010, 26–
29; V. Nayar, “A Maverick CEO Ex-
plains How He Persuaded His Team 
to Leap into the Future,” Harvard 
Business Review, June 2010, 110–
13; B. Einhorn and K. gokhale, 
“Bangalore’s Paying Again to Keep 
the Talent,” Bloomberg Business-
Week, May 24, 2010, 14–16; M. 
Srivastava and S. Hamm, “Using 
the Slump to get Bigger in Ban-
galore,” BusinessWeek, September 
3, 2009, 50–51; and S. Lauchlan, 
“HCL Takes On the World,” Com-
puter Weekly. Copyright © 2009 by 
Computer Weekly. Reprinted with 
Permission.

Understanding Groups 
and Managing Work 
Teams
10
 
Teams almost  
always outperform  
employees working  
individually.
STOCK4B GmbH/Alamy

321
Based on news reports, you’d think that every  
organization has restructured itself around teams. 
And it’s widely believed that team-based  
organizations will always outperform more traditional 
organizations structured around individual efforts. As 
you’ll see in this chapter, teams can be very effective 
devices for accomplishing tasks. But not always!  
For tasks that demand highly creative thinking,  
individuals often outperform teams. Additionally, 
teams can dilute responsibility, which can lead to 
taking outsized risks and allowing contributors  
to hide behind the work of others.

 
today believe that the use of teams  allows 
their organizations to increase sales or 
 produce better products faster and at lower 
costs. Although the efforts to create teams 
aren’t always successful, well-planned 
teams can reinvigorate productivity and 
 better position an organization to deal with 
a rapidly changing environment.
You’ve probably had a lot of experience 
working in groups—class project teams, 
maybe an athletic team, a fundraising 
committee, or even a sales team at work. 
Work teams are one of the realities—
and challenges—of managing in today’s 
 dynamic global environment. Many organi-
zations have made the move to restructure 
work around teams rather than individuals. 
Why? What do these teams look like? And 
how can managers build effective teams? 
These are some of the questions we’ll be 
answering in this chapter. Before we can 
understand teams, however, we first need 
to understand some basics about groups 
and group behavior. •
Learning Outcomes
10-1 Define group and describe the stages of group development. p. 323
10-2 Describe the major concepts of group behavior. p. 326
10-3 Discuss how groups are turned into effective teams. p. 331
10-4 Discuss contemporary issues in managing teams. p. 338
Managers
322

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    323
What Is a Group and What Stages of Development  
Do Groups Go Through?
Each person in this group had his or her assigned role: 
the Spotter, the Back Spotter, the Gorilla, and the Big 
Player. For over 10 years, this group—former MIT stu-
dents who were members of a secret Black Jack Club—
used their extraordinary mathematical abilities, expert 
training, teamwork, and interpersonal skills to take mil-
lions of dollars from some of the major casinos in the 
United States.1 Although most groups aren’t formed for 
such dishonest purposes, the success of this group at its task was impressive. Managers would 
like their work groups to be successful at their tasks also. The first step is understanding what 
a group is and how groups develop.
What Is a Group?
A group is defined as two or more interacting and interdependent individuals who come 
together to achieve specific goals. Formal groups are work groups that are defined by the 
organization’s structure and have designated work assignments and specific tasks directed at 
accomplishing organizational goals. Exhibit 10–1 provides some examples. Informal groups 
are social groups. These groups occur naturally in the workplace and tend to form around 
friendships and common interests. For example, five employees from different departments 
who regularly eat lunch together are an informal group.
What Are the Stages of Group Development?
Five Stages of Group Development
Research shows that groups develop through five stages.2 As shown in Exhibit 10–2, these 
five stages are: forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning.
The forming stage has two phases. The first occurs as people join the group. In a formal 
group, people join because of some work assignment. Once they’ve joined, the second phase 
begins: defining the group’s purpose, structure, and leadership. This phase involves a great deal 
10-1  Define group 
and describe the 
stages of group 
development.
Exhibit 10–1 Examples of Formal Work Groups
• Command groups—Groups that are determined by the organization chart and  
composed of individuals who report directly to a given manager.
• Task groups—Groups composed of individuals brought together to complete a  
specific job task; their existence is often temporary because when the task is  
completed, the group disbands.
• Cross-functional teams—Groups that bring together the knowledge and skills of 
individuals from various work areas or groups whose members have been trained to 
do each other’s jobs.
• Self-managed teams—Groups that are essentially independent and that, in addition 
to their own tasks, take on traditional managerial responsibilities, such as hiring,  
planning and scheduling, and evaluating performance.
group
Two or more interacting and interdependent  
individuals who come together to achieve  
specific goals
forming stage
The first stage of group development in which 
people join the group and then define the group’s 
purpose, structure, and leadership

324    Part 4  •  Leading
of uncertainty as members “test the waters” to determine what types of behavior are  acceptable. 
This stage is complete when members begin to think of themselves as part of a group.
The storming stage is appropriately named because of the intragroup conflict. There’s 
conflict over who will control the group and what the group needs to be doing. When this 
stage is complete, a relatively clear hierarchy of leadership and agreement on the group’s 
direction will be evident.
The norming stage is one in which close relationships develop and the group becomes 
cohesive. The group now demonstrates a strong sense of group identity and camaraderie. This 
stage is complete when the group structure solidifies and the group has assimilated a common 
set of expectations (or norms) regarding member behavior.
The fourth stage is the performing 
stage. The group structure is in place and 
accepted by group members. Their ener-
gies have moved from getting to know 
and understand each other to working on 
the group’s task. This is the last stage of 
development for permanent work groups. 
However, for temporary groups—project 
teams, task forces, or similar groups that 
have a limited task to do—the final stage 
is the adjourning stage. In this stage, the 
group prepares to disband. Attention is 
 focused on wrapping up activities instead 
of task  performance. Group members react 
in different ways. Some are upbeat, thrilled 
about the group’s accomplishments. Others 
may be sad over the loss of camaraderie and 
friendships.
Think of a class project you’ve been 
involved in and you’ve probably experi-
enced these stages firsthand. Group mem-
bers are selected or assigned and then 
meet for the first time. There’s a “feeling 
out” period to assess what the group is 
Stage I
Forming
Stage II
Storming
Stage IV
Performing
Stage III
Norming
Stage V
Adjourning
Exhibit 10–2 Stages of Group Development
Palmer Luckey (center), inventor of the 
Oculus Rift virtual reality headset, started a 
company to launch his product. Shown here 
in the forming stage of the start-up Oculus 
VR are hardware engineer Chris Dycus, 
foreground; Nate Mitchell, vice president of 
product, left; CEO Brendan Iribe, second from 
right; and Michael Antonov, chief software 
architect.
Ana Venegas/ZUMA Press/Newscom
norming stage
The third stage of group development, which  
is characterized by close relationships and  
cohesiveness
adjourning stage
The final stage of group development for temporary 
groups, during which groups prepare to disband
performing stage
The fourth stage of group development, when  
the group is fully functional and works on the 
group task
storming stage
The second stage of group development, which is 
characterized by intragroup conflict

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    325
going to do and how it’s going to be done. This is usually followed by a battle for con-
trol: Who’s going to be in charge? Once this issue is resolved and a “hierarchy” agreed 
on, the group identifies specific work that needs to be done, who’s going to do each part 
of the project, and dates by which the assigned work needs to be completed. General 
 expectations are established. These decisions form the foundation for what you hope will 
be a coordinated group effort culminating in a project that’s been done well. Once the 
project is complete and turned in, the group breaks up. Of course, some groups don’t get 
much  beyond the forming or storming stages. These groups may have serious interper-
sonal conflicts, turn in disappointing work, and get lower grades.
So, does a group become more effective as it progresses through the first four stages? 
Some researchers say yes, but it’s not that simple.3 That assumption may be generally true, 
but what makes a group effective is a complex issue. Here’s why:
• Under some conditions, high levels of conflict are conducive to high levels of group perfor-
mance; that is, there might be situations in which groups in the storming stage outperform 
those in the norming or performing stages.
• Groups don’t always proceed sequentially from one stage to the next. Sometimes, groups 
are storming and performing at the same time. Groups even occasionally regress to previ-
ous stages.
• Don’t assume all groups precisely follow this process or that performing is always the most 
preferable stage.
Think of this group stages model as a general framework that underscores the fact that groups 
are dynamic entities and managers need to know the stage a group is in. Why? So they can 
understand the problems and issues that are most likely to surface.
What else do you need to know about groups? Let’s look at some important aspects of 
group behavior.
A Question of Ethics
When coworkers work closely on a team proj-
ect, is there such a thing as TMI (too much 
information)?4 At one company, a team that 
had just finished a major project went out 
to lunch to celebrate. During lunch, one col-
league mentioned that he was training for a 
20-mile bike race. In addition to a discussion 
of his new helmet and Lycra shorts, the per-
son also described shaving his whole body to 
reduce aerodynamic drag. Afterwards, another 
team member said that she didn’t want to 
hear that type of information from someone 
who was a colleague not a friend and wasn’t 
sure why this individual even wanted to share 
such information with the rest of the work 
team. At other companies, managers often 
hear awkward and questionable comments 
from their younger Gen Y employees about 
activities like too much partying after work 
or on the weekend or that they’re looking for 
another job at another company.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the As-
signments  section of mymanagementlab.com 
to complete these discussion questions.
  Talk About It 1: What benefits/draw-
backs arise from  sharing information like this?
  Talk About It 2: What are the ethical 
implications of  sharing such personal informa-
tion in the workplace?
 Watch It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled Rudi’s Bakery: Work Teams.

326
    Major Concepts  
   of group Behavior
5 
roles
Behavior patterns expected of someone who occupies  
a given position in a social unit
• We adjust our roles to the group we belong to at the time.
• Employees attempt to determine what behaviors are expected of them by: reading 
their job descriptions, getting suggestions from their bosses, and watching what  
their coworkers do.
 
—  Role conflict happens when an  
employee has conflicting role  
expectations.
10-2 Describe the major concepts of group behavior.
Kwest/Shutterstock
norms
Acceptable standards shared by a group’s members
Each group has its own unique set of norms. Most organizations have  
common norms, which typically focus on:
• Effort and performance
 
— Probably most widespread norm
 
—  Can be extremely powerful in affecting an individual  
employee’s performance
• Dress codes (what’s acceptable to wear to work)
Mogen creative/Shutterstock
role
Behavior patterns expected of someone who occupies a given 
position in a social unit
norms
Standards or expectations that are accepted  
and shared by a group’s members
2a
1

327
2b
3
Conformity
Adjusting one’s behavior to align with a group’s norms
• We all want to be accepted by groups to which we belong, 
which makes us susceptible to conformity pressures.
• See the From Past to Present box (p. 330) for more informa-
tion on solomon asch’s classic studies on conformity.5 35%  
of participants 
in Asch’s study 
would conform to 
group behavior or 
“follow the pack.”
status systems
A prestige grading, position, or rank within a group and an 
important factor in understanding behavior
• Human groupings have always had status hierarchies.
• A disparity between what individuals perceive their status to be and what  
others perceive it to be is a significant motivator with behavioral  
consequences.
• Anything can have status value if others in the group 
admire it.
• Group members have no problem placing people 
into status categories, and they usually agree 
about who’s high, low, and in the middle.
• It’s important for people to believe there’s 
congruency (equity between perceived  
ranking of an individual and the status  
symbols he or she has) in an organization’s 
status system to prevent disruptions to general “this 
is what I expect.”
Kjpargeter/Shutterstock
Vbar/Shutterstock
status
A prestige grading, position, or rank within a group
conformity
Adjusting one’s behavior to align with a group’s norms

328
4 group size
Group size affects a group’s behavior, but the  
          effect depends on what criteria you’re using.6
small group Better at:
(5–7 members)
• Completing tasks faster
• Figuring out what to do
• Getting job done
Lantapix/Shutterstock
Large group Better at:
(12 or more members)
• Problem solving
• Finding facts
• Gaining diverse input
Lantapix/Shutterstock
Drawbacks of Large Groups:
• Individual productivity of each group mem-
ber declines as the group expands, which is 
known as social loafing7—reducing effort 
because dispersion of responsibility encour-
ages individuals to slack off.
—  When a group’s results can’t be attributed 
to any single person, individuals may be tempted to become “free riders” and coast on the 
group’s efforts because they think their contributions can’t be measured.
When using large work 
groups, managers 
should find a way to 
identify individual 
efforts.
group Cohesiveness
The degree to which members are attracted to one another 
and share the group’s goals
• Groups that experience a lot of internal disagreement and lack of cooperation are less 
effective than are groups in which individuals generally agree, cooperate, and like 
each other.
• The more that members are attracted to one another and the more that a group’s goals 
align with each individual’s goals, the greater the group’s cohesiveness.
• Highly cohesive groups are more effective than are those with less cohesiveness.
However, the relationship between cohesiveness 
and effectiveness is more complex.8
5 

— A key moderating variable is the degree to which the group’s attitude aligns with its formal goals or those of the 
larger organization.9 see exhibit 10–3, which tells us that:
Cohesiveness
High
Low
Alignment of Group and
Organizational Goals
Strong increase
in productivity
Moderate increase
in productivity
No signiﬁcant eﬀect
on productivity
Decrease in
productivity
High
Low
Exhibit 10–3 Group Cohesiveness and Productivity
— The more cohesive a group, the more its members will follow its goals. If these goals are favorable, a cohesive 
group is more productive than a less cohesive group.
— If cohesiveness is high and attitudes are unfavorable, productivity decreases.
— If cohesiveness is low and goals are supported, productivity increases, but not as much as when both cohesive-
ness and support are high.
— When cohesiveness is low and goals are not supported, cohesiveness has no significant effect on productivity.
Andreanita/Fotolia
social loafing
The tendency for individuals to expend less effort when  
working collectively than when working individually
group cohesiveness
The degree to which group members are attracted 
to one another and share the group’s goals
329

330    Part 4  •  Leading
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
• DOES the desire to be accepted as a part of a group leave 
one susceptible to conforming to the group’s norms?
• WILL a group exert pressure that’s strong enough to 
change a member’s attitude and behavior?
That’s what Solomon Asch wanted to know, and according to 
his research, the answer appears to be yes.10
Asch’s Research:
• Study involved groups of seven or eight people who sat 
in a classroom and were asked to compare two cards 
held by an investigator. The object was for each group 
member to announce aloud which of the three lines 
matched the single line.
• One card had one line; the other 
had three lines of  varying length. 
One of the lines on the three-line 
card was identical to the line on 
the one-line card and the differ-
ence in line length was quite obvi-
ous. (See Exhibit 10–4.)
• Under ordinary conditions, subjects made errors of less 
than 1 percent.
BUT … what happens if members of the group begin to 
give incorrect answers?
Will the pressure to conform cause an unsuspecting sub-
ject (USS) to alter his or her answers to align with those 
of the others?
• The group was seated in a prearranged way so the USS 
was the last to announce his or her decision and so was 
unaware that the experiment was fixed.
• The experiment began with two sets of matching exer-
cises in which all the subjects gave the right answers.
• On the third set, however, the first subject gave an 
obviously wrong answer—for example, saying C in 
Exhibit  10–4. The next subject gave the same wrong 
 answer, and so did the others, until it was the unsuspect-
ing subject’s turn.
• The USS knew that “B” was the same as “X” but every-
one else said “C”.
• The decision confronting the USS 
was this: Do you publicly state a 
perception that differs from the pre-
announced position of the others? 
Or do you give an answer that you 
strongly believe to be incorrect in 
order to have your response agree 
with the other group members?
• Asch’s subjects conformed—that is, gave answers they 
knew were wrong but were consistent with the replies 
of other group members—in about 35 percent of many 
experiments and many trials.
Implications for Managers:
• The Asch study provides considerable insight into group 
behaviors. The tendency, as Asch showed, is for individ-
ual members to go along with the pack. To diminish the 
negative aspects of conformity, managers should create 
a climate of openness in which employees are free to 
discuss problems without fear of retaliation.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these dis-
cussion questions.
   Talk About It 3: Does the desire to be accepted as a part 
of a group leave one susceptible to conforming to the group’s 
norms? Will a group exert pressure that’s strong enough to 
change a member’s attitude and behavior? Discuss.
   Talk About It 4: What can you use from this discussion 
to help you be a better manager?
X
A
B
C
Exhibit 10–4 Examples of Cards Used in Asch’s Study
Have YOU ever been 
pressured by a 
group to conform?

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    331
How Are Groups Turned into Effective Teams?
When companies like W. L. Gore, Volvo, and Kraft 
Foods introduced teams into their production  processes, 
it made news because no one else was  doing it. Today, 
it’s just the opposite—the organization that doesn’t use 
teams would be newsworthy. It’s estimated that some 
80 percent of Fortune 500 companies have at least 
half  of their employees on teams. In fact, more than 
70  percent of U.S. manufacturers use work teams.11 
Teams are likely to continue to be popular. Why? Research suggests that teams typically 
outperform individuals when the tasks being done require multiple skills,  judgment, and 
experience.12 Organizations are using team-based structures because they’ve found that 
teams are more flexible and responsive to changing events than are traditional  departments 
or other permanent work groups. Teams have the ability to quickly assemble, deploy, 
 refocus, and disband. In this section, we’ll discuss what a work team is, the different types 
of teams that organizations might use, and how to develop and manage work teams.
Work groups = Work teams?
Are Work Groups and Work Teams the Same?
At this point, you may be asking yourself: Are teams and groups the same thing? No. In this 
section, we clarify the difference between a work group and a work team.13
Most of you are probably familiar with teams especially if you’ve watched or partici-
pated in organized sports events. Work teams do differ from work groups and have their own 
unique traits (see Exhibit 10–5). Work groups interact primarily to share information and 
to make decisions to help each member do his or her job more efficiently and effectively. 
There’s no need or opportunity for work groups to engage in collective work that requires 
joint effort. On the other hand, work teams are groups whose members work intensely on a 
specific, common goal using their positive synergy, individual and mutual accountability, and 
complementary skills.
These descriptions should help clarify why so many organizations have restructured 
work processes around teams. Managers are looking for that positive synergy that will 
help the organization improve its performance.14 The extensive use of teams creates the 
potential for an organization to generate greater outputs with no increase in (or even fewer) 
inputs. For example, until the economic downturn hit, investment teams at Wachovia’s Asset 
Management Division (which is now a part of Wells Fargo & Company) were able to signifi-
cantly improve investment performance. As a result, these teams helped the bank improve its 
Morningstar financial rating.15
10-3  Discuss how 
groups are 
turned into  
effective teams.
Work Teams
Collective 
performance
Complementary
Individual 
and mutual
Positive
Goal
Skills
Accountability
Synergy
Work Groups
Share information
Random and varied
Individual 
Neutral 
(sometimes negative)
Exhibit 10–5 Groups versus Teams
work teams
Groups whose members work intensely on specific, 
common goals using their positive synergy,  
individual and mutual accountability, and  
complementary skills

332    Part 4  •  Leading
Recognize, however, that such increases are simply 
“potential.” Nothing inherently magical in the creation of 
work teams guarantees that this positive synergy and its 
 accompanying productivity will occur. Accordingly, merely 
calling a group a team doesn’t automatically increase its 
performance.16 As we show later in this chapter, successful 
or high-performing work teams have certain common char-
acteristics. If managers hope to gain increases in organiza-
tional performance, they will need to ensure that the teams 
possess those characteristics.
What Are the Different Types of Work 
Teams?
Teams can do a variety of things. They can design products, 
provide services, negotiate deals, coordinate projects, offer 
advice, and make decisions.17 For instance, at Rockwell 
Automation’s facility in North Carolina, teams are used in work process optimization projects. 
At Arkansas-based Acxiom Corporation, a team of human resource professionals planned and 
implemented a cultural change. And every summer weekend at any NASCAR race, you can 
see work teams in action during drivers’ pit stops.18 The four most common types of work 
teams are problem-solving teams, self-managed work teams, cross-functional teams, and vir-
tual teams.
1. When work teams first became popular, most were problem-solving teams, which are 
teams from the same department or functional area involved in efforts to improve work 
activities or to solve specific problems. Members share ideas or offer suggestions on how 
work processes and methods can be improved. However, these teams are rarely given the 
authority to implement any of their suggested actions.
2. Although problem-solving teams were helpful, they didn’t go far enough in  getting 
 employees involved in work-related decisions and processes. This need led to  another 
type of team, a self-managed work team, which is a formal group of  employees 
who operate without a manager and are responsible for a complete work process 
or  segment. A self-managed team is responsible for getting the work done and 
for  managing themselves, and usually includes planning and scheduling of work, 
 assigning tasks to members, collective control over the pace of work, making 
 operating decisions, and taking action on problems. For instance, teams at Corning 
have no shift  supervisors and work closely with other manufacturing divisions to 
solve  production-line  problems and  coordinate deadlines and deliveries. The teams 
have the authority to make and  implement decisions, finish projects, and address 
 problems.19 Other  organizations, such as Xerox, Boeing,  PepsiCo, and Hewlett-
Packard, also use  self-managed teams. It’s  estimated that about 30 percent of U.S. 
 employers now use this form of team; and among large firms, the number is  probably 
closer to 50 percent.20 Most organizations that use self-managed teams find them to 
be effective.21
3. The third type of team is the cross-functional team, which we introduced in Chapter 6 
and defined as a work team composed of individuals from various specialties. Many orga-
nizations use cross-functional teams. For example, ArcelorMittal, the world’s largest steel 
company, uses cross-functional teams of scientists, plant managers, and salespeople to 
review and monitor product innovations.22 The concept of cross-functional teams is even 
being applied in health care. For instance, at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Maryland, 
intensive care unit (ICU) teams composed of a doctor trained in intensive care medicine, 
a pharmacist, a social worker, a nutritionist, the chief ICU nurse, a respiratory therapist, 
and a chaplain meet daily with every patient’s bedside nurse to discuss and debate the best 
course of treatment. The hospital credits this team care approach with reducing  errors, 
shortening the amount of time patients spend in ICU, and improving communication 
between families and the medical staff.23
Team-based work is a key ingredient to the 
success of Google. Throughout the company, 
small teams that require multiple skills work 
on a specific common goal using their  
positive synergy. Shown here is Google’s  
food preparation team in Toronto, whose goal 
is to plan and prepare nutritious and delicious 
meals for fellow workers.
Mark Blinch/Reuters
problem-solving teams
A team from the same department or functional 
area that’s involved in efforts to improve work 
activities or to solve specific problems
cross-functional team
A work team composed of individuals from various 
specialties
self-managed work team
A type of work team that operates without a 
manager and is responsible for a complete work 
process or segment

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    333
4. The final type of team is the virtual team, which is a team that uses technology to link 
physically dispersed members in order to achieve a common goal. For instance, a virtual 
team at Boeing-Rocketdyne played a pivotal role in developing a radically new  product.24 
Another company, Decision Lens, uses a virtual team environment to generate and evalu-
ate creative ideas.25 In a virtual team, members collaborate online with tools such as 
wide-area networks, videoconferencing, fax, e-mail, or Web sites where the team can 
hold online conferences.26 Virtual teams can do all the things that other teams can—
share information, make decisions, and complete tasks; however, they lack the normal 
give-and-take of face-to-face discussions. That’s why virtual teams tend to be more task-
oriented, especially if the team members have never personally met.
  Try It! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Virtual Teams.
Thirty percent of managers say their work teams are “digitally 
 fluent” and communicate very well using new electronic chan-
nels.30 Work teams need information to do their work. With work 
teams  often being not just steps away, but continents away from 
each other, it’s important to have a way for team members to com-
municate and collaborate. That’s where IT comes in. Technology 
has enabled greater online communication and collaboration within 
teams of all types.31
The idea of technologically aided collaboration actually origi-
nated with online search engines. The Internet itself was initially 
intended as a way for groups of scientists and researchers to share 
information. Then, as more and more information was put “on the 
Web,” users relied on a variety of search engines to help them find 
that information. Now, we see many examples of collaborative 
technologies such as wiki pages, blogs, and even multiplayer virtual 
reality games.
Today, online collaborative tools have given work teams 
more efficient and effective ways to get work done. For instance, 
 engineers at Toyota use collaborative communication tools to 
share process improvements and innovations. These commu-
nication tools allow employees to collectively share common 
knowledge and innovate faster. Managers everywhere should 
look to the power of IT to help work teams improve the way work 
gets done.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
   TaLk aBouT IT 5: What challenges do managers face in man-
aging teams that must rely on IT to communicate?
   TaLk aBouT IT 6: Using Exhibit 10–6, discuss how the four 
major components of team effectiveness would affect and be 
 affected by a team’s use of IT.
KEEPInG ConnECTED: IT AnD TEAmS
::::::: Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::
What makes a Team Effective?
Making a Team Effective
Much research has been done on what it is that makes a team effective.27 Out of these 
 efforts, we now have a fairly focused model identifying those characteristics.28 Exhibit 10–6 
summarizes what we currently know about what makes a team effective. As we look at this 
model, keep in mind two things. ❶ Teams differ in form and structure. This model attempts 
to generalize across all teams, so you should only use it as a guide.29 ❷ The model assumes 
that managers have already determined that teamwork is preferable to individual work. 
Creating “effective” teams in situations in which individuals can do the job better would be 
wasted effort.
virtual team
A type of work team that uses technology to link 
physically dispersed members in order to achieve  
a common goal

334    Part 4  •  Leading
One thing we need to clarify first before looking at the model is what we mean by team 
effectiveness. Typically, it includes objective measures of a team’s productivity, managers’ 
ratings of the team’s performance, and aggregate measures of member satisfaction. As you 
can see from the model, the four key components of effective teams include the context, the 
team’s composition, work design, and process variables.
WhaT FaCTorS in The ConTexT appear To Make a TeaM eFFeCTive? Four con-
textual factors appear to be most significantly related to team performance. These factors 
include adequate resources, leadership and structure, a climate of trust, and performance 
evaluation and reward systems.
As part of the larger organization system, a team relies on resources outside the 
group to sustain it. If it doesn’t have adequate resources, the team’s ability to perform 
its job  effectively is reduced. This factor appears to be so important to team performance 
that one  research study concluded that effective work groups must have support from the 
 organization.32 Resources can include timely information, proper equipment, encouragement, 
adequate staffing, and administrative assistance.
If a team can’t agree on who is to do what or ensure that all members contribute equally 
in sharing the workload, it won’t function properly. Agreeing on the specifics of work 
and how all the team members’ individual skills fit together requires team leadership and 
structure. This aspect can come from the organization or from the team itself. Even in self-
managed teams, a manager’s job is to be more of a coach by supporting the team’s efforts and 
managing outside (rather than inside) the team.
Members of effective teams trust each other. And they also trust their leaders.33 Why is 
trust important? It facilitates cooperation, reduces the need to monitor each other’s behavior, 
and bonds members around the belief that others on the team won’t take advantage of them. 
Team Eﬀectiveness
Work design
• Autonomy
• Skill variety
• Task identity
• Task signiﬁcance
Composition
• Abilities of members
• Personality
• Allocating roles
• Diversity
• Size of teams
• Member ﬂexibility
• Member preferences
Context
• Adequate resources
• Leadership and structure
• Climate of trust
• Performance evaluation
   and reward systems
Process
• Common purpose
• Speciﬁc goals
• Team eﬃcacy
• Conﬂict levels
• Social loaﬁng
Exhibit 10–6 Team Effectiveness model
Source: Stephen P. Robbins and Timothy A. Judge, Organizational Behavior, 14th edition, © 2011, p. 319. 
Reprinted and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    335
Trusting the team leader is also important because it means the team is willing to accept and 
commit to the leader’s goals and decisions.
The final contextual factor of an effective team is a performance evaluation and reward 
system. Team members have to be accountable both individually and jointly. So, in addition 
to evaluating and rewarding employees for their individual contributions, managers should 
consider group-based appraisals, profit-sharing, and other approaches that reinforce team ef-
fort and commitment.
WhaT TeaM CoMpoSiTion FaCTorS Lead To eFFeCTiveneSS? Several team com-
position factors are important to a team’s effectiveness. They include team member abili-
ties, personality, role allocation, diversity, size of teams, member flexibility, and member 
preferences.
Part of a team’s performance depends on its members’ knowledge, skills, and 
 abilities.34 Research has shown that to perform effectively, a team needs three different 
types of skills. First, it needs people with technical expertise. Next, it needs members 
with problem-solving and decision-making skills. Finally, a team needs people with inter-
personal skills. A team can’t achieve its performance potential if it doesn’t have or can’t 
develop all these skills. And the right mix of these skills is also critical. Too much of one 
at the expense of another will lead to lower team performance. However, a team doesn’t 
necessarily need all these skills  immediately. It’s not uncommon for team members to take 
responsibility for learning the skills in which the group is deficient. That way a team can 
achieve its full potential.
As we saw in the last chapter, personality significantly influences individual  behavior. 
It’s also true for team behavior. Research has shown that three of the Big Five dimensions 
are relevant to team effectiveness.35 For instance, high levels of both conscientiousness 
and openness-to-experience tend to lead to higher team performance. Agreeableness 
also appears to matter. And teams that had one or more highly disagreeable members 
performed poorly. Maybe you’ve had that not-so-good experience in group projects that 
you’ve been part of!
Nine potential team roles have been identified. (See Exhibit 10–7.) High-performing 
work teams have people who were selected to fulfill these roles based on their skills and 
 preferences.36 On many teams, individuals may play multiple roles. It’s important for 
 managers to understand the individual strengths a person will bring to a team and select team 
members with those strengths in mind to ensure that these roles are filled.
Team diversity is another factor that can influence team effectiveness. Although many of 
us hold the optimistic view that diversity is desirable, research seems to show the opposite. 
One review found that “Studies on diversity in teams from the last 50 years have shown that 
surface-level social-category differences such as race/ethnicity, gender, and age tend to … 
have negative effects” on the performance of teams.37 Some evidence does show that the 
disruptive effects of diversity decline over time, but evidence does not confirm that diverse 
teams perform better eventually.
What size should a work team be in order to be 
 effective? At Amazon, work teams have consid-
erable autonomy to innovate and to investigate 
ideas. Jeff Bezos, founder and CEO, uses a “two-
pizza” philosophy; that is, a team should be small 
enough that it can be fed with two pizzas. 
This “two-pizza” philosophy usually limits 
groups to five to seven people, depending, 
of course, on team member appetites!38 
Generally speaking, the most effective 
teams have five to nine members. And 
experts suggest using the smallest number 
of people who can do the task.
Team member preferences need to be 
considered. Why? Some people just prefer not 
to work on teams. Given the option, many 
The Microsoft Surface design team had the 
necessary technical and interpersonal skills to 
perform effectively in creating the company’s 
new tablet computer. Shown here demon-
strating the product’s innovative design are, 
from left, team members Steven Sinofsky and 
Mike Angiulo and team leader Panos Panay.
Damian Dovarganes/Associated Press

336    Part 4  •  Leading
employees will opt not to be part of a team. When people who would prefer to work alone 
are forced on a team, it creates a direct threat to the team’s morale and to individual member 
satisfaction.39
hoW doeS Work deSign aFFeCT TeaM eFFeCTiveneSS? Effective teams need to 
work together and take collective responsibility for completing tasks. An effective team must 
be more than a “team in name only.”40 Important work design elements include autonomy, 
using a variety of skills, being able to complete a whole and identifiable task or product, and 
working on a task or project that has a significant impact on others. Research indicates that 
these characteristics enhance team member motivation and increase team effectiveness.41
WhaT TeaM proCeSSeS are reLaTed To TeaM eFFeCTiveneSS? Five team pro-
cess variables have been shown to be related to team effectiveness. These include a common 
purpose, specific team goals, team efficacy, managed conflict, and minimal social loafing.
An effective team has a common plan and purpose. This common purpose provides di-
rection, momentum, and commitment for team members.42 Members of successful teams put 
a lot of time and effort into discussing, shaping, and agreeing on a purpose that belongs to 
them both individually and as a team.
Teams also need specific goals. Such goals facilitate clear communication and help 
teams maintain their focus on getting results.
Team efficacy emerges when teams believe in themselves and believe they can succeed.43 
Effective teams have confidence in themselves and in their members.
Of team managers, 63.5 percent say they are somewhat 
effective at resolving conflict.44
Effective teams need some conflict. Conflict on a team isn’t necessarily bad and can 
actually improve team effectiveness.45 But it has to be the right kind of conflict. Relationship 
conflicts—those based on interpersonal incompatibilities, tension, and autonomy toward 
Explorer-
Promoter
Creator-
Innovator
Team
Reporter-
Adviser
Linker
Upholder-
Maintainer
Controller-
Inspector
Concluder-
Producer
Thruster-
Organizer
Assessor-
Developer
Coordinates and
integrates
Oﬀers insightful
analysis of
options
Encourages the
search for more
information
Provides structure
Fights external
battles
Provides
direction and
follow-through
Examines
details and
enforces rules
Champions ideas after
they have been
initiated
Initiates
creative ideas
Exhibit 10–7 Team member Roles
Source: Based on C. Margerison and D. McCann, Team Management: Practical New Approaches 
(London: Mercury Books, 1990).

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    337
others—are almost always dysfunctional. However, task conflicts—those based on disagree-
ments about task content—can be beneficial because they may stimulate discussion, promote 
critical assessment of problems and options, and can lead to better team decisions.
 Write It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com 
and complete BCOMM 2: Managing Conflict.
Finally, effective teams work to minimize the tendency for social loafing, which we 
discussed earlier in this chapter. Successful teams make members individually and jointly 
 accountable for the team’s purpose, goals, and approach.46
How Can a manager Shape Team Behavior?
A manager can do several things to shape a team’s behavior including proper selection, 
 employee training, and rewarding the appropriate team behaviors. Let’s look at each.
WhaT roLe doeS SeLeCTion pLay? Some individuals already possess the interper-
sonal skills to be effective team players. When hiring team members, managers should 
check whether applicants have the technical skills required to successfully perform the job 
and whether they can fulfill team roles.
Some applicants may have been socialized around individual contributions and, conse-
quently, lack team skills, which could also be true for some current employees being moved 
into teams due to organizational restructuring. When faced with this situation, a manager can 
do several things. First, and most obvious, if team skills are woefully lacking, don’t hire the 
person. If successful performance is going to require interaction, not hiring the individual 
is appropriate. On the other hand, an applicant who has some basic skills can be hired on a 
 probationary basis and required to undergo training to shape him or her into a team player. 
If the skills aren’t learned or practiced, then the individual may have to be let go.
Fifty-seven percent of team leaders said if someone  
on their team hated their job, they would encourage  
them to find another job. Only 7 percent said they  
would change their role to make them happy.47
Can individuaLS Be Trained To Be TeaM 
pLayerS? Performing well in a team  involves a 
set of behaviors.48 As we discussed in the preced-
ing chapter, new behaviors can be learned. Even 
people who feel strongly about the importance of 
individual  accomplishment can be trained to become 
team players. Training specialists can conduct exer-
cises so employees can experience what teamwork 
is all about. The workshops can cover such topics 
as team problem solving, communications, nego-
tiations, conflict resolution, and coaching skills. In 
addition, it’s not unusual for these individuals to be 
exposed to the five stages of team development that 
we discussed earlier.49 At Verizon Communications, 
for example, trainers focus on how a team goes 
through various stages before it gels. And employees 
are reminded of the importance of patience, because 
teams take longer to do some things—such as make 
decisions—than do employees acting alone.50
The Container Store manager Jaimie Moeller 
(left) leads a team huddle with employees 
before they begin their work day. Because 
employees work as a team in serving  
customers, managers begin shaping team 
behavior when interviewing job candidates 
and hiring only a small percentage of  
applicants who are enthusiastic about  
working in a team-oriented environment.
ZUMA Press, Inc/Alamy 

338    Part 4  •  Leading
WhaT roLe do reWardS pLay in Shaping TeaM pLayerS? An organization’s 
reward system needs to encourage cooperative efforts rather than competitive ones. For 
 instance, Lockheed Martin’s aeronautics division organized its some 20,000 employees 
into teams. Rewards are structured to return a percentage increase in the bottom line to the 
team members on the basis of achievements of the team’s performance goals.
Promotions, pay raises, and other forms of recognition should be given to employees who 
are effective collaborative team members. Taking this approach doesn’t mean that individual 
contribution is ignored, but rather that it’s balanced with selfless contributions to the team. 
Examples of behaviors that should be rewarded include training new colleagues, sharing 
 information with teammates, helping resolve team conflicts, and mastering new skills in which 
the team is deficient.51 Finally, managers can’t forget the inherent rewards that employees can 
receive from teamwork. Work teams provide camaraderie. It’s exciting and satisfying to be an 
integral part of a successful team. The opportunity to engage in personal development and to 
help teammates grow can be a satisfying and rewarding experience for employees.52
 Watch It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Work Teams.
What Current Issues Do Managers Face  
in Managing Teams?
Few trends have influenced how work gets done in organizations as much as the use of work 
teams. The shift from working alone to working on teams requires employees to cooperate 
with others, share information, confront differences, and sublimate personal interests for the 
greater good of the team. Managers can build effective teams by understanding what influ-
ences performance and satisfaction. However, managers also face some current challenges 
in managing teams, including those associated with managing global teams and with under-
standing when teams aren’t the answer.
10-4  Discuss 
contemporary 
issues in  
managing 
teams.
 Write It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com 
and complete MGMT 15: Team-Based Structures.
What’s Involved with managing Global Teams?
Two characteristics of today’s organizations are obvious: they’re global and work is increas-
ingly done by teams. Because of those reasons, any manager is likely to have to manage a 
global team. What do we know about managing global teams? We know there are both draw-
backs and benefits in using global teams (see Exhibit 10–8). What are some of the challenges 
associated with managing global teams?
hoW do TeaM CoMpoSiTion FaCTorS aFFeCT Managing a gLoBaL TeaM? In 
global organizations, understanding the relationship between team effectiveness and team 
composition is more challenging because of the unique cultural characteristics represented 
by members of a global team. In addition to recognizing team members’ abilities, skills, 
knowledge, and personality, managers need to be familiar with and clearly understand the 
cultural characteristics of the groups and the group members they manage.53 For instance, 

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    339
DraWBaCks
BenefITs
• Disliking team members
• Mistrusting team members
• Stereotyping
• Communication problems
• Stress and tension
• Greater diversity of ideas
• Limited groupthink
• Increased attention on understanding 
others’ ideas, perspectives, etc.
is the global team from a culture in which uncertainty avoidance is high? If so, members 
will not be comfortable dealing with unpredictable and ambiguous tasks. Also, as managers 
work with global teams, they need to be aware of the potential for stereotyping, which can 
lead to problems.
hoW doeS TeaM STruCTure aFFeCT Managing a gLoBaL TeaM? Some of the 
structural areas where we see differences in managing global teams include conformity, 
status, social loafing, and cohesiveness.
Are conformity findings generalizable across cultures? Research suggests that Asch’s 
findings are culture-bound.54 For instance, as might be expected, conformity to social norms 
tends to be higher in collectivistic cultures than in individualistic cultures. However, group-
think tends to be less of a problem in global teams because members are less likely to feel 
pressured to conform to the ideas, conclusions, and decisions of the group.55
Also, the importance of status varies among cultures. The French, for example, are 
extremely status conscious. Also, countries differ on the criteria that confer status. For 
instance, in Latin America and Asia, status tends to come from family position and formal 
roles held in organizations. In contrast, while status is important in countries like the United 
States and Australia, it tends to be less “in your face.” And it tends to be given based on ac-
complishments rather than on titles and family history. Managers must understand who and 
what holds status when interacting with people from a culture different from their own. An 
American manager who doesn’t understand that office size isn’t a measure of a Japanese ex-
ecutive’s position or who fails to grasp the importance the British place on family genealogy 
and social class is likely to unintentionally offend others and lessen his or her interpersonal 
effectiveness.
Social loafing has a Western bias. It’s consistent 
with individualistic cultures, like the United States 
and Canada, which are dominated by self-interest. 
It’s not consistent with collectivistic societies, in 
which individuals are motivated by group goals. 
For instance, in studies comparing employees from 
the United States with employees from the People’s 
Republic of China and Israel (both collectivistic soci-
eties), the Chinese and Israelis showed no propensity 
to engage in social loafing. In fact, they actually per-
formed better in a group than when working alone.56
Cohesiveness is another group structural element 
that may create special challenges for managers. In a 
cohesive group, members are unified and “act as one.” 
There’s a great deal of camaraderie and group iden-
tity is high. In global teams, however, cohesiveness 
is  often more difficult to achieve because of higher 
levels of “mistrust, miscommunication, and stress.”57
Exhibit 10–8 Global Teams
Source: Based on N. Adler, International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior, 4th ed. 
(Cincinnati, OH: Southwestern Cengage Publishing, 2002), 141–47.
Jambu Palaniappan is a regional general 
manager in Eastern Europe, the Middle East, 
and Africa for Uber, a car service that is  
rapidly expanding throughout the world.  
In managing the market strategy, operations, 
and expansion teams that launch the service 
in different countries, he is challenged by 
the unique cultural characteristics of team 
members.
Mosa’ab Elshamy/AP Images

340    Part 4  •  Leading
hoW do TeaM proCeSSeS aFFeCT Managing a gLoBaL TeaM? The processes 
that global teams use to do their work can be particularly challenging for managers. For 
one thing, communication issues often arise because not all team members may be fluent 
in the team’s working language, which can lead to inaccuracies, misunderstandings, and 
inefficiencies.58 However, research has also shown that a multicultural global team is bet-
ter able to capitalize on the diversity of ideas represented if a wide range of information 
is used.59
Managing conflict in global teams isn’t easy, especially when those teams are virtual 
teams. Conflict can interfere with how information is used by the team. However, research 
shows that in collectivistic cultures, a collaborative conflict management style can be most 
effective.60
  Try It 2! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Teams.
When Are Teams not the Answer?
Teamwork takes more time and often more resources than does individual work.61 Teams 
require managers to communicate more, manage conflicts, and run meetings. So, the benefits 
of using teams need to exceed the costs. And that’s not always the case!62 In the rush to use 
teams, some managers have introduced them into situations in which it would have been bet-
ter to have individuals do the work. So before implementing teams just because everyone’s 
talking about their popularity, you should carefully evaluate whether the work requires or will 
benefit from a collective effort.
How do you know whether work is better done individually or by a group? Three “tests” 
have been suggested.63 First, can the work be done better by more than one person? Task 
complexity would be a good indicator of a need for different perspectives. Simple tasks that 
don’t require diverse input are probably better done by individuals. Second, does the work 
create a common purpose or set of goals for the people in the group that’s more than the sum 
of individual goals? For instance, many car dealerships use teams to link customer-service 
personnel, mechanics, parts specialists, and sales representatives. Such teams can better 
meet the goal of outstanding customer satisfaction. The final test to assess whether teams or 
individuals are better suited for doing work is to look at the interdependence of the individu-
als. Using teams makes sense when there’s interdependence between tasks; that is, when the 
success of everyone depends on the success of each person and the success of each person 
depends on the others. For example, soccer is an obvious team sport. Success requires a lot 
of coordination between interdependent players. On the other hand, swim teams aren’t really 
teams, except on relays. They’re groups of individuals, performing individually, whose total 
performance is merely the sum of their individual performances.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.

10 Review 
341
CHAPTER SUMMARY
  10-1 Define group and describe the stages  
of group development.
A group is two or more interacting and interdependent indi-
viduals who come together to achieve specific goals. Formal 
groups are work groups that are defined by the organization’s 
structure and have designated work assignments and specific 
tasks directed at accomplishing organizational goals. Informal 
groups are social groups.
The forming stage consists of two phases: joining the 
group and defining the group’s purpose, structure, and leader-
ship. The storming stage is one of intragroup conflict over who 
will control the group and what the group will be doing. The 
norming stage is when close relationships and cohesiveness de-
velop as norms are determined. The performing stage is when 
group members work on the group’s task. The adjourning stage 
happens when the group prepares to disband.
  10-2 Describe the major concepts of group  
behavior.
A role refers to a set of behavior patterns expected of someone 
occupying a given position in a social unit. At any given time, 
employees adjust their role behaviors to the group of which 
they are a part. Norms are standards shared by group members. 
They informally convey to employees which behaviors are ac-
ceptable and which are unacceptable. Status is another factor to 
know because it can be a significant motivator and it needs to be 
congruent. Also, group size affects group behavior in a number 
of ways. Smaller groups are generally faster at completing tasks 
than are larger ones. However, larger groups are frequently bet-
ter at fact finding because of their diversified input. As a result, 
larger groups are generally better at problem solving. Finally, 
group cohesiveness is important because of its impact on a 
group’s effectiveness at achieving its goals.
  10-3 Discuss how groups are turned into  
effective teams.
Effective teams have common characteristics. They have ad-
equate resources, effective leadership, a climate of trust, and a 
performance evaluation and reward system that reflects team 
contributions. These teams have individuals with technical ex-
pertise as well as problem-solving, decision-making, and inter-
personal skills and the right traits, especially conscientiousness 
and openness to new experiences. Effective teams also tend to 
be small, preferably of diverse backgrounds. They have mem-
bers who fill role demands and who prefer to be part of a team. 
And the work that members do provides freedom and autonomy, 
the opportunity to use different skills and talents, the ability to 
complete a whole and identifiable task or product, and work that 
has a substantial impact on others. Finally, effective teams have 
members who believe in the team’s capabilities and are commit-
ted to a common plan and purpose, specific team goals, a man-
ageable level of conflict, and a minimal degree of social loafing.
  10-4 Discuss contemporary issues in managing 
teams.
The challenges of managing global teams can be seen in team 
composition factors, especially the diverse cultural character-
istics; in team structure, especially conformity, status, social 
loafing, and cohesiveness; in team processes, especially with 
communication and managing conflict; and in the manager’s 
role in making it all work.
Managers also need to know when teams are not the 
 answer. They can do this by assessing whether the work can 
be done better by more than one person; by whether the work 
creates a common purpose or set of goals for the members of 
the team; and by the amount of interdependence among team 
members.
DIsCussIon QuesTIons
 10-1 Think of a group to which you belong (or have 
 belonged). Trace its development through the stages 
of group development as shown in Exhibit 10–2. 
How closely did its development parallel the group 
 development model? How might the group development 
model be used to improve this group’s effectiveness?
 10-2 Contrast (a) self-managed and cross-functional teams, 
and (b) virtual and face-to-face teams.
 10-3 How do you explain the popularity of work teams in 
countries such as the United States and Canada, whose 
national cultures place a high value on individualism?
 10-4 “All work teams are work groups, but not all work 
groups are work teams.” Do you agree or disagree with 
this statement? Discuss.
 10-5 Would you prefer to work alone or as part of a team? 
Why?

342    Part 4  •  Leading
 10-6 “To have a successful team, first find a great leader.” 
What do you think of this statement? Do you agree? 
Why or why not?
 10-7 What traits do you think good team players have?  
Do some research to answer this question and write a 
short report detailing your findings using a bulleted list 
format.
 10-8 Contrast the pros and cons of diverse teams.
 10-9 How do you think scientific management  theorists 
would react to the increased use of teams in 
 organizations? How would behavioral science 
 theorists react?
10-10 What challenges do managers face in managing global 
teams? How should those challenges be handled?
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded  writing questions:
10-11 Why is it important for managers to know about the 
stages of group development?
10-12 What characteristics do effective teams need?
10-13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
assignment for this chapter.
Management Skill Builder  |   DeveLopIng Your 
CoaChIng skILLs
Organizations have become increasingly structured around teams. Twenty years ago, the individual was the 
basic building block of an organization; today it’s teams. As the manager, you need to be able to effectively 
lead and coach a team. Without those skills, you’re likely to have a short tenure in your management position.
 PERSonAl InvEnToRy ASSESSmEnT
Diagnosing the need for Team Building
Part of being a coach who wants to create and manage an effective team means knowing 
when a team needs help. Use this PIA to assess teams you’re leading or are part of.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
Skill Basics
Effective work team managers are increasingly being  described 
as coaches rather than bosses. Just like coaches, they’re 
 expected to provide instruction, guidance, advice, and encour-
agement to help team members improve their job performance. 
You can learn to be a good team coach by practicing these 
behaviors:
• 
Analyze ways to improve the team’s performance and capa-
bilities. A coach looks for opportunities for team members 
to expand their capabilities and improve performance. How? 
You can use the following behaviors. Observe your team 
members’ behaviors on a day-to-day basis. Ask questions of 
them: Why do you do a task this way? Can it be improved? 
What other approaches might be used? Show genuine interest 
in team members as individuals, not merely as employees. 
Respect them individually. Listen to each employee.
• 
Create a supportive climate. It’s the coach’s responsibility 
to reduce barriers to development and to facilitate a climate 
that encourages personal performance improvement. How? 
You can use the following behaviors. Create a climate that 
contributes to a free and open exchange of ideas. Offer 
help and assistance. Give guidance and advice when asked. 
Encourage your team. Be positive and upbeat. Don’t use 
threats. Ask, “What did we learn from this that can help 
us in the future?” Reduce obstacles. Assure team members 
that you value their contribution to the team’s goals. Take 
personal responsibility for the outcome, but don’t rob team 
members of their full responsibility. Validate team  members’ 

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    343
efforts when they succeed. Point to what was missing when 
they fail. Never blame team members for poor results.
• 
Influence team members to change their behavior. The 
 ultimate test of coaching effectiveness is whether an 
 employee’s performance improves. You must encourage 
ongoing growth and development. How can you do this? 
Try the following behaviors. Recognize and reward small 
improvements and treat coaching as a way of helping 
 employees to continually work toward improvement. Use 
a collaborative style by allowing team members to par-
ticipate in identifying and choosing among improvement 
ideas. Break difficult tasks down into simpler ones. Model 
the qualities you expect from your team. If you want open-
ness, dedication, commitment, and responsibility from 
your team members, demonstrate these qualities yourself.
Practicing the Skill
Read through this scenario and follow the directions at the end 
of it:
You’re the leader of a five-member project team that’s been 
assigned the task of moving your engineering firm into the 
growing area of high-speed intercity rail construction. You 
and your team members have been researching the field, 
identifying specific business opportunities, negotiating alli-
ances with equipment vendors, and evaluating high-speed rail 
experts and consultants from around the world. Throughout 
the process, Tonya, a highly qualified and respected engi-
neer, has challenged a number of things you’ve said dur-
ing team meetings and in the workplace. For example, at a 
meeting two weeks ago, you presented the team with a list 
of 10 possible high-speed rail projects and started evaluat-
ing your organization’s ability to compete for them. Tonya 
contradicted virtually all of your comments, questioned your 
statistics, and was quite pessimistic about the possibility of 
getting contracts on these projects. After this latest display of 
displeasure, two other group members, Bryan and Maggie, 
came to you and complained that Tonya’s actions were dam-
aging the team’s effectiveness. You originally put Tonya on 
the team for her unique expertise and  insight. You’d like to 
find a way to reach her and get the team on the right track to 
its fullest potential.
Form three-member teams in class. Each team should 
analyze this leader’s problem and suggest solutions for coach-
ing Tonya (and other team members, if you feel it’s important). 
Each class team should be prepared to present its conclusions 
to the class.
Colorado State High School Sports Association
To:  Eric Gershman, Manager, Program Infractions  
Investigations
From: Audrey Costa, Director of Association Services
Subject: Conflicts on Investigation Teams
Eric, we’ve got a problem. I’ve been receiving complaints that 
the members of the five-person investigation teams we’re 
sending out to high schools to investigate allegations of rules 
infractions are having conflicts. Because team members have 
to work closely together in interviewing people, interpreting 
the rules, and writing up reports, I’m worried that this conflict 
may be hurting the quality of the teams’ investigation process. 
We’ve got to address this problem immediately in order to 
 protect our reputation for being fair and reasonable in our rules 
enforcement. Please send me a bulleted list (no longer than 
a page) describing how you’re going to address this problem 
and get it to me as soon as possible. Once I’ve had a chance 
to look it over, we’ll get together to discuss it.
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 

344    Part 4  •  Leading
Case appLICaTIon 
Rx: Teamwork
T
he health-care industry is the fastest growing sector 
of the U.S. economy, with annual revenues projected 
at over $1.6 trillion (that’s 12 zeroes!) and employing 
over 18 million workers.64 Many challenges face the health-
care industry, including changing laws/regulations, changing 
technologies, an aging population and increase in chronic 
disease, and labor shortages (physicians and nurses). But the 
goal is still the same—efficiently and effectively provide qual-
ity (appropriate and timely) 
health-care to patients. Given 
the challenges, health-care 
 organizations are looking for 
better ways to do this. And 
one way is through using a 
“team-based care”  approach, which  research studies have 
shown can improve  patient outcomes and reduce costs.
Many hospitals, clinics, and medical practices have 
 adopted this team-care approach. What does that entail? A 
patient receives care from a team of medical professionals 
who divide up responsibilities for performing tasks that tradi-
tionally would have been done by a person’s primary physi-
cian. Although supervising physicians still manage (oversee) 
patient care, tasks such as completing prescription refill re-
quests,  adjusting medication dosages, helping manage chronic 
diseases (for example, teaching someone diagnosed with 
diabetes how to take blood sugar counts and to administer 
insulin), and other routine tasks are now done by a team of 
health-care providers. For instance, at Kaiser Permanente, one 
of the largest not-for-profit managed health-care companies 
in the United States, a new program model called “complete 
care” was  designed to enable health-care staffers to work 
 together to make sure that no patient concern, need, preventive 
action, or matter was missed or overlooked.65 As one indi-
vidual described, staffers often literally chased patients down 
hallways to get them to schedule needed screenings. But the 
team approach is working. After a number of years using this 
model, research on Kaiser’s team model showed significant 
gains in patient medical care across a wide range of stan-
dardized measures. Getting 
to that outcome wasn’t easy, 
however. Departments that 
were accustomed to working 
on their own now had to work 
 together. Instead of  focusing 
on their own specialties, a team of specialists now worked 
together to provide patients with a well-rounded health-care 
experience. Physicians had to be retrained to view themselves 
as part of a team, supported by other professionals such as 
nurses, assistants, and other staff. As the health-care environ-
ment continues to be challenging, is teamwork the Rx?
Discussion Questions
10-14 What challenges are managers of health-care organizations 
facing?
10-15 How would the way health-care organization managers 
 manage be different in a team-based model?
10-16 Explain how roles, norms, status systems, and group cohesive-
ness might influence the success of a team-based model?
10-17 What are some reasons you think a team-based model has led 
to improved patient outcomes and reduced costs?
#1
TEAMING UP for  
better outcomes

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    345
Case appLICaTIon #2
W
hen you think of teams, do you automatically think 
of sports teams? For most of us, that was our first 
introduction to the concept of teams. Well, there’s 
one sports team that is a perfect illustration of what an effective 
team is all about: the St. Louis Cardinals.66 What can we learn 
about effective teams from them? Their record speaks for itself: 
the Cardinals, in the last four years (2011–2014), have won one 
World Series and two pennants, and achieved four consecutive 
playoff spots for the first time; in the last 15 years (2000–
2014), the team has been to the playoffs 11 times, participated 
in more playoff games than 
any team since 2009, and had 
only one losing season; since 
1960, the Cards have had con-
secutive losing seasons just 
once (yes, once) in 55 years, in 
the years 1994 and 1995. The Cardinals organization is a well-
managed team, both on the field and behind the scenes. How 
have they  managed these accomplishments? Here are some 
keys to their success:
• Talent development. The Cardinals organization finds ways 
to maximize its people and the skills they bring to the team. 
Their talent development process often grabs less-gifted mi-
nor league players (for less money) and transforms them into 
major-league contributors. How? Through its well-run farm 
system. Players in the Cards’ AAA, AA, and A leagues are 
repeatedly reminded that this organization likes to win and 
knows it can win.
• Intense focus on the fundamentals (the tasks) of the game. 
The Cardinals play fundamentally sound baseball—they 
know their business and they execute. (Or, using the words 
of the Nike slogan, they “Just Do It!) Players and coaches 
religiously use the 86-page operations manual (titled, of 
course, “The Cardinal Way”) as their guide. The manual 
The Cardinal Way
includes such details as the position a catcher should take on 
a 3-2 count and the fine distinctions of 12 different ground 
balls a second baseman might face.
• Coaches understand the importance of teaching the  details. 
Team players are “taught” and “coached” in real-time 
through a continual focus on improving their skills. Coaches 
help players learn from immediate game experiences. The 
pitching coaches and the batting coaches are right there 
 refining players’ behaviors during a game.
• Culture of success, care, and support. This is an organiza-
tion with a deep history of success. There’s an air of con-
fidence that they’re going to 
win. There’s the expectation 
that they will play the game the 
right way. Traditions are cel-
ebrated and embraced. Team 
members genuinely care about 
each other. When a teammate 
was killed in a car accident at the end of the 2014 season, all 
pulled together in compassion and concern.
The Cardinal Way is, at its very heart, an organizational 
 philosophy that guides all team members—from the team on 
the field to the coach staff to the front office staff to the market-
ing team and all others in the organization. Play ball!
Discussion Questions
10-18 How does the St. Louis Cardinals organization epitomize 
 teamwork?
10-19 Do you think sports teams, like the St. Louis Cardinals, go 
through the stages of group development? Why or why not?
10-20 Using Exhibit 10–6 as your guide, discuss how the St. Louis 
Cardinals organization creates effective teams.
10-21 What could other organizations (even non-sports ones) learn 
from the St. Louis Cardinals?
WINNING Team—Winning  
APProAch

346    Part 4  •  Leading
Case appLICaTIon 
Teaming Up for Take Off
T
he Boeing 737, a short- to medium-range twin-engine, 
narrow-body jet first rolled off the assembly line in 
1967.67 Now, almost half a century later, it’s the best-
selling jet airliner in the history of aviation. As airlines replace 
their aging narrow-body jet fleets, the burden is on Boeing to 
ramp up production to meet demand and to do so efficiently. 
Boeing managers face the 
challenge of producing more 
aircraft without increasing the 
size and scope of the manu-
facturing facility. Managing 
production of the multimil-
lion-dollar product—a 737-800 is sold for $84.4  million—
means “walking an increasingly fine line between generating 
cash and stoking an airplane glut.” And Boeing is relying on its 
employee innovation teams to meet the challenge.
Boeing has been using employee-generated ideas since the 
1990s, when its manufacturing facility in Renton, Washington, 
began adopting “lean” manufacturing techniques. Today, em-
ployee teams are continually looking for innovative ways—
small and big—to be more efficient and effective. For instance, 
a member of one team thought of a solution to a problem of 
stray metal fasteners sometimes puncturing the tires as the air-
plane advanced down the assembly line. The solution? A canvas 
wheel cover that hugs the four main landing-gear tires. Another 
team figured out how to rearrange its work space to make four 
engines at a time instead of three. Another team of workers in 
the paint process revamped their work routines and cut 10 min-
utes to 15 minutes per worker off each job. It took five years for 
another employee team to perfect a process for installing the 
plane’s landing gear hydraulic tubes, but it eventually paid off.
These employee teams are made up of seven to ten work-
ers with diverse skills—from mechanics to assembly workers 
to  engineers—and tend to fo-
cus on a specific part of a jet, 
such as the landing gear or the 
passenger seats or the galleys. 
These teams may meet as often 
as once a week. What’s the 
track record of these teams? Today, it takes about 11 days for 
the final assembly of a 737 jet. That’s down from 22 days about 
a decade ago. The near-term goal is to eventually shave off two 
more days.
Discussion Questions
10-22 What type of team(s) do these employee teams appear to be? 
Explain.
10-23 As this story illustrated, sometimes it may take a long time 
for a team to reach its goal. As a manager, how would you 
motivate a team to keep on trying?
10-24 What role do you think a team leader needs to play in this type 
of setting? Explain.
10-25 Using Exhibit 14–10, what characteristics of effective teams 
would these teams need? Explain.
#3
Employee teams tackle  
INNovATIoN chAllENGE

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    347
Endnotes
 1. B. Mezrich, Bringing Down the 
House: The Inside Story of Six 
MIT Students Who Took Vegas for 
Millions (New York: Free Press, 
2002). The 2008 film 21 was a fic-
tional work based loosely on the 
story.
 2. B. W. Tuckman and M. C. Jensen, 
“Stages of Small-Group Develop-
ment Revisited,” Group and Or-
ganizational Studies, December 
1977, 419–27; and M. F. Maples, 
“Group Development: Extending 
Tuckman’s Theory,” Journal for 
Specialists in Group Work (Fall 
1988): 17–23.
 3. L. N. Jewell and H. J. Reitz, Group 
Effectiveness 
in 
Organizations 
(Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, 
1981); and M. Kaeter, “Repotting 
Mature Work Teams,” Training 
(April 1994): 54–56.
 4. Question of Ethics box based on 
S. Shellenbarger, “Office Over-
sharers: Don’t Tell Us about 
Last Night,” Wall Street Journal, 
June 25, 2014, D2; E. Bernstein, 
“Thank You for Not Sharing,” 
Wall Street Journal, May 7, 2013, 
D1+; P. Klaus, “Thank You for 
Sharing. But Why at the Office?” 
New York Times Online, August 
18, 2012; K. McCullum, “Hush, 
Hush,” OfficePro, March–April 
2011, 18–22; and E. Bernstein, 
“You Did What? Spare the Office 
the Details,” Wall Street Journal, 
April 6, 2010, D1+.
 5. S. E. Asch, “Effects of Group 
Pressure upon the Modification 
and Distortion of Judgments,” in 
H. Guetzkow (ed.), Groups, Lead-
ership, and Men (Pittsburgh, PA: 
Carnegie Press, 1951), 177–90.
 6. See, for example, R. A. Henry, J. 
Kmet, and A. Landa, “Examin-
ing the Impact of Interpersonal 
Cohesiveness on Group Accuracy 
Interventions: 
The 
Importance 
of Matching versus Buffering,” 
Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Decision Processes (January 
2002): 25–43.
 7. Asch, “Effects of Group Pressure 
upon the Modification and Distor-
tion of Judgments.”
 8. O. A. Alnuaimi, L. P. Robert Jr., 
and L. M. Maruping, “Team Size, 
Dispersion, and Social Loafing 
in Technology-Supported Teams: 
A Perspective on the Theory of 
Moral Disengagement,” Journal 
of Management Information Sys-
tems (Summer 2010): 203–30; C. 
Cheshire and J. Antin, “None of 
Us Is as Lazy as All of Us,” In-
formation, Communication & So-
ciety, June 2010, 537–55; R. van 
Dick, J. Stellmacher, U. Wagner, 
G. Lemmer, and P. A. Tissington, 
“Group Membership Salience and 
Task Performance,” Journal of 
Managerial Psychology 24, no. 
7 (2009): 609–26; A. Jassawalla, 
H. Sashittal, and A. Malshe, 
“Students’ Perceptions of Social 
Loafing: Its Antecedents and Con-
sequences in Undergraduate Busi-
ness Classroom Teams,” Academy 
of Management Learning & Edu-
cation, March 2009, 42–54; and 
R. Albanese and D. D. Van Fleet, 
“Rational Behavior in Groups: 
The Free Riding Tendency,” Acad-
emy of Management Review, April 
1985, 244–55.
 9. L. Berkowitz, “Group Standards, 
Cohesiveness, and  Productivity,” 
Human 
Relations, 
November 
1954, 509–19.
 10. From the Past to the Present box 
based on S. S. Wang, “Under the 
Influence: How the Group Chang-
es What We Think,” Wall Street 
Journal, May 3, 2011, D1+; M. E. 
Shaw, Group Dynamics: The Psy-
chology of Small Group Behavior 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1975); 
and E. J. Thomas and C. F. Fink, 
“Effects of Group Size,” Psy-
chological Bulletin (July 1963): 
371–84.
 11. Cited in T. Purdum, “Teaming, 
Take 2,” Industry Week, May 2005, 
43; and C. Joinson, “Teams at 
Work,” HR Magazine, May 1999, 
30.
 12. See, for example, S. A. Mohrman, 
S. G. Cohen, and A. M. Mohrman 
Jr., Designing Team-Based Orga-
nizations (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 1995); P. MacMillan, The 
Performance Factor: Unlocking 
the Secrets of Teamwork (Nash-
ville, TN: Broadman & Holman, 
2001); and E. Salas, C. A. Bow-
ers, and E. Eden (eds.), Improv-
ing Teamwork in Organizations: 
Applications of Resource Man-
agement Training (Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum, 2002).
 13. Information for this section is 
based on J. R. Katzenbach and D. 
K. Smith, The Wisdom of Teams 
(Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 1993), 21, 45, 85; and D. 
C. Kinlaw, Developing Superior 
Work Teams (Lexington, MA: 
Lexington Books, 1991), 3–21.
 14. S. Adams and L. Kydoniefs, 
“Making Teams Work: Bureau 
of Labor Statistics Learns What 
Works and What Doesn’t,” Quality 
Progress (January 2000): 43–49.
 15. D. Hoffman, “At Wachovia, Fund 
Teams Work: Bank’s Buddy Sys-
tem Improves Performance,” In-
vestment News (February 2001): 8.
 16. T. Capozzoli, “How to Succeed 
with Self-Directed Work Teams,” 
Supervision 
(February 
2002): 
25–27.
 17. See, for instance, E. Sunstrom, 
DeMeuse, and D. Futrell, “Work 
Teams: Applications and Effec-
tiveness,” American Psychologist, 
February 1990, 120–33.
 18. J. S. McClenahen, “Bearing Ne-
cessities,” Industry Week, October 
2004, 63–65; P. J. Kiger, “Acxiom 
Rebuilds from Scratch,” Work-
force, December 2002, 52–55; and 
T. Boles, “Viewpoint—Leadership 
Lessons from NASCAR,” Indus-
try Week, www.industryweek.com 
(May 21, 2002).
 19. M. Cianni and D. Wanuck, “Indi-
vidual Growth and Team Enhance-
ment: Moving Toward a New 
Model of Career Development,” 
Academy of Management Execu-
tive, February 1997, 105–15.
 20. C. Joinson, “Teams at Work,” 30; 
and “Teams,” Training (October 
1996): 69.
 21. J. P. Millikin, P. W. Hom, and 
C. C. Manz, “Self-Management 
Competencies in Self-Managing 
Teams: Their Impact on Multi-
Team 
System 
Productivity,” 
Leadership Quarterly, October 
2010, 687–702; O. Turel and 
Y. Zhang, “Does Virtual Team 
Composition Matter? Trait and 
Problem-Solving 
Configuration 
Effects on Team Performance,” 
Behavior & Information Technol-
ogy, July–August 2010, 363–75; 
J. S. Bunderson and P. Boumgar-
den, “Structure and Learning in 
Self-Managed Teams: Why ‘Bu-
reaucratic’ Teams Can Be Better 
Learners,” Organization Science, 
May–June 2010, 609–24; and G. 
M. Spreitzer, S. G. Cohen, and G. 
E. Ledford Jr., “Developing Effec-
tive Self-Managing Work Teams 
in Service Organizations,” Group 
& 
Organization 
Management, 
September 1999, 340–66.
 22. “Meet the New Steel,” Fortune, 
October 1, 2007, 68–71.
 23. J. Appleby and R. Davis, “Team-
work Used to Save Money; Now 
It Saves Lives,” USA Today, www.
usatoday. com (March 1, 2001).
 24. A. Malhotra, A. Majchrzak, R. 
Carman, and V. Lott, “Radical 
Innovation without Collocation: 
A Case Study at Boeing-Rocket-
dyne,” MIS Quarterly, June 2001, 
229–49.
 25. A. Stuart, “Virtual Agreement,” 
CFO, November 2007, 24.
 26. Technology and the Manager’s Job 
box based on K. Lee, “17 Tools 
for Remote Workers,” http://www 
.fastcompany.com/3038333/17-
tools-for-remote-workers, Novem-
ber 12, 2014; C. Mims, “Use of 
Voice Is Key to Managing Teams,” 
Wall Street Journal, September 
23, 2014, B1+; “Virtual Team 
Collaboration 
and 
Innovation 
in Organizations,” Team Perfor-
mance Management, March 2011, 
109–19; M. Flammia, Y. Cleary, 
and D. M. Slattery, “Leadership 
Roles, Socioemotional Strategies, 
and Technology Use of Irish and 
US Students in Virtual Teams,” 
IEEE Transactions on Profes-
sional Communication, June 2010, 
89–101; P. Evans, “The Wiki Fac-
tor,” 
BizEd, 
January–February 
2006, 28–32; and M. McCafferty, 
“A Human Inventory,” CFO, April 
2005, 83–85.
 27. See, for instance, D. C. Jones and 
T. Kato, “The Impact of Teams on 
Output, Quality, and Downtime: 
An Empirical Analysis Using Indi-
vidual Panel Data,” Industrial and 
Labor Relations Review, January 
2011, 215–40; A. Gilley, J. W. Gil-
ley, C. W. McConnell, and A. Ve-
liquette, “The Competencies Used 
by Effective Managers to Build 
Teams: An Empirical Study,” Ad-
vances in Developing Human Re-
sources, February 2010, 29–45; 
M. A. Campion, G. J. Medsker, 
and C. A. Higgs, “Relations be-
tween Work Group Characteristics 
and Effectiveness: Implications 
for Designing Effective Work 
Groups,” Personnel Psychology, 
Winter 1993, 823–50; and J. R. 
Hackman, “The Design of Work 
Teams,” in J. W. Lorsch (ed.), 
Handbook of Organizational Be-
havior (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1987), 315–42.
 28. This model is based on M. A. 
Campion, E. M. Papper, and G. 
J. Medsker, “Relations between 
Work Team Characteristics and 
Effectiveness: A Replication and 
Extension,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy, Summer 1996, 429–52; D. E. 
Hyatt and T. M. Ruddy, “An Ex-
amination of the Relationship be-
tween Work Group Characteristics 
and Performance: Once More into 
the Breech,” Personnel Psychol-
ogy, Autumn 1997, 553–85; S. G. 
Cohen and D. E. Bailey, “What 
Makes Teams Work: Group Effec-
tiveness Research from the Shop 
Floor to the Executive Suite,” 
Journal of Management (Septem-
ber 1997): 239–90; L. Thompson, 
Making the Team (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2000), 
18–33; and J. R. Hackman, Lead-
ing Teams: Setting the Stage for 
Great 
Performance 
(Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press, 
2002).
 29. See M. Mattson, T. V. Mumford, 
and G. S. Sintay, “Taking Teams 
to Task: A Normative Model for 
Designing or Recalibrating Work 
Teams,” paper presented at the Na-
tional Academy of Management 
Conference, 
Chicago, 
August 
1999; and G. L. Stewart and M. 
R. Barrick, “Team Structure and 
Performance: Assessing the Me-
diating Role of Intrateam Process 
and the Moderating Role of Task 
Type,” Academy of Management 
Journal (April 2000): 135–48.
 30. SmartPulse, 
“How 
Effectively 
Does Your Team Communicate 
Using New Electronic Channels?” 
Smart Brief on Leadership, www 
.smartbrief.com/leadership, Octo-
ber 7, 2014.
 31. “Virtual Team Collaboration and 
Innovation 
in 
Organizations”; 
M. Flammia, Y. Cleary, and D. 
M. Slattery, “Leadership Roles, 
Socioemotional Strategies, and 

348    Part 4  •  Leading
Technology Use of Irish and U.S. 
Students in Virtual Teams”; A. 
Malhotra, A. Majchrzak, and B. 
Rosen, “Leading Virtual Teams,” 
Academy of Management Perspec-
tives, February 2007, 60–70; B. L. 
Kirkman and J. E. Mathieu, “The 
Dimensions and Antecedents of 
Team Virtuality,” Journal of Man-
agement (October 2005): 700–18; 
J. Gordon, “Do Your Virtual 
Teams Deliver Only Virtual Per-
formance?” Training (June 2005): 
20–25; L. L. Martins, L. L. Gil-
son, and M. T. Maynard, “Virtual 
Teams: What Do We Know and 
Where Do We Go from Here?” 
Journal of Management (Decem-
ber 2004): 805–35; S. A. Furst, M. 
Reeves, B. Rosen, and R. S. Black-
burn, “Managing the Life Cycle of 
Virtual Teams,” Academy of Man-
agement Executive, May 2004, 
6–20; B. L. Kirkman, B. Rosen, P. 
E. Tesluk, and C. B. Gibson, “The 
Impact of Team Empowerment on 
Virtual Team Performance: The 
Moderating Role of Face-to-Face 
Interaction,” Academy of Man-
agement Journal (April 2004): 
175–92; F. Keenan and S. E. Ante, 
“The New Teamwork,” Business 
Week e.biz, February 18, 2002, 
EB12–EB16; and G. Imperato, 
“Real Tools for Virtual Teams,” 
Fast Company, July 2000, 378–87.
 32. R. I. Sutton, “The Boss as Human 
Shield,” Harvard Business Review, 
September 2010, 106–09; and Hy-
att and Ruddy, “An Examination 
of the Relationship between Work 
Group Characteristics and Perfor-
mance,” 577.
 33. M. E. Palanski, S. S. Kahai, and F. 
J. Yammarino, “Team Virtues and 
Performance: An Examination of 
Transparency, Behavioral Integri-
ty, and Trust,” Journal of Business 
Ethics (March 2011): 201–16; H. 
H. Chang, S. S. Chuang, and S. H. 
Chao, “Determinants of Cultural 
Adaptation, Communication Qual-
ity, and Trust in Virtual Teams’ 
Performance,” 
Total 
Quality 
Management and Business Excel-
lence, March 2011, 305–29; A. C. 
Costa and N. Anderson, “Measur-
ing Trust in Teams: Development 
and Validation of a Multifaceted 
Measure of Formative and Reflec-
tive Indicators of Team Trust,” 
European Journal of Work & Or-
ganizational Psychology (Febru-
ary 2011): 119–54; M. Mach, S. 
Dolan, and S. Tzafrir, “The Dif-
ferential Effect of Team Members’ 
Trust on Team Performance: The 
Mediation Role of Team Cohe-
sion,” Journal of Occupational 
and Organizational Psychology 
(September 2010): 771–94; B. A. 
DeJong and T. Elfring, “How Does 
Trust Affect the Performance of 
Ongoing Teams? The Mediating 
Role of Reflexivity, Monitoring, 
and Effort,” Academy of Man-
agement Journal (June 2010): 
535–49; M. Williams, “In Whom 
We Trust: Group Membership as 
an Affective Context for Trust De-
velopment,” Academy of Manage-
ment Review, July 2001, 377–96; 
and K. T. Dirks, “Trust in Leader-
ship and Team Performance: Evi-
dence from NCAA Basketball,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(December 2000): 1004–12.
 34. R. R. Hirschfeld, M. J. Jordan, 
H. S. Field, W. F. Giles, and A. 
A. Armenakis, “Becoming Team 
Players: Team Members’ Mastery 
of Team Knowledge as a Predictor 
of Team Task Proficiency and Ob-
served Teamwork Effectiveness,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 91, 
no. 2 (2006): 467–74.
 35. S. T. Bell, “Deep-Level Com-
position Variables as Predictors 
of Team Performance: A Meta-
Analysis,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 92, no. 3 (2007): 
595–615; and M. R. Barrick, G. L. 
Stewart, M. J. Neubert, and M. K. 
Mount,  “Relating Member Abil-
ity and Personality to Work-Team 
 Processes and Team Effective-
ness,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy (June 1998): 377–91.
 36. M. Costello, “Team Weaver,” Peo-
ple Management, January 2011, 
26–27; and C. Margerison and 
D. McCann, Team Management: 
Practical New Approaches (Lon-
don: Mercury Books, 1990).
 37. K. H. T. Yu and D. M. Cable, “Un-
packing Cooperation in Diverse 
Teams,” Team Performance Man-
agement, March 2011, 63–82; A. 
Nederveen Pieterse, D. van Knip-
penberg, and W. P. van Ginkel, 
“Diversity in Goal Orientation, 
Team Reflexivity, and Team Per-
formance,” Organizational Be-
havior and Human Performance, 
March 2011, 153–64; M.-E. Ro-
berge and R. van Dick, “Recog-
nizing the Benefits of Diversity: 
When and How Does Diversity 
Increase Group Performance,” Hu-
man Resource Management Re-
view, December 2010, 295–308; 
and E. Mannix and M. A. Neale, 
“What Differences Make a Differ-
ence: The Promise and Reality of 
Diverse Teams in Organizations,” 
Psychological Science in the Pub-
lic Interest, October 2005, 31–55.
 38. A. Deutschman, “Inside the Mind 
of Jeff Bezos,” Fast Company, Au-
gust 2004, 50–58.
 39. Hyatt and Ruddy, “An Examina-
tion of the Relationship between 
Work Group Characteristics and 
Performance”; J. D. Shaw, M. K. 
Duffy, and E. M. Stark, “Inter-
dependence and Preference for 
Group Work: Main and Congru-
ence Effects on the Satisfaction 
and Performance of Group Mem-
bers,” Journal of Management 
(June 2000): 259–79; and S. A. 
Kiffin-Peterson and J. L. Cordery, 
“Trust, Individualism, and Job 
Characteristics of Employee Pref-
erence for Teamwork,” Interna-
tional Journal of Human Resource 
Management (February 2003): 
93–116.
 40. J. S. Bunderson and P. Boum-
garden, “Structure and Learning 
in Self-Managed Teams: Why 
‘Bureaucratic’ Teams Can Be 
Better Learners”; and R. Wage-
man, “Critical Success Factors for 
Creating Superb Self-Managing 
Teams,” Organizational Dynam-
ics, Summer 1997, 55.
 41. Campion, Papper, and Medsker, 
“Relations between Work Team 
Characteristics 
and 
Effective-
ness,” 430; B. L. Kirkman and 
B. Rosen, “Powering Up Teams,” 
Organizational Dynamics,  Winter 
2000, 48–66; and D. C. Man and 
S. S. K. Lam, “The Effects of 
Job Complexity and Autonomy 
on Cohesiveness in Collectivist 
and Individualist Work Groups: 
A Cross-Cultural Analysis,” Jour-
nal of Organizational Behavior 
 (December 2003): 979–1001.
 42. A. Mehta, H. Feild, A. Armenakis, 
and N. Mehta, “Team Goal Ori-
entation and Team Performance: 
The Mediating Role of Team 
Planning,” Journal of Manage-
ment (August 2009): 1026–46; K. 
Blanchard, D. Carew, and E. Pari-
si-Carew, “How to Get Your Group 
to Perform Like a Team,” Training 
and 
Development 
(September 
1996): 34–37; K. D. Scott and A. 
Townsend, “Teams: Why Some 
Succeed and Others Fail,” HR 
Magazine, August 1994, 62–67; 
K. Hess, Creating the High-Per-
formance Team (New York: Wiley, 
1987); and Katzenbach and Smith, 
“The Wisdom of Teams,” 43–64.
 43. H. van Emmerik, I. M. Jawahar, 
B. Schreurs, and N. de Cuyper, 
“Social Capital, Team Efficacy 
and Team Potency: The Mediating 
Role of Team Learning Behav-
iors,” Career Development Inter-
national (February 2011): 82– 99; 
T. Lewis, “Assessing Social Iden-
tity and Collective Efficacy as 
Theories of Group Motivation 
at Work,” International Journal 
of Human Resource Manage-
ment (February 2011): 963–80; 
K. Tasa, G. J. Sears, and A. C. H. 
Schat, “Personality and Teamwork 
Behavior in Context: The Cross-
Level Moderating Role of Collec-
tive Efficacy,” Journal of Organi-
zational Behavior (January 2011): 
65–85; J. A. Goncalo, E. Polman, 
and C. Maslach, “Can Confi-
dence Come Too Soon? Collec-
tive Efficacy, Conflict and Group 
Performance Over Time,” Orga-
nizational Behavior & Human De-
cision Processes, September 2010, 
13–24; K. Tasa, S. Taggar, and 
G. H. Seijts, “The Development 
of Collective Efficacy in Teams: 
A Multilevel and Longitudinal 
Perspective,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology (January 2007): 17–
27; C. B. Gibson, “The Efficacy 
Advantage: Factors Related to 
the Formation of Group Efficacy,” 
Journal of Applied Social Psychol-
ogy (October 2003): 2153–86; and 
D. I. Jung and J. J. Sosik, “Group 
Potency and Collective Efficacy: 
Examining Their Predictive Valid-
ity, Level of Analysis, and Effects 
of Performance Feedback on Fu-
ture Group Performance,” Group 
& 
Organization 
Management, 
September 2003, 366–91.
 44. SmartPulse, “How Effectively Do 
You Resolve Conflict with Oth-
ers?” Smart Brief on Leadership, 
www.smartbrief.com, April 21, 
2015.
 45. K. C. Kostopoulos and N. Bozio-
nelos, “Team Exploratory and 
Exploitative Learning: Psycho-
logical Safety, Task Conflict, and 
Team Performance,” Group & 
Organization Management, June 
2011, 385–415; K. J. Behfar, E. 
A. Mannix, R. S. Peterson, and W. 
M. Trochim, “Conflict in Small 
Groups: The Meaning and Con-
sequences of Process Conflict,” 
Small Group Research, April 
2011, 127–76; R. S. Peterson and 
K. J. Behfar, “The Dynamic Re-
lationship between Performance 
Feedback, Trust, and Conflict in 
Groups: A  Longitudinal Study,” 
Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Decision Processes, Septem-
ber–November 2003, 102–12; and 
K. A. Jehn, “A Qualitative Analy-
sis of Conflict Types and Dimen-
sions in Organizational Groups,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 
September 1997, 530–57.
 46. O. A. Alnuaimi, L. P. Robert Jr., 
and L. M. Maruping, “Team Size, 
Dispersion, and Social Loafing in 
Technology-Supported Teams: A 
Perspective on the Theory of Moral 
Disengagement”; C. Cheshire and 
J. Antin, “None of Us Is as Lazy as 
All of Us”; R. van Dick, J. Stellm-
acher, U. Wagner, G. Lemmer, and 
P. A. Tissington, “Group Mem-
bership Salience and Task Perfor-
mance”; A. Jassawalla, H. Sashit-
tal, and A. Malshe, “Students’ 
Perceptions of Social Loafing: Its 
Antecedents and Consequences 
in Undergraduate Business Class-
room Teams”; K. H. Price, D. A. 
Harrison, and J. H. Gavin, “With-
holding Inputs in Team Contexts: 
Member Composition, Interaction 
Processes, Evaluation Structure, 
and Social Loafing,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (December 
2006): 1375–84; and R. Albanese 
and D. D. Van Fleet, “Rational Be-
havior in Groups: The Free Riding 
Tendency,” Academy of Manage-
ment Review, April 1985, 244–55.
 47. SmartPulse, “If Someone on Your 
Team Hates Their Job, What Do 
You Do?” Smart Brief on Lead-
ership, 
www.smartbrief.com/ 
leadership, October 21, 2014.
 48. “Helping Hands,” HR Magazine, 
May 2011, 18; M. O’Neil, “Lead-
ing the Team,” Supervision, April 
2011, 8–10; J. Beeson, “Build a 
Strong Team,” Leadership Excel-
lence, February 2011, 15; S. Bru-
tus and M. B. L. Donia, “Improv-
ing the Effectiveness of Students 
in Groups with a Centralized Peer 
Evaluation System,” Academy of 
Management Learning & Educa-
tion, December 2010, 652–62; and 
N. H. Woodward, “Make the Most 

CHAPTER 10  •  Understanding Groups and Managing Work Teams    349
of Team Building,” HR Magazine, 
September 2006, 73–76.
 49. R. M. Yandrick, “A Team Effort,” 
HR Magazine, June 2001, 136–41.
 50. Ibid.
 51. “How Should We Recognize Team 
Goals over Individual?” Work-
force Management Online, Feb-
ruary 2011; S. J. Goerg, S. Kube, 
and R. Zultan, “Treating Equals 
Unequally: Incentives in Teams, 
Workers’ Motivation, and Produc-
tion Technology,” Journal of La-
bor Economics (October 2010):. 
747–72; T. Taylor, “The Challenge 
of Project Team Incentives,” Com-
pensation & Benefits Review, Sep-
tember–October 2010, 411–19; 
M. J. Pearsall, M. S. Christian, 
and A. P. J. Ellis, “Motivating In-
terdependent Teams: Individual 
Rewards, Shared Rewards, or 
Something in Between?” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (January 
2010): 183–91; M. A. Marks, C. 
S. Burke, M. J. Sabella, and S. J. 
Zaccaro, “The Impact of Cross-
Training on Team Effectiveness,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(February 2000): 3–14; and M. A. 
Marks, S. J. Zaccaro, and J. E. Ma-
thieu, “Performance Implications 
of Leader Briefings and Team In-
teraction for Team Adaptation to 
Novel Environments,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (December 
2000): 971.
 52. C. Garvey, “Steer Teams with the 
Right Pay: Team-Based Pay Is a 
Success When It Fits Corporate 
Goals and Culture, and Rewards 
the Right Behavior,” HR Maga-
zine, May 2002, 71–77.
 53. F. Niederman and F. B. Tan, 
“Emerging 
Markets 
Manag-
ing Global IT Teams: Con-
sidering 
Cultural 
Dynamics,” 
 Communications of the ACM, 
April 2011, 24–27; R. M. B. 
Boyle and S. Nicholas, “Cross-
Cultural Group Performance,” 
The 
Learning 
Organization, 
March 2011, 94–101; G. K. 
Stahl, M. L. Maznevski, A. Voigt, 
and K. Jonsen, “Unraveling the 
Effects of Cultural Diversity in 
Teams: A Meta-Analysis of Re-
search on Multicultural Work 
Groups,” Journal of Internation-
al Business Studies (May 2010): 
690–709; and M. R. Haas, “The 
Double-Edged Sword of Auton-
omy and External Knowledge: 
Analyzing Team  Effectiveness in 
a Multinational Organization.”
 54. R. Bond and P. B. Smith, “Culture 
and Conformity: A Meta-Analysis 
of Studies Using Asch’s [1952, 
1956] Line Judgment Task,” Psy-
chological Bulletin, January 1996, 
111–37.
 55. I. L. Janis, Groupthink, 2nd ed. 
(New York: Houghton Mifflin 
Company, 1982), 175.
 56. See P. C. Earley, “Social Loafing 
and Collectivism: A Comparison 
of the United States and the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China,” Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, Decem-
ber 1989, 565–81; and P. C. Earley, 
“East Meets West Meets Mideast: 
Further Explorations of Collec-
tivistic and Individualistic Work 
Groups,” Academy of Management 
Journal (April 1993): 319–48.
 57. N. J. Adler, International Dimen-
sions of Organizational Behavior, 
4th ed. (Cincinnati, OH: South-
western, 2002), 142.
 58. K. B. Dahlin, L. R. Weingart, and 
P. J. Hinds, “Team Diversity and 
Information Use,” Academy of 
Management Journal (December 
2005): 1107–23.
 59. Adler, International Dimensions 
of Organizational Behavior, 142.
 60. S. Paul, I. M. Samarah, P. Seeth-
araman, and P. P. Mykytyn, “An 
Empirical Investigation of Collab-
orative Conflict Management Style 
in Group Support System-Based 
Global Virtual Teams,” Journal of 
Management Information Systems 
(Winter 2005): 185–222.
 61. This section is based on S. P. Rob-
bins and T. A. Judge, Organiza-
tional Behavior, 14th ed. (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice 
Hall, 2011).
 62. C. E. Naquin and R. O. Tynan, 
“The Team Halo Effect: Why 
Teams Are Not Blamed for Their 
Failures,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology (April 2003): 332–40.
 63. A. B. Drexler and R. Forrester, 
“Teamwork—Not Necessarily the 
Answer,” HR Magazine, January 
1998, 55–58. See also R. Saave-
dra, P. C. Earley, and L. Van Dyne, 
“Complex 
Interdependence 
in 
Task-Performing Groups,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (February 
1993): 61–72; and K. A. Jehn, G. B. 
Northcraft, and M. A. Neale, “Why 
Differences Make a Difference: A 
Field Study of Diversity, Conflict, 
and Performance in Work Groups,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 
December 1999, 741–63.
 64. “Health Care Industry Statistics,” 
www.statisticbrain.com/health-
care-industry-statistics/, February 
3, 2015; and “Healthcare Work-
ers,” 
www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/
healthcare, December 12, 2014.
 65. L. Landro, “The Teamwork Ap-
proach to Medical Care,” Wall 
Street Journal, June 9, 2014, R3.
 66. B. Nightengale, “Cardinals on 
2015: ‘We Can Do This for Os-
car 
(Taveras)’,” 
www.ustoday.
com/sports/, April 14, 2015; T. 
Ringolsby, “‘Cardinal Way’ Con-
tinues to Be Winning Formula,” 
http://m.cardinals.mlb.com/news/
article/97919236/tracy-ringolsby-
cardinal-way-continues-to-be-
winning-formula, October 7, 2014; 
A. Turock, “The Cardinal Way: 
Making Talent Development a 
Game-Changer Strategy,” http://
www.turock.com/the-cardinal-
way-making-talent-development-a-
game-changer-strategy/, March 27, 
2014; T. Calandro, “The Cardinal 
Way: Built to Last,” http://www. 
h u ffi n g t o n p o s t . c o m / t o ny - 
calandro/the-cardinal-way-built-
to_b_4164652.html, 
January  
23, 
2014; 
H. 
Megdal, 
“The 
Cardinal 
Way,” 
http://www. 
sportsonearth.com/article/ 
56835048/the-st-louis-cardinals-
have-a-system-the-cardina_3, 
August 14, 2013; D. Goold, “Car-
dinal Way,” http://www.stltoday.
com/sports/baseball/professional/ 
now-in-book-form-the-cardinal-
way/article_1c76331b-077e-57aa-
9333-86a85b1f5ac2.html, May 18, 
2012; and D. O’Neill, “The ‘Car-
dinal Way’ Is Team’s Foundation,” 
http://www.stltoday.com/sports/
baseball/professional/the-cardinal-
way-is-team-s-foundation/article_
a32b5806-a307-58b6-ae89-bac 
9e6ae0d2e.html, October 30, 2011.
 67. D. Michaels and J. Ostrower, “Air-
bus, Boeing Walk a Fine Line on 
Jetliner Production,” Wall Street 
Journal, July 16, 2012, B3; D. 
Kesmodel, “Boeing Teams Speed 
Up 737 Output,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, February 7, 2012, B10; and A. 
Cohen, “Boeing Sees Demand for 
Existing, Reengined 737s,” blog 
on Seattle Post-Intelligencer On-
line, October 26, 2011.

Motivating and 
Rewarding Employees
11
Rido/Fotolia
 Motivation is all 
about “show me  
the money.”

351
Maybe the greatest fallacy about motivation  
is that everyone is motivated by money. 
Many ineffective or inexperienced managers 
naively believe that money is a prime  
motivator. Then they proceed to ignore the 
many other actions and rewards they  
control that are as equally important as 
money, if not more so. As you’ll see, one size 
doesn’t fit all, and the secret to being an  
effective motivator is understanding each  
individual’s unique needs.

managers need to understand that what 
motivates them personally may have 
 little or no effect on others. Just because 
you’re motivated by being part of a cohe-
sive work team, don’t assume everyone 
is. Or just  because you’re motivated by 
your job doesn’t mean that everyone is. 
Or just because employees have  access 
to free food, free massages, free laun-
dry, and free M&Ms doesn’t mean those 
extras are enough to keep them from look-
ing elsewhere for career opportunities. 
Effective managers who get employees to 
put forth maximum effort know how and 
why those employees are motivated and 
 tailor  motivational practices to satisfy their 
needs and wants. Motivating and reward-
ing employees are some of the manager’s 
most important and challenging activities. 
To get employees to put forth maximum 
work  effort, managers need to know how 
and why they’re motivated. •
Learning Outcomes
11-1 Define and explain motivation. p. 353
11-2 Compare and contrast early theories of motivation. p. 354
11-3 Compare and contrast contemporary theories of motivation. p. 358
11-4 Discuss current issues in motivating employees. p. 365
SucceSSful 
352

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    353
What Is Motivation?
Several CEOs were attending a meeting where the topic 
was “What do employees want?”1 Each CEO took turns 
describing the benefits they provided and how they 
gave out free M&Ms every Wednesday and offered 
their  employees stock options and free parking spaces. 
However, the meeting’s main speaker made the point that 
“employees don’t want M&Ms; they want to love what 
they do.” Half expecting his audience to laugh, the speaker was pleasantly surprised as the 
CEOs stood up one-by-one to agree. They all recognized that “the value in their companies 
comes from the employees who are motivated to be there.”
These CEOs understand how important employee motivation is. Like them, all manag-
ers need to be able to motivate their employees, which requires understanding what moti-
vation is. Let’s begin by pointing out what motivation is not. Why? Because many people 
incorrectly view motivation as a personal trait; that is, they think some people are motivated 
and others aren’t. Our knowledge of motivation tells us that we can’t label people that way 
because individuals differ in motivational drive and their overall motivation varies from situ-
ation to situation. For instance, you’re probably more motivated to work hard and do well in 
some classes than in others.
78 percent of managers say they do a fair job  
of motivating their people.2
Motivation refers to the process by which a person’s efforts are energized, directed, and 
sustained toward attaining a goal.3 This definition has three key elements: energy, direction, 
and persistence.
The (1) energy element is a measure of intensity or drive. A motivated person puts 
forth effort and works hard. However, the quality of the effort must be considered as well 
as its  intensity. High levels of effort don’t necessarily lead to favorable job performance 
unless the effort is channeled in a (2) direction that benefits the organization. Effort that’s 
directed  toward, and consistent with, organizational goals is the kind of effort we want from 
 employees. Finally, motivation includes a (3) persistence dimension. We want employees to 
persist in putting forth effort to achieve those goals.
Motivating high levels of employee performance is an important organizational concern 
and managers keep looking for answers. For instance, a recent Gallup poll found that a large 
majority of U.S. employees—some 64 percent—are not excited about their work.4 This 
level of disengagement has been described by researchers: “These employees are essentially 
‘checked out.’ They’re sleepwalking through their workday, putting time, but not energy or 
passion, into their work.”5 It’s no wonder, then, that both managers and academics want to 
understand and explain employee motivation.
Let’s start by looking at several early theories of motivation.
11-1  Define and  
explain  
motivation.
 Write It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete MGMT 14: Theories of Motivation.
motivation
The process by which a person’s efforts are  
energized, directed, and sustained toward  
attaining a goal

     early Theories of  
    Motivation (1950s & 1960s)
4  
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Theory 
(probably best-known motivation theory) 6
• Abraham Maslow—a psychologist—proposed that within every person is  
a hierarchy of five needs:
11-2 Compare and contrast early theories of motivation.
Know these early theories because they: ❶ Represent the foundation from 
which contemporary theories grew, and ❷ Still are used by practicing managers to 
explain employee motivation.
• Each level must be substantially satisfied before the next need becomes dominant; an 
individual moves up the hierarchy from one level to the next.
• Lower-order needs are satisfied predominantly externally, and higher-order needs are 
satisfied internally.
HOW is Maslow’s hierarchy used to  
motivate employees?
• Managers will do things to satisfy employees’ needs.
• Remember: Once a need is substantially satisfied,  
it no longer motivates.
Self-
actualization
Esteem
Social
Safety
Physiological
Exhibit 11–1 Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
Source: Maslow, Abraham H.; Frager, Robert D; Fadiman, James, Motivation and Personality, 3rd ed., ©1987. Reprinted 
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.  
Growth, achieving potential, self-
fulfillment; “be all you can be”  
Affection, belongingness, 
acceptance, friendship  
Food, drink, shelter, sex, sleep, 
other physical requirements  
Internal (self-respect, autonomy, achievement) and  
    external (status, recognition, attention)  
Security and protection from harm; assurance  
     that physical needs will continue to be met
hierarchy of needs theory
Maslow’s theory that there is a hierarchy of five human needs: 
physiological, safety, social, esteem, and self-actualization
354
1 

355
• Widely popular among practicing managers probably because it’s easy to under-
stand and intuitive.7
• No empirical support provided for theory; other studies could not validate it.8
2 McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y
• Based on two assumptions about human nature.9
◾ Theory X: a negative view of people that assumes workers have little ambition, dislike  
work, want to avoid responsibility, and need to be closely controlled to work effectively.
◾ Theory Y: a positive view that assumes employees enjoy work, seek out and accept  
responsibility, and exercise self-direction.
• To maximize employee motivation,  
use Theory Y practices—allow  
employees to participate in decisions, 
create responsible and challenging jobs, 
and encourage good group relations.
• No evidence to confirm either set of  
assumptions or that being a Theory Y  
manager is the only way to motivate employees.
3 Herzberg’s Two-factor Theory
• frederick Herzberg’s two-factor theory (also called motivation-hygiene 
theory)—intrinsic factors are related to job satisfaction, while extrinsic factors 
are associated with job dissatisfaction.10
◾ Popular theory from the 1960s to the early 1980s.
◾ Criticized for being too simplistic.
◾ Influenced today’s approach to job design. (See From Past to Present box on p. 360.)
theory X
The assumption that employees dislike work, are lazy, 
avoid responsibility, and must be coerced to work
theory Y
The assumption that employees are creative, enjoy work, 
seek responsibility, and can exercise self-direction
two-factor theory
Herzberg’s motivation theory, which proposes that intrinsic factors 
are related to job satisfaction and motivation, whereas extrinsic 
factors are associated with job dissatisfaction
Marek/Fotolia

356
• Research focus: When people felt exceptionally good 
(satisfied—see left-hand side of Exhibit 11–2) or bad  
(dissatisfied—see right-hand side of exhibit) about their jobs.
• Replies showed these were two different factors!
◾ When people felt good about their work, they tended to cite  
intrinsic factors arising from the job content (job itself), such as 
achievement, recognition, and responsibility.
◾ When they were dissatisfied, they tended to cite extrinsic factors arising 
from the job context, such as company policy and administration, supervi-
sion, interpersonal relationships, and working conditions.
• Replies also gave us the new view of Satisfaction vs. Dissatisfaction (see Exhibit 11–3).
MOTIVATORS
HYGIENE FACTORS
Achievement
Recognition
Work itself
Responsibility
Advancement
Growth
Supervision
Company policy
Relationship with supervisor
Working conditions
Salary
Relationship with peers
Personal life
Relationship with employees
Status
Security
Extremely
Satisﬁed
Neutral
Extremely
Dissatisﬁed
Exhibit 11–2 Herzberg’s Two-Factor Theory
◾ Herzberg concluded that the traditional view—the opposite of satisfaction is dissatisfaction—
was wrong.
◾ He believed that the factors that led to job satisfaction were separate and distinct from those 
that led to job dissatisfaction.
TRADITIONAL VIEW
HERZBERG’S VIEW
Satisfaction
No Satisfaction
No Dissatisfaction
Dissatisfaction
Satisﬁed
Dissatisﬁed
Motivators
Hygiene Factors
Exhibit 11–3 Contrasting Views of Satisfaction and Dissatisfaction
hygiene factors
Factors that eliminate job dissatisfaction but don’t motivate
three-needs theory
McClelland’s theory, which says that three acquired (not 
innate) needs—achievement, power, and affiliation—
are major motives at work
motivators
Factors that increase job satisfaction and motivation
Andersphoto/Fotolia
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 465. Reprinted  
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

357
◾ Removing dissatisfying characteristics from a job didn’t 
necessarily make that job more satisfying (or motivating); 
it simply made you “less” dissatisfied.
◾ Proposed a dual continuum: The opposite of “satisfaction” 
is “no satisfaction,” and the opposite of “dissatisfaction” 
is “no dissatisfaction.”
Motivating Employees:
 
When hygiene factors are adequate, people won’t be  
dissatisfied, but they won’t be motivated, either.
 
To motivate people, use the motivators.
Olly/Fotolia
4 Mcclelland’s Three-Needs Theory
• David McClelland and his associates proposed the three-needs theory, which 
says three acquired (not innate) needs are major motives in work, including:11
1
2
3
need for achievement (nAch),  
which is the drive to succeed and 
excel in relation to a set of standards
need for power (nPow),  
which is the need to make others 
behave in a way that they would 
not have behaved otherwise
need for affiliation (nAff), 
which is the desire for friendly and 
close interpersonal relationships
• nAch has been researched the most:
◾ People with a high nAch are striving for personal achievement rather than for the trappings and  
rewards of success.
◾ They have a desire to do something better or more efficiently than it’s been done before.12
◾ They prefer ❶ jobs that offer personal responsibility for finding solutions to problems, ❷ receiving 
rapid and unambiguous feedback on their performance in order to tell whether they’re improving,  
and ❸ moderately challenging goals.
◾ High achievers avoid what they perceive to be very easy or very difficult tasks.
◾ A high nAch doesn’t necessarily lead to being a good manager, especially in large organizations.  
Why? Because high achievers focus on their own accomplishments, while good managers  
emphasize helping others accomplish their goals.13
◾ Employees can be trained to stimulate their nAch by being in situations where they have personal 
responsibility, feedback, and moderate risks.14
• The best managers tend to be high in nPow and low in nAff.15
need for achievement (nAch)
The drive to succeed and excel in relation to a set of 
standards
need for power (nPow)
The need to make others behave in a way that they 
would not have behaved otherwise
need for affiliation (nAff)
The desire for friendly and close interpersonal  
relationships
1
2

358    Part 4  •  Leading
How Do the Contemporary Theories Explain Motivation?
At Electronic Arts (EA), one of the world’s largest video game designers, employees put 
in grueling hours developing games. However, EA takes care of its game developers by 
 providing them with workday intramural sports leagues, pinball arcades, group fitness 
classes, and an open invite to pets at work.16 With a little over 8,000 workers in more than 
20 countries, EA’s managers need to understand employee motivation.
The theories we look at in this section—goal-setting, job design, equity, and 
 expectancy—represent current explanations of employee motivation. Although maybe not as 
well known as those we just discussed, these are backed by research.17
What Is Goal-Setting Theory?
Goals CAN be powerful motivators!
Before a big assignment or major class project presentation, has a teacher ever encouraged 
you to “Just do your best”? What does that vague statement “do your best” mean? Would 
your performance on a class project have been higher had that teacher said you needed to 
score a 93 percent to keep your A in the class? Research on goal-setting theory addresses 
these issues, and the findings, as you’ll see, are impressive in terms of the effect that goal 
specificity, challenge, and feedback have on performance.18
Substantial research support has been established for goal-setting theory, which says 
that specific goals increase performance and that difficult goals, when accepted, result in 
higher performance than do easy goals. What does goal-setting theory tell us?
(a) Working toward a goal is a major source of job motivation. Studies on goal setting 
have demonstrated that specific and challenging goals are superior motivating forces.19 
Such goals produce a higher output than does the generalized goal of “do your best.” 
The specificity of the goal itself acts as an internal stimulus. For instance, when a sales 
rep commits to making eight sales calls daily, this intention gives him a specific goal 
to try to attain.
(b) Will employees try harder if they have the opportuni-
ty to participate in the setting of goals? Not always. In 
some cases, participatively set goals elicit superior per-
formance; in other cases, individuals performed best 
when their manager assigned goals. However, par-
ticipation is probably preferable to assigning goals 
when employees might resist  accepting difficult 
challenges.20
(c)  We know that people will do better if they get 
feedback on how well they’re progressing toward 
their goals because feedback helps identify dis-
crepancies between what they’ve done and what 
they want to do. But all feedback isn’t equally 
effective. Self-generated feedback—where an 
employee monitors his or her own progress—has 
been shown to be a more powerful motivator than 
feedback coming from  someone else.21
11-3  Compare 
and contrast 
contemporary 
theories of 
motivation.
Working toward a goal is a major source of 
motivation for Mary Kay Cosmetics beauty 
consultants who set their own sales goals and 
earn rewards for achieving them. Consultants 
Shannon Nelson (center) and her sister and 
mother are shown here with a Mustang 
Shannon earned for meeting an ambitious 
sales goal.
ZUMA Press, Inc/Alamy
goal-setting theory
The proposition that specific goals increase  
performance and that difficult goals, when  
accepted, result in higher performance than do 
easy goals
 Watch It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled Rudi’s Bakery: Motivation.

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    359
Three other contingencies besides feedback influence the goal-performance relationship: 
goal commitment, adequate self-efficacy, and national culture.
(1) First, goal-setting theory assumes that an  individual is committed to the goal.  Commitment 
is most likely when goals are made public, when the individual has an  internal locus of 
control, and when the goals are self-set rather than assigned.22
(2) Next, self-efficacy refers to an individual’s belief that he or she is capable of  performing 
a task.23 The higher your self-efficacy, the more confidence you have in your ability to 
succeed in a task. So, in difficult situations, we find that people with low self-efficacy are 
likely to reduce their effort or give up altogether, whereas those with high self-efficacy 
will try harder to master the challenge.24 In addition, individuals with high self-efficacy 
seem to respond to negative feedback with increased effort and motivation, whereas those 
with low self-efficacy are likely to reduce their effort when given  negative feedback.25
(3) Finally, the value of goal-setting theory depends on the national culture. It’s well adapted 
to North American countries because its main ideas align reasonably well with those cul-
tures. It assumes that subordinates will be reasonably independent (not a high score on 
power distance), that people will seek challenging goals (low in uncertainty avoidance), 
and that performance is considered important by both managers and subordinates (high 
in assertiveness). Don’t expect goal setting to lead to higher employee performance in 
countries where the cultural characteristics aren’t like this.
Exhibit 11–4 summarizes the relationships among goals, motivation, and performance. 
Our overall conclusion: The intention to work toward hard and specific goals is a powerful 
motivating force. Under the proper conditions, it can lead to higher performance. However, 
there’s no evidence that such goals are associated with increased job satisfaction.26
How Does Job Design Influence Motivation?
Yes—you can design jobs that motivate!
Because managers want to motivate individuals on the job, we need to look at ways to design 
motivating jobs. If you look closely at what an organization is and how it works, you’ll find 
that it’s composed of thousands of tasks. These tasks are, in turn, aggregated into jobs. We 
use the term job design to refer to the way tasks are combined to form complete jobs. The 
jobs that people perform in an organization should not evolve by chance. Managers should 
design jobs deliberately and thoughtfully to reflect the demands of the changing environ-
ment, the organization’s technology, and employees’ skills, abilities, and preferences.27 When 
jobs are designed like that, employees are motivated to work hard. What are the ways that 
managers can design motivating jobs? We can answer that with the job characteristics model 
(JCM), developed by J. Richard Hackman and Greg R. Oldham.28
self-efficacy
An individual’s belief that he or she is capable  
of performing a task
job design
The way tasks are combined to form complete jobs
Exhibit 11–4 Goal-Setting Theory
Committed
to Achieving
Accepted
Goals
Motivation
(intention to work
toward goal)
Participation
in Setting
• Specific
• Difficult
National
Culture
Self-Efficacy
Higher Performance
Plus
Goal Achievement
Self-Generated
Feedback on
Progress
• Goals are public
• Individual has internal
    locus of control
• Self-set goals
job characteristics model 
(JCM)
A framework for analyzing and designing jobs that 
identifies five primary core job dimensions, their 
interrelationships, and their impact on outcomes

360    Part 4  •  Leading
According to Hackman and Oldham, any job can be described in terms of the following 
five core job dimensions:
1. Skill variety. The degree to which the job requires a variety of activities so the worker 
can use a number of different skills and talents
2. Task identity. The degree to which the job requires completion of a whole and identifi-
able piece of work
3. Task significance. The degree to which the job affects the lives or work of other people
4. Autonomy. The degree to which the job provides freedom, independence, and discretion 
to the individual in scheduling the work and in determining the procedures to be used in 
carrying it out
5. Feedback. The degree to which carrying out the work activities required by the job re-
sults in the individual’s obtaining direct and clear information about the effectiveness of 
his or her performance
Exhibit 11–5 presents the model. Notice how 
the first three dimensions—skill variety, task iden-
tity, and task significance—combine to create mean-
ingful work. What we mean is that if these three 
characteristics exist in a job, we can predict that the 
person will view his or her job as being important, 
valuable, and worthwhile. Notice, too, that jobs that 
possess autonomy give the job incumbent a feeling 
of personal responsibility for the results and that, if a 
job provides feedback, the employee will know how 
effectively he or she is performing.
From a motivational point of view, the JCM 
suggests that internal rewards are obtained when an 
employee learns (knowledge of results through feed-
back) that he or she personally (experienced respon-
sibility through autonomy of work) has performed 
well on a task that he or she cares about (experienced 
Deciding how work tasks should be performed has long 
been of interest to managers.29 From scientific manage-
ment’s  attempts to find the “one best way” to do work to 
the Hawthorne Studies that attempted to unravel patterns of 
human behavior at work, researchers 
have been curious about the ideal ap-
proach to work design. In the 1950s, 
Frederick Herzberg and his associ-
ates began research to “discover 
the importance of attitudes toward 
work and the experiences, both good 
and bad, that workers reported.” He 
wanted to know the kinds of things that made people at 
their work happy and satisfied or unhappy and dissatisfied. 
What he discovered changed the way we view job design. 
The fact that job dissatisfaction and job satisfaction were the 
results of different aspects of the work environment was an 
important finding. Herzberg’s two-factor theory gave practic-
ing managers  insights into both job context and job content. 
And if you wanted to motivate employees, you’d better focus 
more on the job  content aspects (the motivators) than on the 
job context aspects (the hygiene factors).
In addition, Herzberg’s research stimulated additional 
 interest in work design. The Job Characteristics model, for one, 
built upon Herzberg’s findings in iden-
tifying the five core job dimensions, 
especially autonomy. As managers 
and organizations continue to search 
for work designs that will energize and 
engage employees, Herzberg’s study 
of when people felt good and felt bad 
at work continues as a classic.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these 
 discussion questions.
 Talk About It 1: Why do you think jobs need to be 
“ designed”?
 Talk About It 2: How can job design contribute to 
 employee motivation?
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
Job Design:  
How should work 
tasks get done?
The job of this pediatric nurse caring for 
newborn babies at a children’s hospital in 
Germany scores high on task significance  
as she uses her specialized knowledge and 
skills in caring for children from infancy 
through the late teen years, and their  
families. Task significance contributes to the  
meaningfulness of her job and high internal 
work motivation.
Ulrich Baumgarten/Getty Images

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    361
meaningfulness through skill variety, task identity, and/or task significance). The more these 
three conditions characterize a job, the greater the employee’s motivation, performance, and 
satisfaction and the lower his or her absenteeism and the likelihood of resigning. As the model 
shows, the links between the job dimensions and the outcomes are moderated by the strength 
of the individual’s growth need (the person’s desire for self-esteem and self-actualization). 
Individuals are more likely to experience the critical psychological states and respond posi-
tively when their jobs include the core dimensions than are individuals with a low growth 
need. This distinction may explain the mixed results with job enrichment (vertical expansion 
of a job by adding planning and evaluation responsibilities): Individuals with low growth need 
don’t tend to achieve high performance or satisfaction by having their jobs enriched.
The JCM provides significant guidance to managers for job design for both individuals 
and teams.30 The suggestions shown in Exhibit 11–6, which are based on the JCM, specify the 
types of changes in jobs that are most likely to improve each of the five core job dimensions.
Critical
Psychological
States
Personal
and Work
Outcomes
Experienced
meaningfulness of
the work
Experienced
responsibility for
outcomes of the work
Knowledge of the
actual results of the
work activities
High internal
work motivation
High-quality
work performance
High satisfaction
with the work
Low absenteeism
and turnover
Employee
growth-need
strength
Core Job
Dimensions
Skill variety
Task identity
Task signiﬁcance
Autonomy
Feedback
Exhibit 11–5 Job Characteristics Model
Source: Reprinted by permission from Judith D. Hackman (w/o) J. Richard Hackman.
Combine tasks
Form natural work units
Establish client relationships
Expand jobs vertically
Open feedback channels
Suggested Action
Skill variety
Task identity
Task signiﬁcance
Autonomy
Feedback
Core Job Dimension
Exhibit 11–6 Guidelines for Job Redesign
Source: Reprinted by permission from Judith D. Hackman (w/o) J. Richard Hackman.
job enrichment
The vertical expansion of a job by adding planning 
and evaluation responsibilities

362    Part 4  •  Leading
What Is Equity Theory?
Have you ever wondered what kind of grade the person sitting next to you in class makes on a 
test or on a major class assignment? Sure you have—most of us do! Being human, we tend to 
compare ourselves with others. If someone offered you $55,000 a year on your first job  after 
graduating from college, you’d probably jump at the offer and report to work enthusiastic, 
ready to tackle whatever needed to be done, and certainly satisfied with your pay. How would 
you react, though, if you found out a month into the job that a coworker—another recent 
graduate, your age, with comparable grades from a comparable school, and with comparable 
work experience—was getting $60,000 a year? You’d probably be upset! Even though in 
 absolute terms, $55,000 is a lot of money for a new graduate to make (and you know it!), that 
suddenly isn’t the issue. Now you see the issue as what you believe is fair—what is equitable. 
The term equity is related to the concept of fairness and equitable treatment compared with 
others who behave in similar ways. There’s considerable evidence that employees compare 
themselves to others and that inequities influence how much effort employees exert.31
Equity theory, developed by J. Stacey Adams, proposes that employees compare what 
they get from a job (outcomes) in relation to what they put into it (inputs) and then compare 
their inputs-outcomes ratio with the inputs-outcomes ratios of relevant others (Exhibit 11–7). 
If an employee perceives her ratio to be equitable in comparison to those of relevant others, 
there’s no problem. However, if the ratio is inequitable, she views herself as underrewarded 
or overrewarded. When inequities occur, employees attempt to do something about it.32 The 
result might be lower or higher productivity, improved or reduced quality of output, increased 
absenteeism, or voluntary resignation.
The referent—the other persons, systems, or selves individuals compare themselves 
against in order to assess equity—is an important variable in equity theory.33 Each of the 
three referent categories is important. (1) The “persons” category includes other individuals 
with similar jobs in the same organization but also includes friends, neighbors, or profes-
sional associates. Based on what they hear at work or read about in newspapers or trade jour-
nals, employees compare their pay with that of others. (2) The “system” category includes 
organizational pay policies, procedures, and allocation. (3) The “self” category refers to 
inputs-outcomes ratios that are unique to the individual. It reflects past personal experiences 
and contacts and is influenced by criteria such as past jobs or family commitments.
Originally, equity theory focused on distributive justice, which is the perceived fairness 
of the amount and allocation of rewards among individuals. More recent research has focused 
on looking at issues of procedural justice, which is the perceived fairness of the process used 
to determine the distribution of rewards. This research shows that distributive justice has a 
greater influence on employee satisfaction than procedural justice, while procedural justice 
tends to affect an employee’s organizational commitment, trust in his or her boss, and intention 
to quit.34 What are the implications for managers? They should consider openly sharing infor-
mation on how allocation decisions are made, follow consistent and unbiased procedures, and 
engage in similar practices to increase the perception of procedural justice. By increasing the 
perception of procedural justice, employees are likely to view their bosses and the organization 
as positive even if they’re dissatisfied with pay, promotions, and other personal outcomes.
Exhibit 11–7 Equity Theory Relationships
PeRceIved RATIo coMPARISoN*
eMPloYee’S ASSeSSMeNT
Outcomes A  6 Outcomes B
 
Inputs A 
Inputs B
Inequity (underrewarded)
Outcomes A  = Outcomes B
 
Inputs A 
Inputs B
Equity
Outcomes A  7 Outcomes B
 
Inputs A 
Inputs B
Inequity (overrewarded)
*Person A is the employee, and Person B is a relevant other or referent.
equity theory
The theory that an employee compares his or her 
job’s input-to-outcome ratio with that of relevant 
others and then corrects any inequity
referent
The persons, systems, or selves against which 
individuals compare themselves to assess equity
distributive justice
Perceived fairness of the amount and allocation  
of rewards among individuals
procedural justice
Perceived fairness of the process used to determine 
the distribution of rewards

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    363
How Does Expectancy Theory Explain Motivation?
• How hard do I have to work to achieve a certain level of performance?
• Can I actually do that?
• What reward will I get for reaching it?
• How much do I want that reward?
The most comprehensive explanation of how employees are motivated is Victor Vroom’s 
 expectancy theory. Although the theory has its critics,35 most research evidence supports it.36
Expectancy theory states that an individual tends to act in a certain way based on the 
expectation that the act will be followed by a given outcome and on the attractiveness of that 
outcome to the individual. It includes three variables or relationships (see Exhibit 11–8):
1. Expectancy or effort-performance linkage is the probability perceived by the individual 
that exerting a given amount of effort will lead to a certain level of performance.
2. Instrumentality or performance-reward linkage is the degree to which the individual 
 believes that performing at a particular level is instrumental in attaining the desired 
outcome.
3. Valence or attractiveness of reward is the importance that the individual places on the 
potential outcome or reward that can be achieved on the job. Valence considers both the 
goals and needs of the individual.
This explanation of motivation might sound complicated, but it really isn’t. It can be 
summed up in the questions: How hard do I have to work to achieve a certain level of per-
formance, and can I actually achieve that level? What reward will performing at that level 
get me? How attractive is the reward to me, and does it help me achieve my own personal 
goals? Whether you are motivated to put forth effort (that is, to work hard) at any given time 
depends on your goals and your perception of whether a certain level of performance is nec-
essary to attain those goals. Let’s look at an example. Many years ago, when a woman went 
to work for IBM as a sales rep, her favorite work “reward” became having an IBM corporate 
jet fly to pick up her best customers and her and take them for a weekend of golfing at some 
fun location. But to get that particular “reward,” she had to achieve at a certain level of per-
formance, which involved exceeding her sales goals by a specified percentage. How hard 
she was willing to work (that is, how motivated she was to put forth effort) was dependent 
on the level of performance that had to be met and the likelihood that if she achieved at that 
level of performance she would receive that reward. Because she “valued” that reward, she 
always worked hard to exceed her sales goals. And the performance-reward linkage was clear 
because her hard work and performance achievements were always acknowledged by the 
company with the reward she valued (access to a corporate jet).
The key to expectancy theory is understanding an individual’s goal and the linkage be-
tween effort and performance, between performance and rewards, and finally, between rewards 
and individual goal satisfaction. It emphasizes payoffs, or rewards. As a result, we have to be-
lieve that the rewards an organization offers align with what the individual wants. Expectancy 
theory recognizes that no universal principle explains what motivates individuals and thus 
stresses that managers understand why employees view certain outcomes as  attractive or unat-
tractive. After all, we want to reward individuals with those things they value positively. Also, 
expectancy theory emphasizes expected behaviors. Do employees know what is expected of 
C
B
A
Individual
eﬀort
Individual
performance
Organizational
rewards
Individual
goals
=  Eﬀort–performance linkage (expectancy)
=  Performance–reward linkage (instrumentality)
=  Attractiveness (valence) 
A
B
C
Exhibit 11–8 Expectancy Model
expectancy theory
The theory that an individual tends to act in a 
certain way based on the expectation that the act 
will be followed by a given outcome and on the 
attractiveness of that outcome to the individual

364    Part 4  •  Leading
them and how they’ll be evaluated? Finally, the 
theory is concerned with perceptions. Reality is 
irrelevant. An individual’s own perceptions of 
performance, reward, and goal outcomes, not the 
outcomes themselves, will determine his or her 
motivation (level of effort).
How Can We Integrate 
Contemporary Motivation Theories?
Many of the ideas underlying the contempo-
rary motivation theories are complementary, 
and you’ll understand better how to motivate 
people if you see how the theories fit together.37 
Exhibit  11–9 presents a model that integrates 
much of what we know about motivation. Its 
basic foundation is the expectancy model. Let’s 
work through the model, starting on the left.
Foxconn chairman and founder Terry Gou 
(center) honored 140 employees in Shenzhen, 
China, for their excellent performance at an 
awards and recognition banquet for them 
and their relatives. Recognition programs 
that express appreciation for a job well done 
play a powerful role in motivating appropriate 
employee behavior.
Chen Wen/ColorChinaPhoto/Associated Press
• The individual effort box has an arrow leading into it. This arrow flows from the individ-
ual’s goals. Consistent with goal-setting theory, this goals-effort link is meant to illustrate 
that goals direct behavior.
• Expectancy theory predicts that an employee will exert a high level of effort if he or she per-
ceives a strong relationship between effort and performance, performance and rewards, and 
rewards and satisfaction of personal goals. Each of these relationships is, in turn, influenced 
by certain factors. You can see from the model that the level of individual performance is 
determined not only by the level of individual effort but also by the individual’s ability to 
perform and by whether the organization has a fair and objective performance evaluation 
system. The performance-reward relationship will be strong if the individual perceives that 
it is performance (rather than seniority, personal favorites, or some other criterion) that is 
rewarded. The final link in expectancy theory is the rewards-goal relationship.
• The traditional need theories come into play at this point. Motivation would be high to the 
degree that the rewards an individual received for his or her high performance satisfied the 
dominant needs consistent with his or her individual goals.
A closer look at the model also shows that it considers other theories.
• Achievement-need is seen, in that the high achiever isn’t motivated by the organization’s 
assessment of his or her performance or organizational rewards, hence the jump from effort 
to individual goals for those with a high nAch. Remember that high achievers are internally 
driven as long as the jobs they’re doing provide them with personal responsibility, feed-
back, and moderate risks. They’re not concerned with the effort-performance, performance-
reward, or rewards-goals linkages.
• Reinforcement theory is seen in the model by recognizing that the organization’s rewards 
reinforce the individual’s performance. If managers have designed a reward system that is 
seen by employees as “paying off” for good performance, the rewards will reinforce and 
encourage continued good performance.
• Rewards also play a key part in equity theory. Individuals will compare the rewards (out-
comes) they have received from the inputs or efforts they made with the inputs-outcomes 
ratio of relevant others. If inequities exist, the effort expended may be influenced.
• Finally, the JCM is seen in this integrative model. Task characteristics (job design)  influence 
job motivation at two places. First, jobs that are designed around the five job dimensions 
are likely to lead to higher actual job performance because the individual’s motivation will 
be stimulated by the job itself—that is, they will increase the linkage between effort and 
performance. Second, jobs that are designed around the five job dimensions also  increase 
an employee’s control over key elements in his or her work. Therefore, jobs that  offer 
autonomy, feedback, and similar task characteristics help to satisfy the individual goals of 
employees who desire greater control over their work.

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    365
High
nAch
Performance
Evaluation
Criteria
Objective
Performance
Evaluation
System
Reinforcement
Dominant
Needs
Goals
Direct
Behavior
Ability
Job
Design
Individual
Effort
Individual
Performance
Organizational
Rewards
Individual
Goals
Job
Design
Equity
Comparison
:
A
BI
I
A
B
O     O
Exhibit 11–9 Integrating Contemporary Theories of Motivation
 Try It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Motivation.
What Current Motivation Issues  
Do Managers Face?
Understanding and predicting employee 
motivation is one of the most popular 
areas in management research. We’ve 
 introduced you to several motivation 
theories. However, even current studies 
of employee motivation are influenced 
by some significant workplace issues— 
motivating in tough economic circumstances, managing cross-cultural chal-
lenges, motivating unique groups of workers, and designing appropriate 
rewards programs.
11-4  Discuss current 
issues in  
motivating  
employees.

366    Part 4  •  Leading
How Can Managers Motivate Employees  
When the Economy Stinks?
Zappos, the quirky Las Vegas–based online shoe retailer (now a part of Amazon.com), has 
always had a reputation for being a fun place to work.38 However, during the economic 
 recession, it, like many companies, had to cut staff—124 employees in total. CEO Tony 
Hsieh wanted to get out the news fast to lessen the stress for his employees. So he announced 
the layoff in an e-mail, on his blog, and on his Twitter account. Although some might think 
these are terrible ways to communicate that kind of news, most employees thanked him 
for being so open and so honest. The company also took good care of those being laid off. 
Laid-off employees with less than two years of service were paid through the end of the 
year. Longer-tenured employees got four weeks severance pay for every year of service. All 
got six months of continued paid health coverage and, at the request of the employees, got 
to keep their 40 percent merchandise discount through the Christmas season. Zappos had 
 always been a model of how to nurture employees in good times; now it showed how to treat 
 employees in bad times.
Economic recessions can be difficult for many organizations, especially when it comes 
to their employees. Layoffs, tight budgets, minimal or no pay raises, benefit cuts, no  bonuses, 
long hours doing the work of those who had been laid off—this can be the reality that 
many employees face. As conditions deteriorate, employee confidence, optimism, and job 
 engagement plummet as well. As you can imagine, it isn’t an easy thing for managers to keep 
employees motivated under such challenging circumstances.
In an uncertain economy, managers have to be creative in keeping their employees’ 
 efforts energized, directed, and sustained toward achieving goals. They are forced to look at 
ways to motivate employees that don’t involve money or that are relatively inexpensive.39 So 
they use actions such as holding meetings with employees to keep the lines of communication 
open and to get their input on issues; establishing a common goal, such as maintaining excel-
lent customer service, to keep everyone focused; creating a community feel so employees 
could see that managers cared about them and their work; and giving employees opportuni-
ties to continue to learn and grow. And, of course, an encouraging word always goes a long 
way, as well.
How Does Country Culture Affect Motivation Efforts?
The desire for interesting work seems to be global.
In today’s global business environment, managers can’t automatically assume that 
 motivational programs that work in one geographic location are going to work in others. 
Most current motivation theories were developed in the United States by Americans and 
about Americans.40 Maybe the most blatant pro-American characteristic in these theories 
is the strong emphasis on individualism and achievement. For instance, both goal-setting 
and expectancy theories emphasize goal accomplishment as well as rational and individual 
thought. Let’s look at the cross-cultural transferability of the motivation theories.
Maslow’s need hierarchy argues that people start at the physiological level and then 
move progressively up the hierarchy in order. This hierarchy, if it has any application at 
all, aligns with American culture. In countries such as Japan, Greece, and Mexico, where 
 uncertainty avoidance characteristics are strong, security needs would be on top of the 
need hierarchy. Countries that score high on nurturing characteristics—Denmark, Sweden, 
Norway, the Netherlands, and Finland—would have social needs on top.41 We would predict, 
for instance, that group work will be more motivating when the country’s culture scores high 
on the nurturing criterion.
Another motivation concept that clearly has an American bias is the achievement need. 
The view that a high achievement need acts as an internal motivator presupposes two  cultural 
characteristics—a willingness to accept a moderate degree of risk (which excludes coun-
tries with strong uncertainty avoidance characteristics) and a concern with performance 
(which  applies almost singularly to countries with strong achievement characteristics). 

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    367
This combination is found in the Anglo-American 
countries of the United States, Canada, and Great 
Britain.42 On the other hand, these characteristics 
are relatively absent in countries such as Chile and 
Portugal.
Equity theory has a relatively strong follow-
ing in the United States, which is not surprising 
given that U.S.–style reward systems are based on 
the  assumption that workers are highly sensitive to 
equity in reward allocations. In the United States, 
equity is meant to closely link pay to performance. 
However, recent evidence suggests that in collec-
tivist cultures, especially in the former socialist 
countries of Central and Eastern Europe, employees 
expect rewards to reflect their individual needs as 
well as their performance.43 Moreover, consistent 
with a legacy of communism and centrally planned 
economies, employees exhibited a greater “entitle-
ment” attitude—that is, they expected outcomes to 
be greater than their inputs.44 These findings suggest that U.S.–style pay practices may need 
to be modified in some countries in order to be perceived as fair by employees.
Despite these cross-cultural differences in motivation, a number of cross-cultural consis-
tencies can be found. For instance, the desire for interesting work seems important to almost 
all workers, regardless of their national culture. In a study of seven countries, employees in 
Belgium, Britain, Israel, and the United States ranked “interesting work” number one among 
11 work goals. It was ranked either second or third in Japan, the Netherlands, and Germany.45 
Similarly, in a study comparing job-preference outcomes among graduate stu-
dents in the United States, Canada, Australia, and Singapore, growth, achieve-
ment, and responsibility were rated the top three and had identical rankings.46 
Both studies suggest some universality to the importance of intrinsic factors 
identified by Herzberg in his two-factor theory. Another recent study examin-
ing workplace motivation trends in Japan also seems to indicate that Herzberg’s 
model is applicable to Japanese employees.47
How Can Managers Motivate Unique Groups of Workers?
Motivating employees has never been easy! Employees come into organizations 
with different needs, personalities, skills, abilities, interests, and aptitudes. They 
have different expectations of their employers and different views of what they 
think their employer has a right to expect of them. And they vary widely in what 
they want from their jobs. For instance, some employees get more satisfaction 
out of their personal interests and pursuits and only want a weekly paycheck—
nothing more. They’re not interested in making their work more challenging or 
interesting or in “winning” performance contests. Others derive a great deal of 
satisfaction in their jobs and are motivated to exert high levels of effort. Given 
these differences, how can managers do an effective job of motivating the unique 
groups of employees found in today’s workforce? One thing is to understand 
the motivational requirements of these groups including (1) diverse employees, 
(2) professionals, and (3) contingent workers.
(1) Motivating a Diverse Workforce. To maximize motivation among 
today’s workforce, managers need to think in terms of flexibility. For instance, 
studies tell us that men place more importance on having autonomy in their jobs 
than do women. In contrast, the opportunity to learn, convenient and flexible 
work hours, and good interpersonal relations are more important to women.49 
Having the opportunity to be independent and to be exposed to different experi-
ences is important to Gen Y employees, whereas older workers may be more 
Like workers in most cultures, the desire for 
interesting work motivates Japan’s Shigeru 
Miyamoto, the creator of many of Nintendo’s 
characters including Mario, shown here. As a 
video game designer and producer, Miyamoto 
has also been motivated to achieve his goal of 
creating unique games that offer fun and joy 
to people of all ages throughout the world.
Jae C. Hong/Associated Press
A Question of Ethics
A scary thing is happening. Workers facing 
 extraordinary work demands are turning to 
ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) 
drugs to boost their energy. These pills are 
amphetamine-based stimulants that give users 
a boost of energy. Although some students may 
use these when studying for exams or putting 
the final touches on a research paper/presenta-
tion, experts now say that stimulant abuse is 
moving into the workplace. Many young work-
ers using the drugs to increase their productivity 
say that “these drugs are used not to get high, 
but hired.” Such seemingly harmless abuse can 
lead to serious consequences.48
If your professor has assigned this, go to the 
 Assignments section of mymanagementlab 
.com to complete these discussion questions.
   Talk About It 3: What do you think? 
Is this a problem of/for employee motivation? 
Explain.
   Talk About It 4: Why is this a potential 
ethical issue? How might managers address this?

368    Part 4  •  Leading
interested in highly structured work opportunities.50 Managers need to recognize that what 
motivates a single mother with two dependent children who’s working full time to support 
her family may be very different from the needs of a single part-time employee or an older 
employee who is working only to supplement his or her retirement income. A diverse array 
of rewards is needed to motivate employees with such diverse needs. Many of the work/
life balance programs (see Chapter 7) that organizations have implemented are a response 
to the varied needs of a diverse workforce. In addition, many organizations have developed 
flexible work arrangements (see Chapter 6) that recognize different needs. These types of 
programs (including telecommuting, compressed workweeks, flextime, and job sharing) 
may become even more popular as employers look for ways to help employees cope with 
high fuel prices.
Do flexible work arrangements motivate employees? Although such arrangements might 
seem highly motivational, both positive and negative relationships have been found. For 
 instance, one study of the impact of telecommuting on job satisfaction found that job satisfac-
tion initially increased as the extent of telecommuting increased, but as the number of hours 
spent telecommuting increased, job satisfaction started to level off, decreased slightly, and 
then stabilized.51
(2) Motivating Professionals. In contrast to a generation ago, the typical em-
ployee today is more likely to be a professional with a college degree than a blue-collar fac-
tory worker. What special concerns should managers be aware of when trying to motivate a 
team of engineers at Intel’s India Development Center, software designers at SAS Institute 
in North Carolina, or a group of consultants at Accenture in Singapore?
Professionals are different from nonprofessionals.52 They have a strong and long-term 
commitment to their field of expertise. To keep current in their field, they need to regularly 
update their knowledge, and because of their commitment to their profession they rarely de-
fine their workweek as 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. five days a week.
What motivates professionals? Money and promotions typically are low on their prior-
ity list. Why? They tend to be well paid and enjoy what they do. In contrast, job challenge 
tends to be ranked high. They like to tackle problems and find solutions. Their chief reward is 
the work itself. Professionals also value support. They want others to think that what they’re 
working on is important. That may be true for all employees, but professionals tend to be 
focused on their work as their central life interest, whereas nonprofessionals typically have 
other interests outside of work that can compensate for needs not met on the job.
(3) Motivating contingent Workers. As full-time jobs have been eliminated 
through downsizing and other organizational restructurings, the number of openings for 
part-time, contract, and other forms of temporary work have increased. Contingent workers 
don’t have the security or stability that permanent employees have, and they don’t iden-
tify with the organization or display the commitment that other employees do. Temporary 
workers also typically get little or no benefits such as health care or pensions.53
There’s no simple solution for motivating contingent employees. For that small set of 
individuals who prefer the freedom of their temporary status, the lack of stability may not be 
an issue. In addition, temporariness might be preferred by highly compensated physicians, en-
gineers, accountants, or financial planners who don’t want the demands of a full-time job. But 
these are the exceptions. For the most part, temporary employees are not temporary by choice.
What will motivate involuntarily temporary employees? An obvious answer is the oppor-
tunity to become a permanent employee. In cases in which permanent employees are selected 
from a pool of temps, the temps will often work hard in hopes of becoming permanent. A less 
obvious answer is the opportunity for training. The ability of a temporary employee to find a 
new job is largely dependent on his or her skills. If an employee sees that the job he or she is 
doing can help develop marketable skills, then motivation is increased. From an equity stand-
point, when temps work alongside permanent employees who earn more and get benefits too 
for doing the same job, the performance of temps is likely to suffer. Separating such employ-
ees or perhaps minimizing interdependence between them might help managers counteract 
potential problems.54

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    369
How Can Managers Design Appropriate Rewards Programs?
At Blue Cross of California, doctors in its health maintenance organizations are paid bonuses 
on whether customers (patients) are satisfied. At FedEx, drivers are paid on the basis of the 
quantity of packages delivered and whether those packages are delivered on time.55 There’s 
no doubt that employee rewards programs play a powerful role in motivating appropriate 
employee behavior. Some of the more popular rewards programs include open-book manage-
ment, employee recognition, and pay-for-performance.
HoW can oPen-Book ManageMent PrograMs Motivate eMPloyees? Within 
24 hours after managers of the Heavy Duty Division of Springfield Remanufacturing 
Company (SRC) gather to discuss a multipage financial document, every plant employee 
will have seen the same information. If the employees can meet shipment goals, they’ll 
all share in a large year-end bonus.56 Many organizations of various sizes involve their 
 employees in workplace decisions by opening up the financial statements (the “books”). 
They share that information so that employees will be motivated to make better decisions 
about their work, be better able to understand the implications of what they do and how 
they do it, and see the ultimate impact on the bottom line. This approach is called open-
book management and many organizations are using it.57
The goal of open-book management is to get employees to think like an owner by seeing 
the impact their decisions have on financial results. Because many employees don’t have the 
knowledge or background to understand the financials, they have to be taught how to read and 
understand the organization’s financial statements. Once employees have this knowledge, how-
ever, managers need to regularly share the numbers with them. By sharing this information, em-
ployees begin to see the link between their efforts, level of performance, and operational results.
HoW can Managers Use eMPloyee recognition PrograMs? 
Employee 
 recognition programs consist of personal attention and expressions of interest, approval, 
and appreciation for a job well done.58 They can take numerous forms. For instance, Kelly 
Services introduced a new version of its points-based incentive system to better promote 
productivity and retention among its employees. The program, called Kelly Kudos, gives 
employees more choices of awards and allows them to accumulate points over a longer time 
Organizations have historically assumed that “one size fits all” when 
it comes to allocating rewards. Managers typically assumed that 
everyone wants more money and more vacation time. But as organi-
zations become less bureaucratic and more capable of differentiat-
ing rewards, managers will be encouraged to differentiate rewards 
among employees as well as for individual employees over time.
Organizations control a vast number of potential rewards 
that employees might find appealing. A partial list would include 
increased base pay, bonuses, shortened workweeks, extended vaca-
tions, paid sabbaticals, flexible work hours, part-time  employment, 
guaranteed job security, increased pension contributions, college 
 tuition reimbursement, personal days off, help in purchasing a 
home, recognition awards, paid club memberships, and work-from-
home options. And the latest twist in employee rewards comes 
through the use of social networking, mobile accessibility, and 
gamification—that is, applying typical aspects of game play-
ing to other areas of activity especially in a work setting—giving 
employees the opportunity to earn ongoing “badges” or “honors.” 
These types of reward programs have the potential to engage and 
inspire employees. In the future, most organizations will structure 
individual reward packages in ways that will maximize employee 
motivation.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
  TAlK AbouT IT 5: What are the positive aspects of having 
individualized rewards? (Think in terms of employees and managers.)
  TAlK AbouT IT 6: What are the negative aspects of having 
individualized rewards? (Again, think in terms of employees and 
managers.)
INDIVIDuAlIzED REWARDS
::::::: Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::
open-book management
A motivational approach in which an organization’s 
financial statements (the “books”) are shared with 
all employees
employee recognition  
programs
Programs that consist of personal attention and 
expressions of interest, approval, and appreciation 
for a job well done
gamification
Applying typical aspects of game playing to other 
areas of activity especially in a work setting

370    Part 4  •  Leading
period.59 And it’s working. Participants generate three times more revenue and hours than 
employees not receiving points. Most managers, however, use a far more informal approach. 
For example, when Julia Stewart—currently chairman and CEO of DineEquity, Inc.—was 
president of Applebee’s Restaurants, she would frequently leave sealed notes on the chairs 
of employees after everyone had gone home.60 These notes explained how important Stewart 
thought the person’s work was or how much she appreciated the completion of a project. 
Stewart also relied heavily on voice mail messages left after office hours to tell employees 
how appreciative she was for a job well done. And recognition doesn’t have to come only 
from managers. Some 35 percent of companies encourage coworkers to recognize peers for 
outstanding work efforts.61 For instance, managers at Yum Brands Inc. (the Kentucky-based 
parent of food chains Taco Bell, KFC, and Pizza Hut) were looking for ways to reduce em-
ployee turnover. They found a successful customer-service program involving peer recogni-
tion at KFC restaurants in Australia. Workers there spontaneously rewarded fellow workers 
with “Champs cards, an acronym for attributes such as cleanliness, hospitality, and accu-
racy.” Yum implemented the program in other restaurants around the world, and credits the 
peer recognition with reducing hourly employee turnover from 181 percent to 109 percent.62
A survey of organizations found that 84 percent had some 
type of program to recognize worker achievements.63
And do employees think these programs are important? You bet! A survey of a wide 
range of employees asked them what they considered the most powerful workplace motiva-
tor. Their response? Recognition, recognition, and more recognition!64
Consistent with reinforcement theory (see Chapter 9), rewarding a behavior with recog-
nition immediately following that behavior is likely to encourage its repetition. And recogni-
tion can take many forms. You can personally congratulate an employee in private for a good 
job. You can send a handwritten note or e-mail message acknowledging something positive 
that the employee has done. For employees with a strong need for social acceptance, you can 
publicly recognize accomplishments. To enhance group cohesiveness and motivation, you 
can celebrate team successes. For instance, you can do something as simple as throw a pizza 
party to celebrate a team’s accomplishments. Some of these things may seem simple, but they 
can go a long way in showing employees they’re valued.
This baker at Zingerman’s Deli in Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, is empowered with information 
that enables him to think and act like an 
owner. Embracing open-book management, 
Zingerman shares financial, product, custom-
er service, and other information employees 
need to understand how the company works 
and how their decisions affect the company’s 
profitability.
Jeff Greenberg 6 of 6/Alamy
 Watch It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Motivation.
HoW 
can 
Managers 
Use 
Pay-for-
PerforMance to Motivate eMPloyees?  
Here’s a survey statistic that may surprise you: 40 
percent of employees see no clear link between 
performance and pay.65 You have to think: What are 
the companies where these employees work paying 
for? They’re obviously not clearly communicating 
performance expectations.66 Pay-for-performance 
programs are variable compensation plans that 
pay employees on the basis of some performance 
measure.67 Piece-rate pay plans, wage incentive 
plans, profit-sharing, and lump-sum bonuses are 
examples. What differentiates these forms of pay 
from more traditional compensation plans is that 
instead of paying a person for time on the job, pay 
is adjusted to reflect some performance measure. 
These performance measures might include such 
pay-for-performance  
programs
Variable compensation plans that pay employees on 
the basis of some performance measure

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    371
things as individual productivity, team or work group productivity, departmental productiv-
ity, or the overall organization’s profit performance.
Pay-for-performance is probably most compatible with expectancy theory. Individuals 
should perceive a strong relationship between their performance and the rewards they receive 
for motivation to be maximized. If rewards are allocated only on nonperformance factors—
such as seniority, job title, or across-the-board pay raises—then employees are likely to re-
duce their efforts. From a motivation perspective, making some or all of an employee’s pay 
conditional on some performance measure focuses his or her attention and effort toward that 
measure, then reinforces the continuation of the effort with a reward. If the employee, team, 
or organization’s performance declines, so does the reward. Thus, there’s an incentive to keep 
efforts and motivation strong.
Pay-for-performance programs are popular. Some 80 percent of large U.S. companies 
have some form of variable pay plan.68 These types of pay plans have also been tried in other 
countries such as Canada and Japan. About 30 percent of Canadian companies and 22 percent 
of Japanese companies have company-wide pay-for-performance plans.69
Do pay-for-performance programs work? For the most part, studies seem to indicate 
that they do. For instance, one study found that companies that used pay-for-performance 
programs performed better financially than those that did not.70 Another study showed that 
pay-for-performance programs with outcome-based incentives had a “positive impact on 
sales, customer satisfaction, and profits.”71 If an organization uses work teams, managers 
should consider group-based performance incentives that will reinforce team effort and com-
mitment. But whether these programs are individual based or team based, managers need to 
ensure that they’re specific about the relationship between an individual’s pay and his or her 
expected level of appropriate performance. Employees must clearly understand exactly how 
performance—theirs and the organization’s—translates into dollars on their paychecks.72
a final note on eMPloyee reWarDs PrograMs. During times of economic 
and financial uncertainty, managers’ abilities to recognize and reward employees are often 
 severely constrained. It’s hard to keep employees productive during challenging times, 
even though it’s especially critical. It’s not surprising, then, that employees feel less con-
nected to their work. In fact, a recent study by the Corporate Executive Board found that 
declining employee engagement has decreased overall productivity by 3 to 5 percent.73 But 
there are actions managers can take to maintain and maybe even increase employees’ moti-
vation levels. One is to clarify each person’s role in the organization. Show them how their 
efforts are contributing to improving the company’s overall situation. It’s also important to 
keep communication lines open and use two-way exchanges between top-level managers 
and employees to soothe fears and concerns. The key with taking any actions is continu-
ing to show workers that the company cares about them. As we said at the beginning of 
the chapter, the value in companies comes from employees who are motivated to be there. 
Managers have to give employees a reason to want to be there.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.

11 Review 
372
CHAPTER SuMMARY
 11-1 Define and explain motivation.
Motivation is the process by which a person’s efforts are ener-
gized, directed, and sustained toward attaining a goal.
The energy element is a measure of intensity or drive. The 
high level of effort needs to be directed in ways that help the 
organization achieve its goals. Employees must persist in put-
ting forth effort to achieve those goals.
  11-2 Compare and contrast early theories  
of  motivation.
Individuals move up the hierarchy of five needs (physiologi-
cal, safety, social, esteem, and self-actualization) as needs are 
substantially satisfied. A need that’s substantially satisfied no 
longer motivates.
A Theory X manager believes that people don’t like to 
work, or won’t seek out responsibility, so they have to be 
threatened and coerced to work. A Theory Y manager assumes 
that people like to work and seek out responsibility, so they will 
exercise self-motivation and self-direction.
Herzberg’s theory proposed that intrinsic factors  associated 
with job satisfaction were what motivated people. Extrinsic 
factors associated with job dissatisfaction simply kept people 
from being dissatisfied.
Three-needs theory proposed three acquired needs that are 
major motives in work: need for achievement, need for affilia-
tion, and need for power.
  11-3 Compare and contrast contemporary  
theories of motivation.
Goal-setting theory says that specific goals increase perfor-
mance, and difficult goals, when accepted, result in higher 
 performance than do easy goals. Important points in goal- 
setting theory include intention to work toward a goal as a major 
source of job motivation; specific hard goals to produce higher 
levels of output than generalized goals; participation in setting 
goals as preferable to assigning goals, but not always; feedback 
to guide and motivate behavior, especially self-generated feed-
back; and contingencies that affect goal setting, such as goal 
commitment, self-efficacy, and national culture.
The job characteristics model is based on five core job 
dimensions (skill variety, task identity, task significance, 
autonomy, and feedback) that are used to design motivating 
jobs.
Equity theory focuses on how employees compare their 
inputs-outcomes ratios to relevant others’ ratios. A perception 
of inequity will cause an employee to do something about it. 
Procedural justice has a greater influence on employee satis-
faction than does distributive justice.
Expectancy theory says that an individual tends to 
act in a certain way based on the expectation that the act 
will be followed by a desired outcome. Expectancy is the 
 effort-performance linkage (how much effort do I need to 
 exert to achieve a certain level of performance); instrumen-
tality is the performance-reward linkage (achieving at a 
certain level of performance will get me what reward); and 
valence is the  attractiveness of the reward (Is the reward 
what I want?).
  11-4 Discuss current issues in motivating  
employees.
During rough economic conditions, managers must look for 
creative ways to keep employees’ efforts energized, directed, 
and sustained toward achieving goals.
Most motivational theories were developed in the United 
States and have a North American bias. Some theories 
(Maslow’s need hierarchy, achievement need, and equity the-
ory) don’t work well for other cultures. However, the desire for 
interesting work seems important to all workers and Herzberg’s 
motivator (intrinsic) factors may be universal.
Managers face challenges in motivating unique groups 
of workers. A diverse workforce is looking for flexibil-
ity. Professionals want job challenge and support, and are 
 motivated by the work itself. Contingent workers want 
the opportunity to become permanent or to receive skills 
training.
Open-book management is when financial statements (the 
books) are shared with employees who have been taught 
what that information means. Employee recognition programs 
consist of personal attention, approval, and appreciation for 
a job well done. Pay-for-performance programs are variable 
compensation plans that pay employees on the basis of some 
performance measure.

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    373
 11-1 Most of us have to work for a living, and a job is a 
central part of our lives. So why do managers have to 
worry so much about employee motivation issues?
 11-2 What is motivation? Explain the three key elements of 
motivation.
 11-3 Maslow’s hierarchy of needs theory is a flawed model. 
Discuss this statement using examples to support your 
answer.
 11-4 What role would money play in (a) the hierarchy of 
needs theory, (b) two-factor theory, (c) equity theory, 
(d) expectancy theory, and (e) motivating employees 
with a high nAch?
 11-5 What are some of the possible consequences of 
 employees perceiving an inequity between their inputs 
and outcomes and those of others?
 11-6 What are some advantages of using pay-for-performance 
programs to motivate employee performance? Are there 
drawbacks? Explain.
 11-7 Many job design experts who have studied the 
changing nature of work say that people do their best 
work when they’re motivated by a sense of purpose 
rather than by the pursuit of money. Do you agree? 
Explain your position. What are the implications for 
managers?
 11-8 As a manager, what will you need to know about goal-
setting theory as a motivation tool?
 11-9 Can an individual be too motivated? Discuss.
11-10 What challenges do managers face in motivating 
 today’s workforce?
dIScuSSIoN QueSTIoNS
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
11-11 What economic and cross-cultural challenges face 
when motivating employees?
11-12 What are the three variables in expectancy theory 
and how do they explain motivation?
11-13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
assignment for this chapter.
Management Skill Builder  |   beING A Good MoTIvAToR
Great managers are great motivators. They’re able to find the magic “potion” that stimulates employees to 
reach their full potential. The fact that there are hundreds of business books on motivation and dozens of 
experts who make a living by putting on motivation seminars only confirms the importance of this topic to 
managerial effectiveness.
 PERSoNAl INVENToRy ASSESSMENT 
Work Motivation Indicator
How motivated are you? Use this PIA to assess your own level of work motivation. You 
could also use it to assess others’ levels of work motivation.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT

374    Part 4  •  Leading
Skill Basics
Attempting to motivate others is a complex task. Unfortunately, 
no universal motivators are available that are guaranteed to 
work on anyone, anywhere. That said, we do know a lot about 
what works and doesn’t work in terms of motivating others. 
The following suggestions summarize the essence of what we 
know is likely to be effective.74
• 
Recognize individual differences. People have different 
needs. Don’t treat them all alike. Moreover, spend the time 
necessary to understand what’s important to each person. 
This will allow you to individualize goals, level of involve-
ment, and rewards to align with individual needs.
• 
Use goals and feedback. People prefer to have goals. If 
you’re in a position to assign or participate in setting goals 
for others, help them to set hard and specific goals. These 
are most likely to motivate. In addition, individuals are 
most likely to be motivated when they get feedback on how 
well they are faring in the pursuit of their goals.
• 
Allow people to participate in decisions that affect them. If 
you are in a position to influence the level of participation, 
actively seek input from the person you seek to motivate. 
Employees are especially likely to respond positively when 
allowed to participate in setting work goals, choosing their 
benefit packages, solving productivity and quality prob-
lems, and the like.
• 
Link rewards to unsatisfied needs. Recommendations #2 
and #3 apply most directly to managers or team leaders 
trying to motivate their employees or team members. Ef-
fectively linking rewards to unsatisfied needs is a more 
generalizable action: It applies to motivating colleagues, 
friends, spouses, customers—as well as employees and 
team members. It builds on recommendation #1 and indi-
vidual differences.
Depending on your position in an organization and your re-
sources, the rewards you control will vary. For example, senior-
level executives typically can control pay increases, bonuses, 
promotion decisions, job assignments, and training decisions. 
They also can usually control job design such as  allowing 
employees more freedom and control over their work, improv-
ing working conditions, increasing social interactions in the 
workplace, or modifying the workload. But everyone can offer 
others rewards such as recognition or providing sympathetic 
and sensitive help with problems. The key is identifying what 
needs are dominant and unsatisfied, then choosing  rewards that 
will help satisfy those needs.
• 
Link rewards to performance. The rewards you choose 
should be allocated so as to be contingent on performance. 
Importantly, the person you’re trying to motivate must 
 perceive a clear linkage. Regardless of how closely rewards 
are actually correlated to performance criteria, it’s percep-
tion that counts. If individuals perceive this relationship to 
be low, motivation and performance will suffer.
• 
Maintain equity. Rewards should be perceived by people 
in the organization as equating with the inputs they bring 
to their job. At a simplistic level, it means that experience, 
skills, abilities, effort, and other obvious inputs should 
 explain differences in performance and, hence, pay, job 
 assignments, and other obvious rewards.
Practicing the Skill
Read through this scenario and follow the directions at the end 
of it:
Sean’s first job out of college is as a supervisor for Lyle’s 
Catering Services. One of Lyle’s main businesses is managing 
the food service operations at colleges and hospitals.
Sean has been given responsibility for the cafeteria at 
St. Paul College. He has a staff of approximately 12 full-time 
and 15 part-time workers. The cafeteria is open 7 days a week, 
from 6:30 a.m. until 8 p.m.
Sean has been in the job eight months and has become 
frustrated by the high employee turnover. Just since he’s been 
on the job, three full-time and six part-time people have quit. 
Sean went back and looked at the personnel records for the past 
five years and this pattern has been a constant. He’s frustrated 
by the cost and time involved in continually hiring and training 
new people. He’s decided he needs to do something.
Sean has begun informally talking to employees. None 
seem particularly enthusiastic about their jobs. Even some 
of the “old timers”—who’ve worked in the cafeteria for six 
years or more—have little enthusiasm for their work. In fact, 
the part-timers seem more motivated than the full-timers even 
though the average part-timer makes only $11.50 an hour 
 versus the full-timers’ $15.00.
The class should form into small groups. Assume you are 
Sean. How can you improve the staff’s motivation and reduce 
the turnover rate?

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    375
La Mexican Kitchen
To: Linda Bustamante, Operations Manager
From: Matt Perkins, Shift Supervisor
Linda, HELP! We’re having a difficult time keeping our food 
servers with us. It seems like I just get them trained and they 
leave. And we both know that our servers are key to our com-
pany’s commitment to excellent customer service. We can have 
the best food in town (and do!), but if our servers aren’t motivat-
ed to provide excellent service, we won’t have any customers.
Although these positions pay minimum wage, you and 
I both know a motivated server can make additional money 
from tips. But it seems that this isn’t enough to motivate them 
to stay. So what would you recommend? Could you jot down 
some ideas about how to better motivate our food servers 
and send those to me? Thanks!
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 
Money = Happiness, or  
Does It?
cASe APPlIcATIoN 
One for the Money…
D
oes money buy happiness? Several of the 120 
 employees at Gravity Payments, a credit card process-
ing company based in Seattle, are about to find out.75
The company’s founder, 29-year-old Dan Price, made 
the news in the spring of 2015 when he decided to bump up 
the salary of 70 employees to a new “minimum wage” of 
$70,000. Now, everyone in the company will be making at 
least $70,000. Some employees at the company, where the av-
erage salary was $48,000, doubled their pay, and others got a 
nice salary  increase—prob-
ably enough, you’d think, 
for employees to be pretty 
happy about!
Why did Price do it? 
He said that he had been 
thinking about employee pay for a while, especially after 
reading several news reports about the glaring pay dispari-
ties between corporate CEOs and employees, which he says 
struck him as “ridiculous” and “absurd.” Also, Price had read 
an  article on happiness by two Princeton researchers (one a 
Nobel Prize-winning psychologist) who had surveyed 450,000 
U.S. residents on whether money could buy happiness—both 
as it affected overall happiness but also how it affected day-to-
day life. The researchers concluded that people claimed to be 
happier with each doubling of income but only to a point. But 
even more interesting was the dollar amount that respondents 
said would make their daily life more pleasant: about $75,000 a 
year. Price decided to offer his employees a minimum salary of 
$70,000. He felt that giving his employees this amount could 
enable many of them to buy homes and pay for their kids’ 
educations.
To pay for the salary increase, Price is taking a pay cut 
from his annual $1 million salary down to $70,000. Also, the 
company will have to use 75 to 80 percent of its profits to help 
cover the cost. Some manage-
ment consultants are questioning 
the move, wondering if it will 
affect employee productivity and 
pay off in the long run. Concerns 
about what happens to employee 
motivation include: Will employees be less motivated to work 
to be promoted to higher levels of responsibility, and would 
those employees who put in additional effort above and be-
yond their current tasks lose the incentive to do so (“why 
should I work harder if we all get the same pay”). And what 
happens to the CEO’s motivation—would Price himself lose 
the incentive to want to grow the company? Then, there’s 
also the question of what happens if the company’s profit-
ability starts to fall. Only time will tell if such issues are even 
relevant.
#1

376    Part 4  •  Leading
Discussion Questions
11-14 Look back at the chapter-opening Management Myth and 
how it was “debunked.” Evaluate this wage decision in light 
of that.
11-15 Explain each of the employee productivity/motivation 
 concerns. Which of these do you think is most critical? Why?
11-16 Choose one of the contemporary motivation theories dis-
cussed in the chapter and write a description of it for Mr. Price, 
explaining how and why it would be a good alternative for 
employee motivation.
11-17 What problem(s) might managers face under this new pay 
 approach and how could they use knowledge about employee 
motivation to help them deal with those problem(s)?
cASe APPlIcATIoN #2
T
he Alibaba Group is China’s largest e-commerce com-
pany. Its main platforms—Taobao, Tmall, and Alipay—
offer the largest online market place for Chinese busi-
nesses and consumers to connect.76 Alibaba has evolved into 
a business giant with company acquisitions reaching into an 
array of industries such as entertainment, real estate, mobile 
technology, and finance. Its recent IPO on the New York Stock 
Exchange (NYSE) reflects its dominance in the area. Wall 
Street history was made when the company raised $25 billion 
as capital. No longer confined to the emerging online markets 
of China, Alibaba now plays on an international level with 
plans to compete for customers from around the world.77
Jack Ma, Alibaba’s founder and executive chairman, fuels 
the motivation and inspiration for the company’s competitive 
spirit. Alibaba’s bedrocks rest in his desires for making dreams 
come true and for creating a 
lively atmosphere where employ-
ees strive for success as a fam-
ily. These ideals can be traced 
back to the company’s roots. 
Ma, along with 17 co-founders, 
launched the Alibaba Web site from his humble six-room apart-
ment. In his living room, the determined group set out to not 
only become one of the world’s top Internet companies, but to 
also be one that will survive for 102 years. Ma and his team’s 
‘innovative spirit’ believed that together they could achieve 
the extraordinary by valuing the customer and focusing on the 
future. The company now has over 34,000 employees and con-
tinues to grow; and Ma’s motto of ‘customer first, employee 
second, and shareholder third’ holds true even today.
Alibaba’s leaders try hard to maintain the culture that 
was established during those first days in Ma’s apartment. 
Despite having offices worldwide and a 17.2 acre campus for 
its headquarters, the company seeks to retain a transparent 
environment where employees are encouraged to challenge 
Alibaba: Motivation for the Long Haul
ideas at all levels. Each employee adopts a nickname to help 
reduce a sense of hierarchy in hopes of spurring innovative 
dialogue. Annual events, such as Alifest, celebrate employees 
and customer unity. During these jovial celebrations, Ma has 
been known to wear dazzling costumes and sing. Employees 
are taken care of beyond their paychecks with access to ben-
efits like iHome, Alibaba’s own mortgage fund used to fund 
interest-free loans for employees.
Despite such motivators, the company faces various chal-
lenges related to retention. Losing employees who possess 
critical knowledge threaten its long- term vision despite attract-
ing new talent. With over a quarter of its employees owning 
company shares, the temptation to cash out and walk away is 
common as the company rides the waves of the Wall Street.
In response, Ma has penned letters to employees not 
to forget the company’s ideal of 
keeping the customer first and to 
consider the longer journey. Ma 
cautions employees to be careful of 
wealth’s seductive side and to keep 
the greater good at heart. Such talk 
is reflected in Ma’s actions and statements.
Now one of the world’s leading billionaires, Ma keeps 
his focus on motivations beyond just money. He has set up 
numerous charities focusing on education, the environment, 
and health. In a recent presentation to the Economic Club of 
New York, he reflected on how happiness does not always 
come with money indicating that some of his happiest times 
 occurred when he was making $12 a month as an English 
school teacher. The question that remains is whether these 
 ideals keep Alibaba on its path towards 102 years.
Discussion Questions
11-18 Alibaba has a vision to be a 102 year old company. How could 
a manager motivate an employee to stay and effectively 
Motivating employees  
the RIGHT WAY

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    377
 contribute for more than 30 years? Consider Alibaba’s found-
ing ideals.
11-19 How would you retain employees who are sitting on lucrative 
stock options and could walk out the door tomorrow knowing 
that they would never have to work another day in their life? 
use various motivation theories to support your answer.
11-20 Can Jack Ma’s statement suggesting he was happier earning 
$12 a month as a school teacher be justified? Explain your 
answer using the motivational theories.
11-21 Where would equity theory be relevant in Alibaba’s history?
11-22 Having read this case, which motivational theory do you feel most 
represents Ma’s ability to lead his team to overcome all odds?
cASe APPlIcATIoN 
Discretionary Time Off Policy
U
nlimited vacation time would seem a dream to most, 
but for a handful it just got very real. Companies 
like Virgin, and Netflix, are looking to motivate their 
 employees by offering leaves with no restrictions on the 
number of days per year. Known as “discretionary time off” 
(DTO), the policy is based on observations78 that highlight 
the  importance of providing employees with more control 
over their work scheduled. Supporters of DTO affirm that 
employees do not need to be 
micro-managed and providing 
them with generous time off 
is a good way to empower 
the people who contribute to a 
company’s growth. The most 
recent of the large tech companies to adopt DTO is LinkedIn, 
announcing their intention to introduce the policy starting 
November 1, 2015. 
This choice, however, isn’t completely altruistic. Some of 
the biggest benefits that the employer receives from such a policy 
include attracting and retaining more employees with a promise 
of flexible vacation planning. It also saves these companies from 
certain hidden costs like unused leaves. Of course, DTO is not 
without rules. Employees cannot take an extended period of six-
months as leave, would need to guarantee that deadlines will be 
met without overloading their colleagues’ schedule, and would 
also need their manager’s approval. 
If the DTO policy is as good as it seems on paper, why 
isn’t it a standard? The reason is probably because the benefits 
are not as unequivocal as it seems. The reality shows that sev-
eral companies, like Chicago Tribune, were forced to stop DTO 
because of employee complaints and misuse of the policy. The 
first problem is that DTO is based on the assumption that all 
employees desire to have more discretion in performing their 
work. This does not hold true for everybody as some may pre-
fer a well-defined work schedule, established time-off, and less 
responsibility. The second point against unlimited vacations 
is regarding workaholic employees or those who need more 
money may decide to take less vacation and work more. This 
may become problematic in certain professions like healthcare, 
where days off and getting the required amount of rest cru-
cial to avoid making mistakes. 
What would it happen if a sur-
geon decides to work longer 
and perform more surgeries 
instead of taking the neces-
sary days off to rest? Another 
potential problem relates to the real intentions behind adopt-
ing such policies. Some columnists and bloggers feel that this 
action is made with the intention to force employees to work 
more as they may feel insecure about whether taking a day off 
is appropriate and respectful of company and colleagues.
Discussion Questions
11-23 What is your opinion on DTO? What motivation theory do 
you think it has been inspired by? Explain whether or not you 
would adopt it in your organization.
11-24 What is fundamental for the DTO policy to be effectively 
 implemented in organizations? Do you think there might be 
some equity problems in the management of personnel?
11-25 Do you think that DTO can be applied in every industry or is it 
only applicable for tech companies? Explain the reasons for 
your answer.
11-26 Should this unlimited vacation policy be adopted in all coun-
tries or do you think it won’t work well in certain countries? 
Explain your answer using examples.
#3
Unlimited  
VACATION at work

378    Part 4  •  Leading
Endnotes
 1. P. Bronson, “What Should I Do 
with My Life Now?” Fast Com-
pany, April 2009, 35–37.
 2. SmartPulse, “How Well Do You 
Motivate Your People?” Smart 
Brief 
on 
Leadership, 
www 
.smartbrief.com/leadership, Janu-
ary 20, 2015.
 3. R. M. Steers, R. T. Mowday, and 
D. L. Shapiro, “The Future of 
Work Motivation Theory,” Acad-
emy of Management Review, July 
2004, 379–87.
 4. A. 
Adkins, 
“U.S. 
Employee 
Engagement 
Holds 
Steady 
at 
31.7%,” 
http://www.gallup 
.com/poll/183041/employee- 
engagement-holds-steady.aspx, 
May 7, 2015.
 5. J. Krueger and E. Killham, “At 
Work, Feeling Good Matters,” 
Gallup 
Management 
Journal, 
http://gmj.gallup.com (December 
8, 2005).
 6. “Maslow Motion,” New States-
man, March 15, 2010, 37; “Dia-
logue,” Academy of Management 
Review, October 2000, 696–701; 
M. L. Ambrose and C. T. Kulik, 
“Old Friends, New Faces: Mo-
tivation Research in the 1990s,” 
Journal of Management 25, no. 3 
(1999): 231–92; A. Maslow, D. C. 
Stephens, and G. Heil, Maslow on 
Management (New York: John Wi-
ley & Sons, 1998); and A. Maslow, 
Motivation and Personality (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1954).
 7. R. Coutts, “A Pilot Study for the 
Analysis of Dream Reports Using 
Maslow’s Need Categories: An 
Extension to the Emotional Selec-
tion Hypothesis,” Psychological 
Reports, October 2010, 659–73; E. 
A. Fisher, “Motivation and Leader-
ship in Social Work Management: 
A Review of Theories and Related 
Studies,” Administration in Social 
Work, October–December 2009, 
347–67; and N. K. Austin, “The 
Power of the Pyramid: The Foun-
dation of Human Psychology and, 
Thereby, of Motivation, Maslow’s 
Hierarchy Is One Powerful Pyra-
mid,” Incentive (July 2002): 10.
 8. See, for example, M. L. Ambrose 
and C. T. Kulik, “Old Friends, 
New Faces: Motivation Research 
in the 1990s”; J. Rowan, “Ascent 
and Descent in Maslow’s Theory,” 
Journal of Humanistic Psychol-
ogy (Summer 1999): 125–33; 
J. Rowan, “Maslow Amended,” 
Journal of Humanistic Psychol-
ogy (Winter 1998): 81–92; R. M. 
Creech, “Employee Motivation,” 
Management Quarterly, Summer 
1995, 33–39; E. E. Lawler III and 
J. L. Suttle, “A Causal Correla-
tional Test of the Need Hierarchy 
Concept,”  Organizational Behav-
ior and Human Performance, April 
1972, 265–87; and D. T. Hall and 
K. E. Nongaim, “An Examination 
of Maslow’s Need Hierarchy in an 
Organizational Setting,” Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Per-
formance, February 1968, 12–35.
 9. R. E. Kopelman, D. J. Prottas, 
and A. L. Davis, “Douglas Mc-
Gregor’s Theory X and Y: Toward 
a Construct-Valid Measure,” Jour-
nal of Managerial Issues (Summer 
2008): 255–71; and D. McGregor, 
The Human Side of Enterprise 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960). 
For an updated description of 
Theories X and Y, see an annotated 
edition with commentary of The 
Human Side of Enterprise (Mc-
Graw-Hill, 2006); and G. Heil, W. 
Bennis, and D. C. Stephens, Doug-
las McGregor, Revisited: Manag-
ing the Human Side of Enterprise 
(New York: Wiley, 2000).
 10. F. Herzberg, B. Mausner, and B. 
Snyderman, The Motivation to 
Work (New York: John Wiley, 
1959); F. Herzberg, The Manage-
rial Choice: To Be Effective or 
to Be Human, rev. ed. (Salt Lake 
City: Olympus, 1982); R. M. 
Creech, “Employee Motivation”; 
and M. L. Ambrose and C. T. Ku-
lik, “Old Friends, New Faces: Mo-
tivation Research in the 1990s.”
 11. D. C. McClelland, The Achieving 
Society (New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1961); J. W. Atkinson 
and J. O. Raynor, Motivation and 
Achievement (Washington, DC: 
Winston, 1974); D. C. McClel-
land, Power: The Inner Experi-
ence (New York: Irvington, 1975); 
and M. J. Stahl, Managerial and 
Technical Motivation: Assessing 
Needs for Achievement, Power, 
and Affiliation (New York: Prae-
ger, 1986).
 12. McClelland, The Achieving Society.
 13. McClelland, Power: The Inner Ex-
perience; D. C. McClelland and D. 
H. Burnham, “Power Is the Great 
Motivator,” Harvard Business Re-
view, March–April 1976, 100–10.
 14. D. Miron and D. C. McClelland, 
“The Impact of Achievement Mo-
tivation Training on Small Busi-
nesses,” California Management 
Review, Summer 1979, 13–28.
 15. “McClelland: An Advocate of 
Power,” International Manage-
ment, July 1975, 27–29.
 16. J. Flint, “How to Be a Player,” 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, January 
24–30, 2011, 108–09.
 17. R. M. Steers, R. T. Mowday, and 
D. L. Shapiro, “The Future of 
Work Motivation Theory”; E. A. 
Locke and G. P. Latham, “What 
Should We Do about Motivation 
Theory? Six Recommendations 
for the Twenty-First Century,” 
Academy of Management Review, 
July 2004, 388–403; and M. L. 
Ambrose and C. T. Kulik, “Old 
Friends, New Faces: Motivation 
Research in the 1990s.”
 18. M. L. Ambrose and C. T. Kulik, 
“Old Friends, New Faces: Motiva-
tion Research in the 1990s.”
 19. J. C. Naylor and D. R. Ilgen, “Goal 
Setting: A Theoretical Analysis 
of a Motivational Technique,” in 
B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings 
(eds.), Research in Organizational 
Behavior, vol. 6 (Greenwich, CT: 
JAI Press, 1984), 95–140; A. R. 
Pell, “Energize Your People,” 
Managers Magazine, December 
1992, 28–29; E. A. Locke, “Facts 
and Fallacies about Goal Theory: 
Reply to Deci,” Psychological Sci-
ence, January 1993, 63–64; M. E. 
Tubbs, “Commitment as a Mod-
erator of the Goal-Performance 
Relation: A Case for Clearer 
Construct 
Definition,” 
Journal 
of Applied Psychology (Febru-
ary 1993): 86–97; M. P. Colling-
wood, “Why Don’t You Use the 
Research?” Management Deci-
sion, May 1993, 48–54; M. E. 
Tubbs, D. M. Boehne, and J. S. 
Dahl, “Expectancy, Valence, and 
Motivational Force Functions in 
Goal-Setting Research: An Em-
pirical Test,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology (June 1993): 361–73; 
E. A. Locke, “Motivation Through 
Conscious Goal Setting,” Applied 
and Preventive Psychology, vol. 5 
(1996): 117–24; M. L. Ambrose 
and C. T. Kulik, “Old Friends, 
New Faces: Motivation Research 
in the 1990s; E. A. Locke and G. 
P. Latham, “Building a Practically 
Useful Theory of Goal Setting 
and Task Motivation: A 35-Year 
Odyssey,” American Psycholo-
gist, September 2002, 705–17; 
Y. Fried and L. H. Slowik, “En-
riching Goal-Setting Theory with 
Time: An Integrated Approach,” 
Academy of Management Review, 
July 2004, 404–22; G. P. Latham, 
“The Motivational Benefits of 
Goal-Setting,” Academy of Man-
agement 
Executive, 
November 
2004, 126–29; and G. Yeo, S. Loft, 
T. Xiao, and C. Kiewitz, “Goal 
Orientation 
and 
Performance: 
Differential Relationships Across 
Levels of Analysis and as a Func-
tion of Task Demands,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (May 2009): 
710–26.
 20. J. A. Wagner III, “Participation’s 
Effects on Performance and Sat-
isfaction: A Reconsideration of 
Research and Evidence,” Acad-
emy of Management Review, April 
1994, 312–30; J. George-Falvey, 
“Effects of Task Complexity and 
Learning Stage on the Relation-
ship between Participation in Goal 
Setting and Task Performance,” 
Academy of Management Pro-
ceedings on Disk, 1996; T. D. 
Ludwig and E. S. Geller, “As-
signed versus Participative Goal 
Setting and Response Generaliza-
tion: Managing Injury Control 
among Professional Pizza Deliver-
ers,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy (April 1997): 253–61; and S. 
G. Harkins and M. D. Lowe, “The 
Effects of Self-Set Goals on Task 
Performance,” Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology (January 2000): 
1–40.
 21. J. M. Ivancevich and J. T. 
 McMahon, “The Effects of Goal 
Setting, External Feedback, and 
Self-Generated Feedback on Out-
come Variables: A Field Experi-
ment,” Academy of Management 
Journal (June 1982): 359–72; and 
E. A. Locke, “Motivation Through 
Conscious Goal Setting.”
 22. J. R. Hollenbeck, C. R. Williams, 
and H. J. Klein, “An Empirical 
Examination of the Antecedents of 
Commitment to Difficult Goals,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(February 1989): 18–23; see, also, 
J. C. Wofford, V. L. Goodwin, and 
S. Premack, “Meta-Analysis of 
the Antecedents of Personal Goal 
Level and of the Antecedents and 
Consequences of Goal Commit-
ment,” Journal of Management 
(September 
1992): 
595–615; 
Tubbs, “Commitment as a Mod-
erator of the Goal-Performance 
Relation”; J. W. Smither, M. 
London, and R. R. Reilly, “Does 
Performance Improve Following 
Multisource Feedback? A Theo-
retical Model, Meta-Analysis, and 
Review of Empirical Findings,” 
Personnel 
Psychology, 
Spring 
2005, 171–203.
 23. M. E. Gist, “Self-Efficacy: Impli-
cations for Organizational Behav-
ior and Human Resource Manage-
ment,” Academy of Management 
Review, July 1987, 472–85; and A. 
Bandura, Self-Efficacy: The Exer-
cise of Control (New York: Free-
man, 1997).
 24. E. A. Locke, E. Frederick, C. Lee, 
and P. Bobko, “Effect of Self-
Efficacy, Goals, and Task Strate-
gies on Task Performance,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology (May 
1984): 241–51; M. E. Gist and 
T. R. Mitchell, “Self-Efficacy: A 
Theoretical Analysis of Its Deter-
minants and Malleability,” Acad-
emy of Management Review, April 
1992, 183–211; A. D. Stajkovic 
and F. Luthans, “Self-Efficacy 
and Work-Related Performance: 

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    379
A Meta-Analysis,” Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, September 1998, 
240–61; A. Bandura, “Cultivate 
Self-Efficacy for Personal and 
Organizational Effectiveness,” in 
E. Locke (ed.), Handbook of Prin-
ciples of Organizational Behavior 
(Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004), 
120–36; and F. Q. Fu, K. A. Rich-
ards, and E. Jones, “The Motiva-
tion Hub: Effects of Goal Setting 
and Self-Efficacy on Effort and 
New Product Sales,” Journal of 
Personal Selling & Sales Manage-
ment (Summer 2009): 277–92.
 25. A. Bandura and D. Cervone, 
“Differential Engagement in Self-
Reactive Influences in Cognitively 
Based Motivation,” Organization-
al Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, August 1986, 92–113; 
and R. Ilies and T. A. Judge, “Goal 
Regulation across Time: The Ef-
fects of Feedback and Affect,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(May 2005): 453–67.
 26. See J. C. Anderson and C. A. 
O’Reilly, “Effects of an Orga-
nizational Control System on 
 Managerial Satisfaction and Per-
formance,” Human Relations, June 
1981, 491–501; and J. P. Meyer, B. 
Schacht-Cole, and I. R. Gellatly, 
“An Examination of the Cognitive 
Mechanisms by Which Assigned 
Goals Affect Task Performance 
and Reactions to Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Social Psychol-
ogy 18, no. 5 (1988): 390–408.
 27. See, for example, R. W. Griffin, 
“Toward an Integrated Theory of 
Task Design,” in L. L. Cummings 
and B. M. Staw (eds.), Research 
in Organizational Behavior, vol. 
9 (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 
1987), 79–120; and M. Campion, 
“Interdisciplinary Approaches to 
Job Design: A Constructive Rep-
lication with Extensions,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (August 
1988): 467–81.
 28. See J. R. Hackman and G. R. Old-
ham, “Motivation Through the 
Design of Work: Test of a Theory,” 
Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Performance, August 1976, 
250–79; Y. Fried and G. R. Ferris, 
“The Validity of the Job Character-
istics Model: A Review and Meta 
Analysis,” Personnel Psychology, 
Summer 1987, 287–322; S. J. Zac-
caro and E. F. Stone, “Incremental 
Validity of an Empirically Based 
Measure of Job Characteristics,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(May 1988): 245–52; and R. W. 
Renn and R. J. Vandenberg, “The 
Critical Psychological States: An 
Underrepresented Component in 
Job Characteristics Model Re-
search,” Journal of Management 
(February 1995): 279–303.
 29. From the Past to the Present box 
based on C. M. Christensen, “How 
Will You Measure Your Life?” 
Harvard Business Review, July–
August 2010, 46–51; D. A. Wren 
and A. G. Bedeian, The Evolution 
of Management Thought (New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
2009); F. Herzberg, One More 
Time: How Do You Motivate Em-
ployees? (Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press, 2008); and 
F. Herzberg, B. Mausner, and B. 
B. Snyderman, The Motivation to 
Work.
 30. G. Van Der Vegt, B. Emans, and 
E. Van Der Vliert, “Motivating 
Effects of Task and Outcome In-
terdependence in Work Teams,” 
Journal of Managerial Psychology 
(July 2000): 829; and B. Bemmels, 
“Local Union Leaders’ Satisfac-
tion with Grievance Procedures,” 
Journal of Labor Research (Sum-
mer 2001): 653–69.
 31. J. S. Adams, “Inequity in Social 
Exchanges,” in L. Berkowitz (ed.), 
Advances in Experimental Social 
Psychology, vol. 2 (New York: 
Academic Press, 1965): 267–300; 
and M. L. Ambrose and C. T. Ku-
lik, “Old Friends, New Faces: Mo-
tivation Research in the 1990s.”
 32. See, for example, R. L. Bell, “Ad-
dressing 
Employees’ 
Feelings 
of Inequity,” Supervision, May 
2011, 3–6; P. S. Goodman and 
A. Friedman, “An Examination 
of Adams’ Theory of Inequity,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 
September 1971, 271–88; M. R. 
Carrell, “A Longitudinal Field 
Assessment of Employee Percep-
tions of Equitable Treatment,” 
Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Performance, February 1978, 
108–18; E. Walster, G. W. Walster, 
and W. G. Scott, Equity: Theory 
and Research (Boston: Allyn & 
Bacon, 1978); R. G. Lord and 
J. A. Hohenfeld, “Longitudinal 
Field Assessment of Equity Ef-
fects on the Performance of Major 
League Baseball Players,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (February 
1979): 19–26; J. E. Dittrich and 
M. R. Carrell, “Organizational 
Equity 
Perceptions, 
Employee 
Job Satisfaction, and Departmen-
tal Absence and Turnover Rates,” 
Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Performance, August 1979, 
29–40; and J. Greenberg, “Cogni-
tive Reevaluation of Outcomes in 
Response to Underpayment Ineq-
uity,” Academy of Management 
Journal (March 1989): 174–84.
 33. P. S. Goodman, “An Examination 
of Referents Used in the Evalua-
tion of Pay,” Organizational Be-
havior and Human Performance, 
October 1974, 170–95; S. Ronen, 
“Equity Perception in Multiple 
Comparisons: A Field Study,” 
Human Relations, April 1986, 
333–46; R. W. Scholl, E. A. Coo-
per, and J. F. McKenna, “Referent 
Selection in Determining Equity 
Perception: Differential Effects on 
Behavioral and Attitudinal Out-
comes,” Personnel Psychology, 
Spring 1987, 113–27; and C. T. 
Kulik and M. L. Ambrose, “Per-
sonal and Situational Determi-
nants of Referent Choice,” Acad-
emy of Management Review, April 
1992, 212–37.
 34. See, for example, R. C. Dailey 
and D. J. Kirk, “Distributive and 
Procedural Justice as Antecedents 
of Job Dissatisfaction and Intent 
to Turnover,” Human Relations, 
March 1992, 305–16; D. B. Mc-
Farlin and P. D. Sweeney, “Dis-
tributive and Procedural Justice 
as Predictors of Satisfaction with 
Personal and Organizational Out-
comes,” Academy of Management 
Journal (August 1992): 626–37; 
M. A. Konovsky, “Understanding 
Procedural Justice and Its Im-
pact on Business Organizations,” 
Journal of Management 26, no. 3 
(2000): 489–511; J. A. Colquitt, 
“Does the Justice of One Interact 
with the Justice of Many? Re-
actions to Procedural Justice in 
Teams,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology (August 2004): 633–46; 
J. Brockner, “Why It’s So Hard 
to Be Fair,” Harvard Business Re-
view, March 2006, 122–29; and B. 
M. Wiesenfeld, W. B. Swann Jr., 
J. Brockner, and C. A. Bartel, “Is 
More Fairness Always Preferred: 
Self-Esteem Moderates Reactions 
to Procedural Justice,” Academy 
of Management Journal (October 
2007): 1235–53.
 35. See, for example, V. H. Vroom, 
“Organizational Choice: A Study 
of Pre- and Postdecision Process-
es,” Organizational Behavior and 
Human Performance, April 1966, 
212–25; L. W. Porter and E. E. 
Lawler III, Managerial Attitudes 
and Performance (Homewood, IL: 
Richard D. Irwin, 1968); W. Van 
Eerde and H. Thierry, “Vroom’s 
Expectancy Models and Work-Re-
lated Criteria: A Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(October 1996): 575–86; and M. 
L. Ambrose and C. T. Kulik, “Old 
Friends, New Faces: Motivation 
Research in the 1990s.”
 36. Right or Wrong box based on Bor-
ders Group, Inc., 2010 Form 10-K, 
www.borders.com (June 6, 2011); J. 
Checkler, “Judge Clears Bonuses at 
Borders,” Wall Street Journal, April 
23–24, 2011, B3; “News Briefs,” 
Publishers Weekly, April 11, 2011, 
4+; P. Brickley, “Borders Seeks to 
Hand Out $8.3 Million in Bonuses,” 
Wall Street Journal, March 26, 
2011, B2; and J. A. Trachtenberg 
and M. Spector, “For Borders, a 
Scramble to Be Lean,” Wall Street 
Journal, March 14, 2011, B1.
 37. See, for instance, M. Siegall, 
“The Simplistic Five: An Inte-
grative Framework for Teaching 
 Motivation,” The Organizational 
Behavior Teaching Review 12, no. 
4 (1987–1988): 141–43.
 38. “100 Best Companies to Work 
For,” Fortune, February 7, 2011, 
91+; V. Nayar, “Employee Hap-
piness: Zappos vs. HCL,” Busi-
nessweek.com, January 5, 2011; 
D. Richards, “At Zappos, Culture 
Pays,” Strategy+Business Online, 
Autumn 2010; T. Hseih, “Zap-
pos’s CEO on Going to Extremes 
for Customers,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, July–August 2010, 
41–45; A. Perschel, “Work-Life 
Flow: How Individuals, Zappos, 
and Other Innovative Compa-
nies Achieve High Engagement,” 
Global Business & Organizational 
Excellence, July 2010, 17–30; and 
J. M. O’Brien, “Zappos Know 
How to Kick It,” Fortune, Febru-
ary 2, 2009, 54–60.
 39. T. 
Barber, 
“Inspire 
Your 
 Employees 
Now,” 
Bloombeg 
BusinessWeek Online, May 18, 
2010; D. Mattioli, “CEOs Wel-
come Recovery to Look After 
Staff,” Wall Street Journal, April 
5, 2010, B5; J. Sullivan, “How 
Do We Keep People Motivated 
Following Layoffs?” Workforce 
Management Online, March 2010; 
S. Crabtree, “How to Bolster Em-
ployees’ Confidence,” The Gal-
lup Management Journal Online, 
February 25, 2010; S. E. Needle-
man, “Business Owners Try to 
Motivate  Employees,” Wall Street 
Journal, January 14, 2010, B5; H. 
Mintzberg, “Rebuilding Compa-
nies as Communities,” Harvard 
Business Review, July–August, 
2009, 140–43; and R. Luss, “En-
gaging Employees through Peri-
ods of Layoffs,” Towers Watson, 
www.towerswatson.com (March 
3, 2009).
 40. N. J. Adler with A. Gunder-
sen, International Dimensions of 
 Organizational Behavior, 5th ed. 
(Cincinnati, OH: Thomson South-
Western, 2008).
 41. G. Hofstede, “Motivation, Leader-
ship and Organization: Do Ameri-
can Theories Apply Abroad?” Or-
ganizational Dynamics, Summer 
1980, 55.
 42. Ibid.
 43. J. K. Giacobbe-Miller, D. J. Miller, 
and V. I. Victorov, “A Comparison 
of Russian and U.S. Pay Alloca-
tion Decisions, Distributive Justice 
Judgments and Productivity under 
Different Payment Conditions,” 
Personnel 
Psychology, 
Spring 
1998, 137–63.
 44. S. L. Mueller and L. D. Clarke, 
“Political-Economic Context and 
Sensitivity to Equity: Differences 
between the United States and the 
Transition Economies of Central 
and Eastern Europe,” Academy of 
Management Journal (June 1998): 
319–29.

380    Part 4  •  Leading
 45. I. Harpaz, “The Importance of 
Work Goals: An International Per-
spective,” Journal of International 
Business Studies (First Quarter 
1990): 75–93.
 46. G. E. Popp, H. J. Davis, and T. T. 
Herbert, “An International Study 
of Intrinsic Motivation Composi-
tion,” Management International 
Review, January 1986, 28–35.
 47. R. W. Brislin, B. MacNab, R. 
Worthley, F. Kabigting Jr., and B. 
Zukis, “Evolving Perceptions of 
Japanese Workplace Motivation: 
An 
Employee-Manager 
Com-
parison,” International Journal 
of Cross-Cultural Management 
(April 2005): 87–104.
 48. A. Schwartz, “Workers Seeking 
Productivity in a Pill Are Abusing 
ADHD Drugs,” New York Times 
Online, April 18, 2015.
 49. J. R. Billings and D. L. Sharpe, 
“Factors Influencing Flextime 
Usage among Employed  Married 
Women,” 
Consumer 
Interests 
 Annual, 1999, 89–94; and I. Har-
paz, “The Importance of Work 
Goals: An International Perspec-
tive,” Journal of International 
Business Studies (First Quarter 
1990): 75–93.
 50. N. Ramachandran, “New Paths at 
Work,” U.S. News & World Report, 
March 20, 2006, 47; S. Armour, 
“Generation Y: They’ve Arrived at 
Work with a New Attitude,” USA 
Today, November 6, 2005, B1+; 
and R. Kanfer and P. L. Ackerman, 
“Aging, Adult Development, and 
Work Motivation,” Academy of 
Management Review, July 2004, 
440–58.
 51. T. D. Golden and J. F. Veiga, 
“The Impact of Extent of Tele-
commuting on Job Satisfaction: 
 Resolving Inconsistent Findings,” 
Journal of Management (April 
2005): 301–18.
 52. See, for instance, M. Alpert, “The 
Care and Feeding of Engineers,” 
Fortune, September 21, 1992, 
86–95; G. Poole, “How to Manage 
Your Nerds,” Forbes ASAP, De-
cember 1994, 132–36; T. J. Allen 
and R. Katz, “Managing Techni-
cal Professionals and Organiza-
tions: Improving and Sustaining 
the Performance of Organizations, 
Project Teams, and Individual 
Contributors,” Sloan Management 
Review, Summer 2002, S4–S5; 
and S. R. Barley and G. Kunda, 
“Contracting: A New Form of Pro-
fessional Practice,” Academy of 
Management Perspectives, Febru-
ary 2006, 45–66.
 53. K. Bennhold, “Working (Part-
Time) in the 21st Century,” New 
York Times Online, December 29, 
2010; and J. Revell, C. Bigda, and 
D. Rosato, “The Rise of Freelance 
Nation,” CNNMoney, cnnmoney.
com (June 12, 2009); and R. J. 
Bohner Jr. and E. R. Salasko, “Be-
ware the Legal Risks of Hiring 
Temps,” Workforce, October 2002, 
50–57.
 54. H. G. Jackson, “Flexible Work-
places: The Next Imperative,” 
HR Magazine, March 2011, 8; E. 
Frauenheim, “Companies Focus 
Their Attention on Flexibility,” 
Workforce Management Online, 
February 
2011; 
P. 
Davidson, 
“Companies Do More with Fewer 
Workers,” USA Today, February 
23, 2011, 1B+; M. Rich, “Weigh-
ing Costs, Companies Favor Tem-
porary Help,” New York Times 
Online, December 19, 2010; P. 
Davidson, “Temporary Workers 
Reshape Companies, Jobs,” USA 
Today, October 13, 2010, 1B+; J. 
P. Broschak and A. Davis-Blake, 
“Mixing Standard Work and Non-
standard Deals: The Consequenc-
es of Heterogeneity in Employ-
ment Arrangements,” Academy 
of Management Journal (April 
2006): 371–93; M. L. Kraimer, S. 
J. Wayne, R. C. Liden, and R. T. 
Sparrowe, “The Role of Job Secu-
rity in Understanding the Relation-
ship between Employees’ Percep-
tions of Temporary Workers and 
Employees’ Performance,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology (March 
2005): 389–98; and C. E. Connelly 
and D. G. Gallagher, “Emerging 
Trends in Contingent Work Re-
search,” Journal of Management 
(November 2004): 959–83.
 55. C. Haddad, “FedEx: Gaining on 
the Ground,” BusinessWeek, De-
cember 16, 2002, 126–28; and L. 
Landro, “To Get Doctors to Do 
Better, Health Plans Try Cash Bo-
nuses,” Wall Street Journal, Sep-
tember 17, 2004, A1+.
 56. K. E. Culp, “Playing Field Widens 
for Stack’s Great Game,” Spring-
field, 
Missouri, 
News-Leader, 
January 9, 2005, 1A+.
 57. P. M. Buehler, “Opening Up 
Management 
Communication: 
Learning from Open Book Man-
agement,” Supervision, August 
2010, 15–17; D. Drickhamer, 
“Open Books to Elevate Perfor-
mance,” Industry Week, Novem-
ber 2002, 16; J. Case, “Opening 
the Books,” Harvard Business Re-
view, March–April 1997, 118–27; 
J. P. Schuster, J. Carpenter, and M. 
P. Kane, The Power of Open-Book 
Management (New York: John 
Wiley, 1996); and J. Case, “The 
Open-Book 
Revolution,” 
Inc., 
June 1995, 26–50.
 58. J. Singer, “Healing Your Work-
place,” 
Supervision, 
March 
2011, 11–13; P. Hart, “Benefits 
of  Employee Recognition in the 
Workplace: Reduced Risk and 
Raised Revenues,” EHS Today, 
February 2011, 49–52; and F. 
Luthans and A. D. Stajkovic, 
“Provide Recognition for Per-
formance 
Improvement,” 
in 
E. A. Locke (ed.), Principles 
of 
 Organizational 
Behavior 
 (Oxford, England: Blackwell, 
2000), 166–80.
 59. C. Huff, “Recognition That Reso-
nates,” Workforce Management 
Online, April 1, 2008.
 60. J. Stewart, “I’m Standing up for 
the Industry. Are You?” Restaurant 
Business, February 2011, 36–37; 
and M. Littman, “Best Bosses Tell 
All,” Working Woman, October 
2000, 54.
 61. E. White, “Praise from Peers Goes 
a Long Way,” Wall Street Journal, 
December 19, 2005, B3.
 62. Ibid.
 63. K. J. Dunham, “Amid Sinking 
Workplace Morale, Employers 
Turn to Recognition,” Wall Street 
Journal, November 19, 2002, B8.
 64. See B. Nelson, “Try Praise,” Inc., 
September 1996, 115; and J. Wis-
combe, “Rewards Get Results,” 
Workforce, April 2002, 42–48. 
Cited in S. Caudron, “The Top 20 
Ways to Motivate Employees,” In-
dustry Week, April 3, 1995, 15–16.
 65. V. M. Barret, “Fight the Jerks,” 
Forbes, July 2, 2007, 52–54.
 66. E. Krell, “All for Incentives, In-
centives for All,” HR Magazine, 
January 2011, 35–38; and E. 
White, “The Best vs. the Rest,” 
Wall Street Journal, January 30, 
2006, B1+.
 67. R. K. Abbott, “Performance-
Based Flex: A Tool for Managing 
Total Compensation Costs,” Com-
pensation and Benefits Review, 
March–April 1993, 18–21; J. R. 
Schuster and P. K. Zingheim, “The 
New Variable Pay: Key Design 
Issues,” Compensation and Ben-
efits Review, March–April 1993, 
27–34; C. R. Williams and L. P. 
Livingstone, “Another Look at 
the Relationship between Perfor-
mance and Voluntary Turnover,” 
Academy of Management Jour-
nal (April 1994): 269–98; A. M. 
Dickinson and K. L. Gillette, “A 
Comparison of the Effects of Two 
Individual 
Monetary 
Incentive 
Systems on Productivity: Piece 
Rate Pay versus Base Pay Plus 
Incentives,” Journal of Organi-
zational Behavior Management 
(Spring 1994): 3–82; and C. B. 
Cadsby, F. Song, and F. Tapon, 
“Sorting and  Incentive Effects of 
Pay for Performance: An Experi-
mental Investigation,” Academy 
of Management Journal (April 
2007): 387–405.
 68. E. White, “Employers Increasing-
ly Favor Bonuses to Raises,” Wall 
Street Journal, August 28, 2006, 
B3.
 69. “More Than 20 Percent of Japa-
nese Firms Use Pay Systems 
Based on Performance,” Man-
power Argus, May 1998, 7; and 
E. Beauchesne, “Pay Bonuses Im-
prove Productivity, Study Shows,” 
Vancouver Sun, September 13, 
2002, D5.
 70. H. Rheem, “Performance Man-
agement 
Programs,” 
Harvard 
Business 
Review, 
September–
October 1996, 8–9; G. Sprinkle, 
“The Effect of Incentive Contracts 
on Learning and Performance,” 
Accounting Review, July 2000, 
299–326; and “Do Incentive 
Awards Work?” HRFocus, Octo-
ber 2000, 1–3.
 71. R.D. Banker, S.Y. Lee, G. Potter, 
and D. Srinivasan, “Contextual 
Analysis of Performance Impacts 
on 
Outcome-Based 
Incentive 
Compensation,” Academy of Man-
agement Journal (August 1996): 
920–48.
 72. S. A. Jeffrey and G. K. Adomza, 
“Incentive Salience and Improved 
Performance,” 
Human 
Perfor-
mance 24, no. 1 (2011): 47–59; T. 
Reason, “Why Bonus Plans Fail,” 
CFO, January 2003, 53; and “Has 
Pay for Performance Had Its Day?” 
McKinsey Quarterly, no. 4 (2002), 
accessed at www.forbes.com.
 73. E. Frauenheim, “Downturn Puts 
New Emphasis on Engagement,” 
Workforce Management Online, 
July 21, 2009; S. D. Friedman, 
“Dial Down the Stress Level,” 
Harvard Business Review, Decem-
ber 2008, 28–29; and S. E. Needle-
man, “Allaying Workers’ Fears 
During Uncertain Times,” Wall 
Street Journal, October 6, 2008.
 74. Based on V. H. Vroom, Work 
and Motivation (New York: John 
Wiley, 1964); J. S. Adams, “In-
equity in Social Exchanges,” in 
L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in 
Experimental 
Social 
Psychol-
ogy (New York: Academic Press, 
1965), 267–300; and E. A. Locke 
and G. P. Latham, A Theory of 
Goal Setting and Task Perfor-
mance (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1990).
 75. L. Dishman, “Can a $70,000 
Minimum Wage Work?” http://
www .fastcompany.com/3045138/
the-future-of-work/can-a-70000- 
minimum-wage-work, April 20,  

CHAPTER 11  •  Motivating and Rewarding Employees    381
2015; 
and 
P. 
Cohen, 
“One 
 Company’s New Minimum Wage: 
$70,000 a Year,” New York Times 
Online, April 13, 2015.
 76. J. D’onfro and K. Smith, “Google 
Employees Reveal Their Favorite 
Perks about Working for the Com-
pany,” http://www.businessinsider 
.com/google-employees-favorite-
perks-2014-7, July 1, 2014; J. B. 
Stewart, “Looking for a Lesson in 
Google’s Perks,” New York Times 
Online, March 15, 2013; “100 Best 
Companies to Work For,” Fortune, 
February 4, 2013, 85+; S. Levy, 
“The Problem with Success,” 
Wall Street Journal, April 7, 2011, 
A15; S. Levy, In the Plex: How 
Google Thinks, Works, and Shapes 
Our Lives (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 2011); C. C. Miller and 
J. Wortham, “Silicon Valley Hiring 
Perks: Meals, iPads, and a Cubicle 
for Spot,” New York Times Online, 
March 26, 2011; J. Light, “Google 
Is No. 1 on List of Desired Em-
ployers,” Wall Street Journal, 
March 21, 2011, B8; M Moskow-
itz, R. Levering, and C. Tkaczyk, 
“100 Best Companies to Work 
For,” Fortune, February 7, 2011, 
91+; C. C. Miller and M. Helft, 
“Google Shake-Up Is Effort to 
Revive Start-Up Spark,” New York 
Times Online, January 20, 2011; 
C. C. Miller, “Google Grows and 
Works to Retain Nimble Minds,” 
New York Times Online, November 
28, 2010; A. Efrati and P-W. Tam, 
“Google Battles to Keep Talent,” 
Wall Street Journal, November 
11, 2010, B1+; L. Petrecca, “With 
3,000 Applications a Day, Google 
Can Be Picky,” USA Today, May 
19, 2010, 2B; S. E. Ante and K. 
Weisul, “And Google Begat …,” 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, March 
8, 2010, 39–42; A. Lashinsky, 
“Where Does Google Go Next?” 
CNNMoney.com, May 12, 2008; 
and “Perk Place: The Benefits Of-
fered by Google and Others May 
Be Grand, But They’re All Busi-
ness,” Knowledge @ Wharton, 
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn 
.edu/article (March 21, 2007).
 77. J. D’Onfro, “How Jack Ma Went 
From Being A Poor School 
 Teacher To Turning Alibaba Into 
A $168 Billion Behemoth,” Busi-
ness Insider, May 7, 2014; Z. 
Soo, “Jack Ma – Happier Mak-
ing US$12 a month than living 
as a billionaire,” South China 
Morning Post, June 10, 2015; H. 
H. Wang, “Why Amazon Should 
Fear Alibaba,” Forbes, www 
.forbes.com, July 8, 2015; “Ali-
baba Unveiled: Inside China’s 
E-Commerce Giant,” The Poli-
tic, October 17, 2014; W. Fick, 
“The Secret to  Alibaba’s Cul-
ture is Jack Ma’s Apartment,” 
Harvard Business  Review, June 
19, 2014; “China ‘Unparalleled 
Ruthlessness’ Awaits Jack Ma’s 
Letter to Alibaba Employees,” 
The Wall Street Journal, May 7, 
2014; H. Shao, “A Peek Inside 
Alibaba’s 
Corporate 
Culture,” 
Forbes Asia, May 13, 2014; Ali-
baba Group 2015 Annual Report 
http://ar.alibabagroup.com/2015/
letter .html 9 Forbes– “As Alibaba 
IPO Approaches, Founder Jack 
Ma Pens Letter to Potential In-
vestors.” Ryan Mac Sept 5, 2014 
10 Forbes Asia – “A Peek Inside 
Alibaba’s Corporate Culture”. 
Heng Shao. May 13, 2014 11 
Business  Insider – “How Jack Ma 
Went From  Being A Poor School 
Teacher To Turning Alibaba Into 
A $168 Billion Behemoth” Jil-
lian D’Onfro. May 7, 201412 
Forbes Asia–“A Peek Inside 
Alibaba’s Corporate Culture”. 
Heng Shao. May 13, 2014 13 14 
The Wall Street Journal. China 
 ‘Unparalleled 
Ruthlessness’ 
Awaits Jack Ma’s Letter to Alib-
aba Employees.’ May 7, 2014. 15 
China Daily – “Alibaba ponders 
ways to keep flock together”. He 
Wei June 6, 2014 16 The Econo-
mist –“China’s Carnegie”. May 
3, 2014 17 South China Morning 
Post–“Jack Ma – Happier Mak-
ing US$12 a month than living as 
a billionaire”. Zen Soo. June 10, 
2015 18 Forbes Asia – “A Peek 
 Inside Alibaba’s Corporate Cul-
ture”. Heng Shao. May 13, 2014.
 78. L. B. Hammer, R.C. Johnson, T.L. 
Crain, T. Bodner, E. E. Kossek, 
K.D. Davis, E.L. Kelly, O.M. Bux-
ton, G. Karuntzos, L.C. Chosewood, 
and L. Berkman, “Intervention Ef-
fects On Safety Compliance And 
Citizenship Behaviors: Evidence 
From The Work, Family, And 
Health Study,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, 2015, http://
psycnet.apa.org/index.cfm?fa=buy.
optionToBuy&id=2015-40868-001. 
Emily 
Peck, 
“LinkedIn 
Now 
 Offering Employees ‘Unlimited’ 
Vacation Time,” Huffington Post, 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/
entry/linkedin-unlimited-vacation-
time_561c007be4b0e66ad4c8c015, 
October 12, 2015.

Leadership 
and Trust
12
 Leadership  
can’t be  
taught.
Image Source/Alamy

383
Many people incorrectly assume that 
leaders are born. For example, they point 
to kids who, as early as four or five years 
old, are leading other kids around on the 
playground and displaying leadership 
qualities. The evidence suggests that 
while there are certainly personality traits 
associated with leadership and that these 
traits are more due to nature than nurture, 
leadership can be taught.

Learning Outcomes
12-1 Define leader and leadership. p. 385
12-2 Compare and contrast early leadership theories. p. 386
12-3 Describe the four major contingency leadership theories. p. 389
12-4  Describe modern views of leadership and the issues facing today’s  
leaders. p. 394
12-5 Discuss trust as the essence of leadership. p. 401
384
does it take to be an effec-
tive leader in today’s orga-
nizations? Should the workplace environ-
ment be one in which employees feel like 
they’re heard and trusted? It’s important for 
managers in all organizations to be seen 
as effective leaders. Why is leadership so 
important? Because it’s the leaders in or-
ganizations who make things happen. But 
what makes leaders different from nonlead-
ers? What’s the most appropriate style of 
leadership? What makes leaders effective? 
These are just some of the topics we’re 
 going to address in this chapter. •
What 

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    385
Who Are Leaders, and What Is  
Leadership?
12-1  Define leader 
and leadership.
Let’s begin by clarifying who leaders are and what lead-
ership is. Our definition of a leader is someone who 
can influence others and who has managerial authority. 
Leadership is what leaders do; that is, it’s a process of lead-
ing a group and influencing that group to achieve its goals.
Are all managers leaders? Because leading is one of the four management functions, 
ideally all managers should be leaders. Thus, we’re going to study leaders and  leadership 
from a managerial perspective.1 However, even though we’re looking at these from a 
managerial perspective, we’re aware that groups often have informal leaders who emerge. 
Although these informal leaders may be able to influence others, they have not been 
the focus of most leadership research and are not the types of leaders we’re studying in 
this chapter.
Leaders and leadership, like motivation, are organizational behavior topics that have 
been researched a lot. Most of that research has been aimed at answering the question: “What 
is an effective leader?” We’ll begin our study of leadership by looking at some early leader-
ship theories that attempted to answer that question.
Both the Ohio State and Michigan studies added a lot to our 
understanding of effective leadership.2 Prior to the completion 
of these studies, it was widely thought by researchers and 
practicing managers that one style of 
leadership was good and another bad. 
However, as the research showed, 
both leader behavior dimensions—
job-centered and employee-centered 
in the Michigan studies, and initiating 
structure and consideration in the Ohio 
State studies—are necessary for effec-
tive leadership. That dual focus of “what” a leader does still 
holds today. Leaders are expected to focus on both the task 
and on the people he or she is leading. Even the later contin-
gency leadership theories used the people/task distinction to 
define a leader’s style. Finally, these early behavioral studies 
were important for the rigorous methodology they used and 
for increasing awareness of how important leader behavior is. 
Although the behavioral theories may not have been the final 
chapter in the book on leadership, they 
provided us with important insights 
that became the foundation of contin-
gency leadership theories.
If your professor has assigned this, 
go to the Assignments section of 
 mymanagementlab.com 
to 
com-
plete these discussion questions.
   Talk About It 1: Is saying that the leader’s “job” is to fo-
cus on the task and focus on the people too simplistic? Explain.
   Talk About It 2: How did the behavioral theories serve 
as a springboard for the leadership research that followed?
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
People—Task:  
Both are important  
to leaders.
leader
Someone who can influence others and who has 
managerial authority
leadership
The process of leading a group and influencing that 
group to achieve its goals

thE LEaDER What Traits Do Leaders Have?
• What DO YOU KNOW aBOUt LEaDERShIP? When asked that question, most 
people cite a list of qualities they admire 
in leaders—intelligence, charisma, deci-
siveness, enthusiasm, strength, bravery, 
integrity, self-confidence, and so forth.
• That’s the trait theories of leadership 
in a nutshell—the search for traits or 
characteristics that differentiate leaders 
from nonleaders.
• If this concept was valid, all leaders  
would have to possess those unique and consistent characteristics, making it easy to 
find leaders in organizations.
• But that’s not going to happen: Despite the best efforts of researchers, they have yet to 
find a set of traits that would always differentiate a leader (the person) from a nonleader.
• Attempts to identify traits consistently associated with 
leadership (the process, not the person) have been more 
successful. See Exhibit 12–1 for those eight traits.3
What Do Early Leadership theories 
tell Us about Leadership?
Leaders. Groups. Long History!
12-2 Compare and contrast early leadership theories.
Sergiu Ungureanu/Shutterstock
trait theories of leadership
Theories that isolate characteristics (traits) that differentiate 
leaders from nonleaders
• Actual studies of leadership began in the twentieth century.
• Early leadership theories focused on:
— The person (leader trait theories)
—  The behaviors—how the leader interacted with his or her group members (behavioral 
theories)
1 
386

387
Exhibit 12–1 Traits Associated with Leadership
1 
Drive.  
Leaders exhibit a high effort 
level. They have a relatively 
high desire for achievement, 
they are ambitious, they 
have a lot of energy, they are 
tirelessly persistent in their 
activities, and they show 
initiative. 2 3 
5 
Intelligence.  
Leaders need to be intelligent 
enough to gather, synthesize, 
and interpret large amounts  
of information, and they need  
to be able to create visions, 
solve problems, and make  
correct decisions. 6 
Job-relevant  
knowledge.  
Effective leaders have a high 
degree of knowledge about  
the company, industry, and 
technical matters. In-depth 
knowledge allows leaders to 
make well-informed decisions 
and to understand the impli-
cations of those decisions.7 
Extraversion.  
Leaders are energetic, lively 
people. They are sociable,  
assertive, and rarely silent or 
withdrawn.
Source: Based on S. A. Kirkpatrick and E. A. Locke, “Leadership: Do Traits Really Matter?” 
Academy of Management Executive, May 1991, 48–60; T. A. Judge, J. E. Bono, R. Ilies, 
and M. W. Gerhardt, “Personality and Leadership: A Qualitative and Quantitative Review,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology (August 2002): 765–80.
What Now?
• TRAITS alone were not sufficient for identifying effective leaders? Why? Explanations 
based solely on traits ignored the interactions of leaders and their group members as 
well as situational factors.
• Possessing the appropriate traits only made it more likely that an individual would be 
an effective leader.
• Leadership research from the late 1940s to the mid-1960s turned to finding preferred  
behavioral styles that leaders demonstrated.
Was there some-
thing unique in what 
leaders did—in  
other words, in their 
behavior?
Vege/Fotolia
Desire to lead.  
Leaders have a strong desire 
to influence and lead others.  
They demonstrate the willing-
ness to take responsibility.
4 
Self-confidence.  
Followers look to leaders who 
don’t self-doubt. Leaders, 
therefore, need to show 
self-confidence in order to 
convince followers of the 
rightness of their goals and 
decisions.
8 
honesty  
and integrity. 
Leaders build trusting rela-
tionships with followers by 
being truthful, or nondeceit-
ful, and by showing high 
consistency between word 
and deed.
Proneness to guilt. 
Guilt proneness is positively re-
lated to leadership effectiveness 
because it produces a strong 
sense of responsibility for others.

388
thE BEhaVIORS What Behaviors Do Leaders Exhibit?
• Would behavioral theories of leadership provide more definitive 
answers about the nature of leadership?
• If behavioral theories could identify critical behavioral determinants of leader-
ship, people could be trained to be leaders—the premise behind management 
development programs.
What Now?
• Dual nature of leader behaviors—
that is, focusing on the work to  
be done and focusing on the  
employees—is an important char-
acteristic of each of these studies.
• Leadership researchers were 
discovering that predicting leader-
ship success involved something 
more complex than isolating a few leader traits or preferable behaviors.
• They began looking at situational influences. Specifically, which leadership  
styles might be suitable in different situations and what were these  
different situations?
Coloures-pic/Fotolia
OhIO StatE5
Behavioral Dimension
Consideration: being considerate of 
followers’ ideas and feelings
Initiating structure: structuring work 
and work relationships to meet job 
goals
CONCLUSION
High–high leader (high in consider-
ation and high in initiating structure) 
achieved high subordinate perfor-
mance and satisfaction, but not in all 
situations
UNIVERSItY OF  MIChIGaN6
Behavioral Dimension
Employee oriented: emphasized 
interpersonal relationships and taking 
care of employees’ needs
Production oriented: emphasized 
technical or task aspects of job
CONCLUSION
Employee-oriented leaders were 
 associated with high group productivity 
and higher job satisfaction.
MaNaGERIaL GRID7
Behavioral Dimension
Concern for people: measured 
leader’s concern for subordinates on a 
scale of 1 to 9 (low to high)
Concern for production: measured 
leader’s concern for getting job done 
on a scale 1 to 9 (low to high)
CONCLUSION
Leaders performed best with a 9,9 
style (high concern for production and 
high concern for people).
UNIVERSItY OF IOWa4
Behavioral Dimension
Democratic style: involving sub-
ordinates, delegating authority, and 
encouraging participation
autocratic style: dictating work 
methods, centralizing decision making, 
and limiting participation
Laissez-faire style: giving group 
freedom to make decisions and 
complete work
CONCLUSION
Democratic style of leadership was 
most effective, although later studies 
showed mixed results.
behavioral theories of leadership
Theories that isolate behaviors that differentiate effective 
leaders from ineffective leaders
managerial grid
A two-dimensional grid for appraising leadership styles
2 

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    389
Fiedler contingency model
Leadership theory proposing that effective group 
performance depends on the proper match between 
a leader’s style and the degree to which the situa-
tion allowed the leader to control and influence
least-preferred coworker 
(LPC) questionnaire
A questionnaire that measures whether a leader 
was task or relationship oriented
Richard Branson, founder and CEO of Virgin 
Group, is a relationship-oriented leader. Pic-
tured here with an in-flight teammate while 
showing the interior of a new Virgin airplane, 
Branson is fun loving, takes a personal inter-
est in the needs of employees, emphasizes 
interpersonal relations, and accepts individual 
differences among workers.
David Woo/Dallas Morning News/Corbis
What Do the Contingency Theories of Leadership Tell Us?
“The corporate world is filled with stories of leaders who 
failed to achieve greatness because they failed to under-
stand the context they were working in.”8 In this section 
we examine four contingency theories—Fiedler, Hersey-
Blanchard, leader-participation, and path-goal. Each looks 
at defining leadership style and the situation, and attempts 
to answer the if-then contingencies (that is, if this is the con-
text or situation, then this is the best leadership style to use).
What Was the First Comprehensive Contingency Model?
The first comprehensive contingency model for leadership was developed by Fred Fiedler.9 
The Fiedler contingency model proposed that effective group performance depended on 
properly matching the leader’s style and the amount of control and influence in the situation. 
The model was based on the premise that a certain leadership style would be most effective in 
different types of situations. The keys were:
1. define those leadership styles and the different types of situations, and then
2. identify the appropriate combinations of style and situation.
Fiedler proposed that a key factor in leadership success was an individual’s basic leader-
ship style, either task oriented or relationship oriented. To measure a leader’s style, Fiedler 
developed the least-preferred coworker (LPC) questionnaire. This questionnaire contained 
18 pairs of contrasting adjectives—for example, pleasant–unpleasant, cold–warm, boring–in-
teresting, or friendly–unfriendly. Respondents were asked to think of all the coworkers they 
had ever had and to describe that one person they least enjoyed working with by rating him or 
her on a scale of 1 to 8 for each of the sets of adjectives (the 8 always described the positive 
adjective out of the pair and the 1 always described the negative adjective out of the pair).
If the leader described the least preferred coworker in relatively positive terms (in 
other words, a “high” LPC score—a score of 64 or above), then the respondent was primar-
ily interested in good personal relations with coworkers and the style would be described as 
relationship oriented. In contrast, if you saw the least preferred coworker in relatively un-
favorable terms (a low LPC score—a score of 57 or below), you were primarily interested 
in productivity and getting the job done; thus, your style would be labeled as task oriented. 
Fiedler did acknowledge that a small number of people might fall in between these two 
extremes and not have a cut-and-dried leadership style. One other important point is that 
Fiedler assumed a person’s leadership style was fixed regardless of the situation. In other 
words, if you were a relationship-oriented leader, 
you’d always be one, and the same for task-oriented.
After an individual’s leadership style had been 
assessed through the LPC, it was time to evaluate the 
situation in order to be able to match the leader with 
the situation. Fiedler’s research uncovered three contin-
gency dimensions that defined the key situational fac-
tors in leader effectiveness. These were:
• Leader-member relations: the degree of confidence, 
trust, and respect employees had for their leader; rat-
ed as either good or poor.
• Task structure: the degree to which job assignments 
were formalized and structured; rated as either high 
or low.
• Position power: the degree of influence a leader had over 
activities such as hiring, firing, discipline, promotions, 
and salary increases; rated as either strong or weak.
12-3  Describe the four 
major contingency  
leadership  
theories.

390    Part 4  •  Leading
Each leadership situation was evaluated in terms of these three contingency variables, which 
when  combined produced eight possible situations that were either favorable or unfavorable 
for the leader. (See the bottom of the chart in Exhibit 12–2). Situations I, II, and III were clas-
sified as highly favorable for the leader. Situations IV, V, and VI were moderately favorable 
for the leader. And situations VII and VIII were described as highly unfavorable for the leader.
Once Fiedler had described the leader variables and the situational variables, he had 
everything he needed to define the specific contingencies for leadership effectiveness. To do 
so, he studied 1,200 groups where he compared relationship-oriented versus task-oriented 
leadership styles in each of the eight situational categories. He concluded that task-oriented 
leaders performed better in very favorable situations and in very unfavorable situations. (See 
the top of Exhibit 12–2, where performance is shown on the vertical axis and situation favor-
ableness is shown on the horizontal axis.) On the other hand, relationship-oriented leaders 
performed better in moderately favorable situations.
Because Fiedler treated an individual’s leadership style as fixed, there were only two 
ways to improve leader effectiveness. First, you could bring in a new leader whose style bet-
ter fit the situation. For instance, if the group situation was highly unfavorable but was led 
by a relationship-oriented leader, the group’s performance could be improved by replacing 
that person with a task-oriented leader. The second alternative was to change the situation 
to fit the leader. This could be done by restructuring tasks; by increasing or decreasing the 
power that the leader had over factors such as salary increases, promotions, and disciplinary 
actions; or by improving the leader-member relations. Research testing the overall validity 
of Fiedler’s model has shown considerable evidence to support the model.10 However, his 
theory wasn’t without criticisms. The major one is that it’s probably unrealistic to assume that 
a person can’t change his or her leadership style to fit the situation. Effective leaders can, and 
do, change their styles. Another is that the LPC wasn’t very practical. Finally, the situation 
variables were difficult to assess.11 Despite its shortcomings, the Fiedler model showed that 
effective leadership style needed to reflect situational factors.
How Do Followers’ Willingness and Ability Influence Leaders?
Paul Hersey and Ken Blanchard developed a leadership theory that has had a strong follow-
ing among management development specialists.12 This model, called situational leadership 
theory (SLT), is a contingency theory that focuses on followers’ readiness. Before we proceed, 
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
Good
Good
Good
Good
Poor
Poor
Poor
Poor
High
High
High
High
Low
Low
Low
Low
Strong
Weak Strong Weak Strong Weak Strong
Weak
Category
Leader–member
relations
Task structure
Position power
Good
Poor
Favorable
Moderate
Unfavorable
Performance
Task oriented
Relationship oriented
Highly 
Favorable
Moderate
Highly 
Unfavorable
Exhibit 12–2 The Fiedler Model
situational leadership theory 
(SLT)
A leadership contingency theory that focuses  
on followers’ readiness

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    391
there are two points we need to clarify: Why a leadership theory focuses on the followers, and 
what is meant by the term readiness.
The emphasis on the followers in leadership effectiveness reflects the reality that it is 
the followers who accept or reject the leader. Regardless of what the leader does, the group’s 
 effectiveness depends on the actions of the followers. This is an important dimension that has 
been overlooked or underemphasized in most leadership theories. And readiness, as defined 
by Hersey and Blanchard, refers to the extent to which people have the ability and willingness 
to accomplish a specific task.
LEADER
SLT uses the same two leadership dimensions that Fiedler identified: task and relationship 
behaviors. However, Hersey and Blanchard go a step further by considering each as either high 
or low and then combining them into four specific leadership styles described as follows:
• Telling (high task–low relationship): The leader defines roles and tells people what, how, 
when, and where to do various tasks.
• Selling (high task–high relationship): The leader provides both directive and supportive 
behavior.
• Participating (low task–high relationship): The leader and followers share in decision mak-
ing; the main role of the leader is facilitating and communicating.
• Delegating (low task–low relationship): The leader provides little direction or support.
FOLLOWERS
The final component in the model is the four stages of follower readiness:
• R1: People are both unable and unwilling to take responsibility for doing something. 
 Followers aren’t competent or confident.
• R2: People are unable but willing to do the necessary job tasks. Followers are motivated but 
lack the appropriate skills.
• R3: People are able but unwilling to do what the leader wants. Followers are competent, but 
don’t want to do something.
• R4: People are both able and willing to do what is asked of them.
Now—let’s put the two together!
SLT essentially views the leader-follower relationship as like that of a parent and a child. 
Just as a parent needs to relinquish control when a child becomes more mature and responsi-
ble, so, too, should leaders. As followers reach higher 
levels of readiness, the leader responds not only by 
decreasing control over their activities but also de-
creasing relationship behaviors. The SLT says:
• If followers are at R1 (unable and unwilling to do 
a task), the leader needs to use the telling style and 
give clear and specific directions.
• If followers are at R2 (unable and willing), the lead-
er needs to use the selling style and display high 
task orientation to compensate for the followers’ 
lack of ability and high relationship orientation to 
get followers to “buy into” the leader’s desires.
• If followers are at R3 (able and unwilling), the 
leader needs to use the participating style to gain 
their support.
• If followers are at R4 (both able and willing), the 
leader doesn’t need to do much and should use the 
delegating style.
French entrepreneur Bertin Nahum is the 
founder and CEO of Medtech, a firm that 
develops, designs, and markets computer-
assisted neurosurgical robotics. With high 
follower readiness of being able and willing, 
Nahum’s managers and staff have the skills 
and experience to innovate and provide 
superior technical support.
Alain Robert/APERCU/SIPA/Newscom
readiness
The extent to which people have the ability  
and willingness to accomplish a specific task

392    Part 4  •  Leading
SLT has intuitive appeal. It acknowledges the importance of followers and builds on the 
logic that leaders can compensate for ability and motivational limitations in their followers. 
However, research efforts to test and support the theory generally have been disappointing.13 
Possible explanations include internal inconsistencies in the model as well as problems with 
research methodology. Despite its appeal and wide popularity, we have to be cautious about 
any enthusiastic endorsement of SLT.
How Participative Should a Leader Be?
Back in 1973, Victor Vroom and Phillip Yetton developed a leader-participation model that 
related leadership behavior and participation to decision making.14 Recognizing that task 
structures have varying demands for routine and nonroutine activities, these researchers ar-
gued that leader behavior must adjust to reflect the task structure. Vroom and Yetton’s model 
was normative. That is, it provided a sequential set of rules to be followed in determining 
the form and amount of participation in decision making in different types of situations. The 
model was a decision tree incorporating seven contingencies (whose relevance could be iden-
tified by making yes or no choices) and five alternative leadership styles.
More recent work by Vroom and Arthur Jago has revised that model.15 The new model 
retains the same five alternative leadership styles but expands the contingency variables to 12—
from the leader’s making the decision completely by himself or herself to sharing the problem 
with the group and developing a consensus decision. These variables are listed in Exhibit 12–3.
Research on the original leader-participation model was encouraging.16 But unfortunately, 
the model is far too complex for the typical manager to use regularly. In fact, Vroom and Jago 
have developed a computer program to guide managers through all the decision branches in 
the revised model. Although we obviously can’t do justice to this model’s sophistication in this 
discussion, it has provided us with some solid, empirically supported insights into key contin-
gency variables related to leadership effectiveness. Moreover, the leader-participation model 
confirms that leadership research should be directed at the situation rather than at the person. 
That is, it probably makes more sense to talk about autocratic and participative situations than 
autocratic and participative leaders. As House did in his path-goal theory, Vroom, Yetton, and 
Jago argue against the notion that leader behavior is inflexible. The leader-participation model 
assumes that the leader can adapt his or her style to different situations.17
Only 53 percent of leaders are willing to step outside their 
leadership comfort zone and try new techniques.18
Exhibit 12–3 Contingency Variables in the Revised Leader-Participation Model
1. Importance of the decision
2. Importance of obtaining follower commitment to the decision
3. Whether the leader has sufficient information to make a good decision
4. How well structured the problem is
5. Whether an autocratic decision would receive follower commitment
6. Whether followers “buy into” the organization’s goals
7. Whether there is likely to be conflict among followers over solution alternatives
8. Whether followers have the necessary information to make a good decision
9. Time constraints on the leader that may limit follower involvement
10. Whether costs to bring geographically dispersed members together are justified
11. Importance to the leader of minimizing the time it takes to make the decision
12. Importance of using participation as a tool for developing follower decision skills
Source: Stephen P. Robbins and Timothy A. Judge, Organizational Behavior, 13th ed., ©2009, 
p. 400. Reprinted and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., 
New York, NY.
leader-participation model
A leadership contingency theory that’s based on a 
sequential set of rules for determining how much 
participation a leader uses in decision making 
according to different types of situations

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    393
How Do Leaders Help Followers?
Another approach to understanding leadership is path-goal theory, which states that the leader’s 
job is to assist followers in attaining their goals and to provide direction or support needed to 
ensure that their goals are compatible with the goals of the group or organization. Developed by 
Robert House, path-goal theory takes key elements from the expectancy theory of motivation 
(see Chapter 11).19 The term path-goal is derived from the belief that effective leaders clarify 
the path to help their followers get from where they are to the achievement of their work goals 
and make the journey along the path easier by reducing roadblocks and pitfalls.
House identified four leadership behaviors:
• Directive leader: Lets subordinates know what’s expected of them, schedules work to be 
done, and gives specific guidance on how to accomplish tasks.
• Supportive leader: Shows concern for the needs of followers and is friendly.
• Participative leader: Consults with group members and uses their suggestions before mak-
ing a decision.
• Achievement-oriented leader: Sets challenging goals and expects followers to perform at 
their highest level.
In contrast to Fiedler’s view that a leader couldn’t change his or her behavior, House assumed 
that leaders are flexible and can display any or all of these leadership styles depending on the 
situation.
As Exhibit 12–4 illustrates, path-goal theory proposes two situational or contingency 
variables that moderate the leadership behavior–outcome relationship:
1. those in the environment that are outside the control of the follower (factors including task 
structure, formal authority system, and the work group) and
2. those that are part of the personal characteristics of the follower (including locus of con-
trol, experience, and perceived ability).
Environmental factors determine the type of leader behavior required if subordinate outcomes 
are to be maximized; personal characteristics of the follower determine how the environment 
and leader behavior are interpreted. The theory proposes that a leader’s behavior won’t be 
 effective if it’s redundant with what the environmental structure is providing or is incongruent 
with follower characteristics. For example, some predictions from path-goal theory are:
• Directive leadership leads to greater satisfaction when tasks are ambiguous or stressful than 
when they are highly structured and well laid out. The followers aren’t sure what to do, so 
the leader needs to give them some direction.
  • Locus of control
  • Experience
  • Perceived ability
  • Task structure
  • Formal authority system
  • Work group
  • Directive
  • Supportive
  • Participative
  • Achievement oriented
  • Performance
  • Satisfaction
Leader behavior
Environmental contingency 
factors
Outcomes
Employee contingency factors
Exhibit 12–4 Path-Goal Model
path-goal theory
A leadership theory that says the leader’s job is 
to assist followers in attaining their goals and to 
provide direction or support needed to ensure that 
their goals are compatible with the organization’s 
or group’s goals

394    Part 4  •  Leading
• Supportive leadership results in high employee 
performance and satisfaction when subordinates 
are performing structured tasks. In this situation, 
the leader only needs to support followers, not tell 
them what to do.
• Directive leadership is likely to be perceived as 
redundant among subordinates with high per-
ceived ability or with considerable experience. 
These followers are quite capable so they don’t 
need a leader to tell them what to do.
• The clearer and more bureaucratic the formal 
authority relationships, the more leaders should 
exhibit supportive behavior and deemphasize di-
rective behavior. The organizational situation has 
provided the structure as far as what is expected of 
followers, so the leader’s role is simply to support.
• Directive leadership will lead to higher employee 
satisfaction when there is substantive conflict 
within a work group. In this situation, the follow-
ers need a leader who will take charge.
• Subordinates with an internal locus of control will be more satisfied with a participative 
style. Because these followers believe that they control what happens to them, they prefer 
to participate in decisions.
• Subordinates with an external locus of control will be more satisfied with a directive style. 
These followers believe that what happens to them is a result of the external environment so 
they would prefer a leader who tells them what to do.
• Achievement-oriented leadership will increase subordinates’ expectancies that effort will 
lead to high performance when tasks are ambiguously structured. By setting challenging 
goals, followers know what the expectations are.
Research findings on the path-goal model have been mixed because the theory has so 
many variables to examine. Although not every study has found support, we can still say that 
evidence supports the logic underlying the theory.20 That is, an employee’s performance and 
satisfaction are likely to be positively influenced when the leader chooses a leadership style 
that compensates for shortcomings in either the employee or the work setting. However, if 
the leader spends time explaining tasks that are already clear or when the employee has the 
ability and experience to handle them without interference, the employee is likely to see such 
directive behavior as redundant or even insulting.
  try It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Leadership.
Mary Barra, CEO of General Motors, is a par-
ticipative leader. She involves employees in 
the decision-making process by encouraging 
them to voice their opinions, and she holds 
town hall meetings to gather advice. Barra’s 
participative style results in highly engaged 
employees, organizational commitment, and 
effective work teams.
Epa european pressphoto agency b.v./Alamy
What Is Leadership Like Today?
What are the latest views of leadership, and what issues do today’s leaders have to deal with? 
In this section, we’re going to look at four contemporary views of leadership: leader-member 
exchange (LMX), transformational-transactional leadership, charismatic-visionary leader-
ship, and team leadership. In addition, we’ll discuss some issues that leaders have to face in 
leading effectively in today’s environment.
What Do the Four Contemporary Views of Leadership Tell Us?
Remember our discussion at the beginning of this chapter where we said that leadership 
studies have long had the goal of describing what it takes to be an effective leader? That 
12-4  Describe 
modern views 
of leadership 
and the issues 
facing today’s 
leaders.

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    395
goal hasn’t changed! Even the contemporary views of leadership are interested in answering 
that question. These views of leadership have a common theme: leaders who interact with, 
inspire, and support followers.
How do Leaders Interact wItH FoLLowers? Have you ever been in a group in 
which the leader had “favorites” who made up his or her in-group? If so, that’s the premise 
behind leader-member exchange (LMX) theory.21 Leader-member exchange (LMX) theory 
says that leaders create in-groups and out-groups and those in the in-group will have higher 
performance ratings, less turnover, and greater job satisfaction.
LMX theory suggests that early on in the relationship between a leader and a given fol-
lower, a leader will implicitly categorize a follower as an “in” or as an “out.” That relation-
ship tends to remain fairly stable over time. Leaders also encourage LMX by rewarding those 
employees with whom they want a closer linkage and punishing those with whom they do 
not.22 For the LMX relationship to remain intact, however, both the leader and the follower 
must “invest” in the relationship.
It’s not exactly clear how a leader chooses who falls into each category, but evidence 
 indicates that in-group members have demographic, attitude, personality, and even gender 
similarities with the leader or they have a higher level of competence than out-group mem-
bers.23 The leader does the choosing, but the follower’s characteristics drive the decision.
Ninety-two percent of executives see favoritism  
in who gets job promotions.24
Research on LMX has been generally supportive. It appears that leaders do differentiate 
among followers; that these disparities are not random; and followers with in-group status 
will have higher performance ratings, engage in more helping or “citizenship” behaviors at 
work, and report greater satisfaction with their boss.25 These findings probably shouldn’t be 
surprising when leaders are most likely to invest their time and other resources in those whom 
they expect to perform best.
How do transactIonaL Leaders dIFFer From transFormatIonaL Leaders?  
Many early leadership theories viewed leaders as transactional leaders; that is, leaders who 
lead primarily by using social exchanges (or transactions). Transactional leaders guide or 
motivate followers to work toward established goals by exchanging rewards for their pro-
ductivity.26 But another type of leader—a transformational leader—stimulates and inspires 
(transforms) followers to achieve extraordinary outcomes. How? By paying attention to the 
concerns and developmental needs of individual followers; changing followers’ awareness of 
issues by helping those followers look at old problems in new ways; and being able to excite, 
arouse, and inspire followers to exert extra effort to achieve group goals.
Transactional and transformational leadership shouldn’t be viewed as opposing approaches 
to getting things done.27 Transformational leadership develops from transactional leadership. 
Transformational leadership produces levels of employee effort and performance that go beyond 
what would occur with a transactional approach alone. Moreover, transformational leadership is 
more than charisma since the transformational leader attempts to instill in followers the ability to 
question not only established views but those views held by the leader.28
The evidence supporting the superiority of transformational leadership over transactional 
leadership is overwhelmingly impressive. For instance, studies that looked at managers in differ-
ent settings, including the military and business, found that transformational leaders were evalu-
ated as more effective, higher performers, more promotable than their transactional counterparts, 
and more interpersonally sensitive.29 In addition, evidence indicates that transformational lead-
ership is strongly correlated with lower turnover rates and higher levels of productivity, work 
engagement, employee satisfaction, creativity, goal attainment, and follower well-being.30
How do cHarIsmatIc LeadersHIp and VIsIonary LeadersHIp dIFFer? Jeff 
Bezos, founder and CEO of Amazon.com, is a person who exudes energy, enthusiasm, and 
drive.31 He’s fun-loving (his legendary laugh has been described as a flock of Canada geese 
on nitrous oxide), but he has pursued his vision for Amazon with serious intensity and has 
transactional leaders
Leaders who lead primarily by using social 
exchanges (or transactions)
leader-member exchange 
(LMX) theory
A leadership theory that says leaders create 
in-groups and out-groups and those in the in-group 
will have higher performance ratings, less turnover, 
and greater job satisfaction
transformational leaders
Leaders who stimulate and inspire (transform) 
 followers to achieve extraordinary outcomes

396    Part 4  •  Leading
charismatic leaders
Enthusiastic, self-confident leaders whose  
personalities and actions influence people to 
behave in certain ways
visionary leadership
The ability to create and articulate a realistic, 
credible, and attractive vision of the future that 
improves on the present situation
Amazon.com founder and CEO Jeff Bezos is 
a charismatic leader. Shown here displaying 
Amazon’s Kindle Fire tablets, he is described 
as energetic, enthusiastic, optimistic, and 
self-confident. Bezos has the drive to set and 
pursue goals for risky new ventures and uses 
his charisma to inspire his employees to work 
hard to achieve them.
Reed Saxon/AP Images
demonstrated an ability to inspire his employees through the ups and downs of a rapidly 
growing company. Bezos is what we call a charismatic leader—that is, an enthusiastic, self-
confident leader whose personality and actions influence people to behave in certain ways.
Several authors have attempted to identify personal characteristics of the charismatic 
leader.32 The most comprehensive analysis identified five such characteristics: they have a vision, 
the ability to articulate that vision, willingness to take risks to achieve that vision, sensitivity to 
both environmental constraints and follower needs, and behaviors that are out of the ordinary.33
It’s good to be charismatic!
An increasing body of evidence shows impressive correlations between charismatic lead-
ership and high performance and satisfaction among followers.34 Although one study found 
that charismatic CEOs had no impact on subsequent organizational performance, charisma is 
still believed to be a desirable leadership quality.35
If charisma is desirable, can people learn to be charismatic leaders? Or are charismatic lead-
ers born with their qualities? Although a small number of experts still think that charisma can’t 
be learned, most believe that individuals can be trained to exhibit charismatic behaviors.36 For 
example, researchers have succeeded in teaching undergraduate students to “be” charismatic. 
How? They were taught to articulate a far-reaching goal, communicate high performance expec-
tations, exhibit confidence in the ability of subordinates to meet those expectations, and empa-
thize with the needs of their subordinates; they learned to project a powerful, confident, and dy-
namic presence; and they practiced using a captivating and engaging voice tone. The researchers 
also trained the student leaders to use charismatic nonverbal behaviors including leaning toward 
the follower when communicating, maintaining direct eye contact, and having a relaxed posture 
and animated facial expressions. In groups with these “trained” charismatic leaders, members 
had higher task performance, higher task adjustment, and better adjustment to the leader and to 
the group than did group members who worked in groups led by noncharismatic leaders.
One last thing we should say about charismatic leadership is that it may not always be nec-
essary to achieve high levels of employee performance. It may be most appropriate when the fol-
lower’s task has an ideological purpose or when the environment involves a high degree of stress 
and uncertainty.37 This aspect may explain why, when charismatic leaders surface, it’s more 
likely to be in politics, religion, or wartime; or when a business firm is starting up or facing a sur-
vival crisis. For example, Martin Luther King Jr. used his charisma to bring about social equality 
through nonviolent means, and Steve Jobs achieved unwavering loyalty and commitment from 
Apple’s technical staff in the early 1980s by articulating a vision of personal computers that 
would dramatically change the way people lived.
Although the term vision is often linked with charis-
matic leadership, visionary leadership is different: It’s 
the ability to create and articulate a realistic, credible, 
and  attractive vision of the future that improves on the 
 present situation.38 This vision, if properly selected and 
implemented, is so energizing that it “in effect jump-
starts the future by calling forth the skills, talents, and 
 resources to make it happen.”39
An organization’s vision should offer clear and com-
pelling imagery that taps into people’s emotions and 
 inspires enthusiasm to pursue the organization’s goals. It 
should be able to generate possibilities that are inspirational 
and unique and offer new ways of doing things that are 
clearly better for the organization and its members. Visions 
that are clearly articulated and have powerful imagery are eas-
ily grasped and accepted. For instance, Michael Dell created a 
vision of a business that sells and delivers customized PCs directly 
to customers in less than a week. The late Mary Kay Ash’s vision of 
women as entrepreneurs selling products that improved their self-image 
gave impetus to her cosmetics company, Mary Kay Cosmetics.

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    397
wHat about Leaders and teams? Because leadership is increasingly taking place 
within a team context and more organizations are using work teams, the role of the leader in guid-
ing team members has become increasingly important. The role of team leader is different from 
the traditional leadership role, as J. D. Bryant, a supervisor at Texas Instruments’ Forest Lane 
plant in Dallas, discovered.40 One day he was contentedly overseeing a staff of 15 circuit board 
assemblers. The next day he was told that the company was going to use employee teams and he 
was to become a “facilitator.” He said, “I’m supposed to teach the teams everything I know and 
then let them make their own decisions.” Confused about his new role, he admitted, “There was 
no clear plan on what I was supposed to do.” What is involved in being a team leader?
The most “dangerous” leadership trait: 32 percent of team 
members say indecisiveness and  
over-cautiousness; 26 percent say selfishness.41
Many leaders are not equipped to handle the change to employee teams. As one consultant 
noted, “Even the most capable managers have trouble making the transition because all the 
command-and-control type things they were encouraged to do before are no longer appropri-
ate. There’s no reason to have any skill or sense of this.”42 This same consultant estimated that 
“probably 15 percent of managers are natural team leaders; another 15 percent could never lead 
a team because it runs counter to their personality—that is, they’re unable to sublimate their 
dominating style for the good of the team. Then there’s that huge group in the middle: Team 
leadership doesn’t come naturally to them, but they can learn it.”43
The challenge for many managers is learning how to become an effective team 
leader. They have to learn skills such as patiently sharing information, being able 
to trust others and to give up authority, and understanding when to intervene. And 
effective team leaders have mastered the difficult balancing act of knowing when to 
leave their teams alone and when to get involved. New team leaders may try to retain 
too much control at a time when team members need more autonomy, or they may 
abandon their teams at times when the teams need support and help.44
One study looking at organizations that had reorganized themselves around 
employee teams found certain common responsibilities of all leaders. These 
responsibilities included coaching, facilitating, handling disciplinary problems, 
reviewing team and individual performance, training, and communication.45 
However, a more meaningful way to describe the team leader’s job is to focus on 
two priorities: (1) managing the team’s external boundary, and (2) facilitating the 
team process.46 These priorities entail four specific leadership roles, as shown in 
Exhibit 12–5.
What Issues Do Today’s Leaders Face?
It’s not easy being a chief information officer (CIO) today. A person responsible 
for managing a company’s information technology activities faces a lot of exter-
nal and internal pressures. Technology changes rapidly—almost daily, it some-
times seems. Business costs continue to rise. Competitors develop new strategies. 
Economic conditions continue to confound even the experts. Rob Carter, CIO of 
FedEx, is on the hot seat facing such challenges.47 He’s responsible for all the 
computer and communication systems that provide around-the-clock and around-
the-globe support for FedEx’s products and services. If anything goes wrong, you 
know who takes the heat. However, Carter has been an effective leader in this 
seemingly chaotic environment.
 Watch It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Power and Political Behavior.
A Question of Ethics
Have you ever watched the show Undercover 
Boss? It features a company’s “boss” working 
undercover in his or her own company to find 
out how the organization really works. Typically, 
the executive works undercover for a week, and 
then the employees the leader has worked with 
are summoned to company headquarters and 
either rewarded or punished for their actions. 
Bosses from organizations ranging from Waste 
Management and White Castle to NASCAR and 
Stella and Dot have participated.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the As-
signments section of mymanagementlab.com 
to complete these discussion questions.
 Talk About It 3: What do you think? Is 
it ethical for a leader to go undercover in his or 
her organization? Why or why not?
 Talk About It 4: What ethical issues 
could arise? How could managers deal with 
those issues?

398    Part 4  •  Leading
Leading effectively in today’s environment is likely to involve such challenges for many 
leaders. Twenty-first-century leaders face some important leadership issues. In this section, 
we look at these issues, including empowering employees, cross-cultural leadership, and 
emotional intelligence and leadership.
Say What? Lead by NOT Leading
wHy do Leaders need to empower empLoyees? As we’ve described in different 
places throughout the text, managers are increasingly leading by not leading; that is, by empow-
ering their employees. Empowerment involves increasing the decision-making discretion of 
workers. Millions of individual employees and employee teams are making the key operating 
decisions that directly affect their work. They’re developing budgets, scheduling workloads, con-
trolling inventories, solving quality problems, and engaging in similar activities that until very 
recently were viewed exclusively as part of the manager’s job.48 For instance, at The Container 
Store, any employee who gets a customer request has permission to take care of it. The com-
pany’s chairman emeritus Garret Boone says, “Everybody we hire, we hire as a leader. Anybody 
in our store can take an action that you might think of typically being a manager’s action.”49
One reason more companies are empowering employees is the need for quick decisions by 
those people who are most knowledgeable about the issues—often those at lower organizational 
levels. If organizations want to successfully compete in a dynamic global economy, employees 
have to be able to make decisions and implement changes quickly. Another reason is that organi-
zational downsizings left many managers with larger spans of control. In order to cope with the 
increased work demands, managers had to empower their people. Although empowerment is not 
a universal answer, it can be beneficial when 
employees have the knowledge, skills, and 
experience to do their jobs competently.
Technology also has contributed to 
the increases in employee empowerment. 
Managers face unique challenges in leading 
empowered employees who aren’t physically 
present in the workplace as the Technology 
and the Manager’s Job box discusses.
does natIonaL cuLture aFFect 
LeadersHIp? One general conclusion 
that surfaces from leadership research is 
that effective leaders do not use a single 
style. They adjust their style to the situa-
tion. Although not mentioned explicitly, 
national culture is certainly an important 
situational variable in determining which 
leadership style will be most effective. 
What works in China isn’t likely to be 
In China, the cultural value of collectivism 
affects the relationship between leaders 
and followers such as Yuki Tan, president of 
fashion retailer Folli Follie China, and store 
employees. During store visits, Tan displays 
her effective paternalistic leadership style of 
caring for her loyal, dependable, and hard-
working employees.
Ton Koene/ZUMApress/Newscom
empowerment
The act of increasing the decision-making discretion 
of workers
Eﬀective
Team Leadership
Roles
Coaches
Liaisons with
external constituents
Conﬂict managers
Troubleshooters
Exhibit 12–5 Team Leader Roles

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    399
 effective in France or Canada. For  instance, one study of Asian leadership styles revealed that 
Asian managers preferred leaders who were competent decision makers, effective commu-
nicators, and supportive of employees.50 Another study of leadership in Sub-Saharan Africa 
found that charismatic leaders can help overcome cultural problems of corruption, poverty, 
tribalism, and violence.51
National culture affects leadership style because it influences how followers will respond. 
Leaders can’t (and shouldn’t) just choose their styles randomly. They’re constrained by the 
cultural conditions their followers have come to expect. Exhibit 12–6 provides some findings 
from selected examples of cross-cultural leadership studies. Because most leadership theories 
were developed in the United States, they have an American bias. They emphasize follower 
responsibilities rather than rights; assume self-gratification rather than commitment to duty or 
altruistic motivation; assume centrality of work and democratic value orientation; and stress 
rationality rather than spirituality, religion, or superstition.52 However, the GLOBE research 
program, which we first introduced in Chapter 2, is the most extensive and comprehensive 
cross-cultural study of leadership ever undertaken. The GLOBE study has found that there are 
some universal aspects to leadership. Specifically, a number of elements of transformational 
leadership appear to be associated with effective leadership regardless of what country the 
leader is in.53 These elements include vision, foresight, providing encouragement, trustworthi-
ness, dynamism, positiveness, and proactiveness. The results led two members of the GLOBE 
team to conclude that “effective business leaders in any country are expected by their subordi-
nates to provide a powerful and proactive vision to guide the company into the future, strong 
motivational skills to stimulate all employees to fulfill the vision, and excellent planning skills 
to assist in implementing the vision.”54 Some people suggest that the universal appeal of these 
transformational leader characteristics is due to the pressures toward common technologies 
and management practices, as a result of global competitiveness and multinational influences.
Becoming a STAR ✯ leader
How does emotIonaL InteLLIgence aFFect LeadersHIp? We introduced emo-
tional intelligence (EI) in our discussion of emotions in Chapter 9. We revisit the topic here 
because of recent studies indicating that EI—more than IQ, expertise, or any other single 
factor—is the best predictor of who will emerge as a leader.55
Exhibit 12–6 Cross-Cultural Leadership
• Korean leaders are expected to be paternalistic toward employees.
• Arab leaders who show kindness or generosity without being asked to do so are seen 
by other Arabs as weak.
• Japanese leaders are expected to be humble and speak frequently.
• Scandinavian and Dutch leaders who single out individuals with public praise are likely 
to embarrass, not energize, those individuals.
• Effective leaders in Malaysia are expected to show compassion while using more of 
an autocratic than a participative style.
• Effective German leaders are characterized by high performance orientation, low 
 compassion, low self-protection, low team orientation, high autonomy, and high 
participation.
Sources: Based on J.-H. Shin, R. L. Heath, and J. Lee, “A Contingency Explanation of Public 
Relations Practitioner Leadership Styles: Situation and Culture,” Journal of Public Relations 
Research (April 2011): 167–90; J. C. Kennedy, “Leadership in Malaysia: Traditional Values, 
International Outlook,” Academy of Management Executive, August 2002, 15–17; F. C. 
Brodbeck, M. Frese, and M. Javidan, “Leadership Made in Germany: Low on Compassion, 
High on Performance,” Academy of Management Executive, February 2002, 16–29; M. F. 
Peterson and J. G. Hunt, “International Perspectives on International Leadership,” Leadership 
Quarterly, Fall 1997, 203–31; R. J. House and R. N. Aditya, “The Social Scientific Study of 
Leadership: Quo Vadis?” Journal of Management 23, no. 3 (1997): 463; and R. J. House, 
“Leadership in the Twenty-First Century,” in A. Howard (ed.), The Changing Nature of Work 
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995), 442.

400    Part 4  •  Leading
As we said in our earlier discussion of trait research, leaders need basic intelligence 
and job-relevant knowledge. But IQ and technical skills are “threshold capabilities.” They’re 
 necessary but not sufficient requirements for leadership. It’s the possession of the five compo-
nents of emotional intelligence—self-awareness, self-management, self-motivation, empathy, 
and social skills—that allows an individual to become a star performer. Without EI, a person 
can have outstanding training, a highly analytical mind, a long-term vision, and an endless 
supply of terrific ideas but still not make a great leader, especially as individuals move up in 
an organization. The evidence indicates that the higher the rank of a person considered to be a 
star performer, the more that EI capabilities surface as the reason for his or her effectiveness. 
Specifically, when star performers were compared with average ones in senior management 
positions, nearly 90 percent of the difference in their effectiveness was attributable to EI fac-
tors rather than basic intelligence.
Rudolph Giuliani’s EI evolution
Example of EI and Leadership: The maturing of Rudolph Giuliani’s leadership effectiveness 
closely followed the development of his emotional intelligence. For the better part of the 
eight years that he was mayor of New York, Giuliani ruled with an iron fist. He talked tough, 
picked fights, and demanded results. The result was a city that was cleaner, safer, and  better 
governed—but also more polarized. Critics called Giuliani a tin-eared tyrant. In the eyes of 
many, something important was missing from his leadership. That something, his critics 
 acknowledged, emerged as the World Trade Center collapsed. It was a newfound compassion to 
complement his command: a mix of resolve, empathy, and inspiration that brought comfort to 
millions.57 It’s likely that Giuliani’s emotional capacities and compassion for others were stimu-
lated by a series of personal hardships, including prostate cancer and the highly visible breakup 
of his marriage, both of which had taken place less than a year before the terrorist attacks on the 
World Trade Center.58
How do you lead people who are physically separated from you 
and with whom your interactions are primarily written digital com-
munications?56 That’s the challenge of being a virtual leader. And 
unfortunately, leadership research has been directed mostly at face-
to-face and verbal situations. But we can’t ignore the reality that 
today’s managers and their employees are increasingly being linked 
by technology rather than by geographic proximity. So what guid-
ance would be helpful to leaders who must inspire and motivate 
dispersed employees?
It’s easy to soften harsh words in face-to-face communication 
with nonverbal action. A smile or a comforting gesture can go a long 
way in lessening the blow behind strong words like disappointed, 
unsatisfactory, inadequate, or below expectations. That nonverbal 
component doesn’t exist in online interactions. The structure of 
words in a digital communication also has the power to motivate 
or demotivate the receiver. A manager who inadvertently sends a 
message in short phrases or in ALL CAPS may get a very different 
response than if the message had been sent in full sentences using 
appropriate punctuation.
To be an effective virtual leader, managers must recognize that 
they have choices in the words and structure of their digital commu-
nications. They also need to develop the skill of “reading between 
the lines” in the messages they receive. It’s important to try and 
decipher the emotional content of a message as well as the written 
content. Also, virtual leaders need to think carefully about what 
actions they want their digital messages to initiate. Be clear about 
what’s expected and follow up on messages.
For an increasing number of managers, good interpersonal 
skills may include the abilities to communicate support and leader-
ship through digital communication and to read emotions in others’ 
messages. In this “new world” of communication, writing skills are 
likely to become an extension of interpersonal skills.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
  taLK aBOUt It 5: What challenges does a “virtual” leader face?
  taLK aBOUt It 6: How can virtual leaders use technology to 
help them be more effective leaders?
VIRTUAL LeADeRSHIP
::::::: Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    401
EI has been shown to be positively related to job performance at all levels. But it  appears 
to be especially relevant in jobs that demand a high degree of social interaction. And of 
course, that’s what leadership is all about. Great leaders demonstrate their EI by exhibiting all 
five of its key components: self-awareness, self-management, self-motivation, empathy, and 
social skills (see pp. 296–297).
Although there has been some controversy about the role of EI in leadership,59 most 
research makes a case for concluding that EI is an essential element in leadership effective-
ness.60 As such, it could be added to the list of traits associated with leadership that we 
 described earlier in the chapter.
Why Is Trust the Essence of Leadership?
Trust, or lack of trust, is an increasingly important issue 
in today’s organizations.61 In today’s uncertain environ-
ment, leaders need to build, or even rebuild, trust and 
credibility. Before we can discuss ways leaders can do 
that, we have to know what trust and credibility are and 
why they’re so important.
The main component of credibility is honesty. Surveys show that honesty is consis-
tently singled out as the number one characteristic of admired leaders. “Honesty is abso-
lutely essential to leadership. If people are going to follow someone willingly, whether it 
be into battle or into the boardroom, they first want to assure themselves that the person 
is worthy of their trust.”62 In addition to being honest, credible leaders are competent and 
inspiring. They are personally able to effectively communicate their confidence and enthu-
siasm. Thus, followers judge a leader’s credibility in terms of his or her honesty, compe-
tence, and ability to inspire.
Trust is closely entwined with the concept of credibility, and, in fact, the terms are of-
ten used interchangeably. Trust is defined as the belief in the integrity, character, and ability 
of a leader. Followers who trust a leader are willing to be vulnerable to the leader’s actions 
because they are confident that their rights and interests will not be abused.63 Research has 
identified five dimensions that make up the concept of trust:
• Integrity: honesty and truthfulness
• Competence: technical and interpersonal 
knowledge and skills
• Consistency: reliability, predictability, and 
good judgment in handling situations
• Loyalty: willingness to protect a person, 
physically and emotionally
• Openness: willingness to share ideas and in-
formation freely64
Of these five dimensions, integrity seems to 
be the most critical when someone assesses 
another’s trustworthiness.65 Both integrity and 
competence were seen in our earlier discus-
sion of leadership traits found to be consis-
tently associated with leadership.
Workplace changes have reinforced why 
such leadership qualities are important. For 
instance, trends of employee empowerment 
and self-managed work teams have reduced 
many of the traditional control mechanisms 
used to monitor employees. If a work team 
is free to schedule its own work, evaluate its 
12-5  Discuss trust as 
the essence of 
leadership.
credibility
The degree to which followers perceive someone as 
honest, competent, and able to inspire
trust
The belief in the integrity, character, and ability of 
a leader
PepsiCo CEO Indra Nooyi is a leader with high 
emotional intelligence. Shown here listening 
to an employee at the firm’s yogurt plant, 
Nooyi possesses the five EI components that 
have contributed to her excellent performance 
in jobs that demand a high degree of social 
interaction with workers, customers, and busi-
ness leaders throughout the world.
Donald Heupel/Corbis

402    Part 4  •  Leading
own performance, and even make its own hiring decisions, trust becomes critical. Employees 
have to trust managers to treat them fairly, and managers have to trust employees to consci-
entiously fulfill their responsibilities.
Also, leaders have to increasingly lead others who may not be in their immediate work 
group or even may be physically separated—members of cross-functional or virtual teams, 
individuals who work for suppliers or customers, and perhaps even people who represent 
other organizations through strategic alliances. These situations don’t allow leaders the 
luxury of falling back on their formal positions for influence. Many of these relationships, 
in fact, are fluid and fleeting. So the ability to quickly develop trust and sustain that trust is 
crucial to the success of the relationship.
Why is it important that followers trust their leaders?
Research has shown that trust in leadership is significantly related to positive job out-
comes including job performance, organizational citizenship behavior, job satisfaction, and 
organizational commitment.66 Given the importance of trust to effective leadership, leaders 
need to build trust with their followers. Some suggestions are shown in Exhibit 12–7.
Exhibit 12–7 Suggestions for Building Trust
1. practice openness. Mistrust comes as much from what people don’t know as 
from what they do know. Openness leads to confidence and trust. So keep people 
informed; make clear the criteria on how decisions are made; explain the rationale for 
your decisions; be candid about problems; and fully disclose relevant information.
2. be fair. Before making decisions or taking actions, consider how others will perceive 
them in terms of objectivity and fairness. Give credit where credit is due; be objective 
and impartial in performance appraisals; and pay attention to equity perceptions in 
reward distributions.
3. speak your feelings. Leaders who convey only hard facts come across as cold and 
distant. When you share your feelings, others will see you as real and human. They 
will know who you are and their respect for you will increase.
4. tell the truth. If honesty is critical to credibility, you must be perceived as someone 
who tells the truth. Followers are more tolerant of being told something they “don’t 
want to hear” than of finding out that their leader lied to them.
5. be consistent. People want predictability. Mistrust comes from not knowing what to 
expect. Take the time to think about your values and beliefs. Then let them consis-
tently guide your decisions. When you know your central purpose, your actions will 
follow accordingly, and you will project a consistency that earns trust.
6. Fulfill your promises. Trust requires that people believe that you’re dependable. So 
you need to keep your word. Promises made must be promises kept.
7. maintain confidences. You trust those whom you believe to be discreet and whom 
you can rely on. If people make themselves vulnerable by telling you something in 
confidence, they need to feel assured that you won’t discuss it with others or betray 
that confidence. If people perceive you as someone who leaks personal confidences 
or someone who can’t be depended on, you won’t be perceived as trustworthy.
8. demonstrate confidence. Develop the admiration and respect of others by demon-
strating technical and professional ability. Pay particular attention to developing and 
displaying your communication, negotiating, and other interpersonal skills.
Sources: Based on P. S. Shockley-Zalabak and S. P Morreale, “Building High-Trust 
Organizations,” Leader to Leader, Spring 2011, 39–45; J. K. Butler Jr., “Toward Understanding 
and Measuring Conditions of Trust: Evolution of a Condition of Trust Inventory,” Journal 
of Management (September 1991): 643–63; and F. Bartolome, “Nobody Trusts the Boss 
Completely—Now What?” Harvard Business Review, March–April 1989, 135–42.

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    403
Now, more than ever, managerial and leadership effectiveness depends on the ability to 
gain the trust of followers.67 Downsizing, corporate financial misrepresentations, and the 
increased use of temporary employees have undermined employees’ trust in their leaders 
and shaken the confidence of investors, suppliers, and customers. A survey found that only 
39 percent of U.S. employees and 51 percent of Canadian employees trusted their executive 
leaders.68 Today’s leaders are faced with the challenge of rebuilding and restoring trust with 
employees and with other important organizational stakeholders.
A Final Thought Regarding Leadership
Despite the belief that some leadership style will always be effective regardless of the situ-
ation, leadership may not always be important! Research indicates that, in some situations, 
any behaviors a leader exhibits are irrelevant. In other words, certain individual, job, and 
organizational variables can act as “substitutes for leadership,” negating the influence of the 
leader.69
For instance, follower characteristics such as experience, training, professional orienta-
tion, or need for independence can neutralize the effect of leadership. These characteristics 
can replace the employee’s need for a leader’s support or ability to create structure and reduce 
task ambiguity. Similarly, jobs that are inherently unambiguous and routine or that are intrin-
sically satisfying may place fewer demands on the leadership variable. Finally, such organi-
zational characteristics as explicit formalized goals, rigid rules and procedures, or cohesive 
work groups can substitute for formal leadership.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.

12 Review 
CHAPTER SUMMARy
  12-1 Define leader and leadership.
A leader is someone who can influence others and who has 
managerial authority. Leadership is a process of leading a 
group and influencing that group to achieve its goals. Managers 
should be leaders because leading is one of the four manage-
ment functions.
  12-2 Compare and contrast early leadership  
theories.
Early attempts to define leader traits were unsuccessful, although 
later attempts found seven traits associated with leadership.
The University of Iowa studies explored three leadership 
styles. The only conclusion was that group members were 
more satisfied under a democratic leader than under an auto-
cratic one. The Ohio State studies identified two dimensions 
of leader behavior—initiating structure and consideration. 
A leader high in both those dimensions at times achieved 
high group task performance and high group member satis-
faction, but not always. The University of Michigan studies 
looked at employee-oriented leaders and production-oriented 
leaders. They concluded that leaders who were employee 
oriented could get high group productivity and high group 
member satisfaction. The Managerial Grid looked at leaders’ 
concern for production and concern for people and identified 
five leader styles. Although it suggested that a leader who 
was high in concern for production and high in concern for 
people was the best, there was no substantive evidence for 
that conclusion.
As the behavioral studies showed, a leader’s behavior has 
a dual nature: a focus on the task and a focus on the people.
  12-3 Describe the four major contingency  
leadership theories.
Fiedler’s model attempted to define the best style to use in 
particular situations. He measured leader style—relationship 
oriented or task oriented—using the least-preferred cowork-
er questionnaire. Fiedler also assumed a leader’s style was 
fixed. He measured three contingency dimensions: leader-
member relations, task structure, and position power. The 
model  suggests that task-oriented leaders performed best in 
very favorable and very unfavorable situations, and relation-
ship-oriented leaders performed best in moderately favorable 
situations.
Hersey and Blanchard’s situational leadership theory 
focused on followers’ readiness. They identified four leader-
ship styles: telling (high task–low relationship), selling (high 
task–high relationship), participating (low task–high relation-
ship), and delegating (low task–low relationship). They also 
identified four stages of readiness: unable and unwilling (use 
telling style); unable but willing (use selling style); able but 
unwilling (use participative style); and able and willing (use 
delegating style).
The leader-participation model relates leadership behav-
ior and participation to decision making. It uses a decision tree 
format with seven contingencies and five alternative leader-
ship styles.
The path-goal model developed by Robert House identi-
fied four leadership behaviors: directive, supportive, participa-
tive, and achievement-oriented. He assumes that a leader can 
and should be able to use any of these styles. The two situ-
ational contingency variables were found in the environment 
and in the follower. Essentially the path-goal model says that a 
leader should provide direction and support as needed; that is, 
structure the path so the followers can achieve goals.
  12-4 Describe modern views of leadership  
and the issues facing today’s leaders.
Leader-member exchange (LMX) theory says that leaders cre-
ate in-groups and out-groups and those in the in-group will have 
higher performance ratings, less turnover, and greater job sat-
isfaction.
A transactional leader exchanges rewards for productivity 
where a transformational leader stimulates and inspires follow-
ers to achieve goals.
A charismatic leader is an enthusiastic and self-confident 
leader whose personality and actions influence people to be-
have in certain ways. People can learn to be charismatic. A 
visionary leader is able to create and articulate a realistic, cred-
ible, and attractive vision of the future.
A team leader has two priorities: manage the team’s ex-
ternal boundary and facilitate the team process. Four leader 
roles are involved: liaison with external constituencies, trouble-
shooter, conflict manager, and coach.
The issues facing leaders today include employee empow-
erment, national culture, and emotional intelligence. As em-
ployees are empowered, the leader’s role tends to be one of not 
leading. As leaders adjust their style to the situation, one of the 
most important situational characteristics is national culture. 
Finally, EI is proving to be an essential element in leadership 
effectiveness.
404

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    405
12-5 Discuss trust as the essence of leadership.
The five dimensions of trust include integrity, competence, 
consistency, loyalty, and truthfulness. Integrity refers to one’s 
honesty and truthfulness. Competence involves an individual’s 
technical and interpersonal knowledge and skills. Consistency 
relates to an individual’s reliability, predictability, and good 
judgment in handling situations. Loyalty is an individual’s 
willingness to protect and save face for another person. Open-
ness means that you can rely on the individual to give you the 
whole truth.
DISCUSSION QUEStIONS
 12-1 Define leader and leadership and discuss why 
 managers should be leaders.
 12-2 What behaviors do leaders exhibit that non-leaders  
do not?
 12-3 “Leaders are born, not made.” Do you agree with this 
statement? Why or why not?
 12-4 “A leader’s effectiveness depends on their follower’s 
ability.” Which theory states this and why?
 12-5 Do you think that most managers in real life use a 
contingency approach to increase their leadership 
 effectiveness? Discuss.
 12-6 Does management style affect the way leaders lead? 
Consider McGregor’s Theory X-Y and explain whether 
or not the leadership styles between a Theory X man-
ager and a Theory Y manager would differ.
 12-7 Do you think trust evolves out of an individual’s person-
al characteristics or out of specific situations? Explain.
 12-8 Do you think trustworthy leaders be more effective in 
getting results from followers? Explain.
 12-9 How can organizations develop effective leaders?
12-10 When might leaders be irrelevant?
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
12-11 What is the difference between trait theories and 
behavioral theories of leadership?
12-12 Why is trust the essence of leadership?
12-13 Differentiate between transactional and transforma-
tional leaders and between charismatic and visionary 
leaders.
Management Skill Builder  |   BEING a GOOD LEaDER
The terms management and leadership are frequently used interchangeably. That’s a misnomer. The two 
aren’t the same but they are related. Although you don’t need to hold a management position to be a leader, 
you’re unlikely to be an effective manager if you can’t be an effective leader.
 PeRSonAL InVenToRy ASSeSSMenT 
Leadership Style Indicator
What’s your leadership style? Take this PIA and find out!
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT

406    Part 4  •  Leading
Skill Basics
Simply put, leadership style can be categorized as task- or peo-
ple-oriented. Neither one is right for all situations. Although 
a number of situational variables influence the choice of an 
effective leadership style, four variables seem most relevant:70
• 
Task structure. Structured tasks have procedures and rules 
that minimize ambiguity. The more structured a job is, the 
less need there is for a leader to provide task structure.
• 
Level of stress. Situations differ in terms of time and per-
formance stress. High-stress situations favor leaders with 
experience. Low stress favors a leader’s intelligence.
• 
Level of group support. Members of close-knit and sup-
portive groups help each other out. They can provide both 
task support and relationship support. Supportive groups 
make fewer demands on a leader.
• 
Follower characteristics. Personal characteristics of fol-
lowers—such as experience, ability, and motivation—in-
fluence which leadership style will be most effective. 
Employees with extensive experience, strong abilities, and 
high motivation don’t require much task behavior. They 
will be more effective with a people-oriented style. Con-
versely, employees with little experience, marginal abili-
ties, and low motivation will perform better when leaders 
exhibit task-oriented behavior.
Practicing the Skill
Read through this scenario and follow the directions at the end 
of it:
You recently graduated from college with your degree in busi-
ness administration. You’ve spent the past two summers work-
ing at Connecticut Mutual Insurance (CMI), filling in as an 
intern on a number of different jobs while employees took their 
vacations. You have received and accepted an offer to join CMI 
full time as supervisor of the policy renewal department.
CMI is a large insurance company. In the headquarters of-
fice alone, where you’ll be working, there are more than 1,500 
employees. The company believes strongly in the personal 
development of its employees. This belief translates into a phi-
losophy, emanating from the top executive offices, of trust and 
respect for all CMI employees. The company is also regularly 
atop most lists of “best companies to work for,” largely due to 
its progressive work/life programs and strong commitment to 
minimizing layoffs.
In your new job, you’ll direct the activities of 18 
policy-renewal clerks. Their jobs require little training and 
are highly routine. A clerk’s responsibility is to ensure that 
renewal notices are sent on current policies, to tabulate 
any changes in premiums, to advise the sales division if a 
policy is to be canceled as a result of nonresponse to renewal 
 notices, and to answer questions and solve problems related 
to renewals.
The people in your work group range in age from 19 to 62, 
with a median age of 25. For the most part they are high school 
graduates with little prior working experience. They earn 
between $2,350 and $3,200 a month. You will be replacing a 
long-time CMI employee, Jan Allison. Jan is retiring after 37 
years with CMI, the past 14 spent as a policy-renewal supervi-
sor. Because you spent a few weeks in Jan’s group last summer, 
you’re familiar with Jan’s style and are acquainted with most of 
the department members. But people don’t know you very well 
and are suspicious of the fact that you’re fresh out of college 
and have little experience in the department. The reality is that 
you got this job because management wanted someone with 
a college degree to oversee the department. Your most vocal 
critic is Lillian Lantz. Lillian is well into her 50s, has been a 
policy renewal clerk for over a dozen years, and—as the “grand 
old lady” of the department—carries a lot of weight with group 
members. You know that it’ll be very hard to lead this depart-
ment without Lillian’s support.
Using your knowledge of leadership concepts, which lead-
ership style would you choose? And why?
Preferred Bank Card, Inc.
To: Pat Muenks, VP Employee Relations
From: Jan Plemmons, Customer Service Director
About: Leadership Training
I agree completely with your recommendation that we need 
a leadership training program for our customer service team 
leaders. These leaders struggle with keeping our customer ser-
vice reps focused on our goal of providing timely, accurate, 
and friendly service to our bank card holders who call in with 
questions or complaints.
Put together a one-page proposal that describes the 
leadership topics you think should be covered. Also, give me 
some suggestions for how we might present the information 
in a way that would be interesting. We need to get started 
on this immediately, so please get this report to me by early 
next week.
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    407
CaSE aPPLICatION #1
H
ow important are excellent leaders to organizations? 
Well, the answer,in theory of course, would be very 
important. However, the answer as practiced by count-
less organizations might indicate otherwise. Only 38 percent of 
organizations have a formal 
frontline leadership develop-
ment program in place.71 It’s 
important for organizations 
to commit to strong leader-
ship development, and it’s 
particularly important for organizations to begin grooming 
their Gen Y employees to move into critical leadership posi-
tions. Why? Within 10 years (by 2025), these Millennials are 
set to comprise 75 percent of the global workforce. That’s why 
organizational leadership development programs are absolutely 
essential.72 Let’s look at what some companies are doing to 
prepare the next generation for leadership.
3M’s leadership development program is so effective that 
it has been one of the “Top 20 Companies for Leadership” in 
six of the last seven years and ranks as one of the top 25 com-
panies for grooming leadership talent according to consultant 
Hay Group.73 What is 3M’s leadership program all about? 
A few years ago, the company’s former CEO and his top 
team spent 18 months developing a leadership model for the 
company. After numerous brainstorming sessions and much 
heated debate, the group finally agreed on six “leadership 
attributes” that they believed were essential for managers to 
have in order for the company to become skilled at executing 
strategy and being accountable. Those six attributes included 
the ability to: develop a plan and implement that plan; moti-
vate and rouse others; be ethical and trustworthy and abide 
by the rules; achieve outcomes; strive for excellence; and be 
a capable and creative innovator. The company has continued 
to reinforce its pursuit of leadership excellence with these six 
attributes.
Other companies, such as Ernst & Young, start early in 
recruiting and investing in future leaders, often going after 
talented college freshmen who have leadership potential. They 
take the best talent and involve them in various leadership 
development programs both while in school and after gradua-
tion.74 Deloitte, another company rated high for its leadership 
development programs, is deeply committed to helping its 
Millennial employees learn and absorb the leadership skills 
they will need to lead the company in the future.75 It starts 
with a very specific recruiting strategy for hiring Millennials 
and continues with a yearlong “Welcome to Deloitte” pro-
gram. This program is all about teaching this age group 
client- management skills and 
team-building skills, and offer-
ing professional development 
opportunities. And, not surpris-
ingly, it’s done largely through 
social media using interactive 
experiences such as role-plays, simulations, games, and a tool 
to help these employees track their first-year tasks.
At Facebook, the first Millennial-run organization to 
 become a Fortune 500 company, leadership development is 
designed around the needs of a fast-moving, fast-growing com-
pany.76 The head of leadership development at Facebook says 
that the only way leadership development works there is by 
making it consistent with the types of engineering tech types 
that comprise the company. Engineers are concerned only with 
“what works.” And it’s the same for any type of leadership 
development to be successful here; the focus has to be on what 
works. Also, since Facebook is an extremely flat organization 
with few levels of management, employees find out early on 
that in order to get anything done, they’re going to have to 
be able to influence and inspire people. That’s why leaders at 
Facebook don’t have to be convinced of the need for people 
skills. They won’t survive long without them.
Discussion Questions
12-14 Why do you think that there’s a huge gap in theory (what we 
know we should do) and practice (what we’re actually doing) 
of leadership development?
12-15 What are some reasons that companies might not be address-
ing Gen y leadership development programs?
12-16 Take each of the six leadership attributes that 3M feels is im-
portant. Explain what you think each one involves. Then dis-
cuss how those attributes might be developed and measured.
12-17 Would any of those six leadership attributes be appropriate for 
any of the other companies mentioned? Explain.
12-18 Three different types of organizations are described here: 
3M is primarily a manufacturing organization. Ernst & young 
and Deloitte are professional services organizations. Face-
book is a tech company. Compare and contrast their differing 
 approaches to Gen y leadership development.
Developing Gen Y Leaders
Excellent leaders have to be 
developed and cultivated.

408    Part 4  •  Leading
CaSE aPPLICatION
Serving Up Leaders
T
he success achieved by Manchester United Football 
Club a professional football club based in Old Trafford, 
England, between 1986 and 2013, is evident by their 38 
domestic and non-domestic trophies. 
With the trophies came 
scrutiny, the UK and world 
media were fascinated by 
the leadership at Manchester 
United. There were tales of 
the manager shouting at players in the dressing room with 
such ferocity that it was referred to as the ‘hairdryer treat-
ment’. One journalist recounts, from personal experience, 
how this treatment was not reserved just for the players! His 
high expectations were not restricted to the football pitch. 
When the Captain openly criticized his teammates in an in-
terview, his contract was terminated. While these make good 
headlines, they do not comprise the whole story. 
Is it really possible to lead an organization so effectively 
for over a quarter of a century just by having the loudest voice 
and a fearsome reputation? How did Alex Ferguson, the man-
ager of Manchester United F. C. for those 26 years, lead his 
team so effectively?
When Ferguson joined Manchester United in 1986 he 
had very definite ideas of how he was going to build his club. 
Planning for long term success, he set about changing the very 
culture of the club—no small task. He tackled a damaging 
drink culture head on and encouraged a strong work ethic, be-
ing the first into the office and last to leave.  To increase the 
players’ feeling of commitment and belonging he insisted that 
when representing the club they should dress as Manchester 
United, wearing blazers displaying the club badge. These 
things all contributed to his vision.
The club’s former chief executive David Gill compared 
Alex Ferguson to Steve Jobs. And there are some obvi-
ous similarities. Both men were driven, determined, often 
terrifying, and ultimately extremely successful leaders in 
highly competitive arenas. While Jobs had an unapologeti-
cally blunt and aggressive approach, Ferguson would vary 
his managing style—shouting at some players and taking a 
different approach with oth-
ers. This could appear to be 
an arbitrary and inconsistent 
approach but was actually a 
conscious choice made by a 
manager who really knew his players and understood how to 
get the best out of each one. When it was necessary to instill 
discipline in players, to ensure a positive working relation-
ship, Ferguson would deal with the issue immediately and 
move on.
Ferguson knew the importance of detail.  As a manager, 
knowing the names of your team is obviously essential, but 
he understood that the organization was bigger than the team, 
learning the names of all the support staff and taking time to 
talk to them.  One interviewer commented that by the end of a 
filming session Ferguson had learned the name of the film crew 
and was happy to converse with them whilst sharing a bottle of 
champagne.
In 2014, Ferguson took up a teaching post in executive 
education with the Harvard Business School, and his book 
‘Leading’ was published in 2015.77
Discussion Questions
12-19 What leadership theories do you feel Ferguson’s actions sup-
port?
12-20 What leadership traits can you see being demonstrated in the 
case?
12-21 To what degree has emotional intelligence played a part in 
Alex Ferguson’s success?
12-22 What do you see as the possible problems of varying the lead-
ership approach with different players? 
#2
The LEADERSHIP game

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    409
CaSE aPPLICatION
Leading Without Intervention
S
hih Wing-Ching is a self-made billionaire in Hong 
Kong’s booming capitalist arena, where so many people 
have lifted themselves out of poverty.
Shih started the Centaline Property Agency with a friend 
in 1978 and built it into the one of the largest real estate 
brokers in Hong Kong and China. 
To date, Centaline has over 30,000 
employees working in 30 cities on 
the Mainland.
Shih adopts a freewheeling ap-
proach to business and parenting. 
He follows Chinese sage Laozi’s 
philosophy of managing without intervention, allowing his 
employees to develop and work on their own ideas. Centaline 
is an innovative company, and they were a pioneer to offer 
consumers property information via the internet and electronic 
maps. The company allows its brokers to specialize in specific 
segments. This is similar to Google, 3M and other innovative 
companies in the west in that it allows the staff to work on their 
own projects. In the end, staff members are very motivated 
and work happily with increased levels of creativity and a high 
sense of responsibility. Shih practices what he preaches. He 
manages his businesses and his family this way, which allows 
them to grow naturally under a self-organized mode.78 Shih’s 
model innovates by rewarding employees at his two compa-
nies, right down to the lowest organizational level.
“My management style at Centaline is like that of ancient 
emperors in China, who divided the empire into duchies and let 
the dukes rule the roost,” he says. “I call it a jungle-style devel-
opment model, where each tree is independent. This contrasts 
with the big tree-style development model. The trunk support-
ing the tree will buckle as the tree gets bigger and heavier.”79
Shih didn’t go to university. He began teaching at a night 
school run by leftists which was common at that time as day 
time secondary school education for grassroots were not 
widespread in those days. He did not just focus on textbook 
theories but also shared his critical thinking and creative 
thoughts.
Shih told his children that people should rely on no one but 
themselves. He said, “Glory comes 
only from self-accomplishment. 
Reliance on family deprives one of 
the opportunities of hard-work and 
self-discovery, leading to an unful-
filled life.”80
Shih’s case is also a good ex-
ample of how a good leader should be able to make appropri-
ate use of internal and external resources available to achieve 
the final goals. 
His liberal approach in parenting is in conflict with the 
discipline espoused by his wife, a teacher. “I contradict her all 
the time regarding our children's upbringing. She thinks that 
children need to study before exams. I think that it’s OK, or 
even better, to study after exams. Those who study after exams 
will be smarter.”81
Shih demonstrates that leadership is not about one time 
success. Strong and good leadership is a process of continuous 
review, control and fine tuning.
Discussion Questions
12-23 After reading this case, how would you best describe Shih’s 
leadership style?
12-24 What should be done by top level managers in order to carry 
out management without interference?
12-25 Do you think Shih’s management or leadership style can be 
applied to other industries? Explain using examples.
12-26 Shih stated that glory only comes from self-accomplishment. 
Explain whether you agree or disagree with Shih.
#3
Practicing LEADERSHIP  
WISDOM from ancient 
China

410    Part 4  •  Leading
endnotes
 1. Most leadership research has 
 focused on the actions and respon-
sibilities of managers and extrapo-
lated the results to leaders and 
leadership in general.
 2. From the Past to the Present 
box based on D. S. Derue, J. D. 
 Nahrgang, N. Wellman, and S. E. 
Humphrey, “Trait and Behavioral 
Theories of Leadership: An Inte-
gration and Meta-Analytic Test of 
Their Relative Validity,” Personnel 
Psychology, Spring 2011, 7–52; and 
D. A. Wren and A. G. Bedeian, The 
Evolution of Management Thought, 
6th ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley 
& Sons, 2009), 345–46.
 3. See D. S. Derue, J. D. Nahrgang, 
N. Wellman, and S. E. Humphrey, 
“Trait and Behavioral Theories 
of Leadership: An Integration 
and Meta-Analytic Test of Their 
Relative 
Validity,” 
Personnel 
Psychology, Spring 2011, 7–52; 
T. A. Judge, J. E. Bono, R. Ilies, 
and M. W. Gerhardt, “Personal-
ity and Leadership: A Qualitative 
and Quantitative Review,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (August 
2002): 765–80; and S. A. Kirk-
patrick and E. A. Locke, “Leader-
ship: Do Traits Matter?” Academy 
of Management Executive, May 
1991, 48–60.
 4. K. Lewin and R. Lippitt, “An Ex-
perimental Approach to the Study 
of Autocracy and Democracy: A 
Preliminary Note,” Sociometry 1 
(1938): 292–300; K. Lewin, “Field 
Theory and Experiment in Social 
Psychology: Concepts and Meth-
ods,” American Journal of Sociol-
ogy 44 (1939): 868–96; K. Lewin, 
R. Lippitt, and R. K. White, “Pat-
terns of Aggressive Behavior in 
Experimentally Created Social 
Climates,” Journal of Social Psy-
chology 10 (1939): 271–301; and 
R. Lippitt, “An Experimental 
Study of the Effect of Democratic 
and Authoritarian Group Atmo-
spheres,” University of Iowa Stud-
ies in Child Welfare 16 (1940): 
43–95.
 5. R. M. Stodgill and A. E. Coons, 
eds., Leader Behavior: Its De-
scription 
and 
Measurement, 
Research Monograph No. 88 
(Columbus: Ohio State Univer-
sity, Bureau of Business Research, 
1951). See also S. Kerr, C. A. 
Schriesheim, C. J. Murphy, and 
R. M. Stodgill, “Toward a Con-
tingency Theory of Leadership 
Based upon the Consideration and 
Initiating Structure Literature,” 
Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Performance (August 1974): 
62–82; and B. M. Fisher, “Consid-
eration and Initiating Structure and 
Their Relationships with Leader 
Effectiveness: A Meta Analysis,” 
in F. Hoy, ed., Proceedings of the 
48th Annual Academy of Manage-
ment Conference (Anaheim, CA, 
1988), 201–05.
 6. R. Kahn and D. Katz, “Leadership 
Practices in Relation to Productiv-
ity and Morale,” in D. Cartwright 
and A. Zander, eds., Group Dy-
namics: Research and Theory, 2nd 
ed. (Elmsford, NY: Pow, Paterson, 
1960).
 7. R. R. Blake and J. S. Mouton, The 
Managerial Grid III (Houston: 
Gulf Publishing, 1984).
 8. W. G. Bennis, “The Seven Ages 
of the Leader,” Harvard Business 
Review, January 2004, 52.
 9. F. E. Fiedler, A Theory of Lead-
ership Effectiveness (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1967).
 10. R. Ayman, M. M. Chemers, and F. 
Fiedler, “The Contingency Model 
of Leadership Effectiveness: Its 
Levels of Analysis,” Leader-
ship Quarterly, Summer 1995, 
147–67; C. A. Schriesheim, B. J. 
Tepper, and L. A. Tetrault, “Lease 
Preferred Co-Worker Score, Situ-
ational Control, and Leadership 
Effectiveness: A Meta-Analysis of 
Contingency Model Performance 
Predictions,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology (August 1994): 561–73;  
and L. H. Peters, D. D. Hartke, and 
J. T. Pholmann, “Fiedler’s Contin-
gency Theory of Leadership: An 
Application of the Meta-Analysis 
Procedures of Schmidt and Hunt-
er,” Psychological Bulletin, March 
1985, 274–85.
 11. See B. Kabanoff, “A Critique of 
Leader Match and Its Implications 
for Leadership Research,” Per-
sonnel Psychology, Winter 1981, 
749–64; and E. H. Schein, Or-
ganizational Psychology, 3rd ed. 
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1980), 116–17.
 12. P. Hersey and K. H. Blanchard, 
Management of Organizational Be-
havior: Leading Human Resourc-
es, 8th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 2001); and P. Hersey 
and K. Blanchard, “So You Want 
to Know Your Leadership Style?” 
Training and Development Journal 
(February 1974): 1–15.
 13. See, for instance, E. G. Ralph, 
“Developing Managers’ Effective-
ness: A Model with Potential,” 
Journal of Management Inquiry 
(June 2004): 152–63; C. L. Graeff, 
“Evolution of Situational Leader-
ship Theory: A Critical Review,” 
Leadership Quarterly 8, no. 2 
(1997): 153–70; and C. F. Fernan-
dez and R. P. Vecchio, “Situational 
Leadership Theory Revisited: A 
Test of an Across-Jobs Perspec-
tive,” Leadership Quarterly 8, no. 
1 (1997): 67–84.
 14. V. H. Vroom and P. W. Yetton, 
Leadership and Decision Making 
(Pittsburgh: University of Pitts-
burgh Press, 1973).
 15. V. H. Vroom and A. G. Jago, The 
New Leadership: Managing Par-
ticipation in Organizations (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
1988). See especially Chapter 8.
 16. See, for example, R. H. G. Field 
and R. J. House, “A Test of the 
Vroom Yetton Model Using Man-
ager and Subordinate Reports,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(June 1990): 362–66; J. T. Ettling 
and A. G. Jago, “Participation 
Under Conditions of Conflict: 
More on the Validity of the Vroom 
Yetton Model,” Journal of Man-
agement Studies (January 1988): 
73–83; C. R. Leana, “Power Re-
linquishment versus Power Shar-
ing: Theoretical Clarification and 
Empirical Comparison of Delega-
tion and Participation,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (May 1987): 
228–33; and R. H. G. Field, “A 
Test of the Vroom Yetton Norma-
tive Model of Leadership,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology (Octo-
ber 1982): 523–32.
 17. For additional information about 
the exchanges that occur between 
the leader and the follower, see 
A. S. Phillips and A. G. Bedeian, 
“Leader Follower Exchange Qual-
ity: The Role of Personal and In-
terpersonal Attributes,” Academy 
of Management Journal 37, no. 
4 (1994): 990–1001; and T. A. 
Scandura and C. A. Schriesheim, 
“Leader Member Exchange and 
Supervisor Career Mentoring as 
Complementary 
Constructs 
in 
Leadership Research,” Academy 
of Management Journal 37, no. 6 
(1994): 1588–602.
 18. SmartPulse, “How Willing Are 
You to Step Outside Your Lead-
ership Style ‘Comfort Zone’ and 
Try New Techniques?” www 
.smartbrief.com/leadership, 
De-
cember 10, 2013.
 19. R. J. House, “Path-Goal Theory of 
Leadership: Lessons, Legacy, and 
a Reformulated Theory,” Leader-
ship Quarterly, Fall 1996, 323–52; 
R. J. House and T. R. Mitchell, 
“Path-Goal Theory of Leader-
ship,” Journal of Contemporary 
Business (Autumn 1974): 86; and 
R. J. House, “A Path-Goal Theory 
of Leader Effectiveness,” Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, Septem-
ber 1971, 321–38.
 20. A. Sagie and M. Koslowsky, “Or-
ganizational Attitudes and Behav-
iors as a Function of Participation 
in Strategic and Tactical Change 
Decisions: An Application of Path-
Goal Theory,” Journal of Organi-
zational Behavior (January 1994): 
37–47; and J. C. Wofford and L. 
Z. Liska, “Path-Goal Theories of 
Leadership: A Meta-Analysis,” 
Journal of Management (Winter 
1993): 857–76.
 21. L. Ma and Q. Qu, “Differentia-
tion in Leader-Member Exchange: 
A Hierarchical Linear Modeling 
Approach,” 
Leadership 
Quar-
terly, October 2010, 733–44; C. 
P. Schriesheim, S. L. Castro, X. 
Zhou, and F. J. Yamarinno, “The 
Folly of Theorizing ‘A’ but Test-
ing ‘B’: A Selective Level-of-
Analysis Review of the Field and 
a Detailed Leader-Member Ex-
change Illustration,” Leadership 
Quarterly, Winter 2001, 515–51; 
R. C. Liden, R. T. Sparrowe, and 
S. J. Wayne, “Leader-Member 
Exchange Theory: The Past and 
Potential for the Future,” in G. R. 
Ferris (ed.), Research in Personnel 
and Human Resource Manage-
ment, vol. 15 (Greenwich, CT: JAI 
Press, 1997), 47–119; G. B. Graen 
and M. Uhl-Bien, “Relationship-
Based Approach to Leadership: 
Development of Leader-Member 
Exchange (LMX) Theory of Lead-
ership Over 25 Years: Applying a 
Multi-Domain Perspective,” Lead-
ership Quarterly, Summer 1995, 
219–47; and R. M. Dienesch and 
R. C. Liden, “Leader-Member 
Exchange Model of Leadership: 
A Critique and Further Develop-
ment,” Academy of Management 
Review, July 1986, 618–34.
 22. J. B. Wu, A. S. Tsui, and A. J. 
Kinicki, “Consequences of Dif-
ferentiated Leadership in Groups,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(February 2010): 90–106; S. S. 
Masterson, K. Lewis, and B. M. 
Goldman, 
“Integrating 
Justice 
and Social Exchange: The Dif-
fering Effects of Fair Procedures 
and Treatment on Work Relation-
ships,” Academy of Management 
Journal (August 2000): 738–48; 
S. J. Wayne, L. J. Shore, W. H. 
Bommer, and L. E. Tetrick, “The 
Role of Fair Treatment and Re-
wards in Perceptions of Organiza-
tional Support and Leader-Mem-
ber Exchange,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology (June 2002): 590–98; 
R. C. Liden, S. J. Wayne, and D. 
Stilwell, “A Longitudinal Study of 
the Early Development of Leader-
Member 
Exchanges,” 
Journal 
of Applied Psychology (August 
1993): 662–74; and R. C. Liden 
and G. Graen, “Generalizability of 
the Vertical Dyad Linkage Model 
of Leadership,” Academy of Man-
agement 
Journal 
(September 
1980): 451–65.
 23. V. L. Goodwin, W. M. Bowler, 
and J. L. Whittington, “A Social 
Network Perspective on LMX 
Relationships: Accounting for the 
Instrumental Value of Leader and 
Follower Networks,” Journal of 
Management (August 2009): 954–
80; R. Vecchio and D. M. Brazil, 
“Leadership and Sex-Similarity: 
A Comparison in a Military Set-
ting,” Personnel Psychology, vol. 
60 (2007): 303–35; M. Uhl-Bien, 
“Relationship 
Development 
as 
a Key Ingredient for Leadership 
Development,” in S. E. Murphy 
and R. E. Riggio (eds.), Future of 
Leadership Development (Mah-
wah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 
2003), 129–47; R. C. Liden, S. 
J. Wayne, and D. Stilwell, “A 

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    411
Longitudinal Study of the Early 
Development of Leader-Member 
Exchanges”; and D. Duchon, S. 
G. Green, and T. D. Taber, “Verti-
cal Dyad Linkage: A Longitudinal 
Assessment of Antecedents, Mea-
sures, and Consequences,” Journal 
of Applied Psychology (February 
1986): 56–60.
 24. P. Drexler, “The Upside of Favor-
itism,” Wall Street Journal, June 
8–9, 2013, C3.
 25. See, for instance, F. O. Walumbwa, 
D. M. Mayer, P. Wang, H. Wang, K. 
Workman, and A. L. Christensen, 
“Linking Ethical Leadership to 
Employee Performance: The Roles 
of 
Leader-Member 
Exchange 
Theory, Self-Efficacy, and Organi-
zational Identification,” Organiza-
tional Behavior & Human Decision 
Processes, July 2011, 204–213; K. 
J. Harris, A. R. Wheeler, and K. 
M. Kacmar, “The Mediating Role 
of Organizational Embeddedness 
in the LMX-Outcomes Relation-
ship,” Leadership Quarterly, April 
2011, 271–81; W. M. Bowler, J. R. 
B. Halbesleben, J. R. B. Paul, “If 
You’re Close with the Leader, You 
Must Be a Brownnose: The Role 
of Leader-Member Relationships 
in Follower, Leader, and Coworker 
Attributions 
of 
Organizational 
Citizenship Behavior Motives,” 
Human 
Resource 
Management 
Review, December 2010, 309–16; 
G. Sears and C. Holmvall, “The 
Joint Influence of Supervisor and 
Subordinate Emotional Intelligence 
on Leader-Member Exchange,” 
Journal of Business & Psychol-
ogy (December 2010): 593–605; 
V. Venkataramani, S. G. Green, and 
D. J. Schleicher, “Well-Connected 
Leaders’ Social Network Ties on 
LMX and Members’ Work Atti-
tudes,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy (November 2010): 1071–84; 
Z. Chen, W. Lam, and J. A. Zhong, 
“Leader-Member Exchange and 
Member Performance: A New 
Look at Individual-Level Nega-
tive Feedback-Seeking Behavior 
and Team-Level Empowerment 
Culture,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology (January 2007): 202–12; 
R. Ilies, J. D. Nahrgang, and F. P. 
Morgeson, “Leader-Member Ex-
change and Citizenship Behaviors: 
A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology (January 2007): 
269–77; and C. R. Gerstner and D. 
V. Day, “Meta-Analytic Review of 
Leader-Member Exchange Theory: 
Correlates and Construct Issues,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(December 1997): 827–44.
 26. B. M. Bass and R. E. Riggio, 
Transformational Leadership, 2d 
ed. (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates, Inc., 2006), 3.
 27. J. Seltzer and B. M. Bass, “Trans-
formational Leadership: Beyond 
Initiation 
and 
Consideration,” 
Journal of Management (Decem-
ber 1990): 693–703; and B. M. 
Bass, “Leadership: Good, Better, 
Best,” Organizational Dynamics, 
Winter 1985, 26–40.
 28. B. J. Avolio and B. M. Bass, 
“Transformational 
Leadership, 
Charisma, and Beyond,” working 
paper, School of Management, 
State University of New York, 
Binghamton, 1985, 14.
 29. R. S. Rubin, D. C. Munz, and 
W. H. Bommer, “Leading from 
within: The Effects of Emotion 
Recognition and Personality on 
Transformational Leadership Be-
havior,” Academy of Management 
Journal (October 2005): 845–58; 
T. A. Judge and J. E. Bono, “Five-
Factor Model of Personality and 
Transformational 
Leadership,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(October 2000): 751–65; B. M. 
Bass and B. J. Avolio, “Develop-
ing Transformational Leadership: 
1992 and Beyond,” Journal of Eu-
ropean Industrial Training (Janu-
ary 1990): 23; and J. J. Hater and 
B. M. Bass, “Supervisors’ Evalua-
tion and Subordinates’ Perceptions 
of Transformational and Trans-
actional Leadership,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (November 
1988): 695–702.
 30. M. Tims, A. B. Bakker, and D. 
Xanthopoulou, 
“Do 
Transfor-
mational Leaders Enhance Their 
Followers’ Daily Work Engage-
ment?” 
Leadership 
Quarterly, 
February 2011, 121–31; X.-H. 
(Frank) Wang and J. M. Howell, 
“Exploring the Dual-Level Ef-
fects of Transformational Lead-
ership on Followers,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology (November 
2010): 1134–44; A. E. Colbert, 
A. L. Kristof-Brown, B. H. Brad-
ley, and M. R. Barrick, “CEO 
Transformational Leadership: The 
Role of Goal Importance Congru-
ence in Top Management Teams,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(February 2008): 81–96; R. F. Pic-
colo and J. A. Colquitt, “Trans-
formational Leadership and Job 
Behaviors: The Mediating Role of 
Core Job Characteristics,” Acade-
my of Management Journal (April 
2006): 327–40; O. Epitropaki and 
R. Martin, “From Ideal to Real: 
A Longitudinal Study of the Role 
of Implicit Leadership Theories 
on Leader-Member Exchanges 
and Employee Outcomes,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology (July 
2005): 659–76; J. E. Bono and T. 
A. Judge, “Self-Concordance at 
Work: Toward Understanding the 
Motivational Effects of Transfor-
mational Leaders,” Academy of 
Management Journal (October 
2003): 554–71; T. Dvir, D. Eden, 
B. J. Avolio, and B. Shamir, “Im-
pact of Transformational Leader-
ship on Follower Development 
and Performance: A Field Experi-
ment,” Academy of Management 
Journal (August 2002): 735–44; 
N. Sivasubramaniam, W. D. Mur-
ry, B. J. Avolio, and D. I. Jung, “A 
Longitudinal Model of the Effects 
of Team Leadership and Group 
Potency on Group Performance,” 
Group and Organization Manage-
ment (March 2002): 66–96; J. M. 
Howell and B. J. Avolio, “Trans-
formational Leadership, Transac-
tional Leadership, Locus of Con-
trol, and Support for Innovation: 
Key Predictors of Consolidated-
Business-Unit 
Performance,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(December 1993): 891–911; R. T. 
Keller, “Transformational Leader-
ship and the Performance of Re-
search and Development Project 
Groups,” Journal of Management 
(September 1992): 489–501; and 
Bass and Avolio, “Developing 
Transformational Leadership.”
 31. M. Thompson and B. Tracy, 
“Building a Great Organization,” 
Leader to Leader, Fall 2010, 
45–49; and F. Vogelstein, “Mighty 
Amazon,” Fortune, May 26, 2003, 
60–74.
 32. J. M. Crant and T. S. Bateman, 
“Charismatic Leadership Viewed 
from Above: The Impact of Proac-
tive Personality,” Journal of Or-
ganizational Behavior (February 
2000): 63–75; G. Yukl and J. M. 
Howell, “Organizational and Con-
textual Influences on the Emer-
gence and Effectiveness of Char-
ismatic Leadership,” Leadership 
Quarterly, Summer 1999, 257–83; 
and J. A. Conger and R. N. Kanun-
go, “Behavioral Dimensions of 
Charismatic Leadership,” in J. 
A. Conger, R. N. Kanungo and 
Associates, Charismatic Leader-
ship (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
1988), 78–97.
 33. J. A. Conger and R. N. Kanungo, 
Charismatic Leadership in Orga-
nizations (Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, 1998).
 34. F. Walter and H. Bruch, “An Af-
fective Events Model of Char-
ismatic Leadership Behavior: A 
Review, Theoretical Investigation, 
and Research Agenda,” Journal 
of Management (December 2009): 
1428–52; K. S. Groves, “Linking 
Leader Skills, Follower Attitudes, 
and Contextual Variables via an 
Integrated Model of Charismatic 
Leadership,” Journal of Manage-
ment (April 2005): 255–77; J. J. 
Sosik, “The Role of Personal Val-
ues in the Charismatic Leadership 
of Corporate Managers: A Model 
and Preliminary Field Study,” 
Leadership Quarterly, April 2005, 
221–44; A. H. B. deHoogh, D. 
N. den Hartog, P. L. Koopman, 
H. Thierry, P. T. van den Berg, J. 
G. van der Weide, and C. P. M. 
Wilderom, “Leader Motives, Char-
ismatic Leadership, and Subordi-
nates’ Work Attitudes in the Profit 
and Voluntary Sector,” Leadership 
Quarterly, February 2005, 17–38; 
J. M. Howell and B. Shamir, “The 
Role of Followers in the Charis-
matic Leadership Process: Rela-
tionships and Their Consequenc-
es,” Academy of Management 
Review, January 2005, 96–112; J. 
Paul, D. L. Costley, J. P. Howell, 
P. W. Dorfman, and D. Trafimow, 
“The Effects of Charismatic Lead-
ership on Followers’ Self-Concept 
Accessibility,”  Journal of Applied 
Social 
Psychology 
(September 
2001): 1821–44; J. A. Conger, R. 
N. Kanungo, and S. T. Menon, 
“Charismatic Leadership and Fol-
lower Effects,” Journal of Organi-
zational Behavior, vol. 21 (2000): 
747–67; R. W. Rowden, “The Re-
lationship between Charismatic 
Leadership Behaviors and Orga-
nizational Commitment,” Leader-
ship & Organization Development 
Journal (January 2000): 30–35; G. 
P. Shea and C. M. Howell, “Char-
ismatic Leadership and Task Feed-
back: A Laboratory Study of Their 
Effects on Self-Efficacy,” Leader-
ship Quarterly, Fall 1999, 375–96; 
S. A. Kirkpatrick and E. A. Locke, 
“Direct and Indirect Effects of 
Three Core Charismatic Leader-
ship Components on Performance 
and Attitudes,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology (February 1996): 36–
51; D. A. Waldman, B. M. Bass, 
and F. J. Yammarino, “Adding to 
Contingent-Reward Behavior: The 
Augmenting Effect of Charismatic 
Leadership,” Group & Organiza-
tion Studies, December 1990, 381–
94; and R. J. House, J. Woycke, 
and E. M. Fodor, “Charismatic and 
Noncharismatic Leaders: Differ-
ences in Behavior and Effective-
ness,” in Conger and Kanungo, 
Charismatic Leadership, 103–04.
 35. B. R. Agle, N J. Nagarajan, J. A. 
Sonnenfeld, and D. Srinivasan, 
“Does CEO Charisma Matter? 
An Empirical Analysis of the Re-
lationships among Organizational 
Performance, Environmental Un-
certainty, and Top Management 
Team Perceptions of CEO Cha-
risma,” Academy of Management 
Journal (February 2006): 161–74.
 36. R. Birchfield, “Creating Char-
ismatic Leaders,” Management, 
June 2000, 30–31; S. Caudron, 
“Growing Charisma,” Industry 
Week, May 4, 1998, 54–55; and 
J. A. Conger and R. N. Kanungo, 
“Training Charismatic Leader-
ship: A Risky and Critical Task,” 
in Conger and Kanungo, Charis-
matic Leadership, 309–23.
 37. J. G. Hunt, K. B. Boal, and G. E. 
Dodge, “The Effects of Visionary 
and Crisis-Responsive Charisma 
on Followers: An Experimental 
Examination,” Leadership Quar-
terly, Fall 1999, 423–48; R. J. 
House and R. N. Aditya, “The 
Social Scientific Study of Leader-
ship: Quo Vadis?” Journal of Man-
agement 23, no. 3 (1997): 316–23; 
and R. J. House, “A 1976 Theory 
of Charismatic Leadership.”
 38. This definition is based on M. 
Sashkin, “The Visionary Leader,” 
in Conger and Kanungo et al., 
Charismatic Leadership, 124–25; 
B. Nanus, Visionary Leadership 
(New York: Free Press, 1992), 
8; N. H. Snyder and M. Graves, 
“Leadership and Vision,” Business 
Horizons, January–February 1994, 
1; and J. R. Lucas, “Anatomy of a 
Vision Statement,” Management 
Review, February 1998, 22–26.
 39. Nanus, Visionary Leadership, 8.

412    Part 4  •  Leading
 40. S. Caminiti, “What Team Leaders 
Need to Know,” Fortune, February 
20, 1995, 93–100.
 41. SmartPulse, “Which of These 
Characteristics Is the Most Dan-
gerous Leadership Trait?” www 
.smartbrief.com/leadership, 
July 1, 2014.
 42. S. Caminiti, “What Team Lead-
ers  Need to Know,” Fortune, 
 February 20, 1995, 93.
 43. Ibid., 100.
 44. D. S. DeRue, C. M. Barnes, and 
F. M. Morgeson, “Understanding 
the Motivational Contingencies of 
Team Leadership,” Small Group Re-
search, October 2010, 621–51; B. 
Meredith, “Leader Characteristics: 
Is There a Shift in Requirements?” 
Leadership Excellence, September 
2010, 19; B. Neal, “Heroes and 
Sidekicks: Ensuring Proper Fol-
lowership,” T&D, September 2010, 
76–77; R. D. Ramsey, “Preparing 
to Be Tomorrow’s Leader Today,” 
Supervision, January 2010, 79; N. 
Steckler and N. Fondas, “Build-
ing Team Leader Effectiveness: A 
Diagnostic Tool,” Organizational 
Dynamics, Winter 1995, 20.
 45. R. S. Wellins, W. C. Byham, and G. 
R. Dixon, Inside Teams (San Fran-
cisco: Jossey-Bass, 1994), 318.
 46. Steckler and Fondas, “Building 
Team Leader Effectiveness,” 21.
 47. “The 100 Most Creative People in 
Business 2010,” Fast Company, 
June 2010, 70–119; and G. Colvin, 
“The FedEx Edge,” Fortune, April 
3, 2006, 77–84.
 48. J. Fabre, “The Importance of Em-
powering Front-Line Staff,” Su-
pervision, December 2010, 6–7; S. 
Raub and C. Robert, “Differential 
Effects of Empowering Leadership 
on In-Role and Extra-Role Em-
ployee Behaviors: Exploring the 
Role of Psychological Empower-
ment and Power Values,” Human 
Relations, November 2010, 1743–
70; N. D. Cakar and A. Erturk, 
“Comparing Innovation Capability 
of Small and Medium-Sized En-
terprises: Examining the Effects 
of Organizational Culture and 
Empowerment,” Journal of Small 
Business Management (July 2010): 
325–59; A. Srivastava, K. M. Bar-
tol, and E. A. Locke, “Empowering 
Leadership in Management Teams: 
Effects on Knowledge Sharing, Ef-
ficacy, and Performance,” Academy 
of Management Journal (Decem-
ber 2006): 1239–51; P. K. Mills 
and G. R. Ungson, “Reassessing 
the Limits of Structural Empower-
ment: Organizational Constitution 
and Trust as Controls,” Academy 
of Management Review, January 
2003, 143–53; W. A. Rudolph and 
M. Sashkin, “Can Organizational 
Empowerment Work in Multi-
national Settings?” Academy of 
Management Executive, February 
2002, 102–15; C. Gomez and B. 
Rosen, “The Leader-Member Link 
between Managerial Trust and Em-
ployee Empowerment,” Group & 
Organization Management, March 
2001, 53–69; C. Robert and T. 
M. Probst, “Empowerment and 
Continuous Improvement in the 
United States, Mexico, Poland, and 
India,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy (October 2000): 643–58; R. C. 
Herrenkohl, G. T. Judson, and J. A. 
Heffner, “Defining and Measuring 
Employee Empowerment,” Jour-
nal of Applied Behavioral Science 
(September 1999): 373; R. C. Ford 
and M. D. Fottler, “Empowerment: 
A Matter of Degree,” Academy of 
Management Executive, August 
1995, 21–31; and W. A. Rudolph, 
“Navigating the Journey to Em-
powerment,” Organizational Dy-
namics, Spring 1995, 19–32.
 49. T. A. Stewart, “Just Think: No Per-
mission Needed,” Fortune, Janu-
ary 8, 2001, 190–92.
 50. I. Wanasika, J. P. Howell, R. Lit-
trell, and P. Dorfman, “Managerial 
Leadership and Culture in Sub-
Saharan Africa,” Journal of World 
Business (April 2011): 234–41.
 51. F. W. Swierczek, “Leadership and 
Culture: Comparing Asian Manag-
ers,” Leadership & Organization 
Development Journal (December 
1991): 3–10.
 52. House, “Leadership in the Twenty-
First Century,” 443; M. F. Peterson 
and J. G. Hunt, “International Per-
spectives on International Leader-
ship,” Leadership Quarterly, Fall 
1997, 203–31; and J. R. Schermer-
horn and M. H. Bond, “Cross-Cul-
tural Leadership in Collectivism 
and High Power Distance Set-
tings,” Leadership & Organization 
Development Journal 18, no. 4/5 
(1997): 187–93.
 53. Wanasika, Howell, Littrell, and 
Dorfman, “Managerial Leadership 
and Culture in Sub-Saharan Afri-
ca”; R. J. House, P. J. Hanges, S. A. 
Ruiz-Quintanilla, P. W. Dorfman, 
et al., “Culture Specific and Cross-
Culturally Generalizable Implicit 
Leadership Theories: Are the At-
tributes of Charismatic/Transfor-
mational Leadership Universally 
Endorsed?” Leadership Quarterly, 
Summer 1999, 219–56; and D. E. 
Carl and M. Javidan, “Universal-
ity of Charismatic Leadership: A 
Multi-Nation Study,” paper pre-
sented at the National Academy of 
Management Conference, Wash-
ington, DC, August 2001.
 54. D. E. Carl and M. Javidan, “Uni-
versality of Charismatic Leader-
ship,” 29.
 55. This section is based on D. Gole-
man, R. E. Boyatzis, and A. McK-
ee, Primal Leadership: Realizing 
the Power of Emotional Intelli-
gence (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 2002); D. R. Caruso, 
J. D. Mayer, and P. Salovey, “Emo-
tional Intelligence and Emotional 
Leadership,” in R. E. Riggio, S. 
E. Murphy, and F. J. Pirozzolo 
(eds.), Multiple Intelligences and 
Leadership (Mahwah, NJ: Law-
rence Erlbaum, 2002), 55–74; J. 
M. George, “Emotions and Lead-
ership: The Role of Emotional In-
telligence,” Human Relations, Au-
gust 2000, 1027–55; D. Goleman, 
“What Makes a Leader?” Harvard 
Business Review, November–De-
cember 1998, 93–102; and D. 
Goleman, Working with Emotional 
Intelligence (New York: Bantam, 
1998).
 56. Technology and the Manager’s Job 
box based on K. D. Strang, “Lead-
ership Substitutes and Personal-
ity Impact on Time and Quality in 
Virtual New Product Development 
Projects,” Project Management 
Journal (February 2011): 73–90; 
A. Rapp, M. Ahearne, J. Mathieu, 
and T. Rapp, “Managing Sales 
Teams in a Virtual Environment,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Re-
search in Marketing (September 
2010): 213–24; M. Muethel and 
M. Hoegl, “Cultural and Societal 
Influences on Shared Leadership 
in Globally Dispersed Teams,” 
Journal of International Manage-
ment (September 2010): 234–56; 
J. Grenny, “Virtual Teams,” Lead-
ership Excellence, May 2010, 20; 
L. A. Hambley, T. A. O’Neill, and 
T. J. B. Kline, “Virtual Team Lead-
ership: The Effects of Leadership 
Style and Communication Me-
dium on Team Interaction Styles 
and Outcomes,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, May 2007, 1–20; and 
B. J. Avolio and S. S. Kahai, “Add-
ing the ‘E’ to E-Leadership: How 
It May Impact Your Leadership,” 
Organizational Dynamics, Janu-
ary 2003, 325–38.
 57. “The Secret Skill of Leaders,” U.S. 
News & World Report (January 
14, 2002): 8. See, also, L. Gardner 
and C. Stough, “Examining the 
Relationship between Leadership 
and Emotional Intelligence in Se-
nior Level Managers,” Leadership 
and Organization Development 
Journal, January–February 2002, 
68–79.
 58. Ibid.
 59. F. Walter, M. S. Cole, and R. H. 
Humphrey, “Emotional Intelli-
gence: Sine Qua Non of Leader-
ship or Folderol?” Academy of 
Management Perspectives, Febru-
ary 2011, 45–59.
 60. See Walter, Cole, and Humphrey, 
“Emotional Intelligence: Sine Qua 
Non of Leadership or Folderol”; L. 
A. Zampetakis and V. Moustakis, 
“Managers’ Trait Emotional Intel-
ligence and Group Outcomes: The 
Case of Group Job Satisfaction,” 
Small Group Research, Febru-
ary 2011, 77–102; H.-W. Vivian 
Tang, M.-S. Yin, and D. B. Nelson, 
“The Relationship between Emo-
tional Intelligence and Leadership 
Practices,” Journal of Manage-
rial Psychology 25, no. 8 (2010): 
899–926; P. K. Chopra and G. K. 
Kanji, “Emotional Intelligence: A 
Catalyst for Inspirational Lead-
ership and Management Excel-
lence,” Total Quality Management 
& Business Excellence, October 
2010, 971–1004; R. Boyatzis and 
A. McKee, “Intentional Change,” 
Journal of Organizational Excel-
lence (Summer 2006): 49– 60, 
and R. Kerr; J. Garvin, N. Heaton, 
and E. Boyle, “Emotional Intel-
ligence and Leadership Effective-
ness,” Leadership and Organiza-
tional Development Journal (April 
2006): 265–79.
 61. S. Simsarian, “Leadership and 
Trust Facilitating Cross-Function-
al Team Success,” Journal of Man-
agement Development (March–
April 2002): 201–15.
 62. J. M. Kouzes and B. Z. Posner, 
Credibility: How Leaders Gain 
and Lose It, and Why People De-
mand It (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 1993), 14.
 63. Based on F. D. Schoorman, R. C. 
Mayer, and J. H. Davis, “An Inte-
grative Model of Organizational 
Trust: Past, Present, and Future,” 
Academy of Management Review, 
April 2007, 344–54; G. M. Sp-
reitzer and A. K. Mishra, “Giv-
ing Up Control without Losing 
Control,” Group & Organization 
Management, June 1999, 155–87; 
R. C. Mayer, J. H. Davis, and F. 
D. Schoorman, “An Integrative 
Model of Organizational Trust,” 
Academy of Management Review, 
July 1995, 712; and L. T. Hosmer, 
“Trust: The Connecting Link be-
tween Organizational Theory and 
Philosophical Ethics,” Academy of 
Management Review, April 1995, 
393.
 64. P. L. Schindler and C. C. Thomas, 
“The Structure of Interpersonal 
Trust in the Workplace,” Psycho-
logical Reports, October 1993, 
563–73.
 65. H. H. Tan and C. S. F. Tan, “To-
ward the Differentiation of Trust 
in Supervisor and Trust in Orga-
nization,” Genetic, Social, and 
General Psychology Monographs, 
May 2000, 241–60.
 66. J. H. Cho and E. J. Ringquist, 
“Managerial 
Trustworthiness 
and Organizational Outcomes,” 
Journal of Public Administration 
Research and Theory (January 
2011): 53–86; R. C. Mayer and M. 
B. Gavin, “Trust in Management 
and Performance: Who Minds the 
Shop While the Employees Watch 
the Boss?” Academy of Manage-
ment Journal (October 2005): 
874–88; and K. T. Dirks and D. L. 
Ferrin, “Trust in Leadership: Me-
ta-Analytic Findings and Implica-
tions for Research and Practice,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(August 2002): 611–28.
 67. R. Zemke, “The Confidence Cri-
sis,” Training (June 2004): 22–30; 
J. A. Byrne, “Restoring Trust in 
Corporate America,” Business-
Week, June 24, 2002, 30–35; S. 
Armour, “Employees’ New Motto: 
Trust No One,” USA Today, Febru-
ary 5, 2002, 1B; J. Scott, “Once 
Bitten, Twice Shy: A World of 
Eroding Trust,” New York Times, 
April 21, 2002, WK5; J. Brockner, 
P. A. Siegel, J. P. Daly, T. Tyler, and 
C. Martin, “When Trust Matters: 
The Moderating Effect of Out-
come Favorability,” Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, September 

CHAPTER 12  •  Leadership and Trust    413
1997, 558; and J. Brockner, P. A. 
Siegel, J. P. Daly, T. Tyler, and C. 
Martin, “When Trust Matters: The 
Moderating Effect of Outcome Fa-
vorability,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly, September 1997, 558.
 68. “Weathering the Storm: A Study of 
Employee Attitudes and Opinions,” 
WorkUSA 2002 Study,  Watson 
Wyatt, www.watsonwyatt.com.
 69. S. Kerr and J. M. Jermier, “Sub-
stitutes for Leadership: Their 
Meaning and Measurement,” Or-
ganizational Behavior and Human 
Performance, 
December 
1978, 
375–403; J. P. Howell, P. W. Dorf-
man, and S. Kerr, “Leadership and 
Substitutes for Leadership,” Jour-
nal of Applied Behavioral Science 
22, no. 1 (1986): 29–46; J. P. How-
ell, D. E. Bowen, P. W. Dorfman, 
S. Kerr, and P. M. Podsakoff, “Sub-
stitutes for Leadership: Effective 
Alternatives to Ineffective Lead-
ership,” Organizational Dynam-
ics, Summer 1990, 21–38; and P. 
M. Podsakoff, B. P. Niehoff, S. B. 
MacKenzie, and M. L. Williams, 
“Do Substitutes for Leadership Re-
ally Substitute for Leadership? An 
Empirical Examination of Kerr and 
Jermier’s Situational Leadership 
Model,” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes, 
February 1993, 1–44.
 70. Based on R. J. House and R. N. 
Aditya, “The Social Scientific 
Study of Leadership: Quo Vadis?” 
Journal of Management (June 
1997): 409–73; and G. A. Yukl, 
Leadership in Organizations, 7th 
ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pren-
tice Hall, 2010).
 71. L. Patel, “Preparing Tomorrow’s 
Executives,” T&D, March 2014, 20.
 72. A. Harjani, “From Brats to Boss-
es—Gen Y to Dominate by 2025,” 
www.cnbc.com/id/101353573, 
January 22, 2014.
 73. Best Companies for Leadership 
2014, Hay Group, http://www 
.haygroup.com/bestcompanies 
forleadership/downloads/Best_ 
Companies_for_Leadership_2014_
Executive_summary.pdf, 2014.
 74. L. Lykins and A. Pace, “Mastering 
Millennial Leadership Develop-
ment,” T&D, May 2013, 42–45.
 75. H. Stevens, “How Top-Ranked 
Companies 
Develop 
Lead-
ers,” 
http://www.clomedia.com/
articles/5749-how-top-ranked-
companies-develop-leaders, 
 August 6, 2014.
 76. D. 
Livermore, 
“What 
Face-
book Tells Us about the Future 
of 
Leadership,” 
http://www. 
management-issues.com/opinion/ 
6776/what-facebook-tells-us-
about-the-future-of-leadership/, 
October 15, 2013.
 77. D. Meek, “The Real Sir Alex 
Ferguson: 
Memories 
of 
His 
Ghost-Writer,” BBC Sport, http://
www.bbc.com/sport/0/football/ 
22539385, May 18, 2013; A. El-
berse, “Ferguson’s Formula,” Har-
vard Business Review, https://hbr 
.org/2013/10/fergusons-formula, 
October 2013; W. Isaacson, “The 
Real Leadership Lessons of Steve 
Jobs,” Harvard Business Review, 
April 2012; N. Robinson, “Nick 
Robinson: What I Learned About 
Leadership From Sir Alex Fergu-
son,” www.radiotimes.com,  October 
11, 2015; J. Aglionby, “Sir Alex Fer-
guson Signs For Harvard Business 
School,” www .ft .com, April 4, 2014. 
 78. S-C. J. Chen, “Practicing What 
He Preaches,” Forbes, www.forbes 
.com, May 26, 2011; E. Yau,  
“Ethics Come First for Shih Wing-
ching,” South China Morning Post, 
http://www.scmp.com/lifestyle/
family-education/article/1121286/
building-blocks-ethics-come-first-
shih-wing-ching, January 7, 2013; 
S. Zhao, “Shih Wing-Ching,” Time 
Out, 
www.timeout.com.hk/big-
smog/features/51904/shih-wing-
ching.html, July 2, 2012.
 79. J. Nocera, “What Makes Steve 
Jobs Great,” New York Times On-
line, August 26, 2011.
 80. A. 
Lashinsky, 
“How 
Apple 
Works: Inside the World’s Big-
gest 
Startup,” 
http://fortune 
.com/2011/05/09/inside-apple/, 
May 9, 2011.
 81. Ibid.
 82. W. Isaacson, “The Real Lead-
ership Lessons of Steve Jobs,” 
https://hbr.org/2012/04/the-real-
leadership-lessons-of-steve-jobs, 
April 2012.

Managing 
Communication 
and Information
Managers  
should try to  
stifle the 
grapevine.
13
Andres Rodriguez/Alamy

415
The grapevine is a well-known source for 
organizational gossip and news.  
For the inexperienced manager, it’s seen 
as a destructive element in an  
organization’s communication network. 
But the grapevine isn’t going away. It’s as 
natural to an organization as water is to 
an ocean. Astute managers acknowledge 
the existence of the grapevine and learn 
to use it in beneficial ways.

to the world 
of communi-
cation! In this “world,” managers are going 
to have to understand both the importance 
and the drawbacks of communication—all 
forms of communication, even the grapevine. 
Communication takes place every day in every 
organization. In all areas. By all organizational 
members. In many different forms. Most of 
that communication tends to be work-related. 
But as we’ll see, sometimes communication 
can cause some unintended consequences. In 
this chapter, we’re going to look at basic con-
cepts of interpersonal communication. We’ll 
explain the communication process, meth-
ods of communicating, barriers to effective 
communication, and ways to overcome those 
 barriers. In addition, we’ll look at communica-
tion issues that today’s managers face. •
Learning Outcomes
13-1  Describe what managers need to know about communicating effectively.  
p. 417
13-2 Explain how technology affects managerial communication. p. 425
13-3 Discuss contemporary issues in communication. p. 428
Welcome 
416

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    417
How Do Managers Communicate Effectively?
Poor communication can cost  
a business up to $5,000 per  
employee each year!1
The importance of effective communication for 
 managers cannot be overemphasized for one specific 
reason: Everything a manager does involves 
communicating. Not some things but everything! 
A manager can’t formulate strategy or make a decision without information. That informa-
tion has to be communicated. Once a decision is made, communication must again take 
place. Otherwise, no one will know that a decision has been made. The best idea, the most 
creative suggestion, or the finest plan cannot take form without communication. Managers, 
 therefore, need effective communication skills. We’re not suggesting, of course, that 
good  communication skills alone make a successful manager. We can say, however, that 
 ineffective communication skills can lead to a continuous stream of problems for a manager.
13-1  Describe what 
managers need 
to know about 
communicating 
effectively.
 Write It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete BCOMM 3: Importance of Communication.
How Does the Communication Process Work?
WHAT is communicated? The 3 I’s: Information,  
Ideas, Instructions
Communication can be thought of as a process or flow. Communication problems occur 
when deviations or blockages disrupt that flow. Before communication can take place, a 
purpose, expressed as a message to be conveyed, is needed. It passes between a source (the 
sender) and a receiver. The message is encoded (converted to symbolic form) and is passed 
by way of some medium (channel) to the receiver, who retranslates (decodes) the message 
initiated by the sender. The result is communication, which is a transfer of understanding and 
meaning from one person to another.2
Exhibit 13–1 depicts the communication process. This model has seven parts: (1) the 
communication source or sender, (2) encoding, (3) the message, (4) the channel, (5) decod-
ing, (6) the receiver, and (7) feedback.
1 and 2. The sender initiates a message by encoding a thought. Four conditions affect 
the encoded message: skill, attitudes, knowledge, and the social cultural system. Our message 
in our communication to you in this book depends on our writing skills; if we don’t have the 
requisite writing skills, our message will not reach you in the form desired. Keep in mind that 
a person’s total communicative success includes speaking, reading, listening, and reasoning 
skills as well. As we discussed in Chapter 9, our attitudes influence our behavior. We hold pre-
disposed ideas on numerous topics, and our communications are affected by these attitudes. 
Furthermore, we’re restricted in our communicative activity by the extent of our knowledge of 
the particular topic. We can’t communicate what we don’t know, and should our knowledge 
be too extensive, it’s possible that our receiver will not understand our message. Clearly, the 
amount of knowledge the source holds about his or her subject will affect the message he or 
she seeks to transfer. And, finally, just as attitudes influence our behavior, so does our position 
communication
A transfer of understanding and meaning from  
one person to another
communication process
The seven-part process of transferring and  
understanding of meaning
encoding
Converting a message into symbolic form

418    Part 4  •  Leading
in the social cultural system in which we exist. Your beliefs and values, all part of your culture, 
act to influence you as a communication source.
3. The message is the actual physical product from the source that conveys some pur-
pose. When we speak, the words spoken are the message. When we write, the writing is the 
message. When we paint, the picture is the message. When we gesture, the movements of our 
arms and the expressions on our faces are the message.3 Our message is affected by the code 
or group of symbols we use to transfer meaning, the content of the message itself, and the 
decisions that we make in selecting and arranging both codes and content.4
4. The channel is the medium through which the message travels. It’s selected by the 
source, who must determine whether to use a formal or an informal channel. Formal channels 
are established by the organization and transmit messages that pertain to the job-related activi-
ties of members. They traditionally follow the authority network within the organization. Other 
forms of messages, such as personal or social, follow the informal channels in the organization.
5 and 6. The receiver is the person to whom the message is directed. However, before the 
message can be received, the symbols in it must be translated into a form that can be under-
stood by the receiver—the decoding of the message. Just as the encoder was limited by his or 
her skills, attitudes, knowledge, and social cultural system, the receiver is equally restricted. 
Accordingly, the source must be skillful in writing or speaking; the receiver must be skillful 
in reading or listening; and both must be able to reason. A person’s knowledge, attitudes, and 
cultural background influence his or her ability to receive, just as they do the ability to send.
7. The final link in the communication process is a feedback loop. “If a communication 
source decodes the message that he encodes, if the message is put back into his system, we have 
feedback.”5 Feedback is the check on how successful 
we’ve been in transferring our messages as originally 
intended. It determines whether understanding has 
been achieved. Given the cultural diversity that exists 
in our workforce today, the importance of effective 
feedback to ensure proper communications cannot be 
overstated.6
Are Written Communications  
More Effective Than Verbal Ones?
Written communications include memos, letters,  
e-mail and other forms of digital communication, 
organizational periodicals, bulletin boards, or any 
other device that transmits written words or sym-
bols. Why would a sender choose to use written 
communications?
Message
Noise
Noise
Noise
Noise
Purpose
Message
Message
Sender
Encoding
Channel
Decoding
Receiver
Message transferred successfully? 
Feedback
Exhibit 13–1 The Communication Process
Participating in a meeting at company  
headquarters, these employees of Alibaba, 
China’s largest e-commerce firm, illustrate 
the channel part of the communication 
process. The meeting is a formal channel 
established by Alibaba during which  
employees transmit messages that pertain  
to their job-related activities.
Steven Shi/Reuters
message
A purpose for communicating that’s to be conveyed
decoding
Translating a received message
feedback
Checking to see how successfully a message has 
been transferred
channel
The medium by which a message travels

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    419
Advantages: Well, they’re tangible, verifiable, and more permanent than oral commu-
nication. Typically, both sender and receiver have a record of the communication. The mes-
sage can be stored for an indefinite period of time. If questions arise about the content of the 
message, it’s physically available for later reference. This feature is particularly important 
for complex or lengthy communications. For example, the marketing plan for a new product 
is likely to contain a number of tasks spread out over several months. By putting it in writ-
ing, those who have to carry out the plan can readily refer to the document over the life of 
the plan. A final benefit of written communication comes from the process itself. Written 
communications are more likely to be well thought out, logical, and clear. Except in rare 
instances, such as when presenting a formal speech, more care is taken with the written word 
than with the spoken word. Having to put something in writing forces a person to think more 
carefully about what he or she wants to convey.
Drawbacks: Of course, written messages have their drawbacks. Writing may be more 
 precise, but it also consumes a great deal of time. You could convey far more information 
to your college instructor in a one-hour oral exam than in a one-hour written exam. In fact, 
you could probably say in 10 to 15 minutes what it takes you an hour to write. The other 
major disadvantage is the lack of feedback. Oral communications allow receivers to respond 
rapidly to what they think they hear. However, written communications don’t have a built-in 
feedback mechanism. Sending a memo is no assurance that it will be received and, if it is 
received, no guarantee that the recipient will interpret it as the sender meant. The latter point 
is also relevant in oral communication, but it’s easier in such cases merely to ask the receiver 
to summarize what you have said. An accurate summary presents feedback evidence that the 
message has been received and understood.
 Watch It 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Communication.
Is the Grapevine an Effective Way to Communicate?
The Grapevine: Fruitful or Not?
The grapevine is the unofficial way that communication takes place in an organization. It’s 
neither authorized nor supported by the organization. Rather, information is spread by word 
of mouth—and even through electronic means. Ironically, good information passes among 
us rapidly, but bad information travels even faster.7 The grapevine gets information out to 
 organizational members as quickly as possible.
The biggest question raised about the grapevine, however, focuses on the accuracy of 
the rumors. Research on this topic has found somewhat mixed results. In an  organization 
 characterized by openness, the grapevine may be extremely accurate. In an authoritative 
 culture, the rumor mill may not be accurate. But even then, although the information  flowing 
is inaccurate, it still contains some element of truth. Rumors about major layoffs, plant clos-
ings, and the like may be filled with inaccurate information regarding who will be affected or 
when it may occur. Nonetheless, the reports that something is about to happen are probably 
on target. (See the From the Past to the Present box on p. 420 for more about the grapevine.)
How Do Nonverbal Cues Affect Communication?
Some of the most meaningful communications are neither spoken nor written. They are 
nonverbal communications. A loud siren or a red light at an intersection tells you something 
without words. A college instructor doesn’t need words to know that students are bored; 
their eyes get glassy or they begin to read the school newspaper during class. Similarly, 
when papers start to rustle and notebooks begin to close, the message is clear: Class time is 
about over. The size of a person’s office and desk or the clothes he or she wears also convey 
grapevine
An unofficial channel of communication

420    Part 4  •  Leading
 messages to others. However, the best-known areas of nonverbal communication are body 
language and verbal intonation.
Body language refers to gestures, facial configurations, and other movements of the 
body.9 A snarl, for example, says something different from a smile. Hand motions, facial 
expressions, and other gestures can communicate emotions or temperaments such as aggres-
sion, fear,  shyness, arrogance, joy, and anger.10
It’s not WHAT you say but HOW you say it.
Verbal intonation refers to the emphasis someone gives to words or phrases. To illustrate 
how intonations can change the meaning of a message, consider the student who asks the 
instructor a question. The instructor replies, “What do you mean by that?” The student’s reac-
tion will vary, depending on the tone of the instructor’s response. A soft, smooth tone  creates 
a different meaning from one that is abrasive with a strong emphasis on the last word. Most of 
us would view the first intonation as coming from someone who sincerely sought clarification, 
whereas the second suggests that the person is aggressive or defensive. The adage, “it’s not what 
you say but how you say it,” is something managers should remember as they communicate.
The fact that every oral communication also has a nonverbal message cannot be 
overemphasized.11 Why? Because the nonverbal component is likely to carry the greatest 
impact. Research indicates that from 65 to 90 percent of the message of every face-to-face 
conversation is interpreted through body language. Without complete agreement between 
the spoken words and the body language that accompanies it, receivers are more likely to 
react to body language as the “true meaning.”12
What Barriers Keep Communication from Being Effective?
A number of interpersonal and intrapersonal barriers affect why the message decoded by a 
receiver is often different from what the sender intended. We summarize the more prominent 
barriers to effective communication in Exhibit 13–2 and briefly describe them here.
One of the most famous studies of the grapevine was conduct-
ed by management researcher Keith Davis who investigated 
the communication patterns among 67 managerial personnel.8 
The approach he used was to learn from each communication 
recipient how he or she first received a given piece of infor-
mation and then trace it back to its source. It was found that, 
while the grapevine was an important source of information, 
only 10 percent of the executives acted 
as  liaison individuals (that is, passed 
the information on to more than one 
other person). For example, when one 
 executive decided to resign to enter 
the insurance business, 81 percent of 
the  executives knew about it, but only 
11 percent transmitted this information 
to others. At the time, this study was interesting because of 
what it found, but more  importantly because of what it showed 
about how the communication network worked.
Recent research by IBM and the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology using a similar type of analysis focused more 
on people’s social networks of contacts at work rather than on 
how information flowed through the organizational grapevine. 
However, what was noticeably interesting about this study 
was that it found that employees who have strong communi-
cation ties with their managers tend to bring in more money 
than those who steer clear of the boss.
What managers can learn from both of these studies is 
that it’s important to understand the social and communi-
cation networks that employees use as they do their work. 
Know who the key contact points are 
so that if you ever need to find out 
or relay information, you know who 
to go to.
If your professor has assigned this, 
go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to com-
plete these discussion questions.
  Talk About It 1: Why is it important for managers to un-
derstand social and communication networks employees use?
  Talk About It 2: What have been your experiences 
with the grapevine and what did you learn from those 
 experiences about dealing with the grapevine as a source 
of communication?
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
The Grapevine:  
An important source 
of information
body language
Nonverbal communication cues such as facial 
expressions, gestures, and other body movements
verbal intonation
An emphasis given to words or phrases that 
conveys meaning

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    421
How Does FilTerinG AFFecT communicATion?  
Filtering refers to the way that a sender manipulates 
information so that it will be seen more favorably by 
the receiver. For example, when a manager tells his 
boss what he feels that boss wants to hear, he is filtering 
information. Does filtering happen much in organiza-
tions? Sure it does. As information is passed up to senior 
executives, it has to be condensed and synthesized by 
subordinates so upper management doesn’t become 
overloaded with information. Those doing the condens-
ing filter communications through their own personal 
interests and perceptions of what’s important.
The extent of filtering tends to be the function 
of the organization’s culture and number of vertical 
levels in the organization. More vertical levels in an 
organization mean more opportunities for filtering. As 
organizations become less dependent on strict hierar-
chical arrangements and instead use more collabora-
tive, cooperative work arrangements, information filtering may become less of a problem. 
In addition, the ever-increasing use of e-mail to communicate in organizations reduces 
filtering because communication is more direct as intermediaries are bypassed. Finally, 
the organizational culture encourages or discourages filtering by the type of behavior it 
rewards. The more that organizational rewards emphasize style and appearance, the more 
managers will be motivated to filter communications in their favor.
How Does selecTive PercePTion AFFecT communicATion? The second bar-
rier is selective perception. We’ve mentioned selective perception before in this book. We 
 discuss it again here because the receivers in the communication process selectively see 
and hear based on their needs, motivations, experience, background, and other personal 
characteristics. Receivers also project their interests and expectations into communications 
as they decode them. The employment interviewer who expects a female job applicant 
Employees gesture during a conversation in 
the break room at the offices of Facebook in 
Paris, France. Body language, which includes 
gestures such as hand motions, and facial 
expressions are areas of nonverbal  
communication that can express fear,  
shyness, arrogance, joy, anger, and other  
emotions and temperaments.
Tomas van Houtryve/VII/Corbis
Exhibit 13–2 Barriers to Effective Communication
BarrIer
DescrIptIon
Filtering
The deliberate manipulation of information to make it  
appear more favorable to the receiver.
Selective Perception
Receiving communications on the basis of what one  
selectively sees and hears depending on his or her  
needs, motivation, experience, background, and other 
personal characteristics.
Information Overload
When the amount of information one has to work with 
exceeds one’s processing capacity.
Emotions
How the receiver feels when a message is received.
Language
Words have different meanings to different people.  
Receivers will use their definition of words being  
communicated.
Gender
How males and females react to communication may 
be different, and they each have a different communi-
cation style.
National Culture
Communication differences arising from the different 
languages that individuals use to communicate and the 
national culture of which they are a part.
filtering
Deliberately manipulating information to make it 
appear more favorable to the receiver
selective perception
Selectively perceiving or hearing a communication 
based on your own needs, motivations, experiences, 
or other personal characteristics

422    Part 4  •  Leading
to put her family ahead of her career is likely to see that tendency in female applicants, 
 regardless of whether the applicants would do so or not. As we said in Chapter 9, we don’t 
see reality; rather, we interpret what we see and call it reality.
How Does inFormATion overloAD AFFecT communicATion? Individuals have a 
finite capacity for processing data. For instance, consider an international sales representative 
who returns home to find that she has more than 600 e-mails waiting for her. It’s not possible 
to fully read and respond to each one of those messages without facing information  overload. 
Today’s typical executive frequently complains of information overload.13 The demands 
of keeping up with e-mail, phone calls, faxes, meetings, and professional reading create an 
 onslaught of data that is nearly impossible to process and assimilate. What happens when you 
have more information than you can sort out and use? You’re likely to select out, ignore, pass 
over, or forget information. Or you may put off further processing until the overload situation 
is over. In any case, the result is lost information and less effective communication.
How Do emoTions AFFecT communicATion? How a receiver feels when a message 
is received influences how he or she interprets it. You’ll often interpret the same message 
 differently, depending on whether you’re happy or distressed. Extreme emotions are most 
likely to hinder effective communications. In such instances, we often disregard our ratio-
nal and objective thinking processes and substitute emotional judgments. It’s best to avoid 
 reacting to a message when you’re upset because you’re not likely to be thinking clearly.
How Does lAnGuAGe AFFecT communicATion? Words mean different things 
to different people. “The meanings of words are not in the words; they are in us.”14 Age, 
 education, and cultural background are three of the more obvious variables that  influence 
the language a person uses and the definitions he or she applies to words. Columnist 
George F. Will and rapper Iggy Azalea both speak English. But the language one uses is 
vastly different from how the other speaks.
Forty percent of employees say that buzzwords are very 
prevalent in normal conversations at work.15
In an organization, employees usually come from diverse backgrounds and, therefore, 
have different patterns of speech. Additionally, the grouping of employees into departments 
creates specialists who develop their own jargon or technical language.16 In large organiza-
tions, members are also frequently widely dispersed geographically—even operating in dif-
ferent countries—and individuals in each locale will use terms and phrases that are unique to 
their area.17 And the existence of vertical levels can also cause language problems. The lan-
guage of senior executives, for instance, can be mystifying to regular employees not familiar 
with management jargon. Keep in mind that while we may speak the same language, our use 
of that language is far from uniform. Senders tend to assume that the words and phrases they 
use mean the same to the receiver as they do to them. This assumption, of course, is incorrect 
and creates communication barriers. Knowing how each of us modifies the language would 
help minimize those barriers.
How Does GenDer AFFecT communicATion? Effective communication between the 
sexes is important in all organizations if they are to meet organizational goals. But how can we 
manage the various differences in communication styles? To keep gender differences from be-
coming persistent barriers to effective communication, individuals must strive for acceptance, 
understanding, and a commitment to communicate adaptively with each other. Both men and 
women need to acknowledge differences are present in communication styles, that one style 
isn’t better than the other, and that it takes real effort to talk successfully with each other.18
How Does nATionAl culTure AFFecT communicATion? Finally, communi-
cation differences can also arise from the different languages that individuals use to 
information overload
What results when information exceeds processing 
capacity
jargon
Technical language specific to a discipline or 
industry

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    423
communicate and the national culture of which they’re a part.19 For example, let’s compare 
countries that place a high value on individualism (such as the United States) with coun-
tries where the emphasis is on collectivism (such as Japan).20
In the United States, communication patterns tend to be oriented to the individual and 
clearly spelled out. Managers in the United States rely heavily on memoranda, announce-
ments, position papers, and other formal forms of communication to state their positions on 
issues. Supervisors here may hoard information in an attempt to make themselves look good 
(filtering) and as a way of persuading their employees to accept decisions and plans. And for 
their own protection, lower-level employees also engage in this practice.
In collectivist countries, such as Japan, there’s more interaction for its own sake and a 
more informal manner of interpersonal contact. The Japanese manager, in contrast to the U.S. 
manager, engages in extensive verbal consultation with employees over an issue first and 
draws up a formal document later to outline the agreement that was made. The Japanese value 
decisions by consensus, and open communication is an inherent part of the work setting. 
Also, face-to-face communication is encouraged.21
Cultural differences can affect the way a manager chooses to communicate.22 And these 
differences undoubtedly can be a barrier to effective communication if not recognized and 
taken into consideration.
 Write It 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete BCOMM4: Multicultural Communication.
How Can Managers Overcome Communication Barriers?
Given these barriers to communication, what can managers do to overcome them? The following 
suggestions should help make communication more effective (see also Exhibit 13–3).
wHy use FeeDbAck? Many communication problems are directly attributed to misun-
derstanding and inaccuracies. These problems are less likely to occur if the manager gets 
feedback, both verbal and nonverbal.
A manager can ask questions about a message to determine whether it was received and 
understood as intended. Or the manager can ask the receiver to restate the message in his or 
her own words. If the manager hears what was intended, understanding and accuracy should 
improve. Feedback can also be more subtle as general comments can give a manager a sense 
of the receiver’s reaction to a message.
Feedback doesn’t have to be verbal. If a sales manager e-mails information about a 
new monthly sales report that all sales representatives will need to complete and some 
of them don’t turn it in, the sales manager has received feedback. This feedback suggests 
Exhibit 13–3 Overcoming Barriers to Effective Communication
Use Feedback
Check the accuracy of what has been communicated—or 
what you think you heard.
Simplify Language
Use words that the intended audience understands.
Listen Actively
Listen for the full meaning of the message without making 
premature judgment or interpretation—or thinking about 
what you are going to say in response.
Constrain Emotions
Recognize when your emotions are running high. When 
they are, don’t communicate until you have calmed down.
Watch Nonverbal Cues
Be aware that your actions speak louder than your words. 
Keep the two consistent.

424    Part 4  •  Leading
that the sales manager needs to clarify the initial 
communication. Similarly, managers can look for 
nonverbal cues to tell whether someone’s getting 
the message.
wHy sHoulD simPliFieD lAnGuAGe be 
useD? Because language can be a barrier, man-
agers should consider the audience to whom the 
message is  directed and tailor the language to 
them. Remember, effective communication is 
achieved when a message is both received and 
understood. For example, a hospital administrator 
should  always try to communicate in clear,  easily 
 understood terms and to use language  tailored 
to  different  employee groups. Messages to the 
 surgical staff should be purposefully different 
from those directed to the marketing team or office 
employees. Jargon can facilitate understanding if 
it’s used within a group that knows what it means, but can cause problems when used 
outside that group.
Do you really listen OR do you just hear?
wHy musT we lisTen AcTively? When someone talks, we hear. But too often we 
don’t listen. Listening is an active search for meaning, whereas hearing is passive. In listen-
ing, the receiver is also putting effort into the communication.
Many of us are poor listeners. Why? Because it’s difficult, and most of us would rather 
do the talking. Listening, in fact, is often more tiring than talking. Unlike hearing, active 
 listening, which is listening for full meaning without making premature judgments or 
 interpretations, demands total concentration. The average person normally speaks at a rate 
of about 125 to 200 words per minute. However, the average listener can comprehend up to 
400 words per minute.23 The difference leaves lots of idle brain time and opportunities for the 
mind to wander.
Active listening is enhanced by developing empathy with the sender—that is, by put-
ting yourself in the sender’s position. Because senders differ in attitudes, interests, needs, 
and expectations, empathy makes it easier to understand the actual content of a message. 
An empathetic listener reserves judgment on the message’s content and carefully listens to 
what is being said. The goal is to improve one’s ability to get the full meaning of a com-
munication without distorting it by premature judgments or interpretations. Other specific 
behaviors that active listeners use include making eye contact, exhibiting affirmative nods 
and appropriate facial expressions, avoiding distracting actions or gestures that suggest 
boredom, asking questions, paraphrasing using your own words, avoiding interrupting 
the speaker, not talking too much, and making smooth transitions between being a speaker 
and a listener.
wHy musT we consTrAin emoTions? It would be naïve to assume that managers 
always communicate in a rational manner. We know that emotions can cloud and distort 
communication. A manager who’s upset over an issue is more likely to misconstrue incom-
ing messages and fail to communicate his or her outgoing messages clearly and accurately. 
What to do? The simplest answer is to calm down and get emotions under control before 
communicating.
wHy THe emPHAsis on nonverbAl cues? If actions speak louder than words, then 
it’s important to make sure your actions align with and reinforce the words that go along 
with them. An effective communicator watches his or her nonverbal cues to ensure that 
they convey the desired message.
Ana Botin, executive chairman of Spain’s 
Banco Santander, is respected as an  
empathetic listener and a good  
communicator and consensus builder. Shown 
here communicating with employees at a 
bank in London, Botin asks questions and 
listens to feedback from employees,  
customers, and shareholders that helps  
her plan the company’s strategy.
Anthony Devlin/PA Wire URN:11384241/AP Images
active listening
Listening for full meaning without making  
premature judgments or interpretations

425
technology and managerial 
communication
IT is where it’s at!
13-2  Explain how technology affects 
managerial communication.
• Information technology (IT) has radically  
changed the way organizational members  
work and communicate.
— Improves manager’s ability to monitor indi-
vidual and team performance
— Allows employees to have 
more complete information 
to make faster decisions
— Provides employees more 
opportunities to collabo-
rate and share information
— Allows employees to be 
fully accessible 24/7
Steven Senne/AP Images
2 IT developments have had a significant  
effect on managerial communication . . .
1 networked communication
In a networked communication system
◼ Organizational computers are linked through 
compatible hardware and software, creating an 
integrated organizational network.
◼ Employees communicate with each other and get 
information wherever they are.
xstock/Shutterstock

426
Networked Communication Applications
•  e-mail—instantaneous transmission of messages on networked computers.
Messages read at receiver’s convenience
Fast, cheap, efficient, and convenient
Print documents, if needed
  Slow and cumbersome
•  Instant messaging (Im)—interactive, real-time communication among computer  
users who are logged on to the computer network at the same time.
Instantaneous communication without  
waiting for colleagues to read e-mail
Users must be logged on at the same time
Potential network and data security breaches
•  Voice mail—a system that digitizes a spoken message, transmits it over the network,  
and stores it for a receiver to retrieve later.24
Information transmitted without receiver  
being physically present
Message can be saved, deleted, or re-routed
No immediate feedback
•  Fax machines—transmit documents containing both text and graphics over  
ordinary telephone lines.
Printed form of information easily and  
quickly shared by organization members
Privacy can be  
compromised
•  electronic data interchange (eDI)—organizations exchange business transaction documents 
such as invoices or purchase orders, using direct computer-to-computer networks.
Saves time and money by eliminating printing  
and handling of paper documents
•  teleconference and videoconference meetings—confer simultaneously  
by telephone, e-mail, or video screens.
Participants don’t need to be in same physical  
location to share information and collaborate
Saves travel money
•  Organizational intranet—an organizational communication  
network using Internet technology that’s  
accessible only to organizational employees.
Share information and collaborate on  
documents and projects
Access company policy manuals and  
employee-specific materials25
Possible network and data security 
breaches
Cemil Adakale/Fotolia
Arekmalang/Fotolia
HSN/Fotolia

•  Organizational extranet—an organizational communication network using Internet technology that allows 
authorized organizational users to communicate with certain outsiders such as customers or vendors.
Faster and more convenient communication
Monkey Business/Fotolia
Concerns about network and data security breaches
•   Internet-based voice/video communication—Internet based communication services (such as Skype, 
Viber, FaceTime, Vonage, Yahoo!).
Fast and convenient communication
Concerns about network and data security breaches
2 Wireless communication
Wireless communication systems 
have benefits:
• Employees can be connected  
without being physically “plugged 
in” at work!
• Mobile technology is extremely 
popular!
• Improving the way you work is the 
payoff!
Wireless Communication Applications
• People don’t have to be physically “at the office” in order to communicate, collaborate, 
and share information with managers and colleagues.26
• Managers and employees “keep in touch” using smart-
phones, tablet computers, notebook computers, and mobile 
pocket communication devices.
• And wireless communication works—anywhere. People  
can send and receive information from the summit of 
Mt. Everest to the remotest locations on the planet.
Oleksiy Mark/Fotolia
427

428    Part 4  •  Leading
  try It! 
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com  
to complete the Simulation: Communication.
The office of tomorrow is still likely to resemble in some ways the 
office of today. There probably won’t be mail delivery by robots 
on hovercraft nor any teleportation devices. Most of the changes, 
 however, will likely be in the way we communicate.27 Employees 
will rely on multiple channels of communication with heavy reli-
ance on social networks, text messaging, 
instant messaging, mobile technology, 
and dashboard apps that allow employ-
ees to message each other directly. 
Smartphones will be as powerful as 
today’s mainframes, meaning employees 
will be able to do heavy computing on 
the go. Software will be able to track where employees are and 
blend that data with information about current projects and sug-
gest potential collaborators. E-mail is likely to decline in popular-
ity, largely because other channels are faster, more fluid, and 
more immediate.
Accurately forecasting tomorrow’s technology is impossible. But 
several patterns seem to be evolving. For instance, the combining 
of functions in a single device is likely to result in employees having 
a single product that will combine phone, text messaging, Internet 
access, video camera, teleconferencing, and language translator. It 
will allow people to read proposals, legal papers, news, or almost 
any document digitally. It won’t need a keyboard and will operate 
via voice commands. It’s also likely not to be handheld but rather 
something akin to combining reading glasses and an earpiece. You’ll 
read documents through the lenses of what look like normal read-
ing glasses and the earpiece/microphone will make it hands-free. 
Google Glass is an example of this wearable technology.29 As this 
type of technology becomes more com-
mon, organizations will have to address 
usage issues regarding information secu-
rity and possible legal dilemmas.
Another outcome made possible by 
technology will be a significant decrease 
in business travel. Improvements in 
computer-mediated groupware will allow individuals to conduct 
meetings in environments that closely simulate face-to-face inter-
actions. In these settings, real-time translations will be transcribed 
and displayed on screen and teleconferencers will be able to hear 
and see the words.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
  talk aBout It 3: Do you view communicating using technol-
ogy as more of a help or a hindrance? Explain.
   talk aBout It 4: What issues does wearable technology 
present in the workplace? What do you think managers will need to 
do to deal with these issues?
OffICE Of TOMOrrOW
::::::: Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::
Over 83 percent of managers 
are using mobile technology 
to improve communication 
with employees.28
What Communication Issues Do Managers Face Today?
“Pulse lunches.” That’s what managers at Citibank’s offices throughout Malaysia used to 
address pressing problems of declining customer loyalty and staff morale and increased em-
ployee turnover. By connecting with employees and listening to their concerns—that is, tak-
ing their “pulse”—during informal lunch settings, managers were able to make changes that 
boosted both customer loyalty and employee morale by more than 50 percent and reduced 
employee turnover to nearly zero.30
Being an effective communicator in today’s organizations means being connected—
most importantly to employees and customers, but in reality, to any of the organization’s 
stakeholders. In this section, we examine five communication issues of particular significance 
to today’s managers: managing communication in an Internet world, managing the organiza-
tion’s knowledge resources, communicating with customers, getting employee input, and 
communicating ethically.
13-3  Discuss  
contemporary 
issues in  
communication.

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    429
How Do We Manage Communication in an Internet World?
Lars Dalgaard, founder and chief executive of SuccessFactors, a human resource manage-
ment software company, recently sent an e-mail to his employees banning in-house e-mail 
for a week. His goal? Getting employees to “authentically address issues amongst each 
other.”31 And he’s not alone. Other companies have tried the same thing. As we discussed 
earlier, e-mail can consume employees, but it’s not always easy for them to let go of it, even 
when they know it can be “intexticating.” But e-mail is only one communication challenge 
in this Internet world. A recent survey found that 20 percent of employees at large compa-
nies say they contribute regularly to blogs, social networks, wikis, and other Web services.32 
Managers are learning, the hard way sometimes, that all this new technology has created spe-
cial communication challenges. The two main ones are (1) legal and security issues, and (2) 
lack of personal interaction.
This is BIG!
leGAl AnD securiTy issues. Chevron paid $2.2 million to settle a sexual harass-
ment lawsuit stemming from inappropriate jokes being sent by employees over company 
e-mail. UK firm Norwich Union had to pay £450,000 in an out-of-court settlement after 
an employee sent an e-mail stating that its competitor, Western Provident Association, was 
in financial difficulties. Whole Foods Market was investigated by federal regulators and its 
board after CEO John P. Mackey used a pseudonym to post comments on a blog attacking 
the company’s rival Wild Oats Markets.33
Although e-mail, blogs, tweets, and other forms of online communication are quick and 
easy ways to communicate, managers need to be aware of potential legal problems from inap-
propriate usage. Electronic information is potentially admissible in court. For instance, dur-
ing the Enron trial, prosecutors entered into evidence e-mails and other documents they say 
showed that the defendants defrauded investors. Says one expert, “Today, e-mail and instant 
messaging are the electronic equivalent of DNA evidence.”34 But legal problems aren’t the 
only issue; security concerns are an issue as well.
A survey addressing outbound e-mail and content security found that 26 percent of the 
companies surveyed saw their businesses affected by the exposure of sensitive or embarrass-
ing information.35 Managers need to ensure that confidential information is kept confidential. 
Employee e-mails and blogs should not communicate—inadvertently or purposely—proprie-
tary information. Corporate computer and e-mail systems should be protected against hackers 
(people who try to gain unauthorized access to computer systems) and spam (electronic junk 
mail). These serious issues must be addressed if the benefits of communication technology 
are to be realized.
PersonAl inTerAcTion. It may be called 
 social media, but another communication chal-
lenge posed by the Internet age we live and work 
in is the lack of personal interaction.36 Even when 
two people are communicating face-to-face, under-
standing is not always achieved. However, it can 
be especially challenging to achieve understanding 
and collaborate on getting work done when com-
munication takes place in a virtual environment. In 
response, some companies have banned e-mail on 
certain days, as we saw earlier. Others have sim-
ply encouraged employees to collaborate more in 
person. Yet, sometimes and in some situations, per-
sonal interaction isn’t physically possible—your 
colleagues work across the continent or even across 
the globe. In those instances, real-time collabora-
tion software (such as private workplace wikis, 
Internal social media enable these IBM 
employees in Dublin, Ireland, to  
communicate and collaborate with colleagues 
at IBM offices throughout the world. They use 
IBM Connections, a social network platform, 
and Sametime 8.5.2, IBM’s internal instant  
messaging system, to share knowledge, 
improve decision making, and accelerate 
innovation.
Artur Widak/ZUMA Press/Newscom

430    Part 4  •  Leading
blogs, instant messengers, and other types of groupware) may be a better communication 
choice than sending an e-mail and waiting for a response.37 Instead of fighting it, some 
companies are encouraging employees to utilize the power of social networks to collabo-
rate on work and to build strong connections. This trend is especially appealing to younger 
workers who are comfortable with this communication medium. Some companies have 
gone as far as to create their own in-house social networks. For instance, employees at 
Starcom MediaVest Group tap into SMG Connected to find colleague profiles that outline 
their jobs, list the brands they admire, and describe their values. A company vice president 
says, “Giving our employees a way to connect over the Internet around the world made 
sense because they were doing it anyway.”38
EMPLOYEES AND SOCIAL MEDIA
77 percent say they use social media to connect with colleagues.
35 percent say that social media has damaged a work relationship.
61 percent say that social media has led to new or better work relationships.
32 percent say they use social media to enhance work-related projects or solve 
problems.39
How Does Knowledge Management Affect Communication?
Part of a manager’s responsibility in fostering an environment conducive to learning and 
 effective communications is to create learning capabilities throughout the organization. These 
opportunities should extend from the lowest to the highest levels in all areas. How can man-
agers create such an environment? An important step is recognizing the value of knowledge 
as a major resource, just like cash, raw materials, or office equipment. To illustrate the value 
of knowledge, think about how you register for your college classes. Do you talk to others 
who have had a certain professor? Do you listen to their experiences with this individual and 
make your decision based on what they have to say (their knowledge about the situation)? If 
you do, you’re tapping into the value of knowledge. But in an organization, just recognizing 
the value of accumulated knowledge or wisdom isn’t enough. Managers must deliberately 
manage that base of knowledge. Knowledge management involves cultivating a learning 
culture in which organizational members systematically gather knowledge and share it with 
others in the organization so as to achieve better performance.40 For instance, accountants 
and consultants at Ernst & Young document best practices that they’ve developed, unusual 
problems they’ve dealt with, and other work information. This “knowledge” is then shared 
with all employees through computer-based applications and through community-of-interest 
teams that meet regularly throughout the company. Many other organizations, including 
General Electric, Toyota, and Hewlett-Packard, have recognized the importance of knowl-
edge management within a learning organization (see Chapter 6, pp. 204–205). Today’s 
technologies are helping improve knowledge management and facilitating organizational 
communications and decision making.
What’s Involved with Managing the Organization’s Knowledge 
resources?
Kara Johnson is a materials expert at product design firm IDEO. To make finding the right 
materials easier, she built a master library of samples linked to a database that explains their 
properties and manufacturing processes.41 What Johnson is doing is managing knowledge 
and making it easier for others at IDEO to learn and benefit from her knowledge. That’s what 
today’s managers need to do with the organization’s knowledge resources—make it easy for 
employees to communicate and share their knowledge so they can learn from each other ways 
to do their jobs more effectively and efficiently. One way organizations can do this is to build 
online information databases that employees can access. For example, William Wrigley Jr. 
Co. launched an interactive Web site that allows sales agents to access marketing data and 
other product information. The sales agents can question company experts about products or 
search an online knowledge bank. In its first year, Wrigley estimates that the site cut research 
knowledge management
Cultivating a learning culture in which organiza-
tional members systematically gather knowledge 
and share it with others

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    431
time of the sales force by 15,000 hours, making them more efficient and effective.42 This one 
example, among many others, shows how managers can use communication tools to manage 
this valuable organizational resource called knowledge.
In addition to online information databases for sharing knowledge, companies can create 
communities of practice, which are groups of people who share a concern, a set of problems, 
or a passion about a topic, and who deepen their knowledge and expertise in that area by 
interacting on an ongoing basis. To make these communities of practice work, however, it’s 
important to maintain strong human interactions through communication using such essential 
tools as interactive Web sites, e-mail, and videoconferencing. In addition, these groups face 
the same communication problems that individuals face—filtering, emotions, defensiveness, 
overdocumentation, and so forth. However, groups can resolve these issues by focusing on 
the same suggestions we discussed earlier.
What role Does Communication Play in Customer Service?
You’ve been a customer many times; in fact, you probably find yourself in a customer ser-
vice encounter several times a day. So what does a customer service encounter have to do 
with communication? As it turns out, a lot! What communication takes place and how it 
takes place can have a significant impact on a customer’s satisfaction with the service and 
the likelihood of being a repeat customer. Managers in service organizations need to make 
sure that employees who interact with customers are communicating appropriately and 
effectively with those customers. How? By first recognizing the three components in any 
service delivery process: the customer, the service organization, and the individual service 
provider.43 Each plays a role in whether communication is working. Obviously, manag-
ers don’t have a lot of control over what or how the customer communicates, but they can 
 influence the other two.
An organization with a strong service culture already values taking care of  customers—
finding out what their needs are, meeting those needs, and following up to make sure 
that their needs were met satisfactorily. Each of these activities involves communication, 
whether face-to-face, by phone or e-mail, or through other channels. In addition, commu-
nication is part of the specific customer service strategies the organization pursues. One 
strategy that many service organizations use is personalization. For instance, at Ritz-Carlton 
Hotels, customers are provided with more than a clean bed and room. Customers who have 
stayed at a location previously and indicated that certain items are important to them—such 
as extra pillows, hot chocolate, or a certain brand of shampoo—will find those items waiting 
in their room at arrival. The hotel’s database allows service to be personalized to customers’ 
expectations. In addition, all employees are asked to communicate information related to 
service provision. For instance, if a room attendant overhears guests talking about celebrat-
ing an anniversary, he or she is supposed to relay the information so something special can 
be done.44 Communication plays an important role in the 
hotel’s customer personalization strategy.
Communication also is important to the individual 
service provider or contact employee. The quality of the 
interpersonal interaction between the customer and that 
contact employee does influence customer satisfaction, 
especially when the service encounter isn’t up to expecta-
tions.45 People on the front line involved with those “criti-
cal service encounters” are often the first to hear about or 
notice service failures or breakdowns. They must decide 
how and what to communicate during these instances. 
Their ability to listen actively and communicate appro-
priately with the customer goes a long way in whether 
the situation is resolved to the customer’s satisfaction or 
spirals out of control. Another important communication 
concern for the individual service provider is making sure 
that he or she has the information needed to deal with cus-
tomers efficiently and effectively. If the service provider 
Communication is an important part of the 
customer service strategy of Metro Bank  
in London. Recognizing that how  
communication takes place has a great 
impact on customer satisfaction, the bank 
expects all employees to greet guests with 
a smile and a friendly greeting and teaches 
them how to treat guests with warmth,  
courtesy, and respect.
Facundo Arrizabalaga/EPA/Newscom
communities of practice
Groups of people who share a concern, a set of 
problems, or a passion about a topic and who 
deepen their knowledge and expertise in that area 
by interacting on an ongoing basis

432    Part 4  •  Leading
doesn’t personally have the information, there should be some way to get the 
information easily and promptly.46
How Can We Get Employee Input and Why Should We?
Nokia’s intranet soapbox, known as Blog-Hub, is open to employee bloggers 
around the world. There, employees have griped about their employer, but rather 
than shutting it down, Nokia managers want them to “fire away.” They feel 
that Nokia’s growth and success can be attributed to a “history of encouraging 
 employees to say whatever’s on their minds, with faith that smarter ideas will 
result.”48
In today’s challenging environment, companies need to get input from their 
employees. Have you ever worked somewhere that had an employee suggestion 
box? When an employee had an idea about a new way of doing something—
such as reducing costs, improving delivery time, and so forth—it went into the 
suggestion box, where it usually sat until someone decided to empty the box. 
Businesspeople frequently joked about the suggestion box and cartoonists lam-
basted the futility of putting ideas in the employee suggestion box. Unfortunately, 
this attitude about suggestion boxes still persists in many organizations, but it 
shouldn’t. Managers do business in a world today where you can’t afford to 
 ignore such potentially valuable information. Exhibit 13–4 lists some suggestions 
for letting employees know that their opinions matter.
Why Should Managers Be Concerned  
with Communicating Ethically?
Fifteen percent of employees say they wish their managers 
would improve their communication skills, especially in 
clarity and transparency.49
It’s particularly important today that a company’s communication efforts be ethical. Ethical 
communication “includes all relevant information, is true in every sense, and is not decep-
tive in any way.”50 On the other hand, unethical communication often distorts the truth or 
manipulates audiences. What are some ways that companies communicate unethically? 
It could be by omitting essential information. For instance, not telling employees that an 
impending merger is going to mean some of them will lose their jobs is unethical. It’s 
also unethical to plagiarize, which is “presenting someone else’s words or other creative 
product as your own.”51 It would also be unethical communication to selectively misquote, 
A Question of Ethics
Want to vent about your boss or your company? 
Now, there are apps to do just that: Yik Yak, 
Whisper, and Memo, among others.47 In these 
apps, users post anonymous messages about 
their employers. Giving and receiving feedback 
can be a significant challenge for employees 
and managers. Yes, providing the opportunity for 
employees to offer honest feedback about their 
managers and workplace is commendable. But 
are apps that provide a platform for employees 
to do just that, but anonymously, the answer?
If your professor has assigned this, go to the As-
signments section of mymanagementlab.com 
to complete these discussion questions.
  Talk About It 5: How do these apps that 
let employees post anonymous feedback benefit 
employees? Managers?
  Talk About It 6: What ethical dilemmas 
might arise because of these apps?
ethical communication
Presented material that contains all relevant  
information, is true in every sense, and is not 
deceptive in any way
Hold town-hall meetings where information is shared and input solicited.
Provide information about what’s going on, good and bad.
Invest in training so that employees see how they impact the customer experience.
Analyze problems together—managers and employees.
Make it easy for employees to give input by setting up different ways for them 
to do so (online, suggestion box, preprinted cards, and so forth).
Exhibit 13–4 How to Let Employees Know Their Input Matters
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 421. Reprinted  
and electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    433
misrepresent numbers, distort visuals, and fail to respect privacy or information security 
needs. For instance, although British Petroleum attempted to communicate openly and truth-
fully about the Gulf Coast oil spill, the public felt that much of the company’s communica-
tion had some unethical elements to it.
So how can managers encourage ethical communications? One thing is to “establish 
clear guidelines for ethical behavior, including ethical business communication.”52 In a 
global survey by the International Association of Business Communicators, 70 percent of 
communication professionals said their companies clearly define what is considered ethical 
and unethical behavior.53 If no clear guidelines exist, it’s important to answer the following 
questions:
• Has the situation been defined fairly and accurately?
• Why is the message being communicated?
• How will the people who may be affected by the message or who receive the message be 
impacted?
• Does the message help achieve the greatest possible good while minimizing possible harm?
• Will this decision that appears to be ethical now seem so in the future?
• How comfortable are you with your communication effort? What would a person you 
 admire think of it?54
Remember that as a manager, you have a responsibility to think through your communication 
choices and the consequences of those choices. If you always remember that, you’re likely to 
have ethical communication.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.

13 Review
434
CHAPTEr SUMMArY
  13-1 Describe what managers need to know  
about communicating effectively.
Communication is the transfer and understanding of meaning. 
The communication process consists of seven elements: First, 
a sender or source has a message. A message is a purpose to 
be conveyed. Encoding converts a message into symbols. A 
channel provides the medium along which a message travels. 
Decoding happens when the receiver retranslates a sender’s 
message. Finally, feedback lets the sender know whether the 
communication was successful. The barriers to effective com-
munication include filtering, emotions, information overload, 
defensiveness, language, and national culture. Managers can 
overcome these barriers by using feedback, simplifying lan-
guage, listening actively, constraining emotions, and watching 
for nonverbal clues.
  13-2 Explain how technology affects  
managerial communication.
Technology has radically changed the way organizational mem-
bers communicate. It improves a manager’s ability to monitor 
performance; it gives employees more complete information 
to make faster decisions; it provides employees more oppor-
tunities to collaborate and share information; and it makes it 
possible for people to be fully accessible, anytime anywhere. 
IT has affected managerial communication through the use of 
networked computer systems and wireless capabilities.
  13-3 Discuss contemporary issues  
in communication.
The two main challenges of managing communication in an 
Internet world are the legal and security issues and the lack of 
personal interaction.
Organizations can manage knowledge by making it easy 
for employees to communicate and share their knowledge 
so they can learn from each other ways to do their jobs 
more  effectively and efficiently. One way is through online 
 information databases, and another way is through creating 
communities of practice.
Communicating with customers is an important manage-
rial issue because what communication takes place and how 
it takes place can significantly affect a customer’s satisfaction 
with the service and the likelihood of being a repeat customer.
It’s important for organizations to get input from their 
employees. Such potentially valuable information should not 
be ignored.
Finally, it’s important that a company’s communication 
efforts be ethical. Ethical communication can be encouraged 
through clear guidelines and through answering questions that 
force a communicator to think through the communication 
choices made and the consequences of those choices.
DIscussIon QuestIons
 13-1 Explain why the different types of communication are 
effective across an organization’s hierarchy.
 13-2 Why isn’t effective communication synonymous with 
agreement?
 13-3 Examine the communication process as illustrated in 
Exhibit 13-1. What constitutes noise? Do you think noise 
can be prevented? Explain the reasons for your answer.
 13-4 “Ineffective communication is the fault of the sender.” 
Do you agree or disagree with this statement? Discuss.
 13-5 In your opinion, will information technology cause 
information overload for managers in future?
 13-6 How might a manager use the grapevine to his or her 
advantage? Support your response.
 13-7 Research the characteristics of a good communicator. 
Write up your findings in a bulleted list report. Be sure 
to cite your sources.
 13-8 Discuss the five contemporary communication issues 
facing managers.
 13-9 For one day, track nonverbal communication that you 
notice in others. What types did you observe? Was the 
nonverbal communication always consistent with the 
verbal communication taking place? Describe.

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    435
Management Skill Builder  |  BeIng a gooD lIstener
Most of us like to talk more than we like to listen. In fact, it’s been facetiously said that listening is just the 
price we have to pay to get people to allow us to talk. Managers must be effective communicators if they are 
to do their job well. Part of effective communication is conveying clear and understandable messages. But it’s 
also using active listening skills to accurately decipher others’ messages.
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
13-10 What purposes does communication serve?
13-11 Describe three barriers to communication and how 
managers can overcome those barriers.
13-12 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
assignment for this chapter.
 PErSONAL INVENTOry ASSESSMENT 
communication styles
What type of communication style(s) do you use? Take this PIA and learn more about 
your communication style so you can become a better communicator.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
Skill Basics
Too many people take listening skills for granted. They confuse 
hearing with listening. Hearing is merely picking up sound 
vibrations. Listening is making sense out of what we hear; and 
it requires paying attention, interpreting, and remembering. 
Active listening is hard work and requires you to “get inside” 
the speaker’s head in order to understand the communication 
from his or her point of view.
Eight specific behaviors are associated with active listen-
ing. You can be more effective at active listening if you use 
these behaviors.55
• 
Make eye contact. We may listen with our ears, but others 
tend to judge whether we’re really listening by looking at 
our eyes.
• 
Exhibit affirmative nods and appropriate facial expres-
sions. The effective active listener shows interest in what’s 
being said through nonverbal signals.
• 
Avoid distracting actions or gestures. When listening, don’t 
look at your watch, shuffle papers, play with your pencil, 
or engage in similar distractions. They make the speaker 
feel that you’re bored or uninterested.
• 
Ask questions. The critical listener analyzes what he or she 
hears and asks questions. This behavior provides clarifica-
tion, ensures understanding, and assures the speaker that 
you’re really listening.
• 
Paraphrase. Restate in your own words what the speaker 
has said. The effective active listener uses phrases such 
as “What I hear you saying is . . . ” or “Do you mean . . . ?” 
Paraphrasing is an excellent control device to check wheth-
er you’re listening carefully and is also a control for accu-
racy of understanding.
• 
Avoid interrupting the speaker. Let the speaker complete 
his or her thoughts before you try to respond. Don’t try to 
second-guess where the speaker’s thoughts are going.

436    Part 4  •  Leading
• 
Don’t overtalk. Most of us would rather speak our 
own ideas than listen to what others say. Although 
 talking might be more fun and silence might be uncom-
fortable, you can’t talk and listen at the same time. The 
good  active listener recognizes this fact and doesn’t 
 overtalk.
• 
Make smooth transitions between the roles of speaker 
and listener. In most work situations, you’re continu-
ally  shifting back and forth between the roles of speaker 
and listener. The effective active listener makes transi-
tions smoothly from speaker to listener and back to 
speaker.
Practicing the Skill
Follow these directions:
Break into groups of two. This exercise is a debate. Person A 
can choose any contemporary issue. Some examples include 
business ethics, the value of unions, stiffer college grading pol-
icies, gun control, and money as a motivator. Person B then se-
lects a position on this issue. Person A must automatically take 
the counterposition. The debate is to proceed for 8–10 minutes, 
with only one catch. Before each speaks, he or she must first 
summarize, in his or her own words and without notes, what 
the other has said. If the summary doesn’t satisfy the speaker, it 
must be corrected until it does.
I need some advice, Chris. As you know, my depart-
ment and all its employees are being transferred from 
Los  Angeles to Dallas. We’ve had to keep the information 
 “under wraps” for competitive reasons. However, one of my 
employees asked me point blank yesterday about a rumor 
she’s heard that this move is in the works. I didn’t answer 
her question directly. But I’m afraid that the office grapevine 
is going to start spreading inaccurate information and then 
affect  morale and productivity. What should I do now? Send 
me your written response soon (confidential, please!) about 
what you would do.
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Stone, Hartwick, and Mueller  
Talent Management Associates
To: Chris Richards
From: Dana Gibson
Subject: Office gossip
Experiential Exercise 
The Good and the Bad  
of TWITTER
case applIcatIon #1
T
weets. Twittering. Prior to 2006, the only definition we 
would have known for these words would have involved 
birds and the sounds they make. Now, practically 
 everyone knows that Twitter is also an online service—with 
974 million registered users, 
302 million monthly active us-
ers, 500 million tweets daily, 
and 1.6 billion daily search 
 queries—used to trade short 
messages of 140 characters or 
less via the Web, cell phones, 
and other devices.56 According to its founders (Jack Dorsey, 
Biz Stone, and Evan Williams), Twitter is many things: a mes-
saging service, a customer-service tool to reach customers, a 
Social Benefit or Social Disaster?
real-time search tool, and microblogging. And as the numbers 
show, it’s become quite popular!
One place where Twitter has caught on is the sports 
world, especially in college sports. For instance, Mike Riley, 
head football coach at the 
University of Nebraska, uses 
Twitter to keep fans informed. 
He understands the power of 
instant communication. Coach 
Hugh Freeze of the University 
of Mississippi was an early 
adopter of social media to communicate recruitment news. 
He’s discovered that tweeting is an easy and fun way to com-
municate quick tidbits of information to fans, alumni boosters, 

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    437
and other interested people who subscribe to Twitter. And it’s 
a convenient way for the football staff and football recruiting 
prospects to communicate with each other. There are pretty 
strict rules the NCAA has about contact allowed between 
potential recruits and coaches, but NCAA rules do allow un-
limited direct messaging. However, coaches still are cautious 
about committing recruiting violations. So, using Twitter to an-
nounce their destinations on the recruiting trail, coaches can in-
directly share their recruitment news without naming names.57
However, many universities and college coaches are moni-
toring and, in some cases, banning athletes’ use of social me-
dia. A potentially precarious issue can arise if an athlete tweets 
some comment that could put the university in a negative light, 
offend boosters, or possibly violate an NCAA regulation. Here 
are a couple of tweeting slip-ups: A Western Kentucky running 
back was suspended after he tweeted critical comments about 
the team’s fans; the NCAA pulled 15 football scholarships 
after an investigation based on a player’s tweet; and a Lehigh 
University wide receiver was suspended for retweeting a ra-
cial slur. We even saw how tweeting backfired at the London 
Olympics. The first “casualty”—a Greek triple jumper—was 
banned from the Games over some racially charged tweets. 
That seems to be good reason for the managers (i.e., coaches 
and administrators) of these programs to attempt to control the 
information flow. But is banning the answer? Some analysts 
say no. They argue that those setting up rules and regulations 
don’t understand what social media is all about and the value 
it provides as a marketing and recruiting tool, and they argue 
that it’s necessary to understand First Amendment rights (part 
of which includes freedom of speech). Rather than banning the 
use of social media, many universities are hiring companies 
to monitor athletes’ posts. This, however, requires athletes to 
give access to their accounts, which some call an invasion of 
privacy. But as time goes on, social media conversations are 
becoming more common and more expected. By the time the 
Sochi Olympics rolled around, social media had changed the 
way Olympics news and views were conveyed.58
Discussion Questions
13-13 What are the advantages and drawbacks of universities using 
social media to communicate with various stakeholders— 
students, potential students, alumni, donors, etc.?
13-14 Do you think there are more or fewer communication barriers 
when using social media? Discuss.
13-15 What should managers do to be sure they communicate 
 effectively when using social media?
13-16 Looking at the rules and regulations that universities are 
 establishing, do you think that business organizations should 
have rules for employees using social media? What types 
of rules do you think would be necessary? Be as specific as 
 possible.
13-17 What have been your experiences—both positive and 
 negative—with social media? From your experiences, what 
guidelines could you suggest for managers and organizations?

438    Part 4  •  Leading
case applIcatIon 
Banning E-Mail. Banning Voice Mail.
I
t’s estimated that the average corporate user sends and 
 receives some 112 e-mails daily.59 That’s about 14 e-mails 
per hour, and even if half of those don’t require a lot of time 
and concentration, that level of e-mail volume can be stressful 
and lead to unproductive time. 
Once imagined to be a time-
saver, has the inbox become 
a burden? What about voice 
mails? Are phone messages 
even necessary for organiza-
tional communication? These 
and other concerns are forcing many organizations to take a 
closer look at how information is communicated.
Several years ago, U.S. Cellular’s executive vice presi-
dent implemented a ban on e-mail every Friday. In his memo 
 announcing the change to employees, he told them to get out 
and meet the people they work with rather than sending an  
e-mail. That directive went over with a thud. One employee 
confronted him saying that Ellison didn’t understand how much 
work had to get done and how much easier it was when using e-
mail. Eventually, however, employees were won over. Forced to 
use the phone, one employee learned that a  coworker he thought 
was across the country was, instead, across the hall. Now, other 
 executives are discovering the benefits of banning e-mail.
Jessica Rovello, cofounder and president of Arkadium, 
which develops games, has described e-mail as “a form of busi-
ness attention-deficit disorder.” She found herself—and her 
employees—putting e-mail in the inbox ahead of everything 
else being worked on. What she decided to do was only check 
her e-mail four times a day and to turn off her e-mail notifica-
tion. Another executive, Tim Fry of Weber Shandwick, a global 
public relations firm, spent a year preparing to “wean” his em-
ployees off their e-mail system. His goal: dramatically reduce 
how much e-mail employees send and receive. His approach 
started with the firm’s interoffice communication system, which 
became an internal social network, with elements of Facebook, 
work group collaboration software, and an employee bulletin 
board. And then there’s Thierry 
Breton, 
head 
of 
Europe’s 
largest IT firm, Atos. He an-
nounced a “zero e-mail policy” 
to be replaced with a service 
more like Facebook and Twitter 
combined.
The latest casualty in organizational communication choices 
is voice mail. Under pressure to cut costs, several large financial 
institutions, including J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., Citigroup Inc., 
and Bank of America Corp., are deleting or cutting back on 
phone voice mail. Some company executives explaining their 
actions cite the reality that few people use voice mail anymore. 
The question remains, however, whether customers still expect 
to be able to maintain voice contact with their financial advisors.
Discussion Questions
13-18 What do you think of this? Do you agree that e-mail and voice 
mail can be unproductive in the workplace?
13-19 Were you surprised at the volume of e-mail an average 
 employee receives daily? What are the challenges of dealing 
with this volume of e-mail? How much e-mail would you say 
you receive daily? Has your volume of e-mail increased? Have 
you had to change your e-mail habits?
13-20 What do you think of the e-mail “replacement” some busi-
nesses are using—more of a social media tool? In what ways 
might it be better? Worse?
13-21 What role should customer service play in choosing which 
 organizational communication methods to use?
#2
What IS necessary for  
organizational  
communication?

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    439
case applIcatIon #3
T
heories about commu-
nication should provide 
managers with the tools 
and information necessary to 
be able to communicate more 
effectively and efficiently with 
members of the staff and avoid miscommunication.
However, there are numerous cases where the intended 
message has not been received by staff or customers in the way 
it was intended. With the advent of social media, managers 
and businesses have new opportunities and methods to com-
municate with staff and customers. At the same time, messages 
that are transmitted via social media can lead to instances of 
miscommunication and confusion amongst the recipients, with 
many often questioning whether managers have used the most 
appropriate channel of communication. For instance—
• A cryptic post to the social media site Facebook was how the 
staff of a popular Belfast restaurant, the Bank Café Bar, found 
out that they were to lose their jobs. Managers took the deci-
sion to announce the immediate closure of the restaurant to 
customers and staff in the same message, ending the message 
with “#nojob”. Members of the staff had previously been told 
that the restaurant was facing some difficulties, but many had 
agreed to stay with the business despite the difficulties.60
• UK based supermarket Morrisons fell victim to cyber 
crime and found that the personal data, including bank 
Using Social Media for Workplace Communication
details of 100,000 employees 
had been stolen and uploaded 
to the Internet. They used so-
cial media platform Facebook 
to immediately announce the 
issue. Morrisons had also sent 
out notifications via email to 
managers within stores and requested that it be passed onto 
colleagues who did not have access to company email ad-
dresses. Many employees had found out about the issue 
because of the announcement on Facebook, long before any 
internal communication had reached them.61
Discussion Questions
13-22 Based on the two examples from the case, what do you 
think are the main communication issues? Did the manag-
ers of these organizations communicate effectively? Why or 
why not?
13-23 How would you feel if you were working in these organiza-
tions and were affected by such miscommunication through 
social media platforms?
13-24 What would you do differently if you were a manager for the 
companies mentioned in the examples?
13-25 What do you think other mangers should learn from these 
 examples of miscommunication?
Understand your chosen  
COMMUNICATION  
CHANNEL

440    Part 4  •  Leading
Endnotes
 1. D. L. Berchelmann, “You’re Doing 
It Wrong,” https://texasceomagazine 
.com/departments/leadership- 
feedback/, December 13, 2014.
 2. D. K. Berlo, The Process of Com-
munication (New York: Holt, Rine-
hart & Winston, 1960), 30–32.
 3. Ibid., 54.
 4. See, for instance, “Get the Mes-
sage: Communication Is Key in 
Managing Change within Or-
ganizations—Yet Ensuring Its 
Effectiveness at Times of High 
Concerns Can Be Tricky,” Em-
ployee Benefits, February 2002, 
58–60.
 5. Ibid., 103.
 6. L. R. Birkner and R. K. Birkner, 
“Communication Feedback: Put-
ting It All Together,” Occupational 
Hazards, August 2001, 9.
 7. L. Hilton, “They Heard It through 
the Grapevine,” South Florida 
Business Journal, August 18, 
2000, 53.
 8. From the Past to the Present box 
based on S. Baker, “Putting a Price 
on Social Connections,” Business-
Week Online, April 8, 2009; and 
K. Davis, “Management Commu-
nication and the Grapevine,” Har-
vard Business Review, September–
October 1953, 43–49.
 9. L. 
Talley, 
“Body 
Language: 
Read It or Weep,” HR Maga-
zine, July 2010, 64–65; and M. 
Fulfer, “Nonverbal Communica-
tion: How to Read What’s Plain 
as the Nose . . . Or Eyelid . . . Or 
Chin . . . On Their Faces,” Jour-
nal of Occupational Excellence 
(Spring 2001): 19–38.
 10. Ibid.; and T. Fernsler, “The Secrets 
and Science of Body Language,” 
Nonprofit World, 25.
 11. P. Mornell, “The Sounds of Si-
lence,” Inc., February 2001, 117.
 12. A. Warfield, “Do You Speak Body 
Language?” Training and Devel-
opment (April 2001): 60.
 13. S. Begley, “I Can’t Think,” News-
week, March 7, 2011, 28–33; D. 
Dean and C. Webb, “Recover-
ing from Information Overload,” 
McKinsey Quarterly, Issue 1, 
2011, 80–88; and “Information 
Overload,” Australian Business 
Intelligence, April 16, 2002.
 14. S. I. Hayakawa, Language in 
Thought and Action (New York: 
Harcourt 
Brace 
Jovanovich, 
1949), 292.
 15. SmartPulse, “How Prevalent Is 
the Use of Buzzwords in Your 
Organization?” Smart Brief on 
Leadership, www.smartbrief.com/ 
leadership, July 29, 2014.
 16. “Jargon Leaves Us Lost for 
Words,” Australian Business In-
telligence, August 23, 2002; and 
W. S. Mossberg, “A Guide to the 
Lingo You’ll Want to Learn for 
Wireless Technology,” Wall Street 
Journal, March 28, 2002, B1.
 17. “Gobbledygook Begone,” Work-
force, February 2002, 12; and 
“Business-Speak,” Training and 
Development 
(January 
2002): 
50–52.
 18. J. Langdon, “Differences between 
Males and Females at Work,” USA 
Today, www.usatoday.com (Febru-
ary 5, 2001); J. Manion, “He Said, 
She Said,” Materials Manage-
ment in Health Care, November 
1998, 52–62; G. Franzwa and C. 
Lockhart, “The Social Origins 
and Maintenance of Gender Com-
munication 
Styles, 
Personality 
Types, and Grid-Group Theory,” 
Sociological Perspectives 41, no. 1 
(1998): 185–208; and D. Tannen, 
Talking From 9 to 5: Women and 
Men in the Workplace (New York: 
Avon Books, 1995).
 19. See, for example, M. K. Kozan, 
“Subcultures and Conflict Man-
agement Styles,” Management In-
ternational Review, January 2002, 
89–106.
 20. A. Mehrabian, “Communication 
without Words,” Psychology To-
day, September 1968, 53–55.
 21. See also W. L. Adair, T. Okumura, 
and J. M. Brett, “Negotiation Be-
havior when Cultures Collide: The 
United States and Japan,” Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology (June 
2001): 371.
 22. C. H. Tinsley, “How Negotiators 
Get to Yes: Predicting the Constel-
lation of Strategies Used across 
Cultures to Negotiate Conflict,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 
(August 2001): 583.
 23. See, for instance, S. P. Robbins 
and P. L. Hunsaker, Training in 
Interpersonal Skills, 4th ed. (Up-
per Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2006); M. Young and J. E. 
Post, “Managing to Communicate, 
Communicating to Manage: How 
Leading Companies Communicate 
with Employees,” Organizational 
Dynamics, Summer 1993, 31–43; 
J. A. DeVito, The Interpersonal 
Communication Book, 6th ed. 
(New York: HarperCollins, 1992); 
and A. G. Athos and J. J. Gabarro, 
Interpersonal Behavior (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
1978).
 24. See, for example, R. R. Panko, 
Business Data Networks and 
Communications, 4th ed. (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
2003).
 25. “Virtual Paper Cuts,” Workforce, 
July 2000, 16–18.
 26. See, for instance, A. Cohen, 
“Wireless Summer,” Time, May 
29, 2000, 58–65; and K. Hafner, 
“For the Well Connected, All the 
World’s an Office,” New York 
Times, March 30, 2000, D1.
 27. S. Kessler, “Slack with Friends, 
Lovers and Geeks: How the Hot 
Workplace App Is Getting Per-
sonal,” 
http://www.fastcompany 
.com/3046889/tech-forecast/
slack-with-friends-lovers-and-
geeks-how-the-hot-workplace-
app-is-getting-perso, 
June 
3, 
2015; M. Ravindranath, “Slack 
Takes on Internal Communication 
for Small Teams and Startups,” 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/
business/on-it/slack-takes-on- 
internal-communication-for-small-
teams-and-start-ups/2014/11/01/
ab1ad5b4-5eed-11e4-8b9e- 
2ccdac31a031_story.html, 
 November 2, 2014; and G. Colvin, 
“Brave New Work: The Office of 
Tomorrow,” Fortune, January 16, 
2012, 49+.
 28. SmartPulse, “Do You Use Emerg-
ing Mobile Technology . . . To Im-
prove Your Communication with 
Your Employees?” Smart Brief on 
Exec Tech, www.smartbrief.com/
exectech, February 22, 2015.
 29. H. Tsukayama, “Everything You 
Need to Know about Google 
Glass,” www.washingtonpost.com, 
February 27, 2014.
 30. S. Luh, “Pulse Lunches at Asian 
Citibanks Feed Workers’ Morale, 
Lower Job Turnover,” Wall Street 
Journal, May 22, 2001, B11.
 31. S. Shellenbager, “Backlash against 
Email Builds,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, April 29, 2010, D6.
 32. H. Green, “The Water Cooler Is 
Now on the Web,” BusinessWeek, 
October 1, 2007, 78–79.
 33. The Associated Press, “Whole 
Foods 
Chief 
Apologizes 
for 
Posts,” New York Times Online, 
July 18, 2007; E. White, J. S. Lub-
lin, and D. Kesmodel, “Executives 
Get the Blogging Bug,” Wall Street 
Journal, July 13, 2007, B1+; C. 
Alldred, “U.K. Libel Case Slows 
E-Mail Delivery,” Business Insur-
ance, August 4, 1997, 51–53; and 
T. Lewin, “Chevron Settles Sexual 
Harassment Charges,” New York 
Times Online, February 22, 1995.
 34. J. Eckberg, “E-mail: Messages 
Are Evidence,” Cincinnati En-
quirer, www.enquirer.com (July 
27, 2004).
 35. M. Scott, “Worker E-Mail and 
Blog Misuse Seen as Growing 
Risk for Companies,” Workforce 
Management, www.workforce.com 
(July 20, 2007).
 36. K. Byron, “Carrying Too Heavy 
a Load? The Communication and 
Miscommunication of Emotion by 
Email,” Academy of Management 
Review, April 2008, 309–27.
 37. J. Marquez, “Virtual Work Spaces 
Ease Collaboration, Debate among 
Scattered Employees,” Workforce 
Management, May 22, 2006, 38; 
and M. Conlin, “E-Mail Is So Five 
Minutes Ago,” BusinessWeek, No-
vember 28, 2005, 111–12.
 38. H. Green, “The Water Cooler Is 
Now on the Web”; E. Frauenheim, 
“Starbucks Employees Carve Out 
Own ‘Space,’” Workforce Man-
agement, October 22, 2007, 32; 
and S. H. Wildstrom, “Harnessing 
Social Networks,” BusinessWeek, 
April 23, 2007, 20.
 39. S. Castellano, “The Social Media 
Skills Gap,” T&D, July 2014, 14.
 40. J. S. Brown and P. Duguid, “Bal-
ancing Act: How to Capture 
Knowledge without Killing It,” 
Harvard Business Review, May–
June 2000, 73–80; and J. Torsilieri 
and C. Lucier, “How to Change 
the World,” Strategy and Business, 
October 2000, 17–20.
 41. J. Scanlon, “Woman of Sub-
stance,” Wired, July 2002, 27.
 42. H. 
Dolezalek, 
“Collaborating 
in Cyberspace,” Training (April 
2003): 33.
 43. B. A. Gutek, M. Groth, and B. 
Cherry, “Achieving Service Suc-
cess through Relationship and 
 Enhanced 
Encounters,” 
Acad-
emy of Management Executive, 
 November 2002, 132–44.
 44. R. C. Ford and C. P. Heaton, “Les-
sons from Hospitality That Can 
Serve Anyone,” Organizational 
Dynamics, Summer 2001, 30–47.
 45. M. J. Bitner, B. H. Booms, and 
L. A. Mohr, “Critical Service 
 Encounters: 
The 
Employee’s 
Viewpoint,” Journal of Marketing 
(October 1994): 95–106.
 46. S. D. Pugh, J. Dietz, J. W. Wi-
ley, and S. M. Brooks, “Driving 
Service 
Effectiveness 
through 
Employee-Customer 
Linkages,” 
Academy of Management Execu-
tive, November 2002, 73–84.
 47. J. Mahler, “Who Spewed That 
Abuse? Anonymous Yik Yak App 
Isn’t Telling,” New York Times 
Online, March 8, 2015; L. Gell-
man, “App Lets Workers Vent 
Anonymously,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, January 21, 2015, B7; and K. 
Whitehouse, “Workplace Gossip 
App Draws Ire from Firms,” USA 
Today, January 19, 2015, 3B.
 48. J. Ewing, “Nokia: Bring on the 
Employee Rants,” BusinessWeek, 
June 22, 2009, 50.
 49. S. Vozza, “5 Things Your Employ-
ees Wish They Could Tell You,” 
http://www.fastcompany.com/ 
3045282/hit-the-ground-running/ 
5-things-your-employees-wish-
they-could-tell-you, 
April 
27, 
2015.
 50. J. V. Thill and C. L. Bovee, Excel-
lence in Business Communication, 
9th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 2011), 24–25.
 51. Ibid.
 52. Ibid.
 53. Ibid.
 54. Ibid.
 55. Based on K. J. Murphy, Effective 
Listening (New York: Bantam 
Books, 1987); and T. Drollinger, 
L. B. Comer, and P. T. Warrington, 
“Development and Validation of 
the Active Empathetic Listening 
Scale,” Psychology & Marketing, 
February 2006, 161–80.
 56. Twitter Usage, Company Facts, 
h t t p s : / / a b o u t . t w i t t e r. c o m / 
company, March 31, 2015; E. 
Sherman, “Many Twitter  Users 

CHAPTER 13  •  Managing Communication and Information    441
Don’t Tweet, Finds Report,” http://
www.cbsnews.com/news/many-
twitter-users-dont-tweet-finds-
report/, April 14, 2014; R. W. 
Ahrens, “Tweets Per Day,” USA 
Today, March 20, 2013, 2A; M. 
Lopresti, “Elimination by Twit-
ter,” USA Today, July 26, 2012, 
1C; K. Paulson, “College Athlete 
Tweet Ban? Free Speech Sacks 
That Idea,” USA Today, April 16, 
2012, 9A; L. East, “Les Miles’ 
Tweets Entertain CWS Fans,” 
theadvocate.com/sports, July 12, 
2012; P. Thamel, “Tracking Twit-
ter, Raising Red Flags,” New York 
Times Online, March 30, 2012; 
L. Dugan, “Twitter to Surpass 
500 Million Registered Users on 
Wednesday,” 
www.mediabistro 
.com, February 21, 2012; C. Ho, 
“Companies 
Tracking 
College 
Athletes’ Tweets, Facebook Posts 
Go After Local Universities,” 
Washington Post Online, October 
16, 2011; D. Rovell, “Coaches 
Ban of Twitter Proves College 
Sports Isn’t about Education,” 
CNBC Sports Business Online, 
August 8, 2011; Staff of Corporate 
Executive Board, “Corporate Con-
fidential: How Twitter Changes 
Everything,” BusinessWeek On-
line, September 4, 2009; S. John-
son, “How Twitter Will Change 
the Way We Live,” Time, June 15, 
2009, 30–37; J. Swartz, “A World 
That’s All a-Twitter,” USA Today, 
May 26, 2009, 1B+; and K. White-
side, “College Coaches Are Chirp-
ing about Twitter!” USA Today, 
April 29, 2009, 1C+.
 57. G. Schroeder, “Coaches Using 
Twitter from Recruiting Trail,” 
USA Today, February 2, 2015, 10C.
 58. K. Whiteside, “Sochi-al Media’s 
Golden Moment,” USA Today, 
February 11, 2014, 1A+.
 59. M. Nalsky, “How Quitting Email 
Helped My Company Commu-
nicate Better,” http://thenextweb 
.com/entrepreneur/2014/11/09/ 
quitting-email-helped-company- 
team-communicate-better/, 
November 9, 2014; M. Pro-
kopeak, 
“What 
If 
Email 
Got 
Pantsed?” 
www.workforce 
.com, October 14, 2013; C. Brown, 
A. Killick, and K. Renaud, “To Re-
duce E-mail, Start at the Top,” Har-
vard Business Review, September 
2013, 26; J. Wortham, “When E-
Mail Turns from Delight to Deluge,” 
New York Times Online, February 
9, 2013; T. Provost, “Long Live 
E-Mail,” CFO, January/February 
2013, 29; M. V. Rafter, “Too Much 
Email on the Menu? Here Are Five 
Tips to Curb Company Consump-
tion,” Workforce Management On-
line, April 24, 2012; M. V. Rafter, 
“If Tim Fry Has His Way, He’ll 
Eradicate Email for Good,” Work-
force Management Online, April 
24, 2012; M. A. Field, “Turning 
Off Email, Turning Up Productiv-
ity,” Workforce Management On-
line, February 29, 2012; “Internet 
2011 in Numbers,” royalpingdom.
com, January 17, 2012; “Should 
Workplaces Curtail Email?” New 
York Times Online, December 7, 
2011; W. Powers, “The Phony ‘Zero 
Email’ Alarm,” New York Times On-
line, December 6, 2011; L. Suarez, 
“What We Would Miss,” New York 
Times Online, December 5, 2011; P. 
Duncan, “Break Bad Habits,” New 
York Times Online, December 5, 
2011; N. Carr, “Put the Cost Back 
in Communication,” New York Times 
Online, December 5, 2011; and P. 
Allen, “One of the Biggest Informa-
tion Technology Companies in the 
World to Abolish E-mails,” www 
.dailymail.com,  November 30, 2011.
 60. E. Reynolds, “How Facebook could 
cost you your job! One in five 
bosses has rejected a job applicant 
after checking out their profile on 
social media sites,” Mail Online, 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/
article-2115927/How-Facebook-
cost-job-One-applicants-rejected-
bosses-check-profiles-social- 
media-sites.html, March 16, 2012; 
J. Beattie, “Staff at popular East 
Belfast restaurant claim they were 
told they’d lost their job via Face-
book,” Belfast Live, http://www 
.belfastlive.co.uk/news/belfast-
news/staff-popular-east-belfast- 
restaurant-10210444, October 6, 
2015.
 61. E. Simpson, “Wm Morrison Super-
market Suffers Payroll Data Theft,” 
BBC News, www.bbc .com, March 
14, 2014; J.   Davey, “UK grocer 
Morrisons suffers payroll data theft,” 
Reuters, www.reuters.com/article/
uk-morrisons-data-theft-idUK-
BREA2D0O020140314, 
March 
14, 2014; H. Gye, “Payroll details 
of 100,000 Morrisons staff includ-
ing bank account numbers leaked 
by insider and published on the 
web,” Mail Online, www.dailymail 
.co.uk, March 14, 2014.

Foundations  
of Control
14 
A lack of 
 employee 
turnover is a sign of  
a good manager.
Yeko Photo Studio/Shutterstock

443
While high employee turnover is almost always 
dysfunctional, low turnover is not necessarily 
the best goal. An absence of turnover often can 
mean a complacent manager, one who’s willing 
to accept mediocre employee performance. In 
an effective organizational control system,  
managers are encouraged to identify and 
remove marginal employees. Low levels of 
employee turnover can be functional only if the 
right people—those who are the weakest  
performers—are the ones leaving.

is the final step in the management process. 
Managers must monitor whether goals that 
were established as part of the planning 
process are being accomplished efficiently 
and effectively. That’s what they do when 
they control. Appropriate controls can help 
managers look for specific performance 
gaps and areas for improvement. Things 
don’t always go as planned. But that’s why 
controlling is so important! In this chapter, 
we’ll look at the fundamental elements of 
controlling, including the control process, the 
types of controls that managers can use, and 
contemporary issues in control. •
Learning Outcomes
14-1 Explain the nature and importance of control. p. 445
14-2 Describe the three steps in the control process. p. 447
14-3 Discuss the types of controls organizations and managers use. p. 452
14-4 Discuss contemporary issues in control. p. 458
Controlling 
444

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     445
What Is Control and Why Is It Important?
“Bailout” was the magic word that cost Domino’s 
Pizza 11,000 free pizzas. The company had prepared an 
Internet coupon for an ad campaign that was considered 
but not approved. However, when someone apparently 
typed “bailout” into a Domino’s promotional code win-
dow and found it was good for a free medium pizza, 
the word spread like wildfire on the Web. Somewhere, somehow, a lack of control cost the 
company big time.1
What Is Control?
How do you know a control system is effective? Look at 
whether goals are being achieved!
Control is the management function that involves monitoring activities to ensure that they’re 
being accomplished as planned and correcting any significant deviations. Managers can’t 
 really know whether their units are performing properly until they’ve evaluated what activi-
ties have been done and have compared the actual performance with the desired standard. An 
 effective control system ensures that activities are completed in ways that lead to the attain-
ment of the organization’s goals. The effectiveness of a control system is determined by how 
well it facilitates goal achievement. The more a control system helps managers achieve their 
organization’s goals, the better it is.
Why Is Control Important?
• A press operator at the Denver Mint noticed a flaw—an 
extra up leaf or an extra down leaf—on Wisconsin state 
quarters being pressed at one of his five press machines. 
He stopped the machine and left for a meal break. When 
he returned, he saw the machine running and assumed that 
someone had changed the die in the machine. However, af-
ter a routine inspection, the machine operator realized the 
die had not been changed. The faulty press had likely been 
running for over an hour and thousands of the flawed coins 
were now commingled with unblemished quarters. As many 
as 50,000 of the faulty coins entered circulation, setting off 
a coin collector buying frenzy.3
• At least 4 million records of federal government employees’ 
personal data held by the Office of Personnel Management 
were hacked. Hackers appeared to be looking for Social Secu-
rity numbers and other personal information.4
• After an above-ground radioactive release at a nuclear waste 
storage vault in New Mexico, a report blamed managers who 
failed to “understand and control the risks.”5
• McDonald’s Japan has apologized to customers and vowed 
to better control product safety after objects including a tooth 
and plastic were found in food.6
• After a number of negatively publicized incidents on its cruise 
ships, Carnival Corporation accelerated its schedule of main-
tenance and other renovations.7
• A technical error on Walmart’s Web site led to certain 
products showing unbelievably low prices (for instance, a 
14-1  Explain the nature 
and importance 
of control.
A Question of Ethics
It’s called the “walk of shame.” Marching employees through 
stores in handcuffs to discourage theft and other infractions.2 
At a Target store in Pasadena, California, an employee who was 
subjected to the walk of shame was released and never charged 
with a crime. However, the emotional distress of the incident led 
to the individual later committing suicide. After the incident went 
public, other Target employees in other stores told of their experi-
ences either witnessing or experiencing the walk of shame. Target 
Corporation denies that it has any such policy. The company also 
did not elaborate on what guidance it gives managers on how to 
handle suspected employee theft or other work violations that 
could potentially involve law enforcement.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments sec-
tion of mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion 
 questions.
  Talk About It 1: What do you think of this “supposed” 
 practice—positive and negative? Discuss.
  Talk About It 2: How could an organization make sure it’s 
being ethical in controlling employees’ behaviors and still achieving 
organizational goals?
control
Management function that involves monitoring 
activities to ensure that they’re being accomplished 
as planned and correcting any significant deviations

446    Part 5  •  Controlling
 treadmill for $33). The error was not the result of hacking, but rather an internal glitch, 
and was quickly corrected.8
• Clothing return fraud costs U.S. retailers almost $9 billion annually. To combat this, many 
high-end retailers have started placing large black plastic tags in highly visible places on 
dresses and other pricey clothing items.9
• No fast-food chain wants its employees doing gross stuff behind the scenes, but social 
media photos and videos of a Taco Bell employee licking a stack of taco shells, a Wendy’s 
employee bending down under a Frosty machine with mouth wide open gobbling the treat, 
or a Domino’s Pizza employee performing vulgar and unsanitary actions while preparing 
food have all shown up online.10
77 percent of executives say that the biggest threat  
to their organizations comes from within.11
Can you see now why controlling is such an important managerial function? Planning 
can be done, an organizational structure created to facilitate efficient achievement of goals, 
and employees motivated through effective leadership. But there’s no assurance that activities 
are going as planned and that the goals employees and managers are working toward are, in 
fact, being attained. Control is important, therefore, because it’s the only way that managers 
know whether organizational goals are being met and, if not, the reasons why. The value of 
the control function can be seen in three specific areas:
1. Planning. In Chapter 5, we described goals, which provide specific direction to em-
ployees and managers, as the foundation of planning. However, just stating goals or hav-
ing employees accept goals doesn’t guarantee that the necessary actions to accomplish 
those goals have been taken. As the old saying goes, “The best-laid plans often go awry.” 
The effective manager follows up to ensure that what employees are supposed to do is, 
in fact, being done and goals are being achieved. As the final step in the management 
process, controlling provides the critical link back to planning. (See Exhibit 14–1.) If 
managers didn’t control, they’d have no way of knowing whether goals and plans were 
being achieved and what future actions to take.
2. Empowering employees. The second reason controlling is important is because of em-
ployee empowerment. Many managers are reluctant to empower their employees because 
Leading
Motivation
Leadership
Communication
Individual and
    Group Behavior
Planning
Goals
Objectives
Strategies
Plans
Organizing
Structure
Human Resource
    Management
Controlling
Standards
Measurements
Comparison
Actions
Exhibit 14–1 Planning–Controlling Link

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     447
they fear something will go wrong for 
which they would be held responsible. 
But an effective control system can pro-
vide information and feedback on em-
ployee performance and minimize the 
chance of potential problems.
3. Protecting the workplace.  The final 
reason that managers control is to pro-
tect the organization and its assets.12 
Organizations face threats from natural 
disasters, financial pressures and scan-
dals, workplace violence, supply chain 
disruptions, security  breaches, and 
even possible terrorist attacks. Manag-
ers must protect organizational assets 
in the event that any of these should 
happen. Comprehensive controls and 
backup plans will help minimize work 
disruptions.
John Jamason, media and public information 
manager, talks to employees working in the 
social media monitoring room at the Palm 
Beach County Emergency Operations Center. 
Social media such as Facebook and Twitter 
help the center track and monitor  information 
during storm emergencies to get help to 
people in need.
Richard Graulich/ZUMA Press/Corbis
What Takes Place as Managers Control?
When Maggine Fuentes joined Ohio-based Core Systems 
as HR manager, she knew that her top priority was reduc-
ing the number of employee injuries, which was well 
above the industry average. The high frequency and 
severity of the company’s injury rates not only affected 
employee morale but also resulted in lost workdays and 
affected the bottom line.13 Fuentes relied on the control process to turn this situation around.
The control process is a three-step process of (1) measuring actual performance, (2) 
comparing actual performance against a standard, and (3) taking managerial action to cor-
rect deviations or to address inadequate standards. (See Exhibit 14–2.) The control process 
assumes that performance standards already exist, and they do. They’re the specific goals cre-
ated during the planning process.
Specific goals ARE the performance standards.
1 What Is Measuring?
To determine actual performance, a manager must first get information about it. Thus, the 
first step in control is measuring.
How Do Managers Measure? Four common sources of information frequently 
used to measure actual performance include personal observation, statistical reports, oral 
reports, and written reports. Each has its own particular strengths and weaknesses, but us-
ing a combination of them increases both the number of input sources and the probability 
of receiving reliable information.
Personal observation provides firsthand, intimate knowledge of the actual activity— 
information that is not filtered through others. It permits intensive coverage because minor 
as well as major performance activities can be observed, and it provides opportunities for 
the manager to read between the lines. Management by walking around (MBWA) is a phrase 
used to describe when a manager is out in the work area, interacting directly with employees 
14-2  Describe the 
three steps in the 
control process.
control process
A three-step process of measuring actual perfor-
mance, comparing actual performance against a 
standard, and taking managerial action to correct 
deviations
management by walking 
around (MBWA)
When a manager is out in the work area  interacting 
with employees

448    Part 5  •  Controlling
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Measure
actual
performance
No
Compare
actual
performance
with standard
Goals
Standard
Correct
performance
Identify
cause of
variation
Do
nothing
Do
nothing
Is standard
being attained?
Is variance
acceptable?
Is standard
acceptable?
Revise
standard
Exhibit 14–2 The Control Process
Greeting customers with a handshake, a 
smile, and a warm welcome is a practice 
Apple stores adopted from Ritz-Carlton, 
the luxury hotel chain known as the gold 
standard of customer service. Apple bench-
marked with Ritz-Carlton because it wants its 
employees to excel at customer service that 
leads to customer loyalty.
Nati Harnik/AP Images
and exchanging information about what’s going on. Management by walking around can 
pick up factual omissions, facial expressions, and tones of voice that may be missed by other 
sources. Unfortunately, in a time when quantitative information suggests objectivity, per-
sonal observation is often considered an inferior information source. It is subject to percep-
tual biases; what one manager sees, another might not. Personal observation also consumes 
a good deal of time. Finally, this method suffers from obtrusiveness. Employees might 
interpret a manager’s overt observation as a lack of confidence or 
a sign of mistrust.
The widespread use of computers has led managers to 
rely increasingly on statistical reports for measuring 
actual performance. This measuring device, however, 
isn’t limited to computer outputs. It also includes 
graphs, bar charts, and numerical displays of 
any form that managers can use for assessing 
performance. Although statistical information 
is easy to visualize and effective for showing 
relationships, it provides limited information 
about an activity. Statistics report on only a 
few key areas and may often ignore other 
important, often subjective, factors.
Information can also be acquired 
through oral reports—that is, through 
conferences, meetings, one-to-one conver-
sations, or telephone calls. In employee-
oriented organizations where employees 
work closely together, this approach may 

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     449
be the best way to keep tabs on work performance. For instance, at the Ken Blanchard 
Companies in Escondido, California, managers are expected to hold one-on-one meet-
ings with each of their employees at least once every two weeks.14 The advantages and 
disadvantages of this method of measuring performance are similar to those of personal 
observation. Although the information is filtered, it is fast, allows for feedback, and permits 
expression and tone of voice as well as words themselves to convey meaning. Historically, 
one of the major drawbacks of oral reports has been the problem of documenting informa-
tion for later reference. However, our technological capabilities have progressed in the past 
couple of decades to the point where oral reports can be efficiently taped and become as 
permanent as if they were written.
Actual performance may also be measured by written reports. Like statistical reports, 
they are slower yet more formal than firsthand or secondhand oral measures. This formality 
also often gives them greater comprehensiveness and conciseness than found in oral reports. 
In addition, written reports are usually easy to catalog and reference.
Given the varied advantages and disadvantages of each of these four measurement tech-
niques, managers should use all four for comprehensive control efforts.
Seventy-three percent of employers have taken efforts to 
address productivity killers at work.15
wHat Do Managers Measure? What managers measure is probably more critical 
to the control process than how they measure. Why? The selection of the wrong criteria can 
result in serious dysfunctional consequences. Besides, what we measure determines, to a 
great extent, what people in the organization will attempt to excel at.16 For example, as-
sume that your instructor has required a total of 10 writing assignments from the exercises 
at the end of each textbook chapter. But in the grade computation section of the syllabus, 
you notice that these assignments are not scored. In fact, when you ask your professor 
about this, she replies that these writing assignments are for your own enlightenment and 
do not affect your grade for the course; grades are solely a function of how well you per-
form on the three exams. We predict that you would, not surprisingly, exert most, if not all, 
of your effort toward doing well on the three exams.
Some control criteria are applicable to any management situation. For instance, be-
cause all managers, by definition, direct the activities of others, criteria such as employee 
satisfaction or turnover and absenteeism rates can be measured. Also, most managers have 
budgets for their area of responsibility set in monetary units (dollars, pounds, francs, lire, 
and so on). Keeping costs within budget is, therefore, a fairly common control measure. 
However, any comprehensive control system needs to recognize the diversity of activi-
ties among managers. For example, a production manager in a paper tablet manufacturing 
plant might use measures of the quantity of tablets produced per day, tablets produced per 
labor hour, scrap tablet rate, or percentage of rejects returned by customers. On the other 
hand, the manager of an administrative unit in a government agency might use number of 
document pages produced per day, number of orders processed per hour, or average time 
required to process service calls. Marketing managers often use measures such as percent 
of market held, number of customer visits per salesperson, or number of customer impres-
sions per advertising medium.
As you might imagine, some activities are more difficult to measure in quantifiable 
terms. It is more difficult, for instance, for a manager to measure the performance of a 
medical researcher or a middle school counselor than of a person who sells life insurance. 
But most activities can be broken down into objective segments that allow for measurement. 
The manager needs to determine what value a person, department, or unit contributes to the 
organization and then convert the contribution into standards.
Most jobs and activities can be expressed in tangible and measurable terms. When a 
performance indicator cannot be stated in quantifiable terms, managers should look for and 
use subjective measures. Certainly, subjective measures have significant limitations. Still, 

450    Part 5  •  Controlling
they are better than having no standards at all and ignoring the control function. If an activity 
is important, the excuse that it’s difficult to measure is inadequate. In such cases, managers 
should use subjective performance criteria. Of course, any analysis or decisions made on the 
basis of subjective criteria should recognize the limitations of the data.
2 How Do Managers Compare Actual Performance  
to Planned Goals?
The comparing step determines the variation between actual performance and the standard. 
Although some variation in performance can be expected in all activities, it’s critical to deter-
mine an acceptable range of variation (see Exhibit 14–3). Deviations outside this range need 
attention. Let’s work through an example.
Chris Tanner is a sales manager for Green Earth Gardening Supply, a distributor of 
specialty plants and seeds in the Pacific Northwest. Chris prepares a report during the first 
week of each month that describes sales for the previous month, classified by product line. 
Exhibit 14–4 displays both the sales goals (standard) and actual sales figures for the month 
of June. After looking at the numbers, should Chris be concerned? Sales were a bit higher 
than originally targeted, but does that mean there were no significant deviations? That de-
pends on what Chris thinks is significant—that is, outside the acceptable range of variation. 
Even though overall performance was generally quite favorable, some product lines need 
closer scrutiny. For instance, if sales of heirloom seeds, flowering bulbs, and annual flow-
ers continue to be over what was expected, Chris might need to order more product from 
nurseries to meet customer demand. Because sales of vegetable plants were 15 percent 
below goal, Chris may need to run a special on them. As this example shows, both over-
variance and undervariance may require managerial attention, which is the third step in the 
control process.
We introduced benchmarking in the planning chapter  (Chapter 
5) as a way for organizations to promote quality.17 Not surpris-
ingly, since planning and controlling are so closely linked, it also 
has implications for control. Benchmarking has been a highly 
utilized management tool. Although Xerox is often credited 
with the first widespread benchmarking effort in the United 
States, the practice can actually be traced back much further.
The benefits of benchmarking 
have long been recognized in the 
manufacturing industry. At the Mid-
vale Steel Company plant where he 
was employed, Frederick W. Taylor (of 
scientific management fame) used 
concepts of benchmarking to find the 
“one best way” to perform a job and 
to find the best worker to perform the job. Even Henry Ford 
recognized the benefits. Based on the techniques used at 
Chicago slaughterhouses where carcasses were hung from 
hooks mounted on a monorail, with each man performing his 
job and then pushing the carcass to the next work station, 
Ford’s assembly line used the same concept for producing 
cars, beginning in 1913. “The idea that revolutionized manu-
facturing was imported from another industry.”
Today, managers in diverse industries such as health 
care, education, and financial services are discovering what 
manufacturers have long recognized—the benefits of bench-
marking. For instance, the American Medical Association de-
veloped more than 100 standard measures of performance 
to improve medical care. Carlos Ghosn, CEO of Nissan, 
benchmarked Walmart’s operations in purchasing, transpor-
tation, and logistics. At its most basic, 
benchmarking means learning from 
others. However, as a tool for moni-
toring and measuring organizational 
and work performance, benchmarking 
can be used to identify specific per-
formance gaps and potential areas of 
improvement.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these dis-
cussion questions.
  Talk About It 3: What are the benefits of 
 benchmarking?
  Talk About It 4: What are the challenges in doing it?
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
Benchmarking:  
How do we  
measure up?
range of variation
The acceptable parameters of variance between 
actual performance and a standard

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     451
3 What Managerial Action Can Be Taken?
Managers can choose among three possible courses  
of action:
• Do nothing (self-explanatory)
• Correct actual performance
• Revise the standards
How Do You CorreCt aCtual PerforManCe? Depending on what the problem 
is, a manager could take different corrective actions. For instance, if unsatisfactory work is 
the reason for performance variations, the manager could correct it through training pro-
grams, disciplinary action, changes in compensation practices, and so forth. One decision 
that a manager must make is whether to take immediate corrective action, which corrects 
problems at once to get performance back on track, or to use basic corrective action, which 
looks at how and why performance deviated before correcting the source of deviation. It’s 
not unusual for managers to rationalize that they don’t have time to find the source of a 
Acceptable
upper limit
Standard
Acceptable
lower limit
Acceptable
range of
variation
t   
t + 1
t + 2
t + 3
t + 4
t + 5
•
•
•
•
•
•
Exhibit 14–3  Acceptable Range of Variation
ProduCt
Standard
aCtual
over (under)
Vegetable plants
1,075
913
(612)
Perennial flowers
630
634
4
Annual flowers
800
912
112
Herbs
160
140
(20)
Flowering bulbs
170
286
116
Flowering bushes
225
220
(5)
Heirloom seeds
540
672
132
Total
3,600
3,777
177
Exhibit 14–4  Example of Determining Significant Variation: Green Earth Gardening 
Supply—June Sales
immediate corrective action
Corrective action that addresses problems at once 
to get performance back on track
basic corrective action
Corrective action that looks at how and why 
performance deviated before correcting the source 
of deviation

452    Part 5  •  Controlling
problem (basic corrective action) and continue to perpetually “put out fires” with immedi-
ate corrective action. Effective managers analyze deviations and, if the benefits justify it, 
take the time to pinpoint and correct the causes of variance.
How Do You revise tHe stanDarD? It’s possible that the variance was a result of an 
unrealistic standard—too low or too high a goal. In such cases, it’s the standard that needs 
corrective action, not the performance. If performance consistently exceeds the goal, then 
a manager should look at whether the goal is too easy and needs to be raised. On the other 
hand, managers must be cautious about revising a standard downward. It’s natural to blame 
the goal when an employee or a team falls short. For instance, students who get a low score 
on a test often attack the grade cutoff standards as too high. Rather than accept the fact 
that their performance was inadequate, they will argue that the standards are unreason-
able. Likewise, salespeople who don’t meet their monthly quota often want to blame what 
they think is an unrealistic quota. The point is that when performance isn’t up to par, don’t 
immediately blame the goal or standard. If you believe the standard is realistic, fair, and 
achievable, tell employees that you expect future work to improve, and then take the neces-
sary corrective action to help make that happen.
 Watch it 1!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled CH2MHill: Foundations of Control.
Feedforward
control
Anticipates
problems
Concurrent
control
Corrects problems
as they happen
Feedback
control
Corrects problems
after they occur
Input
Processes
Output
Exhibit 14–5 “When” Does Control Take Place?
What Should Managers Control?
Cost efficiency. The length of time customers are kept on hold. Customers being satisfied 
with the service provided. These are just a few of the important performance indicators that 
executives in the intensely competitive call-center service industry measure. To make good 
decisions, managers in this industry want and need this type of information so they can con-
trol work performance.
How do managers know what to control? In this section, we’re first going to look at the 
decision of what to control in terms of when control takes place. Then, we’re going to dis-
cuss some different areas in which managers might choose to establish controls.
When Does Control Take Place?
Management can implement controls before an activity commences, during the activity, or 
after the activity has been completed. The first type is called feedforward control, the second 
is concurrent control, and the last is feedback control (see Exhibit 14–5).
14-3  Discuss the 
types of controls 
organizations 
and managers 
use.

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     453
wHat is feeDforwarD Control? The most 
desirable type of control—feedforward control—
prevents problems because it takes place before the 
actual activity.18 For instance, when McDonald’s 
began doing business in Moscow, it sent company 
quality control experts to help Russian farmers 
learn techniques for growing high-quality pota-
toes and to help bakers learn processes for baking 
high-quality breads. Why? McDonald’s demands 
consistent product quality no matter the geographi-
cal location. They want french fries in Moscow to 
taste like those in Omaha. Still another example 
of feedforward control is the scheduled preventive 
maintenance programs on aircraft done by the ma-
jor airlines. These schedules are designed to detect 
and hopefully to prevent structural damage that 
might lead to an accident.
The key to feedforward controls is taking managerial action before a problem occurs. 
That way, problems can be prevented rather than having to correct them after any damage—
poor-quality products, lost customers, lost revenue, etc.—has already been done. However, 
these controls require timely and accurate information that isn’t always easy to get. Thus, 
managers frequently end up using the other two types of control.
wHen is ConCurrent Control useD? 
Concurrent control, as its name implies, 
takes place while a work activity is in progress. For instance, the director of business 
product management at Google and his team keep a watchful eye on one of Google’s most 
profitable businesses—online ads. They watch “the number of searches and clicks, the rate 
at which users click on ads, the revenue this generates—everything is tracked hour by hour, 
compared with the data from a week earlier and charted.”19 If they see something that’s not 
working particularly well, they fine-tune it.
Fifty-five percent of employees say that micromanaging 
decreases their productivity.20
Technical equipment (such as computers and computerized machine controls) can be 
designed to include concurrent controls. For example, you’ve probably experienced this 
with word-processing software that alerts you to a misspelled word or incorrect grammati-
cal  usage. Also, many organizational quality programs rely on concurrent controls to inform 
workers whether their work output is of sufficient quality to meet standards.
The best-known form of concurrent control, however, is direct supervision. For 
example, Nvidia’s CEO Jen-Hsun Huang had his office cubicle torn down and replaced 
with a conference table so he’s now available to employees at all times to discuss what’s 
going on.21 Even GE’s CEO, Jeff Immelt, spends 60 percent of his workweek on the road 
talking to employees and visiting the company’s numerous locations.22 All managers 
can benefit from using concurrent control because they can correct problems before they 
become too costly. MBWA, which we described earlier in this chapter, is a great way for 
managers to do this.
wHY is feeDBaCk Control so PoPular? The most popular type of control relies 
on feedback. In feedback control, the control takes place after the activity is done. For 
instance, remember our earlier Denver Mint example. The flawed Wisconsin quarters were 
discovered with feedback control. The damage had already occurred even though the orga-
nization corrected the problem once it was discovered. And that’s the major problem with 
this type of control. By the time a manager has the information, the problems have already 
occurred, leading to waste or damage. However, in many work areas—the financial area 
being one example—feedback is the only viable type of control. (Continued on p. 457)
Microsoft uses concurrent 
control to track its energy usage. 
Shown here at its operations 
center, control technician Ray 
Nichols monitors real-time data on heating, 
cooling, and other systems in the company’s 
buildings that will help Microsoft achieve its 
goals of improving its carbon footprint and 
reducing its impact on the environment.
Elaine Thompson/AP Images
feedforward control
Control that takes place before a work activity  
is done
concurrent control
Control that takes place while a work activity is in 
progress
feedback control
Control that takes place after a work activity is done

454
KeePing traCK:  
What gets Controlled?
1 
Countless activities are taking place in  
different organizational locations and  
functional areas!
Keeping track of an organization’s Finances
Want to earn a profit?  
You need financial controls!
Traditional financial controls include:
• ratio analysis. (See Exhibit 14–6.)  
Ratios are calculated using selected  
information from the organization’s  
balance sheet and income statement.
objeCtive
ratio
CalCulation
Meaning
liquidity ratios: measure an 
organization’s ability to meet 
its current debt obligations
Current ratio
Current assets
Current liabilities
Tests the organization’s ability to meet  
short-term obligations
Acid test
Current assets - Inventories
Current liabilities
Tests liquidity more accurately when inventories turn over 
slowly or are difficult to sell
leverage ratios:  
examine the organization’s 
use of debt to finance its as-
sets and whether it’s able to 
meet the interest payments 
on the debt
Debt to assets
Total debt
Total assets
The higher the ratio, the more leveraged the organization
Times interest 
earned
Profits before interest and taxes
Total interest charges
Measures how many times the organization is able to cover 
its interest expenses
activity ratios: assess how 
efficiently a company is 
using its assets
Inventory turnover
Sales
Inventory
The higher the ratio, the more efficiently inventory  
assets are being used
Total asset turnover
Sales
Total assets
The fewer assets used to achieve a given level of sales, the 
more efficiently management is using the organization’s  
total assets
Profitability ratios:  
measure how efficiently and 
effectively the company is 
using its assets to generate 
profits
Profit margin on 
sales
Net profit after taxes
Total sales
Identifies the profits that are being generated
Return on 
 investment
Net profit after taxes
Total assets
Measures the efficiency of assets to generate profits
Exhibit 14–6 Popular Financial Ratios
Ekaterina Semenova/Fotolia

455
• budget analysis. Budgets are used for both planning and controlling.
 ◾    Planning tool: indicates which work activities are important and what and how much  
resources should be allocated to those activities.
 ◾    Controlling tool: provides managers with quantitative standards against which to measure 
and compare resource consumption. Significant deviations require action and a manager to 
examine what has happened and why and then take necessary action.
2
Keeping track of organization’s information
management information system (MIS)
A system used to provide management with needed information on a regular basis
Morena/Shutterstock
information—a critical tool for controlling other organizational activities
WHY Managers need rigHt inForMation at the rigHt tiMe and in the 
rigHt aMount to help them monitor and measure organizational activities:
• about what is happening within their area of re-
sponsibility.
• about the standards in order to be able to  
compare actual performance with the standard.
• to help them determine if deviations are acceptable.
• to help them develop appropriate courses of action.
Information is important!
HOW  A Management information System (MiS)
• Can be manual or computer-based, 
although most organizational MIS  
are computer-supported applications.
• System in MIS implies order,  
arrangement, and purpose.
• Focuses specifically on providing  
managers with information  
(processed and analyzed data), not 
merely data (raw, unanalyzed facts).
Dusit/Shutterstock
A    

456
3
Keeping track of employee Performance
• Are employees doing their jobs as planned 
and meeting goals that have been set?
• If not, employee counseling or employee 
discipline may be needed.  
See p. 238 in Chapter 7.
Bedrin/Shutterstock
Mike Charles/Shutterstock
B   information—an organizational resource that needs controlling
in 2014—79,700 reported security incidents  
and 2,122 confirmed data breaches.23
• Information is critically important to everything an organization does— 
that information needs to be protected.
◾  Controls: data encryption, system  
firewalls, data backups, and other  
techniques.24
◾  Look for problems in places that might 
not even have been considered, like 
search engines.
◾  Equipment such as laptop computers, 
tablets, and even RFID (radio-frequency 
identification) tags are vulnerable to 
viruses and hacking.
◾  Monitor information controls regularly to 
ensure that all possible precautions are 
in place to protect important information.
▸▸▸
▸▸▸
Over 81 percent of managers say they don’t 
do very well at giving difficult feedback.25

457
Keeping track using a balanced Scorecard  
approach
balanced scorecard approach looks at more than the financial perspective26 by  
typically looking at four areas that contribute to a company’s performance:
Financial
Customer
Internal processes
People/innovation/
growth assets
Managers should: develop goals for each of the 
four areas and then measure whether goals 
are being met.
4
Sharifulin Valery/Itar-Tass Photos/Newscom
balanced scorecard
A performance measurement tool that looks at more than just the 
financial perspective
Feedback controls do have two advantages.27 First, feedback gives managers meaningful 
information on how effective their planning efforts were. Feedback that shows little variance 
between standard and actual performance indicates that the planning was generally on target. 
If the deviation is significant, a manager can use that information to formulate new plans. 
Second, feedback can enhance motivation. People want to know how well they’re doing, and 
feedback provides that information.
  try it!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Controlling.
2
3
1
4

458    Part 5  •  Controlling
Do Controls Need to Be Adjusted for Cultural Differences?
The concepts of control that we’ve discussed are appropriate for organizational units that 
aren’t geographically distant or culturally distinct. But what about global organizations? 
Would control systems be different, and what should managers know about adjusting controls 
for national differences?
Methods of controlling employee behavior and operations can be quite different in dif-
ferent countries. In fact, the differences in organizational control systems of global organiza-
tions are primarily in the measurement and corrective action steps of the control process. In 
a global corporation, for instance, managers of foreign operations tend not to be closely con-
trolled by the home office if for no other reason than that distance keeps managers from being 
able to observe work directly. Because distance creates a tendency for formalized controls, 
the home office of a global company often relies on extensive, formal reports for control. 
The global company may also use information technology to control work activities. For 
instance, Seven and i Holdings (Japan’s biggest retail conglomerate and parent company of 
the 7-Eleven convenience store chain in the United States) uses automated cash registers not 
only to record sales and monitor inventory but also to schedule tasks for store managers and 
to track their use of the built-in analytical graphs and forecasts. If managers don’t use them 
enough, they’re told to increase their activities.29
Technology’s impact on control is most evident 
in comparisons of technologically advanced nations 
with countries that aren’t as technologically ad-
vanced. Organizations in technologically advanced 
nations such as the United States, Japan, Canada, 
Great Britain, Germany, and Australia use indi-
rect control devices—particularly computer-related 
reports and analyses—in addition to standardized 
rules and direct supervision to ensure that activi-
ties are going as planned. In less technologically 
advanced countries, direct supervision and highly 
centralized decision making are the basic means of 
control.
Also, constraints on what corrective action 
managers can take may affect managers in foreign 
countries because laws in some countries do not al-
low managers the option of closing facilities, laying 
off employees, or bringing in a new management 
What Contemporary Control Issues Do  
Managers Confront?
The employees of Integrated Information Systems Inc. didn’t think twice about exchang-
ing digital music over a dedicated office server they had set up. Like office betting on col-
lege and pro sports, it was technically illegal, but harmless—or so they thought. But after 
the company had to pay a $1 million settlement to the Recording Industry Association of 
America, managers wished they had controlled the situation better.28 Control is an important 
managerial function. We’re going to look at two control issues that managers face today: 
cross-cultural differences and workplace concerns.
14-4  Discuss 
 contemporary 
issues in control.
 Watch it 2!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the video exercise titled Zane’s Cycles: Foundations of Control.
Yum! Brands, a global restaurant firm, estab-
lished tighter control systems in China after 
learning that some of its poultry suppliers for 
its KFC restaurants violated company rules 
on the use of drugs to fatten chickens. Cor-
rective actions of its control process included 
strengthening the oversight of its suppliers 
and establishing the principle of zero toler-
ance in food safety.
Zhou Junxiang/AP Images

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     459
team from outside the country. Finally, another challenge for global companies in collect-
ing data is comparability. For instance, a company’s manufacturing facility in Mexico might 
produce the same products as a facility in Scotland. However, the Mexican facility might be 
much more labor intensive than its Scottish counterpart (to take advantage of lower labor 
costs in Mexico). If top-level executives were to control costs by, for example, calculating 
labor costs per unit or output per worker, the figures would not be comparable. Managers in 
global companies must address these types of global control challenges.
What Challenges Do Managers Face in Controlling the Workplace?
Today’s workplaces present considerable control challenges for managers. From monitoring 
employees’ computer usage at work to protecting the workplace against disgruntled employ-
ees intent on doing harm, managers need controls to ensure that work can be done efficiently 
and effectively as planned.
Sixty-eight percent of employees admit to using company 
computers to check personal email.31
Technological advances have made the process of managing an 
organization much easier.30 And technological advancements 
have also provided employers a means of sophisticated employee 
monitoring. Although most of this monitoring is designed to 
enhance worker productivity, it could, and has been, a source 
of concern over worker privacy. These advantages bring with 
them difficult questions regarding what managers have the right 
to know about employees and how far they can go in control-
ling employee behavior, both on and off the job. Consider the 
following:
• The mayor of Colorado Springs, Colorado, reads the e-mail mes-
sages that city council members send to each other from their 
homes. He defended his actions by saying he was making sure 
that e-mails to each other were not being used to circumvent the 
state’s “open meeting” law that requires most council business 
to be conducted publicly.
• The U.S. Internal Revenue Service’s internal audit group monitors 
a computer log that shows employee access to taxpayers’ ac-
counts. This monitoring activity allows management to check and 
see what employees are doing on their computers.
• American Express has an elaborate system for monitoring 
telephone calls. Daily reports provided to supervisors detail the 
frequency and length of calls made by employees, as well as 
how quickly incoming calls are answered.
• Employers in several organizations require employees to wear 
badges at all times while on company premises. These badges 
contain a variety of data that allow employees to enter certain 
locations in the organization. Smart badges, too, can transmit 
where the employee is at all times!
Just how much control a company should have over the private 
lives of its employees also becomes an issue. Where should an em-
ployer’s rules and controls end? Does the boss have the right to dictate 
what you do on your free time and in your own home? Could your boss 
keep you from engaging in riding a motorcycle, skydiving, smoking, 
drinking alcohol, or eating junk food? Again, the answers may surprise 
you. Today many organizations, in their quest to control safety and 
health insurance costs, are delving into their employees’ private lives.
Although controlling employees’ behaviors on and off the job 
may appear unjust or unfair, nothing in our legal system prevents 
employers from engaging in these practices. Rather, the law is 
based on the premise that if employees don’t like the rules, they 
have the option of quitting. Managers, too, typically defend their ac-
tions in terms of ensuring quality, productivity, and proper employee 
behavior. For instance, an IRS audit of its southeastern regional 
offices found that 166 employees took unauthorized looks at the tax 
returns of friends, neighbors, and celebrities.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
 talK about it 5: When does management’s need for 
 information about employee performance cross over the line and 
interfere with a worker’s right to privacy?
  talK about it 6: Is any action by management acceptable 
as long as employees are notified ahead of time that they will be 
monitored? Discuss.
MoNIToRING EMPLoyEES
::::::: Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::

460    Part 5  •  Controlling
is MY work CoMPuter reallY Mine? If 
you work, do you think you have a right to privacy 
at your job? What can your employer find out 
about you and your work? You might be surprised 
at the answers! Employers can (and do), among 
other things, read your e-mail (even those marked 
“personal or confidential”), tap your telephone, 
monitor your work by computer, store and review 
computer files, monitor you in an employee bath-
room or dressing room, and track your where-
abouts in a company vehicle. And these actions 
aren’t that uncommon. In fact, some 30 percent 
of companies have fired workers for misusing the 
Internet and another 28 percent have terminated 
workers for e-mail misuse.32
Why do managers feel they need to monitor 
what employees are doing? A big reason is that em-
ployees are hired to work, not to surf the Web check-
ing stock prices, watching online videos, playing 
fantasy baseball, or shopping for presents for family or friends. Recreational on-the-job Web 
surfing is thought to cost billions of dollars in lost work productivity annually. In fact, a survey 
of U.S. employers said that 87 percent of employees look at non-work-related Web sites while 
at work and more than half engage in personal Web site surfing every day.33 Watching online 
video has become an increasingly serious problem not only because of the time being wasted by 
employees but also because it clogs already-strained corporate computer networks.34 If you had 
to guess the video site viewed most often at work, what would you guess? If you said YouTube, 
you’d be absolutely correct!35 However, as innocent as it may seem (after all, it may be just a 
30-second video), all this nonwork adds up to significant costs to businesses.
Another reason that managers monitor employee e-mail and computer usage is that 
they don’t want to risk being sued for creating a hostile workplace environment because of 
offensive messages or an inappropriate image displayed on a coworker’s computer screen. 
Concerns about racial or sexual harassment are one reason companies might want to monitor 
or keep backup copies of all e-mail. Electronic records can help establish what actually hap-
pened so managers can react quickly.36
Finally, managers want to ensure that company secrets aren’t being leaked.37 In addition 
to typical e-mail and computer usage, companies are monitoring instant messaging, blogs, 
and other social media outlets, and banning phone cameras in the office. Managers need to 
be certain that employees are not, even inadvertently, passing information on to others who 
could use that information to harm the company.
Because of the potentially serious costs and given the fact that many jobs now entail 
computers, many companies have workplace monitoring policies. Such policies should con-
trol employee behavior in a nondemeaning way, and employees should be informed about 
those policies.
At Citrix, a provider of virtualization, network-
ing, and cloud technologies for businesses, 
employees are allowed to BYOD—Bring Your 
Own Device. Although more companies are 
adopting BYOD policies, the control risks are 
still very much the same. Even in a BYOD 
environment, workplace monitoring policies 
are very much needed.
 Write it!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete MGMT 3: Technology.
is eMPloYee tHeft on tHe rise? Would you be surprised to find that up to 85 per-
cent of all organizational theft and fraud is committed by employees, not outsiders?38 And 
it’s a costly problem—estimated to be about $4,500 per worker per year.39 In a survey of 
U.S. companies, 20 percent said that workplace theft has become a moderate to very big 
problem.40
Employee theft is defined as any unauthorized taking of company property by  employees 
for their personal use.41 It can range from embezzlement to fraudulent filing of expense 
Miami Herald/MCT/Landov
employee theft
Any unauthorized taking of company property by 
employees for their personal use

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     461
reports to removing equipment, parts, software, or office supplies from company premises. 
Although retail businesses have long faced serious potential losses from employee theft, 
loose financial controls at startups and small companies and the ready availability of informa-
tion technology have made employee stealing an escalating problem in all kinds and sizes 
of organizations. It’s a control issue that managers need to educate themselves about and be 
prepared to deal with it.42
Global employee fraud is estimated to cost organizations 
$3.7 trillion a year.43
Why do employees steal? The answer depends on whom you ask.44 Experts in various 
fields—industrial security, criminology, clinical psychology—have different perspectives. 
The industrial security people propose that people steal because the opportunity presents 
itself through lax controls and favorable circumstances. Criminologists say that it’s because 
people have financial-based pressures (such as personal financial problems) or vice-based 
pressures (such as gambling debts). And the clinical psychologists suggest that people 
steal because they can rationalize whatever they’re doing as being correct and appropriate 
behavior (“everyone does it,” “they had it coming,” “this company makes enough money 
and they’ll never miss anything this small,” “I deserve this for all that I put up with,” and so 
forth).45 Although each approach provides compelling insights into employee theft and has 
been instrumental in attempts to deter it, unfortunately, employees continue to steal. What 
can managers do?
The concept of feedforward, concurrent, and feedback control is useful for identifying 
measures to deter or reduce employee theft.46 Exhibit 14–7 summarizes several possible 
managerial actions.
FEEDFORWARD
FEEDBACK
CONCURRENT
Make sure employees 
know when theft or fraud has 
occurred—not naming names 
but letting people know this 
is not acceptable.
Treat employees with
respect and dignity.
Use careful prehiring
screening.
Use the services of
professional investigators.
Openly communicate
the costs of stealing.
Establish speciﬁc
policies deﬁning theft 
and fraud and discipline 
procedures.
Redesign control measures.
Let employees know on 
a regular basis about their 
successes in preventing 
theft and fraud.
Involve employees 
in writing policies.
Evaluate your organ-
ization’s culture and the
relationships of managers
and employees.
Use video surveillance
equipment if conditions
warrant.
Educate and train
employees about the
policies.
Install “lock-out” options on computers, 
telephones, and e-mail. 
Use corporate hotlines for reporting incidences.
Set a good example.
Have a professional
review of your internal
security controls.
Exhibit 14–7  Controlling Employee Theft
Source: Robbins, Stephen P., Coulter, Mary, Management, 13th Ed., © 2016, p. 541. Reprinted and 
electronically reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.

462    Part 5  •  Controlling
wHat Can Managers Do aBout workPlaCe violenCe? In January 2015, a 
cardiologist at Boston’s Brigham and Women’s Hospital was gunned down by a man 
whose mother had been operated on by the doctor and subsequently died. After kill-
ing the cardiologist, the man shot himself. In September 2014, a man who was recently 
fired walked into the UPS he had worked at and killed two individuals and then took his 
own life. In April 2014, an individual who worked as a baggage handler opened fire at 
a FedEx facility near Atlanta injuring six employees. In August 2010, a driver about to 
lose his job at Hartford Distributors in Hartford, Connecticut, opened fire killing eight 
other employees and himself. In July 2010, a former employee at a solar products manu-
facturer in Albuquerque, New Mexico, walked into the business and opened fire, killing 
two people and wounding four others. On November 6, 2009, in Orlando, Florida, an 
engineer who had been dismissed from his job for poor performance returned and shot 
and killed one person while wounding five others. This incident happened only one day 
after a U.S. Army psychiatrist went on a shooting rampage at Fort Hood Army post, 
killing 13 and wounding 27.47 These are just a few of the deadly workplace attacks in 
recent years. Is workplace violence really an issue for managers? Yes. Despite these 
examples, thankfully, the number of workplace shootings has decreased.48 However, the 
U.S. National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health still says that each year, some 
2 million American workers are victims of some form of workplace violence. In an aver-
age week, one employee is killed and at least 25 are seriously injured in violent assaults 
by current or former coworkers. And according to a Department of Labor survey, 58 
percent of firms reported that managers received verbal threats from workers.49 Anger, 
rage, and violence in the workplace are intimidating to coworkers and adversely affect 
their productivity. The annual cost to U.S. businesses is estimated to be between $20 bil-
lion and $35 billion.50 And office rage isn’t a uniquely American problem. A survey of 
aggressive behavior in Britain’s workplaces found that 18 percent of managers say they 
have personally experienced harassment or verbal bullying, and 9 percent claim to have 
experienced physical attacks.51
What factors are believed to contribute to workplace violence? Undoubtedly, employee 
stress caused by job uncertainties, declining value of retirement accounts, long hours, infor-
mation overload, other daily interruptions, unrealistic deadlines, and uncaring managers play 
a role. Even office layout designs with small cubicles where employees work amidst the noise 
and commotion from those around them have been cited as contributing to the problem.52 
Other experts have described dangerously dysfunctional work environments characterized by 
the following as primary contributors to the problem:53
• Employee work driven by TNC (time, numbers, and crises)
• Rapid and unpredictable change where instability and uncertainty plague employees
• Destructive communication style where managers communicate in excessively aggressive, 
condescending, explosive, or passive-aggressive styles; excessive workplace teasing or 
scapegoating
• Authoritarian leadership with a rigid, militaristic mind-set of managers versus employees; 
employees not allowed to challenge ideas, participate in decision making, or engage in 
team-building efforts
• Defensive attitude with little or no performance feedback given; only numbers count; and 
yelling, intimidation, or avoidance as the preferred ways of handling conflict
• Double standards in terms of policies, procedures, and training opportunities for managers 
and employees
• Unresolved grievances due to an absence of mechanisms or only adversarial ones in place 
for resolving them; dysfunctional individuals protected or ignored because of long-standing 
rules, union contract provisions, or reluctance to take care of problems
• Emotionally troubled employees and no attempt by managers to get help for these people
• Repetitive, boring work and little chance for doing something else or for new people coming in
• Faulty or unsafe equipment or deficient training, which keeps employees from being able 
to work efficiently or effectively
• Hazardous work environment in terms of temperature, air quality, repetitive motions, over-
crowded spaces, noise levels, excessive overtime, and so forth; to minimize costs, a failure 

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     463
to hire additional employees when workload becomes excessive, leading to potentially dan-
gerous work expectations and conditions
• Culture of violence perpetuated by a history of individual violence or abuse, violent or ex-
plosive role models, or tolerance of on-the-job alcohol or drug abuse
Reading through this list, you surely hope that workplaces where you’ll spend your pro-
fessional life won’t be like this. However, the competitive demands of succeeding in a 24/7 
global economy put pressure on organizations and employees in many ways.
What can managers do to deter or reduce possible workplace violence? Once again, the 
concept of feedforward, concurrent, and feedback control can help identify actions that man-
agers can take.54 Exhibit 14–8 summarizes several suggestions.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.
Exhibit 14–8  Controlling Workplace Violence
FeedForWard
ConCurrent
FeedbaCK
Ensure management’s commitment  
to functional, not dysfunctional, work 
environments.
Provide employee assistance  
programs (EAPs) to help employees  
with behavioral problems.
Enforce organizational policy that any  
workplace rage, aggression, or  
violence will not be tolerated.
Use careful prehiring screening.
Never ignore threats.
Train employees about how to avoid  
danger if a situation arises.
Clearly communicate policies to  
employees.
Use MBWA (managing by walking around) to  
identify potential problems; observe how  
employees treat and interact with each other.
Allow employees or work groups to “grieve”  
during periods of major organizational change.
Be a good role model in how you treat others.
Use corporate hotlines or some other  
mechanism for reporting and investigating  
incidents.
Use quick and decisive intervention.
Get expert professional assistance if violence erupts.
Provide necessary equipment or procedures for  
dealing with violent situations (cell phones, alarm  
system, code names or phrases, and so forth).
Communicate openly about  
violent incidents and what’s  
being done.
Investigate incidents and take  
appropriate action.
Review company policies and  
change, if necessary.
Sources: Based on M. Gorkin, “Five Strategies and Structures for Reducing Workplace Violence,” Workforce Management Online, 
December 3, 2000; “Investigating Workplace Violence: Where Do You Start?” Workforce Management Online, December 3, 2000;  
“Ten Tips on Recognizing and Minimizing Violence,” Workforce Management Online, December 3, 2000; and “Points to Cover in a 
Workplace Violence Policy,” Workforce Management Online, December 3, 2000.

14 Review 
CHAPTER SUMMARY
 14-1 Explain the nature and importance of control.
Control is the management function that involves monitoring 
activities to ensure that they’re being accomplished as planned 
and correcting any significant deviations.
As the final step in the management process, controlling 
provides the link back to planning. If managers didn’t control, 
they’d have no way of knowing whether goals were being met.
Control is important because (1) it’s the only way to know 
whether goals are being met and, if not, why; (2) it provides infor-
mation and feedback so managers feel comfortable empowering 
employees; and (3) it helps protect an organization and its assets.
  14-2 Describe the three steps in the control 
 process.
The three steps in the control process are measuring, compar-
ing, and taking action. Measuring involves deciding how to 
measure actual performance and what to measure. Comparing 
involves looking at the variation between actual performance 
and the standard (goal). Deviations outside an acceptable range 
of variation need attention.
Taking action can involve doing nothing, correcting the 
actual performance, or revising the standards. Doing nothing is 
self-explanatory. Correcting the actual performance can involve 
different corrective actions, which can either be immediate or ba-
sic. Standards can be revised by either raising or lowering them.
  14-3 Discuss the types of controls organizations 
and managers use.
Feedforward controls take place before a work activity is 
done. Concurrent controls take place while a work activity is 
being done. Feedback controls take place after a work activity 
is done.
Financial controls that managers can use include finan-
cial ratios (liquidity, leverage, activity, and profitability) and 
budgets. One information control managers can use is an MIS, 
which provides managers with needed information on a regu-
lar basis. Others include comprehensive and secure controls, 
such as data encryption, system firewalls, data backups, and 
so forth, that protect the organization’s information. Also, bal-
anced scorecards provide a way to evaluate an organization’s 
performance in four different areas rather than just from the 
financial perspective.
 14-4 Discuss contemporary issues in control.
Adjusting controls for cross-cultural differences may be neces-
sary, primarily in the areas of measuring and taking corrective 
actions.
Workplace concerns include workplace privacy, employee 
theft, and workplace violence. For each of these, managers 
need to have policies in place to control inappropriate actions 
and ensure that work is getting done efficiently and effectively.
diSCuSSion QueStionS
 14-1 What is the role of control in management?
 14-2 Describe four methods managers can use to acquire 
information about actual work performance.
 14-3 Planning and controlling are the opposite sides of the 
same coin. Do you think this statement is true at all 
levels of organizational hierarchy? Why or why not?
 14-4  Contrast feedforward, concurrent, and feedback controls.
 14-5  Feedback control is after the fact. Illustrate why its use 
may be perceived as a disadvantage for any organization.
 14-6  In Chapter 8 we discussed the “white-water rapids” 
view of change. Do you think it’s possible to establish 
and maintain effective standards and controls in this 
type of environment? Discuss.
 14-7  Why is it that what is measured is more critical to the 
control process than how it is measured?
 14-8  “Every individual employee in an organization 
plays a role in controlling work activities.” Do you 
agree with this statement, or do you think control is 
something that only managers are responsible for? 
Explain.
 14-9  What are some work activities in which the acceptable 
range of variation might be higher than average? What 
about lower than average? (Hint: Think in terms of the 
output from the work activities, whom it might affect, 
and how it might affect them.)
14-10  How could you use the concept of control in your 
personal life? Be specific. (Think in terms of feed-
forward, concurrent, and feedback controls as well 
as specific controls for the different aspects of your 
life—school, work, family relationships, friends, 
 hobbies, etc.)
464

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     465
Skill Basics
No single approach is always effective in dealing with difficult 
people. However, we can offer several suggestions that are 
likely to lessen the angst these people create in your life and 
may have some influence in reducing their difficult behavior.55
• 
Don’t let your emotions rule. Our first response to a dif-
ficult person is often emotional. We get angry. We show 
frustration. We want to lash out at them or “get even” when 
we think they’ve insulted or demeaned us. This response is 
not likely to reduce your angst and may escalate the other 
person’s negative behavior. So fight your natural tenden-
cies and keep your cool. Stay rational and thoughtful. At 
worst, while this approach may not improve the situation, 
it is also unlikely to encourage and escalate the undesirable 
behavior.
• 
Attempt to limit contact. If possible, try to limit your con-
tact with the difficult person. Avoid places where they hang 
out and limit nonrequired interactions. Also, use commu-
nication channels—like e-mail and text messaging—that 
minimize face-to-face contact and verbal intonations.
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
14-11  Why is it important for managers to understand the 
control process?
14-12  Discuss the various types of tools used to monitor 
and measure organizational performance.
14-13  MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
assignment for this chapter.
Management Skill Builder  |   diSCiPlining diFFiCult 
eMPloyeeS
Almost all managers will, at one time or another, have to deal with employees who are difficult. There is 
no shortage of characteristics that can make someone difficult to work with. Some examples include being: 
short-tempered, demanding, abusive, angry, defensive, complaining, intimidating, aggressive, narcissistic, ar-
rogant, and rigid. Successful managers have learned how to cope with difficult people.
 PERSoNAL INVENToRy ASSESSMENT 
Workplace discipline indicator
Disciplining, especially with difficult employees, is usually not a manager’s favorite 
thing to do. But it is important. Take this PIA and discover how you prefer to discipline 
employees.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
• 
Try polite confrontation. If you can’t avoid the difficult 
person, consider standing up to them in a civil but firm 
manner. Let them know that you’re aware of their behavior, 
that you find it unacceptable, and that you won’t tolerate it. 
For people who are unaware of the effect their actions have 
on you, confrontation might awaken them to altering their 
behavior. For those who are acting purposefully, taking a 
clear stand might make them think twice about the conse-
quences of their actions.
• 
Practice positive reinforcement. We know that positive 
reinforcement is a powerful tool for changing behavior. 
Rather than criticizing undesirable behavior, try reinforc-
ing desirable behaviors with compliments or other positive 
comments. This focus will tend to weaken and reduce the 
exhibiting of the undesirable behaviors.
• 
Recruit fellow victims and witnesses. Finally, we know 
strength lies in numbers. If you can get others who are also 
offended by the difficult person to support your case, several 
positive things can happen. First, it’s likely to lessen your 
frustrations because others will be confirming your percep-
tion and can offer support. Second, people in the  organization 

466    Part 5  •  Controlling
with authority to reprimand are more likely to act when com-
plaints are coming from multiple sources. And third, the dif-
ficult person is more likely to feel pressure to change when 
a group is speaking out against his or her specific behaviors 
than if the complaint is coming from a single source.
Practicing the Skill
Read through this scenario and follow the directions at the end 
of it:
Your career has progressed even faster than you thought pos-
sible. After graduating from college with an accounting degree, 
you passed your CPA exam and worked three years for a major 
accounting firm. Then you joined General Electric in their fi-
nance department. Two employers and four jobs later, you have 
just been hired by a Fortune 100 mining company as their vice 
president for finance. What you didn’t expect in the new job 
was having to deal with Mark Hundley.
Mark is the vice president of company operations. He has 
been with the company for eight years. Your first impression of 
Mark was that he was a “know-it-all.” He was quick to put you 
down and acted as if he was your superior rather than an equal. 
Based on comments you’ve heard around the offices, it seems 
you are not alone. Other executives all seemed to agree that 
Mark is a brilliant engineer and operations manager but very 
difficult to work with. Specific comments you’ve heard include 
“an abrasive attitude”; “talks down to people”; “arrogant”; 
“thinks everyone is stupid”; and “poor listener.”
In your short time in the new job, you’ve already had sev-
eral run-ins with Mark. You’ve even talked to your boss, the 
company president, about him. The president’s response wasn’t 
surprising: “Mark isn’t easy to deal with. But no one knows 
this company’s operations like he does. If he ever leaves, I 
don’t know how we’d replace him. But, that said, he gives me 
a lot of grief. Sometimes he makes me feel like I work for him 
rather than the other way around.” Describe what you could do 
to improve your ability to work with Mark.
Collins State College, School of Accountancy
To: Matt Wrobeck, Ethics Committee Chair
From: Dr. Rebecca Rodriguez, Director
Re: Minimizing student cheating
Matt, you’ve probably heard that several of our faculty 
 members want to develop some specific controls to minimize 
opportunities for our students to cheat on homework assign-
ments and exams. As the ethics committee chair, I’d like you to 
work with them on developing some suggestions. As you look 
at this topic, please think in terms of ways to control cheating 
(1) before it happens, (2) while in-class exams or assignments 
are being completed, and (3) after it has happened.
Keep your list brief (around a page) and send it to me by 
the end of the week. I’d like to get this out to our entire faculty 
at our next scheduled monthly meeting.
This fictionalized organization and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     467
CaSe aPPliCation #1
“P
risons are easier to enter than Visa’s top-secret 
Operations Center East (OCE), its biggest, newest 
and most advanced U.S. data center.”56 And Rick 
Knight, senior vice president at Visa and formerly the head 
of global operations and engineering, is responsible for its 
security and functioning. Why all the precautions? Because 
Visa acknowledges that (1) hackers are increasingly savvy, 
(2) data is an increasingly desirable black-market commodity, 
and (3) the best way to keep 
itself safe is with an informa-
tion network in a fortress that 
instantly  responds to threats.
In a year’s time, Visa pro-
cesses more than 91.6 billion 
retail electronic payments from around the globe. And every 
day, Visa’s system connects up to 2.2 billion debit and credit 
cards, millions of acceptance locations, 2.1 million ATMs, and 
14,400 financial institutions.57 Visa, which completes an an-
nual “stress test” of its system in preparation for the holiday 
season, recently processed a peak volume of 56,000 messages 
per second.58 (Do some math on that and be amazed!) So what 
seems to us a simple swipe of a card or keying in our card 
numbers on an online transaction actually triggers a robust set 
of activities including the basic sales transaction processing, 
risk management, and information-based services. That’s why 
OCE’s workers have two jobs: “Keep hackers out and keep 
the network up, no matter what.” And that’s why Visa doesn’t 
reveal the location of OCE—on the eastern seaboard is as spe-
cific as the description gets.
Beneath the road leading to the OCE, hydraulic posts 
can rise up fast enough to stop a car going 50 miles per 
hour. And a car won’t be able to go that fast or it will miss 
a “vicious hairpin turn” and drive off into a drainage pond. 
Back in medieval days, that would have been known as the 
Top Secret
castle moat, which was also designed as protection. There 
are also hundreds of security cameras and a superb security 
team of former military personnel. If you’re lucky enough to 
be invited as a guest to OCE (which few people are), you’ll 
have your photo taken and right index fingerprint encoded 
on a badge. Then you’re locked into a “mantrap portal” 
where you put your badge on a reader that makes sure you 
are you, and then put it on another reader with your finger 
on a fingerprint detector. If 
you make it through, you’re 
clear to enter the network op-
erations center. With a wall 
of screens in front of them, 
each employee sits at a desk 
with four monitors. In a room behind the main center, three 
top-notch security experts keep an eye on things. Knight says 
that “about 60 incidents a day warrant attention.”
Although hackers are a primary concern, OCE also wor-
ries about network capacity. Right now, maximum capacity is 
currently at 56,000 transactions per second. If the network goes 
over that capacity, the network wouldn’t just stop processing 
one message, it would stop processing all of them. OCE is de-
scribed as a “Tier-4” center, which is a certification from a data 
center organization. To achieve that certification, every (and 
yes, we mean every) mainframe, air conditioner, and battery 
has a backup.
Discussion Questions
14-14 Is Visa being overly cautious? Why or why not?
14-15 Why is this level of managerial controls necessary?
14-16  Which controls would be more important to Visa: feedfor-
ward, concurrent, or feedback? Explain.
14-17  What other managerial controls might be useful to the 
 company?
Prisons are easier to enter than 
Visa’s OCE!

468    Part 5  •  Controlling
CaSe aPPliCation #2
C
ontrolling employee performance is a vitally important 
responsibility of managers. After all, it’s your employ-
ees who are working to accomplish established goals, 
and you want to see that those goals are being accomplished 
as planned. So wouldn’t it seem that managing employees’ 
performance would cover the good and the not-so-good? Well, 
some organizations are encouraging managers to lighten up on 
the harsh feedback and focus only on the positive.59
At consulting firm the Boston Consulting Group, man-
agers now frequently praise employees, encourage them to 
 celebrate even small victories, 
and conduct performance re-
views focusing on an individ-
ual employee’s strengths in-
stead of any mistakes that may have happened. And managers 
are to bring up only one or two areas that require improvement 
and development. It never used to be this way. When employ-
ees didn’t do a good job with a client’s assignment, managers 
would focus on what went wrong and where and how the em-
ployee needed to improve and develop his or her skills. This 
shift towards more positive feedback occurred after the com-
pany noticed some employees leaving the company and other 
employees who were still upset for a period of time after a 
negative performance review. And BCG isn’t the only company 
taking this approach. Others are increasing the use of positive 
feedback and minimizing any discussion of the areas that need 
improvement. At PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, for instance, 
managers are asked to have discussions with employees about 
If You Can’t Say Something Nice, Don’t Say Anything at All
their future with the organization. These “career outlook” dis-
cussions focus more on where an employee fits in, rather than 
on where they screwed up. The company also encourages its 
staff to send shout-outs via e-cards praising colleagues or sub-
ordinates for work done. Managers have also allocated money 
to further reward positive accomplishments.
But there are companies not following this positivism 
trend. These companies take a more “tough-love” approach 
and don’t shy away from giving negative feedback. For in-
stance, at Netflix, CEO Reed Hasting’s view is that they’re a 
“pro sports team, not a Little 
League squad,” noting that 
“adequate performance gets a 
generous severance package.” 
Not everyone in the company is going to get a trophy. There’s 
little doubt as to what that company’s performance expecta-
tions are.
Discussion Questions
14-18  Is controlling employee performance an important responsi-
bility of managers? Discuss.
14-19 Why should managers focus on positive feedback?
14-20  What are the risks associated with providing employees only 
positive feedback and providing limited feedback on areas of 
improvement?
14-21  Where would you be more comfortable? An organization with 
a performance review approach more like the Boston Consult-
ing Group or more like Netflix? Why?
No Negativism Allowed!
CaSe aPPliCation #3
A
s yoga classes gained in popularity, one company that 
had benefited greatly was Lululemon. In fact, at one 
point, it was on Fortune’s Fastest-Growing Companies 
List three years in a row. Company executives had positioned 
the company as a lifestyle brand and customers were hooked 
and loyal. Then, a rare stumble happened. The company had 
to recall a large batch of its signature black “Luon” yoga pants 
because the fabric was too sheer.60
Too Relaxed
Lululemon was founded by Dennis (Chip) Wilson, who 
had noticed in his yoga class that other students’ yoga pants 
became see-through when they bent over after class to roll up 
their mats. Having just sold his surf/skateboard/snowboard 
clothing company, he sensed an opportunity to pair his ex-
pertise in “technical” athletic wear with the surging demand 
by yoga enthusiasts. What he developed was revolutionary! 
Instead of following what others had done—essentially cutting 

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     469
Losing your pose…
down men’s workout wear and then selling them in feminine 
colors—Wilson believed that women would prefer working out 
in clothes that actually fit them. So, in addition to fashionable 
styles, he concentrated on technical elements including seam-
less stitching and breathable fabrics. And surprise, surprise: 
women were willing to pay $100 or more for his company’s 
workout clothes. Lululemon was off and running. Like many 
smaller companies, executives 
focused on the product and not 
so much on the “infrastruc-
ture” side of the business (hu-
man resources, IT, finance). That works … up to a point. When 
the chief information officer was hired, she actually found it 
fairly easy to implement the technology she felt was needed 
because there wasn’t really anything in place to work around.
One area where former executives felt focus was lacking 
was in the production area. No rigorous manufacturing model 
was in place. There were no schedules or deadlines. The com-
pany countered that by saying it wanted to remain flexible. But 
the manufacturing weakness was also evident in the lack of 
people who had expertise in the technical aspects of clothing 
manufacturing, such as quality control or control over raw ma-
terials. Which brings us to the problem of sheer yoga pants—
yoga pants being a core product of the company. As customers 
began returning the product and as the product complaint rate 
hit 12 percent, Lululemon had no choice but to pull the pants 
off the store shelves. The CEO at that time said the pants had 
passed quality assurance tests, but admitted that the only way 
to actually quality test the product was to put them on and bend 
over. And the company hadn’t done that … until it was too late.
That was in 2013, and the company is still trying to get 
back to where it was in terms of customer loyalty and sales 
numbers. Although the com-
pany’s core business is still 
women, it is seeing strong 
growth in men’s and girl’s 
businesses. It’s no longer one of the fastest-growing compa-
nies, but it has certainly learned something about the impor-
tance of control!
Discussion Questions
14-22  What type (or types) of control—feedforward, concurrent, or 
feedback—do you think would have been helpful in this situ-
ation? Explain your choice.
14-23  Using Exhibit 14–2, discuss if and how this situation could 
have been prevented.
14-24 Could Lululemon’s controls have been more effective? How?
14-25  What role would information controls play in this situation? 
Customer interaction controls? What other controls do you 
think might have been useful?

470    Part 5  •  Controlling
 1. “Domino’s Delivered Free Piz-
zas,” Springfield, Missouri News-
Leader, April 3, 2009, p. 3B.
 2. H. Peterson, “Target Workers 
Claim ‘Walk of Shame’ That 
Allegedly Led to a Suicide Is 
a Widespread Practice,” http://
www.businessinsider.com/target-
workers-claim-walk-of-shame-
is-widespread-2015-2, 
February 
6, 2015; H. Peterson, “Target 
Cashier Jumped to His Death 
after Managers Allegedly Sub-
jected Him to ‘Walk of Shame,’” 
http://www.businessinsider.com/
mother-blames-target-for-sons-
suicide-2015-1, January 27, 2015; 
and ABC7 News Staff, “Lawsuit 
Claims Pasadena Target Em-
ployee Committed Suicide after 
Being Shamed,” http://abc7.com/
news/lawsuit-pasadena-target-
employee-killed-self-after-being-
shamed/488247/, 
January 
23, 
2015.
 3. B. Hagenbaugh, “State Quarters 
Extra Leaf Grew Out of Lunch 
Break,” USA Today, January 20, 
2006, 1B.
 4. D. E. Sanger and J. H. Davis, 
“Data Breach Linked to China Ex-
poses Millions of Workers,” New 
York Times Online, June 4, 2015.
 5. J. R. Emshwiller, “Managers 
Blamed in Nuclear Leak,” Wall 
Street Journal, April 25, 2014, A6.
 6. Reuters, 
“McDonald’s 
Japan 
Apologizes after Tooth, Plastic 
Found in Food,” New York Times 
Online, January 7, 2015.
 7. M. Murphy and S. Chaudhuri, 
“Carnival to Step Up Maintenance 
after Mishaps,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, March 16–17, 2013, B3.
 8. E. A. Harris, “Error Creates Deals 
Too Good to Be True on Walmart’s 
Site,” New York Times Online, No-
vember 6, 2013.
 9. C. Timberlake, R. Dudley, and C. 
Burritt, “Don’t Even Think about 
Returning This Dress,” Bloomberg 
BusinessWeek, September 30–Oc-
tober 6, 2013, 29–31.
 10. B. Horovitz, “Gross Photo with 
Wendy’s Frosty Is Latest to Go 
Viral,” USA Today, June 14, 
2013, 2B; and S. Clifford, “Video 
Prank at Domino’s Taints Brand,” 
New York Times Online, April 16, 
2009.
 11. SmartPulse, “Where Does the 
Biggest Threat to Your Orga-
nizations Come From?” www 
.smartbrief.com/leadership, May 
12, 2015.
 12. J. F. Van Niekerk and R. Von 
Solms, 
“Information 
Security 
Culture: A Management Perspec-
tive,” Computers & Security, 
June 2010, 476–86; T. Vinas and 
J. Jusko “5 Threats That Could 
Sink Your Company,” Industry 
Week, September 2004, 52–61; 
“Workplace Security: How Vul-
nerable Are You?” special section 
in Wall Street Journal, September 
29, 2003, R1–R8; P. Magnusson, 
“Your Jitters Are Their Lifeblood,” 
Business Week, April 14, 2003, 41; 
and T. Purdum, “Preparing for the 
Worst,” Industry Week, January 
2003, 53–55.
 13. A. Dalton, “Rapid Recovery,” In-
dustry Week, March 2005, 70–71.
 14. B. Nelson, “Long-Distance Rec-
ognition,” 
Workforce, 
August 
2000, 50–52.
 15. D. Auerbach, “Watch for Work-
place 
Productivity 
Killers,” 
Springfield, Missouri, News-Lead-
er, July 13, 2014, 1G.
 16. S. Kerr, “On the Folly of Re-
warding A, While Hoping for B,” 
Academy of Management Journal 
(December 1975): 769–83; and 
N. F. Piercy, D. W. Cravens, N. 
Lane, and D. W. Vorhies, “Driv-
ing Organizational Citizenship 
Behaviors and Salesperson In-
Role Behavior Performance: The 
Role of Management Control and 
Perceived Organizational Sup-
port,” Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science (Spring 2006): 
244–62.
 17. From the Past to the Present box 
based on H. Min and H. Min, 
“Benchmarking the Service Qual-
ity of Fast-Food Restaurant Fran-
chises in the USA,” Benchmark-
ing: An International Journal 
(April 2011): 282–300; R. Pear, 
“A.M.A. to Develop Measure of 
Quality of Medical Care,” New 
York Times Online, February 21, 
2006; and A. Taylor III, “Double 
Duty,” Fortune, March 7, 2005, 
104–10; C. Bogan and D. Cal-
lahan, “Benchmarking in Rapid 
Time,” Industrial Management, 
March–April 2001, 28–33; and 
L. D. McNary, “Thinking about 
Excellence and Benchmarking,” 
Journal for Quality and Participa-
tion (July–August 1994).
 18. H. Koontz and R. W. Bradspies, 
“Managing through Feedforward 
Control,” Business Horizons, June 
1972, 25–36.
 19. M. Helft, “The Human Hands be-
hind the Google Money Machine,” 
New York Times Online, June 2, 
2008.
 20. J. Yang and S. Music, “Micro-
managing,” USA Today, August 8, 
2014, 1B.
 21. B. Caulfield, “Shoot to Kill,” 
Forbes, January 7, 2008, 92–96.
 22. T. Laseter and L. Laseter, “See 
for Yourself,” Strategy+Business, 
www.strategy-business.com (No-
vember 29, 2007).
 23. 2015 
Data 
Breach 
Investi-
gations 
Report, 
http://www 
.verizonenterprise.com/DBIR/ 
2015/, May 31, 2015.
 24. B. Grow, K. Epstein, and C.-C. 
Tschang, “The New E-Spionage 
Threat,” Business Week, April 21, 
2008, 32–41; S. Leibs, “Firewall 
of Silence,” CFO, April 2008, 31–
35; J. Pereira, “How Credit-Card 
Data Went out Wireless Door,” 
Wall Street Journal, May 4, 2007, 
A1+; and B. Stone, “Firms Fret 
as Office E-Mail Jumps Security 
Walls,” New York Times Online, 
January 11, 2007.
 25. SmartPulse, 
“How 
Well 
Do 
You Give Difficult Feedback?” 
Smart 
Brief 
on 
Leadership, 
www.smartbrief.com/leadership, 
 December 3, 2014.
 26. E. R. Iselin, J. Sands, and L. Mia, 
“Multi-Perspective 
Performance 
Reporting Systems, Continuous 
Improvement Systems, and Orga-
nizational Performance,” Journal 
of General Management (Spring 
2011): 19–36; L. Elmore, “The 
Balanced Business,” Women in 
Business, Spring 2011, 14–16; D. 
Agostino and M. Arnaboldi, “How 
the BSC Implementation Process 
Shapes Its Outcome,” Interna-
tional Journal of Productivity & 
Performance Management (Janu-
ary 2011): 99–114; R. S. Kaplan 
and D. P. Norton, “How to Imple-
ment a New Strategy without 
Disrupting Your Organization,” 
Harvard Business Review, March 
2006, 100–09; L. Bassi and D. 
McMurrer, “Developing Measure-
ment Systems for Managers in the 
Knowledge Era,” Organizational 
Dynamics, May 2005, 185–96; 
G. M. J. DeKoning, “Making the 
Balanced Scorecard Work (Part 
1),” Gallup Brain, www.brain 
.gallup.com (July 8, 2004); G. M. 
J. DeKoning, “Making the Bal-
anced Scorecard Work (Part 2),” 
Gallup Brain, www.brain.gallup 
.com (August 12, 2004); K. Gra-
ham, “Balanced Scorecard,” New 
Zealand 
Management, 
March 
2003, 32–34; K. Ellis, “A Ticket to 
Ride: Balanced Scorecard,” Train-
ing (April 2001): 50; and T. Leahy, 
“Tailoring the Balanced Score-
card,” Business Finance, August 
2000, 53–56.
 27. W. H. Newman, Constructive 
Control: Design and Use of Con-
trol Systems (Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1975), 33.
 28. J. Yaukey and C. L. Romero, 
 “Arizona Firm Pays Big for 
Workers’ Digital Downloads,” 
Associated Press, Springfield, 
Missouri, News-Leader, May 6, 
2002, 6B.
 29. Information on Hoovers On-
line, 
www.hoovers.com 
(June 
17, 2011); and N. Shirouzu and 
J. Bigness, “7-Eleven Operators 
Resist System to Monitor Manag-
ers,” Wall Street Journal, June 16, 
1997, B1.
 30. Technology and the Manager’s 
Job box based on C. A. Ciocchetti, 
“The Eavesdropping Employer: 
A Twenty-First-Framework for 
Employee Monitoring,” Ameri-
can Business Law Journal (Sum-
mer 2011): 285–369; G. M. 
Amsler, H. M. Findley, and E. 
Ingram,  “Performance Monitor-
ing:  Guidance for the Modern 
Workplace,” Supervision, January 
2011, 16–22; T. Harbert, “When 
IT Is Asked to Spy”; D. Searcey, 
“Employers Watching Workers 
Online Spurs Privacy Debate,” 
Wall Street Journal, April 23, 
2009, A13; D. Darlin, “Software 
That Monitors Your Work, Wher-
ever You Are,” New York Times 
Online, April 12, 2009; S. Boehle, 
“They’re Watching You,” Train-
ing (September 2008): 23+; S. 
Shellenbarger, “Work at Home? 
Your Employer May Be Watching 
You,” Wall Street Journal, July 30, 
2008, D1+; J. Jusko, “A Watchful 
Eye,” Industry Week, May 7, 2001, 
9; “Big Brother Boss,” U.S. News 
and World Report, April 30, 2001, 
12; and L. Guernsey, “You’ve Got 
Inappropriate E-Mail,” New York 
Times, April 5, 2000, C1+.
 31. A. R. Carey and P. Trap, “Wasting 
Work Time Online?” USA Today, 
October 18, 2014, 1A.
 32. “2007 Electronic Monitoring & 
Surveillance Survey,” American 
Management Association, www 
.amanet.org.
 33. S. Armour, “Companies Keep an 
Eye on Workers’ Internet Use,” 
USA Today, February 21, 2006, 2B.
 34. B. White, “The New Workplace 
Rules: No Video-Watching,” Wall 
Street Journal, March 4, 2008, 
B1+.
 35. Ibid.
 36. N. Lugaresi, “Electronic Privacy 
in the Workplace: Transparency 
and Responsibility,” Internation-
al Review of Law, Computers, & 
Technology, July 2010, 163–73; 
P.-W. Tam, E. White, N. Wing-
field, and K. Maher, “Snooping 
E-Mail by Software Is Now a 
Workplace Norm,” Wall Street 
Journal, March 9, 2005, B1+; 
D. Hawkins, “Lawsuits Spur 
Rise in Employee Monitoring,” 
U.S. News & World Report, Au-
gust 13, 2001, 53; and L. Guern-
sey, “You’ve Got Inappropriate 
Mail,” New York Times, April 5, 
2000, C1+.
 37. S. Armour, “More Companies 
Keep Track of Workers’ E-Mail,” 
USA Today, June 13, 2005, 4B; 
and E. Bott, “Are You Safe? Pri-
vacy Special Report,” PC Comput-
ing, March 2000, 87–88.
 38. A. M. Bell and D. M. Smith, 
“Theft and Fraud May Be an In-
side Job,” Workforce Online, www 
.workforce.com 
(December 
3, 
2000).
 39. C. C. Verschoor, “New Evidence 
of Benefits from Effective Ethics 
Systems,” Strategic Finance, May 
2003, 20–21; and E. Krell, “Will 
Forensic Accounting Go Main-
stream?” Business Finance, Octo-
ber 2002, 30–34.
 40. B. Mirza, “Combat Costly Dis-
crimination, 
Employee 
Fraud, 
Endnotes

CHAPTER 14   •  Foundations of Control     471
Theft,” HR Magazine, February 
2011, 14; and S. E. Needleman, 
“Businesses Say Theft by Their 
Workers Is Up,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, December 11, 2008, B8.
 41. J. Greenberg, “The STEAL Mo-
tive: Managing the Social Deter-
minants of Employee Theft,” in R. 
Giacalone and J. Greenberg (eds.), 
Antisocial Behavior in Organiza-
tions (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 
1997), 85–108.
 42. M. S. Hershcovis, “Incivility, So-
cial 
Undermining, 
Bullying . . . 
Oh My! A Call to Reconcile 
Constructs within Workplace Ag-
gression Research,” Journal of 
Organizational Behavior (April 
2011): 499–519; B. E. Litzky, 
K. A. Eddleston, and D. L. Kid-
der, “The Good, the Bad, and the 
Misguided: How Managers In-
advertently Encourage Deviant 
Behaviors,” Academy of Manage-
ment Perspective, February 2006, 
91–103; “Crime Spree,” Busi-
nessWeek, September 9, 2002, 
8; B. P. Niehoff and R. J. Paul, 
“Causes of Employee Theft and 
Strategies That HR Managers Can 
Use for Prevention,” Human Re-
source Management, Spring 2000, 
51–64; and G. Winter, “Taking at 
the Office Reaches New Heights: 
Employee Larceny Is Bigger and 
Bolder,” New York Times, July 12, 
2000, C1+.
 43. K. Aho, “A Highly Effective, Very 
Low-Tech Way to Stop Fraud,” 
http://www.bloomberg.com/
bw/articles/2014-08-11/to-stop-
fraud-employee-tip-hotlines-are-
remarkably-effective, August 11, 
2014.
 44. This section is based on J. Green-
berg, Behavior in Organizations, 
10th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 2011).
 45. A. H. Bell and D. M. Smith, 
“Why Some Employees Bite the 
Hand That Feeds Them,” Work-
force  Online, www.workforce.com 
 (December 3, 2000).
 46. B. E. Litzky et al., “The Good, the 
Bad, and the Misguided”; A. H. 
Bell and D. M. Smith, “Protect-
ing the Company against Theft 
and Fraud”; J. D. Hansen, “To 
Catch a Thief,” Journal of Ac-
countancy (March 2000): 43–46; 
and J. Greenberg, “The Cognitive 
Geometry of Employee Theft,” in 
Dysfunctional Behavior in Orga-
nizations: Nonviolent and Devi-
ant Behavior (Stamford, CT: JAI 
Press, 1998), 147–93.
 47. T. K. Garrett, “Subduing Vio-
lence at Work: Setting Policies to 
Help Safeguard the Workplace,” 
http://www.workforce.com/
articles/21201-subduing-violence-
at-work-setting-policies-to-help-
safeguard-the-workplace, March 
18, 2015; G. Botelho, “Work-
place Violence: Know the Num-
bers, Risk Factors and Possible 
Warning Signs,” http://www.cnn 
.com/2014/09/27/us/workplace-
violence-questions-answers/, Sep-
tember 28, 2014; L. Copeland and 
D. Stanglin, “‘Rambo’ Gunman 
Injures 6 at FedEx Facility,” USA 
Today Online, April 29, 2014; R. 
Rivera and L. Robbins, “Troubles 
Preceded 
Connecticut 
Work-
place Killing,” New York Times 
Online, August 3, 2010; J. Grif-
fin, “Workplace Violence News” 
[www.workplaceviolencenews 
.com], July 16, 2010; and J. 
Smerd, “Workplace Shootings in 
Florida, Texas Again Put Focus on 
Violence on the Job,” Workforce 
Management Online, November 
6, 2009.
 48. “Workplace 
Homicides 
from 
Shootings,” U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, http://www.bls.gov/iif/
oshwc/cfoi/osar0016.htm, January 
2013.
 49. J. McCafferty, “Verbal Chills,” 
CFO, June 2005, 17; S. Armour, 
“Managers Not Prepared for Work-
place Violence,” July 15, 2004, 
1B+; and “Workplace Violence,” 
OSHA Fact Sheet, U.S. Depart-
ment of Labor, Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration, 2002.
 50. “Ten Tips on Recognizing and 
Minimizing Violence,” Workforce 
Management Online, December 3, 
2000.
 51. “Bullying Bosses Cause Work 
Rage Rise,” Management Issues 
News 
[www.management-issues 
.com], January 28, 2003.
 52. C. Cosh, “Keep a Close Eye Out 
for the Signs,” Macleans, Decem-
ber 27, 2010, 24; and R. McNatt, 
“Desk Rage,” BusinessWeek, No-
vember 27, 2000, 12.
 53. M. Gorkin, “Key Components of a 
Dangerously Dysfunctional Work 
Environment,” Workforce Online, 
www.workforce.com (December 3, 
2000).
 54. L. D. Lieber, “HR’s Role in Pre-
venting Workplace Violence”; C. 
Cosh, “Keep a Close Eye Out for 
the Signs”; “Ten Tips on Recog-
nizing and Minimizing Violence”; 
A. C. Klotz and M. R. Buck-
ley, “Where Everybody Knows 
Your Name: Lessons from Small 
 Business about Preventing Work-
place Violence,” Business Hori-
zons, November 2010, 571–79; 
M. Gorkin, “Five Strategies and 
Structures for Reducing Work-
place Violence”; “Investigating 
Workplace Violence: Where Do 
You Start?”; and “Points to Cover 
in a Workplace Violence Policy”—
all of these are articles from Work-
force Online, www.workforce.com 
(December 3, 2000).
 55. Based on N. Pelusi, “Dealing with 
Difficult People,” Psychology To-
day, September–October 2006, 68–
69; and R. I. Sutton, The No Asshole 
Rule: Building a Civilized Work-
place and Surviving One That Isn’t 
(New York: Business Plus, 2007).
 56. J. Swartz, “Visa Stores Data Like 
Gold: In Its Own Fort Knox,” 
USA Today, March 26, 2012, 4B; 
M. Fitzgerald, “Visa Is Ready for 
Anything,” 
FastCompany.com, 
November 2011, 54–58; and “Visa 
Launches New Operating System, 
Data Center,” CardLine, Novem-
ber 20, 2009, 37.
 57. “Visa Inc. Corporate Overview,” 
http://usa.visa.com/download/
corporate/_media/visa-overview_
may2014.pdf, May 2014.
 58. J. Stewart, “Visa’s Test Results: 
Record Peak Volume and Expect-
ed Smooth Sailing for Tokens,” 
http://digitaltransactions.net/news/
story/4831, August 25, 2014.
 59. R. Feintzeig, “Everything Is Awe-
some! Why You Can’t Tell Em-
ployees They’re Doing a Bad Job,” 
Wall Street Journal Online, Feb-
ruary 10, 2015; TciiStrategic and 
Management Consultants, “Why 
Positive Feedback Is Crucial to 
High Performance,” http://www 
.businesszone.co.uk/blogs/tcii/
tcii-strategic-and-management-
consultants/why-positive- 
f e e d b a c k - c r u c i a l - h i g h - 
performance, May 13, 2013; and 
C. M. Phoel, “Feedback That 
Works,” Harvard Business Review, 
https://hbr.org/2009/04/feedback-
that-works/, April 27, 2009.
 60. Trefis Team, “Lululemon Grows 
on Higher-Than-Expected Men’s, 
ivivva Businesses, But 2015 Out-
look Disappoints,” www.forbes 
.com, March 30, 2015; B. Kowitt 
and C. Leahey, “Lululemon: In an 
Uncomfortable Position,” Fortune, 
September 16, 2013, 110-18; and 
S. Clifford, “Recall Is Expensive 
Setback for Maker of Yoga Pants,” 
New York Times Online, March 21, 
2013.

Operations Management
Ron Chapple Stock/Alamy
15
In the future of  
manufacturing, robots  
will replace almost  
all workers.

473
Recent headlines claiming that robots are  
making people obsolete in the workforce may 
be true in some jobs, but robots are more likely 
to assist people in doing their jobs rather than  
replace them completely. Robots will do  
menial or dangerous jobs and those made up 
entirely of repetitive tasks, so some types of 
jobs are likely to be replaced by technology. 
However, technology also means people can 
focus on more complex work that demands 
creativity and flexibility.

organization 
produces 
something, whether it’s 
a good or a service. Some, like Starbucks, 
produce both a good and a service. 
Technology has changed how production 
is done. This chapter focuses on how 
organizations do operations manage-
ment. We also look at the important role 
that managers play in managing those 
 operations. •
Learning Outcomes
15-1 Define operations management and explain its role. p. 475
15-2 Define the nature and purpose of value chain management. p. 478
15-3 Describe how value chain management is done. p. 481
15-4 Discuss contemporary issues in managing operations. p. 486
EvEry 
474

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    475
Why Is Operations Management Important  
to Organizations?
You’ve probably never given much thought to how 
 organizations “produce” the goods and services that 
you buy or use. But it’s an important process. Without 
it, you wouldn’t have a car to drive or McDonald’s fries 
to snack on, or even a hiking trail in a local park to 
 enjoy. Organizations need to have well-thought-out and 
well-designed operating systems, organizational control 
systems, and quality programs to survive in today’s increasingly competitive global environ-
ment. And it’s the manager’s job to manage those things.
What Is Operations Management?
The term operations management refers to the design, operation, and control of the trans-
formation process that converts such resources as labor and raw materials into goods and 
services that are sold to customers. Exhibit 15–1 portrays a simplified overview of the 
transformation process of creating value by converting inputs into outputs. The system takes 
inputs—people, technology, capital, equipment, materials, and information—and transforms 
them through various processes, procedures, and work activities into finished goods and 
services. These processes, procedures, and work activities are found throughout the organiza-
tion. For example, department members in marketing, finance, research and development, 
human resources, and accounting convert inputs into outputs such as sales, increased market 
share, high rates of return on investments, new and innovative products, motivated and com-
mitted employees, and accounting reports. As a manager, you’ll need to be familiar with op-
erations management concepts, regardless of the area in which you’re managing, in order to 
achieve your goals more effectively and efficiently.
Why is operations management so important  
to organizations and managers?
1. It encompasses processes in services and manufacturing organizations.
2. It’s important in effectively and efficiently managing productivity.
3. It plays a strategic role in an organization’s competitive success.
1 How Do Service and Manufacturing Firms Differ?
With a menu that offers more than 250 items made fresh each day, The Cheesecake Factory 
restaurants rely on a finely tuned production system. One food-service consultant says, 
“They’ve evolved with this highly complex menu combined with a highly efficient kitchen.”1
15-1  Define  
operations  
management and 
explain its role.
• People
• Technology
• Capital
• Equipment
• Materials
• Information
Transformation
Process
Inputs
• Goods
• Services
Outputs
Exhibit 15–1 The Operations System
operations management
The study and application of the transformation 
process

476    Part 5  •  Controlling
All organizations produce goods or services 
through the transformation process. Simply stated, 
every organization has an operations system that cre-
ates value by transforming inputs into finished goods 
and services outputs. For manufacturers, the products 
are obvious: cars, cell phones, or food products. After 
all, manufacturing organizations produce physical 
goods. It’s easy to see the operations management 
(transformation) process at work in these types of 
organizations because raw materials are turned into 
recognizable physical products. But that transforma-
tion process isn’t as readily evident in service organi-
zations because they produce nonphysical outputs in 
the form of services. For instance, hospitals provide 
medical and health care services that help people 
manage their personal health; taxi companies provide 
transportation services that move people from one 
location to another; cruise lines provide vacation 
and entertainment services; and residential plumbers 
and electricians ensure that we have electricity and 
running water where we live. All of these  service 
organizations transform inputs into outputs. For example, look at your college. College 
 administrators bring together inputs—instructors, books, multimedia classrooms, and similar 
resources—to transform students into educated and skilled individuals.
The reason we’re making this point is that the U.S. economy, and to a large extent the 
global economy, is dominated by the creation and sale of services. Most of the world’s 
 developed countries are predominantly service economies.2 In the United States, for instance, 
almost 78 percent of all economic activity is services, and in the European Union, it’s nearly 
73 percent. In lesser-developed countries, the services sector is less important. For instance, 
in Chad, it accounts for only 32 percent of economic activity; in Laos, only 44 percent; and 
in Bolivia, 48 percent.
2 How Do Businesses Improve Productivity?
One jetliner has some 4 million parts. Efficiently assembling such a finely engineered 
 product requires intense focus. Boeing and Airbus, the two major global manufacturers, 
have copied techniques from Toyota. However, not every technique can be copied because 
airlines demand more customization than do car buyers and there are significantly more 
rigid safety regulations for jetliners than for cars.3 At the Evans Findings Company in East 
Providence, Rhode Island, which makes the tiny cutting devices on dental-floss  containers, 
one production shift each day is run without people.4 The company’s goal is to do as much 
as possible with no labor. And it’s not because they don’t care about their employees. 
Instead, like many U.S. manufacturers, Evans needed to improve productivity in order to 
survive, especially against low-cost competitors. So they turned to “lights-out” manufactur-
ing, where machines are designed to be so reliable that they make flawless parts on their 
own, without people operating them.
Although most organizations don’t make products that have 4 million parts and most 
organizations can’t function without people, improving productivity has become a major goal 
in virtually every organization. For countries, high productivity can lead to economic growth 
and development. Employees can receive higher wages and company profits can increase 
without causing inflation. For individual organizations, increased productivity gives them a 
more competitive cost structure and the ability to offer more competitive prices.
Over the past decade, U.S. businesses have made dramatic improvements to increase 
their efficiency. For example, at Latex Foam International’s state-of-the-art digital facility in 
Shelton, Connecticut, engineers monitor all of the factory’s operations. The facility boosted 
capacity by 50 percent in a smaller space and achieved a 30 percent efficiency gain.5 
And it’s not just in manufacturing that companies are pursuing productivity gains. Pella 
Eri Otsubo is a flight attendant for Japan’s 
Peach Aviation Ltd., a service firm that  
provides low-cost air transportation. Peach’s 
operations system creates value by  
transforming inputs such as aircraft and crew 
members into the nonphysical output of air 
travel. Like other developed nations, Japan 
has a service-based economy.
Kyodo/AP Images
transformation process
The process that converts resources into finished 
goods and services
manufacturing organizations
Organizations that produce physical goods
service organizations
Organizations that produce nonphysical products  
in the form of services

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    477
Corporation’s purchasing office improved productivity by reducing purchase order entry 
times anywhere from 50 percent to 86 percent, decreasing voucher processing by 27 per-
cent, and eliminating 14 financial systems. Its information technology department slashed 
e-mail traffic in half and implemented work design improvements for heavy PC users such 
as call center users. The human resources department cut the time to process benefit enroll-
ment by 156.5 days. And the finance department now takes two days, instead of six, to do its 
end-of-month closeout.6
Organizations that hope to succeed globally are looking for ways to improve 
 productivity. For example, McDonald’s Corporation drastically reduced the time it takes 
to cook french fries—65 seconds as compared to the 210 seconds it once took, saving 
time and other resources.7 The Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, based in Toronto, 
automated its purchasing function, saving several million dollars annually.8 And Skoda, 
the Czech car company, improved its productivity through an intensive restructuring of its 
manufacturing process.9
Productivity = People + Operations variables
Productivity is a composite of people and operations variables. To improve productiv-
ity, managers must focus on both. The late W. Edwards Deming, a renowned quality expert, 
believed that managers, not workers, were the primary source of increased productivity. 
He outlined 14 points for improving management’s productivity (see the From the Past to 
the Present box on p. 481 for more information). A close look at these suggestions reveals 
Deming’s  understanding of the interplay between people and operations. High productivity 
can’t come solely from good “people management.” The truly effective organization will 
maximize productivity by successfully integrating people into the overall operations system. 
For instance, at Simplex Nails Manufacturing in Americus, Georgia, employees were an 
integral part of the company’s much-needed turnaround effort.10 Some production work-
ers were redeployed on a plant-wide cleanup and organization effort, which freed up floor 
space. The company’s sales force was retrained and refocused to sell what customers wanted 
rather than what was in inventory. The results were dramatic. Inventory was reduced by more 
than 50 percent, the plant had 20 percent more floor space, orders were more consistent, 
and  employee morale improved. Here’s a company that understood the important interplay 
 between people and the operations system.
3 What Role Does Operations Management Play  
in a Company’s Strategy?
Modern manufacturing originated more than 110 years ago in the United States, primarily 
in Detroit’s automobile factories. The success that U.S. manufacturers experienced during 
World War II led manufacturing executives to believe that troublesome production problems 
had been conquered. These executives focused, instead, on improving other functional areas 
such as finance and marketing and paid little attention to manufacturing.
However, as U.S. executives neglected production, managers in Japan, Germany, and 
other countries took the opportunity to develop modern, technologically advanced facilities 
that fully integrated manufacturing operations into strategic planning decisions. The competi-
tion’s success realigned world manufacturing leadership. U.S. manufacturers soon discovered 
that foreign goods were being made not only less expensively but also with better quality. 
Finally, by the late 1970s, U.S. executives recognized that they were facing a true crisis and 
responded. They invested heavily in improving manufacturing technology, increased the 
 corporate authority and visibility of manufacturing executives, and began incorporating exist-
ing and future production requirements into the organization’s overall strategic plan. Today, 
successful organizations recognize the crucial role that operations management plays as part 
of the overall organizational strategy to establish and maintain global leadership.11
The strategic role that operations management plays in successful organizational per-
formance can be seen clearly as more organizations move toward managing their operations 
from a value chain perspective, which we’re going to discuss next.

What Is value Chain Management?
Let’s start from the beginning. . .
• Every organization needs customers to survive and prosper.
• Customers want value from the goods and services 
they purchase or use, and they decide what has value.
• Organizations must provide that value to attract and 
keep customers.
• value is defined as the performance characteristics, 
features and attributes, and any other aspects of goods 
and services for which customers are willing  
to give up resources (usually money).
What Is value Chain Management 
and Why Is It Important?
15-2  Define the nature and purpose of value chain management.
The following examples of closely integrated work activities 
among many different players are brought to you by … 
VALUE CHAIN MANAGEMENT!
• BIG management assignment due in one week and your computer crashes! 
NO!!! Your custom-designed dream computer is built to your exact specifications and 
delivered two days later. Management assignment DONE!
• Zero inventory warehousing. Order processing that  
involves only one change of hands. It’s happening at  
Siemens AG’s Computed Tomography manufacturing  
plant in Forchheim, Germany, because its 30  
supplier partners share responsibility with the  
plant for overall process performance.
• Black & Decker’s handheld glue gun—totally outsourced  
to the leading glue gun manufacturer.12
Marek Kosmal/Fotolia
vege/Fotolia
value
The performance characteristics, features, attributes, and other aspects of 
goods and services, for which customers are willing to give up resources
1 
478

479
intheskies/Fotolia
▸▸▸
▸▸▸
• Value is provided to customers through transforming raw materials and other resourc-
es into some product or service that end users need or desire when, where, and how 
they want it.
That seemingly simple act of turning varied resources 
into something that customers value and are willing 
to pay for involves a vast array of interrelated work 
activities performed by different participants (suppliers, 
manufacturers, and even customers)—that is, it 
involves the value chain.13
• value chain management (VCM) is externally oriented and focuses on  
both incoming materials and outgoing products and 
services. VCM is effectiveness  
oriented and aims to create the high-
est value for customers.14
■   Contrast to supply chain management, 
which is efficiency oriented (its goal is to 
reduce costs and make the organization more 
productive) and internally oriented by focusing on 
efficient flow of incoming materials (resources) to 
the organization.
• Who has the power in the value chain?
■   Is it the supplier providing needed resources and materials? After 
all, suppliers have the ability to dictate prices and quality.
■   Is it the manufacturer that assembles those resources into a valuable product or service?  
A manufacturer’s contribution in creating a product or service is critical.
■   Is it the distributor that makes sure the product or service is available where and when  
the customer needs it?
Actually, it’s none of these!
In value chain management, CustOMErs are  
the ones with the power.15
value chain
The entire series of work activities that add value at each step from raw 
materials to finished product
value chain management
The process of managing the sequence of activities and information 
along the entire value chain

480
• They define what value is and how it’s created and provided.
• Using VCM, managers seek to find that unique combination in which customers are 
offered solutions that truly meet their needs and at a price that can’t be matched by 
competitors.16
Goals of Value Chain Management
• Sequence of participants work to-
gether as a team, each adding some 
component of value—such as faster 
assembly, more accurate informa-
tion, or better customer response 
and service—to the overall process.17
• The better the collaboration among the 
various chain participants, the better 
the customer solutions.
• When value is created for customers 
and their needs and desires satisfied, 
everyone along the chain benefits.18
Durand Florence/SIPA/Newscom
How Does value Chain Management  
Benefit Businesses?
• Improved procurement (acquiring needed resources).
• Improved logistics (managing materials,  
service, and information).
• Improved product development (close  
relationships with customers leads to  
developing products they value).
• Enhanced customer order management  
(managing every step to make sure customers  
are satisfied).19
nickylarson974/Fotolia
2 

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    481
William Edwards Deming was an American statistician, 
professor, author, lecturer, and consultant.20 He is widely 
credited with improving production in the United States 
during World War II, although he’s probably best known for 
his work in Japan. From 1950 onward, he taught Japanese 
top managers how to improve product design and product 
quality, testing, and sales, primarily through applying statis-
tical methods. Dr. Deming’s philosophy was quite simple: 
Focus on increasing quality and reducing costs through 
continually improving how employees’ work is done and by 
approaching manufacturing in an orderly, systematic, and 
logical way.
Putting that philosophy into practice required following 
Deming’s 14 points for improving management’s productiv-
ity. These suggestions are as follows:
• Plan for the long-term future.
• Never be complacent concerning the quality of your 
product.
• Establish statistical control over your production pro-
cesses and require your suppliers to do so as well.
• Deal with the best and fewest number of suppliers.
• Find out whether your problems are confined to particular 
parts of the production process or stem from the overall 
process itself.
• Train workers for the job that you are asking them to 
perform.
• Raise the quality of your line supervisors.
• Drive out fear.
• Encourage departments to work closely together 
rather than to concentrate on departmental or divisional 
distinctions.
• Do not adopt strictly numerical goals.
• Require your workers to do quality work.
• Train your employees to understand statistical methods.
• Train your employees in new skills as the need arises.
• Make top managers responsible for implementing these 
principles.
These principles have withstood the test of time and are 
still applicable for managers looking to improve productivity.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these dis-
cussion questions.
 Talk About It 1: Why are (1) continual improvement 
and (2) thinking of manufacturing as a system so important to 
managing operations?
 Talk About It 2: Explain why these 14 principles are still 
appropriate today.
◂ ◂ ◂ From the Past to the Present ▸ ▸ ▸
Deming:  
Improving Managers’ 
Productivity
How Is Value Chain Management Done?
The dynamic, competitive environment facing contem-
porary global organizations demands new solutions.21 
Understanding how and why value is determined by 
the marketplace has led some organizations to experi-
ment with a new business model—that is, a strategic 
design for how a company intends to profit from its 
broad  array of strategies, processes, and activities. For 
example, IKEA, the home furnishings manufacturer, 
transformed itself from a small, Swedish mail-order furniture operation into the world’s 
largest retailer of home furnishings by reinventing the value chain in the home furnishings 
industry. The company offers customers well-designed products at substantially lower 
prices in return for the customers’ willingness to take on certain key tasks traditionally 
done by manufacturers and retailers—such as getting the furniture home and assembling 
it.22 The company’s adoption of a unique business model and willingness to abandon old 
methods and processes have worked well. It also helped that IKEA recognized the impor-
tance of managing its value chain.
15-3  Describe how 
value chain 
management  
is done.
business model
A strategic design for how a company intends to 
profit from its broad array of strategies, processes, 
and activities

482    Part 5  •  Controlling
Coca-Cola’s CEO Muhtar Kent (at right) is 
shown here with officials of the firm’s bottling 
partner Coca-Cola Hellenic at a new plant 
opening in Russia. Kent and other company 
managers are strongly committed to leading 
the firm’s global value chain from producers 
of agricultural ingredients to bottling partners 
and retailers.
ZUMA Press, Inc./Alamy
What Are the Requirements for Successful  
Value Chain Management?
So what does successful value chain management require? Exhibit 15–2 summarizes the six 
main requirements. Let’s look at each of these elements more closely.
(1) CoordInatIon and CollaboratIon. For the value chain to achieve its goal of 
meeting and exceeding customers’ needs and desires, comprehensive and seamless integra-
tion among all members of the chain is absolutely necessary. All partners in the value chain 
must identify things that they may not value but that customers do. Sharing information 
and being flexible as far as who in the value chain does what are important steps in build-
ing coordination and collaboration. This sharing of information and  analysis requires open 
communication among the various value chain partners. For example, Furon Company, a 
manufacturer of specialty polymer products, believes that better  communication with cus-
tomers and with suppliers has facilitated timely delivery of goods and services and opened 
up additional business opportunities for all its value chain partners.23
(2) teChnology InvestMent. Successful value 
chain management isn’t possible without a significant 
investment in information technology. The payoff 
from this investment is that information technol-
ogy can be used to restructure the value chain to 
better serve end users.24 For example, Rollerblade, 
Inc., invested heavily in developing a Web site and 
used it to educate customers about its products. 
Although the company has chosen not to sell its 
products over the Web for fear of antagonizing 
its dealer network, managers remain flexible 
about the issue and would reconsider if they 
felt that value could be better delivered to cus-
tomers by doing so.25
What types of technology are important? 
According to experts, the key tools include a 
supporting enterprise resource planning soft-
ware (ERP) system that links all of an organi-
zation’s activities, sophisticated work planning 
and scheduling software, customer relationship 
Value
Chain
Strategy
Technology
Investment
Employees
Organizational
Culture and
Attitudes
Coordination
and
Collaboration
Leadership
Organizational
Processes
Exhibit 15–2 Requirements for Successful Value Chain Management

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    483
management systems, business intelligence capabilities, and e-business connections with 
trading network partners.26 For instance, Dell Inc. manages its supplier relationships almost 
exclusively online. The company has one Web site for customers and one for suppliers. The 
supplier Web site is the primary mode of communication between Dell and its largest sup-
pliers. The company’s investment in this type of information technology allows it to meet 
customers’ needs in a way that competitors haven’t been able to match.27
(3) organIzatIonal ProCesses. Value chain management radically changes 
 organizational processes—that is, the way organizational work is done.28 Managers must 
critically evaluate all organizational processes from beginning to end by looking at core 
competencies—the organization’s unique skills, capabilities, and resources—to determine 
where value is being added. Non-value-adding activities are eliminated. Questions such 
as “Where can internal knowledge be leveraged to improve flow of material and informa-
tion?” “How can we better configure our product to satisfy both customers and suppliers?” 
“How can the flow of material and information be improved?” and “How can we  improve 
customer service?” should be asked for each process. For example, when managers at 
Deere & Company implemented value chain management in its Worldwide Commercial 
and Consumer Equipment Division, a thorough process evaluation revealed that work ac-
tivities needed to be better synchronized and  interrelationships between multiple links in 
the value chain better managed. They changed numerous work processes division-wide in 
order to improve these relationships.29
Three important conclusions can be made about how organizational processes must 
change:
• First, better demand forecasting is necessary and possible because of closer ties with 
 customers and suppliers. For example, in an effort to make sure that Listerine was on the 
store shelves when customers wanted it, Walmart collaborated with product manufacturer 
Pfizer Consumer Healthcare on improving product demand forecast information. Through 
their mutual efforts, the partners boosted Walmart’s sales of Listerine by $6.5 million. 
 Customers also benefited because they were able to purchase the product when and where 
they wanted it.
• Second, selected functions may need to be done collaboratively with other partners 
in the value chain. This collaboration may even extend to sharing employees. For in-
stance, Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics, headquartered in Northboro, Massachu-
setts, places its own employees in customer sites and brings employees of suppliers and 
customers to work on its premises. Saint-Gobain’s CEO says this type of collaboration 
is essential.30
• Finally, new measures are needed for evaluating the performance of various activities along 
the value chain. Because the goal in value chain management is meeting and exceeding 
customers’ needs and desires, managers need a better picture of how well value is being cre-
ated and delivered to customers. For instance, when Nestlé USA implemented a value chain 
management approach, it redesigned its measurement system to focus on one consistent set 
of factors, including accuracy of demand forecasts and production plans, on-time delivery, 
and customer service levels. This redesign allowed management to more quickly identify 
problems and take actions to resolve them.31
(4) leadershIP. The importance of leadership to value chain management is plain and 
simple—successful value chain management isn’t possible without strong and committed 
leadership.32 From top organizational levels to lower levels, managers must support, fa-
cilitate, and promote the implementation and ongoing practice of value chain management. 
Managers must make a serious commitment to identifying what value is, how that value can 
best be provided, and how successful those efforts have been. That type of organizational 
atmosphere or culture, in which all efforts are focused on delivering superb customer value, 
isn’t possible without a serious commitment on the part of the organization’s leaders.
Also, it’s important that leaders outline expectations for what’s involved in the orga-
nization’s pursuit of value chain management. Ideally, articulating expectations should 
start with a vision or mission statement that expresses the organization’s commitment to 
organizational processes
The way organizational work is done

484    Part 5  •  Controlling
identifying, capturing, and providing the highest possible value to customers. For example, 
when American Standard Companies began its pursuit of value chain management, the CEO 
attended dozens of meetings across the country explaining the changing competitive environ-
ment and why the company needed to create better working relationships with its value chain 
partners.33 Throughout the organization, then, managers should clarify expectations regard-
ing each employee’s role in the value chain. Being clear about expectations also extends to 
partners. For example, managers at American Standard identified clear requirements for sup-
pliers and were prepared to drop any that couldn’t meet them. The company was so serious 
about its expectations that it did cut hundreds of suppliers from air-conditioning, bath and 
kitchen, and vehicle control systems businesses. The upside, though, was that those suppliers 
that met the expectations benefited from more business and American Standard had partners 
that could deliver better value to customers.
Flexibility. Flexibility. Flexibility.
(5) eMPloyees/huMan resourCes. We know from our discussions of management 
theories and approaches throughout this textbook that employees are the organization’s 
most important resource. So, not surprisingly, employees play an important part in value 
chain management. Three main human resources requirements for value chain management 
are flexible approaches to job design, an effective hiring process, and ongoing training.
Flexibility is the key description of job design in a value chain management organization. 
Traditional functional job roles—such as marketing, sales, accounts payable, customer ser-
vice representative, and so forth—are inadequate in a value chain management environment. 
Instead, jobs need to be designed around work processes that link all functions involved in 
creating and providing value to customers. This type of flexible job design supports the com-
pany’s commitment to providing superb customer value.34 In designing jobs for a value chain 
approach, the focus needs to be on how each activity performed by an employee can best 
contribute to the creation and delivery of customer value, which requires flexibility in what 
employees do and how they do it.
The fact that jobs in a value chain management organization must be flexible contrib-
utes to the second requirement: Flexible jobs require employees who are flexible. In a value 
chain organization, employees may be assigned to work teams that tackle a given process 
and are often asked to do different things on different days, depending on need. In an envi-
ronment  focusing on collaborative relationships that may change as customer needs change, 
 employees’ ability to be flexible is critical. Accordingly, the organization’s hiring process 
must be designed to identify those employees who have the ability to quickly learn and adapt.
Finally, the need for flexibility also requires a significant investment in ongoing employee 
training. Whether the training involves learning how to use information technology software, 
how to improve the flow of materials throughout 
the chain, how to identify activities that add value, 
how to make better decisions faster, or how to im-
prove any number of other potential work activities, 
managers must see to it that employees have the 
knowledge and tools they need to do their jobs. For 
example, at defense and electronics contractor Alenia 
Marconi Systems, based in Portsmouth, England, 
ongoing training is part of the company’s commit-
ment to efficiently and effectively meeting the needs 
of customers. Employees continually receive techni-
cal training as well as training in strategic issues, 
including the importance of emphasizing people and 
customers, not just sales and profits.35
(6) organIzatIonal Culture and attI­
tudes. The last requirement for value chain 
management is having a supportive organizational 
As the global VP for team member services 
for Whole Foods Market, Mark Ehrnstein 
ensures that the retailer’s culture of sharing, 
respect, and trust extends to all value chain 
members. It encompasses the firm’s core 
values of creating win-win partnerships with 
suppliers, delighting and nourishing  
customers, and supporting employee  
happiness and excellence.
Austin American-Statesman/MCT/Landov

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    485
culture and attitudes. Those cultural attitudes include sharing, collaborating, openness, 
flexibility, mutual respect, and trust. And these attitudes encompass not only the internal 
partners in the value chain but external partners as well. For instance, American Standard 
has chosen to practice these attitudes the old-fashioned way—with lots of face time and 
telephone calls. However, as we mentioned earlier, Dell has taken a completely different 
approach, as it works with its value chain partners almost exclusively through cyber-
space.36 Both approaches, however, reflect each company’s commitment to developing 
long-lasting, mutually beneficial, and trusting relationships that best meet customers’ 
needs.
What Are the Obstacles to Value Chain Management?
As desirable as value chain management may be, managers must tackle several obstacles in 
managing the value chain—organizational barriers, cultural attitudes, required capabilities, 
and people (see Exhibit 15–3).
organIzatIonal barrIers. Organizational barriers are among the most difficult 
obstacles to handle. These barriers include refusal or reluctance to share information, re-
luctance to shake up the status quo, and security issues. Without shared information, close 
coordination and collaboration is impossible. And the reluctance or refusal of employees 
to shake up the status quo can impede efforts toward value chain management and prevent 
its successful implementation. Finally, because value chain management relies heavily on 
a substantial information technology infrastructure,  system security and Internet security 
breaches are issues that need to be addressed.
Cultural attItudes. Unsupportive cultural attitudes— especially trust and control—
also can be obstacles to value chain management. The trust issue is a critical one—both 
lack of trust and too much trust. To be effective, partners in a value chain must trust each 
other. There must be a mutual respect for, and honesty about, each partner’s activities 
all along the chain. When that trust doesn’t exist, the partners will be reluctant to share 
information, capabilities, and processes. But too much trust also can be a problem. Just 
about any organization is vulnerable to theft of intellectual property—that is, proprietary 
information that’s critical to an organization’s efficient and effective functioning and com-
petitiveness. You need to be able to trust your value chain partners so your organization’s 
valuable assets aren’t compromised.37 Another cultural attitude that can be an obstacle is 
the belief that when an organization collaborates with external and internal partners, it no 
longer controls its own destiny. However, this just isn’t the case. Even with the intense col-
laboration that’s important to value chain management, organizations still control critical 
decisions such as what customers value, how much value they desire, and what distribution 
channels are important.38
Cultural
Attitudes
Organizational
Barriers
Required
Capabilities
People
Obstacles to
Value Chain
Management
Exhibit 15–3 Obstacles to Successful Value Chain Management

486    Part 5  •  Controlling
requIred CaPabIlItIes. We know from our earlier discussion 
of requirements for the successful implementation of value chain 
management that value chain partners need numerous capabilities. 
Several of these—coordination and collaboration, the ability to con-
figure products to satisfy customers and suppliers, and the ability 
to educate internal and external partners—aren’t easy. But they’re 
essential to capturing and exploiting the value chain. Many of the 
companies we’ve described throughout this section endured critical, 
and oftentimes difficult, self-evaluations of their capabilities and 
processes in order to  become more effective and efficient at manag-
ing their value chains.
Your people must be committed  
to VCM.
PeoPle. The final obstacles to successful value chain manage-
ment can be an organization’s people. Without their unwavering 
commitment to do whatever it takes, value chain management 
won’t be successful. If employees refuse to be flexible in their 
work—how and with whom they work—collaboration and coopera-
tion throughout the value chain will be hard to achieve. In addition, 
value chain management takes an incredible amount of time and 
energy on the part of an organization’s employees. Managers must 
motivate those high levels of effort from employees, which isn’t an 
easy thing to do.
  try It!
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of mymanagementlab.com to 
complete the Simulation: Operations Management.
What Contemporary Issues Do Managers Face  
in Managing Operations?
Redesigned milk jugs that have been adopted by Walmart and Costco are cheaper to 
ship, better for the environment, cost less, and keep the milk fresher. Experts say this 
type of redesign is “an example of the changes likely to play out in the American 
economy over the next two decades. In an era of soaring global demand and higher costs for 
energy and materials, virtually every aspect of the economy needs to be re-examined and 
many products must be redesigned for greater efficiency.”40
If you somehow thought that managing operations didn’t really matter in today’s online 
24/7 global economy, think again. It does matter . . . a lot. We’re going to look at three con-
temporary issues that managers face in managing operations.
1 What Role Does Technology Play in Operations Management?
As we know from our previous discussion of value chain management, today’s competitive 
marketplace has put tremendous pressure on organizations to deliver products and services 
that customers value in a timely manner. Smart companies are looking at ways to harness 
15-4  Discuss 
contemporary 
issues in  
managing 
operations.
A Question of Ethics
Okay—so here’s an “unusual” ethics dilemma for you and it’s 
a fitting conclusion in the last chapter of the textbook. Why? 
Because it illustrates that questions of ethics can pop up in 
the most ordinary of places. Suppose that you went to a pop-
ular shopping area where parking was extremely limited and 
the store owner had instituted “customers only” parking and 
you were lucky enough to find an open space. Then suppose 
that once you finished your business at that store—having 
spent a fair amount of money—you had other shopping to do 
in the same vicinity so you left your car in that same “custom-
ers only” parking space. You believed that what you did was 
okay since you “paid” for that spot with your purchase. But 
your significant other disagreed saying that since you had fin-
ished your business at that store, your car should be moved.39
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments 
section of mymanagementlab.com to complete these 
 discussion questions.
  Talk About It 3: What is the “question of ethics” 
here? Why is it a “question of ethics”?
 Talk About It 4: Who are the other stakeholders 
in this situation and how might this one seemingly simple 
 decision affect them?

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    487
technology to improve operations management. Many fast-food companies are competing to 
see who can provide faster and better service to drive-through customers. With drive-through 
now representing a huge portion of sales, faster and better delivery can be a significant com-
petitive edge. For instance, Wendy’s added awnings to some of its menu boards and replaced 
some of the text with pictures. Others use confirmation screens, a technology that helped 
McDonald’s boost accuracy by more than 11 percent. And technology used by two national 
chains tells managers how much food they need to prepare by counting vehicles in the drive-
through line and factoring in demand for current promotional and popular staple items.41
Although an organization’s production activities are driven by the recognition that the 
customer is king, managers still need to be more responsive. For instance, operations managers 
need systems that can reveal available capacity, status of orders, and product quality while prod-
ucts are in the process of being manufactured, not just after the fact. To connect more closely 
with customers, production must be synchronized across the enterprise. To avoid bottlenecks 
and slowdowns, the production function must be a full partner in the entire business system.
What’s making such extensive collaboration possible is technology. Technology is also 
allowing organizations to control costs particularly in the areas of predictive maintenance, 
 remote diagnostics, and utility cost savings. For instance, Internet-compatible equipment 
contains embedded Web servers that can communicate proactively—that is, if a piece of equip-
ment breaks or reaches certain preset parameters indicating that it’s about to break, it asks for 
help. But technology can do more than sound an alarm or light up an indicator button. For 
instance, some devices have the ability to initiate e-mail or signal a pager at a supplier, the 
maintenance department, or contractor describing the specific problem and requesting parts 
and service. How much is such e-enabled maintenance control worth? It can be worth quite a 
lot if it prevents equipment breakdowns and subsequent production downtime.
Managers who understand the power of technology to contribute to more effective and ef-
ficient performance know that managing operations is more than the traditional view of simply 
producing the product. Instead, the emphasis is on working together with all the  organization’s 
business functions to find solutions to customers’ business problems. (See the Technology and 
the Manager’s Job box for more information on technology’s role in the  factory of the future.)
WelCOMe TO THe FACTORy OF THe FuTuRe!
::::::: Technology and the Manager’s Job   :::::::
What would the ideal factory of the future look like?42 
Experts at Georgia Tech’s Manufacturing Research 
Center say that three important trends are driving what 
tomorrow’s factories will look like. ❶ One trend is globalization 
of the supply chain. In the factories of the future, design and busi-
ness processes will be performed where it’s most efficient and 
effective to do so. For example, parts for Boeing’s 787 Dreamliner 
are produced around the world and then come together in Boeing’s 
U.S. facilities. (See Case Application #2 on p. 499 for more info!)  
❷ The second trend is technology that simultaneously dema-
terializes the product while vastly increasing complexity. The 
challenge for managing operations is that despite simplicity in 
products, the production process is becoming more complex. 
❸ The third trend is  demographics and the impact on demand 
patterns. Products will have shorter life cycles and more variety 
and choices. The key characteristic of the factory of the future will 
be its ability to change to accommodate whatever product is being 
produced in the needed time frame. And it will be particularly 
 important that these factories be efficient and effective.
Given these trends, it’s clear that technology will continue to 
play a key role in transformation processes that need to be col-
laborative, adaptive, flexible, and responsive. But keep in mind 
that technology is simply a tool. Future factories will also require a 
talented and skilled workforce and a clear understanding of manag-
ing operations processes. Those are the challenges facing managers 
who want their organizations to survive and thrive.
If your professor has assigned this, go to the Assignments section of 
mymanagementlab.com to complete these discussion questions.
  talk aBOut It 5: How will technology contribute to the 
 operations management process? What are the downsides to using 
technology in the operations management process?
  talk aBOut It 6: In the factory of the future, what role does a 
manager play?

488    Part 5  •  Controlling
2 How Do Managers Control Quality?
$100 million—Apple’s settlement with customers  
over poor quality.
Quality problems are expensive. For example, even though Apple has had phenomenal suc-
cess with its iPod, the batteries in the first three versions died after four hours instead of 
lasting up to 12 hours, as buyers expected. Apple’s settlement with consumers cost close to 
$100 million. At Schering-Plough, problems with inhalers and other pharmaceuticals were 
traced to chronic quality control shortcomings, for which the company eventually paid a $500 
million fine. And the auto industry paid $14.5 billion to cover the cost of warranty and repair 
work in one year.43
Many experts believe that organizations unable to produce high-quality products won’t 
be able to compete successfully in the global marketplace. What is quality? When you con-
sider a product or service to have quality, what does that mean? Does it mean that the product 
doesn’t break or quit working—that is, is it reliable? Does it mean that the service is delivered 
in a way that you intended? Does it mean that the product does what it’s supposed to do? Or 
does quality mean something else? Exhibit 15–4 provides a description of several quality 
dimensions. We’re going to define quality as the ability of a product or service to reliably do 
what it’s supposed to do and to satisfy customer expectations.
how Is qualIty aChIeved? How quality is achieved is an issue managers must 
 address. A good way to look at quality initiatives is with the management functions— 
planning, organizing and leading, and controlling—that need to take place.
When planning for quality, managers must have quality improvement goals and strate-
gies and plans to achieve those goals. Goals can help focus everyone’s attention toward some 
objective quality standard. For instance, Caterpillar’s goal is to apply quality improvement 
techniques to help cut costs.44 Although this goal is specific and challenging, managers 
Exhibit 15–4 What Is Quality?
ProduCt qualIty dIMensIons
1. Performance—Operating characteristics
2. Features—Important special characteristics
3. Flexibility—Meeting operating specifications over some period of time
4. Durability—Amount of use before performance deteriorates
5. Conformance—Match with preestablished standards
6. Serviceability—Ease and speed of repair or normal service
7. Aesthetics—How a product looks and feels
8. Perceived quality—Subjective assessment of characteristics (product image)
servICe qualIty dIMensIons
1. Timeliness—Performed in promised period of time
2. Courtesy—Performed cheerfully
3. Consistency—Giving all customers similar experiences each time
4. Convenience—Accessibility to customers
5. Completeness—Full service, as required
6. Accuracy—Performed correctly each time
Sources: Based on J. W. Dean and J. R. Evans, Total Quality: Management, Organization, and 
Society (St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Company, 1994); H. V. Roberts and B. F. Sergesketter, 
Quality Is Personal (New York: The Free Press, 1993); D. Garvin, Managed Quality: The 
Strategic and Competitive Edge (New York: The Free Press, 1988); and M. A. Hitt, R. D. 
Ireland, and R. E. Hoskisson, Strategic Management, 4th ed. (Cincinnati: South-Western 
Publishing, 2001), 121.

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    489
and employees are partnering together to pursue well-
designed strategies to achieve the goals, and are confident 
they can do so.
When organizing and leading for quality, it’s impor-
tant for managers to look to their employees. For instance, 
at the Moosejaw, Saskatchewan, plant of General Cable 
Corporation, every employee participates in continual 
quality assurance training. In addition, the plant manager 
believes wholeheartedly in giving employees the informa-
tion they need to do their jobs better. He says, “Giving 
people who are running the machines the information is 
just paramount. You can set up your cellular structure, you 
can cross-train your people, you can use lean tools, but if 
you don’t give people information to drive improvement, 
there’s no enthusiasm.” Needless to say, this company 
shares production data and financial performance mea-
sures with all employees.45
Organizations with extensive and successful quality improvement programs tend to 
rely on two important people approaches: cross-functional work teams and self-directed or 
empowered work teams. Because achieving product quality is something that all employees 
from upper to lower levels must participate in, it’s not surprising that quality-driven organiza-
tions rely on well-trained, flexible, and empowered employees.
Finally, managers must recognize when controlling for quality that quality improvement 
initiatives aren’t possible without having some way to monitor and evaluate their progress. 
Whether it involves standards for inventory control, defect rate, raw materials procurement, 
or other operations management areas, controlling for quality is important. For instance, at 
the Northrup Grumman Corporation plant in Rolling Meadows, Illinois, several quality con-
trols have been implemented, such as automated testing and IT that integrates product design 
and manufacturing and tracks process quality improvements. Also, employees are empow-
ered to make accept/reject decisions about products throughout the manufacturing process. 
The plant manager explains, “This approach helps build quality into the product rather than 
trying to inspect quality into the product.” But one of the most important things they do is “go 
to war” with their customers—soldiers preparing for war or live combat situations. Again, the 
plant manager says, “What discriminates us is that we believe if we can understand our cus-
tomer’s mission as well as they do, we can help them be more effective. We don’t wait for our 
customer to ask us to do something. We find out what our customer is trying to do and then 
we develop solutions.”46
Quality improvement success stories can be found globally. For example, at a Delphi 
assembly plant in Matamoros, Mexico, employees worked hard to improve quality and made 
significant strides. For instance, the customer reject rate on shipped products is now 10 ppm 
(parts per million), down from 3,000 ppm—an improvement of almost 300 percent.47 Quality 
initiatives at several Australian companies, including Alcoa of Australia, Wormald Security, 
and Carlton and United Breweries, have led to significant quality improvements.48 At Valeo 
Klimasystemme GmbH of Bad Rodach, Germany, assembly teams build different climate-
control systems for high-end German cars including Mercedes and BMW. Quality initiatives 
by those teams have led to significant improvements.49
what qualIty goals MIght organIzatIons Pursue? To publicly demonstrate 
their commitment to quality, many organizations worldwide have pursued challenging 
quality goals. The two best-known are the following:
(1)   ISO 9000 is a series of international quality management standards established by 
the International Organization for Standardization (www.iso.org), which sets uniform 
 guidelines for processes to ensure that products conform to customer requirements. 
These standards cover everything from contract review to product design to product 
delivery. The ISO 9000 standards have become the internationally recognized standard 
for evaluating and comparing companies in the global marketplace. In fact, this type of 
Italian carmaker Ferrari competes  
successfully in the global marketplace by  
developing and producing high-quality cars 
in terms of design, performance, and  
reliability. Employees like this worker 
performing a quality check at the end of an 
assembly line apply the concept of excellence 
to the way they think, plan, act, and carry out 
their tasks.
AFP/Stringer/Getty Images
ISO 9000
A series of international quality standards that set 
uniform guidelines for processes to ensure that 
products conform to customer requirements

490    Part 5  •  Controlling
certification can be a prerequisite for doing business globally. Achieving ISO 9000 cer-
tification provides proof that a quality operations system is in place. As of 2009, more 
than 1 million certifications had been awarded to organizations in 175 countries. Almost 
40,000 U.S. businesses are ISO 9000 certified. More than 200,000 Chinese firms have 
received certification.50
(2)   More than 30 years ago, Motorola further popularized the use of stringent quality  standards 
through a trademarked quality improvement program called Six Sigma.51 Very simply, Six 
Sigma is a quality standard that establishes a goal of no more than 3.4 defects per million 
units or procedures. What does the name mean? Sigma is the Greek letter that statisticians 
use to define a standard deviation from a bell curve. The higher the sigma, the fewer the 
deviations from the norm—that is, the fewer the defects. At One Sigma, two-thirds of 
whatever is being measured falls within the curve. Two Sigma covers about 95 percent. 
At Six Sigma, you’re about as close to defect-free as you can get.52 It’s an ambitious 
quality goal! Although it’s an extremely high standard to achieve, many quality-driven 
businesses are using it and benefiting from it. For instance, General Electric estimates that 
it has saved billions since 1995 by using Six Sigma, according to company executives.53 
Other examples of companies pursuing Six Sigma include ITT Industries, Dow Chemical, 
3M Company, American Express, Sony Corporation, Nokia Corporation, and Johnson & 
Johnson. Although manufacturers seem to make up the bulk of Six Sigma users, service 
companies such as financial institutions, retailers, and health-care organizations are begin-
ning to apply it. What impact can Six Sigma have? Let’s look at an example.
It used to take Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield, a managed-care health-care com-
pany, 65 days or more to add a new doctor to its medical plans. Thanks to Six Sigma, the 
company discovered that half the processes they used were redundant. With those unneces-
sary steps gone, the job now gets done in 30 days or less and with reduced staff. The company 
also has been able to reduce its administrative expenses by $3 million per year, an amount 
passed on to consumers through lower health premiums.54
Although it’s important for managers to recognize that many positive benefits come 
from obtaining ISO 9000 certification or Six Sigma, the key benefit comes from the quality 
improvement journey itself. In other words, the goal of quality certification should be having 
work processes and an operations system in place that enable organizations to meet custom-
ers’ needs and employees to perform their jobs in a consistently high-quality way.
3 How Are Projects Managed?
As we discussed in Chapter 6, many organizations are structured around projects. A project is 
a one-time-only set of activities with a definite beginning and ending point.55 Projects vary in 
size and scope, from a NASA space shuttle launch to 
a wedding. Project management is the task of get-
ting the activities done on time, within budget, and 
according to specifications.
Project management has actually been around 
for a long time in industries such as construction 
and movie making, but now it has expanded into 
almost every type of business. What explains the 
growing popularity of project management? It fits 
well with a dynamic environment and the need 
for flexibility and rapid response. Organizations 
are increasingly undertaking projects that are 
somewhat unusual or unique, have specific dead-
lines, contain complex  interrelated tasks requiring 
 specialized skills, and are temporary in nature. 
These types of projects don’t lend themselves 
well to the standardized operating procedures 
that guide routine and continuous organizational 
activities.56
Project management in the music industry in-
cludes concert tours by artists such as coun-
try music singer Kenny Chesney. Managing 
a tour involves coordinating the timeline, 
activities, accommodations, and transporta-
tion for the musicians and crew members in 
different cities and performance venues from 
the first to the last concert date.
Eric Henderson/Reuters/Landov
Six Sigma
A quality standard that establishes a goal of 
no more than 3.4 defects per million units or 
procedures
project
A one-time-only set of activities with a definite 
beginning and ending point
project management
The task of getting project activities done on time, 
within budget, and according to specifications

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    491
In the typical project, team members are temporarily assigned to and report to a project 
manager who coordinates the project’s activities with other departments and reports directly 
to a senior executive. The project is temporary: It exists only long enough to complete its 
specific objectives. Then it’s wound down and closed up; members move on to other projects, 
return to their permanent departments, or leave the organization.
If you were to observe a group of supervisors or department managers for a few days, you 
would see them regularly detailing what activities have to be done, the order in which they are 
to be done, who is to do each, and when they are to be completed. The managers are doing what 
we call scheduling. The following discussion reviews some useful scheduling devices.
how do you use a gantt Chart? The Gantt chart is a planning tool developed 
around the turn of the century by Henry Gantt. The idea behind the Gantt chart is relatively 
simple. It’s essentially a bar graph, with time on the horizontal axis and the activities to be 
scheduled on the vertical axis. The bars show output, both planned and actual, over a period 
of time. The Gantt chart visually shows when tasks are supposed to be done and compares 
the assigned date with the actual progress on each. This simple but important device allows 
managers to detail easily what has yet to be done to complete a job or project and to assess 
whether it’s ahead of, behind, or on schedule.
Exhibit 15–5 shows a Gantt chart that was developed for book production by a manager 
in a publishing firm. Time is expressed in months across the top of the chart. Major activities 
are listed down the left side. The planning comes in deciding what activities need to be done 
to get the book finished, the order in which those activities need to be done, and the time that 
should be allocated to each activity. The blue shading represents actual progress made in 
completing each activity.
A Gantt chart, then, actually becomes a managerial control device as the manager looks 
for deviations from the plan. In this case, most activities were completed on time. However, if 
you look at the “review first pages” activity, you will notice that it’s actually almost two and 
a half weeks behind schedule. Given this information, the manager might want to take some 
corrective action to make up the lost time and to ensure that no further delays will occur. At 
this point, the manager can expect that the book will be published at least two weeks late if no 
corrective action is taken.
A modified version of the Gantt chart is a load chart. Instead of listing activities on the 
vertical axis, load charts list either whole departments or specific resources. This informa-
tion allows managers to plan and control for capacity utilization. In other words, load charts 
schedule capacity by workstations. For example, Exhibit 15–6 shows a load chart for six 
production editors at the same publishing firm. Each editor supervises the design and produc-
tion of several books. By reviewing the load chart, the executive editor who supervises the six 
production editors can see who is free to take on a new book. If everyone is fully scheduled, 
the executive editor might decide not to accept any new projects, to accept some new projects 
and delay others, to ask the editors to work overtime, or to employ more production editors.
PERT: Program Evaluation and Review Technique
Copyedit manuscript
Design sample pages
Draw artwork
Review ﬁrst pages
Print ﬁnal pages
Design cover
1
2
Month
Reporting Date
Activity
3
4
Actual progress
Goals
Exhibit 15–5 A Sample Gantt Chart
Gantt chart
A planning tool that shows in bar graph form when 
tasks are supposed to be done and compares that 
with the actual progress on each
load chart
A modified version of a Gantt chart that lists either 
whole departments or specific resources

492    Part 5  •  Controlling
what Is a Pert network analysIs? Gantt and load charts are helpful as long as 
the activities or projects being scheduled are few and independent of each other. But what 
if a manager had to plan a large project—such as a complex reorganization, the launching 
of a major cost-reduction campaign, or the development of a new product—that required 
coordinating inputs from marketing, production, and product design personnel? Such 
projects require coordinating hundreds or thousands of activities, some of which must be 
done simultaneously and some of which cannot begin until earlier activities have been 
completed. If you are constructing a shopping mall, you obviously cannot start erecting 
walls until the foundation has been laid. How, then, to schedule such a complex project? 
Use PERT.
PERT network analysis was originally developed in the late 1950s for coordinating the 
more than 3,000 contractors and agencies working on the Polaris submarine weapon system. 
This project was incredibly complicated, with hundreds of thousands of activities that had to 
be coordinated. PERT is reported to have cut two years off the completion date for the Polaris 
project.
A PERT network is a flowchart-like diagram that depicts the sequence of activities 
needed to complete a project and the time or costs associated with each activity. With a PERT 
network, a project manager must think through what has to be done, determine which events 
depend on one another, and identify potential trouble spots (see Exhibit 15–7). PERT also 
makes it easy to compare the effects alternative actions will have on scheduling and costs. 
PERT allows managers to monitor a project’s progress, identify possible bottlenecks, and 
shift resources as necessary to keep the project on schedule.
To understand how to construct a PERT network, you need to know three terms: events, 
activities, and critical path. Let us define these terms, outline the steps in the PERT process, 
and then develop an example.
• Events are end points that represent the completion of major activities. Sometimes called 
milestones, events indicate that something significant has happened (such as receipt of pur-
chased items) or an important component is finished. In PERT, events represent a point in 
time.
• Activities, on the other hand, are the actions that take place. Each activity consumes time, 
as determined on the basis of the time or resources required to progress from one event to 
another.
• The critical path is the longest or most time-consuming sequence of events and activities 
required to complete the project in the shortest amount of time.57
Let’s apply PERT to a construction manager’s task of building a 6,500-square-foot cus-
tom home.
Keri
Chris
Mark
Tim
Natalie
Jen
1
6
5
4
3
2
Editor
Month
Work scheduled
Exhibit 15–6 A Sample load Chart
PERT network analysis
A flowchart-like diagram that depicts the sequence 
of activities needed to complete a project and the 
time or costs associated with each activity
events
End points that represent the completion of major 
activities
activities
Actions that take place
critical path
The longest or most time-consuming sequence of 
events and activities required to complete a project 
in the shortest amount of time

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    493
As a construction manager, you recognize that time really is money in your business. 
Delays can turn a profitable job into a money loser. Accordingly, you must determine how 
long it will take to complete the house. You have carefully dissected the entire project into 
activities and events. Exhibit 15–8 outlines the major events in the construction project and 
your estimate of the expected time required to complete each activity. Exhibit 15–9 depicts 
the PERT network based on the data in Exhibit 15–8.
how does Pert oPerate? Your PERT network tells you that if everything goes as 
planned, it will take just over 32 weeks to build the house. This time is calculated by trac-
ing the network’s critical path: A B C D E I J K L M N P Q. Any delay in completing the 
events along this path will delay the completion of the entire project. For example, if it took 
six weeks instead of four to frame the house (event E), the entire project would be delayed 
by two weeks (or the time beyond that expected). But a one-week delay for installing the 
brick (event H) would have little effect because that event is not on the critical path. By us-
ing PERT, the construction manager would know that no corrective action would be needed. 
Further delays in installing the brick, however, could present problems—for such delays may, 
in actuality, result in a new critical path. Now back to our original critical path dilemma.
Notice that the critical path passes through N, P, and Q. Our PERT chart (Exhibit 15–9) 
tells us that these three activities take four weeks. Wouldn’t path N O Q be faster? Yes. The 
PERT network shows that it takes only 3.5 weeks to complete that path. So why isn’t N O Q 
on the critical path? Because activity Q cannot begin until both activities O and P are com-
pleted. Although activity O takes half a week, activity P takes one full week. So, the earliest 
we can begin Q is after one week. What happens to the difference between the critical activity 
(activity P) time and the noncritical activity (activity O) time? The difference, in this case half 
a week, becomes slack time. Slack time is the time difference between the critical path and 
all other paths. What use is there for slack? If the project manager notices some slippage on a 
critical activity, perhaps slack time from a noncritical activity can be borrowed and temporar-
ily assigned to work on the critical one.
As you can see, PERT is both a planning and a control tool. Not only does PERT help 
us estimate the times associated with scheduling a project, but it also gives us clues about 
Developing a PERT network requires the manager to identify all key activities needed 
to complete a project, rank them in order of dependence, and estimate each activity’s 
completion time. This procedure can be translated into five specific steps:
1. Identify every significant activity that must be achieved for a project to be completed. 
The accomplishment of each activity results in a set of events or outcomes.
2. Ascertain the order in which these events must be completed.
3. Diagram the flow of activities from start to finish, identifying each activity and its rela-
tionship to all other activities. Use circles to indicate events and arrows to represent 
activities. The result is a flowchart diagram that we call the PERT network.
4. Compute a time estimate for completing each activity, using a weighted average that 
employs an optimistic time estimate (to) of how long the activity would take under ideal 
conditions, a most-likely estimate (tm) of the time the activity normally should take, and 
a pessimistic estimate (tp) that represents the time that an activity should take under 
the worst possible conditions. The formula for calculating the expected time (te) is then
te =
to + 4tm + tp
6
5. Finally, using a network diagram that contains time estimates for each activity, the 
manager can determine a schedule for the start and finish dates of each activity and 
for the entire project. Any delays that occur along the critical path require the most 
 attention because they delay the entire project. That is, the critical path has no slack 
in it; therefore, any delay along that path immediately translates into a delay in the 
final deadline for the completed project.
Exhibit 15–7 Developing PeRT Charts
slack time
The time difference between the critical path and 
all other paths

494    Part 5  •  Controlling
where our controls should be placed. Because any event on the critical path that is delayed 
will delay the overall project (making us not only late but also probably over budget), our 
attention needs to be focused on the critical activities at all times. For example, if activity 
F (installing windows) is delayed by a week because supplies have not arrived, that is not 
a major issue. It’s not on the critical path. But if activity P (installing flooring) is delayed 
from one week to two weeks, the entire project will be delayed by one week. Consequently, 
anything that has the immediate potential for delaying a project (critical activities) must be 
monitored closely.
As we said in the beginning of this chapter, it’s the manager’s job to manage the organi-
zation’s operating systems, organizational control systems, and quality programs. That’s the 
only way organizations will survive in today’s increasingly competitive global economy.
MyManagementLab
®
Go to mymanagementlab.com to complete the problems marked with this icon 
.
Exhibit 15–8 Major Activities in Building a Custom Home
EvENt
DEsCrIptION
tIME 
(WEEks)
prECEDING 
aCtIvIty
A
Approve design and get permits
3
None
B
Perform excavation/lot clearing
1
A
C
Pour footers
1
B
D
Erect foundation walls
2
C
E
Frame house
4
D
F
Install windows
0.5
E
G
Shingle roof
0.5
E
H
Install brick front and siding
4
F, G
I
Install electrical, plumbing,  
and heating and A/C rough-ins
6
E
J
Install insulation
0.25
I
K
Install sheetrock
2
J
L
Finish and sand sheetrock
7
K
M
Install interior trim
2
L
N
Paint house (interior and exterior)
2
H, M
O
Install all cabinets
0.5
N
P
Install flooring
1
N
Q
Final touch-up and turn over house 
to homeowner
1
O, P
Start
Finish
A
B
C
D
E
G
P
N
H
Q
F
O
I
J
K
L
M
Exhibit 15–9 A PeRT Network for Building a Custom Home

15 Review 
495
CHAPTER SUMMARY
  15-1 Define operations management  
and explain its role.
Operations management is the transformation process 
that converts resources into finished goods and services. 
 Manufacturing organizations produce physical goods. Ser-
vice organizations produce nonphysical outputs in the form of 
 services. Productivity is a composite of people and operations 
variables. A manager should look for ways to successfully 
integrate people into the overall operations systems. Organi-
zations must recognize the crucial role that operations man-
agement plays as part of their overall strategy in achieving 
successful performance.
  15-2 Define the nature and purpose of value  
chain management.
The value chain is the sequence of organizational work activi-
ties that add value at each step from raw materials to finished 
product. Value chain management is the process of managing 
the sequence of activities and information along the entire prod-
uct chain.
The goal of value chain management is to create a value 
chain strategy that meets and exceeds customers’ needs and 
desires and allows for full and seamless integration among all 
members of the chain.
Four benefits from value chain management include 
 improved procurement, improved logistics, improved product 
development, and enhanced customer order management.
  15-3 Describe how value chain management  
is done.
The six main requirements for successful value chain manage-
ment include coordination and collaboration, investment in 
technology, organizational processes, leadership, employees or 
human resources, and organizational culture and attitudes.
The obstacles to value chain management include orga-
nizational barriers (refusal to share information, reluctance 
to shake up the status quo, or security issues), unsupportive 
cultural attitudes, lack of required capabilities, and employees 
unwilling or unable to do it.
  15-4 Discuss contemporary issues in managing 
operations.
Companies are looking at ways to harness technology to 
 improve their operations management by extensive collabora-
tion and cost control.
ISO 9000 is a series of international quality management 
standards that set uniform guidelines for processes to ensure 
that products conform to customer requirements. Six Sigma is 
a quality standard that establishes a goal of no more than 3.4 
defects per million units or procedures.
Project management involves getting a project’s activities 
done on time, within budget, and accomplished to specifications. 
A project is a one-time-only set of activities that has a definite be-
ginning and ending point in time. Popular project scheduling tools 
include Gantt charts, load charts, and PERT network analysis.
DIsCussION QuEstIONs
 15­1 What is operations management and how is it used in 
both manufacturing and service organizations?
 15­2 Why is operations management important to business 
organizations?
 15­3 Discuss the importance of effective operations 
 management from the manager’s perspective. 
 15­4 Do you think that manufacturing or service organizations 
have greater need of operations management? Explain.
 15­5 What is a value chain? What is value chain manage-
ment? What is the goal of value chain management?
 15­6 What types of organizational benefits does value chain 
management provide? What obstacles stand in the way 
of successful value chain management?
 15­7 Explain why managing productivity is important in 
operations management.
 15­8 Who has the power in the value chain? Explain your 
response.
 15­9 Choose two tasks that you do every week (for exam-
ple, shop for groceries, host a poker party, clean your 
house/apartment, do laundry). For each one, identify 
how you could (a) be more productive in doing that 
task, and (b) have higher-quality output from that task.
15­10 Select a company with which you’re familiar. Describe 
its value chain. Be as specific as possible in your 
description. Evaluate how it “uses” the value chain to 
create value.

496    Part 5  •  Controlling
Management Skill Builder  |   BEING a GOOD CONflICt 
MaNaGEr
Managing any project will require good conflict management skills. You’ll typically have to work across 
 vertical and horizontal levels in the organization, deal with people over whom you have no formal authority, 
and have to negotiate schedules, deadlines, work assignments, and the like with people possibly both inside 
and outside the organization.
MyManagementLab
Go to mymanagementlab.com for the following Assisted-graded writing questions:
15­11 How could you use value chain management in your 
everyday life? Be specific.
15­12 How does technology affect operations management 
decisions?
15­13 MyManagementLab Only – comprehensive writing 
assignment for this chapter.
 PeRSONAl INVeNTORy ASSeSSMeNT 
strategies for Handling Conflict
Conflict can arise any time you’re working with a group of people on a project. Use this  
PIA to assess different strategies for handling conflict.
P
I
A
PERSONAL  
INVENTORY 
ASSESSMENT
Practicing the Skill
To manage conflict effectively, you need to know yourself, as 
well as the conflicting parties; to understand the situation that 
has created the conflict; and to be aware of your options.58
• 
What’s your underlying conflict-handling style? Most of 
us have the ability to vary our conflict response accord-
ing to the situation, but each of us has a preferred style 
for handling conflicts. These styles include collaborating 
 (accommodating various points of view to seek a win-win 
solution); compromising (we both give up something so 
there is no clear winner or loser); accommodating (self-
sacrificing by putting others’ interests above your own); 
forcing (satisfying your own interest regardless of the 
 impact on others); and avoiding (withdrawing from or sup-
pressing differences).
• 
Selectively choose the conflicts you want to handle. Not ev-
ery conflict justifies your attention. Avoidance may appear 
to be a cop-out, but it can sometimes be the most appropri-
ate response. Avoid trivial conflicts and save your efforts 
for the ones that count.
• 
Evaluate the conflict parties. Who is involved in the con-
flict? What interests do you or they represent? What are 
each party’s values, personality, feelings, and resources?
• 
Assess the source of the conflict. The most common 
sources of interpersonal conflicts in organizations are 
communication differences, structural differences (i.e., 
rules,  territorial battles, budget conflicts, questions of 
authority), and personality and value differences. Com-
munication conflicts are typically the easiest to resolve, 
while personality and value differences the most difficult. 
Knowing the source of a conflict will narrow your choic-
es of resolution  techniques.
• 
Select the best option. In addition to the five preferred 
styles of handling conflict noted above, additional reso-
lution techniques include expanding the scarce resource 
(such as a budget or promotion opportunities) that is caus-
ing the conflict; creating a shared goal that requires all 
parties to the conflict to cooperate on; behavioral-change 
intervention and counseling; and reorganizing jobs or 
 departments.

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    497
Practicing the Skill
Follow the directions:
Form teams of three. Analyze each of the following scenarios 
and formulate a conflict-handling strategy:
Situation 1. You are a staff specialist and have been assigned 
two projects: one by your immediate supervisor and one by the 
supervisor of another department. There is adequate time to 
complete both projects by the deadline date; however,  neither 
project would be completed with the degree of excellence 
 required by your organization. What would you do?
Situation 2. You are the moderator of a group session with five 
other people. The purpose of the session is to formulate a plan 
that requires consent from all participants. One of the partici-
pants is so involved with the important details of the plan that 
he is delaying the group from reaching agreement. As modera-
tor, what would you do in this situation?
Situation 3. Your boss has called you into his office and you 
find that he wants your opinion about the performance of one of 
your coworkers. The coworker is your best friend and neighbor, 
but you are inclined to believe that his performance is substan-
dard. What would you tell the boss?
WestWood Travel Services
To: Ebben Crawford, Director of Operations
From: Anne Mendales, President
Subject: ISO 9001 Certification
I’ve been doing a lot of reading on total quality manage-
ment and I think we need to look at using TQM principles. 
Since our business has grown from one office with 12 em-
ployees to five offices with nearly 50 employees, I want 
to ensure that we’re doing everything we can to meet our 
clients’ needs, especially since we’ve lost some clients to 
competitors. Could you do an analysis describing how we 
might apply the concepts of customer focus, continuous 
process improvement,  benchmarking, training, teamwork, 
and empowerment to our travel business to make us more 
competitive? Write up your analysis in a bulleted list format 
(no more than two pages please) and get it to me by the end 
of the week.
This fictionalized company and message were created for educational 
purposes only, and not meant to reflect positively or negatively on manage-
ment practices by any company that may share this name.
Experiential Exercise 
CasE applICatION 
Tragedy in Fashion
A
lthough one fortunate and lucky young woman was 
pulled out alive after 17 days buried in the rubble, 
over 1,100 workers perished in a deadly factory 
building collapse in Dhaka, Bangladesh, in April 2013.59 The 
Rana Plaza building collapse is now considered the deadliest 
disaster in the history of the 
clothing industry. As stated 
in this chapter, the dynamic 
competitive environment fac-
ing contemporary global or-
ganizations 
demands 
new 
solutions, but, as this story 
illustrates, sometimes those solutions have consequences—
tragic consequences. As global apparel retailers reassess their 
operations management strategies, changes are likely to be 
forthcoming.
Rock-bottom labor costs enticed global clothing giants to 
Bangladesh during the mid-2000s. Many of the retailers that have 
relied on these factories are known for cheap, “fast” apparel: 
H&M, Zara, Lee, Wrangler, J.C. Penney, and Walmart. And 
when you’re selling many articles of clothing for $20 and under, 
it means your costs (especially 
when being shipped from an-
other location halfway around 
the world) need to be tightly 
controlled. Also, the concept of 
fashion trends has changed over 
the last two decades. Where 
fashion used to be “good” for an entire season, now fashion 
styles, colors, shapes, and so forth, change, seemingly overnight.
Retailers like Zara and H&M have hooked customers on 
fast fashion—that is, clothes that go from concept and design 
#1
The deadliest disaster in the 
history of the clothing industry

498    Part 5  •  Controlling
to being in your local mall stores in a matter of weeks—and 
clothing has become a sort of “single-serving disposable item.” 
Now consumers are wanting new and different items almost 
continuously. There’s a “constant, ceaseless rotation through 
looks and styles.” Providing for that demand has placed a sig-
nificant strain on the operations system behind this fast, cheap 
fashion. Hasty expansion of factory capacity, lax governmental 
enforcement of permits and approvals, and a focus on keep-
ing costs as low as possible in whatever ways needed have 
become the focus of factory work culture in this developing 
country. Because garment factories in Bangladesh don’t have a 
lot of the more sophisticated machinery like China, their edge 
in the fashion industry had always been basic, simply-con-
structed clothing. And as the fashion industry’s fashion empha-
sis changed, Bangladesh’s importance to the global clothing 
trade rose. In fact, in six years, it rose from the 8th top clothing 
exporter to the 3rd (after China and Italy). Both Bangladeshi 
factory owners and the government were fully aware of the 
importance of this industry to the country.
Working conditions for factory employees in developing 
countries have long been less than desirable. Explosions and 
fires have been a continual problem, as have other unsafe work 
conditions. (Unfortunately, this isn’t just a problem of the retail 
fashion industry.) Workplace protections are expensive, which 
doesn’t work with consumers hooked on fashionable “cheap” 
clothing. However, with this latest tragic loss of life at this 
specific garment factory, the fashion industry’s decisions—
good and bad—are now on the world stage for everyone to 
see and criticize. Says one outspoken critic, “What happened 
in Bangladesh is a game-changer because of the gravity of the 
situation and tremendous loss of life.” Now public policy and 
governmental groups around the world are turning up the heat 
on Bangladesh to reform its labor standards and are pressuring 
global retailers to more carefully monitor their sourcing stan-
dards. Recently, several of the world’s largest apparel com-
panies agreed to a significant plan to help fund fire safety 
and building improvements. Part of this five-year agreement 
is to not hire/use manufacturers whose clothing factories fail 
to meet safety standards. Well-known European retailers who 
have signed on include Hennes & Mauritz AB (H&M), Inditex 
(the Spanish parent company of Zara), Tesco PLC, and  others. 
Major U.S. retailers, including Walmart, Target, and Gap, 
chose not to sign that agreement because they felt it exposed 
them to unlimited liability. However, a group of nearly 20 U.S. 
North American retailers did sign a pact in which they agreed 
to inspect all the factories they do business with and to set up 
basic safety standards.60 The Bangladeshi government also has 
pledged to raise wages for garment workers and to fix labor 
laws, making it easier for workers to form labor unions.
Discussion Questions
15­14 Discuss this from a value chain management perspective. 
What happened? How did it happen? Why did it happen?
15­15 How do incidents like this affect how managers work with a 
value chain?
15­16 Do some research on offshoring. What is it? What are the 
benefits and the drawbacks of offshoring as far as managing 
the operations system?
15­17 What can managers learn about managing operations from 
this situation?
15­18 Societal moral issue: Although enforcement of worker safety 
in Bangladesh is clearly lax, government officials clearly don’t 
want global businesses withdrawing from the country (and 
moving the problem somewhere else) and driving it deeper 
into poverty. Discuss.
15­19 Personal moral issue: Would you pay a higher price for 
 “ethical” clothing? Why or why not? Discuss.

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    499
CasE applICatION #2
T
he 787 Dreamliner was born out of desperation.61 
The year was 2003 and Boeing had just lost its title 
as the world’s largest plane manufacturer to European 
rival Airbus. Boeing’s then 
CEO had just resigned in a 
defense-contract scandal. And 
the company’s stock price had 
plunged to its lowest price in 
a decade. Remember, this was 
two years after the 9/11 ter-
rorist attacks and financially troubled airlines were reluctant to 
invest in new equipment. Boeing needed something revolution-
ary to win back customers.
That something was a technologically advanced aircraft 
that would be developed and built by a global network of sup-
pliers. Major parts for the airplane would be preassembled all 
over the world and then shipped to Everett, Washington, where 
they would be “snapped together” in three days, compared 
with a month the traditional way. And it was Boeing’s first 
aircraft built with lightweight composite materials (graphite, 
titanium, carbon fiber) rather than traditional metals, mak-
ing the 787 a lighter and more efficient aircraft than previous 
models. Why was this so revolutionary? The 787 could fly 
farther, burn less fuel, and offer more passenger comforts than 
what was currently available. The 787 had built-in sensors de-
signed to help counter the effects of turbulence, making for a 
smoother flight. And it was designed to have more humid air, 
quieter engines, improved lighting, and the largest windows in 
the industry. Of course, airlines were eager to save money and 
entice customers and ordered a record number of the planes. 
Despite its innovative features (or, as some critics said, maybe 
because of), the 787 faced many production setbacks and 
delays (the plane was originally scheduled to be delivered in 
May 2008). These delays were due to several issues, includ-
ing design and manufacturing challenges—coordinating that 
many global suppliers, using new materials in the plane, and 
assembling the sophisticated components. However, three 
years after its first expected delivery date, Boeing handed 
over the first 787 on a rainy and blustery day in Everett, 
Washington, to Japan’s All Nippon Airways Co. on September 
26, 2011. The chief executive of Boeing’s commercial air-
planes division said “Today . . . will always be remembered as 
the dawn of a new day in commercial aviation.”
Dreamliner Nightmare
In the 787’s first year of service, at least four aircraft suffered 
some type of electrical problem. Although such problems are not 
unusual, especially in the first year of a newly designed aircraft, 
a number of incidents, including 
an electrical fire aboard an All 
Nippon Dreamliner plane and a 
similar fire aboard a landed 787 
at Boston’s Logan International 
Airport, led the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) to order 
a review of the design and manufacture of the Dreamliner. 
There obviously was enough concern over what the FAA found 
because it proceeded to ground the entire Boeing 787 fleet. 
Aviation safety investigators focused their attention on the 787’s 
lithium-ion batteries, manufactured by a Japanese company, GS 
Yuasa of Kyoto. Boeing’s team immediately set to work to solve 
the  issue because a grounded fleet is a BIG problem! In mid-
March 2013, Boeing announced that it had come up with solu-
tions for the Dreamliner problems. The 787’s chief engineer said, 
“We may never get to a single root cause.” But the engineers had 
looked at some 80 potential problems that could lead to a bat-
tery fire, categorized them into four groups, and come up with 
solutions for each group. A major part of the “fix” was a battery 
enclosure made of stainless steel, not designed to contain a fire, 
but to prevent the battery from ever having a fire to begin with by 
quickly starving any flame of oxygen. With the fix in place and 
approved by the FAA, a team of Dreamliner technicians fanned 
out around the globe modifying the 787’s batteries. By the end of 
April 2013, the Dreamliner fleet went back into service.
Discussion Questions
15­20 What role does innovation play in managing an organization’s 
operations?
15­21 What role does technology play in managing an organiza-
tion’s operations? (Take a look back at the Technology and the 
 Manager’s Job box on p. 487.)
15­22 Describe the operations management issues that the Dream-
liner team faced. Could these issues have been avoided? Why 
or why not?
15­23 Is a global network of suppliers the future of operations man-
agement? Discuss.
15­24 What other lessons about operations management can you 
see in this story?
The Boeing 787: Developed 
and built by a global network 
of suppliers

500    Part 5  •  Controlling
Starbucks Value Chain: From 
Bean to Cup to You
CasE applICatION 
Stirring Things Up
T
he steaming cup of coffee placed in a customer’s hand 
at any Starbucks store location starts as coffee beans 
(berries) plucked from fields of coffee plants.62 From 
harvest to storage to roasting to retail to cup, Starbucks under-
stands the important role each value chain participant plays.
Starbucks offers a selection of coffees from around the 
world, and its coffee buyers personally travel to the coffee-
growing regions of Latin America, Africa/Arabia, and Asia/
Pacific to select and purchase the highest-quality arabica 
beans. Once the beans arrive 
at any one of its six roast-
ing facilities (in Washington, 
Pennsylvania, 
Nevada, 
South Carolina, Georgia, or 
Amsterdam), Starbucks’ mas-
ter professional roasters do their “magic” in creating the com-
pany’s rich signature roast coffees. There are many potential 
challenges in “transforming” the raw material into the quality 
product and experience that customers expect at Starbucks—
weather, shipping and logistics, technology, political instabil-
ity, and so forth. All could potentially affect the company. 
Although those operations management challenges are sig-
nificant, the most challenging issue facing Starbucks today is 
balancing its vision of the uniquely Starbucks’ coffee experi-
ence with the realities of selling a $4 latte in today’s world. 
Starbucks products have become an unaffordable luxury for 
many. As revenues and profits declined during the economic 
downturn, CEO Howard Schultz realized that Starbucks had 
to evaluate everything about how the company operated and to 
make changes where needed. Although it built its business as 
“the anti-fast-food joint,” the recession and growing competi-
tion forced Starbucks to become more streamlined. Under one 
new initiative put into effect at its U.S. stores, employee time 
wasters such as bending over to scoop coffee from below the 
counter, idly standing by waiting for expired coffee to drain, 
or dawdling at the pastry case were discouraged. Instead, 
 employees were to keep busy doing something, such as help-
ing customers or cleaning. At one of the first stores to imple-
ment the “lean” techniques, the store manager looked for ways 
for her employees to be more efficient with simple things like 
keeping items in the same place, moving drink toppings closer 
to where drinks are handed to customers, and altering the or-
der of assembly. After two months under the new methods, her 
store experienced a 10 percent increase in transactions.
Another thing that Schultz did that was quite unprec-
edented was to close every one of its stores for three hours on 
one Tuesday evening to train ALL of their over 135,000 baris-
tas (a barista is a person who prepares and serves espresso-
based coffee drinks). During 
that training, baristas were re-
minded that they played an 
important role in creating not 
only a fabulous product but a 
fabulous customer experience. 
Despite warnings that closing the stores would be a public rela-
tions nightmare and a financial mistake, the decision seemed to 
be a sound one. In the weeks following the retraining, quality 
scores for the company’s beverages went up and stayed there.
Discussion Questions
15­25 Would you describe production/operations technology in 
Starbucks retail stores as unit, mass, or process? Explain your 
choice. (Hint: You may need to review this material found in 
Chapter 6.) How does its production/operations technology 
approach affect the way products are produced?
15­26 What uncertainties does Starbucks face in its value chain? 
Can Starbucks manage those uncertainties? If so, how? If not, 
why not?
15­27 Go to the company’s Web site at www.starbucks.com and 
find the information on the company’s environmental activi-
ties from bean to cup. Select one of the steps in the chain (or 
your professor may assign one). Describe what environmental 
actions it’s taking. How might these affect the way Starbucks 
“produces” its products?
15­28 Research the concept of lean organizations. What benefits 
does “lean” offer? How might a business like Starbucks 
 further utilize the concepts of being lean?
15­29 What lessons could other organizations learn from Starbucks’ 
actions?
#3 

CHAPTER 15  •  Operations Management    501
endnotes
 1. D. Eng, “Cheesecake Factory’s 
Winning Formula,” Fortune, May 
2, 2011, 19–20; and D. McGinn, 
“Faster Food,” Newsweek, April 
19, 2004, E20–E22.
 2. All of the following examples are 
from the World Factbook 2015, 
https://www.cia.gov/library/ 
publications/the-world-factbook/
geos/bl.html.
 3. D. Michaels and J. L. Lunsford, 
“Streamlined Plane Making,” Wall 
Street Journal, April 1, 2005, B1+.
 4. T. Aeppel, “Workers Not Includ-
ed,” Wall Street Journal, Novem-
ber 19, 2002, B1+.
 5. A. Aston and M. Arndt, “The Flex-
ible Factory,” BusinessWeek, May 
5, 2003, 90–91.
 6. P. Panchak, “Pella Drives Lean 
throughout the Enterprise,” Indus-
tryWeek, June 2003, 74–77.
 7. J. Ordonez, “McDonald’s to Cut 
the Cooking Time of Its French 
Fries,” Wall Street Journal, May 
19, 2000, B2.
 8. C. Fredman, “The Devil in the De-
tails,” Executive Edge, April–May 
1999, 36–39.
 9. http://new.skoda-auto.com/ 
Documents/AnnualReports/
skoda_auto_annual_report_ 
2007_%20EN_FINAL.pdf 
(July 
8, 2008); and T. Mudd, “The Last 
Laugh,” IndustryWeek, September 
18, 2000, 38–44.
 10. T. Vinas, “Little Things Mean a 
Lot,” IndustryWeek, November 
2002, 55.
 11. P. Panchak, “Shaping the Future 
of Manufacturing,” IndustryWeek, 
January 2005, 38–44; M. Ham-
mer, “Deep Change: How Opera-
tional Innovation Can Transform 
Your Company,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, April 2004, 84–94; 
S. Levy, “The Connected Com-
pany,” Newsweek, April 28, 2003, 
40–48; and J. Teresko, “Plant 
Floor Strategy,” IndustryWeek, 
July 2002, 26–32.
 12. T. Laseter, K. Ramdas, and D. 
Swerdlow, “The Supply Side of 
Design and Development,” Strat-
egy & Business, Summer 2003, 
23; J. Jusko, “Not All Dollars and 
Cents,” IndustryWeek, April 2002, 
58; and D. Drickhamer, “Medical 
Marvel,” IndustryWeek, March 
2002, 47–49.
 13. Q. H. Soon and Z. M. Udin, “Sup-
ply Chain Management from the 
Perspective of Value Chain Flex-
ibility: An Exploratory Study,” 
Journal of Manufacturing Tech-
nology Management (May 2011): 
506–26; G. Soni and R. Kodali, 
“A Critical Analysis of Sup-
ply Chain Management Content 
in Empirical Research,” Busi-
ness Process Management, April 
2011, 238–56; and J. H. Sheridan, 
“Managing the Value Chain,” In-
dustryWeek, September 6, 1999, 
1–4, available online in archives 
at www.industryweek.com.
 14. “Supply Chain Management: A 
New Narrative,” Strategic Direction, 
March 2011, 18–21; and J. H. Sheri-
dan, “Managing the Value Chain.”
 15. S. Leibs, “Getting Ready: Your 
Suppliers,” IndustryWeek, www 
.industryweek.com (September 6, 
1999).
 16. See, for example, J. Jusko, “Pro-
curement—Not All Dollars and 
Cents,” 
IndustryWeek, 
www 
.industryweek.com (April 4, 2002).
 17. D. Bartholomew, “The Infrastruc-
ture,” IndustryWeek, September 6, 
1999, 1.
 18. G. Taninecz, “Forging the Chain,” 
IndustryWeek, May 15, 2000,  
40–46.
 19. T. Vinas, “A Map of the World: IW 
Value-Chain Survey,” Industry-
Week, September 2005, 27–34.
 20. From the Past to the Present box 
based on “Honorary Members 
Form Impressive Lineup of Qual-
ity Thinkers,” Quality Progress, 
March 2011, 17; “W. Edwards 
Deming,” Quality Progress, No-
vember 2010, 17; R. Aguayo, 
Dr. Deming: The American Who 
Taught the Japanese about Quality 
(New York: Fireside Press, 1991); 
M. Walton, The Deming Manage-
ment Method (New York: Penguin 
Group, 1986); and W. E. Deming, 
“Improvement of Quality and Pro-
ductivity through Action by Man-
agement,” National Productivity 
Review, Winter 1981–1982, 12–22.
 21. See J. H. Sheridan, “Now It’s a 
Job for the CEO,” IndustryWeek, 
March 20, 2000, 22–30.
 22. R. Norman and R. Ramirez, 
“From Value Chain to Value Con-
stellation,” Harvard Business Re-
view on Managing the Value Chain 
(Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 2000), 185–219.
 23. S. Leibs, “Getting Ready: Your 
Customers,” IndustryWeek, Sep-
tember 6, 1999, 4.
 24. See, for example, C. Lunan, 
“Workers Doing More in Less 
Time,” Charlotte Observer, June 
1, 2002, D1.
 25. S. Leibs, “Getting Ready: Your 
Customers,” 3.
 26. See, for instance, L. Harrington, 
“The Accelerated Value Chain: 
Supply Chain Management Just 
Got Smarter, Faster, and More 
Cost-Effective, 
Thanks 
to 
a 
Groundbreaking Alliance between 
Intel and Technologies,” Industry-
Week, April 2002, 45–51.
 27. Ibid.
 28. Ibid.; and J. H. Sheridan, “Manag-
ing the Value Chain.”
 29. J. H. Sheriden, “Managing the 
Value Chain,” 3.
 30. S. Leibs, “Getting Ready: Your 
Customers,” 4.
 31. J. H. Sheriden, “Managing the Val-
ue Chain,” 2–3; S. Leibs, “Getting 
Ready: Your Customers,” 1, 4; and 
D. Bartholomew, “The Infrastruc-
ture,” 6.
 32. G. Taninecz, “Forging the Chain.”
 33. Ibid.
 34. Ibid.
 35. D. Drickhamer, “On Target,” In-
dustryWeek, October 16, 2000, 
111–12.
 36. Ibid.
 37. “Top Security Threats and Man-
agement Issues Facing Corpo-
rate America: 2003 Survey of 
Fortune 1000 Companies,” ASIS 
 International and Pinkerton, www 
.asisonline.org.
 38. J. H. Sheridan, “Managing the 
Value Chain,” 4.
 39. Question of Ethics box based on 
C. Hausman, “Ethics of Using 
Store’s Parking Lot Fuels Lively 
Debate in Newspaper Series,” 
Ethics Newsline Online, April 25, 
2011; J. Rose, “Ethics of Custom-
er Parking in Portland: Circling the 
Block One More Time,” Orego-
nian Online, April 21, 2011; and 
J. Rose, “The Ethics of ‘Customer 
Only’ Parking in the Pearl—and 
Beyond,” Oregonian Online, April 
16, 2011.
 40. S. Rosenbloom, “Solution, or 
Mess? A Milk Jug for a Green 
Earth,” New York Times Online, 
June 30, 2008.
 41. K. T. Greenfeld, “Taco Bell and 
the Golden Age of Drive-Thru,” 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek Online, 
May 5, 2011; and S. Anderson, 
Associated Press, “Restaurants 
Gear Up for Window Wars,” 
Springfield, Missouri, News-Lead-
er, January 27, 2006, 5B.
 42. Technology and the Manager’s Job 
box based on S. Minter, “What Is 
Advanced Manufacturing?” In-
dustryWeek, August 2009, 7; J. 
Bush, “Russia’s Factories Shift 
Gears,” BusinessWeek, May 18, 
2009, 50–51; D. Blanchard, “A 
Manufacturer for All Seasons,” 
IndustryWeek, December 2008, 
7; J. Teresko, “Planning the Fac-
tory of the Future,” IndustryWeek, 
December 2008, 22–24; and J. 
Teresko, “Winning with Digital 
Manufacturing,” 
IndustryWeek, 
July 2008, 45–47.
 43. D. Bartholomew, “Quality Takes 
a Beating,” IndustryWeek, March 
2006, 46–54; J. Carey and M. 
Arndt, “Making Pills the Smart 
Way,” BusinessWeek, May 3, 
2004, 102–03; and A. Barrett, 
“Schering’s Dr. Feelbetter?” Busi-
nessWeek, June 23, 2003, 55–56.
 44. T. Vinas, “Six Sigma Rescue,” In-
dustryWeek, March 2004, 12.
 45. J. S. McClenahen, “Prairie Home 
Companion,” IndustryWeek, Octo-
ber 2005, 45–46.
 46. T. Vinas, “Zeroing In on the Cus-
tomer,” IndustryWeek, October 
2004, 61–62.
 47. W. Royal, “Spotlight Shines on 
Maquiladora,” 
IndustryWeek, 
 October 16, 2000, 91–92.
 48. See B. Whitford and R. Andrew 
(eds.), The Pursuit of  Quality 
(Perth: 
Beaumont 
Publishing, 
1994).
 49. D. Drickhamer, “Road to Excel-
lence,” IndustryWeek, October 16, 
2000, 117–18.
 50. J. Heizer and B. Render, Opera-
tions Management, 10th ed. (Up-
per Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2011), 193.
 51. G. Hasek, “Merger Marries Qual-
ity Efforts,” IndustryWeek, August 
21, 2000, 89–92.
 52. J. Jusko, “An Elite Crew,” Indus-
tryWeek, March 2011, 17–18; and 
M. Arndt, “Quality Isn’t Just for 
Widgets,” BusinessWeek, July 22, 
2002, 72–73.
 53. E. White, “Rethinking the Qual-
ity Improvement Program,” Wall 
Street Journal, September 19, 
2005, B3.
 54. M. Arndt, “Quality Isn’t Just for 
Widgets.”
 55. For a thorough overview of proj-
ect management, see S. Berkun, 
The Art of Project Management 
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2005); or J. K. Pinto, Proj-
ect Management: Achieving Com-
petitive Advantage and MS Project 
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2007).
 56. H. Maylor, “Beyond the Gantt 
Chart: Project Management Mov-
ing On,” European Management 
Journal (February 2001): 92–101.
 57. For additional information on 
CPM, see W. A. Haga and K. 
A. Marold, “A Simulation Ap-
proach to the PERT/CPM Time-
Cost Trade-Off Problem,” Project 
Management Journal (June 2004): 
31–37.
 58. Based on S. P. Robbins, Managing 
Organizational Conflict (Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
1974); K. W. Thomas, “Conflict 
and Conflict Management,” in 
Marvin Dunnette (ed.), Handbook 
of Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology (Chicago: Rand Mc-
Nally, 1976), 889–935; and K. 
Cloke and J. Goldsmith, Resolving 
Conflicts at Work: Eight Strate-
gies for Everyone on the Job, rev. 
ed. (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
2006).
 59. S. Banjoy and C. Passariello, 
“Promises in Bangladesh,” Wall 
Street Journal, May 14, 2013, 
B1+; S. Greenhouse and J. Yardley, 
“Global Retailers Join Safety Plan 
for Bangladesh,” New York Times 
Online, May 13, 2013; A. Zimmer-
man and N. Shah, “Taste for Cheap 
Clothes Fed Bangladesh Boom,” 
Wall Street Journal, May 13, 2013, 
B1+; S. Zain Al-Mahmood, “Ban-
gladesh to Raise Workers’ Pay,” 
Wall Street Journal, May 13, 2013, 
B4; J. Ali Manik and J. Yardley, “17 
Days in Darkness, A Cry of ‘Save 
Me,’ and Joy,” New York Times On-
line, May 10, 2013; S. Greenhouse, 
“Retailers Are Pressed on Safety at 
 Factories,” New York Times Online, 

502    Part 5  •  Controlling
May 10, 2013; J. O’Donnell and C. 
Macleod, “Bangladesh Fire Adds 
Pressure on Retailers,” USA Today, 
May 10, 2013, 1B+; S. Zain Al-
Mahmood, K. Chu, and S. Banjo, 
“Bangladesh Shuts 3 Factories of 
Top Exporter,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, May 10, 2013, A8; S. Clifford, 
“Some Retailers Say More about 
Their Clothing’s Origins,” New 
York Times Online, May 8, 2013; 
K. Chu, “Tough Options for Ap-
parel Retailers,” Wall Street Jour-
nal, May 8, 2013, B1+; “Clothing 
Retailers Evaluate Moral Choices 
in Contracting Work to Bangla-
desh,” www.globalethics.org, May 
6, 2013; S. Wright and F. Hossain, 
“Pressure on Bangladesh, Retail-
ers to Fix Factories,” www.sfgate 
.com, May 4, 2013; S. Zain Al-
Mahmood, C. Passariello, and P. 
Rana, “The Global Garment Trail: 
From Bangladesh to a Mall Near 
You,” Wall Street Journal, May 
4/5, 2013, A1+; M. Mosk, “Big 
Retailers Reassess Practices after 
Bangladesh Building Collapse,” 
abcnews.go.com, May 3, 2013; H. 
Malcolm, “Worker Safety Gains 
Steam,” USA Today, May 2, 2013, 
2B; E. L. Cline, “Ethical Fashion: 
Is the Tragedy in Bangladesh A 
Final Straw?” www.npr.org, May 
2, 2013; M. Davies, “Can Bangla-
desh Clothing Factory Disasters 
Be 
Prevented? 
www.bbc.co.uk, 
May 2, 1013; S. Greenhouse, 
“Bangladesh Fears an Exodus of 
Apparel Firms,” New York Times 
Online, May 2, 2013; D. Bobkoff, 
“Would You Pay a Higher Price 
for Ethical Clothing?” www.npr 
.org, May 1, 2013; S. Zain 
Al- Mahmood, 
“Doomed 
Fac-
tories Raced to Fill Orders,” 
Wall Street Journal, April 30, 
2013, A1+; 
“Deadly 
Bangla-
desh 
Collapse 
Focuses 
Spot-
light on Ethics & Demand for 
Cheap Goods,” www.globalethics 
.org, April 29, 2013; M. T. Ander-
son, “Clothed in Misery,” New York 
Times Online, April 29, 2013; R. L. 
Brown, “Q&A: Who Ultimately 
Bears Responsibility for Bangla-
desh Factory Disasters,” www. 
csmonitor.com, April 25, 2013; 
and J. Ali Manik, S. Greenhouse, 
and J. Yardley, “Western Firms 
Feel Pressure as Toll Rises in Ban-
gladesh,” New York Times Online, 
April 25, 2013.
 60. A. D’innocenzio, “Gap, Walmart, 
Target 
Agree 
to 
Bangladesh 
 Factory Safety Pact,” http://www 
.mercurynews.com/ci_23634246/
gap-walmart-target-agree- 
bangladesh-factory-safety-pact, 
July 10, 2013.
 61. J. Ostrower and H. Kachi, “Boe-
ing’s 787 Resumes Service,” Wall 
Street Journal, April 29, 2013, B3; 
J. Ostrower and T. Stynes, “Boe-
ing Steers Past 787 Woes,” Wall 
Street Journal, April 25, 2013, B2; 
S. Jakab, “Dreamliner’s Woes Fail 
to Ground Boeing,” Wall Street 
Journal, April 24, 2013, C1; N. 
Clark, “Boeing Begins Modifying 
787 Batteries,” New York Times 
Online, April 22, 2013; A. Pasz-
tor, “How Boeing Rescued the 
787,” Wall Street Journal, April 
20/21, 2013, B1+; C. Drew and J. 
Mouawad, “Boeing Fix for Bat-
tery Is Approved by F.A.A.,” New 
York Times Online, April 19, 2013; 
H. Tabuchi, “Boeing Presents So-
lution for Dreamliner Problems,” 
New York Times Online, March 
15, 2013; S. Mayerowitz, “For-
mer Workers: Boeing Rushed 
Dreamliner Project,” Springfield, 
Missouri, 
News-Leader, 
Janu-
ary 26, 2013, 7A; D. Michaels, 
“Innovation Is Messy Business,” 
Wall Street Journal, January 24, 
2013, B1+; S. Dubois, “Boeing’s 
Dreamliner Mess: Simply Inevi-
table?” management.fortune.com, 
January 22, 2013; P. Kavilanz, 
“Dreamliner: Where in the World 
Its Parts Come From,” money.cnn.
com, January 18, 2013; “Boeing’s 
Dreamliner Takes to the Skies,” 
USA Today, October 21, 2011, 3B; 
P. Jonsson, “787 Dreamliner Takes 
Off at Last. When Can You Jump 
Aboard?” 
www.csmonitor.com, 
September 27, 2011; and W. J. 
Hennigan, “Boeing Delivers First 
787 Dreamliner,” articles.latimes.
com, September 26, 2011.
 62. B. Horovitz, “Starbucks CEO 
Reinvents the Spiel,” USA Today, 
April 25, 2013, 3B; S. Jakab, 
“Starbucks Story Could Have a 
Bitter Edge,” Wall Street Journal, 
April 25, 2013, C1; “Starbucks’ 
Quest for Healthy Growth: An 
Interview with Howard Schultz,” 
McKinsey Quarterly, no. 2 (2001): 
34–43; “Return to Glory,” Retail 
Traffic, May/June 2011, 38; J. 
Jannarone, “Grounds for Concern 
at Starbucks,” Wall Street Journal, 
May 3, 2011, C10; M. Morrison, 
“Bang for Its Starbucks: Hits No. 
3 Despite Limited Ad Spending,” 
Advertising Age, May 2, 2011, 
1+; W. Kendall, “A Long, Hard 
Grind,” Management Today, May 
2011, 27; “Howard Schultz, On 
Getting a Second Shot,” Inc., April 
2011, 52–54; “Starbucks Corp. 
Plans Retail Push,” Nation’s Res-
taurant News, April 4, 2011, 6; 
“Starbucks Marks 40th Anniver-
sary,” Beverage Industry, April 
2011, 8; R. Lowenstein, “When 
Latte Lost Its Luster,” Wall Street 
Journal, March 29, 2011, A17; H. 
Schultz, “How Starbucks Got Its 
Mojo Back,” Newsweek, March 
21, 2011, 50–55; G. Charles, 
“Change Brewing at Starbucks,” 
Marketing, January 2011, 14–15; 
“Starbucks 
Outlines 
Strategies 
for Growth,” Beverage Industry, 
January 2011, 14; and H. Edwards, 
“Howard Schultz’s Tall Order,” 
Marketing, January 2011, 19; and 
S. Berfield, “Starbucks: Howard 
Schultz vs. Howard Schultz,” 
BusinessWeek Online, August 6, 
2009; J. Jargon, “Latest Starbucks 
Buzzword: ‘Lean’ Japanese Tech-
niques,” Wall Street Journal, Au-
gust 4, 2009, A1.

503
Entrepreneurship Module
Managing EntrEprEnEurial VEnturEs
Russell Simmons is an entrepreneur. He co-founded Def Jam Records because the emerging 
group of New York hip-hop artists needed a record company, and the big record companies 
refused to take a chance on unknown artists. Def Jam was just one piece of Simmons’s cor-
poration, Rush Communications, which also included a management company; a clothing 
company called Phat Farm; a movie production house; television shows; a magazine; and an 
advertising agency. In 1999, Simmons sold his stake in Def Jam to Universal Music Group, 
and in 2004, he sold Phat Farm. Today, Simmons is involved in UniRush, a Cincinnati com-
pany that sells a prepaid Visa debit card, and Russell Simmons ArgyleCulture, a clothing line. 
He also launched an advertising venture described as a digital solutions company, set up to 
work for ad agencies, not to be one. And in his latest announced venture, Simmons is bringing 
rap to Broadway. His show “The Scenario” is a musical featuring songs from more than 30 
years of rap hits. USA Today named Simmons one of the top 25 Influential People, while Inc. 
magazine named him one of America’s 25 Most Fascinating Entrepreneurs.
In this appendix, we’re going to look at the activities engaged in by entrepreneurs like 
Russell Simmons. We’ll start by looking at the context of entrepreneurship and then examin-
ing entrepreneurship from the perspective of the four managerial functions: planning, organiz-
ing, leading, and controlling.
What Is Entrepreneurship?
Entrepreneurship is the process of starting new businesses, generally in response to opportu-
nities. For instance, Fred Carl, founder of the Viking Range Corporation, saw an opportunity 
to create an appliance that combined the best features of commercial and residential ranges.
Many people think that entrepreneurial ventures and small businesses are the same, but 
they’re not. Entrepreneurs create entrepreneurial ventures—organizations that pursue oppor-
tunities, are characterized by innovative practices, and have growth and profitability as their 
main goals. On the other hand, a small business is an independent business having fewer than 
500 employees that doesn’t necessarily engage in any new or innovative practices and that 
has relatively little impact on its industry. A small business isn’t necessarily entrepreneurial 
because it’s small. To be entrepreneurial means that the business is innovative and seeking out 
new opportunities. Even though entrepreneurial ventures may start small, they pursue growth. 
Some new small firms may grow, but many remain small businesses, by choice or by default.
Who’s Starting Entrepreneurial Ventures?
Call them accidental entrepreneurs, unintended entrepreneurs, or forced entrepreneurs: As the 
unemployment rate hovers around double digits, many corporate “refugees” are becoming 
entrepreneurs. These individuals are looking to entrepreneurship, not because they sense some 
great opportunity, but because there are no jobs. The Index of Entrepreneurial Activity by the 
Kauffman Foundation showed the rate at which new businesses formed in 2010 remained 
high, representing the “highest level of entrepreneurship over the past decade and a half.” The 
report found that “the patterns provided some early evidence that ‘necessity’ entrepreneurship 
is increasing and ‘opportunity’ entrepreneurship is decreasing.” But “accidental or by design,” 
entrepreneurship is on the rise again.
entrepreneurship
The process of starting new businesses, generally 
in response to opportunities
small business
An independent business having fewer than  
500 employees that doesn’t necessarily engage 
in any new or innovative practices and that has 
relatively little impact on its industry
entrepreneurial ventures
Organizations that pursue opportunities, are  
characterized by innovative practices, and have 
growth and profitability as their main goals

504    Part 5  •  Controlling
As many entrepreneurs (successful and not-so-successful) would attest to, being an 
 entrepreneur isn’t easy. According to the Small Business Administration, only two-thirds of 
new businesses survive at least two years. The survival rate falls to 44 percent at four years, 
and to 31 percent at seven. But the interesting thing is that entrepreneurial venture survival 
rates are about the same in economic expansions and recessions.
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
Describing what entrepreneurs do isn’t an easy or simple task! No two entrepreneurs’ work 
activities are exactly alike. In a general sense, entrepreneurs create something new, something 
different. They search for change, respond to it, and exploit it.
Initially, an entrepreneur is engaged in assessing the potential for the entrepreneurial 
venture and then dealing with startup issues. In exploring the entrepreneurial context, entre-
preneurs gather information, identify potential opportunities, and pinpoint possible competi-
tive advantage(s). Then, armed with this information, an entrepreneur researches the venture’s 
 feasibility—uncovering business ideas, looking at competitors, and exploring financing options.
After looking at the potential of the proposed venture and assessing the likelihood of pur-
suing it successfully, an entrepreneur proceeds to plan the venture. This process includes such 
activities as developing a viable organizational mission, exploring organizational culture issues, 
and creating a well-thought-out business plan. Once these planning issues have been resolved, the 
entrepreneur must look at organizing the venture, which involves choosing a legal form of busi-
ness organization, addressing other legal issues such as patent or copyright searches, and coming 
up with an appropriate organizational design for structuring how work is going to be done.
Only after these startup activities have been completed is the entrepreneur ready to actu-
ally launch the venture. A launch involves setting goals and strategies, and establishing the 
technology-operations methods, marketing plans, information systems, financial-accounting 
systems, and cash flow management systems.
Once the entrepreneurial venture is up and running, the entrepreneur’s attention switches 
to managing it. What’s involved with actually managing the entrepreneurial venture? An impor-
tant activity is managing the various processes that are part of every business: making deci-
sions, establishing action plans, analyzing external and internal environments, measuring and 
evaluating performance, and making needed changes. Also, the entrepreneur must perform 
activities associated with managing people, including selecting and hiring, appraising and 
training, motivating, managing conflict, delegating tasks, and being an effective leader. Finally, 
the entrepreneur must manage the venture’s growth, including such activities as developing 
and designing growth strategies, dealing with crises, exploring various avenues for financing 
growth, placing a value on the venture, and perhaps even eventually exiting the venture.
What Planning Do Entrepreneurs Need to Do?
Planning is important to entrepreneurial ventures. Once a venture’s feasibility has been thor-
oughly researched, an entrepreneur then must look at planning the venture. The most impor-
tant thing that an entrepreneur does in planning the venture is developing a business plan—a 
written document that summarizes a business opportunity and defines and articulates how the 
identified opportunity is to be seized and exploited. A written business plan can range from 
basic to thorough. The most basic type of business plan would simply include an executive 
summary, sort of a mini-business plan that’s no longer than two pages. A synopsis type plan is 
a little more involved. It’s been described as an “executive summary on steroids.” In addition 
to the executive summary, it includes a business proposal that explains why the idea is relevant 
to potential investors. A summary business plan includes an executive summary and a page 
or so of explanation of each of the key components of a business plan. A full business plan is 
the traditional business plan, which we describe fully next. Finally, an operational business 
plan is the most detailed (50 or more pages) and is used by ventures already operating with an 
business plan
A written document that summarizes a business 
opportunity and defines and articulates how the 
identified opportunity is to be seized and exploited

Entrepreneurship Module   505
existing strategy. It’s often used to “plan the business” but also can be used to raise additional 
money or to attract potential acquirers. It’s important for entrepreneurs to know which type of 
business plan they need for their purposes.
What’s in a Full Business Plan?
For many would-be entrepreneurs, developing and writing a business plan seems like a 
 daunting task. However, a good business plan is valuable. It pulls together all the elements of 
the entrepreneur’s vision into a single coherent document. The business plan requires careful 
planning and creative thinking. But if done well, it can be a convincing document that serves 
many functions. It serves as a blueprint and road map for operating the business. And the busi-
ness plan is a “living” document, guiding organizational decisions and actions throughout the 
life of the business, not just in the startup stage.
If an entrepreneur has completed a feasibility study, much of the information included in 
it becomes the basis for the business plan. A good business plan covers six major areas: execu-
tive summary, analysis of opportunity, analysis of the context, description of the business, 
financial data and projections, and supporting documentation.
Executive summary. The executive summary summarizes the key points that the entrepre-
neur wants to make about the proposed entrepreneurial venture. These might include a brief 
mission statement; primary goals; brief history of the entrepreneurial venture, maybe in the 
form of a timeline; key people involved in the venture; nature of the business; concise prod-
uct or service descriptions; brief explanations of market niche, competitors, and competitive 
advantage; proposed strategies; and selected key financial information.
Analysis of opportunity. In this section of the business plan, an entrepreneur presents the 
details of the perceived opportunity, which essentially includes (1) sizing up the market 
by describing the demographics of the target market; (2) describing and evaluating indus-
try trends; and (3) identifying and evaluating competitors.
Analysis of the context. Whereas the opportunity analysis focuses on the opportunity in 
a specific industry and market, the context analysis takes a much broader perspective. 
Here, the entrepreneur describes the broad external changes and trends taking place in the 
economic, political-legal, technological, and global environments.
Description of the business. In this section, an entrepreneur describes how the entrepre-
neurial venture is going to be organized, launched, and managed. It includes a thorough 
description of the mission statement; a description of the desired organizational culture; 
marketing plans including overall marketing strategy, pricing, sales tactics, service- 
warranty policies, and advertising and promotion tactics; product development plans 
such as an explanation of development status, tasks, difficulties and risks, and anticipated 
costs; operational plans, including a description of proposed geographic location, facili-
ties and needed improvements, equipment, and work flow; human resource plans, includ-
ing a description of key management persons, composition of board of directors including 
their background experience and skills, current and future staffing needs, compensation 
and benefits, and training needs; and an overall schedule and timetable of events.
Financial data and projections. Every effective business plan contains financial data 
and projections. Although the calculations and interpretation may be difficult, they are 
absolutely critical. No business plan is complete without financial information. Finan-
cial plans should cover at least three years and contain projected income statements, pro 
forma cash flow analysis (monthly for the first year and quarterly for the next two), pro 
forma balance sheets, breakeven analysis, and cost controls. If major equipment or other 
capital purchases are expected, the items, costs, and available collateral should be listed. 
All financial projections and analyses should include explanatory notes, especially where 
the data seem contradictory or questionable.
Supporting documentation. This is an important component of an effective business plan. 
The entrepreneur should back up his or her descriptions with charts, graphs, tables, pho-
tographs, or other visual tools. In addition, it might be important to include information 
(personal and work-related) about the key participants in the entrepreneurial venture.

506    Part 5  •  Controlling
Just as the idea for an entrepreneurial venture takes time to germinate, so does the 
 writing of a good business plan. It’s important for an entrepreneur to put serious thought and 
 consideration into the plan. It’s not an easy thing to do. However, the resulting document 
should be valuable in current and future planning efforts.
What Issues Are Involved in Organizing  
an Entrepreneurial Venture?
Once the startup and planning issues for the entrepreneurial venture have been addressed, the 
entrepreneur is ready to begin organizing the entrepreneurial venture. The main organizing 
issues an entrepreneur must address include the legal forms of organization, organizational 
design and structure, and human resource management.
What Are the Legal Forms of Organization for Entrepreneurial 
Ventures?
The first organizing decision that an entrepreneur must make is a critical one. It’s the form of 
legal ownership for the venture. The two primary factors affecting this decision are taxes and 
legal liability. An entrepreneur wants to minimize the impact of both of these factors. The right 
choice can protect the entrepreneur from legal liability as well as save tax dollars, in both the 
short run and the long run.
The three basic ways to organize an entrepreneurial venture are sole proprietorship, 
 partnership, and corporation. However, when you include the variations of these basic 
 organizational alternatives, you end up with six possible choices, each with its own tax 
 consequences, liability issues, and pros and cons. These six choices are sole proprietorship, 
general partnership, limited liability partnership (LLP), C corporation, S corporation, and 
 limited liability company (LLC).
The decision regarding the legal form of organization is important because it has significant 
tax and liability consequences. Although the legal form of organization can be changed, it’s not 
easy to do. An entrepreneur needs to think carefully about what’s important, especially in the areas 
of flexibility, taxes, and amount of personal liability, in choosing the best form of organization.
What Type of Organizational Structure Should Entrepreneurial 
Ventures Use?
The choice of an appropriate organizational structure is also an important decision when 
 organizing an entrepreneurial venture. At some point, successful entrepreneurs find that 
they can’t do everything. They need people. The entrepreneur must then decide on the most 
 appropriate structural arrangement for effectively and efficiently carrying out the  organization’s 
activities. Without a suitable type of organizational structure, an entrepreneurial venture may 
soon find itself in a chaotic situation.
In many small firms, the organizational structure tends to evolve with very little inten-
tional and deliberate planning by the entrepreneur. For the most part, the structure may be 
very simple—one person does whatever is needed. As an entrepreneurial venture grows and 
the entrepreneur finds it increasingly difficult to go it alone, employees are brought on board 
to perform certain functions or duties that the entrepreneur can’t handle. As the company con-
tinues to grow, these individuals tend to perform those same functions. Soon, each functional 
area may require managers and employees.
As the venture evolves to a more deliberate structure, an entrepreneur faces a whole new 
set of challenges. All of a sudden, he or she must share decision making and operating respon-
sibilities, which are typically the most difficult things for an entrepreneur to do—letting go 
and allowing someone else to make decisions. After all, he or she reasons, how can anyone 
know this business as well as I do? Also, what might have been a fairly informal, loose, 
and flexible atmosphere that worked well when the organization was small may no longer 

Entrepreneurship Module   507
be effective. Many entrepreneurs are greatly concerned about keeping that “small company” 
atmosphere alive even as the venture grows and evolves into a more structured arrangement. 
But having a structured organization doesn’t necessarily mean giving up flexibility, adapt-
ability, and freedom. In fact, the structural design may be as fluid as the entrepreneur feels 
comfortable with and yet still have the rigidity it needs to operate efficiently.
Organizational design decisions in entrepreneurial ventures also revolve around the six 
elements of organizational structure discussed in Chapter 6: work specialization, departmen-
talization, chain of command, span of control, amount of centralization-decentralization, and 
amount of formalization. Decisions about these six elements will determine whether an entre-
preneur designs a more mechanistic or organic organizational structure. When would each be 
preferable? A mechanistic structure would be preferable when cost efficiencies are critical 
to the venture’s competitive advantage; when more control over employees’ work activities 
is important; if the venture produces standardized products in a routine fashion; and when 
the external environment is relatively stable and certain. An organic structure would be most 
appropriate when innovation is critical to the organization’s competitive advantage; for smaller 
organizations where rigid approaches to dividing and coordinating work aren’t necessary; if 
the organization produces customized products in a flexible setting; and where the external 
environment is dynamic, complex, and uncertain.
What Human Resource Management (HRM)  
Issues Do Entrepreneurs Face?
As an entrepreneurial venture grows, additional employees must be hired to perform the 
 increased workload. As employees are brought on board, two HRM issues of particular 
 importance are employee recruitment and employee retention.
An entrepreneur wants to ensure that the venture has the people to do the required work. 
Recruiting new employees is one of the biggest challenges that entrepreneurs face. In fact, the 
ability of small firms to successfully recruit appropriate employees is consistently rated as one 
of the most important factors influencing organizational success.
Entrepreneurs, particularly, look for high-potential people who can perform multiple roles 
during various stages of venture growth. They look for individuals who “buy into” the venture’s 
entrepreneurial culture—individuals who have a passion for the business. Unlike their corpo-
rate counterparts who often focus on filling a job by matching a person to the job requirements, 
entrepreneurs look to fill in critical skills gaps. They’re looking for people who are exceptionally 
capable and self-motivated, flexible, multiskilled, and who can help grow the entrepreneurial ven-
ture. While corporate managers tend to focus on using traditional HRM practices and techniques, 
entrepreneurs are more concerned with matching characteristics of the person to the values and 
culture of the organization; that is, they focus on matching the person to the organization.
Getting competent and qualified people into the venture is just the first step in effectively 
managing the human resources. An entrepreneur wants to keep the people he or she has hired 
and trained. A unique and important employee retention issue entrepreneurs must deal with is 
compensation. Whereas traditional organizations are more likely to view compensation from 
the perspective of monetary rewards (base pay, benefits, and incentives), smaller entrepre-
neurial firms are more likely to view compensation from a total rewards perspective. For these 
firms, compensation encompasses psychological rewards, learning opportunities, and recog-
nition in addition to monetary rewards (base pay and incentives).
What Issues Do Entrepreneurs Face  
in Leading an Entrepreneurial Venture?
Leading is an important function of entrepreneurs. As an entrepreneurial venture grows and 
people are brought on board, an entrepreneur takes on a new role—that of a leader. In this 
section, we want to look at what’s involved with that. First, we’re going to look at the unique 

508    Part 5  •  Controlling
personality characteristics of entrepreneurs. Then we’re going to discuss the important role 
entrepreneurs play in motivating employees through empowerment and leading the venture 
and employee teams.
What Type of Personality Do Entrepreneurs Have?
Think of someone you know who is an entrepreneur. Maybe it’s someone you personally 
know or maybe it’s someone you’ve read about, like Bill Gates of Microsoft. How would you 
describe this person’s personality? One of the most researched areas of entrepreneurship has 
been the search to determine what—if any—psychological characteristics entrepreneurs have 
in common; what types of personality traits entrepreneurs have that might distinguish them 
from nonentrepreneurs; and what traits entrepreneurs have that might predict who will be a 
successful entrepreneur.
Is there a classic “entrepreneurial personality”? Although trying to pinpoint specific per-
sonality characteristics that all entrepreneurs share has the same problem as identifying the 
trait theories of leadership—that is, being able to identify specific personality traits that all 
entrepreneurs share—this hasn’t stopped entrepreneurship researchers from listing common 
traits. For instance, one list of personality characteristics included the following: high level of 
motivation, abundance of self-confidence, ability to be involved for the long term, high energy 
level, persistent problem solver, high degree of initiative, ability to set goals, and moderate 
risk-taker. Another list of characteristics of “successful” entrepreneurs included high energy 
level, great persistence, resourcefulness, the desire and ability to be self-directed, and rela-
tively high need for autonomy.
Another development in defining entrepreneurial personality characteristics was the 
proactive personality scale to predict an individual’s likelihood of pursuing entrepreneurial 
ventures. The proactive personality is a personality trait describing those individuals who 
are more prone to take actions to influence their environment—that is, they’re more pro-
active. Obviously, an entrepreneur is likely to exhibit proactivity as he or she searches for 
opportunities and acts to take advantage of those opportunities. Various items on the proactive 
personality scale were found to be good indicators of a person’s likelihood of becoming an 
entrepreneur, including gender, education, having an entrepreneurial parent, and possessing 
a proactive personality. In addition, studies have shown that entrepreneurs have greater risk 
propensity than do managers. However, this propensity is moderated by the entrepreneur’s pri-
mary goal. Risk propensity is greater for entrepreneurs whose primary goal is growth versus 
those whose focus is on producing family income.
How Can Entrepreneurs Motivate Employees?
When you’re motivated to do something, don’t you find yourself energized and willing to 
work hard at doing whatever it is you’re excited about? Wouldn’t it be great if all of a venture’s 
employees were energized, excited, and willing to work hard at their jobs? Having motivated 
employees is an important goal for any entrepreneur, and employee empowerment is an im-
portant motivational tool entrepreneurs can use.
Although it’s not easy for entrepreneurs to do, employee empowerment—giving 
employees the power to make decisions and take actions on their own—is an important 
motivational approach. Why? Because successful entrepreneurial ventures must be quick 
and nimble, ready to pursue opportunities and go off in new directions. Empowered employ-
ees can provide that flexibility and speed. When employees are empowered, they often 
display stronger work motivation, better work quality, higher job satisfaction, and lower 
turnover.
Empowerment is a philosophical concept that entrepreneurs have to “buy into.” It 
doesn’t come easily. In fact, it’s hard for many entrepreneurs to do. Their life is tied 
up in the business. They’ve built it from the ground up. But continuing to grow the 
 entrepreneurial venture is eventually going to require handing over more responsibilities 
to employees. How can entrepreneurs empower employees? For many entrepreneurs, it’s 
a gradual  process.
proactive personality
A personality trait describing those individuals who 
are more prone to take actions to influence their 
environment

Entrepreneurship Module   509
Entrepreneurs can begin by using participative decision making, in which employees 
provide input into decisions. Although getting employees to participate in decisions isn’t quite 
taking the full plunge into employee empowerment, at least it’s a way to begin tapping into the 
collective array of employees’ talents, skills, knowledge, and abilities.
Another way to empower employees is through delegation—the process of assigning 
certain decisions or specific job duties to employees. By delegating decisions and duties, the 
entrepreneur is turning over the responsibility for carrying them out.
When an entrepreneur is finally comfortable with the idea of employee empowerment, 
fully empowering employees means redesigning their jobs so they have discretion over the 
way they do their work. It’s allowing employees to do their work effectively and efficiently by 
using their creativity, imagination, knowledge, and skills.
If an entrepreneur implements employee empowerment properly—that is, with complete 
and total commitment to the program and with appropriate employee training—results can 
be impressive for the entrepreneurial venture and for the empowered employees. The busi-
ness can enjoy significant productivity gains, quality improvements, more satisfied customers, 
increased employee motivation, and improved morale. Employees can enjoy the opportunities 
to do a greater variety of work that is more interesting and challenging.
How Can Entrepreneurs Be Leaders?
The last topic we want to discuss in this section is the role of an entrepreneur as a leader. In 
this role, the entrepreneur has certain leadership responsibilities in leading the venture and in 
leading employee work teams.
Today’s successful entrepreneur must be like the leader of a jazz ensemble known for its 
improvisation, innovation, and creativity. Max DePree, former head of Herman Miller, Inc., 
a leading office furniture manufacturer known for its innovative leadership approaches, said 
it best in his book, Leadership Jazz, “Jazz band leaders must choose the music, find the right 
musicians, and perform—in public. But the effect of the performance depends on so many 
things—the environment, the volunteers playing the band, the need for everybody to perform 
as individuals and as a group, the absolute dependence of the leader on the members of the 
band, the need for the followers to play well…. The leader of the jazz band has the beautiful 
opportunity to draw the best out of the other musicians. We have much to learn from jazz band 
leaders, for jazz, like leadership, combines the unpredictability of the future with the gifts of 
individuals.”
The way an entrepreneur leads the venture should be much like the jazz leader— 
drawing the best out of other individuals, even given the unpredictability of the situation. 
One way an entrepreneur does this is through the vision he or she creates for the organiza-
tion. In fact, the driving force through the early stages of the entrepreneurial venture is often 
the visionary leadership of the entrepreneur. The entrepreneur’s ability to articulate a coher-
ent, inspiring, and attractive vision of the future is a key test of his or her leadership. But if 
an entrepreneur can do this, the results can be worthwhile. A study contrasting visionary and 
nonvisionary companies showed that visionary companies outperformed the nonvisionary 
ones by six times on standard financial criteria, and their stocks outperformed the general 
market by 15 times.
As we know from Chapter 6, many organizations—entrepreneurial and otherwise—are 
using employee work teams to perform organizational tasks, create new ideas, and resolve 
problems. The three most common types of employee work teams in entrepreneurial ven-
tures are empowered teams (teams that have the authority to plan and implement process 
improvements), self-directed teams (teams that are nearly autonomous and responsible for 
many managerial activities), and cross-functional teams (work teams composed of individuals 
from various specialties who work together on various tasks).
Developing and using teams is necessary because technology and market demands are 
forcing entrepreneurial ventures to make products faster, cheaper, and better. Tapping into 
the collective wisdom of a venture’s employees and empowering them to make decisions just 
may be one of the best ways to adapt to change. In addition, a team culture can improve the 
overall workplace environment and morale. For team efforts to work, however, entrepreneurs 
must shift from the traditional command-and-control style to a coach-and-collaboration style.

510    Part 5  •  Controlling
What Controlling Issues Do Entrepreneurs Face?
Entrepreneurs must look at controlling their venture’s operations in order to survive and pros-
per in both the short run and long run. The unique control issues that face entrepreneurs 
include managing growth, managing downturns, exiting the venture, and managing personal 
life choices and challenges.
How Is Growth Managed?
Growth is a natural and desirable outcome for entrepreneurial ventures. Growth is what distin-
guishes an entrepreneurial venture. Entrepreneurial ventures pursue growth. Growing slowly 
can be successful, but so can rapid growth.
Growing successfully doesn’t occur randomly or by luck. Successfully pursuing growth 
typically requires an entrepreneur to manage all the challenges associated with growing, 
which entails planning, organizing, and controlling for growth.
How Are Downturns Managed?
Although organizational growth is a desirable and important goal for entrepreneurial ventures, 
what happens when things don’t go as planned—when the growth strategies don’t result in the 
intended outcomes and, in fact, result in a decline in performance? There are challenges, as 
well, in managing the downturns.
Nobody likes to fail, especially entrepreneurs. However, when an entrepreneurial ven-
ture faces times of trouble, what can be done? How can downturns be managed success-
fully? The first step is recognizing that a crisis is brewing. An entrepreneur should be alert 
to the warning signs of a business in trouble. Some signals of potential performance decline 
include inadequate or negative cash flow, excess number of employees, unnecessary and 
cumbersome administrative procedures, fear of conflict and taking risks, tolerance of work 
incompetence, lack of a clear mission or goals, and ineffective or poor communication within 
the organization.
Although an entrepreneur hopes to never have to deal with organizational downturns, 
declines, or crises, these situations do occur. After all, nobody likes to think about things 
going bad or taking a turn for the worse. But that’s exactly what the entrepreneur should 
do—think about it before it happens (remember feedforward control from Chapter 14). It’s 
important to have an up-to-date plan for covering crises. It’s like mapping exit routes from 
your home in case of a fire. An entrepreneur wants to be prepared before an emergency 
hits. This plan should focus on providing specific details for controlling the most funda-
mental and critical aspects of running the venture—cash flow, accounts receivable, costs, 
and debt. Beyond having a plan for controlling the venture’s critical inflows and outflows, 
other actions would involve identifying specific strategies for cutting costs and restructur-
ing the venture.
What’s Involved with Exiting the Venture?
Getting out of an entrepreneurial venture may seem to be a strange thing for entrepreneurs 
to do. However, the entrepreneur may come to a point at which he or she decides it’s time 
to move on. That decision may be based on the fact that the entrepreneur hopes to capitalize 
financially on the investment in the venture—called harvesting—or that the entrepreneur is 
facing serious organizational performance problems and wants to get out, or even on the en-
trepreneur’s desire to focus on other pursuits (personal or business). The issues involved with 
exiting the venture include choosing a proper business valuation method and knowing what’s 
involved in the process of selling a business.
Although the hardest part of preparing to exit a venture may involve valuing it, other 
factors are also important. These include being prepared, deciding who will sell the busi-
ness, considering the tax implications, screening potential buyers, and deciding whether to 
tell employees before or after the sale. The process of exiting the entrepreneurial venture 
harvesting
Exiting a venture when an entrepreneur hopes 
to capitalize financially on the investment in the 
venture

Entrepreneurship Module   511
should be approached as carefully as the process of launching it. If the entrepreneur is selling 
the venture on a positive note, he or she wants to realize the value built up in the business. 
If the venture is being exited because of declining performance, the entrepreneur wants to 
 maximize the potential return.
Why Is It Important to Think About  
Managing Personal Challenges as  
an Entrepreneur?
Being an entrepreneur is extremely exciting and fulfilling, yet extremely demanding. It 
 involves long hours, difficult demands, and high stress. Yet, many rewards can come with 
 being an entrepreneur as well. In this section, we want to look at how entrepreneurs can make 
it work—that is, how can they be successful and effectively balance the demands of their work 
and personal lives?
Entrepreneurs are a special group. They’re focused, persistent, hardworking, and 
 intelligent. Because they put so much of themselves into launching and growing their entre-
preneurial ventures, many may neglect their personal lives. Entrepreneurs often have to make 
sacrifices to pursue their entrepreneurial dreams. However, they can make it work. They can 
balance their work and personal lives. But how?
One of the most important things an entrepreneur can do is become a good time manager. 
Prioritize what needs to be done. Use a planner (daily, weekly, monthly) to help schedule 
priorities. Some entrepreneurs don’t like taking the time to plan or prioritize, or they think 
it’s a ridiculous waste of time. Yet identifying the important duties and distinguishing them 
from those that aren’t so important actually makes an entrepreneur more efficient and effec-
tive. In addition, part of being a good time manager is delegating those decisions and actions 
the entrepreneur doesn’t have to be personally involved in to trusted employees. Although it 
may be hard to let go of some of the things they’ve always done, entrepreneurs who delegate 
effectively will see their personal productivity levels rise.
Another suggestion for finding that balance is to seek professional advice in those 
areas of business where it’s needed. Although entrepreneurs may be reluctant to spend 
scarce cash, the time and energy saved and potential problems avoided in the long run are 
well worth the investment. Competent professional advisors can provide entrepreneurs 
with information to make more intelligent decisions. Also, it’s important to deal with 
conflicts as they arise—both workplace and family conflicts. If an entrepreneur doesn’t 
deal with conflicts, negative feelings are likely to crop up and lead to communication 
breakdowns. When communication falls apart, vital information may get lost, and people 
(employees and family members) may start to assume the worst. It can turn into a night-
mare situation that feeds on itself. The best strategy is to deal with conflicts as they come 
up. Talk, discuss, argue (if you must), but an entrepreneur shouldn’t avoid the conflict or 
pretend it doesn’t exist.
Another suggestion for achieving that balance between work and personal life is to 
develop a network of trusted friends and peers. Having a group of people to talk with is 
a good way for an entrepreneur to think through problems and issues. The support and 
encouragement offered by these people can be an invaluable source of strength for an 
entrepreneur.
Finally, recognize when your stress levels are too high. Entrepreneurs are achievers. They 
like to make things happen. They thrive on working hard. Yet, too much stress can lead to 
significant physical and emotional problems (as we discussed in Chapter 8). Entrepreneurs 
have to learn when stress is overwhelming them and to do something about it. After all, what’s 
the point of growing and building a thriving entrepreneurial venture if you’re not around to 
enjoy it?

512    Part 5  •  Controlling
Endnotes
 1. Entrepreneurship Module based on 
J. Newman, “Russell Simmons Is 
Ready to Bring Rap to Broadway,” 
http://www.rollingstone.com/ 
music/features/russell-simmons-is-
ready-to-bring-rap-to-broadway- 
scenario-20150323, 
March 
23, 2015; “Russell Simmons’ 
New Venture Digital Marketing 
 Launches ‘Digital-Solutions’ Shop 
Called 
Narrative,” 
adage.com, 
April 10, 2013; T. Padgett, “Russell 
Simmons: Getting Rich Is So Sim-
ple,” CNNMoney.com, April 29, 
2011; R. Schmidt and P. O’Connor, 
“Def Jam’s Founder Out-Lobbies 
Big Banks,” Bloomberg Business-
Week, June 28, 2010, 21–22; R. 
A. Smith, “From Phat to Skinny,” 
Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2010, 
W7; J. Dean, “The Endless Flow of 
Russell Simmons,” Entrepreneur, 
September 2009, 24–28; S. Page, 
“Top 25 Influential People,” USA 
Today, September 4, 2007, A10; 
S.  Berfield, “Hip-Hop Nation,” 
BusinessWeek, June 13, 2005, 12; 
R. Kurtz, “Russell Simmons, Rush 
Communications,” Inc., April 2004, 
137; J. Reingold, “Rush Hour,” 
Fast Company, November 2003, 
68–80; S. Berfield, “The CEO of 
Hip Hop,” BusinessWeek, October 
27, 2003, 90–98; J.  L. Roberts, 
“Beyond Definition,” Newsweek, 
July 28, 2003, 40–43; C. Dugas, 
“Hip-Hop Legend Far Surpassed 
Financial Goals,” USA Today, May 
15, 2003, 6B; “Jobless Entrepre-
neurship Tarnishes Steady Rate of 
U.S. Startup Activity, Kauffman 
Study Shows,” www.kauffman.org/
newsroom/ (March 7, 2011); “Fre-
quently Asked Questions,” U.S. 
Small Business Administration, 
www.sba.gov/advo 
(September 
2008); D. E. Gumpert, “The Right 
Business Plan for the Job,” Busi-
nessWeek Online,  January 7, 2008; 
W. H. Stewart, “Risk Propensity 
 Differences between Entrepreneurs 
and Managers: A Meta-Analytic 
Review,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology (February 2001): 145–53; 
I. O. Williamson, “Employer Le-
gitimacy and Recruitment Success 
in Small Businesses,” Entrepre-
neurship Theory and Practice, Fall 
2000, 27–42; R. L. Heneman, J. W. 
Tansky, and S. M. Camp, “Human 
Resource Management Practices 
in Small and Medium-Sized En-
terprises: Unanswered Questions 
and Future Research Perspec-
tives,”  Entrepreneurship Theory 
and Practice, Fall 2000, 11–26; T. 
L. Hatten, Small Business: Entre-
preneurship and Beyond (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
1997), 5; L. W. Busenitz, “Re-
search on Entrepreneurial Alert-
ness,” Journal of Small Business 
Management 
 (October 
1996): 
35–44; J. M. Crant, “The Proac-
tive  Personality Scale as Predictor 
of 
 Entrepreneurial 
Intentions,” 
Journal of Small Business Man-
agement (July 1996): 42–49; J. 
C. Collins and J. I. Porras, Built 
to Last: Successful Habits of Vi-
sionary Companies (New York: 
Harper Business, 1994); Max 
Depree, Leadership Jazz: The 
Essential Elements of a Great 
Leader, Dell.; P. B. Robinson, D. 
V. Simpson, J. C. Huefner, and H. 
K. Hunt, “An Attitude Approach 
to the Prediction of Entrepreneur-
ship,”  Entrepreneurship Theory 
and Practice, Summer 1991, 
13–31; P. F. Drucker, Innovation 
and  Entrepreneurship: Practice 
and Principles (New York: Harper 
& Row, 1985); and J. W. Carland, 
F. Hoy, W. R. Boulton, and J. C. 
Carland, “Differentiating Entre-
preneurs from Small Business 
Owners: A Conceptualization,” 
Academy of Management Review 
9, no. 2 (1984): 354–59.

513
Glossary
A
Absenteeism The failure to show up for work
Active listening Listening for full meaning 
without making premature judgments or 
interpretations
Activities Actions that take place
Adjourning stage The final stage of group 
development for temporary groups, during 
which groups prepare to disband
Affective component The part of an attitude 
that’s the emotional or feeling part
Affirmative action programs Programs that 
ensure that decisions and practices enhance 
the employment, upgrading, and retention of 
members of protected groups
Assumed similarity An observer’s perception 
of others influenced more by the observer’s 
own characteristics than by those of the person 
observed
Attitudes Evaluative statements, either 
 favorable or unfavorable, concerning objects, 
people, or events
Attribution theory A theory used to explain 
how we judge people differently, based 
on what meaning we attribute to a given 
behavior
Authority The rights inherent in a managerial 
position to give orders and expect the orders 
to be obeyed
B
Balanced scorecard A performance measure-
ment tool that looks at more than just the 
financial perspective
Basic corrective action Corrective action 
that looks at how and why performance 
deviated before correcting the source of 
deviation
Behavior The actions of people
Behavioral component The part of an attitude 
that refers to an intention to behave in a cer-
tain way toward someone or something
Behavioral theories of leadership Theories 
that isolate behaviors that differentiate effec-
tive leaders from ineffective leaders
Benchmarking The search for the best practices 
among competitors or noncompetitors that 
lead to their superior performance
Big data The vast amount of quantifiable 
information that can be analyzed by highly 
sophisticated data processing
Big Five Model A personality trait model that 
examines five traits: extraversion, agreeable-
ness, conscientiousness, emotional stability, 
and openness to experience
Board representatives Employees who sit on a 
company’s board of directors and represent the 
interest of employees
Body language Nonverbal communication cues 
such as facial expressions, gestures, and other 
body movements
Boundaryless career When an individual takes 
personal responsibility for his or her own 
career
Boundaryless organization An organization 
whose design is not defined by, or limited to, 
boundaries imposed by a predefined structure
Bounded rationality Making decisions that are 
rational within the limits of a manager’s ability 
to process information
Brainstorming An idea-generating process that 
encourages alternatives while withholding 
criticism
Break-even analysis A technique for identify-
ing the point at which total revenue is just 
sufficient to cover total costs
Business model A strategic design for how a 
company intends to profit from its broad array 
of strategies, processes, and activities
Business plan A written document that summa-
rizes a business opportunity and defines and 
articulates how the identified opportunity is to 
be seized and exploited
C
“Calm waters” metaphor A description of 
organizational change that likens that change to 
a large ship making a predictable trip across a 
calm sea and experiencing an occasional storm
Capabilities An organization’s skills and abili-
ties in doing the work activities needed in its 
business
Career The sequence of work positions held by 
a person during his or her lifetime
Centralization The degree to which decision 
making takes place at upper levels of the 
organization
Certainty A situation in which a decision 
maker can make accurate decisions because all 
outcomes are known
Chain of command The line of authority 
extending from upper organizational levels to 
lower levels, which clarifies who reports to 
whom
Change agents People who act as change 
catalysts and assume the responsibility for 
managing the change process
Channel The medium by which a message 
travels
Charismatic leaders Enthusiastic, self-confident 
leaders whose personalities and actions 
 influence people to behave in certain ways
Code of ethics A formal document that states an 
organization’s primary values and the ethical 
rules it expects managers and nonmanagerial 
employees to follow
Cognitive component The part of an attitude 
made up of the beliefs, opinions, knowledge, 
and information held by a person
Cognitive dissonance Any incompatibility or 
inconsistency between attitudes or between 
behavior and attitudes
Commitment concept The idea that plans 
should extend far enough to meet those com-
mitments made when the plans were developed
Communication A transfer of understanding 
and meaning from one person to another
Communication process The seven-part 
process of transferring and understanding of 
meaning
Communities of practice Groups of people 
who share a concern, a set of problems, or a 
passion about a topic and who deepen their 
knowledge and expertise in that area by inter-
acting on an ongoing basis
Competitive advantage What sets an organiza-
tion apart; its distinctive edge
Competitive intelligence A type of environ-
mental scanning that gives managers accurate 
information about competitors
Competitive strategy An organizational strat-
egy for how an organization will compete in 
its business(es)
Compressed workweek A workweek where 
employees work longer hours per day but 
fewer days per week
Conceptual skills A manager’s ability to 
 analyze and diagnose complex situations
Concurrent control Control that takes place 
while a work activity is in progress
Conformity Adjusting one’s behavior to align 
with a group’s norms
Contingency approach (or situational 
approach) An approach to management that 
says that individual organizations,  employees, 
and situations are different and require 
 different ways of managing
Contingent workers Temporary, freelance, 
or contract workers whose employment is 
contingent upon demand for their services
Contingent workforce Part-time, temporary, 
and contract workers who are available for 
hire on an as-needed basis
Control Management function that involves 
monitoring activities to ensure that they’re 
being accomplished as planned and correcting 
any significant deviations
Controlling Monitoring activities to ensure that 
they are accomplished as planned
Control process A three-step process of mea-
suring actual performance, comparing actual 
performance against a standard, and taking 
managerial action to correct deviations
Core competencies The major value-creating 
capabilities of an organization

514    Glossary
Expectancy theory The theory that an indi-
vidual tends to act in a certain way based on 
the expectation that the act will be followed by 
a given outcome and on the attractiveness of 
that outcome to the individual
Exporting Making products domestically and 
selling them abroad
External environment Factors, forces, situa-
tions, and events outside the organization that 
affect its performance
F
Family-friendly benefits Benefits that provide 
a wide range of scheduling options and allow 
employees more flexibility at work, accom-
modating their needs for work-life balance
Feedback Checking to see how successfully a 
message has been transferred
Feedback control Control that takes place after 
a work activity is done
Feedforward control Control that takes place 
before a work activity is done
Fiedler contingency model Leadership theory 
proposing that effective group performance 
depends on the proper match between a lead-
er’s style and the degree to which the situation 
allowed the leader to control and influence
Filtering Deliberately manipulating informa-
tion to make it appear more favorable to the 
receiver
First-line managers Supervisors responsible 
for directing the day-to-day activities of non-
managerial employees
Fixed-point reordering system A method for a 
system to “flag” the need to reorder inventory 
at some preestablished point in the process
Flextime (also known as flexible work 
hours) A work scheduling system in which 
employees are required to work a specific 
number of hours per week but can vary when 
they work those hours within certain limits
Focus strategy When an organization competes 
in a narrow segment or niche with either a cost 
focus or a differentiation focus
Foreign subsidiary A direct investment in a 
foreign country that involves setting up a sepa-
rate and independent facility or office
Formal planning department A group of plan-
ning specialists whose sole responsibility is to 
help write the various organizational plans
Formalization How standardized an orga-
nization’s jobs are and the extent to which 
employee behavior is guided by rules and 
procedures
Forming stage The first stage of group develop-
ment in which people join the group and then 
define the group’s purpose, structure, and 
leadership
Franchising An agreement in which an 
organization gives another organization the 
right, for a fee, to use its name and operating 
methods
Functional departmentalization Grouping 
activities by functions performed
Functional strategy Strategy used in an orga-
nization’s various functional departments to 
support the competitive strategy
Functional structure An organizational design 
that groups similar or related occupational 
specialties together
Fundamental attribution error The tendency 
to underestimate the influence of external 
f actors and overestimate the influence of 
 internal factors when making judgments 
about the behavior of others
Efficiency Doing things right, or getting the 
most output from the least amount of inputs
Electronic meeting A type of nominal group 
technique in which participants are linked by 
computer
Emotional intelligence (EI) The ability to 
notice and to manage emotional cues and 
information
Employee assistance programs (EAPs) Pro-
grams offered by organizations to help 
employees overcome personal and health-
related problems
Employee benefits Membership-based rewards 
designed to enrich employees’ lives
Employee counseling A process designed to 
help employees overcome performance-related 
problems
Employee engagement When employees are 
connected to, satisfied with, and enthusiastic 
about their jobs
Employee productivity A performance mea-
sure of both work efficiency and effectiveness
Employee recognition programs Programs that 
consist of personal attention and expressions 
of interest, approval, and appreciation for a job 
well done
Employee theft Any unauthorized taking of 
company property by employees for their 
personal use
Employee training A learning experience 
that seeks a relatively permanent change 
in employees by improving their ability to 
perform on the job
Employment planning The process by which 
managers ensure they have the right numbers 
and kinds of people in the right places at the 
right time
Empowerment The act of increasing the 
decision-making discretion of workers
Encoding Converting a message into 
 symbolic form
Entrepreneurial ventures Organizations that 
pursue opportunities, are characterized by 
innovative practices, and have growth and 
profitability as their main goals
Entrepreneurship The process of starting 
new businesses, generally in response to 
 opportunities
Environmental complexity The number of 
components in an organization’s environment 
and the extent of knowledge that the organiza-
tion has about those components
Environmental scanning An analysis of the 
external environment, which involves screen-
ing large amounts of information to detect 
emerging trends
Environmental uncertainty The degree of 
change and complexity in an organization’s 
environment
Equity theory The theory that an employee 
compares his or her job’s input-to-outcome 
ratio with that of relevant others and then cor-
rects any inequity
Escalation of commitment An increased 
commitment to a previous decision despite 
evidence that it may have been a poor decision
Ethical communication Presented material that 
contains all relevant information, is true in 
every sense, and is not deceptive in any way
Ethics A set of rules or principles that defines 
right and wrong conduct
Ethnicity Social traits, such as one’s cultural 
background or allegiance, that are shared by a 
human population
Events End points that represent the completion 
of major activities
Corporate strategy An organizational strategy 
that specifies what businesses a company is in 
or wants to be in and what it wants to do with 
those businesses
Cost leadership strategy When an organization 
competes on the basis of having the lowest 
costs in its industry
Creativity The ability to produce novel and 
useful ideas
Credibility The degree to which followers 
perceive someone as honest, competent, and 
able to inspire
Critical path The longest or most time-
consuming sequence of events and activities 
required to complete a project in the shortest 
amount of time
Cross-functional team A work team composed 
of individuals from various specialties
Customer departmentalization Grouping 
activities by customer
D
Decentralization The degree to which lower-
level managers provide input or actually make 
decisions
Decisional roles Entailing making decisions or 
choices
Decision criteria Factors that are relevant in a 
decision
Decision implementation Putting a decision 
into action
Decision-making process A set of eight steps 
that includes identifying a problem, selecting 
a solution, and evaluating the effectiveness of 
the solution
Decision trees A diagram used to analyze a 
progression of decisions. When diagrammed, 
a decision tree looks like a tree with branches.
Decoding Translating a received message
Demographics The characteristics of a 
 population used for purposes of social studies
Departmentalization How jobs are grouped 
together
Design thinking Approaching management 
problems as designers approach design 
problems
Differentiation strategy When an  organization 
competes on the basis of having unique 
 products that are widely valued by customers
Directional plans Plans that are flexible and set 
general guidelines
Discipline Actions taken by a manager to 
enforce an organization’s standards and 
regulations
Distributive justice Perceived fairness of the 
amount and allocation of rewards among 
individuals
Divisional structure An organizational 
 structure made up of separate business units 
or divisions
Division of labor (or job specialization) The 
breakdown of jobs into narrow repetitive 
tasks
Downsizing The planned elimination of jobs in 
an organization
E
Economic order quantity (EOQ) A model that 
seeks to balance the costs involved in  ordering 
and carrying inventory, thus  minimizing 
total costs associated with carrying and 
 ordering costs
Effectiveness Doing the right things, or 
 completing activities so that organizational 
goals are attained

Glossary    515
Job specification A written statement of the 
minimum qualifications that a person must 
possess to perform a given job successfully
Joint venture A specific type of strategic alli-
ance in which the partners agree to form a 
separate, independent organization for some 
business purpose
K
Karoshi A Japanese term that refers to a sudden 
death caused by overworking
Knowledge management Cultivating a learn-
ing culture in which organizational members 
systematically gather knowledge and share it 
with others
L
Layoff-survivor sickness A set of attitudes, 
perceptions, and behaviors of employees who 
survive layoffs
Leader Someone who can influence others and 
who has managerial authority
Leader-member exchange (LMX) theory  
A leadership theory that says leaders create 
in-groups and out-groups and those in the 
in-group will have higher performance ratings, 
less turnover, and greater job satisfaction
Leader-participation model A leader-
ship contingency theory that’s based on a 
 sequential set of rules for determining how 
much participation a leader uses in deci-
sion making according to different types of 
 situations
Leadership The process of leading a group and 
influencing that group to achieve its goals
Leading Directing and coordinating the work 
activities of an organization’s people
Learning A relatively permanent change in 
behavior that occurs as a result of experience
Learning organization An organization that 
has developed the capacity to continuously 
learn, adapt, and change
Least-preferred coworker (LPC) question-
naire A questionnaire that measures whether 
a leader was task or relationship oriented
Licensing An agreement in which an organiza-
tion gives another the right, for a fee, to make 
or sell its products, using its technology or 
product specifications
Linear programming A mathematical 
technique that solves resource allocation 
problems
Line authority Authority that entitles a man-
ager to direct the work of an employee
Load chart A modified version of a Gantt chart 
that lists either whole departments or specific 
resources
Locus of control The degree to which people 
believe they control their own fate
Long-term plans Plans with a time frame 
beyond three years
M
Machiavellianism (“Mach”) A measure of 
the degree to which people are pragmatic, 
maintain emotional distance, and believe that 
ends justify means
Management The process of getting things 
done, effectively and efficiently, through and 
with other people
Management by objectives (MBO) A process 
of setting mutually agreed-upon goals and 
using those goals to evaluate employee 
performance
Human resource inventory A report listing 
important information about employees such 
as name, education, training, skills, languages 
spoken, and so forth
Human resource management (HRM) The 
management function concerned with getting, 
training, motivating, and keeping competent 
employees
Hygiene factors Factors that eliminate job 
 dissatisfaction but don’t motivate
I
Idea champions Individuals who actively and 
enthusiastically support new ideas, build sup-
port for, overcome resistance to, and ensure 
that innovations are implemented
Immediate corrective action Corrective 
action that addresses problems at once to get 
 performance back on track
Importing Acquiring products made abroad and 
selling them domestically
Industrial Revolution The advent of machine 
power, mass production, and efficient trans-
portation beginning in the late eighteenth 
century in Great Britain
Informational roles Involving collecting, 
receiving, and disseminating information
Information overload What results when 
 information exceeds processing capacity
Innovation The process of taking a creative idea 
and turning it into a useful product, service, or 
method of operation
Intergroup development Activities that 
attempt to make several work groups more 
cohesive
Interpersonal roles Involving people (subor-
dinates and persons outside the organization) 
and other duties that are ceremonial and 
symbolic in nature
Interpersonal skills A manager’s ability to 
work with, understand, mentor, and motivate 
others, both individually and in groups
Intuitive decision making Making decisions on 
the basis of experience, feelings, and accumu-
lated judgment
ISO 9000 A series of international quality stan-
dards that set uniform guidelines for processes 
to ensure that products conform to customer 
requirements
J
Jargon Technical language specific to a disci-
pline or industry
Job analysis An assessment that defines jobs 
and the behaviors necessary to perform them
Job characteristics model (JCM) A frame-
work for analyzing and designing jobs that 
identifies five primary core job dimensions, 
their interrelationships, and their impact on 
outcomes
Job description A written statement that 
describes a job
Job design The way tasks are combined to form 
complete jobs
Job enrichment The vertical expansion of a job 
by adding planning and evaluation responsi-
bilities
Job involvement The degree to which an 
employee identifies with his or her job, 
actively participates in it, and considers his or 
her job performance important for self-worth
Job satisfaction An employee’s general attitude 
toward his or her job
Job sharing When two or more people split a 
full-time job
G
Gamification Applying typical aspects of game 
playing to other areas of activity especially in 
a work setting
Gantt chart A planning tool that shows in 
bar graph form when tasks are supposed to 
be done and compares that with the actual 
progress on each
General administrative theory Descriptions of 
what managers do and what constitutes good 
management practice
Geographic departmentalization Grouping 
activities on the basis of geography or territory
Global corporation An MNC that centralizes 
management and other decisions in the home 
country
Global sourcing Purchasing materials or 
labor from around the world, wherever it is 
cheapest
Global strategic alliance A partnership 
between an organization and foreign company 
partner(s) in which both share resources and 
knowledge in developing new products or 
building production facilities
Global village A boundaryless world where 
goods and services are produced and marketed 
worldwide
GLOBE The Global Leadership and 
 Organizational Behavior Effectiveness 
research program, a program that studies 
cross-cultural leadership behaviors
Goals (objectives) Desired outcomes or targets
Goal-setting theory The proposition that 
specific goals increase performance and that 
difficult goals, when accepted, result in higher 
performance than do easy goals
Grapevine An unofficial channel of 
 communication
Group Two or more interacting and interdepen-
dent individuals who come together to achieve 
specific goals
Group cohesiveness The degree to which group 
members are attracted to one another and 
share the group’s goals
Groupthink When a group exerts extensive 
pressure on an individual to withhold his or 
her different views in order to appear to be in 
agreement
Growth strategy A corporate strategy in 
which an organization expands the number 
of markets served or products offered either 
through its current business(es) or through 
new business(es)
H
Halo effect When we form a general impres-
sion of a person on the basis of a single 
characteristic
Harvesting Exiting a venture when an 
 entrepreneur hopes to capitalize financially on 
the investment in the venture
Hawthorne studies Research done in the late 
1920s and early 1930s devised by Western 
Electric industrial engineers to examine the 
effect of different work environment changes 
on worker productivity, which led to a new 
emphasis on the human factor in the function-
ing of organizations and the attainment of 
their goals
Heuristics Judgmental shortcuts or “rules of 
thumb” used to simplify decision making
Hierarchy of needs theory Maslow’s theory 
that there is a hierarchy of five human needs: 
physiological, safety, social, esteem, and self-
actualization

516    Glossary
Performance management system A system 
that establishes performance standards that are 
used to evaluate employee performance
Performance-simulation tests Selection 
devices based on actual job behaviors
Performing stage The fourth stage of group 
development, when the group is fully func-
tional and works on the group task
Personality A unique combination of emo-
tional, thought, and behavioral patterns that 
affect how a person reacts to situations and 
interacts with others
PERT network analysis A flowchart-like 
diagram that depicts the sequence of activities 
needed to complete a project and the time or 
costs associated with each activity
Planning Defining goals, establishing strategy, 
and developing plans to coordinate activities
Plans Documents that outline how goals are 
going to be met
Policy A guideline for making decisions
Political skills A manager’s ability to 
build a power base and establish the right 
 connections
Power An individual’s capacity to influence 
decisions
Principles of management Fayol’s fundamen-
tal or universal principles of management 
practice
Proactive personality A personality trait 
describing those individuals who are more 
prone to take actions to influence their envi-
ronment
Problem A discrepancy between an existing and 
a desired state of affairs
Problem-solving team A team from the same 
department or functional area that’s involved 
in efforts to improve work activities or to 
solve specific problems
Procedural justice Perceived fairness of the 
process used to determine the distribution of 
rewards
Procedure A series of interrelated, sequen-
tial steps used to respond to a structured 
problem
Process consultation Using outside consultants 
to assess organizational processes such as 
workflow, informal intra-unit relationships, 
and formal communication channels
Process departmentalization Grouping activi-
ties on the basis of work or customer flow
Process production Continuous flow or process 
production
Product departmentalization Grouping activi-
ties by major product areas
Programmed decision A repetitive decision 
that can be handled using a routine approach
Project A one-time-only set of activities with a 
definite beginning and ending point
Project management The task of getting proj-
ect activities done on time, within budget, and 
according to specifications
Project structure A structure in which employ-
ees continuously work on projects
Q
Quantitative approach The use of quantitative 
techniques to improve decision making
Queuing theory Also known as waiting line 
theory, it is a way of balancing the cost 
of having a waiting line versus the cost of 
maintaining the line. Management wants 
to have as few stations open as possible to 
minimize costs without testing the patience of 
its customers.
Norming stage The third stage of group 
development, which is characterized by close 
relationships and cohesiveness
Norms Standards or expectations that are 
accepted and shared by a group’s members
O
Omnipotent view of management The view 
that managers are directly responsible for an 
organization’s success or failure
Open-book management A motivational 
approach in which an organization’s financial 
statements (the “books”) are shared with all 
employees
Open systems Systems that dynamically 
 interact with their environment
Operant conditioning A theory of learning that 
says behavior is a function of its consequences
Operations management The study and appli-
cation of the transformation process
Opportunities Positive trends in the external 
environment
Organic organization A structure that’s low in 
specialization, formalization, and centralization
Organization A systematic arrangement of 
people brought together to accomplish some 
specific purpose
Organization design When managers develop 
or change the organization’s structure
Organization development (OD) Efforts that 
assist organizational members with a planned 
change by focusing on their attitudes and 
values
Organizational behavior (OB) The field of 
study that researches the actions (behaviors) of 
people at work
Organizational change Any alteration of an 
organization’s people, structure, or technology
Organizational citizenship behavior  
Discretionary behavior that’s not part of an 
employee’s formal job requirements, but that 
promotes the effective functioning of the 
organization
Organizational commitment An employee’s 
orientation toward the organization in terms of 
his or her loyalty to, identification with, and 
involvement in the organization
Organizational culture The shared values, 
principles, traditions, and ways of doing 
things that influence the way organizational 
members act
Organizational processes The way organiza-
tional work is done
Organizing Determining what needs to be done, 
how it will be done, and who is to do it
Orientation Introducing a new employee to the 
job and the organization
P
Parochialism A narrow focus in which manag-
ers see things only through their own eyes and 
from their own perspective
Path-goal theory A leadership theory that 
says the leader’s job is to assist followers in 
attaining their goals and to provide direction 
or support needed to ensure that their goals are 
compatible with the organization’s or group’s 
goals
Pay-for-performance programs Variable 
compensation plans that pay employees on the 
basis of some performance measure
Perception A process by which we give mean-
ing to our environment by organizing and 
interpreting sensory impressions
Management by walking around (MBWA)  
When a manager is out in the work area 
 interacting with employees
Management information system (MIS)  
A system used to provide management with 
needed information on a regular basis
Managerial grid A two-dimensional grid for 
appraising leadership styles
Managerial roles Specific categories of 
 managerial behavior; often grouped around 
interpersonal relationships, information 
 transfer, and decision making
Managers Individuals in an organization who 
direct the activities of others
Manufacturing organizations Organizations 
that produce physical goods
Mass production Large-batch manufacturing
Matrix structure A structure in which special-
ists from different functional departments are 
assigned to work on projects led by a project 
manager
Means-ends chain An integrated network of 
goals in which higher-level goals are linked to 
lower-level goals, which serve as the means 
for their accomplishment
Mechanistic organization A bureaucratic orga-
nization; a structure that’s high in specializa-
tion, formalization, and centralization
Message A purpose for communicating that’s to 
be conveyed
Middle managers Individuals who are typically 
responsible for translating goals set by top 
managers into specific details that lower-level 
managers will see get done
Mission A statement of an organization’s 
purpose
Motivation The process by which a person’s 
efforts are energized, directed, and sustained 
toward attaining a goal
Motivators Factors that increase job satisfaction 
and motivation
Multidomestic corporation An MNC that 
decentralizes management and other deci-
sions to the local country where it’s doing 
business
Multinational corporation (MNC) Any type 
of international company that maintains opera-
tions in multiple countries
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)  
A personality assessment that uses four 
dimensions of personality to identify different 
personality types
N
Need for achievement (nAch) The drive to suc-
ceed and excel in relation to a set of standards
Need for affiliation (nAff) The desire for 
friendly and close interpersonal relationships
Need for power (nPow) The need to make oth-
ers behave in a way that they would not have 
behaved otherwise
Network organization An organization that 
uses its own employees to do some work 
activities and networks of outside suppliers to 
provide other needed product components or 
work processes
Nominal group technique A decision-making 
technique in which group members are physi-
cally present but operate independently
Nonmanagerial employees People who work 
directly on a job or task and have no responsi-
bility for overseeing the work of others
Nonprogrammed decision A unique and 
nonrecurring decision that requires a custom-
made solution

Glossary    517
Staff authority Positions with some authority 
that have been created to support, assist, and 
advise those holding line authority
Stakeholders Any constituencies in an organi-
zation’s environment that are affected by that 
organization’s decisions and actions
Standing plans Plans that are ongoing and 
provide guidance for activities performed 
repeatedly
Stated goals Official statements of what an 
organization says, and wants its stakeholders 
to believe, its goals are
Status A prestige grading, position, or rank 
within a group
Stereotyping When we judge someone on the 
basis of our perception of a group to which 
that person belongs
Storming stage The second stage of group 
development, which is characterized by intra-
group conflict
Strategic business units (SBUs) An organiza-
tion’s single businesses that are independent 
and formulate their own competitive strategies
Strategic management What managers do to 
develop an organization’s strategies
Strategic management process A six-step 
process that encompasses strategy planning, 
implementation, and evaluation
Strategic plans Plans that apply to the entire 
organization and encompass the organization’s 
overall goals
Strategies Plans for how the organization 
will do what it’s in business to do, how it will 
compete successfully, and how it will attract 
its customers in order to achieve its goals
Strengths Any activities the organization does 
well or any unique resources that it has
Stress Response to anxiety over intense 
demands, constraints, or opportunities.
Stressors Factors that cause stress
Strong cultures Cultures in which the key 
values are deeply held and widely shared
Structured problem A straightforward, 
 familiar, and easily defined problem
Survey feedback A method of assessing 
employees’ attitudes toward and perceptions 
of a change
Sustainability A company’s ability to achieve 
its business goals and increase long-term 
shareholder value by integrating economic, 
environmental, and social opportunities into 
its business strategies
SWOT analysis The combined external and 
internal analyses
Symbolic view of management The view that 
much of an organization’s success or failure is 
due to external forces outside managers’ control
Systems approach An approach to management 
that views an organization as a system, which 
is a set of interrelated and interdependent parts 
arranged in a manner that produces a unified 
whole
T
Tactical plans Plans that specify the details of 
how the overall goals are to be achieved
Team-building Using activities to help work 
groups set goals, develop positive interper-
sonal relationships, and clarify the roles and 
responsibilities of each team member
Team leaders Individuals who are responsible 
for managing and facilitating the activities of 
a work team
Team structure A structure in which the entire 
organization is made up of work teams
Self-monitoring A personality trait that mea-
sures the ability to adjust behavior to external 
situational factors
Self-serving bias The tendency for individuals 
to attribute their successes to internal factors 
while putting the blame for failures on exter-
nal factors
Service organizations Organizations that 
produce nonphysical products in the form of 
services
Sexual harassment Any unwanted action or 
activity of a sexual nature that explicitly or 
implicitly affects an individual’s employment, 
performance, or work environment
Shaping behavior The process of guiding 
learning in graduated steps, using reinforce-
ment or lack of reinforcement
Sharing economy An economic environment in 
which asset owners share with other individu-
als through a peer-to-peer service, for a set 
fee, their underutilized physical assets or their 
knowledge, expertise, skills, or time
Short-term plans Plans with a time frame of 
one year or less
Simple structure An organizational design with 
low departmentalization, wide spans of con-
trol, authority centralized in a single person, 
and little formalization
Single-use plan A one-time plan specifically 
designed to meet the needs of a unique situ-
ation
Situational leadership theory (SLT) A 
leadership contingency theory that focuses on 
followers’ readiness
Six Sigma A quality standard that establishes a 
goal of no more than 3.4 defects per million 
units or procedures
Skill-based pay A pay system that rewards 
employees for the job skills they demonstrate
Slack time The time difference between the 
critical path and all other paths
Small business An independent business hav-
ing fewer than 500 employees that doesn’t 
necessarily engage in any new or innovative 
practices and has relatively little impact on its 
industry
Social learning theory A theory of learning that 
says people can learn through observation and 
direct experience
Social loafing The tendency for individuals to 
expend less effort when working collectively 
than when working individually
Social media Forms of electronic communica-
tion through which users create online com-
munities to share ideas, information, personal 
messages, and other content
Social obligation When a business firm 
engages in social actions because of its 
obligation to meet certain economic and legal 
responsibilities
Social responsibility (corporate social respon-
sibility, or CSR) A business firm’s intention, 
beyond its legal and economic obligations, 
to do the right things and act in ways that are 
good for society
Social responsiveness When a business firm 
engages in social actions in response to some 
popular social need
Span of control The number of employees 
a manager can efficiently and effectively 
supervise
Specific plans Plans that are clearly defined and 
leave no room for interpretation
Stability strategy A corporate strategy in which 
an organization continues to do what it is cur-
rently doing
R
Race The biological heritage (including 
physical characteristics, such as one’s skin 
color and associated traits) that people use to 
identify themselves
Range of variation The acceptable parameters 
of variance between actual performance and 
a standard
Rational decision making Describes choices 
that are consistent and value-maximizing 
within specified constraints
Readiness The extent to which people have 
the ability and willingness to accomplish a 
specific task
Real goals Those goals an organization actually 
pursues as shown by what the organization’s 
members are doing
Realistic job preview (RJP) A preview of a 
job that provides both positive and negative 
information about the job and the company
Recruitment Locating, identifying, and attract-
ing capable applicants
Referent The persons, systems, or selves 
against which individuals compare themselves 
to assess equity
Reliability The degree to which a selection 
device measures the same thing consistently
Renewal strategy A corporate strategy that 
addresses declining organizational perfor-
mance
Resources An organization’s assets that it uses 
to develop, manufacture, and deliver products 
to its customers
Responsibility An obligation to perform 
assigned duties
Rights view of ethics View that says ethical 
decisions are made in order to respect and 
protect individual liberties and privileges
Ringisei Japanese consensus-forming group 
decisions
Risk A situation in which a decision maker 
is able to estimate the likelihood of certain 
outcomes
Role Behavior patterns expected of someone 
who occupies a given position in a social unit
Role ambiguity When role expectations are not 
clearly understood
Role conflicts Work expectations that are hard 
to satisfy
Role overload Having more work to accomplish 
than time permits
Rule An explicit statement that tells employees 
what can or cannot be done
S
Satisfice Accepting solutions that are “good 
enough”
Scientific management The use of scientific 
methods to define the “one best way” for a job 
to be done
Selection process Screening job applicants to 
ensure that the most appropriate candidates 
are hired
Selective perception Selectively perceiving 
or hearing a communication based on your 
own needs, motivations, experiences, or other 
personal characteristics
Self-efficacy An individual’s belief that he or 
she is capable of performing a task
Self-esteem (SE) An individual’s degree of like 
or dislike for himself or herself
Self-managed work team A type of work team 
that operates without a manager and is respon-
sible for a complete work process or segment

518    Glossary
Variable pay A pay system in which an 
individual’s compensation is contingent on 
performance
Verbal intonation An emphasis given to words 
or phrases that conveys meaning
Virtual organization An organization that 
consists of a small core of full-time employees 
and outside specialists temporarily hired as 
needed to work on projects
Virtual team A type of work team that uses 
technology to link physically dispersed mem-
bers in order to achieve a common goal
Visionary leadership The ability to create and 
articulate a realistic, credible, and attractive 
vision of the future that improves on the pres-
ent situation
W
Weaknesses Activities the organization doesn’t 
do well or resources it needs but doesn’t 
possess
Wellness programs Programs offered by orga-
nizations to help employees prevent health 
problems
“White-water rapids” metaphor A descrip-
tion of organizational change that likens that 
change to a small raft navigating a raging 
river
Work councils Groups of nominated or elected 
employees who must be consulted when 
management makes decisions involving 
personnel
Workforce diversity Ways in which people in 
a workforce are similar and different from one 
another in terms of gender, age, race, sexual 
orientation, ethnicity, cultural background, and 
physical abilities and disabilities
Workplace misbehavior Any intentional 
employee behavior that is potentially harmful 
to the organization or individuals within the 
organization
Work specialization Dividing work activities 
into separate job tasks; also called division  
of labor
Work teams Groups whose members work 
intensely on specific, common goals using their 
positive synergy, individual and mutual account-
ability, and complementary skills
Transnational (borderless) organization  
A structural arrangement for global organiza-
tions that eliminates artificial geographical 
barriers
Trust The belief in the integrity, character, and 
ability of a leader
Turnover Voluntary and involuntary permanent 
withdrawal from an organization
Two-factor theory Herzberg’s motivation 
theory, which proposes that intrinsic factors 
are related to job satisfaction and motivation, 
whereas extrinsic factors are associated with 
job dissatisfaction
Type A personality People who have a chronic 
sense of urgency and an excessive competitive 
drive
Type B personality People who are relaxed and 
easygoing and accept change easily
U
Uncertainty A situation in which a decision 
maker has neither certainty nor reasonable 
probability estimates available
Unit production The production of items in 
units or small batches
Unity of command Structure in which each 
employee reports to only one manager
Unstructured problem A problem that is new 
or unusual for which information is ambigu-
ous or incomplete
Utilitarian view of ethics View that says ethical 
decisions are made solely on the basis of their 
outcomes or consequences
V
Validity The proven relationship between 
a selection device and some relevant 
 criterion
Value The performance characteristics, features, 
attributes, and other aspects of goods and 
services, for which customers are willing to 
give up resources
Value chain The entire series of work activities 
that add value at each step from raw materials 
to finished product
Value chain management The process of 
 managing the sequence of activities and 
 information along the entire value chain
Technical skills Job-specific knowledge and 
techniques needed to perform work tasks
Technology Any equipment, tools, or operating 
methods that are designed to make work more 
efficient
Telecommuting A work arrangement in which 
employees work at home and are linked to the 
workplace by computer
Theory of justice view of ethics View that says 
ethical decisions are made in order to enforce 
rules fairly and impartially
Theory X The assumption that employees 
 dislike work, are lazy, avoid responsibility, and 
must be coerced to work
Theory Y The assumption that employees are 
creative, enjoy work, seek responsibility, and 
can exercise self-direction
Threats Negative trends in the external 
 environment
Three-needs theory McClelland’s theory, 
which says that three acquired (not innate) 
needs—achievement, power, and affiliation—
are major motives at work
360-degree appraisal An appraisal device that 
seeks feedback from a variety of sources for 
the person being rated
Top managers Individuals who are responsible 
for making decisions about the direction of 
the organization and establishing policies that 
affect all organizational members
Total quality management (TQM) A manage-
rial philosophy devoted to continual improve-
ment and responding to customer needs and 
expectations
Traditional goal setting Goals set by top 
managers flow down through the organiza-
tion and become subgoals for each organiza-
tional area
Trait theories of leadership Theories that 
isolate characteristics (traits) that differentiate 
leaders from nonleaders
Transactional leaders Leaders who lead 
primarily by using social exchanges (or 
transactions)
Transformation process The process that con-
verts resources into finished goods and services
Transformational leaders Leaders who 
stimulate and inspire (transform) followers to 
achieve extraordinary outcomes

519
A
absenteeism, 290
Accenture, 172, 206
accept errors, 229
achievement
cultural differences and, 87
need for, 357, 366
achievement-need theory, 364
achievement-oriented leadership, 393, 394
acid test ratio, 145, 145e
active listening, 424, 435
activities, 492
activity ratios, 454e
ADHD and work, 367
adjourning stage, 324, 324e
affective component, of attitude, 291
affiliation, need for, 357
affirmative action programs, 222
age, workplace diversity and, 97
age cohorts, 62
age discrimination, 97
Age Discrimination in Employment Act of  
1967, 97
agreeableness, 295
Airbnb, 60
Alcoa, 489
Alenia Marconi Systems, 484
Alibaba, 376, 418
All Nippon Airways Co., 499
Allstate, 207
The Amazing Race, 89
Amazon, 76, 94, 124, 125, 127, 131, 201, 207,  
395, 396
ambiguity, tolerance for, 175–176
AMC Entertainment, 75
American Express (AmEx), 84, 141–142, 141e, 
142e, 186, 241, 490
American Medical Association, 450
American Society for Training and  
Development, 233
American Standard Companies, 484
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), 98
Amerigas Propane, 244
analysis of context (business plan), 505
analysis of opportunity (business plan), 505
anchoring effect, 117, 117e
ancient Egypt, 49
Anheuser-Busch InBev, 86
Apache Corp., 70
Apple, 33, 36, 39, 84, 95, 131, 274, 488
ArcelorMittal, 332
Armstrong, Lance, 178
Armstrong, Neil, 213
artifacts, 67
Asch, Solomon, 327, 330, 339
assertiveness, 88
assumed similarity, 303e, 304
AT&T, 262
attentional processes, 306
Note: When page numbers are followed by the letter e, the reference appears in an exhibit.
Index
attention training, 314
attitudes
cognitive dissonance theory and, 292–293
components of, 291
consistency of, 292
explanation of, 291
importance of understanding, 293–294
job-related, 291–292
organizational change and employee, 263
value chain management and, 484–485
attractiveness of reward, 363
attributions, distortion of, 303
attribution theory, 302–303, 302e
Australia, 224
authority
allocation of, 188–189
concept of, 50
contemporary view of, 190
explanation of, 188
line, 189, 189e, 190e
power vs., 190–192, 191e
staff, 189, 189e, 190e
traditional view of, 188–189
types of, 189, 189e, 190e
unity of command and, 189–190
authority power, 210
autonomy, 360
AutoZone, 131
availability bias, 117, 117e, 122
Avery-Dennison, 186
Avon, 281–282
B
Baby Boomers, 62, 101, 309
balanced scorecard, 457
Banga, Ajay, 272
Banga, Ajiti, 28
Bank of America, 148, 212
bankruptcy, 36
Barnard, Chester, 53
behavior. See also organizational behavior (OB)
consistency in, 292
dealing with negative workplace, 309–310
of leaders, 386
learning theories and, 305–307
methods to shape, 307
personality traits and, 297–298
behavioral component, of attitude, 291
behavioral management approach, 51
behavioral theories of leadership, 388
Bell, Alexander Graham, 130
Bell Lab, 297
benchmarking, 164, 450
Bertucci’s, 113
Best Buy, 308
Bezos, Jeff, 124, 125, 395, 396
Bhattal, Jasjit “Jesse,” 105
bias
in decision making, 117, 117e
self-serving, 117e, 122, 303
big data, 94, 121, 137–138. See also  
data analytics
explanation of, 131–132
as strategic weapon, 165
Big Five model of personality
cultural differences and, 299
explanation of, 295–296
Birchbox, 282
Black and Decker, 188, 244
Blanchard, Ken, 390, 391
Blaster-B worm, 46
Bliss, 282
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 138
Blue Cross of California, 369
Blumenthal, Neil, 179
BMW, 40, 59, 83, 489
board representatives, 225
Bock, Laszlo, 45
body language, 420
Boeing, 201, 225, 241, 332, 346, 499
Boone, Garret, 398
borderless organizations. See transnational  
organizations
Boston Consulting Group, 468
boundaries, 202
boundaryless career, 254
boundaryless organizations
explanation of, 200e, 202–203
learning in, 205
boundaryless structure, 200e
bounded rationality, 119–120
brainstorming, 127, 128
break-even analysis, 143–144, 144e
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 462
Brin, Sergey, 200
British Petroleum, 433
Buckle Inc., 158
budget analysis, 455
Burberry, 177
businesses. See organizations
business model, 481
business plans, 504–506
business ventures. See entrepreneurial ventures
BYOD (bring your own device), 427, 428, 429, 
455–456, 460
C
Caesars Entertainment, 161
Cain, David, 214
“calm waters” metaphor, 263–264
Canada, 223
capabilities, 160
car-buying decisions, 114–116, 114e–116e
career, 254
Carl, Fred, 503
Carlton and United Breweries, 489
Carmike Cinemas, 75
Carnival Corporation, 445

520    Index
multinational, 84, 85
transnational (borderless), 84, 85
cost leadership strategy, 163
Coty, 282
creative-thinking skills, 130
creativity
decision making and, 129–130, 134
development of, 135
explanation of, 129
factors that inhibit, 130
planning and, 156
crisis planning, 178
critical path, 492
cross-functional teams, 188, 323, 332
Cucinelli, Brunello, 249
Cult Beauty, 282
cultural differences. See also diversity
control adjustments based on, 458–459
decision making and, 128–129
Hofstede’s dimensions of, 87, 88
leadership and, 398–399, 399e
management of global organizations and, 86–89
motivation and, 366–367
personality attributes and, 299–300
team structure and, 339
culture. See also organizational culture
descriptive, 66
dimensions of, 66, 87
perceived, 66
shared, 66, 73
value chain management and, 485
current ratio, 145, 145e
customer service
communication and, 431–432
importance of, 38, 158
as strategic weapon, 160, 161
D
Dalgaard, Lars, 429
data analytics, ethics of, 94. See also big data
data security, 45–46, 429
Dave & Barry’s, 36
Davis, Keith, 420
DDB Stockholm, 266
debt to assets ratio, 145e, 146
decentralization, 193
decisional roles, 32
decision criteria, 114, 114e
decision making. See also problems; quantitative 
decision making
big data and, 131–132
bounded rationality in, 119–120
common errors in, 116–117, 117e, 122
conditions for, 125
creativity in, 129–130
cultural differences and, 128–129
design thinking approach to, 131–132
group, 125–129
implementation following, 116
intuitive, 120–121, 120e, 121e
organizational culture and, 71, 71e
problem identification and, 113–114
rational, 118–119
structured and unstructured problems and, 122
technology and, 121
decision-making process. See also problems
appraisal of outcome following, 116
choosing best alternative in, 116, 116e
explanation of, 113, 113e
identifying what is relevant in, 114
weighing criteria and analyzing alternatives in, 
114–116, 114e, 115e
decisions
implementation of, 116
managerial, 124–125, 124e
language as, 421e, 422, 424
methods to overcome, 423–424, 423e
national culture as, 421e, 422–423
selective perception as, 421–422, 421e
communities of practice, 431
compensation, systems for, 238–240
competencies, managerial, 33
competitive advantage, 163
competitive intelligence, 173
competitive strategy, 163
compressed workweeks, 207
concentration, 162
conceptual skills, 33
concurrent control, 453, 461, 463e
confirmation bias, 117, 117e
conflict
strategies to handle, 496–497
on teams, 336–337
conformity, in groups, 327, 330
conscientiousness, 295, 296
consensus, 302
consistency, 302
constraints, 268
The Container Store, 398
contemporary management approaches, 53–54
contingency approach, 54
contingency theories of leadership
Fiedler’s, 388–390, 390e
leader-participation model, 392, 392e
path-goal theory, 393–394, 393e
situational, 390–392, 390e
contingent workers
explanation of, 100, 207–208
motivation of, 368
control
balanced scorecard approach to, 457
comparing actual performance to planned  
goals and, 450, 451e
concurrent, 453, 461, 463e
contemporary issues related to, 458–463,  
461e, 463e
cultural differences and, 458–459
of employee performance, 456, 468
entrepreneurs and, 510–511
explanation of, 31, 445
feedback, 453, 457, 461, 463e
feedforward, 453, 461
financial, 454–455, 454e
importance of, 445–447
of information, 455–456
measuring and, 447–450, 448e
performance correction and, 451–452
process of, 447–448, 448e
span of, 192–193
timing of, 452–453, 452e
control issues
cultural differences and, 458–459
employee theft as, 460–461, 461e
privacy as, 460
technology and, 459
workplace violence as, 462–463, 463e
controlling tool, 455
control process, 447, 448e
Cook, Tim, 33, 95
Cooperative Printing, 297
core competencies, 160, 163
Cornell, Brian, 75
corporate rituals, 67
corporate social responsibility (CSR). See social 
responsibility
corporate strategy. See also strategies
explanation of, 162
role of operations management in, 477
corporations
global, 84, 85
multidomestic, 84, 85
Carter, Rob, 397
Caterpillar, 100, 244
Centaline, 409
centralization, 50, 193
certainty, 125
chain of command
dual, 201
explanation of, 188
Chandler, Alfred, 195
Chanel, 282
change. See also organizational change;  
organizational change resistance
economic uncertainty and unpredictable,  
64–65, 64e
effects on organizations, 37–38
technological, 37, 261, 261e, 265
workforce, 262
Changqing, Lu, 76
channel, 418
charismatic leadership, 395–396
charismatic power, 211
Chevron, 429
Chicago Cubs, 157
China Zhongwang, 76, 77
Cinemark, 75
Circuit City, 36
Cisco Systems, 122, 185
Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII, 97, 98, 243
classical conditioning theory, 304
classical management approach, 50
Clinique, 282
Coca-Cola Company (Coke), 138, 187, 228, 482
codes of ethics, 94–95
coercive power, 210
cognitive component, of attitude, 291
cognitive dissonance, 292
cognitive dissonance theory, 292–293
cohesiveness
group, 328–329, 329e
team, 339
collaboration, technologically-aided, 333
collectivism
explanation of, 87, 88
in-group, 88–89
command
chain of, 188
unity of, 50, 189–190
commitment, organizational, 291
communication
current issues in, 428–433
customer service and, 431–432
employee input and, 432, 432e
from employees, 432
ethical issues in, 432–433
explanation of, 417
face-to-face, 429
grapevine method of, 419
Internet issues related to, 429–430
knowledge management and, 430
knowledge resources and, 430–431
legal and security issues in, 429
methods to facilitate, 423–424
networked, 425–427
nonverbal, 419–420, 424
process of, 417–418, 418e
resistance to, 266–267, 272, 272e
styles of, 435–436
technology and, 425–430
wireless, 427
written, 418–419
communication barriers
emotions as, 421e, 422, 424
filtering as, 421, 421e
function of, 420, 421e
gender as, 421e, 422
information overload as, 421e, 422

Index    521
nonprogrammed, 124
programmed, 123–124
relationship between problems and, 124–125, 125e
decision trees, 142–143, 143e
decoding, 418
Deere & Company, 483
Def Jam Records, 503
Deininger, Erwin, 38
delegating style, 391
Dell, 84, 171, 241, 483
Dell, Michael, 396
Della Valle, Diego, 120
Deloitte, 407
Delphi, 489
demands, 268–270
Deming, W. Edwards, 52, 481
demographics, 62
Denver Mint, 445
departmentalization
contemporary view of, 188
explanation of, 186–187
types of, 187–188, 187e
DePree, Max, 509
descriptive culture, 66
design thinking
explanation of, 131–132
innovation and, 277
developed economies, 62
Dick’s Sporting Goods, 281
differentiation strategy, 163
DineEquity, Inc., 370
direction, motivation and, 353
directional plans, 169
directive leadership, 393, 394
disabilities, 98
discipline, 50, 465–466
discrimination
age, 97
against individuals with disabilities, 98
religious, 98
sexual orientation, 99
distinctiveness, 302
distributive justice, 362
diversification, 162
diversity. See also cultural differences; workforce 
diversity
overview of, 96–97
racial, 98
in teams, 335
workforce, 96–99
DiversityInc., 106
diversity management, 106–107
divisional structure, 198e, 199
division of labor, 49
division of work, 50
dj Orthopedics de Mexico, 167
Doobop, 282
Dorsey, Jack, 436
Dow Chemical, 490
downsizing, 228, 228e, 241, 241e
downturns, 510
dress codes, 326
dual-career couples, 100
Dubai Cup, 137
DuPont, 243
E
Eastern Airlines, 36
Economic Espionage Act, 173
economic inequality, 60
economic order quantity (EOQ) model,  
148–150, 149e
economic performance, social responsibility  
and, 89–92
economic recessions
employee motivation and, 366
organizational change and, 262
strategic management and, 158
unemployment rates and, 64
economy
sharing, 60–61
trends in, 60
in United States, 60
EDS, 172
effectiveness
efficiency vs., 30, 30e
explanation of, 30
understanding learning and, 307
understanding perception and, 308
understanding personality and, 300
efficacy, of teams, 336
efficiency
effectiveness vs., 30, 30e
understanding attitudes and, 293–294
effort-performance linkage, 363
Ek, Daniel, 43
Electronic Arts (EA), 358
electronic data interchange (EDI), 426
electronic meetings, group decision making and, 128
Eli Lilly, 261
e-mail, 426, 438, 460
emerging economies, trends in, 62
Emma Inc., 202
emotional intelligence (EI), 296–297, 313, 399–401
and leadership, 399–401
emotional stability, 295
emotions
as communication barrier, 421e, 422, 424
understanding of, 313
empathy, 297
employee assistance programs (EAPs), 271
employee benefits, 239–240
employee engagement, 40, 291
“employee first” culture, 316
employee productivity, 290
employee recognition programs, 369–370. See also 
rewards
employees. See also human resources management 
(HRM); workforce
attitudes of, 263
change in attitudes, expectations and  
perceptions of, 261, 261e
compensation/benefits for, 238–240, 244
contingent, 100.185–186, 368
cost of health care for, 243–244
with disabilities, 98
downsizing and, 228, 228e, 241, 241e
empowerment of, 398, 446–447, 509
gaining input from, 432, 432e
maintaining connection for mobile and dis-
persed, 203
monitoring, 459
motivation of, 508–509
nonmanagerial, 28
organizational culture and, 69, 73–74
in organizations, 27
orientation for, 232–233
performance assessment for, 237–239, 237e, 
246–247
personalities of, 270
recruitment of, 227, 227e
selection of, 228–232, 229e
social media use by, 39
theft by, 460–461, 461e
value chain management and, 484
working conditions for, 497–498
employee selection
closing the deal and, 231–232
explanation of, 228–229, 229e
reliability and, 229
tests and interviews in, 230–231
validity and, 229–230
employee training
determining need for, 234–235, 234e
effectiveness of, 235, 240
explanation of, 234
information technology and, 233
methods for, 235, 235e
employee turnover, 290
employment. See also unemployment rates
external environment and, 63–64
part-time, 60
trends in, 60
employment planning, 226. See also human  
resources management (HRM)
empowerment, employee, 398, 446–447, 508
energy, motivation and, 353
engagement, employee, 40, 291
Enron, 36
enterprise resource planning software (ERP) 
system, 482
ENTJ (extraversion-intuition-thinking-judging), 295
entrepreneurial ventures. See also entrepreneurs
explanation of, 503
issues involved in leading, 507–509
issues involved in organizing, 506–507
legal issues related to, 506
method to exit, 510–511
entrepreneurs
control functions of, 510–511
function of, 504
issues for, 507–508
as leaders, 509
managing personal challenges as, 511–512
personal challenges of, 511
personality type of, 508
planning role of, 504–506
profile of, 503–504
entrepreneurship, 503
environment, external, 59–65
environmental complexity, 65
environmental scanning, 173
environmental uncertainty, 64–65, 64e
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission  
(EEOC), 242, 243
equal employment opportunity (EEO), 222
equity, 50, 362
equity theory, 362, 364, 367
Ericsson, 202
Ernst & Young, 207, 407
errors, decision making, 116–117, 117e, 122
escalation of commitment, 122
ESFP (extraversion-sensing-feeling-perceiving), 295
ESPN, 157, 160
esprit de corps, 50
ethical behavior
examples of unethical behavior, 92–93
leadership and, 95, 103–104
managerial role in encouraging, 93–95
trends in, 81, 82
ethical issues
in communication, 432–433
data analytics as, 94
employee rights as, 225
faking positive outlook as, 293
financial scandals as, 89
open management as, 193
retail customer tracking as, 165
sharing personal information as, 325
ethics
codes of, 94–95
explanation of, 93
perspectives on, 93
rights view of, 93
theory of justice view of, 93
utilitarian view of, 93
ethics training, 96

522    Index
global strategic alliance, 86
global village, 83
GLOBE research program, 88–89, 399
goals
comparing actual performance to planned, 450, 
451e
explanation of, 165
financial, 166
of organizations, 27
planning and, 155
stated, 166
strategic, 166
types of, 166
of value chain management, 479
well-written, 168, 168e
goal setting
management by objectives, 167–168
steps in, 168
traditional, 166–167, 166e
goal-setting theory, 358–359, 359e
Goldman Sachs, 93
Google, 36, 39, 44–45, 65, 76, 94, 200, 212, 225, 
244, 274, 314, 453
government regulations, as impetus for change, 262
grapevine, 419
Gravity Payments, 375
Green Earth Gardening Supply, 450, 451e
group decision making
advantages and disadvantages of, 126–127
cultural differences and, 129
effectiveness of, 127
overview of, 125–126
techniques to improve, 127–128
groups. See also teams
behaviors in, 289
cohesiveness of, 328–329, 329e
command, 323e
conformity in, 327, 330
developmental stages of, 323–325, 324e
explanation of, 323
formal work, 323, 323e
informal, 323
members of, 324–325
norms in, 326
research on dynamics in, 264
roles in, 326
size of, 328
status systems in, 327
task, 323e
teams vs., 331–332, 331e
groupthink, 126–127
Grupo Televisa, 170
H
habit, 267
Hackman, J. Richard, 359, 360
Hallmark, 186
halo effect, 303e, 304
Harrah’s Entertainment, 161
Harris Interactive, 60
harvesting, 510
Hasbro, 131
Hastings, Reed, 468
Hawthorne Studies, 51
HCL Technologies, 316
health care, costs of employee, 243–244
health care industry, 344
health care legislation, 60
Health Net Inc., 204
Hennes & Mauritz (H&M), 497, 498
Herman Miller, Inc., 509
Hersey, Paul, 390, 391
Herzberg, Frederick, 355, 356, 367
heuristics, 116
ethnicity, 98
Evans Findings Company, 476
events, 492
executive summary (business plan), 504, 505
expectancy theory, 363–364, 363e, 371
expertise, 130
expert power, 211
exporting, 84
external boundaries, 202
external environment
components of, 59–60, 59e
demographics and, 62–63
economic inequality and, 60
environmental scanning and, 173
environmental uncertainty and, 64–65, 64e
explanation of, 59
impact on managers of, 63–64
jobs and employment and, 63–64
planning issues and, 172
sharing economy and, 60–61
stakeholder relationships and, 65
extinction, 307
extranet, 427
extraversion, 295
extraversion vs. introversion (EI), 295
EY, 242
eye contact, 435
F
Facebook, 39, 68, 94, 164, 212, 225, 274, 407
factory of the future, 487
factories, working conditions, 497–498
Fair Labor Association, 95
family-friendly benefits, 100
fax machines, 426
Fayol, Henri, 50, 185
Federal Express (FedEx), 34, 243, 244,  
369, 397, 462
feedback
advantages of, 457
explanation of, 418
to facilitate communication, 423–424
job dimensions and, 360
self-generating, 358
feedback control, 453, 461, 463e
feedforward control, 453, 461
Ferguson, Alex, 408
Fiedler, Fred, 54, 389, 390, 393
Fiedler contingency model, 389–390, 390e
filtering, 421, 421e
financial control, 454–455, 454e
financial data (business plan), 505
financial globalization, 84
financial goals, 166
financial scandals, ethical behavior and, 89
first-line managers, 29, 34
Fitzgerald, Patrick, 46
fixed-point reordering system, 148
flexible work arrangements, 64, 368, 484
benefits and drawbacks of, 212
compressed work weeks, flextime, and job  
sharing as, 207
contingent workforce and, 207–208
overview of, 206
telecommuting and, 206–207
flextime, 207
focus strategy, 163
Follett, Mary Parker, 51
followers, 402, 403
Ford, Henry, 450
Ford Australia, 186
Ford Motor Company, 52, 83
foreign subsidiaries, 86
formalization, 193
formal planning, 155. See also planning
formal planning department, 171
Foxconn, 283
framing bias, 117, 117e
France Télécome, 282–283
franchising, 84
Freeze, Hugh, 436
Fulks, Kip, 281
full business plan, 504–506
functional departmentalization, 187, 187e
functional strategy, 163–164
functional stress, 268
functional structure, 198e, 199
The Functions of the Executive (Barnard), 53
fundamental attribution error, 303
future orientation, 88
G
Gallup Organization, 40
gamification, 233, 369
Gantt chart, 491, 491e
Gap, 122, 498
Gass, Michelle, 276
Gates, Bill, 508
Gawker, 74
gender
as communication barrier, 421e, 422
in workforce, 98
gender differentiation, 88
general administrative theory, 50
General Cable Corporation, 489
General Electric (GE), 192, 202, 453, 490
General Mills, 243
General Motors, 241
Gen X, 62
Gen Y, 62, 101, 308, 309, 309e, 407
Gen Z, 62
geographic departmentalization, 187–188, 187e
Georgia Tech, 487
Germany, 224–225
Ghosn, Carlos, 450
Gilboa, David, 179
Gimbel’s, 36
Giuliani, Rudolph, 400
GLBT (gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender) 
people, in workplace, 99
global corporations, 84, 85
globalization
approaches to, 84, 84e, 86
explanation of, 83
financial, 84
marketplace, 83–84
of supply chain, 487
talent, 84
Global Leadership and Organizational Behavior 
Effectiveness (GLOBE), 88–89, 399
global organizations
control issues in, 458–459
cultural differences and, 87–89
demographic trends and, 62–63
explanation of, 83–84
external environment and, 59
global corporations as, 85
human resource management laws and  
regulations in, 223–225
management concepts and, 35
management of, 86, 88
multidomestic corporations as, 85
organizational structure in, 203
sales in, 83
steps to become, 84, 84e, 86
teams in, 338–340, 339e
transnational, 85
global sourcing, 84

Index    523
Hewlett-Packard, 83, 201, 233, 274, 332
hierarchy of needs theory (Maslow),  
354–355, 354e
hindsight bias, 117e, 122
hiring process. See human resources management 
(HRM)
H&M, 497
Hobean, Claire, 37
Hofstede, Geert, 87, 88
Holland, John, 298–299
Hollywood Video, 36
Home Depot, 262
Hong Kong Police Force, 250
Hooters, 225
Hootsuite, 69
horizontal integration, 162
Hsieh, Tony, 77, 366
Huang, Jen-Hsun, 453
Hulu, 262
humane orientation, 89
human relations movement, 51
human resource inventory, 226
human resources management (HRM). See also 
employees; employee selection
components of, 221, 221e
cost control and, 243–244
diversity and, 242
downsizing and, 228, 228e, 241, 241e
employee compensation/benefits and,  
238–240, 244
employee orientation and, 232–233
employee training and, 234–235, 234e, 235e, 240
employment planning and, 225–227
entrepreneurs and, 507
ethical issues in, 225
explanation of, 221–222
innovation and, 276
legal environment of, 222–225, 223e
performance management approaches and, 
236–238, 237e
recruiting sources and, 227, 227e
selection process and, 228–232, 229e
sexual harassment and, 242–243
technology and, 233
Humphrey, Ambrosia, 69
hygiene factors, 356, 356e
Hyundai Motor, 171
I
IBM, 157, 172, 244, 363, 420
idea champions, 276
IDEO, 430
Idezawa, Takeshi, 122
Iger, Bob, 27
IKEA, 481
IMAX Corporation, 75–76
immediate gratification bias, 117, 117e
Immelt, Jeff, 453
importing, 84
Inc., 503
incubation, 273
Inditex, 498
individual behavior, 289
individualism, 87, 88
individualized rewards, 369
individuals with disabilities, 98
industrial-organizational psychology, 224
Industrial Revolution, 49
inequality, economic, 60
informal planning, 155
information, control of, 455–456
informational roles, 32
information overload, 421e, 422
information power, 211
information technology (IT). See also technology
big data and, 131–132, 165
changing world of work and, 204
decision making and, 121
employee training and, 233
impact of, 54, 63
strategic management and, 161
team collaboration and, 333
in-group collectivism, 88–89
initiative, 50
innovation
creativity and, 273
design thinking and, 277
elements of, 273–274
human resource variables affecting, 276
manager’s role in, 39
methods to foster, 274–275, 275e
organizational culture and, 275–276
overview of, 272–273
technology and, 39, 274
inspiration, 274
Instagram, 39
instant messaging (IM), 426
Institute for Global Ethics, 94
Integrated Information Systems Inc., 458
integration, 162
integrity, 401
Intel, 368
intelligence, emotional, 400–401
intergroup development, 266
internal analysis, function of, 160
internal boundaries, 202
International Association of Business Communica-
tors, 433
International Organization for Standardization, 489
international organizations. See global organiza-
tions
Internet, communication issues and, 429–430
Internet of things, 63
interpersonal demands, 270
interpersonal roles, 32
interpersonal skills, 33, 42
interviews, 230–231
intranet, 426
intrinsic task motivation, 130
Intuit, 277
intuition, planning and, 156
intuitive decision making, 120–121, 120e, 121e
inventory turnover ratio, 145e, 146
Ipsen, Laura, 122
ISO 9000, 489–490
ISTJ (introversion-sensing-thinking-judging), 295
ITT Industries, 490
Ive, Jonathan “Jony,” 131
J
Jago, Arthur, 392
Japan, earthquake and tsunami in, 83
J.C. Penney, 497
Jean, Emilio Azcárraga, 170
job analysis, 226
job applicants, identification of organizational 
culture by, 73–74
job characteristics model (JCM), 360–361, 361e
job description, 226
job design
motivation and, 359–361, 361e, 364
work tasks and, 360
job involvement, 291
job orientation, 232–233
job performance
assessment of, 237–239, 237e, 246–247
attitude and, 291–294
conscientiousness and, 296
control of, 456, 468
keeping track of, 456–457
measurement of, 447–450, 448e
method to correct actual, 451–452
job-person compatibility, 300
jobs
division of labor and, 49
external environment and, 63–64
matching personality to, 298–299, 299e
stress related to, 207
Jobs, Steve, 396
job satisfaction
explanation of, 290
productivity and, 294
job sharing, 207
job specialization, 49
job specification, 226
Johnson, Kara, 430
Johnson & Johnson, 242, 282, 490
joint venture, 86
Jones, Todd, 37
judging vs. perceiving (JP), 295
judgment, decision making and, 115–116
Juran, Joseph M., 52
justice, 362
K
Kaiser Aluminum, 192
Kaiser Permanente, 344
karoshi, 269
Katz, Robert, 33
Kellogg, W. K., 161
Kelly Services, 369
Kent, Muhtar, 482
Kenyi, Stella, 308
Kerviel, Jérôme, 92
Keurig Green Mountain, 105–106
KFC, 86, 370
King, Martin Luther Jr., 396
Kitsplit, 61
Knight, Rick, 467
knowledge
resources for, 430–431
skills, and abilities (KSAs), 239
knowledge management, 430
Kohl’s Corporation, 276
KPMG, 207
Kraft Foods, 331
L
labor markets, organizational change and, 262
Land Rover, 301
language differences, 421e, 422
laptop hobos, 206
large businesses, 35
layoffs, 228
layoff-survivor sickness, 241
Lazaridis, Mike, 276
leader-member exchange (LMX) theory, 395
leader-member relations, 389
leader-participation model, 392, 392e
leadership
achievement-oriented, 393, 394
assessing your style of, 405–406
charismatic, 395–396
contemporary views on, 394–401, 398e, 399e
cross-cultural, 398–399, 399e
decision making and, 118, 118e
directive, 393, 394
emotional intelligence and, 399–401
entrepreneurial, 509
ethical, 95
ethical behavior and, 95, 103–104
explanation of, 385

524    Index
Merck, 241
message, 418
Mexico, 223–224
Meydon Hotel, 137
Microsoft, 241, 508
middle managers. See also managers
explanation of, 28–29, 34
planning function of, 170, 170e, 171
Midvale Steel Company, 450
Millennials, 407
Mintzberg, Henry, 32
misbehavior, workplace, 290
mission
culture and, 67
of organization, 158
mission statements, 159, 159e
Mitsubishi, 242
mobile devices
data security and, 45–46, 429
human resource management and, 233
movies on, 75, 76
work applications for, 204
monitoring employees, 459
Moritz, Bob, 106, 107
Morrisons, 439
Morse, Samuel, 54
motivation
assessing your level of, 373–374
of contingent workers, 368
cross-cultural issues and, 366–367
economic conditions and, 366
entrepreneurs and employee, 508–509
explanation of, 353
intrinsic task, 130
job design and, 359–361, 361e, 364
of professionals, 368
rewards and, 293, 369–371
workforce diversity and, 367–368
motivation theories
equity, 362, 362e
expectancy, 363–3364, 363e
goal-setting, 358–359, 359e
hierarchy of needs, 354–355, 354e
integration of, 364, 365e
method to integrate, 364, 365e
Theory X, 355
Theory Y, 355
three-needs, 357
two-factor, 355–357, 356e
Motorola, 34, 201, 243, 244, 490
motor reproduction processes, 306
motor-vehicle decisions, 114–116, 114e–94e
movie theater industry, 75–76
multidomestic corporations, 84, 85
multinational corporations (MNCs), 84, 85
Munsterberg, Hugo, 51, 224
Mycoskie, Blake, 89
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), 294–295
N
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA), 213
national culture. See also cultural differences
as communication barriers, 421, 422–423
leadership and, 398–399, 399e
National Football League, 93
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association, 
308
natural disasters, 83
Nayar, Vineet, 316
NCAA (National Collegiate Athletic Association), 
127, 437
NCR, 244
negative behavior, 307
Neil Huffman Auto Group, 235
leadership (continued)
in learning organizations, 205
participative, 393
supportive, 393, 394
in teams, 334–335, 397, 398e
transactional, 395–396
trust and, 401–403, 402e
value chain management and, 483–484
virtual, 400
visionary, 395–396
Leadership Jazz. (DePree), 509
leadership theories
behavioral, 388
contingency, 389–394, 390e, 392e, 393e
trait, 386–387
leading, 31
learning, 305
learning organizations
characteristics of, 205, 205e
explanation of, 204
least-preferred coworker (LPC) questionnaire, 389
Lechleiter, John, 261
Lee, 497
Lee, Julia, 207
legal issues, for entrepreneurial ventures, 506
Legge, Katherine, 303
legislation
affecting human resource management, 222–225, 
223e
health care, 60
as impetus for change, 262
Lehman Brothers, 104, 105
leverage ratios, 145–146, 145e, 454e
Levi-Strauss, 243
Lewin, Kurt, 263, 264
licensing, 84
linear programming, 146–147, 147e
line authority, 189, 189e, 190e
LinkedIn, 39, 274
liquidity, 145
liquidity ratios, 145e, 454
listening, active, 424, 435
LiveOps, 207
Livestrong Foundation, 178
load chart, 491, 492e
Lockheed Martin, 34, 243, 244, 338
locus of control, 297
Logitech, 128
Lombard, Didier, 282–283
long-term orientation, 87
long-term plans, 169
Louis Vuitton, 201
Lowe’s, 262
loyalty, 401
Lululemon, 468–469
M
Machiavelli, Niccolo, 297
Machiavellianism (“Mach”), 297
Mackey, John P., 429
management. See also operations management;  
organizations; value chain management (VCM)
concepts of, 35
diversity, 106–107
effect of change on, 37–38
explanation of, 29–30
of global organizations, 86–89
historical background of, 29, 49–54
levels of, 28, 28e, 124–125
omnipotent view of, 61
open-book, 369
project, 490–491
reasons to study, 36–37
scientific, 29
of stakeholder relationships, 65, 68, 68e
strategic, 157–160, 159e, 162–163
sustainability and, 40
symbolic view of, 61
technology and, 37, 38, 54, 63
management approaches
behavioral, 51
classical, 50
contemporary, 53–54
quantitative, 52
management by objectives (MBOs), 167–168
management by walking around (MBWA), 
447–448
management principles (Fayol), 50, 50e
managerial grid, 388
managerial information system (MIS), 455
managers
background of, 27
characteristics of effective, 44–45
competencies of, 33
contemporary communication issues faced by, 
428–433
with contingent employees, 207–208
decision-making approaches for, 118–120, 118e
efficiency and effectiveness of, 30, 30e
encouragement of ethical behavior by, 93–95
explanation of, 28
external environment and, 63–65
first-line, 29, 34
fostering of innovation by, 274
function of, 32
innovative, 39
in large businesses, 35
levels of, 28, 28e, 124–125
middle, 28–29, 34
nonmanagerial employees vs., 28
organizational culture and, 69–71, 71e
planning function and, 170, 170e
political skills of, 33, 42–43
roles of, 35, 35e
skills of, 33
in small businesses, 34–35
social media use by, 39
societal expectations of, 89–92
team building by, 342–343
titles of, 28–29
top, 28, 34
Manchester United Football Club, 408 
mandated experiment time, 274 
manufacturing organizations, 476, 477
marketplace globalization, 83–84
Mars Chocolate North America, 123
Mary Kay Cosmetics, 358, 396
Maslow, Abraham, 51, 354, 366
Massachusetts General Hospital, 84
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 420
mass production, 197
Mastercard, 242, 272
matrix structures, 200e, 201–202, 201e
Matsuba, Naoki, 105
Mattel, 207
maximax choice, 141, 142
maximin choice, 141
Mayer, Marissa, 212
Mayo, Elton, 51
McClelland, David, 357
McCoy, Sherilyn, 282
McDonald’s, 83, 155, 166, 186, 241, 453, 487
McGregor, Douglas, 51, 355
McQueen, Alexander, 177 
means-ends chain, 167
mechanistic organizations, 194e, 195
meetings, electronic, 128
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 34
Menard’s, 262
Mercedes, 489
Mercedes-Benz, 157

Index    525
Nestlé, 128, 483
Netflix, 76, 377, 468
networked communication, 425–427
network organizations, 202
networks, development of, 42
New York Times poll, 60
Nielsen Media Research, 265
Nike, 36, 178, 187
Nissan Motors, 59, 166, 450
Nokia, 262, 432, 490
nominal group technique, 127
Nomura Holdings, 104–105
nonmanagerial employees, 28. See also employees
nonprogrammed decisions, 124
nonverbal communication, 419–420, 424
Nooyi, Indra, 401
norming stage, 324, 324e
norms, in groups, 326
North American Tool, 267
Northrup Grumman Corporation, 489
not-for-profit organizations, 34
Nvidia, 453
O
objectives. See goals
office of tomorrow, 428
Ohio State University, 388
Oldham, Greg R., 359, 360
omnipotent view of management, 61
on-the-job training, 235
open-book management, 193, 369
open management, 193
openness, 401
openness to experience, 295, 296
open systems, 52, 52e
operant conditioning, 304, 305
operating ratios, 145e, 146
operational business plan, 504–505
Operation HoneyStick (Symantec), 46
Operations Center East (OCE) (Visa), 467
operations management. See also value chain  
management (VCM)
contemporary issues in, 486–494, 488e,  
491e–494e
corporate strategy and, 477
explanation of, 475, 475e
productivity and, 476, 477
service and manufacturing firms and,  
475–476
technology and, 486–487
opportunities, 160, 268
oral reports, 448–449
order, 50
organic organizations, 194e, 195
organizational behavior (OB)
dealing with negative, 309–310
explanation of, 51, 289
focus of, 185, 289
generational differences and, 308–309, 309e
goals of, 290
organizational change
“calm waters” metaphor for, 263–264
catalysts of, 263
categories of, 261, 261e
employee stress and, 268–271, 269e (See also 
stress)
explanation of, 261
external forces and, 262
implementation of planned, 265–266
internal forces and, 262–263
research on, 264
technology and, 37, 204, 261, 261e, 265
three-step process of, 263, 264e
“white-water rapids” metaphor for, 265
organizational change resistance
management of, 266–267
reasons for, 267
techniques to reduce, 267, 272, 272e
organizational citizenship behavior, 290
organizational commitment, 291
organizational culture. See also culture
decision making and, 71, 71e
dimensions of, 66, 67
employees and, 69, 73–74
explanation of, 66
innovation and, 275–276
in learning organizations, 205
managers and, 69–71, 71e
method to identify, 73–74
value chain management and, 484–485
organizational design
authority and responsibility and, 188–192, 
189e–192e
boundaryless, 200e, 202–203, 205
centralization vs. decentralization and, 193, 
197–198
challenges in, 203–208
contemporary, 199–200, 200e
departmentalization and, 186–188, 187e
divisional structure, 198e, 199
for entrepreneurial ventures, 507
explanation of, 185
flexible work arrangements and,  
206–208, 212
functional structure, 198e, 199
global differences in, 203
in learning organizations, 205
matrix structure, 200e, 201–202, 201e
project structure, 200e, 201–202, 201e
simple structure, 198–199, 198e
span of control and, 192–193
team structure, 200–201, 200e
technology and, 196, 197, 197e
traditional, 198–199, 198e
variables affecting choice of, 194–196, 194e
work specialization and, 185–186, 186e
organizational development (OD), 265–266
organizational performance, 157
organizational processes, 483
organizational stakeholders, management of, 65, 
68, 68e
organizational structure. See organizational design; 
structure
organization orientation, 233
organizations. See also global organizations
boundaryless, 200e, 202–203, 205
characteristics of, 27, 27e
downturns in, 510
explanation of, 27
learning, 204–205, 205e
levels in, 33–34
manufacturing, 476
mechanistic, 194e, 195
network, 202
not-for-profit, 34
as open system, 52, 52e
organic, 194e, 195
for profit, 34
service, 84, 86
size of, 34–35
societal expectations of, 89–92
sustainability in, 40
transformation process in, 476
virtual, 202
organizing, 31
orientation
future, 88
humane, 89
long-term vs. short-term, 87
new-employee, 232–233
performance, 89
ORION technology, 136–137
over-confidence bias, 117, 117e
overtalking, 436
Owen, Robert, 51
Oxender, Monique, 105
P
Page, Larry, 200
Panera Bread, 39
paraphrasing, 435
parochialism, 86
participating style, 391
participative leaders, 393
part-time employment, 60
Patel, Keyur, 206
path-goal theory, 393–394, 393e
Paychex, 243
pay-for-performance programs,  
370–371
payoff matrices, 141–142, 141e, 142e
Pella Corporation, 476, 477
pension plans, 244
Penske Truck Leasing, 203
PepsiCo, 138, 332, 401
perceived culture, 66
perception
attribution theory and, 302–303, 302e
explanation of, 273, 301, 301e
factors influencing, 301
selective, 304
perceptual shortcuts, 303–304, 303e
performance. See also job performance
comparing planned goals to actual,  
450, 451e
control of, 456, 468
measurement of, 447–450, 448e
method to correct actual, 451–452
performance orientation, 89
performance-simulation tests, 230
performing stage, 324, 324e
persistence, motivation and, 353
personal appearance, 225
personality
Big Five model of, 295–296, 299
cultural differences and, 299–300
emotional intelligence and, 296–297, 313
of entrepreneurs, 508
explanation of, 294
managerial efficiency and understanding, 300
matching jobs to, 298–299, 299e
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator of, 294–295
predicting work-related behaviors and,  
297–298
proactive, 508
type A, 270
type B, 270
personality-job fit (Holland), 298–299, 299e
personal observation, 447–448
PERT network analysis, 492–494,  
493e, 494e
Pfizer, 214, 483
Phat Farm, 503
Pizza Hut, 370
planning. See also strategic management
approaches to, 170–171
benefits of, 155
contingency factors in, 170
criticisms of, 156–157, 156e
decision making and, 118, 118e
directional, 169
in dynamic environments, 172
for entrepreneurial ventures,  
504–506
environmental scanning and, 173
explanation of, 31, 155

526    Index
responsibility, 188
retail industry, 165
retention processes, 306
Re-Time Pty. Ltd., 37
retrenchment strategy, 163
return on investment ratio, 145e, 146
reward power, 210
rewards
cognitive dissonance and, 293
cultural differences and, 367
designing programs for, 369–371
equity theory and, 364
individualized, 369
in teams, 338
Richard, Stéphanie, 283
rights view of ethics, 93
Riley, Mike, 436
ringisei, 129
risk, decision making and, 125
risk taking, 298
Ritz-Carlton Hotels, 431
robotic technology, 38, 472–473
role ambiguity, 269
role conflicts, 269
role demands, 269
role overload, 269
roles
in groups, 326
managerial, 32
Rosedale, Philip, 202
Rovello, Jessica, 438
ROWE (results-only work environment), 30
rules, 123
Russell Simmons Argyle Culture, 503
S
Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics, 483
SAS Institute, 368
satisfice, 119, 120
Sawhney, Rajeev, 316
scalar chain, 50
SCAN Health Plan, 206
Schultz, Howard, 500
scientific management, 29, 50, 224
Scottrade, 262
Seattle Post-Intelligencer (P-I), 37
Second Life, 202
security issues, 429, 456, 467
selection. See employee selection
selective perception
as communication barrier,  
421–422, 421e
explanation of, 304
selective perception bias, 117, 117e
selectivity, 303e
self-awareness, 296
self-efficacy, 359
self-esteem (SE), 297–298
self-generating feedback, 358
self-knowledge, 314
self-managed teams, 332
self-management, 296
self-monitoring, 298
self-motivation, 297
self-serving bias, 117e, 122, 303
selling style, 391
sensing vs. Intuition (SN), 295
service organizations, 84, 86
Seven and i Holding, 458
7-Eleven, 458
sexual harassment, 242–243
sexual orientation, 99
shared culture, 66, 73
sharing economy, 60–61
Shibata, Takumi, 105
planning (continued)
formal, 155, 171
goal setting and, 165–168, 166e
long-term, 169
managerial level and, 170, 170e
short-term, 169
single-use, 169
specificity of, 169
standing, 169
strategic, 157, 169
tactical, 169
planning tool, 455
plans
business, 504–506
development of, 170–171
process to develop, 170–171
types of, 168–169, 169e, 504–505
policies, 123–124
political skills
explanation of, 33
for managers, 42
steps to develop, 42–43
Popchips, 207
population trends, 62–63
Porsche, 166
Porter, M. E., 163
Portteus, Chandini, 178
position power, 389
positive reinforcement, 307
power
authority, 210
authority vs., 190–192.169e
charismatic, 211
coercive, 210
expert, 211
explanation of, 190
information, 211
need for, 357
referent, 211
reward, 210
skills to gain, 210–211
types of, 192, 192e
in value chain, 479
power distance, 87, 88, 129
Prada, 161
Price, Dan, 375
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), 106–107, 468
Primark, 177
Principles of Scientific Management  
(Taylor), 29
privacy
control issues and, 460
data analytics and, 94
proactive personality, 508
problems. See also decision making;  
decision-making process; decisions
decision making, organizational level and, 
124–125, 125e
explanation of, 113
structured, 122, 123
unstructured, 122
problem-solving teams, 332
procedural justice, 362
procedures, 123
process consultation, 266
process departmentalization, 187e, 188
processes, 30
process production, 197
Procter & Gamble, 242
product departmentalization, 187, 187e
production
mass, 197
process, 197
unit, 197
productivity
explanation of, 290
job satisfaction and, 294
operations management and, 476, 477
trends in, 60
work specialization and, 186, 186e
professionals, methods to motivate, 368
profitability ratios, 454e
profit margin on revenues ratio, 145e, 146
programmed decisions, 123–124
project management, 490–491
Project Oxygen (Google), 44–45
project structures, 201–202, 201e
Protiviti, 248
Publix Super Markets, 37
punishment, 307
Q
quality
goals for, 489–490
operations management and,  
488–489
product, 488e
service, 488e
as strategic weapon, 161, 164
quality of life, 87
quantitative decision making
break-even analysis and, 143–144, 144e
decision trees and, 142–143, 143e
economic order quantity model and,  
148–150, 149e
linear programming and, 146–147, 147e
payoff matrices and, 141–142,  
141e, 142e
queuing theory and, 148
ratio analysis and, 144–146, 145e
quantitative management approach, 52
quantity of life, 87
queuing theory, 148
R
race, 98
racial diversity, 98
RadioShack, 178
Rana Plaza building collapse, 497–498
randomness bias, 117e, 122
Randstad USA, 315
ratio analysis, 144–146, 145e,  
454, 454e
rational decision making, 118–119
rationality, bounded, 119–120
ratios, 145e
readiness, 391
realistic job preview (RJP), 232
recruitment, 227, 227e. See also human resources  
management (HRM)
Red Cross, 34
Red Robin Gourmet Burgers, 164
referent, 362
referent power, 211
Regal Entertainment Group, 75
Reimers Electra Steam, 38
reinforcement, 307
reinforcement processes, 306
reinforcement theory, 364, 370
reject errors, 229
relationship oriented style, 389
reliability, 229
religion, in workplace, 98
remuneration, 50
renewal strategy, 163
representation bias, 117e, 122
resources
explanation of, 160
for knowledge, 430–431
for teams, 334

Index    527
short-term orientation, 87
short-term plans, 169
Siemens, 241
Simmons, Russell, 503
Simon, Herbert A., 120
simple structure, 198–199, 198e
sincerity, 42
Singapore Airlines, 36
single-use plans, 169
situational approach. See contingency approach
situational leadership theory (SLT), 390–392, 390e
Six Sigma, 490
SIY (Search Inside Yourself) course, 314
size, of organizations, 34–35
skill-based pay systems, 239
skills, 33
skill variety, 360
Skinner, B. F., 304
Slumdog Millionaire, 316
Small Business Administration, 504
small businesses, 34–35. See also entrepreneurial 
ventures; organizations
Smart Grid, 122
smartphones, data security and, 45–46
SnapGoods, 60, 61
social learning theory, 306
social loafing, 339
social media, 233, 429–430
data analytics and, 94
guidelines for use of, 39–40
as strategic weapon, 164–165
social networks, 233
social obligation, 90
social responsibility
arguments for and against, 90–92, 91e
explanation of, 89–90
social responsiveness, 90
social skills, 297
Société Générale, 92
Society for Industrial and Organizational  
Psychology, 224
Sodexo, 242
software
mobile traffic, 65
network security, 46
Sony, 150, 490
sourcing, global, 84
specific plans, 169
Spotify, 43, 44
Springfield Remanufacturing Company  
(SRC), 369
St. Louis Cardinals, 345
stability, of tenure of personnel, 50
stability strategy, 162
staff authority, 189, 189e, 190e
Staff Builders, 189
stakeholders
explanation of, 65
managing relationships with, 65, 68, 68e
standing plans, 169
Starbucks, 36, 65, 500
Starcom MediaVest Group, 430
stated goals, 166
statistical reports, 448
status
in groups, 327
in teams, 339
Steinhafel, Gregg, 74
stereotyping, 303e, 304
Stewart, Julia, 370
stocking out, 148
Stone, Biz, 436
storming stage, 324, 324e
strategic alliance, global, 86
strategic goals, 166
strategic management. See also planning
competitive strategy and, 163
corporate strategy and, 162–163
explanation of, 157
functional strategy and, 163
importance of, 158
strategic “weapons” for, 160–161,  
164, 165
technology and, 161
strategic management process
explanation of, 158
steps in, 158–160, 159e
strategic plans. See also planning
explanation of, 169
function of, 157
strategic weapons
big data as, 165
customer service as, 160, 161
overview of, 160–161
quality as, 161, 164
social media as, 164–165
strategies
competitive, 163
corporate, 162–163
explanation of, 157
functional, 163
strengths, 160
stress
causes of, 269–270
in entrepreneurs, 511
explanation of, 268
functional, 268
organizational change and, 268–271, 269e
symptoms of, 269, 269e
techniques to reduce, 272, 272e, 279–280
telecommuting and, 207
workplace, 271, 279–280
stress management programs, 270
stressors, 269–270
structure. See also organizational design
boundaryless, 200e
change in, 261, 261e
divisional, 198e, 199
of entrepreneurial ventures, 506–507
functional, 198e, 199
in global organizations, 203
innovation and, 275, 275e
learning, 200e
matrix, 200e, 201–202, 201e
project, 200e, 201–202, 201e
simple, 198–199, 198e
stress and, 270
team, 200–201, 200e, 339
structured problems, 122, 123
subordination of individual interests to the general 
interest, 50
Suburban Hospital, 332
Subway, 86
SuccessFactors, 429
Sultan Qaboos University, 280
summary business plan, 504
SuperValu, 39
supply chain, globalization of, 83, 487
supportive leadership, 393, 394
survey feedback, 266
Susan G. Komen Foundation, 178
sustainability
explanation of, 92
in management, 40
pod-based coffee machines and, 105–106
SWOT analysis, 160
Sylvan, John, 105
Symantec Corporation, 46
symbolic view of management, 61
symbols, 67
synopsis (business plan), 504
systems approach, 53
T
Taco Bell, 157, 370
tactical plans, 169
talent globalization, 84
Tan, Chade-Meng, 314
Tanner, Chris, 450
Target Corp., 74–75, 498
task demands, 269
task identity, 360
task significance, 360
task structure, 389
Tata, 36, 83
Taylor, Frederick Winslow, 29, 50, 224, 450
team, structure of, 200–201, 200e, 339
team-building, 266
team effectiveness model, 334, 334e
team leaders, 29
teams. See also groups
behavior on, 337–338
benefits of, 338, 339e
coaching, 342–343
composition of, 335–336, 338–339
conflict in, 336–337
cross-functional, 188, 323, 332
cultural differences in, 339
effective, 333–337, 334e, 336e
efficacy of, 336
global, 338–340, 339e
groups vs., 331–332, 331e
leadership in, 334–335, 397, 398e
negative aspects of, 340
overview of, 322
problem-solving, 332
processes of, 340
rewards in, 338
roles in, 335–336, 336e
self-managed, 332
sports, 345
virtual, 332, 333
work, 332–333
team structures, 200–201, 200e
technical skills, 33
technology
communication and, 425–430
control issues and, 458, 459
data analytics and, 94
data security, 45–46
decision making and, 121
electronic meetings and, 128
employee empowerment and, 398
environmental scanning and, 173
ethical issues related to, 94
explanation of, 63
flexible work arrangements and,  
206–208
generational differences in use of, 101, 309
human resource management and, 233
impact on management, 37, 38, 54, 63
increased reliance on emotional intelligence  
and, 296
information, 54, 63, 121, 131–132, 161, 204
innovation and, 39, 272
investment in, 482–483
for office of tomorrow, 428
operations management and, 486–487
organizational change and, 37, 204, 261,  
261e, 265
organizational design and, 196, 197, 197e
rewards programs and, 369
robotic, 38
social media and, 39–40, 94, 429–430
strategic management and, 161, 165
sustainable management and, 40
team collaboration and, 333
telecommuting, 206–207

528    Index
flexible arrangements for, 64, 206–208, 212, 
368, 484
technological change and, 204
varying approaches to, 300
work councils, 225
work design, team effectiveness and, 336
workforce. See also employees; work; workplace
aging of, 97
change in composition of, 262
contingent, 100, 207–208
gender in, 98
workforce diversity
age and, 97, 97e
disabilities/abilities and, 98
explanation of, 96–97, 97e
gender and, 98
GLBT sexual orientation and gender identity 
and, 99
management of, 242
motivation and, 367–368
programs to help adapt to, 99–101
race and ethnicity and, 98
religion and, 98
work groups, 323, 323e, 331–332, 331e. See also 
groups
work-life balance programs, 99–100
workplace
approaches to discipline in, 465–466
control issues in, 459–460
dealing with negative behavior in,  
309–310
generational differences in, 101, 308, 309e
management of changing, 37–38
misbehavior in, 290
safe conditions in, 497–498
stress in, 271, 279–280
workplace violence, 462–464, 463e
work specialization, 185–186, 186e
work teams. See also teams
types of, 332–333
work groups vs., 331–332, 331e
work unit orientation, 233
World Business Council for Sustainable  
Development, 40
World Economic Forum, 60
Worldwide Commercial and Consumer Equipment 
Division, 483
Wormald Security, 489
Wrangler, 497
written communication, 418–419. See also  
communication
written reports, 449
Wyndham Peachtree Conference Center, 265
X
Xerox, 201, 332
Xerox Innovation Group, 272
Y
Yahoo!, 94, 96, 212
Yamaha Corporation of America, 244
Yamaji, Hiromi, 105
Yetton, Phillip, 392
YouTube, 76
Yum! Brands Inc., 370, 458
Z
Zappos, 366
Zara, 497
zero inventory warehousing, 478
Zhongtian, Liu, 77
Zipcar, 60
Zippo Manufacturing, 65
teleconferences, 426
telling style, 391
Tesco, 204, 498
tests, 230
TGI Friday’s, 242
theft, employee, 460–461, 461e
theory of justice view of ethics, 93
Theory X (McGregor), 51, 355
Theory Y (McGregor), 51, 355
thinking vs. feeling (TF), 295
threats, 160
3M, 170, 274, 407, 490
three-needs theory (McClelland), 357
times interest earned ratio, 145e, 146
Title VII (Civil Rights Act of 1964), 97, 98, 243
Tod’s, 120
tolerance for ambiguity scale, 175–176
TOMS Shoes, 89
top managers. See also managers
explanation of, 28, 34
planning function of, 170, 170e, 171
total assets turnover ratio, 145e, 146
total quality management (TQM), 52
Toyota, 39, 157, 241
trade, trends in, 60
traditional goal setting, 166–167, 166e
training
attention, 314
employee, 233–235, 234e, 235e, 240
ethics, 96
trait theories of leadership, 386–387
transactional leadership, 395–396
transformational leadership, 395–396
transformation process, 476
transnational organizations, 84, 85
TrunkClub, 165
trust, 401–402, 402e
Tumblr, 39
turnaround strategy, 163
turnover, employee, 290
20% time initiative, 274
Twitter, 39, 212, 225, 436–437
two-factor theory (Herzberg), 355–357, 356e
type A personalities, 270
type B personalities, 270
U
Uber, 60
Ulman, Doug, 178
uncertainty
decision making and, 125
environmental, 64–65, 64e
planning and, 155
resistance to organizational change and, 267
stability strategy and, 162
uncertainty avoidance, 87, 88, 129
unemployment rates. See also employment
global recession and, 64
trends in, 60
Unilever, 282
UniRush, 503
Unisys, 241
United States, economic trends in, 60
unit production, 197
unity of command, 50, 189–190
unity of direction, 50
Universal Music Group, 503
University of Iowa, 388
University of Michigan, 388
unstructured problems, 122
UPS (United PArcel Service), 113, 136–137
U.S. Air Force, 297
U.S. Anti-Doping Agency, 178
U.S. Cellular, 438
U.S. Internal Revenue Service, 459
U.S. National Institute of Occupational Safety and 
Health, 462
U.S. Office of Personnel Management, 445
U.S. Postal Service, 34
utilitarian view of ethics, 93
V
valence, 363
Valeo Klimasystemme GmbH, 489
validity, 229–230
value, 478
value chain, 479
value chain management (VCM). See also  
operations management
benefits of, 480
explanation of, 478–480
goals of, 480
obstacles to, 485–486, 485e
process of, 481
requirements for, 482–485, 482e
Vandebroek, Sophie, 272
variable pay systems, 239
verbal intonation, 420
Verizon, 64, 337
vertical integration, 162
videoconference meetings, 426
Viking Range Corporation, 503
violence, workplace, 462–464, 463e
virtual leadership, 400
virtual organizations, 202
virtual teams, 332, 333
virus hunters, 46
Visa, 141–142, 141e, 142e, 467
visionary leadership, 395–396
voice mail, 426, 438
Volkswagen, 241
Volvo, 331
Vroom, Victor, 392
W
W. L. Gore, 331
W. T. Grant, 36
Wachovia, 331
“walk of shame,” 445
Wall Street Journal, 94
Walmart, 40, 92, 165, 177, 445, 483, 497, 498
Walt Disney Company, 27
Warby Parker, 179
Waze, 65
weaknesses, 160
wearable technology, 427, 428, 456, 459
Weber, Max, 50, 185
Wegmans Food Markets, 244
Welch, Jack, 202
Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield, 490
wellness programs, 271
Wells Fargo & Company, 331
Wendy’s, 487
Western Electric Company, 51
Western Provident Association, 429
“white-water rapids” metaphor, 265
Whiting, Susan, 265
Whole Foods Market, 429
Wild Oats Markets, 429
Williams, Evan, 436
William Wrigley Jr. Co., 430–431
Wilson, Dennis, 468–469
Wilson Sporting Goods, 185
Winegardner & Hammons, 70
Wing-ching, Shih, 409
Wipro Limited, 172
wireless communication, 427
Woodward, Joan, 197, 197e
work. See also workforce; workplace

